Distributed Cache Enabled V2X Network,
Proposals, Research Trends and Challenging Issues

Di Zhang, Member, IEEE

1

8
1
0
2

l
u
J

7
1

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

2
v
9
5
0
6
0
.
3
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Nowadays, vehicle to everything (V2X) has been
proposed to connect everything on the road. However, the current
V2X network is motor-vehicle oriented. In contrast, the internet
of sharing bicycle (IoSB) network is vastly and rapidly deployed
as a feasible solution for the last mile problem (e.g., from
station to home/ofﬁce). To make full use of the devices for
trafﬁc safety and wireless communications, a comprehensive
network model is needed. In this work, while investigating the
existing studies, we propose a versatile V2X network with a
distributed framework and heterogeneous caching method. In
this V2X network, all the devices on the road (motor-vehicle,
non-motor-vehicle, pedestrian, etc.) are connected. We further
introduce a heterogeneous cache method for effective wireless
transmission while utilizing the massive connected devices. The
potential research trends on achieving high speed transmission,
deep programming dedicated network slicing and big data/
machine learning (ML)/ edge computing based image recognition
and reconstruction are highlighted to provide some insights for
future studies. Finally, the challenging issues of path loss model,
channel model and ultra reliable and low latency communications
(URLLC) of this V2X network are discussed.

I. INTRODUCTION

In literature, the primary motivation of connecting vehicle
is to prevent the collision [3]. With this purpose, IEEE 802.11
p standard was released in 2010, and the dedicated short
range communications (DSRC) with carrier frequency 5.9
GHz was allocated. In 2016, 3GPP release 14 has initialed the
cellular-V2X (C-V2X), the 5G automotive association (5GAA)
is established in the same year with the target on C-V2X
solutions (i.e., vehicle to vehicle (V2V), vehicle to pedestrian
(V2P), vehicle to infrastructure (V2I), vehicle to network
(V2N)) for future mobility and transportation services). Based
on the C-V2X network, opening issues of automatic piloting,
trafﬁc signal control, collision detection, emergency warning
and optimal route planning have been raised [4]. However,
up to now, it is found that in V2X studies (DSRC and C-
V2X), existing work mostly is motor-vehicle oriented, the
other elements are playing the secondary roles for the vehicle’s
obstacle detection, collision prevention, etc. At the same time,
the sharing bicycle system, with its ﬂexible deployment and
environment friendly characters, is becoming a convenient
solution for the last mile problem (e.g., from station to ofﬁce,
home, etc.). In China, it is believed that the narrow band IoT
(NB-IoT) based sharing bicycle system will become the ﬁrst
and largest IoT case in the coming years [5]. In order to
accomplish the V2X’s ambitious with connecting everything,

Di Zhang is with the School of Information Engineering, Zhengzhou

University, Zhengzhou, 450001, China.

fast speed transmission and intelligent trafﬁc service, combi-
nation of current V2X, sharing bicycle and other devices is
thus inevitable.

On the other hand, in wireless communications, content
caching and sharing mechanism (CCSM) has been intensively
studied. By invoking CCSM, content request can be satis-
ﬁed from the temporary caches located in the core router,
base station (BS) and neighboring user sides. The engaged
transceiver equipments, links and resources (e.g., carrier fre-
quency, consumed energy) can be greatly reduced via this
method, which yields an improved system energy efﬁciency
(EE) performance. The previous studies of content caching
in vehicle network, however, were mostly restricted to the
motor-vehicle V2V communications, for instance, [6]. Due to
a much smaller number of connected motor-vehicles, it is not
an effective way to obtain requesting contents from the vehicle
caches. The merits of content caching technology are reduced
in this case.

In order to solve the aforementioned problems, here in
this article, we propose the versatile distributed cache en-
abled V2X networks. All
the devices (i.e., motor-vehicle,
non-motor-vehicle, wearable smart device and cell-phone of
the pedestrian) on-the-road are comprehensively connected
for intelligent
trafﬁc system (ITS) control with regard to
public and trafﬁc safety. Besides, caches are distributed to
all connected vehicles and devices (motor-vehicle, non-motor-
vehicle, pedestrian, etc.), which are not limited to the motor-
vehicles. We further exploit the massive connected vehicles
and devices in the distributed cache enabled V2X networks
for wireless transmission with the help of content caching
technology. To effectively use the carrier frequency resources,
we propose an initial co-existing solution for LTE, DSRC
and millimeter wave (mmWave) frequencies. With the purpose
of reducing carbon emission, the solar energy is invoked as
well by introducing the solar energy converters to the vehicle
bodies.

The future research trends and challenging issues on achiev-
ing the distributed cache enabled V2X networks are focused
afterwards. For the implementation, a global perspective is
needed to re-design the network architecture and infras-
tructure. We discuss the majority future research trends on
achieving higher transmission rate, the effective and dedicate
intelligent trafﬁc control network architecture with networking
slicing. The big data, machine learning (ML) and fog com-
puting based image recognition and reconstruction is another
topic for future research. The urban wireless path loss and
channel models bring in great challenge for the quality of
service (QoS) of wireless transmission and intelligence trafﬁc

 
 
 
 
 
 
control. To this end, we sketch the path loss model while
incorporating prior studies. The ultra reliable communication
and low latency requirement are the other challenging issues
for its commercial use with regard to the public and trafﬁc
safety.

II. THE CCSM, V2X AND SHARING BICYCLE

In this section, we discuss the existing work on content
caching technology, V2X systems and sharing bicycle systems.
In wireless communication, content caching mostly restricts to
system EE analysis, optimal content division and positioning.
The V2X and sharing bicycle systems, on the other hand, are
taken as the promising IoT application scenes to reshape the
future driving experiences and vehicle industry.

A. The Features and Beneﬁts of CCSM

CCSM was initially originated from the information centric
networking (ICN). In this paradigm, content is distributed in
in-network storages with a name. Through multicast mech-
anisms, ICN can timely and efﬁciently deliver the contents
to subsequent users. Nowadays, other than the upper layer
studies, ICN is introduced to the wireless communications as
well, which is known as the CCSM. As shown by Fig. 1,
CCSM assumes that all the devices (core router, BS, mobile
terminal, etc.) can cache and share the temporary contents for
subsequent users. In this case, routing back and obtain the
request contents from the remote center is not necessary. The
beneﬁts of CCSM can be summarized as follows:

Alleviated network load: The requesting data can be
directly obtained from the distributed caches. Compared to
routing back and retrieving from the remote content server,
the core network load is alleviated. On condition that the sub-
sequent user gets its requesting content from the neighboring
user’s caches, the BS network load is alleviated.

Less engaged transceiver components: CCSM needs less
engaged transceiver components while providing the same
amount of data to subsequent user. For instance, if the subse-
quent user is satisﬁed from the neighboring user’s caches, the
transceiver components of BS and core router are not needed;
while from the BS caches,
the core network transceiver
components are not engaged; while from the core router
caches, the transceiver components of subsequent routers are
not necessary.

Improved EE system performance: The CCSM can reduce
the transmission distance from transmitter to receiver. Because
of the shorter distance, emission power is reduced, which
brings less system energy consumption. Moreover, CCSM
needs less engaged transceiver components. By keep those
components into sleep mode, we may further reduce the energy
consumption. In other words, CCSM consumes less energy
while transmitting the same amount of contents. The system
EE performance is therefore improved.

B. The Current V2X and Sharing Bicycle Networks

There are two types of V2X networks, i.e., DSRC and
C-V2X. DSRC is to provide active safety communications

2

Fig. 1. The CCSM in wireless communications.

contributes to safe driving while connecting the vehicles to
RSU or other vehicles. In contrast, C-V2X aims to connect
not only the vehicle, pedestrian, but also other elements (for
instance, trafﬁc lights, sensors) on the road. It can provide
faster speed and lower latency transmission through the cel-
lular network compared to DSRC. As shown by Fig. 2. a,
vehicles can connect to the roadside units (RSU) via V2I,
connect to the network via V2N, connect among each other
via V2V and connect to the pedestrian via V2P. While com-
municating, DSRC relies on the wireless local area network
(WLAN) physical transmission (PHY) and medium access
control (MAC). Meanwhile, C-V2X works on two mode:
1) direct communication mode (DCM), for instance, V2V,
V2P; and 2) network based communication mode (NBM),
for instance, V2N, V2I. The beneﬁts of V2X network can
be summarized as follows.

Safe and intelligent transport: The centers can broadcast
emergency warning message to vehicles via media access
control (MAC) broadcasting to guide the vehicles for rescue
and escape. With the shared real time information, the vehicle
can adjust its travel speed to make the green light, take the
optimal route to avoid trafﬁc congestion, keep safe distance to
avoid crash, etc.

Improved in-car entertainment service: The C-V2X net-
works enable the vehicle smart device communications by
wireless connections working on the unlicensed spectrum (e.g.,
Bluetooth connection between vehicle and cellphone). For
instance, the smart devices can lock or unlock the vehicle, play
video or music through the vehicle’s speakers. Besides, DCM
and NBM working on the licensed spectrum makes the access
of in-car high-deﬁnition media and virtual reality applications
a reality.

Different from the C-V2X network, as shown by Fig.
2. b,
the sharing bicycle network, mainly relies on the
general packet radio service (GPRS)/Bluetooth/NB-IoT/global
positioning system (GPS) technologies for nearest bicycle
ﬁnding, lock/unlock, information sharing/uploading, location
tracking, etc. That is, with the help of GPS and NB-IoT,
potential user can ﬁnd the nearest bicycle and unlock it via
GPRS/Bluetooth/NB-IoT. While riding, the real time informa-

3

Solar Panel and 
Battery

NB-IoT 
Based locker

Solar Panel and 
Battery

(cid:20)(cid:20)

Fig. 2. The current V2X and sharing bicycle systems.

tion (location, speed, acceleration, consumed energy, etc) will
be recorded by the apps or transmitted to the remote center.
The main beneﬁts of the sharing bicycles network can be listed
as follows.

Last mile problem solutions and lower carbon emission:
Sharing bicycle network can tackle down the last mile problem
(e.g., from bus/subway station to ofﬁce/home). In this case,
more people will prefer the public transport, especially when
travelling within the urban area. Carbon emission thus is
greatly reduced. Additionally, with less vehicles on the road,
the sharing bicycle network can also alleviate the trafﬁc
congestion.

Personal health diagnosis: Sharing bicycle network can
record the rider’s personal data (e.g., calorie consumption,
heart rate, blood pressure, ride distance) with apps or con-
nected wearable sensors. Afterward, with some analytical
tools, the rider can evaluate his (her) physical condition. The
doctor may also access these data to provide professional
health diagnosis under the rider’s permission.

However, the current V2X networks and sharing bicycle
networks are disconnected. We might cause a road accident
when vehicles and bicycles cannot detect each other. On the
other hand, we cannot provide the optimal routing without
awareness of all types of devices on the road. It is also worth
noting that in V2X networks, vehicle is playing a dominant
role. The other elements are playing the secondary roles to
assist its safe driving, automatic driving, in-car entertainment
applications, etc.

III. THE PROPOSED DISTRIBUTED CACHE ENABLED V2X
NETWORKS

By incorporating the existing works on content caching,
the proposed distributed cache

V2X and sharing bicycle,
enabled V2X networks are elaborated in this section.

A. The Proposal

The distributed cache enabled V2X networks can be shown
by Fig. 3. Here in the proposed networks, CCSM is introduced
to the core router, BS and all types of devices on the road.
In reality, the cache can be integrated into the entertainment
system of the car, and located in the intelligent locker system
of the bicycle. In order to utilize the clean energy, we introduce

Cache

4G/5G 
BS

Small 
cell

Router

Area 
center

Total
center

Fig. 3. The proposed distributed cache enabled V2X networks. All V2X
devices on the road are connected for public and trafﬁc safety with the CCSM.
In addition, solar panel and battery are equipped in V2X devices as well.

solar energy converter to the V2X devices1 (e.g., solar panel on
vehicle and device body). Due to the bicycle’s limited energy
harvest ability, battery is invoked to equip within the basket.
That is, the battery unit is equipped to the bottom of the
basket, the solar energy converter is located over the battery
unit. For the sharing bicycle within this system, we discard
the GPRS/Bluetooth based locker while utilizing the NB-IoT
based intelligent locker for fast lock/unlock. According to the
report, lock/unlock can be completed within 1 s with NB-IoT,
the payment process has been dropped from 25 seconds to less
than 5 seconds, while battery life has been prolonged from 1
or 2 months to more than 2 years [5].

In order to provide fast speed transmission for the connected
devices, the distributed V2X networks can use 5G technologies
in its NBM transmission. For implementation, we can put
the massive multi-input-multi-output (MIMO) BS above the
building, and vastly deploy the small cell BSs (femotocell, pic-
ocell) to roadside units. For the carrier frequency, NBM reuses
the existing cellular frequency resources for cellular to V2X
devices transmission, and the mmWave and DSRC frequencies
are dedicated to the V2V, V2X, everything to vehicle (X2V),
small cell to vehicle (SC2V) and small cell to pedestrian
(SC2P) transmissions. Detailed comparison between the dis-
tributed cache enabled V2X networks and prior cache enabled
vehicle networks, V2X, sharing bicycle are given by Table I.
As shown here, the proposed distributed cache enabled V2X
networks comprehensively cover the existing technologies,
which enables the ITS and wireless information delivery. The
main features and beneﬁts of the proposed networks, while
comparing with prior work, can be listed as follows:

Improved intelligent trafﬁc system and wireless trans-
mission: In this proposed distributed cache enabled V2X
networks, all devices on the road are connected for public
and trafﬁc safety. The connected V2X devices are playing
the equal roles for wireless communication. With the shared
upload information from all vehicles and devices on the road,
the control and service center can more effectively broadcast

1While using the word devices, we mean all devices besides the vehicle,

such as cell-phone, laptop, wearable smart devices.

TABLE I
COMPARISON BETWEEN PRIOR WORK AND THE PROPOSED DISTRIBUTED CACHE ENABLED V2X NETWORKS

Prior cache enabled vehicle networks
Current V2X system
Sharing bicycle system
Our proposal

Vehicle
√
√

×
√

Bicycle

Pedestrian

×
×
√
√

×
√

×
√

Content caching
√

×
×
√

Solar energy

×
×
√
√

DSRC
√
√

×
√

LTE
√
√
√
√

5G

×
√

×
√

4

networks, especially by caching in the wireless section (BS,
vehicle, device, etc.). This is mainly due to the reduced core
network energy consumption. It is worth to note that giving
the battery constraint, caching in the wireless section is only
feasible when they have enough power.

Usage of mixed frequency resources: The DSRC 5.9 GHz
frequency as well as mmWave frequency are dedicated for the
wireless communications with V2V, V2P, V2I, V2N, SC2V,
SC2P and P2P in the urban environment. This is mainly
due to the high atmospheric attenuation and easily blocked
features of higher frequency. By invoking DSRC and mmWave
frequencies, the user can employ a wider carrier bandwidth
for its large volume information transmission within a limited
power under the assistance of content caching technology. In
contract, to reuse the existing resources, LTE frequency is
invoked for the BS to vehicle (BS2V) and BS to pedestrian
(BS2P) transmissions.

IV. FUTURE RESEARCH TRENDS AND CHALLENGING
ISSUES

In this section, we discuss the future research trends and
challenging issues to accomplish the proposed cache en-
abled V2X networks. Methods on achieving the high speed
transmission, ﬂexible and dedicated network slicing service,
big data and machine learning based image recognition and
reconstruction, are main research topics for future research.
Additionally,
the accurate urban channel and propagation
model, ultra reliable communication and low latency are big
challenges of the distributed cache enabled V2X networks’
implementation.

A. Future Research Trends

1) Solutions for More Than 10 Folds Faster Transmission
Rate: In literature, the massive MIMO is raised as an essential
element of 5G. It is proved that with antenna number growing,
we can obtain more channel degree of freedom (DoF), which
yields faster transmission rate and link reliability. On the other
hand, mmWave recently is emerging as a vital element of
5G. According to Shannon theory, the achievable transmission
rate can be boosted up while increasing the carrier frequency
bandwidth value. Recently, the non-orthogonal multiple access
(NOMA) is also intensively studied with regard to 5G’s spec-
trum efﬁciency (SE). It allocates the same carrier frequency
resource for multiple user’s information transmission, whereas
the encode and decode procedures are executed according to
the allocated different power values (power domain NOMA)
or codes (code domain NOMA) [8].

Meanwhile, the HetNets technology with co-existing macro
cells and small cells are proposed. In HetNets, macro cell

Fig. 4. The power consumption and system EE performance in different
scenarios while transmitting 2G data within 1 second, carrier bandwidth
20MHz, by further considering the machine room (400 W), erbium doped
ﬁbre ampliﬁer (EDFA, 243 W) and other core network elements. In upper two
ﬁgures, caching in the core router and without caching is compared, where
the bottom ﬁgures are system power consumption and EE performances of
caching in the wireless section.

the emergency information and guide the vehicle (speed,
accelerate, route, etc.) on the road. By sharing the information
amongst cooperating vehicles, the automatics piloting system
can be accomplished even without the help of center. Addi-
tionally, by adopting the 5G and CCSM, the proposed network
can provide more efﬁcient high speed wireless transmissions.
Clean energy and more reasonable system model: The
V2X devices can use solar energy for communication, and
store it in their batteries. With the clean solar energy, the
distributed V2X networks can reduce the carbon emission and
air pollution. Additionally, compared to prior cache enabled
studies, e.g., [7], solar energy’s usage of the distributed V2X
networks brings higher energy capacity to these V2X devices,
which makes CCSM a more reasonable choice for V2X
communications. For instance, with more energy, the V2X
devices can increase its transmission power for faster speed
transmission or prolong the transmission time.

Reduced energy consumption and enhanced EE per-
formance: More energy can be saved while obtaining the
request information from caches due to the shorter trans-
mission distance and less engaged transceiver devices. The
system EE performance is enhanced as well via this method.
As shown by Fig. 4, content caching can greatly reduce the
energy consumption of the distributed cache enabled V2X

are used to provide wide coverage area, whereas in the cell
edge areas, small cells are utilized to improve the connec-
tion and transmission quality. The carrier aggregation (CA)
and coordinate multiple point
transmission (CoMP) based
cloud radio access network (C-RAN) can further leverage
the transmission rate. Additionally, as talked before, content
caching based network evolution is another interesting topic
which attracts increasing attentions from both industry and
academia. However, according to 5G Summit in Silicon Valley,
scholars claimed that the 5G’s higher transmission rate cannot
be simply achieved with existing technologies up to now,
redesigning the whole network architecture, combining the
existing technologies, working on new air radio technologies
are comprehensively needed with a joint force from both
academia and industry.

2) The Dedicated Network Slicing Service: In prior wire-
less generations, for application scene with fast transmission
rate, wide coverage area, ultra reliable communications, low
latency communications, mostly a specialized network ar-
chitecture should be established. Those specialized network
architecture, once established, is hard to accommodate up-
dates. Meanwhile, with large number of accessing vehicles
and devices, the management of such a large scale network
becomes troublesome [9]. To cope with the diversity, dedicated
network slicing technology [10] can be a feasible choice.

Network slicing technology is able to virtually divide the
network into multiple co-existing sub-networks. It can adap-
tively assign the needed resources and establish the optimal
router for each sub-network (network slicing service). Since
the divisions and resource allocations are based on the soft-
ware deﬁned deeply programming, it can reuse the resources
and update the existing sub-network(s) or establish a new
dedicated sub-network once needed. With software deﬁned
network (SDN) controller and orchestration, we can control the
connected vehicles and devices by creating a comprehensive
network slice. In addition, it is also possible to set up different
dedicated sub-networks for the high speed data transmission
and intelligent trafﬁc control scenarios, and adaptively adjust
the allocated resources according to the update information.
How to effectively tailor the dedicated network slice with
given resources and ﬂexibly adjust the sub-network to cater
to the updates with network slicing technology will be an
interesting topic for future study.

3) Big Data, Machine Learning and Fog Computing Based
Image Recognition and Reconstruction: As known, automatics
pilot is calling for real time ultra reliable image recognition
and reconstruction. Due to the large scale and even fast grow-
ing data, previous iterative ML algorithm is not an effective
way due to the space and time limitations. To accelerate the
recognition speed, large scale deep learning (DL) and high-
rank matrix factorization (MF) methods are proposed with
massive parameters for improved ﬁltering problems [11]. Yet
the processing time and required resources are still huge. This
is mainly due to the fact that while detecting the objectives,
we need a set of labeled training data from a large scale
data volume. This is the most time consuming process that
called as the ground truth labeling [12]. On the contrary, if
less parameters are considered, some elements on the road

5

Fig. 5. An explanatory description of labeling data in image detection. The
sharing bicycles and ordinary bicycles are all labeled as bicycle. Additionally,
the chair is not labeled (marked with green arrow), which might bring risk
to the vehicle while applying in automatic piloting for image detection in the
following frames.

might be omitted, which will bring in risk for the trafﬁc and
public safety. For instance, while labeling the data in Fig. 5,
the chair is not labeled (marked with green arrow, next to
the ﬁrst tree counting from the bottom left). For the image
detection in the following frames based on the labeled data
with Fig. 5, once the objective (unlabeled chair) was located
on the motor-way, an accident might be caused. In addition,
the sharing bicycle and ordinary bicycle are all recognized as
the bicycle with same label to accelerate the recognition speed
in the following steps.

Fortunately, Matlab has released the automated driving
system toolbox to accelerate the labeling process, in addition,
the Kanade Lucas Tomasi algorithm (KLT) can be invoked
to label the objects in the ﬁrst frame, and track them in the
following frames [12]. The specialized GPU (for instance,
NVIDIA a Tesla K40c) can be used to speed up the training
is
process as well. However, with data scale growing,
still a challenging and time-consuming task. To this end, a
trade-off strategy between the engaged parameters (or labels)
and real-time recognition and reconstruction requirement is
needed. Additionally, a joint force of the off-the-shelf in-car
cooperative edge computing chips and information sharing
strategies amongst vehicles is needed. The developments on ef-
fective big data analysis and DL based recognition algorithms,
cooperative edge and cloud computing strategies, specialized
processing chips are comprehensively needed with a full steam
ahead for the forthcoming V2X system.

it

B. The Challenging Issues

1) The Path Loss and Channel Model: The path loss and
channel model of higher carrier frequencies with DSCR and
mmWave are vital for cellular coverage and performance es-
timation, as well as the public and trafﬁc safety. The enriched
buildings around, denser BS deployment and even higher
carrier frequencies are all challenging issues of the realistic
channel and path loss models. In prior studies from UT-
Austin, the Manhattan poisson line process was introduced.
They assumed the vertical (North-South direction) and horizon

(East-West direction) paths growing inﬁnity with y and x-
axis, based on the street canyons. However, in the non light
of sight (NLOS) path, the corner loss was simpliﬁed with a
constant factor. The ITU-R, recently, published the urban path
loss model for the frequency ranges from 300 MHz to 100
GHz. However, it is too complex especially for the mmWave
frequency. The light of sight (LOS) and NLOS path losses
were comprehensively studied with a remedy study in [13],
the proposed models were veriﬁed in Seoul City. We invoke
this work here with urban street conﬁguration (street block
100 m, BS height 40 m, vehicle and device height 1 m),
the results are given by Fig. 6. As shown, NLOS path loss
becomes extremely large after 1-turn while crossing the corner.
Thus normally, only 1-turn NLOS path can be established in
urban street canyon environment. On the other hand, to the
mmWave path loss model, series trials were done by the New
York University in the New York urban street. Yet up to now,
no matured path loss or channel models have been arrived.

Fig. 6. The urban path loss simulation according to [13] with BS height 40 m,
vehicle and device height 1 m, street block distance 100 m, carrier frequency
2 GHz.

2) The Low Latency Communication:

In the distributed
cache enabled V2X networks, less than 1 ms latency is a vital
issue for automatic pilot, especially while encountering some
emergency conditions. For instance, giving a vehicle speed 120
Km/h, with LTE latency 30 ms, the moving distance will be
around 9 dm. On the contrary, with 5G’s 1 ms latency, it will
be around 3 cm. Moreover, the low latency is a nature feature
for real time in-car entertainment. As known, the ultra dense
cellular deployment will result in a limited coverage area, low
latency will guarantee the fast response for each request. The
handover time across cellular can be reduced as well via low
latency. The CoMP joint transmission is calling for low latency
processing and precise time synchronization as well.

in
Albeit 1 ms latency issue has been appealed a lot,
literature, speciﬁc technology to achieve the less than 1 ms
latency is still less. In our distributed cache enabled V2X
networks, although the low latency requirement can be par-
tially realized via D2D communications, and the NOMA [8]
transmission can be invoked for simultaneous transmission of
multiple user information, it is still not enough. Generally,

6

to achieve this goal, a dedicated network slicing service
should be assigned. The dedicated short package emergency
information can be used for fast response to further improve
its latency performance. Developing on the chips with real
time processing ability is also needed. To sum up, the low
latency goal can not be simply achieved, a comprehensive
scope on cross-layer design and updates from both hardware
and software sides are needed.

3) The Ultra Reliable Communication Issue: The ultra re-
liable communication is another challenging issue. The higher
transmission speed will be of less meaning without small
error probability. For instance, we prefer 100 MBit/s 99%
reliability rather than 1 GBit/s 50% reliability while accessing
the internet. Ultra reliable communication is critical for vehicle
safety and public safety as well. The vehicle cannot be safely
braked without it while encountering some emergencies even
the processing time is within 1 ms. Additionally, it will cause
great damage once the communication link is damaged or
hacked, in which case the intelligence control center and
automatics pilot cannot successfully manage the trafﬁc.

In literature, the ultra reliable communication is not a new
problem. For example, intensive studies have been done in
the core network with backup routing and link connections
across core routers to ensure the robust connections. For
the wireless communication, re-transmission can improve the
transmission success rate and the completeness of the received
information. However, the massive connected devices bring in
new challenging issues for the ultra reliable communication,
e.g., hacker attack, resource competing, equipment failure, un-
controllable interference, missing protocol, etc. Additionally,
the trade off strategy should be set forth while invoking the
re-transmission method with regard to the ultra reliable and
low latency requirements. To this end, a lot of work is still
needed in future studies.

V. CONCLUSION

The distributed cache enabled V2X networks are introduced
in this article. The basic principles, merits, future research
trends, and potential challenging issues are discussed. Com-
pared with prior studies, this proposal can offer more intelli-
gent trafﬁc control while connecting all vehicles and devices
on the road. The wireless communications are leveraged as
well by this proposed system with less engaged transceiver
components, better system EE performance and more effective
carrier frequency resource usage. More endeavors on the solu-
tions for the even higher transmission rate requirement, ﬂexible
network slicing service design and big data/ML/fog computing
image recognition and reconstruction methods are needed in
future studies. Meanwhile, the accurate urban channel/path
loss model, ultra reliable communications and low latency
issues are critical factors for its realization.

REFERENCES

[1] D. Zhang et al., “One integrated energy efﬁciency proposal for 5G IoT
communications,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 1346–1354,
Dec. 2016.

[2] Z. Zhou et al., “Unlicensed spectrum sharing: From coexistence to
convergence,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 94–101, Oct.
2017.

7

[3] C. Wu, Z. Liu, D. Zhang, T. Yoshinaka, and Y. Ji, “Spatial intelligence
towards trustworthy vehicular IoT (in press),” IEEE Commun. Mag.,
2018.

[4] N. Lu et al., “Connected vehicles: Solutions and challenges,” IEEE

Internet Things J., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 289–299, Aug. 2014.

[5] Huawei, “The race is on: NB-IoT boosts smart bike sharing for ofo

[online:] http://www.huawei.com/en/cases/ofo,” 2017.

[6] S. H. Ahmed et al., “Named data networking for software deﬁned
vehicular networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 60–66,
Aug. 2017.

[7] B. Chen, C. Yang, and A. F. Molisch, “Cache-enabled device-to-device
communications: Ofﬂoading gain and energy cost,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 4519–4536, Jul. 2017.

[8] D. Zhang et al., “Performance analysis of non-regenerative Massive-
MIMO-NOMA relay systems for 5G,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65,
no. 11, pp. 4777–4790, Nov. 2017.

[9] J. Huang et al., “Topology control for building a large-scale and energy-
efﬁcient internet of things,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 24, no. 1, pp.
67–73, Feb. 2017.

[10] T. Taleb et al., “Permit: Network slicing for personalized 5G mobile
telecommunications,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 88–93,
May 2017.

[11] E. P. Xing et al., “Petuum: A new platform for distributed machine
learning on big data,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 49–67,
Jun. 2015.

[12] A. Nehemiah and A. Jayaraman, “Deep learning for automated driv-
ing with matlab [online:] https://devblogs.nvidia.com/parallelforall/deep-
learning-automated-driving-matlab/,” NVIDIA, Technical blogs, Jul.
2017.

[13] J. Lee et al., “NLOS path loss model for low-height antenna links
in high-rise urban street grid environments,” International J. Antennas
Propag., vol. 2015, pp. 1–9, Jan. 2015.

