8
1
0
2

r
p
A
1

]
I

A
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
9
3
1
0
.
4
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

1

Artiﬁcial Intelligence and its Role in Near Future

Jahanzaib Shabbir, and Tarique Anwer

Abstract—AI technology has long history which is actively and constantly changing and growing. It focuses on intelligent agents,
which contains devices that perceives environment and based on which takes actions in order to maximize goal success chances. In
this paper, we will explain the modern AI basics and various representative applications of AI. In context of modern digitalized world,
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is the property of machines, computer programs and systems to perform the intellectual and creative functions
of a person, independently ﬁnd ways to solve problems, be able to draw conclusions and make decisions. Most artiﬁcial intelligence
systems have the ability to learn, which allows people to improve their performance over time. The recent research on AI tools,
including machine learning, deep learning and predictive analysis intended toward increasing the planning, learning, reasoning,
thinking and action taking ability [1]. Based on which, the proposed research intended towards exploring on how the human intelligence
differs from the artiﬁcial intelligence [2]. In addition, on how and in what way, the current artiﬁcial intelligence is clever than the human
beings. Moreover, we critically analyze what the state-of-the art AI of today is capable of doing, why it still cannot reach human level
intelligence and what are the open challenges existing in front of AI to reach and outperform human level of intelligence. Furthermore, it
will explore the future predictions for artiﬁcial intelligence and based on which potential solution will be recommended to solve it within
next decades [2].

(cid:70)

1 INTRODUCTION

The term intelligence refers to the ability to acquire
and apply different skills and knowledge to solve a given
problem. In addition, intelligence is also concerned with
the use of general mental capability to solve, reason, and
learning various situations [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10],
[11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21],
[22], [23]. Intelligence is integrated with various cognitive
functions such as; language, attention, planning, memory,
perception. The evolution of intelligence can basically is
studied about in the last ten years. Intelligence involves
both Human and Artiﬁcial Intelligence . In this case, critical
human intelligence is concerned with solving problems,
reasoning and learning. Furthermore, humans have simple
complex behaviors which they can easily learn in their entire
life [24].

2 WHICH OF THESE AND IN WHAT LEVEL CAN TO-
DAYS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE DO?

Todays Artiﬁcial Intelligence (robotics) has the capabilities
to imitate human intelligence, performing various tasks
that require thinking and learning, solve problems and
make various decisions. Artiﬁcial Intelligence software or
programs that are inserted into robots, computers, or other
related systems which them necessary thinking ability [25].
However, much of the current Artiﬁcial Intelligence systems
(robotics) are still under debate as they still need more
research on their way of solving tasks. Therefore Artiﬁcial
Intelligence machines or systems should be in position to
perform the required tasks by without exercising errors.
In addition, Robotics should be in position to perform
various tasks without any human control or assistance
[24]. Todays artiﬁcial intelligence such as robotic cars are
highly progressing with high performance capabilities such
as controlling trafﬁc, minimizing their speed, making from
self-driving cars to the SIRI, the artiﬁcial intelligence is
rapidly progressing [26]. The current attention towards por-
traying the artiﬁcial intelligence in robots for developing

the human-like characteristics considerably increases the
human dependence towards the technology. In addition,
the artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) ability towards effectively
performing every narrower and cognitive task considerably
increases the peoples dependence towards the technology
[27]. Artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) tools having the ability
to process huge amounts of data by computers can give
those who control them and analyze all the information.
Today, this considerably increases the threat which makes
someone’s ability to extract and analyze data in a massive
way [24]. Recently, Artiﬁcial intelligence is reﬂected as the
artiﬁcial representation of human brain which tries to sim-
ulate their learning process with the aim of mimicking the
human brain power. It is necessary to reassure everyone that
artiﬁcial intelligence equal to that of human brain which is
unable to be created [25]. Till now, we operate only part
of our capabilities. As currently, the level of knowledge is
rapidly developing, it takes only a part of the human brain.
As the potential of human brain is incommensurably higher
than we can now imagine and prove. Within human brain,
there are approximately 100 trillion electrically conducting
cells or neurons, which provide an incredible computing
power to perform the tasks rapidly and efﬁciently. It is
analyzed from the research that till now computer has the
ability to perform the tasks of multiplication of 134,341 by
989,999 in an efﬁcient manner but still unable to perform the
things like the learning and changing the understanding of
world and recognition of human faces [28].

3 WHERE DOES THE HUMAN INTELLIGENCE DIF-
FER FROM AI?

Artiﬁcial intelligence refers to the potential of computer
controlled machines/robots towards performing tasks that
that almost or similar to human beings. In this case, Ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence is used to develop various robots that
have human intellectual characteristics, behaviors, learning
from past experience, have abilities to sense, and abilities

 
 
 
 
 
 
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

to making predications and determine meaning of certain
situation [29]. Robotic technology is largely trending in
the current life which has gained popularity in various
sectors such as industries, hospitals, schools, military, music,
gaming, quantum science and many others [28]. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence is an efﬁcient means that make computers and
software control robotic thinking with expert systems that
signiﬁcantly illustrate the intelligent behavior, learning and
effectively advice users. In general, AI is basically known as
the ability or potential of robotics to decide, solve problems
and reason [30]. There are various innovations of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, for example robotic cars which dont require a
driver to control or supervise them. In addition, artiﬁcially
intelligent technology (robots) involves smart machines that
process a large amount of data that a human being cant
be in position to perform. By so robotics are assuming
repetitive duties that require creativity and knowledge base.
Furthermore, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is the combination
of various technologies that give chance to robotics to un-
derstand, learn, perceive or complete human activities on
their own [2]. In this case, Artiﬁcial Intelligence programs
(robots) are built for a speciﬁc purpose such as learning,
acting and understating whereas humans intelligence is
basically concerned with various abilities of multitasking.
In general, an Artiﬁcial Intelligence tool is majorly con-
cerned with emphasizing robotics which portrays human
behaviors. But however, Artiﬁcial Intelligence may fail out
at some points due to differences in human brain and
computers. In brief, Artiﬁcial Intelligence has the potential
to mimic human character or behaviors [31]. Furthermore,
Artiﬁcial intelligence is currently partially developed with-
out advanced abilities to learn on their own but instead
given commands to act on. This will be the ultimate future
of artiﬁcial intelligence, where the AI machines will be
recognized the human behavior and emotions and will train
their kernel as per it [32].

4 WHY CANT WE TELL THAT TODAYS AI
CLEVER AS HUMAN BEINGS?

IS AS

Generally, there are various paths towards building the
intelligent machines that enables the humans to build the
super-intelligent machines and provide ability to machines
towards redesigning their own programming in order to
increase their intelligence level, which is usually considered
as the intelligence explosion. In contrast, the shielded hu-
man hunt is basically the emotion. The breakthrough of
AI technology can frighten the humanity in a way that
machine are unable to effectively transmit the emotions.
So, there may be possibility that AI can support us with
the tasks and functions which usually not involves the
feelings and emotion. Till now, AI machines are not able
to control their process, for which they need the intelligence
and mind of human beings [32]. But AI development with
same pace may cause threat to the humanity, because the
self-learning ability may cause the AI machines to learn
destructive things, which may cause killing of humanity in
a drastic way. In general, there exist various characteristics
which distinguish human level intelligence with Artiﬁcial
intelligence and they include the following;

2

Thinking ability; it can be both positive as well as neg-
ative because of having emotions, which are not with AI
machines. The lack of machines emotion may lead to de-
structive in a situation where emotions are required. Russel
Stuart believes that machines would be able to think in a
weak manner. In general, there are things that computers
cannot do, regardless of how they are programmed and
certain ways of designing intelligent programs are doomed
to failure sooner or later [33]. Therefore, most accurate
idea would be to think that it is never going to make the
machines have a thought at least similar to human The lack
of thinking ability of machines may cause lack in passing
the behavioral test. What was later called the Turing Test,
proposed that a machine be able to converse before an
interrogation for ﬁve minutes for the year 2000 and in fact, it
was partly achieved. It is concluded then, that the machines
can actually think, although they can never have a sense
of humor, fall in love, learn from experience, know how
to distinguish the good from the bad and other attitudes
of the human. Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Modern Approach
dedicates its last chapter to wonder what would happen
if machines capable of thinking were conceived [34]. Then
it is when we ask ourselves if it is convenient to continue
with this project, take risks and follow an unknown path
and believe that what may happen will not be negative.
Russel and Norvig believe that AI machines role are to be
more optimistic. They believe that intelligent machines are
capable of ”improving the material circumstances in which
human life unfolds” and that in no way can they affect
our quality of life negatively. Reasoning; algorithms mimic
the phased reasoning that people use to solve puzzles and
guide logical conclusions. For complex tasks, algorithms
may require huge computational resources; most of them
experience ’combinatorial explosions’. Memory or required
computer time will be astronomical with tasks of a certain
size. Finding a more effective algorithm to solve the problem
is a top priority. Humans usually use quick and intuitive
judgment rather than gradual deductions modeled by ear-
lier AI studies. I made progress using the ”sub-symbol”
solution to the problem. The materialized approach of the
agent highlights the importance of sensory - motor skills for
higher reasoning. The search of the neural network attempts
to imitate the structure in the brain that generates this
skill. The statistical approach to AI mimics human guessing
abilities. Planning ability; the objection of those who defend
human intelligence against that of machines is based on the
fact that they do not possess creativity or consciousness.
Planning and creativity could be deﬁned as the ability to
combine the elements at our disposal to give an efﬁcient, or
beautiful, or shrewd solution to a problem we are facing.
That is, we call creativity what we have not yet been able
to explain and reproduce mechanically in our behavior.
However, the functioning of artiﬁcial neural networks can
also be considered creative but little predictable and plan
able [35]. Action taking ability; the action taking ability of
humans are based on emotions, deep thinking and its com-
parison with how much it is beneﬁcial for the human beings
while AI only takes actions either based on their coding,
therefore, the lack of emotions and comparison about good
and bad increases threats. AI machines are actually very
intellectually limited, although they may become brilliant

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

in specialization. A child in his earliest childhood is able to
learn to put the triangle in the hollow of the triangle of the
toy, can recognize the sounds of animals and begin to apply
what he learned on a stage in different ones. Machines are
not able to do this at the same time without being previously
trained for each task. Generally, there is no neural network
in the world capable of identifying objects, images, sounds
and playing video games at the same time as people [36]. Its
limitations are obvious even within the same ﬁeld of action:
when Google’s Deep Mind created a system to pass Atari
video games, relatively simple for a computing entity due
to its two-dimensional progress based on reﬂexes and trial
and error, its neural networks they had to be trained every
time a game was completed. Machines are not capable of
transferring what they learn to other scenarios that catch
them off guard as well as humans can adapt, make use
of logic, creativity, ingenuity and reason in any situation,
however strange and new they may be [37].

Knowledge representation; it includes the problems ma-
chines which expresses the relationships between objects,
properties, categories, objects, situations, events, states, and
times. The potential cause and effect of knowledge repre-
sentation is based on what we know about what others
know of many other well-studied domains. The concept of
”what is present” is an ontology that ofﬁcially describes
a set of objects, relationships, concepts, and properties so
that the softwares agent can signiﬁcantly interpret it. The
semantics of this data are recognized as logic to describe
roles and descriptions which usually realized as ontology
web language classes, properties, and individuals. The most
common ontology is called a top ontology that provides
the basis of all other knowledge and acts as an intermedi-
ary between domain ontology covering speciﬁc knowledge
about a speciﬁc knowledge ﬁeld. Such formal knowledge
representation is based on knowledge using content-based
indexing and searching, interpretation of scenarios, support
for clinical decisions, automatic reasoning [38]. Perception;
the machine perception is the ability to derive aspects of
the world using input signals from cameras, microphones,
sensors, sonar etc., while the computer vision is the ability
to analyze visual input. Learning ability; the development of
new algorithm considerably helps the AI machines to learn
to write like humans and is able to recognize and draw
very simple visual concepts. Generally, the main virtue of
human beings is their speed and diversity, when it comes
to learning new concepts and applying them in new situa-
tions. Computers usually have hard time generalizing from
particular samples. In addition, to assessing the ability of the
program to learn concepts, they asked people to reproduce
a series of characters that had also been plotted by the ma-
chine [38]. Then, they compared them and asked different
people what they thought had been done by humans and
what by a program, in an adaptation of the classic Turing
test that the researchers call visual Turing test. Basically the
Turing test is that someone in a room is asking questions to
determine if the answers and interactions they receive come
from a person or a machine. Therefore, machine learning
ability machines signiﬁcantly makes it much better than that
of human being [38]. The natural language process system;
they give machines the ability to read and understand
human language. A sufﬁciently powerful natural language

3

processing system enables the use of user interfaces in
natural language and gains direct knowledge from written
sources such as news texts. Some simple natural language
processing applications include information retrieval, text
mining, machine translation etc [39]. The general way to
extract and process the natural language, it is essential to use
semantic indexing. These indices are expected to increase
efﬁciency as the user speeds up the processor and lower the
cost of storing the data despite the user’s input being large
[27].

5 GIVE A COMPREHENSIVE SURVEY OF WHAT CAN
TODAYS AI SUBFILELDS DO?

Todays artiﬁcial intelligence is creeping into our daily lives
by using the GPS navigation and check-scanning machines.
The use of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in business contributes
to the potentialization of various areas of daily life such
as customer service, ﬁnance, sales and marketing, admin-
istration and technical processes in various sectors. Un-
doubtedly, over the next few years, digital efforts will no
longer be isolated projects or initiatives in companies, but
the adoption of technologies such as AI at all levels and
processes of companies will be a reality to increase their
competitiveness. AI begins to integrate into the activities
of business. It is important to consider that it has not
arrived to replace human tasks, but to complement them
and allow people to develop their potential and creativity to
the maximum. Introduction of new technologies is a tool for
the prevention and ﬁght against corruption, the traceability
of electronic actions, and the security that surrounds their
management favors conﬁdence in management. This essay
will prove how artiﬁcial intelligence can improve efﬁciency
of people, help create jobs, and begin to make our soci-
ety safer for our children. Currently, massive research on
artiﬁcial intelligence signiﬁcantly improving the world, in
which majority of the tasks was performed by the machines,
while the role of humans will be to control them. This leads
towards the question that is artiﬁcial intelligence exceeds the
performance level of humans and provide human task in an
efﬁcient, quicker and economical level? The paper is about
the present and future of artiﬁcial intelligence technology
and compares it with human intelligence [39]. The role of
this paper is to explore where we are today and what will
be the ultimate future of AI technology, if we continuously
applied in every ﬁeld. Further, we will analyses the potential
AI techniques and their potential beneﬁts for improving the
system.

6 BRIEFLY EXPLAIN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND AS
WELL?

Artiﬁcial Intelligence has facilitated us in almost every ﬁeld
of life and has immense scope in future for more produc-
tivity and betterment. The origin of artiﬁcial intelligence
goes back to the advances made by Alan Turing during
World War II in the decoding of messages. The term as
such was ﬁrst used in 1950, but it was only in the 1980s
when research began to grow with the resolution of algebra
equations and analysis of texts in different languages. The
deﬁnitive takeoff of Artiﬁcial intelligence has come in the

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

4

Fig. 1: Abilities of Artiﬁcial Intelligence

last decade with the growth of the internet and the power
of microprocessors [40]. ”Artiﬁcial intelligence may be the
most disturbing technology the world has ever seen since
the industrial revolution” Paul Daugherty, Accenture’s chief
technology ofﬁcer, recently wrote in an article published
by the World Economic Forum. This ﬁeld is now boom-
ing due to the increase in ubiquitous computing,
low-
cost cloud services, new algorithms and other innovations,
adds Daugherty. Developments in Artiﬁcial Intelligence go
hand in hand with the development of processors that
over time have made them start to see these technologies
as intellectual, even changing our idea of intellect and
forthcoming the perceptions of ’machine’, traditionally un-
intelligent capacity previously assigned exclusively to man.
The AI was introduced to the scientiﬁc community in 1950
by the English Alan Turing in his article ”Computational
Machinery and Intelligence.” Although research on the de-
sign and capabilities of computers began some time ago, it
was not until Turing’s article appeared that the idea of an
intelligent machine captured the attention of scientists. The
work of Turing, who died prematurely, was continued in
the United States by John Von Neumann during the 1950s
[41]. His central contribution was the idea that computers
should be designed using the human brain as a model. Von
Neumann was the ﬁrst to anthropomorphize the language
and conception of computing when speaking of memory,
sensors etc. of computers. He built a series of machines
using what in the early ﬁfties was known about the human
brain, and designed the ﬁrst programs stored in the memory
of a computer [27].

McCulloch (1950) formulate a radically different posi-
tion by arguing that the laws governing thought must be

sought between the rules that govern information and not
between those that govern matter. This idea opened great
possibilities for AI. In addition, Minsky (1959) modiﬁed his
position and argued that imitation of the brain at the cellular
level should be abandoned. The basic presuppositions of
the theoretical core of the AI were emphasis on recognition
of thought that can occur outside the brain [?], [42], [43],
[44]. On 1958, Shaw and Simon design the ﬁrst intelligent
program based on their information processing model. This
model of Newell, Shaw and Simon was soon to become
the dominant theory in cognitive psychology. At the end
of the 19th century, sufﬁciently powerful formal logics were
obtained and by the middle of the 20th century, machines
capable of make use of such logics and solution algorithms.

7 WHAT IS MISSING TO TODAYS AI STILL TO BE
CALLED HUMAN LEVEL INTELLIGENCE?

Humans are different from Artiﬁcial Intelligence machine
physically in a sense that human race usually experiences
the same physical features while the machines takes several
forms and shapes. The trans-humanist vision analysis ex-
hibits us to believe that brains are principally the computers.
AI reports are the silicon based machines, which was con-
trolled by using the algorithm that reinforces entire internet
business. AI believes that once the computers have adequate
advanced algorithms, then they will be capable to replicate
and enhance the human mind [45]. The tests which exhibits
how much AI is distinct from the human intellectual are as
follows Turing test; in order to evaluate on what intelligence
means and on how the machine intelligence is different than
the human intelligence, the Turing test strongly provide the

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

5

Fig. 2: Timeline evolution of Artiﬁcial Intelligence

in the world are already developing actively in various
Artiﬁcial Intelligence strategies [47].In addition, they should
focus on developing responsible AI systems aligned with
ethical and moral values that lead to positive feedback and
empower people to do what they know best such as innova-
tion [50]. With the introduction of successfully implemented
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) solutions, many industries across
the earth can beneﬁt from increased proﬁtability and still
count on economic growth. To capitalize on this opportu-
nity, the study identiﬁes eight strategies for the successful
implementation of AI that focuses on adopting a human-
centric approach and taking innovative and responsible
measures for the application of technology to companies
and organizations in the world [51], [52], [53], [54], [55]. The
construction of intelligent machines in various industries
presupposes the existence of symbolic structures, the ability
of them to demand and the existence of knowledge (raw
material). Once artiﬁcial intelligence has intelligence equal
to or greater than man’s, political and social change will
inevitably arise, in which AI has all the advantages of
gaining if it realizes that it does not need humans to colonize
the universe [39], [56], [57], [58]. Recent advancement in
artiﬁcial technology depicts orbiting communications satel-
lites in the space with its 486 processors. In the future, self-
replicating artiﬁcial intelligence could easily be made with
all human colonies outside the earth, and the human race
will never be able to ﬁght in the empty space on equal terms
[45].

Fig. 3: Turing test

essential insights to the AI ﬁeld, which emphasis on how
the machine simulates the human thinking. The algorithmic
aspects of AI tools should pass the Turning Test [46]. This
algorithm will not essentially result in the AGI but may also
lean towards applied artiﬁcial intelligence. The algorithm
tuned through Turing process can also signiﬁcantly deﬁne
and passed it.

Eugene Goostman Test; Goostman tests the Turing test
and concluded that it has 33% fooling, which intended him
to propose test that should rely on AI in order to efﬁciently
solve the particular tasks that was quite near to AGI. He
also concluded that it is not possible for AI machines to be
much efﬁcient than that of human because their always acts
human actors to work the AI machine.

8 IMPORTANCE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Artiﬁcial Intelligence will revolutionize the way in which
different companies across compete and grow across the
world by representing a new production factor that can
drive business proﬁtability [4], [5], [6], [47], [48], [49]. In
order to realize the opportunity of AI, most the companies

9 KNOWLEDGE BASED TOWARDS UNDERSTAND-
ING THE NATURAL LANGUAGE

The most signiﬁcant characteristics of the natural language
are that it has the ability to serve as its particular meta-
language. It is easily possible to utilize the natural language

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

in order to provide instruction in the use as well as describe
the language itself (Weston et al., 2015). It is because, human
usually capable to utilize their natural language to describe
about natural language itself. The advancement in the nat-
ural language understanding signiﬁcantly provide effective
educable cognitive agent role whose task domain contains
the understanding of language and whose discourse do-
main contains the knowledge of their own language.

10 SPATIAL FRAMES OF REFERENCE COMPUTA-
TION FOR NARRATIVE TEXT UNDERSTANDING

This AI technique provide the spatial references which
explicitly build in order to indicate on how the reference
frame should be established and provide the determination
of burden of its determination is left to the hearers or the
readers inferences. Its also intended towards developing
heuristics which signiﬁcantly aid for dynamically comput-
ing of reference frames. The rule based expert systems; they
have important characteristics related to multiple produc-
tion rules and levels that embody the knowledge of the
distinct document images characteristics. Its includes the
inference engine which utilizes the knowledge base in order
to have identities interpretations of several blocks logical
within the image [45], [59], [60]. The control inference engine
is applied in several distinct rules levels on the image data
for blocks identiﬁcation. The lowest rule level is the knowl-
edge rule that examines the intrinsic blocks properties. The
control rules act and guide the search as the mechanism of
focuses on attention. The strategy rules determine whether
the constant image interpretation has been achieved or not.
The cognitive letter recognition model; it is based on the
feature models utilization. Within the acquisition time, the
letters is subjected towards developing the object oriented
quad tree model. In general, all of the acquired letters are
integrated into object knowledge, similar quad tree and
density values. At the time of recognition, the densities and
quad tree analysis of the current letter are related to store
quad tree density.

11 WHAT ARE OPEN CHALLENGES?

Challenges of AI technology include the following; Within
near future, the artiﬁcial intelligence goals were to affect
the society from law and economics in several technical
terms including security, veriﬁcation, validity, and control
[45], [61], [62], [63], [64], [65]. The major short-term threats of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence include the devastating race of arms in
fatal autonomous weapons and full dependence of our life
on technology will eventually lead to unemployment prob-
lem, social discrimination and power inequality in societies.
long term use of robotics will create a big challenge includes
to human beings as they will take over the world. In addi-
tion, with in a given period of time, AI will become better in
solving tasks compared to human beings hence lose of jobs.
For example drivers will be ruled over by robotic cars, tellers
will be out competed by robotic tellers and many others [66],
[67], [68]. As a result of Artiﬁcial Intelligence out competing
humans will create a big challenge on human thinking.
But in the positive side, the AI technology advancement
can also considerably aid for eradicating the disease, war

6

and poverty level. Rapid research of Artiﬁcial intelligence
in robotics is reﬂected as the large existential threats that
are faced by the humanity. The destructive method de-
veloped in the artiﬁcial intelligent robot can also increase
the risk for the super-intelligent system. For example, the
ambitious project of geo-engineering can wreak havoc of
ecosystem. This considerably increases the concerns about
the AI system advancement which is not malevolence but
have increased competency. Although, the super-intelligent
artiﬁcial intelligence tools can considerably aid in fulﬁlling
the goals un-alignment of goals may cause an increasing
problem [26], [31], [36], [37], [50], [69], [70], [71], [72], [73].
Artiﬁcial intelligence is simply the next wave of automation,
which considerably allows the machines to do tasks that
previously required attention and human intelligence. In the
short term it can replace people, but above all, it changes
the nature of the work that humans do. In the long run,
automation creates more and different types of jobs, which
is why not everyone has jobs today. Further, challenges
include the large dependence of people towards technol-
ogy for their work. This considerably increases several
psychological, physical and mental issues. In order hand,
it considerably reduces the unemployment, economic and
power balance and disability. It is believed that until the
end of 2021, there will be the beginning of a disruptive
tidal wave of artiﬁcially intelligent robots in our daily life,
such solutions powered by cognitive or artiﬁcial intelligence
technology will signiﬁcantly displace the jobs, with the great
impact felt in logistics, transportation, consumer services
and educational process. Furthermore, it can considerably
increase the privacy, security and authenticity issues within
the society.

12 WHAT ARE SOLUTION SUGGESTIONS?

To reduce the destructive effects of AI, it is essential to
develop the symbolic approach, which should allow us to
operate with weakly formalized representations and their
meanings. The success and effectiveness of solving new
problems depend on the ability to allocate only essential
information, which requires ﬂexibility in the methods of
abstraction. While a normal program sets one’s own way of
interpreting the data, which makes its work look prejudiced
and purely mechanical. The intellectual task, in this case,
solves only the person, the analyst or the programmer,
not knowing to entrust this machine. As a result, a sin-
gle abstraction model is created, a system of constructive
essences and algorithms. And ﬂexibility and universality
translate into signiﬁcant resource costs for non-typical tasks,
that is, the system from the intellect returns to brute force.
Furthermore, the hybrid approach should also be developed
in order to provide the synergistic combination of neural
and symbolic models achieves a full range of cognitive
and computational capabilities. For example, expert rules
of inference can be generated by neural networks, and
generating rules are obtained through statistical training.
Supporters of this approach believe that hybrid information
systems will be much stronger than the sum of different
concepts separately. Furthermore, to decrease the potential
threats of artiﬁcial intelligent technology, the rational risk
management process that includes the potential principles

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

7

Fig. 4: Rule-based expert system structure

of adopting the expensive precautions, which have high cost
even for the lower probability risks, can considerably pro-
vide the beneﬁts (Russell et al., 1995). The global nature of
artiﬁcial intelligence risks if fails to transfer the ethical goals
then its absolutely reasonable to estimate the longer-term AI
research risks as even larger than those of climate change.
It is also essential to adopt effective information system
which should be established in order to effectively improve
the artiﬁcial intelligence safety by initiating the awareness
on the experts working part on AI, decision-makers, and
investors. The risks information integrated with AI progress
should also have to understandable and accessible for the
broad audience. In addition, it is also instigated to adopt
the AI safety tools in order to reduce the authentication and
security issues. It is also essential to develop an effective
global coordination and cooperation system in order to
build the competitive environment in which the dangerous
race of artiﬁcial intelligent arms should be reduced [?],
[46], [51], [74], [75], [76]. It is believed that although the
future of artiﬁcial intelligence has a tremendously beneﬁcial
impact on the economy and daily lives of Americans still it
increases the issues related to privacy, security, unemploy-
ment, technological dependency, and authenticity within the
society. Therefore, it is essential to develop the preventive
control solution for mitigating or reducing such challenges.

13 WHAT ARE FUTURE PREDICTIONS FOR AI?
There is a great increase in the discussion about the impor-
tance of AI in the recent time leading to future discussions
about the existence of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the world.
The idea of creating AI is aimed at making human life easier.
However, there is still a big debate about advantages and
disadvantages of AI in the whole [77], [78], [79], [80], [81],
[82], [83]. With the introduction and successful implementa-
tion of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) solutions, many industries

in the world are and will beneﬁt from increased proﬁtability
and will still have good economic growth rates. In addi-
tion, artiﬁcial Intelligence opportunities will be aiming at
innovative, human centered approaches and measuring the
applicability of robotic technology to various industries and
companies in the entire world. Artiﬁcial Intelligence will
also revolutionize the way different companies in the world
grow and compete by representing new production ideas
that will derive proﬁtability in businesses [77], [84], [85],
[86], [87]. So as to realize such opportunities, it will require
most of the companies in the world to become more active
in the development of various Artiﬁcial Intelligence strate-
gies such as placing human factors to central nucleus. In
addition, they will focus on developing various responsible
Artiﬁcial Intelligence machines having moral and ethical
values which will result into positive results and empow-
erment of people to do things that they are well versed
with. Construction of various Artiﬁcial Intelligence systems
will help the entire world to industrial sector to presuppose
the available symbolic structures such as, the ability to
reason and also knowledge existence. In addition, at the
time Artiﬁcial Intelligence acquires intelligence greater or
equal to that of human beings, there will be a concern
about social and political change .In furthermore, AI will
have all the advantages of colonize the world without the
help of human beings. In the near future, self-replicating AI
could be made where human colonies beyond the earth will
never have potentials to ﬁght in the free space with critical
terms. The future Artiﬁcial Intelligence in various regions
in the world may be as a result of various investigation
technologies such as stellar travel, teleportation and others.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

14 WHICH LEVELS WILL IT REACH AND WHICH
ISSUES WILL BE SOLVED IN NEXT DECADES?

In this case, it is more likely that Artiﬁcial Intelligence
innovations will strongly emerge in conceivable future. In
next decades, the future of AI will be concerned on improv-
ing speech, voice, video conferencing and face recognition.
Further, Artiﬁcial Intelligence will aid for providing the
personal assistances and fully automate systems, which will
provide assistance in monitoring and surveillance, perform-
ing heavy workloads and many others [88], [89], [90], [91].
In addition, the future of Artiﬁcial Intelligence technology
such as robotics will be ensuring self-driven cars, delivery
robots and many others. With the great improvement in
computer versions and legged locomotion, the robots within
environments will become more practical hence helping
in agriculture and other service settings. In addition, the
robotics will improve on the service delivery hence reducing
domestic chores [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [88]. Further-
more, as Artiﬁcial Intelligence robotics is developing search
engines, there will be provision of personal assistance and
language gasps by use of mobile devices. The development
of search engines will lead to signiﬁcant synthesize and
improvement of the quality of information. Furthermore,
Artiﬁcial Intelligence tool will improve the medical and bio-
logical system hence reducing the complexity and volume of
information challenges concerned human abilities. Artiﬁcial
intelligence will be used in the algorithm that materializes
various systems and programs. Artiﬁcial intelligence will
consist of speciﬁc hardware and software which intends to
imitate the way of human brain performance. In general, the
areas of Artiﬁcial Intelligence application will widely cover
both emerging and traditional technologies. Recent research
on AI considerably provide the potential effects on organi-
zation and industries, for example, the AI technology will
be aiming at improving the area of data science to almost
9.6%, business intelligence to 7.8%, patient and health care
to about 6.3%, speech recognition 5.3%, computer vision
5.6%, improve defense and aerospace system to about 5.3%
and natural language processing to about 5.1%. The role
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence tools on product manufacturing
operations will lead to toward employment, ﬂexibility and
responsive chain of supply. In addition, AI roles will also
result to reliable forecasting demands, inventory accuracy
and optimization of schedules. The roles of AI will therefore
beneﬁt quicker, smarter and environmental efﬁcient process.
AI application in security and defense will majorly focus
on infrastructure protection. Currently Artiﬁcial Intelligence
facilitates the power plant, airport and economic sectors
which are quite hard to detect attacks, individuals anoma-
lous predication of disruption by man-made and natural
causes [92].

Within logistics area, the intervention of Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence will contain efﬁcient vehicles that will be in position
to route and make necessary adaptive delivery schedules. In
the ﬁnancial service sector, Artiﬁcial Intelligence tools will
contain system failure and risk alerts aiming at decreasing
malicious attacks various ﬁnancial systems; such as fraud,
market manipulation and reduction in market volatility
and trading costs. In the agriculture sector, the intelligent
solutions will provide intelligent production mechanisms

8

for processing, consumption, storage and distribution [92].
The Artiﬁcial solution will also provide given timely data
on crops that will involve use of proper materials such
as chemicals and fertilizers. Artiﬁcial Intelligence will also
be used in consumer goods and services so as to utilize
machine learning processes to match consumer demand
and enable them get best ;practices at reduced ;prices.
In communication sector, there will be improvement in
bandwidth and storage and Web translation languages.
Within the education sector, Artiﬁcial Intelligence solution
will intervene basic meaningful adaptive learning basing on
adaptive learning complemented by individual learning in
the classroom, accurate measurement of student’s sensitivity
and development of students. Easy manual techniques and
judgment will be supplemented by artiﬁcial intelligence.
The medical & health-care will provide various health eval-
uations to patients, decision support for prescribing drugs
and indication. Artiﬁcial intelligence will be used in large-
scale genome researches to determine new drugs, give nec-
essary support for ﬁnding new genetic problems, efﬁciency
and safety. The evidence based health and medicine will
help various physicians gain conﬁdence which will require
supplementary support by patients [24]. In customer service
sector, AI systems will provide the virtual assistants which
will aim at increasing the reproduction and interpretation
abilities of human language with greater precision. For
example, chat bots redraw the landscape of the IT ecosys-
tem. They will replace themselves and applications, and
service personnel in companies, and even entire operating
systems. Chat-bot (Chat-bot) - this program will contain an
interlocutor, which will be designed to communicate and
help people. At the other end, there will be a complex
system based on several Artiﬁcial Intelligence technologies.
Chat bots, oriented to business tasks, will help to can take
up best ﬂights, diet, ﬁtness trainings, booking of a hotel,
make purchase, that is to say; they will represent a unique
sub-sector of assistance and advice. Personal assistants are a
kind of incarnation of chat bots, although more common
because the technology will be developed by the largest
IT companies [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [71]. Currently,
hundreds of millions of people interact with personal digital
assistants on platforms such as Google, Apple, Amazon,
Facebook and others. This technology with the help of
personal assistants and chat-bots will be more effective
which will make a great transition from the graphical user
interface (GUI) to the Conversational User Interface (CUI)
the key trend of the next decades. The predictive algorithms
and machine learning based on AI tools will provide sales
forecasts in speciﬁc markets and also effective provision
and optimization of inventory as they will help forecast in-
come and determine the necessary quantities of a particular
input. In addition, modern Artiﬁcial Intelligence systems
will control robotics to provide surveillance, security and
attacks without threatening the human life in Warﬁeld. AI
applications in robotics will have diverse objectives related
to automation of military applications, industrial processes
and space exploration. The use of AI technology in medicine
and surgeries will signiﬁcantly help in provision of safe
work as the machinery occupied will reduce the degree of
error that could occur in surgery, avoid a tragic outcome
[93]. The disaster recovery and management application of

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

9

Fig. 5: Application areas of AI

Artiﬁcial Intelligence will considerably remark the provision
of remedial and control actions in the aftermath of man-
made and environmental disasters. Within disasters, the
considerable will optimize the mobile networks and allocate
the smart bandwidth [94]. Further, the satellite feed and
unmanned drones having image recognition and processing
feature will help in assessing damage of infrastructure and
provide predictions aimed at avoiding trafﬁc congestion and
various structural stability by adopting the adaptive routing
system.

15 CONCLUSION

In this way, artiﬁcial intelligence can achieve great discov-
eries and advances for humanity due to its multiple possi-
bilities. Most artiﬁcial intelligence systems have the ability
to learn, which allows people to improve their performance
over time. The adoption of AI outside the technology sector
is at an early or experimental stage [?], [29], [34], [43], [44],
[44], [48], [49], [54], [55], [59], [60], [70], [72], [72], [95], [95],
[96], [97], [98], [99], [100]. The evidence suggests that AI
can provide real value to our lives.AI bases its operation
on accessing huge amounts of information, processing it,
analyzing it and, according to its operation algorithms,
executing tasks to solve certain problems. Due to the new
computing architectures of the cloud, this technology be-
comes more affordable for any organization.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank...

REFERENCES

[1]

[2]

J. Shabbir and T. Anwer, “A Survey of Deep Learning Techniques
for Mobile Robot Applications,” ArXiv e-prints, Mar. 2018.
U. Neisser, G. Boodoo, T. J. Bouchard Jr, A. W. Boykin, N. Brody,
S. J. Ceci, D. F. Halpern, J. C. Loehlin, R. Perloff, R. J. Sternberg
et al., “Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns.” American psycholo-
gist, vol. 51, no. 2, p. 77, 1996.

[5]

[3]

[6]

2002.

ICELP Press,

R. Feuerstein, The Dynamic Assessment of Cognitive Modiﬁability:
The Learning Propensity Assessment Device : Theory, Instruments
and Techniques.
[Online]. Available:
https://books.google.com.pk/books?id=-3vsAAAAMAAJ
[4] M. Milford, C. Shen, S. Lowry, N. Suenderhauf, S. Shirazi, G. Lin,
F. Liu, E. Pepperell, C. Lerma, B. Upcroft et al., “Sequence
searching with deep-learnt depth for condition-and viewpoint-
invariant route-based place recognition,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Work-
shops, 2015, pp. 18–25.
K. Fragkiadaki, S. Levine, P. Felsen, and J. Malik, “Recurrent net-
work models for human dynamics,” in Computer Vision (ICCV),
2015 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 4346–4354.
S. Niekum, S. Osentoski, G. Konidaris, S. Chitta, B. Marthi, and
A. G. Barto, “Learning grounded ﬁnite-state representations from
unstructured demonstrations,” The International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 131–157, 2015.
C. Devin, A. Gupta, T. Darrell, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Learn-
ing modular neural network policies for multi-task and multi-
robot transfer,” in Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2017 IEEE
International Conference on.
C. Finn, X. Y. Tan, Y. Duan, T. Darrell, S. Levine, and P. Abbeel,
“Deep spatial autoencoders for visuomotor learning,” in Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), 2016 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 512–519.
A. A. Rusu, M. Vecerik, T. Roth ¨orl, N. Heess, R. Pascanu, and
R. Hadsell, “Sim-to-real robot learning from pixels with progres-
sive nets,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.04286, 2016.
S. Mohamed and D. J. Rezende, “Variational information max-
imisation for intrinsically motivated reinforcement learning,” in
Advances in neural information processing systems, 2015, pp. 2125–
2133.

IEEE, 2017, pp. 2169–2176.

[10]

[8]

[9]

[7]

[11] Y. Zhu, R. Mottaghi, E. Kolve, J. J. Lim, A. Gupta, L. Fei-Fei,
and A. Farhadi, “Target-driven visual navigation in indoor scenes
using deep reinforcement learning,” in Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2017 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2017, pp.
3357–3364.

[12] F. Cruz, J. Twiefel, S. Magg, C. Weber, and S. Wermter, “In-
teractive reinforcement learning through speech guidance in a
domestic scenario,” in Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2015 International
Joint Conference on.

IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–8.

[13] A. Vinciarelli, A. Esposito, E. Andr´e, F. Bonin, M. Chetouani, J. F.
Cohn, M. Cristani, F. Fuhrmann, E. Gilmartin, Z. Hammal et al.,
“Open challenges in modelling, analysis and synthesis of human
behaviour in human–human and human–machine interactions,”
Cognitive Computation, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 397–413, 2015.
J. Doshi, Z. Kira, and A. Wagner, “From deep learning to episodic
memories: Creating categories of visual experiences,” in Proceed-

[14]

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

ings of the third annual conference on advances in cognitive systems
ACS, 2015, p. 15.

[15] X. Wang, D. Fouhey, and A. Gupta, “Designing deep networks for
surface normal estimation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2015, pp. 539–547.
[16] H. Cuay´ahuitl, S. Keizer, and O. Lemon, “Strategic dialogue
management via deep reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.08099, 2015.

[17] B. M. Lake, T. D. Ullman, J. B. Tenenbaum, and S. J. Gershman,
“Building machines that learn and think like people,” Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, vol. 40, 2017.

[18] E. Ohn-Bar and M. M. Trivedi, “Looking at humans in the age
of self-driving and highly automated vehicles,” IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Vehicles, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 90–104, 2016.
J. Wei, H. Liu, G. Yan, and F. Sun, “Robotic grasping recognition
using multi-modal deep extreme learning machine,” Multidimen-
sional Systems and Signal Processing, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 817–833,
2017.

[19]

[20] M. Mathieu, C. Couprie, and Y. LeCun, “Deep multi-scale
video prediction beyond mean square error,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.05440, 2015.

[22]

[23]

[21] G. Chen, D. Clarke, M. Giuliani, A. Gaschler, and A. Knoll,
“Combining unsupervised learning and discrimination for 3d
action recognition,” Signal Processing, vol. 110, pp. 67–81, 2015.
J. Wulff and M. J. Black, “Efﬁcient sparse-to-dense optical ﬂow
estimation using a learned basis and layers,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2015,
pp. 120–130.
J.-R. Ruiz-Sarmiento, C. Galindo, and J. Gonzalez-Jimenez,
“Scene object recognition for mobile robots through semantic
knowledge and probabilistic graphical models,” Expert Systems
with Applications, vol. 42, no. 22, pp. 8805–8816, 2015.
[24] L. S. Gottfredson, “The general intelligence factor,” 1998.
[25] Y. Zhang, D. K. Robinson, A. L. Porter, D. Zhu, G. Zhang,
and J. Lu, “Technology roadmapping for competitive technical
intelligence,” Technological Forecasting and Social Change, vol. 110,
pp. 175–186, 2016.

[26] M. Turan, Y. Almalioglu, H. Araujo, E. Konukoglu, and M. Sitti,
“A non-rigid map fusion-based direct slam method for endo-
scopic capsule robots,” International journal of intelligent robotics
and applications, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 399–409, 2017.

[27] D. C. Parkes and M. P. Wellman, “Economic reasoning and
artiﬁcial intelligence,” Science, vol. 349, no. 6245, pp. 267–272,
2015.

[28] T. Y. Wong and N. M. Bressler, “Artiﬁcial intelligence with deep
learning technology looks into diabetic retinopathy screening,”
Jama, vol. 316, no. 22, pp. 2366–2367, 2016.

[29] M. Turan, Y. Almalioglu, E. Konukoglu, and M. Sitti, “A deep
learning based 6 degree-of-freedom localization method for en-
doscopic capsule robots,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.05435, 2017.

[30] M. Turan, Y. Almalioglu, H. Gilbert, A. E. Sari, U. Soylu,
and M. Sitti, “Endo-vmfusenet: deep visual-magnetic sensor fu-
sion approach for uncalibrated, unsynchronized and asymmet-
ric endoscopic capsule robot localization data,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1709.06041, 2017.

[31] M. Turan, J. Shabbir, H. Araujo, E. Konukoglu, and M. Sitti, “A
deep learning based fusion of rgb camera information and mag-
netic localization information for endoscopic capsule robots,”
International journal of intelligent robotics and applications, vol. 1,
no. 4, pp. 442–450, 2017.

[32] D. M. Mart´ınez and J. C. Fern´andez-Rodr´ıguez, “Artiﬁcial intel-
ligence applied to project success: a literature review,” IJIMAI,
vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 77–84, 2015.
J. Weston, A. Bordes, S. Chopra, A. M. Rush, B. van Merri¨enboer,
A.
Joulin, and T. Mikolov, “Towards ai-complete question
answering: A set of prerequisite toy tasks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1502.05698, 2015.

[33]

[34] M. Turan, Y. Almalioglu, E. P. Ornek, H. Araujo, M. F. Yanik,
and M. Sitti, “Magnetic-visual sensor fusion-based dense 3d
reconstruction and localization for endoscopic capsule robots,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.01048, 2018.

[35] M. Turan, Y. Y. Pilavci, R. Jamiruddin, H. Araujo, E. Konukoglu,
and M. Sitti, “A fully dense and globally consistent 3d map recon-
struction approach for gi tract to enhance therapeutic relevance
of the endoscopic capsule robot,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.06524,
2017.

10

[36] M. Turan, Y. Almalioglu, H. Araujo, E. Konukoglu, and M. Sitti,
“Deep endovo: A recurrent convolutional neural network (rcnn)
based visual odometry approach for endoscopic capsule robots,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 275, pp. 1861–1870, 2018.

[37] M. Turan, E. P. Ornek, N. Ibrahimli, C. Giracoglu, Y. Almali-
oglu, M. F. Yanik, and M. Sitti, “Unsupervised odometry and
depth learning for endoscopic capsule robots,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.01047, 2018.

[38] W. Penﬁeld, Mystery of the mind: A critical study of consciousness

[39]

and the human brain. Princeton University Press, 2015.
J. E. Swain, P. Kim, J. Spicer, S. Ho, C. J. Dayton, A. Elmadih, and
K. Abel, “Approaching the biology of human parental attach-
ment: Brain imaging, oxytocin and coordinated assessments of
mothers and fathers,” Brain research, vol. 1580, pp. 78–101, 2014.
[40] C. Renzi, F. Leali, M. Cavazzuti, and A. Andrisano, “A review
on artiﬁcial intelligence applications to the optimal design of
dedicated and reconﬁgurable manufacturing systems,” The In-
ternational Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, vol. 72,
no. 1-4, pp. 403–418, 2014.

[41] N. J. Nilsson, Principles of artiﬁcial intelligence. Morgan Kauf-

mann, 2014.

[42] P. Gupta and P. Sahai, “A review on artiﬁcial intelligence ap-

proach on prediction of software defects,” 2016.

[43] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” nature, vol.

[44]

521, no. 7553, p. 436, 2015.
S. Levine, C. Finn, T. Darrell, and P. Abbeel, “End-to-end training
of deep visuomotor policies,” The Journal of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1334–1373, 2016.

[45] F. J. Varela, E. Thompson, and E. Rosch, The embodied mind:

[46]

Cognitive science and human experience. MIT press, 2017.
S. J. Russell and P. Norvig, Artiﬁcial intelligence: a modern approach.
Malaysia; Pearson Education Limited,, 2016.

[47] Q. Kang, B. Huang, and M. Zhou, “Dynamic behavior of artiﬁcial
hodgkin–huxley neuron model subject to additive noise,” IEEE
transactions on cybernetics, vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 2083–2093, 2016.
[48] V. Campos, A. Salvador, X. Giro-i Nieto, and B. Jou, “Diving deep
into sentiment: Understanding ﬁne-tuned cnns for visual senti-
ment prediction,” in Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop
on Affect & Sentiment in Multimedia. ACM, 2015, pp. 57–62.
S. Russell, D. Dewey, and M. Tegmark, “Research priorities for
robust and beneﬁcial artiﬁcial intelligence,” Ai Magazine, vol. 36,
no. 4, pp. 105–114, 2015.
[50] M. Turan, Y. Y. Pilavci,

I. Ganiyusufoglu, H. Araujo,
E. Konukoglu, and M. Sitti, “Sparse-then-dense alignment-based
3d map reconstruction method for endoscopic capsule robots,”
Machine Vision and Applications, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 345–359, 2018.
[51] Z. Ghahramani, “Probabilistic machine learning and artiﬁcial

[49]

intelligence,” Nature, vol. 521, no. 7553, p. 452, 2015.

[52] O. K. Oyedotun and A. Khashman, “Deep learning in vision-
based static hand gesture recognition,” Neural Computing and
Applications, vol. 28, no. 12, pp. 3941–3951, 2017.

[53] R. K. Moore, “From talking and listening robots to intelligent

[54]

[55]

communicative machines.”
J. Sanchez-Riera, K.-L. Hua, Y.-S. Hsiao, T. Lim, S. C. Hidayati,
and W.-H. Cheng, “A comparative study of data fusion for rgb-d
based visual recognition,” Pattern Recognition Letters, vol. 73, pp.
1–6, 2016.
J. Tang, C. Deng, and G.-B. Huang, “Extreme learning machine
for multilayer perceptron,” IEEE transactions on neural networks
and learning systems, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 809–821, 2016.

[56] M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen, C. Citro,
G. S. Corrado, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin et al., “Tensorﬂow:
Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous distributed sys-
tems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.04467, 2016.

[57] G. E. Hinton, S. Osindero, and Y.-W. Teh, “A fast learning
algorithm for deep belief nets,” Neural computation, vol. 18, no. 7,
pp. 1527–1554, 2006.

[58] C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna,
“Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2016, pp. 2818–2826.

[59] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. L.
Yuille, “Deeplab: Semantic image segmentation with deep con-
volutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected crfs,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.00915, 2016.
J.-C. Chen, V. M. Patel, and R. Chellappa, “Unconstrained face
veriﬁcation using deep cnn features,” in Applications of Computer

[60]

11

[83]

[82] D. C. Cires¸an, U. Meier, L. M. Gambardella, and J. Schmidhuber,
“Deep, big, simple neural nets for handwritten digit recognition,”
Neural computation, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 3207–3220, 2010.
J. Lu, V. Behbood, P. Hao, H. Zuo, S. Xue, and G. Zhang, “Transfer
learning using computational intelligence: a survey,” Knowledge-
Based Systems, vol. 80, pp. 14–23, 2015.
J. Schmidhuber, “Deep learning in neural networks: An
overview,” Neural networks, vol. 61, pp. 85–117, 2015.

[84]

[85] H. Brighton and H. Selina, Introducing Artiﬁcial Intelligence:
A Graphic Guide, ser.
Icon Books Limited,
Introducing...
2015. [Online]. Available: https://books.google.com.pk/books?
id=4GxGCgAAQBAJ
J. Bai, Y. Wu, J. Zhang, and F. Chen, “Subset based deep learning
for rgb-d object recognition,” Neurocomputing, vol. 165, pp. 280–
292, 2015.

[86]

[87] V. Veeriah, N. Zhuang, and G.-J. Qi, “Differential recurrent neural
networks for action recognition,” in Computer Vision (ICCV), 2015
IEEE International Conference on.

IEEE, 2015, pp. 4041–4049.

[88] M. F. Rooney and S. E. Smith, “Artiﬁcial intelligence in engineer-
ing design,” Computers & Structures, vol. 16, no. 1-4, pp. 279–288,
1983.

[89] Y. Duan, X. Chen, R. Houthooft, J. Schulman, and P. Abbeel,
“Benchmarking deep reinforcement learning for continuous con-
trol,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, 2016, pp.
1329–1338.
S. Levine, P. Pastor, A. Krizhevsky, and D. Quillen, “Learning
hand-eye coordination for robotic grasping with large-scale data
collection,” in International Symposium on Experimental Robotics.
Springer, 2016, pp. 173–184.

[90]

[91] Y. Yang, C. Fermuller, Y. Li, and Y. Aloimonos, “Grasp type
revisited: A modern perspective on a classical feature for vision,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2015, pp. 400–408.

[93]

[92] C. S. Tirgul and M. R. Naik, “Artiﬁcial intelligence and robotics,”
International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Engineering
& Technology, vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 1787–1793, 2016.
S. E. Dilsizian and E. L. Siegel, “Artiﬁcial intelligence in medicine
and cardiac imaging: harnessing big data and advanced comput-
ing to provide personalized medical diagnosis and treatment,”
Current cardiology reports, vol. 16, no. 1, p. 441, 2014.

[94] M. Imran, C. Castillo, J. Lucas, P. Meier, and S. Vieweg, “Aidr:
Artiﬁcial intelligence for disaster response,” in Proceedings of the
23rd International Conference on World Wide Web. ACM, 2014, pp.
159–162.

[95] M. Vrigkas, C. Nikou, and I. A. Kakadiaris, “A review of human
activity recognition methods,” Frontiers in Robotics and AI, vol. 2,
p. 28, 2015.

[96] H.-J. Yoo, “Deep convolution neural networks in computer vi-
sion,” IEIE Transactions on Smart Processing & Computing, vol. 4,
no. 1, pp. 35–43, 2015.

[97] N. Das, E. Ohn-Bar, and M. M. Trivedi, “On performance evalua-
tion of driver hand detection algorithms: Challenges, dataset, and
metrics,” in Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 2015 IEEE
18th International Conference on.

IEEE, 2015, pp. 2953–2958.

[98] R. Salakhutdinov, “Learning deep generative models,” Annual

[99]

Review of Statistics and Its Application, vol. 2, pp. 361–385, 2015.
J. Schmidhuber, “On learning to think: Algorithmic informa-
tion theory for novel combinations of reinforcement learning
controllers and recurrent neural world models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1511.09249, 2015.

[100] T. Chen, Z. Chen, Q. Shi, and X. Huang, “Road marking detection
and classiﬁcation using machine learning algorithms,” in Intelli-
gent Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2015 IEEE.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 617–621.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

Vision (WACV), 2016 IEEE Winter Conference on.
1–9.

IEEE, 2016, pp.

[61] C. Dong, C. C. Loy, K. He, and X. Tang, “Image super-resolution
using deep convolutional networks,” IEEE transactions on pattern
analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 295–307, 2016.
[62] A. Gongal, S. Amatya, M. Karkee, Q. Zhang, and K. Lewis,
“Sensors and systems for fruit detection and localization: A
review,” Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 116, pp. 8–
19, 2015.

[63] A. M. Nguyen, J. Yosinski, and J. Clune, “Innovation engines:
Automated creativity and improved stochastic optimization via
deep learning,” in Proceedings of the 2015 Annual Conference on
Genetic and Evolutionary Computation. ACM, 2015, pp. 959–966.
[64] Y. Du, W. Wang, and L. Wang, “Hierarchical recurrent neural
network for skeleton based action recognition,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2015,
pp. 1110–1118.

[65] Y. Tang, “Deep learning using linear support vector machines,”

[66]

arXiv preprint arXiv:1306.0239, 2013.
I. Stoica, D. Song, R. A. Popa, D. Patterson, M. W. Mahoney,
R. Katz, A. D. Joseph, M. Jordan, J. M. Hellerstein, J. E. Gonzalez
et al., “A berkeley view of systems challenges for ai,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1712.05855, 2017.

[67] N. S ¨underhauf, S. Shirazi, F. Dayoub, B. Upcroft, and M. Milford,
“On the performance of convnet features for place recognition,”
in Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2015 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on.

IEEE, 2015, pp. 4297–4304.

[68] C. Chen, A. Seff, A. Kornhauser, and J. Xiao, “Deepdriving:
Learning affordance for direct perception in autonomous driv-
ing,” in Computer Vision (ICCV), 2015 IEEE International Conference
on.

IEEE, 2015, pp. 2722–2730.

[69] M. Turan, Y. Almalioglu, H. Araujo, E. Konukoglu, and M. Sitti,
“A non-rigid map fusion-based rgb-depth slam method for en-
doscopic capsule robots,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.05444, 2017.

[70] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, S. Jha, M. Fredrikson, Z. B. Celik,
and A. Swami, “The limitations of deep learning in adversarial
settings,” in Security and Privacy (EuroS&P), 2016 IEEE European
Symposium on.

IEEE, 2016, pp. 372–387.
[71] M. Turan, Y. Almalioglu, H. Araujo, T. Cemgil, and M. Sitti,
“Endosensorfusion: Particle ﬁltering-based multi-sensory data
fusion with switching state-space model for endoscopic capsule
robots using recurrent neural network kinematics,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1709.03401, 2017.

[72] G. Huang, Y. Sun, Z. Liu, D. Sedra, and K. Q. Weinberger,
“Deep networks with stochastic depth,” in European Conference
on Computer Vision. Springer, 2016, pp. 646–661.

[73] T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa,
D. Silver, and D. Wierstra, “Continuous control with deep rein-
forcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
[74] B. M. Lake, R. Salakhutdinov, and J. B. Tenenbaum, “Human-
level concept learning through probabilistic program induction,”
Science, vol. 350, no. 6266, pp. 1332–1338, 2015.
S. Marsland, “Machine learning, an algorithmic perspective,
chapman & hall/crc machine learning & pattern recognition,”
CRC, Boca Raton, Fla, 2009.
I. Lenz, H. Lee, and A. Saxena, “Deep learning for detecting
robotic grasps,” The International Journal of Robotics Research,
vol. 34, no. 4-5, pp. 705–724, 2015.

[75]

[76]

[77] V. C. M ¨uller and N. Bostrom, “Future progress in artiﬁcial in-
telligence: A survey of expert opinion,” in Fundamental issues of
artiﬁcial intelligence. Springer, 2016, pp. 555–572.
J. S. Esteves, A. Carvalho, and C. Couto, “Generalized geo-
metric triangulation algorithm for mobile robot absolute self-
localization,” in Industrial Electronics, 2003. ISIE’03. 2003 IEEE
International Symposium on, vol. 1.

IEEE, 2003, pp. 346–351.

[78]

[79] A. Vedaldi and K. Lenc, “Matconvnet: Convolutional neural
networks for matlab,” in Proceedings of the 23rd ACM international
conference on Multimedia. ACM, 2015, pp. 689–692.

[80] A. Eitel, J. T. Springenberg, L. Spinello, M. Riedmiller, and W. Bur-
gard, “Multimodal deep learning for robust rgb-d object recog-
nition,” in Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2015 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on.

IEEE, 2015, pp. 681–687.

[81] Y. Yang and Y. Li, “Robot learning manipulation action plans
by” watching” unconstrained videos from the world wide web.”
2015.

