FINDING AND FOLLOWING OF HONEYCOMBING REGIONS IN
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY LUNG IMAGES BY DEEP LEARNING

Emre E ˘GR˙IBOZ1, Furkan KAYNAR1, Song¨ul VARLI1, Benan M ¨USELL˙IM2, Tuba SELC¸ UK3

9
1
0
2

b
e
F
1
1

]

V
C
.
s
c
[

3
v
1
5
6
2
0
.
1
1
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— In recent years, besides the medical treatment
methods in medical ﬁeld, Computer Aided Diagnosis (CAD)
systems which can facilitate the decision making phase of
the physician and can detect the disease at an early stage
have started to be used frequently. The diagnosis of Idiopathic
Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF) disease by using CAD systems is very
important in that it can be followed by doctors and radiologists.
It has become possible to diagnose and follow up the disease
with the help of CAD systems by the development of high
resolution computed imaging scanners and increasing size of
computation power. The purpose of this project is to design a
tool that will help specialists diagnose and follow up the IPF
disease by identifying areas of honeycombing and ground glass
patterns in High Resolution Computed Tomography (HRCT)
lung images. Creating a program module that segments the lung
pair and creating a deep learning model from given Computed
Tomography (CT) images for the speciﬁc diseased regions
thanks to doctors are the main purposes of this work. Through
the created model, program module will be able to ﬁnd special
regions in given new CT images. In this study, the performance
of lung segmentation was tested by the Sørensen-Dice coefﬁcient
method and the mean performance was measured as 90.7%,
testing of the created model was performed with data not
used in the training stage of the Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN), and the average performance was measured as 87.8%
for healthy regions, 73.3% for ground-glass areas and 69.1%
for honeycombing zones.

Index Terms— Health, Lung, Deep Learning, Honeycombing,
Ground Glass, Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis, High Resolution
Computed Tomography, Classiﬁcation

I. INTRODUCTION

CT is a three-dimensional cross-sectional imaging method
based on an X-ray machine. It tries to display the internal
structure of an object with the rays it sends from different
angles. An image from the capture moment of the tomogra-
phy device is presented in Figure 1. In years of development,
the CT scans have become faster and have started to generate
higher resolution images. In this way, the diagnosis and
treatment of the doctors started to produce more efﬁcient
results. The need for accurate and consistent analysis of
high resolution and multiple sections of tomography im-
ages, which is the output of modern tomography devices,
increases. Computer Aided Diagnostic (CAD) systems are
produced to meet this analysis need.

Deep Learning is an artiﬁcial neural network algorithm
that simulates the functioning of the human brain in the

1 Yıldız Technical University, Computer Engineering Department

{emre.egriboz, furkankaynary}@gmail.com,
songul@ce.yildiz.edu.tr

2˙Istanbul University, Cerrahpas¸a Faculty of Medicine, Department of

Chest Diseases benanmusellim@gmail.com

3Haseki Education Research Hospital, Department of Radiology

drtubas@gmail.com

Fig. 1. Tomography Capturing Step

processing of data and creates models for decision making.
In this method, the decision model is created by training and
veriﬁcation phases. The amount of data used in these phases,
cleaning and distribution according to a statistical model are
important parameters for the accuracy of the model to be
formed. CNNs are artiﬁcial networks that are often formed
from image patterns and are a special study area of deep
learning.

IPF which is a type of Interstitial Lung Disease (ILD), is
a progressive lung disease that hardens the lungs and makes
the patient increasingly breathing difﬁcult. Fibrosis is seen
as scar tissue or a hard collagen surrounding the alveoli.
The diagnosis is made based on the typical pattern of lung
tomography, which is called as honeycombing region. Also,
the typical pattern of the early period of lung ﬁbrosis is
called as ground-glass region. Tomography images of the
honeycombing and ground-glass regions are presented in
Figure 2.

Due to the high number of sections, small areas or difﬁcult
to diagnose, the detection of speciﬁc areas of IPF disease
on tomography images and the process-related follow-up of
disease progression have become a difﬁcult task for ﬁeld
experts. CT images were processed by image processing
methods. Mean Hounsﬁeld Unit (HU) value of all lungs
[1], density histogram analysis [1], density mask technique
[2],[3] and tissue classiﬁcation methods [4] were used for
the characterization of IPF disease. These studies show
the tight correlation between HU values and IPF and the
patterns of tissue obtained from CT images are can be
successfully used in prediction by its differentiation ability.
This project provides a digital system for the detection of the
honeycombing and ground-glass pattern by computer, which
play a decisive role in the diagnosis of IPF disease on CT
images. It is also a CAD project that helps the doctors and
radiologists in the diagnosis and follow-up of IPF disease.

 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I
HOUNSFIELD UNIT SCALE VALUES

Substance
Air
Lung
Water
Blood
Kidney
Bone
Gold

Value(HU)
-1000
-700 to -600
0
13 to 50
20 to 45
200 to 3000
30000

Before the lung segmentation phase begins the CT images
are enriched to work more clearly and human-viewable. The
beneﬁt of the enrichment stage can be seen in Figure 3.

(a) Original CT image

(b) Enriched CT image

Fig. 3. Enrichment stage sample.

The lungs are all ﬁlled with air. Then the necessary mask
can be gotten by thresholding at the lung by HU value(-
700 to -600) and the air HU value(-1000) to segment the
lung pair. Then, the mask is obtained by removing small
objects on lungs. After the obtained mask is applied to the
tomography image containing the original HU values, lung
segmentation is completed. Figure 4 shows mask that will
be used to segment current section and shows also masked
lung pair.

(a) Obtained mask

(b) Masked lung pair

Fig. 4. Lung segmentation result sample.

C. Blocking

Segmented lung images are need to be partitioned into
blocks and presented as input to the network. Blocks are
cropped by the region of interest (ROI) and padding dimen-
sions. The blocks are shifted to get a new ROI. ROI regions
are not overlapped. The dominant marked output of the ROI
region for the cropped part is considered to be the output for
the whole part. ROI and padding sizes, cropped blocks and
grid are presented in Figure 5.

All experiments in the study used 4 pixels as the ROI and
4 pixels as the padding. According to these ROI and padding

(a) Ground-glass pattern

(b) Honeycombing pattern

Fig. 2.
(a) Ground-glass pattern which is colored green is seen in the
posterior region of the right lob of lung. (b) Honeycombing pattern which
is colored red is seen in the entire posterior region of left lob of lung.

Unfortunately there are no previous studies to benchmark the
algorithms used in the prediction of the regions of disease.
The next chapters of this article are organized as follows:
In the second chapter, the characteristics of the dataset, lung
segmentation, the cutting of the lung images and the deep
learning model which are the main topics of the system
design are mentioned. In the third chapter, the details of the
experimental results are explained and in the last section, the
results obtained from this study are summarized and future
studies are mentioned.

II. SYSTEM DESIGN

A. Dataset

CT image data is saved in DICOM (Digital Imaging
and Communications in Medicine) ﬁle format, which is a
international standard for medical imaging, by tomography
machines. During all phases, the HU scale which was used
to digitize DICOM images is used.

Special areas on the lungs are divided into 3 groups:
ground-glass, honeycombing and healthy. The marking pro-
cess is performed by any scoring tool by ﬁeld experts who
are generally doctors and radiologists. The dataset has data
from 6 patients, per includes from 32 to 170 DICOM slices.
The detailed data sizes of the patients are given in Section
II-C. Scoring data is saved in NIFTI (The Neuroimaging
Informatics Technology Initiative) ﬁle format separately from
tomography images, which is a global standard for neu-
roimaging marking.

B. Lung Segmentation

Different substances have different HU values. HU values
of some items related to our project are provided in Table
I. Materials containing similar substances have similar HU
values. In other words, the hardness of the material could be
thought as HU value.

regions.

Experiments in this study were applied on Windows-10
operating system and Keras application program interface
which uses Google TensorFlow framework in backend by
using Python programming language. The computer runs
on that system is powered by a 4-core Intel i7-6700HQ
with 2.6 GHz 6MB cache processor, 16GB of memory and
a NVIDIA GeForce GTX950M model with 4GB memory
graphical processor.

A. Lung Segmentation Accuracy

The performance in the lung segmentation phase was
measured by Sørensen–Dice coefﬁcient. The Dice similarity
coefﬁcient speciﬁes a similarity ratio for the segmented
lung by analytical method segmentation and professional
segmentation between 0 and 1. 0 indicates that two images
do not intersect at any point, and 1 indicates full intersection
for all points.

Dice(A, B) =

2 ∗ |intersection(A, B)|
|A| + |B|

(1)

The Dice similarity coefﬁcient of two sets A and B is
expressed as in (1) where |A| represents the cardinal of set A.
Lung segmentation accuracy by patient samples are provided
in Table III.

TABLE III
LUNG SEGMENTATION ACCURACY BY PATIENT

1st Patient
2nd Patient
3rd Patient
4th Patient
5th Patient
6th Patient
Weighted Average

#of Section
36
32
41
170
159
39
-

Dicemetric(%)
0.920
0.916
0.903
0.845
0.980
0.871
0.907

B. Region Prediction Accuracy

Prediction performance is measured by one patient out
method. In the one patient out method, each data is used
once as training and once as test data. The accuracy of the
model is calculated by taking the weighted average of the
accuracy values according to the number of sections. Region
prediction precision table by patient samples are provided in
Table IV.

The data of 3rd patient could not be used because the
tomography images were not clear due to the patient’s motion
inside the tomography device so patterns are broken, up
to negatively affect the network’ s weights. Higher accu-
racy was obtained for both ground-glass and honeycombing
regions in the 4th and 5th patients whose CT has more
sections than others. The worst result was measured as 40%
in ground-glass accuracy of 6th patient.

In general, the system have some trouble distinguishing
between ground-glass and honeycombing ﬁelds and confuses
them. It has been difﬁcult to differentiate them for even
doctors and radiologists. The system has obtained 87%
accuracy in the detection of healthy areas.

Fig. 5.
arrow represents ROI length.

Blocking process: Short arrow represents padding length, long

length, the number of blocks obtained from the sections
are given in Table II. The number of blocks of regions is
proportioned to the lowest region’ s sample count to avoid
the over-sampling. For this reason, the number of total blocks
of some patients is low compared to the number of sections.

TABLE II

NUMBER OF BLOCKS BY PATIENT AND REGION

1st Patient
2nd Patient
3rd Patient
4th Patient
5th Patient
6th Patient
Total

#of Section Honeycombing G. Glass Healthy
25.507
10.204
21.317
15.174
980
393
66.942
26.778
47.402
28.441
3.412
1.366
165.560
82.356

15.304
16.705
588
40.165
18.962
2.047
93.741

36
32
41
170
159
39
447

D. Deep Learning Model

Deep learning methods have been widely used in recent
years with its high successes especially in image classiﬁca-
tion [6]. CNN is one of the deep learning algorithm used by
LeCun for character recognition for the ﬁrst time[5]. CNN
was applied in small size data at the time when it was ﬁrst
proposed. The development of hardware technologies, it has
been tried to be applied in large scale data.

CNN models uses different kinds of layers. The layers
used in this study are dense layer which consists regular
neurons with their weights, 2 dimensional convolutional
layer which extracts features by applying spatial convolution
over images, 2 dimensional max-pooling layer which does
down-sampling over images by reducing their dimensionality
because of memory limitation, dropout layer which prevents
the overﬁtting by dropping speciﬁed percentage of dense
layer. Activation functions are used to draw the results from
the neurons to a common range.

The success of CNN depends on the number of ﬁlters used,
the depth of the network and the simpliﬁcations performed
in the pool layers in the structured architecture. Therefore,
there are different CNN architectures according to different
problem types. The proposed model is depicted in Figure 6.

III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Experimental results include the success rate of lung
segmentation and the success rate of predicting the diseased

Fig. 6. Structure of deep learning network model

TABLE IV

REGION PREDICTION ACCURACY BY PATIENT

1st Patient
2nd Patient
3rd Patient
4th Patient
5th Patient
6th Patient
W. Average

#of Section Honeycombing(%) G. Glass(%) Healthy(%)
0.640
0.508
-
0.952
0.906
0.970
0.878

0.601
0.601
-
0.631
0.756
0.846
0.691

0.606
0.906
-
0.801
0.736
0.401
0.733

36
32
41
170
159
39
-

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The purpose of this project is to design a tool that will help
specialists diagnose and follow up the disease by identifying
areas of honeycombing and ground glass areas in high-
resolution lung images. Creating a program module that
segments the lung pair and creating a deep learning model
from given CT ﬁles for the special diseased regions thanks
to doctors are the main purposes of this work. Through the
created model, program module will be able to ﬁnd special
regions in given new CT ﬁles.

In future studies, different additional image processing
methods such as morphological operations can be applied
to lung segmentation phase. By adding more patients to
the system, it is hoped that success in the deep learning
model will increase further. Also, additional features can
be manually extracted and the channels in the input can be
increased to improve the weights in the network. With such
improvements, the performance of both segmentation and
prediction can be increased.

REFERENCES

[1] Murray J. Gilman, Richard G. Laurens, James W. Somogyi and Eric
G. Honig, ”CT Attenuation Values of Lung Density in Sarcoidosis”
Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography, 7(3):407–410, JUN 1983
[2] Nestor L.M¨uller, Roberta R.Miller and Raja T.Abboud, ”An Objective
Method to Quantitate Emphysema Using Computed Tomography”,
Chest, Volume 94, Issue 4, October 1988, Pages 782-787

[3] Wang, Z., Gu, S., Leader, J.K. et al., ”Optimal

threshold in CT

quantiﬁcation of emphysema”, Eur Radiol (2013) 23: 975

[4] Ye Xu, Edwin J.R. van Beek, Yu Hwanjo, Junfeng Guo, Geoffrey
McLennan and Eric A. Hoffma, ”Computer-aided Classiﬁcation of
Interstitial Lung Diseases Via MDCT: 3D Adaptive Multiple Feature
Method (3D AMFM)”, Academic Radiology, Volume 13, Issue 8,
August 2006, Pages 969-978

[5] LeCun, Yann, et al. ”Gradient-based learning applied to document
recognition.”, Proceedings of the IEEE 86.11 (1998): 2278-2324
[6] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778.

