8
1
0
2
c
e
D
5
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

3
v
1
7
6
8
0
.
2
1
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Deep Learning by Doing: The NVIDIA Deep Learning Institute
and University Ambassador Program

Xi Chen
University of Kentucky
Lexington, Kentucky
billchenxi@gmail.com

Gregory S. Gutmann
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Tokyo, Japan
gutmann@c.titech.ac.jp

Joe Bungo
Deep Learning Institute, NVIDIA
Corporation
Austin, Texas
jbungo@nvidia.com

ABSTRACT
Over the past two decades, High-Performance Computing (HPC)
communities have developed many models for delivering educa-
tion aiming to help students understand and harness the power of
parallel and distributed computing. Most of these courses either
lack a hands-on component or heavily focus on theoretical charac-
terization behind complex algorithms. To bridge the gap between
application and scientific theory, NVIDIA Deep Learning Institute
(DLI) (nvidia.com/dli) has designed an on-line education and train-
ing platform that helps students, developers, and engineers solve
real-world problems in a wide range of domains using deep learning
and accelerated computing. DLI’s accelerated computing course
content starts with the fundamentals of accelerating applications
with CUDA and OpenACC in addition to other courses in training
and deploying neural networks for deep learning. Advanced and
domain-specific courses in deep learning are also available. The
online platform enables students to use the latest AI frameworks,
SDKs, and GPU-accelerated technologies on fully-configured GPU
servers in the cloud so the focus is more on learning and less on
environment setup. Students are offered project-based assessment
and certification at the end of some courses. To support academics
and university researchers teaching accelerated computing and
deep learning, the DLI University Ambassador Program enables
educators to teach free DLI courses to university students, faculty,
and researchers.

KEYWORDS
Hands-on learning, HPC Education, Open edX, Deep learning, Pro-
fessional education

1 INTRODUCTION
With an increasing emphasis on using computing as the new sci-
entific experimentation method, computer science has become an
interdisciplinary academic area. Deep Learning (DL), an emerging
and powerful tool for machine learning, has gained attention in re-
cent years due to its potential to reshape the future of computational
research. Many ground-breaking results rely on DL, such as image
classification[11], Atari game bots[10], and medical diagnosis[9],

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full
citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Copyright ©JOCSE,
a supported publication of the Shodor Education Foundation Inc.

© 2018 Journal of Computational Science Education
https://doi.org/10.22369/issn.2153-4136/x/x/x

and have achieved superhuman levels of performance. One reason
for this recent quantum leap in research has its roots in the growing
prevalence of High-Performance Computing (HPC).

HPC provides the parallel and distributed computing power
that allows deep learning to excel. NVDIA CUDA-powered GPUs
have several times enabled the title of the fastest supercomputer
in the world since 2010[2]. Since then, the new setup for most
HPC research has been parallel systems incorporating CPUs with
GPUs[7].

Despite decades-long efforts in HPC education, HPC and DL
are still understood and used by only a small portion of the sci-
entific and engineering community[6]. There two main problems
contributing to the low rates of adoption: 1. the material requires
a certain amount of computational and statistical literacy; and 2.
HPC programming environments are difficult to set up due to the
variety of hardware and OS system types. Overcoming these two
concerns requires curating learning material for a broad range of
audiences that includes practical cases, as well as abstracting the
system implementation to simplify the use of HPC resources.

Combing current online learning andragogy with a cloud com-
puting platform consisting of a VM and Docker containers, we il-
lustrate a new educational platform designed by the NVIDIA Deep
Learning Institute as showing in Figure 1. This platform provides
hands-on experience with DL and facilitates practical DL and HPC
education.

1.1 High Performance and GPU Accelerated

Computing Education

High Performance Computing and GPU acceleration used to be
accessible only to scientists and engineers to fulfill their desire to
better model realistic physical systems. As computing hardware
becomes cheaper and its performance improves, these resources
are no longer found only in mega research centers. Major tech
companies such as Microsoft, Google, and Amazon now provide
low-cost HPC instances in the cloud, and major academic programs
have gradually embraced the convenience and efficiency of HPC
because of it. Despite these efforts there is still a large unmet need
for new, powerful, HPC-enabled tools and curricula for education.
To extend exposure and build a larger base within the HPC
research community, many government agencies have initiated
programs aimed to develop awareness at all stages of the education
pipeline. These include the Education, Outreach and Training (EOT)
program from the National Science Foundation (NSF), the Advanced
Scientific Computing Initiative (ASCI) funding program, and the
High-Performance Computing Modernization Program (HPCMP)
from the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), among others. Such

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: CUDA C/C++ course on DLI online platform. The
Navigation Bar allows students navigate across different sec-
tions of the platform. Courses that contain multiple sub-
sections will list all course titles as url links to navigate to
the course content.

initiatives have a huge effect in developing awareness of HPC at
all stages of the education system.

While waiting for these efforts to pay off, and in response to
the immediate need for HPC, hundreds of modules and online
training sessions have been created for users from the world’s
supercomputing centers. While these approaches are widespread
and effective, they cannot be scaled to reach a larger audience as
they are centered around a set of one-to-one tutorials and are only
available for certain infrastructures. In addition, due to the high
demand of research needs, only limited HPC resources from these
computing centers are allocated for education and experimentation
by the beginning learners and students.

1.2 Abstractions through CUDA
CUDA, in essence, is a minimal extension of the C and C++ pro-
gramming language. As a scalable parallel programming platform,
it allows sophisticated HPC programing to be expressed in an easily
understood abstraction. After its release in 2007, CUDA rapidly
evolved into a popular Application Programming Interface (API)
model that facilitates a wide range of research and applications[5].
CUDA provides three key abstractions: a hierarchy of thread
groups, shared memories, and barrier synchronization. The CUDA
paradigm allows programmers to partition a "problem into coarse
subproblems that can be solved independently in parallel, and then
into finer pieces that can be solved cooperatively in parallel"[7]
while hiding memory management and thread synchronization
behind the scenes. In addition, NVIDIA provides a CUDA profiler
to help programmers further understand and debug each parallel
process to achieve the best possible performance (Figure 7).

(a) To start a course, click the
"Start" button.

(b) How to access Jupyter
Notebook. To stop GPU
server and end a course,
click "Stop Task."

Figure 2: Individual course landing page.

1.3 NVIDIA’s Deep Learning Institute for HPC

and DL Education

NVIDIA’s Deep Learning Institute (DLI) aims to lower the barrier
of entry for HPC education and develop novel ways of enabling sci-
entists and engineers in their own research through the use of HPC
resources [www.nvidia.com/dli]. Based on the experience from pre-
vious instructor-led courses via DLI’s University Ambassador Pro-
gram, cloud-based computing solutions for training and education
reduces the learning curve and allows students to gain hands-on ex-
perience with parallel computing systems without getting bogged
down setting up programming environments. Participants can earn
certification to prove subject matter competency and support pro-
fessional career growth. Certification is offered for select online
courses and instructor-led workshops. [www.nvidia.com/dli] All
students need to participate in the hands-on training is a computer
with a modern browser installed and a reliable internet connection.
DLI is currently using GPU virtual instances in combination with
Jupyter Notebooks to implement a hands-on, project-based expe-
rience in DL and accelerated computing. Participants can easily
click a "Launch Task" or "Stop Task" button to begin and end their
learning tasks as part of a full course, as showing in Figure 2. If a stu-
dent has issues or questions about the course material at any point,
they can participate in a MOOC-style discussion session to post
their questions or search for solutions, as showing in Figure 3. For
programming questions beyond the scope of the course, NVIDIA
provides online forums and documentation that allow students to
find answers to more complex questions.

DLI offers five full-day, hands-on "Fundamentals" courses for
those who may be new to accelerated computing or deep learning.
Two of DLI’s most popular courses with project-based certifica-
tion are Fundamentals of Deep Learning for Computer Vision and
Fundamentals of Accelerated Computing with CUDA C/C++. To
prepare learners with more practical knowledge, DLI also provides
application-specific content in the following disciplines:

• Deep Learning for Autonomous Vehicles
• Deep Learning for Healthcare
• Deep Learning for Digital Content Creation
• Deep Learning for Finance

(a) Users can post a topic (A),
search existing topics (B), and
browse all topics (C). The in-
struction of how to use Discus-
sion (D).

(b) Individual topic layout: (A)
Title and content of the topic,
and (B) responses from members
or course staff.

Figure 3: Discussion panel layout.

Figure 4: Inside the DLI CUDA C/C++ course - Managing Ac-
celerated Application Memory with CUDA C/C++ Unified
Memory and nvprof. Course content including links that al-
low students open browser-based code editors.

In this article, we present a hands-on, online course provided by
DLI: Fundamentals of Accelerated Computing with CUDA C/C++
(Figure 4). This course provides a path that allows learners with
little or no knowledge of HPC GPU acceleration to harness the
power of parallel computing and possibly achieve an official CUDA
certification based on project-based assessments.

The rest of the article is organized as follows: In Section 2, we
present the technologies used in the design of the course. Section
3 highlights the University Ambassador Program, and Section 4
demonstrates the results of teaching events across the globe. We
conclude with a summary of the work.

2 METHODS
When developing courseware, DLI combines the primary design
elements of HPC abstraction and hands-on experience with deep
learning. Before DLI courses, the vast majority of learners were us-
ing personal computers or relying on traditional batch-processing
application programming interfaces (APIs) to manage a HPC en-
vironment. Instead of convincing participants to follow the tradi-
tional HPC education paradigm, DLI focused on providing access to
fully-configured GPU servers in the cloud that abstract complicated
environment setup, HPC project-based courses and tasks available

Figure 5: By combining teaching and interaction with in-
structor and hands-on practice, learning promotes self-
discovery and self-appropriate. which leads to future appli-
cation.

to students perpetually after training for students to refer back to
course materials at any time.

Since NVIDIA’s 2007 introduction of CUDA, a parallel computing
platform API, and the emergence of many open source software li-
braries extended from CUDA such as TensorFlow, TensorRT, Torch,
Caffe, CNTK, etc., access to high-performance computation has
given researchers the scientific and parallel computing abstractions
they need to utilize HPC resources. Therefore, all DLI courses and
labs provide CUDA-powered GPU acceleration. NVIDIA also pro-
vides cloud-computing support through the NVIDIA GPU Cloud
(NGC): GPU-accelerated containers available on-demand on all ma-
jor cloud platforms for accelerating deep learning and scientific
research.

2.1 Reflection-in-action Model
From the very beginning of DLI’s course development, the em-
phasis has always been on hands-on experience and a journey of
reflection-in-action. For participants of all backgrounds, learning
by doing provides the ultimate method to master a skill, especially
in the case of continuing learning throughout a professional career.
For live, instructor-led courses, students receive active coaching and
participate in a transparent teaching experience with a instructor
which helps students understand how and why they are learning
course content in particular ways. A similar experience is provided
by DLI online self-paced courses. By presenting students with real-
world problems, feedback and project-based assessment, students
develop a much better grasp of the course material. A trial-and-error
approach to solve in-lecture tasks provides students with opportu-
nities for self-discovery and self-appropriate learning [Schon 1987]
(Figure 5). We believe a hands-on andragogy encourages students
to go beyond what the course work provides and makes it more
likely that they will later apply what they have learned in their
own disciplines.

If students are enthusiastic and want to immediately apply what
they have learned, NVIDIA also provides documentation webpages,
FAQs, and expert support to facilitate the efforts of course partici-
pants.

2.2 OpenEdX MOOC and Cloud Delivery

Method

Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) are no longer a new con-
cept in the educational landscape. Open edX, a non-profit MOOC
platform, emerged in 2012 [Porter et al. n.d.]. The main aim behind
it is to provide essential education for a particular topic to anyone,
and sometimes at any time,either toward a degree or just to sat-
isfy one’s own personal learning desires. One advantage of this
approach is the ability to reach many attendees across geographical
location and technology barriers. The Open edX platform includes
both a Content Management System (CMS) and a Learning Manage-
ment System (LMS)[8]. DLI has adopted this platform and delivers
courses to help address the pressing educational needs in the HPC
and communities.

Unlike traditional education, MOOC-style platforms provide an
immediate feedback assessment technique (IF-AT) that allows stu-
dents to receive immediate results that assess their knowledge[4].
IF-AT encourages students to self-discover and self-explore new
knowledge, provides an enjoyable learning experience, and evi-
dently improves students’ retention of the course content[3].

To date, DLI have planned and delivered hundreds of instructor-
led trainings, created more than 50 courses and labs across the
globe, and have fully embraced the MOOC paradigm.

One obstacle that many HPC and parallel computing beginners
face is the environment setup. To learn from a hands-on program-
ming project, students need a clean and functional setup so the
debugging process can focus on coding problems instead of HPC
environment issues. DLI uses a cloud container solution to allow
students to focus more on learning and less on environment set-
up. DLI uses fully-configured GPU servers in the cloud to provide
this immersive programming environment. Cloud containers are
a lightweight technology to virtualize applications in the cloud.
They allow elastic and rapid resource pooling to provide a fully
functional parallel CPU and GPU programming environment[1].
The average setup time is below 5 minutes for most DLI courses.
To further simplify the process for students, DLI uses an automated
script to abstract the whole process behind the scenes as showing
in Figure 2.

2.3 Interactive Course Interface
Here we illustrate the DLI interface using the Fundamentals of
Accelerated Computing C/C++ course as an example. Students nav-
igate through the course via a series of links. Each course page links
to areas within four subgroups: Home (the landing page), Course,
Discussion, and Progress (Figure 1). The actual training content
is located in the course section and developed into modules using
flecture videos and practical/programming sessions to reinforce the
key concepts, as shown in Figure 1. Navigating between units and
modules is as simple as clicking on the links, completing assess-
ments, and leaving the interactive assessment lab by clicking the
start/launch and stop buttons (Figure 2).

Figure 6: Remote Nvidia Visual Profiler captures all of the
GPU metrics.

As part of the LMS, a progress page keeps track of all the ques-
tions and projects that a student has completed as well as the cor-
responding assessment results for each module. This allows both
students and instructors have an at-a-glance grasp of the students
performance to date. The hands-on assignments (Figures 4) were
developed using Jupyter notebooks allowing students to receive
immediate feedback while working though the content. In the case
of the CUDA C/C++ course, the remote NVIDIA Visual Profiler (Fig-
ure 6) enabled students student a deep understanding from the GPU
visual metrics allowing them to better determine the bottlenecks
in a GPU function.

3 DLI UNIVERSITY AMBASSADOR

PROGRAM
3.1 DLI Mission
The mission of the DLI is to help engineers and researchers solve
extremely challenging problems using AI and deep learning. To
achieve this end, it is necessary to utilize HPC platforms. DLI pro-
vides the education essential for using such platforms leveraging
massively parallel GPUs. DLI helps "developers, data scientists and
engineers to get started in architecting, optimizing, and deploying
neural networks to solve real-world problems in diverse indus-
tries such as autonomous vehicles, healthcare, robotics, media &
entertainment and game development." [nvidia.com/dli]

As stated above, one of the most important elements of the
DLI course design is the hands-on experience, which is integrated
into both the self-paced and instructor-led versions of the courses.
Course materials are currently available across many disciplines
ranging from finance to biology, from computer vision to autonomous
vehicles, and from game development to accelerated computing
[nvidia.com/dli]. More industry-specific content is coming soon.

3.2 Bringing DLI to Campus: University

Ambassador Program

DLI recognizes and awards qualified academics as applied deep
learning experts. "DLI University Ambassador" is an additional
status academics and researchers can achieve on top of a DLI in-
structor certification. The University Ambassador Program enables

educators to teach free instructor-led DLI courses exclusively to uni-
versity students and staff. This program is free to join and provides a
wealth of benefits to academic communities looking to bring AI and
deep learning to their campuses. The Ambassador Program offer
free DLI instructor certification. provides ready-made, world-class
educational content to universities, and offers expense reimburse-
ment for travel and catering expenses for instructor-led workshops.
Ambassadors leverage DLI content in their university curriculum
courses, campus-wide workshops, and to satisfy workshop and
tutorial submissions at academic conferences around the world. For
more information about this program visit www.nvidia.com/dli.

3.3 DLI Teaching Kits
In an effort to extend the HPC community and encourage students
to harness the power of DL, DLI offers downloadable Teaching
Kits co-developed with well-known academic experts and univer-
sities. Each kit includes curriculum materials for a semester-long
university course. Complementing DLI’s application and hands-on
approach, Teaching Kit content integrates more academic theory
to satisfy the needs of traditional university coursework. Albeit,
in addition to lecture slides, video, and textbook materials, there
is at least one accompanying hands-on lab with full source code
solutions found in private Git repositories. Many Teaching Kit mod-
ules offer multiple labs and solutions. The Teaching Kit program
also enables educators to give free access to online, self-paced DLI
courses and student certification by way of promotional codes on
the MOOC-style platform. To learn more about these resources
please visit developer.nvidia.com/teaching-kits. The current Teach-
ing Kits and academic co-authors includes:

• Machine/Deep Learning (NYU/Yann LeCun)
• Accelerated/Parallel Computing (UIUC/Wen-Mei Hwu)
• Robotics (CalPoly)

Most Teaching Kits contain:

• Lecture slides
• Lecture videos
• Hands-on labs with solutions
• Larger coding projects with solutions
• Quiz/Exam questions with solutions
• Electronic textbooks
• DLI online self-paced promotional codes
• Syllabus with specific DLI online labs interleaved

3.4 Fundamentals of Accelerated Computing

with CUDA C/C++

In the Fundamentals of Accelerated Computing courses, DLI intro-
duced CUDA parallel computing platform that aims to accelerating
computing in terms of impressive performance and ease of use.
CUDA supports many popular programming languages such as
C, C++, Fortran, Python and MATLAB and expresses parallelism
through extensions in the form of basic keywords. CUDA has an
ecosystem of highly optimized libraries for DNN, BLAS, graph ana-
lytics, FFT, and more, and also ships with powerful command line
and visual profilers. Here we present a glimpse of the course to help
readers have a better understand of the structure and contents of
the course on how to use CUDA to accelerate computing in C/C++.

Figure 7: Slides on differentiating GPU-accelerated vs. CPU-
only applications.

Figure 8: Hands-on experience reinforces learning. Through
hands-on coding practice, students have chance to learn
though doing. It also opens opportunities to interact with
instructor.

To help students ease in the parallel programming paradigm, the
CUDA course first differentiates the GPU-accelerated vs. CPU-only
applications through a series of animation as showing in Figure 7.
Then after CUDA syntax and keywords introduction, a hands-on
task follows: students need to modify a CPU C/C++ function into a
GPU kernel as showing in Figure 8. (Due to the space limitation,
we will not further include detailed and exciting course contents.)
For every hands-on task, comments in the code will assist student
work and the solutions are available in case they get stuck.

Following the CUDA design cycle: Assess Parallelize, Optimize,
Deploy (APOD), in the second and third labs of the course, stu-
dents will learn how to use command line and visual profilers to
further optimize their CUDA code. Along the way, CUDA course
will also introduce concepts such as Unified Memory, Streaming
Multiprocessors, asynchronous memory prefetching, manual mem-
ory allocation and copying, Streams and so on. All in the efforts
to help students to have a better grasp of the HPC programming
bottle-necks in real-world scenario and to offer solutions on how
to toggle them. In Figure 9 we showed that using the command-
line and visual profilers one can quickly and qualitatively measure
the performance of a application, and to identify opportunities for
optimization.

especially due to the fact that some courses offer certification they
can use to bolster their professional career in the future.

4.2 Feedback from University Ambassador

Instructor

DLI content primarily focuses on the hands-on application of deep
learning and parallel computing. This creates a good complement
to the theoretical approaches of traditional academic curricula. DLI
courses enable students who are new to deep learning quickly jump-
start their journey of solving real world problems. The content is not
designed to provide a low-level explanation on the core components
of deep learning such as mathematics and statistics.

At Tokyo Institute of Technology, Prof. Gutmann (author of the
paper) conducted a pilot workshop using the CUDA course and
online platform described in this paper, and there were no reported
issues of students using the online learning platform despite the use
of various host machines and operating system types. At the start
of each topic within the course Prof. Gutmann would give a very
brief introduction to the concepts, then the students were able to go
through the material and solve the exercises that were correspond-
ing to each topic. Unlike traditional lectures where students have
little interactivity with the content and tend to easily lose interest
and not be actively engaged, Prof. Gutmann’s students remained
enthusiastic with the hands-on materials and teaching instructions.
At the end of the course, many students were able to use what they
learned from the course and their hands-on exercises to solve the
assessment task of accelerating a particle system code, resulting
in their individual certificate of competency. Students who did not
finish on-sight were able to finish over the next couple days on
their own, as the course platform conveniently provides students
perpetual access to the online version of the course.

At University of Kentucky (UK), students from the Association
for Computing Machinery organization also conducted the DLI
CUDA C/C++. DLI Certified University Ambassador Xi Chen (au-
thor of the paper) taught the workshop paving the way for students
to have a better understanding of how to accelerate and parallelize
applications using GPU computing. UK students were very excited
about learning the concepts from the course materials, and also
from each other, since Xi Chen himself happens to be a PhD student.
The CUDA course demystified GPU programming for the students,
and the hands-on exercises provide a platform that allows students
to challenge each other with positive reinforcement. Many students
expressed how the course made it simple to quickly learn how to
harness the power of CUDA and GPUs, and they were interested
in future DLI courses.

4.3 Feedback from Students
The feedback from students who attended the DLI CUDA C/C++
course was quite positive and encouraging, shown in Figure 11.
None of the students had difficulty navigating the course platform,
and all of them expressed interest in future DLI workshops in AI
and accelerated computing. The feedback survey showed that al-
most all of the students thought the instructors were helpful during
the learning path, with 86% of them indicating the instructors were
extremely helpful. Part of this can be attributed to DLI’s rigorous in-
structor certification process consisting of a collection of instructor

Figure 9: Command line and Visual Profilers. In second and
third lab, students will learn how to use profiler to measure
the performance and identify opportunities for optimiza-
tion.

Figure 10: Certificate of Competency. After completing the
course and passing the project-based assessment, students
receive a certificate of course competency.

After students finish the course and pass the assessments, they
will receive a certificate of course completion, as shown in Fig-
ure 10. Every certification has a unique identification number and
online hyperlink, and is tied directly to the student. Students are
actively linking their certifications from their resumes and LinkedIn
profiles. At the time of this writing, there are no other hands-on,
project-based assessment and certification programs in applied
deep learning.

4 RESULTS
DLI has awarded over 150 certified University Ambassadors across
the globe, and they have delivered over 150 instructor-led work-
shops in less than a year’s time since 2017. Many academics have
included DLI course materials in their own syllabi to prepare their
students to solve real-world problems using AI and parallel com-
puting.

4.1 Reaching Students Globally
At UC Berkeley, Prof. Rekesha and Prof. Arias have modified the
content of their courses to include a full life-cycle example from
the DLI of how Deep Learning can be used, and to illustrate the
relationship between Deep Learning and CPU/GPU-powered hard-
ware. At National Tsing Hua University, Prof. Lee has integrated
DLI course materials into teaching activities. His team, NVISION,
won the 2016 NVIDIA Intelligent Robotics challenge.

In India, Prof. Chickerur of KLE Technology University has con-
ducted several DLI training events training thousands of students.
The feedback from students continues to be positive and favorable,

The authors would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers

for their valuable comments and helpful suggestions.

REFERENCES
[1] David Bernstein. 2014. Containers and Cloud: From LXC to Docker to Kubernetes.

IEEE Cloud Computing 1, 3 (Sept. 2014), 81–84.

[2] Shane Cook. 2013. CUDA Hardware Overview. Morgan Kaufmann.
[3] Michael L Epstein, Amber D Lazarus, Tammy B Calvano, Kelly A Matthews,
Rachel A Hendel, Beth B Epstein, and Gary M Brosvic. 2017. Immediate Feed-
back Assessment Technique Promotes Learning and Corrects Inaccurate first
Responses. The Psychological Record 52, 2 (May 2017), 187–201.

[4] Andrew Ho, Isaac Chuang, Justin Reich, Cody Coleman, Jacob Whitehill, Curtis
Northcutt, Joseph Williams, John Hansen, Glenn Lopez, and Rebecca Petersen.
2015. HarvardX and MITx: Two Years of Open Online Courses Fall 2012-Summer
2014. SSRN Electronic Journal (March 2015).

[5] David Luebke and 2008. [n. d.]. CUDA: Scalable parallel programming for high-
performance scientific computing. In 2008 5th IEEE International Symposium on
Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2008). IEEE, 836–838.

[6] Julia Mullen, Chansup Byun, Vijay Gadepally, Siddharth Samsi, Albert Reuther,
and Jeremy Kepner. 2017. Learning by doing, High Performance Computing
education in the MOOC era. J. Parallel and Distrib. Comput. 105 (July 2017),
105–115.

[7] John Nickolls, Ian Buck, Michael Garland, and Kevin Skadron. 2008. Scalable
parallel programming with CUDA. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2008 classes. ACM Press,
New York, New York, USA, 1.

[8] B Porter, M Haseltine, N Batchelder The Open edX Conference, and 2015. [n. d.].

The state of Open edX.

[9] Ravi, Daniele, Wong, Charence, Deligianni, Fani, Berthelot, Melissa, Andreu-
Perez, Javier, Lo, Benny, and Yang, Guang-Zhong. [n. d.]. Deep Learning for
Health Informatics. IEEE journal of biomedical and health informatics 21, 1 ([n.
d.]), 4–21.

[10] David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George
van den Driessche, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershel-
vam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalch-
brenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. 2016. Mastering the game of Go with deep
neural networks and tree search. Nature 529, 7587 (Jan. 2016), 484–489.
[11] C Szegedy, W Liu, Y Jia, P Sermanet, and S Reed. 2015. Going deeper with

convolutions. (2015).

Figure 11: Summary of the Student Feedback Survey for Fun-
damentals of Accelerated Computing with CUDA C/C++.

assessments and in-person interviews with DLI master instructors.
When asking how useful the information provided by the course
might be for solving real-world problems and science, 71% of the
students suggested the information is extremely useful, while 29%
indicated moderately. Regarding the question about how helpful
the course was for sharpening their HPC programming knowledge
in general, 72% suggested it was extremely helpful, 14% expressed
moderately helpful, and 14% indicated slightly helpful.

We also asked what percentage of the course should be instructor-
led vs. self-paced, and students suggested they should be roughly
50% versus 50%. There were a few suggestions on how to improve
the course delivery: 66% expressed a desire to add more low-level de-
tails and theory in the course, and 17% wish the course content was
easier to understand. Other free-form comment responses from the
survey included more time was needed for the exercises and more
practical examples and less number crunching would be beneficial.

5 CONCLUSIONS
Like the discovery of the electricity, Deep Learning is fundamentally
changing the world using scalable HPC platforms as the medium of
education for this technology. Major breakthroughs in computer vi-
sion, Natural Language Processing (NLP) and autonomous driving
go hand-in-hand with the growth of HPC. Three related goals form
the foundation of DLI course design: (1) to provide training to assist
the AI and HPC communities in fulfilling its educational needs; (2)
to help researchers transition to using the technologies future HPC
will build upon; and (3) to explore novel learning and application-
based teaching paradigms. We present the platform, content and
programs from NVIDIA’s Deep Learning Institute, which aims to
train researchers, scientists and professional engineers how to solve
real-world problems with AI and accelerated computing. We be-
lieve that deeper hands-on experiences provide the most rapid and
effective style of technology education.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank NVIDIA Deep Learning Institute
for providing the figures, documents and online course platform,
and Tokyo Institute of Technology and ACM University of Kentucky
chapter for their helps organizing the course workshops.

