Deep optical neural network by living tumour brain cells 
Authors: D. Pierangeli1,4†, V. Palmieri2,4†, G. Marcucci1,4, C. Moriconi3, G. Perini2,  
M. De Spirito2, M. Papi2*, C. Conti1,4*  

Affiliations: 
1Department of Physics, University Sapienza, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome (IT) 
2Institute of Physics, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, IRCCS ‐ Università 

Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, 00168 Rome (IT) 
3School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Cardiff University, CF10 3NB Cardiff (UK) 
4Institute for Complex Systems, National Research Council (ISC-CNR), Via dei Taurini 19, 
00185 Rome (IT) 

*Correspondence to claudio.conti@uniroma1.it, massimiliano.papi@unicatt.it 

†These authors equally contributed 

Abstract:  
The new era of artificial intelligence demands large-scale ultrafast hardware for machine learning.1 
Optical artificial neural networks process classical and quantum information at the speed of light, 
and are compatible with silicon technology, but lack scalability and need expensive manufacturing 
of  many  computational  layers2–6.  New  paradigms,  as  reservoir  computing7–9  and  the  extreme 
learning  machine10,  suggest  that  disordered11–16  and  biological  materials  may  realize  artificial 
neural networks with thousands of computational nodes trained only at the input and at the readout. 
Here we employ biological complex systems, i.e., living three-dimensional tumour brain models, 
and demonstrate a random neural network (RNN) trained to detect tumour morphodynamics via 
image  transmission17,18.  The  RNN,  with  the  tumour  spheroid19  as  a  three-dimensional  deep 
functions  and  detects  cancer 
computational 
morphodynamics from laser-induced hyperthermia inaccessible by optical imaging. Moreover, the 
RNN quantifies the effect of chemotherapy inhibiting tumour growth. We realize a non-invasive 
smart probe for cytotoxicity assay, which is at least one order of magnitude more sensitive with 
respect  to  conventional  imaging.  Our  random  and  hybrid  photonic/living  system  is  a  novel 
artificial machine for computing and for the real-time investigation of tumour dynamics. 

reservoir,  performs  programmed  optical 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
Brain-inspired complex systems are emerging as computing reservoirs in machine learning, optical 
neuromorphic  computing,  telecommunication,  and  cryptography  4,7.  This  approach  to  learning 
machines does not require training of each of the deep computational layers but employs large-
scale random mixing with trained input and output. This strategy is optimally suited for cheap new 
hardware with thousands of layers and novel applications.  
Optical  neuromorphic  computing  processes  information  at  the  speed  of  light2,3,  but  requires  a 
careful  design  and  fabrication  of  the  deep  layers,  which  strongly  hampers  the  development  of 
large-scale  photonic  learning  machines.  On  the  other  hand,  random  optical  systems  have  been 
considered  for  imaging  and  computing  at  the  classical  and  quantum  level11,17.  Recently, 
paradigmatic complex systems, such as spin-glasses, have been experimentally demonstrated and 
proposed by random photonics12–16. Disordered assemblies of dielectric particles furnish thousands 
of optical computing neurons; however, the large scattering loss limits computing applications. 

Here  we  use  real-brain  cells  for  realizing  a  bio-inspired  optical  neural  network.  Our  living 
computational reservoir has thousands of cells acting as wave-mixing nodes. Not only they furnish 
a large-scale computing reservoir but enable specific and very significant applications as detection 
of tumour morphodynamics. We use three-dimensional (3D) tumour models (3DTMs), which are 
largely  used  in  oncology  and  are  a  promising  platform  for  studying  complex  cell-to-cell 
interactions and anti-cancer therapeutics uptake and diffusion in tumour bulk. As we demonstrate 
here, 3DTMs disclose applications for hybrid bio/photonic computational devices.  

A tumour is a population of abnormal cells with temporally unrestricted growth. Most tumours are 
composed of different types of cells with remarkable variety with respect to metastatic ability and 
chemotherapy  resistance  20.  The  spatial  features  of  the  tumour  architecture  are  fundamental 
markers of cancer growth and invasiveness behavior 21. For light, a 3DTM is a complex assembly 
of disordered scattering cells, which also evolve with time.  

In our hybrid bio/photonic-hardware, the 3DTM cellular layers are the diffractive deep layers of 
the RNN (Figure 1). By exploiting structured light propagation,11,18,22–24, we show that the RNN is 
a “universal optical interpolant” able to perform programmed functions25. Through external stimuli 
on the tumour brain cells – either of thermal or chemical nature – we control the internal weights 
of the living RNN and its functionality. The RNN follows subcellular cancer morphodynamics, 
not detected by more invasive and destructive optical imaging.  
In  optical  neural  networks,  the  many  signals  composing  a  laser  beam  4,26  are  mixed  by  using 
waveguides2,  or  in  free-space3,  and  processed  by  a  nonlinear  operation  at  detection.  Figure  1 
compares  the  conventional  artificial  optical  neural  network  architectures  with  our  RNN.  In  the 
reported optical learning machines2,3, (Figs. 1a,b), the trained internal matrix W and the biases B 
are implemented by tunable waveguide devices 2 or customized diffractive layers 3. In our design, 
the input layer is realized by a spatial light modulator (SLM) that is iteratively trained, and the 
light propagates through the spherical layers of the 3DTM (Fig. 1c). The number, position, size, 
and  optical  properties  (as  absorption  and  refraction)  of  the  complex  assembly  of  tumour  cells 
determine the time-dependent internal weights of the reservoir (encoded in their random transfer 
matrix W and variable bias B in Fig. 1b).  

We use glioblastoma cells to form brain cancer models fabricated following a commonly adopted 
protocol19 for 3D spheroids [Figure 1c, see Methods]. Various 3D cell culture systems have been 
reported, we use non-scaffolded 3D spheroid cultures27. If compared with in vivo  tumours, the 
spheroid  mimics  heterogeneity,  internal  structures  growth  kinetic  and  –  remarkably  –  drug 

2 

 
 
response 21. We consider both static and time-evolving 3DTM. In the latter case, the evolution is 
either induced all-optically by nonlinear optical thermal effects due to an additional infrared laser 
pump (used below to simulate hyperthermia) or freely evolving, due to the spontaneous cancer 
growth (eventually hampered by a chemotherapy, as detailed in the following). 

Figure 2a shows the experimental implementation of the bio-photonic machine (see Methods). We 
first consider fixed tumour cells, with no spontaneous dynamics, obtained by chemical fixation. 
The weights of the computational network layers are static and do not change in time. By a proper 
training (Fig. 2b) of the input SLM, we obtain many different output images: the RNN acts as a 
universal optical synthesizer (Fig. 2c). In this case, once the target function is implemented, no 
feedback is present on the SLM weights.  

The  training  procedure  fixes  the  weights  of  the  input  layers  but  is  strongly  dependent  on  the 
internal  structures of  the deep  cellular layers that  are  permanently  fixed. If the  structure of the 
spheroid varies, the computation gives a different result. This property allows us to track light-
stimulated cancer morphodynamics with extreme sensitivity. 

We  first  demonstrate  morphodynamics  sensing  by  inducing  hyperthermia.  Infrared  (IR)  laser-
induced temperature variations in brain tissue are studied in many applications, like imaging and 
cancer therapy 28,29. To induce changes in the fixed spheroid we use an IR pump beam that locally 
heats the cells (Methods). By affecting the internal structure of the deep layers through thermally-
induced  changes  in  the  refractive  index  and  geometry,  the  IR  laser  modifies  the  output  of  the 
machine  (Fig.  3a).  As  the  cancer  spheroid  changes  morphology,  the  single-point  target  image 
moves and blurs, and the intensity autocorrelation decreases. By means of a recurrent approach, 
as the state of the deep layers changes, we retrain the SLM to keep constant the output (Fig. 3b). 
The RNN with feedback adapts its internal structure to maintain its functionality. This is equivalent 
to invert the information flow, with the constant output playing the role of an input state and the 
original input  weights  acting as the actual output. These  weights  detect internal  changes in  the 
tumour  spheroid  (Fig.  3c)  and  track  the  effect  of  the  hyperthermia.    Fig.  3d  shows  the  tumour 
rearrangement time when varying the pump power. 

As the transmission image results from the complex interference process in the random medium, 
the machine output is extremely sensitive to any small change inside the spheroid. To show that 
this approach outperforms standard optical methods, we repeat the hyperthermia during imaging 
of spheroids with confocal microscopy. We observe the cell nuclei morphology and distribution 
during irradiation  by  IR  laser pulses and we did  not  find any detectable  morphological  change 
(Figs. 3e,f). The output of the bio-photonic neural network contains information about the entire 
volumetric sample and detects internal variations that are not resolved by direct imaging. 

We  then  realize  an  optical  machine  with  living  tumour  cells.  While  the  tumour  spontaneously 
evolves, we continuously adjust the input matrix on the SLM to keep the light focused in a specific 
point  (“feedback  on”  case,  Fig.  4a).  After  an  initial  transient,  the  efficiency  of  the  operation 
improves, and the focus intensity increases with time.  This dynamic is an outcome of the growth 
of tumour spheroid as confirmed by monitoring the spheroid shape with direct optical imaging in 
a set of parallel experiments (Fig. 4d) 30. Figure 4c shows the persistence time TP of transmitted 
speckle  22  and  gives  the  decay  time  on  which  the  field  decorrelates  due  to  the  tumour 
morphodynamics.  TP scales linearly with the efficiency of the target image formation 22. We find 
that TP grows with time, corresponding to an improved performance of the neural network. The 
enhancement of the RNN performance is related to the increased number of internal cellular layers 

3 

 
 
during the growth of the 3DTM. Figure 4d shows 3DTM images (“CTRL” panels). The area of 
the cell assembly increases with time as shown in Figure 4e. Notably, the percentage growth in 
Fig. 4e of Tp is orders of magnitudes larger the corresponding increase for the area in Fig. 4c. 

We also obtain evidence that the living RNN track cellular processes in the 3DTM beyond the 
simple unconstrained growth. We consider the cytotoxic action of chemotherapeutics (Methods) 
31. We treat spheroids with cisplatin at 80µg/ml and we observe that after an initial transient the 
machine is still able to follow the tumour dynamics at a reduced signal level (Figs. 4b,c). This 
occurs because the natural growth is counter-balanced by the apoptotic effect of the cisplatin (Fig. 
4e).  The  evolution  of  the  optical  machine  output  is  found  in  correlation  with  direct  imaging 
analysis  (Figs.  4c,e).  However,  while  microscopy  is  not  able  to  evidence  the  effect  of  the 
chemotherapy, the output of the optical neural network displays significant differences (with one 
order of magnitude amplification) in the initial stage with respect to freely evolving tumours. The 
two signals  in  Fig. 4c  are  clearly separated  whereas  the analysis of images in  Fig.  4e does not 
reveal statistically relevant changes. The living RNN hence furnishes real-time novel information 
on the tumour dynamics and is more sensitive with respect to static optical imaging. 

Nowadays various methods are available to characterize tumour spheroids, including, for example, 
immunohistochemistry, confocal laser scanning microscopy, and two-photon microscopy 21. All 
these techniques have various advantages, but also many drawbacks. The biggest limitations of the 
pathological analysis of tumour morphology – commonly adopted for biopsies from patients - 21 
are the artifacts of the cutting process, the variability in staining and the batch effects and the lack 
of information about dynamics. Live imaging is being improved to follow cell dynamics, but dyes, 
probes,  and  phototoxic  routines  modify  native  cell  behavior  27.  Our  random  optical  learning 
machines furnish - after proper training - direct volumetric information, which is real-time, label-
free, and extremely sensible, as it depends on thousands of scattering events interference processes 
in a 3DTM. We have demonstrated the first hybrid biological/photonic computational hardware. 
The use of biological matter in photonic devices is not only relevant for understanding fundamental 
processes  in  tumour  dynamics  but  allows  to  explore  evolving  cellular  assemblies  as  new 
architectures  for  computing.  Our  demonstration  opens  several  possibilities  for  novel 
computational systems, novel diagnostic equipment, and - more in general - for the application of 
photonic and artificial intelligence to the study of living complex systems. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
References 

1.  LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. & Hinton, G. Deep learning. Nature 521, 436 (2015). 

2.  Englund, D. et al. Deep learning with coherent nanophotonic circuits. Nat. Photonics 11, 441 

(2017). 

3.  Lin, X. et al. All-optical machine learning using diffractive deep neural networks. Science 

361, 1004 (2018). 

5.  Krenn, M., Malik, M., Fickler, R., Lapkiewicz, R. & Zeilinger, A. Automated Search for 

new Quantum Experiments. Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, (2016). 

6.  Bueno, J. et al. Reinforcement learning in a large-scale photonic recurrent neural network. 

Optica 5, 756 (2018). 

7.  Duport, F., Schneider, B., Smerieri, A., Haelterman, M. & Massar, S. All-optical reservoir 

computing. Opt. Express 20, 22783 (2012). 

8.  Van,  der S. G., Brunner, D. & Soriano, M. C. Advances in photonic reservoir computing. 

Nanophotonics 6, 561 (2017). 

9.  Vandoorne, K. et al. Toward optical signal processing using Photonic Reservoir Computing. 

Opt. Express 16, 11182 (2008). 

10. Huang, G.-B., Wang, D. H. & Lan, Y. Extreme learning machines: a survey. Int. J. Mach. 

Learn. & Cyber. 2, 107 (2011). 

11. Huisman, S. R., Huisman, T. J., Wolterink, T. A. W., Mosk, A. P. & Pinkse, P. W. H. 

Programmable multiport optical circuits in opaque scattering materials. Opt. Express 23, 

3102 (2015). 

12. Ghofraniha, N. et al. Experimental evidence of replica symmetry breaking in random lasers. 

Nat. Commun. 6, 6058 (2015). 

5 

 
 
 
 
13. Pierangeli, D. et al. Observation of replica symmetry breaking in disordered nonlinear wave 

propagation. Nat. Commun. 8, 1501 (2017). 

14. Takesue, H. et al. Large-scale Ising spin network based on degenerate optical parametric 

oscillators. Nat. Photonics 10, 415 (2016). 

15. Roques-Carmes, C. et al. Photonic Recurrent Ising Sampler. arXiv:1811.02705 [physics] 

(2018). 

16. del Hougne, P. & Lerosey, G. Leveraging Chaos for Wave-Based Analog Computation: 

Demonstration with Indoor Wireless Communication Signals. Phys. Rev. X 8, 041037 

(2018). 

17. Vellekoop, I. M. & Mosk, A. P. Focusing coherent light through opaque strongly scattering 

media. Opt. Lett. 32, 2309 (2007). 

18. Horstmeyer, R., Ruan, H. & Yang, C. Guidestar-assisted wavefront-shaping methods for 

focusing light into biological tissue. Nat. Photonics 9, 563 (2015). 

19. Moriconi, C. et al. INSIDIA: A FIJI Macro Delivering High-Throughput and High-Content 

Spheroid Invasion Analysis. Biotechnol. J. 12, 1700140 (2017). 

20. Tamura, M. et al. Morphology-based optical separation of subpopulations from a 

heterogeneous murine breast cancer cell line. PLOS ONE 12, e0179372 (2017). 

21. Yuan, Y. et al. Quantitative Image Analysis of Cellular Heterogeneity in Breast Tumors 

Complements Genomic Profiling. Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 157ra143 (2012). 

22. Vellekoop, I. M. & Mosk, A. P. Phase control algorithms for focusing light through turbid 

media. Opt. Commun. 281, 3071 (2008). 

23. Rotter, S. & Gigan, S. Light fields in complex media: mesoscopic scattering meets wave 

control. Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, (2017). 

6 

 
 
24. Mosk, A. P., Lagendijk, A., Lerosey, G. & Fink, M. Controlling waves in space and time for 

imaging and focusing in complex media. Nat. Photonics 6, 283 (2012). 

25. Huang, G.-B., Wang, D. H. & Lan, Y. Extreme learning machines: a survey. Int. J. Mach. 

Learn. & Cyber. 2, 107–122 (2011). 

26. Tait, A. N. et al. Neuromorphic photonic networks using silicon photonic weight banks. Sci. 

Rep. 7, 7430 (2017). 

27. Kasprowicz, R., Suman, R. & O’Toole, P. Characterising live cell behaviour: Traditional 

label-free and quantitative phase imaging approaches. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 84, 89 

(2017). 

28. Nourhashemi, M., Mahmoudzadeh, M. & Wallois, F. Thermal impact of near-infrared laser 

in advanced noninvasive optical brain imaging. Neurophotonics 3, 015001 (2016). 

29. Scholkmann, F. et al. A review on continuous wave functional near-infrared spectroscopy 

and imaging instrumentation and methodology. Neuroimage 85, 6 (2014). 

30. Schindelin, J. et al. Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat. 

Methods 9, 676 (2012). 

31. Jiang, P. et al. Novel anti-glioblastoma agents and therapeutic combinations identified from 

a collection of FDA approved drugs. J. Transl. Med. 12, 13 (2014). 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgments  We  thank  MD  Deen  Islam  for  the  assistance  in  the  laboratory.  We 
acknowledge support from the QuantERA ERA-NET Co-fund 731373 (Project QUOMPLEX) and 
Sapienza Ateneo 2016 and 2017. 

Author contributions CC and MP, conceptualization and supervision, ideation of experiments, 
methodology,  project  administration.  DP,  investigation  by  experiments  and  data  analysis.  VP, 
resources, and investigation by sample fabrication, imaging, and biological assays, validation. GM 
and MDS, methodology and theoretical analysis. CM and GP, resources by providing samples and 
expertise on tumour models. All the authors contributed to the writing of the original draft, review, 
and editing. 

8 

 
 
 
 
Fig.  1.  Hybrid  bio/photonic  deep  learning  machine.  a,  Conventional  optical  deep  neural 
networks with multiple layers (L1, …, LN). Each point is a neuron with a complex transmission 
trained  to  perform  a  function  between  input  and  output  planes.  We  report  diffractive  optical 
networks3 and nanophotonic neural networks2. Bn and Wn are the bias and the linear transfer matrix 
at each layer n. F is a nonlinear activation function. The network is ordered, and colors encode the 
bias at each node. b, RNN with the tumour spheroid as a computing reservoir. In the input,  an 
SLM with feedback by the output layer tailors the input signal. The internal layers are random 
multicellular  assemblies.  Each  cell  is  a  scattering  center  with  a  complex  transfer  function  and 
training occurs by input SLM weights. Due to the biological nature, the internal weights change 
because of  tumour  spontaneous  evolution, or  under the  controlled  external  action of  an optical 
pump beam that heats the spheroid (non-linear control layer). This realizes a recurrent disordered 
network with time-dependent B and W.  c, 3D representation of the hybrid living machine by z-
stack  images  of  the  spheroid  obtained  after  staining  of  cell  nuclei  (DAPI)  and  cell  actin 
cytoskeleton (Phalloidin) and imaging by confocal microscopy. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. Optical synthesis with quenched tumour cells. a, Implementation of the bio-photonic 
RNN.  A  continuous-wave  (CW)  laser  beam  (=532  nm)  is  phase-modulated  by  the  SLM  in 
N=72×72 addressable input modes that are mixed with different weights by the cancer spheroid. 
Insets show a trained phase mask on the SLM and a representative confocal image of a central 
plane of a glioblastoma spheroid labeled with DAPI (in cyan, marks cell nuclei) and Phalloidin (in 
red, marks cells actin cytoskeleton). The transmitted light distribution is detected by a CCD camera 
and feedback the network. b, Intensity distribution in the output plane during training for an input 
wave that is initially randomly-shaped and reaches the target shape for any random tumour sample 
(reservoir)  by  a  proper  fixing  of  the  input  weights.  c,  The  RNN  performs  different  optical 
transformations such as focusing on a single-point, two-points, and four-points targets. Intensities 
are normalized to the average transmission. Scale bars are 50µm. P1, P2: polarizers; L1, L2, L3: 
lenses; OBJ1, OBJ2: microscope objectives. SH: shutter.  

10 

 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Optical neural network retrieving the tumour response to hyperthermia. a,b, Evolution of the 
trained output under IR pumping: temporal dynamics of the intensity y-profile along the single-point target 
for (a) static input weights and (b) feedback on. Vertical dashed lines indicate the time interval of active 
pumping. c, Autocorrelation overlap of the SLM matrix in different cases: without feedback (a, blue dots) 
and with feedback (b) for pump power P=0.3W (magenta) and P=0.6W (red). The recurrent RNN adjusts 
the input weights to maintain the target operation and compensate for the spheroid structural variations. d, 
3DTM response time varying the pump power. e, Confocal microscopy of spheroids labeled with DAPI 
before and after irradiation with IR pulses. Scale bar is 30 µm. f, Morphological features of cell nuclei 
before (blue) and after (red) irradiation with IR pulses by image analysis with FIJI software.30 Histograms 
show that statistically significant alterations of nuclei nearest neighbor distances (Nnd), nuclei area, aspect 
ratio, circularity and solidity after hyperthermia treatment are not visible (Methods).  

11 

 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Detecting tumour growth and chemotherapy effects. a-b,  The RNN - trained to focus light 
in a point - operates with feedback to track (a) the dynamics of spontaneously growing spheroid (“control”, 
CTRL) and (b) the effect of chemotherapy (80 g/mL of cisplatin). c, Timescale of internal cell dynamics 
(persistence  time  TP  normalized  to  the  initial  value)  from  the  RNN  output  for  freely  evolving  and 
chemotherapy administered spheroids. d, Bright-field images of untreated glioblastoma spheroids (CTRL) 
show a temporal increase in diameter compared to cisplatin-treated (CIS) samples. e, Time evolution of the 
area (normalized to the initial value) of the untreated and treated (80 g/mL of cisplatin) spheroids. 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
METHODS 

Tumour spheroids growth 
Spheroids have been prepared as reported in19 using human glioblastoma cell line U-87 MG (ATCC® HTB-14™) 
cultured in DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum at 37 °C, 5% CO2. To form spheroids, 2500 cells have been seeded 
into  ultra-low-adherence  round-bottomed  96-well  plates  and  immediately  centrifuged  (300g,  2  min)  obtaining  a 
suspended  loose  cell  aggregate.  After  4  days,  tight  spheroidal  cell  aggregates  had  formed.  Depending  on  the 
experiments, spheroids have been analyzed in two possible states, namely fixed or living state. Fixed spheroids have 
been prepared with formaldehyde (3,7%) and glutaraldehyde (2,5%) mixture for 30 minutes and then washed with 
Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS). Living spheroids have not been processed to monitor real-time response to therapy.  

Chemotherapy treatment  
Spheroids treated with different concentrations (10-80 g/mL) of Cisplatin (Accord Healthcare) were imaged with a 
multi-well plate reader (Cytation 3, Biotek) at controlled temperature (37 °C) over time to analyze spheroid growth 
from brightfield images. Image analysis has been performed using INSIDIA Macro.19  

Optical experimental setup 
Light from a continuous-wave (CW) laser source with wavelength λ= 532nm is expanded and made to impinge on a 
twisted nematic liquid crystal reflective modulator (SLM, Holoeye LC-R 720). The active area of the SLM is divided 
into N= 72x72 independent blocks (100 pixels per block) forming the set of controlled input  modes (input layer). 
Using a suitable combination of incident and analyzed polarizations (polarizers P1 and P2), the SLM  is set into a 
phase-mostly modulation mode with a 10% residual intensity modulation. Phase-modulated light is imaged through a 
1:3 demagnifying telescope (lens L1 and L2) on the back-focal plane of a long working distance objective (OBJ1, 
50x, NA= 0.55), so that the phase of each block of the SLM matches a wavevector at the entrance of the sample. The 
3mW beam is focused inside the cancer spheroid and the intensity transmitted in a plane 1.5 mm apart is imaged on a 
CCD  camera  by  a  collecting  objective  (OBJ2,  20x,  NA=  0.25).  During  the  experiments,  the  tumour  spheroid  is 
embedded  in  a  physiological  water  solution  and  kept  at  room  temperature.  The  morphological  structure  of  the 
quenched tumour spheroid, approximately 450µm sized, has been fixed during growth, which makes the biological 
sample  optically  stationary  over  the  measurement  time  (several  minutes).  A  CW  near-infrared  laser  source  (λ  = 
1064nm) is used as a pump beam to induce cancer morphodynamics (laser-induced hyperthermia) by means of thermo-
mechanical effects mediated by the absorption of water molecules. 

Training method 
The generic input state is a combination of the N optical modes with arbitrary phases from 0 to 2π and gives a low-
intensity speckle pattern as output (Fig. 2b). Training of the optical random neural network is achieved by a feed-
forward  algorithm  that  minimizes  a  cost  function  expressed  in  terms  of  a  target  local  intensity  distribution  in  the 
transmission plane (output layer). Specifically, at each iteration of the algorithm we randomly select a cluster of input 
modes  and  adjust  the  corresponding  phases  with  π/5  resolution  on  the  SLM;  the  change  is  stored  only  if  the  cost 
function decreases, that is, if the intensity detected on specific groups of the CCD pixel (target) increases. 
As the algorithm converges, random clusters of decreasing size are selected to avoid trapping into local computational 
minima. In the case of multiple-points targets, at each iteration, the input matrix change is stored only if combinations 
of cost functions associated to each single-point target are simultaneously minimized. After the training stage, that in 
Fig.  2b  we  limit  to  approximately  103  iterations,  the  input  layer  encodes  the  proper  distribution  of  modes  (input 
weights)  that  mixed  by  the  deep  multicellular  layers  performs  the  specific  operation. These  photonic  input-output 
functions are extremely sensitive to changes in the reservoir structure (the multicellular cancer network) and can be 
exploited for monitoring and sensing its morphology. When the optical neural network operates with feedback on, this 
training algorithm runs while the cancer spheroid changes morphology over time, adapting the input phases on the 
SLM to maintain the output target. 

Confocal microscopy imaging and analysis 
To  verify  if  light  treatment  impaired  spheroid  structure,  the  hyperthermia  experiment  was  performed  on  fixed 
spheroids stained with 4',6-diamidine-2-fenilindolo (DAPI, Sigma Aldrich) under a Confocal Microscope (Nikon A1 
MP). Z-stacks of each spheroid have been acquired (y=1 µm) and analyzed with FIJI software.30 A set of nuclei 
morphology  describers  have  been  retrieved  from  confocal  images,  i.e.  nearest  neighbor  distance,  area,  circularity 
(4*Area/Perimeter2),  aspect  ratio  of  the  nucleus  fitted  ellipse  (Major  axis/Minor  axis)  ranges  from  0  (infinitely 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elongated polygon) to 1 (perfect circle).  The aspect ratio of the particle’s fitted ellipse (Major Axis/Minor Axis), 
and solidity (Area/convex area). Labeling of actin cytoskeleton has been obtained by Alexa Fluor 647 phalloidin (Life 
Technologies), according to the manufacturer protocol.  

Data and materials availability 
The authors declare that the data supporting the findings of this study are available within the paper. 

Statistical analysis 
Each experiment has been repeated on biological replicates (n=3) with 3 technical replicates for each sample. Data 
statistics were analyzed by calculating the t-test between two groups, and One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) 
for multiple groups with post-hoc Bonferroni test (Graphpad Prism v7, GraphPad Software Inc.).  Unless otherwise 
noted, all results were expressed as the mean ± s.d. A value of p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Power 
analysis was not conducted to determine sample size and investigators were not blinded. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
