2
2
0
2

l
u
J

0
2

]

O
H
.
h
t
a
m

[

2
v
6
2
7
0
1
.
1
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

On teaching mathematics to gifted students: some enrichment ideas
and educational activities

Alok Shukla

Mathematical and Physical Sciences division,
School of Arts and Sciences,
Ahmedabad University, India

ARTICLE HISTORY
Compiled July 21, 2022

ABSTRACT
Many mathematicians ﬁnd mathematics aesthetically beautiful and even compara-
ble to art forms such as music or painting. On the other hand, every year a great
number of school students leave mathematics with total disillusionment and bitter-
ness, without ever witnessing any beauty in it. In this work, we give some strategies
to teach mathematics, especially to gifted students and to instill a love of mathe-
matics in them. We will describe an integrated approach to teaching mathematics
where students are introduced to not only more advanced, but also more elegant and
more beautiful aspects of the subject early. The proposed integrated approach takes
advantage of the fascinating interconnections between various subﬁelds of mathe-
matics, and even borrows from seemingly advanced topics such as number theory
and topology. Combining the teaching of computer programming with the teaching
of mathematics is another key focus of this work. This opens up the door to explore,
not only the beautiful topics such as fractals, computer math art and computer graph-
ics in general, but also real-life applications resulting from computer simulations in
engineering and physics and other natural sciences. We will also discuss the use of
storytelling, explorations and experimenting, puzzles and creative problem solving
etc., to make learning interesting for students. It is important to show students that
the ‘true’ essence of mathematics goes beyond the dry procedural drill of learning
arithmetic. Students must be provided with the opportunities to experience the ‘aha
moment’ resulting from the joy of solving a diﬃcult problem, or from the under-
standing of a deep concept with complete clarity. We will discuss several strategies,
and provide many examples to illustrate how this could be achieved. Some of these
strategies also draw from recent advancements in the ﬁeld of cognitive neuroscience.
They also take into account the emotional and psychological aspects of mathematical
cognition and learning.

KEYWORDS
Math education; Gifted mathematics education; Early childhood mathematics;
School mathematics.

1. Introduction.

Imagine the most beautiful, enchanting and colorful garden on the earth ever. Suppose
this garden is located on a mountain top, and it’s full of diﬀerent kinds of exquisite
ﬂowers, all of vibrant colors. Amongst the ﬂowers some exotic birds are chirping and
ﬂying around singing gleefully soft melodious songs, while a few quiet ones are sitting
completely still on the branches of nearby lush green trees, as if contemplating the

 
 
 
 
 
 
deepest secrets of the universe, and some others are ﬂuttering and dancing carelessly
in the sprinkling water coming out of a water-fountain in the middle of the garden.
Who would not want to visit such a magical garden? However, there is a catch.
Before entering the garden, a visitor has to undertake a very long and arduous
journey to the mountain top. Moreover, visitors must remain blindfolded throughout
the climb, not even once, the visitors are allowed to have a peek into the delightful
beauty of the garden. Most of the people could not endure the hardships of the journey
and abandoned it in the middle, forgoing their desire to ever visit the garden. They
return home, disillusioned and bitter. It is heard in the city that the garden, although
created with the utmost architectural precision and perfection, actually looks ugly,
and moreover, it has no real-life use for a person living in the city.

In our opinion, the above analogy sums up one of the most common problems,
that many students face in learning mathematics. In many parts of the world, for the
ﬁrst few years in schools, the focus of mathematics education is entirely on teaching
arithmetic. Students learn procedural drills of arithmetic, such as how to perform a
long division. No doubt, numeracy or number skills are important and all the basic
arithmetic operations must be mastered by students. However, a chief problem here is
- the almost exclusive focus on arithmetic, and too often on just procedures and drills
without a true understanding of the underlying concepts. Unfortunately, to a great
extent traditional mathematics teaching consists of stand-alone skills development
through drills and practice exercises. Many students, specially gifted ones, get bored
by the mindless and excessive drills of arithmetic they are often subjected to. It is like
blindfolding them and not allowing them to sneak a peek into the beautiful garden
of mathematics. After several years of such education, it is hardly surprising if only
a few students still remain interested in learning mathematics.

In this work, we will focus on ways to address this issue and propose some strate-
gies to teach mathematics to gifted students. First, we recall some traditional learning
models. According to Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget, cognitive developments in
children take place in four distinct stages: sensory-motor, preoperational, concrete,
and formal Piaget (1964). A progression through these stages is supposed to be age-
dependent and linear. Therefore, the model posits that a child of a certain age can
only deal with concrete physical objects and is yet unable to conceptualize abstractly.
Here we diﬀer a little from Piaget’s learning models while addressing the problem
of devising mathematics course plans for gifted students. In our opinion, gifted
children should not be forced to learn mathematics linearly. Mathematics is not a
straight ladder that children should climb step by step. Indeed, mathematics is full
of beautiful interconnections. Children should not be prevented from learning the
so-called ‘diﬃcult’ topics beyond their ages. We have found impressive learning
capabilities and imaginations in young children, and if nurtured appropriately they
have the potential to learn advanced mathematical concepts.

As we have remarked earlier, spending too much time on procedural aspects of
arithmetic alienates many students. Such students perceive mathematics as a boring
subject and lose their motivation to learn it. Therefore, all eﬀorts should be made to
introduce beautiful parts of mathematics to children, as early as possible. Of course,
in following this non-linear approach to learning, there might remain gaps in their
understanding of concepts, and they need to go back and forth to learn some of the
missing concepts. Still, this way of learning is preferable in many cases and it oﬀers
several advantages. Various subﬁelds in Mathematics are beautifully interconnected,
and sometimes these interconnections help in understanding a mathematical concept
by providing views from multiple angles. Therefore, an early introduction to alge-

bra, geometry, and coordinate geometry is very helpful to gifted students in their
mathematical journey.

We strongly recommend an integrated approach of teaching mathematics with
an early introduction to:

• algebra, abstraction and symbolism in mathematics,
• geometry and coordinate geometry,
• combinatorics and graph theory,
• beauty in mathematics,
• computer programming.

The proposed integrated approach will also take into account:

• puzzles and problem-solving strategies,
• independent mathematical exploration,
• applications in physics and engineering
• managing emotional well-being and dealing with failures.

In the following, we will describe our key ideas in detail and illustrate them
with examples, with topics ranging from preschool to high school mathematics, and
sometimes even beyond that. We will refer to research in cognitive neuroscience,
and discuss, how both the educators and the learners can make use of results in this
ﬁeld. Above everything else, developing a deep love for mathematics in young minds
should be the ultimate goal of mathematics education. Once this goal is achieved, the
other pieces of the puzzle will automatically fall in place.

This work contains several examples, including some python codes. We note that
many of the concepts discussed here were tested on a set of gifted students. The
names of these students appear in the examples to follow. We are thankful to these
ideal and enthusiastic students. Teaching these students provided opportunities for
the author to learn and reﬂect on mathematics and its teaching. The ages of these
students in the context of examples in this work can be treated as Natasha - 4 years,
Sophie - 6 years, Anya and Medha - 7 years, and Pragya and Arya - 10 years. Natasha
has yet to start her formal schooling. Sophie was being home-schooled. Everyone
else was a member of the GT (Gifted & Talented) program in a public school in
Oklahoma, United States.

A Remark. Even though, we have used the term ‘gifted students’ throughout this
work, we do not want to imply that this work is meant exclusively for only a very
few students. Without engaging in any debate over ‘nature’ vs ‘nurture’, we would
like to state that, in our opinion, most of what we have to say in this work applies
to any school student of mathematics, who is willing to devote the time and eﬀorts
needed in the pursuit of learning this beautiful subject.

2. Let us count.

Learning to count is amongst the ﬁrst mathematical skills that a child learns. Counting
is an important survival skill. Even in primitive societies, infants and non-human
animals, counting skills are developed Beran et al. (1998), Boysen and Capaldi (2014),
Davis and Memmott (1982). How does a child learn to count? Research suggests that

(b)

(a)

Figure 1.: Developing an ’intuitive’ number-sense in students using visual aids.

some aspects of counting abilities are innate Antell and Keating (1983). However, in a
formal learning environment most often a child learns to count by actually associating
‘words’ to the count of discrete objects such as toys, cups or fruits.

What could be a good strategy to teach counting and basic addition facts to young
children? Before attempting to answer this question, we recall that the human brain
is biologically so well-wired for image processing as against number crunching. In
numerical calculations, such as multiplying or dividing two large numbers, or ﬁnding
the cube root of a large prime number, even a calculator can easily beat us. However,
until very recently humans were doing better than the computer in image recognition
and analysis Fleuret et al. (2011), although in near future perhaps computers will catch
up and even surpass humans in image processing as well. 1 Still, a human brain has
this special ability to complete even a partially hidden picture and attach meaning to
it. Perhaps once upon a time survival of humans depended upon quickly identifying
a predator, even with incomplete visual data, and promptly acting. As a result, even
a ﬁve old kid is capable of identifying and placing the missing piece of a puzzle and
thus completing the picture. Well, if we humans are so well-equipped to carry out
visual image processing, then why not try to include visual aids wherever possible in
education, including in learning how to count and how to learn basic addition facts?
Keeping the above discussion in mind, in addition to discrete counting objects,
students should also be taught counting using continuous models using detachable
cubic blocks, as shown in Fig. 1a. Any other ‘continuous’ objects or household items
may also be used. In our experience with 3-4 years old children, after a few trials, they
could easily visually identify the blocks by just looking at their sizes. For example,
Natasha could identify the blocks after playing and practicing with them for a few
days. Later, when she was asked to identify the block 3, she immediately responded
three, without counting. In fact, she could identify any individual block of sizes 1
to 5 without counting. The biggest advantage of this visual analog approach was in
learning addition facts. As Natasha could identify the blocks of sizes 2 and 3, and
also she knew that when she joined them, then the new joined block was as big as a
block of size 5. Therefore, she instinctively knew that 2 + 3 = 5 (see Fig. 1b).

Later in this work, we will discuss the importance of engaging students using
mathematical games, beautiful patterns and hands-on activities. Here we present

1In fact, already in 2015 researchers at Baidu Research, claimed that on one of the computer vision benchmarks, the
ImageNet classiﬁcation challenge, their system has exceeded the human recognition performance Wu et al. (2015).

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 2.: Curve stitching.

one example of a beautiful pattern that Natasha obtained by joining points on two
perpendicular lines such that their sum was 10 (see Fig. 2a). She then carried out some
variations of this exercise to draw some other interesting patterns (see Fig. 2b, 2c and
2d). She ﬁrst performed these exercises on paper. Later, on she did it on a computer
using the interactive software Geogebra (see https://www.geogebra.org/). We re-
mark here that, such hands-on activities with visualization help in developing the
so-called intuitive ‘number-sense’ in gifted students.

3. A relationship game: meeting abstractions early.

Mathematics is concerned with relationships among various objects. Even before a
child learns how to count, this aspect could be emphasized. For instance, when asked
- “Who is the father of your dad?”, Natasha immediately responded - “Grandpa”.
She could not answer at ﬁrst when she was asked a slightly complicated relationship
question - “Who is the wife of your father‘s dad?”, but after a little help, she answered
the question correctly. Within a few days of practicing with such kinds of problems,
she could not only answer even more complicated relationship problems but also
challenged others with her own questions. It became a sort of game that she enjoyed
playing.

The relationship game that Natasha played helped set the stage for the next level.
Once she was familiar with the relationship game, she was given problems like -

192837465564738291100192837465564738291100191928283737464655556464737382829191100100Figure 3.: A family tree.

“Suppose D is C’s daughter. Also, suppose A’s father is B, and B’s mother is C. A and
E are B’s daughters. Then who is A’s grandmother?”.

She learned how to draw a family-tree (see Fig. 3) and then she was able to correctly
answer such questions. She understood that we can represent people by their names
or a symbol, which is just a shorter name, for convenience. She also learned how to
represent the relationships amongst people, by connecting the symbols using lines
with arrow heads. She was already getting introduced to some abstractions.

Another occasion to learn abstract symbolism came when Natasha was learning
how to add numbers. She was given a series of problems, and she learned the addition
facts such as 5 + 0 = 5, 6 + 0 = 6, . . . 100 + 0 = 100 and so on. At the end of a
series of such problems, she was asked -“What would be x + 0?”, she responded
within a few seconds x. She didn’t even ask - “What does x stand for?”. Maybe
the relationship game she had played earlier, helped her. When probed further to
explain why should x + 0 be x, she did not clearly state that there the x stood for any
arbitrary number, instead she responded -“0 is nothing, so adding it to something
should work like that”. Clearly, she could notice the pattern and could come to a
conclusion that demanded mathematical abstraction and generalization. Later on,
when Natasha learned subtraction, she could correctly answer that x − x should be
equal to 0. Similarly, when Natasha was learning multiplication, after answering a
series of questions related to mathematical facts such as 1 × 2 = 2, 1 × 3 = 3, and
1 × 4 = 4; she could also answer the question 1 × x = x.

The above examples show that at least some kids will be able to understand and
appreciate mathematical abstractions from an early age. We should not wait until
students gain complete mastery of arithmetical concepts before exposing them to
higher-level abstractions and algebraic thinking. In fact, there are ways to integrate
arithmetic teaching with algebraic thinking at each stage. We will discuss some other
examples later in this work.

4. Beauty in mathematics.

Many accomplished mathematicians have commented on the beauty of mathematics.
The following quote by Poincar´e succinctly describes the importance of beauty in
mathematics from the perspective of a pure mathematician: “The mathematician does
not study pure mathematics because it is useful; he studies it because he delights in
it, and he delights in it, because it is beautiful.”

CDBAE(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 4.: Skip counting on a circle.

A recent research result in neuroscience, Zeki et al. (2014), shows that the
experience of mathematical beauty and the experience of visual, musical, and
moral beauty are correlated by the activity in the same brain area, the medial
orbito-frontal cortex.

It is important to introduce young students to the aesthetic beauty of mathematics
as soon as possible. Even while students are learning basic arithmetic operations
such as addition, skip counting, multiplications etc., it is possible to include beautiful
visual patterns or math art in their learning modules. We have already discussed one
such example in Sect.2 (see Fig. 2). Here, we present some more examples. Medha
enjoyed the following activity. Suppose, the numbers 1, 2, . . . , 10 were marked on a
circle such that the numbers are equally spaced (see Fig. 4). Now suppose a turtle
starts from the number 1 and visits numbers on the circle in the counterclockwise
fashion by skipping the next number in the sequence. Clearly, such a turtle will
travel along the path 1 − 3 − 5 − 7 − 9 − 1. Similarly, if the turtle starts from 2 then
it will travel along the path 2 − 4 − 6 − 8 − 10 − 2 (see Fig. 4a). Therefore, Fig. 4a
is the pattern obtained by performing a ‘skip-counting’ by one on a circle with ten
numbers. Similarly, Medha obtained Fig. 4b, Fig. 4c and Fig. 4d by performing skip
counting by 2, 3 and 4 respectively.

We note that Fractals are another example of beautiful mathematical objects, that
are even capable of imitating the shapes of many natural objects. Sophie was intrigued
by the beauty of fractal patterns when she ﬁrst encountered them. She learned how
to draw a Sierpinski triangle (Fig. 20b) and Koch snowﬂakes.

12345678910123456789101234567891012345678910The advantages of introducing such beautiful objects to young children are man-
ifold. First, children are naturally curious and once they ﬁnd fractals beautiful they
want to discover more about fractals and get interested in mathematics. Second,
the colorful fractal patterns present the opportunity for teachers to engage students
by letting them create beautiful fractal arts by coloring and possibly cutting shapes
out of paper. Third, for advanced students fractals could be used to teach various
mathematical concepts. Fractals can be used to familiarize students with the basics
of complex numbers and the concept of recursion. After gaining some knowledge of
computer programming, students can write computer programs to generate fractal
patterns. In Sect. 13 and Sect. 17, we will further describe using fractals in the context
of computer programming.

5. Math and play.

Children are playful by nature. Play is important for the cognitive, social, emotional
and physical well-being of children Milteer et al. (2012). Playing provides a great op-
portunity for parents and teachers to connect to a child. Many mathematical concepts
can be introduced to children by playing with them. Pragya was hopping over alter-
nate squares while saying the numbers 2, 4, 6, . . ., aloud. She repeated this activity
with 3, 6, 9, . . ., and learned the tables of 2 and 3 while hopping over the squares.
Pragya also liked to play the board game ‘Snake and Ladders’ with her sister. She also
played a modiﬁed version of this game with a dice with numbers 10, 20, 30, . . . , 60 on
it. Playing such games helped her in mastering basic counting skills.

A 4 × 4 Sudoku can be turned into a game for young children, wherein players
take turn to solve the puzzle by placing the fruits on the Sudoku board placed on the
ﬂoor.

5.1. Nim

Combinatorial games provide a rich source of puzzles for developing problem-
solving skills in young children. Suppose two players play the following game.
They take turns to eat a = 5 apples and b = 6 bananas. On her turn, a player has
to select a type of fruit that she wants to eat. Then she must eat at least one fruit
of that type. If she wants, she may eat more than one fruit of the chosen type. The
player who eats the last remaining fruit wins the game (See Table 1). This is a two
‘heap’ version of the famous combinatorial game Nim (See Bouton (1901)). The good
thing about this game is that it has been completely solved, in the sense that there
exists an algorithm for giving the winning strategy for one of the players from any
speciﬁed game position. For the a × b version of the game described earlier, ﬁnding
this winning strategy is not so diﬃcult, and discovering this winning strategy could
provide a good intellectual challenge to a gifted child.

For example, Pragya enjoyed playing this game. After a while, she started to notice
some of the attributes of the winning position. With a little help from her teacher, she
listed down the winners for the small games. For the (a = 1) × (b = 1) game, it was
clear to her that the second player will be the winner, irrespective of what the ﬁrst
player did. Next, for the (a = 2) × (b = 1) game, the ﬁrst player can just eat one apple
to convert this game to the (a = 1) × (b = 1) game, with the ﬁrst player now eﬀectively
becoming the ‘second player’, and thereby winning the game as discussed earlier.
Pragya noticed that the same strategy worked for (a > 1) × (b = 1) games, wherein the

Move

Apples

Bananas

Initial position
Player 1 eats 3 bananas
Player 2 eats 2 apples
Player 1 eats 1 apple
Player 2 eats 2 bananas
Player 1 eats 1 apple
Player 2 eats 1 apple
Player 1 eats 1 banana & wins the game

Table 1.: 5 apples and 6 bananas game.

ﬁrst player eats a − 1 apples to convert the game to (a = 1) × (b = 1) game. What about
a (a = 2) × (b = 2) game? It was clear that because of the symmetry one needed to
analyze the only two moves available to the ﬁrst player. The ﬁrst, eating the 2 apples,
which is a losing move as then the second player eats 2 bananas. The second, eating
1 apple converts the game to the (a = 1) × (b = 1) game, which was analyzed earlier.
But this was also a losing move for the ﬁrst player. Therefore, the ﬁrst player will lose
the (a = 2) × (b = 2) game if the second player plays perfectly. Now Pragya could see a
pattern emerging. It was clear to her that for the (a = 3) × (b = 2) game, the ﬁrst player
will simply eat one apple and reduce the game to the (a = 2) × (b = 2) game with
the ﬁrst player now becoming the second. It was obvious that the ﬁrst player had
a winning strategy for the (a = 3) × (b = 2) game. At this point, Pragya conjectured
that if a = b then the second player will have a winning strategy, otherwise the ﬁrst
player has a winning strategy. In fact, after a little more exploration and analysis she
discovered that if a = b, then the goal of the second player is to always keep this
balance on her turn, i.e., a winning strategy for the second player is to follow the
moves of the ﬁrst player but for the other fruit. In the case of a (cid:44) b, without loss
of generality suppose a > b. Then the ﬁrst player will eat a − b apples, reducing it
to the b × b game, becoming eﬀectively the second player, and thereby winning it.
After understanding the winning strategy, Pragya went on to play this game with
her younger sister Medha. She was happy to win several games, until Medha quit
playing. In fact, Medha was also noticing some patterns then, and she went to her
teacher for discussing the game with him. She was given the following problem to
think over.

Problem 1:
Suppose two players take turns to eat a = 5 apples, b = 6 bananas and c = 7
oranges. On her turn a player must select and eat one type of fruit. She is free to
eat as many available fruits of the chosen type as she wants. The player who eats
the last remaining fruit wins the game. Is there a winning strategy for any player
in this game? If yes, describe this winning strategy?

5.2. Make 10

For students who are learning basic addition facts, the following game could be
useful. The aim is to create a pile of 10 apples. Two players take turns placing either
one apple or two apples in the pile. The player who makes the last move wins the
game. A sample game is shown in Table 2.

Problem 2:
Does there exist a winning strategy for any player in the “Make 10” game? If yes,
what is it?

Of course, there can be many variations of this game, such as “Make 15” or “Make
100”. Also, instead of only one or two apples, players might be allowed to place one,
two or three apples, or any other such variations.

Problem 3:
Does there exist a winning strategy for any player in the “Make 15” game? If yes,
what is it?

Move

Apples

Initial position
Player 1 puts 1 apple in the pile
Player 2 puts 2 apples in the pile
Player 1 puts 2 apples in the pile
Player 2 puts 1 apple in the pile
Player 1 puts 1 apple in the pile
Player 2 puts 1 apple in the pile
Player 1 puts 2 apples in the pile & wins!

Table 2.: Make 10 game. Two players take turns to place either one apple or two
apples in the pile. The player who plays the last move wins the game.

6. Combinatorics and graph theory.

Combinatorics and graph theory are two important subjects that are not included
in a typical middle school curriculum. We believe that these two subjects should
be taught to gifted students in elementary and middle schools. The fundamental
principle of counting is pretty intuitive and can be visually explained to a child who
knows how to multiply. For example, Sophie could understand and correctly answer
the following problem. “There are 3 ﬂights from California to France and 2 ﬂights
from France to India. Sophie wants to ﬂy from California to France and then to India.
How many diﬀerent ways are there for her to ﬂy from California to India?”.

The subject of combinatorics oﬀers many attractive problems which could pro-
vide intellectual nourishment to a gifted child. For example, the following problem
stumped Pragya, and she spent quite some time trying to solve it. In how many ways

Figure 5.: In how many ways can eight rooks be placed on a chessboard so that no
two rooks are attacking each other?

can eight rooks be placed on a chessboard (Fig. 5) so that no two rooks are attacking
each other?

Many problems in Graph theory can be stated and understood by even elementary
school kids, however, they are often hard to prove. For example, students could be en-
couraged to explore and conjecture / discover the “four color theorem” (see Gonthier
(2008)). Another attractive problem to challenge young children is the “K ¨onigsberg
bridge problem” (also see Sec. 16). Graph theory can be used as a vehicle to introduce
the concept of “proof” in mathematics to students. Pragya was introduced to some
basic deﬁnitions in Graph theory and then given a set of theorems and results to
prove.

• Prove that the sum of the degrees of the vertices of any ﬁnite graph is even.
• Prove that a ﬁnite simple graph, with more than one vertex, has at least two

vertices with the same degree.

• Prove that a ﬁnite graph has an even number of vertices with odd degrees.
• Show that a connected graph on n vertices is a tree if and only if it has n − 1

edges.

n(n − 1)
2

• Prove that a complete graph on n vertices contains
• Prove that for a given vertex of an odd degree in a graph, there exists a path

edges.

from it to another odd-degree vertex in the graph.

Some of the problems were too diﬃcult for Pragya. However, with some helpful
hints, she could solve the above problems. She was asked to write her solutions, as a
professional mathematician would write. Unfortunately, writing and communicating
mathematics clearly, is a skill that is often not emphasized in schools.

6.1. Adjacency Matrix and counting the number of walks.

Matrices are one of the most important concepts in mathematics. Of course, linear
transformations and vector spaces are the right settings to introduce them to a gifted
student. However, since in this section we are discussing graphs, we would like to
point out that young students can be taught about computing the number of walks
of a given length from the adjacency matrix. Pragya and Medha both learned how
to multiply two matrices. Then they were taught to write the adjacency matrix for
a given graph. For a given graph with its vertex set V = v1, v2, · · · , vn, its adjacency
matrix A is a square matrix of size n such that the (i, j)th entry is given by the number
of edges directly connecting the vertex vi to vj. Loops are also counted once, i.e., for

Figure 6.: Counting the number of walks of a given length.

a loop at vi (when vi is connected to itself by an edge), the (i, i)th diagonal entry will
be 1. Pragya and Medha both easily learned how to calculate the adjacency matrix
of a given graph. For example, for the graph in Fig. 6 they calculated the adjacency
matrix A and its powers A2, A3 and A4 as follows

A =

(cid:35)

(cid:34) 1 1 0 0
1 0 1 1
0 1 0 1
0 1 1 0

, A2 =

(cid:35)

(cid:34) 2 1 1 1
1 3 1 1
1 1 2 1
1 1 1 2

, A3 =

(cid:35)

(cid:34) 3 4 2 2
4 3 4 4
2 4 2 3
2 4 3 2

, and A4 =

(cid:35)

.

(cid:34) 7 7 6 6
7 12 7 7
6 7 7 6
6 7 6 7

Now they were asked to count the number of walks from v2 to v2 of length 2 (in a
walk a vertex or an edge can be repeated and the length of a walk is the number of
edges traversed counting with its multiplicity). They listed the 3 such possible walks:
e2e2, e3e3 and e4e4. Of course, the (2, 2)th entry of A2 = 3. Similarly, they listed the
number of walks from v2 to v2 of length 4 and found it amazing that the number of
such walks is 12 which is the (2, 2)th entry of A4. They had fun listing other walks and
how their numbers are given by the entries of the matrices listed above. They could
conjecture that the number of possible walks of length from vi to v j is given by (i, j)th
entry of An. Of course, it was a great puzzle for them to ﬁgure out why is it so!

7. Distributive law.

It is very convenient to have real-world models for mathematical operations such
as multiplication. These models can then be used to introduce further mathematical
symbolism and abstraction. A simple multiplication model is given in Fig. 8a. Another
simple multiplication model is the area model given in Fig. 8b. Traditionally, two and
higher digit multiplication is taught by using the column method. The traditional
method is a fast and eﬃcient method of doing multiplication by hand. However, often
students do not really understand why the multiplication algorithm works. They just
follow it mechanically without any actual insight into the whole process. On the
other hand, using the distributive property to teach multiplication to young children
has the advantage that the concepts are understandable with an easy visualization
oﬀered by the ‘area model’ of the multiplication operation (Fig. 8c). Moreover, on
following this approach students learn the concepts of ‘area’ and ‘multiplication’
together, unlike the traditional method wherein the concept of area is introduced
much later. Interestingly, the distributive property illustrates an important problem-
solving strategy in mathematics (as well as maybe in our lives): when one is unable to
solve a hard problem, one should try to break it into smaller problems that are easier
to solve. This concept can be used to teach how to perform multiplication as well

v1v2v3v4e1e2e3e4e5Figure 7.: Garﬁeld’s proof of the Pythagorean theorem.

(a) A simple multiplication model
using an array of ‘∗’ in 3 rows and
4 columns.

(b) Area model for teaching mul-
tiplication.

(c) Area model to explain the distributive law, 3 × (4 + 3) = 3 × 4 + 3 × 3 = 12 + 9 = 21.

Figure 8.: Distributive law and the area model.

as division operations. Anya initially had some trouble learning multiplication and
distributive law using the area model. However, once she understood this method,
she preferred it over the column method of multiplication, that she was learning at
her school.

Another advantage of introducing the distributive law and the area model is that
it helps students in understanding the distributive law a(b + c) = ab + ac, when
they encounter it in algebra later. In fact, the Pythagorean theorem, arguably one of
the most important theorems in mathematics, can be proved using the distributive
law and the area model. Such a proof of the Pythagorean theorem was given by
the twentieth president of the United States James A. Garﬁeld. Medha could easily
understand a modernized version of Garﬁeld’s proof. Consider the big square in
Fig. 7. We compute its area in two diﬀerent ways. First, its area is (a + b)2. Then its
2 ab = 2ab and the
area is also the sum of the areas of four triangles which equals 4 × 1
area of a small square c2. Therefore, we must have

(a + b)2 = 2ab + c2 =⇒ a2 + b2 = c2.

abcabcabcabc************8. Early introduction to algebraic symbols and functional thinking.

Algebra is one of the biggest hurdles that many college students in the United
States face during their college mathematics coursework. We refer readers to Stewart
and Reeder (2017) for an interesting take on the consequences of algebra under-
performances at the college level. We believe that one solution to this problem is an
early introduction to algebraic thinking in school education. Indeed, algebraic sym-
bols can be introduced even before preschool as we have remarked earlier. The same
is true for the concept of functions. Functions are arguably one of the most important
concepts in entire mathematics. Many ﬁve-year-olds are capable of understanding
the fundamental idea behind functions. Natasha was given a paper with the names of
her sisters and friends on the one side and their ages on the other (see Fig. 9), and she
was asked to draw arrows connecting names to corresponding ages. She could draw
it correctly. Later on, she was introduced to the function notation and she understood
the meaning of f (Pragya) = 11. Of course, she also understood that since two persons
can have the same age, it is okay if two or more arrows from the “left” point to the
same object on the “right”. However, since one person can‘t have two diﬀerent ages
at the same time, from one object on the “left” more than one arrow can’t originate.
Later on, she was given several other examples of functions, and she even came up
with a few examples of her own.

One particular example, related to the “relationship games” she played earlier (see
Sect. 3) pertained to the composition of functions. Suppose f is a map from the son to
his father, i.e., f (A) = B if A’s father is B. Then, Natasha understood that the statement
“A‘s father is B, and B‘s father is C” can be expressed in the function-notation as
f ( f (A)) = C.

Another example simply related to the function f (x) = x + 1. She was given the
information that f (1) = 2, f (2) = 3, f (3) = 4 and so on. Then she was asked to guess
the pattern and predict f (9), she could get the correct answer 10. However, when she
was asked what should be f (x) she said y. She reasoned that y comes after x, so f (x)
should be y. Perhaps this misconception originated from her misunderstanding of the
“ordinal” and “cardinal” numbers. Moreover, she was also unaware of the symbolic
expression “x + 1”. She was then introduced to another game. Some marbles were
hidden under a cup and 1 marble was placed beside it on the table. She was told that
there are x marbles hidden inside the cup and if she adds the 1 marble beside it the
total would be x + 1 marbles. Then the cup was lifted to show that x was indeed 2, i.e.,
2 marbles were hidden. And, in that case there were total x+1 = 2+1 = 3 marbles. She
also played another variation of this game. This time there were two cups, labeled
x and y hiding some unknown number of marbles. Her goal was to count the total
number of hidden marbles, i.e. x + y. She turned the cup labeled x and noted the
number of hidden marbles under the heading x. Similarly, she counted the number
of marbles hidden under the cup labeled y and noted it under the heading y. Finally,
she computed x + y. After several variations of this game, she understood what was
going on. The upshot of all the above exercises was that not only she became familiar
with the function notation and simple symbolic expressions, but she also learned
how to model and express her own thoughts using the function notation. This early
introduction to functional thinking will be helpful to her in her mathematical journey
in the coming years.

Anya

Sophie

Pragya

Medha

Natasha

10

6

11

8

4

Figure 9.: The function f mapping names of Natasha and her friends to their ages.

9. Modular arithmetic.

Gauss has called number theory the ‘queen of mathematics’. Indeed, number theory is
a source of fascinating problems, which can often be formulated in a relatively simple
language, for example, the famous modularity theorem of Wiles, i.e., Fermat’s last
theorem. The modular arithmetic developed by Gauss is a beautiful topic in number
theory, which is easily accessible to a gifted student in middle school. It is also amazing
that modular arithmetic has recently found applications in creating error correcting
codes, for example, Reed-Solomon error correction codes, which is useful in modern
devices such as DVDs, Blu-ray Discs and even in satellite communications. This is
just one example where pure mathematics pursued only for the sake of its beauty
and human curiosity turns out to be useful in practical applications.

The example of a clock is a well-known device to introduce modular arithmetic to
beginners. Pragya very easily understood the concept of addition modulo 12. It was
clear to her that for a 12-hour clock 1 is the same as 13.

Then for simplicity, she was given a few numbers and asked to divide them by
3 and ﬁnd remainders if any. After this exercise, she observed that when a number
is divided by 3, the only possible remainders are 0, 1 or 2. In this manner, the set
of integers, which is an inﬁnite set, is partitioned into 3 classes (equivalent classes),
with a number n being in the class corresponding to the remainder obtained when n
is divided by 3. Next Pragya learned how to add or multiply two numbers modulo
3 and how these operations are independent of representatives of the three classes
chosen. She then created a multiplication table modulo 3 and modulo 7 (see Fig. 10).
Arithmetic Modulo 7 is connected with the days of the week, just as arithmetic
modulo 12 is connected with a clock, and so it constitutes another familiar example
of modular arithmetic. In fact, she was also introduced to the deﬁnition of a Group and
asked to check if the additions and multiplications modulo 7 satisfy group axioms.
Moreover, using the multiplication table modulo 7 she could discover interesting
number theoretic facts such as 62n − 1 is divisible by 7 for each natural number n.

Another interesting exercise for Pragya was to use the above multiplication table
to create a digram as follows. She started with drawing a circle. Then she placed the
points 1, 2, . . . , n = 7 on the circle with equal spacing between points. Now for each
of the above points m, she joined the points m and (2m mod 7) by a straight line to
obtain Fig. 13a. The interesting thing happened when she did the same exercise for
the set 1, 2, . . . , n = 36 to get Fig. 13b. The envelope of the chords happened to be a
‘heart like shape’. Indeed, this shape was a cardioid and the above method to draw

Figure 10.: Multiplication table modulo 7.

a cardioid as the envelope of a pencil of lines is due to L. Cremona. Then it was a
good time to introduce polar coordinates to Pragya. She understood how to plot a
cardioid r = 1 + cos(θ). It also became obvious to Pragya that drawing the chords and
doing modular arithmetic is going to be very time-consuming if n is big. Therefore,
it would be nice if we can take help from a computer. This was a good motivation for
her to learn to write a computer program (also see Sect. 17.1). She learned the concept
of ’loop’ and managed to write programs for generating Figs. 13c and 13d.

Other patterns can be generated by considering more points on the circle, for
example with 360 points. Patterns generated by considering multiplication modulo
360 are shown in Fig. 14. The two diagrams on the top row ((a) and (b) are created
using multiplication by 6 and 7 modulo 360 respectively. The bottom row diagrams
are generated by using multiplication by 9 and 10 modulo 360 respectively. Interest-
ing geometric shapes such as pentagon, hexagon etc., appear at the centers of the
diagrams in Fig. 14.

Cardioid is a cycloidal curve. Cycloidal curves are described by the path traced by
a point that is lying to a circle rolling along another circle or a straight line without
slipping (See Fig. 21 and Fig. 22). Interactive geometry and algebra Software Geoge-
bra, can be used to simulate this rolling and create an animation depicting various
cycloidal curve (see Sect. 15.1). Cycloids appear in the solution of the brachistochrone
problem (see de Icaza Herrera (1993) for a historical account of this problem) and
Pragya was fascinated to learn the history of the brachistochrone problem and its
connection with the cycloids.

There was even more to the story of a cardioid. The complex map z → z2 sends
a circle through the origin to a cardioid. This results in the interesting fact that the
boundary of the central bulb of the Mandelbrot set is a cardioid. The Mandelbrot set
contains an inﬁnite number of self-repeating patterns such that the central bulbs of
these smaller repeating copies are approximate cardioids (see Fig. 12). The Mandelbrot
set is an example of Fractals. Fractals are one of the most visually stunning and
mysteriously beautiful objects in mathematics (see Sect. 13).

A couple of days after learning about the cardioid, Pragya found a piece of one half
of an apple and observed that it looked very similar to a cardioid (see Fig. 11a). Later
she was amazed to see that when a torch was lit in front of a coﬀee cup she could see
the shape of a cardioid inside it (see Fig. 11b). It was a great opportunity for her to
learn about the nature of light and how it travels in a medium and the phenomenon
of reﬂection and refraction of light etc.

·1234567·11234560·22461350·33625140·44152630·55316420·66543210·70000000(a) Cardioid and apples.

(b) A Cardioid appearing, when a torch
was lit in front of a coﬀee cup.

Figure 11.: Cardioid in real life.

Figure 12.: Mandelbrot set. The central bulb has the shape of a cardioid.

10. Storytelling in mathematics.

Storytelling is a powerful mode of human communication and it is capable of engag-
ing us at a deep emotional level. Stories often emerge from shared cultural constructs
and common human experiences and they foster a unique bond between the sto-
ryteller and the listener. Teachers and educators have long advocated in support of
the beneﬁts of reading bedtime stories to children. It is believed that storytelling pro-
vides many educational beneﬁts to children, such as improvement in vocabulary, and
an enhancement in imagination and communication skills. Indeed, stories provide
listeners an opportunity to paint the characters on the canvas of their own imagi-
nations and create their own movies in their minds as the story unfolds. Perhaps it
explains the ﬁndings of a recent research study, Yabe et al. (2018), wherein the eﬀects
of storytelling on the brains of children were assessed by using near-infrared spec-
troscopy (NIRS) and it was concluded that -“The results indicated more sustained
brain activation to storytelling in comparison with picture-book reading, suggesting
possible advantages of storytelling as a psychological and educational medium in
children.” There are many neuroscience and cognitive science-based research papers
that discuss the merits of storytelling as an instructional tool Aldama (2015). In fact,
researchers have studied the use of storytelling, in marketing Pulizzi (2012), as a
primary leadership tool Wright and Dziak (2016), and as an alternative method of
healing for trauma survivors Carey (2006).

It can be hoped, given the preceding discussion, that storytelling can also be an
eﬀective pedagogical tool in the teaching of mathematics, especially to young stu-

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 13.: Modular arithmetic and cardioid. Points 1, 2, . . . n are placed on a circle
with equal spacing between points. Then chords are drawn between points m and
(2m mod n) for each point m on the circle. The diagrams (a), (b), (c) and (d) are drawn
using n = 7, 36, 66 and 360 respectively.

1234567123456789101112131415161718192021222324252627123456789101112131415161718192021222324252627282930313233343536373839404142434445464748495051525354555657585960616263646566(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 14.: Multiplication modulo 360. The two diagrams on the top row ((a) and (b)
are created using multiplication by 6 and 7 modulo 360 respectively. The bottom row
diagrams are generated by using multiplication by 9 and 10 modulo 360 respectively.
The appearance of geometric shapes such as pentagon, hexagon etc., at the centers of
the diagrams above is very interesting.

dents. One advantage of an eﬀective story is that it engages young curious students.
Engagement is the ﬁrst step towards learning. Indeed, it was a story of a ‘Dwarf
Kingdom’ that helped six-year-old Sophie in learning the basics of coordinate geom-
etry. There was a land of dwarfs, where these little creatures moved by hopping. In
one jump they could only hop one unit to their left, or right, or up, or down (see
Fig. 15). In the center of the kingdom was the magniﬁcent Palace of the King. A little
small but equally splendid was the palace of the dwarf princess. There were other
important buildings of the kingdom, such as the Ministry of Music, the Ministry of
Magic, the Ministry of Truth, the Ministry of Beauty and the Ministry of Math. One
ﬁne day the king of dwarfs received a secret message from his trusted spy that the
neighboring Kingdom of Elves is planning an attack on the kingdom of dwarfs. Elves
were very skilled magicians. Therefore, in order to prepare for their defense, the king
of dwarfs ordered his messenger Neo to go from the King’s palace to the Ministry
of Magic, and urgently summon the royal magician. Now Sophie was asked to help
Neo in reaching to the Ministry of Magic as quickly as possible. With Sophie’s advice,
Neo ﬁrst hopped 3 times to his right and then 4 times up. Will he reach the correct
destination? Of course, said Sophie. She had advised Neo correctly. Later she learned
to write (3 right , 4 up) to describe the motion of Neo in short, where it was agreed
that ‘left or right’ movements will be written ﬁrst and thereafter ’up or down’. For
example, (3 left, 4 down) was also a valid move and if Neo followed this starting from
the King‘s palace, he will reach the Ministry of Math. It was agreed that hops to the
left for n times will be represented as −n hops to the right. Similarly, hops to −n times
up represented n hops downwards. Therefore, (3 left, 4 down) is the same as (−3
right, −4 up). This formulation also helped Sophie in reinforcing her understanding
of negative numbers.

Now with the impending danger of war, the royal magician created ‘a magical oil’.
If this magical oil is sprinkled on a particular place, then any enemy soldier entering
there will turn into a stone. Suppose the royal magician wanted to sprinkle his magical
oil on the blue dot in Fig. 15 and Neo was again assigned this task. He had to start
from the King’s Palace with the magical oil and very carefully hop to his destination.
Sophie once again helped Neo and wrote down the coded instruction for Neo as (2
right, 3 up). Later on, more details were added to the story. In fact, it was turned into
a small game. First, the condition was imposed that Neo is allowed to reach only
those places where he can reach by hopping an equal number of times to right and
up. Now an enemy position was given, say the green dot in Fig. 15. Sophie found
out that Neo couldn’t reach there under the constraints imposed on the movement
of Neo. The game continued for a while. Sophie began to notice some patterns. Then
Sophie was advised to list down all the places Neo could reach, if he was instructed
to hop an equal number of times to the right and the up. She ﬁgured it out with some
help and then marked all such places with red dots (see Fig. 15). She immediately
noticed that all the red dots appeared to lie on a straight line. Of curse, Dwarf moved
only on an integer lattice still Sophie was learning many interesting new things, such
as the connection between the constraint on hopping ‘right = up’ with the pattern of
red dots appearing to lie on a straight line (y = x). She even learned to plot all the
points corresponding to the constraint on hopping ‘right > up’. It was a story, play,
and a hands-on painting activity for her. She not only enjoyed this activity, but using
her rich imagination she went on to add more to the story of the dwarfs and in the
process learned some of the fundamental concepts of coordinate geometry.

Of course, the art of storytelling and its theory and techniques in the literary
context is not our concern here. We are interested in exploring how can storytelling

be eﬀectively used as a tool in teaching mathematics in a classroom. We can gain
some insights on this from the example of the story of the Dwarf Kingdom. Young
children are especially fond of fairy tales, and stories with monsters or animals as
characters in them. It is a good idea to include such characters in our mathematical
stories. A story should have some conﬂict or tension which can evoke emotions in
the listener. Moreover, if possible adding some dramatic words, sounds or actions
while narrating the story is helpful. For example, in the above story of dwarfs, one
can enact the hopping of dwarfs with a slouched gesture and perhaps a hilarious
grunting sound after each hop. Such gestures and sounds are especially appealing to
small kids and they tend to enjoy such stories. Moreover, a story in the educational
context, and especially if a mathematics classroom, is even more eﬀective if it leads
to some hands-on activity.

Mathematical Anecdotes, jokes on mathematicians or other forms of humor could
also be eﬀective in engaging students, especially older students. For example, a story
in Barrow (2008), describes how calculus literally saved the life of the Nobel prize
winner physicist Igor Tamm, when he was caught by bandits during the Russian
revolution period.

In the Russian revolutionary period, Tamm was a young professor teaching
physics at the University of Odessa in the Ukraine. Food was in short supply
in the city, and so he made a trip to a nearby village, which was under the
apparent control of the communists, in an attempt to trade some silver spoons
for something more edible, like chickens. Suddenly, the village was captured
by an anti-communist bandit leader and his militia, armed with riﬂes and
explosives. The bandits were suspicious of Tamm, who was dressed in city
clothes, and took him to their leader, who demanded to know who he was and
what he did. Tamm tried to explain that he was merely a university professor
looking for food. ‘What kind of professor?’ the bandit leader asked. ‘I teach
mathematics,’ Tamm replied. ‘Mathematics?’ said the bandit. ‘All right! Then
give me an estimate of the error one makes by cutting oﬀ Maclaurin’s series at
the nth term. Do this and you will go free. Fail, and you will be shot!’ Tamm was
not a little astonished. At gunpoint, somewhat nervously, he managed to work
out the answer to the problem - a tricky piece of mathematics that students
are taught in their ﬁrst course of calculus in a university degree course of
mathematics. He showed it to the bandit leader, who perused it and declared
‘Correct! Go home!’

Considered in the larger social context and as a collective human endeavor, math-
ematics needs role models and icons to motivate and inspire its practitioners. The
history of mathematics is a rich source of inspirational stories. Many present-day
mathematicians have mentioned being inspired by past legends. Children should be
introduced to biographies of geniuses such as Gauss, Euler, Riemann, Galois, Abel,
Ramanujan, Erd˝os etc.

Another aspect of the history of mathematics is the fascinating story of how math-
ematical ideas have developed. A mathematical idea, which seems obvious to us,
might have taken several hundreds of years to develop in its present simpliﬁed form.
Also, there are many important theorems and conjectures in mathematics, worth in-
troducing to young students. For example, the statement of Fermat’s last theorem is
elementary and even school students can easily understand it.

y
6

5

4

3

2

1

1

2

3

4

5

x

6

−6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1 0

0
−1
−2
−3
−4
−5
−6

Figure 15.: Dwarf Kingdom and Coordinate Geometry.

(a)

(b)

Figure 16.: The concept of slope: a journey from the intuitive understanding of ‘slope’
to the symbolic mathematical deﬁnition.

11. Meeting coordinate geometry early.

We have already described how coordinate geometry was introduced to Sophie using
a story about the Dwarf Kingdom. Another method used was a game played on a
big grid on the ﬂoor. Some small toys were lying on the ﬂoor at some of the grid
points. A player gets the toy by correctly ﬁnding the coordinates of the point where
a toy is located. One important concept in coordinate geometry is that of the slope
of a straight line. In fact, even a six-year-old can easily ﬁgure out that the road in
Fig. 16b is steeper than that of Fig. 16a. It is slightly harder to connect this intuition
to the traditional deﬁnition of the slope as the ratio of ‘rise’ over ‘run’. Still, after
some initial diﬃculty, Arya understood the mathematical deﬁnition of the slope of
a straight line. Arya also reviewed the basic concepts of equivalent fractions while
learning about the slope. The concept of similar triangles was also introduced to
him. Now by connecting all these diﬀerent aspects related to the concept of slope,
his understanding of fractions was reinforced. He was also getting well-prepared for
learning calculus later, where the understanding of the concept of the slope will be
useful.

In Sect. 17.3 and Sect. 17.4 we will again discuss some other strategies for teaching

coordinate geometry to young gifted students.

12. Connections: combining it all.

One source of aesthetic beauty in mathematics is the unexpected connections between
apparently disconnected sub-ﬁelds. The joy of true understanding overwhelms a sci-
entist or a mathematician when she uncovers the hidden truth behind a phenomenon
or a mathematical problem. It is true that x = y is an algebraic relation, but at the same
time, it also represents a geometric object, namely a straight line passing through the
origin and having the slope 1. We have already emphasized the need to introduce
algebra and coordinate geometry as early as possible to young gifted children. Also in
Sect. 7, we have noted that there exists an easy pathway for proving the Pythagorean
theorem using the area model and the distributive property. Once this theorem is
understood by a gifted child, several avenues open up for learning many interesting
mathematical results. We note a few possible directions:

(cid:113)

(1) Assuming that coordinate geometry is already introduced, students can now
learn the distance formula, i.e., the shortest distance between the points (x1, y1)
and (x2, y2) is given by

(x2 − x1)2 + (y2 − y1)2.
(2) An equation of a circle, say with center at (a, b) and radius r, can be intro-
duced as this equation (x − a)2 + (y − b)2 = r2 depends on the distance formula
or essentially on the Pythagorean theorem.

(3) The trigonometric identities such as sin2 θ + cos2 θ = 1, 1 + tan2 θ = sec2 θ etc.
are just alternate ways of expressing the Pythagorean theorem. Therefore, these
concepts can easily be introduced quickly after the Pythagorean theorem is
taught.

(4) Pythagorean theorem is used in ﬁnding the magnitude of a vector and also a

complex number.

The above discussion makes it clear that a gifted student can beneﬁt from an inte-
grated learning approach that combines concepts from algebra, coordinate geometry,
trigonometry, vectors and complex number together. There is no reason that a gifted
student is forced to wait for several years before getting a taste of these subjects. Un-
fortunately, due to excessive focus on arithmetic, this happens quite often. Of course,
we are not suggesting that in one go, a gifted student will completely learn and mas-
ter all the subjects mentioned earlier. What we are suggesting is that if opportunities
open up for introducing advanced concepts while teaching, then without hesitation
such advanced concepts should be introduced to gifted students. In fact, the learning
would take place non-linearly, as it mostly happens for research mathematicians.

We have remarked earlier that mathematics is highly interconnected, and these
interconnections should be utilized in teaching gifted students. For example, from a
single diagram (see Fig. 17), Pragya learned a number of mathematical concepts.

(1) The triangular law of vector addition: (cid:126)c = (cid:126)a + (cid:126)
b.
(2) Decomposition of a vector into its components:

(cid:126)c = (x2 − x1)ˆi + (y2 − y1) ˆj.

Figure 17.: One diagram, connected with multiple concepts.

(3) Pythagorean theorem (or the distance formula):

|(cid:126)c| =

(cid:113)

(x2 − x1)2 + (y2 − y1)2.

(4) Describing a Vector with the given end points: The vector from point A with

coordinates (x1, y1) to point B with coordinates (x2, y2) is given by

(x2 − x1)ˆi + (y2 − y1) ˆj.

(5) The polar decomposition of a vector: (cid:126)a = |(cid:126)c| cos θ ˆi and
(6) The slope of a given line: The slope of the line joining points A and B is

(cid:126)
b = |(cid:126)c| sin θ ˆj.

m = Rise
Run

= tan θ = y2 − y1
x2 − x1

.

(7) An equation of the straight line: An equation of the straight line joining points

A and B is

y − y1 =

(cid:19)

(cid:18) y2 − y1
x2 − x1

(x − x1).

xyˆiˆj(x1,y1)~a=(x2−x1)ˆi~b=(y2−y1)ˆj(x2,y2)~cABθFigure 18.: Koch snowﬂake.

13. Fractals.

Benoit Mandelbrot coined the term Fractals in 1975 and introduced a class of mathe-
matical objects, that are beautiful and also appear in nature. Indeed, fractals are con-
nected to a wide variety of natural objects such as the shapes of clouds, coastlines, rip-
ples in oceans and even ﬂowers and trees. Of course, fractals produce stunning visual
images and are used in producing realistic special eﬀects in movies and video games.
Fractals are deﬁned by iteration of simple mathematical equations and it is indeed
amazing that such simple mathematical relations produce complex fractal images.
For instance, consider the iteration of the equation f (z) = z2 + c, starting from z = 0
one can obtain the sequence z0, z1, z2, . . . with z0 = f (0) = c, z1 = f (z0) = f (c) = c2 + c,
z2 = f (z1) = (c2 + c)2 + c and so on. The Mandelbrot set consists of all of those complex
numbers c for which the elements of the sequence z0, z1, z2, . . . remain bounded in
absolute value. Fig. 12 shows the picture of the Mandelbrot set.

When Pragya ﬁrst encountered fractals, she was fascinated by their beauty. First,
she learned how to draw Koch snowﬂakes (see Fig. 18) by hand. Then, as she was
already familiar with the concept of recursion and the knew how to program in python
using its library ‘turtle’, it was a good opportunity for her to use her programming
skills to draw some beautiful pictures of fractals (see Sect. 17.1).

14. Introducing beautiful examples and results from advanced topics.

There is so much beautiful math that can be introduced early to gifted students. Of
course, it will not be possible for gifted children to understand the proof of many such

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 19.: Computer-generated trees using recursion. The trees are drawn using
the Turtle graphics library of Python with an increasing depth of recursion from
Subﬁg. (a) to Subﬁg. (d).

(a) Koch curve. (L-system: rule F → F-F++F-F,
angle=-60, axiom=F, order=4.)

(b) Sierpinski triangle. (L-system: rule F → G-F-G
and G → F+G+F, angle=-60, axiom=F, order=8.)

(c) Hilbert curve.(L-system: rule L → +RF-LFL-
FR+ and R → -LF+RFR+FL-, angle=20, axiom=F,
order=6.)

Fractal plant.

rule X → F-
(d)
[[X]+X]+F[+FX]-X and F → FF, angle=20, axiom=F,
order=6.)

(L-system:

Figure 20.: Fractals using L-system.

theorems, although sometimes intuitive explanations can be provided to them. Still,
even knowing some of these beautiful results will be intriguing for them and it will
kindle their interest in mathematics. For example, gifted students can be told about
results from number theory and topology, such as Fermat’s last theorem, Euclid’s
proof of the inﬁnitude of primes, Twin prime conjecture, Collatz Conjecture, Jacobi’s
theta function and its connection with the period of a real pendulum, Euler’s formula
V − E + F = 2 connecting vertices V, edges E, and faces F of complex polyhedrons,
Brouwer ﬁxed-point theorem and its illustration with the example of a coﬀee cup
in which the coﬀee is stirred using a spoon, Borsuk-Ulam theorem illustrated as
implying that there always exist a pair of antipodal points on the Earth’s surface with
the same temperatures and also the same barometric pressures.

15. Experimenting, exploring and discovering.

At least some of the joy, that a research mathematician experiences while exploring
the beautiful world of mathematics, should be accessible to gifted students. One way
to achieve this is to give students open-ended problems. We give a few examples in
the following.
Ex. 1. Find all the diﬀerent patterns that you can ﬁnd in Pascal’s triangle. Can you
guess what would be the sum of all the numbers in the nth row in the Pascal’s
triangle? (Here it is convenient to start with the topmost row being the 0th row).
Ex. 2. Find all the patterns or relations you can ﬁnd in the sequence of Fibonacci

numbers. A couple of examples are:

(cid:80)n

k=1 Fk = Fn+2 − 1 and

(cid:80)n

k=1 F2
k

= FnFn+1

Ex. 3. Determine the decimal expansion of 1/89 up to a few terms. Do you notice any
patterns? Can you ﬁnd the number in base 5 which has the same pattern?

Ex. 4. Can you ﬁnd the Fibonacci Numbers in Pascal’s Triangle?
Ex. 5. Find out the heights of all the students in your class and then create a height-

frequency plot. What is the shape of this graph?

15.1. Interactive algebra and geometry software programs.

There are many interesting results in elementary mathematics, especially in euclidean
geometry, that students can discover by doing experiments. Interactive Computer
software tools such as Geogebra (https://www.geogebra.org/) can also be eﬀec-
tively used in these experiments. For example, in a guided inquiry-based learning
exercise Medha was asked to draw two parallel lines and also a third transversal
intersecting the two parallel lines. Then she was asked to measure various angles and
after repeating this experiment several times she understood the relations between a
pair of corresponding angles, alternate angles and consecutive interior angles. Sim-
ilarly, she did experiments using Geogebra to measure all the internal angles of a
triangle and found the sum to always be equal to 180 degrees. She was also guided to
discover the Pythagorean theorem, the ratio of the circumference and the diameter of
a circle and several other results in geometry by actual experimental measurements.
This was a sort of active learning exercise for her. It helped in kindling her interest in
geometry, and she was motivated to learn and understand the axiomatic proof-based
geometry to understand the puzzling results that she had discovered through her
experiments.

Pragya was given the following problem. Consider a special point on a wheel of

Figure 21.: A cycloid. Pick a point P on a circle, which is rolling over a line without
slipping. The locus of the P is a cycloid. This was simulated using Geogebra.

Figure 22.: A cardioid. A cardioid is obtained by simulating the rotation of a circle,
over the boundary of another circle of the same radius, using Geogebra. The locus of
point P is a cardioid.

radius r which is rotating without slipping on a straight path. A point P is marked
on the wheel. Find the trajectory of point P. Of course, the answer is that S traces out
a cycloid as the wheel rotates and moves forward. She could really see this by doing
a practical experiment with a wheel and later she simulated this using Geogebra. If
instead, if we consider the trajectory of a point on the perimeter of a wheel, that is
rolling around another ﬁxed wheel of the same radius, then the resulting curve is a
cardioid. Pragya simulated the rolling of one circle around the other and obtained
the curve cardioid using Geogebra (see Fig. 22). She was fascinated by observing this
familiar curve appearing once again in a diﬀerent context (see Sect. 9 for an earlier
discussion).

16. Puzzles, aha moments and creative problem-solving.

Recently in a discussion on mathematics in the lobby of the math department at the
University of Manitoba a professor remarked - “ There are several types of mathemati-
cians, with diﬀerent personalities and tastes in life, some may be nice and humble,
some arrogant, however, invariably every one of them must have experienced the
‘aha moment’ of clarity of a concept or the joy of solving a hard problem.“ Indeed,
one of the goals of early mathematics education should be that students experience

this ‘aha moment’. Puzzles are important in the sense that they oﬀer opportunities for
young gifted students to experience the joy of problem-solving. However, it is impor-
tant to realize that puzzles can also be extremely frustrating to students. Therefore,
it is important to select good puzzles. Moreover, in case a student is totally stuck on
a puzzle, appropriate hints and guidance should be provided. We also remark that
a good puzzle for young children should be simple to state, easy to understand and
fun to try. A puzzle that appears simple and solvable is less likely to intimidate a
young child. Puzzles that involve actual physical activity such as tracing a curve or
rearranging dominoes on a board, etc. hold special appeal to young children.

In the following, we provide some illustrative examples.

Ex. 1. Counting the number of squares on a chess board. When Arya was asked how
many squares are there on a regular 8 × 8 chess board, he immediately replied
64. However, when he was told that there are more squares, for example, there
is a big square of the size 8 × 8, he got stuck on the problem. Arya was provided
with some hints. One important skill in mathematical problem solving is to start
with a smaller or simpler baby version of the problem. Arya could solve the
problem of counting the number of squares on a 3×3 chess board. Then he went
on to solve the problem for 4 × 4 chess board. Equipped with the experience
gained from the smaller examples, he could ﬁnally solve the original problem
for the 8 × 8 chess board.

Ex. 2. Drawing shapes in one stroke without retracing. Pragya was given the task of
drawing the diagram in Fig. 25a, without lifting the pen, and without tracing
the same line more than once. She believed that she could do it and therefore she
tried for a long time. When she was getting frustrated, she was given another
variant of the same problem, which she could solve. She discovered that some
of the shapes are easy to draw under the given restrictions, while some others
are hard or perhaps impossible. This puzzle provided a good opportunity for
her to learn about Eulerian paths and the general result given by Euler that
tracing a graph without lifting the pen and without repeating the same edge
twice is possible only if either all, or all but two vertices are of even degrees.
Here the degree of a vertex is the number of vertices with which it is connected.

Ex. 3. The Seven Bridges of K ¨onigsberg. Pragya was introduced to the famous prob-
lem related to the seven bridges of K ¨onigsberg. A sketch of the map of the city
is given in Fig. 25b. The problem was to devise a walk through the city that
would cross each of those bridges once and only once. Since she had already
attempted the previous problem, with a little guidance (that she can represent
the problem by a graph by viewing the land masses as vertices and the bridges
as edges of a graph), she discovered that it was impossible to devise a desired
walk.

Ex. 4. Triangle counting problem. How many triangles are there in Fig. 24a and

Fig. 24b.

Ex. 5. Covering a square with a missing corner with dominoes. How can a 4 × 4
square, whose two opposite corners are removed, be tiled using seven domi-
noes? One domino is of the size of 2 × 1 (see Fig. 23b). What about an 8 × 8 square
with one pair of opposite corners missing?

Ex. 6. Sudoku for kids. For very young kids the smaller 4 × 4 version of Sudoku can

be given (see Fig. 23a).

Ex. 7. Ants on a scale. Fifty ants are moving on a one-meter scale, which is so thin

2

4

3

1

1

3

4

2

4

2

1

3

3

1

2

4

(a) Sudoku for kids.

Domino
(b) A 4 × 4 square with a pair of diagonally op-
posite squares removed. Can it be completely
covered by 2×1 dominos? What about the same
problem with n × n square?

Figure 23.: Puzzles.

that an ant can travel only to the left or to the right. Each ant is traveling at a
constant speed of 1 meter per minute. When two ants coming from the opposite
direction collide, they simply reverse their directions of travel. When any ant
reaches an end of the scale, it falls oﬀ. What is the minimum time after which
it becomes certain, irrespective of the initial conﬁgurations of the ants on the
scale, that all the ants have fallen oﬀ the scale?

We remark that some of the puzzles that we presented have no solutions, while
some others have multiple solutions. This is another important thing that students
should be made aware of, to give them a sense of what lies ahead if they happen
to study advanced mathematics or do research in this subject. Otherwise, most of
the students erroneously assume that there is always a correct answer to any given
math problem, such as the ones they ﬁnd in their math exams, and mathematics is all
about somehow getting to this correct answer. Once they encounter such problems
they realize that there is more to mathematics than just following some algorithm to
get to the right answer.
√

The students should be encouraged to think out of the box and ask creative ques-
−1 be a member of our system of numbers? What can go wrong? Can
tions. Can
we have a system where the multiplication operation is not commutative? Can we
have a number system where 2 + 2 = 5 and 1 + 1 = 11? See Padmanabhan and Shukla
(2022) for an interesting discussion on this. Asking such questions enables students
to see mathematics as a creative discipline rather than a dull boring subject involving
mindless calculations.

A typical math textbook contains problems at the end of each of its chapters. Many
such problems are routine problems,i.e., problems which can be solved by a direct
application of the theory discussed in the concerned chapter. However, in general,
solving non-routine mathematical problems, such as some of the puzzles discussed
earlier, is not so easy even for a gifted student, as such problems often demand out-
of-box thinking and creativity. Still, some basic principles can help students develop
their toolbox for solving such creative problems. In his excellent book How To Solve It
Polya (2004), Polya has given four basic principles of problem-solving: Understand

(a) The equal sides of the triangle are di-
vided into 5 segments.

(b) The equal sides of the triangle are di-
vided into 25 segments.

Figure 24.: How many triangles are there?

(a) Can you draw this shape without lifting your pen and
without retracing any edge?

(b) The Seven Bridges of K ¨onigsberg problem.

Figure 25.: Puzzles related to Eulerian paths.

the problem, Devise a plan, Carry out the plan, Look back; and he has discussed these
principles in detail. Of course, these principles are a good starting point. Eventually,
in the course of their mathematical journey students should develop, from their indi-
vidual experiences, personalized toolboxes of mathematical knowledge, principles,
and problem solving tricks and techniques. We list below some of the commonly
used techniques or principles, that are helpful in mathematical problem-solving.

• Pigeon-hole principle.
• Inclusion-exclusion principle.
• Method of distinguished element.
• Double counting.
• Mathematical induction.
• Divide and conquer.
• Recurrence relation.
• Principle of invariants.
• Principle of symmetry.

Here, we remark that sometimes a gifted student, who is not used to struggling
with routine mathematical problems, may ﬁnd the experience of solving a hard
mathematical problem very frustrating. It is possible that such a student may even
lose interest in mathematics. Therefore, dealing with failure and managing emotions
in such a student is of great importance. We have further discussed this in Sect. 18.

17. Mathematics and programming

One of the key themes of this work is to strongly argue in favor of integrating com-
puter programming with mathematics education of young gifted children. Learning
to program a computer is an exceedingly important skill in the modern technology
driven world. Indeed, computer simulation is pretty useful in mathematical model-
ing, not only in natural sciences and engineering, but also in economics, geography,
psychology and many other disciplines in humanities. It may appear that learning
to program is a skill that is too advanced for a child to learn. However, this fear is
misplaced and it is certainly possible for a gifted child to learn the fundamentals of
computer programming. Moreover, there are many resources available for a child to
learn to program a computer. We will discuss some of them, such as Scratch and Tur-
tle graphics library in the following. Once a child learns the basics of programming,
it oﬀers a great tool to experiment and play with various ideas in mathematics and
thereby providing a very hands-on way of learning for a child. Further, in many situ-
ations, it allows a gifted child to have concrete realizations of abstract mathematical
concepts.

17.1. Scratch, Python, Turtle and L-systems.

Scratch (see https://scratch.mit.edu/), developed by MIT Media Lab, is a visual
programming language that is especially useful in teaching a child to code. Scratch
programs are created using blocks that can be dragged and dropped. Students can use
Scratch to create and share stories, animations and games and thereby expressing their
creativity and imagination. Scratch oﬀers a perfect logical foundation for students
and after learning Scratch they can comfortably move on to learn other traditional

mainstream programming languages.

Another good way to introduce programming to children is by using Turtle graph-
ics, which like Scratch provides visual feedback. In fact, programming with quick
visual feedback is extremely helpful for beginner programmers. Turtle graphics has
its roots in the programming language Logo created by Wally Feurzeig, Seymour
Papert, and Cynthia Solomon in 1967. Even a modern language like Python has sup-
port for Turtle graphics, which we will consider in the following. In Turtle graphics,
a turtle can move relative to its current position by the following main commands.

(1) Moving forward/backward. Suppose the turtle is initially at (0, 0) facing the
direction of the positive x-axis, then turtle.forward(25) will move the turtle to
(25, 0) and also draw a line from (0, 0) to (25, 0) as the turtle moves. We note that
turtle.forward(-25) or turtle.backward(25), both commands will result in the
turtle moving to (−25, 0). This can be used to reinforce the concept of negative
numbers in a child.

(2) Turning left/right. Again assuming that the initial position of the turtle is at
(0, 0), pointing towards the positive x-axis, we note that the command tur-
tle.left(45) will turn the turtle by 45 degrees in place counterclockwise (i.e., in
the left direction relative to its current direction of positive x-axis).

There are some other commands. In fact, the commands in Turtle graphics are quite
simple and intuitive. The motion of the turtle on the screen makes it easy for children
to learn and play with Turtle graphics.

A classroom exercise. A volunteer student, say Adam, is acting as a turtle. He
is following the commands just like a turtle in Turtle graphics. Other students
should be given some drawing challenges. For example, Clara has to draw
a rectangle of given dimensions. She will issue a sequence of commands to
Adam, such as forward(5), left(90) etc. to move him on a rectangle as required
in the drawing challenge discussed in Sect. 16.

Moreover, children can learn basic programming concepts such as that of a ’for-
loop’ using Turtle graphics. For example, in Fig. 26a a square of size 200 is drawn
using the Turtle graphics in Python by turning forward by 200 units and then turning
left by 90 degrees in succession four times. Medha learned to write the same program
by using a for loop (see Fig. 27).

Turtle graphics is also useful in learning geometry. For instance, after drawing a
square the next challenge for Medha was to draw a regular hexagon. Of course, in
order to draw a regular hexagon, she needed to ﬁnd the angle of turn which led to
her excursion in geometry. She learned how to compute an internal angle of a regular
hexagon and also for any regular polygon. Finally, she could write a program to draw
a hexagon.

Pragya was helping Natasha in the activity that we discussed in Sect. 2. She created
the patterns Fig. 2a, using Turtle graphics, where a point lying on any of the two
oblique lines was joined to a point on the horizontal line if their sums equaled 100.

Turtle graphics can be used to draw objects with recursive structures such as
fractals. For example, Pragya created a Python program using Turtle graphics (see
Fig. 28) to draw the trees in Fig. 19.

Turtle graphics can be combined with L-Systems to create complex natural ob-
jects such as trees, ﬂowers, snowﬂakes and many other organisms. An L-system,
also known as the Lindenmayer-system, was named after the biologist and botanist

from turtle import *

""" Draw a square of size 200
"""

forward (200)
left(90)
forward (200)
left(90)
forward (200)
left(90)
forward (200)
left(90)
done ()

(b) A square of size 200 was drawn using
the Turtle graphics library of Python.

(a) A Python program to draw a square of
the size 200 using Turtle graphics library.

Figure 26.: A simple Turtle graphics program to draw a square.

from turtle import *

""" Draw a square of size 200 using
for i in range(4):
forward (200)
left(90)
done ()

a for -loop

"""

Figure 27.: A Python program using Turtle graphics library to draw a square of the
size 200 using a ‘for-loop’.

from turtle import *
import random

screen . colormode (255)

""" Recursively draws a tree using a turtle object t.
Len: is the length of the tree.
theta: is the angle of turn (in degrees ) of a child branch from its parent

branch ."""

def tree(Len ,theta ,t):

if Len < 5:
return

else:

color( random . randint (0,255),random . randint (0,255),random . randint (0,255))
forward (Len); left(theta); tree(Len-10 ,theta ,t);
right(theta); tree(Len-10 ,theta ,t);
right(theta); tree(Len-10 ,theta ,t);
left(theta);

backward (Len);

return

left(90); up(); bk(200); down ();
tree(100 ,20 ,t);

Figure 28.: Recursively draws a tree using Turtle graphics. The output of this program
is given in Fig. 19.

Figure 29.: Evolution of the ﬁrst few generations of an L-system which consists of the
alphabets A and B, the axiom A and the rules A → AB and B → A.

Aristid Lindenmayer. An L-system consists of the following:

(1) Alphabet. A set of symbols that are used to form a word or string in the system.

There are two types of alphabets.

• Constants: do not change during iterations.
• Variables: change during iterations according to the production rules.

(2) Axiom. An initial starting word from which the system grows.
(3) Rules. A set of rules that govern the growth of the system by stipulating how the
variables can be replaced with combinations of constants and other variables
in each iteration.

For example, consider an L-system consisting of the alphabets A and B, the axiom A
and the rules A → AB and B → A. This means in each iteration all the occurrences of
A are replaced by AB and all the occurrences of B are replaced by A. We list below
the growth of the system for the ﬁrst few iterations (also see Fig. 29).

(1) Axiom: A.
(2) First iteration: AB.
(3) Second iteration: ABA.
(4) Third iteration: ABAAB.

In order to draw geometrical shapes, the variables in an L-system can be associated

with the movements of a turtle. For example,

(1) F : means the turtle moves forward a certain distance (say d units) in the current

direction.

(2) f : means the turtle moves forward a certain distance (say d units) in the current

direction without drawing the line.

(3) + : means the turtle turns left by a certain angle.
(4) − : means the turtle turns right by a certain angle.
(5) [ : means save the current state of the turtle (i.e., its position and direction). It is

like pushing the program state in a stack.

(6) ] : means restore the last saved state of the turtle. It is like popping the program

state from a stack.

Here we note that L-systems are supported by the TikZ and PGF Packages for Latex.
All the sub-ﬁgures in Fig. 20 are drawn using the Lindenmayer System Drawing
Library provided by TikZ and PGF. For example, the following code

\begin{tikzpicture}
\draw [green!50!black, rotate=90]
[l-system={rule set={{X -> F-[[X]+X]+F[+FX]-X},{F -> FF}},
axiom=X, order=6,
step=2pt, angle=-25}]
lindenmayer system;
\end{tikzpicture}

generates the plant shown in Fig. 20d.

17.2. Computer graphics and image processing.

Computer graphics is full of applications of mathematics. Of course, most of these
applications are too advanced for a child to learn. Still, there are plenty of attractive
bits and pieces available in this ﬁeld to make learning fun for a gifted child. We will
discuss some of these ideas in the following.

Ex. 1. Mathematical function describing a photograph. With the easy availability of
smartphones with a camera, it is easy to capture photographs of objects such
as ﬂowers, animals, buildings, clouds, water fountains, glass, windows, fruits
etc. Then these objects can be imported into image editing software programs.
In fact, in many of these objects students can see the occurrences of common
mathematical curves, such as circles, ellipses, parabolas, cycloids etc. Some-
times a mathematical equation will not be apparent (but it can still be analyzed
mathematically, see the remark at the end of this example). Still for advanced
gifted students in high schools, these images can further be manipulated by
importing them in a Python program. An image can be thought of a m × n
matrix with the entry at (i, j)th position storing the integer deﬁning the color at
that position. Python supports many functions for working with an image. For
example, consider the image of a cat as shown in Fig. 31a. The python program
shown in Fig. 30a extracts the contour of this image (which means the coordi-
nates of the set of boundary points), see Fig. 31b, and then rotates the image
counterclockwise by the angle θ = π
A remark. We note that using FFT (Fast Fourier Transform) algorithm the set of
boundary points can be transformed in the frequency domain. Then on carrying
out the inverse FFT, one can get a function, which is a linear combination of
complex exponential basis functions. Therefore, a complex function represent-
ing the shape of the contour can be obtained. Of course, FFT is an extremely
important algorithm in signal and image processing, but we do not expect it to
be introduced to a school student. We just wanted to point out that for a given
image (unless it is too pathological), one can obtain a function representing the
shape of its contour.

2 , see Fig. 31d.

Ex. 2. Transforming an image (translation and rotation). Translation and rotation
of images are required in many situations, for example, in a video game. Un-
derstanding of linear transformation is an important topic within mathematics
itself. In fact, the rotation matrix helps in providing an intuitive understanding
of various trigonometric identities and sum and diﬀerence formulas. It is advan-
tageous to holistically teach interrelated topics such as the geometric meaning
of multiplication by a complex number, Euler’s formula for eiθ and the action

import math as mt
import numpy as np
import matplotlib . pyplot as plt
from skimage import io
from skimage import measure

# Read the image of the cat
cat = io. imread (’cat.png ’)

# Find the contour of the image cat
contours = measure . find_contours (cat , 0.8)

for n, contour in enumerate ( contours ):
x = contour [:, 0]
y = contour [:, 1]

# Rotate the image by the angle theta
theta = mt.pi/2
x1 = x*mt.cos(theta)
y1 = x*mt.sin(theta)

- y*mt.sin( theta)
+ y*mt.cos( theta)

plt.plot(x1 ,y1 , linewidth =2)
plt.show ()

(a) Extracting the contour of an image, see Fig. 31b, and then rotating the image
counterclockwise by the angle θ = π
2 , see Fig. 31d.
import numpy as np
import matplotlib . pyplot as plt
from skimage import io

# Read the image of the cat
camera = io. imread (’cat.png ’)

# Get the size of the image
(l_x , l_y) = camera .shape

# Initialize the grid of size l_x times l_y
X, Y = np.ogrid[:l_x , :l_y]

# Compute which pixels should be masked .
outer_disk_mask = (X - l_x / 2) ** 2 + (Y - l_y / 2) ** 2 > (0.45*l_x) **

2

""" Apply the mask which will change the pixel color outside a disk
centered at (l_x/2,l_y/2) and of radius 0.45*l_x """
camera [ outer_disk_mask ] = 200

plt. imshow (camera , cmap=’gray ’, interpolation =’nearest ’)
plt.axis(’off ’)
plt.show ()

(b) Creating a disk shaped mask using the image of the cat shown in Fig. 31a.

Figure 30.: Python programs for some simple image processing tasks. The programs
use mathematical concepts like the rotation matrix for rotating the image, and the
equation of the exterior of a disk to create a disk-shaped mask.

(cid:105)

(cid:104)

(cid:35)

(cid:34)

cos θ − sin θ
sin θ cos θ

of a rotation matrix on a vector. The multiplication action of a rotation matrix
r(θ) =
is to rotate the vector by the angle θ in the
counterclockwise direction, i.e., (cid:126)v1 = r(θ)(cid:126)v is the vector obtained by rotating
(cid:126)v in the counterclockwise direction. For rotating an image by an angle θ, the
rotation matrix needs to be applied for each of its points.

on (cid:126)v =

x
y

In Fig. 30a the following lines of code

x1 = x*mt.cos(theta)
y1 = x*mt.sin(theta)

- y*mt.sin(theta)
+ y*mt.cos(theta)

are responsible for the rotation of 90 degrees of the image of the cat in
Fig. 31b resulting in the image of the cat in Fig. 31d. The above lines of
code correspond to the following obvious mathematical calculation

(cid:35)

(cid:104)

=

(cid:34)

x1
y1

cos θ − sin θ
sin θ cos θ

(cid:34)

(cid:105)

(cid:35)

x
y

(1)

where the coordinate (x1, y1) is obtained by rotating the coordinate of the
point (x, y) counterclockwise by the angle θ.

Ex. 3. Image masking. Image masking is a method wherein a set of pixels are selected
so that further image-manipulations can be performed on them. The Python
code in Fig. 30b is used to create a disk-shaped mask using the image of the cat
shown in Fig. 31a. The result of applying this mask is shown in Fig. 31c.

The line of code which is used to create this disk shaped mask is

outer_disk_mask = (X - l_x / 2)**2 +
(Y - l_y / 2)**2 > (0.45*l_x)**2.
In fact, all the pixels lying outside the disk of radius 0.45lx centered
are getting selected. A student with knowledge of coordinate
at
geometry can appreciate the fact that how mathematically this region is

(cid:16) lx
2

, ly
2

(cid:17)

described by

(cid:32)

x − lx
2

(cid:33)2

(cid:32)

+

y −

(cid:33)2

ly
2

> (0.45 ∗ lx)2.

(a) A cat.

(b) Extracting the boundary (contour) of the
image of a cat using Scikit image processing
library.

(c) Applying a disk-shaped mask on the image
of a cat.

(d) Rotation of the contour image of the cat
using the rotation matrix.

Figure 31.: Application of mathematics in image processing using Scikit image pro-
cessing library (Python).

Unfortunately, to the best of our knowledge at this moment, there is no im-
age processing library available in the spirit of Turtle graphics (except per-
haps the “novice” module of the Python Scikit Image available at https:
//scikit-image.org/ to a certain extent), which is written for the pedagogi-
cal purpose of teaching image-processing-related programming to kids. How-
ever, working in the spirit of the above examples, such a library can be created,
wherein one essentially hides the unnecessary program details from beginner
students and still allow them to concentrate on the relevant mathematical con-
cepts and their applications in image processing. Of course, we have just given
a glimpse of the possibilities with only a few examples. However, even with
these few examples some of the advantages of this approach are obvious.

(1) It is a hands-on approach that allows a student to practically experiment

with the code,

(2) it allows students to see concrete real word applications of abstract math-

ematical concepts,

(3) it oﬀers visual feedback and encourages students to express their creativ-

ity.

Indeed, a student math art photo or math video-animation competition or
exhibition can be organized in the classroom, enriching students’ imagination
and creativity, while they also learn some interesting mathematical concepts
during the process.

17.3. Physics and engineering.

Mathematics is extensively used in Physics and Engineering. Indeed, it appears that
the laws of nature are written in the language of mathematics. Unfortunately, of-
ten learning mathematics is totally disconnected from learning physics. Renowned
mathematician V.I. Arnold had once remarked (in an address on the teaching of math-
ematics in Paris in 1997) that “In the middle of the twentieth century it was attempted
to divide physics and mathematics. The consequences turned out to be catastrophic.
Whole generations of mathematicians grew up without knowing half of their science
and, of course, in total ignorance of any other sciences. They ﬁrst began teaching
their ugly scholastic pseudomathematics to their students, then to schoolchildren
(forgetting Hardy’s warning that ugly mathematics has no permanent place under
the Sun).” We believe that Physics can be used to shape and inspire the learning of
mathematics of a gifted child.

In the following, we give some examples and possible ideas for using concepts

from physics and engineering in the math education of a gifted child.

Ex. 1. Electrical circuits and a positive deﬁnite matrix. A gifted student in high
school, who has learned about positive deﬁnite matrices, can beneﬁt from the
example that we consider now. We say that a symmetric n × n real matrix A is
positive deﬁnite if the scalar xTAx is positive for every non-zero column vector
x ∈ Rn.
Suppose the matrix

R =

(cid:104) R1+R2+R4
R2

R2
R2+R3+R5

(cid:105)

(2)

Figure 32.: Application of mathematics in basic electrical circuit analysis. The above
circuit can be used to show that the matrix R, as given in Eq. 2, is positive deﬁnite.

is given such that R1, R2, R3, R4, R5 > 0.
We can use basic physics and the electrical circuit in Fig. 32, to show that the ma-
trix R is positive deﬁnite. Using Kirchhoﬀ’s current law (KCL) and Kirchhoﬀ’s
voltage law (KVL) we can write the following equation for the circuit.

(cid:105)

(cid:104) V1
V2

=

(cid:104) R1+R2+R4
R2

R2
R2+R3+R5

(cid:105) (cid:104) i1
i2

(cid:105)

.

(3)

(cid:105)

(cid:104) V1
V2

(cid:105)

(cid:104) i1
i2

.

and I =

Let V =
Since the electric power in a purely resistive circuit is always consumed by the
load, we get that the total power delivered by the voltage sources is positive,
i.e., V1i1 + V2i2 > 0 unless i1 = i2 = 0. It is easy to see that,

V1i1 + V2i2 > 0 =⇒ VTI > 0 =⇒ (RI)TI > 0 =⇒ ITRTI > 0 =⇒ ITRI > 0,

(4)

unless i1 = i2 = 0. This is precisely the mathematical deﬁnition of a positive
deﬁnite matrix mentioned earlier. We also note that in this example one can
directly show without using the electrical circuit that the matrix R is positive
deﬁnite. An easy calculation shows that

ITRI = (R1 + R2 + R4)i2
1
= (R1 + R4)i2
1

+ 2R2i1i2 + (R2 + R3 + R5)i2
2

+ R2(i1 + i2)2 + (R3 + R5)i2
2

> 0

(5)

unless i1, i2 = 0. Therefore, the example illustrates the meaning of a matrix being
positive deﬁnite in the context of the power dissipated in an electrical circuit.

Ex. 2. Electrical circuit voltage and current measurements. Simple electrical circuits
with a voltage source and a few resistors and possibly some LEDs are easy to
analyze using Kirchhoﬀ’s current and voltage laws. These circuits will result
in solving a system of linear equations. Solutions to these equations can be
checked using direct measurements by a multimeter and the diﬀerences in
practical measurements and theoretical predictions can be analyzed. This is a
good practical experiment that is accessible to gifted students in middle and
high school. Moreover, the solution of linear equations leads to matrices and
the rich subject of linear algebra.

Ex. 3. Bufoon’s needle. This is a well-known method of calculating the approximate
value of π by a physical experiment of dropping a needle on a grid of parallel

Figure 33.: A simple game in which a monkey can jump up or down on a ladder. This
game can be used to teach ‘negative numbers’ to students.

lines, whose spacing is greater than the length of a needle. The probability
of the needle lying across a line is related to the value of π. Suppose in an
experiment out of n needles c of those needles crossed lines, then it turns out
that π ≈ 2l · n
, where l is the length of the needle and t is the spacing between the
tc
parallel lines. Although, the proof of this fact involves calculus, for a bright high
school student this experiment could be a good opportunity to learn about the
concept of geometric probability. Moreover, approximating areas using many
small rectangles can be introduced (basically, leading to the concept of Riemann
sums).

Ex. 4. Moving a robot on a given curve. This is a slightly advanced challenge for a
gifted student in high school who is interested in electronics and robotics. There
are open-source single-board microcontroller kits, such as Arduino, available
for building digital devices and interactive objects. It will be a challenging
hands-on project to move a robot on a given curve, say a parabola or an ellipse.

17.4. Computer games.
Computer games can be very eﬀective learning tools. Games are hands-on and often
involve motor control coupled with the processing of visual information. This helps
in the understanding of concepts and also in long-term memory retention.

In the following, we give some examples of games that can be helpful in teaching

a gifted student.

Ex. 1. Negative numbers on a ladder and a monkey. A simple game in which a
monkey can jump up or down on a ladder (see Fig. 33). The up direction is
positive and the down direction is negative. Suppose a monkey is at position
x and there is a banana at position y on the ladder. Assume that the monkey
can move one step on the ladder in one jump. The player is required to enter
the correct number of jumps with the correct sign to move the monkey to the
banana. This game can be used to introduce negative numbers. Moreover, some
variations of this game, such as changing the jump from one step to two, three,
or more steps can help in reinforcing the multiplication facts.

05-5Ex. 2. Shooting games to learn coordinate geometry. A target is required to hit and
for that the coordinate of the target is needed. This game can have several
variations, such as when the target is one vertex of a right-angle triangle and the
player is required to use the Pythagorean theorem to ﬁnd the coordinate of the
target. The game setup can include objects such as walls, roofs, catenary arches,
ﬂowers ect., providing a blending of real-life objects with nice mathematical
descriptions.

Ex. 3. Calculus games. Perhaps it would be somewhat more challenging to design
games for learning calculus. Still, there are many possibilities. For example,
a game could be set up in a desert where the goal of the game could be to
design a tent using limited resources. This tent design problem could be such
that an optimization problem is required to be solved in order to win. Another
scenario might require some approximate calculation based on the concept of
the Riemann sum. An engaging interactive game, with a series of tasks involving
calculus concepts, might be very helpful for students learning calculus.

18. Dealing with failures.

So far we have seen some strategies to engage gifted kids and get them interested
in mathematics. Now, we discuss an important topic, which is dealing with failures
while learning mathematics. Unfortunately, this topic is often not given its due im-
portance in a typical math classroom. While teaching a class of young students, the
teacher asked a simple addition question. Many students raised their hands to an-
swer the question. The teacher picked Danny and asked him to answer. Danny gave a
wrong answer and as soon as the teacher said no it was wrong, Danny started crying,
and with tearful eyes, he swiftly ran away from the class. Danny is an extreme exam-
ple, but it is still true that many students run away from mathematics because they
can not tolerate failure. Negative emotions associated with failure in mathematics,
such as failure to answer a question in class or low grades in the subject begin to
aﬀect the self-worth of an individual learner. As a coping mechanism, they start to
avoid mathematics as much as possible. This exacerbates the situation, and such stu-
dents further fall behind in their mathematical learning goals. Later on, many of such
students become adults who are intelligent and successful in their professions, but
they still resent mathematics and proudly proclaim that -“I’m not a math-person”.
One remedy to this lies in the hands of teachers teaching young students. The teach-
ers should emphasize that failure in mathematics is inevitable. Even professional
research mathematicians struggle in solving their problems. There are many open
problems, some for several decades. Therefore it is important to enjoy the process
of learning without any worry of failure. This message should be conveyed to every
young student of mathematics.

References

Aldama, F. L. (2015). The science of storytelling: Perspectives from cognitive science, neuro-

science, and the humanities.

Antell, S. E. and Keating, D. P. (1983). Perception of numerical invariance in neonates. Child

development, pages 695–701.

Barrow, J. D. (2008). 100 essential things you didn’t know you didn’t know. Random House.

Beran, M. J., Rumbaugh, D. M., and Savage-Rumbaugh, E. S. (1998). Chimpanzee (pan
troglodytes) counting in a computerized testing paradigm. The Psychological Record, 48(1):3–
19.

Bouton, C. L. (1901). Nim, a game with a complete mathematical theory. Annals of Mathematics,

3(1/4):35–39.

Boysen, S. T. and Capaldi, E. J. (2014). Counting in chimpanzees: Nonhuman principles and
emergent properties of number. In The development of numerical competence, pages 47–68.
Psychology Press.

Carey, L. (2006). Expressive and creative arts methods for trauma survivors.

Jessica Kingsley

Publishers.

Davis, H. and Memmott, J. (1982). Counting behavior in animals: A critical evaluation.

Psychological Bulletin, 92(3):547.

de Icaza Herrera, M. (1993). Galileo, bernoulli, leibniz and newton around the brachistochrone

problem. Revista Mexicana de F´ısica, 40(3):459–475.

Fleuret, F., Li, T., Dubout, C., Wampler, E. K., Yantis, S., and Geman, D. (2011). Comparing
machines and humans on a visual categorization test. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 108(43):17621–17625.

Gonthier, G. (2008). Formal proof–the four-color theorem. Notices of the AMS, 55(11):1382–1393.
Milteer, R. M., Ginsburg, K. R., Mulligan, D. A., et al. (2012). The importance of play in
promoting healthy child development and maintaining strong parent-child bond: Focus on
children in poverty. Pediatrics, 129(1):e204–e213.

Padmanabhan, R. and Shukla, A. (2022). 106.20 when do we have 1 1 = 11 and 2 2 = 5? The

Mathematical Gazette, 106(566):319–323.

Piaget, J. (1964). Part i: Cognitive development in children: Piaget development and learning.

Journal of research in science teaching, 2(3):176–186.

Polya, G. (2004). How to solve it: A new aspect of mathematical method. Number 246. Princeton

university press.

Pulizzi, J. (2012). The rise of storytelling as the new marketing. Publishing research quarterly,

28(2):116–123.

Stewart, S. and Reeder, S. (2017). Algebra underperformances at college level: What are the

consequences? In And the Rest is Just Algebra, pages 3–18. Springer.

Wright, R. P. and Dziak, J. M. (2016). Storytelling as a primary leadership tool. In 2016 IEEE

Aerospace Conference, pages 1–12.

Wu, R., Yan, S., Shan, Y., Dang, Q., and Sun, G. (2015). Deep image: Scaling up image

recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1501.02876.

Yabe, M., Oshima, S., Eifuku, S., Taira, M., Kobayashi, K., Yabe, H., and Niwa, S.-i. (2018).
Eﬀects of storytelling on the childhood brain: near-infrared spectroscopic comparison with
the eﬀects of picture-book reading. Fukushima journal of medical science, 64(3):125–132.
Zeki, S., Romaya, J. P., Benincasa, D. M., and Atiyah, M. F. (2014). The experience of mathe-

matical beauty and its neural correlates. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8:68.

