Workshop Report

Detection and Classiﬁcation in Marine
Bioacoustics with Deep Learning

Fabio Frazao, Bruno Padovese, Oliver S. Kirsebom

December 2019

On 21–22 November 2019, about 30 researchers gathered in Victoria, BC,
for the workshop Detection and Classiﬁcation in Marine Bioacoustics with Deep
Learning organized by MERIDIAN and hosted by Ocean Networks Canada.
The workshop was attended by marine biologists, data scientists, and com-
puter scientists coming from both Canadian coasts and the US and representing
a wide spectrum of research organizations including universities, government
(Fisheries and Oceans Canada, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Adminis-
tration), industry (JASCO Applied Sciences, Google, Axiom Data Science),
and non-for-proﬁts (Orcasound, OrcaLab). Consisting of a mix of oral pre-
sentations, open discussion sessions, and hands-on tutorials, the workshop pro-
gram oﬀered a rare opportunity for specialists from distinctly diﬀerent domains
to engage in conversation about Deep Learning and its promising potential
for the development of detection and classiﬁcation algorithms in underwater
acoustics. Presentations given at the workshop can be found on MERIDIAN’s
website at meridian.cs.dal.ca, while the hands-on tutorial can be found at git-
lab.meridian.cs.dal.ca/workshops/victoria nov2019. In the following, we sum-
marize key points from the presentations and discussion sessions. The list of
participants can be found at the end of the report.

0
2
0
2

b
e
F
8
1

]
S
A
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
9
4
2
8
0
.
2
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Attendees at the workshop Detection and Classiﬁcation in Marine
Bioacoustics with Deep Learning held on 21–22 November 2019 at Ocean Net-
works Canada in Victoria BC, Canada.

2

1 Deep Learning in a Nutshell

Introductions to Machine Learning and Deep Learning were given on the ﬁrst
day of the workshop by Marie Roch (San Diego State University) and Fabio
Frazao (MERIDIAN).

Machine Learning (ML) is an approach to creating Artiﬁcial Intelligence
systems. Its deﬁning characteristic is the use of algorithms capable of learning
to perform a task from data, as opposed to having every single step explicitly
programmed. These algorithms may act either directly on the raw data or on
a (heavely) reduced representation of the data. For many years, the latter was
the favored (and only feasible) alternative, but this has changed within the last
decade. Aided by growth in computational power and increased availability of
training data, algorithms have been developed that successfully learn patterns
and correlations directly from raw data, giving birth to a new sub-discipline of
ML known as Deep Learning (DL) [1, Chapter 1].

Thus, the deﬁning characteristic of a DL model is that it acts on the raw
data, or a high-dimensional representation very close to the raw data, rather
than a small set of features. By employing a layered structure, DL models are
capable of learning the representation that is best suited for solving a given task
(adaptability), and the same DL model may be trained to solve multiple tasks
(versatility). Moreover, knowledge acquired in one domain may be transfered
to solve a related task in a diﬀerent domain (transferability). Compared to
convetional ML models, DL models tend to be data-hungry and computationally
intensive to train (but not necessarily to run).

All DL models employ some type of Artiﬁcial Neural Network [1, Chap-
ter 6]. Within the last decade, neural networks have become the preferred ML
algorithm for solving a wide range of tasks, outperforming existing methods
and achieving human-level accuracy in domains such as image analysis [2] and
natural speech processing [3]. Originally inspired by the human brain, neural
networks consist of a large number of interconnected “neurons”, each typically
performing a simple linear operation on input data, speciﬁed by a set of weights
and a bias, followed by an activation function.
In a supervised training ap-
proach, the network is given examples of labeled data, and the weights and
biases are optimized using a gradient-descent technique.

Modern neural networks exhibit multi-layer architectures, which enable them
to build complex concepts out of simpler concepts and hence learn a non-linear
representation of the data. Therefore, modern neural networks are often referred
to as Deep Neural Networks. Two of the most commonly encountered basic
architectures are Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs), which are particularly well adapted to analyzing image data
and sequential data, respectively [1, Chapter 9 & 10]. The availability of large
labeled datasets, containing millions of labeled examples, has been a key factor
in the success of deep neural networks in domains such as image analysis and
natural speech processing. Therefore, much of the current research focuses on
how to train deep neural networks more eﬃciently on smaller datasets [4].

3

2 Applications to Marine Bioacoustics

Shallow neural networks have been employed for the purpose of sound detec-
tion and classiﬁcation in marine bioacoustics since the 1990s, usually combined
with a method of feature extraction [5], but also acting directly on the spectro-
gram [6]. In the last few years, the ﬁrst studies employing modern (i.e. deep)
neural networks have been reported. Applications include classiﬁcation of ﬁsh
sounds [7], detection of orca [8, 9] and humpback [10] vocalizations, classiﬁcation
of calls of multiple whale species [11, 12], detection of sperm whale echolocation
clicks and classiﬁcation of their codas [13], and detection of the upcall of the
North Atlantic right whale [14, 15]. For a recent review of ML applications to
acoustics, see Ref. [16].

At the workshop, presentations given by Herv´e Glotin (Universit´e de Toulon),
Shyam Madhusudhana (Cornell University), Mark Thomas (Dalhousie Univer-
sity), Fabio Frazao (MERIDIAN), Ann Allen (NOAA), and Lauren Harrell
(Google), gave an overview of the state-of-the-art. A common theme was the
use of CNNs acting on spectrogram representations of acoustic data.

The presentations given by Shyam Madhusudhana and Mark Thomas show-
cased two complementary and equally relevant approches: Reduce the computa-
tional load (both during training and inferrence) as much as possible while main-
taining high performance (“DenseNet”), or maximize the performance by build-
ing more sophisticated models trained on high-performance computers (“Mask
R-CNN”). Meanwhile, the presentation given by Fabio Frazao highlighted the
importance of having a training dataset with large variance. Indeed, not only
the size of the training dataset, but also its variance is a key factor in determin-
ing the DL model’s ability to generalize, i.e., how well the model will perform
on unseen test data.

Where most presentations were concerned with the detection and classiﬁca-
tion of low-frequency calls of baleen whales from spectrogram representations,
e.g., the upcall of the North Atlantic right whale, Herv´e Glotin discussed a DL
model for classifying echolocation clicks of ten diﬀerent species of whales and
dolphins from the raw acoustic waveform. This work highlights the complemen-
tary nature of the time- and frequency domains, the former being better suited
for short-duration, broad-band signals (e.g. clicks) and the latter better suited
for longer-duration, narrow-band signals (e.g. tonals). For intermediate cases,
it is conceivable that a hybrid approach, exploiting both domains simultane-
ously, may yield the best performing model. Another interesting aspect of this
work was the investigation of the impact of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) on the
classiﬁcation accuracy: Synthetic noise was superimposed on the original signal
in varying amounts to simulate a range of SNRs, and the change in accuracy
was determined. Such a characterization, while restricted to ﬂat noise back-
grounds (as opposed to transients), is essential for normalizing model results
and enabling inferrences on an absolute level concerning the presence and dis-
tribution of marine species. Finally, the importance of sound directionality was
also addressed. High-frequency sounds, in contrast to low-frequency sounds,
tend to be highly anisotropic, implying that a receiver positioned in front of

4

the sound-producing animal will record a very diﬀerent sound from a receiver
positioned behind it or below it. On one hand, this makes the classiﬁcation task
more challenging. On the other hand, it implies that directional information
is embedded in the waveform and a DL model could potentially learn to infer
directionality.

A limitation common to all the DL models presented at the workshop, shared
by both time- and frequency-domain approaches, is the neglect of long-term tem-
poral context. For example, the spectrograms used as input for the CNNs had
lengths ranging from just a few seconds to at most a few tens of seconds. Going
forward, the integration of long-term temporal context (as commonly done by
human analysts) could prove critical for further enhacing the performance of DL
models. This may require that we give up our cherised CNNs in favour of more
sophisticated network architectures. The use of Convolutional Recurrent Net-
works [17] as Seq2Seq models [18, 19] provides a promising approach to solving
this challenge.

Another limitation, common to all frequency-domain models, is the depen-
dence on the choice of transform (Fourier or wavelet) and spectrogram resolu-
tion. The issue here is not necessarily one of reduced performance, but loss of
versatility and transferability. For example, spectrogram parameters that pro-
duce enhanced signal-to-noise ratio for North Atlantic right whale upcalls may
not be optimal for calls of other whale species. Various methods to mitigate
this issue have been proposed, including the use of a superposition of several
diﬀerent spectrogram representations [12] and models that learn the optimal set
of wavelets from the data [20].

Presentations given by Herv´e Glotin and Bruno Padovese (MERIDIAN) dis-
cussed various augmentation techniques for synthetically enlarging the size of
a training dataset to produce better-performing DL models. Such techniques
range from the simple to the sophisticated. Simple augmentation techniques
include: adding synthetic noise to a signal, producing several copies of the same
signal that diﬀer only by time shifts, and removing selected pixels or whole
regions of a spectrogram [21]. Sophisticated augmentation techniques include
training Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [22] to create synthetic sig-
nals and using sound propagation models to account for acoustic underwater
eﬀects such as reverberations and multi-path echoes. We note that GANs have
been successfully employed to create highly realistic synthetic music [23], sug-
gesting that similar results could be achieved in underwater acoustics.

The potential beneﬁts of Transfer Learning [24] were also discussed brieﬂy at
the workshop, but due to a lack of studies on Transfer Learning in the context of
underwater acoustics little could be concluded. It remains to be seen if Transfer
Learning can help boost performance in cases where the amounts of training
data are limited. That said, it seems likely that we will be able to use Transfer
Learning to great eﬀect to reduce training time and computational demand.

Finally, semi-supervised and unsupervised approaches were identiﬁed as tech-
niques that could help leverage unlabelled data for training purposes (see, e.g.,
Ref. [25]) and be used for characterizing complex soundscapes.

5

3 A Community Eﬀort

Public datasets such as ImageNet have been instrumental in driving progress in
computer vision and related domains. Such datasets both facilitate model devel-
opment and serve as benchmarks enabling inter-model comparisons. Moreover,
public datasets have been extensively used as part part of challenges, further
incentivizing model development.

Several factors contribute to the usability and impact of public datasets such
as ImageNet. Most importantly, the annotations must of be of a hiqh quality
and the documentation provided must be clear and suﬃcient. Moreover, the
data must be easily accessible and remain accessible for many years to ensure
continuity and allow the community to track long-term progress. Finally, there
needs to be clearly deﬁned tasks and performance metrics, allowing inter-model
comparisons.

In marine bioacoustics, the DCLDE (Detection, Classiﬁcation, Localization
and Density Estimation) workshop series (2003–2020) has been the main pro-
ducer of public datasets:

• Workshops 1–6: http://www.mobysound.org/workshops.html

• Workshop 7: http://www.cetus.ucsd.edu/dclde/dataset.html

• Workshop 8: http://sabiod.univ-tln.fr/DCLDE/challenge.html

• Workshop 9: http://www.soest.hawaii.edu/ore/dclde/

These datasets, despite certain shortcomings discussed below, have been and
continue to be an important resource for the community, facilitating the de-
velopment of improved detection and classiﬁcation algorithms. The fact that
DCLDE datasets played an important role in three of the presentations given a
this workshop (Herv´e Glotin, Shyam Madhusudhana, Fabio Frazao) testiﬁes to
this fact.

While there are known issues with the annotation quality of some of the
DCLDE datasets and minor gaps in the documentation (esp. concerning anno-
tation protocols), the datasets have other, more signiﬁcant, shortcomings: The
datasets often lack clearly deﬁned tasks and performance metrics and do not
always remain available after the workshops (e.g. workshop no. 8). The lack
of a single platform and/or a uniﬁed standard format for sharing the datasets
further reduces their value.

The DCASE (Detection and Classiﬁcation of Acoustic Scenes and Events)
workshop series (2013–2019) provides an excellent example of a community plat-
form that allows exchange of datasets, model results, and tracking of progress
over the years (http://dcase.community/). Another platform of interest is Kag-
gle, which may even be a viable option for sharing an annotated acoustic dataset
and hosting challenges.

Hosting of large datasets (> 1 TB) is a challenge that needs to be addressed
by the community. Collaborations with large tech companies such as Google
provide one viable solution, as demonstrated by the presentations given by Ann

6

Allen (NOAA) and Lauren Harrell (Google), and is also the solution adopted
for the upcoming DCLDE Workshop no. 9, where the dataset has a size of 8 TB.
However, while such large datasets may be needed to achieve the best possible
performance, it must be remembered that smaller datasets of tens of GB or less
often are suﬃcient for model development and benchmarking. This is particu-
larly true for data acquired at low sampling rates suitable for classiﬁcation of
low-frequency species.

It is diﬃcult to set down speciﬁc guidelines for the creation of training and
test sets, but some general observations can still be made: Annotations must
(of course) have high quality, but more importantly, the annotation protocol
must be clearly documented: Were the ﬁles annotated at the call level and,
if so, were all calls annotated or only one representative call per ﬁle? What
level of certainty was required from the analyst? Did the analyst inspect/listen
to the entire recordings, or did the analyst only validate the results of an au-
tomated detection algorithm, etc. Datasets should always be accompanied by
clearly deﬁned tasks, which should be aligned with the interests of the marine
bioacousticians and the quality and characteristics of the annotations available.
Even weakly labelled data can be useful for model development, if the tasks are
well-aligned with the data. Datasets should contain a reasonably balanced pro-
portion of samples from each class of interest, and should ideally cover the full
spectrum of acoustic conditions likely to be encountered in applications. That
is, the larger the variance of the dataset, the better. However, if the intention
is to develop a model that will only be used in restricted geographical region,
or a restricted period of the year (say, the summer months), then it is perfectly
ﬁne and useful to have datasets that focus on these regions and time periods.

Licensing must also be considered. While it would be desirable to enforce
open-sourcing of models derived from public datasets, this could prove counter
productive in terms of incentivising model development.

Creating a high-quality training dataset requires a lot of eﬀort. Luckily, we
are seeing more incentives to undertake such eﬀorts as journals are opening for
submissions of pure datasets, e.g., Nature Scientiﬁc Data and Data in Brief.
Also, labs and companies can always choose to release only partial datasets,
thereby maintaining a competitive advantage by being able to train their own
models on a larger dataset than the one available to the public.

4 From Academic Exercises to Practical Tools

As discussed above, Deep Neural Networks exhibit a high degree of ﬂexibility,
i.e., the same network architecture can be trained to solve a range of diﬀerent
tasks. While it requires a good understanding of Machine Learning to design
and implement a neural network, training it is, in principle, straightforward.
All you must do is feed the appropriate training data to the neural network.
Therefore, it is conceivable that not just experts, but also people with limited
programming experience and limited knowledge of machine learning could de-
velop or re-purpose DL-based detection and classiﬁcation algorithms. However,

7

to achieve this ambitious goal, the proper software tools ﬁrst need to be devel-
oped. MERIDIAN is contributing towards this goal through the development of
the open-source Python library Ketos (docs.meridian.cs.dal.ca/ketos/). At the
workshop, participants could explore the functionalities of Ketos in a 90-min
hands-on tutorial (gitlab.meridian.cs.dal.ca/workshops/victoria nov2019).

Marine biologists in general, but especially those working in government re-
search, are under constant pressure to provide marine environmental regulators
with data, reliable results, and ﬁrm conclusions. Since conditions and require-
ments imposed by regulators often change, it would be useful to have adaptable
detection and classiﬁcation algorithms. However, adaptability is not the only
desirable feature. Equally important, is improved performance and the capacity
to provide uncertainty estimation. DL models have the potential to meet all of
these requirements.

While achieving human-level performance remains the number one long-term
goal, producing adaptable models is an important complementary goal, which
could be achieved in shorter time. This will require the development of graphi-
cal user interfaces (GUI) since few users will be comfortable with programming.
With a GUI, users could interact with DL models without having to do any
programming, but some understanding and control of machine-learning param-
eters will still be required for the successful implementation of such an Active
Learning scheme [26].

Some level of compatability with existing software, e.g., Pamguard and
RavenPro, is also highly desirable. As a minimum this implies ensuring that
input/output formats are compatible, i.e., that a list of detections produced by
the DL software can be loaded into commonly used annotation software tools
for review (and editing), and conversely that annotation tables produced by the
same commonly used annotation tools can be loaded into the DL software. More
advanced levels of compatability would involve the development of plug-ins for
existing software, such as the Humpback whale detector plug-in developed by
Google for use in Pamguard by NOAA, as discussed in Ann Allen’s presenta-
tion. Another practical concern is to ensure functionality across OS systems
(Windows, Mac, Linux) and dealing with strict ﬁrewalls present especially in
government research labs.

As a ﬁnal note, we mention the VIAME toolkit (www.viametoolkit.org) as
a recent example of an open-source toolkit allowing users to train ML models
(for underwater image processing, not audio) through a GUI without the need
to program.

5 Public Sharing of Data and Software

Presentations addressing (among other things) public sharing of acoustic data
were given by Scott and Val Veirs (Orcasound), Ann Allen (NOAA), and Lauren
Harrell (Google).

Streaming of stored or live acoustic data is a convenient method of data
If combined with a

sharing, particularly well suited for outreach activities.

8

public annotation platform, live streaming provide a means to build training
datasets (assuming the acoustic data is stored somewhere) as currently pursued
by Orcasound (www.orcasound.net).

Sharing of large datasets, such as NOAA’s HARP Data Archive for the
Paciﬁc (> 300 TB, and growing at 50 TB/yr), is a huge challenge. Ann Allen
and Lauren Harrell demonstrated how Google (AI for Social Good) can help
solve such problems by providing cloud storage, computing power, and analyti-
cal tools. It is likely that cloud/decentralized storage and computing will play a
growing role in underwater acoustics data handling and analysis in the future.
Funding for such services should be built into grant applications. The problem
of long-term storage (beyond the duration of the grant), however, remains.

With scientiﬁc journals beginning to accept pure data articles, incentives for
sharing data are growing, but this also imposes stricter requirements on data
descriptors, which we should welcome as positive development.

For software there is the added challenge of ensuring that the software (and
all its dependencies) still runs 5–10 years after it was developed. Adoption by
the community of good software development practices should be encouraged,
including collaborative coding on platforms like github and gitlab, version con-
trol, etc. On the other hand, enforcing use of certain tools over others is not
realistic, nor productive, so we recommend to go with what works for your
problem, but be mindful of what other people in your community.

6 Conclusion

We end the report with a brief set of recommendations for the community,

• Eﬀorts should go into developing models that require less training data,

• and should be paralleled by eﬀorts towards developing improved data aug-

mentation techniques.

• Inclusion of long-term temporal context will likely be needed to achieve

human-level accuracy.

• We also need “light-weight” models with minimal power consuption that

can be deployed on ﬁeld instruments.

• Availability of more and better public datasets is essential to ensure progress.

• A community platform for hosting datasets, documentation, and task de-

scriptions, and sharing results and code would go a long way!

• The creation of graphical user interfaces could enable non-programmers
to train their own DL models, producing detection algorithms that are
tailored to their precise needs.

9

References

[1] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep learning book.

MIT Press, 521(7553):800, 2016.

[2] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Delving deep into rectiﬁers: Sur-
passing human-level performance on imagenet classiﬁcation. In 2015 IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 1026–1034,
Dec 2015.

[3] G. Hinton, L. Deng, D. Yu, G. E. Dahl, A. Mohamed, N. Jaitly, A. Senior,
V. Vanhoucke, P. Nguyen, T. N. Sainath, and B. Kingsbury. Deep neural
networks for acoustic modeling in speech recognition: The shared views of
four research groups. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):82–97, Nov
2012.

[4] https://towardsdatascience.com/advances-in-few-shot-learning-a-guided-

tour-36bc10a68b77.

[5] Mohammed Bahoura and Yvan Simard. Blue whale calls classiﬁcation
using short-time fourier and wavelet packet transforms and artiﬁcial neural
network. Digital Signal Processing, 20(4):1256 – 1263, 2010.

[6] Xanadu C. Halkias, S´ebastien Paris, and Herv´e Glotin. Classiﬁcation of
mysticete sounds using machine learning techniques. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 134(5):3496–3505, 2013.

[7] Marielle Malfante, Omar Mohammed, Cedric Gervaise, Mauro Dalla Mura,
and Jerome I. Mars. Use of deep features for the automatic classiﬁcation
of ﬁsh sounds. In OCEANS’18 MTS/IEEE, Kobe, Japan, May 2018.

[8] Christian Bergler, Hendrik Schr¨oter, Rachael Xi Cheng, Volker Barth,
Michael Weber, Elmar N¨oth, Heribert Hofer, and Andreas Maier. ORCA-
SPOT: An automatic killer whale sound detection toolkit using deep learn-
ing. Scientiﬁc Reports, 9(1):10997, July 2019.

[9] https://www.blog.google/technology/ai/protecting-orcas/.

[10] https://ai.googleblog.com/2018/10/acoustic-detection-of-humpback-

whales.html.

[11] C. McQuay, F. Sattar, and P. F. Driessen. Deep learning for hydrophone
big data. In 2017 IEEE Paciﬁc Rim Conference on Communications, Com-
puters and Signal Processing (PACRIM), pages 1–6, Aug 2017.

[12] Mark Thomas, Bruce Martin, Katie Kowarski, Briand Gaudet, and
Stan Matwin. Marine mammal species classiﬁcation using convolutional
neural networks and a novel acoustic representation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.13188, 2019.

10

[13] Peter C. Bermant, Michael M. Bronstein, Robert J. Wood, Shane Gero, and
David F. Gruber. Deep machine learning techniques for the detection and
classiﬁcation of sperm whale bioacoustics. Scientiﬁc Reports, 9(1):12588,
August 2019.

[14] Y. Shiu, K. J. Palmer, M. A. Roch, et al. Deep neural networks for au-
tomated detection of marine mammal species. Scientiﬁc Reports, 10, 607,
2020.

[15] Oliver S. Kirsebom, Fabio Frazao, Yvan Simard, Nathalie Roy, Stan
Matwin, Samuel Giard. Performance of a Deep Neural Network at Detect-
ing North Atlantic Right Whale Upcalls. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09127,
2020.

[16] Michael J. Bianco, Peter Gerstoft, James Traer, Emma Ozanich, Marie A.
Roch, Sharon Gannot, and Charles-Alban Deledalle. Machine learning in
acoustics: Theory and applications. The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 146(5):3590–3628, 2019.

[17] Keunwoo Choi, Gy¨orgy Fazekas, Mark Sandler, and Kyunghyun Cho.
Convolutional recurrent neural networks for music classiﬁcation. In 2017
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), pages 2392–2396. IEEE, 2017.

[18] Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural ma-
chine translation by jointly learning to align and translate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.0473, 2014.

[19] Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V Le, Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Lukasz

Kaiser. Multi-task sequence to sequence learning, 2015.

[20] Randall Balestriero, Romain Cosentino, Herve Glotin, and Richard Bara-
niuk. Spline ﬁlters for end-to-end deep learning. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas
Krause, editors, Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pages 364–373, Stockholmsm¨assan, Stockholm Sweden, 10–15 Jul 2018.
PMLR.

[21] J. Salamon and J. P. Bello. Deep convolutional neural networks and data
augmentation for environmental sound classiﬁcation. IEEE Signal Process-
ing Letters, 24(3):279–283, March 2017.

[22] https://ai.googleblog.com/2018/10/acoustic-detection-of-humpback-

whales.html.

[23] Sicong Huang, Qiyang Li, Cem Anil, Xuchan Bao, Sageev Oore, and
Roger B. Grosse.
Timbretron: A wavenet(cycleGAN(CQT(audio)))
pipeline for musical timbre transfer. In International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, 2019.

11

[24] Karl Weiss, Taghi M Khoshgoftaar, and DingDing Wang. A survey of

transfer learning. Journal of Big data, 3(1):9, 2016.

[25] Randall Balestriero, Vincent Roger, Herve G. Glotin, and Richard G. Bara-
niuk. Semi-supervised learning via new deep network inversion, 2017.

[26] Burr Settles. From theories to queries: Active learning in practice.

In
Active Learning and Experimental Design workshop In conjunction with
AISTATS 2010, pages 1–18, 2011.

12

7 List of Participants

Aﬃliation
Name
SFU
Alex Harris
NOAA
Ann Allen
MERIDIAN, Dalhousie University
Bruno Padovese
Clair Evers
DFO
Dany Alejandro Cabrera Vargas ONC
Fabio Frazao
Harald Yurk
Herv´e Glotin
Hilary Moors-Murphy
James Pilkington
Jesse Lopez
Kristen Kanes
Lauren Harrell
Lisa Leung
Marie Roch
Mark Thomas
Miguel Neves Dos Reis
Oliver Kirsebom
Quinlan McIntire
Scott Veirs
Shyam Madhusudhana
Steven Bergner
Suzie Hall
Val Veirs
Valentina Staneva
Wilfried Beslin
Xavier Mouy

MERIDIAN, Dalhousie University
DFO
Universit´e de Toulon
DFO
DFO
Axiom Data Science
ONC
Google
MERIDIAN, UBC
San Diego State University
Dalhousie University, JASCO
DFO
MERIDIAN, Dalhousie University
OrcaLab
Orcasound
Cornell University
MERIDIAN, SFU
OrcaLab
Orcasound
University of Washington
DFO
JASCO

Table 1: Attendees at the workshop Detection and Classiﬁcation in Marine
Bioacoustics with Deep Learning held on 21–22 November 2019 at Ocean Net-
works Canada in Victoria BC, Canada.

13

