Research and development of MolAICal for drug design via deep 

learning and classical programming 

Qifeng Bai1,* 

https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7296-6187 

1School of Basic Medical Sciences, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, Gansu 730000, P. R. China 

*Corresponding author 
E-mail: molaical@yeah.net 

Abstract 

Deep learning methods have permeated into the research area of computer-aided drug design. 

The deep learning generative model and classical algorithm can be simultaneously used for three-
dimensional (3D) drug design in the 3D pocket of the receptor. Here, three aspects of MolAICal 
are illustrated for drug design: in the first part, the MolAICal uses the genetic algorithm, Vinardo 
score and deep learning generative model trained by generative adversarial net (GAN) for drug 
design. In the second part, the deep learning generative model is trained by drug-like molecules 
from the drug database such as ZINC database. The MolAICal invokes the deep learning 
generative model and molecular docking for drug virtual screening automatically. In the third part, 
the useful drug tools are added for calculating the relative properties such as Pan-assay 
interference compounds (PAINS), Lipinski's rule of five, synthetic accessibility (SA), and so on. 
Besides, the structural similarity search and quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR), 
etc are also embedded for the calculations of drug properties in the MolAICal. MolAICal will 
constantly optimize and develop the current and new modules for drug design. The MolAICal can 
help the scientists, pharmacists and biologists to design the rational 3D drugs in the receptor 
pocket through the deep learning model and classical programming. MolAICal is free of charge 
for any academic and educational purposes, and it can be downloaded from the website 
https://molaical.github.io.   

Keywords 

MolAICal, Drug design, CADD, Deep learning 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 

With the technology development of computer-aided drug design (CADD), the deep learning 
method has been immersed in the research field of drug design such as the chemical syntheses [1], 
classification of drugs [2] and so on [3]. Deep learning and classical programming of CADD have 
their own advantages on the development and discovery of innovative drugs. The traditional 
machine learning methods include the support vector machine (SVM) [4], Bayesian algorithm [5], 
random forest (RF) [6], artificial neural networks (ANNs) [7, 8], etc. According to some research 
reports, machine learning shows a good way for drug discovery. For instance, the inhibitors of 
kallikrein 5 protease [9] are explored via the SVM method. The binding score between ligand and 
protein is a key factor for screening the potential compounds. RF-based scoring functions reveal 
the Pearson’s correlation coefficients ranging from 0.559 to 0.783 between experimental affinities 
and predicted values on basis of PDBbind database v2007 [10]. Some studies indicate that 
Bayesian algorithms can be used to identify the inhibitors of G-protein-coupled receptors [11], and 
so on. The ANNs have been reported to predict chemical immunotoxicity [12]. As current research 
reports, the deep learning method shows a better performance than the traditional machine 
learning methods [13-15]. The deep learning methods have popularly used in the area of drug 
virtual screening and de novo drug design [16-18]. The representative methods for de novo drug 
design include variational autoencoders (VAEs) [19] and generative adversarial net (GAN) [20, 
21]. The objective-reinforced generative adversarial networks (ORGAN) is designed with the 
generator that produces the molecules to cheat the discriminator based on the reinforcement and 
adversarial learning methods [22]. The ORGAN mainly trains the deep learning model based on 
the SMILES sequences of ligands. The molecular graph is another way to profile the molecules 
with nodes and edges that correspond to the atoms and bonds of molecule. MolGAN [23] is a deep 
learning program that can be used to train molecular generative model based on molecular graph. 
The MolGAN contains GAN and VAEs for training the drug-like molecules through the 
annotation matrix and dense adjacency tensor. Besides, the research reports shows a good way to 
carry out drug virtual screening by SVM, molecular docking and molecular mechanics/generalized 
Born surface area (MM/GBSA), etc [24].   

The deep learning model and classical programming have different ways for drug design. The 

deep learning focuses on training rules of drug design based on input and output data of drugs. 
The well-trained model can be used to design drugs directly. In contrast, the traditional CADD 
software needs the algorithm rules and relative input data to design the drugs. The LigBuilder 
[25], OpenGrowth [26] and AutoDock Vina [27] are the popular drug design software. The 
LigBuilder and OpenGrowth develop the potential candidate drugs via the fragmented growth or 
link method that belongs to one branch of de novo drug design methods. The AutoDock Vina 
designs the ligands through molecular docking that is one way of virtual screening methods. The 
traditional CADD software shows a good performance for drug design. Especially, the AutoDock 
Vina shows the best scoring power according to the reported experiments about the ligands 
assessment in the receptor pocket [28]. The deep learning can learn the molecular characteristics 
with one-dimensional (1D) SMILES sequence, two-dimensional (2D) molecular graph and 
molecular graph incorporating three-dimensional (3D) structural information [29]. The classical 

 
 
programming can design the 3D ligands in the receptor pocket directly. In this case, the MolAICal 
is preliminarily designed on basis of deep learning and classical programming. The MolAICal soft 
package mainly focuses on three aspects of development and research. In the first part, the 
MolAICal is designed based on the de novo drug design method and deep learning model that is 
trained on the fragments of appointed special drugs such as Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-
approved drugs. In the second part, the MolAICal contains the modules of virtual screening and 
deep learning model that is trained on drug-like ligands of appointed special database such as 
ZINC database. In the third part, the useful tools for drug filter, prediction, etc. are developed in 
the MolAICal software for drug discovery. The main part of MolAICal is written by JAVA 
program that derives many useful libraries such as Chemistry Development Kit (CDK) [30], 
Ambit JAVA library, etc. MolAICal uses JAVA parallelstream to invoke multicore CPU for 
designing drugs concurrently. MolAICal will try its best to take advantage of the drug design 
method of deep learning model and classical programming for drug discovery. The MolAICal 
supplies an effective way for 3D ligand design in the receptor pocket.   

Figure 1. The module of MolAICal contains deep learning and classical programming methods. 

Results and Discussion 

Deep learning and de novo methods for drug design 

In the first module, MolAICal focuses on the method development of deep learning generative 
model and de novo drug design. As shown in Figure 1, the deep learning generative model is an 
important  direction  of  research  and  development  of  MolAICal  based  on  SMILES  sequence  and 
molecular graph. The effective and stable training methods can improve the accuracy rate of drug 
discovery. The  popular  training  methods such  as  GAN are  picked  up  for  training  the  generative 
model  of  ligands  and fragments  in  the  current  version  of  MolAICal. The  MolAICal  will  further 
optimize the current training method GAN, and employ the new advanced technology for training 
generative  models.  In  addition,  the  spatial  structural  information  of  ligand  and  receptor  is  an 
important  factor  for  rational  drug  design. The  deep  learning  generative  model  incorporating  3D 
structural  information  can  show  the  state-of-the-art  way  to  produce  the  molecules  with  high  3D 
similarity  to  the  determined  ligand  of  the  receptor.  MolAICal  will  further  develop  and  train  the 
excellent generative model incorporating 3D structural information for drug design. Meanwhile, the 

 
 
 
MolAICal also employs classical programming such as fragment growth for drug design based on 
the output fragments of deep learning generative model (see Figure 1). In the process of the drug 
design of MolAICal, the initial fragment is chosen as the started fragment in the 3D pocket of the 
receptor.  The  next  fragment  grows  on  the  previous  ligand  fragment.  The  growth  algorithm  and 
binding  score  play  an  important  role  in  the  evaluation  of  drug  design.  MolAICal  will  further 
optimize  the  growth  algorithm  and  develop  the  superior  binding  score  based  on  the  PDBbind 
database. Besides, MolAICal also supplies the user-defined seed fragments for de novo drug design. 
Generally, deep learning and classical programming are the development aspects of the MolAICal. 
The  ultimate  goal  is  that  MolAICal  can  try  its  best  to  take  advantage  of  the  deep  learning  and 
classical programming for drug design. 

Figure 2. The module of MolAICal contains deep learning and drug virtual screening method. 

Deep learning and virtual screening method for drug design 

In the second module, the deep learning generative model and virtual screening method are 
introduced  for  drug  screening  in  the  MolAICal.  MolAICal  provides  two  drug  design  ways  that 
screen  ligands  in  the  3D  pocket  of  receptors  based  on  the  known  drug  database  and  generated 
database by deep learning model. First of all, the high-quality ligand sets can promote the speed of 
new drug discovery. As shown in Figure 2, MolAICal employs the deep learning generative model 
for producing the drug-like database. The deep learning generative model can generate high-quality, 
novel, synthesizable, diversity and drug-like ligands. Secondly, because the ligands are the SMILES 
format in the generated drug database, the software Open Babel [31] is employed to transform the 

 
 
 
 
3D  structure  from  the  SMILES  format  ligands  on  basis  of  Merck  Molecular  Force  Field  94 
(MMFF94). The MolAICal will further develop its module to satisfy the requirement of molecular 
format  conversion  for  drug  design.  Thirdly,  the  drug  virtual  screening  is  performed  on  the  3D 
receptor pocket based on the generated drug database by invoking the molecular docking program 
Autodock Vina (see Figure 2). The MolAICal will further update Autodock Vina to another version 
named  MACDock.  The  MACDock  will  improve  its  performance  based  on  "scoring  power", 
"ranking power", "docking power", and "screening power". In addition, drug virtual screening based 
on  the  known  ligands  database  is  also  added  in  MolAICal.  Lastly,  the  MM/GBSA  is  a  kind  of 
recognized accurate way to assess the binding free energy of protein-ligand, protein-protein, and so 
on  [32].  MolAICal  provides  a  way  to  calculate  the  MM/GBSA  based  on  the  output  results  of 
molecular dynamics simulations that are carried out by software NAMD. The score functions which 
can be used to assess the affinities of ligands in the receptor pocket are an important development 
area  in  MolAICal.  The  MolAICal  will  develop  its  molecular  format  transformation  and  3D 
coordinate generation based on the force field. The drug generative model and molecular docking 
program, etc are also added in the development plan of MolAICal.     

Figure 3. The useful tools of MolAICal for drug design. 

Useful tools for drug design 

The deep learning model, classical programming and Vinardo score can be used to select the 

good affinity ligands in soft package MolAICal. However, it still needs to evaluate absorption, 
distribution, metabolism, excretion, toxicity, drug-likeness, etc of drugs. In the current version of 
MolAICal, Lipinski's rule of five (RO5), pan-assay interference compounds (PAINS) and 
synthetic accessibility (SA) are embedded to assess the drug-likeness of ligands (see Figure 3). 
The parameters and methods of these filter rules will further be optimized and improved in 
MolAICal. For example, as the research report of FDA approved oral drugs [33], the RO5 has 
substantially changed its cutoff values of rotatable bonds, molecular weight, and hydrogen bond 
acceptors. In this case, the parameters of RO5 need to be updated according to the research report. 
Besides, MolAICal also contains useful drug design tools such as quantitative structure-activity 

 
 
 
 
relationship (QSAR), ligand similarity search (SS) and potential of mean force (PMF) (see Figure 
3). These kinds of tools can be quickly used to screen or evaluate the drugs. The MolAICal will 
further develop the medicinal chemistry filters (MCFs) [34], descriptor MCE-18 [35], weak 
interaction [36] and so on. Generally, MolAICal will continually develop new and effective tools 
for drug filter and design.   

Conclusions 

In this paper, the main three modules of MolAICal are introduced for drug design. For the first 
module,  the  deep  learning  and  de  novo  methods  are  developed  for  fragment  growth  in  the  3D 
pocket  of  the  receptor.  For  the second  module,  deep learning  and virtual  screening  method  are 
added for drug screening in the 3D pocket of the receptor. Both of two modules in MolAICal can 
be also used to design drugs in the receptor pocket based classical programming independently. 
For the third module, the MolAICal focuses on the development of effective and useful tools for 
drug filter and design. In total, the MolAICal will continually optimize and develop new methods 
for drug design. The ultimate aim is that MolAICal can help scientists to find new drugs efficiently.   

Materials and methods 

Deep learning 

In the current version, the Wasserstein generative adversarial networks (WGANs) [37] are 
picked up to train the deep learning generative model of MolAICal. The WGANs can be used to 
calculate the difference of probability distributions between the fraud and genuine drugs data 
distribution (see equation 1).   

𝑊(ℙ𝑟, ℙ𝜃) =

sup   
||𝑓||𝐿≤1

𝔼𝑥~ℙ𝑟

[𝑓(𝑥)] − 𝔼𝑥~ℙ𝜃[𝑓(𝑥)]

                                      (1) 

To obtain the best optimization of equation 1, the solution of WGANs is shown in equation 2: 

min
𝐺

  max
𝐷

  𝔼𝑥~ℙ𝑟

[𝐷(𝑥)] − 𝔼𝑧~𝑝(𝑧)[𝐷(𝐺(𝑧)]                                              (2) 

Where the D and G are the discriminator and generator, respectively. The discriminator D 
increases the distinguishable probability of genuine data and decrease the indistinguishable 
probability of fraud data in the training process. The stable training WGANs is added to the 
development plan of MolAICal.   

Classical programming 

The genetic algorithm is used for de novo drug design. The initial fragment is chosen from 
the part of known ligand in the receptor pocket or generated by appointed SMILES around the 
atom of key residue. The next fragment grows on the previous fragment through the perturbation 
search of the Fibonacci or random algorithm. The Fibonacci points are distributed on the sphere 
according to equation 3:   

𝑥𝑖 = √1 − (1 −

1
𝑁

−

2
)

2𝑖
𝑁

∗ cos (π(3 − √5) ∗ 𝑖) 

 
   
 
 
 
𝑦𝑖 = √1 − (1 −

1
𝑁

−

2
)

2𝑖
𝑁

𝑧𝑖 = 1 −

1
𝑁

−

2𝑖
𝑁

∗ sin (π(3 − √5) ∗ 𝑖)                                    (3) 

Where xi, yi and zi represent the position of sphere points in the coordinate system. The letter N 
represents the number of produced points that can be appointed by users. The operators' crossover 
and mutation of genetic algorithm (GA) are used to optimize the ligands in the receptor pocket. The 
MolAICal  also employs  classical  programming  for  drug  virtual  screening  and  unwanted  ligands 
filtering.  MolAICal  will  optimize  these  methods,  and  further  add  the  new  effective  classical 
programming for drug design.   

References 

1. 

Segler MHS, Preuss M, Waller MP. Planning chemical syntheses with deep neural networks 

and symbolic AI, Nature 2018;555:604-610. 

2.  Miao R, Xia LY, Chen HH et al. Improved Classification of Blood-Brain-Barrier Drugs Using 

Deep Learning, Scientific Reports 2019;9:8802. 

3. 

Shi Q, Chen W, Huang S et al. Deep learning for mining protein data, Brief Bioinform 2019. 

4.  Hearst MA, Dumais ST, Osuna E et al. Support vector machines, IEEE Intelligent Systems and 

their applications 1998;13:18-28. 

5. 

Friedman  N,  Geiger  D,  Goldszmidt  M.  Bayesian  network  classifiers,  Machine  learning 

1997;29:131-163. 

6.  Ho  TK.  Random  decision  forests.  In:  Proceedings  of  3rd  international  conference  on 

document analysis and recognition. 1995, p. 278-282. IEEE. 

7.  Rumelhart DE, Widrow B, Lehr MA. The basic ideas in neural networks, Communications of 

the ACM 1994;37:87-93. 

8.  Hinton GE. How neural  networks learn from experience, Scientific American 1992;267:144-

151. 

9. 

Fang X, Bagui S, Bagui S. Improving virtual screening predictive accuracy of Human kallikrein 

5 inhibitors using machine learning models, Computational Biology and Chemistry 2017;69:110-

119. 

10.  Li  Y,  Yang  J.  Structural  and  Sequence  Similarity  Makes  a  Significant  Impact  on  Machine-

Learning-Based  Scoring  Functions  for  Protein-Ligand 

Interactions,  Journal  of  Chemical 

Information and Modeling 2017;57:1007-1012. 

11.  Renault N, Laurent X, Farce A et al. Virtual screening of CB(2) receptor agonists from bayesian 

network and high-throughput docking: structural insights into agonist-modulated GPCR features, 

Chemical Biology & Drug Design 2013;81:442-454. 

12.  Tenorio-Borroto  E,  Garcia-Mera  X,  Penuelas-Rivas  CG  et  al.  Entropy  model  for  multiplex 

drug-target interaction endpoints of drug immunotoxicity, Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry 

 
 
 
 
2013;13:1636-1649. 

13.  Dahl  GE,  Jaitly  N,  Salakhutdinov  R.  Multi-task  neural  networks  for  QSAR  predictions,  arXiv 

preprint arXiv:1406.1231 2014. 

14.  Mayr A, Klambauer G, Unterthiner T et al. DeepTox: toxicity prediction using deep learning, 

Frontiers in Environmental Science 2016;3:80. 

15.  Winkler  DA,  Le  TC.  Performance  of  Deep  and  Shallow  Neural  Networks,  the  Universal 

Approximation Theorem, Activity Cliffs, and QSAR, Molecular Informatics 2017;36. 

16.  Chen H, Engkvist O, Wang Y et al. The rise of deep learning in drug discovery, Drug Discovery 

Today 2018;23:1241-1250. 

17.  Leong  MK,  Syu  RG,  Ding  YL  et  al.  Prediction  of  N-Methyl-D-Aspartate  Receptor  GluN1-

Ligand  Binding  Affinity  by  a  Novel  SVM-Pose/SVM-Score  Combinatorial  Ensemble  Docking 

Scheme, Scientific Reports 2017;7:40053. 

18.  Segler  MHS,  Kogej  T,  Tyrchan  C  et  al.  Generating  Focused  Molecule  Libraries  for  Drug 

Discovery with Recurrent Neural Networks, ACS Cent Sci 2018;4:120-131. 

19.  Kingma DP, Welling M. Auto-encoding variational bayes, arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 2013. 

20.  Goodfellow I, Pouget-Abadie J, Mirza M et al. Generative adversarial nets. In: Advances in 

Neural Information Processing Systems. 2014, p. 2672-2680. 

21.  Xue D, Gong Y, Yang Z et al. Advances and challenges in deep generative models for de novo 

molecule  generation,  Wiley 

Interdisciplinary  Reviews:  Computational  Molecular  Science 

2019;9:e1395. 

22.  Guimaraes  GL,  Sanchez-Lengeling  B,  Outeiral  C  et  al.  Objective-reinforced  generative 

adversarial networks (ORGAN) for sequence generation models, arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.10843 

2017. 

23.  De Cao N, Kipf T. MolGAN: An implicit generative model for small molecular graphs, arXiv 

preprint arXiv:1805.11973 2018. 

24.  Sun H, Pan P, Tian S et al. Constructing and Validating High-Performance MIEC-SVM Models 

in Virtual Screening for Kinases: A Better Way for Actives Discovery, Scientific Reports 2016;6:24817. 

25.  Yuan  Y,  Pei  J,  Lai  L.  LigBuilder  2:  a  practical  de  novo  drug  design  approach,  Journal  of 

Chemical Information and Modeling 2011;51:1083-1091. 

26.  Cheron N, Jasty N, Shakhnovich EI. OpenGrowth: An Automated and Rational Algorithm for 

Finding New Protein Ligands, Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 2016;59:4171-4188. 

27.  Trott O, Olson AJ. AutoDock Vina: improving the speed and accuracy of docking with a new 

scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading, Journal of Computational Chemistry 

2010;31:455-461. 

28.  Wang Z, Sun H, Yao X et al. Comprehensive evaluation of ten docking programs on a diverse 

set of protein-ligand complexes: the prediction accuracy of sampling power and scoring power, 

Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2016;18:12964-12975. 

29. 

Imrie F, Bradley AR, van der Schaar M et al. Deep Generative Models for 3D Linker Design, 

Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 2020;60:1983-1995. 

30.  Willighagen EL, Mayfield JW, Alvarsson J et al. The Chemistry Development Kit (CDK) v2.0: 

atom 

typing,  depiction,  molecular 

formulas,  and  substructure  searching, 

Journal  of 

Cheminformatics 2017;9:33. 

31.  O'Boyle NM, Banck M, James CA  et al. Open Babel: An open chemical toolbox, Journal of 

Cheminformatics 2011;3:33. 

32.  Hou  T,  Wang  J,  Li  Y  et  al.  Assessing  the  performance  of  the  MM/PBSA  and  MM/GBSA 

methods.  1.  The  accuracy  of  binding  free  energy  calculations  based  on  molecular  dynamics 

simulations, Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 2011;51:69-82. 

33.  Shultz MD. Two Decades under the Influence of the Rule of Five and the Changing Properties 

of Approved Oral Drugs, Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 2019;62:1701-1714. 

34.  Polykovskiy  D,  Zhebrak  A,  Sanchez-Lengeling  B  et  al.  Molecular  sets  (MOSES):  a 

benchmarking platform for molecular generation models 2018. 

35. 

Ivanenkov  YA,  Zagribelnyy  BA,  Aladinskiy  VA.  Are  We  Opening  the  Door  to  a  New  Era  of 

Medicinal Chemistry or Being Collapsed to a Chemical Singularity?, Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 

2019;62:10026-10043. 

36.  Lefebvre C, Rubez G, Khartabil H et al. Accurately extracting the signature of intermolecular 

interactions  present  in  the  NCI  plot  of  the  reduced  density  gradient  versus  electron  density, 

Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2017;19:17928-17936. 

37.  Arjovsky M, Chintala S, Bottou L. Wasserstein gan, arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.07875 2017. 

 
