Deep-Learning-Based, Multi-Timescale Load 

Forecasting in Buildings: Opportunities and 
Challenges from Research to Deployment  

Sakshi Mishra†, Stephen M. Frank, Anya Petersen, Robert Buechler, and Michelle Slovensky 

Intelligent Campus Program, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado, United States 

†Corresponding author (sakshi.mishra@nrel.gov) 

Abstract— Electricity load forecasting for buildings and campuses is becoming increasingly important as the penetration of distributed 

energy  resources  (DERs)  grows.  Efficient  operation  and  dispatch  of  DERs  require  reasonably  accurate  predictions  of  future  energy 

consumption  in  order  to  conduct  near-real-time  optimized  dispatch  of  on-site  generation  and  storage  assets.  Electric  utilities  have 

traditionally  performed  load  forecasting  for  load  pockets  spanning  large  geographic  areas,  and  therefore  forecasting  has  not  been  a 

common  practice  by  buildings  and  campus  operators.  Given  the  growing  trends  of  research  and  prototyping  in  the  grid-interactive 

efficient buildings domain, characteristics beyond simple algorithm forecast accuracy are important in determining the algorithm’s true 

utility for smart buildings. Other characteristics include the overall design of the deployed architecture and the operational efficiency of 

the forecasting system. In this work, we present a deep-learning-based load forecasting system that predicts the building load at 1-hour 

intervals for 18 hours in the future. We also discuss challenges associated with the real-time deployment of such systems as well as the 

research opportunities presented by a fully functional forecasting system that has been developed within the National Renewable Energy 

Laboratory’s Intelligent Campus program.  

Keywords—Deep  Learning,  Recurrent  Neural  Networks,  Long  Short-Term  Memory,  Building  Load  Forecasting,  Grid-Interactive 

Efficient Buildings, Smart Grid 

I. 

INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND  

The  commercial  buildings  sector  in  the  United  States  consumed  1,671.61  trillion  Btu  of  energy  in  January  2020  alone 

(immediately prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic) and a total of 18,177.95 trillion Btu in 2019 (Total Energy - Monthly 

Energy Review, 2020). Overall, buildings account for nearly 40% of the total energy consumption in the United States (DOE), and 

building energy consumption is projected to expand by an annual 1.5% globally (Jordan, 2014). Even with many commercial facilities 

operating at reduced occupancy during  the COVID-19 pandemic, preliminary industry reports indicate  that commercial building 

energy is again increasing as operators increase ventilation rates (Energy-Spectral, 2020). Because buildings are among the largest 

consumers of energy globally, research  to increase the design and operational energy efficiencies of  the commercial sector  (i.e., 

commercial buildings) will play a significant role in meeting energy and greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets.  

  The  penetration  of  behind-the-meter  distributed  energy  resources  (DERs)  is  also  increasing,  owing  to  the  decreasing  cost  of 

renewable  energy  technologies  (Donohoo-Vallett,  et  al.,  2016).  Smart  buildings  operations  can  simultaneously  reduce  energy 

consumption (and, by extension, greenhouse gas emissions) and optimize behind-the-meter DER dispatch to save money for building 

owners/operators via additional value streams such as demand management (peak shaving), energy arbitrage, user-initiated demand-

response, and optimal electric vehicle charging. Properly deployed, these capabilities also benefit the utility grid by enhancing grid 

 
 
 
 
reliability and resilience, deferring or reducing capital expenditures required to upgrade the distribution grid, and helping balance the 

supply  of  renewable  energy  as  its  penetration  increases.  The  U.S.  Department  of  Energy’s  Grid-interactive  Efficient  Buildings 

initiative (Neukomm, Nubbe, & Fares, 2019) describes the multi-faceted benefits of these smart building capabilities. Smart building 

controls are also an integral component of  autonomous  energy grids  (Kroposki, Dall’Anese, Bernstein, Zhang, & Hodge, 2017), 

where they provide opportunities for granular device-level controls.  

Proportional–integral–derivative  (PID)  controllers  are  still  widely  used  in  building  controls  for  heating,  ventilating,  and  air-

conditioning (HVAC) systems, largely because of their simplicity and fast solutions times as they employ numerical methods to 

determine the controlling parameters (Afram & Janabi-Sharifi, 2014). However, the time-varying system dynamics characteristics of 

HVAC control systems result in the inconsistent performance of traditional controllers, often leading to less-economical performance 

(Khanmirza, Esmaeilzadeh, & Markazi, 2016). Moreover, the objectives of building control systems have shifted from being solely 

occupant-comfort and economic-operations to being grid-interactive prosumers. As prosumers, building energy management systems 

have goals such as (i) maximize the use of on-site distributed energy resources, (ii) manage consumption profile based on time-of-

use energy rates, and (iii) use on-site energy storage to reduce the peak demand for cost savings.  

Such  a  complex  set of objectives  requires  the  use of  advanced control  techniques  like  model-predictive control  (Khanmirza, 

Esmaeilzadeh, & Markazi, 2016). Implementation of intelligent dispatch and model-predictive control algorithms that help achieve 

the above-stated goals to reduce overall energy consumption and operational costs of the building nearly always requires a forecast 

of the energy consumption of the building. These algorithms use these building load predictions to schedule the dispatch of flexible 

loads,  on-site  clean  energy  resources,  and/or  energy  storage  systems  to  optimize  a  desired  metric,  such  as  utility  cost.  Forecast 

accuracy  is  a  key  driver  of  model-predictive  control  algorithm  effectiveness  (Afram  &  Janabi-Sharifi,  2014)  (Khanmirza, 

Esmaeilzadeh, & Markazi, 2016) (Nguyen, Yoo, & Kim, 2017). Prediction of building energy consumption patterns is also important 

for  detecting  faults  or  operational  anomalies  in  energy  systems.  Therefore,  building  load  forecasting  systems  are  an  essential 

component of smart buildings. 

  Building load forecasting is not a new research question; many research works in the literature have addressed this problem space 

(Iino, et al., 2009) (Zhang & Zhou, 2008) (Iwafune, Yagita, Ikegami, & Ogimoto, 2014). Commercial load forecasting tools for 

building energy predictions are also available (Itron) (Enverus). The journey of successful research outcome to industry deployment, 

however,  inevitably  passes  through  the  research-prototyping  phase,  and  advanced  building  load  forecasting  systems  are  no 

exceptions. This is especially relevant for data-driven modeling projects where the type, quality, and preprocessing of data largely 

dictate the performance of the forecasting system. The work presented in this article sheds light on the end-to-end pipeline of building 

load forecasting systems—in a campus-wide prototyping setup—using advanced data-driven methods (recurrent neural networks). 

The following paragraphs delineate the types of modeling algorithms used in the literature for the building energy forecasting problem 

and specifically discuss works that have utilized data-driven modeling methods. 

As building systems become more advanced through next-generation sensors, controls, connectivity, and communications, they 

produce a large volume of empirical data available to building operators for decision-making. These data, along with meteorological 

parameters, can be harnessed to predict building and campus energy consumption. There are two main approaches available for this 

prediction task: (i) physics-based (or “white box”) modeling, and (ii) data-driven (or “black box”) modeling. (Physics-based models 

are termed “white box” because the inner workings of the model are typically open to the modeler, whereas data-driven models are 

termed “black box” because their prediction logic is often opaque.)  A third category, “grey box” models  (Sohlberg & Jacobsen, 

 
 
 
 
2008), represent a combination of the physics-based and data-driven approaches. They combine a partial theoretical structure with 

data, offering relatively simpler model architectures. Grey box models are generally trained or fit like data-driven models. 

Physics-based  building  models  such  as  EnergyPlus®  (Crawley,  et  al.,  2001),  (EERE,  2020)  model  the  physical  relationships 

between the building characteristics (construction details, operation schedules, shading information) and environmental parameters 

(sky  conditions)  to  calculate  building  energy  consumption  (Kwok  &  Lee,  2011).  Data-driven  models,  on  the  other  hand,  make 

predictions by learning the pattern empirically from historical data. Data-driven models have two major subcategories: (i) statistical 

models, and (ii) machine learning models. Deep learning models are a subset of machine learning models that are capable of learning 

complex nonlinear relationships between the inputs and the predicted variable(s). Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are an advanced 

variant of deep neural networks that are capable of incorporating temporal dependencies between the input and output variables. 

Long short-term memory networks (LSTM) are a variant of RNNs that are effective at capturing longer-term temporal dependencies 

in the data sets.  

There are numerous advanced applications of predictive analytics in the renewable energy field (Mishra, Glaws, & Palanisamy, 

2020)—spanning the energy system from generation (solar and wind forecasting) to consumption (smart buildings energy forecasting 

to fault predictions). Because the focus of this article is smart buildings’ predictive analytics application, herein we discuss literary 

works focused on data-driven building load forecasting. Recent research has established the utility of neural networks for forecasting 

the energy consumption of both individual buildings and groups of buildings. For example, a machine-learning-based forecasting 

model is presented in (Hwang, Suh, & Otto, 2020); whereas (Jahan, Snasel, & Misak, 2020) covers a review of the intelligent system 

for power load forecasting. A Polish power system study with a deep learning approach is presented in (Ciechulski & Osowski) and 

(Jin, Guo, Wang, & Song, 2020) takes a deeper look at a hybrid system based on LSTM for short-term power load forecasting; 

similarly,  (Chitalia,  Pipattanasomporn,  Garg,  &  Rahman,  2020)  presents  an  RNN-based  robust  short-term  load  forecasting 

framework. An online adaptive RNN-based load forecasting algorithm with smart meter data is presented in (Fekri, Patel, Grolinger, 

& Sharma, 2021). Short-term load forecasting for urban loads using an artificial neural network is tackled in (Gautam, Mayal, Ram, 

& Priya, 2019). An LSTM based method is improved upon for short-term load forecasting in (Cui, Gao, & Li, 2020).  

On the research end of the building load forecasting spectrum, the existing literature has extensively focused on assessing the 

effectiveness of machine learning (specifically deep learning) models for the building load prediction problem. The commercial end 

of building load forecasting spectrum, on the other hand, focuses on using proven and tested traditional methods in prepackaged 

software products. Both these extreme ends of the building load forecasting problem space do not address the “research prototyping” 

step for incrementally adopting cutting-edge prediction methodologies. That is to say, none of these works have covered a holistic 

picture of the deep-learning-based prediction system deployment process—in a research set-up—which starts with data collection, 

curation process, and continues to critically assess the challenges and opportunities with its end-to-end deployment and continued 

use. The work presented in this paper contributes a perspective of how to move data-driven algorithms from research to practical 

deployment by presenting a case study of designing, building, and deploying a research prototype of a deep-learning-based building 

load forecasting system. 

The current section lays out the introduction and background behind the presented work, and the rest of the paper is organized as 

follows: Section II provides a brief introduction of the real-time testbed (Intelligent Campus) utilized for deploying the deep learning 

models.  Section  III  discusses  the  algorithm  employed  in  modeling,  methodology,  and  benchmarking.  Section  IV  presents  the 

 
 
challenges faced, lessons learned, and opportunities that a fully functional and deploy load forecasting system presents for modern 

buildings. Section V concludes the paper with an outlook discussion. 

II. 

INTELLIGENT CAMPUS 

    The Intelligent Campus platform at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) was established to collect historical and 

real-time building performance data to support analytics that enhance operational awareness and decision-making with respect to 

energy use. The platform was developed using open standards and protocols (Fig. 1) with the intent to provide an architecture that 

is readily transferable to other campuses (Cutler, Frank, Slovensky, Sheppy, & Petersen, 2016). Since its inception, the Intelligent 

Campus platform has evolved into a program providing an ecosystem for the use of the NREL campus as a living laboratory. 

Fig. 1. End-to-end data collection architecture 

The  Intelligent  Campus  program  offers  nascent  energy  analytics  technologies  and  algorithms  a  pathway  to  mature  toward 

commercialization. The Intelligent Campus program includes an interdisciplinary portfolio of projects aimed at prototyping the 

future of smart, sustainable, resilient, and self-healing buildings. By providing an environment for technology demonstration in real 

facilities, the Intelligent Campus program is bridging the gap between theoretical research into building efficiency technologies 

(which  is  often  published  but  rarely  deployed)  and  practical  application.  Intelligent  Campus  pilot  projects  include  detailed 

monitoring and analysis in order to identify and improve technology shortcomings.  

A.  Data: Measurement, Collection, and Curation 

Advanced analytics and model-predictive control algorithms for smart buildings require reliable, internally consistent building 

performance  data.  NREL  collects  a  variety  of  performance  data  at  its  South  Table  Mountain  campus.  The  campus  has  a  single 

common utility electric meter  for  all facilities, including  the  campus’s  central  heating  and chilled  water plant. Eighteen campus 

buildings have whole-building electrical meters; several other small buildings do not have dedicated electrical meters. Several newer 

buildings have submetering by end use, per the requirements of ASHRAE 90.1 (ASHRAE, 2019). Facilities that consume heating 

and chilled water from the central plant have thermal meters for heating and chilled water consumption. 

NREL captures the electric and thermal meter interval data using a central energy management information system (EMIS). 

The EMIS also collects interval data from the campus building automation system and syncs data from several cloud data sources 

via web application programming interfaces, including utility data from  the campus main electricity meter and NREL’s on-site 

research  weather  station (Stoffel  &  Andreas,  1981).  To maximize  accessibility  for  operations  and  research,  Intelligent  Campus  

organizes collected interval data per the Project Haystack standard (Project Haystack, 2020) (Cutler, Frank, Slovensky, Sheppy, & 

Petersen, 2016). These interval data are available to serve as inputs for predictive load models. 

 
 
 
B.  Predictive Analytics 

Intelligent Campus’s predictive analytics project applies recent machine learning and deep learning advances to develop and 

continuously improve load forecasting capability for NREL’s South Table Mountain campus. Intelligent Campus executes research, 

prototyping,  and  enhancement  in  a  cycle  so  that  practical  deployment  lessons  can  be  folded  back  into  early-stage  research, 

increasing the ultimate effectiveness and eventual impact of the work. Intelligent Campus’s building load forecasting work builds 

from prior NREL research that predicts expected building performance based on exogenous inputs (Henze, Pless, Petersen, Long, 

& Scambos, 2015).  

As an academic discipline, load forecasting approaches can be studied using static postprocessed data sets. Transferal of these 

results to a real-world setting requires at a minimum some underlying sensor infrastructure, a mapping of sensor data streams to 

model inputs, and quality control on the measured data being fed to the model. Therefore, the focus of the current effort is twofold: 

(i) to automate, replicate, and scale the predictive algorithms;  and (ii) to improve accuracy by leveraging state-of-the-art neural 

networks. 

A.  Deep Learning: Long Short-Term Memory Network 

III.  LOAD FORECASTING USING DEEP LEARNING  

    Artificial neural networks are universal function approximators. They are capable of representing complex nonlinear relationships 

in high-dimensional data sets such as the one being employed for building load forecasting in this work. Deep learning algorithms, 

which employ multiple hidden layers, have powerful generalizing capabilities. That is, they are able to make reasonably accurate 

predictions for previously unseen scenarios because of their ability to learn the intricate structures in large data sets. Feedforward 

neural networks, sometimes referred to as “vanilla” deep neural networks, have the fundamental drawback of independence among 

the time-series samples/data points, which makes them an ineffective choice of algorithm for time-series-based prediction problems. 

This is because the entire state of the feedforward neural network is cleared after processing each time-series sample, which means 

that the network starts mapping the inputs and output for the next time step from scratch, thereby failing to account for the impact of 

the previous time step’s inputs variables. 

  Recurrent  neural  networks  (RNN)  are  advanced  types  of  deep  neural  networks  that  overcome  feedforward  neural  networks’ 

limitations. They are different from feedforward neural networks because of the presence of additional directed edges that introduce 

temporal memory components, enabling them to capture complex nonlinear relationships between the temporally related inputs and 

outputs  across  multiple  time  steps.  This  makes  them  effective  at  modeling  time-series  forecasting  problems.  A  long  short-term 

memory  (LSTM) network (Hochreiter &  Schmihuber, 1997),  shown  in  Fig  2,  is an  RNN  variant that  is able to  learn  long-term 

dependencies between the input features and the predicted variable (Mishra & Palanisamy, 2019).  

 
 
Fig 2. LSTM memory cell diagram1 (Mishra & Palanisamy, 2019) 

   Fig 2 displays a typical memory cell for an LSTM network. In the figure, 𝐶 denotes the cell states at different points in time 𝑡; 𝑓𝑡, 
𝑖𝑡, and 𝑜𝑡 denote the forward, input, and output  gates, respectively; ℎ(𝑡) is the hidden state at time 𝑡; and 𝑊𝑓, 𝑊𝑖, 𝑊𝑐, 𝑊𝑜 are the 

weights. Further explanation can be found in (Mishra & Palanisamy, 2019). 

B.  Performance Measure 

    The  evaluation  metric  used  to  measure  the  performance  of  the  forecasting  algorithm  is  the  mean  squared  error  (MSE).  The 

difference between the ground truth (i.e., the actual future time-step value of the measurement being predicted) and forecasting values 

(i.e., output of the deep learning model) is calculated using MSE: 

MSE  =  

1
𝑛

𝑛
∑ (AV𝑗
𝑗 = 1

(𝑡)̂

(𝑡) − OV𝑗

2

)

where 𝐴𝑉𝑗

(𝑡) is a vector of actual (ground truth) values, and 𝑂𝑉𝑗

(𝑡)̂

 is a vector of forecasted (output) values.  

C.  Case Study: Building Load Forecasting on a Research Campus 

    In this case study, the energy consumption at the main electricity meter for the Café building on the NREL South Table Mountain 

campus is predicted at an hourly resolution. There are six input features used for training the model: relative humidity, barometric 

pressure, dry bulb temperature, global horizontal irradiance, total cloud cover, and wind speed. These data are from NREL’s Solar 

Radiation Research Laboratory data set (Stoffel & Andreas, 1981); however, they also represent measurements commonly available 

from high-quality weather stations worldwide. The model is run for 200 epochs with the data spanning a year’s interval: 10- and 2-

months train/test split, respectively. We use a single-layered network with 35 neurons. The following MSE plot shows the train and 

test losses over several thousand iterations. Despite the difference between final train and test losses, no overfitting was observed in 

the experiment. 

1 Reused with permission 

 
 
 
 
 
Fig 3. Mean squared error (MSE) error plot for train and test data 

The model can produce load forecasts at multiple future time steps, as shown in Fig 4 for the Café building main power. The models 

use the most recent 12 hours of weather data to capture the transient effect of weather on energy consumption and use time of day 

and day of week to capture time-based energy consumption patterns, such as those related to building occupancy. Because neural 

networks can learn non-linear relationships, the trained models are  able to infer complex behaviors, such as the pre-occupancy 

energy spike in the Café due to early morning food preparation. Each model outputs a prediction of building load from the current 

time step to 18 hours in the future in 1-hour increments. This input-output structure applies to all buildings that were studied on the 

NREL campus.  

Fig 4. Multi-time horizon forecast 

Model performance was not seen to change significantly as the length of the forecast window increased/decreased, but the training 

time was significantly impacted by the length of the training window (number of hours of historical data used as input to the model).  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV.  OPERATIONAL LOAD FORECASTING SYSTEM DEPLOYMENT 

A  primary  research  objective  of  the  case  study  was  to  establish  deployment  and  continuous  improvement  pathways  for  the 

developed algorithms. That is, developed algorithms should be able to be rapidly deployed for testing within the Intelligent Campus 

platform and iteratively improved with minimal retooling. The Intelligent Campus team intends to expand the algorithm to forecast 

other quantities (such as building electricity meters, thermal meters, and photovoltaic system generation) and to support additional 

exogenous variables. Therefore, from a software development point of view, the system’s input-output architecture must be flexible, 

replicable, and scalable. 

Due to the nature of the deep learning algorithms used, ongoing access to data is an integral part of the continued operation of the 

system. Periodic retraining of the models as more data gets collected has the potential to increase model accuracy. The following two 

subsections  describe  the  challenges  and  opportunities  that  open  up  for  smart  buildings’  research  and  prototyping  once  those 

challenges are addressed. Understanding the deployment aspect of deep-learning-based forecasting system, therefore, completes the 

research-prototyping loop. 

A.  Challenges 

1)  Data Availability and Quality Control  

“Garbage in, garbage out”––a common phrase used in the machine learning community––captures the importance of this step 

of data collection and curation. Assembling a machine learning training data set begins with proper commissioning and maintenance 

of meters, sensors, and other data inputs. Data should have proper units and scaling. (Although in some circumstances a  machine 

learning model could be successfully trained from improperly scaled or otherwise corrupted input data, if those data stream errors 

were corrected in the future the model would need to be retrained.) 

Automated  accumulation  of  new  training  data  (without  extensive  human  review)  presents  data  quality  challenges.  NREL’s 

Intelligent Campus team has implemented quality check mechanisms for the measurements coming from the sensors in real-time 

before they are fed to the model. One example is removing the outliers identified by the values lying outside of three standard 

deviations. Another is operating basic fault detection rules that check for stuck sensors (constant value for long periods of time), 

logically out-of-range data (such as significant solar radiation recorded at night), and similar anomalies. These checks not only 

improve machine learning model quality but also provide an opportunity to detect and correct errors in the measurement systems 

and equipment. 

2)  Integration with EMIS and Scalability 

Practical  implementation  of  a  forecasting  system  requires  reliable  interfaces  for  transferring  data  to  the  model  and  for 

transferring  model  outputs  to  an  analytics  system  that  consumes  them.  The  forecasting  system  developed  for  this  case  study 

communicates with the NREL EMIS via an application programming interface defined by the Project Haystack standard (Project 

Haystack, 2020). The EMIS provides forecast inputs, and the forecast system, in turn, writes forecasts back to the EMIS. Adherence 

to a metadata standard and an open application programming interface allows the forecasting system to be rapidly retrained and 

redeployed for new sites. Any database that adheres to the Project Haystack standard and correctly tags the required input points 

can be connected to a new instance of the deep learning algorithm, and a new model can be trained with minimal effort. When the 

forecasting system runs in integration with EMIS, it is also important to be able to redeploy the model (with either architectural or 

training updates) without service interruption. 

 
 
Because forecasts cover a span of time but are frequently updated, managing caching is a key challenge. In addition, the forecast 

read/write system must be flexible enough to handle arbitrary forecast inputs and outputs. Additionally, given the computationally 

intensive  nature  of  deep  learning  models,  scalability  in  terms  of  available  compute  power  for  retraining  the  models  is  another 

interesting challenge. 

3)  Online vs. Offline Training 

Training is an important consideration for deep-learning-based forecasting systems because deep learning models’ accuracies 

have been shown to keep rising with more training.  Offline training is a relatively simpler way of implementation in which the 

machine learning models are retrained by a manual process where an engineer copies the old model to a local machine, trains it 

further with the new data, and transfers it back to the servers where the systems are deployed. Offline training, therefore, requires 

more human-hours over the course of the system’s operation because human intervention is needed to further train the models at 

regular intervals. 

The online training approach, on the other hand, is an automated process. At its simplest, an online training system trains models 

on a schedule (for example, every 1 to 2 months), without any manual intervention (Cloud-Architecture-Center, Google, 2021). 

Though setting up the automated training pipeline initially requires additional planning and coding, this online training eliminates 

the  maintenance  dependency  on  human  intervention  to  move  the  models  offline,  retrain  them,  and  upload  them  back  into  the 

forecasting system pipeline regularly. Thus, online training can increase operational efficiency and reduce opportunities for human 

error to impact the forecasting system. Moreover, because a robust metering platform is already established as the first step in the 

process in our prototype of Intelligent Campus, high-quality data are constantly accumulating and can be used for increasing the 

accuracy rates of our models. For our final implementation, we have chosen the online training option.  

4)  Continuous Improvement  

As described above, deep learning models are capable of increasing accuracy as more data is made available for training. Also, 

in the initial stages when the accuracy of the model is not satisfactory given the shortage of data points to train it, large changes in 

predictive behavior can be off-putting to end users. Therefore, along with iterative training, we conduct model enhancement with 

hyperparameter tuning as the operational circumstances change over time. This is an infrequent yet desirable step. 

5)  Generalizability  

Another  typical  challenge  in  deploying  deep  learning  models  for  multiple  prediction  points  (i.e.,  building  wise  energy 

consumption  forecasts)  is  generalizability.  Because  each prediction  point has  its  own  model,  the  deployment  architecture  must 

address  the  need  for  automated  model  generation.  To  address  the  challenge  of  generalizability,  the  forecasting  system’s  data 

preprocessing and postprocessing modules are designed with the capability to take in a generic variable named  “point-id” that is 

used as a reference to fetch the respective machine learning model and input data streams.  

B.  Opportunities 

An automated end-to-end pipeline for load forecasting deployed on-site, with an online training mechanism in place, enables 

many  opportunities  to  harness  the  predicted  data  for  furthering  the  smart  buildings’  research.  In  the  following  subsections,  we 

describe three potential applications. 

1)  Demand Management 

Motivations for electricity demand management (peak shaving) including utility demand charge reductions and reduced carbon 

footprint. (When the peak of multiple buildings and campuses coincides with the utility peak,  lower-efficiency “peaking” power 

 
 
plants  fired by gas  or  diesel  are  used  to  support  the  grid, which  translates  to  proportionally  higher greenhouse  gas emissions.) 

Reducing peak demand requires the ability to predict the timing and magnitude of peak demand, then preemptively shifting load or 

dispatching energy storage assets to avoid the peak. 

2)  Energy Arbitrage 

Energy arbitrage is another cost-saving opportunity available for grid-interactive buildings in cases where on-site energy storage 

is available. Energy arbitrage is performed by participating in the energy markets by charging energy storage (for example, batteries) 

when electricity prices are low and discharging storage to sell power back to the grid when prices spike. Even in utility markets 

where bidirectional electricity exchange is not possible, a form of energy arbitrage is possible by buying energy when prices are 

low, storing the energy locally, and dispatching the energy locally to meet load when energy prices are high. 

Energy arbitrage can be accomplished by employing near-real-time or real-time optimization algorithms. However, the real-

time optimized storage dispatch requires reasonable foresight into future on-site energy consumption, thereby making building load 

forecasts an important component of the system. 

3)  Load Flexibility 

A third opportunity to save energy costs for building operations is shifting the load based on the time-of-use energy rates. Building 

load  can  be  classified  as  critical,  which  consists  of  loads  that  cannot  be  deferred,  and  flexible,  which  consists  of  loads  whose 

consumption can be scheduled within a given time window. Examples of critical loads include lights, fans, microwaves, computing 

systems, etc.; these loads must be available for use when needed. Examples of flexible load include dishwashers, laundry, and even 

heating and cooling (buildings can be precooled/preheated). With adequate foresight, flexible loads can be shifted to minimize the 

energy costs. This also requires predicting the building’s future energy consumption. 

V.  SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK 

The paradigm of grid-interactive efficient buildings, i.e., dynamically operating buildings that constantly exchange information 

and energy with the utility grid, is increasingly gaining traction in both the research community and in industry. Such smart buildings 

will operate in harmony with the grid to make electricity more affordable and integrate a larger share of DERs while meeting the 

comfort and productivity needs of the buildings’ occupants. NREL’s Intelligent Campus is a living laboratory that is dedicated to 

accelerating the research and deployment of various pieces of the smart buildings puzzle, serving as a vital testbed for the innovative 

solutions that push the frontier of smart building operations. 

In this article, we describe and critically discuss a deep learning building load forecasting system that is an important module 

of  smart  buildings’  overall  controls.  We  demonstrate  that  metering,  collection,  and  curation  of  data  is  a  crucial  part  of  the 

prototyping process of such an advanced forecasting system. Using LSTMs, the deep learning model can predict the building and 

campus load for 18 hours’ time-horizon. The architecture is flexible with the time-resolution; subhourly predictions can be enabled 

with minimal modifications to the code.  

Using Intelligent Campus as the platform for testing the research findings in real-time settings, we shed light on the deployment 

aspect of such advanced forecasting systems. We conclude that a well-architected design of the forecasting system is key to its 

effectiveness. To take a forecasting algorithm from the research phase to deployment for practical use, building engineers will need 

to focus on the end-to-end pipeline, which requires considerations for multiple submodules such as access to data, data handling, 

 
 
seamless integration with the existing building data platform, model training and update mechanism, periodic performance checks, 

and model enhancement with hyperparameter tuning as operational circumstances change. 

The end-to-end forecasting system presented in this work forms a robust platform for furthering research in the building energy 

predictive analytics problem space. We plan to expand this work in the following directions: 

A.   Probabilistic Forecasting 

    Rather than generating a point forecast for every time step, a range can be outputted with the estimated minimum and maximum 

values serving as the upper and lower bounds for a prediction band within which the actual consumption in the future time step will 

fall. Having a range instead of point forecasting is especially helpful in the fault detection application where consistent outliers 

(outside of the band points) indicate a potential issue which can be further investigated by the building’s operations team. Moreover, 

probabilistic forecasting using deep neural networks is an active inquiry-front on the research end of the forecasting technology’s 

spectrum. 

B.  Predictive Maintenance 

     Current practice in the buildings industry is to perform “schedule-based” maintenance for fault prevention, which is not effective 

in terms of flagging the equipment vulnerable to a  fault  beforehand. The next generation of the fault-prevention mechanism is 

“condition-based”  or  “preventive”  maintenance.  This  involves  using  statistical  analysis  to  assess  the  health  and  estimate  the 

probability of failure, to inform the operators. The presented forecasting system can be further developed for predictive-maintenance 

application where the occurrence of a specific fault on the system, which may occur due to unusual wear-and-tear on equipment 

can be predicted well in advance, thereby preventing equipment failure triggering faults. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work was authored by NREL, operated by Alliance for Sustainable Energy, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) 

under Contract No. DE-AC36-08GO28308. Funding provided by the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Energy Efficiency and 

Renewable Energy Building Technologies Office. The views expressed in the article do not necessarily represent the views of the 

DOE or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges 

that the U.S. Government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form 

of this work, or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government purposes. 

The authors wish to acknowledge the National Renewable Energy Laboratory’s continued support in enhancing the research and 

prototyping capabilities of the Intelligent Campus program. The authors would like to thank Rob Buechler (Stanford University) for 

reviewing the code implementation.  

REFERENCES 

Afram, A., & Janabi-Sharifi, F. (2014). Theory and applications of HVAC control systems - A review of model predictive contol 

(MPC). Building and Environment, 72, 343-355. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2013.11.016 

ASHRAE. (2019). Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings, Standard 90.1-2019. Retrieved from 

https://www.ashrae.org/technical-resources/bookstore/standard-90-1 

Chitalia, G., Pipattanasomporn, M., Garg, V., & Rahman, S. (2020). Robust short-term electrical load forecasting framework for 

commercial buildings using deep recurrent neural networks. Applied Energy, 278. Retrieved from 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115410 

Ciechulski, T., & Osowski, S. (n.d.). Deep Learning Approach to Power Demand Forecasting in Polish Power System. Energies, 

13(22). Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.3390/en13226154 

 
 
 
Cloud-Architecture-Center, Google. (2021). MLOps: Continuous delivery and automation pipelines in machine learning. 

Retrieved July 2021, from https://cloud.google.com/architecture/mlops-continuous-delivery-and-automation-pipelines-
in-machine-learning 

Crawley, D. B., Lawrie, L. K., Winkelmann, F. C., Buhl, W. F., Pedersen, Y. H., Strand, R. K., . . . Glazer, J. (2001). EnergyPlus: 

creating a new-generation building energy simulation program. Energy and Buildings, 33(4), 319-331. 
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-7788(00)00114-6 

Cui, J., Gao, Q., & Li, D. (2020). Improved Long Short-Term Memory Network Based Short Term Load Forecasting. Hangzhou, 

China. Retrieved from 10.1109/CAC48633.2019.8996379 

Cutler, D., Frank, S., Slovensky, M., Sheppy, M., & Petersen, A. (2016). Creating an Energy Intelligent Campus: Data Integration 
Challenges and Solutions at a Large Research Campus. ACEEE Summer Study on Energy Efficiency in Buildings. Pacific 
Grove, CA. 

DOE, U. (n.d.). Buildings energy data book.  
Donohoo-Vallett, P., Gilman, P., Feldman, D., Brodrick, J., Gohlke, D., Gravel, R., . . . Harman, S. (2016). Revolution Now The 

Future Arrives for Five Clean Energy Technologies. U.S. DOE. Retrieved 05 02, 2020, from 
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2016/09/f33/Revolutiona%CC%82%E2%82%ACNow%202016%20Report_2.p
df 

EERE. (2020). EnergyPlus. (energy.gov) Retrieved from https://www.energy.gov/eere/buildings/downloads/energyplus-0 
Energy-Spectral. (2020). During COVID-19 Lockdown, Office Buildings are Consuming Even More HVAC Energy Than When 

Fully Occupied. (Spectral Energy) Retrieved 07 25, 2020, from https://spectral.energy/news/covid19-office-building-
energy-consumption-increasing/ 

Enverus. (n.d.). Electric Gas and Load Forecast. Retrieved from https://www.prtforecast.com/products/electric-gas/ 
Fekri, M. N., Patel, H., Grolinger, K., & Sharma, V. (2021). Deep learning for load forecasting with smart meter data: Online 

Adaptive Recurrent Neural Network. Applied Energy, 282. Retrieved from 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.116177 

Gautam, N., Mayal, A. S., Ram, V. S., & Priya, A. (2019). Short Term Load Forecasting Of Urban Loads Based On Artificial 
Neural Network. 2nd International Conference on Power and Embedded Drive Control (ICPEDC). 2019. Retrieved 
from 10.1109/ICPEDC47771.2019.9036616 

Henze, G. P., Pless, S., Petersen, A., Long, N., & Scambos, A. T. (2015). Control limits for building energy end use based on 
frequency analysis and quantile regression. Energy Efficiency, 8, 1077–1092. doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/s12053-015-
9342-6 

Hochreiter, S., & Schmihuber, J. (1997). Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computation, 9(8), 1735-1780. doi:10.1.1.676.4320 
Hwang, J., Suh, D., & Otto, M.-O. (2020). Forecasting Electricity Consumption in Commercial Buildings Using a Machine 

Learning Approach. Energies, 13(22). Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.3390/en13225885 

Iino, Y., Murai, M., Murayama, D., Motoyama, I., Kuzusaka, S., & Ueta, K. (2009). Hybrid modeling with physical and JIT 

model for building thermal load prediction and optimal energy saving control. ICCAS-SICE. Fukuoka, Japan. Retrieved 
from https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5334323 

Itron. (n.d.). Energy Forecasting. Retrieved from https://www.itron.com/solutions/what-we-enable/analytics/forecasting 
Iwafune, Y., Yagita, Y., Ikegami, T., & Ogimoto, K. (2014). Short-term forecasting of residential building load for distributed 

energy management. 2014 IEEE International Energy Conference (ENERGYCON). Cavtat, Croatia. 
doi:10.1109/ENERGYCON.2014.6850575 

Jahan, I. S., Snasel, V., & Misak, S. (2020). Intelligent Systems for Power Load Forecasting: A Study Review. Energies, 13(22). 

Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.3390/en13226105 

Jin, Y., Guo, H., Wang, J., & Song, A. (2020). A Hybrid System Based on LSTM for Short-Term Power Load Forecasting. 

Energies, 13(23). Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.3390/en13236241 

Jordan, P. G. (2014). Global Markets. In Solar Energy Markets (pp. 127-133). Retrieved from 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780123971746000088 

Khanmirza, E., Esmaeilzadeh, A., & Markazi, A. H. (2016). Predictive control of a building hybrid heating system for energy cost 

reduction. Applied Soft Computing, 46, 407-23. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2016.05.005 
Kroposki, B., Dall’Anese, E., Bernstein, A., Zhang, Y., & Hodge, B.-M. (2017). Autonomous Energy Grids. doi:NREL/CP-

5D00-68712  

Kwok, S. S., & Lee, E. W. (2011). A study of the importance of occupancy to building cooling load in prediction by intelligent 

approach. Energy Conversion and Management, 52(7), 2555-2564. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2011.02.002 

Mishra, S., & Palanisamy, P. (2019). An Integrated Multi-Time-Scale Modeling for Solar Irradiance Forecasting Using Deep 

Learning. arxiv.org. doi:https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1905/1905.02616.pdf 

Mishra, S., Glaws, A., & Palanisamy, P. (2020). Predictive Analytics in Future Power Systems: A Panorama and State-Of-The-

Art of Deep Learning Applications. In Optimization, Learning, and Control for Interdependent Complex Networks (pp. 
147-182). SpringerLink. doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-34094-0_7 

 
 
Neukomm, M., Nubbe, V., & Fares, R. (2019). Grid-interactive Efficient Buildings Technical Report Series. DoE Office of 

Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy. Retrieved 05 2020, from 
https://www1.eere.energy.gov/buildings/pdfs/75470.pdf 

Nguyen, T.-T., Yoo, H.-J., & Kim, H.-M. (2017). Analyzing the Impacts of System Parameters on MPC-Based Frequency 

Control for a Stand-Alone Microgrid. Energies, 10(4). doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/en10040417 

Project Haystack. (2020). Retrieved from https://project-haystack.org/ 
Sohlberg, B., & Jacobsen. (2008). Grey Box Modelling - Branches and Experiences. IFAC Proceedings Volumes, 41(2), 11415-

11420. doi:https://doi.org/10.3182/20080706-5-KR-1001.01934 

Stoffel, T., & Andreas, A. (1981). NREL Solar Radiation Research Laboratory (SRRL): Baseline Measurement System (BMS). 

Golden, Colorado (Data): National Renewable Energy Laboratory. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.5439/1052221 

Total Energy - Monthly Energy Review. (2020, 05 02). (U.S. Energy Information Administration,) Retrieved 05 02, 2020, from 

https://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/monthly/index.php 

Zhang, F., & Zhou, X. (2008). Gray-Regression Variable Weight Combination Model for Load Forecasting. 2008 International 
Conference on Risk Management & Engineering Management. Beijing, China. doi:10.1109/ICRMEM.2008.14 

 
 
