When will the mist clear? On the Interpretability of 

Machine Learning for Medical Applications: a 

survey. 

Authors 

Antonio-Jesús Banegas-Luna*, a (ajbanegas@ucam.edu), Jorge Peña-Garcíaa 
(jpena@ucam.edu), Adrian Ifteneb (adiftene@info.uaic.ro), Fiorella Guadagnic,d 
(guadagnifiorella@gmail.com), Patrizia Ferronic,d (ferronipatrizia@gmail.com), Noemi 
Scarpatod (noemi.scarpato@uniroma5.it), Fabio Massimo Zanzottoe 
(fabio.massimo.zanzotto@uniroma2.it), Andrés Bueno-Crespoa (abueno@ucam.edu), 
Horacio Pérez-Sánchez*, a (hperez@ucam.edu) 

Affiliations 

a Universidad Católica de Murcia (UCAM), Structural Bioinformatics and High-Performance 
Computing Research Group (BIO-HPC), Murcia, Spain. 
b Universitatea Alexandru Ioan Cuza (UAIC), Faculty of Computer Science, Iaşi, Romania 
c IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Rome, Italy 
d San Raffaele Roma Open University, Department of Human sciences and Promotion of 
the quality of life, Rome, Italy 
e University or Rome Tor Vergata, Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Impresa “Mario 
Lucertini”, Rome, Italy 

ORCID 

Antonio-Jesús Banegas-Luna: 0000-0003-1158-8877 
Jorge Peña-García: 0000-0002-3622-4634 
Adrian Iftene: 0000-0003-3564-8440 
Fiorella Guadagni: 0000-0003-3652-0457 
Patrizia Ferroni: 0000-0002-9877-8712 
Noemi Scarpato: 0000-0002-6573-8095 
Fabio Massimo Zanzotto: 0000-0002-7301-3596 
Andrés Bueno-Crespo: 0000-0003-1734-6852 
Horacio Pérez-Sánchez: 0000-0003-4468-7898 

Corresponding author: ajbanegas@ucam.edu (0034-968278819), hperez@ucam.edu 
(0034-968278819) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 

Artificial Intelligence is providing astonishing results, with medicine being one of its 

favourite playgrounds. In a few decades, computers may be capable of formulating 

diagnoses and choosing the correct treatment, while robots may perform surgical 

operations, and conversational agents could interact with patients as virtual coaches. 

Machine Learning and, in particular, Deep Neural Networks are behind this revolution. In 

this scenario, important decisions will be controlled by standalone machines that have 

learned predictive models from provided data. Among the most challenging targets of 

interest in medicine are cancer diagnosis and therapies but, to start this revolution, 

software tools need to be adapted to cover the new requirements. In this sense, learning 

tools are becoming a commodity in Python and Matlab libraries, just to name two, but to 

exploit all their possibilities, it is essential to fully understand how models are interpreted 

and which models are more interpretable than others.  

In this survey, we analyse current machine learning models, frameworks, databases and 

other related tools as applied to medicine - specifically, to cancer research - and we 

discuss their interpretability, performance and the necessary input data. From the 

evidence available, ANN, LR and SVM have been observed to be the preferred models. 

Besides, CNNs, supported by the rapid development of GPUs and tensor-oriented 

programming libraries, are gaining in importance. However, the interpretability of results by 

doctors is rarely considered which is a factor that needs to be improved. We therefore 

consider this study to be a timely contribution to the issue.  

Keywords: drug repurposing, machine learning, personalised therapy, cancer treatment, 

deep learning, high performance computing. 

Abbreviations 

1CM, One-carbo metabolism; AI, Artificial Intelligence; ANN, Artificial Neural Network; 

AUC, Area Under the Curve; BC, Breast Cancer; BioBIM, InterInstitutional Multidisciplinary 

Biobank; BMI, Body Mass Index; BN, Bayesian Network; CCF, Cancer Cell Fraction; CNN, 

Convolutional Neural Network; CRC, Colorectal Cancer; DCNN, Dilated Convolutional 

Neural Network; DL, Deep Learning; DSS, Decision Support System; DT, Decision Tree; 

ELM, Extreme Learning Machine; EMR, Electronic Medical Record; ENLR, Elastic Net 

Logistic Regression; FOLFIRI, 5-FU, leucovorin and irinotecan; FOLFOX, 5-FU, leucovorin 

and oxaliplatin; FT, Fourier Transform, GBM, Gradient Boosting Machine; GEO, Gene 

Expression Omnibus; GOSS, Genetic Ontology Similarity Score; GPU, Graphics 

Processing Unit; HDF5, Hierarchical Data Format 5; HNSCC, Head and Neck Squamous 

Cell Carcinoma; HPC, High Performance Computing; ICBC, Iranian Centre for Breast 

Cancer; IMRT, Intensity Modulated Radiotherapy; KNN, K-Nearest Neighbours; LDA, 

Linear Discriminant Analysis; LPP, Locality Preserving Projection; LR, Logistic Regression; 

LSTM, Long Short-Term Memory; ML, Machine Learning; MVA, Multivariate analysis; 

NCBI, National Center for Biotechnology Information; NCSS, Number Cruncher Statistical 

Systems; NMSC, Non-Melanoma Skin Cancer; PCA, Principal Component Analysis; 

RECIST, Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors; REVOLVER, Repeated 

EVOLution in cancER; RF, Random Forest; RMSE, Root Mean Square Error; RNN, 

Recurrent Neural Network; RO, Random Optimization; ROC, Receiver Operating 

Characteristic; SAP, Single Amino Acid Polymorphism; SEABED, Segmentation and 

Biomarker Enrichment of Differential Treatment Response; SEER, Surveillance, 

Epidemiology and End Results; SIFT, Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant; SKCM, Skin 

Cutaneous Melanoma; SNP, Single Nucleotide Polymorphism; SSL, Semi-Supervised 

Learning; SVC-W, Support Vector Classification with Weight; SVM, Support Vector 

Machine; SVM-L1, Support Vector Machine with L1 Regularization; TCGA, The Cancer 

Genome Atlas; TGF-β, Transforming Growth Factor beta; TL, Transfer Learning; WEKA-

FCBF, Waikato Environment of Knowledge Analysis - Fast Correlation Based Filter; WHO, 

World Health Organization; XAI, Explainable Artificial Intelligence; YARN, Yet Another 

Resource Negotiator. 

 
 
1. 

Introduction  

Cancer has become one of the most common human diseases and causes of death 

(Cronin et al., 2018; Culp, Soerjomataram, Efstathiou, Bray, & Jemal, 2020; Ferlay et al., 

2015). Among other factors, its occurrence is mainly growing because of aging 

(Chiavenna, Jaworski, & Vendrell, 2017). Even though cancer is a disease that affects 

men as well as women, there seems to be a clear relationship between gender and 

incidence. Thus, lung, prostate, colorectal, stomach and liver cancer are predominant 

among men, while breast, colorectal, lung, cervical and thyroid are the most common 

cancers in women (https://www.who.int/health-topics/cancer). Figure 1 depicts the number 

of estimated deaths in 2020 by cancer type collected from the Surveillance, Epidemiology 

and End Results (SEER) database. 

Fig. 1. Estimated deaths in USA in 2020 by cancer type and gender. Source: SEER 

database. 

A diverse range of therapies, including chemotherapy, radiotherapy, surgery and 

irradiation, is used in cancer patients depending on tumour type and stage. Unfortunately, 

the success of these treatments is limited because they attack normal and tumoral cells 

equally, which may result in toxicity and make the tumoral cells drug-resistant. In this 

scenario, early detection is a crucial factor for the successful application of therapies, for 

limiting associated side effects and, consequently, increasing the chance of survival 

(Coleman, 2017; Loud & Murphy, 2017). For this reason, providing the physicians with 

 
appropriate tools for accurate diagnosis and prognosis remains a major challenge in 

cancer research. 

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common type of cancer worldwide, representing 

10% of all diagnosed cases, and the fourth in the number of deaths it causes (Araghi et al., 

2019; Dekker, Tanis, Vleugels, Kasi, & Wallace, 2019). Furthermore, these figures are not 

very promising because the number of CRC cases is expected to increase by around 60% 

in the forthcoming decade (Arnold et al., 2017). 

As regard the reasons for such disheartening data, bad dietary habits are suspected to be 

behind the growing number of CRC cases reported in recent years but there are other 

reasons, such as the lack of exercise, obesity and smoking that are suspected of causing 

tumours (Kuipers et al., 2015). Moreover, familial and hereditary antecedents have proved 

to influence the incidence of this cancer (Weinberg, Marshall, & Salem, 2017). In an 

attempt to identify reasons, beyond the biological, for the evolution of CRC worldwide, 

Arnold (Arnold et al., 2017) published a study correlating the human development index 

with the incidence and high mortality of CRC, which resulted in the classification of 

countries into three groups with well-defined characteristics. In short, a number of factors 

in our daily lives promote the emergence of colorectal tumours and, although there is no 

clear numerical estimation of how much these factors contribute to the appearance CRC, it 

seems to be in our hands to change the trend. From a more medical point of view, the high 

morbidity and mortality rates could be explained by the fact that malignant CRC tumours 

are considered to be especially complex biologically (García-Figueiras et al., 2018). 

Much effort has been put into predicting CRC or, at least, into predicting the manner in 

which the tumour is likely to progress. Genetic information plays a key role for detecting 

tumoral cells and tissues that can help identify cancer disease at an early stage. The role 

of genetic mutations in CRC has been extensively analysed and several publications are 

available in the literature on this topic (D. Huang et al., 2018; Oh et al., 2018; Ruiz-López 

et al., 2018; Valle, Vilar, Tavtigian, & Stoffel, 2019). Other authors have focused on 

identifying biomarkers with the aim of finding the subset with the highest predictive power 

(Ding, Han, Zhang, He, & Li, 2019; Kather, Halama, & Jaeger, 2018; Lech, Słotwiński, 

Słodkowski, & Krasnodębski, 2016; Yiu & Yiu, 2016). Early identification could increase 

the likelihood of survival and dramatically reduce the mortality rate. Unfortunately, a full 

understanding of cancer cell behaviour is still beyond our grasp, making this a major 

challenge in medicine. 

When prevention has failed, the application of individualised therapies is the ideal scenario 

for the treatment of cancer patients. Personalising therapies implies finding the most 

suitable set of drugs and their exact dose for a given patient, based on the available input 

parameters, such as cancer type, tumour size, and whether metastasis is present or not. 

The idea behind this individualisation of therapies is to maximize the effect of drugs, limit 

their side effects, shorten the time necessary to cure the disease and reduce costs. The 

idea that individualised therapies are more cost-effective than generic ones seems 

credible because the same treatment is obviously not suitable for every patient since not 

all cases are similar. Several publications have discussed the direction that medicine is 

taking in this respect (Jackson & Chester, 2015; Jain, 2005; Olin, 2019; Usher-Smith et al., 

2017) and its popularity has grown in recent years. Although all these authors agree that 

personalised treatment will increase the effectiveness of existing drugs, to the best of our 

knowledge, there has been no attempt to put it into practice in the case of cancer 

treatment, making this goal a priority in cancer research. 

In this move towards individual therapies, computing sciences have become a close ally of 

health and life sciences and medicinal chemistry. The rapid development of high-

performance computing (HPC) platforms such as parallel and distributed computing have 

found a place to develop in the field of chemical and biological problems. It is well known 

that HPC infrastructures are extensively used to carry out complex scientific calculations 

(Shanyu Chen et al., 2019; Schmidt & Hildebrandt, 2017; Upton, Trelles, Cornejo-García, 

& Perkins, 2016) and their computing power can drastically speed up the resolution of a 

problem (Garg, Arora, & Gupta, 2011; Nobile, Cazzaniga, Tangherloni, & Besozzi, 2017; 

Wang, Ma, Pratx, & Xing, 2011). However, this is not enough: firstly, because the amount 

of medical and pharmacological data available is overwhelming and huge computing 

power is needed to analyse it all; and, secondly, the analysis methods necessary to 

transform such data into real understandable knowledge are very challenging. While HPC 

can help overcome the first difficulty, the application of artificial intelligence (AI), and more 

specifically machine learning (ML), is necessary for the second. Only if HPC and ML work 

together will they be capable of screening the vast chemical space and predict the most 

 
 
cost-effective therapy for individual patients (Dilsizian & Siegel, 2014; Pérez-Sianes, 

Pérez-Sánchez, & Díaz, 2019). 

Machine learning experts know that with the right data very efficient predictions can be 

made, as has been demonstrated in several fields such as sports results, injuries, stock 

market movements, text-based emotions, etc. The field of medicine has not been left 

behind in this respect and such technology is already used to diagnose or predict diseases 

such as cancer (Kourou, Exarchos, Exarchos, Karamouzis, & Fotiadis, 2015), making it 

clear that ML, complemented by HPC, represents the future of anti-cancer medicine. 

Already, ML algorithms are very helpful in many cancer-related tasks, such as the 

prediction and diagnosis of the disease, predicting its progression, the search for new drug 

synergies, predicting therapy outcomes and estimating survivability. It is the potential for 

analysing historical data, learning from the analysis and making predictions for future 

cases that makes them suitable for application in cancer research. It might even be 

claimed that ML is the aid that doctors need to increase the accuracy of their predictions 

and decision making, due to its ability to extract knowledge from previous cases. Evidently, 

the output of ML systems has to be transformed to make it understandable by healthcare 

staff; otherwise, we would be wasting an important opportunity.  

This critical review highlights the role of ML in each of the main steps of anti-cancer 

medicine. Section 2 focuses on the needs of doctors, attempting to answer questions like 

“What kind of ML do doctors need?” and “Does ML output need to be adapted to medical 

doctors?”. Section 3 presents a revision of the typical ML algorithms used in each stage, 

each subsection describing the most frequently used approaches, which are condensed 

into a table to facilitate their readability. The most relevant findings observed in Section 3 

are discussed in Section 4. Finally, the main conclusions reached and the future of ML in 

cancer research are summarized. 

2.  What kind of ML is important in Medicine/Cancer Prediction and Treatment? 

In this section, we focus on the basic features of an ML system that medical doctors and 

medical/biological researchers are seeking beyond the output that a trained ML system 

already provides. 

The advantages of ML systems stem from the fact that they use thousands of features, 

which they use to produce decisions in a very short time. It is important to note that the 

training stage can be expensive in terms of computing power, while the prediction stage is 

in comparison fast and computationally cheaper. The correlations that the algorithm finds 

between the samples are similar to those found by experienced doctors, who have seen 

hundreds of patients and begun to notice repetitive symptoms or similar values in their 

detailed medical tests, which helps them to make decisions.  

However, no matter how accurate ML systems are, no matter how many lives they can 

save in principle, and no matter if they are based on the doctor’s entire medical knowledge 

if medical/biological researchers do not understand the underlying models and their 

inferences. Only if ML systems cannot be explained, these systems will not be a game 

changer in medicine, nor will medical/biological researchers use them to make everyday 

decisions, condemning the whole approach to failure. To achieve any success, ML 

systems need to gain trust of medical/biological researchers. 

Consequently, our aim was to define four factors that should contribute to the success of 

ML learning systems in the medical domain: i) Output explainability, ii) Linking the 

predictions to the original cases used to produce outputs and iii) Low data hungriness. In 

this survey, we analyse existing approaches with respect to these factors as, only if there 

is a substantial attention paid to all of them will a novel ML approach or system be a game 

changer in a specific clinical situation. Only if the answer to the question “Do doctors need 

to know about and learn ML in the future?” is negative can ML add real value to clinical 

practice.  

2.1. 

Factor One: Output Explainability  

Explainability in Machine Learning or, in AI in general (XAI), is a hot topic, especially when 

it is applied to medicine. AI systems tend to return raw results that are hard to understand, 

which complicates their interpretation by non-expert users, including doctors. Thus, to 

make AI more attractive to healthcare professionals we should answer the question “What 

do doctors need to easily interpret AI predictions?” Explainability or interpretability often 

appears as a desideratum but it is poorly defined (Lipton, 2018). Hence, a clear 

understanding of the term explainability is essential in order to classify existing ML 

approaches. In general, there are two approaches to explainability: model explainability 

and inference explainability (Jacovi, Sar Shalom, & Goldberg, 2018). Model explainability 

relates to understanding how a model behaves in general, whereas inference explainability 

 
aims to describe how systems decide on each instance. Hence, these are two facets of the 

same problem. However, in both cases, explainability may be obtained by showing 

symbols (e.g., natural language or structured languages such as logical forms) to explain 

models or inferences.  

Since the first AI systems, authors have outlined their stages of inference. For example, 

Swartout et al. (Swartout, Paris, & Moore, 1991) deal with explanations for expert systems, 

Johnson (Johnson, 1994) presents agents that learn to explain themselves, and Lacave 

and Diez (Lacave & Díez, 2002) discuss explanation methods for Bayesian networks (BN). 

In recent years, there has been a strong emphasis on revealing what happens behind the 

black box that uses AI algorithms (Holzinger, Langs, Denk, Zatloukal, & Müller, 2019). This 

is necessary if doctors are to trust the results provided by these algorithms and so use 

them in their daily activities (diagnosis, deciding on the most appropriate treatment, etc.). 

In comparison with other domains, medicine deals with the uncertain, probabilistic, 

unknown, incomplete, imbalanced, heterogeneous, noisy, dirty, erroneous, inaccurate and 

missing data sets in arbitrary high‐dimensional spaces (Holzinger, Dehmer, & Jurisica, 

2014; Lee & Holzinger, 2016). 

Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) has received much attention in recent years 

(Gunning, 2016). There are two aspects of unsupervised learning models relevant in the 

context of explainability (Holzinger et al., 2019). First, the representations learned in these 

models may show similarities between the data in a class. One such case is the word 

embedding, which can signal semantic similarity between words (Mikolov, Chen, Corrado, 

& Dean, 2013). Second, being able to generate instances that allow us to study the 

differences between data within a class. This is relevant in medicine, where the discovery 

and analysis of disease-related abnormalities are relevant (Schlegl, Seeböck, Waldstein, 

Schmidt-Erfurth, & Langs, 2017). 

Trustworthiness in AI is the ability to evaluate the validity and reliability of an ML system in 

many different input configuration and application environments. This factor is very 

important in the medical environment, particularly in cancer prediction, where it is 

necessary to be able to evaluate exactly the limitations of an ML system and, 

consequently, accurately interpret and trustfully apply ML prediction system outputs. 

Bærøe et al. (Bærøe, Miyata-Sturm, & Henden, 2020) underline the growing importance of 

AI and the relative need for trustworthiness in AI systems, especially in the medical 

environment. In the same work, the authors analyse the report: “Ethical guidelines for 

trustworthy artificial intelligence” published by the European Commission in 2019 

(https://ec.europa.eu/futurium/en/ai-alliance-consultation) and highlight the need for 

“globalising” the guidelines at both European and international level.  

2.2. 

Factor Two: Linking to original cases to produce outputs 

AI systems often focus on the outputs but do not explain how much each input participates 

in the result. In a medical context, this correlation between inputs and outputs may be 

necessary to identify the reasons leading to a given decision. 

Assignment methods try to link a certain output of the deep neural network with input 

variables (Holzinger et al., 2019). In another paper (Sundararajan, Taly, & Yan, 2017), the 

authors analyse the change in output gradients depending on the change in input 

variables. In this way, the authors propose a result based on the data that were used as 

the input of an algorithm and try to make a link between these data and the result 

obtained.  However, in the medical field, although we will can still explain the results 

obtained and see a link with similar cases that formed the basis of a decision formulated 

by the AI algorithms, besides the huge opportunities that AI provides, there will always be 

the possibility of making a mistake and exposing the patient to certain risks (Oakden-

Rayner & Palmer, 2019). 

2.3. 

Factor Three: Data Hungriness 

With the widespread application of computer technology in the medical field, the amount of 

medical data available has increased dramatically, and analysis methods are already in 

use for the intelligent assessment of medical health. In coming years, we expect the 

volume of medical data to increase even more, ranging from terabytes to petabytes and 

even yottabytes (Archenaa & Anita, 2015; Hermon & Williams, 2014; Ristevski & Chen, 

2018).  

However, due to the mixed format of medical data, incomplete records, and the noise 

present in them, it is still difficult to analyse large amounts of medical data (Sun, Liu, 

Wang, Lian, & Ma, 2019). Because traditional ML methods cannot efficiently extract a rich 

body of information from large medical databases, Deep Learning (DL) methods are used 

to build a hierarchical model by simulating the human brain. Increasingly, DL models use 

large medical databases, from which they select and optimize parameters and 

automatically learn the process of pathological analysis of doctors (Hassan, Hassan, & 

Kholief, 2018). Based on these models, the disease in question is in an intelligent way and 

an early diagnosis can be made. Thus, the pressure on the activities of doctors is 

considerably reduced and the efficiency of their work can be improved. 

3.  Application of ML approaches in cancer cases 

In this section, a number of cases will be discussed to illustrate how ML can help doctors 

in the different stages of cancer evolution, from its diagnosis to the prediction of survival 

chances. Each section focuses on one of the main steps targeted by ML in healthcare 

contexts. Tables 1 to 6 summarize a detailed collection of works related with the topic of 

discussion. The datasets column describes the original source of data to reference a 

specific dataset, a full database, a citation, a project, or the institution that collected the 

samples. The column entitled “Exp?” means whether the interpretability of the results by 

non-experts is considered in the paper or not. Other relevant information, such as the AI 

approaches and the software tools used, are also reported. To facilitate the readability of 

the examples, we present the works in a short table per section. 

3.1. 

Predict the possibility of cancer 

Cancer 

AI 

Datasets 

Software 

Trainin

Data 

Exp? 

Referenc

type 

approa

ch 

g data 

types 

e 

set size 

Lung 

CNN 

BRFSS 

Caffe 

235673 

Text 

Yes 

(Songjing 

Chen & 

Wu, 

2020) 

Any 

RF 

COSMIC, dbSNP 

R, 

200,  

Text 

No 

(Kaminke

HMMER, 

800 

Dojo 

r, Zhang, 

Watanab

e, & 

Zhang, 

2007) 

 
 
 
 
Any 

SVM 

Cosmic, 

Libsvm 

6326 

Text 

No 

(Capriotti 

SwissVar, Swiss-

Prot 

Breast, 

RF 

TCGA:BRCA, 

Thyroid, 

Kidney 

TCGA:THCA, 

TCGA:KIRP 

Java, 

Weka, 

YARN, 

MLlib 

897, 

571, 

321 

& Altman, 

2011) 

Text 

No 

(Celli, 

DT 

TCGA:BRCA 

unknown 

897 

Text 

No 

SVM 

TCGA:BRCA 

unknown 

897 

Text 

No 

BN 

BN 

CRC 

TCGA:BRCA 

unknown 

897 

NSHDS 

R, 

1676 

Text 

Text 

No 

Yes 

Visualizatio

ns with 

Cytoscape 

Breast 

ANN 

Matlab 

62219 

Images, 

No 

(Ayer et 

Private 

Text 

al., 2010) 

CNN, 

unknown 

SVM 

CNN, 

unknown 

KNN 

GBM, 

KBCP, 

SVM 

OBCS 

R 

R 

500 

Images, 

No 

(Heidari 

Text 

et al., 

2018) 

500 

Images, 

No 

Text 

Text 

Yes 

(Behrava

XGBoost, 

696, 

Sklearn, 

923 

esyN, 

Matplotlib, 

Python 

Gastric  GBM 

Private 

XGBoost 

1431 

LR 

Private 

unknown 

1431 

Text 

Text 

No 

No 

Cumbo, 

& 

Weitsche

k, 2018) 

(Myte et 

al., 2017) 

n et al., 

2018) 

(Taninag

a et al., 

2019) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Skin 

ANN 

NHIS 

unknown 

462630 

Text 

No 

(Roffman

, Hart, 

Girardi, 

Ko, & 

Deng, 

2018) 

Ovarian  KNN, 

IOTA tumor images 

Matlab 

348 

Images 

No 

(Martínez

database 

LDA, 

SVM, 

ELM 

-Más et 

al., 2019) 

Cervical  CNN 

Private 

Caffe 

20000 

Images 

No 

(Martínez

-Más et 

al., 2020) 

Table 1. Review of publications whose main topic is ML and cancer risk prediction. 

Currently, most of the studies performed for predicting the possibility of cancer are based 

on the analysis of genetic data and mutations. Kaminker et al. (Kaminker et al., 2007) 

developed CanPredict software to identify and predict whether certain mutations are 

associated with tumours or not. The software combines the Sorting Intolerant From 

Tolerant (SIFT), LogR.E-value score, and Genetic Ontology Similarity Score (GOSS) 

methods by applying an advanced Random Forest (RF) classification scheme. Capriotti 

and Altman (Capriotti & Altman, 2011) used support vector machines (SVM) to analyse 

different databases, each created with an equal number of cancer driver Single Amino 

Acid Polymorphisms (SAPs) and neutral SAPs. Using this technique, it is possible to 

predict whether a given missense SAP is neutral or is involved in cancer appearance. In 

their study, the authors achieved an effectiveness greater than or equal to 90% in the 

overall predictions. 

Taninaga (Taninaga et al., 2019) describe how a set of characteristics related to gastric 

cancer can be processed using extra gradient boosting decision (XGBoost) algorithms or 

logistic regression (LR) methods to predict whether a patient is at risk of developing the 

disease over the next 122 months. In this study, 10 models were developed. For the first 

five, the authors used XGBoost: the first model only took into account Helicobacter 

infections, while to the second they added data on chronic atrophic gastritis, in the third 

they included endoscopic findings, in the fourth they added biological background factors 

 
and in the fifth they also included blood tests. The other five models were identical applied 

linear logistic regression instead of XGBoost. The performance of each model was 

measured using the area under the curve (AUC) value. As a result of the research, the 

most influential characteristics in the development of gastric cancer were seen to be the 

mean corpuscular volume, the proportion of lymphocytes, age, body mass index (BMI), 

and postgastrectomy. Finally, AUC values of 0.899 and 0.874, respectively, were obtained 

with the 5th and 10th models, the authors concluding that with these models it is likely to 

predict whether a patient might suffer from cancer. 

According to the American Cancer Society, 3.3 million people are diagnosed with skin 

cancer annually. A prediction of the risk of suffering Non-Melanoma Skin Cancer (NMSC) 

was made (Roffman et al., 2018) using 13 personal data of patients that can easily be 

obtained from an Electronic Medical Record (EMR): gender, age, BMI, diabetic status, 

smoking status, emphysema, asthma, race, Hispanic ethnicity, hypertension, heart 

diseases, vigorous exercise habits, and history of stroke. These input parameters were 

first normalised to values between 0 and 1 and an artificial neural network (ANN) model 

was developed based on one input layer with 13 nodes, two hidden layers with 13 nodes, 

and one output node. The authors used 462630 cases, taking 70% of the cases for 

training and the remaining 30% for validation, and obtained an AUC value of 0.81. The 

study concluded that by including the two most important factors that should be taken into 

account in skin cancer, i.e. radiation and personal history, risk predictions of the model 

could very likely be improved. 

Martínez-Más et al. (Martínez-Más et al., 2019) combined different ML techniques with 

features obtained by Fourier transform (FT) to classify ovarian tumours as benign or 

malignant, using ultrasound images. After extracting 187 features from the ultrasound 

images using FT, they were used as input features for KNN, LD, SVM and ELM. For this, 

different kernels were analysed to obtain the optimal configuration, and it was seen that 

the combinations of FT with LD, SVM or ELM are good classifiers for biomedical images, 

providing an accuracy of more than 85%. 

Breast cancer (BC) is one of the most common types of cancer in women. For prediction 

purposes, a regular analysis of mammographic images is required. To estimate the 

probability of malignancy of the tumour there are three categories: prognostic models, 

 
 
 
computer-aided detection, and computer-aided diagnosis. Ayer (Ayer et al., 2010) 

proposed a method for accurately predicting BC using ANNs, with particular emphasis on 

calibration made by means of the Hosmer–Lemeshow goodness-of-fit test. This generates 

a network topology with three layers: the first one with 36 input nodes (mammographic 

descriptors, demographic factors, and BI-RADS), a hidden layer with 1000 nodes and an 

output layer with 1 node. Later, they trained the network using a cross-validation method 

on 62219 registers. Next, they compared the results obtained through their model with the 

prediction experience of eight radiologists. The fact that the ANN obtained an AUC value 

of 0.965 and the radiologists a value of 0.939, demonstrates the good predictive 

capabilities of ANN, which can therefore be considered a reliable support tool. 

Predictions of the risk of developing BC in the short term can be made by comparing the 

distribution of volumetric breast density of both breasts based on mammographic image 

analysis (Heidari et al., 2018). The authors proposed a model based on a Convolutional 

Neural Network (CNN), which converts an image into a characteristics vector, then applied 

a Locality Preserving Projection (LPP) algorithm to reduce the features obtained by the 

network, finally obtaining a vector with 44 characteristics. Classification was then carried 

out, comparing two classification methods, SVM and k-nearest neighbours (KNN). The 

model was trained through a cross-validation using 500 mammographic images, which 

provided an AUC value of 0.62 for SVM and 0.60 for KNN. In order to further optimize the 

accuracy of the model, the AUC values were calculated for each of the 44 characteristics 

and then sorted according to these values. Subsequently, the least relevant characteristics 

were eliminated, by testing the model based on a range of 2 to 10 characteristics. With 10 

features and using KNN, an AUC value equivalent to 0.64 was obtained, which was better 

than when using 44 features. The best configuration was achieved using LPP-KNN, 

reducing the regenerated features to four.  This gave an AUC value of 0.68 for the short-

term prediction of BC (less than 5 years). 

The risk of developing BC can be predicted through the identification of Single Nucleotide 

Polymorphisms (SNPs) in DNA that contribute most to its development (Behravan et al., 

2018). To identify them, a three-stage protocol is implemented: (i)  the SNPs are selected 

using a gradient boosting classification technique: XGBoost; (ii) based on the XGBoost 

output data, an adaptive iterative search for SNPs is made, sorting the results downwards 

according to their scores; the M best-scored results and the M worst-scored ones are 

 
 
selected and are separately ordered from lowest to highest; this process is repeated, 

increasing the size of M until the both lists overlap; (iii) the top SNPs are chosen and 

classified with SVM representing an optimal group that can potentially predict the risk of 

BC. The protocol is implemented in Python with the libraries sklearn, xgboost among 

others and can be downloaded from github. 

DNA methylation is known to play a major role in tumorigenesis. BIGGIOCL (Celli et al., 

2018) is a tool that can be used to analyse hundreds of thousands of individual data in a 

few hours. Although it was designed to analyse DNA and CpG Islands, the author 

specifies that it could be adapted to other fields. The tool, developed in Java and based on 

the MLlib learning library, allows parallelization of work in multiple machines. When 

developing the software one of the reasons for implementing RF was its parallelization 

capability that allows a forest tree to be executed in each node and the information to be 

sent to the master node. As it is based on MLlib it can be used in Yet Another Resource 

Negotiator (YARN) environment. In the publication the authors analysed data from 

HumanMethylation450 to check its relationship with BC and obtained a direct relationship 

with the genes RP53, PIK3CA, BRCA1, BRCA2 and BDNF, results that match those 

previously published by other authors. 

Another type of cancer that is frequent in both men and women is CRC. Myte (Myte et al., 

2017) carry out the first study relating a One-carbon metabolism (1CM) pathway to cancer 

risk in humans by applying a BN. The observed relationship between compounds of 1CM 

and CRC, and the lack of empirical studies proving the impact of 1CM and SNPs on CRC 

motivated this work. The study collects data from blood samples, one per patient, and 

uses a BN to relate population-based data, SNPs and the metabolic pathways involved in 

1CM. The authors suggested that the most important factors in colorectal tumorigenesis 

are the associations between folate, vitamin B6 and vitamin B2, and concluded that these 

compounds should be taken into account in future studies of 1CM and the development of 

CRC.  

Lifestyle is important for disease prevention. In the case of lung cancer particularly, there 

are certain habits or external factors that can increase the risk of contracting the disease. 

In the study of Chen and Wu (Songjing Chen & Wu, 2020) a set of data concerning 

demographics, disease, radiation, behaviour, environment, and smoking was analysed in a 

 
 
 
group of adult patients. The authors used a CNN to identify which of these factors are the 

most important in the development of this type of cancer. The study divided the samples 

into four groups: (i) men over 64 years, (ii) women over 64 years, (iii) all those over 64 

years, and (iv) all those over 17 years. The four sets of data were then converted into 

Hierarchical Data Format 5 (HDF5), which is designed to store and organize large 

amounts of data and is used by Caffe, a Deep learning framework, to import the data into 

their CNNs. After training the model with a cross-validation, it achieved an AUC prediction 

value of 0.913 and, of all the risk factors for lung cancer examined in those over 64 years 

of age, smoking was the most important. 

In Martínez-Mas et al. (Martínez-Más et al., 2020), the authors propose a novel method for 

the early detection of cervical cancer, which is one of those with high mortality in women. 

Frequently, the automatic classification of medical images does not pre-clean the images 

to remove overlaps, which does not reflect the reality of the images obtained directly from 

the medical samples. To overcome this issue, the authors implemented an artificial cell 

merger approach to improve the efficiency and realism of the classification model using 

CNN and without ruling out blurred, overlapping cells, etc. This approach showed a 

classification accuracy of 88.8%, obtaining a sensitivity and specificity of 0.92 and 0.83, 

respectively. 

3.2. 

Predict cancer recurrence 

Cancer 

AI 

Datasets 

Software  Training 

Data 

Exp?  Reference 

data set 

types 

size 

GEO, 

R 

50 

Text 

Yes 

(Lu et al., 2020) 

ArrayExpress 

type 

approach 

CRC 

KNN, 

SVM, 

GBM, 

ANN, DT, 

RF 

LR, DT, 

BioStudies 

Python, 

800 

Text 

Yes 

(Y. Xu, Ju, 

GBM 

database 

R 

Tong, Zhou, & 

Yang, 2020) 

 
 
Breast 

SVM, 

unknown 

SPSS, R  733 

Text 

No 

(J. Kim & Shin, 

ANN, 

Regression 

2013) 

SVM, 

ICBC 

Weka 

1189 

Text 

No 

(Ahmad, 

ANN, DT 

Eshlaghy, 

Poorebrahimi, 

Ebrahimi, & AR, 

2013) 

SVM, RO 

BioBIM 

Java 

318 

Text 

Yes 

(Ferroni et al., 

2019) 

Breast 

SSL 

GEO, I2D 

C++ 

194988 

Text 

Yes 

(C. Park, Ahn, 

CRC 

Kim, & Park, 

2014) 

Oral 

BN, ANN, 

unknown 

unknown  86 

Text, 

Yes 

(Exarchos, 

SVM, DT, 

RF 

Cervical  SVM, DT, 

ELM 

Chung Shan 

Medical 

University 

Hospital 

Tumor 

Registry 

Images 

Goletsis, & 

Fotiadis, 2012) 

unknown  168 

Text 

Yes 

(Tseng, Lu, 

Chang, & Chen, 

2014) 

Table 2. Summary of studies analysed in Section 3.2 about cancer recurrence. 

Once the cancer is diagnosed, one of the main concerns is the possibility of recurrence or 

metastasis. In this line, Exarchos et al. (Exarchos et al., 2012) used a data set comprising 

clinical, image and genomic data to provide a multiparametric system to detect recurrence 

in squamous cell carcinoma using BN, ANN, SVM, decision trees (DT) and RF classifier 

algorithms and ROC curve assessments. The best results were obtained for the BN 

classifier (78.6% for clinical data, 82.8% for images and 91.7% for genomic data). Kim et 

al. (W. Kim et al., 2012) studied the recurrence of BC over 5 years using SVMs, ANNs, 

and regression analysis; in this case, the SVM model gave the best results in terms of 

accuracy (89%). In the same study, it should be noted that selection of the characteristics 

 
of the models was based on the mutual information provided by the input characteristics. 

In the same line of detecting recurrent BC, Park et al. (C. Park et al., 2014) used genetic 

information to create a graphical model based on semi-supervised learning (SSL) through 

gene pairs that indicate strong biological interactions, in this case for both breast and colon 

cancer. This graphic model proved to be quite accurate in predicting the recurrence of 

breast and colon cancer (80.7% and 76.7%, respectively). This SSL technique was seen 

to very interesting when very few labelled samples are available, which is a fairly common 

problem for this type of data set. 

In Ahmad et al. (Ahmad et al., 2013), three ML methods (DT, ANN and SVM) were 

compared for predicting for BC recurrence by analysing sensitivity, specificity and 

accuracy. The C4.5 algorithm was used in DT. Accuracy of 0.936, 0.947 and 0.957, 

respectively, were obtained. This work showed that SVM had the lowest error rate and the 

highest accuracy for predicting the recurrence of BC.  In Tseng et al. (Tseng et al., 2014), 

SVM, DT and Extreme Learning Machine (ELM) are used to predict the recurrence of 

cervical cancer. Of these three methods, DT obtained the best results, especially when 

using the C5.0 algorithm (92.44 % accuracy). The following were analysed in the study: 

Pathologic Stage, Pathologic T, Cell Type and RT Target Summary.  

Another way of approaching cancer prediction is through making individual predictions for 

each patient. Ferroni et al. (Ferroni et al., 2019) studied this approach using SVM and 

Random Optimization (RO) to predict BC in individual patients. In addition to prediction, 

the model allowed patients with low and high risk of cancer progression to be 

differentiated. The authors concluded that the use of ML algorithms (specifically SVM) with 

RO, allows the creation of an efficient model for customization in the prediction and 

recurrence of BC. 

Two studies by Lu et al. and Xu et al. (Lu et al., 2020; Y. Xu et al., 2020) worked on the 

early identification of CRC recurrence. In the first paper, several treatments were 

analysed, and good results were observed in patients who are sensitive to FOLFOX (5-FU, 

leucovorin and oxaliplatin). The authors used ML algorithms (more specifically KNN, SVM, 

GBM, ANN, DT and RF) to identify the differences in genes between patients who respond 

to FOLFOX and those who do not respond in cases of CRC recurrence. They concluded 

that SVM and RF are the most effective ML methods for predicting FOLFOX response. In 

 
 
 
the second paper, too, ML techniques (LR, DT, Light GBM, GBM) were used to study the 

impact of treatments once CRC had been detected. Light GBM and GBM were found to be 

the most efficient for detecting the reappearance of CRC, and the treatments that most 

influence the reappearance of tumours were chemotherapy, age, carcinoembryonic 

antigen and anaesthesia time. 

3.3. 

Predicting cancer progression 

Cancer 

AI 

Datasets 

Software 

Training 

Data 

Exp?  Reference 

type 

approach 

dataset 

types 

size 

Lung 

RF 

Multicenter 

Matlab2016, 

72, 32, 

No 

(Dercle et 

Clinical 

SPSS23 

31 

Images 

al., 2020) 

Trials 

Lung 

TL 

TRACERx, 

ClonEvol 

768 

Yes 

(Caravagna 

Breast 

Renal 

CRC 

RNN 

Lung 

CRC 

(Yates et 

al., 2015), 

(Gerlinger 

et al., 

2014) 

TCGA 

CCF, 

binary 

data 

et al., 

2018) 

Matlab 

506, 253 

No 

(Auslander, 

Numbers 

Wolf, & 

Koonin, 

2019) 

Breast 

ANN 

(Albertazzi 

unknown 

16 

No 

(Grey, 

et al., 

1998) 

Numbers 

Dlay, 

Leone, 

Cajone, & 

Sherbet, 

2003) 

Head 

LR 

GSE57441, 

GraphPad 

330 

No 

(Ishii et al., 

and 

Neck 

Skin 

GSE9844 

Prism 

Mass 

spectra 

2020) 

Weka-

FCBF, 

SVM, PCA, 

ExtraTrees, 

TCGA 

caret, scikit, 

371, 

No 

(Bhalla, 

OmicsMarkeR, 

354, 371 

Numbers 

Rtsne, 

scatterplot3d 

Kaur, Dhall, 

& Raghava, 

2019) 

KNN, RF, 

LR, Ridge 

Table 3. Works applying ML to forecast cancer progression. 

Tumours can change over time, getting bigger, becoming malignant or undergoing 

metastasis (McGranahan & Swanton, 2017) in an evolutive process that involves 

cancerous cells (Greaves & Maley, 2012). Tumours evolve in different ways in different 

patients. The REVOLVER (Repeated EVOLution in cancER) method (Caravagna et al., 

2018) applies the so-called Transfer Leaning (TL) approach to forecasting cancer 

progression. While the standard procedure infers uncorrelated models for each individual 

patient depicted by phylogenetic trees containing noisy data, REVOLVER uses TL to 

correlate models obtained from different patients and identify similarities in those tumours 

that evolve in a similar manner. The idea behind TL is to store the knowledge obtained 

while solving one problem and to apply this knowledge, when possible, in the resolution of 

a similar task. Thus, the knowledge extracted from one sample is transferred to another. 

As input, REVOLVER uses a set of Cancer Cell Fractions (CCF) or any other genetic 

alteration that can be represented in binary format. It then follows a two-step process: i) it 

calculates a set of correlated evolutionary trees, which are numerically scored, describing 

the evolution of each patient’s tumour; and ii) it computes the evolutionary trajectories for 

each group of input alterations depicted in a tree that shows the number of times an 

alteration occurs among other values. This method was used to analyse a collection of 

datasets for lung, breast, renal and colorectal cancer based on 768 samples, and identified 

interesting genomic trajectories that were judged to merit further study (e.g. 

CDKNA→TP53→TERT, TP53→PIK3CA→-8p→+8q).  

Alternative to TL for studying mutation timelines are Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) 

networks, which are a type of recurrent neural network (RNN) with the ability to learn long-

term dependencies from a sequence of events. LSTM takes advantage of the temporal 

nature of mutation trajectories. With this type of algorithm, mutations can be sorted by 

occurrence time to provide an explanation of tumour evolution (Auslander et al., 2019). 

The authors trained an LSTM of 5 hidden layers aiming to predict the number of mutations 

present in each tumour, the so-called mutational load. The model was trained on two 

datasets containing CRC and lung cancer samples. In less than 100 epochs they reach an 

AUC of 0.95. It is also possible to predict the genes that are present in such mutations and 

 
 
identify a set present in both types of cancer (e.g. titin, mucin-16, nesprin-1). Finally, the 

authors reported that the last 20 mutations are highly correlated with the mutational load. 

To validate their model, they implemented an SVM model that exhibited lower 

performance than LSTM, probably because they studied a non-linear relationship between 

mutations. 

The state of a BC usually depends on several factors, such as the tumour size and 

cellularity, the presence of tumoral cells in the lymph nodes being the most reliable marker 

and the expression of S100A4 and nm23 genes the most effective predictors of their 

status. In order to investigate the predictive power of these genes and tumour size and 

grade a set of 15 ANNs was trained on 16 BC samples and tested against another 16 

(Grey et al., 2003). The results confirmed the expression of S100A4 and nm23 genes as 

the most effective predictor and that the inclusion of other markers could improve the 

accuracy (e.g. ER/PgR expression). 

Simpler ML approaches, such as LR, can also help in predicting cancer progression (Ishii 

et al., 2020). The method works in the knowledge that Transforming Growth Factor beta 

(TGF-β) is involved in the acquisition of heterogeneity by tumours (Hall & Massagué, 

2008). This fact means that TGF-β is responsible for promoting tumour evolution, thus 

complicating cancer prognosis. The activation of TGF-β signalling contributes to the 

acquisition of malignant properties by head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). 

However, the effects of TGF-β on lipid metabolism remain unclear. In this context, the 

authors aimed to develop an ML-based algorithm to detect intratumoral TGF-β-stimulated 

areas in clinical HNSCC tissue without recourse to a conventional immunohistological 

examination. For this purpose, Logistic Regression of the mass spectra of HNSCC-

stimulated and non-stimulated human cells was carried out on the public datasets 

GSE57441 and GSE9844. The LR algorithm accurately segregated stimulated and non-

stimulated cells reaching a classification accuracy of up to 98%. This finding demonstrates 

that simple ML approaches, despite their limitations, can also be helpful in predicting 

cancer progression. 

Metastatic Skin Cutaneous Melanoma (SKCM) has been demonstrated to arise from 

factors such as the expression of mRNAs and miRNAs and aberrations in methylation 

patterns (Greenberg, Chong, Huynh, Tanaka, & Hoon, 2012; Mazar et al., 2011). To 

 
 
 
understand how skin melanoma progresses a combination of feature selection methods 

and ML classifiers has been used (Bhalla et al., 2019). The data, including mRNA, miRNA 

and methylation expressions from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database, were split 

into 80% for training and 20% for testing, giving training datasets of 371, 354 and 371 

samples respectively. First, three feature selection methods, namely Weka-FCBF, SVM 

with L1 regularization (SVM-L1) and Principal Component Analysis (PCA), were applied to 

reduce the number of input features so that subsequent analysis could focus on the most 

discriminative characteristics. In this step, SVM-L1 outperformed the other methods by 

selecting the 17 features that were used in the next stage. The Jaccard index was 

calculated to select the best method. Secondly, six classification models were developed 

to support vector classification with weight (SVC-W) performed best, obtaining 0.95 AUC 

and 89.4% accuracy in an external validation test. The other classifiers were ExtraTrees, 

KNN, RF, LR and Ridge classifier. The models were assessed using different metrics, 

including AUC, the Matthews coefficient, sensitivity, specificity and accuracy. As a 

conclusion, the authors reported a collection of genes that could be considered relevant 

markers of cutaneous melanoma metastasis (e.g. ESM1, NFATC3, C7orf4).  

3.4.  Calculating drug doses or drug combinations 

It used to be commonly accepted that the administration of drug combinations rather than 

providing monotherapy can increase treatment efficacy (Mokhtari et al., 2017). This 

approach is nowadays limited by the huge size of the chemical space that makes the 

identification of novel drugs very difficult and, consequently, complicates the choice of 

effective drug combinations. In order to perform a cost-effective screening of this chemical 

space, DL methods are gaining in importance. For example, the DeepSynergy tool (Preuer 

et al., 2018) aims to predict the most efficacious anti-cancer multi-drug treatments by 

means of DL. DeepSynergy provides an ANN, which is implemented with the modern 

TensorFlow framework, and outperformed other ML methods, such as gradient boosting 

machines (GBM), RF, SVM and Elastic Nets, in a benchmark on the largest synergy 

dataset. However, the performance all these methods decreased when exploring new 

datasets of different sizes and data distributions, which is one of the typical problems of 

ML approaches which remains a challenge today. In the same line, Celebi (Celebi, Bear 

Don’t Walk, Movva, Alpsoy, & Dumontier, 2019) published a study to identify functional 

anti-cancer dual therapies, an approach whereby two single-target drugs work in synergy 

to cure a disease. The above authors evaluated five ML methods (LR, Lasso, SVM, RF 

and GBM) implemented with the sklearn and xgboost Python libraries. All the models were 

trained on a novel dataset released by AstraZeneca and the Dialogue for Reverse 

Engineering Assessments and Methods consortium (Menden et al., 2017). The 

assessment showed that GBM outperformed the other methods in synergy identification. It 

is interesting to mention that the study included a variant of LR, the so-called Lasso 

(Tibshirani, 1996), which is a regularized version of LR that reduces overfitting in the 

model. 

Cancer 

AI 

Datasets 

Software 

Training 

Data types 

Exp? 

Reference 

type 

approach 

dataset 

size 

Prostate  ANN 

UCSD 

unknown 

66 

#140520 

study 

ANN 

UCSD 

unknown 

66 

#140520 

study 

Text, 

Images 

Text, 

Images 

unknown 

(Shiraishi, 

Tan, Olsen, 

& Moore, 

2015) 

No 

(Shiraishi & 

Moore, 

2016) 

CNN 

unknown 

Keras, 

72 

Images 

No 

(Nguyen et 

Tensorflow 

al., 2019) 

Breast 

DSS 

Local 

unknown 

unknown  DB-stored 

Yes 

(Musen, Tu, 

database 

medical 

records 

Das, & 

Shahar, 

1996) 

Any 

LR, SVM, 

AstraZeneca, 

sklearn, 

2790 

Numbers 

Yes 

(Celebi et 

RF, GBM 

DREAM 

xgboost 

al., 2019) 

consortium 

MVA on 

GDSC, 

R, 

700 

CSV, Text 

Yes 

(Keshava et 

Undirected 

CCLE, CTRP  

Matplotlib, 

Graphs 

Graphviz  

al., 2019) 

 
 
ANN 

(O’Neil et al., 

TensorFlow   23062 

Compounds, 

Yes 

(Preuer et 

2016) 

Cell lines 

al., 2018) 

RF 

Princess 

unknown  

383 

Images 

No 

(McIntosh & 

Margaret 

Cancer 

Centre  

Purdie, 

2016) 

CNN 

PASCAL 

TensorFlow   1464 

Images 

No 

(L.-C. Chen, 

VOC 2012  

Papandreou, 

Kokkinos, 

Murphy, & 

Yuille, 2017) 

CNN 

PASCAL 

Caffe, 

1464 

Images 

No 

(L.-C. Chen, 

VOC 2012  

TensorFlow  

Papandreou, 

Schroff, & 

Adam, 2017) 

ANN 

NCI 

unknown 

141 

Text 

Yes 

(Weinstein 

database 

et al., 1992) 

Table 4. Manuscripts applying ML to estimate drug doses or finding drug combinations for cancer 

therapies. 

Besides deciding on the drug combination to be administered, identifying the exact dose is 

crucial for creating personalised cancer therapies. However, despite the importance of 

these points, research into them lags behind estimating cancer risk or predicting therapy 

outcome. EON software (Musen et al., 1996), a component-based decision support 

system (DSS) that was developed to build healthcare protocols at a high level of 

abstraction, represented a first attempt to use AI to build reusable software capable of 

helping doctors. Its modular design makes it easy to add and replace components, and the 

graphical interface means that it is accessible to any user, even those lacking advanced 

computer skills. A major advantage of EON is that, once designed, the protocols can be 

reused for any disease with minimal adaptations; for example, different types of cancer or 

AIDS might share the same protocol. With regards to drug dose estimation and the optimal 

application time, EON includes the Chronus temporal query system, which implements a 

 
 
specific algebra for writing temporal queries and can be extended with the Catenation 

operator. This operator is able to identify adjacent periods and merge them into a single 

one, making it possible to know when and for how long a patient was given a certain drug 

combination. This information, along with the therapy outcomes for the same periods, can 

help analyse the effectiveness of a drug synergy, providing useful information for future 

cases.  

A recently published work (Kearney, Chan, Valdes, Solberg, & Yom, 2018) summarizes 

the main advances of AI for treating head and neck cancer patients. A key factor when 

planning treatments for this cancer is the intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) dose 

prediction. The manuscript describes the way ANN (Shiraishi & Moore, 2016; Shiraishi et 

al., 2015), CNN (L.-C. Chen, Papandreou, Kokkinos, et al., 2017; L.-C. Chen, Papandreou, 

Schroff, et al., 2017; Nguyen et al., 2019) and tree-based methods (McIntosh & Purdie, 

2016) are currently applied to resolve classification problems from a collection of images. 

The aim of this sort of protocol is to identify the most effective dose for each patient. Tree-

based methods try to mimic the thinking of an expert clinician looking at a set of images of 

a new patient, identify a similar past patient with the most similar images, and map the 

dose distribution administered to the former patient in order to assess the optimal 

treatment to be applied with the new patient. To do this, a collection of features is 

extracted from the images to build a dataset of structured data that can be handled by 

most ML algorithms. This approach reached 78.68% and 86.83% accuracy in breast and 

prostate cancer, respectively, when the Gamma metric was used. The main drawback of 

tree-based algorithms that work in this way is that their accuracy is closely coupled to their 

core steps: extracting descriptive features from the source images, identifying a similar 

patient on the basis of such descriptive features and adapting the past dose to the new 

patient. The alternatives to the tree-based methods used in the above work are fully 

connected ANNs with two layers, which are easy to train but which do not conserve 

memory and may suffer overfitting. Whatever the case, the prediction error reported was 

lower than 10% (Shiraishi & Moore, 2016). Fortunately, CNNs are very good for predicting 

volumetric information, the most suitable types being Tiramisu and Dilated CNNs (DCNN). 

Tiramisu models work in two steps: i) encoding the input image to extract the most 

descriptive features; and ii) decoding the information to restore it to the initial size. When 

the dose volumes are consistent with respect to the anatomy (e.g. in prostate cancer), 

Tiramisu models are the preferred option (Nguyen et al., 2019), otherwise (e.g. head and 

neck cancer), DCNNs are preferable. 

Frequently, gene mutations are detected in cancer patients, and discovering the 

relationship between these genetic variations and drug responses has led to the ability to 

identify which patients might profit most from certain drug synergies. However, the results 

of clinical trials in their advanced stages must exhibit a significant improvement over 

standard therapy. Thus, clearly defining groups of patients in which a novel drug may be 

more effective than the existing ones could help lead to individualised therapies, and, as a 

consequence, this has become a target of ML. An unsupervised learning approach based 

on multivariate analysis (MVA) of undirected graphs (Keshava et al., 2019) was performed 

to classify patients into well-defined subpopulations. The statistical methods were 

implemented with R packages and the input datasets were collected from the GDSC 

(https://www.cancerrxgene.org/), CCLE (https://portals.broadinstitute.org/ccle) and CTRP 

(https://portals.broadinstitute.org/ctrp/) databases. As result of this work, the SEABED 

(Segmentation and Biomarker Enrichment of Differential Treatment Response) platform 

was developed and used in several examples, in one of which the authors aimed to 

assess the response to a combination of drugs, namely A and B. To accomplish this, they 

segmented patients into subpopulations depending on their response to the therapies, 

considering AUC and IC50 as metrics. They also provided a graphical representation of the 

results in a tree whereby the identified subpopulations were coloured depending on the 

exhibited sensitivity to both, A, B or no drugs, which is important for facilitating 

interpretation of the results. Then, the authors chose a BRAF and a MEK inhibitor and 

discovered that the subpopulation sensitive to A was enriched for BRAF mutations and the 

one sensitive to B was enriched for MEK mutations. This approach is generic enough to be 

used for the analysis of any type of cancer sample, independently of its particular 

characteristics and can also be of great use for predicting tumour progress.  

As can be inferred from Table 4, image processing is a key procedure when estimating 

drug doses and finding effective drug combinations. To satisfy the need for powerful image 

processing algorithms, CNNs have shown themselves to be alternative to traditional 

ANNs. In parallel, new frameworks (e.g. TensorFlow, PyTorch) have been developed to 

exploit all the computing power of graphical processing units (GPUs) and accelerate image 

analysis. When there are no images available or their inspection is not suitable, other 

statistical methods and classifiers (e.g. LR, RF, MVA) can be fed with a diverse collection 

of data types. Regarding interpretability of the results, this is not the main concern of 

scientists according to Table 4. Very few of the works try to adapt the output of their 

models to make it understandable by doctors or use easily interpretable models (e.g. DT, 

BN). Whatever the case, the extensive use of image processing with CNN makes some 

models easier to understand than raw numerical results. 

3.5. 

Predict treatment outcome 

Cancer 

AI 

Datasets 

Software 

Training 

Data 

Exp?  Reference 

type 

approach 

dataset 

types 

size 

CRC 

CNN 

Akershus 

TensorFlow 

12*106 

Images 

No 

(Skrede et al., 

2020) 

University 

Hospital, Aker 

University 

Hospital, 

Gloucester 

Colorectal 

Cancer Study, 

VICTOR trial 

RF 

Teikyo 

unknown 

54 

Medical 

No 

(Tsuji et al., 

University 

Hospital, Gifo 

University 

Hospital 

Records 

2012) 

RF, SVM, 

GSE19860, 

caret, class, 

50 

ANN, DT, 

GSE28702, 

e1071, gbm, 

KNN, GBM 

GSE72970 

tree, 

Raw 

data 

No 

(Lu et al., 

2020) 

randomForest, 

RSNNS 

LR, DT, 

BioStudies 

Scikit-learn, R  800 

Excel 

No 

(Y. Xu et al., 

GBM 

database 

2020) 

BN 

ACTUR 

NCSS 

5301 

DB-

Yes 

(Steele et al., 

database 

stored 

2014) 

RF, ANN 

Genomics of 

Encog, 

38930 

Drug 

randomForest 

Sensitivity in 

Cancer portal 

SVM 

GSE19860, 

e1071 

144 

GSE28702, 

GSE72970 

RF 

GSE52735, 

limma, glmnet, 

58 

GSE62080, 

Boruta, 

GSE69657 

randomForest, 

pROC 

medical 

records 

Raw 

data 

No 

(Menden et 

al., 2013) 

Raw 

data 

Raw 

data 

No 

(Lin, Qiu, 

Zhang, & 

Zhang, 2018) 

No 

(Gan et al., 

2019) 

SVM, LR 

unknown 

Orange 

38 

unknown  No 

(Land, 

Margolis, 

Gottlieb, 

Yang, & 

Krupinski, 

2010) 

SVM 

Val d’Aurelle 

MAS 5.0 

5 to 19 

Numbers  No 

(Del Rio et 

Regional 

Cancer Center 

al., 2007) 

Breast 

Diagonal 

Nellie B. 

dCHIP 

133 

Text, 

No 

(Hess et al., 

LDA, KNN 

Connally 

Numbers 

2006) 

Breast Center, 

M.D. 

Anderson 

Cancer 

Center, 

Instituto 

Nacional de 

Enfermedades 

Neoplásicas 

de Lima 

SVM, 

University of 

e1071, ROC 

52, 48 

Numbers  No 

(Thuerigen et 

Recursive 

Heidelberg 

al., 2006) 

Feature 

Elimination 

LR 

unknown 

unknown 

84 

Numbers  No 

(Harris et al., 

2007) 

Bladder 

DT 

University of 

SPSS 

948 

Numbers  No 

(Mitra, 

Southern 

California 

Skinner, 

Miranda, & 

Daneshmand, 

2013) 

Blood 

LDA 

FRALLE93 

unknown 

32 

Numbers  No 

(Talby et al., 

protocol 

2006) 

Renal 

SVM 

National 

e1071 

250 

Numbers  No 

(C. C. Huang 

Wilms Tumor 

Study-5 

et al., 2009) 

Ovary 

Binary LR, 

Duke 

Bioconductor 

83 

Numbers  No 

(Dressman et 

Stochastic 

University 

Regression 

Medical 

Center, H. Lee 

Moffitt Cancer 

Center and 

Research 

Institute 

al., 2007) 

Esophageal  SVM 

unknown 

unknown 

46 

Text, 

No 

(Duong et al., 

Numbers 

2007) 

Text 

Yes 

(Deist et al., 

2018) 

156, 

137, 

363, 

179, 

327, 

139, 

922, 

257, 

548, 

131, 

149, 188 

Lung 

DT, RF, 

(Belderbos et 

caret 

ANN, SVM, 

al., 2005), 

LR, GBM 

(Bots et al., 

Head and 

Neck 

Meningioma 

Laryngeal 

2017), 

(Carvalho et 

al., 2016), 

(Janssens et 

al., 2012), 

(Jochems et 

al., 2017), 

(Kwint et al., 

2012), 

(Lustberg et 

al., 2016), 

Morin 

(forthcoming), 

(Oberije et al., 

2015), (Olling, 

Nyeng, & 

Wee, 2018), 

(Wijsman et 

al., 2015), 

(Wijsman et 

al., 2017) 

Table 5. List of works presented in Section 3.5 about the prediction of therapy outcome in cancer 

patients. 

In the move towards personalised therapies, the prediction of therapy outcome is 

essential. In spite of the fact that several works where AI is used to estimate a tumour’s 

evolution after therapy for colorectal (Del Rio et al., 2007; Tsuji et al., 2012), breast (Harris 

et al., 2007; Hess et al., 2006; Thuerigen et al., 2006), blood (Talby et al., 2006), renal (C. 

C. Huang et al., 2009), ovary (Dressman et al., 2007) or oesophageal (Duong et al., 2007) 

cancer, this topic remains a major challenge for scientists. 

Classification, regression and clustering algorithms have frequently been used to resolve 

this sort of issue. As example of the classification method, a DT was implemented to 

 
diagnose and predict therapy outcome for bladder cancer patients using the SPSS 

statistical package (Mitra et al., 2013). The work showed how nearly 950 patients could be 

classified into three groups with different recurrence-free and overall survival probabilities. 

DTs have the advantage of being very intuitive and easy to interpret by medical doctors, 

which is one of the main aims of health-related MLs. A similar statistical analysis for 

classification purposes was carried out with BN implemented with Number Cruncher 

Statistical Systems (NCSS) on a dataset of CRC patients (Steele et al., 2014). In this case, 

the positive prediction rate ranged from 78 to 84 per cent when estimating recurrence for 

the training dataset extracted from the ACTUR database. The main limitation of this work 

is data reliability and consistency due the military nature of some institutions feeding the 

data source, which lack approved programs for cancer treatments. RF is another widely 

used recurrent classification algorithm that is already used to predict the response to 

FOLFOX (5-FU, leucovorin and oxaliplatin) therapy (Tsuji et al., 2012). The model was 

able to correctly predict 69.2% of cases in the test set. Relationships between genomic 

alterations and drug responses is a factor that could lead to enhanced individual therapies. 

Although both genomic features and chemical properties have been computationally 

analysed, there is still a lack of works studying both factors together. To shed some light 

on this topic, ANNs and RF were used to predict therapy outcomes (Menden et al., 2013). 

The core of this work was the implementation of a three-layer ANN. The inputs were 608 

cell lines and 111 drugs, a number between 1 and 30 hidden nodes were tested to find the 

best performing architecture and the IC50 predicted value was the only output. Note that 

the IC50 value is normalized in the range [0,1] by the sigmoid function added in the output 

layer. Based on the R2 performance metric, the model obtained 0.64 on the test dataset 

extracted from the GDSC portal, and 0.61 on an external validation dataset. Then, a RF 

implemented in R was developed to ascertain whether the ANN model could be improved 

but it resulted in a R2 of 0.59 on the blind test dataset, which is a slightly lower value than 

that achieved by the ANN model. Although the results look promising, the model has some 

limitations that could be overcome by adding more cell lines, epigenetics data and gene 

expression data as inputs. Classification algorithms could also help in identifying potential 

biomarkers too which is another topic that has received increasing attention in recent 

years. An R-implemented RF (Gan et al., 2019) for this task achieved 81% accuracy in the 

validation dataset. A feature selection step is carried out in this study before the 

classification. Reducing the dimension of the input makes the classifier faster and 

facilitates interpretation of the results by clinicians. 

The diversity of classification and regression algorithms makes scientists wonder about the 

best choice to build new models and benchmark their own. To fairly assess some of the 

most typical classifiers an extensive study was carried out (Deist et al., 2018) with a set of 

algorithms. Six classifiers were evaluated on twelve datasets related to different cancers 

(lung, head, neck, meningioma, and laryngeal) using the AUC as a measure of which ones 

will work well in the future too. Although none of the algorithms stood out over the others, 

RF and Elastic Net Logistic Regression (ENLR) exhibited a higher discriminative power in 

chemo and radiotherapy outcome. Therefore, it is suggested that they might be the first 

choice when building classification models. The authors also claim that RF and ENLR 

should be the preferred option against which custom models should be compared. 

Many other supervised learning approaches can be found in the literature. Most of the 

cases exploit datasets from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) or 

collected from local institutions. SVMs represent a method that is commonly adopted to 

predict tumour progress after therapy and is especially helpful when predicting FOLFOX 

therapy results in CRC patients because this type of algorithm usually works with images. 

When working alone, SVM reached a positive prediction rate of 85.4% (Lin et al., 2018), 

which is similar to that obtained by RF. But SVM can also be combined with LR to provide 

a novel scoring method to measure the tumour size response to therapy, as it outperforms 

the traditional WHO and RECIST measurements (Land et al., 2010). 

Recent studies assessed a variety of ML methods in CRC prediction scenarios. Lu (Lu et 

al., 2020) compared six models implemented with R packages in a FOLFOX response 

prediction task. The models represented the following approaches: RF, SVM, ANN, DT, 

KNN, and GBM. The experimental tests showed that RF and SVM were the most accurate 

methods when predicting FOLFOX outcome. Unfortunately, their performance fell off when 

predicting other therapies such as FOLFIRI (5-FU, leucovorin, and irinotecan), therefore 

their application to future patients is limited. The reason for this reduction in performance 

when using alternative therapies seems to be related with the aforementioned use of 

unexplored datasets with different characteristics, which would indicate a close 

relationship between the model and the training data. The third best-ranked classifier was 

the ANN model, whose accuracy was close to that of RF and SVM but was more 

consistent when confronted with other therapies. This result demonstrates that ANNs 

 
 
 
constitute a powerful predictive tool for future CRC studies. In another work (Y. Xu et al., 

2020) the authors assessed four ML methods (LR, DT, GBM, and Light GBM) and found 

GBM and Light GBM to be more accurate than the others. This evidence leads us to think 

that GBM probably gain in importance in the near future. Finally, the rapid development of 

ANN and its variants (e.g. recurrent neural networks, convolutional neural networks, 

adversarial neural networks) has encouraged scientists to develop enhanced and more 

powerful networks capable of profiting from HPC architectures. As a result of that 

evolution, several libraries (e.g. TensorFlow) are widely used nowadays. Tensor-based 

networks are especially useful for image processing due to their ability to exploit all the 

computing power of GPUs to analyse images in a parallel manner. This novel ML 

paradigm has been used to build a CNN model that anticipates the outcome after 

resection based on a dataset of 12 million images (Skrede et al., 2020). 

The poor interpretability of the results is a challenge that needs to be faced. Raw 

estimations or complicated charts might be unintelligible to doctors and may render any 

ML algorithm worthless for practical reasons. The data types feeding ML systems intended 

to predict therapy outcomes are very different, ranging from binary data to well-structured 

records (e.g. Excel, CSV, database records). In this step, the application of image 

processing through CNN is not so frequent, as explained in the previous section, but still 

constitutes the preferred approach when manipulating images, as can be seen in Table 5.  

3.6. 

Predicting likelihood of survival 

Once cancer has been diagnosed, classified, and treated, the next questions are how the 

tumour will evolve and how likely is the patient’s survival. The former was already 

answered in section 3.3, so this section will focus on the available ML methods for the 

latter. Note that the works introduced in section 3.5 not necessarily predict the survival 

chances in months, for example, but is more likely to focus on how the treatment will 

reduce the tumour size. The prognostication of a patient’s survivability is not easy and 

depends on many factors, such as the type of cancer and the stage. Fortunately, ML can 

help doctors evaluate survival chances by analysing several biomarkers in a systematic 

manner. With the aim of answering this question, Zhu (Zhu, Xie, Han, & Guo, 2020) 

summarizes an extensive collection of works concerning the use of DL in cancer 

prognosis, including some that estimate the survival likelihood and even the survival time. 

 
 
Cancer 

AI 

Datasets  Software 

Training 

Data 

Exp? 

Reference 

type 

approach 

dataset 

types 

size 

Breast 

SVM 

(van de 

unknown 

295 

Numbers  No 

(X. Xu, 

Vijver et 

al., 2002) 

BN 

(Van’t 

unknown 

97 

Numbers  Yes 

Veer et 

al., 2002) 

SSL 

SEER 

unknown 

162500 

DB-

No 

database 

stored 

medical 

records 

Zhang, Zou, 

Wang, & Li, 

2012) 

(Gevaert, 

De Smet, 

Timmerman, 

Moreau, & 

De Moor, 

2006) 

(K. Park et 

al., 2013) 

SSL Co-

SEER 

unknown 

162500 

DB-

No 

(J. Kim & 

training 

database 

stored 

medical 

records 

Shin, 2013) 

ANN, LR, 

SEER 

unknown 

200000 

DB-

Yes 

(Delen, 

DT 

database 

stored 

medical 

records 

Oral 

SVM 

unknown 

unknown 

69 

unknown  No 

Walker, & 

Kadam, 

2005) 

(Rosado, 

Lequerica-

Fernandez, 

Villallain, 

Peña, et al., 

2013) 

Any 

ANN 

unknown 

unknown 

440 

unknown  No 

(Y.-C. Chen, 

Lung 

Linear 

SEER 

R 

7830 

DB-

Yes 

Regression, 

database 

DT, SVM, 

GBM, 

Customa 

stored 

medical 

records 

Ke, & Chiu, 

2014) 

(Lynch et 

al., 2017) 

CRC 

CNN, RNN  Helsinki 

Keras 

420 

Images 

Yes 

(Bychkov et 

University 

Central 

Hospital 

al., 2018) 

Brain 

CNN 

TCGA, 

Keras, 

679 

Images 

Yes 

(Zadeh 

South 

Tensorflow 

Australian 

public 

hospital 

system 

Prostate  DT, BN, 

The 

S-PLUS 

1050 

Text 

Yes 

Cox 

Methodist 

Hospital 

Shirazi et 

al., 2020) 

(Zupan, 

Demšar, 

Kattan, 

Beck, & 

Bratko, 

2000) 

Table 6. Summary of works about ML and the likelihood of survival 

a A custom ensemble of methods. 

According to a recent review (Kourou et al., 2015), SVMs provide the most accurate 

predictions of cancer survival. Although all the analysed studies are trained on small 

datasets, they are able to reach up to 98% and 97% accuracy in oral (Rosado, Lequerica-

Fernandez, Villallain, Pena, et al., 2013) and breast (X. Xu et al., 2012) cancer, 

respectively. Other approaches such as ANNs (Tseng et al., 2014) and BNs (Gevaert et 

al., 2006) are showing good results as well, attaining more than 83% accuracy, and both 

 
are expected to gain in importance in coming years. On the other hand, SSL, which only 

works with a few labelled samples, has emerged as a feasible alternative to the classic 

supervised and unsupervised learning paradigms but, as its results show (71% and 76% 

accuracy reported by (K. Park et al., 2013), and (J. Kim & Shin, 2013)), predictive capacity 

of this approach still has to be improved. Nevertheless, another study on lung cancer that 

used similar ML techniques yielded different results (Lynch et al., 2017). The authors 

evaluated linear regression, DT, SVM, GBM, and a custom ensemble, finding that GBM 

was the most accurate model in terms of root mean square error (RMSE). All the models 

were implemented in R language and trained on SEER database. In recent decades, 

cancer has been one of the preferred fields for the assessment of ML models to predict 

survival likelihood. An analysis of survivability in prostate cancer patients (Zupan et al., 

2000) was carried out using three non-linear statistical methods: DT, BN and Cox (Cox, 

1972). This work represents a case study that aims to demonstrate that ML classifiers are 

useful for estimating a patient’s survival chances, a process that is receiving increasing 

attention from ML experts. The authors conclude that ML statistical models could be 

helpful in the near future for predicting survival and other issues such as the probability of 

recurrence in cancer patients. 

The new wave of ML is dominated by ANNs and their subtypes such as convolutional, 

recurrent or adversarial neural networks, among others. CRC can also profit from ANNs to 

predict survival chances, especially when the input datasets are image collections and the 

use of CNNs is advantageous. A recent work (Bychkov et al., 2018) described the training 

of a DL system, built on convolutional and recurrent neural networks, to classify tumour 

images. Such classifications of tumour images are a frequent way of predicting tumour 

evolution and, consequently, evaluating survival chances. It is worth mentioning that the 

classifier used by these authors ran on a GPU to accelerate the processing and deliver the 

results in a short time. GPUs can speed up CNN calculations dramatically, which is a huge 

advantage due to the large number of samples that CNNs usually deal with and the high 

number of layers they have. Other cancer types also take advantage of CNNs and exploit 

GPU computing power. Such is the case with brain cancer, for which condition patient 

survival can be estimated by means of the recently published classifier DeepSurvNet 

(Zadeh Shirazi et al., 2020). DeepSurvNet builds CNN models implemented with Keras 

and TensorFlow libraries, which are trained with a dataset from the TCGA Program 

(Weinstein et al., 2013). The models classify the patients into four groups, each with an 

estimated overall survival. 

The use of ML approaches whose output can be graphically represented, such as BN, DT 

and CNN, facilitates the interpretation of survival chances by healthcare professionals. The 

easy interpretation of results should always be taken as a requirement when ML is to be 

applied in a context outside computer sciences. It is also worth noting that medical records 

extracted from public databases are a common input (Hutter & Zenklusen, 2018; SEER, 

2020) when evaluating survivability, which indicates that long-term well-structured data are 

the most useful data source to predict survival chances. 

4. 

Software and datasets 

In this section, we will summarize the most relevant technical details extracted from the 

above-mentioned works, such as the software tools created, the availability of the source 

code, the use of HPC platforms and the main features of the datasets. Figure 2 

summarises the approaches applied at every stage. It can be observed that ANN, LR and 

SVM are the most common methods in cancer research. RF, BN, DT, KNN, GBM and 

CNN are also used frequently but are not reported in all the tasks. 

Fig. 2. Graphical summary of ML methods being applied in cancer research tasks. Super 

indices in the central figure represent the number of steps in which that approach is 

reported. No index means that the approach is reported in all the tasks.  

4.1. 

Software tools 

In Tables 1-6 we have enumerated a number of libraries and frameworks frequently used 

for developing ML models. There is a clear trend to implement models in R and Python 

languages. R is a good choice for rapid development due to the diverse collection of 

packages it provides (e.g. caret, e1071, Bioconductor) and the many possibilities it offers 

to create different models, including SVM, RF and DT, among others. Therefore, its 

simplicity and flexibility make it an attractive alternative for several scientists. The other 

preferred option is Python and, in particular, frameworks like TensorFlow and PyTorch. 

 
 
Tensor-based frameworks have gained in importance in recent years supported by the 

rapid development of GPUs, which are a very suitable hardware solution for tensored 

calculations. While the use of R implementations has been mentioned for several years, 

publications reporting works in Python-based frameworks tend to date from 2017. This 

confirms the intuition that the development of GPUs, and more generally HPC, will be 

closely connected with the advances achieved in the performance of ML algorithms in the 

near future.  

Many statistical tools are less frequently used. This group of statistical methods is 

composed of tools such as Matlab, SPSS, Caffe and Weka. Although they are not so 

powerful as programming languages, they offer many statistical features that allow the 

rapid development of models, including LR, SVM, ANN and BN. Furthermore, the 

indicated tools are well established in the academic world, and so many scientists are 

familiar with them and their reliability has been extensively proved. 

Despite being well known and a very stable language, Java is barely used in this context. 

Only the Encog and MLlib libraries are reported in the works. There may be many reasons 

to explain this but the main ones are probably that Java is usually considered slower than 

other languages and that the users do not have the programming skills required by this 

tool. 

Task 

Reference 

Code availability 

Predict 

cancer risk 

(Behravan et 

al., 2018) 

(Celli et al., 

2018) 

https://github.com/hambeh/breast-cancer-risk-prediction 

https://github.com/fcproj/BIGBIOCL  

Predict 

(Auslander 

https://github.com/noamaus/LSTM-Mutational-series  

progression 

et al., 2019) 

(Bhalla et 

https://webs.iiitd.edu.in/raghava/cancerspp/  

al., 2019) 

Predict 

(W. Kim et 

http://ami.ajou.ac.kr/bcr/ 

recurrence 

al., 2012) 

Estimate 

(Musen et 

https://protege.stanford.edu/  

drug 

synergy 

al., 1996) 

(Celebi et 

https://github.com/rcelebi/dream-drugcombo 

al., 2019) 

https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn5605365/wiki/394725 

(Keshava et 

https://github.com/szen95/SEABED  

al., 2019) 

(Preuer et 

http://www.bioinf.jku.at/software/DeepSynergy/  

al., 2018) 

(L.-C. Chen, 

https://github.com/tensorflow/models/tree/master/research/deeplab  

Papandreou, 

Kokkinos, et 

al., 2017) 

(L.-C. Chen, 

http://liangchiehchen.com/projects/DeepLab.html  

Papandreou, 

Schroff, et 

al., 2017) 

(Deist et al., 

https://github.com/timodeist/classifier_selection_code  

2018) 

(K. Park et 

http://embio.yonsei.ac.kr/̃Park/ssl.php  

al., 2013) 

Predict 

therapy 

outcome 

Predict 

survival 

Table 7. List of code repositories or servers listed in the manuscript. 

Few authors share the source code of their models with the community (see Table 7). 

Sometimes they prefer to develop and release a novel tool providing the obtained models 

through a web interface (Bhalla et al., 2019; Preuer et al., 2018). While this is an 

understandable decision it hinders understanding of the models by external users. 

However, other researchers freely share their codes, usually on github, and allow others to 

study and analyse how they are developed. From an objective point of view, this is the 

preferred solution because it allows existing codes to be better understood, improved and 

optimized, as well as the development of new models from a solid base. 

4.2.  HPC infrastructures 

While HPC platforms are rarely reported in the analysed papers, the use of GPUs has 

increasingly been mentioned recent years (e.g. Bychkov et al., 2018; Zadeh Shirazi et al., 

2020). The recent development of Tensor-based frameworks and libraries for ML, e.g. 

TensorFlow, Keras, PyTorch, has promoted the use of GPUs for programming ML 

algorithms (Bychkov et al., 2018; L.-C. Chen, Papandreou, Kokkinos, et al., 2017; Y.-C. 

Chen et al., 2014; Nguyen et al., 2019; Preuer et al., 2018; Skrede et al., 2020; Y. Xu et 

al., 2020; Zadeh Shirazi et al., 2020). The rapid integration of GPU computing in ML 

strongly suggests that faster ML algorithms will emerge in coming years, resulting in the 

ability to handle even larger training datasets. 

Please note that, although references to other HPC paradigms have not been found in this 

revision, it is very possible that other authors have leveraged HPC platforms (e.g. parallel 

computing) in their works. 

4.3.  Datasets 

We can broadly classify the input datasets into two major groups: i) those obtained from 

publicly available databases; and ii) those collected from institutions (e.g. hospitals or 

universities). Although both online and custom approaches are valid, public datasets 

facilitate the reproducibility of the experiments. SEER and TCGA databases are typically 

used in cancer research. 

Leaving their source aside, we have focused on two properties of the datasets: the data 

types they contain and the size of the training dataset. The data types vary widely between 

works, including in terms of the text, images, medical records and binary data. Numerical 

values are the preferred option for feeding ML algorithms because they mostly work on 

numerical calculations. As can be observed in Tables 1-6, when public or private 

institutions are responsible for collecting data, they usually work with numerical data. Also, 

text inputs are widely used, probably because they can be easily translated into numerical 

values. Images are typically used to feed CNNs due to the ability of this type of network to 

apply sequential filters on images and extract patterns. This is also a frequent option 

because many hospitals and universities have easy access to historical images from 

scans, tomography or mammography. 

 
 
Fig. 3. Reported dataset size by algorithm. 

Structured information is more suitable for ML than unstructured. Usually, ML algorithms 

receive a set of well-defined inputs, which they evaluate and weigh to make predictions. 

Therefore, when the inputs are clearly defined, the models can be easily developed (e.g. 

BN, ANN, LR, DT). This is the case of databases, such as ACTUR, SEER and TCGA, and 

other datasets where the fields are undoubtedly separated. 

The second key feature of the analysed datasets is their size, which ranges from tens to 

millions of samples. In general terms, neural networks (ANN, CNN, RNN) handle the 

largest datasets (e.g. 200000, 463080, 235673 and 12x106 samples). Although a large 

number of samples may seem an advantage, their sheer numbers can slow the system 

down during training. Thus, finding a good balance between dataset size and learning 

capability is required. By contrast, the simplest approaches seem to need fewer data to 

learn as can be inferred from the fact that the smallest datasets (less than 100 training 

 
 
 
samples) are used by traditional methods such as RF and SVM. Figure 3 shows the 

reported dataset size used in ML algorithms. 

5.  Conclusions and outlook 

Decision-making is one of the main challenges in modern medicine is exercised at every 

stage of a disease’s lifecycle, from diagnosis to the prediction of recurrence. Traditionally, 

doctors have trusted their experience to choose the best option for individual patients. 

However, they cannot be expected to recall all the details of all the patients they have 

treated in the past, which clouds their ability to recognise patterns in similar situations. This 

is where computational help is required. 

In recent years, AI, and, more specifically, machine and deep learning, have looked at 

medical decision-making. In this context, anti-cancer medicine has been found to be a 

favourite playground due to the high mortality rate of the disease, the increasing number of 

cases expected in the forthcoming years and the vast amount of data available in 

databases of hospitals, universities and research centres. The diversity of existing cancer 

types encourages experiments with different ML algorithms aimed at the same target. In 

this review, we have analysed the generalised use of ML in cancer research but always 

bearing in mind CRC.  

CRC is the fourth cause of mortality due to cancer worldwide and the number of cases that 

are expected to appear in the next decade is not promising, making it a suitable target for 

ML. Any ML algorithm can be applied on CRC research ranging from the simplest (e.g. LR, 

SVM, KNN) to the most complex ones (e.g. CNN, DNN) but it has been observed that 

ANN, LR and SVM are frequently reported in any task related with decision-making (risk 

prediction, recurrence prediction, tumour progression, estimation of drug synergy, therapy 

outcomes and survival time estimates). Moreover, RF, GBM, BN, DT, KNN and CNN are 

often applied in many cases.  

There is no clear relationship between the selected approach and the type of data feeding 

the system. However, CNN is clearly the preferred option when manipulating medical 

images. It is clear that well-structured records with text or numerical fields are the simplest 

and favourite options when available. The dataset size is another key factor when training 

ML or DL systems. If the dataset is too small, the ML system will face difficulties related 

 
 
 
with learning and generalizing, whereas excessively large datasets may slow down the 

training phase. Thus, finding the optimal dataset size remains a challenge. As regards 

performance in terms of computing time, his key concern for scientists has resulted in the 

emergence of libraries and frameworks specifically focused on profiting from HPC 

facilities, such as GPUs. GPU are the preferred architecture for running CNN calculations, 

and NVIDIA has placed its bet on this technology becoming the world’s leading 

manufacturer. 

Explainability has been identified as the third key point to worry about, although it is no 

less important than the typical accuracy and performance metrics. The importance of 

explainability stems from the fact that ML is increasingly used in a medical context, where 

users are often inexperienced in interpreting AI metrics and results. Consequently, output 

must be translated into a language that physicians can understand. It has been perceived 

that explainability is still barely considered in most of the works analysed, suggesting that it 

is a factor that can be improved in order to “democratise” AI in many other areas. To 

improve the explainability of systems, feature selection methods are sometimes applied 

before classification. This technique helps to reduce the input size leading to faster 

classification and providing a more interpretable output. Some ML algorithms such as BN 

and DT are especially appropriate for this purpose because they return labelled directed 

graphs which are very easy to read and interpret. 

In short, we predict a bright future of ML and DL in medical decision-making but the results 

must be more explainable in this or any other context. Identifying the optimal training 

dataset size is another factor that deserves further study. Fortunately, the rapid 

development of HPC will make ML systems more efficient and enable them to transform 

the overwhelming quantity of historical data stored in public and private databases into 

real, reliable and valuable knowledge. 

Funding 

This work has been funded by grants from the European Project Horizon 2020 SC1-BHC-

02-2019 [REVERT, ID:848098]; Fundación Séneca del Centro de Coordinación de la 

Investigación de la Región de Murcia [Project 20988/PI/18]; and Spanish Ministry of 

Economy and Competitiveness [CTQ2017-87974-R]. 

 
 
 
Competing interests  

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.  

Author’s contributions  

All the authors contributed equally to this work. 

Acknowledgments.  

This work has been funded by grants from the European Project Horizon 2020 SC1-BHC-

02-2019 [REVERT, ID:848098]; Fundación Séneca del Centro de Coordinación de la 

Investigación de la Región de Murcia [Project 20988/PI/18]; and Spanish Ministry of 

Economy and Competitiveness [CTQ2017-87974-R]. Powered@NLHPC: This research 

was partially supported by the supercomputing infrastructure of the NLHPC (ECM-02). 

References 

Ahmad, L., Eshlaghy, A., Poorebrahimi, A., Ebrahimi, M., & AR, R. (2013). Using Three 

Machine Learning Techniques for Predicting Breast Cancer Recurrence. Journal of 

Health & Medical Informatics, 04(02). https://doi.org/10.4172/2157-7420.1000124 

Albertazzi, E., Cajone, F., Leone, B. E., Naguib, R. N., Lakshmi, M. S., & Sherbet, G. V. 

(1998). Expression of Metastasis-Associated Genes h-mts1 (S100A4) and nm23 in 

Carcinoma of Breast Is Related to Disease Progression. DNA and Cell Biology, 17(4), 

335–342. https://doi.org/10.1089/dna.1998.17.335 

Araghi, M., Soerjomataram, I., Jenkins, M., Brierley, J., Morris, E., Bray, F., & Arnold, M. 

(2019). Global trends in colorectal cancer mortality: projections to the year 2035. 

International Journal of Cancer, 144(12), 2992–3000. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.32055 

Archenaa, J., & Anita, E. M. (2015). A survey of big data analytics in healthcare and 

government. Procedia Computer Science, 50, 408–413. 

Arnold, M., Sierra, M. S., Laversanne, M., Soerjomataram, I., Jemal, A., & Bray, F. (2017). 

Global patterns and trends in colorectal cancer incidence and mortality. Gut, 66(4), 

683–691. https://doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2015-310912 

Auslander, N., Wolf, Y. I., & Koonin, E. V. (2019). In silico learning of tumor evolution 

through mutational time series. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 

the United States of America, 116(19), 9501–9510. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1901695116 

Ayer, T., Alagoz, O., Chhatwal, J., Shavlik, J. W., Kahn, C. E., & Burnside, E. S. (2010). 

Breast cancer risk estimation with artificial neural networks revisited: Discrimination 

and calibration. Cancer, 116(14), 3310–3321. https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.25081 

Bærøe, K., Miyata-Sturm, A., & Henden, E. (2020). How to achieve trustworthy artificial 

intelligence for health. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 98(4), 257–262. 

https://doi.org/10.2471/BLT.19.237289 

Behravan, H., Hartikainen, J. M., Tengström, M., Pylkäs, K., Winqvist, R., Kosma, V. –M, & 

Mannermaa, A. (2018). Machine learning identifies interacting genetic variants 

contributing to breast cancer risk: A case study in Finnish cases and controls. 

Scientific Reports, 8(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-31573-5 

Belderbos, J., Heemsbergen, W., Hoogeman, M., Pengel, K., Rossi, M., & Lebesque, J. 

(2005). Acute esophageal toxicity in non-small cell lung cancer patients after high 

dose conformal radiotherapy. Radiotherapy and Oncology, 75(2), 157–164. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radonc.2005.03.021 

Bhalla, S., Kaur, H., Dhall, A., & Raghava, G. P. S. (2019). Prediction and Analysis of Skin 

Cancer Progression using Genomics Profiles of Patients. Scientific Reports, 9(1). 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-52134-4 

Bots, W. T. C., van den Bosch, S., Zwijnenburg, E. M., Dijkema, T., van den Broek, G. B., 

Weijs, W. L. J., … Kaanders, J. H. A. M. (2017). Reirradiation of head and neck 

cancer: Long-term disease control and toxicity. Head and Neck, 39(6), 1122–1130. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/hed.24733 

Bychkov, D., Linder, N., Turkki, R., Nordling, S., Kovanen, P. E., Verrill, C., … Lundin, J. 

(2018). Deep learning based tissue analysis predicts outcome in colorectal cancer. 

Scientific Reports, 8(1), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-21758-3 

Capriotti, E., & Altman, R. B. (2011). A new disease-specific machine learning approach 

for the prediction of cancer-causing missense variants. Genomics, 98(4), 310–317. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2011.06.010 

Caravagna, G., Giarratano, Y., Ramazzotti, D., Tomlinson, I., Graham, T. A., Sanguinetti, 

G., & Sottoriva, A. (2018). Detecting repeated cancer evolution from multi-region 

tumor sequencing data. Nature Methods, 15(9), 707–714. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-018-0108-x 

Carvalho, S., Troost, E. G. C., Bons, J., Menheere, P., Lambin, P., & Oberije, C. (2016). 

Prognostic value of blood-biomarkers related to hypoxia, inflammation, immune 

response and tumour load in non-small cell lung cancer – A survival model with 

external validationPrognostic value of blood-biomarkers in NSCLC. Radiotherapy and 

Oncology, 119(3), 487–494. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radonc.2016.04.024 

Celebi, R., Bear Don’t Walk, O., Movva, R., Alpsoy, S., & Dumontier, M. (2019). In-silico 

Prediction of Synergistic Anti-Cancer Drug Combinations Using Multi-omics Data. 

Scientific Reports, 9(8949). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45236-6 

Celli, F., Cumbo, F., & Weitschek, E. (2018). Classification of Large DNA Methylation 

Datasets for Identifying Cancer Drivers. Big Data Research, 13, 21–28. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bdr.2018.02.005 

Chen, L.-C., Papandreou, G., Kokkinos, I., Murphy, K., & Yuille, A. L. (2017). DeepLab: 

Semantic Image Segmentation with Deep Convolutional Nets, Atrous Convolution, 

and Fully Connected CRFs. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine 

Intelligence, 40(4), 834–848. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2017.2699184 

Chen, L.-C., Papandreou, G., Schroff, F., & Adam, H. (2017). Rethinking Atrous 

Convolution for Semantic Image Segmentation. Retrieved from 

http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.05587 

Chen, Shanyu, He, Z., Han, X., He, X., Li, R., Zhu, H., … Niu, B. (2019, August 1). How 

Big Data and High-performance Computing Drive Brain Science. Genomics, 

Proteomics and Bioinformatics. Beijing Genomics Institute. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2019.09.003 

Chen, Songjing, & Wu, S. (2020). Identifying Lung Cancer Risk Factors in the Elderly 

Using Deep Neural Networks: Quantitative Analysis of Web-Based Survey Data. 

Journal of Medical Internet Research, 22(3), e17695. https://doi.org/10.2196/17695 

Chen, Y.-C., Ke, W.-C., & Chiu, H.-W. (2014). Risk classification of cancer survival using 

ANN with gene expression data from multiple laboratories. Computers in Biology and 

Medicine, 48, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2014.02.006 

Chiavenna, S., Jaworski, J. P., & Vendrell, A. (2017). State of the art in anti-cancer mAbs. 

Journal of Biomedical Science, 24(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12929-016-0311-y 

Coleman, C. (2017). Early Detection and Screening for Breast Cancer. Seminars in 

Oncology Nursing, 33(2), 141–155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soncn.2017.02.009 

Cox, D. R. (1972). Regression Models and Life-Tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical 

Society. Series B (Methodological), 34(2), 187–220. Retrieved from 

https://www.jstor.org/stable/2985181 

Cronin, K. A., Lake, A. J., Scott, S., Sherman, R. L., Noone, A. M., Howlader, N., … Jemal, 

A. (2018). Annual Report to the Nation on the Status of Cancer, part I: National 

cancer statistics. Cancer, 124(13), 2785–2800. https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.31551 

Culp, M. B. B., Soerjomataram, I., Efstathiou, J. A., Bray, F., & Jemal, A. (2020). Recent 

Global Patterns in Prostate Cancer Incidence and Mortality Rates. European Urology, 

77(1), 38–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eururo.2019.08.005 

Deist, T. M., Dankers, F. J. W. M., Valdes, G., Wijsman, R., Hsu, I. C., Oberije, C., … 

Lambin, P. (2018). Machine learning algorithms for outcome prediction in 

(chemo)radiotherapy: An empirical comparison of classifiers. Medical Physics, 45(7), 

3449–3459. https://doi.org/10.1002/mp.12967 

Dekker, E., Tanis, P. J., Vleugels, J. L. A., Kasi, P. M., & Wallace, M. B. (2019). Colorectal 

cancer. Lancet, 394(10207), 1467–1480. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-

6736(19)32319-0 

Del Rio, M., Molina, F., Bascoul-Mollevi, C., Copois, V., Bibeau, F., Chalbos, P., … Ychou, 

M. (2007). Gene expression signature in advanced colorectal cancer patients select 

drugs and response for the use of leucovorin, fluorouracil, and irinotecan. Journal of 

Clinical Oncology, 25(7), 773–780. https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2006.07.4187 

Delen, D., Walker, G., & Kadam, A. (2005). Predicting breast cancer survivability: A 

comparison of three data mining methods. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 34(2), 

113–127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artmed.2004.07.002 

Dercle, L., Lu, L., Schwartz, L. H., Qian, M., Tejpar, S., Eggleton, P., … Piessevaux, H. 

(2020). Radiomics Response Signature for Identification of Metastatic Colorectal 

Cancer Sensitive to Therapies Targeting EGFR Pathway. Journal of the National 

Cancer Institute, 112(9), 902–912. https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djaa017 

Dilsizian, S. E., & Siegel, E. L. (2014). Artificial intelligence in medicine and cardiac 

imaging: Harnessing big data and advanced computing to provide personalized 

medical diagnosis and treatment. Current Cardiology Reports, 16(1). 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11886-013-0441-8 

Ding, D., Han, S., Zhang, H., He, Y., & Li, Y. (2019). Predictive biomarkers of colorectal 

cancer. Computational Biology and Chemistry, 83. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2019.107106 

Dressman, H. K., Berchuck, A., Chan, G., Zhai, J., Bild, A., Sayer, R., … Lancaster, J. M. 

(2007). An integrated genomic-based approach to individualized treatment of patients 

with advanced-stage ovarian cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 25(5), 517–525. 

https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2006.06.3743 

Duong, C., Greenawalt, D. M., Kowalczyk, A., Ciavarella, M. L., Raskutti, G., Murray, W. 

K., … Thomas, R. J. S. (2007). Pretreatment gene expression profiles can be used to 

predict response to neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy in esophageal cancer. Annals of 

Surgical Oncology, 14(12), 3602–3609. https://doi.org/10.1245/s10434-007-9550-1 

Exarchos, K. P., Goletsis, Y., & Fotiadis, D. I. (2012). Multiparametric decision support 

system for the prediction of oral cancer reoccurrence. IEEE Transactions on 

Information Technology in Biomedicine, 16(6), 1127–1134. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/TITB.2011.2165076 

Ferlay, J., Soerjomataram, I., Dikshit, R., Eser, S., Mathers, C., Rebelo, M., … Bray, F. 

(2015). Cancer incidence and mortality worldwide: Sources, methods and major 

patterns in GLOBOCAN 2012. International Journal of Cancer, 136(5), E359–E386. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.29210 

Ferroni, P., Zanzotto, F. M., Riondino, S., Scarpato, N., Guadagni, F., & Roselli, M. (2019). 

Breast Cancer Prognosis Using a Machine Learning Approach. Cancers (Basel), 

11(3), 328. https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers11030328 

Gan, Z., Zou, Q., Lin, Y., Xu, Z., Huang, Z., Chen, Z., & Lv, Y. (2019). Identification of a 

13-gene-based classifier as a potential biomarker to predict the effects of fluorouracil-

based chemotherapy in colorectal cancer. Oncology Letters, 17(6), 5057–5063. 

https://doi.org/10.3892/ol.2019.10159 

García-Figueiras, R., Baleato-González, S., Padhani, A. R., Luna-Alcalá, A., Marhuenda, 

A., Vilanova, J. C., … Gómez-Caamaño, A. (2018). Advanced imaging techniques in 

evaluation of colorectal cancer. Radiographics, 38(3), 740–765. 

https://doi.org/10.1148/rg.2018170044 

Garg, V., Arora, S., & Gupta, C. (2011). Cloud computing approaches to accelerate drug 

discovery value chain. Combinatorial Chemistry & High Throughput Screening, 

14(10), 861–871. https://doi.org/10.2174/138620711797537085 

Gerlinger, M., Horswell, S., Larkin, J., Rowan, A. J., Salm, M. P., Varela, I., … Swanton, C. 

(2014). Genomic architecture and evolution of clear cell renal cell carcinomas defined 

by multiregion sequencing. Nature Genetics, 46(3), 225–233. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2891 

Gevaert, O., De Smet, F., Timmerman, D., Moreau, Y., & De Moor, B. (2006). Predicting 

the prognosis of breast cancer by integrating clinical and microarray data with 

Bayesian networks. In Bioinformatics (Vol. 22). 

https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btl230 

Greaves, M., & Maley, C. C. (2012). Clonal evolution in cancer. Nature, 481(7381), 306–

313. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10762 

Greenberg, E. S., Chong, K. K., Huynh, K. T., Tanaka, R., & Hoon, D. S. B. (2012). 

Epigenetic Biomarkers in Skin Cancer. Cancer Letters, 342(2), 170–177. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2012.01.020 

Grey, S. R., Dlay, S. S., Leone, B. E., Cajone, F., & Sherbet, G. V. (2003). Prediction of 

nodal spread of breast cancer by using artificial neural network-based analyses of 

S100A4, nm23 and steroid receptor expression. Clinical & Experimental Metastasis 

(Vol. 20). 

Gunning, D. (2016). Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI). In Defense Advanced 

Research Projects Agency. 

Hall, A., & Massagué, J. (2008). Cell regulation. Current Opinion in Cell Biology, 20(2), 

117–118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceb.2008.02.006 

Harris, L. N., You, F., Schnitt, S. J., Witkiewicz, A., Lu, X., Sgroi, D., … Winer, E. P. 

(2007). Predictors of resistance to preoperative trastuzumab and vinorelbine for 

HER2-positive early breast cancer. Clinical Cancer Research, 13(4), 1198–1207. 

https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-06-1304 

Hassan, A. K., Hassan, Y. F., & Kholief, M. H. (2018). A deep classification system for 

medical big data analysis. Journal of Medical Imaging & Health Informatics, 8(2), 

250–256. 

Heidari, M., Khuzani, A. Z., Hollingsworth, A. B., Danala, G., Mirniaharikandehei, S., Qiu, 

Y., … Zheng, B. (2018). Prediction of breast cancer risk using a machine learning 

approach embedded with a locality preserving projection algorithm. Physics in 

Medicine and Biology, 63(3). https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6560/aaa1ca 

Hermon, R., & Williams, P. A. (2014). Big data in healthcare: what is it used for? In 

Australian Ehealth Informatics and Security Conference (pp. 40–49). 

Hess, K. R., Anderson, K., Symmans, W. F., Valero, V., Ibrahim, N., Mejia, J. A., … 

Pusztai, L. (2006). Pharmacogenomic predictor of sensitivity to preoperative 

chemotherapy with paclitaxel and fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide in 

breast cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 24(26), 4236–4244. 

https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2006.05.6861 

Holzinger, A., Dehmer, M., & Jurisica, I. (2014). Knowledge discovery and interactive data 

mining in bioinformatics—State-of-the-art, future challenges and research directions. 

BMC Bioinformatics, 15(I1). 

Holzinger, A., Langs, G., Denk, H., Zatloukal, K., & Müller, H. (2019, July 1). Causability 

and explainability of artificial intelligence in medicine. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: 

Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery. Wiley-Blackwell. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1312 

Huang, C. C., Gadd, S., Breslow, N., Cutcliffe, C., Sredni, S. T., Helenowski, I. B., … 

Perlman, E. J. (2009). Predicting relapse in favorable histology wilms tumor using 

gene expression analysis: A report from the renal tumor committee of the children’s 

oncology group. Clinical Cancer Research, 15(5), 1770–1778. 

https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1030 

Huang, D., Sun, W., Zhou, Y., Li, P., Chen, F., Chen, H., … Zhang, H. (2018, March 1). 

Mutations of key driver genes in colorectal cancer progression and metastasis. 

Cancer and Metastasis Reviews. Springer New York LLC. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10555-017-9726-5 

Hutter, C., & Zenklusen, J. C. (2018). The Cancer Genome Atlas: creating lasting value 

beyond its data. Cell, 173(2), 283–285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.042 

Ishii, H., Saitoh, M., Sakamoto, K., Sakamoto, K., Saigusa, D., Kasai, H., … Yoshimura, K. 

(2020). Lipidome-based rapid diagnosis with machine learning for detection of TGF-β 

signalling activated area in head and neck cancer. British Journal of Cancer, 122(7), 

995–1004. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-020-0732-y 

Jackson, S. E., & Chester, J. D. (2015, July 15). Personalised cancer medicine. 

International Journal of Cancer. Wiley-Liss Inc. https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.28940 

Jacovi, A., Sar Shalom, O., & Goldberg, Y. (2018). Understanding Convolutional Neural 

Networks for Text Classification. In Proceedings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop 

BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP (pp. 56–65). 

Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Association for Computational Linguistics. 

https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-5408 

Jain, K. K. (2005). Personalised medicine for cancer: from drug development into clinical 

practice. Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy, 6(9), 1463–1476. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1517/14656566.6.9.1463 

Janssens, G. O., Rademakers, S. E., Terhaard, C. H., Doornaert, P. A., Bijl, H. P., Van 

Ende, P. Den, … Kaanders, J. H. (2012). Accelerated radiotherapy with carbogen and 

nicotinamide for laryngeal cancer: Results of a phase III randomized trial. Journal of 

Clinical Oncology, 30(15), 1777–1783. https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2011.35.9315 

Jochems, A., Deist, T. M., El Naqa, I., Kessler, M., Mayo, C., Reeves, J., … Dekker, A. 

(2017). Developing and Validating a Survival Prediction Model for NSCLC Patients 

Through Distributed Learning Across 3 Countries. International Journal of Radiation 

Oncology Biology Physics, 99(2), 344–352. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2017.04.021 

Johnson, W. L. (1994). Agents that learn to explain themselves. In 12th National 

Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI’ 94) (pp. 1257–1263). 

Kaminker, J. S., Zhang, Y., Watanabe, C., & Zhang, Z. (2007). CanPredict: A 

computational tool for predicting cancer-associated missense mutations. Nucleic 

Acids Research, 35(SUPPL.2). https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkm405 

Kather, J. N., Halama, N., & Jaeger, D. (2018, October 1). Genomics and emerging 

biomarkers for immunotherapy of colorectal cancer. Seminars in Cancer Biology. 

Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semcancer.2018.02.010 

Kearney, V., Chan, J. W., Valdes, G., Solberg, T. D., & Yom, S. S. (2018). The application 

of artificial intelligence in the IMRT planning process for head and neck cancer. Oral 

Oncology, 87, 111–116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oraloncology.2018.10.026 

Keshava, N., Toh, T. S., Yuan, H., Yang, B., Menden, M. P., & Wang, D. (2019). Defining 

subpopulations of differential drug response to reveal novel target populations. Npj 

Systems Biology and Applications, 5(36). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41540-019-0113-4 

Kim, J., & Shin, H. (2013). Breast cancer survivability prediction using labeled, unlabeled, 

and pseudo-labeled patient data. Journal of the American Medical Informatics 

Association, 20(4), 613–618. https://doi.org/10.1136/amiajnl-2012-001570 

Kim, W., Kim, K. S., Lee, J. E., Noh, D. Y., Kim, S. W., Jung, Y. S., … Park, R. W. (2012). 

Development of novel breast cancer recurrence prediction model using support vector 

machine. Journal of Breast Cancer, 15(2), 230–238. 

https://doi.org/10.4048/jbc.2012.15.2.230 

Kourou, K., Exarchos, T. P., Exarchos, K. P., Karamouzis, M. V., & Fotiadis, D. I. (2015). 

Machine learning applications in cancer prognosis and prediction. Computational and 

Structural Biotechnology Journal. Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csbj.2014.11.005 

Kuipers, E. J., Grady, W. M., Lieberman, D., Seufferlein, T., Sung, J. J., Boelens, P. G., … 

Watanabe, T. (2015). Colorectal cancer. Nature Reviews Disease Primers, 1. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2015.65 

Kwint, M., Uijterlinde, W. I., Nijkamp, J., Chen, C., de Bois, J., Sonke, J. J., … Belderbos, 

J. (2012). Acute esophagus toxicity in lung cancer patients after Intensity Modulated 

Radiotherapy and concurrent chemotherapy. International Journal of Radiation 

Oncology Biology Physics, 84(2), 223–228. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2012.03.027 

Lacave, C., & Díez, F. J. (2002). A review of explanation methods for Bayesian networks. 

The Knowledge Engineering Review, 17, 107–127. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/S026988890200019X 

Land, W. H., Margolis, D., Gottlieb, R., Yang, J. Y., & Krupinski, E. A. (2010). Improving 

CT prediction of treatment response in patients with metastatic colorectal carcinoma 

using statistical learning. International Journal of Computational Biology and Drug 

Design, 3(1), 15–18. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJCBDD.2010.034463 

Lech, G., Słotwiński, R., Słodkowski, M., & Krasnodębski, I. W. (2016). Colorectal cancer 

tumour markers and biomarkers: Recent therapeutic advances. World Journal of 

Gastroenterology, 22(5), 1745–1755. https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v22.i5.1745 

Lee, S., & Holzinger, A. (2016). Knowledge discovery from complex high dimensional data. 

In & M. S. S. Michaelis, N. Piatkowski (Ed.), Solving large scale learning tasks. 

Challenges and algorithms, lecture notes in artificial intelligence (pp. 148–167). 

Heidelberg (Germany): Springer. 

Lin, H., Qiu, X., Zhang, B., & Zhang, J. (2018). Identification of the predictive genes for the 

response of colorectal cancer patients to FOLFOX therapy. OncoTargets and 

Therapy, 11, 5943–5955. https://doi.org/10.2147/OTT.S167656 

Lipton, Z. C. (2018). The Mythos of Model Interpretability. ACM Queue, 16(3). 

Loud, J. T., & Murphy, J. (2017, May 1). Cancer Screening and Early Detection in the 21st 

Century. Seminars in Oncology Nursing. W.B. Saunders. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soncn.2017.02.002 

Lu, W., Fu, D., Kong, X., Huang, Z., Hwang, M., Zhu, Y., … Ding, K. (2020). FOLFOX 

treatment response prediction in metastatic or recurrent colorectal cancer patients via 

machine learning algorithms. Cancer Medicine, 9(4), 1419–1429. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/cam4.2786 

Lustberg, T., Bailey, M., Thwaites, D. I., Miller, A., Carolan, M., Holloway, L., … Dekker, A. 

(2016). Implementation of a rapid learning platform: Predicting 2-year survival in 

laryngeal carcinoma patients in a clinical setting. Oncotarget, 7(24), 37288–37296. 

https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.8755 

Lynch, C. M., Abdollahi, B., Fuqua, J. D., de Carlo, A. R., Bartholomai, J. A., Balgemann, 

R. N., … Frieboes, H. B. (2017). Prediction of lung cancer patient survival via 

supervised machine learning classification techniques. International Journal of 

Medical Informatics, 108, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2017.09.013 

Martínez-Más, J., Bueno-Crespo, A., Khazendar, S., Remezal-Solano, M., Martínez-

Cendán, J. P., Jassim, S., … Timmerman, D. (2019). Evaluation of machine learning 

methods with Fourier Transform features for classifying ovarian tumors based on 

ultrasound images. PLoS ONE, 14(7), 1–14. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0219388 

Martínez-Más, J., Bueno-Crespo, A., Martínez-España, R., Remezal-Solano, M., Ortiz-

González, A., Ortiz-Reina, S., & Martínez-Cendán, J. P. (2020). Classifying 

Papanicolaou cervical smears through a cell merger approach by deep learning 

technique. Expert Systems with Applications, 160, 113707. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2020.113707 

Mazar, J., Khaitan, D., DeBlasio, D., Zhong, C., Govindarajan, S. S., Kopanathi, S., … 

Perera, R. J. (2011). Epigenetic Regulation of MicroRNA Genes and the Role of miR-

34b in Cell Invasion and Motility in Human Melanoma. PLoS ONE, 6(9), e24922. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0024922 

McGranahan, N., & Swanton, C. (2017). Clonal Heterogeneity and Tumor Evolution: Past, 

Present, and the Future. Cell, 168(4), 613–628. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.01.018 

McIntosh, C., & Purdie, T. G. (2016). Contextual Atlas Regression Forests: Multiple-Atlas-

Based Automated Dose Prediction in Radiation Therapy. IEEE Transactions on 

Medical Imaging, 35(4), 1000–1012. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMI.2015.2505188 

Menden, M. P., Iorio, F., Garnett, M., McDermott, U., Benes, C. H., Ballester, P. J., & 

Saez-Rodriguez, J. (2013). Machine Learning Prediction of Cancer Cell Sensitivity to 

Drugs Based on Genomic and Chemical Properties. PLoS ONE, 8(4). 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0061318 

Menden, M. P., Wang, D., Guan, Y., Mason, M. J., Szalai, B., Bulusu, K. C., … Saez-

Rodriguez, J. (2017). A cancer pharmacogenomic screen powering crowd-sourced 

advancement of drug combination prediction. BioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/200451 

Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J. (2013). Efficient estimation of word 

representations in vector space. https://doi.org/arXiv:1301.3781 

Mitra, A. P., Skinner, E. C., Miranda, G., & Daneshmand, S. (2013). A precystectomy 

decision model to predict pathological upstaging and oncological outcomes in clinical 

stage T2 bladder cancer. BJU International, 111(2), 240–248. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1464-410X.2012.11424.x 

Mokhtari, R. B., Homayouni, T. S., Baluch, N., Morgatskaya, E., Kumar, S., Das, B., & 

Yeger, H. (2017). Combination therapy in combating cancer. Oncotarget, 8(23), 

38022–38043. https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.16723 

Musen, M. A., Tu, S. W., Das, A. K., & Shahar, Y. (1996). EON: A Component-Based 

Approach to Automation of Protocol-Directed Therapy. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 

3(6), 367–388. https://doi.org/10.1136/jamia.1996.97084511 

Myte, R., Gylling, B., Häggström, J., Schneede, J., Magne Ueland, P., Hallmans, G., … 

Van Guelpen, B. (2017). Untangling the role of one-carbon metabolism in colorectal 

cancer risk: A comprehensive Bayesian network analysis. Scientific Reports, 7. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/srep43434 

Nguyen, D., Long, T., Jia, X., Lu, W., Gu, X., Iqbal, Z., & Jiang, S. (2019). A feasibility 

study for predicting optimal radiation therapy dose distributions of prostate cancer 

patients from patient anatomy using deep learning. Scientific Reports, 9(1076). 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-37741-x 

Nobile, M. S., Cazzaniga, P., Tangherloni, A., & Besozzi, D. (2017). Graphics processing 

units in bioinformatics, computational biology and systems biology. Briefings in 

Bioinformatics, 18(5), 870–885. https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbw058 

O’Neil, J., Benita, Y., Feldman, I., Chenard, M., Roberts, B., Liu, Y., … Shumway, S. D. 

(2016). An unbiased oncology compound screen to identify novel combination 

strategies. Molecular Cancer Therapeutics, 15(6), 1155–1162. 

https://doi.org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0843 

Oakden-Rayner, L., & Palmer, L. J. (2019). Artificial Intelligence in Medicine: Validation 

and Study Design: Opportunities, Applications and Risks. In Artificial Intelligence in 

Medical Imaging (pp. 83–104). 

Oberije, C., De Ruysscher, D., Houben, R., Van De Heuvel, M., Uyterlinde, W., Deasy, J. 

O., … Lambin, P. (2015). A validated prediction model for overall survival from stage 

III non-small cell lung cancer: Toward survival prediction for individual patients. 

International Journal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics, 92(4), 935–944. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.02.048 

Oh, M., McBride, A., Yun, S., Bhattacharjee, S., Slack, M., Martin, J. R., … Abraham, I. 

(2018). BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations and colorectal cancer risk: Systematic 

review and meta-analysis. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. Oxford University 

Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djy148 

Olin, R. L. (2019). Delivering intensive therapies to older adults with hematologic 

malignancies: strategies to personalize care. Blood, 134(23), 2013–2021. 

https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2019001300 

Olling, K., Nyeng, D. W., & Wee, L. (2018). Predicting acute odynophagia during lung 

cancer radiotherapy using observations derived from patient-centred nursing care. 

Technical Innovations & Patient Support in Radiation Oncology, 5, 16–20. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tipsro.2018.01.002 

Park, C., Ahn, J., Kim, H., & Park, S. (2014). Integrative gene network construction to 

analyze cancer recurrence using semi-supervised learning. PLoS ONE, 9(1). 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0086309 

Park, K., Ali, A., Kim, D., An, Y., Kim, M., & Shin, H. (2013). Robust predictive model for 

evaluating breast cancer survivability. Engineering Applications of Artificial 

Intelligence, 26(9), 2194–2205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2013.06.013 

Pérez-Sianes, J., Pérez-Sánchez, H., & Díaz, F. (2019). Virtual Screening Meets Deep 

Learning. Current Computer-Aided Drug Design, 15(1), 6–28. 

https://doi.org/10.2174/1573409914666181018141602 

Preuer, K., Lewis, R. P. I., Hochreiter, S., Bender, A., Bulusu, K. C., & Klambauer, G. 

(2018). DeepSynergy: Predicting anti-cancer drug synergy with Deep Learning. 

Bioinformatics, 34(9), 1538–1546. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btx806 

Ristevski, B., & Chen, M. (2018). Big Data Analytics in Medicine and Healthcare. Journal 

of Integrative Bioinformatics, 15(3), 20170030. https://doi.org/10.1515/jib-2017-0030 

Roffman, D., Hart, G., Girardi, M., Ko, C. J., & Deng, J. (2018). Predicting non-melanoma 

skin cancer via a multi-parameterized artificial neural network. Scientific Reports, 

8(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-19907-9 

Rosado, P., Lequerica-Fernandez, P., Villallain, L., Pena, I., Sanchez-Lasheras, F., & De 

Vicente, J. C. (2013). Survival model in oral squamous cell carcinoma based on 

clinicopathological parameters, molecular markers and support vector machines. 

Expert Systems with Applications, 40(12), 4770–4776. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2013.02.032 

Rosado, P., Lequerica-Fernandez, P., Villallain, L., Peña, I., Sánchez-Lasheras, F., & De 

Vicente, J. C. (2013). Survival model in oral squamous cell carcinoma based on 

clinicopathological parameters, molecular markers and support vector machines. 

Expert Systems with Applications, 40(12), 4770–4776. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2013.02.032 

Ruiz-López, L., Blancas, I., Garrido, J. M., Mut-Salud, N., Moya-Jódar, M., Osuna, A., & 

Rodríguez-Serrano, F. (2018, April 1). The role of exosomes on colorectal cancer: A 

review. Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology (Australia). Blackwell Publishing. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/jgh.14049 

Schlegl, T., Seeböck, P., Waldstein, S. M., Schmidt-Erfurth, U., & Langs, G. (2017). 

Unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial networks to guide 

marker discovery. In International Conference on Information Processing in Medical 

Imaging (pp. 146–157). 

Schmidt, B., & Hildebrandt, A. (2017). Next-generation sequencing: big data meets high 

performance computing. Drug Discovery Today, 22(4), 712–717. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drudis.2017.01.014 

SEER. (2020). SEER Research Data 1975-2017. Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End 

Results (SEER) Program (www.seer.cancer.gov) SEER*Stat Database: Incidence - 

SEER Research Data, 9 Registries, Nov 2019 Sub (1975-2017). 

Shiraishi, S., & Moore, K. L. (2016). Knowledge-based prediction of three-dimensional 

dose distributions for external beam radiotherapy. Medical Physics, 43(1), 378–387. 

https://doi.org/10.1118/1.4938583 

Shiraishi, S., Tan, J., Olsen, L. A., & Moore, K. L. (2015). Knowledge-based prediction of 

plan quality metrics in intracranial stereotactic radiosurgery. Medical Physics, 42(2), 

908. https://doi.org/10.1118/1.4906183 

Skrede, O. J., De Raedt, S., Kleppe, A., Hveem, T. S., Liestøl, K., Maddison, J., … 

Danielsen, H. E. (2020). Deep learning for prediction of colorectal cancer outcome: a 

discovery and validation study. The Lancet, 395(10221), 350–360. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(19)32998-8 

Steele, S. R., Bilchik, A., Johnson, E. K., Nissan, A., Peoples, G. E., Berhardt, J. S., … 

Stojadinovic, A. (2014). Time-dependent estimates of recurrence and survival in colon 

cancer: Clinical decision support system tool development for adjuvant therapy and 

oncological outcome assessment. The American Surgeon, 80(5), 441–453. 

https://doi.org/10.1200/jco.2013.31.15_suppl.e14500 

Sun, H., Liu, Z., Wang, G., Lian, W., & Ma, J. (2019). Intelligent Analysis of Medical Big 

Data Based on Deep Learning. In IEEE Access (pp. 7:142022-142037). 

https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2942937 

Sundararajan, M., Taly, A., & Yan, Q. (2017). Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In 

ICML’17: Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 

70:3319–3328). 

Swartout, W., Paris, C., & Moore, J. (1991). Explanations in knowledge systems: design 

for explainable expert systems. In IEEE Expert (pp. 6:58-54). 

Talby, L., Chambost, H., Roubaud, M.-C., N’Guyen, C., Milili, M., Loriod, B., … Schiff, C. 

(2006). The chemosensitivity to therapy of childhood early B acute lymphoblastic 

leukemia could be determined by the combined expression of CD34, SPI-B and BCR 

genes. Leukemia Research, 30(6), 665–676. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leukres.2005.10.007 

Taninaga, J., Nishiyama, Y., Fujibayashi, K., Gunji, T., Sasabe, N., Iijima, K., & Naito, T. 

(2019). Prediction of future gastric cancer risk using a machine learning algorithm and 

comprehensive medical check-up data: A case-control study. Scientific Reports, 9(1). 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-48769-y 

Thuerigen, O., Schneeweiss, A., Toedt, G., Warnat, P., Hahn, M., Kramer, H., … Lichter, 

P. (2006). Gene expression signature predicting pathologic complete response with 

gemcitabine, epirubicin, and docetaxel in primary breast cancer. Journal of Clinical 

Oncology, 24(12), 1839–1845. https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2005.04.7019 

Tibshirani, R. (1996). Regression Shrinkage and Selection via the Lasso. Journal of the 

Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 58(1), 267–288. Retrieved from 

www.jstor.org/stable/2346178 

Tseng, C. J., Lu, C. J., Chang, C. C., & Chen, G. Den. (2014). Application of machine 

learning to predict the recurrence-proneness for cervical cancer. Neural Computing 

and Applications, 24(6), 1311–1316. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-013-1359-1 

Tsuji, S., Midorikawa, Y., Takahashi, T., Yagi, K., Takayama, T., Yoshida, K., … Aburatani, 

H. (2012). Potential responders to FOLFOX therapy for colorectal cancer by Random 

Forests analysis. British Journal of Cancer, 106(1), 126–132. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/bjc.2011.505 

Upton, A., Trelles, O., Cornejo-García, J. A., & Perkins, J. R. (2016, May 16). Review: 

High-performance computing to detect epistasis in genome scale data sets. Briefings 

in Bioinformatics. Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbv058 

Usher-Smith, J. A., Silarova, B., Lophatananon, A., Duschinsky, R., Campbell, J., 

Warcaba, J., & Muir, K. (2017). Responses to provision of personalised cancer risk 

information: A qualitative interview study with members of the public. BMC Public 

Health, 17(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-017-4985-1 

Valle, L., Vilar, E., Tavtigian, S. V., & Stoffel, E. M. (2019, April 1). Genetic predisposition 

to colorectal cancer: syndromes, genes, classification of genetic variants and 

implications for precision medicine. Journal of Pathology. John Wiley and Sons Ltd. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/path.5229 

Van’t Veer, L. J., Dai, H., Van de Vijver, M. J., He, Y. D., Hart, A. A. M., Mao, M., … 

Friend, S. H. (2002). Gene expression profiling predicts clinical outcome of breast 

cancer. Nature, 415(6871), 530–536. https://doi.org/10.1038/415530a 

van de Vijver, M. J., Yudong, D. H., van’t Veer, L. J., Dai, H., Hart, A. A. M., Voskuil, D. W., 

… Roberts, C. (2002). A Gene-Expression Signature As a Predictor of Survival in 

Breast Cancer. The New England Journal of Medicine, 347(25), 1999–2009. 

https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa021967 

Wang, H., Ma, Y., Pratx, G., & Xing, L. (2011, September 7). Toward real-time Monte 

Carlo simulation using a commercial cloud computing infrastructure. Physics in 

Medicine and Biology. https://doi.org/10.1088/0031-9155/56/17/N02 

Weinberg, B. A., Marshall, J. L., & Salem, M. E. (2017). The Growing Challenge of Young 

Adults With Colorectal Cancer. Oncology (Williston Park), 31(5), 381–389. 

Weinstein, J. N., Collison, E. A., Mills, G. B., Shaw, K. R. M., Ozenberger, B. A., Ellrott, K., 

… Stuart, J. M. (2013). The Cancer Genome Atlas Pan-Cancer analysis project. 

Nature Genetics, 45, 1113–1120. https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2764 

Weinstein, J. N., Kohn, K. W., Grever, M. R., Viswanadhan, V. N., Rubinstein, L. V., 

Monks, A. P., & Scudiero, D. A. . (1992). Neural computing in cancer drug 

development: predicting mechanism of action. Science, 258(5081), 447–451. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1411538 

Wijsman, R., Dankers, F. J. W. M., Troost, E. G. C., Hoffmann, A. L., van der Heijden, E. 

H. F. M., de Geus-Oei, L.-F., & Bussink, J. (2015). Multivariable normal-tissue 

complication modeling of acute esophageal toxicity in advanced stage non-small cell 

lung cancer patients treated with intensity-modulated (chemo-)radiotherapy. 

Radiotherapy and Oncology, 117(1), 49–54. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radonc.2015.08.010 

Wijsman, R., Dankers, F. J. W. M., Troost, E. G. C., Hoffmann, A. L., van der Heijden, E. 

H. F. M., de Geus-Oei, L. F., & Bussink, J. (2017). Inclusion of Incidental Radiation 

Dose to the Cardiac Atria and Ventricles Does Not Improve the Prediction of 

Radiation Pneumonitis in Advanced-Stage Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Patients 

Treated With Intensity Modulated Radiation Therapy. International Journal of 

Radiation Oncology Biology Physics, 99(2), 434–441. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2017.04.011 

Xu, X., Zhang, Y., Zou, L., Wang, M., & Li, A. (2012). A gene signature for breast cancer 

prognosis using support vector machine. In 2012 5th International Conference on 

Biomedical Engineering and Informatics, BMEI 2012 (pp. 928–931). 

https://doi.org/10.1109/BMEI.2012.6513032 

Xu, Y., Ju, L., Tong, J., Zhou, C. M., & Yang, J. J. (2020). Machine Learning Algorithms for 

Predicting the Recurrence of Stage IV Colorectal Cancer After Tumor Resection. 

Scientific Reports, 10(1), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-59115-y 

Yates, L. R., Gerstung, M., Knappskog, S., Desmedt, C., Gundem, G., Van Loo, P., … 

Larsimont, D. (2015). Subclonal diversification of primary breast cancer revealed by 

multiregion sequencing. Nature Medicine, 21, 751–759. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.3886 

Yiu, A. J., & Yiu, C. Y. (2016). Biomarkers in Colorectal Cancer. Anticancer Research, 36, 

1093–1102. 

Zadeh Shirazi, A., Fornaciari, E., Bagherian, N. S., Ebert, L. M., Koszyca, B., & Gomez, G. 

A. (2020). DeepSurvNet: deep survival convolutional network for brain cancer survival 

rate classification based on histopathological images. Medical and Biological 

Engineering and Computing. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11517-020-02147-3 

Zhu, W., Xie, L., Han, J., & Guo, X. (2020, March 1). The application of deep learning in 

cancer prognosis prediction. Cancers. MDPI AG. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers12030603 

Zupan, B., Demšar, J., Kattan, M. W., Beck, J. R., & Bratko, I. (2000). Machine learning for 

survival analysis: a case study on recurrence of prostate cancer. Artificial Intelligence 

in Medicine (Vol. 20). Retrieved from www.elsevier.com/locate/artmed 

 
