When Being Soft Makes You Tough: A Collision-Resilient Quadcopter
Inspired by Arthropods’ Exoskeletons

Ricardo de Azambuja1, Hassan Fouad1, Yann Bouteiller1, Charles Sol1, Giovanni Beltrame1

2
2
0
2

n
u
J

7
2

]

O
R
.
s
c
[

4
v
3
2
4
4
0
.
3
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract— Flying robots are usually rather delicate and
require protective enclosures when facing the risk of collision,
while high complexity and reduced payload are recurrent
problems with collision-resilient ﬂying robots. Inspired by
arthropods’ exoskeletons, we design a simple, open source,
easily manufactured, semi-rigid structure with soft joints that
can withstand high-velocity impacts. With an exoskeleton, the
protective shell becomes part of the main robot structure,
thereby minimizing its loss in payload capacity. Our design
is simple to build and customize using cheap components (e.g.
bamboo skewers) and consumer-grade 3D printers. The result
is CogniFly, a sub-250 g autonomous quadcopter that survives
multiple collisions at speeds up to 7 m s−1. In addition to its
collision-resilience, CogniFly carries sensors that allow it to ﬂy
for approx. 17 min without the need of GPS or an external
motion capture system, and it has enough computing power
to run deep neural network models on-board. This structure
becomes an ideal platform for high-risk activities, such as
ﬂying in a cluttered environment or reinforcement learning
training, by dramatically reducing the risks of damaging its own
hardware or the environment. Source code, 3D ﬁles, instructions
and videos are available (open source license) through the
project’s website: https://thecogniﬂy.github.io.

I. INTRODUCTION

The world is an unforgiving place and any robot will
sooner or later face a collision. Complex sensors and com-
putational methods are usually employed to avoid collisions,
while nature takes a different approach and, in many cases,
animals embrace collisions instead of avoiding them. One ex-
ample of such amazing behaviour comes from a well known
arthropod: the cockroach. This undervalued insect is capable
of achieving faster direction transitions by hitting its head
against walls [1]. Arthropods’ collision-resilience results
from the presence of jointed appendages, body segmentation
and a nonliving external skeleton, called an exoskeleton. An
exoskeleton has a dual purpose: it works as support and
protective structure. Nevertheless, it is not necessarily fully
rigid, mixing stiff segments connected by soft joints [2].

Uncrewed [3], [4] Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) can take ad-
vantage of collisions, too. This idea was shown to reduce
the control complexity when ﬂying surrounded by trees [5],
only using the sense of touch [6], and to go through conﬁned
spaces by crashing onto each other and the environment [7].
Recent studies have presented contact–based navigation [8]
and even a complete collision inertial odometry algorithm
that uses collisions [9]. Collision tolerance also was proved
useful for reinforcement learning using real robots [10].

1MISTLab, ´Ecole Polytechnique de Montr´eal, Montr´eal, Canada
Contact: ricardo.azambuja@gmail.com.

Fig. 1: CogniFly (A, B and C) is a small, under-250 g, open
source collision-resilient quadcopter. Its frame mixes soft
(red) and rigid (black/gray) parts, allowing it to better absorb
and distribute impact energy.

Looking at solutions provided by nature, arthropods can
be a rich source of inspiration for innovative UAV designs.
A structure inspired by their exoskeletons could replace a
traditional cage by mixing rigidity with ﬂexibility to absorb
collision energy and protect sensitive components. For a
UAV,
this would increase its maximum payload (useful
weight it can carry), since frame and cage are now fused,
and it could allow to more easily physically interact with
the environment.

In this paper, we present the CogniFly (Fig. 1): a small
size, sub-250 g and collision resilient quadcopter. Inspired
by arthropods’ exoskeletons, it uses a semi-rigid structure
with soft joints fusing frame and protective cage, thus pro-
viding protection against collisions and helping to maintain
the structural integrity of the quadcopter. The CogniFly is
designed with indoors, outdoors and subterranean exploration
in mind. The main requirements for our quadcopter design
i) Small form factor and weight (sub-250 g), for
were:
enhanced ability of exploring relatively narrow spaces, and
easier handling and logistics ii) Enough computational power
to carry out on-board image processing from its own camera

 
 
 
 
 
 
absorption for force components perpendicular (rigid cages)
or aligned (rigid and soft cages) to the axis of rotation as
the internal structures are connected to the cage using rigid
parts.

Researchers have been trying to improve collision re-
silience for UAVs using different strategies than traditional
rigid cages. Carbon ﬁbre structures are usually popular with
drone frame designers because of their steel-like stiffness.
However, it is also possible to take advantage of their elastic
behaviour (Euler springs [16]) to design ﬂexible protective
[6], [16], [17]). In fact, many cage designs
cages (e.g.
that don’t even claim impact energy absorption share the
same elastic behaviour,
to a certain extent, as they are
made of long, curved carbon ﬁbre parts (e.g. [5], [12], [13],
[18]). Nevertheless, the high strength of carbon ﬁbre limits
its stand-alone energy absorption applications to very long
and thin struts [19], creating a problem when the focus is
designing small-sized UAVs.

Structures protecting UAVs are usually made of rigid
materials, but that is not vital, and even Expanded Polypropy-
lene (EPP) can be used for collision resilience [10]. A
weakness of materials like EPP is the low stiffness to weight
ratio that makes such materials too heavy for high-energy
impacts [16]. In addition to EPP, soft protective structures
for UAVs can use different materials. By precision laser-
cutting and folding very thin plastic sheets it is possible to
build simple bumpers [20] or an origami rotatory bumper for
impacts up to 2m/s [21].

The weight of a UAV can vary from a few grams to
kilograms. While a pico drone weighs as few as 25 g [7], the
total mass of a more complex drone using gimbals protecting
each propeller easily reaches more than 2 kg when the
batteries are included [14]. Still, many regulatory agencies
take the 250 g value as the limit for UAVs to be considered
safe.

Weight reduction is a simple collision resilience strat-
egy [1], [7], but small weight and size comes with disadvan-
tages such as smaller motors, limiting payload and ability to
counter disturbances. Reduced payload also restricts battery
size, computational power and ultimately many interesting
applications.

A ﬂexible frame that is capable of absorbing energy during
a collision while protecting sensitive parts, by changing its
shape or employing non-destructive deformation, is a very
interesting option for collision resilient drones. However,
previous strategies based on ﬂexible frames (e.g. [19], [22],
[23]) make it very difﬁcult for the UAV to instantly recover
from a hard collision because they all lead to an inevitable
fall to the ground as they automatically fold or disconnect
the motors.

One advantage of ﬂexible frames without guards or a cage
to keep propellers from touching obstacles (e.g. [19], [23])
is the increase in payload capability. However, unprotected
propellers do not allow UAVs to physically interact with the
external world, even considering the use of special ﬂexible
propellers [24], as the decrease in thrust and torque from a
bent propeller could easily destabilize the UAV.

Fig. 2: Bamboo version (top right), using lighter parts
optimized for ﬂight time (up to 17 min using 1404/3000KV
motors, 4” propellers and 2S 2000mAh LiPo battery).

using deep neural network models. iii) Open source design
focused on hobby grade 3D printers, and a software base
that is easy to interact with. iv) Easy access to the battery to
pave the way for automated battery swapping.1.

As an open source project, we consider having a customiz-
able and easy to fabricate or repair design is paramount.
Thus, it relies on readily available carbon ﬁbre rods, or even
bamboo skewers (Fig. 2) for an even cheaper implementa-
tion2, and 3D printed parts that are simple, small and easy
to print.

CogniFly’s exoskeleton provides protection for sensitive
integrity for the quadcopter, and
components, structural
effective passive damping of impacts. To test its collision
resilience, we run crash-landing experiments and compare
to a rigid counterpart. Using these data, we model our
exoskeleton as linear viscoelastic components (Kelvin-Voigt
model [1]) resulting in a lumped mass-spring-damper model
that allows us to study the collision viability of the drone,
and the role of different materials and conﬁgurations in the
future.

Finally, we provide a Python library, as well as Buzz [11]
language extension, for easy programming. The latest version
of CogniFly is able to ﬂy autonomously for up to 17 min, and
run algorithms, such as deep neural network object detectors,
despite of its small size and sub-250 g weight. The CogniFly
opens the doors for potential applications like agriculture,
subterranean exploration, drone swarming and many others.

II. RELATED WORK

In general, the main strategy to endow UAV designs with
collision resilience has been the simple addition of external
protective structures like cages and bumpers (e.g. [5], [8],
[12], [13]). These structures evolved into designs that al-
lowed some level of movement to avoid external disturbances
like a sphere containing a gimbal or a cylinder capable of
rolling around its main axis (e.g. [5], [9], [13]–[15]), but
those design choices have some drawbacks like increased
weight, mechanical complexity, and a general lack of energy

1The battery swapping system is the subject of currently ongoing research.
2All crash test data and models are based on the carbon ﬁbre rod version.

Fig. 3: First, top and bottom are built (A). Corners are
inserted and both sides are connected (B) and folded (C).
Finally, arms and extra dampening struts are attached (D).

Fig. 4: Comparison between the equivalent x-frame (A/B)
and the full frame (C/D). The x-frame (B) bends 4x more
than the full frame (D) for the same throttle value.

Although other designs [15], [25], [26] share some char-
acteristics also seen in the CogniFly, they do not employ
a truly ﬂexible exoskeleton. Some designs have external
tensegrity structures where soft, ﬂexible parts are used to
connect more rigid components to form a ﬂexible protective
cage, but [15] uses a rigid rotating axis at its center, and
[26] a rigid quadcopter x-frame, making those two UAVs
only ﬂexible to the extent of their cages. The cargo drone
from [25], according to the publicly available information,
is fully ﬂexible only in its folded conﬁguration (for storage)
as the quadcopter arms are secured together (screw system)
before ﬂight transforming the arms into a rigid x-frame.

Only a few previous works explored truly ﬂexible frames,
where the UAV arms holding the motors are not rigidly con-
nected to the central part of the frame (e.g. [19], [20], [23]),
but the ﬂexible arms mainly offer protection against in-plane
collisions while leaving propellers mostly exposed (hindering
the ability to physically interact with the external world [19],
[23], or protecting propellers in only one plane [20], and
they are not easy to manufacture without special materials
or tools. Still, collision-resilient works under 250 g show bare
minimum payload capacity, restricting their on-board compu-
tational power and their ability to ﬂy autonomously without
an external computer or motion capture system. Finally,
their batteries are designed to be manually connected and
extracted by human hands, making the use of an automatic
battery swapping station very unlikely.

From all previous collision-resilient UAV designs, only
a few manage to keep the total weight below the 250 g
threshold (e.g. [7], [19]–[21], [23]), and, besides [20], those
employ high-speed coreless brushed DC motors, limiting
their payload,
time and lifespan [27]. More-
over, those sub-250 g UAVs have a very limited maximum
payload, on-board computing (if any) and sensing capacity,
requiring external control and/or an external motion capture
systems.

total ﬂight

III. UAV DESIGN

A. Structural design

In our design, we opt for a structure, loosely inspired by
arthropods’ exoskeletons, mixing rigid and soft components.
The fragile on-board electronics are mounted on rigid parts

(3D printed in ABS, black or PLA, gray, Figs. 1 and 2) that
are placed at the central gap of the exoskeleton (Fig. 3-D).
However, these rigid 3D printed parts are connected to the
exoskeleton using ﬂexible joints (red and blue parts, Fig. 1,
2 and 3). Moreover, we mount the motors on special ﬂexible
parts to allow them to ﬂex during impacts.

The exoskeleton (Fig. 3-D), that can be made of carbon
ﬁbre (Fig. 1) or bamboo (Fig. 2), gives the quadcopter a ﬁnal
box-like external shape. By having ﬂat-like external faces,
our quadcopter can take advantage of its collision resilience
to easily align itself against external structures that are big
enough compared to the gaps between the outermost rods.

To control where the parts should bend, we designed
3D printed soft
the rigid parts of
joints to interconnect
the exoskeleton (see detail in Fig. 3-A). These joints use
ﬂexible ﬁlament (TPU 95A), providing sufﬁcient damping
for impacts, and helping CogniFly survive impacts at speeds
up to 7 m s−1 (carbon ﬁbre version, Fig. 1). TPU 95A enables
the drone to be generally ﬂexible, as shown in Fig. 1-C, while
keeping the integrity of its central rigid part. The choice
of the exoskeleton dimensions becomes a trade-off between
reducing the probability of direct impact on sensitive com-
ponents and general total size and weight. In the case of
CogniFly, we wanted to make it small enough to ﬁt in a
standard backpack, thus it measures only 210 x210 x120 mm.
The ﬁnal weight distribution for the carbon ﬁbre version:
i) Exoskeleton shown in Fig. 3-D: 62 g. ii) Central ABS
parts: 25 g. iii) Quadcopter without battery (Fig 1-C): 178 g.
iv) Battery: 58 g. Total weight (178 g+58 g): 236 g.

To visualize the importance of the exoskeleton for load
distribution, Fig. 4 shows two conﬁgurations under full
thrust and rigidly attached to the desk only by the battery
holder: with (full frame, Fig. 4-C and D) and without (x-
frame, Fig. 4-A and B) the external protective parts of the
exoskeleton.

B. Manufacturability

The main aspects for assessing the manufacturability that
we adopt are: i) Accessibility to different structural com-
ponents. ii) Required manufacturing processes and facilities.
iii) Cost. The main components of the exoskeleton are carbon
ﬁbre or bamboo rods and joints made of TPU 95A (Fig. 3).

sign (Fig. 1), and record the results as absolute acceleration
(Eq. 1) to avoid the need of a complex guiding/alignment
system that would be otherwise necessary to isolate indi-
vidual axis during the experiments. These tests highlight the
ability of our ﬂexible exoskeleton to absorb impact energy by
comparing the acceleration recorded from a CogniFly made
with carbon ﬁbre rods (Fig.1, 241 g when ﬁtted with the
datalogger) and only the rigid central part of the frame, which
holds the ﬂight controller, single-board computer, sensors
and the battery, made entirely of ABS (a bag of loose screws
was added to reach 239 g).

|acc| =

(cid:113)

accx

2 + accy

2 + accz

2

(1)

We reckon a vertical free fall to be a critical scenario
as we consider payload contact with hard exterior objects,
like the ground, has the highest potential of causing damage
because the absolute acceleration (Eq. 1) peaks in such cases.
Moreover, the battery is located at the bottom part of the
drone, and it should not be subjected to extreme loads.

Acceleration values saved by ﬂight controllers are usually
limited to ±16G with heavy ﬁltering smoothing any peaks,
therefore, we use a custom datalogger for our experiments.
Our datalogger setup has an accelerometer (ADXL377, 3-
Axis, ±200G, 500 Hz) rigidly attached to the center of the
frame, and a Feather M0 Express running a custom ﬁrmware
for sampling (1kHz) the sensor and saving the data.

A. Mass-spring-damper model

We model the impact absorbing aspect of the CogniFly
as linear viscoelastic components (Kelvin-Voigt model [1])
resulting in a lumped mass-spring-damper system that is
described by

m¨x + c ˙x + kx = F

(2)

where m > 0 is the mass of the drone, and c > 0 and
k > 0 are the equivalent damping and stiffness coefﬁcients,
respectively. Moreover, we augment the model with a ﬁrst
order Butterworth low-pass ﬁlter with a cutoff frequency of
500 Hz to take into account the sampling latency of our
accelerometer setup.

To ﬁnd the parameters, we put Eq. 2 in the following form

m

(cid:21)

(cid:21)

(cid:21)

F

=

+

(3)

(cid:20) ˙x
˙v

(cid:21) (cid:20)x
v

(cid:20) 0
− k

1
m − c

(cid:20) 0
1
m
lsim to solve
and then use Scipy signal processing tool
the system (3) to obtain the velocity and displacement of
the payload’s centre of gravity as a function of the initial
displacement (x0), velocity (v0), and the parameters k, c to
be estimated. In order to model the conditions at moment
of impact, we set the external force F to gravity (mg), the
initial displacement to zero and the initial velocity to the
value of velocity just before impact (without air drag).

The equivalent stiffness k was obtained by deforming
the payload to a known displacement, while measuring
the applied force. From these data, we ﬁt a linear model
constrained to the minimum force before any deformation
could be measured (x = 0mm and F = mg = 2.36N ).

Fig. 5: The model is valid from the moment the exoskeleton
touches the ﬂoor (x0 = 0mm and v0 =
2 ∗ g ∗ h, where h
is the drop altitude) until x = 16mm and the battery collides.

√

Carbon ﬁbre rods are cheap, readily available, easy to cut
and modify, and there are several examples of previous works
using carbon ﬁbre rods in UAVs (e.g.
[5], [16], [26]). On
top of that, our design allows the use of bamboo rods (BBQ
skewers, Fig. 2), at the expense of lower impact resistance.
A low-cost desktop 3D printer (Monoprice Mini v2) was
used for all parts, hence we were constrained to small and
simple parts, and all ﬂexible parts are printed ﬂat and without
supports. Moreover, we took advantage of the TPU95A
ﬂexibility and designed the parts to work as living hinges
and bend (Fig. 3-A) or snap-ﬁt as the drone is assembled.

C. On-board hardware and software tools

CogniFly uses as its main controller a single-board com-
puter running Linux. Additionally, a cheap and popular ﬂight
controller (e.g. Kakute F7 Mini) running our customized
version of iNAV takes care of lower level ﬂight control tasks.
For running deep neural models on-board, CogniFly offers
three possible conﬁgurations: two using the Raspberry Pi
Zero W as its high level controller together with Google
AIY Vision or Coral USB; a third option uses only a Google
Coral Dev Mini board.

In addition to a normal camera, CogniFly carries Optical
Flow (PMW3901) and Time-of-Flight (VL53L0X) sensors,
thus allowing it to navigate autonomously.

Finally, we developed open source tools to allow Cog-
niFly to operate autonomously and run complex DCNN
models (YAMSPy), to be remote controlled from an external
computer (cogniﬂy-python), mocap extension for iNAV, and
swarm experiments using Buzz [11] (cogniﬂy-buzz).

IV. COLLISION RESILIENCE EXPERIMENTS

We perform a

fall)
tests (Fig. 5), using the carbon ﬁbre version of our de-

crash-landing (free

series of

Fig. 6: Energy distribution according our model.

The equivalent damping c is estimated by minimizing
the Mean Square Error between the mass-spring-damper
model (Eq. 2), after passing through the low-pass ﬁlter, and
the collected acceleration data from the end of the free fall
until the peak of the measured absolute acceleration (Eq. 1)
for all experiments (50, 100 and 150 cm). However, as the
number of trials for each experiment is different (101, 97 and
89, respectively), the ﬁnal value is weighted accordingly.

Minimization was carried out using Scipy Optimize mini-
mize, with Nelder-Mead method, default arguments, cauchy
loss (L(z) = ln(1 + z)), and initial values of c = 50 and
k = 7040. It resulted in the coefﬁcients c = 46.32 and
k = 6996.12. However, as the calculated value for k was very
close to the static one experimentally measured, we adopted
the coefﬁcients c = 46 and k = 7040 for our model.

We use the proposed model to calculate the percentages of
the energy that go into different parts of the system during
the impact, which is depicted in Fig. 6. To construct such
plot, we consider the kinetic energy (Ek = 1
2 mv2) at the
beginning of the impact (end of the free fall) as being the
total energy of the system. Therefore, we have two possible
situations: the battery holder never touches the ground (x <
16mm) or the payload hits the ground (x ≥ 16mm).

When x < 16mm (drop altitudes up to 100cm), the ﬁnal
kinetic energy at the point of maximum displacement is zero
(the movement is about to reverse) and the total energy
is split between stored in the spring (Es = 1
2 kx2) and
dissipated by the damper (Ed = Ek − Es).

Our mass-spring-damper-model

is not valid for direct
collisions between the battery holder and the ground (drop
altitudes from 150 cm and above) and it is only valid until
x < 16mm. Therefore, in these situations we calculate the
energy dissipated by the damper considering the difference
between the initial kinetic energy (Ek) and the kinetic energy
when x = 16mm. This way, we know, in the worst scenario,
the energy that will be dissipated during the rigid collision
(battery holder hits the ground) will be the same as the
kinetic energy available at x = 16mm (represented by the
red bars in Fig.6) to show the severity of the impact to the
ground.

B. Experimental Results

Fig. 7: Experimental crash landing peak acceleration data..

1) Impact testing: We carry out the tests at three different
altitudes: 50 cm, 100 cm and 150 cm. To obtain usable data
and avoid irreparable damage to the rigid version tested, we
had to limit its free fall to 30 cm. Fig. 7 shows that the
median of the absolute acceleration (Eq. 1) peak values for
the rigid frame falling from 30 cm is higher than that of the
CogniFly falling from 150 cm. This strongly suggests our
exoskeleton design is more capable of dissipating impacts
than a rigid structure made of ABS plastic with a smaller
weight.

As a ﬁnal experiment, we tested CogniFly (carbon ﬁbre
rods) by dropping it from the maximum altitude our exper-
imental setup allowed us (literally, our ceiling). CogniFly
falls from 262 cm, without suffering any damage (speed at
impact of approximately 7 m s−1). Compared to some of the
latest works on collision resilience UAVs with equivalent size
and weight [19], [21], [22], [26], CogniFly reaches a higher
collision speed without suffering any damage.

2) Maximum absolute acceleration: One of the main uses
of the exoskeleton is to provide protection against high
acceleration (deceleration) values to vulnerable components
during impacts. To simplify the necessary experimental
setup, the main criterion we adopt is the maximum absolute
acceleration during a vertical free fall impact (i.e. crash
landing) Fig. 5.

In addition to surviving falls, during pilot tests (see video)
our ﬂexible exoskeleton showed the ability to withstand in-
ﬂight frontal (vertical) collisions. Unlike [19], [23], where
the drone has to land before it is able to ﬂy again because
its motors are disconnected from the main body during
collisions, CogniFly keeps ﬂying (e.g. bouncing off walls).
3) Mass-spring-damper model: We model the CogniFly
with its exoskeleton structure as a mass-spring-damper sys-
tem (Fig. 5), with the aim of predicting the distribution
of energy stored and dissipated (Fig. 6), as well as the
displacement of the main payload after the beginning of the
impact until the point the acceleration reaches its maximum
value (Fig. 9).

We assess our model by comparing the accelerometer
data against the values of acceleration we predict (Fig. 8).
Accelerations are used because it is challenging to devise
an affordable and reliable method for measuring the dis-
placement of the center of gravity during impact, while
we have easy access to precise accelerometer data. From

V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we introduce a new collision resilient quad-
copter design inspired by the ﬂexible exoskeleton of arthro-
pods, fusing the protective cage and the main frame in one
semi-rigid structure with soft joints that can withstand high-
velocity impacts. Our UAV (CogniFly, Fig. 1) weighs under
250 g and blends rigid and soft materials, giving the ﬁnal
structure the ability to absorb and dissipate impact energy,
while still being sufﬁciently stiff to fulﬁll its mission. Thanks
to its exoskeleton, it is possible to save precious weight when
compared to a traditional protective cage design.

CogniFly survived multiple collisions at speeds up to
7 m s−1 while carrying enough computing power to run deep
neural network models. Throughout a series of simple crash-
landing experiments (Fig. 5), we show CogniFly withstands
up to a ﬁve fold increase in the maximum collision energy
when compared to a rigid system (3D printed on ABS)
of similar weight. Moreover, we employ the experimental
that
data to create a lumped mass-spring-damper model
allows us to extrapolate the results to untested cases while
the calculated damping and stiffness can be used to better
understand the role of different materials or conﬁgurations.
We also make available software to allow easy of use and
customization.

We designed CogniFly from the ground up for easy man-
ufacturing and it can be built using a very small consumer-
grade 3D printer, in addition to inexpensive off-the-shelf
parts. The design of the drone itself was restricted by
maximum weight (below 250 g) and size (ﬁts in a backpack,
Fig. 1-B). Also, considering that batteries correspond to 33%
of UAV’s total mass on average [27], its battery holder and
lid were designed to enable easy manipulation of batteries,
which we plan as being a stepping stone towards design-
ing small-sized portable battery swap stations for extended
energy autonomy.

As an interesting side effect, we noticed an increased
life span of the propellers used during our experiments.
Throughout a period of around one year crashing prototypes
against walls, furniture and ﬂoors, we only used two sets
of propellers (Gemfan 3025 3X2.5, Polycarbonate) with
the second set seen in Fig.1. One explanation for that is
the ﬂexibility of CogniFly’s exoskeleton. Even the motors
themselves are mounted on parts 3D printed in ﬂexible
ﬁlament, increasing the time of impact and reducing forces,
resulting in longer life spans for propellers.

Future work possibilities would be extending the model
to take into account collisions from other directions, study
which components or buiding methods contribute the most
for the impact energy absorption, tune the design of the soft
parts to improve its collision resilience, verify the effectivi-
ness of the use of a ﬂexible net, and analyze the impact of not
being strictly stiff in the power consumption and dynamic
reactions during ﬂight. Ultimately, fatigue probably plays
an important role in the structure’s lifespan because some
parts work as living hinges. Therefore, this would be another
interesting topic to be further studied.

Fig. 8: Raw measurements vs. our model.

Fig. 9: Predicted displacements
tions (right) without low-pass ﬁlter and no ridig impacts.

and accelera-

(left)

a simple visual inspection of Fig. 8, the predicted values
follow the same trend as the experimental data (mean) for
valid displacements (x < 16mm, vertical dashed black line).

Since the main motivation behind the model is to predict
the most critical failure mode (i.e. battery holder direct
hit), Fig. 9 shows the predicted payload’s centre of gravity
displacement. The allowable displacement for crash-landing
experiments presented in this paper (i.e. maximum distance
before the battery holder hits the ground) is 16 mm, and
Fig. 9 predicts direct impacts on the battery holder for falls
from altitudes ≥150 cm, matching experimental results.

One of the uses for the ﬁnal mass-spring-damper model
is to analyse the energy distribution in different parts of
the drone for different altitudes, with the ability to, even if
roughly, predict such distribution for higher altitudes (Fig. 6).
We show the kinetic energy at impact is distributed in differ-
ent components: stored in the spring (in blue), dissipated by
the damper (in green), and the remaining energy that goes
into rigid collision (in red) for higher altitudes when the
payload displacement is beyond the safe allowable value.

For altitudes below 150 cm, Fig. 6 shows that the total
kinetic energy is divided only between the damper and the
spring, while for higher altitudes the amount of energy that
goes into what we call here rigid collision increases with
altitude. Such collision energy can give an indication of how
strong the impact between payload and ground is, helping to
decide how far the operational altitude can be pushed.

[19] S. Mintchev, S. de Rivaz, and D. Floreano, “Insect-inspired mechanical
resilience for multicopters,” IEEE Robotics and automation letters,
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1248–1255, 2017.

[20] L. Dilavero˘glu and O. ¨Ozcan, “Minicore: A miniature, foldable, colli-
sion resilient quadcopter,” in 2020 3rd IEEE International Conference
on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft), 2020, pp. 176–181.

[21] P. Sareh, P. Chermprayong, M. Emmanuelli, H. Nadeem, and M. Ko-
vac, “Rotorigami: A rotary origami protective system for robotic
rotorcraft,” Science Robotics, vol. 3, no. 22, 2018.

[22] J. Shu and P. Chirarattananon, “A quadrotor with an origami-inspired
protective mechanism,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 4,
no. 4, pp. 3820–3827, 2019.

[23] S. Mintchev, J. Shintake, and D. Floreano, “Bioinspired dual-stiffness

origami,” Science Robotics, vol. 3, no. 20, 2018.

[24] J. Jang, K. Cho, and G.-H. Yang, “Design and experimental study of
dragonﬂy-inspired ﬂexible blade to improve safety of drones,” IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 4200–4207, 2019.
[25] P. M. Kornatowski, S. Mintchev, and D. Floreano, “An origami-
inspired cargo drone,” in 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 6855–6862.
[26] J. Zha, X. Wu, J. Kroeger, N. Perez, and M. W. Mueller, “A collision-
resilient aerial vehicle with icosahedron tensegrity structure,” in 2020
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), 2020, pp. 1407–1412.

[27] Y. Mulgaonkar, M. Whitzer, B. Morgan, C. M. Kroninger, A. M.
Harrington, and V. Kumar, “Power and weight considerations in small,
agile quadrotors,” in Micro-and Nanotechnology Sensors, Systems, and
Applications VI, vol. 9083.
International Society for Optics and
Photonics, 2014, p. 90831Q.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank the ﬁnancial support received
from IVADO (postdoctoral scholarship 2019/2020) and the
productive discussions and help received from current and
past students and interns from MISTLab.

REFERENCES

[1] K. Jayaram, J.-M. Mongeau, A. Mohapatra, P. Birkmeyer, R. S.
Fearing, and R. J. Full, “Transition by head-on collision: Mechanically
mediated manoeuvres in cockroaches and small robots,” Journal of the
Royal Society Interface, vol. 15, no. 139, p. 20170664, 2018.

[2] M. A. Clark, J. H. Choi, and M. Douglas, Biology 2e. OpenStax

College, Rice University, 2018.

[3] S. Garber, “Style guide for nasa history authors and editors,” National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, 2012, accessed: 2022-02-17.
[Online]. Available: https://history.nasa.gov/styleguide.html

[4] M. Koren, “The outdated language of space travel,” Jul 2019, accessed:
2022-02-17. [Online]. Available: https://www.theatlantic.com/science/
archive/2019/07/manned-spaceﬂight-nasa/594835/

[5] A. Briod, P. Kornatowski, J.-C. Zufferey, and D. Floreano, “A
collision-resilient ﬂying robot,” Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 31,
no. 4, pp. 496–509, 2014.

[6] A. Briod, P. Kornatowski, A. Klaptocz, A. Garnier, M. Pagnamenta,
J.-C. Zufferey, and D. Floreano, “Contact-based navigation for an
autonomous ﬂying robot,” in 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems.

IEEE, 2013, pp. 3987–3992.

[7] Y. Mulgaonkar, A. Makineni, L. Guerrero-Bonilla, and V. Kumar, “Ro-
bust aerial robot swarms without collision avoidance,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 596–603, 2018.

[8] N. Khedekar, F. Mascarich, C. Papachristos, T. Dang, and K. Alexis,
“Contact-based navigation path planning for aerial robots,” in 2019
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE,
2019, pp. 4161–4167.

[9] T. Lew, T. Emmei, D. D. Fan, T. Bartlett, A. Santamaria-Navarro,
R. Thakker, and A.-a. Agha-mohammadi, “Contact inertial odometry:
Collisions are your friend,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.00079, 2019.

[10] D. Gandhi, L. Pinto, and A. Gupta, “Learning to ﬂy by crashing,” in
2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 3948–3955.
[11] C. Pinciroli and G. Beltrame, “Buzz: An extensible programming
language for heterogeneous swarm robotics,” in 2016 IEEE/RSJ Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2016,
pp. 3794–3800.

[12] A.-a. Agha-mohammadi, A. Tagliabue, S. Schneider, B. Morrell,
M. Pavone, J. Hofgartner, I. A. Nesnas, R. B. Amini, A. Kalantari,
A. Babuscia et al., “The shapeshifter: a morphing, multi-agent, multi-
modal robotic platform for the exploration of titan (preprint version),”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.08293, 2020.

[13] A. Kalantari and M. Spenko, “Design and experimental validation
of hytaq, a hybrid terrestrial and aerial quadrotor,” in 2013 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
IEEE, 2013,
pp. 4445–4450.

[14] C. J. Salaan, K. Tadakuma, Y. Okada, Y. Sakai, K. Ohno, and
S. Tadokoro, “Development and experimental validation of aerial
vehicle with passive rotating shell on each rotor,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 2568–2575, 2019.

[15] S. Mintchev, D. Zappetti, J. Willemin, and D. Floreano, “A soft robot
for random exploration of terrestrial environments,” in 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE,
2018, pp. 7492–7497.

[16] A. Klaptocz, A. Briod, L. Daler, J.-C. Zufferey, and D. Floreano,
“Euler spring collision protection for ﬂying robots,” in 2013 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems.
IEEE,
2013, pp. 1886–1892.

[17] A. Briod, A. Klaptocz, J.-C. Zufferey, and D. Floreano, “The airburr:
A ﬂying robot that can exploit collisions,” in 2012 ICME International
Conference on Complex Medical Engineering (CME).
IEEE, 2012,
pp. 569–574.

[18] C. J. O. Salaan, Y. Okada, S. Mizutani, T. Ishii, K. Koura, K. Ohno,
and S. Tadokoro, “Close visual bridge inspection using a uav with a
passive rotating spherical shell,” Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 35,
no. 6, pp. 850–867, 2018.

