1
2
0
2

y
a
M
8
2

]

V
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
0
9
3
1
.
5
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

TRAINING OF SSD(SINGLE SHOT DETECTOR) FOR FACIAL
DETECTION USING NVIDIA JETSON NANO

A PREPRINT

Saif Ur Rehman

saifurrehman4114@gmail.com

Muhamamd Rashid Razzaq
mrashidrazzaq143@gmail.com

Muhammad Hadi Hussian

hadihussain76@yahoo.com

May 31, 2021

ABSTRACT

In this project we have used computer vision algorithm SSD (Single Shot detector) computer vision
algorithm and trained this algorithm from the dataset which consists of 139 Pictures. Images were
labeled using Intel CVAT (Computer Vision Annotation Tool)

We trained this model for facial detection. We have deployed our trained model and software in
NVIDIA Jetson Nano Developer kit. Model code is written in Pytorch deep learning framework.
Programming language used is Python.

1

Introduction

We are using NVIDIA Jetson Nano Developer kit as our accelerator system.Which will contain Docker Container which
will contain the dataset and trained model SSD (Single Shot Detector) MobileNetV2 which we will be used to for facial
detection.

Video would be recorded through the Camera attached to the accelerator system. Code of the SSD (Single Shot
Detector) MobileNetV2 is written in Python Programming Language and Deep learning framework which has been
used is PyTorch.To optimized the neural network layers.NVIDIA TensorRT is used for faster Inference during the run
time. NVIDIA TensorRT is built on the NVIDIA CUDA for parallel computing.

2 Related Work

Our Project is related to deep learning which have revolutionized the domain of AI.A subdomain of Machine Learning
is deep learning. Deep learning means that you give data to the deep learning models to get the features of the data to
train the model which could then be used for inference for unseen data that’s how the deep learning model is trained.

Deep learning ﬁeld made it’s when convolutional neural network Ima was trained to categorize the images in the
ImageNet LSVRC-2010 contest.

These days deep learning is being utilized everywhere from data science, big data, Image Classiﬁcation, Image
Segmentation, natural language processing, robotics, computer vision e.t.c

Deep learning models architectures have the input layer which is used to take the input data then the hidden layers
which have perceptrons whose nodes are interconnected to each other to extract the features from the input data then
the output layer comes in which is used to output the result it is also called the inference layer.

In our project we are using SSD deep learning model which is faster and accurate with smaller dataset then the RNN
and FRCNN. When we compare the FRCNN 150 with SSD 151 that SSD has a 76.9% mAP which was trained on
PASCAL VOC citeThePasca65:online,COCO COC,and ILSVRC Russakovsky et al. [2015] datasets individually to
prove that the FRCNN which is 66% mAP trained on PASCAL is less accurate and faster.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Training of SSD(Single Shot Detector) for Facial Detection using Nvidia Jetson Nano

A PREPRINT

3 History Of Computer Vision

Marvin Minsky made the ﬁrst attempt to copy the human brain more than 50 years ago, making further research into the
ability of computers to interpret knowledge to make wise decisions. The method of automating image processing has
resulted in the programming of algorithms over the years. However, although there was acceleration in deep learning
methods, it was only from 2010 onwards. Google Brain developed a neural network of 16,000 computer processors in
2012 that could recognize images of cats.

With the internet being a backbone, computer scientists have gained access to more knowledge than ever before. As
costs of computer hardware continued to declined and improve. In the 1980s-90s, basic neural networks and algorithms
emerged. The ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence, now more than half a century old, ﬁnally had its breakthrough moment at
the.

The ILSVRC is an annual competition for image classiﬁcation where research teams test their algorithms on the given
data set, and then compete on multiple visual recognition tasks to achieve greater accuracy. A University of Toronto
team then joined a deep neural network called AlexNet in 2012, making innovation for artiﬁcial intelligence and
computer vision.

4 Tensorﬂow and PyTorch

Famous deep learning libraries are Tensorﬂow and PyTorch.Both Tensorﬂow and PyTorch are open-source. Tensorﬂow
is primarily establish on Theano and has been originated from Google, while PyTorch is establish on Torch and has
been originated from Facebook.

Critical distinction among them is the way they deﬁne the computational graphs. even as Tensorﬂow builds a static
graph, PyTorch builds a dynamic graph.

PyTorch is more python favourite and AI models is easier to in it. However, for the usage of Tensorﬂow you may need
to take training.

PyTorch changed in 2016 with the aid of facebook’s AI research lab. because it is normally intended for use in python,
however it has a C++ interface. TensorFlow supports many programming.

TensorFlow uses TensorBoard for visualizing neural network.PyTorch on the other hand do not have a visualization
feature.They uses Python packages for plotting.

PyTorch is the standard deep learning framework library for researchers, TensorFlow is preferred in commercial side.
TensorFlow extensions for deployment on each servers and smartphone make this the desired alternative for teams that
work with deep learning.

5 Convolutional Neural Network

An artiﬁcial neural network was inspired from the network of neurons present in the human brain. At each layer of
artiﬁcial neural network input data is weights of previous artiﬁcial neural network is summed. Features of the input is
taken out and prediction is made in the ﬁnal layer.

The convolution operation speciﬁc to CNNs combines the input data from one layer with a convolution ﬁlter to make a
feature map for next layer. CNNs for image classiﬁcation are generally composed of an input layer (the image), a series
of hidden layers for feature extraction (the convolutions), and a fully connected output layer (the classiﬁcation). Deep
learning relies on Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) models to transform images into predicted classiﬁcations. A
CNN is a class of artiﬁcial neural network that is made of convolutional layers which extract the features from the input
data, and is preferred network for image applications

As it is trained, the CNN adjusts automatically to ﬁnd the most relevant features based on its classiﬁcation requirements.

5.1 Single Shot Detector

By using SSD 151, we only uses one single shot to get objects in the image.On the other hand regional proposal network
(RPN) based models require two shots.

Implementing SSD in PyTorch for object detection, uses MobileNet backbones. SSD was released at 2016 and made
improvements in object detection tasks with high accuracy, reaching over 74 mAP at 59 frames per second on datasets
such as PascalVOC and COCO.

2

Training of SSD(Single Shot Detector) for Facial Detection using Nvidia Jetson Nano

A PREPRINT

Figure 1: Processing of an Image in an Convolutional Neural Network art

Figure 2: Convolutional Neural Network Architecture con

SSD do object detection and classiﬁcation of it in the single forward pass.Detector is used to detect and distinguish
the objetcs. Conﬁdence Loss means how much sure network is sure about the detected object in the bounding box.
Location Loss how much network prediction is away from training set prediction.

Features maps represents the major features in the Image. Multibox technique helps us to to detect the objects very
clearly.

The authors of SSD 151 argue that data augmentation is very important to improve the accuracy of the model.

Figure 3: SSD Architecture ssd

3

Training of SSD(Single Shot Detector) for Facial Detection using Nvidia Jetson Nano

A PREPRINT

6

Jetson Nano Developer Kit

Nvidia Jetson Nano Developer Board is very useful as it has GPU in it which helps us to run neural networks very fast
for different applications in computer vision or robotics.

Figure 4: Jetson Nano Developer Kit Jet

• GPU 128-core Maxwell

• CPU Quad-core ARM A57 1.43 GHz

• Memory 4 GB 64-bit LPDDR4 25.6 GB/s

• USB 4x USB 3.0, USB 2.0 Micro-B

• Display HDMI and display port

• Serial Communications Protocols GPIO, I2C, I2S, SPI, UART

• Board Power Rating 5V 2A, 5V 4A

• Storage 64GB Solid State Drive (SSD)

• Operating System Ubuntu 18.04

4

Training of SSD(Single Shot Detector) for Facial Detection using Nvidia Jetson Nano

A PREPRINT

7 A4Tech Webcam PK-810G

Anti-glare coating to avoid reﬂections that are disturbing. Capture images of great quality even under low-light
conditions. With no aliasing, intelligent multisampling provides ﬂuent video transmission. Just plug it in and play, no
installation of any software required. Intelligent MultiSampling. Snap Shot Buttom, free webcam driver, USB 2.0,
built-in microphone.

Figure 5: A4Tech Webcam PK-810G Ant

• Resolution: 480P, 640*480 Pixels
• Focus Range: 60cm and Beyond
• Built-in Mic.: 1 Mic.
• Output Video Format: MJPEG
• Frame Rate: 30fps

8 CVAT

CVAT is an open-source tool for annotating digital images and videos. The main function of the application is to provide
users with suitable annotation tools. For that purpose, we designed CVAT as a handy service that has many great
features. CVAT is a browser-based application for both individuals and teams that supports different work scenarios.
The main tasks of supervised machine learning can be divided into three groups:

• Object detection
• Image classiﬁcation
• Image segmentation

CVAT allows you to annotate image/video for each of these cases. Here are some advantages and disadvantages of the
tool.

8.1 Advantages

• Web-based. In this technique Users don’t need to install the CVAT app; User just have to run the tool link in a

browser if user want to create a task or annotate data.

• Collaborative. They can create a public project and split the project work between other users.
• Easy to deploy. CVAT can be deployed in the local network using Docker.
• Deep Learning Deployment Toolkit (Intel® Distribution of OpenVINO™ toolkit element)

5

Training of SSD(Single Shot Detector) for Facial Detection using Nvidia Jetson Nano

A PREPRINT

8.2 Disadvantages

• Limited browser support. CVAT’s users works only on Google Chrome Platform. CVAT is not working in

other browsers, but it may work on Chromium based browsers like a Opera Browser.

• All test have to be done manually, considerably slowing the development process.

9 Our Approach

We trained this computer vision algorithm and deployed in the Jetson Nano.Training took around 2 hours. We were
using it full performance.

Hyperparameter were that we set the epoch at 5 and the iteration was of 2 in each epoch.There was 139 total data
set,validation dataset was around 29, and the training data set was around 110.

Learning rate was of 0.01 of base net layer and of extra layer. There was 3 classes for facial detection Saif, Hadi, and
Rashid. Background is always added by deafult.

Accuracy when tested was approximately 97

Figure 6: Training of SSD Model

10 Conclusion and Future Work

You can see that for facial detection SSD(Single Shot Detector) algorithm is really a great algorithm for facial
detection.It’s accuracy with small dataset and training very quickly makes it’s a very effective algorithm.

Our future work would be used it in a embedded system and utilize it for real world application and solve a real world
problem.

6

Training of SSD(Single Shot Detector) for Facial Detection using Nvidia Jetson Nano

A PREPRINT

Figure 7: Facial Detection

References

Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2012/file/

c399862d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-Paper.pdf. (Accessed on 12/21/2020).

1504.08083.pdf. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1504.08083.pdf. (Accessed on 12/21/2020).
1512.02325.pdf. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1512.02325.pdf. (Accessed on 12/21/2020).
Coco - common objects in context. https://cocodataset.org/#home. (Accessed on 12/21/2020).
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang, Andrej Karpathy,
Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition
Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 115(3):211–252, 2015. doi:10.1007/s11263-015-0816-
y.

artiﬁcial_neural_network.png (624×218). https://developer.nvidia.com/sites/default/files/pictures/

2018/artificial_neural_network.png. (Accessed on 01/05/2021).

convolutional_neural_network.png (560×253).

https://developer.nvidia.com/sites/default/files/

pictures/2018/convolutional_neural_network.png. (Accessed on 01/05/2021).

ssd_architecture.png.

https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wzding/Self_Driving_Car_Nanodegree/

master/Object-Detection/images/ssd_architecture.png. (Accessed on 01/05/2021).

Jetsonnano-devkit_front-top_right_trimmed.jpg (1200×979). https://developer.nvidia.com/sites/default/
files/akamai/embedded/images/jetsonNano/JetsonNano-DevKit_Front-Top_Right_trimmed.jpg.
(Accessed on 01/05/2021).

Anti-glare webcam(pk-810g) |. https://www.a4tech.com/product.aspx?id=127. (Accessed on 01/05/2021).

7

