Counterfactual Analysis of the Impact of the IMF Program on Child Poverty
in the Global-South Region using Causal-Graphical Normalizing Flows

Sourabh Balgi 1 Jose M. Pe ˜na 1 Adel Daoud 2
1 Department of Computer and Information Science (IDA), Link¨oping University, Link¨oping, Sweden
2 Institute for Analytical Sociology (IAS), Link¨oping University, Link¨oping, Sweden
jose.m.pena@liu.se 1

sourabh.balgi@liu.se 1

adel.daoud@liu.se 2

2
2
0
2

b
e
F
7
1

]
I

A
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
9
3
9
0
.
2
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract
This work demonstrates the application of a partic-
ular branch of causal inference and deep learning
models: causal-Graphical Normalizing Flows (c-
GNFs). In a recent contribution, scholars showed
that normalizing ﬂows carry certain properties,
making them particularly suitable for causal and
counterfactual analysis. However, c-GNFs have
only been tested in a simulated data setting and
no contribution to date have evaluated the appli-
cation of c-GNFs on large-scale real-world data.
Focusing on the AI for social good, our study pro-
vides a counterfactual analysis of the impact of
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) program
on child poverty using c-GNFs. The analysis re-
lies on a large-scale real-world observational data:
1,941,734 children under the age of 18, cared for
by 567,344 families residing in the 67 countries
from the Global-South. While the primary ob-
jective of the IMF is to support governments in
achieving economic stability, our results ﬁnd that
an IMF program reduces child poverty as a pos-
itive side-effect by about 1.2±0.24 degree (‘0’
equals no poverty and ‘7’ is maximum poverty).
Thus, our article shows how c-GNFs further the
use of deep learning and causal inference in AI
for social good. It shows how learning algorithms
can be used for addressing the untapped poten-
tial for a signiﬁcant social impact through coun-
terfactual inference at population level (ACE),
sub-population level (CACE), and individual level
(ICE). In contrast to most works that model ACE
or CACE but not ICE, c-GNFs enable personal-
ization using ‘The First Law of Causal Inference’.

1. Introduction

As poverty hinders individuals to ﬂourish, many studies
have deepened our understanding of the causes and conse-
quences that push vulnerable groups such as children into

poverty (Banerjee et al., 2011). However, there is lacking
knowledge about how to optimally tailor public policies
to alleviate poverty for such vulnerable groups in times of
macroeconomic volatility (Haller¨od et al., 2013; Kino et al.,
2021). A key question is then, to what extent can policy-
makers tailor policies to each child’s circumstances and to
what extent is it viable to articulate one policy for a popula-
tion. One of the most powerful international organization
today is the International Monetary Fund (IMF), as it is re-
sponsible to support macroeconomic stability in the global
system. The IMF is part of the United Nations, and hence
the mandate of almost all countries in the world. Yet the
effects of its programs on children are disputed. Thus, more
research is required not only to determine the average affect
of IMF on child poverty, but also to develop methods to per-
sonalize public policies to children’s circumstances (Daoud
et al., 2017; Daoud & Reinsberg, 2018; Daoud et al., 2019;
˚Akerstr¨om et al., 2019).

In this article, we analyze the impact of the IMF program on
child poverty at an individual child level by considering the
microeconomic factors such as family conditions along with
the macroeconomic factors impacted by the austerity of the
IMF program. This idea of individualization or personaliza-
tion follows from a policy vision of tailoring interventions
to an individual’s needs and context. For example, Banerjee
et al. (2011) states,

“We have to abandon the habit of reducing the
poor to cartoon characters and take the time to re-
ally understand their lives, in all their complexity
and richness.”

In other words, instead of the conventional Average Causal
Effect (ACE) policymaking that ascribes the same treatment
to an entire population, researchers need to develop more
sensitive frameworks. While articulating policies based on
conditional ACE (CACE) is an improvement over ACE pol-
icymaking, CACE is still insufﬁcient as it analyzes groups
of individuals and hence ignores the individual complexity
within-groups (K¨unzel et al., 2019). Thus, CACE still sug-

 
 
 
 
 
 
Causal Impact Analysis of the IMF Program on Child Poverty using Causal-Graphical Normalizing Flows

gests a sub-optimal ‘one-size-ﬁts-all’ policy, and therefore,
it is critical to move to the ﬁnest level of granularity and
perform an Individual Causal Effect (ICE) analysis. Such
personalized analysis relies on the tools of causal infer-
ence and, more speciﬁcally, counterfactual inference (Pearl,
2009a;b). Currently, to combat poverty, government ofﬁ-
cials use mainly an individual’s income and similar charac-
teristics to identify vulnerable population and then assess
if they are eligible for social welfare programs. Then, a
simple rule is often applied: if an individual is eligible, that
person will likely receive a ﬁxed ‘one-size-ﬁts-all’ public
policy; if the individual is ineligible, no policy is ascribed.
Although such public-policy making is highly transparent as
it applies what is best on average for a population (i.e., ACE)
or group (i.e., CACE) it lacks an adaptability to that individ-
ual’s needs that is necessary to efﬁciently combat poverty,
ill-health, and other social ills (Daoud, 2018). For effective
combating, government ofﬁcials and others require methods
that are able to personalize these policies (Kino et al., 2021).
That is, personalized public policy analysis (P3A) requires
methods that can move beyond ACE estimation, and into
counterfactual inference.

Although there exists a range of ACE and CACE estimation
methods powered by machine-learning algorithms (K¨unzel
et al., 2019), there is a lack of similar ICE methods. If the
statistical (functional) form among the outcome, treatment,
and covariates are known, one could in principle estimate
ICE parametrically (Pearl, 2009a). However, in observa-
tional studies, functional forms are rarely known due to the
complexity of reality and, thus, causal estimation would ben-
eﬁt if machine-learning methods can learn these functions in
a data-driven way. To learn these functional forms, recently
Balgi et al. (2022) developed an ICE estimation method,
called causal-Graphical Normalizing Flows (c-GNFs) . This
method is a ﬂow-based deep-learning model, that encapsu-
lates the underlying SCM. In other words, c-GNFs enable a
scholar to stipulate the causal connections among variables
in an SCM, but without making any functional form assump-
tion. The c-GNF is able to approximate these functional
forms efﬁciently in a data-driven manner. Most importantly,
because c-GNFs are invertible (they can propel forward and
backward through a SCM) and thus calculate noise vari-
ables for each individual, it has been shown that c-GNFs
enable ICE estimation using ‘The First Law of Causal Infer-
ence’ (Pearl, 2009a).

The existing development of c-GNFs relies purely on
In Balgi et al.
statistical proofs and simulation studies.
(2022), scholars developed c-GNFs and benchmarked them
against well established methods such as Inverse Proba-
bility Weighting (Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983; Hern´an &
Robins, 2009), Regression-With-Residuals (Wodtke, 2020),
and Meta-Learners (K¨unzel et al., 2019) under controlled
simulated experimental settings where the true causal effect

is known. Thus, a c-GNFs real-world applicability for P3A
remains uncertain.

In this article we evaluate c-GNFs in a large-scale real-world
observational study. Based on substantive assumptions en-
coded in an SCM, we encapsulate the causal mechanism
identifying the impact of the IMF program on child poverty.
The data used are observational and thus carries the usual
caveats for observational studies. Our study shows how
c-GNFs are likely to provide insightful conclusions that are
hidden in such large scale data and that are signiﬁcant for
P3A speciﬁcally and AI for social good, generally.

Our article supplies at least three contributions. First, it
shows how a synthesis of causal inference and deep-neural
networks, through c-GNF can further AI for Social Good.
This contribution focuses on tailoring macroeconomic poli-
cies, minding children’s health and living conditions. Our
analysis shows how this tailoring can be done empirically
and with different personalized-treatment strategies at dif-
ferent population-level personalization granularity: ACE for
the planetary (Global-South) level, CACE for the country
level, and ICE for individual (child) level.

Second, in contrast to previous work (Daoud & Johansson,
2019), our ﬁndings reveal that the IMF program has beneﬁ-
cial average (ACE) effect. Our CACE ﬁnding indicates that
the program is most beneﬁcial for India and Bangladesh,
and least beneﬁcial for Iraq, Pakistan, Rwanda, and Zambia.
Third, as virtually all previous IMF studies focus on ACE
or CACE for evaluating the effect of macroeconomic poli-
cies (Daoud et al., 2017; Daoud & Reinsberg, 2018), our
research breaks new ground by being the ﬁrst in evaluating
ICE on children. Our individual child level analysis ﬁnds
that IMF program is beneﬁcial to 61.22±4.09% and harmful
to 7.25±4.89% of a sample of 1,941,734 children from the
Global-South population.

Although we apply c-GNFs to the setting of IMF and chil-
dren, c-GNFs generalize to other settings and P3A. There
is a large application space in AI for social good, covering
many social challenges in criminal justice, public health,
education, and social welfare (Lakkaraju et al., 2015; Potash
et al., 2015; Sankaran et al., 2017; Ghani, 2018; Ye et al.,
2019; Daoud & Dubhashi, 2020; Shiba et al., 2021a;b; Kino
et al., 2021). Thus, one important future task is to evalu-
ate the strengths and weaknesses of c-GNFs, and continue
reﬁning their capacities.

2. Notation, Problem Deﬁnition and

Assumptions

In this section, we discuss the formulation of the causal
problem focusing on the relationship between the treatment
(IMF program) and the outcome (child poverty). We deﬁne
our notations and discuss key assumptions. As our analy-

Causal Impact Analysis of the IMF Program on Child Poverty using Causal-Graphical Normalizing Flows

ZC

UC

C

O

UO

ZO

ZA

UA

A

Y

UY

ZY

(a) SCM representing the IMF causal system.

(b) c-GNF architecture for causal and counterfactual inference.

Figure 1. (a) represents the SCM of IMF causal system where Y is the outcome of interest (degree of child poverty), A is the ac-
tion/intervention/treatment (the IMF program), C are the observed confounders of A and Y (macroeconomic factors), and O are other
causes of Y but not of A (microeconomic factors). For any given observed endogenous variable X in (a), UX and ZX respectively
denote the unobserved exogenous noises of the true SCM F :U→X and the encapsulated-SCM ˜F =(F H)=T −1:Z→X in Fig. 1(b),
where H:Z→U denotes an auxiliary transformation, X=[O, C, A, Y ]T, U=[UO, UC , UA, UY ]T and Z=[ZO, ZC , ZA, ZY ]T are the
respective vectorial notations. Since ˜F (green) encapsulates F (red) and H (blue) SCMs, i.e., ˜F =(F H)=T −1, we refer to ˜F as the
encapsulated-SCM. The c-GNF models T :X→Z and readily provides the encapsulated-SCM ˜F :Z→X, as T is invertible by construction,
facilitating counterfactual inference using ‘The First Law of Causal Inference’ (Pearl, 2009a;b).

sis relies on observational data, we are making conditional
independence assumptions: the treatment assignment and
the outcome are independent conditional on a set of con-
founders. These confounders have to block all back-door
paths (Pearl, 2009b). To enforce conditional independence,
we rely on existing social-science studies on IMF and child
poverty (Daoud et al., 2017; Daoud & Reinsberg, 2018;
Daoud & Johansson, 2019). Fig. 1(a) depicts a conceptual
causal-Directed Acyclic Graph (c-DAG) identifying the im-
pact of the IMF program on the degree of child poverty
derived from Daoud & Johansson (2019). In Fig. 1(a), A
denotes the IMF program as the treatment (exposure, action
or intervention) and Y denotes the degree of child poverty
as the outcome of causal interest. Moreover, C denotes the
observed confounders of A and Y , and O are other causes
of Y but not of A. Speciﬁcally, C includes macroeconomic
factors such as country’s economy, polity, political will, pub-
lic spending, trade, and governance. These macroeconomic
factors are the main confounders. O includes microeco-
nomic and family related factors such as child’s age, sex and
family wealth. Although these microeconomic variables are
unnecessary for adjusting, they are critical to individualize
the treatment. The c-DAG used in this work involves 32
random variables and it is presented in Fig. 5 of Appendix C.
We note that the c-DAG is constructed with care with the
help of social scientists who are the domain experts well
aware of the socio-economic literature. However careful the
c-DAG is considered, there might be some confounding vari-
ables which might be missing and hence, in the assumptions
below, we explicitly state the unconfoundedness assump-
tion. Unfortunately, unconfoundedness is an untestable
assumption (Rubin, 1990; Robins & Hern´an, 2008) and
identiﬁability of the causal effect is only achievable under
unconfoundedness assumption (Pearl, 2012).

Our main objective in this work is to estimate the causal
effect of the treatment (IMF program) at any given popu-
lation level and personalize treatments depending on the
causal effects at that population level or personalization
granularity. Depending on the personalization granularity,
the instantiation of the causal effect might vary, i.e., ACE
deﬁnes the causal effect when personalization granularity is
the entire population level (Global-South), CACE deﬁnes
the causal effect when personalization granularity is a sub-
population level (e.g., country, age, gender, etc.), and ICE
deﬁnes the causal effect when personalization granularity is
the individual child level. Therefore, in the personalization
granularity spectrum, we have ACE that offers no person-
alization and ICE that offers highest personalization at the
extremes, with CACE offering intermediate personalization.
Formally, ACE, CACE and ICE are deﬁned as follows.

ACE = E[(Y1 − Y0)] ,

(1)

CACE(C=c) = E[(Y1 − Y0)|C=c] ,
ICEi(C=c, O=o) = (Y1 − Y0)|C=c, O=o ,
(3)
ICEit(C=c, O=o) = (1(Y1>1) − 1(Y0>1))|C=c, O=o ,
(4)

(2)

where Ya denotes the potential outcome of Y under the in-
tervention A=a. Eqs. (3) and (4) differ in that the former
considers the actual degree of child poverty, whereas the
latter considers the threshold > 1 to obtain an indicator of
child poverty, i.e., degrees of 2 to 7 indicate poor and de-
grees of 0 and 1 indicate not poor, a simplifying assumption
considered in Daoud & Johansson (2019).

For any given personalization granularity, the treatment
assignment condition identiﬁes the optimal treatment to
prescribe at the given personalization granularity. In our
analysis, we consider six treatment strategies at three per-

Causal Impact Analysis of the IMF Program on Child Poverty using Causal-Graphical Normalizing Flows

sonalization granularities as summarized in Table 1 of Ap-
pendix B, i.e., Global-South (no personalization), country
(intermediate personalization), and individual child (ﬁnest
personalization) levels. The six treatment strategies from
our study are described as follows:

1. T S0 : The IMF program is discouraged (A=0) for
the entire Global-South. Then, there is no personalization
at any granularity.

2. T S1 : The IMF program is encouraged (A=1) for
the entire Global-South. Then, there is no personalization
at any granularity.

3. T SOb : The IMF program is encouraged (A=1)
or discouraged (A=0) for the entire country based on the
observed treatment, i.e., the countries treated get encouraged
and the rest do not.

4. T SC : The IMF program is encouraged (A=1) or
discouraged (A=0) or neither for the entire country based
on the country’s CACE in Eq. (2). Then, there is personal-
ization at country level.

5. T SI : The IMF program is encouraged (A=1) or
discouraged (A=0) or neither based on the child’s ICE in
Eq. (3). Then, there is personalization at child level.

6. T SIt : The IMF program is encouraged (A=1) or
discouraged (A=0) or neither based on the child’s ICE in
Eq. (4). Then, there is personalization at child level.

We note that the expectations in Eqs. (1) and (2) are with
respect to the samples from the interventional distributions
P (Ya). However, the fundamental problem of causal infer-
ence dictates that the counterfactual outcomes under the un-
observed interventions are always missing, i.e., the samples
from P (Ya) are not readily available to compute the expec-
tations in Eqs. (1) and (2). These missing values can be
computed using the observational data under the following
six main assumptions: (a) unconfoundedness or no unob-
served confounders (Rubin, 1990), (b) positivity or overlap
or common support or extrapolation (Rosenbaum & Rubin,
1983), (c) conditional ignorability or exchangability (Rosen-
baum & Rubin, 1983), (d) consistency (Robins, 1986; Cole
& Frangakis, 2009; VanderWeele, 2009), (e) no interference
or Stable Unit-Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA) (Cox,
1958), and (f) modularity or independent mechanisms or
autonomy or invariance (Pearl, 2009b; Peters et al., 2017).
As our study relies on observational data, some of these
assumptions, in particular unconfoundedness and positivity,
are untestable. This limitation applies to all observational
study. Therefore, any observational study results should be
evaluated, jointly with the plausibility of these causal identi-
ﬁcation assumptions. If one believes the assumptions lack
plausibility, then it is possible to make improvement to the
unconfoundedness and positivity assumptions by changing

the c-DAG and collecting more data. Even though these im-
provements might change the results, the general mechanics
of applying c-GNF to P3A speciﬁcally and AI for social
good, generally, remains the same.

For the c-DAG in Fig. 1(a), the observational data can at
best help modeling the observational joint distribution as

P (O, C, A, Y ) = P (Y |A, C, O)P (A|C)P (C)P (O) .(5)

As the c-DAG considered assumes unconfoundedness, the
do-calculus (Pearl, 2012) provides a way to identify a valid
adjustment set and expresses P (Ya) from the components
of the observational joint distribution in (5) as,

P (Ya) =

(cid:88)

{c,o}

P (Y |A=a, C=c, O=o)1(A=a)

P (C=c)P (O=o) ,

(6)

where the probability term corresponding to the indepen-
dent mechanism of the intervened variable is replaced by the
indicator function 1(A=a) denoting the intervention A=a
(modularity assumption). Even with the identiﬁed adjust-
ment set {C} and the non-parametric expression for the
interventional distribution in Eq. (6), the computation of
ACE or CACE in Eqs. (1)-(2) still requires a complex and
potentially time-consuming summation over the adjustment
set variable {C}. Even though do-calculus identiﬁes a non-
parametric expression for ACE or CACE, do-calculus still
lacks the estimation of ICE. However, in the next section,
we see that it is possible to easily draw the samples from
the distributions in Eqs. (5) and (6) using causal-Graphical
Normalizing Flows (c-GNFs) without the need of the ad-
justment set or Eq. (6), using just ‘The First Law of Causal
Inference’ (Pearl, 2009b; Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018). Hence
easily estimating ACE, CACE and ICE in Eqs. (1)-(4) us-
ing Monte-Carlo expectation estimation from the samples
drawn from the c-GNF.

3. SCM, encapsulated-SCM and c-GNF

Here, we brieﬂy present the c-GNFs and describe their con-
nection to SCMs. An SCM consists of a set of assignment
equations describing the causal relations between the ran-
dom variables of a causal system represented by a causal-
Directed Acyclic Graph (c-DAG), such as

Xi := fi(P Ai, Ui) with i=1, . . . , d ,

(7)

where {Xi}d
i=1 represents the set of observed endoge-
nous random variables, P Ai represents the set of vari-
ables that are connoting parents of Xi, {Ui}d
i=1 denotes
the set of exogenous noise random variables, and {fi}d
i=1
denotes the set of functions (independent mechanisms)
that generate the the endogenous variable Xi from its
observed causes P Ai and noise Ui. An SCM is also

Causal Impact Analysis of the IMF Program on Child Poverty using Causal-Graphical Normalizing Flows

referred as Functional Causal Model (FCM) due to the
functional mechanisms {fi}d
i=1. An SCM can be seen
as a transformation F :U→X such that X=F (U) where
U=[U1, . . . , Ud]T∈Rd and X=[X1, . . . , Xd]T∈Rd. Let G
represent a c-DAG with {X1, . . . , Xd} as the set of nodes
and adjacency matrix AG∈{0, 1}d×d. Let PX(X) repre-
sent the joint distribution over the endogenous variables X,
which factorizes according to G as

PX(X) = Πd

i=1P (Xi|P Ai) ,

(8)

where P Ai={Xj:AG i,j=1} denotes the set of parents of
the vertex/node Xi in G. As we see in the next section,
the factorized joint distributions in Eqs. (5) and (8) can be
modeled using an autoregressive model parameterized by
a deep-neural-network θ, which we denote by PX(X; θ).
Such a model is what is called as c-GNF.

3.1. Causal-Graphical Normalizing Flows (c-GNFs)

Normalizing Flows (NFs) (Tabak & Vanden-Eijnden, 2010;
Tabak & Turner, 2013; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015;
Kobyzev et al., 2020; Papamakarios et al., 2021) are a fam-
ily of generative models with tractable distributions where
both sampling and density evaluation can be efﬁcient and
exact. A NF is a ﬂow-based model with transformation
T :X→Z such that Z=T (X), where Z=[Z1, . . . , Zd]T∈Rd
represents the base random variable of the ﬂow-model with
the base distribution PZ(Z) that is usually a d-dimensional
standard normal distribution for computational convenience
and ease of density estimation. Hence the name normal-
izing ﬂow. The deﬁning properties of T are, (i) T must
be invertible with T −1 as the inverse generative ﬂow such
that T −1:Z→X, and (ii) T and T −1 must be differentiable,
i.e., T must be a d-dimensional diffeomorphism (Milnor &
Weaver, 1997). Under these properties, from the change of
variables formula, we can express the endogenous joint dis-
tribution PX(X) in terms of the assumed base distribution
PZ(Z) as

PX(X)=PZ(T X)|detJT (X)| .

(9)

Calculating the joint density of PX(X) requires the calcula-
tion of the determinant of the Jacobian of T with respect to
X, i.e., detJT (X). It is, therefore, advantageous for com-
putational reasons to choose T to have an autoregressive
structure such that JT (X) is a lower-triangular matrix and
detJT (X) is just the product of the diagonal elements. Au-
toregressive Flows (AFs) (Kingma et al., 2016; Papamakar-
ios et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2018) are NFs that model an
autoregressive structure. AFs are composed of two compo-
nents, the transformer and the conditioner (Papamakarios
et al., 2021). Under the assumption of a strictly monotonic
transformer, AFs are universal density estimators (Huang
et al., 2018). Among these AFs, Graphical Normalizing
Flows (GNFs) (Wehenkel & Louppe, 2021) facilitate the

use of a desired DAG representation as opposed to an ar-
bitrary autoregressive structure. For causal inference, it is
crucial that the DAG has a causal interpretation. In this work,
we assume the true c-DAG G for the GNFs, hence the name
causal-GNFs (c-GNFs). In c-GNFs, we use Unconstrained
Monotonic Neural Network (UMNN) (Wehenkel & Louppe,
2019), a strictly monotonic integration based transformer
along with G for the graphical conditioner to ensure c-GNF
is an universal density estimators (Huang et al., 2018).

As Markov equivalent DAGs induce equivalent factoriza-
tions of the observational joint distributions, GNFs that use
Markov equivalent DAGs represent the same observational
joint distribution. This is problematic for causal and counter-
factual inference, as different GNFs may represent different
interventional joint distributions. In other words, to per-
form exact causal inference as we do in this work, the GNF
needs to use casual-DAG G. Note that only a GNF with the
true c-DAG G encapsulates the true SCM, thus satisfying
the modularity assumption, which is necessary for correct
causal and counterfactual inference. This is formalized as

X=F (U)=F (H(Z))=F ·H(Z)= ˜F (Z)=T −1(Z) (10)

where H:Z→U is an auxiliary transformation such that
Ui=hi(Zi) for i=1, . . . , d, i.e., U=H(Z) without loss
of generality.
It follows from Eq. (10) that the c-GNF
T −1= ˜F =F ·H encapsulates the true SCM F as T and T −1
both encode G in the graphical conditioner, thus providing a
way to indirectly model F without making assumptions on
U or the functional causal mechanisms F or the auxiliary
transformation H. This sets apart the c-GNFs from most
other models for causal inference.

Training a c-GNF amounts to training the deep neural net-
works that parameterize the transformers and conditioners.
This is typically done by maximizing the log-likelihood
of the training dataset {X(cid:96)}Ntrain
, which is expressed as
(cid:96)=1
shown below, by using Eq. (9) for the summation term
PX(X(cid:96); θ)

Ntrain(cid:88)

L(θ)=

(cid:96)=1

logPX(X(cid:96); θ) ,

(11)

where θ denotes the parameters of the deep neural networks
of the UMNN transformer and graphical conditioner, op-
timized using stochastic gradient descent. We utilize the
Gaussian dequantization trick from Balgi et al. (2022) pre-
sented in Algorithm 1 of Appendix E to model discrete
variables into NFs using the fact that NFs are strongest
in modeling Gaussian distributions seamlessly. Fig. 1(b)
shows the c-GNF architecture for causal and counterfactual
inference using T and T −1.

Causal Impact Analysis of the IMF Program on Child Poverty using Causal-Graphical Normalizing Flows

3.2. Counterfactual Inference and ‘The First Law of

Causal Inference’

Since a c-GNF encapsulates the true SCM, this enables
us to compute the potential outcomes under all the treat-
ment strategies described in Section 2 using ‘The First Law
of Causal Inference’ (Pearl, 2009a;b; Pearl & Mackenzie,
2018). This law essentially provides a framework to identify
the unit level potential outcomes using an SCM, thereby
addressing the fundamental missing value problem of coun-
terfactual inference. The law states that the missing/unseen
potential outcome Y for a unit Z(cid:96) under the treatment strat-
egy T Sa, denoted as YT Sa (Z(cid:96)), can be computed as

YT Sa (Z(cid:96))=Y ˜FT Sa

(Z(cid:96)) ,

(12)

(Z(cid:96)) represents the actual outcome Y observed
where Y ˜FT Sa
from the mutilated-SCM ˜FT Sa that is obtained by remov-
ing the causes of A from the encapsulated-SCM ˜F , and
setting A to the value dictated by T Sa. Essentially, this law
involves the following three steps.

1. Abduction: For a given observed unit-individual evi-
dence X(cid:96), the respective exogenous noise Z(cid:96) corresponding
to X(cid:96) is recovered from the encapsulated-SCM ˜F . In the
case of a c-GNF, we have Z(cid:96)=T X(cid:96)= ˜F −1X(cid:96) where the
encapsulated-SCM noise Z(cid:96) represents the unobserved yet
unique identiﬁer of an individual (e.g., DNA) of the (cid:96)th
individual with observed evidence X(cid:96).

2. Action: The action or intervention on A dictated by the
treatment strategy T Sa is performed after mutilating the
structural equation corresponding to A in the encapsulated-
SCM ˜F (from the modularity assumption), which results in
the mutilated-SCM ˜FT Sa .
3. Prediction: The recovered noises Z(cid:96) from abduction are
re-propagated through ˜FT Sa and the outcomes Y ˜FT Sa
(Z(cid:96))
observed are nothing but the potential outcomes YT Sa (Z(cid:96))
we were interested to begin with.

4. Experimental Results and Discussion

In our experiments, we consider the IMF dataset used
in Daoud & Johansson (2019); Daoud et al. (2017); Haller¨od
et al. (2013) with 1,941,734 children under the age of 18,
cared for by 567,344 families residing in 67 countries from
the Global-South. Fig. 4 in Appendix A shows the country-
wise proportions of the observational samples in the IMF
dataset. The beneﬁt of this dataset is that it represents 2.8
billion samples (50%) of the world’s population by the year
2000. Fig. 5 in Appendix C shows the c-DAG with 32
variables such as economy, polity, public spending, living
condition, etc. along with the observed IMF program treat-
ment at a country level and the degree of the child poverty
under the observed treatment considered in our study. The

degree of the child poverty in the dataset is calculated based
on 7 individual dimensions of poverty for each of the child
based on 1) education, 2) health, 3) information, 4) mal-
nutrition, 5) sanitization, 6) shelter, 7) water, resulting in
an aggregate degree of child poverty between 0 and 7 with
0 indicating no poverty and 7 indicating severe poverty.
Due to the sensitive nature and the accompanying ethical
considerations, the IMF dataset is not made publicly avail-
able and can be requested upon from the original authors
of Haller¨od et al. (2013); Daoud et al. (2017); Daoud &
Johansson (2019). Since deep neural networks are prone
to overﬁt, we split the data into 1,922,316 training, 9,709
validation and 9,709 test samples. We run multiple simu-
lations for the hyperparameter selection and select the best
hyperparameters with the best held-out validation loss. We
strictly use only the training set samples for training and
use the held-out validation set for early stopping to get the
model with best validation loss. We further validate the
generalization of the best validation loss model on the held-
out test set. We use three fully-connected layers with [40,
30, 20] hidden units for the graphical conditioner and three
fully-connected layers with [15, 10, 5] hidden units for the
monotonic UMNN transformer. We implement c-GNFs
in Pytorch (Paszke et al., 2017) using GNF baseline code1
and AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) optimizer with
learning-rate=3e−4 and a batch-size of 1024 (4GB of GPU
memory) for all our experiments.

Fig. 2(a) shows the child poverty statistics sorted degree-
wise for the entire Global-South observed across multiple
treatment strategies for multiple simulations. The invari-
ability of the boxplot corresponding to the strategy T SOb
(i.e., naturally observed treatment) validates the consistency
assumption of the c-GNF model, as the same outcome is
observed for the same observed treatments across multiple
simulations. Thus, the c-GNF model satisﬁes consistency
by construction. More importantly, Fig. 2(b) shows the IMF
program advisability statistics or the proportions of person-
alization across multiple treatment strategies. Since T SI
provides the ﬁnest personalization at the individual child
level, we observe that IMF program is harmful (discouraged)
for 7.25±4.89%, beneﬁcial (encouraged) for 61.22±4.08%,
and neutral for the rest. Contrast to T SI , T SC provides
intermediate personalization at country level, hence we
observe that IMF program is harmful (discouraged) for
10.8±7.1%, beneﬁcial (encouraged) for 88.1±6.04%, and
neutral for the rest. It should noted that the invariability of
the T S0, T S1 and T SC is due to the fact that the treatments
for these strategies are ﬁxed beforehand.

As for T SIt, our ﬁndings also indicate the importance of
considering all the seven poverty degrees in the analysis

1https://github.com/AWehenkel/

Graphical-Normalizing-Flows

Causal Impact Analysis of the IMF Program on Child Poverty using Causal-Graphical Normalizing Flows

Figure 2. All the boxplot results are reported from 5 different random seeded simulations to indicate the variability in the c-GNF results
across multiple simulations. (a) presents the number of samples in each of the 8 possible degrees of child poverty across different
treatment strategies in the entire Global-South. (b) indicates the advisability of the IMF program for each treatment strategy in the entire
Global-South. (c) indicates the average degree of child poverty for each treatment strategy in the entire Global-South. (d) indicates the
ACE estimated in the entire Global-South.

Figure 3. The region-wise average causal effect estimates from 5 random seeded simulations plotted along with the zero-ACE line.

in contrast to Daoud & Johansson (2019) that considers
only the indicator of child poverty, as the IMF program may
help children move from severe to moderate poverty. This
may get obscured if a binary indicator of poverty (poor vs
non-poor) is used, leading to the erroneous conclusion that
personalization is irrelevant. The fundamental oversight
from over-simpliﬁcation by grouping poverty degrees 2 to 7
neglects the improvements within the group, e.g., 7 to 2 is
a signiﬁcant improvement for which the IMF program will
be rightly encouraged in T SI . However, T SIt considers no

change in the indicator of the poverty and hence wrongly
assumes that the IMF program is neutral for resource opti-
mization. In other words, T SIt wrongly values a change
of degree from 2 to 1 more than a change of degree from
7 to 2. This is speciﬁcally seen in the advisability plots of
T SIt where, compared to T SI , there is an increase in the
neutral advisability over the encouragement. This important
ﬁnding of ours reinforces the need of the radical rethink-
ing of Banerjee et al. (2011)’s Nobel Prize winning work
stated previously in Section 1 that suggests one should not

Causal Impact Analysis of the IMF Program on Child Poverty using Causal-Graphical Normalizing Flows

resort to over-simpliﬁcation of the poor into cartoon charac-
ters by ignoring their individual characteristics in all their
rich complexities and relative improvements in their living
conditions.

Fig. 2(c) shows the variation of the average degree of child
poverty for all the treatment strategies obtained from aver-
aging Fig. 2(a). From Fig. 2(c), the treatment strategies can
be sorted in the decreasing order of their expected degree of
child poverty E[YT Sa ]: T S0 > T SIt > T SOb > T S1 >
T SC > T SI . This indicates that the IMF program is beneﬁ-
cial for the Global-South (T S0 > T SOb > T S1). Fig. 2(c)
shows that the personalization at the country level due to the
treatment strategy T SC (purple) represents a signiﬁcant re-
duction in child poverty over the ‘one-size-ﬁts-all’ treatment
strategy T S1 (blue) and the sub-optimal naturally observed
treatment strategy T SOb (orange). Moreover, personaliza-
tion at the individual child level is even more beneﬁcial
(T SC > T SI ).

Fig. 2(d) reconﬁrms the beneﬁcial nature of the IMF pro-
gram across multiple simulations as the average degree of
the child poverty is observed to be reduced by 1.2 ± 0.24 de-
gree. Similarly, Fig. 3 shows that most countries experience
a reduction in the average degree of child poverty from the
IMF program, and hence the program has beneﬁcial effects
on the Global-South as a whole. Figs. 6 in Appendix D
provides a qualitative visual analysis of the country-wise
average degree of child poverty in the form of the six poten-
tial (interventional) worlds under each of the six treatment
strategies from one of the 5 simulations. From these results,
we see that it is indeed possible to perform P3A, under the
assumptions in Section 2, to effectively combat social ills in
contrast to the ‘one-size-ﬁts-all’ approaches.

4.1. On interpretability and explanability of the c-GNF

Since the c-GNF is able to provide the encapsulated-SCM,
this enables to go beyond total causal effect estimation and
into the mediation analysis dealing with natural/controlled
direct/indirect effects (Pearl, 2009b). The probabilistic na-
ture of the c-GNF further enables one to analyse important
causal quantities such as probabilities of causation (Pearl,
1999) to dive deep into the causal aspects of the social
system under study and enable policymakers with person-
alized policies. Finally, the c-GNF/encapsulated-SCM is
able to successfully navigate across all the three rungs of the
‘Ladder of Causation’ (Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018), i.e., (i)
association, (ii) intervention, and (iii) counterfactuals, to be
able to answer every causal and counterfactual questions us-
ing ‘The First Law of Causal Inference’ (Pearl, 2009b; Pearl
& Mackenzie, 2018). Of all the 16 macroeconomic variables
that cause child poverty, we observed that political will is
the most impactful as it deﬁnes the way of the nation and
hence impacts in a macroeconomic shock that trickles down

to the individual child level, via microeconomic family-level
factors. Observing the c-DAG in Fig. 5 of Appendix C, it is
evident that the political will of a country determines other
macroeconomic factors such as public spending, polity, gov-
ernance, and also trickles down to individual child status via
intermediate microeconomic factors. For example, consider
Pakistan or Iraq where a negative political will is observed
and hence the IMF programs are seen to be harmful (recall
Fig. 3) due to the tendency of the monetary funds being
misused for state-sponsored terrorism instead of the primary
objective of economic stability. In contrast, countries such
as India and Bangladesh, where positive political will is
observed, are seen to be beneﬁting the most from the IMF
program both economy and child poverty-wise. Similarly,
for instance, the most number of current CEOs of tech-giants
such as Google, Microsoft, Adobe, IBM, Twitter can loosely
be attributed to the positive effects of positive political will
It was also observed that the macroeconomic
in India.
shocks on child poverty can be isolated if the microeco-
nomic factors at the family-level such as family wealth, fam-
ily head education, number of children/adults in the family
are well conditioned. This strengthens the belief of person-
alizing the treatments/policies to effectively combat/isolate
the macro-level shocks trickling down to individual family
or child. In summary, our major observations are two-folds:
(i) political will is an important macroeconomic factor that
deﬁnes both macro- and micro- socio-economic status of a
nation, (ii) the IMF program coupled with a positive politi-
cal will is seen to be beneﬁcial for the child poverty status
of the country.

5. Conclusion

In this article, we deployed causal-Graphical Normalizing
Flows (c-GNFs) to draw insights from the real-world obser-
vational data on the impact of the IMF program on child
poverty. Our ﬁndings in terms of ACE indicated the IMF
program to be beneﬁcial for the Global-South, in expecta-
tion. Apart from considering the traditional ‘one-size-ﬁts-
all’ treatment, we also proposed an empirical framework
to formulate different personalized treatment strategies at
different population granularity levels by computing ACE,
country-wise CACE, and child-wise ICE. Our ﬁndings re-
inforced the radical thinking proposed by Banerjee et al.
(2011) to address the problem of child poverty without over-
simpliﬁcation of the poor into cartoon characters. Even
though we demonstrated the personalized treatment strategy
formulation framework in a social science setting, our frame-
work can be extended to the ﬁeld of personalized medicine
as well. The transparent nature of the c-GNF that is able to
provide the encapsulated-SCM enables one to successfully
navigate across all the three rungs of the ladder of causation
to provide an end-to-end causal inference tool.

Causal Impact Analysis of the IMF Program on Child Poverty using Causal-Graphical Normalizing Flows

References

˚Akerstr¨om, J., Daoud, A., and Johansson, R. Natural lan-
guage processing in policy evaluation: Extracting policy
conditions from IMF loan agreements. In Nordic Confer-
ence on Computational Linguistics, pp. 316–320, 2019.

Hern´an, M. A. and Robins, J. M. Causal Inference: What If.

Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2009.

Huang, C., Krueger, D., Lacoste, A., and Courville, A. C.
Neural autoregressive ﬂows. In International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 2083–2092, 2018.

Balgi, S., Pe˜na, J. M., and Daoud, A. Personalized public
policy analysis in social sciences using causal-graphical
normalizing ﬂows. In AAAI conference on Artiﬁcial In-
telligence : AI for Social Impact track (A Virtual Confer-
ence), 2022.

Kingma, D. P., Salimans, T., Jozefowicz, R., Chen, X.,
Sutskever, I., and Welling, M. Improved variational in-
ference with inverse autoregressive ﬂow. In Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 4743–4751,
2016.

Banerjee, A., Banerjee, A. V., and Duﬂo, E. Poor Eco-
nomics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight Global
Poverty. Public Affairs, 2011.

Cole, S. R. and Frangakis, C. E. The consistency state-
ment in causal inference: A deﬁnition or an assumption?
Epidemiology, 20(1):3–5, 2009.

Cox, D. R. Planning of Experiments. New York: Wiley,

1958.

Daoud, A. Unifying studies of scarcity, abundance, and
sufﬁciency. Ecological Economics, 147:208–217, 2018.

Daoud, A. and Dubhashi, D. Statistical modeling: the three

cultures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.04570, 2020.

Daoud, A. and Johansson, F. Estimating treatment hetero-
geneity of international monetary fund programs on child
poverty with generalized random forest. SocArXiv, 2019.

Daoud, A. and Reinsberg, B. Structural adjustment, state ca-
pacity and child health: evidence from IMF programmes.
Epidemiology, 48(2):445–454, 2018.

Daoud, A., Nosrati, E., Reinsberg, B., Kentikelenis, A. E.,
Stubbs, T. H., and King, L. P. Impact of international
monetary fund programs on child health. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS), 114(25):
6492–6497, 2017.

Daoud, A., Reinsberg, B., Kentikelenis, A. E., Stubbs, T. H.,
and King, L. P. The international monetary fund’s inter-
ventions in food and agriculture: An analysis of loans
and conditions. Food Policy, 83:204–218, 2019.

Ghani, R. Data Science for Social Good and Public Policy:
Examples, Opportunities, and Challenges. In ACM Spe-
cial Interest Group in Information Retrieval (SIGIR), pp.
3–3, 2018.

Haller¨od, B., Rothstein, B., Daoud, A., and Nandy, S. Bad
governance and poor children: A comparative analysis of
government efﬁciency and severe child deprivation in 68
low-and middle-income countries. World Development,
48:19–31, 2013.

Kino, S., Hsu, Y.-T., Shiba, K., Chien, Y.-S., Mita, C.,
Kawachi, I., and Daoud, A. A scoping review on the use
of machine learning in research on social determinants
of health: Trends and research prospects. Social Science
& Medicine - Population Health (SSM-PH), 15:100836–
100855, 2021.

Kobyzev, I., Prince, S., and Brubaker, M. Normalizing
ﬂows: An introduction and review of current methods.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine In-
telligence (TPAMI), pp. 1–1, 2020. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.
2020.2992934.

K¨unzel, S. R., Sekhon, J. S., Bickel, P. J., and Yu, B. Met-
alearners for estimating heterogeneous treatment effects
using machine learning. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences (PNAS), 116(10):4156–4165, 2019.

Lakkaraju, H., Aguiar, E., Shan, C., Miller, D., Bhanpuri,
N., Ghani, R., and Addison, K. L. A Machine Learn-
ing Framework to Identify Students at Risk of Adverse
Academic Outcomes. In ACM Special Interest Group on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (SIGKDD), pp.
1909–1918, 2015.

Loshchilov, I. and Hutter, F. Decoupled weight decay reg-
In International Conference on Learning

ularization.
Representations (ICLR), 2019.

Milnor, J. and Weaver, D. W. Topology from the Differen-

tiable Viewpoint. Princeton University Press, 1997.

Papamakarios, G., Murray, I., and Pavlakou, T. Masked
In Neural
autoregressive ﬂow for density estimation.
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 2338–
2347, 2017.

Papamakarios, G., Nalisnick, E., Rezende, D. J., Mohamed,
S., and Lakshminarayanan, B. Normalizing ﬂows for
probabilistic modeling and inference. Journal of Machine
Learning Research (JMLR), 22(57):1–64, 2021.

Paszke, A., Gross, S., Chintala, S., Chanan, G., Yang, E.,
DeVito, Z., Lin, Z., Desmaison, A., Antiga, L., and Lerer,
A. Automatic Differentiation in PyTorch. NeurIPS Work-
shops, 2017.

Causal Impact Analysis of the IMF Program on Child Poverty using Causal-Graphical Normalizing Flows

Shiba, K., Torres, J. M., Daoud, A., Inoue, K., Kanamori,
S., Tsuji, T., Kamada, M., Kondo, K., and Kawachi, I.
Estimating the impact of sustained social participation
on depressive symptoms in older adults. Epidemiology,
2021b.

Tabak, E. and Vanden-Eijnden, E. Density estimation by
dual ascent of the log-likelihood. Communications in
Mathematical Sciences, 8(1):217–233, 2010.

Tabak, E. G. and Turner, C. V. A family of nonparametric
density estimation algorithms. Communications on Pure
and Applied Mathematics, 66(2):145–164, 2013.

Textor, J., van der Zander, B., Gilthorpe, M. S., Li´skiewicz,
M., and Ellison, G. T. Robust causal inference using
directed acyclic graphs: the r package ‘dagitty’. Epidemi-
ology, 45(6):1887–1894, 2016.

VanderWeele, T. J. Concerning the consistency assumption
in causal inference. Epidemiology, 20(6):880–883, 2009.

Wehenkel, A. and Louppe, G. Unconstrained monotonic
neural networks. In Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems (NeurIPS), pp. 1545–1555, 2019.

Wehenkel, A. and Louppe, G. Graphical normalizing ﬂows.
In International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and
Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 37–45, 2021.

Wodtke, G. T. Regression-based adjustment for time-
varying confounders. Sociological Methods & Research
(SMR), 49(4):906–946, 2020.

Ye, T., Johnson, R., Fu, S., Copeny, J., Donnelly, B., Free-
man, A., Lima, M., Walsh, J., and Ghani, R. Using
machine learning to help vulnerable tenants in New York
city. In ACM Computing and Sustainable Societies (COM-
PASS), pp. 248–258, 2019.

Pearl, J. Probabilities of causation: Three counterfactual
interpretations and their identiﬁcation. Synthese, 121(1):
93–149, 1999.

Pearl, J. Causal inference in statistics: An overview. Statis-

tics Surveys, 3:96–146, 2009a.

Pearl, J. Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference. Cam-

bridge University Press, 2009b.

Pearl, J. The do-calculus revisited. In Uncertainty in Artiﬁ-

cial Intelligence (UAI), pp. 3–11, 2012.

Pearl, J. and Mackenzie, D. The Book of Why: The New

Science of Cause and Effect. 2018.

Peters, J., Janzing, D., and Schlkopf, B. Elements of Causal
Inference: Foundations and Learning Algorithms. The
MIT Press, 2017.

Potash, E., Brew, J., Loewi, A., Majumdar, S., Reece, A.,
Walsh, J., Rozier, E., Jorgenson, E., Mansour, R., and
Ghani, R. Predictive Modeling for Public Health: Pre-
venting Childhood Lead Poisoning. In ACM Special In-
terest Group on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(SIGKDD), pp. 2039–2047, 2015.

Rezende, D. and Mohamed, S. Variational inference with
normalizing ﬂows. In International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning (ICML), pp. 1530–1538, 2015.

Robins, J. A new approach to causal inference in mortality
studies with a sustained exposure period—application to
control of the healthy worker survivor effect. Mathemati-
cal Modelling, 7(9):1393–1512, 1986.

Robins, J. M. and Hern´an, M. A. Estimation of the causal
effects of time-varying exposure. Longitudinal Data Anal-
ysis (LDA), pp. 553–599, 2008.

Rosenbaum, P. R. and Rubin, D. B. The central role of
the propensity score in observational studies for causal
effects. Biometrika, 70(1):41–55, 1983.

Rubin, D. B. Formal mode of statistical inference for causal
effects. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference
(JSPI), 25(3):279–292, 1990.

Sankaran, K., Garcia-Olano, D., Javed, M., Alcala-Durand,
M. F., De Un´anue, A., van der Boor, P., Potash, E., Avalos,
R. S., Encinas, L. I. A., and Ghani, R. Applying Machine
Learning Methods to Enhance the Distribution of Social
Services in Mexico. arXiv:1709.05551 [stat], 2017.

Shiba, K., Daoud, A., Hikichi, H., Yazawa, A., Aida, J.,
Kondo, K., and Kawachi, I. Heterogeneity in cognitive
disability after a major disaster: A natural experiment
study. Science Advances, 2021a.

Causal Impact Analysis of the IMF Program on Child Poverty using Causal-Graphical Normalizing Flows

A. IMF dataset country-wise observational samples

Figure 4. Country-wise proportion of observational samples from all the 67 countries in the Global-South.

B. Summary of the six treatment strategies

# Personalization Granularity levels Treatment assignment condition Treatment assigned (A) Treatment strategy

1 None, i.e., entire Global-South level
2 None, i.e., entire Global-South level
Intermediate, i.e., Country level
3
4
Intermediate, i.e., Country level
5 Finest, i.e., Individual child level
6 Finest, i.e., Individual child level

0
1
Naturally observed treatment
CACE(C=c)
ICEi(C=c, O=o)
ICEit(C=c, O=o)

0 (D)
1 (E)
0 (D) or 1(E)

T S0 (in red)
T S1 (in blue)
T SOb (in orange)
0 (D) or 1 (E) or 0/1 (N) T SC (in purple)
0 (D) or 1 (E) or 0/1 (N) T SI (in green)
0 (D) or 1 (E) or 0/1 (N) T SIt (in olive)

Table 1. Six IMF treatment strategies considered in our real-world study with the IMF dataset.

Causal Impact Analysis of the IMF Program on Child Poverty using Causal-Graphical Normalizing Flows

C. Hypothesized causal-DAG for the current social system under study

Figure 5. The detailed causal-DAG involving the 32 variables hypothesized for the SCM, created using Dagitty (http://www.
dagitty.net/dags.html) (Textor et al., 2016).

Causal Impact Analysis of the IMF Program on Child Poverty using Causal-Graphical Normalizing Flows

D. Counterfactual worldmaps for different treatment strategies

(a) Counterfactual world under T S0

(b) Counterfactual world under T S1

(c) Factual world observed under T SOb

(d) Counterfactual world under T SC

(e) Counterfactual world under T SI

(f) Counterfactual world under T SIt

Figure 6. Six potential (interventional) worlds under the six treatment strategies indicating the country-wise average degree of child
poverty.

Causal Impact Analysis of the IMF Program on Child Poverty using Causal-Graphical Normalizing Flows

E. Algorithm for Gaussian dequantization

Algorithm 1 Gaussian Dequantization
Input: Discrete variables {D(cid:96)}b
Generate ˜D(cid:96) ∼ N (µ = D(cid:96), σ2 = 1/36).
Output: Dequantized / continuous variables { ˜D(cid:96)}b

(cid:96)=1

(cid:96)=1

Algorithm 2 Gaussian Quantization

Input: Continuous variables { ˜D(cid:96)}b
Generate D(cid:96) = clamp(round( ˜D(cid:96)), min=0, max=N −1)
Output: Quantized / discrete variables {D(cid:96)}b

(cid:96)=1

(cid:96)=1

