Malware Detection and Prevention using Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Techniques

Md Jobair Hossain Faruk∗, Hossain Shahriar†, Maria Valero†, Farhat Lamia Barsha‡, Shahriar Sobhan¶
Md Abdullah Khan§, Michael Whitman¶, Alfredo Cuzzocrea(cid:107), Dan Lo§, Akond Rahman‡ and Fan Wu∗∗

∗Department of Software Engineering and Game Development, Kennesaw State University, USA
†Department of Information Technology, Kennesaw State University, USA
‡Department of Computer Science, Tennessee Tech university, USA
§Department Computer Science, Kennesaw State University, USA
¶Institute for Cyber Workforce Development, Kennesaw State University, USA
(cid:107)iDEA Lab, University of Calabria, Rende, Italy and LORIA, Nancy, France
∗∗ Department of Computer Science, Tuskegee University, USA

Abstract—With the rapid technological advancement, security
has become a major issue due to the increase in malware activity
that poses a serious threat to the security and safety of both
computer systems and stakeholders. To maintain stakeholder’s,
particularly, end user’s security, protecting the data from fraud-
ulent efforts is one of the most pressing concerns. A set of
malicious programming code, scripts, active content, or intrusive
software that is designed to destroy intended computer systems
and programs or mobile and web applications is referred to
as malware. According to a study, naive users are unable to
distinguish between malicious and benign applications. Thus,
computer systems and mobile applications should be designed to
detect malicious activities towards protecting the stakeholders. A
number of algorithms are available to detect malware activities by
utilizing novel concepts including Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Machine
Learning, and Deep Learning. In this study, we emphasize
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) based techniques for detecting and
preventing malware activity. We present a detailed review of
current malware detection technologies, their shortcomings, and
ways to improve efﬁciency. Our study shows that adopting
futuristic approaches for the development of malware detection
applications shall provide signiﬁcant advantages. The comprehen-
sion of this synthesis shall help researchers for further research
on malware detection and prevention using AI.

Index Terms—Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Malware, Detection Sys-

tem, Malware Prevention Technology, Software Security

I. INTRODUCTION

The computer has indeed come a long way since the
scientiﬁc revolution from the 1500s until today with the con-
tribution of a large number of greatest scientiﬁc scholars who
conceptualized the concept of computing include John Napier,
Blaise Pascal, Gottfried von Leibniz, Joseph Jacquard, Charles
Babbage, Herman Hollerith, John V. Atanasoff, Clifford Berry,
Konrad Zuse, Howard Aiken, John Mauchly, Presper Eckert,
Remington Rand, Alan Turing, and John von Neumann [1].
As a result, computing technology emerges as the key part of
almost every conceivable sector of human endeavor including
technology, engineering, economy, education, and in general,
every aspect of life [2], [3]. Particularly, since the beginning
of the Information Age in the early 1980s, the world has

witnessed a revolutionary period in world history that marked
a rapid, societal shift from an industrialized, machine-based
economy to one based on Information Technology [4]. Rapid
scientiﬁc and technological advancement imposes numerous
challenges, particularly around the domain of computer tech-
nology that has begun since the 1980s, and the number
of different viruses rises over 40,000 so far and increased
dramatically [5].

The ﬁrst computer-based virus was discovered in 1982 on
Apple II machines called “Elk Cloner” develop by a 15-year-
old high school student Rich Skrenta [6]. A few years later in
1986, two brothers Basit Farooq Alvi and Amjad Farooq Alvi
who wanted to prove that PC is not immune, write a pc based
stealth virus called “Brain” [7]. The viruses were capable of
replicating using ﬂoppy disks, inserting the infected ﬂoppy
leads the PC to be infected, especially it’s drive-by adopting
three phases concepts, (i) Boot Loading (ii) Replication and
(iii) Manifestation.

Since then, practices of using the malware-based application
have been increasing rapidly by taking the advantage of the
vulnerability of the software technology. In the early stage,
computer viruses including Elk Cloner and Brain were not
designed to damage or harm any computer system rather point
on problems. However, malware changes the direction towards
more and more destructive with the goal to disrupt computer
operation, gather sensitive information, or gain access to
private computer systems [8].

A large number of Malware has been discovered in the
past few decades including The Morris Worm, ILOVEYOU,
Melissa, Code Red, Sasser, Nimda, Slammer, Welchia,
Commwarrior-A, Stuxnet, and CryptoLocker, and the cre-
ation of these viruses also mutated based on technological
development [9]. All these computer viruses can affect any
government, data center, laboratory, commercial, enterprise,
organizational software application and propagate via normal
use or download, installation of commercial software, mali-

cious intent, or even by clicking a predeﬁned link. According
to a researcher [10], viruses must be introduced to a target
computer system by persuading or tricking someone with le-
gitimate access to install them on the system because computer
viruses do not appear spontaneously. Once it appears, the result
can be very devastating and a number of catastrophic loss was
recorded ever since.

In order to prevent those attacks and catastrophes, scientists
around the world attempt to design security tools and antivirus
packages that are mainly used to prevent, detect, avoid, and
remove viruses, Trojans, worms, etc, whereas ﬁrewalls are
used to monitor incoming and outgoing connections [11]. The
exact origins of the ﬁrst antivirus are disputed, however, the
ﬁrst documented removal of a computer virus by an actual an-
tivirus program was developed by a German computer security
expert Bernd Robert in 1987 who came up with a program to
get rid of Vienna, a virus that infected .com ﬁles on DOS-
based systems, according to a report by Hotspot shield [12].
A number of manuals or automated malware detection and
prevention systems are available for various platforms such
as mobile devices, servers, gateways, and workstations that
provide updates of the detection process and the prevention
process starts with being proactive.

Being the technological wonderland, adopting futuristic
techniques for the development of robust security tools and
antivirus is today’s priority. Advancing such ﬁelds shall con-
tribute by detecting and preventing malware and keeping users
away from unwanted software. And various industries need
focus to protect user’s data from not only malware attacks
but also other security vulnerabilities and data breaches; the
ﬁnancial, aircraft, and healthcare domain is at the forefront
of such a target which needs focus in order to protect the
privacy and security of users and patient’s records [4], [13].
Blockchain as a result can be adopted to secure data or
records of various industries, healthcare, and transportation
for example [14], [15] while Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) can
be used to advance the ﬁelds of malware detection and
prevention with the possibility to develop efﬁcient, robust,
and scalable malware recognition modules. According to Dr.
Giovanni Vigna [16], co-founder and CTO of Lastline, Artiﬁ-
cial intelligence (AI) cannot automatically detect and resolve
every potential malware or cyber threat incident, but when it
combines the modeling of both bad and good behavior, it can
be a successful and powerful weapon against even the most
advanced malware.

This paper pursues to present an analyzed synopsis of
malware detection and prevention methodologies from the
perspective of Artiﬁcial Intelligence. We will provide a de-
tailed overview of AI applications in current malware detection
systems, their limitations, scope to improve, and at last, will
propose ideas to overcome current limitations. The primary
contributions of the paper are as follows:

telligence (AI).

• We provide a comprehensive review on malware detection
and prevention approaches based on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI).

• We discuss the limitations of existing methods and pro-

vide future research directions.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section
II deﬁnes the term Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and Malware
followed by Research Method and Related Work. Section IV
gives a detailed presentation on techniques used for malware
detection and prevention using AI. We discuss the limitation on
existing approaches and future research directions in Section
V. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.

II. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND MALWARE

In this section, we deﬁne Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Mal-
ware. In order to give a proper scenario, we provide the
classiﬁcation of both AI and Malware introduced by different
researchers.

A. Artiﬁcial Intelligence

Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is a technological phenomenon
that all industries wish to exploit to beneﬁt from efﬁciency
gains and cost reductions because of its capability of replacing
humans by undertaking intelligent tasks that were once limited
to the human mind [17]. Nones et al. [18] deﬁne AI as the
rapidly growing development of computer systems that are
able to perform tasks that only human intelligence could ever
accomplish. However, from the aspects of scholars, AI can
be used for intelligence augmentation (IA) instead of being
a replacement for the human mind which gives it strategic
importance with identifying as a potential key driver of the
current
technological revolution. Thus, AI can be widely
used in developing projects based on intellectual processes
including the capacity for augmentation, conception, con-
sciousness, investigation, enthusiastic information, thinking,
arranging, innovation, and problem-solving in different sectors
including Big Data, Security, Business Analytics and many
more domains [19], [20].

Fig. 1. Types and uses of Artiﬁcial Intelligence [21].

• We study potential malware detection and prevention
techniques and investigate the potential of Artiﬁcial In-

There are many types and ways AI can be achieved and
machine learning is one of them which enables computers to

imitate and adapt human-like behavior [22]. Fig. 1 illustrates
the types and uses of Artiﬁcial Intelligence consists of Ma-
chine Learning and Natural Language Processing. Machine
learning (MI) can be deﬁned ﬁeld of study that encompasses
automatic computing procedures to computers to attain AI
without being explicitly programmed based on logical or
binary operations that learn a task from a series of examples
[23]. Such understanding and learning through circumstances
techniques of machine learning, AI can be the stepping stone
for the application to prevent computer viruses and malware.

B. Malware

Malware is a contraction of malicious programming codes,
scripts, active content, or intrusive software that is designed
to destroy intended computer systems and programs or mobile
and web applications using different forms including computer
viruses, worms, ransomware, rootkits, trojan, dialers, adware,
spyware, keyloggers, or malicious Browser Helper Objects
(BHOs) [24], [25]. Malware is the short form of malicious
limited to computer
software or application which is not
system rather extend to the internet and related ﬁelds. Viruses
and the Rise of the Internet grow gradually and signiﬁcantly
back, with only four hosts on the internet back in 1969, statistic
shows the total number reached approximately 1.01 billion in
2019 [26], [27].

ogy based on the research topic and broader domain followed
by related work.

A. Research Methodology

In order to carry out

the study on Malware Detection
Techniques using AI, we utilize a systematic literature review
[31]. The main purpose of the systematic review is to identify,
study, and investigate the suitable existing approaches. We ﬁrst
carried out a “Search Process” to identify potential research
papers from the scientiﬁc databases using pre-selected search
keywords or strings including “Artiﬁcial Intelligence” AND
(“Malware” AND “Detection” OR “Prevention”) OR “AI”.
We had to identify these search strings to avoid ﬁndings from
non-related research papers and those keywords are based on
the Malware and Artiﬁcial Intelligence related terms and their
derivatives, acronyms, and widely used synonyms. Besides,
among various scientiﬁc databases, we used three digital
database sources including (i) IEEE Xplore (ii) ScienceDirect,
and (iii) Springer Link. Choosing these three bibliographic
databases, our goal is to identify research papers that were
published in reputable conferences, journals, and books.

Fig. 3. Paper Classiﬁcation Process [32]

TABLE I
GENERALIZED TABLE FOR SEARCH CRITERIA

Database

Initial Search

Total Inclusion

IEEE Xplore

ScienceDirect

Springer Link

Total

42

111

35

196

8

5

3

16

TABLE II
OVERVIEW OF EXCLUSION AND INCLUSION

Condition of Exclusion and Inclusion

Condition (Inclusion)
Malware Detection, Preven-
tion, Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Papers are not duplicated in
different databases
Papers and proposed ap-
proaches are similar aspects
Studies that are available in
the full format

than afore-

Condition (Exclusion)
Other
studies
mentioned topics
Similar papers in different
databases
Studies that do not depict
expected aspects
Studies are not available
fully

Category
Type of
Papers
Duplicate
Papers
Relativity

Text
Avail-
ability

Fig. 2. Malware Classiﬁcation by [28].

Any software purposefully designed for bad intention can
be categorized as malware and it can be classiﬁed according
to the purpose and method of propagation [29], [30]. Fig. 2
illustrates malware classiﬁcation. A malware program can
copy itself and infect a computer device without the permission
or knowledge of the user, it can self-execute, if an infected ﬁle
or a program is installed or shared with a new computer, the
virus will automatically copy itself into the new computer and
execute its code [30]. Such infected ﬁles or programs come
from other sources, the internet in general, downloading ﬁles
from malicious websites, or clicking on a malicious link in
particular.

III. RESEARCH METHOD AND RELATED WORK

This section will discuss the adopted research methodology
and related work. We ﬁrst deﬁne effective research methodol-

We adopt the paper classiﬁcation process from Anushree
Tandon et al. [32] depicted in Fig. 3 We ﬁltered based on
time restrictions that we set between 2016 to 2022 to search

studies published. We also ﬁltered publication topics including
Systems and Data Security for Springer Link and Publication
Topics for IEEE Explore and Computer Science and Security
for ScienceDirect. A total of 196 studies were found during
the initial search (IEEE Xplore 42, ScienceDirect 43, and
Springer Link 111). Once the search processes are completed,
we have gone through a screening process for ﬁnding relevant
papers based on the paper title at ﬁrst followed by reading
and understanding the abstract and conclusion from screened
papers. In order to apply the inclusion and exclusion criteria,
we set a number of exclusion criteria including (i) duplicate
papers (ii) full-text availability, and (iii) papers that are not
related to Malware Detection and Prevention shown in table
I - II.

B. Related Work

• The purpose of Malware detection is to protect the system
from various kinds of malicious attacks by following
the policy of detection and prevention. There are various
existing algorithms to detect malware, however, with the
advancement of malware technology,
the adoption of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence is crucial for efﬁcient, and robust
malware prevention applications. In order to detection of
malware, ﬁnding the malicious source code is the very
ﬁrst step.

• Researchers

a

proposed

technique

[33],
to

identify malware

source
largest malware

called
SourceFinder
code
source
the
repositories which is
code database. The research showed that the proposed
approach identiﬁes malware repositories with 89 %
precision and 86 % recall while it
identiﬁes 7504
malware source code repositories using SourceFinder
followed by analyzing properties and characteristics of
repositories.

The use of Machine learning techniques to detect mal-
ware is a common practice. Likely many others. Niharika
Sharma [34] presents a detailed analysis of the static,
dynamic, and hybrid methods with an evaluation of
malware detection techniques. The author also facilitates
the detection process by combining machine learning
and data mining techniques. Besides, the paper evaluates
various data mining and machine learning-based malware
detection approaches.

• Sanjay Sharma et al. [35] proposes an approach based
on opcode occurrence to detect malware using machine
learning techniques. The researchers also use a dataset
from the Kaggle Microsoft malware classiﬁcation chal-
lenge dataset and evaluate ﬁve classiﬁers including LMT,
REPTree, Random Forest, NBT, J48Graft. A demon-
stration indicates that the proposed approach capable of
detecting the malware with almost 100% accuracy.

• Despite challenges of applying machine learning in intru-
sion detection like unconventional computing paradigms
and unconventional evasion techniques, Sherif Saad et al.

[36], presents three critical problems that limit the success
of malware detectors using machine learning techniques.
The researchers also discuss the crucial behavioral anal-
ysis that shall dominate the next generation antimalware
systems followed by proposing possible solutions to
overcome the constraints.

• Apart from machine learning, other techniques are also
used in malware detection like cloud computing, network-
based detection system, virtual machine, or the use of hy-
brid methods and technologies. Nowadays Deep learning
and Artiﬁcial are actively applied in malware detection.
Irina Baptista et al. [37] introduces a novel approach for
malware detection by utilizing binary visualization and
self-organizing incremental neural networks. A demon-
stration was conducted on detecting malicious payloads
in various ﬁle types including Portal Document File .pdf
and Microsoft Document Files .doc ﬁles where the ex-
perimental results indicate a detection accuracy of 91.7%
and 94.1% for ransomware respectively. According to the
authors, the proposed technique performed well with an
incremental detection rate, allowing for efﬁcient real-time
identiﬁcation of unknown malware.

• In a separate study, Syam and Vankata [38] propose a
detection way where a virtual analyst was developed by
using Artiﬁcial Intelligence to defend threats and take
appropriate measurements. The researchers categorize
supervised and unsupervised data, and later converted
unsupervised data to supervised data with the help of
analyst feedback and then auto-update the algorithm.
It evolves the algorithm by utilizing Active Learning
Mechanism itself over time and becomes more efﬁcient,
strong.

• A group of researchers from Kennesaw State Univer-
sity [39], propose a novel Bayesian optimization-based
framework for automated hyperparameter optimization,
resulting in the optimum DNN architecture. The research
evaluates the NSL-KDD, a benchmark dataset for net-
work intrusion detection and the demonstration results
indicate the framework’s efﬁcacy, resulting DNN archi-
tecture performs detects signiﬁcantly higher intrusion in
terms of accuracy, precision, recall, and f1-score. The
BO-GP based approach outperforms the random search
optimization-based method where BO-GP achieved the
highest accuracy- 82.95%, and 54.99% for KDDTest+,
and KDDTest-21 datasets, respectively.

IV. MALWARE DETECTION USING AI

In this section, we discuss Artiﬁcial Intelligence-based
techniques to detect malware, limitations of currently used
strategies, and ways to overcome the shortcoming to improve
performance.

A. Malware Detection Techniques

Researchers develop malware detection systems, keep track
of the malicious programs and benign software towards an-

alyzing those applications in order. Malware detection tech-
niques can be classiﬁed into three categories including (i)
signature-based, (ii) anomaly-based, and (iii) heuristic-based.
In this section, we discuss the malware detection systems and
present the result and possible limitations.

Fig. 4. Classiﬁcation of Malware Detection Techniques

Fig. 4 illustrates the techniques for malware detection that
work in a ﬂow including data processing, feature selection,
classiﬁer training, and malware detection. The process begins
with collecting datasets from the Kaggle website consisting
of malware and benign web application. By adopting AI
technology, the development of malware detection systems
shall be in a way that will process malware datasets, and
analyze malware to understand its feature. Fisher Score (FS),
Chi-Square (CS), Information Gain (IG), Gain Ratio (GR), and
Uncertainty Symmetric (US) are used to select 20 features.
The system shall train the classiﬁer by comparing different
classiﬁers on FS, CS, IG, GR, and US to detect unknown
malware.

Implementing different types of classiﬁers to develop mal-
ware detection and prevention systems shall provide better
and using AI shall bring a signiﬁcant advantage to detect
and prevent unknown malicious activities [35]. In Fig. 5,
we display a ﬂowchart of unknown malware detection using
artiﬁcial intelligence. In this section, we provide a detailed
review on each method of Malware Detection.

• Signature-based Detection Technique: The signature-
based detection method consists of four components as
depicted in Fig. 6 is a term that helps in identifying
and detecting attacks by looking for speciﬁc patterns
[40]. In a signature-based method, developers use a
database containing signatures of viruses, scan the ﬁle,
and evaluate information with that database for detecting
malware in the database. If the information matches with
the database’s data that means the ﬁle contains viruses.
The primary advantage of this method is effective for the
known malware, however, it has limitations in detecting
unknown malware [41]. Fig. 7 shows Intrusion Detection
System (IDS) keeps a statistical model of trafﬁc that also
can be referred to a database, IDS accepts trafﬁc from
various sources and matches it with statistical trafﬁc to

Fig. 5. Flow chart of AI Based Unknown Malware Detection Techniques

ﬁnd out whether it is malicious or not and then provide
the result to an administrator.

Fig. 6. Methodology used in Signature based IDS [42]

Fig. 7. Signature based Intrusion Detection System (IDS) [38]

• Anomaly-based Detection Technique: Anomaly-based
network intrusion detection plays a vital role in address-
ing security issues and protecting networks against mali-
cious activities [43]. Anomaly-based methods address the
limitations of signature-based techniques by enabling to
detect any of known or unknown malware by applying
classiﬁcation techniques over activities of a system for
malware detection. Such transformation from pattern-
based detection to a classiﬁcation-based approach to iden-
tify normal or anomalous behavior gives an advantage of
detecting malware activities [44].

from multiple directions without any previous knowledge
about the system [45]. The combination of statistical and
mathematical techniques improves the heuristic method
from previous methods. Fig. 9 represents the features of
Heuristic Methods.

Fig. 10. Heuristic Methods Features [46]

B. Malware Detection by Adopting AI

The continued evolution and diversity of malware consti-
tutes a major threat in modern systems and existing security
defenses are ineffective to mitigate the skills and imagination
of cyber-criminals necessitating the development of novel
solutions [47]. Besides, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is rapidly
evolving and advances in AI enable remarkable results in
many application areas and such advancement of the ﬁelds
in the development of efﬁcient
of AI shall be signiﬁcant
anti-malware systems to overcome limitations of existing
prevention technology. In this section, we discuss the malware
detection technique sing AI and present the result and possible
limitations.

Tal Garﬁnkel and Mendel Rosenblum [48] proposed a
virtual machine monitoring approach to detect malicious soft-
ware. An architectural framework (Fig. 11) was introduced
that maintains the transparency of the host-based Intrusion
detection system (IDS) but for larger attack resistance they
kept the IDS away from the host. The evaluation indicates
to achieve distinct ability to moderate interactions between
host and principal software by using virtual machine monitor.
However,
the risk of errors and tamper resistance is the
limitation of the proposed approach.

Fig. 11. A High-Level View of the VMI-Base [48]

Shanxi Li et al. [49] proposes a malware classiﬁer based
on graph convolutional network, designed to adapt to the dif-

Fig. 8. Common anomaly-based network IDS [43]

Fig. 9. Anomaly Based IDS [38]

Fig. 8 depicts the anomaly-based Network Intrusion De-
tection System (IDS) where the functional stages are
normally adopted in the anomaly-based network intrusion
detection systems (ANIDS). On the other hand, Fig. 9
illustrates a connection with a database consists of the
signature of known attacks, with the common signatures
coming from different packets with that database, an alert
is sent to the system admin if the unknown signature
matches with known signature mean malware detected.

• Heuristic-based Detection Technique: Applying Artiﬁcial
Intelligence over the signature and anomaly-based detec-
tion systems improve the efﬁciency of malware detection.
However, in order to adopt environmental change and
improve prediction ability, a machine learning algorithm
named genetic algorithm along with neural network was
applied over malware detection system to improve the
classiﬁcation method. The algorithm applies character-
istics such as inheritance, selection, and combination
that give the advantage to attain optimum solutions

ference of malware characteristics. The approach ﬁrst extracts
the API call sequence from the malware code and generates
a directed cycle graph followed by extracting the feature
map of the graph, and designing a classiﬁer based on graph
convolutional network using the Markov chain and principal
component analysis method. The method also analyzes and
compares the performance of the method. Fig. 12 illustrates
the GCN-based malware detection system framework. An
evaluation result indicates the highest accuracy is 98.32. %
which is superior compared to other existing methods in terms
of FPR and accuracy

Fig. 12. GCN-based malware detection system framework [49]

Other than that, Long Wen and Haiyang Yu [50] propose
a machine learning-based lightweight system with the goal
of identifying unknown malware on Android devices. The
proposed approach extract features based on static analysis
and dynamic analysis. The researchers also introduce a new
feature selection algorithm PCA-RELIEF towards disposing of
the raw features. Fig. 13 depicts the architecture of machine
learning-based Android malware detection. The demonstration
achieved better performance with a higher detection rate and
lower error detection.

Fig. 13.
detection [50]

The architecture of machine learning-based Android malware

V. DISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS

Previously we discussed different kinds of malware detec-
tion techniques that contribute to solving the limitations of
previous techniques. Analyzing the limitations of detection

systems is vital to deal with novel techniques for malware
detection and prevention. In this section, we aim to discuss
the limitation of the presented approaches with suggestions to
improve those limitations.

The primary limitation of the static signature-based method
is the failure in detecting unknown malware activities. Update
the database regularly may solve the issue temporarily because
of some special viruses that have the capability of modifying
the code after infecting any system. Such issues were ad-
dressed in the Generic signature scanning-based method that
can detect unknown viruses; however, the method is unable to
remove the affected ﬁles from the directory.

Heuristic analysis is divided into two parts- static and
dynamic where it performs code mapping which is a difﬁcult
process as some characteristics of a virus can be implemented
in various ways. Dynamic heuristic analysis is better com-
parably with static analysis regardless of its slow process.
One of the limitations of dynamic processes is the failure
not to detect certain active viruses in a certain situation. For
instance, performing any operation by the user may interrupt
the heuristic dynamic analysis. Integrity checking may solve
the limitation of dynamic heuristic analysis, able to detect
viruses with certainty if accuracy can be ignored because of
its record in failure cases. Other than that, integrity checking
always assumes that the starting state of a ﬁle is unaffected
but this can be false often.

Malware detection techniques are working simultaneously
to detect malicious software applications. In order to improve
the efﬁciency of malware detection techniques, improvement
of existing limitations is a major fact and dynamic solutions
are needed to reduce malware feature analysis time, and more
sophisticated approaches should be applied to detect malicious
activities. Utilizing artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) technology in the
development of both malware detection and prevention needs
to be increased to deal with intelligent malware that has grown
in recent years.

VI. CONCLUSION

Malware or malicious applications may cause catastrophic
damages to not only computer systems but also data centers,
web, and mobile applications to various industries; particu-
larly, ﬁnancial and healthcare institutes. Ensuring the safety of
stakeholders’ data from malicious entities is a major challenge
that leads us towards the concept of malware detection and
prevention. Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) can be an effective
solution that we can adopt for the development of Anti-
Malware Systems. Having such direction, this study presented
a detailed review of malware detection techniques and ap-
proaches. At ﬁrst, we attempted to provide a clear overview of
malware, artiﬁcial intelligence, and its narration. An overview
of existing malware detection systems was discussed in section
III (B) followed by identifying the limitations of existing
applications. Likely every system, the malware detection ap-
proaches also consist of a number of limitations along with

facilities and improvements from its previous version. So far,
our ﬁndings indicate that AI can be utilized as a promising
domain for the development of anti-malware systems for
detecting and preventing malware attacks or security risks of
software applications towards a technological wonderland. To
draw a conclusion, we discuss scores of ideas to overcome the
identiﬁed limitations and aim to continue our effort explicitly
towards signiﬁcant accomplishments around the domain of
Malware Detection and Prevention.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The work is partially supported by the U.S. National
Science Foundation Awards #2100134, #2100115, #1723578,
and #1723586. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the National
Science Foundation.

REFERENCES

[1] O. Asaolu, “On the emergence of new computer technologies.” Educa-

tional Technology Society, vol. 9, pp. 335–343, 01 2006.

[2] Z. Arsic and B. Milovanovic, “Importance of computer technology in
realization of cultural and educational tasks of preschool institutions,”
International Journal of Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and
Education, vol. 4, pp. 9–15, 06 2016.

[3] A. P. Gilakjani, “A detailed analysis over some important issues towards
using computer technology into the eﬂ classrooms,” Universal Journal
of Educational Research, vol. 2, pp. 146–153, 2014.

[4] H. F. Md Jobair, M. Paul, C. Ryan, S. Hossain, and C. Victor, “Smart
connected aircraft: Towards security, privacy, and ethical hacking,”
International Conference on Security of Information and Networks,
2022.

[5] S. Subramanya and N. Lakshminarasimhan, “Computer viruses,” Poten-

tials, IEEE, vol. 20, pp. 16 – 19, 11 2001.

[6] S. Levy and J. Crandall, “The program with a personality: Analysis of

elk cloner, the ﬁrst personal computer virus,” 07 2020.

[7] N. Milosevic, “History of malware,” 02 2013.
[8] A. P. Namanya, A. Cullen, I. Awan, and J. Pagna Diss, “The world of

malware: An overview,” 09 2018.

[9] I. Khan, “An introduction to computer viruses: Problems and solutions,”

Library Hi Tech News, vol. 29, pp. 8–12, 09 2012.

[10] M. Bishop, “An overview of computer viruses in a research environ-

ment,” USA, Tech. Rep., 1991.

[11] D. B. Patil and M. Joshi, “A study of past, present computer virus perfor-
mance of selected security tools,” Southern Economist, 12 2012.

[12] A. Terekhov. History

of
https://www.hotspotshield.com/blog/history-of-the-antivirus

antivirus.

the

[Online]. Available:

[13] M. J. Hossain Faruk, H. Shahriar, M. Valero, S. Sneha, S. Ahamed, and
M. Rahman, “Towards blockchain-based secure data management for
remote patient monitoring,” IEEE International Conference on Digital
Health (ICDH), 2021.

[14] M. J. Hossain Faruk, “Ehr data management: Hyperledger fabric-based
health data storing and sharing,” The Fall 2021 Symposium of Student
Scholars, 2021.

[15] S. Ryan, R. Mohammad A, H. F. Md Jobair, S. Hossain, and C. Alfredo,
“Ride-hailing for autonomous vehicles: Hyperledger fabric-based secure
and decentralize blockchain platform,” IEEE International Conference
on Big Data, 2021.

[16] D. G. Vigna. (2020) How ai will help in the ﬁght against malware.
[Online]. Available: https://techbeacon.com/security/how-ai-will-help-
ﬁght-against-malware

[17] H. Hassani, E. Silva, S. Unger, M. Tajmazinani, and S. MacFeely,
“Artiﬁcial intelligence (ai) or intelligence augmentation (ia): What is
the future?” AI, vol. 1, p. 1211, 04 2020.

[18] A.

I. Nones, A. Palepu,
(ai).

intelligence
artiﬁcial-intelligence.pdf

[Online]. Available:

and M. Wallace.

(2019) Artiﬁcial
cisse.info/pdf/2019/RR-01-

[19] (2020) Artiﬁcial

[Online]. Avail-
britannica.com/technology/artiﬁcial-intelligence/Evolutionary-

intelligence

reasoning.

-

able:
computing

[20] S. Ahn, S. V. Couture, A. Cuzzocrea, K. Dam, G. M. Grasso, C. K.
Leung, K. L. McCormick, and B. H. Wodi, “A fuzzy logic based machine
learning tool for supporting big data business analytics in complex artiﬁ-
cial intelligence environments,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference
on Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE), 2019, pp. 1–6.

[21] A. Cranage. (2019) Getting smart about artiﬁcial intelligence. [Online].
https://sangerinstitute.blog/2019/03/04/getting-smart-about-

Available:
artiﬁcial-intelligence

[22] J. Alzubi, A. Nayyar, and A. Kumar, “Machine learning from theory to
algorithms: An overview,” Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol.
1142, p. 012012, 11 2018.

[23] T. Ayodele, Machine Learning Overview, 02 2010.
[24] M. Ahmad, “Malware in computer systems: Problems and solutions,”
IJID (International Journal on Informatics for Development), vol. 9,
p. 1, 04 2020.

[25] N. Milosevic, “History of malware,” Digital forensics magazine, vol. 1,

no. 16, pp. 58–66, Aug. 2013.

[26] S. Gupta,

“Types of malware

International
Journal of Scientiﬁc Engineering Research, vol. 4, 2013. [Online].
Available:
https://www.ijser.org/researchpaper/Types-of-Malware-and-
its-Analysis.pdf

analysis,”

and its

Number
name

[27] Statista.
the
[On-
domain
line]. Available: https://www.statista.com/statistics/264473/number-of-
internet-hosts-in-the-domain-name-system/

internet
from 1993

system (dns)

in
2019.

hosts
to

worldwide

of

[28] S. Poudyal, D. Dasgupta, Z. Akhtar, and K. D. Gupta, “Malware analyt-
ics: Review of data mining, machine learning and big data perspectives,”
12 2019.

[29] O. Adebayo, M. A., A. Mishra, and O. Osho, “Malware detection,
supportive software agents and its classiﬁcation schemes,” International
Journal of Network Security
Its Applications, vol. 4, pp. 33–49, 11
2012.

[30] A. .K.S., “Impact of malware in modern society,” Journal of Scientiﬁc

Research and Development, vol. 2, pp. 593–600, 06 2019.

reviews

literature

University

[31] B. A. Kitchenham and S. Charters, “Guidelines for performing
engineering,”
systematic
Report,
Keele
Tech. Rep. EBSE 2007-001,
[Online]. Available:
https://www.bibsonomy.org/bibtex/23f4b30c0fe1435b642467af4cca120ef
[32] C. C. Agbo, Q. H. Mahmoud, and J. M. Eklund, “Blockchain technology
in healthcare: A systematic review,” Healthcare, vol. 7, no. 2, 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9032/7/2/56

in
Durham University

software

2007.

Joint

and

07

[33] M. O. F. Rokon, R. Islam, A. Darki, E. Papalexakis, and M. Faloutsos,
“Sourceﬁnder: Finding malware source-code from publicly available
repositories,” in RAID, 2020.

[34] N. Sharma and B. Arora, “Data mining and machine learning techniques
for malware detection,” in Rising Threats in Expert Applications and
Solutions, V. S. Rathore, N. Dey, V. Piuri, R. Babo, Z. Polkowski, and
J. M. R. S. Tavares, Eds.
Singapore: Springer Singapore, 2021, pp.
557–567.

[35] S. Sharma, R. Challa, and S. Sahay, Detection of Advanced Malware by
Machine Learning Techniques: Proceedings of SoCTA 2017, 01 2019,
pp. 333–342.

[36] S. Saad, W. Briguglio, and H. Elmiligi, “The curious case of machine

learning in malware detection,” 2019.

[37] I. Baptista, S. Shiaeles, and N. Kolokotronis, “A novel malware detection
system based on machine learning and binary visualization,” 05 2019,
pp. 1–6.

[38] S. A. Repalle and V. R. Kolluru, “Intrusion detection system using ai

and machine learning algorithm,” 12 2017.

[39] M. Mohammad, S. Hossain, H. Hisham, H. F. Md Jobair, V. Maria,
K. Md Abdullah, A. R. Mohammad, A. Muhaiminul I., C. Alfredo,
and W. Fan, “Bayesian hyperparameter optimization for deep neural
network-based network intrusion detection,” IEEE International Con-
ference on Big Data, 2021.

[40] O. C. Onyedeke, E. Taouﬁk, M. Okoronkwo, U.

Ihedioha,
.B, “Signature based network intrusion
C. H.Ugwuishiwu, and O.
detection system using feature selection on android,” International
Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications, vol. 11, 01
2020.

[41] Y. Ye, T. Li, Q. Jiang, Z. Han, and L. Wan, “Intelligent ﬁle scoring
system for malware detection from the gray list,” 01 2009, pp. 1385–
1394.

[42] S. Jyoti, A. Bhandari, V. Baggan, M. Snehi, and Ritu, “Diverse methods
for signature based intrusion detection schemes adopted,” 07 2020.
[43] J. Veeramreddy and K. Prasad, Anomaly-Based Intrusion Detection

System, 06 2019.

[44] D. Bolzoni and S. Etalle, “Aphrodite: an anomaly-based architecture for

false positive reduction,” ArXiv, vol. abs/cs/0604026, 2006.

[45] S. Bridges, R. Vaughn, and A. Professor, “Fuzzy data mining and genetic

algorithms applied to intrusion detection,” 04 2002.

[46] Z. Bazrafshan, H. Hashemi, S. M. Hazrati Fard, and A. Hamzeh, “A
survey on heuristic malware detection techniques,” 05 2013, pp. 113–

120.

[47] I. Baptista, S. Shiaeles, and N. Kolokotronis, “A novel malware detection
system based on machine learning and binary visualization,” in 2019
IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC
Workshops), 2019, pp. 1–6.

[48] T. Garﬁnkel and M. Rosenblum, “A virtual machine introspection based

architecture for intrusion detection,” NDSS, vol. 3, 05 2003.

[49] S. Li, Q. Zhou, R. Zhou, and Q. Lv, “Intelligent malware detection based
on graph convolutional network,” The Journal of Supercomputing, 08
2021.

[50] L. Wen and H. Yu, “An android malware detection system based on

machine learning,” vol. 1864, 08 2017, p. 020136.

