2
2
0
2

g
u
A
7
1

]

M

I
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

2
v
1
8
5
4
0
.
8
0
2
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

FERIA: Flat Envelope Model with Rotation and Infall under
Angular Momentum Conservation

Yoko Oya1,2, Hirofumi Kibukawa1,3, Shota Miyake4, and Satoshi Yamamoto1,2

oya@taurus.phys.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Received

;

accepted

1Department of Physics, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-

0033, Japan

2Research Center for the Early Universe, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-

ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

3Institute for Cosmic Ray Research, University of Tokyo, 5-1-5, Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa,

Chiba, 277-8582, Japan

4Graduate School of Mathematical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 3-8-1, Komaba,

Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8941, Japan

 
 
 
 
 
 
– 2 –

ABSTRACT

Radio observations of low-mass star formation in molecular spectral lines have

rapidly progressed since the advent of Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter

Array (ALMA). A gas distribution and its kinematics within a few 100s au scale

around a Class 0-I protostar are spatially resolved, and the region where a proto-

stellar disk is being formed is now revealed in detail. In such studies, it is essential

to characterize the complex physical structure around a protostar consisting of

an infalling envelope, a rotationally-supported disk, and an outﬂow. For this

purpose, we have developed a general-purpose computer code ‘FERIA’ (Flat En-

velope model with Rotation and Infall under Angular momentum conservation)

generating the image cube data based on the infalling-rotating envelope model

and the Keplerian disk model, both of which are often used in observational

studies. In this paper, we present the description and the usage manual of FERIA

and summarize caveats in actual applications. This program outputs cube FITS

ﬁles, which can be used for direct comparison with observations. It can also be

used to generate mock data for the machine/deep learnings. Examples of these

applications are described and discussed to demonstrate how the model analyses

work with actual observational data.

Subject headings: ISM: disk formation, ISM: individual (L1527, Elias29, B335)

– 3 –

Contents

1 Introduction

2 Basic Formulae and Key Assumptions of the Envelope Model

2.1 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2 Geometric and Kinematic Structures

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

7

7

8

2.3 Calculation of the Line Intensity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

3 Practical Information in Using FERIA

11

3.1 Mesh in FERIA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

3.2

Input Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

3.2.1 Header Information for the Output FITS File . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

3.2.2

Input Parameters for the Geometric/Kinematic Structures . . . . . .

13

3.2.3

Input Parameters for the Line Emissivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

3.2.4

Input Parameters for Convolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

3.2.5

Input Parameters for the Mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

3.2.6

Input Parameters for Position-Velocity Diagrams

. . . . . . . . . . .

16

3.3 Notes on Computer Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16

3.4 Caveats for Artiﬁcial Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

4 Examples of the Model Results

17

– 4 –

4.1 Envelope Models with Various Physical Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

18

4.1.1

Integrated Intensity Maps and Velocity Field Maps

. . . . . . . . . .

19

4.1.2 Position-Velocity Diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20

4.2 Comparison with the Keplerian Disk Model

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22

5 Comparison with the Actual Observations

23

5.1 General Aim of the Model

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

23

5.2 Obtaining the Best Fit Parameters

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

5.2.1 Chi-Squared Test: L1527 Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25

5.2.2 Chi-Squared Test: B335 Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

27

5.2.3 Chi-Squared Test: Elias 29 Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

29

5.2.4 Chi-Squared Test: Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

32

5.3 Combination with Machine/Deep Learnings

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

33

5.3.1 Analysis with Support Vector Classiﬁcation: 49 Ceti Case

. . . . . .

35

5.3.2 Analysis with Support Vector Classiﬁcation: IRAS 16293−2422 Case

36

6 Discussion

38

6.1 Why Is the Model Applicable? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

38

6.2 Caveats for Employing the Model

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

42

6.3 Relation to Outﬂow Studies

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

44

7 Summary and Future Prospects

44

A Observation: L1527

46

– 5 –

1.

Introduction

Thanks to increasing capabilities of millimeter/submillimeter interferometers including

Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA), observational studies on a

Solar-type (low-mass) protostellar sources in molecular spectral lines at a high angular

resolution have substantially progressed during the last decade. A complex structure within

a few 100s au around a protostar, consisting of a protostellar disk, an infalling envelope,

and an outﬂow, has been revealed even for infant sources. Indeed, rotationally supported

disks (Keplerian disks) have been detected not only in Class I sources but also in Class

0 sources (e.g. Tobin et al. 2012; Yen et al. 2013, 2017; Murillo et al. 2013; Ohashi et al.

2014; Aso et al. 2015; Oya et al. 2016; Oya & Yamamoto 2020; Alves et al. 2017; Lee et al.

2017; Tokuda et al. 2017; Okoda et al. 2018; Yang et al. 2020). Infalling-rotating envelopes

have also been characterized for many Class 0 and I sources (e.g. Sakai et al. 2014a,b,

2016; Ohashi et al. 2014; Aso et al. 2015; Sakai et al. 2016; Oya et al. 2016, 2018a; Oya

& Yamamoto 2020; Hsieh et al. 2019; Imai et al. 2019; Jacobsen et al. 2019; Gaudel et al.

2020; Yang et al. 2020), while the outﬂow structures near their launching zone have been

studied in relation to the disk/envelope system (e.g. Oya et al. 2014, 2015, 2018b, 2021;

Tabone et al. 2017; Lee et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2018). These studies are tackling with a

key issue when and how the disk structure is formed from an infalling-rotating envelope.

This is of great importance in astronomy and planetary science, because a protostellar disk

is evolved into a protoplanetary disk, which is a birthplace of a planetary system. Since

the above three components are mutually related, their individual characterizations are

essential for comprehensive understanding of the disk formation.

In addition to observational studies, theoretical magnetohydrodynamics (MHD)

– 6 –

simulation has extensively been conducted to elucidate the disk formation process (e.g.

Machida et al. 2011; Machida & Matsumoto 2011; Machida & Hosokawa 2013; Tomida et al.

2015; Tsukamoto et al. 2017; Zhao et al. 2016, 2018; Bate 2018; Machida & Basu 2019; Xu

& Kunz 2021). These studies reveal a series of formation processes of a low-mass protostar

and a disk structure around it, where the outﬂow from the protostar and/or the disk is also

reproduced. Such simulations are very useful to clarify the physics occurring in the vicinity

of the protostar and have indeed played an important role in interpretation of observational

results. On the other hand, they involve a number of parameters and assumptions, and

hence, direct comparison with observed intensity distributions and/or kinematic structures

is not always easy. For this reason, simple phenomenological models are often employed to

interpret the observed data.

As for the disk/envelope system, the Keplerian disk model and the ballistic model of

the infalling-rotating envelope (Oya et al. 2014) are successfully used to characterize the

disk and envelope structures (Sakai et al. 2014b, 2016; Oya et al. 2016, 2017; Lee et al. 2017;

Okoda et al. 2018; Imai et al. 2019). By use of these models, central mass, speciﬁc angular

momentum of the gas, and the inclination angle of the disk/envelope system are evaluated.

For the outﬂow structure, the parabolic model has often been employed (e.g. Lee et al.

2000; Hirano et al. 2010; Arce et al. 2013; Oya et al. 2014, 2015). The model including the

outﬂow rotation is also invoked, because the rotation motion of the outﬂow/jet has been

detected in some sources (e.g. Hirota et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2018; Oya et al. 2018b). With

the outﬂow models, the inclination angle of the outﬂow axis with respect to the line of sight

in the vicinity of the protostar can be derived, which helps the analysis of the disk/envelope

system (e.g. Oya et al. 2014, 2017, 2018b). Moreover, a possible rotation of outﬂows can be

discussed in relation to the speciﬁc angular momentum of the gas derived from the analysis

of the infalling-rotating envelope (Oya et al. 2018b, 2021). Information derived with the

simple models will be useful as initial constraints for detailed MHD simulations.

– 7 –

In the ALMA era, the above models of the disk/envelope system and the outﬂow

system are becoming more and more important for characterization of observed results. To

make such analyses easier, general simulation tools for these systems are useful. With this

in mind, we developed a computer program ‘FERIA’ (Flat Envelope model with Rotation

and Infall under Angular momentum conservation) for calculating data cubes of the

infalling-rotating envelope and Keplerian-disk models by mock observations. This program

is public in GitHub1. The model is not a full simulation considering hydrodynamics,

magnetic ﬁeld, radiation transfer, and various other factors speciﬁc to each source. However,

its simplicity rather helps us to extract the essence of observed kinematic structures. Since

this program outputs a cube FITS ﬁle, it is easy to compare with the observational data.

This program can also be used to generate mock data for the analyses using supervised

machine learnings.

In this paper, we describe the model in Section 2. We introduce how to use the codes

in Section 3, and summarize some examples of the model results in Section 4. Moreover, we

present some applications of FERIA to actual observational data in Section 5. We discuss

the applicability of this model in Section 6 with some caveats for a practical use. Finally,

Section 7 summarizes the paper.

2. Basic Formulae and Key Assumptions of the Envelope Model

2.1. Overview

FERIA assumes the axisymmetric structure of the disk/envelope system of a ﬁnite size

with/without ﬂared structure (Figure 1). Gas motion is approximated by a ballistic motion

and/or the Keplerian rotation of the central mass, where the self-gravity of the gas is not

1https://github.com/YokoOya/FERIA

– 8 –

considered (Figure 1e). Distributions of the gas density and molecular emissivity are given

a priori in the power-law form. FERIA calculates the data cube of a mock observation for

a disk/envelope system with a given inclination angle, taking a ﬁnite spatial and spectral

resolutions into account.

Speciﬁcally, FERIA deﬁnes the mesh (Figure 1f) and calculates the velocity vector of the

gas element in each mesh. Then, FERIA calculates the line intensity for each position on the

2-dimensional (position-position) plane of the sky by using the assumed distributions of gas

density and molecular emissivity. Each position has a 1-dimensional (velocity) spectrum,

which is obtained by projecting the contribution from the gas elements along the line of

sight onto the plane of the sky. Finally, convolutions for the limited beam size and spectral

resolution are applied for the position-position plane and the velocity axis, respectively,

to obtain the output cube in the position-position-velocity manner. With this cube data,

comparison with the observation data can be done in various ways. FERIA can provides

position-velocity (PV) diagrams, which are often used for the comparison.

Table 1 summarizes the physical parameters used in the disk/envelope model, as well

as additional parameters necessary for model calculations and header information. Their

details are described in Section 3.

2.2. Geometric and Kinematic Structures

Figure 1 shows the geometric structure assumed in FERIA. The thickness of the

disk/envelope system is assumed to be constant or ﬂared as the distance from the protostar

(Figure 1d). Mock observation is performed by incorporating the eﬀect of the inclination

angle and the position angle (P.A.) of the major axis in the plane of the sky.

– 9 –

FERIA employs the envelope model with infall and rotation motion of a gas element

under the conservation of the energy and the angular momentum, i.e. the ballistic motion.

As well, FERIA outputs a mock observation of a Keplerian disk model and that of a

combination of a ballistic model and a Keplerian disk model.

The theoretical model for an envelope with the ballistic motion was ﬁrst developed

by Cassen & Moosman (1981). Ohashi et al. (1997) and Momose et al. (1998) presented

a simpliﬁed model in order to interpret the rotation structure of low-mass protostellar

cores, where the infall motion and the rotation motion are assumed to be independent.

Sakai et al. (2014a) reported the observational results of the c−C3H2 line showing the

kinematic structure which can be interpreted as the ballistic motion described below. A

three-dimensional model of an infalling-rotating envelope was constructed to simulate its

kinematic structure by Oya et al. (2014), which in fact reproduced the kinematic structure

observed for the protostellar source L1527 (Sakai et al. 2014b). The kinematic structure

employed in FERIA is essentially the same as the ‘infalling-rotating envelope model’ reported

by Oya et al. (2014).

In this model, the ballistic motion to the central source is assumed; i.e., the gas is

simply assumed to be falling and rotating under the gravity of a central protostar. Thus,

the motion of the gas is approximated by the particle motion, ignoring eﬀects of gas

pressure, magnetic ﬁeld, and self-gravity. Because of the energy and angular momentum

conservation, the gas cannot fall inward of a certain radius, or the periastron. This position

is called as the ‘centrifugal barrier’ in this model (Figure 1e). The radius of the centrifugal

barrier (rCB) is represented as;

rCB =

j2
2GM

,

(1)

where G is the gravitational constant, M is the central (protostellar) mass, and j is the

speciﬁc angular momentum of the gas. It is the radius at which all the kinetic energy is

– 10 –

converted to the rotational energy. It is a half of the centrifugal radius (rCR), where the

gravitational force and the centrifugal force balances with each other;

rCR =

j2
GM

= 2rCB.

(2)

(3)

A basic concept of the centrifugal barrier is introduced to explain the kinematic structure of

the infalling-rotating envelope of a low-mass protostellar source L1527 (Sakai et al. 2014a).

Rotation and infall velocities (vrot and vfall) of the gas at the distance of r to the

protostar are represented as follows;

j
r
1
r
(cid:114)

vrot =

=

vfall =

(cid:112)

2GM rCB,

2GM
r

− v2
rot

=

1
r

(cid:112)2GM (r − rCB).

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Thus, the velocity ﬁeld is determined by M and rCB. The inclination angle (i) of the

disk/envelope system also aﬀects the apparent velocity along the line of sight. At the

centrifugal barrier, vfall equals to 0, and vrot takes its maximum value. On the other hand,

vfall takes its maximum value at the centrifugal radius. This situation is shown in Figure 2.

2.3. Calculation of the Line Intensity

For intensity simulations, the gas distribution has to be provided.

In FERIA, a

power-law radial distribution is adopted, where no gas is assumed inside a speciﬁc radius

(see Section 3.2.2). The power-law of r−1.5 corresponds to the density proﬁle of an infalling

cloud (e.g. Shu 1977; Ohashi et al. 1997; Harvey et al. 2003). An optically thin condition

– 11 –

is also assumed in this model, where the intensity of the line emission is proportional to

the column density along the line of sight. Namely, excitation eﬀects and radiative transfer

eﬀects are not considered. These assumptions are rather arbitrary. However, these eﬀects

can eﬀectively be incorporated by changing the power-law index of the gas distribution.

If the main purpose of the simulation is to reproduce the velocity ﬁeld of the gas, these

assumptions do not aﬀect the results seriously. Nevertheless, ones may want to consider the

above eﬀects. For such a purpose, the scripts of FERIA is open to modify by themselves.

A spectral line is assumed to have an intrinsic Gaussian proﬁle with a certain line

width, and an intensity distribution is spatially convolved with a Gaussian beam with a

certain full width at half maximum (FWHM).

3. Practical Information in Using FERIA

FERIA is distributed in GitHub2, which consists of seven C++ ﬁles and one header

ﬁle. Makefile to build this program and a template ﬁle to input are also available in

GitHub. As well, a python script to run FERIA recursively with various combinations of the

parameter values is provided.

FERIA outputs a FITS ﬁle for easy comparison between model results and observational

data. For this purpose, this program requires CFITS library installed in advance. CFITS

is a C and Fortran subroutines for reading and writing FITS ﬁles (Pence 1999), which is

distributed by NASA3. Users of FERIA may need to modify the Makefile according to the

conﬁguration of CFITS library in their environments.

2https://github.com/YokoOya/FERIA

3https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/fitsio/

– 12 –

3.1. Mesh in FERIA

FERIA considers a three-dimensional (position-position-position; PPP) gas structure,

and it outputs a mock observational result as a three-dimensional (position-position-velocity;

PPV) FITS ﬁle, i.e. a data cube. Its geometrical structure is shown in Figures 1(a−d),

while its kinematic structure is in Figure 1(e) (see Section 2.2). They are divided into small

elements as shown in Figure 1(f). Here, nested gridding is not employed, which would cause

artifact features (see Section 3.4). This is because the major purpose of FERIA is to output

a pile of data cubes with its agility rather than to perform an attentive simulation (see

Section 5).

In the convolution processes mentioned in Section 2.3, the intrinsic line width and the

beam size are used, which depend on each observation. Thus, mesh sizes for simulations

need to be adjusted for each observation project (see Section 3.2.5).

3.2.

Input Parameters

Table 1 summarizes the parameters for the model. These parameters are speciﬁed in

the input ﬁle (see template.in), except for two parameters (lbNpix and lbNvel) speciﬁed

in the header ﬁle (feria.h). Some of them are key free parameters, while the others need

to be given as the header information for the output FITS ﬁle.

3.2.1. Header Information for the Output FITS File

The output FITS ﬁle is named after the input values of the physical parameters by

default. Alternatively, the output ﬁle name can be given voluntarily as long as its length

does not exceed the limit given in the header ﬁle (lfilename in feria.h; 256 as the

– 13 –

default). When a FITS ﬁle with the output ﬁle name already exists, it will be replaced

by the new model result with the ‘overwrite’ parameter of ‘y’ (yes). With the ‘overwrite’

parameter of ‘n’ (no), the ﬁle is replaced only if its numbers of the mesh are diﬀerent from

the current setting (see Section 3.2.5).

For easy comparison between model results and observational data of an actual

target source, the output FITS ﬁle of the model has some header information. The ﬁeld

center of the FITS ﬁle is given by its frame (e.g. ICRS, J2000) and coordinates (the right

ascension and the declination). The central source is assumed to be at these coordinates.

The line-of-sight velocity is obtained as the combination of the gas motion and the

systemic velocity of the source. Thus, the output FITS ﬁle can directly be overlaid on the

observational data in usual softwares for viewing and analyzing data cubes.

In addition, the model has parameters as optional notes; the name of the source, the

molecular line transition, and its rest frequency. These parameters do not aﬀect the model

result.

3.2.2.

Input Parameters for the Geometric/Kinematic Structures

As seen in the Eqs. (1)−(7), the kinematic structure can be obtained for given M

and rCB. The distance to the object (d) and the inclination angle of the disk/envelope

system (i; Figure 1b) also aﬀect the modeled data cube. The model takes into account the

position angle (P.A.) of the disk/envelope system for easy comparison with observational

data; the P.A. of the disk/envelope system is deﬁned as the P.A. of the line along which the

mid-plane of the disk/envelope system extends (Figure 1c). The direction of the rotation

motion is speciﬁed by an integer (1 or −1); ‘1’ and ‘-1’ stand for the counterclockwise and

clockwise rotation, respectively, with the inclination angle of 0◦ (Figure 1e). These are the

– 14 –

main parameters for calculating the kinematic structure.

The physical structure is deﬁned by the following parameters; the outer and inner radii

of the envelope (Rout, Rin) in au, the thickness of the gas structure (Henv) in au, and the

ﬂare angle of the scale height (Fenv) in degree. Figure 1(d) schematically shows what these

parameters denote. No molecular emission is assumed if the distance from the protostar

(r) is larger than the outer radius or smaller than the inner radius. The gas structure is

assumed to be a thin disk with the constant thickness of Henv, or a ﬂared one with a ﬂare

angle of Fenv. If both thickness and ﬂare angle are set to be non-zero values, the model

incorporates both of them as shown in Figure 1(d); the thickness of the gas structure

increases with the input ﬂare angle (Fenv), where its extrapolated value at the protostar

equals to the input thickness (Henv).

FERIA can model a Keplerian disk as well as an infalling-rotating envelope. To obtain a

Keplerian disk model, rCB is set to be larger than Rout. The following physical parameters

are for the Keplerian disk component corresponding to those for the infalling-rotating

envelope component: Hdisk and Fdisk.

Moreover, a combination of the infalling-rotating envelope and the Keplerian disk

inside it can be modeled by FERIA (Figure 1e). To obtain such a model, rCB is set to be

smaller than Rout and larger than Rin. In this case, the transition zone from the envelope

to the disk is at the centrifugal barrier.

3.2.3.

Input Parameters for the Line Emissivity

The molecular density is assumed to have a power-law radial distribution. Its value

at the centrifugal barrier is denoted as nCB(X). αdens

env denotes the power-law index of

the molecular density in the envelope component. As well, the gas temperature at the

– 15 –

centrifugal barrier and its power-law index are denoted as TCB and αtemp

env , respectively. αdens
disk

and αtemp

disk are the corresponding parameters for the Keplerian disk component.

In FERIA, the emissivity is simply assumed to be proportional to the product of

the column density of the molecule and the gas temperature. The absolute value of the

calculated intensity is not scaled to meet the actual line intensity. Thus, the absolute

value of the calculated intensity in each pixel does not have physical meaning, while the

relative intensity between the pixels has some meaning. The line intensity projected onto

the plane of the sky can be normalized by its maximum value by setting the ‘Normalize’

parameter to be ‘y’. Users of this model may want to take into account the excitation eﬀect

and/or radiation transfer for calculating the molecular intensity. They can modify the

feria sky.cpp ﬁle to meet their needs. As well, any density and temperature distributions

can be incorporated by editing the feria env.cpp ﬁle.

3.2.4.

Input Parameters for Convolution

The line intensity is convolved with the intrinsic line width of the gas and the Gaussian

beam. A spectral line at each three-dimensional position is assumed to have an intrinsic

Gaussian proﬁle whose FWHM is given by the parameter ‘Linewidth’ in the input ﬁle. After

the projection onto the plane of the sky, the line intensity is convolved with the Gaussian

beam. The Gaussian beam is deﬁned by the FWHM of major and minor axes and the P.A.

of the major axis.

3.2.5.

Input Parameters for the Mesh

The numbers of the mesh for the three position-axes and the velocity axis are speciﬁed

in the header ﬁle (feria.h) to input to the program. The number of the mesh is set to

– 16 –

be 2lbNpix for the position axes and 2lbNvel for the velocity axis. See Section 3.3 for the

limitation for these values.

The mesh size of the position and velocity axes are speciﬁed in the input ﬁle to

the program (template.in). The mesh size of the position axis (‘pixel size’) is given in

arcsecond, while that of the velocity axis (‘velocity resolution’) is given in km s−1. It should

be noted that the mesh size of the velocity axis does not always assure the resolution for

the velocity, if the image suﬀers from coarse sampling along the position axes, as described

in Section 3.4.

The ﬁeld size of the map is obtained as (pixel size ×2lbNpix), while the velocity range is

from −(velocity resolution ×2lbNvel−1) to +(velocity resolution ×2lbNvel−1) centered at the

systemic velocity of the source.

3.2.6.

Input Parameters for Position-Velocity Diagrams

FERIA outputs a PV diagram as well as a data cube. The position axis of the PV

diagram is deﬁned with its P.A. and central position. The central position is given as the

oﬀsets from the protostar (i.e. the ﬁeld center) in au. When the cube FITS ﬁle with the

output ﬁle name already exists and is not overwritten (Section 3.2.1), only a new FITS ﬁle

of a PV diagram is generated by importing the existing cube FITS ﬁle. If a FITS ﬁle of a

PV diagram with the same ﬁle name already exists, it is overwritten.

3.3. Notes on Computer Resources

The calculation time and required memory mostly depend on the numbers of the mesh

deﬁned by ‘lbNpix’ and ‘lbNvel’ (Section 3.2.5). With a computer with macOS Mojave and

– 17 –

the CPU of 3.7 GHz (Intel Xeon E5), the time for generating one new cube FITS ﬁle is

about 90 seconds with ‘lbNpix’ and ‘lbNvel’ of 8. The available values for these parameters

are restricted by the size of the random access memory (RAM) of users’ computers. For

instance, the maximum value for these parameters is 7 for computers with RAM of 8, 16,

and 32 GB, and is 8 for computers with RAM of 64 and 128 GB. This program does not

employ the parallel computing.

3.4. Caveats for Artiﬁcial Features

FERIA employs the discrete Fourier translation to convolve the intensity with the

Gaussian beam and the Gaussian line proﬁle. This can make fringes for coarse meshes.

In addition, the mesh sizes in this model are taken to be uniform for the whole cube,

so that the velocity resolution can be eﬀectively worse than that speciﬁed if the velocity

vector of the gas steeply changes within a small scale. This situation happens, for instance,

near the protostar. For this reason, a clumpy artifact feature often appears in the model

around the protostar, if the inner radius is small.

4. Examples of the Model Results

Figure 3 shows an example of the infalling-rotating envelope model result. Figure 3(a)

shows the integrated intensity map of the model, while Figure 3(b) shows the PV diagram

along the blue arrow shown in Figure 3(a). A protostar with the central mass (M ) of 0.3

M(cid:12) is located at the central position in Figure 3(a). The distance to the protostar from the

Sun (d) is set to be 100 pc. The envelope has an outer radius (Rout) of 500 au, and the

radius of the centrifugal barrier is 100 au. Note that there is no molecular emission outside

Rout and inside Rin (Rin = rCB) according to the speciﬁcation of FERIA (Section 3.2.2). The

– 18 –

envelope is assumed to have an edge-on conﬁguration (inclination angle of 90◦) extending

along the east-west axis. The integrated intensity relative to its peak value in the panel is

shown in a gray scale. The integrated intensity is the highest around the centrifugal barrier.

In the modeled PV diagram (Figure 3b), the angular oﬀset of 0(cid:48)(cid:48) corresponds to the

protostellar position. The vertical axis represents the line-of-sight velocity of the molecules

involving the systemic velocity of the source. In Figure 3(b), a spin-up feature can be seen

along the east-west axis; the rotation velocity increases as approaching to the centrifugal

barrier. The velocity takes its maximum and minimum value around the centrifugal barrier,

where the velocity is red-shifted and blue-shifted in the eastern and western sides of the

protostellar position, respectively. Since no gas resides inside the centrifugal barrier in this

model, the spin-up feature disappears at the centrifugal barrier. This is in contrast to

the Keplerian disk case described later (see Section 4.2). In addition, the counter-velocity

component due to the infall motion can be recognized. Toward the protostellar position,

only a velocity shift due to the infall motion can be seen, since the rotation motion is

perpendicular to the line of sight.

4.1. Envelope Models with Various Physical Parameters

Figures 4−6 show the model results with various parameter values. Figure 4 shows the

integrated intensity (moment 0) maps of the models with various inclination angles (i) and

the radii of the centrifugal barrier (rCB), while Figure 5 shows their velocity ﬁeld (moment

1) maps. Figure 6 shows the PV diagrams corresponding to Figure 5. The position axis in

the PV diagrams is along the mid-plane of the disk/envelope system (P.A. 270◦), which is

shown by the blue arrow in Figure 3(a). The other parameters are common for these models.

Some parameters do not aﬀect the calculation, as described in the caption of Figures 4−6,

and thus they are set arbitrarily. The employed parameter values are summarized in the

– 19 –

captions of these ﬁgures. The images are obtained by convolving the emission with the

intrinsic Gaussian proﬁle with the FWHM of 0.2 km s−1 and the Gaussian beam of (θmajor×

θminor) = (0.(cid:48)(cid:48)2 × 0.(cid:48)(cid:48)2) (P.A. 0◦).

In the following subsections, physical implications of some characteristic features seen

in the calculated images are described. This is useful not only to understand the model but

also to interpret the observed images.

4.1.1.

Integrated Intensity Maps and Velocity Field Maps

In Figure 4, the maps for the edge-on conﬁguration (a highly inclined conﬁguration;

i = 90◦) show double-peaked intensity distributions. At i of 30◦ and 60◦, an elliptic hole

of the intensity distribution is seen. With the face-on conﬁguration (i = 0◦), the intensity

distributions show ring-like structures. These holes appear because there is no molecular

emission inside the radius of the centrifugal barrier in this model (Section 3.2.2). For each

case, the intensity takes the maximum value near the centrifugal barrier.

The velocity of the gas in the model depends on the central mass (M ) as well as i

and rCB. The central mass only scales the value of velocity up and down, and it does not

essentially aﬀect the overall appearance of the velocity ﬁeld map. Thus, we show the results

for various i and rCB with the ﬁxed central mass in Figure 5.

In the edge-on conﬁguration (i = 90◦) case in Figure 5, the averaged velocity in the

eastern and western sides of the protostar is red- and blue-shifted, respectively. These

velocity shifts represent the rotation motion around the protostar. The maximum velocity

shifts are seen around the centrifugal barrier, which is consistent with the velocity proﬁle of

the infalling-rotating motion (Figure 2). The velocity does not show any gradient along the

north-south axis.

– 20 –

On the other hand, a velocity gradient along the north-south axis is seen in the

panels for i of 30◦ and 60◦. These velocity gradients are due to the infall motion. As

shown in Figure 1, the northern edge of the envelope is close to us in the cases with

positive i and a P.A. of 90◦. Thus, the line emission is red-shifted in the northern side

of the protostar. In these panels, the velocity ﬁelds show skewed features; the most red-

and blue-shifted components are seen in the northeastern and southwestern sides of the

protostar, respectively. This is because that the velocity components of the rotation and

infall motion projected along the line of sight have the same direction (see Figure 1e) at

these positions. Such a skewed feature was ﬁrst revealed in the observation of L1551 IRS

5 by Momose et al. (1998). The results for the face-on conﬁguration (i = 0◦) are trivial;

the velocity shift is completely symmetric to the mid-plane of the envelope, and thus, the

averaged velocity is inﬁnitesimal everywhere.

4.1.2. Position-Velocity Diagrams

Figure 6 shows the PV diagrams along the major axis of the disk/envelope system (P.A.

270◦). For the edge-on conﬁguration (i = 90◦), the spin-up feature toward the centrifugal

barrier is seen regardless of rCB. The maximum velocity-shift seen at the centrifugal barrier

is larger for a smaller rCB, if the other parameters are ﬁxed (see Eq. (5)). The infall motion

can be conﬁrmed as the counter-velocity components. The velocity shifts at the angular

oﬀset of 0(cid:48)(cid:48) (i.e. the position of the protostar) also reﬂect the infall motion. For i of 30◦ and

60◦, the counter-velocity components are not seen in most of panels, while they can slightly

be seen in the case for rCB of 30 au at i of 60◦. The gas having considerable infall motion in

the models for rCB of 100 and 300 au are distant from the protostellar position on the plane

of the sky. Therefore, these components are almost outside the beam, and do not make

eﬀective contributions to these PV diagrams. Thus, investigating the velocity gradient

– 21 –

perpendicular to the mid-plane of the disk/envelope system is essential for inclined cases,

as demonstrated below and presented by Oya et al. (2016) for instance. For the face-on

conﬁguration (i = 0◦), it is natural that a velocity gradient due to the infall and rotation

motion cannot be seen regardless of rCB.

Figure 7 shows the model results of the PV diagrams prepared along six P.A.s for i

of 0◦, 30◦, 60◦, and 90◦. The rCB value is ﬁxed to be 100 au. The P.A.s of the position

axes are taken for every 30◦, as shown by arrows in Figure 5. The P.A.s of ‘270◦’ and ‘0◦’

represent the direction along the mid-plane of the envelope and that perpendicular to it,

respectively. For the edge-on conﬁguration (i = 90◦), the distributions look concentrated

around the protostar in all the PV diagrams except for the P.A. of 270◦. A slight velocity

gradient can be seen for these P.A.s, except for the P.A. of 0◦ (the direction perpendicular

to the mid-plane). For the diagram with the P.A. of 0◦, only the velocity shift due to the

infall motion near the ‘centrifugal radius’ is visible, which is a half of the peak velocity-shift

of the rotation motion at the centrifugal barrier (Figure 2).

At i of 30◦ and 60◦, the kinematic structure systematically changes from P.A. to P.A.,

which is caused by the complex combination of the rotation and infall motions. As shown in

Figures 1(e) and 5, the rotation and infall motions cancel each other in the southeastern and

northwestern sides of the protostar, while they strengthen each other in the northeastern

and southwestern sides. For this reason, the absolute values of the velocity shift tend to

be higher in the diagrams with the P.A. of 30◦ and 60◦ (southwest-northeast) than those

with the P.A. of 300◦ and 330◦ (southeast-northwest). The velocity shifts due to the infall

motion is seen for the P.A. of 0◦. Since the infall motion has its maximum velocity at the

centrifugal radius, the maximum velocity shift appears at a position with a slight oﬀset

from the protostar. For the face-on conﬁguration (i = 0◦), no velocity gradient is seen for

any P.A.

– 22 –

4.2. Comparison with the Keplerian Disk Model

In analyses of rotating structures around young stellar objects, a thin-disk model with

the Keplerian rotation is frequently employed. FERIA can also generate a FITS ﬁle of a

data cube for the Keplerian disk (Section 3.2.2). Figure 8 shows the model results of the

Keplerian disk. Although the results are trivial and well known, we present these ﬁgures to

compare them with the results for the infalling-rotating motion described in Section 4.1.

In the Keplerian disk model, the velocity of the gas at the radius r from the protostar

is represented as;

vKep =

(cid:114)

GM
r

,

vfall = 0.

(8)

As shown in Figure 2, the Keplerian velocity takes a smaller value than vrot with the

infalling-rotating motion by a factor of

2 at the centrifugal barrier (r = rCB) for the

√

same central mass, while it equals to vrot and vfall of the infalling-rotating motion at the

centrifugal radius (r = 2rCB).

Figure 8 shows the integrated intensity maps, the velocity ﬁeld maps, and the PV

diagrams of the Keplerian disk models for various inclination angles (i). In these models, the

central mass (M ) and the outer radius (Rout) are ﬁxed to 0.3 M(cid:12) and 500 au, respectively.

The constant thickness (Hdisk) of 50 au is assumed. The other parameters are summarized

in the caption.

In the integrated intensity maps (Figure 8a), the distributions look compact and

are concentrated around the protostar. Since the density of the gas is assumed to be

proportional to r−1.5 in this case, the contribution from the vicinity of the protostar is

dominant. This appearance is in contrast to the infalling-rotating envelope model case

described in Section 4.1.1, where the peak intensities are seen near the centrifugal barrier.

In the velocity ﬁeld maps (Figure 8b), the rotation motion is clearly visible. It is well-known

– 23 –

that the velocity ﬁeld of the Keplerian disk has reﬂection symmetry with respect to

the disk mid-plane regardless of the inclination angle. This is again in contrast to the

infalling-rotating envelope model case, which shows a skewed feature (Figure 5).

In the PV diagrams along the disk mid-plane (P.A. 270◦), the spin-up feature is

seen, except for the model with a face-on conﬁguration (i = 0◦). When the kinematic

structure is well resolved by a beam, no counter-velocity component is seen in contrast to

the infalling-rotating envelope model case (Figure 6) because of the absence of the infall

motion. In the PV diagrams along the direction perpendicular to the disk mid-plane (P.A.

0◦), no velocity gradient is seen regardless of i, while the infalling-rotating envelope model

shows a velocity gradient along this direction due to the infall motion. These diﬀerent

behaviors between the Keplerian disk model and the infalling-rotating envelope model

correspond to the diﬀerence of their velocity ﬁeld maps described above (Figures 5 and 8b).

On the basis of these features, we can discriminate between the Keplerian motion and the

infalling-rotating envelope in principle. However, such discrimination is not always obvious

for observed data in practice, as shown later.

5. Comparison with the Actual Observations

5.1. General Aim of the Model

The infalling-rotating envelope model described in Section 2 is a quite simpliﬁed one

as mentioned in Section 1; the model does not consider any excitation eﬀects, radiative

transfer eﬀects, abundance variations of molecules, hydrodynamics eﬀects, the eﬀect of the

self-gravity of the gas, and temporal variation of the angular momentum. In reality, the

emission may be optically thick in some parts, and the distribution itself may be asymmetric

around the protostar. Moreover, the infalling-rotating envelope model is not appropriate

– 24 –

in some cases (see Section 6.2). Thus, it is not very fruitful to make a ﬁne tuning of the

model so as to better match with the observed intensity. Thus, these models have been

used just for extracting the fundamental characteristics of the observed kinematic structure

(e.g. Sakai et al. 2014b; Oya et al. 2016).

The advantage of FERIA is its agility and easiness to use in comparison with full

hydrodynamics simulations including the above detailed eﬀects. Thus, the analysis with

using FERIA helps observers to ﬁnd reasonable physical parameter values for their target

sources instantly, which can be used as the initial parameters for further analyses.

5.2. Obtaining the Best Fit Parameters

In this section, we present some examples of the model analysis by using FERIA for

actual observational data taken with ALMA. So far, model simulations with a wide range

of physical parameters and eye-based ﬁtting have usually been employed. We here perform

unbiased evaluation of the parameter values by using the cube data.

In model analyses, chi-squared (χ2) tests are often employed to derive the best model

parameters. For instance, Oya & Yamamoto (2020) performed the reduced χ2 tests for

the PV diagrams. They prepared the PV diagrams of the observed line emissions and the

models along the major axis of the disk mid-plane. We can perform similar tests for cube

data by using FERIA. We here show trials of a χ2 test for the observational data toward three

young low-mass protostellar sources: L1527 IRS (hereafter L1527), B335, and Elias 29. The

ﬁtting for L1527 is performed to conﬁrm the applicability of FERIA. B335 is employed as

an example for an infall-dominated system with a slight rotation motion. To the contrast,

Elias 29 has been reported to have a Keplerian disk. Details of the observation and the

analysis for L1527 are described in Appendix A, while those for B335 and Elias 29 were

– 25 –

already reported by Imai et al. (2019) and Oya et al. (2019), respectively. For each target

source, we prepare a data cube of a molecular line observed with ALMA concentrated in

the vicinity of the protostar.

Model simulations are performed by using FERIA for various sets of the central mass

(M ) and the inclination angle (i) as the free parameters. As well, the radius of the

centrifugal barrier (rCB) or the inner radius (Rin) of the emitting region is employed as

a free parameter for the infalling-rotating envelope model or the Keplerian disk model,

respectively. We calculate the reduced χ2 values between the observed and modeled data

cubes4, and ﬁnd the best-ﬁt parameter values. Contribution to the reduced χ2 values from

imperfection of the model would overwhelm those of the statistical noise. Under such a

constraint, it is diﬃcult to quantitatively discuss the likelihood for the parameter ranges.

Therefore, we just demonstrate unbiased screenings for the parameter sets in this study,

while further interpretation of the results of the model analyses are left for future studies

on individual sources.

5.2.1. Chi-Squared Test: L1527 Case

The ﬁrst case is a protostellar source whose inclination angle of the disk/envelope

system is well constrained. It is L1527 IRS (IRAS 04365+2557), the Class 0/I protostellar

source in Taurus. The disk/envelope system of L1527 has an almost edge-on conﬁguration

with the inclination angle of 95◦ (Tobin et al. 2013; Oya et al. 2015). This source is already

known to have the infalling-rotating envelope based on the previous observational studies.

The infalling-rotating motion of the gas has been detected in various molecular lines: C18O

4The intensities in each model cube are scaled to reduce the χ2 value, preserving the

relative intensity among pixels.

– 26 –

by Ohashi et al. (2014) and Aso et al. (2017), c−C3H2 and CCH by Sakai et al. (2014a,b),

and CS by Oya et al. (2015). Thus, this source is a good test case to conﬁrm that FERIA

works for the actual observation data.

We perform a χ2 test for the CS (J = 3 − 2) emission observed with ALMA (see

Appendix A). The CS emission is suitable for this study, because it is known to trace the

disk/envelope system of L1527 (Oya et al. 2015) and to be free from the contamination by

other molecular lines. Moreover, our CS (J = 3 − 2) data observed in ALMA Cycle 4 have

a better quality than the CS (J = 5 − 4) data in ALMA Cycle 0 reported by Sakai et al.

(2014b) and Oya et al. (2015). The free parameters for each case are summarized in Table

2. The inclination angle (i) of 95◦ is employed according to the previous reports (Tobin et

al. 2013; Oya et al. 2015), where the western side of the disk/envelope system faces us (Oya

et al. 2015). Rout is ﬁxed to be 500 au according to the distribution of the CS emission.

The distance (d) of 137 pc is employed for the consistency with our previous report (Oya

et al. 2015). The emission in the following models is convolved with the Gaussian beam of

0.(cid:48)(cid:48)459 × 0.(cid:48)(cid:48)400 (P.A. −20.098◦) and the intrinsic line width of 0.5 km s−1. Since there is a

contamination from the outﬂow component in the CS emission, only the data points within

the speciﬁed region and the velocity range are considered (Figures 9a, 11a).

The χ2 test is performed for the model of the infalling-rotating envelope, according to

the aforementioned previous reports. The free parameters for the χ2 test are the protostellar

mass (M ) and the radius of the centrifugal barrier (rCB). Their values for the best-ﬁt model

are summarized in Table 2.

The best-ﬁt model is compared with the observation in Figures 9−11. The obtained

infalling-rotating envelope model reasonably reproduces the observed ﬂattened distribution

in the integrated intensity map. As well, the velocity gradient along the north-south

direction in the observation is reproduced. Figure 12 shows the reduced χ2 map for the

– 27 –

various values for the two free parameters. The central mass (M ) seems well constrained

with the infalling-rotating envelope model.

It is notable that the values obtained in this analysis (M of 0.15 M(cid:12), rCB of 100 au) are

reasonably consistent with the previous reports; for instance, Sakai et al. (2014a) assumed

M of 0.18 M(cid:12) and rCB of 100 au based on the morphology in one PV diagram prepared

along the mid-plane of the envelope. Our analysis taking the PPV (cube) data into account

indeed reproduces the previous result.

5.2.2. Chi-Squared Test: B335 Case

The second case is a source with a very small rotation motion. B335 is a Bok globule

harboring a low-mass Class 0 protostar IRAS 19347+0727 (Keene et al. 1980). This is

an isolated source, and thus, its physical and kinematic structures have extensively been

studied as a good test bed of the protostellar evolution studies (e.g. Hirano et al. 1988, 1992;

Chandler & Sargent 1993; Zhou et al. 1993; Wilner et al. 2000; Harvey et al. 2001; Yen et

al. 2020; Cabedo et al. 2021). Evans et al. (2015) and Yen et al. (2015) detected the infall

motion of the gas associated with the protostar with ALMA. The small rotation motion

on a 10-au scale in its disk/envelope system was investigated with ALMA at resolutions

of 10 au and 3 au by Imai et al. (2019) and Bjerkeli et al. (2019), respectively. Imai et

al. (2019) reported that the PV diagram observed at a 10 au resolution is better ﬁtted by

the infalling-rotating motion than the Keplerian motion, and they derived the protostellar

mass of (0.02 − 0.06) M(cid:12). Meanwhile, Bjerkeli et al. (2019) just assumed the Keplerian

motion and derived the protostellar mass to be 0.05 M(cid:12) by using the PV diagram of their

data. Hence, the origin of the rotation motion in this source is still controversial. A nearly

edge-on geometry is preferable for B335 based on its outﬂow geometry (Hirano et al. 1988;

Yen et al. 2010; Imai et al. 2016; Bjerkeli et al. 2019).

– 28 –

We perform a χ2 test for the infalling-rotating envelope model and the Keplerian

disk model on the cube data of the CH3OH (126,7 − 135,8; E) emission reported by Imai

et al. (2019). They reported that this molecular line traces the marginal rotation motion

in B335. The free parameters for each case are summarized in Table 3. Rout is ﬁxed to

10 au according to the distribution of the CH3OH emission. The distance (d) to B335 was

reported to be 100 pc by Olofsson & Olofsson (2009), and was later updated to be 164.5 pc

by Watson (2020). We employ the former for the consistency with the previous work by

Imai et al. (2019). The emission in the following models is convolved with the Gaussian

beam of 0.(cid:48)(cid:48)116 × 0.(cid:48)(cid:48)082 (P.A. −56.692◦) and the intrinsic line width of 1.0 km s−1.

The best-ﬁt models are compared with the observation in Figures 13−16. The observed

CH3OH (126,7 − 135,8; E) emission has a compact and almost circular distribution, which

is reproduced by the two models (Figures 13a−c). Imai et al. (2019) detected the velocity

gradient along the northwest-southeast direction (Figure 13d), which is tilted from the

mid-plane of the disk/envelope system along the north-south direction, and attributed it

to the infall motion of the gas. It is indeed reproduced by the infalling-rotating envelope

model (Figure 13e). The channel maps of the models seem to reasonably reproduce the

observation in Figures 14 and 15. Figure 16 shows the PV diagrams along the mid-plane of

the disk/envelope system; a velocity gradient due to the small rotation motion is fortunately

detected in the observation, and it is reproduced by either model.

Figure 17 shows the reduced χ2 maps for various parameter values. The protostellar

mass is reasonably constrained by either model. rCB and Rin are also constrained, while the

inclination angle is not. Although the rotation motion of the gas in B335 is marginal in the

observation, the analysis with the models is found to be useful to constrain the physical

parametes.

The best-ﬁt results for the infalling-rotating envelope model and the Keplerian disk

– 29 –

model are summarized in Table 3. The lowest reduced χ2 values for these two case are

comparable; the kinematic structure observed in the CH3OH (126,7 − 135,8; E) emission

can be approximated by either kinematic structure. The small rotation motion in B335 is

indeed reﬂected in the parameters of the models: the small central mass (M ) and the small

radius of the centrifugal barrier (rCB).

The maximum-likelihood value of M for the best-ﬁt models are diﬀerent between the

infalling-rotating envelope model and the Keplerian model (Table 3); smaller M is obtained

for the infalling-rotating envelope model. This is a natural consequence of the diﬀerent

formulation of the models, where the mass estimated from the rotation velocity at the

centrifugal barrier by assuming the infalling-rotating motion is the half of that estimated

by assuming the Keplerian motion (see Eqs. (5) and (8)).

5.2.3. Chi-Squared Test: Elias 29 Case

The third case is a source with an ordinary inclination angle. Elias 29 is the Class I

protostellar source in Ophiuchus. In this source, the rotation motion of the gas associated

with its protostar was detected in the SO (JN = 67 − 56) emission by Oya et al. (2019). They

reported that the observed kinematic structure is reasonably explained by the Keplerian

disk model, where M is 1.0 M(cid:12), i is 65◦, and Rout is 100 au. In their report, the mid-plane

of the disk/envelope system is assumed to lie along the north-south direction (P.A. 0◦). It

was reported that a fully face-on conﬁguration (i = 0◦) is unlikely for Elias 29 (Lommen

et al. 2008), and the inclination angle was constrained to be from 65◦ to 115◦ (Oya et al.

2019).

Elias 29 is a relatively evolved Class I source judging from its high bolometric

temperature (Miotello et al. 2014). Thus, it is naturally expected to have a Keplerian disk,

– 30 –

as assumed by Oya et al. (2019). However, is this really the case? In this study, we examine

a possibility of an infall motion in this source as well as that of a Keplerian motion with the

aid of FERIA.

We perform a χ2 test for the SO (JN = 67 − 56) data reported by Oya et al. (2019).

The free parameters for the infalling-rotating envelope model and the Keplerian disk model

are summarized in Table 4. Rout is ﬁxed to be 50 au according to the distribution of the SO

emission. The distance (d) to Elias 29 was reported to be (137 − 147) pc by Ortiz-Le´on et

al. (2017) and 141+30

−21 pc by Dzib et al. (2018). We employ d of 137 pc in this study for the

consistency with our previous work (Oya et al. 2019). We assume that the mid-plane of the

disk/envelope system of Elias 29 extends along the northeast-southwest direction with the

position angle of 30◦, judging from the outﬂow directions (Ceccarelli et al. 2002; Ybarra et

al. 2006; Bussmann et al. 2007). The emission in the following models is convolved with the

Gaussian beam of 0.(cid:48)(cid:48)832 × 0.(cid:48)(cid:48)488 (P.A. −85.833◦) and the intrinsic line width of 1.0 km s−1.

The best-ﬁt results for the infalling-rotating envelope model and the Keplerian

disk model are summarized in Table 4. Again, M is obtained to be smaller for the

infalling-rotating envelope model (0.6 M(cid:12)) than the Keplerian disk model (1.4 M(cid:12)). This

diﬀerence can mainly be interpreted as the expected diﬀerence by a factor of 2 following

Eqs. (5) and (8), as described in Section 5.2.2, although the diﬀerent inclination angles

between both models also contribute to the diﬀerence.

The best-ﬁt models are compared with the observation in Figures 18−21. The observed

SO (JN = 67 − 56) emission has an elliptic distribution tracing the disk/envelope system,

which is reproduced by both models (Figures 18a−c). As well, the velocity gradient along

the north-south direction in the observation is reproduced by the models (Figures 18e−g).

A skewed velocity feature with respect to the mid-plane direction (the red line in Figure

18a; P.A. 30◦) is marginally seen in the observation (Figure 18e). This trend seems a bit

– 31 –

overemphasized in the infalling-rotating envelope model (Figure 18f). In contrast, the

Keplerian model shows a velocity gradient rather close to the mid-plane direction. The

feature seen in the northwestern and southeastern parts of the Keplerian model would not

be robust; it is interpreted as the eﬀect of the large ﬂat beam, because it does not appear

with a small circular beam (Figure 8). The channel maps are shown in Figures 19 and 20,

and the PV diagrams along the mid-plane of the disk/envelope system are in Figure 21. A

small diﬀerence of the reduced χ2 values (Table 4) suggests that the observed kinematic

structure is explained by either model.

Figure 22 shows the reduced χ2 maps for various parameter values. The central mass

(M ) seems well constrained in both the two cases. The radius of the centrifugal barrier

(rCB) or the inner radius of the disk (Rin) are estimated to be much smaller than the beam

size (0.(cid:48)(cid:48)8 × 0.(cid:48)(cid:48)5 ∼ 100 au). Meanwhile, the inclination angle (i) is poorly constrained in

this analysis. Further discussion for the disk/envelope system of Elias 29 would become

possible when i is constrained by other approaches, for instance the analysis of the outﬂow

structure.

It should be noted that the lowest reduced χ2 value is smaller for the infalling-rotating

envelope model than the Keplerian model by 10%. This slight diﬀerence may not have a

statistical meaning due to the overwhelming contribution from the simple assumptions in

the models. Nevertheless, an infalling motion may contribute to the kinematic structure of

Elias 29 in addition to a pure Keplerian motion previously assumed by Oya et al. (2019).

Based on the above results, one may think that the actual situation would be the

hybrid case of the infalling-rotating motion and Keplerian motion. Since FERIA can simulate

such a hybrid case by the combined model, we here present a preliminary attempt to apply

it for the observed data to see how it works. The results will be useful for the user of FERIA

to apply the combined model for more complicated systems.

– 32 –

As a demonstration, the combined model is compared with the observation for Elias

29. In this model, the gas within the radius of the centrifugal barrier (rCB) is assumed to

be the Keplerian disk. The inner radius (Rin) is ﬁxed to be 1 au to reduce the parameter

space. The result of the reduced χ2 test is summarized in Table 4. The obtained rCB of 10

au suggests that there are both the contribution from the infalling-rotating envelope and

the Keplerian disk. The best-ﬁt model is compared with the observational result in Figures

18(d, h), 21(d), and 23.

As summarized in Table 4, the ﬁtting is slightly improved with the combined model

compared with the results for the infalling-rotating envelope model and the Keplerian

model. However, the improvement of χ2 value is too small to conclude that the obtained

values with the combined model reﬂect the actual physical conditions. Our result indicates

that the disk-forming region of this source needs to be further characterized with a higher

angular-resolution observations in the future.

5.2.4. Chi-Squared Test: Discussion

In previous works, the observed kinematic structures have typically been analyzed

in 2-dimensional manners; for instance, PV diagrams or velocity proﬁles, as described in

the above sections. Such analyses often eﬀectively focus on the characteristic features

in the observations, and it have helped us to constrain the physical parameters, such as

the protostellar mass. However, these analyses arbitrarily prune much information of the

3-dimensional cube data for simplicity. Such dimensional reduction may provide a biased

view on the kinematic structure. Thus, using all the 3-dimensional information is preferred

to characterize the observed kinematic structure. FERIA makes such comparison of the

3-dimensional data easier.

– 33 –

In the above sections, the χ2 test is applied for the 3-dimensional cube data for the

three sources. We ﬁnd that it is diﬃcult to discriminate the infalling-rotating motion and

the Keplerian rotation for B335 and Elias 29. For these cases, the rotation structures

are not well resolved, and higher spatial resolution observations may work for deﬁnitive

discrimination. The results for B335 and Elias 29 also imply that we should not too much

rely on the χ2 test of a single molecular line for discrimination. Limited quality and limited

resolutions of the data as well as contamination of the outﬂow components may aﬀect the

result.

Since some molecular emissions selectively trace a particular part of the disk/envelope

structure just as molecular markers (Sakai et al. 2014b; Oya et al. 2016, 2017; Oya

2020; Oya & Yamamoto 2020), selection of molecular lines in advance is very important.

Model analyses would get more successful by applying to molecular lines whose kinematic

structures are classiﬁed into the infalling-rotating motion or the Keplerian rotation in

preprocess. Based on multiple-molecular-line analyses, comprehensive consideration should

be made for full understanding of the disk/envelope structure. With this in mind, we

present a possible approach to classiﬁcation of molecular lines in the next section, as

another application of FERIA.

5.3. Combination with Machine/Deep Learnings

In the last decade, a plenty of observational data of ALMA have been archived for

open use. Some of them have a high spatial and velocity resolutions enough to trace the

kinematic structure in the vicinity of a protostar. With such a ﬂood of observational

data, it gets more and more important to analyze them eﬀectively and automatically.

In this context, it would be eﬀective to adopt machine/deep learnings for analyzing the

observational data (see Baron 2019).

– 34 –

In fact, for instance, the principal component analysis (PCA) is often employed to

analyze observational data in an unbiased way (e.g. Ungerechts et al. 1997; Meier &

Turner 2005; Neufeld et al. 2007; Watanabe et al. 2016; Spezzano et al. 2017; Okoda

et al. 2020, 2021). It is an unsupervised machine learning algorithm for dimensionality

reduction (Jolliﬀe 1986). Moreover, deep learning algorithms such as the convolutional

neutral networks (CNN) and the conditional generative adversarial networks (cGAN) (e.g.

Gillet et al. 2019; Shirasaki et al. 2019; Moriwaki et al. 2020) have recently been employed.

These previous works using machine learnings and deep learnings were mostly performed

for intensity distributions or line spectra, i.e. mainly for the studies of the morphology

of objects or the chemical composition. On the other hand, there are still no successful

attempt for the gas kinematics in protostellar sources as far as we know.

FERIA can generate one cube FITS ﬁle in a 10s seconds. It allows us to readily prepare a

heap of mock data cubes, which can be used as the training datasets for supervised learnings.

A possible application is the classiﬁcation of the observed gas kinematic structure into

the infalling-rotating envelope motion and the Keplerian motion in the three-dimensional

coordinate. Support vector classiﬁcation (SVC) and three-dimensional convolutional neural

network (3DCNN) are candidate supervised learning algorithms for this purpose. Since the

actual gas motion is often not pure ballistic nor pure Keplerian, the classiﬁcation may not

be perfect. Nevertheless, such automatic discrimination between them, if possible, will be

useful to deal with a large observational data as an initial classiﬁcation for further detailed

inspection.

We here present such an analysis with SVC to classify the infalling-rotating motion

and the Keplerian motion. Hereafter, we employ the stochastic gradient descent (SGD)

algorithm to train the classiﬁer by using the library provided by SCIKIT-LEARN5.

5https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.

– 35 –

We apply this analysis method to the ALMA observations toward 49 Ceti and IRAS

16293−2422 Source A.

5.3.1. Analysis with Support Vector Classiﬁcation: 49 Ceti Case

First, we apply the above analysis method to the ALMA observation toward the debris

disk of 49 Ceti. Since the CO and [CI] emissions clearly trace the Keplerian motion in this

source (Higuchi et al. 2019), they can be used as a good test case to assess the usability of

this analysis method.

By using FERIA, we ﬁrst prepare 9180 infalling-rotating envelope models and 9180

Keplerian disk models as the mock data set, which are simulated by using various

combination of the central mass (M ), the inclination angle (i), and the outer radius (Rout),

as summarized in Table 5. In addition, the radius of the centrifugal barrier (rCB) or the

inner radius (Rin) is added in the combinations for an infalling-rotating envelope or a

Keplerian disk, respectively. Note that values of rCB and Rin are employed only if they are

smaller than Rout. The other parameters are ﬁxed according to the characteristics of 49

Ceti in order to reduce the parameter space; for instance, we employ −72◦ as the P.A. of

its disk mid-plane (Higuchi et al. 2019). 80% among the mock data are randomly picked up

and are used as the training and validation data sets. The quality of the trained classiﬁer

is assessed by testing with the remaining 20% mock data as the evaluation data set. The

confusion matrix of this evaluation is shown in Table 6. The trained classiﬁer marks the

accuracy as high as 99.9%, where only 4 mock data are wrongly classiﬁed. Two of the

wrongly classiﬁed mock data have the completely face-on conﬁguration (i of 0◦ or 180◦),

and the other two have the smallest central mass (M of 0.50 M(cid:12)) in the parameter range

SGDClassifier.html

– 36 –

(Table 5). Because they have small velocity shifts, the kinematic structures are not well

resolved in the modeled data cubes. Thus, these 4 mock data are recognized as outliers

among the mock data, which are diﬃcult to classify. Therefore, the trained classiﬁer is

enough accurate to classify the two kinematic structures for ordinary cases.

Then, we apply this classiﬁer to the actual data cubes of the CO and [CI] emissions

observed with ALMA (Higuchi et al. 2019). The classiﬁer successfully classiﬁes the

kinematic structure of these two molecular emissions as the Keplerian motion as expected.

Therefore, this approach with a machine learning seems to work on the actual observation

data.

5.3.2. Analysis with Support Vector Classiﬁcation: IRAS 16293−2422 Case

Second, we apply this analysis method to the ALMA observation toward the

Class 0 protostellar source IRAS 16293−2422 Source A, which is a binary or multiple

system. According to Oya & Yamamoto (2020), the C17O and H2CS emissions trace its

circummultiple structure and circumstellar disk, respectively.

We ﬁrst prepared 14400 infalling-rotating envelope models and 14400 Keplerian disk

models as the mock data set, whose parameter ranges are summarized in Table 5. Values

of rCB and Rin are employed only if they are smaller than Rout. We employ 50◦ as the

P.A. of the disk/envelope mid-plane of IRAS 16293−2422 Source A (Oya & Yamamoto

2020). Although Oya & Yamamoto (2020) reported that the gravitational centers for the

circummultiple and circumstellar structures are slightly oﬀset from each other, we employ

the centeral position for the circummultiple structure as that for all the mock data in this

study. Again, 80% of the mock data set are used to train and tune the classiﬁer, and the

other 20% are to evaluate it. The confusion matrix is shown in Table 7. The classiﬁcation

– 37 –

accuracy is as high as 98.9%, and thus this classiﬁer works well. The classiﬁcation is failed

for 62 mock data out of 5760 mock data; they seem to be outliers among the mock data

as we found in the analysis for the 49 Ceti. 37 of the 62 mock data have the completely

face-on conﬁguration, and 10 of the others have the smallest central mass (M of 0.1 M(cid:12);

Table 5). In the other 15 mock data, the radius of the centrifugal barrier (rCB) and the

outer radius (Rout) are close to each other; for instance, rCB of 140 au and Rout of 150 au.

These mock data have only small emitting regions, and the classiﬁcation may be diﬃcult

by the present method.

Then, we apply it to the actual data cubes of the molecular emissions observed with

ALMA, where the details of the observation were reported by Oya & Yamamoto (2020)

and Oya et al. (2021). The results are summarized in Table 8. The C17O emission is

successfully classiﬁed to the infalling-rotating envelope as previously reported (Oya &

Yamamoto 2020). The H2CS emission, which comes from both the circummultiple structure

with the infalling-rotating motion and the circumstellar disk with the Keplerian motion,

is also classiﬁed to the infalling-rotating envelope. As well, all the other molecular lines

except for the (CH3)2CO emission are classiﬁed to the infalling-rotating envelope. A reason

for this result would be that the contribution of the extended circummultiple structure

is overwhelming for most molecular lines in comparison with the compact circumstellar

disk. In contrast, the (CH3)2CO emission is expected to be suitable to investigate the

circumstellar disk without the contamination from the circummultiple structure, and thus,

its further investigation is awaited. Unbiased analyses with machine/deep learnings and

model calculations are potentially useful to ﬁnd out such unique cases. In addition, a survey

for molecular species classiﬁed as the Keplerian disk is essential to study the disk chemistry

in this source.

In this section, we have presented just a tentative demonstration of the analysis

– 38 –

method using a machine learning SVC by using the mock data produced by FERIA. Utility

of analyses introducing machine/deep learnings will rapidly be enhanced in the future with

expanding archival observation data. We would like to emphasize that the agility and

simpleness of FERIA are quite advantageous in preparing a huge pile of model dataset for

such analyses.

6. Discussion

6.1. Why Is the Model Applicable?

While the infalling-rotating motion has long been considered (e.g. Ohashi et al. 1997),

the concept of its centrifugal barrier was ﬁrst reported in the ALMA observation by Sakai

et al. (2014a), and was formulated and modeled by Oya et al. (2014). An existence of

the centrifugal barrier is naturally expected from simple assumptions of the energy and

the angular momentum conservation. In fact, its identiﬁcation or hint was conﬁrmed in

observations of other young low-mass protostellar sources (e.g. Oya et al. 2014, 2016, 2017,

2018a; Sakai et al. 2016; Lee et al. 2017; Alves et al. 2017; Imai et al. 2019, 2022). Moreover,

disk structures seem to be formed inside the centrifugal barriers even at the earliest

evolutionary stages (Classes 0-I). The centrifugal barrier can be regarded as a boundary

between the infalling-rotating envelope outside it and the disk component inside it. In

reality, the transition zone from an envelope to a disk would extend over a considerable size

near the centrifugal barrier, and the envelope and the disk may intricately be contaminated

with each other there. Numerical MHD calculation indeed show a complex structure of the

transition zone in the disk forming region, which depends on assumed physical conditions.

Nevertheless, the infalling-rotating envelope model well represents the kinematic structure

of such regions at least in some sources mentioned above, where the centrifugal barrier

stands for an approximate position of the transition zone.

– 39 –

Generally, the size of a rotationally-supported disk, or a Keplerian disk, is thought

to correspond to the ‘centrifugal radius’ (Hartmann 2009). It is the radius where the

centrifugal force of the gas and the gravity under the central mass are balanced out, and

is twice the radius of the centrifugal barrier (Section 2.2). Thus, the gas can stably keep

rotation around the protostar at the centrifugal radius. The angular momentum of the gas

infalling at a later time tends to be larger, which makes the centrifugal radius larger. This

situation results in the smooth growth of the disk.

However, it seems to be a rather quasi-static picture. In an infalling-rotating envelope,

the rotation speed equals to the infall speed at the centrifugal radius. Since the rotation

speed is the same as the Keplerian speed there, the rotation motion can be continuous

from the infalling-rotating envelope to the Keplerian disk at the centrifugal radius. On

the other hand, there remains the infall motion as far as the eﬀect of the gas pressure and

the magnetic ﬁeld are not signiﬁcant (see below), and the infalling gas tends to go further

inward of the centrifugal radius. In this case, the gas components between the rCR and rCB

has a rotating speed higher than the Keplerian speed. A hint of such a ‘super-Kepler’ like

component is seen, for instance, in the numerical simulations by Machida et al. (2011) (their

Figure 4) and Zhao et al. (2016) (their Figures 11 and 15). Although Figure 4 of Machida

et al. (2011) reveals that the motion is mostly represented by the Keplerian motion, it also

shows some cases where the rotation velocity slightly exceeds the Keplerian velocity in the

transition zone from the envelope to the disk. This implies an intrinsic complexity of the

transition zone. According to Zhao et al. (2016), a weak magnetic coupling due to removal

of small dust grains is responsible for such a feature.

Some observational results indeed indicate that the gas apparently keeps falling

beyond the centrifugal radius toward the centrifugal barrier (e.g. Sakai et al. 2014b; Oya

et al. 2016), and they have been reasonably reproduced by the infalling-rotating envelope

– 40 –

model. Furthermore, a jump of the rotation speed down to the Keplerian speed around the

centrifugal barrier is also suggested in the H2CO observation toward BHB 07−11 by Alves

et al. (2017). Thus, phenomenologically speaking, the infalling-rotating envelope model

captures an essence of the kinematic structure of the envelope and the transition zone at

least partly.

Although the infalling-rotating envelope model reproduces a major observed feature of

the gas kinematics, we should note that this is a very simpliﬁed model. In more realistic

cases, the infall motion of the gas will be suppressed due to the gas pressure. This eﬀect is,

however, not always eﬀective near the centrifugal radius. The static (Pstat) and dynamic

(Pdyn) pressures of the gas are represented as follows (e.g. Chandrasekhar & Fermi 1953b;

Hartmann 2009):

Pstat = ρc2
s,

Pdyn =

1
2

ρv2

fall

(9)

(10)

where ρ, cs, and vfall denote the mass density of the gas, the sound speed, and the radial

velocity of the gas motion, respectively. Thus, if ρ can be assumed to be locally constant,

the dynamic pressure is larger than the static pressure if vfall is larger than

√

2cs. Therefore,

the gas is hardly supported by the static pressure for the case of a large vfall, and keeps

falling beyond the centrifugal radius toward the centrifugal barrier to some extent.

As for the L1527 case (Section 5.2.1; Sakai et al. 2014a,b), such a condition is expected

to be fulﬁlled until the gas reaches near the centrifugal barrier, as shown in Figure 24. In

fact, the static and dynamic pressures are roughly evaluated to be 0.5 × 10−6 and 1.6 × 10−6

dyn cm−2 at the centrifugal radius, respectively, where the vfall is 0.9 km s−1. Here, we

employed M of 0.18 M(cid:12) and rCB of 100 au reported by Sakai et al. (2014a) instead of the

rough evaluation in the trial of the χ2 test described in Section 5.2.1. The gas number

density is assumed to be 108 cm−3, and the averaged particle mass to be 3.83 × 10−24 g. cs is

– 41 –

proportional to

√

T , where T is the gas temperature. It is calculated to be 0.35 km s−1 for

the gas temperature of 30 K in the infalling-rotating envelope of L1527 (Sakai et al. 2014a).

On the other hand, the magnetic pressure is represented as:

PM =

B2
2µ0

,

(11)

where B is the magnetic ﬁeld and µ0 the magnetic permeability (Chandrasekhar & Fermi

1953a). Then, we obtain the following practical expression:

PM = 3.98 × 10−14B (µG)2 dyn cm−2.

(12)

Hence, the magnetic pressure can be comparable to the dynamic pressure, only when the

magnetic ﬁeld is of the order of 10 mG. In turn, the infalling-rotating envelope model

does not work under such a high magnetic ﬁeld condition. The magnetic ﬁeld strength in

the transition zone has not been well understood observationally, although the eﬀect of

the magnetic breaking has often been invoked to account the infall motion (e.g. Machida

et al. 2014; Aso et al. 2015; Yen et al. 2017). It should be noted that the ratio of the

magnetic pressure to the static gas pressure is assumed to be unity or less in the MHD

calculations (e.g. Machida et al. 2011), otherwise the disk/envelope sturucture would be

unstable (Shibata et al. 1990; Machida et al. 2000). Therefore, it is not clear how the

magnetic pressure contributes to the force balance around the centrifugal radius.

Since ρ and cs will be increased around the centrifugal barrier due to the stagnation

of the gas and the relatively high temperature at the centrifugal barrier (60 K in L1527,

>300 K in IRAS 16293−2422; Sakai et al. 2014b; Oya et al. 2016) in comparison with

the temperature in the infalling-rotating envelope (30 K in L1527, <200 K in IRAS

16293−2422), the static pressure will be enhanced near the centrifugal barrier. Thus, the

gas may stop falling before it reaches at the centrifugal barrier. This means that the edge

of the rotationally supported disk will be somewhere between the centrifugal radius and the

centrifugal barrier.

– 42 –

Within the rCB, FERIA assumes a disk component. This is justiﬁed by the following

considerations. Because of the gradual increase of the speciﬁc angular momentum of the

infall gas described above, the gas accreted before would have a smaller rCB than the rCB

for the currently accreting gas (see Eq. (1)). This allows the existence of a disk component

within the current rCB. Moreover, the angular momentum of the gas would be removed

from the stagnated gas around the centrifugal barrier, which would help the transition of

the infall gas to the rotationally-supported gas. This process is also potentially related to

the outﬂow launching (see Section 6.3), which has been studied observationally by Oya et

al. (2015, 2018b, 2021). The angular momentum of the accreting gas is transferred to the

rotation of the outﬂowing gas (e.g. Blandford & Payne 1982; Tomisaka 2000; Anderson et

al. 2003; Pudritz et al. 2007; Machida & Hosokawa 2013) (see Section 6.3). The mechanism

of this kinematic transition occurring from rCR/rCB toward the disk is the remaining

important issue for full understandings of the disk formation.

6.2. Caveats for Employing the Model

Although the infalling-rotating envelope model has successfully been employed

to investigate the observed kinematic structures, we expect some cases for which the

infalling-rotating envelope model could not be applied.

The eﬀects of the gas pressure and the magnetic pressure described above may not be

negligible in some sources. The magnetic breaking eﬀect could be overwhelming near the

protostar, and the infalling gas would be stagnated before it reaches the centrifugal barrier.

As well, very young protostellar sources are not appropriate for FERIA. In such sources, the

envelope mass is not negligible in comparison with the central mass. Thus, the self-gravity

of the envelope gas needs to be considered, which is not taken into account in FERIA.

– 43 –

In addition, sources with a very small or high central mass are not appropriate for the

infalling-rotating envelope model. With a small central mass, the infall velocity is so small

that the dynamic pressure of the gas is small. This will result in the situation that the static

pressure around the centrifugal radius is higher than the dynamic pressure. For instance,

the Class 0 protostellar source IRAS 15398−3359 is reported to have a central mass as

small as 0.007 M(cid:12) (Okoda et al. 2018), resulting in the infall velocity of 0.3 km s−1 at its
centrifugal radius (80 au). In this case, the dynamic pressure of (cid:0)0.2 × 10−6(cid:1) dyn cm−2
does not overwhelm the static pressure of (cid:0)0.5 × 10−6(cid:1) dyn cm−2 at the centrifugal radius,

assuming the number density of 108 cm−3 and cs of 0.35 km s−1. Meanwhile, with a high

central mass, the gas temperature around the centrifugal radius will be high due to the high

luminosity of the protostar. Thus, the static pressure, which is proportional to T , could

be higher than the dynamic pressure. In these situations, the infall gas may be supported

by the static pressure and cannot fall toward the centrifugal barrier. In addition, as for

the more evolved sources, the infalling envelope gas may be exhausted or dissipated, and

thus, the dynamic pressure may not be high enough to push the stagnated gas near the

centrifugal barrier any more. Therefore, the edge of the disk would eventually be extended

to the centrifugal radius as expected (e.g. Hartmann 2009).

In contrast, the gas can never fall inward of the centrifugal barrier unless it loses the

angular momentum and the energy, and hence, it will be stagnated outside the centrifugal

barrier by colliding with the gas infalling afterwards. Such gas stagnation has been reported

in the observation of L1527 with ALMA (Sakai et al. 2017). The above mechanism will

cause a weak accretion shock around the centrifugal barrier, which is indeed indicated by

the emission of complex organic molecules and the high-excitation lines of H2CS in IRAS

16293−2422 Source A (Oya et al. 2016; Miura et al. 2017; Oya & Yamamoto 2020). Thus,

the disk formation, that is the transition from an infalling-rotating envelope to a disk

component, is not a straightforward process, but involves discontinuous physical processes.

– 44 –

Conversely, volatile species highlighting an accretion shock helps the observers to ﬁnd where

the transition zone is (e.g. Oya et al. 2016, 2017, 2018a). In any case, the structure of

the transition zone is not as simple as that assumed in the models. Therefore, the models

should be used with enough understandings of such complexity.

6.3. Relation to Outﬂow Studies

Outﬂow structures are one of the candidate mechanisms responsible for the angular

momentum loss of the infalling gas. In fact, rotation motions of the outﬂowing gas have

recently been reported for several sources (e.g. Hirota et al. 2017; Oya et al. 2018b, 2021;

Zhang et al. 2018; Tabone et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2021, and literatures therein), as predicted

by theoretical models (e.g. Blandford & Payne 1982; Tomisaka 2000; Anderson et al. 2003;

Pudritz et al. 2007; Machida & Hosokawa 2013). In the Class 0 protostellar binary IRAS

16293−2422 Source A, the speciﬁc angular momentum of the rotating outﬂow was evaluated

and compared with those of the circummultiple structure and the circumstellar disk (Oya

et al. 2021), which were evaluated with the aid of FERIA (Oya & Yamamoto 2020). They

suggested that the outﬂow of this source has a larger speciﬁc angular momentum than the

circumstellar disk, and that the outﬂow is indeed possible to extract the angular momentum

from the disk/envelope system. FERIA allows us to quantitatively characterize the kinematic

structure of the disk/envelope system, which can contribute to tackling with this important

problem during the star-formation process.

7. Summary and Future Prospects

We have developed the computer code ‘FERIA’, which outputs the FITS ﬁles of the data

cubes and PV diagrams of the infalling-rotating envelope model and Keplerian disk model.

– 45 –

The source codes of FERIA are open to the community via GitHub6. We also distribute the

source codes for the chi-squared test of FITS cubes, which will be helpful to compare the

modeled results with FERIA and the observed data7.

We have described the basic formulae of the models (Section 2) and how to use this

program (Section 3). We have shown some examples of the model results (Section 4), and

have presented the application of this model to the actual observational data (Section 5).

FERIA is not only for young protostellar sources, but for other systems with accretion,

because the kinematic structure employed in this model is quite basic. For instance, Aalto

et al. (2020) have recently reported that the active galactic nucleus NGC1377 shows a

non-circular motions. This structure may correspond to the counter-velocity component in

the infalling-rotating envelope described in Section 4.1.2.

The infalling-rotating envelope model can reasonably explain the basic kinematic

structure observed for Class 0-I protostellar sources. However, we would like to stress that

FERIA is based on simple assumptions, and thus, there are several important caveats for

employing it (see Sections 3.4, 5.1, and 6.2). In reality, these eﬀects will aﬀect where the

infall motion of the gas actually stops. Recent progress in the observational study of young

protostellar sources has clariﬁed that the next important step to the star-formation process

is to understand what is occurring between the centrifugal radius and the centrifugal barrier.

For such studies, the program FERIA introduced in this paper will be a powerful tool.

The authors are grateful to an anonymous reviewer for useful comments and

constructive suggestions. The authors thank Dr. Yoshiyuki Kabashima and Dr. Takashi

Takahashi for their invaluable discussion on the machine learning. The authors also thank

6https://github.com/YokoOya/FERIA

7https://github.com/YokoOya/cubechi2

– 46 –

Dr. Aya Higuchi for providing the observational data for 49 Ceti. This study used the

ALMA data set ADS/JAO.ALMA#2013.1.01102.S, ADS/JAO.ALMA#2016.1.00457.S,

ADS/JAO.ALMA#2016.1.01203.S, ADS/JAO.ALMA#2016.1.01376.S, and

ADS/JAO.ALMA#2017.0.00467.S. ALMA is a partnership of the European Southern

Observatory, the National Science Foundation (USA), the National Institutes of Natural

Sciences (Japan), the National Research Council (Canada), and the NSC and ASIAA

(Taiwan), in cooperation with the Republic of Chile. The Joint ALMA Observatory is

operated by the ESO, the AUI/NRAO, and the NAOJ. The authors are grateful to the

ALMA staﬀ for their excellent support. This study is supported by a Grant-in-Aid from

the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technologies of Japan (grant Nos.

18H05222, 19H05069, 19K14753, and 21K13954).

A. Observation: L1527

The observations toward L1527 (ADS/JAO.ALMA#2016.1.01203.S) were carrier out

on November 19th, 2016 and September 3rd, 2017 with ALMA. The molecular lines of CS,

13CS, H2CO, c−C3H2, and SO were observed at the frequency from 137 to 151 GHz. The

CS (J = 3 − 2) line is used in this study.

The ﬁeld center of the observations was set to (cid:0)αICRS, δICRS = 04h39m53.s9, 26◦03(cid:48)09.(cid:48)(cid:48)6(cid:1)

near the protostellar position based on our previous observations (Sakai et al. 2014a,b; Oya

et al. 2015). 43 antennas were used with baseline lengths from 15 to 704 m during the ﬁrst

observation, while 46 antennas were used with baseline lengths from 21 to 3697 m during

the second observation. The total observation times were 57 and 122 minutes, where the

total on-source times were 36 and 41 minutes, for the two observations. The size of the

ﬁeld of view was 35(cid:48)(cid:48). The largest recoverable angular scale was requested to be 4(cid:48)(cid:48). The

beam size for the CS (J = 3 − 2) line was (0.(cid:48)(cid:48)459 × 0.(cid:48)(cid:48)400) (P.A. −20.098◦). The bandpass

– 47 –

calibration and total ﬂux calibration were performed with J0510+1800 during the two

observations. J0438+3004 and J0440+2728 were observed for the phase calibration every 8

and 2 minutes in the ﬁrst and second observation, respectively. In the second observation,

J0435+2532 was also observed for the water vapor radiometer gain calibration. During the

ALMA Cycle 4 operation, the absolute accuracy of the ﬂux calibration is expected to be

better than 15% (ALMA Partnership 2016).

The CS (J = 3 − 2) line image was obtained with the CLEAN algorithm with the Briggs

weighting with a robustness parameter of 0.5. We prepared the line image by subtracting

the continuum component from the visibility data, where the continuum component was

obtained by averaging line-free channels. A primary beam correction was applied to the

line image. The rms noise level of the CS image is 4 mJy beam−1 with the channel width of

0.2 km s−1. Since we do not require a higher S/N ratio in this demonstrative study, we did

not apply self-calibration for this observational data.

– 48 –

REFERENCES

Aalto, S., Falstad, N., Muller, S., et al. 2020, arXiv:2007.07824

ALMA Partnership, 2016, S. Asayama, A. Biggs, I. de Gregorio, B. Dent, J. Di Francesco,

E. Fomalont, A. Hales, E. Humphries, S. Kameno, E. M¨uller, B. Vila Vilaro, E.

Villard, F. Stoehr, ISBN 978-3-923524-66-2

Alves, F. O., Girart, J. M., Caselli, P., et al. 2017, A&A, 603, L3

Anderson, J. M., Li, Z.-Y., Krasnopolsky, R., et al. 2003, ApJ, 590, L107. doi:10.1086/376824

Arce, H. G., Mardones, D., Corder, S. A., et al. 2013, ApJ, 774, 39

Aso, Y., Ohashi, N., Saigo, K., et al. 2015, ApJ, 812, 27

Aso, Y., Ohashi, N., Aikawa, Y., et al. 2017, ApJ, 849, 56. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aa8264

Baron, D. 2019, arXiv:1904.07248

Bate, M. R. 2018, MNRAS, 475, 5618

Beuther, H., Schilke, P., & Gueth, F. 2004, ApJ, 608, 330

Bjerkeli, P., van der Wiel, M. H. D., Harsono, D., et al. 2016, Nature, 540, 406.

doi:10.1038/nature20600

Bjerkeli, P., Ramsey, J. P., Harsono, D., et al. 2019, A&A, 631, A64. doi:10.1051/0004-

6361/201935948

Blandford, R. D. & Payne, D. G. 1982, MNRAS, 199, 883. doi:10.1093/mnras/199.4.883

Bontemps, S., Andre, P., Terebey, S., et al. 1996, A&A, 311, 858

– 49 –

Boogert, A. C. A., Hogerheijde, M. R., Ceccarelli, C., et al. 2002, ApJ, 570, 708.

doi:10.1086/339627

Bussmann, R. S., Wong, T. W., Hedden, A. S., et al. 2007, ApJ, 657, L33. doi:10.1086/513101

Cabedo, V., Maury, A., Girart, J. M., et al. 2021, arXiv:2107.01986

Cassen, P. & Moosman, A. 1981, Icarus, 48, 353. doi:10.1016/0019-1035(81)90051-8

Ceccarelli, C., Boogert, A. C. A., Tielens, A. G. G. M., et al. 2002, A&A, 395, 863.

doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20021344

Chandler, C. J. & Sargent, A. I. 1993, ApJ, 414, L29. doi:10.1086/186988

Chandrasekhar, S., & Fermi, E. 1953, ApJ, 118, 113

Chandrasekhar, S., & Fermi, E. 1953, ApJ, 118, 116

Dzib, S. A., Ortiz-Le´on, G. N., Hern´andez-G´omez, A., et al. 2018, A&A, 614, A20.

doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201732093

Evans, N. J., II, Di Francesco, J., Lee, J.-E., et al. 2015, ApJ, 814, 22

Gaudel, M., Maury, A. J., Belloche, A., et al. 2020, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2001.10004

Gillet, N., Mesinger, A., Greig, B., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 484, 282

Hartmann, L. 2009, Accretion Processes in Star Formation: Second Edition, by Lee

Hartmann. ISBN 978-0-521-53199-3. Published by Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge, UK, 2009b,

Harvey, D. W. A., Wilner, D. J., Lada, C. J., et al. 2001, ApJ, 563, 903. doi:10.1086/324076

Harvey, D. W. A., Wilner, D. J., Myers, P. C., Tafalla, M., & Mardones, D. 2003, ApJ, 583,

809

– 50 –

Higuchi, A. E., Saigo, K., Kobayashi, H., et al. 2019, ApJ, 883, 180. doi:10.3847/1538-

4357/ab3d26

Hirano, N., Kameya, O., Nakayama, M., et al. 1988, ApJ, 327, L69. doi:10.1086/185142

Hirano, N., Kameya, O., Kasuga, T., et al. 1992, ApJ, 390, L85. doi:10.1086/186378

Hirano, N., Ho, P. P. T., Liu, S.-Y., et al. 2010, ApJ, 717, 58

Hirota, T., Machida, M. N., Matsushita, Y., et al. 2017, Nature Astronomy, 1, 0146

Hsieh, T.-H., Hirano, N., Belloche, A., et al. 2019, ApJ, 871, 100. doi:10.3847/1538-

4357/aaf4fe

Imai, M., Sakai, N., Oya, Y., et al. 2016, ApJ, 830, L37

Imai, M., Oya, Y., Sakai, N., et al. 2019, ApJ, 873, L21

Imai, M. 2020, Physical and Chemical Structures of Young Low-Mass Protostellar Sources

in Isolated Conditions, Ph.D. Thesis

Imai, M., Oya, Y., Svoboda, B., et al. 2022, ApJ, in press.

Jacobsen, S. K., Jørgensen, J. K., Di Francesco, J., et al. 2019, A&A, 629, A29.

doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201833214

Jolliﬀe, I. T. 1986, Springer Series in Statistics, Berlin: Springer, 1986

Keene, J., Hildebrand, R. H., Whitcomb, S. E., & Harper, D. A. 1980, ApJ, 240, L43

Launhardt, R., Pavlyuchenkov, Y., Gueth, F., et al. 2009, A&A, 494, 147

Lee, C.-F., Mundy, L. G., Reipurth, B., Ostriker, E. C., & Stone, J. M. 2000, ApJ, 542, 925

Lee, C.-F., Li, Z.-Y., Ho, P. T. P., et al. 2017, ApJ, 843, 27

– 51 –

Lee, C.-F., Li, Z.-Y., Codella, C., et al. 2018, ApJ, 856, 14. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aaae6d

Lee, C.-F., Tabone, B., Cabrit, S., et al. 2021, ApJ, 907, L41. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/abda38

Lommen, D., Jørgensen, J. K., van Dishoeck, E. F., et al. 2008, A&A, 481, 141.

doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20077543

Lumbreras, A. M., & Zapata, L. A. 2014, AJ, 147, 72

Machida, M., Hayashi, M. R., & Matsumoto, R. 2000, ApJ, 532, L67

Machida, M. N., Inutsuka, S.-I., & Matsumoto, T. 2011, PASJ, 63, 555

Machida, M. N., & Matsumoto, T. 2011, MNRAS, 413, 2767

Machida, M. N., & Hosokawa, T. 2013, MNRAS, 431, 1719

Machida, M. N., Inutsuka, S.-. ichiro ., & Matsumoto, T. 2014, MNRAS, 438, 2278.

doi:10.1093/mnras/stt2343

Machida, M. N. & Basu, S. 2019, ApJ, 876, 149. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab18a7

McMullin, J. P., Waters, B., Schiebel, D., et al. 2007, Astronomical Data Analysis Software

and Systems XVI, 376, 127

Meier, D. S. & Turner, J. L. 2005, ApJ, 618, 259

Miotello, A., Testi, L., Lodato, G., et al. 2014, A&A, 567, A32. doi:10.1051/0004-

6361/201322945

Miura, H., Yamamoto, T., Nomura, H., et al. 2017, ApJ, 839, 47

Momose, M., Ohashi, N., Kawabe, R., et al. 1998, ApJ, 504, 314

Moriwaki, K., Filippova, N., Shirasaki, M., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 496, L54

– 52 –

Murillo, N. M., Lai, S.-P., Bruderer, S., Harsono, D., & van Dishoeck, E. F. 2013, A&A,

560, A103

Nakamura, F., Kamada, Y., Kamazaki, T., et al. 2011, ApJ, 726, 46. doi:10.1088/0004-

637X/726/1/46

Neufeld, D. A., Hollenbach, D. J., Kaufman, M. J., et al. 2007, ApJ, 664, 890

Ohashi, N., Hayashi, M., Ho, P. T. P., & Momose, M. 1997, ApJ, 475, 211

Ohashi, N., Saigo, K., Aso, Y., et al. 2014, ApJ, 796, 131

Okoda, Y., Oya, Y., Sakai, N., et al. 2018, ApJ, 864, L25

Okoda, Y., Oya, Y., Sakai, N., et al. 2020, arXiv:2007.11106

Okoda, Y., Oya, Y., Abe, S., et al. 2021, ApJ, 923, 168. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac2c6c

Olofsson, S. & Olofsson, G. 2009, A&A, 498, 455. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/200811574

Ortiz-Le´on, G. N., Loinard, L., Kounkel, M. A., et al. 2017, ApJ, 834, 141

Oya, Y., Sakai, N., Sakai, T., et al. 2014, ApJ, 795, 152

Oya, Y., Sakai, N., Leﬂoch, B., et al. 2015, ApJ, 812, 59

Oya, Y., Sakai, N., L´opez-Sepulcre, A., et al. 2016, ApJ, 824, 88

Oya, Y., Sakai, N., L´opez-Sepulcre, A., et al. 2017, ApJ, 837, 174

Oya, Y., Moriwaki, K., Onishi, S., et al. 2018a, ApJ, 854, 96

Oya, Y., Sakai, N., Watanabe, Y., et al. 2018b, ApJ, 863, 72

Oya, Y., L´opez-Sepulcre, A., Sakai, N., et al. 2019, ApJ, 881, 112. doi:10.3847/1538-

4357/ab2b97

– 53 –

Oya, Y. 2020, Origins: From the Protosun to the First Steps of Life, 345, 111.

doi:10.1017/S1743921318008372

Oya, Y. & Yamamoto, S. 2020, ApJ, 904, 185. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/abbe14

Oya, Y., Watanabe, Y., L´opez-Sepulcre, A., et al. 2021, ApJ, 921, 12. doi:10.3847/1538-

4357/ac0a72

Pence, W. 1999, Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems VIII, 487

Pudritz, R. E., Ouyed, R., Fendt, C., et al. 2007, Protostars and Planets V, 277

Sakai, N., Sakai, T., Hirota, T., et al. 2014a, Nature, 507, 78

Sakai, N., Oya, Y., Sakai, T., et al. 2014b, ApJ, 791, L38

Sakai, N., Oya, Y., L´opez-Sepulcre, A., et al. 2016, ApJ, 820, L34

Sakai, N., Oya, Y., L´opez-Sepulcre, A., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 467, L76

Sekimoto, Y., Tatematsu, K., Umemoto, T., et al. 1997, ApJ, 489, L63. doi:10.1086/310961

Shibata, K., Tajima, T., & Matsumoto, R. 1990, ApJ, 350, 295

Shirasaki, M., Yoshida, N., & Ikeda, S. 2019, Phys. Rev. D, 100, 043527

Shu, F. H. 1977, ApJ, 214, 488

Spezzano, S., Caselli, P., Bizzocchi, L., et al. 2017, A&A, 606, A82

Tabone, B., Cabrit, S., Bianchi, E., et al. 2017, A&A, 607, L6. doi:10.1051/0004-

6361/201731691

Tabone, B., Cabrit, S., Pineau des Forˆets, G., et al. 2020, A&A, 640, A82. doi:10.1051/0004-

6361/201834377

– 54 –

Takahashi, S., & Ho, P. T. P. 2012, ApJ, 745, L10

Takahashi, S., Ohashi, N., & Bourke, T. L. 2013, ApJ, 774, 20

Tobin, J. J., Hartmann, L., Chiang, H.-F., et al. 2012, Nature, 492, 83

Tobin, J. J., Hartmann, L., Chiang, H.-F., et al. 2013, ApJ, 771, 48

Tokuda, K., Onishi, T., Saigo, K., et al. 2017, ApJ, 849, 101

Tomisaka, K. 2000, ApJ, 528, L41. doi:10.1086/312417

Tomida, K., Okuzumi, S., & Machida, M. N. 2015, ApJ, 801, 117

Tsukamoto, Y., Okuzumi, S., Iwasaki, K., et al. 2017, PASJ, 69, 95

Ungerechts, H., Bergin, E. A., Goldsmith, P. F., et al. 1997, ApJ, 482, 245

van der Marel, N., Kristensen, L. E., Visser, R., et al. 2013, A&A, 556, A76.

doi:10.1051/0004-6361/201220717

Watanabe, Y., Sakai, N., Sorai, K., et al. 2016, ApJ, 819, 144

Watson, D. M. 2020, Research Notes of the American Astronomical Society, 4, 88.

doi:10.3847/2515-5172/ab9df4

Wilner, D. J., Myers, P. C., Mardones, D., et al. 2000, ApJ, 544, L69. doi:10.1086/317298

Xu, W. & Kunz, M. W. 2021, MNRAS, 508, 2142. doi:10.1093/mnras/stab2715

Yang, Y.-L., Evans, N. J., Smith, A., et al. 2020, ApJ, 891, 61. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab7201

Ybarra, J. E., Barsony, M., Haisch, K. E., et al. 2006, ApJ, 647, L159. doi:10.1086/507449

Yeh, S. C. C., Hirano, N., Bourke, T. L., et al. 2008, ApJ, 675, 454-463

– 55 –

Yen, H.-W., Takakuwa, S., & Ohashi, N. 2010, ApJ, 710, 1786. doi:10.1088/0004-

637X/710/2/1786

Yen, H.-W., Takakuwa, S., Ohashi, N., & Ho, P. T. P. 2013, ApJ, 772, 22

Yen, H.-W., Takakuwa, S., Koch, P. M., et al. 2015, ApJ, 812, 129

Yen, H.-W., Koch, P. M., Takakuwa, S., et al. 2017, ApJ, 834, 178

Yen, H.-W., Zhao, B., Koch, P., et al. 2020, ApJ, 893, 54. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab7eb3

Zapata, L. A., Arce, H. G., Brassﬁeld, E., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 441, 3696

Zhang, Y., Higuchi, A. E., Sakai, N., et al. 2018, ApJ, 864, 76

Zhao, B., Caselli, P., Li, Z.-Y., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 460, 2050. doi:10.1093/mnras/stw1124

Zhao, B., Caselli, P., Li, Z.-Y., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 473, 4868

Zhou, S., Evans, N. J., Koempe, C., et al. 1993, ApJ, 404, 232. doi:10.1086/172271

Zielinski, N., Wolf, S., & Brunngr¨aber, R. 2021, A&A, 645, A125. doi:10.1051/0004-

6361/202039126

This manuscript was prepared with the AAS LATEX macros v5.2.

– 56 –

Table 1:: Physical Parameters of the Model

Physical Parameter

Type

Remarks

Parameters for the Output Filea

Name of the output ﬁle

string

Arbitrary string with length less than 256

Overwrite

char (y/n)

If a ﬁle with the same output ﬁle name exists,

or ’parameter’ for naming after the input parameter values

it is overwritten with ‘y’ and not with ‘n’.

Parameters for the Source and Molecular Linea

Object

Coordinate

Field center (RA)

Field center (Dec)

Systemic velocity

Line

string

string

string

string

double

string

Name of the object source

(e.g. ICRS, J2000)

Right Ascension of the ﬁeld center (e.g. 0h0m0.0s)

Declination of the ﬁeld center (e.g. 0d0m0.0s)

Systemic velocity of the object in km s−1

Name of the line and the transition (e.g. CO2-1)

Rest frequency

double

Rest frequency of the molecular line (GHz)

Pixel size

Velocity resolution

lbNpixc

lbNvelc

d

M

rCB

i

Parameters for the Mesh Sizeb

Mesh size for the position axes (arcsecond)

Mesh size for the velocity axis (km s−1)

Number of mesh of the position axes is 2lbNpix.

Number of mesh of the position axes is 2lbNvel.

Parameters for the Envelope/Diskd

Distance to the object from the Sun (pc)

Central mass (M(cid:12))

Radius of the centrifugal barrier (au)

Inclination angle of the envelope (degree)

double

double

integer

integer

double

double

double

double

– 57 –

Physical Parameter

Type

Remarks

Position angle

double

Position angle of the line

(0◦ for a face-on conﬁguration)

Direction of rotation

int (1/−1)

1 for counterclockwise with the inclination angle of 0◦

along which the mid-plane of the envelope is extended

Rout

Rin

Henv, Hdisk

Fenv, Fdisk

env , αdens
αdens
disk
env , αtemp
αtemp

disk

nCB(X)

TCB

Line width

θmajor

θminor

θPA

double

double

double

double

double

double

double

double

double

double

double

double

Outer radius of the envelope (au)

Inner radius of the envelope (au)

Thickness of the envelope/disk (au)

Flared angle of the scale height of the envelope/disk (au)

Power-law index of the radial density proﬁle

Power-law index of the radial temperature proﬁle

Molecular density at the centrifugal barrier (cm−3)

Gas temperature at the centrifugal barrier (K)

FWHM of the intrinsic Gaussian proﬁle (km s−1)

FWHM of the major axis of the Gaussian beam (arcsecond)

FWHM of the minor axis of the Gaussian beam (arcsecond)

Position angle of the major axis of the Gaussian beam (degree)

Normalize

char (y/n) Calculated intensity is normalized by the maximum value.

Parameters for the Position-Velocity Diagrame

PA

OﬀsetRA, OﬀsetDec

double

double

Position angle of the position axis of the PV diagram (degree)

Oﬀset of the central position of the PV diagram

to the ﬁeld center (au)

a See Section 3.2.1.

b See Section 3.2.5.

c Speciﬁed in the header ﬁle (feria.h). The maximum value is 7 for computers with the memory size

(RAM) of 8 GB or larger, and 8 for those with RAM of 64 GB or larger.

d See Sections 2.2, 2.3, 3.2.2, and 3.2.4.

e See Section 3.2.6.

– 58 –

Table 2: Free Parameters and their Best-Fit Values in the χ2 Test for L1527

Model

Parameters

Rangesa

Best Reduced χ2 value

Infalling-rotating envelope model M (M(cid:12))

0.05 − 1.00

0.15

2.5

rCB (au)

1 − 400

100

i (◦)

Rin (au)

Rout (au)

95

rCB

500

Fixed

Fixed

Fixed

a Parameter ranges surveyed in the χ2 analysis.

Table 3: Free Parameters and their Best-Fit Values in the χ2 Test for B335

Model

Parameters

Rangesa

Best Reduced χ2 value

Infalling-rotating envelope model M (M(cid:12))

0.005 − 0.50

0.02

0.77

rCB (au)

1 − 7

i (◦)

70 − 90

Rin (au)

Rout (au)

rCB

10

1

70

Fixed

Fixed

Keplerian disk model

M (M(cid:12))

0.005 − 0.50

0.04

0.78

rCB (au)

Rout

Fixed

i (◦)

70 − 90

Rin (au)

1 − 7

75

1

Rout (au)

10

Fixed

a Parameter ranges surveyed in the χ2 analysis.

– 59 –

Table 4: Free Parameters and their Best-Fit Values in the χ2 Test for Elias 29

Model

Parameters Rangesa

Best Reduced χ2 value

Infalling-rotating envelope model M (M(cid:12))

0.2 − 10.0

0.6

9.8

rCB (au)

1 − 40

5

i (◦)

60 − 120

120

Rin (au)

Rout (au)

rCB

50

Fixed

Fixed

Keplerian disk model

M (M(cid:12))

0.2 − 10.0

1.4

10.8

Combined Model

rCB (au)

Rout

Fixed

i (◦)

60 − 120

Rin (au)

1 − 40

80

1

Rout (au)

50

Fixed

M (M(cid:12))

0.2 − 10.0

rCB (au)

1 − 40

0.8

10

i (◦)

60 − 120

120

Rin (au)

Rout (au)

1

50

Fixed

Fixed

9.4

a Parameter ranges surveyed in the χ2 analysis.

– 60 –

Table 5: Parameter Ranges for the Mock Data Used in the SVC Analyses for 49 Ceti

and IRAS 16293−2422 Source A

Parameter

Unit Values

Number of cases

49 Ceti

Protostellar mass (M )

M(cid:12)

0.5, 0.6, ..., 1.9

Inclination angle (i)

Radius of the centrifugal barrier (rCB)
or inner radius (Rin)a

◦

0, 30, ..., 330

au

1, 20, ..., 200

Outer radius (Rout)b

au

120, 140, ..., 220

IRAS 16293−2422 Source A

Protostellar mass (M )

M(cid:12)

0.1, 0.2, ..., 1.9,

Inclination angle (i)

Radius of the centrifugal barrier (rCB)
or inner radius (Rin)a

2.0, 2.2, ..., 3.0

◦

0, 30, ..., 330

au

1, 20, ..., 200

Outer radius (Rout)b

au

50, 100, ..., 300

15

12

11

6

25

12

11

6

a A model of an infalling-rotating envelope has rCB as a parameter, while that of a

Keplerian disk has Rin. To make the cube data of Keplerian disks with FERIA, rCB

is set to be larger than Rout.

b Models are prepared only for Rout larger than rCB or Rin.

– 61 –

Table 6: Confusion Matrix of the Classiﬁer Trained in the SVC Analysis for 49

Ceti

True Kinematic Structure

Predicted Kinematic Structure

IREa

1834

IREa

Keplerian disk

2c

Keplerian disk

2b

1834

a Infalling-rotating envelope.

b Both wrongly classiﬁed IRE models have the completely face-on conﬁgura-

tion (i of 0◦ or 180◦).

c Both wrongly classiﬁed Keplerian-disk models have the smallest protostellar

mass (M of 0.05 M(cid:12)).

– 62 –

Table 7: Confusion Matrix of the Classiﬁer Trained in the SVC Analysis for

IRAS 16293−2422 Source A

True Kinematic Structure

Predicted Kinematic Structure

IREa

2821

IREa

Keplerian disk

3c

Keplerian disk

59b

2877

a Infalling-rotating envelope.

b 37 of 59 wrongly classiﬁed IRE models have the completely face-on conﬁg-

uration (i of 0◦ or 180◦), and 7 models have the smallest protostellar mass

(M of 0.05 M(cid:12)). The other 15 models have small emitting regions; rCB of

140 au and Rout of 150 au, or rCB of 180 au and Rout of 200 au.

c All the wrongly classiﬁed Keplerian-disk models have the smallest proto-

stellar mass (M of 0.05 M(cid:12)).

– 63 –

Table 8: Results of the Classiﬁcation of the Kinematic Structures Traced by Molecular Emissions

in IRAS 16293−2422 Source A

Molecule

Transition

Prediction by the Classiﬁera

Previous Reporta

C17O

C34S

H2CS

H2CS

H2CS

H2CS

OCS

OCS

SO

J = 2 − 1

J = 2 − 1

70,7 − 60,6

72,5 − 62,4

73,5 − 63,4

74,4 − 64,3, 74,3 − 64,2

J = 7 − 6

J = 8 − 7

JN = 22 − 11

CH3OH

5−1,5 − 40,4

IRE

IRE

IRE

IRE

IRE

IRE

IRE

IRE

IRE

IRE

(CH3)2CO

186,13 − 175,12

Keplerian disk

a ‘IRE’ denotes an infalling-rotating envelope.

b Oya & Yamamoto (2020).

c Oya et al. (2021).

IREb

IREc

IRE & Keplerian diskb

IRE & Keplerian diskb

IRE & Keplerian diskb

IRE & Keplerian diskb

Disk/envelope and outﬂowc

Disk/envelope and outﬂowc

Disk/envelope and outﬂowc

(IREd)

-

d Oya et al. (2016) reported that the CH3OH (110,11 − 101,10; A++) emission comes from a ring-

like structure around the centrifugal barrier at the innermost part of the infalling-rotating

envelope.

– 64 –

DeclinationRight AscensionLine of SightPosition AngleInclination Angle(a) Physical StructureLine of SightPerpendicular to the P.A.Inclination Angle (i)(b) Inclination Angle ((cid:9517))DeclinationRight AscensionPosition Angle(P.A.)(c) Position Angle (P.A.)Outer Radius ((cid:9494)out)Centrifugal Barrier ((cid:9526)CB)Inner Radius ((cid:9494)in)Thickness ((cid:9484)env, (cid:9484)disk)Flare Angle ((cid:9482)env, (cid:9482)disk)Thickness ((cid:9484)env, (cid:9484)disk)Flare Angle x 1/2 ((cid:9482)env /2, (cid:9482)disk /2)(d) Vertical StructureOuter Radius ((cid:9494)out)Inner Radius ((cid:9494)in)Centrifugal Barrier ((cid:9526)CB)(e) Velocity FieldyxzPlane of The Sky(f) Mesh– 65 –

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

e
l
g
n
a

e
h
t

s
i

e
l
g
n
a

n
o
i
t
a
n
i
l
c
n
i

e
h
T

.
)
.
A
P
(

.

e
l
g
n
a

n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p

e
h
t

d
n
a

e
l
g
n
a

n
o
i
t
a
n
i
l
c
n
i

e
h
t

f
o

s
e
u
l
a
v

t
u
p
n
i

e
h
t

n
o
-
e
c
a
f

a

r
o
f

s
d
n
a
t
s

◦
0

f
o

e
l
g
n
a

n
o
i
t
a
n
i
l
c
n
i

n
A

.
l
e
d
o
m
e
h
t

f
o

e
n
a
l
p
-
d
i
m
e
h
t

o
t

r
a
l
u
c
i
d
n
e
p
r
e
p

e
n
i
l

e
h
t

d
n
a

t
h
g
i
s

f
o

e
n
i
l

e
l
g
n
a

e
h
t

s
i

.

A
P

.

e
h
t

,

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
g
ﬁ
n
o
c

n
o
-
e
g
d
e

e
h
t

h
t
i

W

.
n
o
i
t
a
r
u
g
ﬁ
n
o
c

n
o
-
e
g
d
e

n
a

r
o
f

◦
0
9

f
o

t
a
h
t

e
l
i
h
w

,
n
o
i
t
a
r
u
g
ﬁ
n
o
c

l
e
d
o
m
e
h
t

f
o

e
n
a
l
p
-
d
m
e
h
t

i

h
c
i

h
w

g
n
o
l
a

e
n
i
l

e
h
t

d
n
a

)
n
o
i
t
a
n
i
l
c
e
d

,
.
e
.
i
(

y
k
s

f
o

e
n
a
l
p

e
h
t

n
o

e
n
i
l

l
a
c
i
t
r
e
v

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

f
o

n
o
i
t
o
m
n
o
i
t
a
t
o
r

d
n
a

l
l
a
f
n
I

)
e
(

.
s
l
i
a
t
e
d

e
h
t

s
e
b
i
r
c
s
e
d

2
.
2
.
3

n
o
i
t
c
e
S

.
l
e
d
o
m
e
h
t

f
o

e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s

l
a
c
i
t
r
e
v

e
h
T
)
d
(

.
s
d
n
e
t
x
e

c
i
t
a
m
e
n

i
k

e
h
T
)
c

,

b

,
a
(

.
s
l
e
d
o
m
k
s
i
d

n
a
i
r
e
l
p
e
K
d
n
a

e
p
o
l
e
v
n
e

g
n
i
t
a
t
o
r
-
g
n
i
l
l
a
f
n
i

e
h
t

f
o

s
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
s
u
l
l
i

c
i
t
a
m
e
h
c
S
—
.
1

.
g
i
F

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

i

d
e
n
m
r
e
t
e
d

s
i

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i

d

s
t
I

.
s
e
t
a
n
i
d
r
o
o
c

l
a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
i
d
-
e
e
r
h
t

e
h
t

n
i

d
e
t
a
l
u
c
l
a
c

t
s
r
ﬁ

s
i

l
e
d
o
m
e
h
t

f
o

e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s

,
r
a
t
s
o
t
o
r
p

l
a
r
t
n
e
c

e
h
t

m
o
r
f

r

f
o

e
c
n
a
t
s
i
d

e
h
t

t
A

.
)
1

e
l
b
a
T
e
e
S
(

’
1
‘

f
o

n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d

n
o
i
t
a
t
o
r

e
h
t

h
t
i
w

l
e
d
o
m
e
h
t

n
i

s
a
g

e
h
t

f
o

s
u

i

d
a
r

e
h
t

d
n
a

)
t
u
o
R
(

s
u

i

d
a
r

r
e
t
u
o

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

r

r
o
f

n
o
i
t
o
m
g
n
i
t
a
t
o
r
-
g
n
i
l
l
a
f
n
i

e
h
t

e
b

o
t

d
e
m
u
s
s
a

s
i

n
o
i
t
o
m

s
a
g

e
h
t

e
h
t

d
n
a

)
B
C
r
(

r
e
i
r
r
a
b

l
a
g
u
f
i
r
t
n
e
c

e
h
t

f
o

s
u
i
d
a
r

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

r

r
o
f

n
o
i
t
a
t
o
r

n
a
i
r
l
p
e
K
e
h
t

d
n
a

)
B
C
r
(

r
e
i
r
r
a
b

l
a
g
u
f
i
r
t
n
e
c

e
h
t

.
s
a
g

f
o

s
t
n
e
m
e
l
e

l
l
a
m

s

o
t
n
i

d
e
d
i
v
i
d

s
i

l
e
d
o
m
e
h
t

f
o

e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s

l
a
n
o
i
s
n
e
m
i
d

e
e
r
h
t

e
h
T
)
f
(

.
)
n
R
(

i

s
u
i
d
a
r

r
e
n
n
i

– 66 –

Fig. 2.— Velocity of the gas with the infalling-rotating motion and the Kepelrian rotation as

a function of the distance from the protostar. The horizontal axis represents the distance from

the protostar (r) normalized by the radius of the centrifugal barrier (rCB). The vertical axis

represents the velocity (v) normalized by the rotation velocity of the infalling-rotating motion

at the centrifugal barrier (vmax

rot ). The blue solid and dashed lines represent the rotation (vrot)

and infall (vfall) velocities in the infalling-rotating motion, respectively. At the centrifugal

barrier (r = rCB), vfall equals 0 and vrot takes its maximum value. At the centrifugal radius

(r = 2rCB), vfall takes its maximum value. The red solid line represents the Keplerian rotation

velocity (vKep). All of vrot, vfall, and vKep take the same value (v = vmax

fall = vmax

rot /2) at the

centrifugal radius (rCR).

Velocity (/ (cid:9530)max) rot1.41.210.80.60.40.200 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3Distance from the protostar (/ (cid:9526)CB)(cid:9526) = (cid:9526)CB(cid:9444)(cid:9526) = (cid:9526)CR(cid:9444)(cid:9530)(cid:9444)(cid:9473)(cid:9444)(cid:9530)max rot(cid:9530)(cid:9444)(cid:9473)(cid:9444)(cid:9530)max/2 rot(cid:9530)rot ∝ (cid:9526)(cid:9444)-1(cid:9530)fall(cid:9530)Kep ∝ (cid:9526)(cid:9444)-0.5(cid:9444)(cid:9530)max/√2 rot– 67 –

Fig. 3.— Examples of (a) the integrated intensity (moment 0) map and (b) the position-

velocity diagram of a modeled data cube of an infalling-rotating envelope. The position

axis for the position-velocity diagram is taken along the mid-plane of the envelope, which is

indicated by a cyan arrow in the integrated intensity map (P.A. 270◦). The parameters for

the model are as follows; the distance to the object (d) is 100 pc, the central mass (M ) is

0.3 M(cid:12), the position angle of the disk/envelope system is 90◦, the direction of the rotation

is counterclockwise (1 as the input value), the outer radius (Rout) is 500 au, the inner radius

(Rin) equals to rCB, the thickness (Henv) at the protostar is 0 au, the ﬂare angle (Fenv) is

30◦, the power-law index of the radial density proﬁle (αdens

env ) is −1.5, and that of the gas-

temperature distribution (αtemp

env ) is 0. It should be noted that the following parameters do

not aﬀect the results, and thus their values are just set arbitrarily; the molecular density and

the gas temperature at the centrifugal barrier (nCB(X)) are 10−2 cm−3 and 10 K, respectively.

The emission is convolved with the intrinsic Gaussian proﬁle with the FWHM of 0.2 km s−1

and the Gaussian beam of (θmajor× θminor) = (0.(cid:48)(cid:48)2 × 0.(cid:48)(cid:48)2) (P.A. = 0◦).

-4” -2” 0” 2” 4”Angular Oﬀset420-2-4Velocity Shift (km/s)100806040200Intensity (%)Counter-velocityComponentCentrifugalBarrierProtostellar positionSystemicvelocity100 au0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)Beam sizeProtostar100 auCentrifugal Barrier(a)  (b)Integrated intensity mapPosition-velocity diagramEastWest– 68 –

Fig. 4.— Examples of the integrated intensity maps of infalling-rotating envelope models.

Various values of the radius of the centrifugal barrier (rCB) and the inclination angle (i) are

employed, while the other parameters are the same as those summarized in the caption of

Figure 3. The intensity is normalized by its peak value in the cube, which does not aﬀect

the appearance of the ﬁgures.

0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)(cid:9517) = 90º(edge-on)60º30º0º(face-on)Inclination Angle100 au300 au100 au(cid:9526)CB = 30 auRadius of the Centrifugal Barrier100806040200Integrated Intensity (%)Beam size (0”.2x0”.2)– 69 –

Fig. 5.— Examples of the velocity ﬁeld (moment 1) maps of infalling-rotating envelope

models. The employed parameter values for the models are summarized in the caption of

Figures 3 and 4. The positions with an integrated intensity (Figure 4) lower than the 5%

relative to the peak integrated intensity are masked.

0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)(cid:9517) = 90º(edge-on)60º30º0º(face-on)Inclination Angle100 au300 au100 au(cid:9526)CB = 30 auRadius of the Centrifugal Barrier210-1-2Velocity (km/s)Beam size (0”.2x0”.2)P.A. 0ºP.A. 270º– 70 –

Fig. 6.— Examples of the position-velocity diagrams of infalling-rotating envelope models.

The position axes are taken along the mid-plane of the envelopes, which is indicated by

a cyan arrow in Figure 5 (P.A. 270◦). The employed parameter values for the models are

summarized in the caption of Figures 3 and 4.

-4” -2” 0” 2” 4”Angular Oﬀset-4” -2” 0” 2” 4”Angular Oﬀset-4” -2” 0” 2” 4”Angular Oﬀset420-2-4Velocity Shift (km/s)420-2-4Velocity Shift (km/s)420-2-4Velocity Shift (km/s)420-2-4Velocity Shift (km/s)100806040200Intensity (%)(cid:9526)CB = 30 au100 au300 auRadius of the Centrifugal Barrier(cid:9517) = 90º(edge-on)60º30º0º(face-on)Inclination AngleCounter-velocityComponentCentrifugalBarrierSpin-upEast West– 71 –

.
s
n
o
i
t
c
e
r
i
d

s
u
o
i
r
a
v

g
n
o
l
a

s
l
e
d
o
m

e
p
o
l
e
v
n
e

g
n
i
t
a
t
o
r
-
g
n
i
l
l
a
f
n
i

f
o

s

m
a
r
g
a
i
d

y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v
-
n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p

e
h
t

f
o

s
e
l
p
m
a
x
E
—

.
7

.
g
i
F

r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p

d
e
y
o
l

p
m
e

e
h
T

.

.

A
P
n

i

◦
0
3

y
r
e
v
e

r
o
f

n
e
k
a
t

e
r
a

h
c
i
h
w

,
5

e
r
u
g
i
F

n
i

s
w
o
r
r
a

y
b

d
e
t
a
c
i
d
n
i

e
r
a

s
e
x
a

n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p

e
h
T

.
4

d
n
a

3

s
e
r
u
g
i
F

f
o

n
o
i
t
p
a
c

e
h
t

n
i

d
e
z
i
r
a
m
m
u
s

e
r
a

s
l
e
d
o
m
e
h
t

r
o
f

s
e
u
l
a
v

-6” -4” -2” 0” 2” 4” 6”Angular Oﬀset-6” -4” -2” 0” 2” 4” 6”Angular Oﬀset-6” -4” -2” 0” 2” 4” 6”Angular Oﬀset-6” -4” -2” 0” 2” 4” 6”Angular Oﬀset-6” -4” -2” 0” 2” 4” 6”Angular Oﬀset-6” -4” -2” 0” 2” 4” 6”Angular Oﬀset6420-2-4-6Velocity Shift (km/s)6420-2-4-6Velocity Shift (km/s)6420-2-4-6Velocity Shift (km/s)6420-2-4-6Velocity Shift (km/s)100806040200Intensity (%)Position AngleP.A. 270º(mid-plane)P.A. 300ºP.A. 330ºP.A. 0º(perpendicular to the mid-plane)P.A. 30ºP.A. 60º(cid:9517) = 90º(edge-on)60º30º0º(face-on)Inclination AngleCounter-velocityComponentCentrifugalBarrierSpin-upEast WestSE NWSE NWSouth NorthSW NESW NE– 72 –

Fig. 8.— Examples of (a) the integrated intensity (moment 0) maps, (b) the velocity ﬁeld

(moment 1) maps, and (c) the position-velocity diagrams of the Keplerian disk models. The

positions with an integrated intensity lower than the 5% relative to the peak value in each

model are masked in the velocity ﬁeld map. The position axes for the position-velocity

diagrams are taken along (P.A. 270◦) and perpendicular (P.A. 0◦) to the mid-plane of the

disks, which are indicated by cyan arrows in panel (b). The employed parameter values for

the models are summarized in the caption of Figures 3 and 4, except for the rCB and Rin;

rCB is set to be larger than Rout, and Rin is to be 0 au.

0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)0º00ʼ06”04”02”00”-02”-04”-06”Declination (ICRS)100806040200Integrated Intensity (%) (a) Integrated intensity map(Moment 0 map)100 au0h00m00s.4 0s.2 0s.0 23h59m59s.8 59s.6Right Ascension (ICRS)210-1-2Velocity (km/s)(b) Velocity ﬁeld map(Moment 1 map)(cid:9517) = 90º(edge-on)60º30º0º(face-on)Inclination AngleBeam size (0”.2x0”.2)P.A. 0ºP.A. 270º-4” -2” 0” 2” 4”Angular Oﬀset420-2-4Velocity Shift (km/s)420-2-4Velocity Shift (km/s)420-2-4Velocity Shift (km/s)420-2-4Velocity Shift (km/s)South North20151050Intensity (%)Spin-upEast West(c) Position-Velocity diagramP.A. 270º  P.A. 0º– 73 –

Velocity (km/s)(c) Velocity Map of the CS ((cid:9486) = 3-2) Emission(a) Integrated Intensity Map of the CS ((cid:9486) = 3-2) EmissionIntegrated Intensity (Jy/beam km/s)(b) Infalling-Rotating Envelope Model Integrated Intensity (Jy/beam km/s)Velocity (km/s)(d) Infalling-Rotating Envelope Model – 74 –

;
2
−
3
=
J
(

S
C
e
h
T

.
)
1
.
2
.
5

n
o
i
t
c
e
S

e
e
s
(

7
2
5
1
L
r
o
f

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

l
e
d
o
m
e
h
t

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
o

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
C
—
.
9

.
g
i
F

e
p
o
l
e
v
n
e

g
n

i
t
a
t
o
r
-
g
n

i
l
l
a
f
n

i

e
h
t

h
t
i
w

e
n
o

t
ﬁ
-
t
s
e
b

e
h
t

s
i

t
l
u
s
e
r

l
e
d
o
m
e
h
T

.
n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
c

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

e
r
a

a
t
a
d

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

)
c

,
a

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

d
e
t
a
r
g
e
t
n

i

e
h
t

t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

)
b

,
a
(

s
l
e
n
a
P

.
2

e
l
b
a
T

n
i

d
e
z
i
r
a
m
m
u
s

e
r
a

s
e
u
l
a
v

r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p

e
h
T

.
)
d

,
b
(

l
e
d
o
m

s
l
e
v
e
l

r
u
o
t
n
o
C

.
e
l
a
c
s

y
e
r
g

n

i

e
g
a
m

i

d
e
v
r
e
s
b
o

e
h
t

n
o

d
i
a
l
r
e
v
o

s
i

s
r
u
o
t
n
o
c

n
i

t
l
u
s
e
r

l
e
d
o
m
e
h
t

e
r
e
h
w

,
s
p
a
m

)
0

t
n
e
m
o
m

(

n

i

e
n

i
l

e
u
b

l

d
e
h
s
a
d

a

y
b

d
e
s
o
l
c
n
e

e
l
g
n
a
t
c
e
r

A

.
l
e
d
o
m
e
h
t

f
o

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
i

k
a
e
p

e
h
t

f
o
%
0
8

d
n
a

,

%
0
4

,

%
0
2

,

%
0
1

,

%
5

e
r
a

w
o
ﬂ
t
u
o

e
h
t

m
o
r
f

i

n
o
i
t
a
n
m
a
t
n
o
c

e
h
t

d
i
o
v
a

o
t

a
t
a
d

e
b
u
c

e
h
t

r
o
f

t
s
e
t

2
χ
e
h
t

n
i

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

n
o
i
g
e
r

e
h
t

s
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

)
a
(

l
e
n
a
p

e
r
a

1
1

e
r
u
g
i
F

n

i

s

m
a
r
g
a
i

d

V
P

e
h
t

h
c
i
h
w

g
n
o
l
a

s
i
x
a

n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p

e
h
t

s
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

)
a
(

l
e
n
a
p

n
i

w
o
r
r
a

d
e
r

A

.
s
t
n
e
n
o
p
m
o
c

c
i
m
e
t
s
y
s

e
h
t

m
o
r
f

1
−
s

m
k

5
.
0

y
r
e
v
e

e
r
a

s
l
e
v
e
l

r
u
o
t
n
o
C

.
s
p
a
m

)
1

t
n
e
m
o
m

(

y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

e
h
t

t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

)
d

,
c
(

s
l
e
n
a
P

.
d
e
r
a
p
e
r
p

n
a
h
t

r
e
g
r
a
l

r
o

o
t

l
a
u
q
e

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

n
a

h
t
i
w
s
t
n
i
o
p

a
t
a
d

e
h
t

g
n
i
s
u

y
b

d
e
r
a
p
e
r
p

e
r
a

s
p
a
m
y
t
i
c
o
l
e
V

.
1
−
s

m
k

8
.
5

f
o

y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

d
e
l
e
d
o
m
e
h
t

n

i

e
u

l
a
v
m
u
m
i
x
a
m
e
h
t

f
o
%
1
.
0

d
n
a

,
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
o

e
h
t

r
o
f

)
σ
3
(

1
−
m
a
e
b

y
J
m
5
1

:
s
d
l
o
h
s
e
r
h
t

g
n
i
w
o
l
l
o
f

e
h
t

e
h
t

l
l
a

h
g
u
o
r
h
t

d

l
o
h
s
e
r
h
t

e
h
t

n
a
h
t

r
e
g
r
a
l

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
i

n
a

h
t
i
w
s
t
n
i
o
p

a
t
a
d

y
n
a

e
v
a
h

t
o
n

o
d

s
l
e
x
i
p

d
e
r
o
l
o
c

k
c
a
l
B

.
a
t
a
d

e
b
u
c

.
l
e
n
a
p

h
c
a
e

f
o

r
e
n
r
o
c

t
h
g
i
r

m
o
t
t
o
b

e
h
t

t
a

d
e
t
c
i
p
e
d

s
i

e
z
i
s

m
a
e
b

e
h
T

.
e
g
n
a
r

y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

– 75 –

Fig. 10.— Comparison of the velocity channel maps between the observation and the results

of the infalling-rotating envelope model for L1527 (see Section 5.2.1). Grey scale maps

represent the observed CS (J = 3 − 2) emission. Contours represent the best-ﬁt model

obtained by the χ2 test. The parameters for the model are: M of 0.15 M(cid:12) and rCB of 100

au, assuming i of 95◦. Contour levels are 5%, 10%, 20%, 40%, and 80% of the peak intensity

of the model. The original channel width of 0.2 km s−1 is used in the χ2 test, whereas the

four successive channels are combined in these velocity channel maps. The central velocity

is shown at the upper left corner of each panel. The beam size is depicted at the bottom

right corner of each panel.

Intensity (Jy/beam)km/s– 76 –

Fig. 11.— Comparison of the position-velocity diagrams between the observation and the

model result for L1527 (see Section 5.2.1). Grey scale maps represent the observed CS

(J = 3 − 2) emission. The model result represented in contours is the best-ﬁt one with

the infalling-rotating envelope model (b). The parameter values are summarized in Table

2. Contour levels are 5%, 10%, 20%, 40%, and 80% of the peak intensity in the model.

PV diagrams are prepared along the red arrow in Figure 9(a); this arrow is taken along the

mid-plane of the disk/envelope system and centered at the protostellar position. A rectangle

enclosed by a dashed blue line in panel (a) represents the velocity range considered in the

χ2 test for the cube data, where the velocity shift is within ±3 km s−1 from the systemic

velocity of 5.8 km s−1. Dashed contour in panel (b) represents the intensity dip.

Intensity (Jy/beam)(a) PV Diagram of the CS ((cid:9486) = 3-2) EmissionIntensity (Jy/beam)(b) Infalling-Rotating Envelope Model – 77 –

Fig. 12.— Reduced χ2 map with various parameter values for L1527. Free parameters and

their ranges are summarized in Table 2.

Infalling-rotating envelope modelReduced Chi-Squared Value– 78 –

Velocity (km/s)(d) Velocity Map of the CH3OH (126,7-135,8; E) EmissionVelocity (km/s)(e) Infalling-Rotating Envelope Model Velocity (km/s)(f) Keplerian Disk Model (a) Integrated Intensity Map of the CH3OH (126,7-135,8; E) EmissionIntegrated Intensity (Jy/beam km/s) (b) Infalling-Rotating Envelope Model Integrated Intensity (Jy/beam km/s)(c) Keplerian Disk Model Integrated Intensity (Jy/beam km/s)East-WestOutﬂow – 79 –

h
c
a
e

n

i

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

k
a
e
p

e
h
t

f
o
%
0
8

d
n
a

,

%
0
4

,

%
0
2

,

%
0
1

,

%
5

e
r
a

s
l
e
v
e
l

r
u
o
t
n
o
C

.
e
l
a
c
s

y
e
r
g

n
i

e
g
a
m

i

d
e
v
r
e
s
b
o

e
h
t

n
o

.

d
e
r
a
p
e
r
p

e
r
a

6
1

e
r
u
g
i
F

n

i

s

m
a
r
g
a
i
d
V
P

e
h
t

h
c
i
h
w
g
n
o
l
a

s
i
x
a

n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p

e
h
t

s
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

)
a
(

l
e
n
a
p

n
i

w
o
r
r
a

d
e
r
A

.
l
e
d
o
m

.
l
a

t
e

i
a
m

I

;
0
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

n
e
Y

;
8
8
9
1

.
l
a

t
e

o
n
a
r
i
H
(

e
c
r
u
o
s

s
i
h
t

f
o

w
o
ﬂ
t
u
o

t
s
e

W

-
t
s
a
E

e
h
t

o
t

r
a
l
u
c
i
d
n
e
p
r
e
p

s
i

w
o
r
r
a

s
i
h
T

1
−
s

m
k

5
.
0

y
r
e
v
e

e
r
a

s
l
e
v
e
l

r
u
o
t
n
o
C

.
s
p
a
m

)
1

t
n
e
m
o
m

(

y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

e
h
t

t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

)
f
(

−
)
d
(

s
l
e
n
a
P

.
)
9
1
0
2

.
l
a

t
e

i
l
e
k
r
e
j
B

;
6
1
0
2

l
a
u
q
e

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

n
a

h
t
i
w
s
t
n
i
o
p

a
t
a
d

e
h
t

g
n
i
s
u

y
b

d
e
r
a
p
e
r
p

e
r
a

s
p
a
m
y
t
i
c
o
l
e
V

.
1
−
s

m
k

4
3
.
8

f
o

y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

c
i
m
e
t
s
y
s

e
h
t

m
o
r
f

n

i

e
u

l
a
v
m
u
m
i
x
a
m
e
h
t

f
o
%
1
.
0

d
n
a

,
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
o

e
h
t

r
o
f

)
σ
3
(

1
−
m
a
e
b

y
J
m
3

:
s
d
l
o
h
s
e
r
h
t

g
n
i
w
o
l
l
o
f

e
h
t

n
a
h
t

r
e
g
r
a
l

r
o

o
t

d

l
o
h
s
e
r
h
t

e
h
t

n
a
h
t

r
e
g
r
a
l

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
i

n
a

h
t
i
w
s
t
n
i
o
p

a
t
a
d

y
n
a

e
v
a
h

t
o
n

o
d

s
l
e
x
i
p

d
e
r
o
l
o
c

k
c
a
l
B

.
a
t
a
d

e
b
u
c

d
e
l
e
d
o
m
h
c
a
e

.
l
e
n
a
p

h
c
a
e

f
o

r
e
n
r
o
c

t
h
g
i
r

m
o
t
t
o
b

e
h
t

t
a

d
e
t
c
i
p
e
d

s
i

e
z
i
s

m
a
e
b

e
h
T

.
e
g
n
a
r

y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

e
h
t

l
l
a

h
g
u
o
r
h
t

H
O

3

H
C

e
h
T

.
)
2
.
2
.
5

n
o
i
t
c
e
S

e
e
s
(

5
3
3
B

r
o
f

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

l
e
d
o
m

e
h
t

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
o

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
C
—
.
3
1

.
g
i
F

-
g
n

i
l
l
a
f
n

i

e
h
t

h
t
i
w
s
e
n
o

t
ﬁ
-
t
s
e
b

e
h
t

e
r
a

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

l
e
d
o
m
e
h
T

.
n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
c

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

e
r
a

a
t
a
d

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

)
d

,
a

;

E

;
8
,
5
3
1
−

7
,
6
2
1
(

.
3

e
l
b
a
T
n

i

d
e
z
i
r
a
m
m
u
s

e
r
a

s
e
u

l
a
v

r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p

r
i
e
h
T

.
)
f

,
c
(

l
e
d
o
m
k
s
i
d

n
a
i
r
e
l
p
e
K
e
h
t

d
n
a

)
e

,
b
(

l
e
d
o
m
e
p
o
l
e
v
n
e

g
n
i
t
a
t
o
r

d

i
a
l
r
e
v
o

e
r
a

s
r
u
o
t
n
o
c

n

i

s
t
l

u
s
e
r

l
e
d
o
m
e
h
t

e
r
e
h
w

,
s
p
a
m

)
0

t
n
e
m
o
m

(

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
i

d
e
t
a
r
g
e
t
n
i

e
h
t

t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

)
c
(
−
)
a
(

s
l
e
n
a
P

– 80 –

Fig. 14.— Comparison of the velocity channel maps between the observation and the re-

sults of the infalling-rotating envelope model for B335 (see Section 5.2.2). Grey scale maps

represent the observed CH3OH (126,7 − 135,8; E) emission. Contours represent the best-ﬁt

model obtained by the χ2 test for the infalling-rotating envelope model. The parameters for

the model are: M of 0.02 M(cid:12), rCB of 1 au, and i of 70◦. Contour levels are 5%, 10%, 20%,

40%, and 80% of the peak intensity of the model. The original channel width of 0.28 km s−1

is used in the χ2 test, whereas the two successive channels are combined in these velocity

channel maps. The central velocity is shown at the upper left corner of each panel. The

beam size is depicted at the bottom right corner of each panel.

Intensity (Jy/beam)km/s– 81 –

Fig. 15.— Same as Figure 14, but for the Keplerian disk model. Contours represent the

best-ﬁt model obtained by the χ2 test for the Keplerian disk model. The parameters for the

model are: M of 0.04 M(cid:12), Rin of 1 au, and i of 75◦.

Intensity (Jy/beam)km/s– 82 –

Intensity (Jy/beam)(a) PV Diagram of the CH3OH (126,7-135,8; E) EmissionIntensity (Jy/beam)(b) Infalling-Rotating Envelope Model Intensity (Jy/beam)(c) Keplerian Disk Model – 83 –

e
e
s
(

5
3
3
B
r
o
f

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

l
e
d
o
m
e
h
t

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
o

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

s

m
a
r
g
a
i
d

y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v
-
n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p

e
h
t

f
o

n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
C
—
.
6
1

.
g
i
F

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

s
t
l

u
s
e
r

l
e
d
o
m
e
h
T

.

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

)
E

;
8
,
5
3
1
−

7
,
6
2
1
(
H
O

3

H
C
d
e
v
r
e
s
b
o
e
h
t

t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

s
p
a
m
e
l
a
c
s
y
e
r
G

.
)
2
.
2
.
5
n
o
i
t
c
e
S

r
i
e
h
T

.
)
c
(

l
e
d
o
m
k
s
i

d

n
a
i
r
e
l

p
e
K
e
h
t

d
n
a

)
b
(

l
e
d
o
m
e
p
o
l
e
v
n
e

g
n
i
t
a
t
o
r
-
g
n
i
l
l
a
f
n
i

e
h
t

h
t
i
w
s
e
n
o

t
ﬁ
-
t
s
e
b

e
h
t

e
r
a

s
r
u
o
t
n
o
c

n
i

n

i

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

k
a
e
p

e
h
t

f
o
%
0
8

d
n
a

,

%
0
4

,

%
0
2

,

%
0
1

,

%
5

e
r
a

s
l
e
v
e
l

r
u
o
t
n
o
C

.
3

e
l
b
a
T
n

i

d
e
z
i
r
a
m
m
u
s

e
r
a

s
e
u
l
a
v

r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p

f
o

e
n
a
l
p
-
d
m
e
h
t

i

g
n
o
l
a

n
e
k
a
t

s
i

w
o
r
r
a

s
i
h
t

;
)
a
(
3
1

e
r
u
g
i
F
n
i

w
o
r
r
a

d
e
r

e
h
t

g
n
o
l
a

d
e
r
a
p
e
r
p

e
r
a

s

m
a
r
g
a
i
d
V
P

.
l
e
d
o
m
h
c
a
e

l
e
n
a
p

n

i

e
n

i
l

e
u
b

l

d
e
h
s
a
d

a

y
b

d
e
s
o
l
c
n
e

e
l
g
n
a
t
c
e
r
A

.
n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p

r
a
l
l
e
t
s
o
t
o
r
p

e
h
t

t
a

d
e
r
e
t
n
e
c

d
n
a
m
e
t
s
y
s

e
p
o
l
e
v
n
e
/
k
s
i
d

e
h
t

m
k

6
1
±
n

i

h
t
i
w
s
i

t
f
i

h
s

y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

e
h
t

e
r
e
h
w

,
a
t
a
d

e
b
u
c

e
h
t

r
o
f

s
t
s
e
t

2
χ
e
h
t

n
i

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

e
g
n
a
r

y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

e
h
t

s
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

)
a
(

.

p
d

i

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

e
h
t

s
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

)
b
(

l
e
n
a
p

n
i

r
u
o
t
n
o
c

d
e
h
s
a
D

.
1
−
s

m
k

4
3
.
8

f
o

y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

c
i
m
e
t
s
y
s

e
h
t

m
o
r
f

1
−
s

– 84 –

Fig. 17.— Reduced χ2 maps with various parameter values for B335. Free parameters and

their ranges are summarized in Table 3.

(a) Infalling-rotating envelope modelReduced Chi-Squared Value(b) Keplerian disk modelReduced Chi-Squared Value– 85 –

Velocity (km/s)(e) Velocity Map of the SO ((cid:9486)(cid:9490) = 67-56) EmissionVelocity (km/s)(f) Infalling-Rotating Envelope Model Velocity (km/s)(g) Keplerian Disk Model Velocity (km/s)(h) Combined Model(a) Integrated Intensity Map of the SO ((cid:9486)(cid:9490) = 67-56) EmissionIntegrated Intensity (Jy/beam km/s)(b) Infalling-Rotating Envelope Model Integrated Intensity (Jy/beam km/s)(c) Keplerian Disk Model Integrated Intensity (Jy/beam km/s)(d) Combined ModelIntegrated Intensity (Jy/beam km/s)– 86 –

%
0
8

d
n
a

,

%
0
4

,

%
0
2

,

%
0
1

,

%
5

e
r
a

s
l
e
v
e
l

r
u
o
t
n
o
C

.
e
l
a
c
s

y
e
r
g

n
i

e
g
a
m

i

d
e
v
r
e
s
b
o

e
h
t

n
o

d
i
a
l
r
e
v
o

e
r
a

s
r
u
o
t
n
o
c

n
i

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

s

m
a
r
g
a
i

d
V
P
e
h
t

h
c
i

h
w
g
n
o
l
a

s
i
x
a

n
o
i
t
i
s
o
p

e
h
t

s
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

)
a
(

l
e
n
a
p

n
i

w
o
r
r
a

d
e
r
A

.
l
e
d
o
m
h
c
a
e

n
i

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
i

k
a
e
p

e
h
t

f
o

1
−
s

m
k

1

y
r
e
v
e

e
r
a

s
l
e
v
e
l

r
u
o
t
n
o
C

.
s
p
a
m

)
1

t
n
e
m
o
m

(

y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

e
h
t

t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

)
h
(
−
)
e
(

s
l
e
n
a
P

.
d
e
r
a
p
e
r
p

e
r
a

1
2

e
r
u
g
i
F

f
o

o
t

l
a
u
q
e

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

n
a

h
t
i
w
s
t
n
i
o
p

a
t
a
d

e
h
t

g
n
i
s
u

y
b

d
e
r
a
p
e
r
p

e
r
a

s
p
a
m
y
t
i
c
o
l
e
V

.
1
−
s

m
k

4

f
o

y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

c
i
m
e
t
s
y
s

e
h
t

m
o
r
f

n

i

e
u

l
a
v
m
u
m
i
x
a
m
e
h
t

f
o
%
1
.
0

d
n
a

,
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
o

e
h
t

r
o
f

)
σ
3
(

1
−
m
a
e
b

y
J
m
1
2

:
s
d
l
o
h
s
e
r
h
t

g
n
i
w
o
l
l
o
f

e
h
t

n
a
h
t

r
e
g
r
a
l

r
o

d
l
o
h
s
e
r
h
t

e
h
t

n
a
h
t

r
e
g
r
a
l

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
i

n
a

h
t
i
w
s
t
n
i
o
p

a
t
a
d

y
n
a

e
v
a
h

t
o
n

o
d

s
l
e
x
i
p

d
e
r
o
l
o
c

k
c
a
l
B

.
a
t
a
d

e
b
u
c

d
e
l
e
d
o
m
h
c
a
e

.
l
e
n
a
p

h
c
a
e

f
o

r
e
n
r
o
c

t
h
g
i
r

m
o
t
t
o
b

e
h
t

t
a

d
e
t
c
i
p
e
d

s
i

e
z
i
s

m
a
e
b

e
h
T

.
e
g
n
a
r

y
t
i
c
o
l
e
v

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

e
h
t

l
l
a

h
g
u
o
r
h
t

O
S

e
h
T

.
)
3
.
2
.
5

n
o
i
t
c
e
S

e
e
s
(

9
2

s
a
i
l

E

r
o
f

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

l
e
d
o
m

e
h
t

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
o

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
C
—

.
8
1

.
g
i
F

-
g
n

i
l
l
a
f
n

i

e
h
t

h
t
i
w
s
e
n
o

t
ﬁ
-
t
s
e
b

e
h
t

e
r
a

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

l
e
d
o
m
e
h
T

.
n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
c

r
o
f

d
e
s
u

e
r
a

a
t
a
d

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

)
e

,
a

;
6
5
−

7
6
=

N
J
(

s
e
u
l
a
v

r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p

r
i
e
h
T

.
)
h

,

d
(

l
e
d
o
m
d
e
n
i
b
m
o
c

e
h
t

d
n
a

,
)
g

,
c
(

l
e
d
o
m
k
s
i
d

n
a
i
r
e
l
p
e
K
e
h
t

,
)
f

,
b
(

l
e
d
o
m
e
p
o
l
e
v
n
e

g
n
i
t
a
t
o
r

l
e
d
o
m

e
h
t

e
r
e
h
w

,
s
p
a
m

)
0

t
n
e
m
o
m

(

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
i

d
e
t
a
r
g
e
t
n
i

e
h
t

t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r

)
d
(
−
)
a
(

s
l
e
n
a
P

.
4

e
l
b
a
T

n
i

d
e
z
i
r
a
m
m
u
s

e
r
a

– 87 –

Fig. 19.— Comparison of the velocity channel maps between the observation and the results

of the infalling-rotating envelope model for Elias 29 (see Section 5.2.3). Grey scale maps

represent the observed SO (JN = 67 − 56) emission. Contours represent the best-ﬁt model

obtained by the χ2 test for the infalling-rotating envelope model. The parameters for the

model are: M of 0.6 M(cid:12), rCB of 5 au, and i of 120◦. Contour levels are 5%, 10%, 20%, 40%,

and 80% of the peak intensity of the model. The original channel width of 0.2 km s−1 is used

in the χ2 test, whereas the ﬁve successive channels are combined in these velocity channel

maps. The central velocity is shown at the upper left corner of each panel. The beam size

is depicted at the bottom right corner of each panel.

Intensity (Jy/beam)km/s– 88 –

Fig. 20.— Same as Figure 19, but for the Keplerian disk model. Contours represent the

best-ﬁt model obtained by the χ2 test for the Keplerian disk model. The parameters for the

model are: M of 1.4 M(cid:12), Rin of 1 au, and i of 80◦.

Intensity (Jy/beam)km/s– 89 –

Intensity (Jy/beam)(a) PV Diagram of the SO ((cid:9486)(cid:9490) = 67-56) EmissionIntensity (Jy/beam)(b) Infalling-Rotating Envelope Model Intensity (Jy/beam)(c) Keplerian Disk Model Intensity (Jy/beam)(d) Combined Model– 90 –

Fig. 21.— Comparison of the position-velocity diagrams between the observation and the

model results for Elias 29 (see Section 5.2.3). Grey scale maps represent the observed SO

(JN = 67 − 56) emission. The model results represented in contours are the best-ﬁt ones with

the infalling-rotating envelope model (b), the Keplerian disk model (c), and the combined

model (d). Their parameter values are summarized in Table 4. Contour levels are 5%, 10%,

20%, 40%, and 80% of the peak intensity in each model. PV diagrams are prepared along

the red arrow in Figure 18(a); this arrow is taken along the mid-plane of the disk/envelope

system and centered at the protostellar position. A rectangle enclosed by a dashed blue line

in panel (a) represents the velocity range considered in the χ2 tests for the cube data, where

the velocity shift is within ±12.8 km s−1 from the systemic velocity of 4 km s−1.

– 91 –

Fig. 22.— Reduced χ2 maps with various parameter values for Elias 29. Free parameters

and their ranges are summarized in Table 4.

(a) Infalling-rotating envelope modelReduced Chi-Squared Value(b) Keplerian disk modelReduced Chi-Squared Value– 92 –

Fig. 23.— Same as Figure 19, but for the combined model. Contours represent the best-ﬁt

model obtained by the χ2 test for the combined model. The parameters for the model are:

M of 0.8 M(cid:12), rCB of 10 au, and i of 120◦, assuming Rin of 1 au.

Intensity (Jy/beam)km/s– 93 –

Fig. 24.— Velocity proﬁle in the infalling-rotating envelope model for L1527 (Sakai et al.

2014b; Oya et al. 2015). In the infalling-rotating envelope model, the infall velocity takes

its maximum value (vfall= 0.9 km s−1) at the centrifugal radius (rCR = 200 au). The sound

speed cs is assumed to be 0.35 km s−1, which corresponds to the value at the temperature

of 30 K. We here employ the protostellar mass of 0.18 M(cid:12) and the radius of the centrifugal

barrier of 100 au according to the report by Sakai et al. (2014a).

Velocity (km s-1)2.01.61.20.80.40.00 50 100 150 200 250 300Distance from the protostar (au)(cid:9526) = (cid:9526)CB(cid:9444)(cid:9526) = (cid:9526)CR(cid:9530)(cid:9444)(cid:9473)(cid:9444)(cid:9530)max rot(cid:9530)(cid:9444)(cid:9473)(cid:9444)(cid:9530)max/2 rot(cid:9530)rot ∝ (cid:9526)(cid:9444)-1(cid:9530)fall√2(cid:9511)s (30 K)((cid:9492)stat = ρ(cid:9479)s2 )< ((cid:9492)dyn = ρ(cid:9530)fall2/2)