A New Security Mechanism for Vehicular 
Communication Networks 

Ghassan Samara  
Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Science and 
Information Technology, Zarqa University  
Zarqa, Jordan.  
gsamarah@yahoo.com  

Wafaa A.H. Ali Alsalihy  
School of Computer Science 
Universiti Sains Malaysia  
11800 Penang, Malaysia 
Wafaa@cs.usm.my 

Abstract—Vehicular  communication  networks  is  a  promising  and 
emerging  technology  to  facilitat  road  safety,  Safety  of  life,  traffic 
management,  and  infotainment  dissemination  for  drivers  and 
passengers.  One  of  the  ultimate  goals  in  the  design  of  such 
networking  is  to  resist  various  malicious  abuses  and  security 
attacks. In this research new security mechanisms are proposed to 
achieve  secure  certificate  revocation,  which  is  considered  among 
the most challenging design objective in vehicular ad hoc networks. 

Keywords-component;  VANET;  Certificate  Revocation; 

Certificate Management; VANET Security.  

I. 

 INTRODUCTION  

Traffic  congestion  is  the  most  annoying  thing  that  any 
driver  in  the  world  dreaming  of  avoiding  it,  a  lot  of  traveling 
vehicles may cause problems, or facing problems that must be 
reported  to  other  vehicles  to  avoid  traffic  overcrowding, 
furthermore,  there  are  a  lot  of  vehicles  may  send  incorrect 
information, or a bogus data, and this could make the situation 
even worse.  

Recent  research  initiatives  supported  by  governments  and 
car manufacturers seek to enhance the safety and efficiency of 
transportation systems. And one of the major topics to search is 
"Certificate Revocation".  

Certificate revocation is a method to revoke some or all the 
certificates  that  the  problematic  vehicle  has,  this  will  enable 
other  vehicles  to  avoid  any  information  from  those  vehicles, 
which cause problems.  

(CRL).  RSU  also 

Current  studies  suggest  that  the  Road  Side  Unit  (RSU)  is 
responsible  for  tracking  the  misbehavior  of  vehicles  and  for 
certificate  revocation  by  broadcasting  Certificate  Revocation 
List 
the  certificate 
management,  communication with Certificate  Authority (CA), 
warning  messages  broadcasting,  communicating  with  other 
RSUs.  Figure  1  shows  a  type  of  RSU,  where  Mercedes  Benz 
suggests  that  it  is  a  small  unit  will  be  hanged  on  the  street 
columns, every 1 KM [1] according to DSRC 5.9 GHZ range. 

responsible 

for 

In  vehicular  ad  hoc  networks  most  of  road  vehicles  will 
receive messages or broadcast sequence of messages, and they 
don’t  need  to  consider  all  of  these  Messages,  because  not  all 
vehicles have a good intention and some of them have an Evil-
minded. 

Current technology suffers from high overhead on RSU, as 
RSU  tacking  responsibility  for  the  whole  Vehicular  Network 
(VN)  Communication.  Furthermore,  distributing  CRL  causes 
control  channel  consumption,  as  CRL  need  to  be  transmitted 
every 0.3 second [2]. Search in CRL for each message received 
causes  a  processing  overhead  for  finding  a  single  Certificate, 
where VN communication involves a kind of periodic message 
being sent and received 10 times per second. 

This  research  proposes  mechanisms  that  examine  the 
certificates  for  the  received  messages,  the  certificate  indicates 
to accept the information from the current Vehicle or ignore it; 
furthermore,  this  research  will  implement  a  mechanism  for 
revoking certificates and assigning ones, these mechanisms will 
lead better and faster adversary vehicle recognizing. 

II.  BACKGROUND RESEARCH 

Existing  works  on  vehicular network  security  [3],  [4], [5], 
and [6] propose the usage of a PKI and digital signatures but do 
not  provide  any  mechanisms  for  certificate  revocation,  even 
though it is a required component of any PKI-based solution. 

In [7] Raya presented the problem of certificate revocation 
and its importance, the research discussed the current methods 
of  revocation  and  its  weaknesses,  and  proposed  a  new 
protocols  for    certificate  revocation  including  :  Certificate 
Revocation  List 
(CRL),  Revocation  using  Compressed 
Certificate  Revocation  Lists  (RC2RL),  Revocation  of  the 
Tamper  Proof  Device  (RTPD)  and  Distributed  Revocation 
Protocol  (DRP)  stating  the  differences  among  them.  Authors 
made  a  simulation  on  the  DRP  protocol  concluding  that  the 
DRP  protocol  is  the  most  convenient  one  which  used  the 
Bloom  filter,  the  simulation  tested  a  variety  of  environment 
like: Freeway, City and Mixing Freeway with City.  

In [8] Samara divided the network to small adjacent clusters 
and replaced the CRL with local CRL exchanged interactively 
among vehicles, RSUs and CAs. The size of local CRL is small 
as it contains the certificates for the vehicles inside the cluster 
only. 

In  [9]  Laberteaux  proposed  to  distribute  the  CRL  initiated 
by CA frequently. CRL contains only  the IDs of misbehaving 
vehicles to reduce its size. The distribution of the received CRL 
from  CA  is  made  from  RSU  to  all  vehicles  in  its  region,  the 
problem of this method is that, not all the vehicles will receive 

 
 
 
IC will have the following fields: 

Figure 3. Invalid certificate 

These Certificates will not reserve much Memory like CRL 

does. 

Figure 4. Message checking procedure 

Certificate Revocation: 

Certificate  revocation  is  done  when  any  misbehaving 
vehicle having VC is discovered, where  RSU replaces the old 
VC with new IC, to indicate that this vehicle has to be avoided 
and this happens when more than one vehicle reporting to RSU 
that  a  certain  vehicle  has  a  VC  and  broadcasting  wrong  data. 
See figure 5, this report must be  given to RSU each time  that 
any  receiver  receives  information  from  sender  and  finds  that 
this information is wrong. 

the  CRL  (Ex:  a  vehicle  in  the  Rural  areas),  to  solve  this 
problem the use of Car to Car (C2C) is introduced, using small 
number of RSU’s, transmitting the CRL to the vehicles. 

In  [2]  the  eviction  of  problematic  vehicles  is  introduced, 
furthermore,  some  revocation  protocols  like:  Revocation  of 
Trusted Component (RTC) and Leave Protocol are proposed.  

In 

[10]  some  certificate  revocation  protocols  were 
introduced  in  the  traditional  PKI  architecture.  It  is  concluded 
that the most commonly adopted certificate revocation scheme 
is  through  CRL,  using  central  repositories  prepared  in  CAs. 
Based on such centralized architecture, alternative solutions to 
CRL  could  be  used  for  certificate  revocation  system  like 
certificate revocation tree (CRT), the Online Certificate Status 
Protocol  (OCSP),  and  other  methods  where  the  common 
requirement  for  these  schemes  is  high  availability  of  the 
centralized CAs, as frequent data  transmission  with On Board 
Unit  (OBUs)  to  obtain  timely  revocation  information  may 
cause significant overhead.  

III.  PROPOSED SOLUTION 

In  order  to  improve  the  security  of  certificate  revocation 
problem,  new  protocols  for  message  checking  and  certificate 
revocation  will  be  proposed,  the  amount  of  invalid  messages 
from bad attitude vehicles must minimized.  

Message Checking: 

In  this  approach  any  vehicle  receives  a  message  from  any 
other  vehicle  takes  the  message  and  check  for  the  sender 
certificate  validity,  if  the  sender  has  a  Valid  Certificate  (VC), 
the receiver will consider the message, in contrary, if the sender 
has  an  Invalid  Certificate  (IC)  the  receiver  will  ignore  the 
message, furthermore, if the sender doesn’t have a certificate at 
all,  the  receiver  will  report  to  the  RSU  about  the  sender  and 
check  the  message  if  it  is  correct  or  not,  if  the  information 
received  was  correct  RSU  will  give  a  VC  for  the  sender,  else 
RSU will give IC for it, and register the vehicle’s identity into 
the CRL. See figure  2 and 3 for the VC and IC structure, and 
figure 4 for message checking.  

Figure1. Road side unit 

Figure 2. Valid certificate 

 
 
 
 
 
 
located in the same area, the number of abuse Report messages 
depends on the vehicles density on the road, see figure 6. 

Figure 6. Calculation of the Number of Vehicles in the Range [11]. 

If  the  number  of  vehicles  that  making  accusation  for  a 
specific  vehicle  is  near  the  half  of  the  current  vehicles,  RSU 
will  make a  Revocation  Request  (RR)  to  revoke  the  VC  from 
the sender vehicle. 

Some  vehicles  don’t  produce  an  AR  because  they  didn’t 
receive any data from the  sender vehicle (maybe they weren’t 
in the area wile broadcasting), or they have a problem in their 
devices,  or  they  have  an  IC,  so  RSU  will  not  consider  their 
messages. 

CA  makes a revocation order to RSU after confirming the 
RR and updates the CRL and then RSU revokes the VC from 
the  sender  vehicle,  and  assigns  IC  for  it,  to  indicate  to  other 
vehicles in the future, that this vehicle broadcasts wrong data, 
"don’t trust it". 

Figure 5 shows certificate revocation steps. 

The message sequence is as follows 

1-  sen          rec:ENCPK[Message + Sig] 

2-  rec           RSU:ENCPK [SKA + Sig] 

3-  RSU         rec: ENCPK [SKR + T + Sig] 

4-  rec          sen: ENCSK [VM + T + Sig] 

5-  sen          RSU:ENCPK [SKA + Sig] 

6-  RSU         sen: ENCPK [SKR + T + Sig] 

7-   sen         rec: ENCSK [VC + T + Sig] 

8-   rec          RSU: ENCPK [AbR + T + Sig] 

9-  RSU         CA: ENCPK [SN + RevReq + RevRea+ T + Sig 
+ senid + MesCod] 

10-  CA         RSU: ENCPK [SN + RevOr + UpCRL + T + Sig 
+ senid + RevRea]                                    

11-    RSU            sen:  ENCPK  [RevVC  +  AssBC  +  T  +  Sig  + 
RevRea] 

Message  1:  sen  (sender)  sends  a  message  to  the  rec 
(receiver), this message along with digital signature of sen, and 
this message is encrypted with the Primary Key (PK) of rec.  

Figure 5. Certificate revocation procedure 

The  revocation  will  be  as  follows,  a  sender  sen  sends  a 
message  to  receiver  rec;  this  message  may  be  from  untrusted 
vehicle, so  receiver sends Message to RSU to acquire Session 
Key (SKA), RSU replay message Containing SK Reply (SKR), 
this  message  contains 
the  current 
connection,  this  key  is  used  to  prevent  attackers  from 
fabrication of messages between the two vehicles.  

the  SK  assigned 

to 

Receiver  sends  a  message  to  check  validity,  this  message 
called “Validity Message”, the message job is to indicate if the 
sender vehicle has a VC or not.  Afterwards, RSU reports to the 
rec  that  the  sender  has  a  VC,  so  receiver  can  consider  the 
information from the sender with no fear.  

In  some  situations,  receiver  receives  several  massages, 
where all massages agree on a same result and same data, but a 
specific sender sends deferent data, this data will be considered 
as wrong data, if this data belongs to the same category. 

Every message will be classified depending on its category: 

TABLE I.  

MESSAGE CLASSIFICATION AND CODING 

Every category has a code, if the message received has the 
same code of the other messages, and has a deferent data, then 
this message is considered as a bogus message. In this case rec 
sends an Abuse Report (AR) for RSU, the Abuse  AR (sen id, 
Message Code, Time of Receive), this report will be forwarded 
to  CA,  if  RSU  receives  the  same  AR  from  other  vehicles 

 
 
 
Any attacker can make a fabricated message telling rec that 
this message originated from sen, to prevent this signature from 
being used. 

Message 2: rec sends a request to RSU encrypted with the 

PK of RSU, acquiring a SK for securing connection.  

Message 3: replay for Message 2, contains the SK and the 
time  for  sending  the  replay,  the  importance  of  the  time  is  to 
prevent replay attack, where an attacker can send this message 
more than once, with the same session key, and same signature, 
so he can forge the whole connection. 

Message  4:  rec  sends  validity  message  to  check  if  the 
vehicle  has to be avoided or not, this  message  encrypted with 
the shared SK obtained from RSU.  

Message 7: sen sends a message to rec containing the VC, 
to report for rec that this vehicle must be trusted, and the time 
of sending, in here, to avoid reply attack, which happens when 
an  attacker  keeps  the  message  with  him,  and  sends  it  after  a 
period, may be at that time, the senders certificate been revoked 
by RSU, so the sen must be avoided, but the attacker force the 
rec  vehicle  to  trust  it.  After  receiving  the  information,  rec 
checks if the message has a deferent or same data for the same 
category of other messages received. 

Message 8:  if  the  message  is deferent,  then,  wrong  data  is 
received, rec sends an Abuse Report for RSU, contains sen id 
to  know  which  vehicle  made  the  problem,  Message  Code  to 
know  the  category  of  the  message,  Time  of  Receive  to  know 
when the message received, and the message also includes the 
Time to avoid replay attack and Signature to avoid fabrication; 
the message is encrypted with PK of RSU. 

In  this  situation  replay  attack  will  happen,  if  an  attacker 
copied this message, and sends it frequently to RSU in several 
times  to  make  sure  that  the  number  of  accusation  reached  a 
level, that the certificate must be revoked.  

After  examining  the  number  of  vehicles  that  accused  sen 
for  sending  an  Invalid  message,  if  the  number  is  reasonable, 
RSU sends Message 9. 

Message  9:  RSU  sends  RR  for  CA,  containing  Serial 
Number and Time to avoid replay attack and Signature to avoid 
fabrication,  Revocation  Reason  to  state  what  is  the  reason  for 
revocation, and sen id to know which vehicle is the problematic 
one and message code to know  what is the message category; 
the message is encrypted with PK of CA.  

Replay  attack  in  this  situation  happens  when  an  attacker 
wants to transmit the same message for CA claiming that this 
message  is  from  RSU,  after  some  time  CA  will  not  have  the 
ability  to  respond,  causing  for  DoS  attack,  so  RSU  must  use 
Time and Serial number for this message, because CA has a lot 
of work to do and sending a lot of these kind of messages will 
cause a problem.  

Message 10:  CA  makes a  Revocation Order  for  RSU;  this 
message contains SN to avoid DoS Attack, time to avoid replay 
attack,  signature  to  avoid  fabrication  attack,  Sender  Id, 
Revocation Reason to state what is the reason for revocation.  

After  receiving  this  request  CA  will  update  CRL,  adding 
the new vehicle that been captured to CRL and send it for RSU. 

DoS  attack  can  happen,  when  attacker  keep  sending  the 
same  message  to  RSU,  claiming  that  the  message  originated 
from  CA,  CA  messages  have  the  highest  priority  to  be 
processed  by  RSU,  so  RSU  will  receive  a  huge  amount  of 
messages  from  CA  and  process  it,  without  having  the  time  to 
communicate  with  other  RSUs  or  other  vehicles,  to  avoid  it a 
serial number and signature is used. 

Message  11:  RSU  makes  the  revocation,  revoking  VC, 
assigning  IC,  also  this  message  contains  the  time  to  avoid 
replay attack, Signature to avoid fabrication attack, Revocation 
Reason to state what is the reason for revocation. 

However,  RSU  will  be  responsible  for  renewing  vehicle 
certificates,  any  vehicle  has  an  expiring  certificate  will 
communicate with RSU to renew the certificate, then the RSU 
will  check  the  CRL  to  see  if  this  vehicle  has  an  IC  or  not.  If 
there is no problem for giving a new certificate for this vehicle, 
it will be given for a specific life time, when the period expires 
vehicle  will  issue  a  request  for  the  CA  for  renewing  the 
certificate.  VC  will  have  a  special  design  different  from  the 
design of X.509 certificate [12] as shown in figure 2 and 3. 

IV.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

CRL  is  the  most  common  mechanism  for  certificate 
revocation  in  VANET,    in  [13]  authors  proposed  that  each 
vehicle  must  be  stored  with  approximately  25000  certificates, 
and  each  certificate  has  100  bytes,  so,  2.5  mb  is  required  to 
store  the  revocation  data  for  one  vehicle  in  CRL.  By  simple 
calculation the size of the CRL having 100 adversary vehicles 
might be 250 mb, and this is very large size to be broadcasted 
frequently for dense and high mobile network like VANET. 

The proposed mechanism would replace the old one, where 
the  adversary  vehicles  would  be  identified  by  VC  and  IC 
certificates,  so  the  size  of  the  CRL  will  be  reduced 90  %  and 
this  makes  fast  and  efficient  distribution  and  adversary 
recognition in VANET. 

V.  CONCLUSION 

CRL  is  considered  as  the  most  common  mechanism  for 
adversary  recognition  in  VANET  which  causes  long  delay, 
processing  overhead  and  channel  jamming.  In  this  research 
new  security  mechanisms  were  proposed  to  achieve  secure 
certificate  revocation,  which  is  considered  among  the  most 
challenging design objective in vehicular ad hoc networks. 

The  proposed  mechanisms  help  vehicles  to  easily  identify 
the  adversary  vehicle  and  make  the  certificate  revocation  for 
better certificate management.  

VI.  ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This  work  is  part  of  Universiti  Sains  Malaysia  short  term 

grant No. 304/PKMP/6363/1090. 

 
 
REFERENCES 

[1]  DSRC  Home  Page. 

[cited  2011-11-21;  Available 

from: 

http://www.leearmstrong.com/DSRC/DSRCHomeset.htm.  

[2]  Raya, M., et al., Eviction of misbehaving and faulty nodes in vehicular 
networks.  IEEE  Journal  on  Selected  Areas  in  Communications,  2007. 
25(8): p. 1557-1568. 

[3]  Raya,  M. and  J.P.  Hubaux.  The  security  of  vehicular  ad  hoc networks. 
Proceedings of the 3rd ACM workshop on Security of ad hoc and sensor 
networks, 2005, ACM. 

[4]  Parno,  B.  and  A.  Perrig.  Challenges  in  securing  vehicular  networks.  in 
Proceedings  of  the  Fourth  Workshop  on  Hot  Topics  in  Networks 
(HotNets-IV). 2005. 

[5]  Samara,  G.,  W.A.H.  Al-Salihy,  and  R.  Sures.  Security  Issues  and 
Challenges  of  Vehicular  Ad  Hoc  Networks  (VANET). 
in  4th 
International  Conference  on  New  Trends  in  Information  Science  and 
Service Science (NISS), 2010 . IEEE. 

[6]  Samara,  G.,  W.A.H.  Al-Salihy,  and  R.  Sures.  Security  Analysis  of 
Vehicular  Ad  Hoc  Nerworks  (VANET).  in  Second  International 
Conference  on  Network  Applications  Protocols  and  Services 
(NETAPPS), 2010. IEEE. 

[7]  Raya,  M.,  D.  Jungels,  and  P.  Papadimitratos,  Certificate  revocation  in 
vehicular  networks.  Laboratory  for  computer  Communications  and 
Applications (LCA) School of Computer and Communication Sciences, 
EPFL, Switzerland, 2006. 

[8]  Samara, G., S. Ramadas, and W.A.H. Al-Salihy, Design of Simple and 
Efficient  Revocation  List  Distribution  in  Urban  Areas  for  VANET's. 
International Journal of Computer Science, 2010. 8. 

[9]  Laberteaux, K.P., J.J. Haas, and Y.C. Hu. Security certificate revocation 
list  distribution  for  VANET.  in  Proceedings  of  the  fifth  ACM 
international workshop on VehiculAr Inter-NETworking 2008. ACM. 
[10]  Lin,  X.,  et  al.,  Security  in  vehicular ad  hoc networks.  Communications 

Magazine, IEEE, 2008. 46(4): p. 88-95. 

[11]  Raya, M. and J.P. Hubaux, Securing vehicular ad hoc networks. Journal 

of Computer Security, 2007. 15(1): p. 39-68. 

[12]  Stallings,  W.,  Cryptography  and  network  security,  principles  and 

practices, 2003. Practice Hall. 

[13]  Haas,  J.J.,  Y.C.  Hu,  and  K.P.  Laberteaux.  Design  and  analysis  of  a 
lightweight  certificate  revocation  mechanism  for  VANET.  in  VANET 
'09: Proceedings of the sixth ACM international workshop on VehiculAr 
InterNETworking 2009: ACM. 

 
 
 
 
