Fast Subsequent Color Iris Matching in large Database 

Adnan Alam Khan1, Safeeullah Soomro 2 and Irfan Hyder3 

 1 PAF-KIET Department of Telecommunications, Employer of Institute of Business Management 
Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan 
Adnan_hiit@yahoo.com, adnan.alam@iobm.edu.pk  
2 Institute of Business and Technology, Biztek 
Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan 

safee@ieee.org , safeeullah.soomro@biztekian.com     

3 Pakistan Air Force Karachi Institute of Economics and Technology,  
Karachi, Sindh, Pakistan 
Hyder@pafkiet.edu.pk  

Abstract 
 Databases  play  an  important  role  in  cyber  world.  It  provides 
authenticity across the globe to the legitimate user. Biometrics is 
another  important  tool  which  recognizes  humans  using  their 
physical statistics. Biometrics system requires speedy recognition 
that  provides  instant  and  accurate  results.  Biometric  industry  is 
looking for a new algorithm that interacts with biometric system 
reduces  its  recognition  time  while  searching  its  record  in  large 
database.  We  propose  a  method  which  provides  an  appropriate 
solution  for  the  aforementioned  problem.  Iris  images  database 
could be smart if iris image histogram ratio is used as its primary 
key.  So,  we  have  developed  an  algorithm  that  converts  image 
histogram into eight byte code which will be used as primary key 
of a large database. Second part of this study explains how color 
iris image recognition can take place. For this a new and efficient 
algorithm is developed that segments the iris image and performs 
recognition in much less time. Our research proposes a fast  and 
efficient  algorithm  that  recognizes  color  irises  from  large 
database.  We  have  already  implemented  this  algorithm  in 
Matlab.  It  provides  real-time,  high  confidence  recognition  of  a 
person's  identity  using  mathematical  analysis  of  the  random 
patterns that are visible within the iris of an eye.  
Keywords: Smart database, Histogram, NIR, IRIS 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Every passing day is bringing innovation in technology 
and services in today’s world. There is a rapid increase in 
human activities and transaction which eventually requires 
quick and trusted personal identification. All identification 
efforts  such  as,  computer  login  control  systems,  ATM 
machines  etc.,  provides  reliability,  automation  and  speed. 
There are a variety of technologies available to effectively 
identify someone at work, at the gym, at public events, in 
court  houses  and  even  at  home.  However,  producers  and 
buyers of these  security tools can not  stop thinking about 
new  ways to get the most lucrative contracts from private 
companies or government. A unique, readily measured and 
invariant  biometric  factor  for  each  individual  is  required 
for  identification  purpose  usage  of  biometric  indicia. 
Fingerprints,  signatures,  photographs,  retinal  blood  vessel 

patterns  and  voiceprints  have  quite  a  few  and  significant 
disadvantages.  Though  fingerprints  and  photographs  are 
relatively  cheap  and  offer  easy  usage  but  there  is  no 
assurance,  hence,  can  easily  be  manipulated  and  forged. 
Similarly,  voiceprints,  handprints  and  fingerprints  can 
easily  be  counterfeited.  However,  Iris,  being  an  internal 
organ  of  human  eye,  provides  automation,  speed  and 
reliability to the identification system. It is protected from 
external  environment  which  makes  it  a  perfect  biometric 
for the identification purpose.  
The Purpose of this paper is to focus on the theory behind 
Iris  Recognition  System  and  further  experiment  and 
implement 
this  concept.  Pattern  recognition,  optics, 
statistical inference and computer vision together form Iris 
recognition  technology.  Iris,  being  an  internal  organ  can 
server  to  be  an  automated  password  which  a  person  does 
not  even  have  to  remember.  It  offers  full  confidence 
recognition  for  the  identity  of  a  person  as  iris  random 
textures  are  stable  throughout  the  life  time.  Frank  Bruch, 
an  ophthalmologist,  originally  provided  the  concept  of 
using  iris  patterns  for  personal  identification,  in  the  year 
1936. 

 This  system  contains  no  flaws  only  advantages 
however  but  the  only  disadvantage  is  the  cost  of  the 
equipment,  smart  databases  and  its  backups.  Smart 
database  means  a  database  which  search  iris  image  from 
large iris database in fraction of seconds. It means there is 
requirement  to  develop  an  advance  database  that  can 
provides  authentic  information  as  it  is  required.  In  this 
regard we have developed a new algorithm that generates a 
secret  code  from  iris  image  using  its  histogram  and  near 
infra-red  (NIR)  values  and  assigns  a  code  to  that  image. 
This  code  plays  an  important  role  for  our  recognition 
system and database indexing; we give it a name which is 
HNIR.  Actually  this  code  is  generated  by  an  actual 
histogram  value  from  an  image  that’s  why  it  got  unique 
value and we use this code as primary key. Second part of 
our  research  is  to  select  the  best  iris  image  form  large 
database.  Image  segmentation  is  another  approach  that 
classify  image  into  four  segments  of  left  and  right  irises 

 
 
 
 
 
 
and  compare  the  result  with  previously  saved  image  in  a 
database.  These  iris  images  are  taken  in  NIR  light  and 
contain  valuable  pattern.  This  pattern  is  unique  for  each 
individual that’s why it is easy to identify a person once it 
passes  through  that  system.  Our  contribution  is  related 
with  database  indexing  using  image  HNIR  that  helps  to 
search nearest pattern from thousands of previously stored 
images.  In  other  word  we  can  say  that  it  is  most  secured 
and  accurate  biometric  system  for  user  authentication. 
is  quite 
Role  of  biometric  system 
appreciable.  For  image  analysis  and  detection  iris  input 
plays a key role in this system. 

in  our  society 

CCD cameras and NIR (Near infrared light) is used for 
this purpose. NIR is not visible for human eye, and camera 
can  take  fine  iris  images.  CCD  cameras  are  composed  of 
multi  spectral  sensors  (e.g.  RGB  sensors)  which  offers  a 
lot  of  advantages.  On  the  other  hand,  IR  camera  is  that 
they  provide  good  quality  images  only  in  ideal  situations 
which  leave  a  question  on  its  credibility  under  real 
conditions [1]. Further, IR cameras are not used commonly 
and  are  comparatively  more  expensive  than  the  colored 
devices.  Color  cameras  provide 
richer  and  multi-
dimensional  and  high  performance  contents  as  compared 
to the IR cameras. 

The  problem  in  this  case  is  how  to  combine  the 
information  coming  from  the  different  channels  of  the 
multi  spectral  sensors.  To  deal  with  this  problem,  data 
fusion can represent an efficient solution [2]. Blue channel 
improves recognition rate in many aspects, if we combine 
blue  channel  with  any  other  channel  can  provide  a 
substantial  improvement  in  performance,  and  the  IR  and 
the  brown 
Red  channels  performed  very  well  for 
irises.[3][4][5]  Our  approach  is  to  take  color  iris  image  
from  specific  distance.  It  detects  iris  through  circle  and 
centralized  by  sclera  corners  or  edges.  Once  edges  are 
mapped  the  iris  is  locked  and  zoomed  to  235*335  pixels 
(As shown in Figure2). 

Rule of photography is based on exposure value or “ev”, 
i-e  the  available  light  or  brightness  in  an  image.  It  will 
cause  related  higher  brightness  in  a  single  pixel  or  pixel 
intensity of an image.  
In  other  words  we  can  say  that  pixel  intensity  of  an  iris 
image  is  the  multiple  of  MxN  and  mathematical  figure 
(0.51 to 0.53) as its exposure value.[6][7] 

Iris  localization  is  another  major  step  it’s  based  on  the 
finding  circle  in  an  iris.  Locating  circle  in  pupil  gave  us 
the center of a circle (X0, Y0) in an iris and using its center 
we  find  the  vertical  “dv”  and  horizontal  distance  “dh”  of 
the human iris. Product of horizontal and vertical distance 
gave us the total area “APixels” for recognition. 

Iris  is  ready  to  compare  with  its  original  image  saved  in 
the  database.  Finding  Hamming  distance  “HD”  the  basic 
concepts  behind  all 
Its  mathematical 
expression is as follows. 

recognition. 

2. Methodology 

Iris  recognition  is  the  one  of  an  efficient  approach  in 
biometric  identification.  Color  Iris  Recognition  System 
CIRS  is  based  on  histogram  generated  codes  and  pattern 
matching. In this regards we use two types of data sample 
standard  database  UBIRIS.v1  and  manual  iris  samples. 
CIRS works on control conditions it means it requires near 
infra  light  cameras,  proper  lightening,  and  standard 
computer  which  runs  this  algorithm.  This  algorithm  has 
two separate mode manual recognition and auto detection. 
In manual recognition user must select filter values, color 
signal mathematical operations at its own. Where else auto 
system  choose 
its  own.  Mathematical 
the  best  at 
relationship for are as follows. 

FR (x’, y’) = Cp (x’, y’, 1) VR (1) d1¸ 
FG (x’, y’) = Cp (x’, y’, 2) VG (2) d2 
FB (x’, y’) = Cp (x’, y’, 3) VB (3) d3¸ 

the  mathematical 
Aforementioned  equations  depict 
equations of different wavelengths mainly Red, Green and 
Blue.    These  wavelengths  generally  denoted  by    and 
nanometer is the unit of these wavelengths. [3] 

The size of a color image  matrix is three times the size 
of  monochrome  image  matrix.  This  smart  database  saves 
iris  images;  histogram  based  unique  code  and  authorized 
user data. It contains a lot of user information and sample 
iris images. 
Here we choose near infra-red light images which provides 
clear iris pattern with less reflections which is suitable for 
iris  recognition  system.  This  is  the  first  part  of  research. 
Second  part  of  this  project  is  key  generation  using  image 
histogram  which  will  saves  as  primary  key  of  image 
database further its used as recognition key . Third part of 
this research is database  connectivity,  we  have developed 
this project in Matlab, it has another unique feature which 
is it connectivity  with other  databases. Fourth part of this 
project is storage; here data is stored in the form of images 
not  text  or  special  characters.  Fifth  database  security, 
Matlab  provides  security  to  its  own  built  in  database  so 
data cannot be vulnerable. Sixth part is the efficiency; our 
algorithm compares the small portion of an iris that’s why 
it takes minimum time for recognition. 

 
 
 
 
Color  Iris  Recognition  System  CIRS  algorithm  based  on 
the following steps. 

Figure1: The Algorithm 

This study explains that color iris recognition is possible 
in  large  databases  in  few  conditions.  First  assigning 
histogram Red/Green/Blue and NIR code with that image 
as an iris image ID. Secondly pattern matching algorithm 
can  identify  the  exact  iris  image.  In  other  words  study 
proves  that  HNIR  as  a  primary  key  can  recognize  an 
image  due  to  its  histogram  characteristics  and  latter  it 
confirms  it  using  pattern  matching  algorithms.  Interior 
ministry  of  any  country  can  use  this  smart  algorithm  to 
identify  its  citizens  or  culprits  easily.  This  algorithm  is 
developed for large collection of records and its main use 
to  identify  iris  to  iris  directly  rather  name  or  NIC.  Our 
proposed Matlab code converts color image into separate 
red, green, blue signals and calculates its histogram. This 
generated histogram is combined with another histogram 
of  Near  Infrared  light  and  provides  a  unique  code.  This 
code is used as primary key of color iris image database. 
This  database  is  separately  designed  for  these  types  of 
searches.  Fields  of  this  database  contains  name  of  the 
authorized  person,  his  national  ID,  address,  family 
records. The most important part of this project is the six 
separate  unique  codes  matching;  it  means  a  color  iris 
image  can  produce  six  separate  unique  codes  after 
histogram  matching.  Actually these codes are  calculated 
by the system and matched it with newly input image. It 
means  system  sends  codes  to  match  with  newly  input 
image.  Here  two  simultaneously  processes  run  one  with 
the  database  and  with  the  input  image  for  recognition. 
Let  say  if  the  histogram  result  is  matched  but  green 
SIGNAL 

Figure2: Related Mathematics 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure3: Code Generation 

4. Conclusion 

pattern  matching  is  not  matched  so  user  can  change  the 
signal from green or blue to red. Its results are more clear 
and visible.  

Iris  image  enhancement  is  one  of  the  most  important 
phenomena for iris recognition. Iris image filtering is one 
of  the  most  important  methods  that  can  improve  the 
recognition  rate  because  it  clears  the  iris  image  pattern. 
Here  we  use  different  image  enhancement  filters  mainly 
imtophat filter etc. 

3. Results 

Iris  recognition  is  a  method  of  biometric  authentication 
that  uses  pattern  recognition  technique  based  on  high-
resolution  color  iris  images  of  an  individual's  eyes.  The 
aim  of  this  project  is  to  design  a  smart  database  that 
matches  image  with  image  using  histogram  and  shows 
nearest  iris  classes  or  images.  Further  it  runs  pattern 
matching algorithm which selects the one quadrant out of 
four and generate code using RGB signals. Proposed color 
iris  recognition  methodology  for  complex  system  in 
controlled  environment  is  efficient  than  other  systems. 
Mathematical working and its explanations are focused in 
this  paper.  This  Iris  recognition  system  takes  75%  less 
time from other color iris recognition system.  

For  this  study  UBIRIS.v1  is  used  and  we  picked  of  fifty 
different samples to test our proposed algorithm. It results 
are as follows. 

5. References 

Recognition 
Color 

235*335          
Focused           Not Focused   

235*335 

Red 
Blue 
Green 

91% 
53% 
76% 

10% 
5%  
7% 

Histograms selects the nearest class images and shows the 
results  that  these  images  are  near  to  this  sample  than  we 
run the second part of the algorithm which choose the best 
among  best.  Our  study  proves  that  our  proposed  method 
takes  less  computational  time  than  the  latest  color  iris 
recognition  system.  Image  segmentation  reduces  ¼ 
average  recognition  rates.  Its  accuracy  is  discernible 
because  it  matches  biometric  code  with  self-developed 
code using different mathematical operations. 

[1]  Caitang  Sun,  Farid  Melgani,  Chunguang  Zhou,De 
Natale  Francesco,  Libiao  Zhang,  Xiangdong  Liu, 
“Semi-Supervised  Learning  Based  Color 
Iris 
the  Fourth  International 
Recognition”,  Proc.  of 
Conference on Natural Computation,2008. 

[2]  Caitang  Sun,  Farid  Melgani,  Chunguang  Zhou,De 
Natale  Francesco,  Libiao  Zhang,  Xiangdong  Liu, 
“Incremental Learning based Color Iris Recognition”, 
Proc.  of  2008  Seventh  Mexican 
International 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence,2008. 

[3]  Onur G. Guleryuz, “Image Formation” Department of 
Electrical  and  Computer  Engineering,  Polytechnic 
University, Brooklyn, NY 1,2003. 

[4]  J.  Daugman,  R.  Wildes,  W.  Boles,  “Statistical 

decision theory of Iris”, IEEE, 2004. 

[5]  Emine,  Sonia,  Bernadette  ,“Iris  Identification  Using 
International 
Wavelet  Packets”,  Proc 
Conference  on  Pattern  Recognition  (ICPR’04)1051-
4651/04, IEEE, 2004. 

.of  17th 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
          
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[6]  Hanho Sung, Jaekyung  Lim, Ji-hyun Park, Yillbyung 
Lee,  "Iris  Recognition  Using  Collarette  Boundary 
Localization",17th 
International  Conference  on 
Pattern Reg (ICPR’04),1051-4651/04, IEEE,2004. 
[7]  Li Ma, Yunhong Wang, Tieniu Tan, "Iris Recognition 
Using  Circular  Symmetric  Filters"  proc  .of  16th 
International  Conference  on  Pattern  Recognition 
(ICPR’02) 1051-4651/02 IEEE, 2002. 

 
