CRITICAL UTILITY INFRASTRUCTURAL RESILIENCE 

Giovanna Dondossola1, Geert Deconinck2, Felicita Di Giandomenico3, Susanna 
Donatelli4, Mohamed Kaâniche5, Paulo Verissimo6 
CESI1, KUL2, CNR-ISTI3, CNIT4, LAAS-CNRS5, FCUL6 

Keywords:  infrastructure  interdependencies,  power  control  system  protection,  system 
analysis and model development, resilient control architectures 

Abstract 
The paper refers to CRUTIAL7, CRitical UTility InfrastructurAL Resilience, a European project within 
the  research  area  of  Critical  Information  Infrastructure  Protection,  with  a  specific  focus  on  the 
infrastructures  operated  by  power  utilities,  widely  recognized  as  fundamental  to  national  and 
international  economy,  security  and  quality  of  life.  Such  infrastructures  faced  with  the  recent  market 
deregulations  and  the  multiple  interdependencies  with  other  infrastructures  are  becoming  more  and 
more vulnerable to various threats, including accidental failures and deliberate sabotage and malicious 
attacks. 

The subject of CRUTIAL research are small scale networked ICT systems used to control and manage 
the electric power grid, in which artifacts controlling the physical process of electricity transportation 
need  to  be  connected  with  corporate  and  societal  applications  performing  management  and 
maintenance functionality. The peculiarity of such ICT-supported systems is that they are related to the 
power system dynamics and its emergency conditions. 

Specific  effort  need  to  be  devoted  by  the  Electric  Power  community  and  by  the  Information 
Technology community to influence the technological progress in order to allow commercial intelligent 
electronic  devices  to  be  effectively  deployed  for  the  protection  of  citizens  against  cyber  threats  to 
electric power management and control systems. A well-founded know-how needs to be built inside the 
industrial power sector to allow all the involved stakeholders to achieve their service objectives without 
compromising the resilience properties of the logical and physical assets that support the electric power 
provision. 

1 CESI RICERCA S.p.A. Networks and Infrastructures Department 
Via Rubattino 54, Milan. giovanna.dondossola@cesiricerca.it 
2 Electa Katholieke Universiteit Leuven Department of Electrical Engineering 
Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, Leuven. Geert.deconinck@esat.kuleuven.be 
3 Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche Institute of Science and Information Technologies 
Via G. Moruzzi 1, Pisa. felicita.digiandomenico@isti.cnr.it 
4 Consorzio Nazionale Interuniversitario per le Telecomunicazioni Torino Research Unit 
C.so Svizzera 185, Torino. susi@di.unito.it 
5  LAAS-CNRS,  Université  de  Toulouse  7  Avenue  du  Colonel  Roche,  Toulouse. 
mohamed.kaaniche@laas.fr 
6 Faculty of Sciences University of Lisboa Department of Informatics 
Campo Grande, ED. C6, Piso 3, Lisboa. pjv@di.fc.ul.pt 
7 European research project n. 027513, FP6-2004-IST-4, under the strategic objective 2.4.3 “Towards a 
global dependability and security framework”. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
Introduction 
The problem of security and dependability, or generically speaking, resilience [1] of Internet-
oriented  infrastructure  systems,  such  as  web  server  compounds,  is  reasonably  well 
understood.  Although  it  is  not  completely  mastered  (for  example,  denial  of  service  is  still  a 
research  subject),  it  is  receiving  adequate  attention.  However,  such  is  not  the  case  with  the 
problem  of  resilience  of  critical  utility  infrastructures.  This  problem  is  not  completely 
understood, mainly due to the hybrid composition of these infrastructures. 

The  process  control  of  utility  infrastructures  is  based  on  the  SCADA  (Supervisory  Control 
and  Data  Acquisition)  systems  which  yield  the  operational  ability  to  acquire  data,  supervise 
and control whatever is the business in question (electricity, water, gas, telecomm). However, 
they also have interconnections to the standard corporate intranets, and hence indirectly to the 
Internet (e.g., remote access via dedicated or public networks). The aforementioned SCADA 
systems  were  classically  not  designed  to  be  widely  distributed  and  remotely  accessed,  let 
alone be open. They grew-up standalone, closed, not having security in mind. 

Widely  distributed  monitoring,  protection  and  control  systems,  implementing  special 
protection scheme over the power transmission network, are emerging  whose architecture is 
based on open communication infrastructures. 

This opening that we observe nowadays is an afterthought in the line of the generic trend of 
any  informatics  system.  Whilst  it  seems  non-controversial  that  such  a  status  quo  brings  a 
certain level of threat, namely but not only through interference, we know of no work that has 
tried  to  equate  the  problem  by  defining  a  model  of  “modern  utilities  distributed  systems 
architecture”. We believe that evaluation work on such a model will let us learn about activity 
patterns of interdependencies that will reveal the potential for far more damaging fault/failure 
scenarios  than  those  that  have  been  anticipated  up  to  now.  Moreover,  such  a  model  will  be 
highly constructive as well, for it will form a structured framework for: conceiving the right 
balance  between  prevention  and  removal  of  vulnerabilities  and  attacks,  and  tolerance  of 
remaining potential intrusions and designed-in faults. 

In fact, this hap hazardous evolution led to the inevitable: access to operational networks such 
as  remote  SCADA  maneuvering,  ended  up  entangled  with  access  to  corporate  intranets  and 
public  Internet,  without  there  being  computational  and  resilience  models  that  understand 
(represent) this situation and deal with the resulting interference. In consequence, unlike what 
exists in simpler, more homogeneous settings, e.g.  classical web-based server infrastructures 
on  Internet,  it  is  in  most  circumstances  not  possible  to  devise  a  dependability  and  security 
case for these interconnected critical utility infrastructures. 

The  damage  perspectives  that  may  result  from  this  exposure  are  overwhelming.  They  range 
from  wrong  maneuvering,  to  malicious  actions  coming  from  terminals  located  outside, 
somewhere in the Internet. The targets of these actions are computer control units, embedded 
components  and  systems,  that  is,  devices  connected  to  operational  hardware  (e.g.,  water 
pumps and filters, electrical power generators and power protections, dam gates, etc.). In the 
electrical  power  provision  these  situations  have  already  been  experimented  by  citizens  in 
various part of the world. As a single example, among blackouts that occurred in the summer 
of  2003  in  several  countries,  we  can  remember  the  North  American  one,  which    is  very 
relevant to explain  the project motivations: as highlighted in the analysis report [2], it was the 
failure of various information systems that thwarted the utility workers’ ability to contain the 
blackout  before  it  cascaded  out  of  control.  A  type  of  failure  that  is  characteristic  of 
interdependent  critical  infrastructures  happened  then,  that  is  an  escalating  failure8,  a  type  of 
failure that we shall address in this project. 

8 

“An  escalating  failure  occurs  when  an  existing  disruption  in  one  infrastructure  exacerbates  an  independent 
disruption of a second infrastructure, generally in the form of increasing the severity or the time for recovery 
or restoration of the second failure”. 

 
                                                 
The main challenge of the project is to make power control resilient in spite of threats to their 
information  and  communication  infrastructures.  Considering  the  crucial  role  of  control 
systems in governing the quality and the stability of the electric power service, it is considered 
of  great  importance  for  the  utilities  operating  the  infrastructures  to  dispose  of  tools  for 
analyzing  threat  impacts  and  of  technologies  for  avoiding,  or  limiting,  most  serious 
consequences. 

The  paper  presents  the  basic  research  challenges  that  the  CRUTIAL  consortium  has 
identified, an overview on the state of the art  about the major topics involved, and the  work 
plan that CRUTIAL intends to develop during the project course, based on the modeling and 
architectural approaches which represent the background of the project team. 

Research challenges and objectives 
The project focuses on the electrical power infrastructure and the information infrastructures, 
by  considering  different  topology  realms  and  different  kinds  of  risks:  distinguishing  the 
backbone from the specific information networks and from the infrastructures dedicated to the 
control  and  monitoring  of  the  electric  power  infrastructure,  as  they  usually  have  different 
levels  of  protection;  distinguishing  faults  of  different  kinds  and  severities,  such  as  electric 
power outages and cyber attacks. 

The  main  objective  of  the  project  is  the  investigation  of  models  and  architectures  that  cope 
with  the  scenario  of  openness,  heterogeneity  and  evolvability  endured  by  electrical  utilities 
infrastructures, in the present and near future. The approach taken should support the analysis 
and management of interdependencies and of the resulting overall operational risk. 

in  order 

infrastructure, 

Firstly,  the  project  aims  to  develop  comprehensive  modeling  approaches,  supported  by 
measurement  based  experiments,  to  analyze  critical  scenarios  in  which  internal  or  external 
faults  in  a  segment  of  the  information  infrastructure  provoke  a  serious  impact  on  the 
to  understand  and  master  such 
controlled  electric  power 
interdependencies  to  avoid  escalating  and  cascading  failures  that  result  in  outages  and 
blackouts.  Effort  will  be  focused  on  the  modeling  and  analysis  of  interdependencies, 
especially  the  various  types  of  failures  that  can  occur  in  the  presence  of  accidental  and 
malicious  faults  affecting  the  information  and  electric  power  infrastructures:  physical 
(hardware)  faults  of  various  temporal  characteristics  from  transient  to  permanent;  yet 
undiscovered design faults in software (“bugs”) and in hardware (“errata”); interaction faults 
due to mistakes of human operators or maintainers; malicious human-caused faults, i.e. denial 
or unauthorized alteration of services by software attacks or physical sabotage.  
Given the complexity of the analysis task, a difficulty will be to find the right abstractions of 
the  models.  The  aim  is  therefore  to  produce,  from  conceptual  analysis,  generic  models  that 
can be refined and instantiated. The abstractions will be substantiated by examples taken from 
the  electric  application  domain.  Another  expected  difficulty  is  the  heterogeneity  of  the 
models, given the very different nature of the various components under study. 

Secondly,  the  project  will  investigate  distributed  architectures  dedicated  to  the  control  and 
management  of  the  power  grid,  in  the  perspective  of  improving  the  capability  of  analyzing 
critical  scenarios  and  designing  dependable  interconnected  power  control  systems.  The 
architectures under study will address requirements coming from the needs of flexible electric 
power  services,  characterized  by  dispersed  energy  resources,  on-demand  control  and  inputs 
from the market.  
In  consequence,  our  objective  is  to  devise  new  architectural  configurations  that  address  the 
increase in operational risk derived from the analysis made above. This risk derives not only 
from  accidental  faults  or  wrong  maneuvers,  but  also,  and  very  importantly,  from  both  the 
degree  of  vulnerability  and  the  level  of  threat  to  which  the  infrastructures  and  services  are 
subjected.  The  objective  of  preventing  escalating  failures  on  the  various  information 
infrastructures (monitoring, control, management) that interact on a decentralized power grid 

 
 
can  only  be  met  by  the  combined  use  of  fault  prevention  and  tolerance,  and  by  the 
simultaneous  addressing  of  accidental  and  malicious  faults,  also  called  intrusion-tolerance, 
enhanced  by  the  provision  of  on-line  monitoring  support  to  evaluate  possible  alternative 
architectural configurations in uncertain and evolving scenarios.  

Background 
This section gives an overview of international initiatives and  working groups related to the 
topic  of  our  project,  as  well  as  related  work  on  dependability  and  security  modeling  and  on 
resilient distributed real-time architectures. 

infrastructures.  In  Italy, 

International initiatives and working groups 
There is a consensus in the literature on critical infrastructures that interdependency analyses 
and  models  constitute  a  necessary  step  [3].  The  International  CIIP  Handbook  2004  [4]  is  a 
comprehensive  collection  of  information  about  the  various  initiatives  undertaken  by  the 
different  countries  on  the  theme  of  Critical  Information  Infrastructure  Protection  (CIIP), 
mainly  at  governmental  level.  The  CIIP  Handbook  underlies  the  need  of  developing 
methodologies  for  analyzing  interdependencies  and  guiding  the  protection  of  critical 
information 
the  Working  Group  on  Critical  Information 
Infrastructure Protection released a document [5] in October 2003 describing many elements 
of  the  Italian  infrastructures,  emphasizing  their  interdependencies,  suggesting  CIIP  policy 
strategies and research challenges. 
In the Unites States many research initiatives and activities related to the protection of critical 
infrastructures have been undertaken from the nineties. NERC has organized a Cyber Security 
Urgent  Action,  resulting  in  some  guidelines,  compliance  audits,  and  activities  such  as 
workshops  for  awareness  raising.  In  1998  the  USA’s  Department  of  Energy  assigned  to 
NERC the  role of reference point for  cyber security for the electric power sector.  The  CIPC 
(Critical  Infrastructure  Protection  Committee)  was  created  to  develop  and  maintain 
capabilities  to  respond  to  security  threats  and  incidents,  and  support  the  production  of 
standards and guidelines. Also in the US, the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) started 
the “Infrastructure Security Initiative” addressing power system security at both electrical and 
cyber  levels.  The  Department  of  Energy  (DOE)  published  the  “21  Steps  to  Improve  Cyber 
Security of SCADA Networks”, whilst the Sandia National Laboratories developed a research 
program on SCADA electronic security [6]. 
In  Europe  the  need  of  setting  up  research  programs  on  critical  infrastructures  has  been 
recognized from several years. However a limited number of European Projects has addressed 
the  emerging  problems  of  digitalized  critical  infrastructures.  The  ACIP  (Analysis  & 
Assessment  for  Critical  Infrastructure  Protection)  project  produced  a  roadmap  about  R&D 
activities  to  be  performed  on  the  topic.  A  roadmap  on  research  activity  in  the  area  of 
information  system  dependability  has  been  produced  by  the  AMSD  accompanying  measure 
(A  Dependability  Roadmap  for  the  Information  Society  in  Europe).  The  FP5-IST  research 
project  SAFEGUARD  (Intelligent  Agents  Organization  to  Enhance  Dependability  and 
Survivability of Large Complex Critical Infrastructure) proposed an agent-based architecture 
for  supporting  the  supervision  and  decision  support  systems  in  critical  infrastructural 
domains. 

From the standardization side, there are several working groups devoted to the application of 
Information  Technology  in  Electric  Power  Systems.  A  paper  [7]  providing  a  survey  on 
ongoing  activities  has  been  published  by  the  Cigré  Joint  Working  Group  D2/B3/C2-01 
“Security for Information Systems and Intranets in Electric Power Systems”.  

The  American  Gas  Association  (AGA)  are  active  in  the  development  of  cryptographic 
standards for SCADA communication [8]. 
The Instrumentation, Systems and Automation Society (ISA) published two reference reports 
[9] on Electronic Security in Manufacturing and Control Systems Environment. 

 
 
 
The  Computer  Security  Resource  Center,  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology 
(NIST),  including  the  Process  Control  Security  Requirements  Forum  (PCSRF),  published 
relevant papers on the topic ([10], [11], [12]). 
We can observe that any document by such standard committees emphasizes the importance 
of Cyber Risk Assessment of power control systems and a first methodological approach has 
been presented in a recent paper of the Cigrè Group [13]. 

Also a number of institutional/research organization are performing activities which provide 
information suitable to the identification of robust architectural patterns for industrial control 
systems. 

The National Infrastructure Security Co-ordination Centre – NISCC in London coordinates a 
forum  on  SCADA  and  Control  Systems  Information  Exchange.  They  also  are  going  to 
establish the CERT-UK for SCADA and they are developing the SCADA Incident Database. 
The  British  Columbia  Institute  of  Technology  –  BCIT  is  developing  a  platform  for  testing 
SCADA  vulnerability.  They  perform  vulnerability  analysis  of  SCADA  protocols,  they 
investigate  on  the  use  of  firewall  in  SCADA  systems  and  are  developing  the  Industrial 
Security Incident Database.  

The Idaho National Engineering and Environmental Laboratory - INEEL/SNL are developing 
the SCADA National Test Bed, which is specifically dedicated to testing control systems of a 
wide area electric power grid.  

A  test  bed  for  the  simulation  of  attack  scenarios  to  power  control  and  management  systems 
has been set up at CESI Laboratory [14]. 

Dependability and security modeling 
A large body of research exist on the dependability analysis and evaluation of computer based 
infrastructures,  in  particular  with  respect  to  accidental  threats,  considering  two  main 
complementary approaches: i) analytical modeling and ii) measurement-based assessment.  
Analytical  modeling  has  been  proven  to  be  a  cost  effective  and  useful  technique  to  support 
architectural  design  decisions,  as  a  model  can  play  the  double  role  of  a  specification  of  the 
design, as well as the basis for a qualitative and quantitative evaluation of the design itself.  
Several  model-based  evaluation  techniques  are  currently  available,  including  combinatorial 
techniques (reliability block diagrams, fault trees, network graph analysis, Bayesian networks) 
or state space analysis (Markov chains, stochastic Petri nets and their extensions). State-based 
models  are  commonly  used,  as  they  are  able  to  capture  various  functional  and  stochastic 
dependencies  among  components  and  allow  the  evaluation  of  various  measures  related  to 
dependability and performance. However, the major difficulty with such models is related to 
the  model  largeness  and  state  explosion  problem.  Significant  progress  has  been  obtained 
during  the  last  twenty  years,  by  CRUTIAL  partners  and  elsewhere,  for  addressing  such 
problem  at  the  model  construction  and  model  solution  levels.  The  proposed  techniques 
include  the  use  of  hierarchical  approaches,  composition  rules,  parametric  modelling,  state 
truncation,  state  aggregation,  as  well  as  high-level  specification  formalisms  and  automated 
generation methods, based for example on SPNs (Stochastic Petri Nets) and their extensions, 
or on semi-formal specification languages like UML diagrams.  

As regards  malicious threats, traditional security evaluation approaches are mainly based on 
qualitative  analysis  and  evaluation  criteria.  While  these  criteria  provide  useful  guidelines 
during  the  design,  it  is  widely  recognized  that  they  are  insufficient  to  assess  the  impact  of 
attacks  on  security  during  the  operation  phase.  To  fill  this  gap,  new  approaches  have  been 
proposed recently for the quantitative evaluation of security based on probabilistic modelling 
approaches [15]. 

Existing results on dependability and security modeling and evaluation have mainly addressed 
individual  infrastructures  without  tackling  the  problem  of  interdependencies  between 
infrastructures.  However,  to  truly  understand  and  analyze  the  operational  characteristics  of 
these infrastructures, it is necessary to model such interdependencies and analyze their impact 

 
with respect to the occurrence of critical outages. The need for such modeling and assessment 
studies has been highlighted in the conclusions of the RamI (R&D challenges for  Resilience 
in Ambient Intelligence”) Workshop organized by the European commission in March 2004. 
Also, it has been pointed out in the recommendations of the roadmap for European R&D on 
Critical Infrastructure Protection, produced by the ACIP (Analysis & Assessment for Critical 
Infrastructure Protection) project. 

It is only recently that the problem of interdependencies modeling has been addressed by the 
research community. To the best of our knowledge there are currently no available significant 
results  tackling  this  problem.  The  papers  published  so  far  on  this  topic  mainly  include 
definitions  of  the  multiple  dimensions  of  interdependencies  [3],  or  discuss  potential 
approaches and preliminary models that are aimed at describing and analyzing the impact of 
interdependencies (see [16] and references within [17],[18]).  

Resilient distributed real-time architectures 
There is a reasonable body of research on distributed computing architectures, methodologies 
and  algorithms,  both  in  the  fields  of  dependability  and  fault  tolerance,  and  in  security  and 
information  assurance.  These  are  commonly  used  in  a  wide  spectrum  of  situations: 
information infrastructures; commercial web-based sites; embedded systems. Their operation 
has  always  been  a  concern,  namely  presently,  due  to  the  use  of  COTS,  compressed  design 
cycles,  openness.  Whilst  they  have  taken  separate  paths  until  recently,  the  problems  to  be 
solved  are  of  similar  nature:  keeping  systems  working  correctly,  despite  the  occurrence  of 
mishaps,  which  we  could  commonly  call  faults  (accidental  or  malicious);  ensure  that,  when 
systems  do  fail  (again,  on  account  of  accidental  or  malicious  faults),  they  do  so  in  a  non 
harmful/catastrophic way. In classical dependability, and mainly in distributed settings, fault 
tolerance  has  been  the  workhorse  of  the  many  solutions  published  over  the  years.  Classical 
security-related  work  has  on  the  other  hand  privileged,  with  few  exceptions,  intrusion 
prevention,  or  intrusion  detection  without  systematic  forms  of  processing  the  intrusion 
symptoms. 

A  new  approach  has  slowly  emerged  during  the  past  decade,  and  gained  impressive 
momentum  recently:  intrusion  tolerance.  That  is,  the  notion  of  --  handling/react,  counteract, 
recover, mask -- a wide set of faults encompassing intentional and malicious faults (we may 
collectively call them intrusions), which may lead to failure of the system security properties 
if  nothing  is  done  to  counter  their  effect  on  the  system  state.  In  short,  instead  of  trying  to 
prevent  every  single  intrusion,  these  are  allowed,  but tolerated:  the  system  has  the  means  to 
trigger  mechanisms  that  prevent  the  intrusion  from  generating  a  system  failure.  In  fact,  the 
term “intrusion tolerance” was used for the first time more than 20 years ago, and a sequel of 
that work lead to a specific system developed in the DELTA-4 project [19]. In the following 
years, a number of isolated works, mainly on protocols, took place that can be put under the 
IT umbrella [20],[21],[22], but only recently did the area develop significantly, with two main 
projects  OASIS  and  MAFTIA  [23],  doing  structured  work  on  concepts,  mechanisms  and 
architectures.  These  projects,  however,  mainly  addressed  the  issue  of  intrusion  tolerance  on 
Internet-oriented infrastructures type of systems. Some progress has been obtained recently by 
CRUTIAL  partners  in  protocols  resilient  to  malicious  faults  [24]  and  on  architecting  and 
programming  with  trusted  components  [25].  In  this  project,  we  intend  to  make  important 
advances on how to tolerate intrusions on critical utility infrastructures. 

CRUTIAL work plan 
The research that will developed in CRUTIAL address the objective to improve the resilience 
of  the  power  grid  by  deploying  suited  information  and  communication  infrastructures.  Two 
main  research  directions  will  be  investigated  to  fulfill  this  objective.  The  first  research  line 
focuses on the development of a model-based methodology for the dependability and security 
analysis of the power grid information infrastructures. A second line of research is related to 

 
 
 
the  design  of  control  system  architectures  and  protection  mechanisms  for  electric  power 
systems.  Both  the  (modeling  and  architectural)  project  activities  are  driven  by  the 
identification  of  some  reference  control  system  scenarios  and  examples  of  various  types  of 
interdependencies  based  on  the  analysis  of  the  existing  and  ongoing  evolutions  of  the target 
architectures. 

The activities that will be carried out can be summarized as follows: 

identification and description of reference control system scenarios;  

a) 
b)  development of comprehensive modeling approaches for understanding and mastering the 

various interdependencies;  

c)  development  of  test  beds  integrating  the  electric  power  system  and  the  information 
the  analysis  and  validation  of  control  system  and 

to  support 

infrastructure 
interdependencies scenarios;  

d)  investigation  of  fault-tolerant  architectural  configurations  and  protection  mechanisms  to 

enhance the resilience of target infrastructure;  

e)  provision  of  qualitative  and  quantitative  support  for  the  identification,  analysis  and 

evaluation of the scenarios identified. 

The following subsections summarize these activities and the research directions that will be 
explored.   

Identification and Description of Control System Scenarios 
A control system scenario defines a reference structure of i) the power grid, ii) the monitoring 
& control network, with Intelligent Electronic Devices at different levels of the power system 
(Control  Center  level,  Station  level,  Bay  level,  Process  level),  iii)  the  management 
information networks and their functional relationships with the process network, iv) and the 
different threats that may threaten the operation of the power system services. 
Control  system  scenarios  are  derived  from  ongoing  evolutions  of  existing  control  systems, 
such as the increasing impact of dispersed electricity generation (renewable energy sources, -
e.g.  photovoltaic  and  wind  energy-  that  are  connected  on  different  places  to  the  electricity 
distribution network). If sufficient generation (and storage) facilities are available in a part of 
the  electrical  grid,  such  part  can  become  an  energy  island  (or  microgrid)  which  functions 
independently  from  the  major  grid  (e.g.  during  blackout).  Different  evolution  aspects  are 
taken into account in the scenario identification phase. 
A first set of scenarios will be derived from the control of distributed generation systems and 
microgrids.  Such  control  systems  form  a  so-called  Autonomous  Electricity  Network  (AEN), 
i.e.  a  group  of  distributed  generators,  intelligent  loads  and  storage  devices,  capable  of 
cooperation and control in a distributed manner, i.e., without central controller, and this based 
on  standard  components  and  public  communication  networks.  External  information,  such  as 
the  instantaneous  electricity  price  from  real-time  market  place,  can  be  incorporated  into  the 
control  strategies  in  order  to  optimize  economic  control  objectives.  Hence,  this  information 
infrastructure  is  used  for  tertiary  control,  based  on  communication  among  the  different 
entities  without  central  coordination.  It  comes  on  top  of  the  primary  control  of  voltage  and 
frequency  (which  is  local  i.e.  without  communication)  and  secondary  control  (which  is 
centralized and used  for e.g. dispatching).  As such reliability of these electricity networks is 
improved,  also  when  sub-networks  of  the  electricity  network  are  separated  from  the  main 
network. In islanding mode, several issues need to be solved regarding protection and control 
(e.g.  the  selectivity  of  the  protection  needs  to  react  on  different  threshold),  which  requires 
appropriate communication and control. The ICT infrastructure and several control algorithms 
are also required when re-synchronizing the microgrid to the main grid after islanding. 
A  second  evolutionary  aspect  for  control  scenarios  is  related  to  new  Power  Management 
Systems  which  integrate  management  information  networks  with  process  control  networks. 
Security and dependability issues become a major concern in this situation. This also includes 
the  consideration  of  the  configuration  capabilities  required  to  substation  control  systems  by 
the new organization of the power market. These setups address information infrastructures in 

 
 
which  involved  stakeholders  access  to  the  power  management  system  for  many  different 
purposes,  and  some  of  them  require  to  modify  the  power  network  asset  through  the  on-line 
reconfiguration of the field equipment and their control apparatus. 

Interdependencies modelling 
The  objective  is  to  develop  a  comprehensive  modeling  framework  aimed  at  fulfilling  the 
following  goals:  i)  characterize  and  analyze  the  interdependencies  between  the  information 
infrastructure and the controlled power infrastructure, especially the various types of failures 
that might occur in the presence of accidental and malicious faults; and ii) assess their impact 
on the resilience of these infrastructures with respect to the occurrence of critical outages and 
perform sensitivity analyses to support design decisions. 

Two  complementary  analysis  and  modeling  methods  will  be  investigated:  a)  qualitative 
analysis methods based on hazard identification and risk modeling techniques, aiming at the 
identification of failure scenarios, the analysis of their impact and their ranking according to 
severity  and  criticality  criteria;  b)  quantitative  evaluation  methods  based  on  stochastic 
processes  (using  e.g.,  Markov  chains  or  stochastic  Petri  nets),  aiming  at  quantifying  the 
impact  of  failure  and  recovery  scenarios  on  the  behavior  of  the  infrastructures  and  the 
dependability and trustworthiness of the delivered service. 

The modeling framework investigated in CRUTIAL is aimed at taking into account multiple 
dimensions  of  interdependencies  [3]:  a)  the  types  of  interdependencies  (physical,  cyber, 
geographic,  logical),  b)  the  coupling  and  response  behavior  (loose  or  tight,  inflexible  or 
adaptive), c) the various classes of faults that can occur, and d) the different time scales, and 
the  infrastructure  characteristics  (organizational,  operational,  temporal,  spatial).  Particular 
focus will be put on the study of the types of failures that are characteristic of interdependent 
critical infrastructures: Cascading failures, Escalating failures and Common cause failures.  
Although the modeling of such failures has received increasing interest in the last years9 after 
the large blackouts of electric power transmission systems in 1996 and 2003, this problem is 
still open and further developments are needed, in particular with respect to the modeling of 
escalating failures.  The analysis of such types of failures requires the use of models that are 
able  to  describe  stochastic  dependencies and  to  take  into  account  non-stationary  phenomena 
that  result  in  particular  from  the  combined  impact  of  component  failures  and  performance 
degradations due to overloads.  
Accounting  for  all  such  aspects  raises  a  number  of  challenging  issues  that  need  to  be 
addressed and require appropriate methodologies to overcome them. A discussion of some of 
these challenges and of the research directions that will be explored in the project is given in 
the following. 

A major difficulty lies in the complexity of the modeled infrastructures in terms of largeness, 
multiplicity of interactions and types of interdependencies involved. To address this problem, 
a  number  of  abstractions  and  appropriate  approaches  for  composition  of  models  will  be 
necessary. The aim is therefore to produce, from conceptual analyses, generic models that can 
be  refined,  instantiated  and  composed  according  to  hierarchical  modeling  approaches. 
Generalization, adaptation and extension of our previous approaches (see [26],[27],[28], [29], 
[30]) will be necessary to address: i) the specific challenges and characteristics inherent to the 
combined modeling of information and power distribution infrastructures; ii) the combination 
of  different  formalisms  to  describe  the  various  component  of  a  system  and  their 
dependencies); iii) extension of existing formalisms to deal with peculiar features raising from 
our application context. 

Another  point  is  on-line  evaluation  (as  opposed  to  traditional  off-line  evaluation),  which 
would  be  desirable  in  a  number  of  circumstances,  in  particular  to  support  the  efficient 

9  

I. Dobson, B.A. Carreras, V. Lynch, D.E. Newman, “Complex Systems analysis of series of blackouts: 
cascading failure, criticality, and self-organization”, Bulk Power System and Control, Aug. 2004, Cortina 
d’Ampezzo, Italy. 

 
 
                                                 
selection  of  adaptive  reconfiguration  strategies.  Of  course,  although  appealing,  the  online 
solution  shows  a  number  of  challenging  problems  requiring  substantial  investigations  (e.g., 
dynamic instanciation of models, compositional rules, efficient model solution). 

An additional relevant issue that needs to be carefully addressed in the modeling concerns the 
well  known  stiffness  problem,  or  system  parameters  that  are  only  partially  defined.  Such  a 
problem can be alleviated by the use of aggregation and approximation techniques. Also, we 
need  to  address  the  problem  of  modeling  interdependencies  in  a  context  characterized  by 
different  operation  phases  and  regimes  with  different  configurations  and  behaviors.  Such 
changes  might  have  a  significant  impact  on  the  parameters  describing  the  occurrence  of 
failures  and  their  propagation.  We  will  investigate  the  use  of  stochastic  models  for  multi-
phased systems to address this problem [32]. 

Finally,  a  difficult  issue  concerns  the  evaluation  of  the  impact  of  malicious  faults. 
Traditionally,  only  accidental  faults  in  software  and  hardware  components  have  been  taken 
into account in the evaluation of quantitative dependability measures, while the evaluation of 
security has been mainly based on qualitative evaluation criteria [33].  However, quantitative 
criteria  are  widely  recognized  to  be  insufficient  for  analyzing  and  assessing  the  impact  of 
malicious attacks and vulnerabilities on the security of systems in operation, or to support the 
design  of  intrusion-tolerant  systems,  and  quantitative  evaluation  based  on  probabilistic 
modeling  is  a  promising  research  direction  aimed  at  filling  this  gap.  Some  pioneering  work 
has been achieved by some of the CRUTIAL partners towards this objective [34]. However, 
to be applicable to the context of interdependent information and power distribution systems, 
generalization  and  extensions  have  to  be  developed.  The  ultimate  objective  that  will  be 
pursued during the project on this topic will be the definition of a comprehensive framework 
for the  modeling and evaluation of resilience taking into account malicious faults as  well as 
accidental faults. 

Resilient architectures and protection mechanisms 
CRUTIAL will study the information infrastructures used in electric power systems, in order 
to  derive  common  denominators:  exposure,  threat,  vulnerability,  unsafety,  etc.  Thus  it  will 
define  a  reference  architecture  that  takes  into  account  the  needs  defined  by  this  operation 
(e.g., that a certain level of exposure is unavoidable). Considering the testbed described above 
we  foresee  at  least  three  interconnection  realms  with  different  levels  of  threat,  degrees  of 
vulnerability, 
risk:  operational 
level  of  criticality  w.r.t.  acceptable  operational 
SCADA/embedded networks; corporate intranets; Internet/PSTN access. 
WP4 will investigate on 
• 

architectural  configurations  that  induce  prevention  of  the  more  severe  interaction  faults, 
and attack and vulnerability combinations. The challenge here, furthering recent research 
achievements  on  fault  and  intrusion  tolerant  (FIT)  architecturing  [23],  lies  exactly  with 
the  (unavoidable)  entanglement  of  the  information  flows  of  the  three  above-mentioned 
realms; 

•  middleware devices that achieve tolerance of the remaining faults/intrusions (architectural 
blocks,  protocols).  We  plan  to  study  combinations  of  recent  promising  techniques  for 
building  protocols  that  address  the  different  levels  of  criticality  in  the  foreseen 
architecture, such as randomization or wormholes; 
sophisticated system monitoring mechanisms that go beyond mere intrusion detection but 
instead achieve what might be called trustworthiness monitoring, where the general level 
of resilience of the system is assessed during its operation, both from the perspective of 
attacks, vulnerabilities, and general faults. 

• 

The  architectural  configurations  developed  in  the  project  will  have  to  strike  a  right  balance 
between  the  prevention  and  removal  of  the  more  severe  interaction  faults  and  vulnerability-
attack  combinations,  and  the  tolerance  of  the  remaining  potential  faults  and  intrusions.  The 
challenge  here,  furthering  recent  research  achievements  on  fault  and  intrusion  tolerant 
architecturing,  lies  exactly  with  the  (unavoidable)  entanglement  of  the  information  flows  of 
the various above-mentioned infrastructures. 

 
 
The  findings  of  WP4  investigations  will  be  validated  both  through  proof-of-concept 
prototypes  of  the  above-mentioned  functionality,  and  real-life  testbed  experiments,  and  by 
building  a  resilience  case  in  the  new  architectural  scene,  and  compare  it  against  the  starting 
scenarios studied in the beginning. They will be formally validated also, by several means that 
include modeling, and experimental validation.  

Testbed and experimental evaluation 
Two testbed will be developed which integrate the electric power system and the information 
infrastructure.  This  will  allow  the  elaboration  of  new  control  scenarios  in  order  to  better 
identify  them,  to  allow  for  the  deployment  of  architectural  patterns,  and,  to  complement  the 
modeling  to  analyze  interdependencies  and  to  identify  critical  failure  modes.  These  testbed 
platforms  will  be  based  on  power  electronic  converters  and  Intelligent  Electronic  Devices 
(IEDs) – such as bay level controllers and power station computers – that are interconnected 
via off-the-shelf communication protocols (TCP/IP or UDP/IP).  
It  is  clear  that  in  all  control  scenarios  identified,  ICT  and  electric  power  infrastructures  are 
tightly  coupled:  a  suited  architecture  needs  to  be  developed  and  the  interdependencies 
analyzed.  The  identified  scenarios  will  drive  the  development  of  the  analysis  methodology 
and  of  the  architectural  design.  The  testbed  experiments  will  instantiate  the  designed  ideas 
onto innovative infrastructures in which the power process control is connected to the power 
business management.  

The  testbed  will  consist  of  two  platforms;  as  illustrated  below,  both  platforms  are  required, 
because they are complementary to each other. 

A first testbed consists of several power electronic converters, which are interconnected via 
off-the-shelf  communication  protocols  (TCP/IP).  It  is  based  on  the  Herakles  platform  [35], 
developed  at  K.U.Leuven.  Each  converter  can  be  used  to  emulate  generators  or  loads  in  an 
energy island. The Herakles platform allows different control ideas (voltage/frequency/current 
control, power quality control, etc.) to be modeled in a high level programming tool such as 
Matlab, after  which it can be swiftly prototyped on a 4-quadrant power electronic converter, 
whereby  the  control  algorithms  are  downloaded  on  high  performance  signal  processing 
hardware (DSP  +  FPGA)  which  manages the power electronics.  This  DSP is connected to  a 
PC which allows communication with other intelligent components. 
As  these  Herakles  platforms  are  connected  to  PC’s,  they  can  be  interconnected  via  TCP/IP 
modules  in  order  to  extend  the  control  scope  from  local  towards  hierarchical  and 
decentralized control algorithms.  
By the project-start, about 3 of these Herakles elements are available, on which mainly local 
control  algorithms  are  being  executed.  During  the  CRUTIAL  project,  this  platform  will  be 
further  developed  to  be  able  to  execute  different  hierarchical  and  distributed  control 
algorithms. For this, work is required on the hardware and software of the platform, as well as 
on  the  middleware  modules  to  interconnect  them  into  a  network  –  as  such  creating  an 
information infrastructure.  
Because of the distributed approach, this platform will be mainly used in the context the so-
called  ‘new’  control  scenarios.  It  will  be  used  to  evaluate  the  aspects  of  interdependencies 
between  the  information  infrastructure  and  the  electric  power  system,  and  to  identify  the 
robustness of the control algorithms to disturbances, and to provide feedback to the modeling 
and architectural parts based on the experiments. 

A second testbed is based on a platform  which is  currently under development at  CESI labs 
for supporting the simulation of attack scenarios. The platform consists of an Ethernet based 
communication  infrastructure  interconnecting  a  power  substation  control  network,  a 
substation supervision network and a control centre network through protocols based on 
standard  communication  stacks  (e.g.  UDP/IP).  The  power  substation  control  network  is 
modular  and  composed  by  a  heterogeneous  set  of  real  time  targets  performing  process  data 
elaboration.  The  software  architecture  of  the  station  automation  application  is  based  on  an 
automation  software  engineering  environment  developed  at  CESI  that  supports  automata-

 
 
based  specification,  automatic  code  generation  and  distributed  execution.  The  substation 
supervision  network  consists  of  standard  elaboration  units  which  provide  data  base, 
administration and web services supporting monitoring and maintenance functions, whilst the 
control center implements remote supervision and control functions, as well as maintenance. 

This second set-up is complementary to the first platform because it builds on environments 
that  are  used  in  industrial  automation  (SCADA-based).  It  is  also  well  suited  to  evaluate  the 
effects  of  fault  propagation  of  e.g.  malicious  faults,  because  these  SCADA  networks  can  be 
integrated into corporate control and administrative networks. 

References 
[1]  R&D challenges for Resilience in Ambient Intelligence (RAmI). Report of the workshop held in 

Brussels, 19th March 2004. http://rami.jrc.it. 

[2]  US-Canada  Power  System  Outage  Task  Force.  Interim  Report:  Causes  of  the  August  14th 

Blackout in the United States and Canada, November 2003. 134 pp. 

[3]  S.M.  Rinaldi,  J.P.  Peerenboom,  T.K.  Kelly.  Identifying,  understanding,  and  analysing  critical 

infrastructures interdependencies. IEEE Control Systems Magazine, Dec. 2001. pp. 11-25. 

[4]  A.  Wenger,  J.  Metzger,  M.  Dunn,  I.  Wigert.  Critical  Information  Infrastructure  Protection. 

International CIIP Handbook 2004, ETH the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich, 2004. 

[5]  Gruppo  di  Lavoro  sulla  protezione  delle  Infrastrutture  Critiche  Informatizzate.  Protezione  delle 
Infrastrutture  Critiche  Informatizzate  –  La  realtà  Italiana  (Critical  Information  Infrastructures 
Protection: The Case of Italy). October 2003. 

[6]  Sandia SCADA Program High-Security. Report SAND2002-0729, April 2002. 
[7]  G.  Ericsson,  Managing  Information  Security  in  an  Electric  Utility.  Electra  Magazine  -  Cigré,  n. 

216, October 2004.  

[8]  Cryptographic Protection of SCADA Communications. Series of AGA 12 reports. 
[9] 

ISA-TR99.00.01-2004.  Security  Technologies  for  Manufacturing  and  Control  Systems.  ISA-
TR99.00.02-2004.  Integrating  Electronic  Security  into  the  Manufacturing  and  Control  Systems 
Environment. 

[10]  Falco & oth. IT Security for Industrial Control Systems. 
[11]  Stoneburner  et  oth.  Recommendations  800-30  2002,  Risk  Management  Guide  for  Information 

Technology Systems. 

[12]  Report: April 2004. System Protection Profile - Industrial Control Systems. 
[13]  G. Dondossola, O. Lamquet. Cyber Risk Assessment in the Electric Power Industry. Cigrè Electra 

Magazine n. 224, February 2006. 

[14]  G.  Dondossola,  J.  Szanto,  M.  Masera,  I.  Nai  Fovino.  Evaluation  of  the  effects  of  intentional 
threats  to Power Substation  Control Systems. International  Workshop on Complex Network and 
Infrastructure Protection (CNIP06), Rome 28-29 March, 2006. 

[15]  D.  M. Nicol, W. Sanders, K. Trivedi.  Model-based Evaluation: From Dependability  to Security. 

IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 1 (1), pp.48-65, 2004. 

[16]  S.M.  Rinaldi.  Modeling  and simulating critical infrastructures and their  interdependencies.  Proc. 

37th Annual Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences, Jan. 2004, pp.54-61. 

[17]  O. Gursesli, A.A. Descrochers. Modelling Infrastructure Interdependencies using Petri Nets. Proc. 
36th Annual Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences, Oct. 2003, pp.1506-1512. 
[18]  K. Schneider,  C.-C. Liu. A proposed method of partially-decentralised power system protection. 
International  Conference  on  Securing  Critical  Infrastructures,  CRIS  2004,  Grenoble,  France, 
October 25-27, 2004. 

[19]  Y.  Deswarte,  L.  Blain,  J.C.  Fabre.  Intrusion  tolerance  in  distributed  computing  systems. 
Proceedings  of  the  1991  IEEE  Symposium  on  Research  in  Security  and  Privacy.  pp.110-121, 
1991. 

[20]  L.  Alvisi,  D.  Malkhi,  E.  Pierce,  M.  Reiter,  R.  Wright.  Dynamic  Byzantine  quorum  systems. 
Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Dependable  Systems  and  Networks,  pp. 
283-292, 2000. 

[21]  M.  Castro,  B.  Liskov.  Practical  Byzantine  fault  tolerance.  Proceedings  of  the  Third  Symposium 

on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, 1999. 

[22]  M.  Hiltunen,  R.  Schlichting,  C.  Ugarte.  Enhancing  survivability  of  security  services  using 
redundancy.  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Dependable  Systems  and 
Networks, pp.173-182, 2001. 

 
 
[23]  A.  Adelsbach,  D.  Alessandri,  C.  Cachin,  S.  Creese,  Y.  Deswarte,  K.  Kursawe,  J.  C.  Laprie,  D. 
Powell, B. Randell, J. Riordan, P. Ryan, W. Simmonds, R. Stroud, P. Verissimo, M. Waidner, and 
A.  Wespi.  Conceptual  Model  and  Architecture  of  MAFTIA.  Project  MAFTIA  IST-1999-11583 
deliverable D21. Tech. Rep. DI/FCUL TR-03-01, Dept. of Informatics, University of Lisboa, Feb 
2003. http://www.di.fc.ul.pt/tech-reports/03-1.pdf. 

[24]  Miguel  Correia,  Nuno  Ferreira  Neves,  Paulo  Veríssimo,  Lau  Cheuk  Lung.  Low  Complexity 

Byzantine-Resilient Consensus. Distributed Computing, vol. 17, n. 3, pp. 237--249, March 2005. 

[25]  Miguel  Correia,  Paulo  Veríssimo,  Nuno  Ferreira  Neves.  The  Design  of  a  COTS  Real-Time 
Distributed  Security  Kernel.  Fourth  European  Dependable  Computing  Conference,  Toulouse, 
France, October 2002 © Springer-Verlag. 

[26]  K.  Kanoun  and  M.  Borrel.  Fault-tolerant  systems  dependability.  Explicit  modelling  of  hardware 
and software component-interactions. IEEE Transactions on Reliability, 49 (4), pp.363-376, 2000. 
[27]  M.  Kaâniche,  K.  Kanoun,  M.  Rabah.  Multi-level  modelling  approach  for  the  availability 
assessment  of  e-business  applications.  Software:  Practice  and  Experience,  John  Wiley  &  sons, 
33(14), pp.1323-1341, 2003. 

[28]  Porcarelli, S., et al. A Modular Approach for Model-based Dependability Evaluation of a Class of 
Systems.  In  ISAS  2004,  1st  International  Service  Availability  Symposium  2004.  Munich, 
Germany: Springer Verlag, 2004. 

[29]  S.  Bernardi,  S.  Donatelli.  Building  Petri  Net  scenarios  for  Dependable  Automation  Systems. 
Proceedings  of  the  10th  International  Workshop  on  Petri  Nets  and  Performance  Models 
(PNPM03), IEEE Computer Society, Urbana, Illinois (USA), September 2003, pp.72-81.  

[30]  S.  Bernardi,  S.  Donatelli.  Stochastic  Petri  Nets  and  inheritance  for  dependability  modelling. 
Proceedings  of  the  10th  Pacific  Rim  International  Symposium  on  Dependable  Computing 
(PRDC04), pp. 363-372, IEEE CS-Press, February 2004.  

[31]  I.  Dobson,  B.A.  Carreras,  V.  Lynch,  D.E.  Newman.  Complex  Systems  analysis  of  series  of 
blackouts:  cascading  failure,  criticality,  and  self-organization.  Bulk  Power  System  and  Control, 
Aug. 2004, Cortina d’Ampezzo, Italy. 

[32]  A. Bondavalli et al.. Dependability Modelling and Evaluation of Multiple Phased Systems using 

DEEM. IEEE Transactions on Reliability, 53(4): p. 509-522, 2004. 

[33]  G.  Dondossola,  M.  Masera,  O.  Lamquet.  Emerging  standards  and  methodological  issues  for  the 
security  analysis  of  the  Power  System  information  infrastructures.  CRIS  2004  Conference: 
Securing critical infrastructures, Grenoble 25-27 October 2004. 

[34]  R.  Ortalo,  Y.  Deswarte,  M.  Kaâniche.  Experimenting  with  Quantitative  Evaluation  Tools  for 
Monitoring  Operational  Security.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Software  Engineering,  Vol.25,  N°5, 
pages 633-650, September/October 1999. 

[35]  J.  Van  den  Keybus,  B.  Bolsens,  K.  De  Brabandere,  J.  Driesen.  Using  a  fully  digital  rapid 
prototype  platform  in  grid-coupled  power  electronics  applications.  9th  IEEE  Conference  on 
Computers  and  Power  Electronics  (COMPEL  2004),  Champaign-Urbana,  USA,  August  15-18, 
2004. 10 pp.  

Project Coordinator’s Biography 

Giovanna  Dondossola  belongs  to  the  Networks  and  Infrastructures  Department  of  CESI 
RICERCA  company  where  she  manages  European  Projects  and  National  activities  on 
dependability and security issues of power network control systems. Among the activities she 
is  currently  leading  there  are  interoperability  issues  in  power  station  control  software,  fault 
tolerant  distributed  architectures  in  real  time  industrial  automation,  cyber  security  for  the 
electric  power  system.  Two  main  objectives  of  the  activities  on  power  system  electronic 
security are the development of methodologies for threat analysis and the evaluation of tools 
for  monitoring  the  communications  and  for  studying  attack  evolutions  and  secure 
architectures. 

She  is  author  of  about  30  papers  published  in  international  conferences  proceedings.  She  is 
member of the Cigré Working Group D2/B3/C2-01 on Security for Information Systems and 
Intranets in Electric Power Systems. 

 
 
 
