Principles of Security: Human, Cyber, and Biological

Blake C. Stacey and Yaneer Bar-Yam

New England Complex Systems Institute

238 Main St. Suite 319 Cambridge MA 02142, USA

(Dated: June 1, 2008 / public February 28, 2013)

Abstract

Cybersecurity attacks are a major and increasing burden to economic and social systems globally.

Here we analyze the principles of security in diﬀerent domains and demonstrate an architectural

ﬂaw in current cybersecurity. Cybersecurity is inherently weak because it is missing the ability

to defend the overall system instead of individual computers. The current architecture enables

all nodes in the computer network to communicate transparently with one another, so security

would require protecting every computer in the network from all possible attacks.

In contrast,

other systems depend on system-wide protections. In providing conventional security, police patrol

neighborhoods and the military secures borders, rather than defending each individual household.

Likewise, in biology, the immune system provides security against viruses and bacteria using pri-

marily action at the skin, membranes, and blood, rather than requiring each cell to defend itself.

We propose applying these same principles to address the cybersecurity challenge. This will re-

quire: (a) Enabling pervasive distribution of self-propagating securityware and creating a developer

community for such securityware, and (b) Modifying the protocols of internet routers to accommo-

date adaptive security software that would regulate internet traﬃc. The analysis of the immune

system architecture provides many other principles that should be applied to cybersecurity. Among

these principles is a careful interplay of detection and action that includes evolutionary improve-

ment. However, achieving signiﬁcant security gains by applying these principles depends strongly

on remedying the underlying architectural limitations.

3
1
0
2

r
a

M
1
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
8
6
2
.
3
0
3
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

0

 
 
 
 
 
 
Principles of Security: Human, Cyber and Biological

June 1, 2008

Blake Stacey and Yaneer Bar-Yam

New England Complex Systems Institute

24 Mt. Auburn St.

Cambridge, MA 02139

Reported to

William G. Glenney, IV

Chief of Naval Operations Strategic Studies Group

Preface

In developing revolutionary concepts of Naval Warfare,[1–10] the Chief of Naval Opera-

tions Strategic Studies Group (SSG) has anticipated concepts that are being now adopted

widely. Among these concepts are Network Centric Warfare and FORCEnet.

[1, 5, 11]

Modern technology enables a new focus on the interactions and relationships of action com-

prising a network of human beings and technology as central to advantage in military conﬂict.

More signiﬁcantly, the challenges of 21st century warfare require signiﬁcantly greater levels

of capability for which networks appear to be well suited, and even necessary.

In support of the SSG, Yaneer Bar-Yam, president of the New England Complex Systems

Institute (http://www.necsi.edu), has provided a fundamental scientiﬁc basis using multi-

scale representations for analysis of the capabilities of organizations.

[12-21] His analysis

characterizes the capabilities and limitations of traditional and networked military organi-

zations.

Through periodic lectures at the SSG beginning in January 2000 that have informed

SSG reports, and through papers [22–25] addressing speciﬁc questions in military force

organization and transformation, a basis for understanding is being developed of modern

military conﬂict that enables generalization from experience gained to new and novel military

responsibilities.

One of the central insights provided by multiscale representations is that there are distinct

types of networks that are relevant to military operations.

[12, 24, 25] One of these is a

network of agents that are individually capable of action, e.g. warﬁghters in a battlespace. A

second is a network of decision makers that gathers information widely and makes decisions

collectively about highly speciﬁc actions to perform, where the action is then executed,

perhaps by a large and centrally directed force. The former can be considered in analogy

to the human immune system where the individual agents are the blood cells that battle

harmful agents such as infections within the human body. The second can be considered in

analogy to the human neuro-muscular system where the individual agents of the network

are the nerve cells whose collective decision making ability far exceeds that of a single cell,

and the decision making process results in the actions performed by the muscles.

Distributed networks are particularly needed when facing enemies that are themselves

distributed networks—as is apparent in counter terrorism and in cyber security. Both are

i

growing challenges. The attached report focuses on cyber security. Today, cyber exploits—

spam, malware, denial of service, and security breaches—are widespread. As cyber space

becomes an increasingly integral part of the functioning of all human activities security in

this domain becomes an increasingly critical and unmet challenge. This report presents a

framework for understanding the inherent limitations of existing cyber security and how to

fundamentally improve its capabilities.

ii

Executive Summary

Increasing global interdependence has resulted in distributed human terror networks and

cyber security challenges. Actions by and on networks can result in major damage even

though individual agents causing it are diﬃcult to locate or identify. Traditional methods

of centralized control and local response cannot meet these challenges due to the funda-

mental constraints on distributed information gathering, detection and coordinated action.

Distributed networked security systems are necessary for eﬀective response. Rather than ad-

dressing speciﬁc challenges of today, the vulnerability caused by global communication and

transportation must be met by creating security systems with necessary capabilities to meet

a wide range of challenges that are possible in these systems. With traditional approaches

to security cyber systems are particularly at risk given the rapidity of action and necessary

response.

Security challenges follow certain general patterns. Recognizing the principles of eﬀective

security response provides guidance to meeting new high complexity challenges in global

terror networks and cyber security. Key principles can be found from analyzing security

systems in other domains. In this paper we analyze the biological immune system which is

responsible for analogous security problems within human physiology. The immune system

has evolved a dispersed distributed-control system that can successfully respond to generic

and novel threats and can distinguish threat agents from self and attack threats/invaders

with necessary force.

The human immune system consists of billions of cells that coordinate response to security

challenges in the human body. The activity of the immune system cannot be understood as a

centrally managed process, but rather as arising from a large number of local communications

among specialized components to achieve an emergent response. It achieves high success

rates, is robust, scalable, ﬂexible, and is generally capable of distinguishing self from non-self

in actions. It dynamically reﬁnes its ability to detect pathogens by evolutionary selection.

Actions of the immune system can be divided into three layers. The ﬁrst layer consists of

barriers between security domains, including the skin and membranes between compartments

of the body. The second layer consists of responses to damage of the system aﬀecting

many cells, including repairing barriers and tissues. The third layer, the adaptive immune

system, responds to the ﬁnest scale challenges, detection and response to cells or molecules

iii

distributed through the system. Of particular concern are the viruses and bacteria that

can replicate rapidly from a small to large number. All layers of the immune system have

analogs in human and cyber security. The most diﬃcult to understand and therefore the

focus of our attention is the adaptive immune system.

The central capabilities of the adaptive immune system are detection and action, whose

generalized application must be found in any security system. Detection is achieved by

mapping the space of observed structures or behaviors onto a reduced set of possibilities,

which are partitioned into threat and non-threat, i.e. non-self and self. When a match

is found in the environment to a non-self template, an action is triggered. Detection and

action are separated functions of components of the system, requiring careful regulatory

interplay between them to enable action without damage to self, corresponding to collat-

eral damage. Speciﬁc details of communication protocols and interplay of detection and

action agents reveal the strategies the immune system employs in a system wide response

whose detection ability increases rapidly in order to eliminate even individual molecular or

cellular harmful agents. This requires the ability to replicate and distribute the detection

mechanisms and action response rapidly throughout the system. The rapid development of

improved response involves progressive reﬁnement of detection by a process corresponding

to evolutionary selection, similar to breeding of desired features in agriculture. Improved

detection templates developed for a particular threat are distributed throughout the system

to enable eﬀective local response.

The relevance of the immune system model to cyber security arose when computer com-

munication systems transitioned from infrequent and low bandwidth processes to increas-

ingly pervasive, persistent and high speed networks. The importance of security is growing

as the Internet is used not just as an adjunct to activities for communication about them,

but rather as a necessary component of a wide range of economic and social functions. The

need for security is apparent in the large impact of spam, spyware, phishing, zombie net-

works, denial of service attacks, internet fraud, identify theft, and breaches of high security

systems. The underlying cause of the need for security is the transition of the Internet

connected computers to behavior as a tightly linked system analogous to a multicellular

organism.

Existing cyber security systems have parallels to the immune system but these parallels

are incomplete. Corresponding to the barriers found in the ﬁrst level of security are ﬁre-

iv

walls and separation of distinct networks, e.g. ATM and bank transaction networks where

these are separated from the Internet. The second layer of security consists of response

to widespread exploits, including Domain Name Server Black Lists (DNSBLs) for blocking

spam from their sources. The third layer of security includes virus scanners and e-mail

ﬁlters that detect malware or spam on an individual computer. Detection makes use of

a characterization of programs or e-mail by features (bit strings and logical operations on

these bit strings) that provide signatures similar to the detection templates of the immune

system. Considering the correspondence with the immune system reveals that the response

to detection in cyber security is not pervasive throughout the system.

Our analysis of the immune response identiﬁes the principles of successful response. While

there are similarities to the immune system response in cyber security, we ﬁnd two major

gaps in the architecture of the Internet. Without addressing these issues, improved cyber

security will be diﬃcult or impossible to attain. First, there is no mechanism for distri-

bution of a response throughout the system. While individuals can subscribe to security

systems that are distributed to some degree, it is optional. Moreover, local information

about detection is not redistributed throughout the system. Note that malware does have

the capability of replication and distribution. The absence of parallel capabilities in security

agents enables attackers an inherent advantage over security eﬀorts. Second, the existing

security system is not a collective security system in that it does not protect the Internet

but rather protects individual components of the Internet. The ability of any part of the

Internet to send messages to any other part of the Internet without encountering security

systems implies that weakest elements can be attacked, compromised, or controlled to enable

progressively larger infestation of the system. Conversely, the inability to mount a perva-

sive defense is a fundamental limitation on security which is diametrically counter to the

corresponding processes of immune system response. Without a collective security system,

the only methods for progress are to harden each element of the Internet, a much larger

security burden destined to be ineﬀective. Speciﬁcally, the only means are to improve the

security of the operating system on each computer. Even so, computers that are operated by

individuals that desire to cause harm would continue to be security risks. The implications

of these gaps in the security system are that there is no mechanism within cyberspace for

security actions to counter-attack the sources of attacks. Moreover, there is no mechanism

for blocking their attacks at point of entry into the Internet rather than at point of attack

v

at another node.

Addressing cyber security would require either or both: (a) Making pervasive distribu-

tion of self-propagating but non-destructive security ware acceptable and create a developer

community for such security ware. (b) Modifying the protocols of internet routers to accom-

modate adaptive security software that would regulate internet traﬃc of other kinds and

self-regulate. These modiﬁcations would alter the perspective of the ”rights” of the Internet,

the right of transmission and the right of any node to communicate to any other node of the

system. An eﬀective security system requires that this right be limited, as best as possible,

to those who do not cause damage to the system.

The analysis of the immune system architecture provides many other principles of security

that can be applied to cyber security. Among these principles is a careful interplay of

detection and action that includes evolutionary improvement of the detection and response

capability. However, any advances in applying such principles will have minimal impact as

long as the underlying architectural limitations persist.

vi

Contents

I. Overview on Security

II. The Immune System

A. Introduction to the immune system

B. Immune system architecture

C. Speciﬁc ﬁne scale (adaptive) response

III. Adaptive Immune Response

A. Identiﬁcation

B. Capacity for action

C. Evolution as method

IV. The Cyber Security Challenge

V. Current Cyber Security

A. Layered defense

B. Detection

VI. Why Current Cybersecurity Cannot Work

VII. Conclusions

VIII. Appendix: Detection and Response in the Immune System

A. Detection mechanism

B. Detection templates

C. Evolution of detection

D. B-cell to B-cell communication: Improving detection

E. B-cell to T-cell communication and intelligence

F. Action agents: T cells and phagocytes

G. Post response: Reducing the cohort and memory

H. Security failures

References

vii

1

3

3

4

5

5

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

15

17

17

18

20

20

21

22

23

23

25

I. OVERVIEW ON SECURITY

The current strategies used in human and cyber security are not capable of handling

threats in our increasingly interdependent world. Challenges in human security are changing

through global terror networks. Cyber security, by virtue of its rapid and hidden processes

is arguably an even greater challenge that is poorly met by existing systems. Severe exploits

and massive system burden from actors in cyberspace are common today. Were this extent

of malware (viruses, trojans, spyware) and spam found at the human level, it would be

considered a major breakdown of a social system.

The demands of addressing current challenges in human and cyber security are motivating

the development of fundamentally new approaches. An essential feature of new challenges

is their distributed nature. Global transportation and communication systems enable dis-

tributed groups of individuals to cause major physical or informational damage, elevating the

global challenge of maintaining security at any location. On the one hand, traditional police

forces with solely local authority cannot respond to global relationships and associations.

On the other hand, the many possible actions of diverse forms can overwhelm centralized

responses due to the inability to gather and process information, determine courses of lo-

cal action, and distribute control messages appropriately. The distributed nature of these

challenges demands a distributed, and correspondingly complex, response.[12]

Traditional security revolves around localized agents of various sizes, from individual

criminals to national armies. Such agents manifest in the local damage they cause. To

combat such agents, the source of the damage must be identiﬁed and an appropriate local

response mounted. In general, the possible damage is limited to the scope of the agent. Small

actions are harder to detect, but are commensurately responsible for less damage. Larger

actions responsible for larger-scale damage are easier to observe by virtue of their size. From

this perspective, coordinated, distributed actions present a new challenge in that any one

of them is diﬃcult to detect, the impact of any one agent may be in a diﬀerent location,

and the collective eﬀect of multiple agents can be large. Moreover, an additional universal

aspect of these challenges is their ability to proliferate so that a small scale challenge can

grow by recruitment to a large scale over a short period of time.

An essential aspect of distributed, coordinated action is the availability of necessary

communication and transportation mechanisms.

It is essential to recognize that modern

1

social and technological changes create the opportunities for communication, transportation

and recruitment by virtue of the structures that are developed for the functioning of society

itself. Changes in global connectivity are driving vulnerability to security challenges that

are inherent in the structure of the system.

Recognizing that security challenges stem from changes in social connectivity is impor-

tant. Otherwise we may be fooled into addressing only speciﬁc current challenges, and fail

to meet the next challenge that arises. Solving the current challenge will not eliminate the

general vulnerability.

Instead, it is necessary to create systems that are able to address

challenges of various kinds that surely will arise in the future.

The changes in global communication and transportation systems are easily recognized

in the human sphere given the increasing ease and frequency of global transportation and

communication among people. However, it is even more dramatic in the cyber space context

where changes can be more rapid and the time scale of response may be shorter.

A useful paradigm for the study of distributed response security systems is the biological

immune system. The immune system is the biological system responsible for internal secu-

rity. The analogy between biological attackers and computer attackers is well established in

the notion of “computer viruses.”[31] Still, the key to developing eﬀective systems of secu-

rity is understanding the principles of immune system function so they can be generalized.

In this paper, we frame the essential issues to guide a more general approach to using the

structure and processes of the immune system to inform distributed human and information

technology security. We focus on the part of the immune system designed to address the

most complex distributed challenges corresponding to the highly complex distributed chal-

lenges in human and cyber security. In this context we detail how the distributed structure

and the key interactions between agents enables the remarkable level of success achieved in

a demanding security environment. This success is measured by the ability to eliminate to

the last one adversaries that are capable of rapid proliferation if left unchecked.

This paper is organized upon the concept that identifying principles from one security

system can serve as a foundation for modeling/organizing other security systems with com-

parable complexity. Understanding principles of security from the immune system is not the

same as making an analogy between biological and social or technological systems. Prin-

ciples embody correspondences that reﬂect essential logical or mathematical relationships

between elements, structures and behaviors. While we do not provide here the formal corre-

2

spondence, we strive to make the nature of the formal relationships clear in the presentation.

Our primary conclusions are that the existing structure of the Internet does not allow for

a security system that is able to address its security challenges. This architectural problem

supersedes all speciﬁcs, as it is necessary to address the underlying architectural problems

in order to enable implementation of eﬀective security.

In order to establish the fundamental gap in the ability of the current security systems

we explain the functioning of the biological immune systems solution to its own security

problem. We then discuss the mechanisms that have been used to address cyber security,

why they fail, and what changes are necessary to enable success.

II. THE IMMUNE SYSTEM

A.

Introduction to the immune system

Human beings possess an immune system responsible for the well-being of trillions of cells,

itself comprised of billions of interacting pieces, with no single central focus of control. The

immune system is a medically signiﬁcant arena of study, as it provides our defense against

diseases, and failures of its operation lead to auto-immune disorders. It also provides an

important context for developing our understanding of universal principles that apply across

diverse complex systems including social and technological ones.

The immune system can be understood as a system with emergent response. The many

components of the immune system function by collectively responding to challenges. The

natural scale of its response locally may involve only a few cells, throughout the system it

involves many cells responding to potentially distributed challenges in a coordinated fash-

ion. When necessary, the response in any one location can increase dramatically to achieve

a macroscopic response as is found in visible infections. Collective actions are distributed

among multiple cells, achieving a balance where each cell is important but generally not

essential. This emergent behavior cannot be understood by description of individual agents.

It must be understood by the coupling of individual cell actions through inter-cellular inter-

action.

The immune system has properties that are desirable in any security system: ﬁrst, it is

robust and resilient, as individual components of the system can be removed without com-

3

promising the functionality of the whole. Second, the system is naturally scalable without

substantial modiﬁcation. Third, it is ﬂexible, often able to cope with pathogens which have

never been seen before. Fourth, it displays specialization, with diﬀerent cell types perform-

ing the diﬀerent functions necessary to provide system functionality. Fifth, it is able to

distinguish self from nonself, even when the molecules it produces during its normal aﬀairs

are themselves novel chemical structures.

The immune system exploits the dynamics of evolution to achieve its remarkable success.

Evolution is a central process in the formation of any complex system and is fundamentally

necessary to achieve success in complex tasks.

[12] Evolution enables improvement of a

system to face challenges that cannot be anticipated. Understanding how this works is

therefore necessary for our ability to address many challenges. In particular, it is important

to understand that not only is the immune system itself a product of evolution, but it also

applies evolution to address speciﬁc immune responses. This latter evolution takes place

within a single organism.

B.

Immune system architecture

The biological immune system guards against infection in multiple ways, providing a

“layered defense” with increasing speciﬁcity. Pathogens which penetrate system barriers

(e.g., skin) are challenged by the innate immune system, and the adaptive immune system.

These mechanisms are constantly active, meeting a dynamically changing and large set of

challenges at all times. Signiﬁcant illness occurs only when they fail.

The ﬁrst layer of security consists of the barriers themselves. Barriers distinguish the self

from other at the large scale. They separate space to that controlled and not controlled,

or subject to diﬀerent levels of control. The immune system includes the skin and other

membranes that separate speciﬁc compartments of the body. The skin is the boundary that

separates the internal space where the immune system controls the ﬁne scale security, from

the space outside the system which is not subject to security.

The second layer of the immune system is designed to meet failures of the ﬁrst layer. This

includes disruptions of the barrier itself, repairing the skin, and responding to challenges

that occur when there are signiﬁcant breaches of the skin. A principle of innate immunity is

to characterize damage and threats that are of intermediate scale — involving many cells —

4

and therefore generic features of large classes of hazards rather than speciﬁc to the attacker

types. These include response to blood loss (clotting) or to tissue damage (inﬂamation).

The third layer of the immune system addresses the ﬁnest scale challenges. In particular,

the role of adaptive immunity is to identify speciﬁc individual threats that do not trigger the

innate immune response: individual molecules, cells or loosely associated groups of molecules

or cells distributed through the system.

While there are many potential causes of harm that the immune system guards against,

there are two that are of particular note because they are able to self-replicate and thus

require a response that both can address a large number of such attackers and yet detect a

very small number, even down to a single individual. There are two primary types of such

foreign agents: molecular attackers, viruses, and cellular attackers, commonly bacteria but

also other replicating single celled organisms.

C. Speciﬁc ﬁne scale (adaptive) response

Our focus is on the adaptive immune system whose role is to identify and attack speciﬁc

intruders or self cells that change behavior to become a threat to survival. Any security

system must perform certain key tasks.

1. Detection. Hostile elements introduced into the system or arising within the system

must be noted, distinguished from non-hostile elements and identiﬁed before action

can be taken.

2. Action. Once a threat has been identiﬁed and characterized, a response must be

mounted which is appropriate to both the quantity and the nature of the threat.

We now address these points in more detail.

III. ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSE

A.

Identiﬁcation

The essence of recognizing a threat is distinguishing signatures of its structure or behavior.

The identiﬁcation of a foreign “antigen” in the immune system is analogous to distinguishing

5

undesirable from desirable elements in any system. While this is a commonly necessary

task, this form of pattern recognition is fundamentally diﬃcult. Understanding how it is

accomplished is key to the design of any security system.

Central to identiﬁcation is a way to map any structure or behavior that is to be char-

acterized onto a smaller and better deﬁned set of “possibilities.” This set of possibilities

is then partitioned, perhaps dynamically, into a set that are considered a threat and those

that are not a threat.

The immune system performs this distinction by starting from a large set of prototypes

within the space of possibilities, and rejects from this set those that are matches to com-

ponents of self. The remaining set are used for identiﬁcation of antigens. Also, perhaps,

damage caused may be used as evidence. When an antigen is detected, action is initiated,

and the prototypes are reﬁned by evolutionary processes to achieve better matching, and

thus more rapid response.

B. Capacity for action

The identiﬁcation of the presence of a threat must trigger a response that will be eﬀective

in meeting that threat. The response could be of various kinds, but it must modify to render

harmless, or eliminate the threat from the system.

In a distributed system, such as the immune system, an appropriate level of response

must be recruited from nearby or from far away depending on the size of the response

needed. Once the existence of a threat has been identiﬁed, the ongoing need for detection

should be simpliﬁed for the responding agents. This enables action to be performed by

components that are not as capable of performing diﬀerentiation by themselves, but are

instead specialized for action against a threat.

The existence of responders who are then less capable of discrimination, however, in-

creases the likelihood of actions that are against self rather than against threats. This

challenge must be met by careful regulatory processes for triggering action. The need to

identify threats, and then selectively trigger action requires balanced protocols to safeguard

self while defeating threats. Examples of this issue in human security include the problems of

“friendly ﬁre” and “collateral damage” in warfare, which constitute harm to responders and

to bystanders respectively. While these terms imply unintended harm, we can also include in

6

this category intentional actions by individual agents that are not consistent with collective

goals, such as war crimes. There are two types of methods for avoiding self-damage. The

ﬁrst are within an individual agent, analogous to intention of the individual, and the second

involve regulatory interactions between agents at the time of action.

In computer security, similar issues of self-inﬂicted damage today include issues of “false

positives” such as the blocking of desired e-mails as spam, or blocking of legitimate users

from accessing a system. The extra eﬀort involved in forgotten or mistyped passwords and

password systems can be included as well.

Multiple types of cell and multiple cells of each type are involved in each action of the

immune system. Biological and biochemical details will be discussed in the Appendix; for

the moment, we note that the ability to spread messages and agents throughout the body

via the circulatory system allows initial signals to provoke a systemic reaction to resolve a

challenge. This systemic reaction is not just a call for others to respond to a particular place,

but a pervasive distribution throughout the system of the ability to respond to attackers

that can appear in a distributed fashion and replicate.

C. Evolution as method

The central principle of evolution is the “non-random survival of randomly varying repli-

cators.” [27, 28] In each generation, the replicators which are better able to survive are able

to leave more oﬀspring, and so advantageous traits can spread throughout the population.

If the environment changes, the mixture of traits within the population will change in re-

sponse; populations which cannot adapt in this fashion will quite generally be supplanted

by those who can. We emphasize that the variation that takes place in the traits through,

e.g. mutations, is random, while the selection which acts upon replicators has a much more

deterministic character.

Selection creates a functionality in the replicators over time, where that functionality can

be deﬁned by the ability to meet the criteria of selection. By arranging criteria of selection

to serve a particular purpose, the evolutionary process can serve to induce that purpose in

the replicators.

Such a directed evolutionary process has been variously used both historically and to-

day. The breeding of animals is an artiﬁcial way of applying selection criteria to serve a

7

purpose that human beings determine.[26] In technological applications, so called genetic or

evolutionary algorithms,[29] specify an artiﬁcial measure of “ﬁtness” of a computer-based

replicator and apply random variation and selection to improve the replicators in meeting

that measure. In this context the process of evolution can be considered a form of opti-

mization. Still, computer based evolutionary processes only incorporate some features of

the evolutionary process in nature.[12]

If the goal of a system is relatively easy to specify but the path to achieve that goal

is unclear, then a properly implemented evolutionary process is an approach that can be

eﬀective.

The process of evolution is used by the immune system to improve the most information

intensive aspect of the response process, detection. This process requires eﬀective use of

the existence of some detection to initiate the improvement process so that progressive

improvement of detection is possible. Subsequently, improved detection accelerates the

ability of the system to respond. This requires rapid distribution of the improved capabilities

throughout the system through global dissemination.

IV. THE CYBER SECURITY CHALLENGE

When early “mainframe” computers were replaced by personal computers, an individual

computer still remained largely isolated, interacting with its owner. Programs or data were

transferred via ﬂoppy disk or, sometimes, over telephone lines. As networking became

ubiquitous, the rate of ongoing interactions created a global system in which most of the

communications are not observed directly by human beings and individual human response

times are insuﬃcient to monitor the dynamics of the communications. Moreover, the extent

and rate of communication continues to grow.

The widespread use of the Internet for communication and commerce has increased the

need for cyber security.[30] It is important to recognize the change from a system that is

an adjunct and a convenient substitute to more conventional communications, to when such

interactions are an integral part of society. As commerce is increasingly done through the

Internet, the disruption of economic activity through the disruption of such communica-

tions becomes increasingly important. The next stage of development, already occurring in

many contexts, is the integration of the Internet into response systems. Thus the operation

8

of almost every organization is undergoing a transition from isolated computer stations, to

communications, to real time interactions, to integrating essential responses through the net-

work. Increasingly, individual actions require information from multiple sources distributed

through the network, and actions themselves become distributed among multiple individuals

interacting through the network. Potential disruptions of the network system increase in

impact as this occurs.

For example, computers introduced into medical operations might ﬁrst be used for track-

ing appointments and keeping ﬁnancial records. Then they might be used for sending pre-

scriptions from physician to pharmacy. Third, they can be used for real time monitoring of

procedures. Finally, they can be used for remote controlling of procedures. Once the ﬁnal

stage is reached, the disruption of service has real time impacts not only on the communi-

cation about the procedure but the procedure itself.

The need for security has become apparent in the success of Internet fraud, including

breaches of high security systems and theft of personal records. The extent and variety

of “cyber” actions has increased with the ubiquity of spam, spyware, phishing, zombie

networks, denial of service attacks, etc. A spam-blocking service reports over 4.7 billion

spam messages intercepted since November 2005, almost ten times the amount of legitimate

traﬃc over that period.[56] This includes only the spam which was intercepted. Many of the

spam messages advertise fraudulent products or otherwise attempt to defraud their readers;

they contain links to unlawful sites—which also serves to skew search engines like Google

in their favor; and they often originate from otherwise legitimate computers whose security

has been compromised.

The need for the biological immune system arose when single celled organisms evolved to

form multicellular organisms. As with the change in human social and cyber connectivity,

the connectivity in multicellular organisms leads to a collective vulnerability and a need for

a system to guard against it.

V. CURRENT CYBER SECURITY

There are a number of generally used cyber security systems that are parallel in some way

to the immune system operations. In addition, there are speciﬁc eﬀorts to adapt concepts

from the immune system for cyber security.[32–35, 39]

9

A. Layered defense

The ﬁrst layer consisting of barriers in cyber security includes ﬁrewalls and the separation

of distinct networks for e.g. ATMs and bank transactions. These security systems prevent

malware from entering a system as skin protects an organism. Barriers within a system,

just as membranes within the body, generally are semi-permeable, using mechanisms to

diﬀerentiate what can pass. In cyber security these include password authentication and

S/Key challenges.

The second layer of cyber security includes detection of exploits and generic responses to

them. This includes Domain Name Server Black Lists (DNSBL) often called RBLs (Real-

time Blackhole Lists). These are services that gather and provide lists of IPs that are sources

of spam and other malware. Institutional mail servers can automatically implement policies

that use this information to block domains of the Internet that are sources of spam. The

sources of spam may include servers set up for this purpose, or zombies which are computers

that have been compromised by malware so that they transmit spam and malware on behalf

of others. In eﬀect, zombies are the analog of virus infected cells that become factories for

viruses and other pathogens. The large number of these exploits today results in a response

which is akin to a generic immunity response.

The third layer of cyber security includes virus scanners and e-mail ﬁlters are the analogs

of the adaptive immune system.[32] These applications search programs stored on disk or

incoming e-mail messages for signatures of malware and spam. If the detection system is not

speciﬁc enough, programs that are valid, and e-mail that is valid are rejected. Alternatively,

malware or spam may not be rejected. The desired versus undesired categories are analogous

to the discrimination of “self” from “other” in the adaptive immune system. Where self

consists of legitimate software and desired e-mail, and other is the malware (virus, Trojan

Horse, etc.) which would compromise the system and spam. The existence of false-positives

and false-negatives that misidentify whether the spam or malware are legitimate is similar

to errors of classiﬁcation in the immune system as well.

10

B. Detection

A computer immune system must detect both known and hitherto unknown viruses or

spam. For this purpose a program fragment, or small piece of data from a larger set can be

used as a detection template. This extracted data can be compared with correspondingly

extracted data from a virus or spam. The latter is known as the “signature” of the virus

or spam. Finding the “signature” within a piece of software indicates that the software has

been infected. Various signatures can be constructed based upon procedures speciﬁed by

individuals (heuristic rules), or statistical pattern detection (Bayesian ﬁltering), and collabo-

rative identiﬁcation (when voluntary human communities manually specify spam signatures

that are shared).[58]

Some detection systems are local in that the software itself learns from labeling by the

user what is spam and what isn’t. In this case the user manually identiﬁes spam and non-

spam, and signatures are extracted automatically that diﬀerentiate between the spam and

non-spam by the software.[59] Others are centrally directed by service providers who provide

the software and revise it to add templates for new malware.[60–62] Revisions arise after

reports due to the detection of the virus. Such detection occurs when individuals observe

activity of processes on computers outside of normal operations, or of damage due to such

processes.

Similar issues arise at the level of computer network operation security.[39] Such security

systems operate at the level of the pattern of traﬃc rather than the content of individual

messages. To detect a deviant computer system that may be the source of other attacks, a

pattern detection system has a representation of the types of patterns that can arise. Among

these a set of “self-patterns” is created, representing the legitimate ways in which traﬃc can

ﬂow amongst the computers of a Local Area Network (LAN). Abnormal traﬃc, such as a

computer suddenly sending thousands of e-mail messages to the external Internet, is a “non-

self pattern” and is considered a sign of infection (in this example, the computer may have

been co-opted by a spammer and used as a “zombie” to spread spam and malware).[37, 38]

11

VI. WHY CURRENT CYBERSECURITY CANNOT WORK

The examples of Internet based security suggest that existing systems have some similar-

ities with immune system operations. Still, they do not capture the dynamics of communi-

cation and interplay of detection and action that should provide better security and better

self-protection. These limitations include the manner of detection and sharing of signatures

of malware (local, centralized and limited distribution systems), as well as the limits in

implementing actions to prevent or stop attacks and exploits.

Indeed, while cyber security systems today provide some protection for malware and

spam, the ongoing presence of large volumes of spam and malware, and exploits, suggests

that the existing protections are too limited in their abilities and greater attention to the

principles of security as embedded in immune system operations would give rise to improved

outcomes.

There are two fundamental reasons that the current approaches to cybersecurity cannot

work eﬀectively.

First: There is no mechanism for rapid pervasive distribution of security processes that

can respond to new types of malware or spam. The voluntary use of community or cen-

trally generated malware or spam signatures, while widespread, is not pervasive. One way

to understand the ineﬀectiveness of security distribution is to compare the distribution of

security with that of malware. Malware is much more pervasively and rapidly distributed

than the security that is designed to guard against it. In the immune system, viruses can

be considered to be analogs of antibodies. Both are able to replicate rapidly using cellu-

lar mechanisms and both are able to attack cells or other molecules. This correspondence

makes viruses and antibodies have similar capabilities. Furthermore, T cells are similar to

bacteria in their ability to replicate and attack other cells. This correspondence of defenders

and attackers implies that there are no major gaps in the capabilities of the attackers as

compared to the defenders. By contrast, there is no defensive analog of malware, in that the

anti-malware software is centrally controlled instead of being distributed in origin. A better

correspondence would be a security system that would operate on the basis of a peer-to-peer

protocol. As computer viruses and other malware develop, so would defenders that would

be redistributed automatically across the web. Such a peer-to-peer system would open the

door to more opportunities for malware, but this architecture would give attackers and de-

12

fenders equal capabilities, unlike the current situation where attackers have a wider range

of options, with potentially much greater capabilities.

The closest system to the architecture of the immune system from this perspective is an

existing distributed collective response system where multiple users share signatures of spam.

[63, 64] Still, unless these systems are universally adopted, they do not prevent widespread

infection and thus widespread attack — i.e. they are not collective security systems but

rather localized security systems.

Second: The current architecture of the Internet is based upon a protocol (IP [65, 66])

that transmits messages independent of their content. The basic premise is that any valid

message is delivered to its destination. The delivery process involves transfer from the point

of origin through a sequence of nodes (routers) of the internet. Each router reads the target

destination speciﬁed by the message (packet) identiﬁes a node to transfer the message to

that will enable eventual delivery to the destination, and transfers it. In this proces, there is

no evaluation of what the mesage contains. Individual messages may be lost in transmission

due to network overload, but not due to evaluation of the contents of the message. This

implies that as far as the sender and receiver are concerned the network is transparent.

Any message is transferred from one node of the network to any other node of the network

without intervention. In considering the transfer of messages, it is important to recognize

that a message is also an action that can be harmful. If we consider each destination node

of the network to be like a “home,” and the network to be like the streets, then from the

point of view of security, this is equivalent to having no police on the streets or military

at the borders. Each household, or individual, must defend him or herself, using means of

protection (e.g. guns, etc.) purchased on the market. That the protection is left to the

individual home reﬂects the open nature of the Internet. The corresponding system in a

biological sense would enable any cell to approach and attack any other cell of the body.

Under these untenable conditions there would be no collective security in the medium in

which cells are located. Analogously, there is no protection in the medium of the Internet.

The two fundamental limitations of the architecture of the Internet from a security per-

spective imply that there is no mechanism for a security system to prevent actions consisting

of nodes attacking other nodes in the Internet. Attacks that are launched cannot be stopped

before they arrive at their destination. There is also no process that enables removal or elim-

ination of the originators of an attack. Security systems do not have access to nodes of the

13

Internet except as they voluntarily participate in security actions by subscribing to security

communities or services. Thus, preventive action or removal is only possible if the originat-

ing node voluntarily participates in a security action. Without such participation, the best

that can be done is to protect from attack at its destination. This implies that an inten-

tional attacker can gain strength and evolve increasingly sophisticated attacks. Attacks can

be focused on particular nodes, either because of their vulnerability or value. In contrast,

to be eﬀective, security must defend all parts of the system it wishes to protect.

In order to develop an eﬀective collective security system similar to the immune or human

security systems, substantial architectural changes must be implemented. Collective security

preventing attacks would require that the routers of the Internet themselves would need to

have protocols that allow refusal of transmission based upon content or extrinsic information

such as point of origin. The routers of the Internet serve as the transmission medium for

the nodes of the Internet. This corresponds to the intercellular ﬂuids, including the blood,

of physiological systems, the primary locus of immune system activity. Such an approach

was implemented against spam transmission early in the history of DNSRBLs [67]; however,

it appears to be abandoned. A router based security system would curtail the “right of

transmission,” which may be considered fundamental in discussions of Freedom of speech.

[68]

Absent a router based security system, the second alternative is to enable automatic

transmission of security software among all terminal (non-router) nodes of the internet.

This would enable rapid and pervasive distribution throughout the system. This is a similar

propagation to that of viruses and other malware. Such automated transmission might

be considered to be less desirable than router based security, as it involves partial loss

of control by owners of the activities on their computers in favor of security operations.

Corresponding software capabilities exist in peer-to-peer systems, and in existing voluntary

security communities.

Thus far we have not discussed the use of human legal systems to pursue human origi-

nators of malware and spam. In this regard there are diﬃculties inherent in international

law for pursuing such attacks as crime. Perhaps more critically, the diﬀerent domains and

time scales of Internet activity and human legal activity suggest that this approach will be

diﬃcult to utilize to any signiﬁcant eﬀect. Criminal prosecution is a high cost and time eﬀort

that can be eﬀective in disrupting non-normative activities but not in curtailing widespread

14

actions. Indeed, the existing success in prosecuting Internet crime is limited. [69, 70]

VII. CONCLUSIONS

We performed an analysis of principles of security using the immune system as a model

that provides insight into the functioning of any security system. We identiﬁed central

functional attributes of a security system. However, we found that these properties cannot

be eﬀectively implemented in cyber security because of current limitations of the Internet

structure. This is not a limitation of the security principles but rather of the architecture

of the Internet.

Within the current limitations on security systems, security is largely in the hands of

individual nodes. Improving the resistance of individual nodes to attack is critical because a

compromised node will be the source of attacks on other nodes. The main source of weakness

in the system is the vulnerability of operating systems on individual computers. Vulnerable

operating systems should be avoided not just for the security of the individual node but for

the security of the system as a whole.

A focus on individual nodes, however, will miss the essential nature of a collective system

and its vulnerabilities that arise due to the rapid communication. We therefore recommend

that major modiﬁcations will be considered that allow the ability to perform security within

the router systems of the Internet rather than in the end nodes. This would entail router

protocols that can be used to reject messages based upon content, with distributed detection

systems to identify which content corresponds to harmful acts. Such a security system must

be carefully designed to avoid harm to self through blocking valid Internet traﬃc. Indeed,

it is the fear of such blocking that has limited the implementation of such a system. The

use of principles of security obtained from analysis of other security systems, speciﬁcally the

immune system, can provide guidance to enable eﬀective processes that minimally impede

or interfere with valid traﬃc. To this end we summarize our ﬁndings of immune system

security.

We found that the three subsystems of the immune system are designed to address chal-

lenges at three scales. The largest scale is the separation of internal and external domains,

i.e. the skin, as well as other partitions of the system by membranes to separate diﬀerent

security domains. The intermediate scale corresponds to manifest system damage, includ-

15

ing damage to the boundaries or tissues, that require repair. The ﬁnest scale and highest

complexity system involves responding to distributed collections of molecules or cells that

are diﬃcult to identify in the context of the complex physiology of the body, and are often

able to replicate to create larger scale damage, e.g. viruses and bacteria.

The most speciﬁc and distributed system for security involves remarkable level of empha-

sis on detection. Detection can be described in a general fashion that is relevant to security

systems at other levels of organization including human societal, and cyber security. Detec-

tion involves a standard set of templates that are able to characterize suﬃciently broadly

potential invaders, but have speciﬁcity suﬃcient to distinguish adversaries from self. Once

detection occurs, multiple processes are used to enhance the ability to detect the adversaries

rapidly and in small numbers.

The detection process is intimately linked to action even though diﬀerent agents perform

detection and action. The interaction of action agents and detection agents is a local pro-

cess involving identifying individual elements as adversaries and mounting a proportionate

response. These local interactions are carefully designed to avoid self-inﬂicted damage.

All of the immune system actions utilize widespread communication and transportation to

transport the detection mechanisms throughout the system, to recruit additional defenders,

and to communicate ongoing improvements in detection.

A review of the current major systems for cyber security suggests that there are aspects

of cyber security systems that correspond to the immune system. However, the fundamental

diﬀerences in architecture prevent communication and reﬁnement of responses to adversaries

throughout the system. These constraints also severely limit the possible counter attacks,

including the ability to block sources of attacks at the points of origin. With such limitations

overall success in suppressing the large numbers of cyber attacks will be limited. Since

the transportation and communication systems can be exploited by attackers to achieve

widespread damage, they must also be used as part of successful response by defenders.

16

VIII. APPENDIX: DETECTION AND RESPONSE IN THE IMMUNE SYSTEM

In this appendix we provide details about the immune system response to identify the

mechanisms by which it provides a capacity for detection and for corrective action. These

are key aspects of immune system response but are generally not currently applicable to

cyber security because of the inherent architecture of the Internet. As explained in the main

paper, should the structure of the Internet be modiﬁed in a manner to allow for improved

security, these mechanisms can provide improved guidance for how to proceed.

The adaptive immune system has a high degree of speciﬁcity: a “non-self” antigen (a sig-

nature of an adversary) is recognized and responses are tailored to that particular pathogen

(adversary). We will show how the biological system identiﬁes adversary signatures, trans-

mits information to agents who can take action, determines which actions are appropriate,

and how memory functions.

The cells of the adaptive immune system are known as lymphocytes, which are special

types of white blood cells (leukocytes). The two principal categories of lymphocyte, are B

cells and T cells, are further divided into subcategories as explained below. Both derive

from stem cells found in bone marrow, the hematopoietic or blood-producing cells.[42]

B cells have a primary role in identiﬁcation of adversaries, and T cells are the primary

agents of action in response to the adversaries. The tight coupling of identiﬁcation and action

results in mutual regulation of activity by B and T cells. When detection occurs, B cells

trigger T cell response, and T cells increase the action of B cells to accelerate detection as

necessary.

A. Detection mechanism

Detection starts with pattern matching between a detection template and entities in the

environment that might be characterized as adversaries. One type of cell, B cells, and one

type of molecule, antibodies, are the biological agents primarily responsible for detection of

threats.

The primary template in the adaptive immune system is the antibody. The antibody is a

molecule that binds to anything whose shape matches (complements) the antibody binding

site. Antibodies can be found in two primary forms. First, as part of a cell where it is

17

attached on the surface membrane of a cell to the cell signaling system so that a match

between the antibody and something in the environment triggers a cell response. Second,

antibodies can be released into the blood and when ﬂoating around attach themselves to

matching entities.

The key to the use of the antibody as a pattern matching template is the possibility of

generating many diﬀerent shapes of the molecule binding site. This ability arises because

the antibody is formed of several parts, the parts can be combined together in ﬂexible ways,

and the parts themselves can be varied. An antibody is comprised of four peptide chains

arranged to form a Y-shape. Each of the Y-shape’s two “arms” has a variable region.[43]

The matching between an antibody through binding to another molecule (called an anti-

gen) occurs at the molecular level: the shape of an antibody is complementary to that of

the antigen to which it binds. More precisely, it will bind to a part of the antigen called the
epitope, typically about 600 ˚A2 in area.[44]

Antibodies are generated internally by B cells. The mechanisms for their manufacture are

through the read-out of genetic templates for each of the components and their combination

into a single molecule. B cells also are designed to carry the antibodies they generate on

surface membrane receptors as a detection mode. When the antibody binds to something

in the environment the B cell can change its behavior accordingly.

A B cell identiﬁes a threat when the antibodies present on its surface bind to a speciﬁc

foreign antigen.[45] B cells that have identiﬁed an adversary by binding to it perform a

series of actions to improve future detection of similar adversaries and initiate response.

The actions they take to initiate response will be discussed in the next section.

B. Detection templates

B cells determine which templates to use for detection of invaders through a process which

requires multiple steps, each of which is central to the functioning of the immune system.

The ﬁrst step is that multiple templates can be generated by cellular mechanisms. By

recombining genetic elements from a “toolbox” of short sequences, a large volume in the

shape space of all possible antigens can be covered.

The second is the process of generating the set of templates that are found in the body

as B cells are formed, mostly in bone marrow. B cells are produced from a type of stem cell.

18

They progress through several developmental stages marked by changes in the genetic se-

quences which deﬁne the active sites of their antibody molecules. This variation during their

development gives rise to a remarkable diversity of templates associated with distinct B cells.

This large array of prototype templates don’t exhaustively cover the set of possibilities, but

are widely dispersed throughout the set of possibilities.

The third is eliminating templates that correspond to self molecules. Mounting an im-

mune response to the body’s own molecules and cells is extremely undesirable. The body

avoids this (not always perfectly) by inactivating lymphocytes which happen to be self-

reactive after they are generated. During the last stages of their maturation, B cells are

presented with self molecules. B cells which react to these molecules are triggered into

programmed cell death (apoptosis) or modifying their receptors.

[43] This process occurs

in part after developing B cells move to the spleen, where they complete their maturation

process.

The fourth is enhancing the presence of B cells whose antibodies have responded in the

past to antigens. This serves as a form of memory. Cells that have not been exposed

to antigen develop into diﬀerent forms once they have encountered their target antigen.

Some become eﬀector cells, which go on to play an active role in immune response; others

become memory cells, which do not immediately participate in anti-pathogen defense but are

sensitized to an antigen so that a second encounter will stimulate them to become eﬀector

cells. Over the short term their stimulation by antigens that are present in the current

attack contributes to the strength of the response. Memory cells are much longer-lived than

eﬀector cells, persisting sometimes until the death of the animal instead of dying within

days, so they can facilitate rapid immune responses to threats which have been encountered

before.

The ﬁfth is the enhancement of templates matching to current invaders by the process of

evolution, discussed in the next section.

The sixth is the communication between B cells that enables multiple distinct antibodies

to be formed to the same adversary. This is discussed below in the section on B-cell to B-cell

communications.

The seventh is the use of indicators of cellular damage that may reduce the threshold for

detection or trigger it. [50]

19

C. Evolution of detection

When a body is attacked by a reproducing agent, such as a virus or a bacterium, the

rate of detection of that invader is critical to the success of the response. Detection of

even individual ones is necessary before they can reproduce, requiring remarkably fast and

pervasive detection. The detection can be enhanced if the detection template is improved

to be a better match to the invader. This is accomplished by a process of progressive

improvement through selecting improved versions, i.e. evolution.

The evolutionary process occurs primarily in speciﬁc organs of the body called lymph

nodes.

[51] When B cells detect an invader with their antibodies, they take the piece of

the invader that binds to the antibody. They travel to a lymph node and place the antigen

in the wall of the lymph node. B cells reproduce very rapidly in a lymph node. In doing

so they vary by high rates of mutation their own DNA which codes for the antibody they

produce. They use their antibody to test its binding to the antigens in the wall of the lymph

node. The less successful ones rapidly die by programmed cell death. The ones that are

most successful, i.e. the best detectors, are sent out into the blood stream to engage with

the adversary.

As B cells bring pieces of the invaders into the lymph nodes, and the process of selecting

improved binders continues, the B cells released back into the blood stream are continually

improved in their ability to detect the invader. This leads to a dramatic change in the

sensitivity of the immune system to that invader, enabling the system to completely eliminate

the invader.

D. B-cell to B-cell communication: Improving detection

Once an adversary has been detected, identifying multiple ways to detect it both increases

the ability of detection and reduces the possibility of an adversary acting to avoid detection

by modifying their structure and behavior.

B cells that have identiﬁed an invader by binding to it, use this detection to enhance

the ability of other cells to identify the invader. The method for doing this is to make less

speciﬁc parts of the invader to which other B cells may be able to bind. The B cell breaks

parts of the invader into smaller components and displays these components on the B cell

20

surface. Other B cells then bind to these molecules triggering their own response systems.

This creates additional methods for invader detection in addition to the original one detected

by the ﬁrst B cell.

Since adversaries are not individual molecules or cells, but rather are replicating viruses

and bacteria, the immune system utilizes massive parallelism: many types of pattern detec-

tion templates (antibodies) can be tested simultaneously across the system. This enables

using multiple methods to detect the same type of adversary.

The communication by B cells to other B cells in this way is a key form of cooperation

between cells of the adaptive immune system. The network of interactions also includes

communication from B cells to T cells, and reciprocally from T cells to B cells.

E. B-cell to T-cell communication and intelligence

Cell to cell communication enables B cells to communicate the discovery of antibodies to

the cells responsible for action — T cells. Cell to cell communication is also important for

information gathering by T cells from non-immune cells — the analog of human intelligence.

T cells use a particular “secure” communication channel to receive messages from B cells

and other cells of the body. The security of the communication is provided by MHC

molecules. These are a diverse set of molecules that are highly speciﬁc to each individ-

ual. The speciﬁc nature of these molecules is maintained by high genetic variability of the

MHC molecules over evolutionary time and within the human population at any one time.

Secure communications are important to prevent invaders from “spooﬁng” messages to the

T cells.

When a B cell communicates to T cells, the “information,” is in the form of a molecular

fragment on the surface of the B cell bound to a MHC molecule. T cells have the ability to

bind to and recognize the MHC molecule and the molecular fragment that is bound to it.

As described before, a B cells whose antibodies bind to something in the environment

(the antigen) takes the antigen/antibody complex and breaks it into small units, which are

returned to the surface. At the surface the fragments are combined with a MHC molecule.

The surface display of the MHC with the parts of the antigen/antibody complex are then

detected by T cells in the vicinity triggering T cell action.

Similarly, any cell of the body may display MHC molecules with fragments of molecules

21

that are found inside the cell. This enables T cells to check for normalcy or cell infection

(e.g. by viruses) from the surface display on a cell.

F. Action agents: T cells and phagocytes

The primary agents responsible for action against threats in the immune system are

T cells. T cells both secrete molecular messengers which can kill other cells or can increase

the growth rate of other cells.

T cells can secrete cytotoxins which can kill other cells. T cells target foreign cells or self

cells that have been infected by foreign agents such as viruses. T cell action is triggered by

their binding to complexes of antibody and MHC molecule, i.e. they are triggered to action

by B cell signaling.

T cells also are responsible for signaling B cells into a more active state. This active

state results in two eﬀects. The ﬁrst is rapid growth and proliferation. The second is the

manufacturing of more antibodies and their release into the blood and other intercellular

ﬂuids so that they bind to antigens throughout the system and not just when a B cell

encounters them. This is a process that makes the detection itself a form of action. The

binding of the antibodies can disable the pathogens directly or mark them for destruction.

The former is accomplished by interfering with the surface molecules which pathogens use

to infect cells or by binding to the toxins produced by bacteria.

The two diﬀerent functions of T cells are divided between killer T cells and helper T cells.

The dynamics of killer and helper T-cell response is regulated in part by their responsiveness

to distinct MHC molecules.

Finally, a method is necessary to clean up both the dead cells and molecules, and even

live but marked cells, from the system. This is accomplished by phagocytes. Phagocytes,

are cells that can engulf and use digestive juices to, in eﬀect, eat other cells and molecules.

Their action is triggered by the presence of the antibodies bound to molecules and cells after

their release by B cells. [43]

22

G. Post response: Reducing the cohort and memory

The rapid growth of the number of B cells, antigens and T cells in response to an adversary

also requires a mechanism to reduce that number when the response is successful. As the

number of antigens declines, the short lifespan of the B cells and the absence of triggers to

produce additional ones leads to their decline. Additional triggers to accelerate this process

may also take place but must be carefully designed to avoid exploitation.

The immune system is costly, in that providing an immunological defense against foreign

pathogens requires resources — such as energy and nutrients — which are also needed for

muscular and neural activities, reproduction, growth and other biological processes.[40]

Still, once a speciﬁc threat has been identiﬁed, it is more likely to reappear. This justiﬁes

retention of identiﬁcation templates, in antigen and B cell form, for future use. This retention

accelerates the response when the same threat reappears.

Some B cells preserve the memory of prior responses by continuing to survive for extended

periods of time after a response. Since some death is unavoidable, they also replicate without

mutation to preserve their antibodies in their oﬀspring. These “Memory cells” maintain

the capacity to generate their specialized responses, so that a later infection by the same

pathogen can be countered quickly.

Organisms without an adaptive immune system lack such immunological memory,

whereby a pathogen can be “remembered” by its signature antigens.

H. Security failures

The immune system, like other systems, has modes of failure that demonstrate how its

processes work and fail to work in addressing key challenges.

The ﬁrst type of failure is when an invading organism cannot be overcome by the immune

system. Bacteria are signiﬁcant challenges to the immune system, and before antibiotics

were available many people died due to failure of the immune system to respond suﬃciently

eﬀectively to bacterial diseases. Such failures reﬂect the tight competitive balance between

bacterial attackers and immune system response. When the immune system is weakened

due to lack of nutrition, compound diseases or particularly eﬀective pathogenic attackers

the immune system response may not be suﬃcient to prevent growth and replication of the

23

bacteria.

The second type of failure is auto-immune disease. This is a failure to distinguish self

from non-self which causes the immune system to attack self cells. This is most common

for the case of some special types of cells, such as insulin-producing cells. It is believed that

the small number of such cells leads to their vulnerability as the immune system may not

suﬃciently be exposed to these cells and therefore is more likely to identify them as “other”

and attack them, thereby giving rise to some types of diabetes.[54]

The signiﬁcance of both of these failure modes for other forms of security is that even

with the best system possible, success is not guaranteed.

24

[1] Chief of Naval Operations Strategic Study Group XVI Final Report to the Chief of Naval

Operations, Newport R.I. (1997).

[2] Naval Warfare Innovation Concept Team Reports, Chief of Naval Operations Strategic Study

Group XVII Final Report to the Chief of Naval Operations, Newport R.I. (1998).

[3] Sea Strike: Attacking Land Targets from the Sea, Chief of Naval Operations Strategic Study

Group XVIII Final Report to the Chief of Naval Operations, Newport R.I. (1999).

[4] Naval Power Forward, Chief of Naval Operations Strategic Study Group XIX Final Report to

the Chief of Naval Operations, Newport R.I., (2000).

[5] FORCEnet and the 21st Century Warrior, Chief of Naval Operations Strategic Study Group

XX Final Report to the Chief of Naval Operations, Newport R.I., (2001).

[6] Chief of Naval Operations Strategic Study Group XXI Final Report to the Chief of Naval

Operations, Newport R.I. (2002).

[7] Chief of Naval Operations Strategic Study Group XXII Final Report to the Chief of Naval

Operations, Newport R.I. (2003).

[8] Chief of Naval Operations Strategic Study Group XXIII Final Report to the Chief of Naval

Operations, Newport R.I. (2004).

[9] Chief of Naval Operations Strategic Study Group XXIV Final Report to the Chief of Naval

Operations, Newport R.I. (2005).

[10] Chief of Naval Operations Strategic Study Group XXIV Final Report to the Chief of Naval

Operations, Newport R.I. (2006).

[11] Network Centric Warfare: Developing and Leveraging Information Superiority, D. S. Alberts,

J. J. Garstka, F. P. Stein, (National Defense University Press, Washington, D. C. 1999)

[12] Y. Bar-Yam, Making Things Work: Solving Complex Problems in a Complex World, (NECSI

Knowledge Press, Cambridge, 2005)

[13] Y. Bar-Yam, Dynamics of Complex Systems, (Perseus Press, Reading,1997)

[14] Y. Bar-Yam, Complexity Rising: From Human Beings to Human Civilization, a Complexity

Proﬁle. NECSI Research Report YB-0009 (1998); also UNESCO Encyclopedia of Life Support

Systems (EOLSS, 2002). http://www.necsi.org/Civilization.html

[15] Y. Bar-Yam, General Features of Complex Systems, UNESCO Encyclopedia of Life Support

25

Systems (EOLSS, 2002).

[16] Y. Bar-Yam: Unifying Principles in Complex Systems, in Converging Technology (NBIC) for

Improving Human Performance M. C. Roco and W. S. Bainbridge, eds, (Kluwer Academic,

Dordrecht, 2001).

[17] Y. Bar-Yam, Multiscale Variety in Complex Systems, Complexity 9, 37-45 (2004).

[18] Y. Bar-Yam, A Mathematical Theory of Strong Emergence using Multiscale Variety, Com-

plexity 9, 15-24 (2004).

[19] Y. Bar-Yam, Multiscale Complexity / Entropy, Advances in Complex Systems 7, 47-63 (2004).

[20] R. Metzler and Y. Bar-Yam, Multiscale analysis of correlated Gaussians, Phys. Rev. E 71,

046114 (2005).

[21] S. Gheorghiu-Svirschevski and Y. Bar-Yam, Multiscale analysis of information correlations in

an inﬁnite-range, ferromagnetic Ising system, Phys. Rev. E 70, 066115 (2004).

[22] Y. Bar-Yam, Multiscale Representation Phase I, Final Report to Chief of Naval Operations

Strategic Studies Group (2001)

[23] Y. Bar-Yam, Enlightened Evolutionary Engineering / Implementation of Innovation in

FORCEnet, Report to Chief of Naval Operations Strategic Studies Group (May 1, 2002)

[24] Y. Bar-Yam, Complexity of Military Conﬂict: Multiscale Complex Systems Analysis of Littoral

Warfare, Report to Chief of Naval Operations Strategic Studies Group (April 21, 2002)

[25] Y. Bar-Yam, Multiscale Complex Systems Analysis and Evolutionary Engineering, Report to

Chief of Naval Operations Strategic Studies Group (November 13, 2003)

[26] C. Darwin, On the Origin of Species (John Murray, London, 1859).

[27] R. C. Lewontin. The units of selection. Ann Rev Ecol Syst 1, 1970, 1–18.

[28] R. Dawkins, The Selﬁsh Gene (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1976).

[29] M. Mitchell, An Introduction to Genetic Algorithms (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1996).

[30] The national strategy to secure cyberspace, President’s Critical Infrastructure Protection

Board, (2003) http://www.whitehouse.gov/pcipb/

[31] F. Cohen, Computer viruses. Computers and Security 6, 22–35 (1987)

[32] S. Forrest, C. Beauchamin. Computer immunology. Immunological Reviews 216, 176–97,

(2007).

[33] S. Forrest, A. S. Perelson, L. Allen, and R. Cherukuri, Self-nonself discrimination in a com-

puter. IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (1994) pp. 202–212.

26

[34] J. O. Kephart, G. B. Sorkin, M. Swimmer, and S. R. White Blueprint for a Computer Immune

System. Virus Bulletin International Conference (1997).

[35] A. Somayaji, S. Hofmeyr, S. Forrest. Principles of a computer immune system. New Security

Paradigms Workshop (1997).

[36] K. Edge et al. A retrovirus inspired algorithm for virus detection and optimization”, Pro-

ceedings of the 8th annual conference on Genetic and evolutionary computation (2006),

http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1143997.1144016.

[37] S. A. Hofmeyr, S. Forrest. Architecture for an artiﬁcial immune system. Evol Comput J 8

443–73, (2000).

[38] D. Dasgupta, F. Gonzales. An immunity-based technique to characterize intrusions in com-

puter networks. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 6, 281–91 (2002).

[39] J. Kim, P. Bentley. The human immune system and network intrusion detection. 7th European

Congress on Intelligent Techniques and Soft Computing (1999).

[40] R. Lochmiller., C. Deerenberg. Trade-oﬀs in evolutionary immunology: just what is the cost

of immunity? Oikos 88, 87–98 (2000).

[41] Z. Pancer, M. Cooper. The evolution of adaptive immunity. Annu Rev Immunol 24: 497–518,

(2006).

[42] C. A. Janeway, Jr. et al, Immunobiology., 6th ed., (Garland Science, 2005).

[43] B. Alberts et al. Molecular Biology of the Cell, 4th ed., (Taylor & Francis Group, 2002).

[44] A. S. Perelson, G. Weisbuch. Immunology for physicists. Reviews of Modern Physics 69, 1219–

67 (1997).

[45] T. Sproul, et al. A role for MHC class II antigen processing in B cell development. Int Rev

Immunol 19, 139–55 (2000).

[46] W. Holtmeier, D. Kabelitz. γδ T cells link innate and adaptive immune responses. Chem

Immunol Allergy 86, 151–83 (2005).

[47] M. Kehry, P. Hodgkin. B-cell activation by helper T-cell membranes. Crit Rev Immunol 14,

221–38 (1994).

[48] J. Harty, A. Tvinnereim, D. White. CD8+ T cell eﬀector mechanisms in resistance to infection.

Annu Rev Immunol 18, 275–308 (2000).

[49] S. Radoja, A. Frey, S. Vukmanovic. T-cell receptor signaling events triggering granule exocy-

tosis. Crit Rev Immunol 26, 265–90 (2006).

27

[50] P. Matzinger, The danger model: A renewed sense of self, Science 296, 301 (2002).

[51] D. M. Pierre, D. Goldman, Y. Bar-Yam, A. S. Perelson. Somatic evolution in the immune

system: The need for germinal centers for eﬃcient aﬃnity maturation. J. Theoret. Biol. 186

159–171 (1997).

[52] D. R. Forsdyke, The Origins of the Clonal Selection Theory of Immunity. FASEB. Journal 9

(1995): 164–66.

[53] K. O. Stanley, R. Miikkulainen. Competitive coevolution through evolutionary complexiﬁca-

tion. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 21 (2004): 63–100.

[54] P. Pozzilli, U. Di Mario. Autoimmune diabetes not requiring insulin at diagnosis (latent au-

toimmune diabetes of the adult): deﬁnition, characterization, and potential prevention. Dia-

betes Care 24, 1460–7 (2001).

[55] J. Li, et al. B lymphocytes from early vertebrates have potent phagocytic and microbicidal

abilities. Nature Immunology bf 7, 1116–24 (2006).

[56] Akismet Spam Zeitgeist. http://akismet.com/stats, accessed 22 February 2008.

[57] J. D. Farmer, N. H. Packard, A. S. Perelson. The immune system, adaptation, and machine

learning. Physica D 22 187–204 (1986).

[58] Spam Assassin, Apache http://wiki.apache.org/spamassassin/SpamAssassin

[59] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayesian_spam_filtering

[60] McAfee Virus Information. http://us.mcafee.com/virusInfo/, accessed 6 March 2008.

[61] Symantic Threat Explorer.

http://www.symantec.com/norton/security_response/

threatexplorer/index.jsp, accessed 6 March 2008.

[62] AVG Threat Info. http://free.grisoft.com/doc/6/us/frt/0, accessed 6 March 2008.

[63] Distributed Checksum Clearinghouse. http://www.rhyolite.com/anti-spam/dcc/, ac-

cessed 6 March 2008.

[64] Vipul’s Razor. http://razor.sourceforge.net/, accessed 6 March 2008.

[65] Internetworking Technology Handbook, CISCO

[66] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Protocol

[67] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DNSBL

[68] Regardless of

fronteirs, Global Internet liberty campaign, http://www.cdt.org/gilc/

report.html

[69] Spam, Federal Trade Commission http://www.ftc.gov/spam/

28

[70] FTC announces ﬁrst Can Spam Act cases, April 29, 2004 http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2004/

04/040429canspam.shtm

29

