Business and social evaluation of denial of service attacks in view 
of scaling economic counter-measures 

L-F Pau, Prof. Mobile business Copenhagen business school, and Rotterdam school of 
management lfp.inf@cbs.dk  

ABSTRACT: This paper gives an analytical method to determine the economic 
and  indirect  implications  of  denial  of  service  and  distributed  denial  of  service 
attacks. It is based on time preference dynamics applied to the monetary mass 
for  the  restoration  of  capabilities,  on  long  term  investments  to  rebuild 
capabilities,  and  of  the  usability  level  of  the  capabilities  after  an  attack.  A 
simple  illustrative  example  is  provided  for  a  denial  of  service  on  a  corporate 
data  centre.  The  needed  data  collection  methodologies  are  categorized  by 
classes of targets. The use of the method is explained in the context of legal or 
policy  driven  dissuasive,  retaliation  or  compensation/  restoration  actions.  A 
concrete  set  of  deployment  cases  in  the  communications  service  and  transport 
industries  is  discussed.  The  conclusion  includes  policy  recommendations  as 
well as information exchange requirements. 

INTRODUCTION 

This  work  in  progress  aims  at  addressing  two  strategic  aspects  of  cyber-warfare  mostly  via 
communications  networks  and  IT  applications:    a)  first  to  take  a  total  economic  and  social 
view  in  the  assessment  of  evaluating  damages  of  a  cyber-warfare  attacks  on  a  society  or 
business  target;  b)  scaling  a  trade,  economic,  or  legal  retaliation  or  dissuasion  for  decision 
makers.  It  is  assumed  that  the  target  of  the  attack  does  not  in  general  have  itself  any  or 
sufficient  defence  or  attack means,  so  that  a  corporate  or  national  level  may  decide ex-ante 
(dissuasion)  or  ex-post  (retaliation,  compensation)  to  scale  a  business  defence  affecting  the 
economic sphere of the attacker. Such an approach is also relevant sometimes when attacker 
cannot  be  identified  and  localized  precisely,  so  that  the  economic  sphere  of  the  attacker  is 
restricted to business networks to which the attacker belongs. 

Traditionally the damage assessment has been considered “binary” and limited in time, in that 
the target was considered to be rendered totally dysfunctional until full restoration only of its 
information and communication capabilities. Lessons learnt tell us that other organizational, 
physical,  human  and  social  capabilities  are  to  be  counted  as  representing  often  larger 
collateral damage of the attacks;  their restoration eventually takes quite some time, especially 
if the surrounding society does not have enough civil defence  means and skills in place. Vice-
versa, sometimes, the replacements made to infrastructure damaged by the attack will be less 
obsolete leading to better future robustness. To address this issue, the approach is to capitalize 
on  the ability  of cost-benefit analysis  to  bundle  into  the  internal rate  of  return  both tangible 
and  some  intangible  effects  .The  internal  rate  of  return  expresses  the  time  preference  on 
tangible and intangible assets ,old and new, which gives a break even net present value over 
the long term. It is then proposed to treat short term dynamics of this internal rate of return , 
when  exposed  to  a  Brownian  shock  linked  to  an  attack  affecting  the  command  and  control 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
node for the society or business target which have their normal long term equilibrium return 
rates. 

Assuming the dynamic time preference resulting from a cyber-attack, it becomes possible to 
estimate    all  of  the  following  :a)  the  incremental  monetary  mass  needed  short  term  for 
restoration  of  equilibrium  business  and  social  capabilities;  b)  long  term  investment  over  a 
given pay-back horizon needed over time to restore and improve capabilities to get back to the 
equilibrium rate; c) the value of the assets degraded by the cyber-attack as short term and long 
term restoration measures impact the target. 

Apart from relevance in a national or corporate budgeting process, such a three-dimensional 
scaling  of  compensation,  retaliation  or  dissuasion  gives  decision  makers  a  way  to 
communicate  efficiently  around  them  and  to  implement  such  counter  measures  against  the 
attacker’s  economic  sphere  while  referring  eventually  to  a  game  theoretical  equilibrium 
required by legal/treaty provisions. 

As  a  conclusion,  the  proposed  methodology  empowers  decision  makers  to  scale  eventual 
economic  counter-measures  or  threats  against  attackers,  the  efficiency  of  which  cannot  be 
guaranteed  as  economic-social  effects  may  not  always  impact  attackers  but  surely  their 
surroundings,  and  as  the  resolution  of  decision  makers  may  also  vary.  It  will  be  up  to  the 
reader  to  assess  relevance  in  her/his  own  context,  while  this  project  has  assessed  some 
concrete  cases.  This  project  has  also  been  motivated  by  specific  concerns  and  abilities  of 
wireless communications operators. 

1. SURVEY 

The cyber attacks considered in this paper (denial of service DOS , and distributed denial of 
service  DDOS)  are  those  damaging  information,  capabilities,  and  sometimes  network  and 
infrastructure elements owned or operated by a target, with resulting damages not only to the 
target  but  also  to  third  parties  dependent  on  this  information,  or  those  networks  and 
infrastructure  [1,  14,  16].  Damage  assessment  is  considered  difficult,  as  the  intrusions  and 
attacks  cannot  always  be  detected  short  term  [2,  15,  17].  Nevertheless,  large  economic  and 
social  impact  is  felt,  reaching  from  a  unit  in  an  organization  to  whole  sectors;  have  been 
carried  out as  part  of earlier  work:  descriptive  assessments  of the  impact from  surveys  with 
input-output analysis of effect from outages and propagation models (e.g. [3, 7]), evaluations 
of  incentives  and  investments  to  protect  the  information  infrastructure  (e.g.  [4,  6,  8]),  and 
evaluations of cyber-insurance premiums in relation to security procedures [5, 20]. Very few 
papers  deal  with  models  for  damage  assessment  ,  which  would  allow  a  company  to 
qualitatively  and  quantitatively  estimate  possible  financial  losses  due  to  partial  or  complete 
interruption  of  connectivity  ;  in  [9]  a  systems  engineering  approach  is  taken,  while  in  the 
present one an economic and business approach is taken and  a simple numerical example is 
given in Section 4.  

Also we will address in Section 5 the use of damage assessment estimates on legal grounds 
for  retaliation  or  compensation  [18,  19].  A  distributed  Denial  of  Service  attack  aims  to 
deprive  legitimate  users  of  a  resource  or  service  provided  by  a  system,  by  overloading  the 
system  with  a  flood  of  data  packets,  thus  preventing  it  from  processing  legitimate  requests. 
Therefore it is necessary as in [10] to take into account the doctrines governing the allocation 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of liability among key players in a distributed denial of service attack. Such doctrines are well 
established and based on common law tort principles and policy considerations.  

Regarding  related  types  of  attack,  such  as  malware,  viruses,  identity  theft,  exploiting 
vulnerabilities in control software / management functions/ protocols (such as DNS and BGP 
errors, lack of authentification of users, services or flows, payment solutions vulnerabilities), 
some  studies  like  those  of  Ferris  Research  and  Gartner  Research  have  shown  the  huge 
business  impact  thereof  as  well  as  the  very  high  handling  plus  restoration  costs.  But  such 
estimates are at best interview based, and lack an analytical framework.  

2. THEORETICAL BASIS 

Comparison with economic theory  

One  way of  looking  at  the  economic consequences  of  a  denial-of-service  is  to consider  that 
the target has a diversity of assets included in a portfolio , each with varying life-cycles, and 
that  any  attack  affects  the  overall  value  and  sustainability  of  the  portfolio.  Whereas  in 
economics  and  finance  the  typical  research  question  is  one  of  asset  allocation  in  view  of 
returning some performance goals [13], the cyber-warfare economics question is one of asset 
preservation over time. Another difference with economics and finance is that in these fields’ 
risks  and  returns  are  usually  mutualised  across  populations  of  owners  or  users  via  legal 
contracts,  in cyber-warfare  economics  the  target  normally  stands  alone at the  time  of attack 
with all risks and must have made all required preventive investments. The only subfield of 
economics where some common features can be identified, is the area of pension economics 
where the retired person wants to maintain over time a purchasing power level, although here 
again assets are a mix of own assets and mutualised assets. 

Regarding the definition of capabilities exposed to an attack, they are defined at any time as 
the  net  difference  between  a  normal  time-dependent  operational  capability  profile  of  the 
attacked  entity,  and  the  complete  or  partial  combined  effect  of  the  attack  and  of  restoration 
measures  on  normal  capabilities  due  to  the  nature  of  the  attack  and  restoration  processes. 
Consequently, dynamics play an important role, and the proposed methodology encompasses 
situations  with  a  net  reduction  in  capabilities.  If  the  attack  on  one  target  involves  reduced 
capabilities of other asset owners (like in the case of a “netbot”, or the halving of transmission 
rate capability by the TCP protocol in case of a transmission error / congestion) one can either 
take a systemic view or the view of the target alone.  

Regarding the description of the stochastics of attack processes, only attack specific process 
specifications  with  related  methods  would  allow  to  model  them  closely,  but  macro-level 
approximations by known or tailored distributions already provide a good basis. 

Regarding  the  restoration  process,  it  is  also  to  have  its  specific  dynamics.  However, 
restoration  is  supposed  to  be  possible, at a  cost, but  not  impossible,  thus implying  that  data 
protection, integrity and security must be in place. In the case of data loss prevention (DLP) , 
the  Ponemon  Institute  has  estimated  from  commercial  cases  the  cost  of  data  loss  to  100  k 
Euro-  5000  k  Euro  of  which  36  %  due  to  commercial  losses  and  lost  customers,  and  36  % 
from  loss  of  portable  data  storage.  Although  VOIP  content  is  vulnerable,  repeated  calls 
remain possible in general. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposed methodology: time preference dynamics  

The proposed methodology is to assume that the target applies different time preferences to 
the  assets  in  its  portfolio,  where  the  time  preference  profiles  express  the  urgency  at  which 
restoration of capabilities must be carried out in view of a time distributed attack (including a 
shock) degrading suddenly specific assets in the portfolio. In economics, time preference (or 
"discounting") pertains to how large a premium a user will place on usage nearer in time over 
more remote usage. 

Taking  one  class  of  assets,  assume  that  the    time  preference  rate  r(t)  fluctuates  around  an 
equilibrium  level  r(eq)  while  subject  to  a  Brownian  point  process  W(t)  .The  short  term 
dynamics are modelled by [12]: 

dr(t) = a (r(eq)-r(t))dt – V.dW(t)                                                                                 (1) 

r(t) is the short term time spot preference at time t for a given asset,  0<r(t)<1 
a is the intensity of the feedback force towards the equilibrium time preference r(eq) 
r(eq) is the equilibrium time preference for that given asset 

where : 
- 
- 
- 
-  V is the volatility of the time preference fluctuations 
-  W(t) is the stochastic Brownian point process driving the attack diffusion process 

Monetary mass requirements for restoration of capabilities  

The  incremental  monetary  mass  dM  (t)  needed  short  term  for  restoration  of  equilibrium 
capabilities  of  the  asset  can  then  be  determined.  Assuming  for  simplification  purposes  the 
short  term  time  preference  rate  r  (t)  to  drive  short  term  interest  rate  dynamics  by  near  a 
constant rM: 

dM(t) = M(t-dt). (r(t)+rM).dt     M(0)=M0 

where : 

-  M(t) is the monetary mass used short term to invest in rebuilding the asset capability 
to its levels just before t=0 where monetary mass represented by the asset value was 
M0 
rM is the fixed increment to the short term time preference producing the short term 
interest rate payable to finance the rebuild of the capabilities 

- 

Long term investments to rebuild capabilities  

The  long  term  investment  K  (t)  over  a  given  horizon  TK  needed  long  term  to  restore  and 
improve the assets capabilities to get back to the equilibrium time preference rate r (eq) can be 
expressed as follows: 

dK(t) = K(t) [r(t).dt + V.BetaK.( dW(t)+Lambda.dt) ]  
BetaK = (1-exp(-a.TK))/a 

where :  

-  K(t)  is  the  long  term  bond-like  investment  needed  over  the  horizon  TK  to  restore 

asset’s capabilities 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-  K(0) is the initial annuity value of the assets capability value over the horizon TK 
-  TK is the time horizon to rebuild and possibly improve on the asset’s capabilities; this 

parameter is essential in all practical cases 

-  Lambda is the premium by unit risk needed by the market to support the randomness 

over the real time preference  

-  BetaK s a constant 

Usability of the capabilities over time after an attack 

The value of the assets degraded by the cyber-attack as short term and long term restoration 
measures impact the target, is linked to a specific usability risk characterization WA (t) of the 
asset’s capabilities. The change in the degree of usability A (t) of this asset, bounded between 
0 and 1 is: 

dA(t) = A(t). [r(t).dt +V (dW(t)+Lambda.dt) +VA (dWA(t)+LambdA.dt)] 

where: 
- 

- 

- 

the first term in the parenthesis is the effect of short term restoration via the monetary 
mass investment  
the  second  term  in  the  parenthesis  is  the  contribution  from  long  term  fixed  horizon 
asset capability rebuild  
the third term is the reduction in recovery speed linked to the  volatility and risk  in the 
asset’s specific capabilities as they impact its degree of use 
-  A(t) is the effective degree of usability of the asset , A(eq)=1  
-  VA is the volatility of the asset’s capabilities usability risk  
-  WA(t)  is  the  Brownian  motion  of  the  usability  risk  characterization  of  the  asset’s 

capabilities 

-  LambdA  is  the  premium  by  time  unit  in  unit  usability  risk  needed  by  asset  users  to 

support the randomness over the asset’s usability risk.  

The unique property of this model is that all time preference variations are subject to the short 
term  time  preference  and  that  the  risk  exposure,  which  is  here  the  investment  needed  to 
restore the asset’s capabilities, is by one bond-like financing the duration of which determines 
the  size.  The  usability  of  the  asset  is  a  Brownian  movement  correlated  with  the  time 
preference rates over time. Another characteristic of this model is that it is decoupled from the 
initial asset valuation , which can be tailored to specific cases and rely on data pre-existing to  
an attack (see Sections 4 and 5). 

3. A SIMPLE NUMERICAL EXAMPLE  

Scope  

This very simple example does not allow to show and exploit all the dynamic effects taking 
place,  but  to  show  how  a  concrete  situation  can  lead  to  estimations  of  short  term  and  long 
term financing needs tied to the time preference expressed. It also shows that, even if financial 
means  are  made  available  to  rebuild  capabilities,  the  actual  restoration  time  of  usable 
capabilities is very much subject to the stochastic distribution properties and to the quality of 
actual  means for  capabilities  restoration.  It  also  leads  in  Section  4  to  further  data collection 
methodology considerations. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Description 

The  numerical  example  pertains  to  a  data  centre  in  a  company,  with  a  scrap  value  of  10 
MEuros, running services to support company operations. The equilibrium state is one where 
all services operate 100 % to support all divisions and operations with a company turnover of 
500 MEuros/year; furthermore client capabilities are dependent on the company’s operations 
being  supplied  to  them for  another  500  MEuros  /year  (treated  as contingent  liabilities).  The 
equilibrium  time  preference  r  (eq)  is  equivalent  to  the  company’s  net  operational  profit 
margin from operations r (eq) = 50 %/year, approximated as 0.5/ (365x24) = 5.7E-05 /hour. 
The short term monetary interest rates are only about 10 %/year, so that rM= -4.76E-05/hour. 
A full instantaneous attack W (0) =1 on the data centre at time t=0 reduces services usability 
to  A  (0)  =0  with  a  minimum  nominal  restoration  time  of  TK=  3  months  for  all  resulting 
services  and  operations  to  internal  divisions  and  third  parties  after  such  a  disruption.  The 
attack lasts dt= 1 hour , taken also as time increment, creating a shift in the time preference  to 
a very high  spot time preference value ; the maximum which can be chosen is r(1 hour)=1, 
meaning the target wants perceptually all measures to be taken for immediate recovery of the 
data  centre  .  With  a  maximum  volatility  in  time  preference  fluctuations  of  V=1  /hour,  the 
needed  reactivity  becomes:  a  ~  5.8E-05.    Post  attack,  the  short  term  time  preference  grows 
tremendously leading to a strong rise in perceived short term monetary flows for restoration 
dM(1) of  slightly under 10 MEuros/hour ; this expresses the perception that the data centre 
must be restored at once . The total capability value of the assets over TK=3 months is 250 
MEuros  with  an  hourly  annuity  of  115 740  Euros.  With  a  risk  premium  Lambda=  0.2,  the 
initial  long  term  investments  dK  (1)  needed  to  recoup  lost  supplies  to  customers,  and  to 
rebuild the capability, can be estimated at about 235 M Euros.  For the usability risk WA (t) a 
simplified linear decreasing profile can be taken over the restoration period TK, that is WA (t) 
=1-(t/TK); we also assume LambdA=0. However,  the quality and efficiency of the restoration 
are highly volatile especially in downstream supply chains from the company ;  this leads to 
the    usability  of  the  target’s  capabilities  only  increasing  again  (dA(t)/dt  >0)  ,  despite a high 
time  preference,   if  the volatility  VA  is  less than  1,2*TK  .   Half  of  the overall capability  is 
only  restored  at  time  0,5/  (1,2-VA/TK)  which  can  be  longer  than  TK=  3  months  for  some 
values of VA. 

4. APPLICATION AREAS AND DATA COLLECTION METHODOLOGIES  

This  paper  cannot  give  cases  or  fictive  examples  for  all  the  application  areas  for  which 
economic  and  social  impact  of  denial  of  service  need  to  be  quantified.  This  Section  only 
serves to survey such areas by categories and to give when known established approaches to 
assess relevant data to be fed into the calculations. 

1.  Public services 

The  denial  of  service  of  public  services  on  a  national  basis  or  on  an  agency  basis 
(administrative  services,  social  services,  water,  air  traffic,  waste  management,  financial 
payments), have wide ranging consequences where the indirect impact encompasses prejudice 
caused to citizens (in their ability to act, to get benefits or to contribute tax etc) measured in 
time  lost,  benefits  /  contributions  lost,  and  of  qualitative  damage  (health,  safety, 
administrative registrations etc). In this field, traditional cost-benefit analysis of tangible and 
intangible services applies. As to the setting of the time preference rates, they should be high 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for  those  public  services  where  public  authorities  by  law  have  obligations  of  service 
continuity,  while  they  would  be  less  and  derived  from  minimal  service  obligations  in  other 
cases. 

2.  Company products and services 

In  this  case,  the applicable  methodology  to  the data  collection is  the  one  used  for corporate 
liability  insurance  assessment.  This  includes  loss  of  capabilities  (physical,  raw  material and 
service related) with their replacement, loss of revenue due to non delivery in time, physical 
loss  of  output  such  as  manufacturing  with    associated  logistic  and  CRM  overheads  , 
indemnification  of  human  resources  if  work  or  life  is  jeopardized,  and  indirect  loss  and 
damage  to  clients.  As  to  the  setting  of  time  preference  rates,  in-company  rates  should 
correspond to the average return on assets or operational margin (whichever is largest) within 
the  sector  in  which  the  company  was  denied  services,  while  the  same  would  apply  for  the 
clients in their respective sectors. 

3.  Loss of shared infrastructure 

There  is  no  established  methodology  to  cover  loss  of  shared  infrastructure,  “critical”  or  not 
(such  as  communication  or  transportation  networks,  denial  of  service  of  a  satellite  by 
jamming,  etc).  However  the  normal  approach  would  be  to  make  the  inventory  of  the  lost 
capabilities  (physical  and  service  related)  by  infrastructure  operator,  of  lost  revenues  by 
infrastructure  operator  including  claims  payable  to  customers  under  contract  terms,  of 
verifiable loss and damage by individual and institutional users, and moreover of social costs 
to the same. As to the setting of time preference rates, this is a difficult issue as infrastructure 
suppliers quite often do not have contractual quality of service obligations. On the contrary, 
suppliers of “critical” infrastructure whose control systems may have been compromised, bear 
a responsibility beyond just service provisioning, and there recovery processes may be longer. 
Judgment  would  have  to  be  applied  to  the  time  preference  of  the  infrastructure  operator 
(normally  very  high  but  not  coupled  to  financial  rates  of  returns)  and  to  the  users  taking 
diversity into account. For users the principle of setting the time preference could be based on 
the tolerable postponement of the access and use of the shared infrastructure to next normal 
period (such as shift by e.g. one day, or to next available equivalent infrastructure provider). 

4.  Technology providers 

Some  well  known  technology  providers  in  such  areas  as  communications,  software,  control 
systems,  transport  technologies,  biomedical  devices,  etc..,  may  be  liable  to  claims  by  their 
customers  for  vulnerabilities  in  their  products,  although  third  parties  are  those  exploiting 
them.  While  the  “customer  cum  users”  would  know  the  attack  profiles,  while  not  always 
knowing the technical roots for the vulnerabilities, technology providers may benefit from the 
proposed framework for risk assessment if they share attack profiles with their customers. The 
risk  assessment  method  in  turn  allows  them  to  quantify  reasonable  levels  of  investments  in 
improving the technologies and their distribution mechanisms.  

5. DENIAL OF SERVICE IMPACT ANALYSIS USAGE PROCESS 

The  concept  is  to  use  the  damage  assessment  methodology  of  Section  2  ,  with  its  different 
time  scales,  to  specific  data  collected  by  established  methodologies  moderated  by  neutral 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
judgement  (like  best  practices  or  eventually  arbitration courts)  (see  Section  4)  ,  to  calculate 
estimates of the set of damages . Such assessments must be transparent and done by neutral 
parties. 
The assessed damages can then be used by executive authorities for a spectrum of actions: 

(cid:1)  Dissuasive  process:  preemptively  to  a  denial  of  service,  by  policy  makers  or 
companies,  to  announce  that  these  claims  would  be  raised  if  an  attack  occurs.  The 
policy makers or companies may not have evidence yet or from past cases to identify 
the  attackers,  but  may  communicate  to  make  such  a  categorization  of  attackers 
credible  and  visible  to  attackers  .Also,  subject  to  proper  later  judicial  tracing  and 
identification  of  the  attackers,  the  policy  makers  or  companies  would  communicate 
that they intend to recover the amounts of the claims by all legal means in case of an 
attack. As the average cost to attackers of a cyber-attack is usually small, dissuasion 
followed  by  retaliation  or  recovery  may  be  of  some  concern  to  attackers  or  their 
backers. 

(cid:1)  Retaliation  process:  if  the  attackers  are  traced  and  identified  by  technical  and/or 
judicial  means,  or  if  strong  assumptions  and  partial  evidence  exist  (e.g.  from  IP 
addresses,  software  code  structure,  software  forensics,  etc…),  legal  or  forceful 
retaliation would be done for the same size of claims against direct or indirect interests 
of the attackers. One obvious instance of this would be to seize quarantine or destroy 
the  physical  and  communications  assets  used  by  the  attackers,  or  assets  owned 
controlled  by  them.  This  may  happen  in  a  judicial  framework  (with  fines  and  penal 
measures) or an international treaty framework, but may be replaced by policy maker 
coercitive decisions including offensive means. 

(cid:1)  Compensation / Recovery process: if the attackers are traced and identified by judicial 
means,  and  can  be  put  on  trial,  this  process  would  use  the  damage  assessments  as 
normally done in a judicial court procedure. In this case however the data collection 
methodology  and  data  would  be  subject  to  a  contradictory  evaluation,  there  may  be 
issues  of  sovereignty  leading  to  inability  of  enforcement/  extradition, and  the  delays 
involved are normally quite long. 

(cid:1)  “Keep silent” process: There is of course a fourth process, which is to ignore attacks, 
keep  silent,  report  nothing,  and  not  to  sue,  often  for  “image»  reasons.  It  is 
unfortunately  very  common  that  banks,  communications  and  infrastructure  operators 
so far do not report attacks and even figure out other reasons vis-à-vis their users. 

It is conjectured that the main practical relevance of the proposed method is for dissuasive and 
retaliation processes, resting ultimately on the ability of the asset owner / target to carry out 
and update his own exposure valuations based on estimates related to user and client damages 
(tangible and intangible). 
This  same  conjecture  is  obviously  reinforced  by  the  consideration  that  the  tracing  and 
identification of the true attackers may not always be possible, or may take so much time, that 
the strategy to use a recovery process may not work while a dissuasive or retaliation process 
may have effects when used together.  
Likewise, if attackers are using innocent identifiable resources, a recovery process would take 
time establishing that they are not responsible, while giving time to the responsible attackers. 
It should not be forgotten that cyber-attacks against corporate assets often are initiated from 
inside the company or past employees, which too opens up for a combination of dissuasive, 
retaliation and partial recovery processes. 

 
 
 
Finally,  as  some  types  of  defensive  measures  (such  as  anti-virus)  have  fast  deployable  get-
around’s  known  to  attackers,  dissuasion  and  retaliation  processes  may  in  some  cases  be  the 
only way forward. 

6. APPLICATION CASES 

This research has found its way into a number of deployment cases summarized below 
spanning all categories identified in Section 4: 

•  Public services 

   Case: minimal public transport service under employee strikes (Western Europe) 
   Contribution: the proposed method allowed to determine the public damage- number of 
employees on strike curve, allowing for the union and the employer to settle on a minimum 
service level. 

•  Company products and services 

   Case: corporate liability insurance estimate for a Scandinavian CRM provider 
   Contribution: the customer relationship management (CRM) company’s services were 
outsourced by several operators in the communications and credit card fields. The contracts 
between these operators and the CRM service supplier stipulated damage claims should the 
CRM supplier not be operational. The method allowed the CRM provider to determine the 
liability insurance amount it had to get cover for vis-à-vis cyber attacks to compensate its 
customers. 

•  Loss of shared communications infrastructure 

    Case: attack on 3G operator BSC with partial recovery via other operator(s) 
    Contribution:  The wireless 2G and 3G base system controller manages the connectivity to 
and from radio base systems (RBS). Due to bad network management or practices, some BSC 
are not totally immune from certain types of attacks. When redundancy and restoration 
procedures have failed, radio coverage and connectivity may be lost unless back-up is 
activated from other operator’s BSC (when feasible). Such operators have to be compensated, 
as well as possibly some wireless service users under contractual terms, and total damage 
assessment with/without insurance may be necessary. 

Mobile networks not only provide great benefits to their users but they also introduce inherent 
security  issues.  With  respect  to  security,  the  emerging  risks  of  denial  of  service  (DOS  and 
DDOS)  attacks  will  evolve  into  a  critical  danger  as  the  availability  of  mobile  networks 
becomes  more  and  more  important  for  the  modern  information  society.  There  are  ways  to 
mitigate  the  attacks  by  adding  minimal  authentication  to  the  radio  channel  assignment 
protocol,  but  this  too  has  business  implications  and  requires  risk  assessment.  At  the  same 
time,  via  subscriber  management,  interoperable  management  and  signalling  /  control 
networks,  they  carry  the  potential  for  tracing  and  retaliation  measures,  besides  lawful 
interception in support of legal procedures. In particular is highlighted the retaliation process 
which  international  inter-carrier  settlements  allow  for,  as  such  agreements  reach  out 
worldwide.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Finally, it has been brought to the attention of the author, that other applications exist, e.g. in 
the case of water distribution protection, where attacks have wide reaching implications, and 
where physical-chemical forensic evidence may be collected. In this case the attack has both 
time-based as well as spatial distributions. 

CONCLUSION 

While  law  and  jurisprudence  regarding  denial  of  service  and  other  cyber-attacks  is  making 
slow  progress  in  both  national  and  international  arenas,  this  paper  presents  a  quantitative 
approach respecting attack and restoration dynamics likely to be used in dissuasion as well as 
in  retaliatory  processes,  in  the  hope  that  ultimately  attackers  will  feel  a  largely  missing 
retroaction. It may also allow institutions and companies to determine by self-analysis in the 
presence  of  a  given  threat  profile,  which  assets  to  protect  in  priority  on  economic,  business 
and social grounds. 

In the event international organizations like GATT, European Space Policy Institute, OECD 
or the European Parliament (“Declaration on the reinforcement of international security”, 25 
March  2003  and  report  to  the  Council  of  11  December  2008)  also  embark  on  putting  an 
economic and social measure to cyber-attacks, supplemented by constraining legal measures, 
instead stating of political / cultural or defence values only, this research may give elements 
of the analysis. 

Specific policy recommendations linked to the above research and the deployed cases, would 
be the following: 
-in international commercial contract law, allow for compensation and information exchange 
clauses  whereby  attackers  using  one  party’s  facilities  or  services  to  mount  an  attack  on  the 
other  party,  may  retaliate  against  the  attackers  on  the  basis  of  damage  assessment  and 
evidence  provided  by  the  other  party;  an  example  of  this  are  international  communications 
operators inter-operator settlement procedures; 
-enhance auditing procedures, to verify the basis for insurance or damage claims in the case of 
cyber-attacks; 
-mandate  reporting  and  information  exchange  about  attacks  to  designated  governmental 
bodies, for sharing of attack profiles and partial evidence (like envisaged by the EU). 

Just  as  technical  vulnerability  reduction  demands  collaborative  efforts  between  users, 
technology providers and operators, the business and social impact assessments also demand 
such  collaboration  and  information  exchange,  besides  internal  due  diligence.  The  issue  is 
which governments, players and sectors, like the communications industry, will take concrete 
steps in this direction. One reason why this is an issue is that “patches” and additional costly 
imperfect  technologies  are  too  often  preferred  to  demanding  and  longer  lasting    technical, 
legal, architectural and economic measures. It is in this context that humanities, economic and 
social disciplines can clarify the way towards peace in cyber conflicts [21]. 

What this research does not allow to do is to account for interdependencies between targets 
and  attackers,  or  proxies  to  the  attackers,  due  to  cross-ownership,  exclusive  agreements, 
shared infrastructure (buildings, communications, transport, and energy), geo-economics and 
political / cultural / social influence.  

REFERENCES 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
1. Lech J. Janczewski, Andrew M. Colarik (Editors) (2007), Cyber Warfare and Cyber Terrorism,  
Boca Raton:  Idea Group Inc (IGI), ISBN 1591409918, 9781591409915   
2. O. Sami Saydjari (2004), Cyber defence: art to science, Communications of the ACM,  
Vol 47, Issue 3 (March), 52-57 
3. Scott Dynes, Eva Andrijcic, M. Eric Johnson (2006), Costs to the U.S. Economy of Information 
Infrastructure Failures: Estimates from Field Studies and Economic Data, Proceedings of the Fifth 
Workshop on the Economics of Information Security, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
4. Lawrence D. Bodin, Lawrence A. Gordon , Martin P. Loeb (2005),  Evaluating information security 
investments using the analytic hierarchy process,  Communications of the ACM, Volume 48 ,  Issue 2  
(February) , 78 - 83  
5. Jay P. Kesan_ Rupterto P. Majuca, William J. Yurcik (2004), The Economic Case for Cyber 
insurance, University of Illinois College of Law and Economics Working Papers, Paper no 2, 
http://law.bepress.com/uiuclwps/papers/art2 
6. Huseyin Cavusoglu (2008), Economics of information security, in: L. Jean Camp and 
Stephen Lewis (Editors), Advances in Information Security, Vol.12, Springer, US, 978-1-4020-8089-0 
(Print) 978-1-4020-8090-6 (Online) 
7. Marco Benini & Sabrina Sicaria (2008), Risk assessment in practice: A real case study, 
Computer communications, Vol 31, no 15, 3691-3699 
8. Bruce H. Kobayashi (2005), An Economic Analysis of the Private and Social Costs of the Provision 
of Cyber security and other Public Security Goods, George Mason University School of Law, 
Working Paper Series, Paper no 26,  http://law.bepress.com/gmulwps/gmule/art26 
9. T. Dubendorfer, A. Wagner &   B. Plattner (2004), An economic damage model for large-scale 
Internet attacks, in Proceedings 13th IEEE International Workshops on Enabling Technologies: 
Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises (WET ICE) , 14-16 June,  223- 228, ISBN: 0-7695-2183-5 
10. Meiring de Villiers (2007), Distributed Denial of Service: Law, Technology & Policy, Sydney: 
University of New South Wales Faculty of Law Research Series, Paper no 3, 
http://law.bepress.com/unswwps/flrps/art3 
11. Valer Bocan & Vladimir Cretu (2005), Mitigating Denial of Service Threats in GSM Networks, 
The First International Conference on Availability in GSM networks, Department of Computer 
Science and Engineering, Politechnica University of Timisoara, http://www.dataman.ro  
12. O. Vasicek (1977), An equilibrium characterization of the term structure, Journal of financial 
economics, Vol 5, no 2, 177-188 
13. K.C. Butler, D.L. Domian (1991), Risk, diversification and investment horizon, Journal of portfolio 
management, Vol 17 ,Spring, 41-47 
14. D. Ventre (2007), La guerre de l’information, Paris : Lavoisier, ISBN: 978-2-7462-1883-3  
15. J. Kizza, F. Migga Kizza (2008), Securing the information infrastructure, Cyber Tech Publishing, 
ISBN: 978-1-59904-379-1 
16. T. Shimeall, P. Williams, C. Dunlevy (2001), Countering cyber-war, NATO Review, Vol 49, no 4, 
Winter, 16-28 
17. Jason Fritz (2008), How China will use cyber warfare to leapfrog in  military competitiveness , 
Culture Mandala, Vol. 8, No. 1, October, 28-80 
18. H. Axlerod & D. Jay (1999), Crime and punishment in cyberspace: Dealing with law enforcement 
and the courts, Paper presented at the SIGUCCS Conference, Denver Colorado 
19. M. Erbschloe (2001), Information warfare: How to survive cyber attacks, Berkeley, California: 
Osborne/McGraw Hill. 
20. Shari Lawrence Pfleeger, Daniela Golinelli, Robin Beckman, Sarah K. Cotton, Robert H. 
Anderson, Anil Bamezai, Christopher R. Corey, Megan Zander-Cotugno, John L. Adams, Ronald 
Euller, Paul Steinberg, Rachel Rue, Martin C. Libicki & Michael Webber (2008), Cyber security 
Economic Issues : Corporate Approaches and Challenges to Decision making, Rand Corp. Research 
brief RB-9365-1  
21. M. Godelier & H. Dawod (Editors) (2004), Guerre et paix, Special issue, Thema, Paris: CNRS, 
March,  www.cnrs.fr/presse  

 
 
 
