Harmonization among National Cyber Security and Cybercrime 

Response Organizations: New Challenges of Cybercrime

Yunsik Jake Jang1

Bo young Lim2

Abstract

  This presentation will discuss the need for national-level organizational strategies to effectively combat 

cyber security threats and cybercrime. In many countries, new agencies have been established and/or new 

roles have been allotted to existing agencies to cope with the needs for cyber security or fighting against 

cybercrime. The two pillars of organizational structure and functions (i.e., security vs. law enforcement) have 

given new challenges to us, especially in the context of traditional criminal justice system. To illustrate the 

challenges, a case study examining the responses to major security incidents followed by nationwide debates 

and remarkable organizational changes in Korea will be given. 

I.	  Introduction	  

  The world today has never been more connected in human history. Owing to the remarkable progress 

people made in information technology, which was marked by the advent of the Internet, it became possible 

to overcome the barriers of time and space in the cyberspace. Now it takes only a few seconds for people to 

communicate with each other from halfway around the world, and regional events can have global 

implications. In this context, Asia’s influence on world affairs in general is growing rapidly and will continue 

to grow in the next following decades. Asia boasts the largest population ‘offline’; it continues its dominance 

‘online’ as well, accounting for nearly 45% of all Internet users in the world3. Still this number is anticipated 

to grow further largely due to the increase of Internet users in China and India4.

  However, flip the coin; what you find is not a utopian ‘small world’, but a new space of  opportunities for 

the ‘bad guys,’ i.e., criminals. What we see is a flood of news reports and publications dealing with phishing, 

hacking incidents, DoS attacks and viruses targeting individuals, corporations and government sites, which 

are all united under the word most frequently used by the media, ‘cybercrime’. One of the most general 

assumptions on cybercrime is that as the number of Internet users increases, so will the number of 

1 Professor, Department of Police Science, Korea National Police University 

2 M.A., Korea National Police Agency, Ph.D student at Korea University (Department of Law)

3 Internet world stats, http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm (Last accessed: July 28, 2012)

4 Aguiar, M., Boutenko, V., Michael, D., Rastogi, V., Subramanian, A., & Zhou, Y. (2010). The Internet's New Billion: 
Digital Consumers in Brazil, Russia, India, China, and Indonesia. Retrieved from http://www.bcg.com/documents/
file58645.pdf

1

cybercrime cases. This is usually drawn from the theory that crime follows opportunity, which has become 

established wisdom in criminology. Grabosky and Smith (1998) explains this by referring to a notorious 

American bank robber who, when asked why he persisted in robbing banks, replied: “Because that’s where 

the money is.” Linking this flow of logic to the significance Asia possesses in terms of Internet users, one 

might grimly conclude that Asia will have to face a dark future in cyberspace, having the biggest number of 

cybercrime cases than anywhere in the world. 

  But is it so? For criminologists, this is not a simple problem. First of all, to confirm whether the number of 

cybercrime really increases as the number of Internet users grew, reliable empirical data about criminal 

trends should be provided. However, in order to accumulate such data, an agreement on a general definition 

of cybercrime and standard methods to measure cybercrime should be reached. Secondly, unlike ‘traditional’ 

crimes, cybercrime has many overlapping areas that tend to blur the existing boundaries between the public 

police and other governmental/private organizations. This is a reason why many organizations and functions 

other than the public police are involved in dealing with cybercrime issues. Due to this nature of cybercrime, 

information about cybercrime does not flow through a single channel and is distributed among many relevant 

agencies5. Solving these problems is essential both in analyzing cybercrime from the criminological point of 

view and also improving the national-level organizational strategies to effectively combat cyber security 

threats and cybercrime.

  This presentation aims to serve as a basis for solving this problem from a holistic view, focusing on the 

harmonization among relevant organizations and functions. In doing so, it will point out some practical 

problems and challenges that arise from the imbalance among different approaches to cybercrime by 

illustrating the case of South Korea. Finally, the presentation will conclude by giving some recommendations 

for national and international harmonization of organizational structure and its functions to improve global 

cooperation which is essential to protect the citizens from the borderless threats of cybercrime.

II.	  The	  Impact	  of	  Cybercrime	  on	  Criminology	  and	  Criminal	  Justice

i.	  Deﬁning	  ‘Cybercrime’	  

  Defining the concept of ‘cybercrime’ is a critical matter; yet it is a difficult one which has huge impacts on 

not only legal issues such as the scope of jurisdiction but also on practical research designed to assess the 

impact of cybercrime on the society in general. Since policymaking relies heavily on the reliability of the 

information provided on the issue, the definition of cybercrime serves as a basis of quantitative measurement  

and qualitative classification. However, despite numerous attempts to define ‘cybercrime’ and classify it into 

categories, the following statement, which is part of the conclusion of a 1995 United Nations report that 

attempted to define ‘computer crime,’ still holds true for the concept of cybercrime as well:

“There is no doubt among the authors and experts who have attempted to arrive at definitions of computer 

crime that the phenomenon exists. However, the definitions that have been produced tend to relate to the 

5 Wall, D. S. (2007). Cybercrime: The Transformation of Crime in the Information Age: Polity Press. p. 17. For more 
information on ‘policing’ the cyberspace and preventing cybercrime, see chapters 8 and 9 (pp. 157-206).

2

 
study for which they were written. [...] A global definition of computer crime has not been achieved; 

rather, functional definitions have been the norm. 6”

  The Council of Europe’s Convention of Cybercrime, which is to date the only international convention 

related to the issue that is legally binding, uses ‘cybercrime’ as an umbrella term to refer to an array of 

criminal activity including the following: offenses against computer data and systems, computer-related 

offenses, content offenses, and copyright offenses7. 

  Nevertheless, functional definitions are not flexible enough to embrace new types of cybercrime; given the 

significance and difficulty of defining cybercrime, it would be more reasonable to extend the discussion to 

consider the overall ‘digitalization’ of crime itself, rather than to confine the issue to looking for a separate 

way to cope with a new type of crime. According to Wall (2007), the term ‘cybercrime’ itself  is fairly 

meaningless since it was largely an invention of the media and thus has been used metaphorically and 

emotionally rather than scientifically or legally. Rather, he argues that “the term [cybercrime] has a greater 

meaning if we construct it in terms of the transformation of criminal or harmful behavior by networked 

technology, rather than simply the behavior itself.8”

  Although the term ‘cybercrime’ is indiscriminately used in the media, regardless of its type, it does not take 

long to realize that cybercrime is not a specific, single type of new crime. It is rather a set of various forms of 

crime that are related to the cyberspace one way or another that awaits comprehensive explanations and 

measures. Therefore, in devising a better strategy to effectively combat cybercrime, first it would be 

meaningful to explore how networked technology changed criminal behavior and the landscape of criminal 

justice in policing the cyberspace.

ii.	  Criminological	  Explanations	  and	  the	  Need	  for	  Reliable	  Measurement

  There have been many attempts made in the field of criminology to explain the transformation network 

technology brought to criminal behavior. In the United States, trends in violent and property crime shows 

that throughout the 1970s and 1980s the crime rate changed in proportion to the fluctuation of the youth 

population; as the volume of the youth population grew, so did the crime rate. However, starting from the 

mid 1990s, even though the youth population grew, the crime rate continued to fall9. 

6 United Nations Manual on the Prevention and Control of Computer-Related Crime. (1995) International Review of 
Criminal Policy: United Nations.

7 Jaishankar, K. (2008). Space Transition Theory of Cyber Crimes. In F. Schmalleger & M. Pittaro (Eds.), Crimes of the 
internet: Prentice Hall. p. 286

8 Wall (2007). p. 10

9 Schafer, J. A. Policing 2020: Exploring the Future of Crime, Communities, and Policing: Police Futurists 
International. p. 111. Retrieved from http://futuresworkinggroup.cos.ucf.edu/publications/Policing2020.pdf 

3

[Figure	  1]	  U.S.	  Crime	  Trend,	  1973-­‐2003

  Ouimet (2008) identifies Internet usage as the main reason for this unexpected change in crime trends. 

Based on Cohen and Felson’s Routine Activities Theory, he argues that since Netscape and Internet Explorer 

became standard in operating systems in 1994 and 1995, the Internet has brought a transformation in the 

daily routines of people, increased the possibility of crime detection because of the almost permanent traces, 

and provided people with information that has crime protection potential, and therefore contributed to the 

significant decrease of crime during the 1990s10. 

  While this may hold true for the sudden change in non-cybercrime trends of the United States in the 1990s, 

many questions still remain unanswered or inadequately addressed. For example, does this mean that the 

arrival of networked technology cause a decline in the overall crime rate? In contrast to the decrease of 

violent crime in the 1990s, complaints on all kinds of cybercrime have been showing a sharp increase, and 

the Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3) now receives more complaints in a single month than it received 

in its first six months11. 

[Figure	  2]	  Internet	  Crime	  Complaints,	  2000-­‐2011

10 Ouimet, M. (2008). Internet and Crime Trends. In F. Schmalleger & M. Pittaro (Eds.), Crimes of the Internet: 
Prentice Hall.

11 2011 Internet Crime Report. (2011): Internet Crime Complaint Center. p. 7.

4

Then, in this case, can it be that the decline of crimes in the real world was actually a natural corollary of the 

crime transition from the physical space to cyberspace? Or can it be that the Internet rather brings an increase 

in crime rate by providing new opportunities to meet strangers in the cyberspace and plot a crime in the real 

world? Ouimet’s explanation may account for the changes in crime trend of the United States during the 

1990s, but it cannot be generalized to explain the changes in other Internet-using countries which show very 

different results regarding the impact of Internet usage on crime rates. This illustrates the need for a more 

comprehensive and generalizable theory for explaining cybercrime.

  In fact, many attempts have been made to explain certain types of cybercrime with existing theories of 

criminology. But as cybercrime is a set of various types of crimes and does not clearly fit into the 

assumptions made by criminology, it is critical yet difficult to find a way to explain the phenomenon as a 

whole. In order to better understand the impacts of cybercrime Jaishankar (2008) has tried to provide an 

overall explanation for the phenomenon of cybercrime with his ‘Space Transition Theory12,’ which 

postulates the following:

1. Persons, with repressed criminal behavior ( in the physical space) have a propensity to commit crime 

in cyberspace, which, otherwise they would not commit in physical space, due to their status and 

position.

2. Identity, Flexibility, Dissociative Anonymity and lack of deterrence factor in the cyberspace provides 

the offenders the choice to commit cybercrime. 

3. Criminal behavior of offenders in cyberspace is likely to be imported to Physical space which, in 

physical space may be exported to cyberspace as well.

4. Intermittent ventures of offenders in to the cyberspace and the dynamic spatio-temporal nature of 

cyberspace provide the chance to escape. 

5. (a) Strangers are likely to unite together in cyberspace to commit crime in the physical space. (b) 

Associates of physical space are likely to unite to commit crime in cyberspace.

6. Persons from closed society are more likely to commit crimes in cyberspace than persons from open 

society.

7. The conflict of Norms and Values of Physical Space with the Norms and Values of cyberspace may 

lead to cybercrimes.

  Despite of the absence of a consistent and comprehensive definition of cybercrime, as criminology has 

started viewing the emergence of cyberspace as a new locus of criminal activity 13,  Jaishankar’s attempt to 

take an overall look at cybercrime is meaningful. However, although his theory seems to be persuasive, there 

is a need to test whether the above statements actually explains cyber-criminal activities. Perhaps the most 

general way to do this, as in verifying hypotheses in other fields as well, is by using quantitative data such as 

statistics. 

12 Jaishankar, K. (2008). Space Transition Theory of Cyber Crimes. In F. Schmalleger & M. Pittaro (Eds.), Crimes of the 
internet: Prentice Hall.

13 Jaishankar, K. (2007). Establishing a Theory of Cyber Crimes. International Journal of Cyber Criminology, 1(2). 

5

iii.	  Changing	  Landscape	  of	  Criminal	  Justice	  in	  Policing	  the	  Cyberspace	  

  The most generally used statistics in analyzing criminal behavior usually is that from public police 

departments, since the information of most traditional crimes would be reported to the police as that is where 

the case is to be resolved. This was possible because the criminal, victim, and the place where the case 

occurred were usually located in the same place or restricted to a certain area, and thus crime tended to be 

locally or nationally defined. Wall (2007) explains how cybercrimes made a change to this landscape. First, 

cybercrime contributed to “radical changes in the organization of crime and the division of criminal labor, 

and to changes in the scope of criminal opportunity 14.” This had a huge impact upon the existing localized 

criminal justice landscape by introducing a “new global dimension to the relationship between police, 

technology and the public15”. Unlike traditional types of crime, networked technology makes it possible for 

cybercrime to overcome geographical constraints, making its reach global and inter-jurisdictional. According 

to Wall, in spite of various procedural and organizational responses, cybercrime poses a number of 

challenges to the traditional policing paradigm: de minimism (‘the law does not deal with trifles’), which 

causes cybercrime to fall outside the traditional Peelian paradigm of policing dangerousness; nullum crimen 

(no crime without law) disparities in inter-jurisdictional cases; jurisdictional disparities; difficulties can arise 

when non-routine activities such as cross-border investigations happen, since the public police tends to be 

based upon local and ‘routinized’ practices; and under-reporting16. Consequently, cybercrime clearly falls 

outside the traditional purview of public police and causes under-reporting of cybercrime victimization to the 

police:

“Put simply, relatively few Internet-related crimes are reported to the police because most are resolved 

elsewhere by the victims themselves, or by the panoply of other types of organizations or groups involved 

in the regulation of behavior in cyberspace.17”

 Due to these reasons, Wall argues that the role of the public police in policing cybercrime should be 

understood as a small part of the networks of security within the cyberspace, and that the public police needs 

to forge new relationships with the other nodes within the network18. This argument is especially noteworthy, 

not only because of the distributed nature of cybercrime, but also because in reality there are many interest 

groups who play a role in policing cybercrimes other than the public police, either private organizations or 

governmental non-police organizations. As this is a relatively recent issue, public police in many countries 

are undergoing a transition period and are exploring how to forge partnerships with other organizations or 

agencies.

14 Wall, D. S. (2007). Cybercrime: The Transformation of Crime in the Information Age: Polity Press. p. 39.

15 Ibid., p. 160.

16 See Ibid., pp. 161-166 for more information.

17 Ibid., p. 166. 

18 Wall, D. S. (2011). Policing Cybercrimes: Situating the Public Police in Networks of Security Within Cyberspace. 
Police Practice & Research: An International Journal, 8(2), 183-205. 

6

  What this change in the landscape of criminal justice implies is that unlike the information of traditional 

crimes that usually flows through a single channel, the information of cybercrime is distributed among many 

private and public entities, so without adequate networking and collaboration among these organizations it is 

difficult to establish a comprehensive national, or even international, strategy to combat cybercrime. As Wall 

himself mentions, “We need reliable information about criminal trends not only to make sense of ‘the 

problem’, but also to act as a key driver of (criminal justice) policy reform and resource allocation within 

relevant agencies19. (...) The key issue here is about whether reliable information flows freely to form 

reliable viewpoints20.” This account makes it clear that cooperation among various organizations with 

different functions is critical to grasp the situation of cybercrime and establish effective strategies to deal 

with it by enabling the provision of reliable information. From a long-term perspective, this is certain to have 

a bigger impact on the development of cyber criminology or criminology in general, both in verifying new 

theories that purport to explain cybercrime and in assisting the academic field to understand cybercrime 

more comprehensively. 

  But before arguing that multi-agency cross-sector partnerships are necessary for the development of 

criminology and more effective policies to combat cybercrime, taking a look at how the organizations 

involved in this issue are structured in reality would help to find more specific and feasible solution, since 

there exists a huge difference among states in the way the relevant entities are organized.

III.	  Approaches	  on	  Cyber	  Attacks:	  Security	  vs.	  Law	  Enforcement

i.	  The	  Two	  Approaches	  on	  Cyber	  Attacks

  To date, many states have placed ‘combating cybercrime’ on the national agenda, and cybercrime has 

become an important issue at the global level as well. Yet not many countries have come up with an effective 

way to harmonize the functions of existing organizations and government agencies to better cope with the 

issue. Apart from the lack of a standard definition of cybercrime and the difficulty in measuring it, the 

absence of a holistic approach in viewing the issue of cybercrime stands as the main obstacle in establishing 

a comprehensive national strategy for cybercrime.

  Currently there are two main approaches which is common at both the national and international level when 

viewing cyber attacks: a security-oriented approach, which first originated from viewing the threats from 

cyberspace as a technical threat to national security; and a law enforcement approach, which approaches the 

issue from a criminal justice point of view. The former has a tendency to focus on deterrence and prevention, 

while the latter emphasizes on investigation and attribution. This point is well identified in Maurer (2011)’s 

work. Maurer distinguished two streams of discourse in the United Nations on cyber security issues: the 

19 Ibid., p. 13.

20 Ibid., p. 23.

7

politico-military stream, which mainly has to do with cyber arms race; and the economic stream focusing on 

the criminal use of information technologies21.

[Picture	  1]	  Two	  Streams	  Model	  of	  Cyber	  Norm	  Emergence	  in	  the	  United	  Nations

  While this Two Streams Model illustrates how international norms of cyber security is currently emerging 

in the United Nations and related organizations, it is nevertheless a result of close observation of the 

activities related to cyber norms emergence and thus has no normative implications for how the issue should 

be dealt with in reality. Just as cybercrime changed the landscape of criminal justice as mentioned above, the 

bigger picture of cyber attacks in general has also blurred the traditional boundaries that existed between 

crime and warfare.

  Traditionally, regulation and deterrence of crime belongs to the purview of criminal justice and the 

perpetrator is punished by the law enforcement, which is mostly based on domestic law. On the other hand, 

warfare is conflict between states and follows the rules of international law. When physical attack was the 

only possible form of aggression, this dual approach and response was quite reasonable. But since stories of 

cyber attacks started to make the front page in all newspapers, it is becoming all the more difficult to 

conceptually distinguish between warfare and crime and decide how to resolve a certain case. 

ii.	  The	  Problem	  of	  Demarcation	  and	  Attribution	  of	  Cyber	  Attacks

  Nye (2010) has classified four major cyber threats to national security as economic espionage, crime, cyber 

war, and cyber terrorism22. These concepts are widely used, despite the fact that there is no universal 

definition for these concepts, making demarcation among them difficult. Nevertheless, basically all four 

concepts have one thing in common: they are all subject to the regulation of law. Cyber war should be ruled 

by international law, while cyber terrorism, cybercrime and economic espionage can be categorized as crime 

and is subject to criminal law. Since there is no fully developed international practice or norm regarding 

cyber war to date and both economic espionage and cyber terrorism can be classified as a type of 

cybercrime, there is no point in distinguishing between the type of legislation applied to each of the four 

attacks. Rather, demarcation has a bigger meaning in practical terms such as deciding the division of labor 

among relevant organizations and agencies in response to such incidents. 

21 Maurer, T. (2011). Cyber Norm Emergence at the United Nations - An Analysis of the UN's Activities Regarding 
Cyber-Security? : Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School.

22 Nye, J. S. (2010). Cyber Power: Harvard Kennedy School Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs.

8

  Yet, even if one day we reach a point where the demarcation problem of cyber attacks based on standard 

definitions is resolved, due to the nature of the cyberspace it is difficult to attribute a certain attack to one of 

the four types of cyber attack. Technically this is because it is difficult to trace the attacker, and easier for the 

attacker to disguise or detour, Other than technical reasons there are legal problems in tracing information 

located overseas and difficulties in acquiring voluntary cooperation from foreign counterparts. Since a 

precise method for attribution has yet to be developed, the attribution process should be based upon several 

elements, such as the type of attack, subject, period of time, the size and impact of the attack, target of attack, 

and motive, put together. However, it is very difficult to collect all these information perfectly due to the 

distributed nature of cyber attacks and the lack of partnership among relevant organizations at the current 

stage. 

  Regarding criminal investigation, the discussion on the role in attribution is especially important. This point 

was already made by the United States in 2003 in The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace:

“Law enforcement and the national security community play a critical role in preventing attacks in 

cyberspace. Law enforcement plays the central role in attributing an attack through the exercise of 

criminal justice authorities. Many cyber-based attacks are crimes. As a result the Justice Department’s 

Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section, the FBI’s Cyber Division, and the U.S. Secret Service 

all play a central role in apprehending and swiftly bringing to justice the responsible individuals. (...) 

Ideally, an investigation, arrest, and prosecution of the perpetrators, or a diplomatic response in the case 

of a state-sponsored action, will follow such an incident23.”

  It is a natural corollary for the law enforcement to play the central role in attribution since legal authority 

prescribed by the criminal justice procedure is necessary in identifying the origin and thus attributing a cyber 

attack case to a certain type of attack, and because it is generally allowed to take a criminal justice approach 

regardless of the type of attack. Under normal situations, a case should be first attributed to a certain type 

through investigation led by law enforcement agencies in order to decide how to respond to it depending on 

its type of attack. 

  However, the overall structure of cyber attacks response differs from one state to another, and some 

countries have cyber crisis management systems that put defense and damage restoration above cyber attack 

attribution. By doing so, it becomes extremely difficult not only in the attribution of a certain cyber attack, 

but also in generating information about the “changing nature of threats, the characteristics and 

methodologies of threats, and emerging threat idiosyncrasies for the purpose of developing response 

strategies and reallocating resources, as necessary, to accomplish effective prevention24,” which is critical for 

both the academic circle of criminology and decision-makers who establish national strategies for the 

cyberspace. A good example is the case of South Korea.

23 The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace. (2003): The White House. p. 43.

24 Carter, D. L., & Schafer, J. A. The Future of Law Enforcement Intelligence. In J. A. Schafer (Ed.), Policing 2020: 
Exploring the Future of Crime, Communities, and Policing: Police Futurists International. p. 235.

9

 
III.	  Case	  Study:	  South	  Korea’s	  National	  Cybersecurity	  Structure

i. Current National Cyber Security Structure of South Korea

  The ‘information security policy’ was first implemented in the mid 1990s as a part of ‘informatization’ 

strategy. In 1996, the Korean Information Security Center (currently Korea Internet & Security Agency) was 

established, based on the Act on Expansion and Dissemination and Promotion of Utilization of Information 

System (currently the Act on Promotion of Information and Communications Network Utilization and 

Information Protection, etc., which works as a mother law for regulating most of the misconducts on 

cyberspace). In 2000, triggered by the Mafia boy’s DDoS attacks and global media attention, the Cyber 

Terror Response Center (CTRC) of Korea National Police Agency was established. Since then, major 

security incidents have provoked changes in the national cyber security strategy and organizational 

structures. For example, in the aftermath of the 2003. 1. 25. Slammer Worm incident, also known as 1·25 

Internet Disaster in South Korea, several new organizations were launched following national concerns. The 

National Cyber Security Center in the National Intelligence Service (NIS) became responsible for national 

cyber security in the public sector, while the Ministry of National Defense (MND) set up the Information 

Warfare Response Center to handle cyber warfare, and the Korea Internet Security Center (KISA) launched 

the Korean Internet Incident Response Center which became responsible for national cyber security in the 

private sector. This set of alphabet soup triggered the initial national cyber security framework. After the 

2004 National Espionage case, in which the investigation started from a civillian’s report about a spoofed 

email and some sort of attribution was successful, the government announced the Presidential Directive for 

National Cyber Security Regulation and the Presidential Directive for National Crisis Management, both of 

which are controlled by the National Security Council (NSC) secretariat. Following the 2009 7·7 DDoS 

attack, which was traced back to the origin of North Korea by the CTRC, in August the Comprehensive 

Countermeasure for Cyber Crisis was released. This initiative in effect eliminated the roles of the NSC and 

reinforced the responsibilities of the NIS. In 2010, the Cyber Command was established in the MND.

  Centering on security incident response, currently there are three national frameworks: Critical Information 

Infrastructure (CII) protection framework, which is based on the Act on the Protection of Information and 

Communications Infrastructure of 2001 and is chaired by the Minister of Prime Minister Office (PMO); 

National Cybersecurity Regulation (NCR), which is based on the Presidential Directive for National Cyber 

Security Regulation and is chaired by the head of NIS, is applied to all governmental information systems 

except for CII; and Security Incident Response in Private Sectors, based on the Act on Promotion of 

Information and Communications Network Utilization and Information Protection. 

ii.	  Problems	  of	  the	  Current	  Structure

(i)	  National	  Cybersecurity	  Regulation	  (NCR)

  Among these three frameworks, the NCR represents the overwhelming control of the National Intelligence 

Service over the governmental information system.

10

Governmental CERTs 

[Picture	  2]	  National	  Cybersecurity	  Regulation

  Normally governmental CERTs are in charge of the monitoring, and relevant information is transferred to 

the NIS through networks. When an incident is detected, it is required to report to the NIS. The inspections 

are carried out by governmental agencies if it seems to be a ‘trivial’ case, but by the NIS if is a ‘serious’ one. 

When national security is concerned, it is mandatory for law enforcement agencies to inform the NIS of the 

criminal case, whereas it is optional for the NIS to notify law enforcement agencies of the case if there is any 

criminal suspicion since. As most cyber incidents are crimes under the existing law, this optional clause 

could be in violation of the Criminal Procedure Act, which states that “when a public official in the course of 

his/her duty believes that an offense has been committed, he shall lodge an accusation” (Art. 234 (2)). 

Moreover, this regulation also seriously undermines the basis for cybercrime measurement. Since 2009, the 

NIS stopped announcing the statistics of incidents against governmental information systems. As most cases 

handled by the NIS does not undergo police investigation, the nondisclosure of statistics severely flaws the 

current cybercrime statistics announced by the police.

  In addition, recently the government has announced the National Cyber Security Master Plan in August 

2011, which designated the Director of the NIS to oversee and coordinate national cybersecurity-related 

policy and management. This can be very dangerous, since national intelligence services act relatively free 

from legal restrictions due to the nature of its mission. When NIS operations are confined to providing 

national security intelligence to “support decision” making, the low legal threshold applied to the NIS 

usually does not matter. However, giving the NIS the authority to “coordinate” policy without any legal 

restrictions threatens the balance of power, which is one of the principles of democracy.

(ii)	  Security	  Incident	  Response	  in	  Private	  Sectors

  The framework for Security Incident Response in Private Sectors also shows a simliar problem of over-

centralization and lack of harmonization among relevant organizations. Article 48-3 of The Act on Promotion 

of Information and Communications Network Utilization and Information Protection, on which this 

framework is based, stipulates obligation to immediately report incidents against 1) a provider of information  

11

and communications services or; 2) A business operator of clustered information and communications 

facilities. Furthermore, in Article 48-4 (5):

“The Korea Communications Commission or the joint private-public investigation team shall not use the 

information learned through the data submitted and the investigation conducted in accordance with 

paragraph (4) for any purposes other than analysis of causes of the intrusion and preparation of 

countermeasures, and shall destroy it immediately after the analysis of causes is completed.”

  Although the role of law enforcement is indispensable due to the legal authority required in the criminal 

procedure in attribution since it is necessary to identify the origin of the attack, nowhere does the Act clearly 

mention the need to collaborate with law enforcement agencies. Moreover, Article 48-4 (5) further impedes 

attempts to measure cybercrime. To borrow the words of Wall, this not only preclude relevant agencies from 

acquiring reliable information about criminal trends, but also severely undermines the resources 

policymakers can refer to when making decisions for a better national cyber security policy and resource 

allocation within relevant agencies.

(iii)	  Failure	  to	  Recognize	  the	  Role	  of	  Law	  Enforcement	  and	  Cybercrime	  Measurement	  

  While the National Cybersecurity Regulation grants excessive access and control to information of cyber 

incidence to the intelligence service, the Act on Promotion of Information and Communications Network 

Utilization and Information Protection restricts the use of information other than the analysis of cause of the 

intrusion and preparation of countermeasures, and requires the immediate destruction of information after 

such analysis is completed, thereby making the measurement of cybercrime difficult and also impedes 

criminal investigation on cyber incidents. 

  Both frameworks have little in mind of the nature of cyber attacks, i.e., the fact that most types of cyber 

attacks can and should be dealt according to the criminal law, and lacks an overall view of the problem, 

thereby granting excessive authority to either the intelligence service or the security community while failing 

to recognize the need to work with the law enforcement. This is a stark contrast compared to the incident 

response system of the United States, which is frequently referred to as a model cyber security framework. 

According to the Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA), federal agencies must report 

incidents to the United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) and the details are guided 

by the Computer Security Incident Handling Guide, which mentions the role of law enforcement as follows: 

“One reason that many security-related incidents do not result in convictions is that organizations do not 

properly contact law enforcement. (...) The incident response team should become acquainted with its 

various law enforcement representatives before an incident occurs to discuss conditions under which 

incidents should be reported to them, how the reporting should be performed, what evidence should be 

collected, and how it should be collected. Law enforcement should be contacted through designated 

individuals in a manner consistent with the requirements of the law and the organization’s procedures. 

Many organizations prefer to appoint one incident response team member as the primary POC with law 

12

enforcement. This person should be familiar with the reporting procedures for all relevant law 

enforcement agencies and well prepared to recommend which agency, if any, should be contacted25.”

  Not to mention that this failure to recognize the importance of law enforcement in incident management, it 

also seriously undermines the grounds for reliable measurement of cybercrime, either by giving the 

intelligence excessive authority in handling relevant information while paying insufficient attention to the 

role law enforcement plays in attribution, or by restricting the use of information of private sector security 

incidents to the analysis of causes of the intrusion and preparation of countermeasures, thereby blocking the 

information flow to law enforcement agencies for criminal investigation. 

iv.	  Need	  for	  Harmonization	  among	  Organizations

  Taking a look at the big picture of national security, the problems mentioned above seem to originate from 

the lack of consistency in the national cyber security strategy and organizational structures. As mentioned 

earlier, the current national cyber security structure was subject to changes every time a major security 

incident occurred. The words of Schnier (2000) are especially meaningful in pointing this out: 

“The policy [an overall strategy] is what ties everything together. (...) [a security policy should be built] 

based on the threat analysis, (...) The policy should outline who is responsible for what (implementation, 

enforcement, audit, review), what the basic network security policies are, and why they are the way they 

are. The last one is important; arbitrary policies brought down from on high with no explanation are likely 

to be ignored. A clear, concise, coherent, and consistent policy is more likely to be followed. (...) In any 

case, the security policy needs to outline “why” and not “how”26.”

  But the lack of consistency is not the root of the problem. Why new agencies were established every time 

an incident occurred is because South Korea does not have an overall national strategy based on inadequate 

threat analysis. This is why the current national cyber security structure of South Korea only explains “how” 

to deal with cyber incidents and which agency carries out what responsibilities, but does not tell “why” it has 

granted the NIS de facto control over incidents of governmental information networks, or “why” the 

information of private sector security incidents should be immediately destroyed after the analysis of cause is 

completed. Although the issue of cyber incident response may appear to be a complex issue, if anyone paid 

sufficient attention to the nature of cyber attacks and recognized the difficulty of attribution and 

measurement, law enforcement may have been playing an important role in detecting, attributing, and 

identifying the perpetrator. 

25 Scanfone, K., Grance, T., & Masone, K. (2008). Computer Security Incident Handling Guide NIST Special 
Publication: National Institute of Standards and Technology. p. 2-6.

26 Schneier, B. (2000). Secrets & Lies: Digital Security in a Networked World. Indianapolis, Indiana: Wiley Publishing, 
Inc. pp. 308-309.

13

  Nevertheless, “security is a process, not a product27.” Although the current national cybersecurity structure 

of South Korea has many problems, they can be resolved by promoting harmonization among relevant 

organizations. 

27 Ibid., p. 84. 

14

Reference

[1] United Nations Manual on the Prevention and Control of Computer-Related Crime. (1995) International Review 

of Criminal Policy: United Nations.

[2] The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace. (2003): The White House.

[3] 2011 Internet Crime Report. (2011): Internet Crime Complaint Center.

[4] Aguiar, M., Boutenko, V., Michael, D., Rastogi, V., Subramanian, A., & Zhou, Y. (2010). The Internet's New 

Billion: Digital Consumers in Brazil, Russia, India, China, and Indonesia. Retrieved from http://www.bcg.com/

documents/file58645.pdf

[5] Carter, D. L., & Schafer, J. A. The Future of Law Enforcement Intelligence. In J. A. Schafer (Ed.), Policing 

2020: Exploring the Future of Crime, Communities, and Policing: Police Futurists International.

[6] Jaishankar, K. (2007). Establishing a Theory of Cyber Crimes. International Journal of Cyber Criminology, 1(2). 

[7] ___________. (2007). Cyber Criminology: Evolving a novel discipline with a new journal. International Journal 

of Cyber Criminology, 1(1). 

[8] ___________. (2008). Space Transition Theory of Cyber Crimes. In F. Schmalleger & M. Pittaro (Eds.), Crimes 

of the internet: Prentice Hall.

[9] ___________. (2010). The Future of Cyber Criminology: Challenges and Opportunities. International Journal of 

Cyber Criminology, 4(1&2). 

[10] Maurer, T. (2011). Cyber Norm Emergence at the United Nations - An Analysis of the UN's Activities 

Regarding Cyber-Security? : Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School.

[11] Nye, J. S. (2010). Cyber Power: Harvard Kennedy School Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs.

[12] Ouimet, M. (2008). Internet and Crime Trends. In F. Schmalleger & M. Pittaro (Eds.), Crimes of the Internet: 

Prentice Hall.

[13] Scanfone, K., Grance, T., & Masone, K. (2008). Computer Security Incident Handling Guide NIST Special 

Publication: National Institute of Standards and Technology.

[14] Schafer, J. A. Policing 2020: Exploring the Future of Crime, Communities, and Policing: Police Futurists 

International.

[15] Schneier, B. (2000). Secrets & Lies: Digital Security in a Networked World. Indianapolis, Indiana: Wiley 

Publishing, Inc.

[16] Wall, D. S. (2007). Cybercrime: The Transformation of Crime in the Information Age: Polity Press.

[17] ________. (2011). Policing Cybercrimes: Situating the Public Police in Networks of Security Within 

Cyberspace. Police Practice & Research: An International Journal, 8(2), 183-205. 

[18] 이동희, 장윤식, 김석범, 표창원. (2010). 국제 사이버범죄 아카데미 모델 개발.

15

