International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 69– No.24, May 2013 

Multicriteria Evaluation and Sensitivity Analysis  
on Information Security 

Irfan Syamsuddin 
CAIR - Center for Applied ICT Research  
Department of Computer and Networking Engineering 
State Polytechnic of Ujung Pandang 
Jl Perintis Kemerdekaan Km 10 Tamalanrea  
Makassar 90245 INDONESIA 

ABSTRACT 

Information  security  plays  a  significant  role  in  recent 
information  society.  Increasing  number  and  impact  of  cyber 
attacks  on  information  assets  have  resulted  the  increasing 
awareness  among  managers  that  attack  on  information  is 
actually attack on organization itself. Unfortunately, particular 
model  for  information  security  evaluation  for  management 
levels is still not well defined. In this study, decision analysis 
based  on  Ternary  Analytic  Hierarchy  Process  (T-AHP)  is 
proposed as a novel model to aid managers who responsible in 
making  strategic  evaluation  related  to  information  security 
issues. In addition, sensitivity analysis is applied to extend our 
analysis  by  using  several  “what-if”  scenarios  in  order  to 
measure  the  consistency  of  the  final  evaluation.  Finally,  we 
conclude  that  the  final  evaluation  made  by  managers  has  a 
significant consistency shown by sensitivity analysis results. 

General Terms 

Information Security, Security Evaluation. 

Keywords 

information  security,  security  evaluation,  Analytic  Hierarchy 
Process, Ternary AHP, sensitivity analysis. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

The  role  of  information  security  has  gained  more  serious 
concerns  particularly  in  the  last  two  decades.  The  more 
dependent  organizations  on  access,  store,  and  transfer  their 
information  through  the  internet,  the  more  probability  of 
cyber  security  attacks  they  could  face.  In  this  regards,  many 
cyber crime cases  with significant financial losses have  been 
periodically announced by  several organizations.  As a result, 
security  managers  are  highly  requested  to  be  aware  of  the 
increasing security challenges which may occur anytime.  

it  might  affect 

incidences  since 

In  fact,  only  few  academic  papers  examine  how  security 
managers  formulate  strategic  decision  in  such  dynamic 
situations. This is because most organizations tend to hide the 
image  of 
actual 
organization.  In  addition,  such  announcements  may  damage 
public  trust  to  the  company  because  it  is  likely  to  reveal 
internal  weaknesses  that  should  not  appear  publicly  (Fulford 
and Doherty, 2003). Therefore, empirical studies in this field 
are  still  open  both  from  academic  and  professional  to  give 
constructive  contributions.  This  study  aims  to  fill  the  gap  in 
information  security  literature  particularly  from  managerial 
perspective.  It  is  believed  that  by  having  an  adequate  model 

the 

that  could  aid  managers  in  evaluating  information  security 
issues,  many  potential  damages  related  to  cyber  security 
attacks  can  be  avoided  or  at  least  reduced  in  terms  of  its 
impact  on  organizations.  Therefore,  this  paper  is  aimed  at 
applying  an  evaluation  framework  of  information  security 
based  on  our  previous  work  in  2009.  In  addition,  the 
evaluation results will be also extended by sensitivity analysis 
to  measure  how  consistent  the  final  evaluation  made  by 
managers. 

2.  LITERATURE REVIEW 

information  security 

there  are  several 
In  evaluating 
perspectives  that  should  be  involved  in  order  to  produce  a 
better 
security 
effective 
implementations  in  the  future  (Wylder,  2004).  The  elements 
encompass  people,  systems,  information  and  procedure  with 
respect to security and privacy issues.  

and  more 

information 

technical  security 

In  this  regard,  many  perspectives  should  be  considered  in 
evaluation  information  security  as  argued  by  Syamsuddin 
(2012)  considering  complexity  of  recent  security  breaches  in 
organization  that  do  not  only  involves  technical  issues  but 
also has non technical ones such as  economic,  managerial  as 
well  as  cultural  effects.  Householder,  et.al  (2002)  mention 
historical 
issues  from  hardware  and 
applications  security  until  computer  network  security, 
wireless  security  and  internet  or  cyber  security.  These  all 
justify  the  root  of  current  cyber  security  issues  are  basically 
from  technical  perspectives  (Syamsuddin,  2012).  However, 
along  with  advancement  of  information  technology  and 
reliance  of  business  and  government  organizations  on 
technical 
information,  cyber  security 
domain.Awareness  on  economic 
information 
security has just discussed in the last decade. Anderson (2001) 
is  among  the  earliest  researcher  who  describe  relationship 
between  information  security  and  economy  by  proposing  a 
theory  called  the  economics  of  information  security.  Under 
this  concept,  various  economic  mechanisms  are  applied  to 
analyze  cyber  security  behavior  such  as  security  incentives, 
investment  and  financial  information  sharing  (Gordon  and 
Loeb, 2002). 

impact  of 

longer  a 

is  no 

Similarly,  managerial  aspect  of  information  security  plays 
more  and  more  important  role  just  several  years  ago  as  it 
plays an essential role in ensuring information handling within 
in  managerial 
organization 
handling of information security may result in serious damage 
to information resources of an organization.  

(Filipek,  2007).  Weakness 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
Successful information security could not be achieved unless 
it has become a daily life of people within an organization. In 
this  regards,  cultural  information  security  is  believed  as  a 
fundamental solution to any kind of technical security applied 
in  an  organization.  Without  strong  cultural  approach  any 
security technologies will not work properly. Lack of cultural 
awareness of security in an organization is cited as the source 
of  a  number  security  breaches  (Martins  and  Eloff,  2002). 
Education  and  reward-punishment  method  are  promoted  to 
cultivate  security  culture  at  organizational  level  (Thomson 
and von Solms, 1998). 

Syamsuddin  and  Hwang  (2009)  justify  that  in  evaluating 
information  security,  one  should  look  at  the  problem  from 
four  perspectives  above  namely,  technology,  management, 
economy  and culture. They point out  that further decision or 
evaluation  should  consider  three  main  aspects  of  security 
objectives  called  CIA  which  stands  for  confidentiality, 
integrity and availability.  

(2008)  describes  confidentiality 

Bacik 
integrity  and 
availability  as  follows.  Confidentiality  reflects  protection  of 
the privacy users in respect to their own information. It is the 
property  of  preventing  disclosure  of 
to 
unauthorized individuals or systems.  

information 

Integrity is the property of preventing any possible changes of 
information. It means by ensuring the integrity, information or 
data cannot be modified or edited without authorization of the 
owner.  In  other  words,  integrity  keeps  the  intact  of  data  and 
that only authorized user able to access or modify it. 

is 

Availability 
the  property  of  providing  appropriate 
information when required. It means that for any information 
system to serve its purpose, the information must be available 
when it is needed. Availability ensures the computing systems 
used to store and process the information, the security controls 
used  to  protect  it,  and  the  communication  channels  used  to 
access it must be functioning correctly.  

3.  MULTICRITERIA EVALUATION  

3.1  Analytic Hierarchy Process 

One  of  the  natures  of  evaluation  is  the  existence  of  multiple 
alternatives  to  be  chosen  and  multiple  aspects  or  criteria  to 
assist evaluation processes. Multicriteria Evaluation (MCE) or 
often  called  Multicriteria  Decision  Analysis  (MCDA)  or 
Multicriteria  Decision  Making  (MCDM)  is  a  method  that 
satisfies 
incorporate  multiple  criteria  and 
alternatives  at  the  same  time  under  equal  judgment  (Ertay, 
et.al, 2012).  

the  need 

to 

Among  several  methodology  of  MCE,  Analytic  Hierarchy 
Process  developed  by  Saaty  (1980)  is  one  that  widely 
accepted  and  applied  by  researchers  and  practitioners  from 
various disciplines.  

To  date,  thousands  of  AHP  applications  can  be  seen  in 
business,  management,  government,  military  and  many  other 
areas  where  multi  criteria  decision  problems  exist.  The 
strength  of  AHP  also  lies  on  its  simplistic  mathematical 
calculation to perform decision making processes. In addition, 
both  qualitative  and  quantitative  analysis  can  be  done 
simultaneously  with  AHP  which  is  rarely  found  in  other 
decision  making  methods  (Vadya  and  Kumar,  2006).  Details 
of  logical  algorithm  behind  AHP  method  might  be  read 
directly  from  Saaty  (1980)  while  example  of  mathematical 

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 69– No.24, May 2013 

application  with  OpenCalc  (an  open  source  software)  might 
be read from Syamsuddin and Hwang (2010).  

Like other fields, AHP is also not immune from criticism that 
reveals some of its weaknesses.  There is no single method On 
the other hand, several limitations addressed to AHP by many 
researchers.  Preserving  consistency  is  the  most  challenging 
effort  in  conducting  an  AHP  survey.  If  the  consistency  ratio 
(CR) is more than 0.1, than respondents are required to review 
their judgments until the minimum standard of CR is satisfied.  

3.2  Ternary AHP 

In  reality,  human  being  can  easily  compare  one  to  other 
simply by saying “A better than B” or “A worse than B”. This 
situation  was  adopted  by  Takahashi  (1990)  who  apply 
modified  AHP    in  sports  game.  According  to  Takahashi 
(1990), in reality there are three possible conditions in sports 
game  namely  win,  lose  or  draw.  Readers  may  refer  to 
Takahashi’s  paper 
for  details  argument  and 
mathematical foundation behind Ternary AHP. 

(1990) 

In  short,  instead  of  using  classical  AHP  of  Saaty  (1980),  we 
prefer  to  apply  Takahashi’s  Ternary  Analytic  Hierarchy 
Process  (1990)  since  it  adequately  meets  main  requirements 
for  this  study.  Moreover,  the  decision  makers  require  lesser 
time  and  put  minimal  efforts  while  significantly  reducing 
possibility of inconsistency ratio. Unlike classical AHP which 
employs  1  to  9  scales,  T-AHP  uses  only  three  values  to 
represent  one’s  preference  or  judgment.  As  can  be  seen  in 
Table 1 below 

Table 1. Ternary AHP’s preference values 

No 

Preference 
Values 

Description 

1 

2 

3 

1 

 

equally important between 
criteria/alternative 

i to j 

criteria/alternative 

i is more important than  j  

1/ 

reciprocal state of number 2 

One  of  the  main  advantages  of  applying  ternary  numbers  as 
described  above  is  significantly  reduce  potential  judgment 
conflicts  which  eventually  lead  to  better  consistency  ratio. 
This  advantage  improved  by  Takeda  (2001)  who  justify 
potential  applications  of  Ternary  AHP  in  uncertainty  and 
indetermination and incomplete certain information.  

Besides,  Nishizawa  and  Takahashi’s  paper  (2007)  that 
illustrate  applicability  of  Ternary  AHP  in  stochastic  models,  
minimax  as  well  as  least  square  estimation  methods  adds  a 
series of benefit of Ternary AHP.  

4.  ANALYSIS and DISCUSSION 

4.1  Evaluation Model  

The  proposed  model  for  strategic 
information  security 
decision  analysis  is  represented  in  figure  4.  It  is  structured 
into  four  levels  of  hierarchy  consisting  of  goal,  criteria,  sub-
criteria  and  alternatives.  The  first  level  of  goal  represents 
“Information  Security  Evaluation”  as  the  aim  of  this  study. 
The second level of criteria consists of four items, namely  

23 

 
 
Management (M), Technology (T), Economy (E) and Culture 
(C)  which  represent  the  four  main  aspects  of  information 
security.  Subsequently,  the  sub  criteria  level  consists  of  ten 
additional criteria grouped by each main criterion previously. 

In  the  last  layer,  three  alternatives  are  given.  They  are 
Integrity  (In)  and  Availability  (Av)  which  represent  strategic 
solution  for  future  information  security  implementation. 
Typical  survey  question  at  second  layer  is  exemplified  like 
“Which  one  is  more  important  in  Information  Security 
Evaluation,  Technical  criteria  or  Management  criteria?” 
There are only three possible answer to choose, 1 for equally 

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 69– No.24, May 2013 

important,  for Technical is more important than Managerial 
and 1/ for in contrary of second option of Managerial is more 
important than Technical. 

Finally  after  performing  pairwise  comparison  at  all  levels, 
results  for  main  criteria  and  alternative  are  gained.  Cultural 
aspect in terms of security education and reward/ punishment 
approaches is found to be the main focus  for  future strategic 
information security which accounted for 0.409. It is followed 
by  managerial 
improvement  of  0.241.  Technical  and 
economical  perspectives  seem  to  have  similar  weight  of 
0.175. 

Fig. 1. Decision Analysis Model 

Fig. 2. Final evaluation 

Fig. 3. Simulation final evaluation with sensitivity analysis 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure  2  reveals  the  final  preference  of  alternative  with 
respect to the goal that shows the best  evaluation of decision 
maker  of  CIA  (confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability) 
resource allocation in this study. Confidentiality is accounted 
on  the  top  preference  with  0.409  followed  by  integrity  and 
availability both with 0.314 and 0.277 respectively.  

The  findings indicate that most efforts should be given  more 
on  improving  the  confidentiality  of  data  and  information 
systems  as  a  key  strategy  for  the  future.  On  the  other  hand, 
efforts to ensure integrity should also get adequate attentions 
for  the  future  strategic  information  security  programs,  while 
availability of data and information systems are recommended 
with lesser concerns due to its maturity in its development. 

4.2  Sensitivity Analysis  

Applying  sensitivity  analysis 
to  such  decision  making 
processes  is  essential  to  ensure  the  consistency  of  final 
decision.  Through  sensitivity  analysis,  different  “what-if” 
scenarios  can  be  visualized  which  are  helpful  to  observe  the 
impact  of  changing  on  criteria  to  final  alternative  rank. 
Sensitivity  analysis  as  shown  in  figure  3  lets  evaluator  to 
observe how final evaluation is likely to change. It also helps 
in  measuring  how  much  changes  made  by  certain  extent  of 
deviations in weights of criteria. 

In this case, simulation of sensitivity analysis is carried out by 
making  gradual  changes on values of each criterion, whether 
technology (T), management (M), economy (E) or culture (C), 
and  then  observing  the  rank  order  due  to  such  changes.  It  is 
revealed  that by shifting the  value of each criterion  lowering 
down to zero point, it did not have any effect would not result 
in any changes to the first rank (confidentiality).  

Rank  reversal  occurs  only  to  the  second  and  third  ranks 
(integrity and availability respectively) when cultural aspect is 
reduced  to  zero  point.  Only  in  this  particular,  rank  reversal 
occurs when  availability jump on top over integrity. Overall, 
based on sensitivity analysis, it can be concluded that the final 
decision is consistent and reliable. 

5.  CONCLUSION  

The application of Ternary AHP is sound and fit to the case of 
evaluation  of  information  security.  Its  simplicity  has  assisted 
evaluator to reach high level consistency level and also reduce 
possibility  of  rank  reversal  as  demonstrated  in  sensitivity 
analysis through various simulations.   

In  short,  the  evaluation  suggest  the  essential  role  of  cultural 
approaches such as security education or training and reward 
punishment  practices  in  improving  information  security 
program 
the  organization.  Additionally,  a  strategic 
information security in the future must put more concerns on 
confidentiality issues of data and information systems, before 
integrity and availability. 

in 

6.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

I would like to five special thanks to Politeknik Negeri Ujung 
Pandang and Center for Applied ICT Research for supporting 
this study and finalizing the publication. 

7.  REFERENCES 

[1]  Householder,  Houle,  K.  &  Dougherty,  C.  (2002). 
Computer  attack  trends  challenge  Internet  security. 
Computer IEEE, 35 (4), 5-7, 2002.  

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 69– No.24, May 2013 

[2]  Ransbotham, S. & Mitra, S. (2009). Choice and Chance: 
A  Conceptual  Model  of  Paths  to  Information  Security 
Compromise.  Information  Systems  Research,  20  (1), 
121-139.  

[3]  Syamsuddin, I and Hwang, J, 2010, The Use of AHP in 
Security Policy Decision Making: An  Open Office Calc 
Application, Journal of Software, 5(10), 1162-1169  

[4]  Bacik,  S.  (2008).  Building  an  effective  information 
security  policy  architecture.  United  States  CRC  Press. 
LLC, Boca Raton.  

[5]  Wylder, J. (2004). Strategic Information Security, United 

States: Auerbach 2008.  

[6]  Filipek,  R.  (2007).  Information  security  becomes  a 

business priority. Internal Auditor, 64 (1), 18.  

[7]  Anderson, R. (2001). Why Information Security is Hard: 
An  Economic  Perspective.  Proceedings  of  17th  Annual 
Computer Security Applications Conference, 10-14.  

[8]  Gordon, L.A. &  Loeb, M. P. (2002). The Economics of 
Investment  in  Information  Security.  ACM  Transactions 
on Information and System Security, 5(4), 438-457.  

[9]  Martins,  A.  &  Eloff,  J.  (2002).  Information  security 
culture”,  IFIP  TC11,  17th  international  conference  on 
information security (SEC2002), Cairo, Egypt, 203–214.  

[10] Saaty,  T.L.  (1990).  The  Analytic  Hierarchy  Process, 
United States: RWS Publications, Pittsburgh, PA.  

[11] Syamsuddin,I  and  Hwang,  J,  2009,  The  Application  of 
AHP  to  Evaluate  Information  Security  Policy  Decision 
Making,  International  Journal  of  Simulation,  Systems, 
Science and Technology, 10(4), 46-50.  

[12] Vaidya,O.  &  Kumar,  S.  (2006).  Analytic  hierarchy 
process: An overview of applications”, European Journal 
of Operational Research, 169(1), 1–29.  

[13] Takahashi, I. (1990) AHP Applied to Binary and Ternary 
Comparisons. Journal of Operations Research Society of 
Japan, 33(3),199–206.  

[14] Fulford, H. and Doherty, N.F. (2003). The application of 
information 
large  UK-based 
organizations:  an  exploratory  investigation.  Information 
Management & Computer Security, 11(3). 106-14.  

security  policies 

in 

[15] Nishizawa,  K  and  Takahashi,I 

(2007)  Estimation 
Methods  By  Stochastic  Model  In  Binary  And  Ternary 
AHP,  Journal  of  the  Operations  Research  Society  of 
Japan 50(2), 101-122. 

[16] Takeda,E,  2001,  A  method  for  multiple  pseudo-criteria 
decision  problems,  Computers  &  Operations  Research, 
28(14), 1427–1439. 

[17] Syamsuddin, I, 2012, Evaluation of Strategic Information 
Security  with Fuzzy  AHP Method, American Journal of 
Intelligent Systems, 2(1), 9-13 

[18] Thomson,  M.E,  &  von  Solms,R.  (1998).  Information 
security  awareness:  educating  your  users  effectively. 
Information  Management  and  Computer  Security,  6(4), 
167–173 

IJCATM : www.ijcaonline.org 

25 

