                           The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue: 

The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13], 
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.74 

e-ISSN: 2251-7545 

Analysis of Increasing Malwares and Cyber Crimes 
Using Economic Approach 

Umer Asgher 
SMME 
College of E&ME 
National University of Science 
and Technology (NUST) 
Islamabad, Pakistan 
umer_asgher2000@yahoo.com 

Fahad Moazzam Dar 
College of E&ME 
National University of Science 
and Technology (NUST) 
Islamabad, Pakistan 
fahaddar@gmail.com 

Ali Hamza 
College of E&ME 
National University of Science 
and Technology (NUST) 
Islamabad, Pakistan 
ahrocs752@gmail.com 

Abdul Moeed Paracha 
College of E&ME 
National University of Science 
and Technology (NUST) 
 Islamabad, Pakistan. 
moeed.paracha@gmail.com 

ABSTRACT-  The  economics  of  an  internet  crime  has  newly 
developed into a field of controlling black money. This economic 
approach  not  only  provides  estimated  technique  of  analyzing 
internet  crimes  but  also  gives  details  to  analyzers  of  system 
dependability  and  divergence.  This  paper  will  highlight  on  the 
subject  of  online  crime,  which  has  formed  its  industry  since.  It 
all  started  from  amateur  hackers  who  cracked  websites  and 
wrote  malicious  software  in  pursuit  of  fun  or  achieving  limited 
objectives  to  professional  hacking.  In  the  past  days,  electronic 
fraud  was  main  objective  but  now  it  has  been  changed  into 
electronic  hacking.  This  study  focuses  the  issue  through  an 
economic  analysis  of  available  web  forum  to  deals  in  malware 
and  private  information.  The  findings  of  this  survey  research  
provide considerable in-depth sight into the functions of malware 
economy 
and 
compromise.  In  this  regard,  the  survey  research  paper  may 
benefit  particularly  computer  security  officials, 
law 
enforcement  agencies,  and 
in  general  prospective  anyone 
involved  in  better  understanding  cybercrime  from  the  offender 
standpoint. 

impositions 

computer 

spinning 

around 

the 

Keywords: Malware, cyber crime, crime economics, Information 

security, online crime, IT industry, electronic fraud, hackers 

I. 

Introduction 

The  internet  usage  becomes  very  important  each  day 
around  the  world.  Number  of  Internet  users  is  taking 
benefit  of  the  convenience  and  ﬂexibility  the  internet  has 
given to them, searching from information to online access 
for  e-business  and  e-  ﬁnance.  This  has  given  birth  to  the 
possessions  own  by  the  ordinary  Internet  consumer, 
malicious  attacker  find  out  the  Web  because  a  novel  field 
for  building  money  by  harming  naive  internet  consumer. 
Much  progress  has  been  made  by  such  persons  for  the 
growth of  online  black  markets  that  facilitate  them  to  sale 
and  distribute  tools  and  information  that  is    intended  to 
negotiation computer networks and consumer. particularly, 
a  number  of  web  medium  permit  individuals  to  purchase 

487 

malicious  software  to  victimize  vulnerable  systems  and 
persons.  Now  it  is  obvious  that  malicious  players  can 
obtain funds to make possible criminal action, however it is 
not obvious what the revisit on investments is like relative 
to the expenses of trade goods and services in the course of 
these  market.  Due  to  this  reason  the  past  years  have 
witnessed the increase in efforts to increase the security of 
systems  and  networks.  Hacking  is  a  cybercrime[1],its 
purpose, procedure adopted, goal and threats involved can 
be classified as:- 

Purpose:  self  esteem,  agenda,  moral  work,  front  for 
other  organizations.  Procedure:  Black  money,  recruitment 
of some insiders of organization, malware and hacking that 
target  a  system.  Goal:  Large  firms,  governments,  supply 
chains  managers,  security  chain  or  media  outlets  that 
oppose their  agenda or  moral work.  Threat: It  depends  on 
the nature of protected information and the public potential 
targets;  in  the  section  2  we  shall  cover  the  types  of 
malwares.  In section 3, cyber crime  motivation. In  section 
4,  we  shall  be  covering  analysis  of  survey  research.  In 
section  5  IBM’s  X-Force  compiled  report.  In  section  6 
Norton cyber crime report analysis is covered followed by 
findings of the research and the conclusions. 

II. 

Types of Malware 

There are numerous types of malwares including:- 

--Smartphone Malware 

--Worms, viruses and other propagating Malware 

--Spyware,  keystroke 

loggers, 

information 

theft 

Malware 

--Botnet attacks, detection/tracking and defense 

--Root kit and virtualization techniques 

III. 

3. Analysis of Survey Research 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue: 

The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13], 
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.74 

e-ISSN: 2251-7545 

Cyber activity has the following main motivations:- 

--Malicious activity by country against another country 

--Web-based attacks on the users 

--Data breaches leading to identity theft 

--Bot-infected computers 

IV. 

4. Analysis of Survey Research 

A.  The Online crime Market 
The online crime market or the cybercrime market is, as its 
name suggests, a pool of cybercriminals who seek to make 
lots of dirty money out of deceiving unknowing web users 
[3].  It’s  made  up  of  malicious  networks  that,  although 
they’re already filled with cybercriminals’ interaction, they 
sometimes interact between them as well. Now, who drives 
it  exactly?  Well,  any  cyber-pro  with  malicious  intentions, 
who  wants  to  breach  your  internet  security.  In  short,  as 
with  any  other  market,  the  online  black  market  includes 
logistics 
activities 
(delivering malware to web users and catching their online 
data),  sales  (of  users’  data  to  other  cybercriminals), 
marketing  and  promotion  of  cyber-products  obtained 
illegally [2][3]. 

like:  production 

(of  malware), 

B. 

 Mechanism of the Online crime Market 

1.  Phase 1. Malware creation 

Behind  every  Trojan,  virus,  worm,  bot  and  other  malware 
there’s  business.  Heads  of  criminal  networks  contact 
programmers  to  develop  malware,  hackers  to  break  into 
networks or other scammers and fraudsters to  devise spam 
and phishing attacks [4]. The victims are usually Windows 
users  and  web  users  tricked  while  browsing  for  specific 
information,  banking,  socializing.  If  you  fall  for  one  of 
their internet security scams, your data may get stored onto 
servers  that  hackers  can  access.  They  can  use  it  to  enter 
your accounts and steal money and your identity, or trade it 
on the online black market. 

2. Phase 2. Promotions of illegal online commodities 

Just like legal commodity markets, the online black market 
is  very  competitive.  And  in  order  to  be  profitable, 
cybercriminals  have  to  promote  their  “goods”  to  fellow-
criminals.  They  come  up  with  promotions,  demos,  service 
guarantees,  even  discounts  for 
large  “purchases”  all 
advertised on underground forums and sometimes on social 
media. 

3. 

 Phase 3. The sales process 

A  cyber  crook  gets  interested  in  another  cyber  crook’s 
offer. Here is how the sales process work:- 

--Contact the client/vendor via private chat or e-mail using 
generic addresses and negotiate. 

--Use  existing  underground  online  stores  to  distribute  the 
products. 

--Establish  the  method  of  payment,  which  is  always  one 
that everybody uses, like Western Union. 

--Ask  for  customer  support  if  the  product  is  not  working 
e.g. if a credit card number is not valid, they will change it 
for one that is. 

4.  Phase 4. Money laundering 

This  phase  applies  to  cyber  crooks  who  steal  money  from 
users’  bank  accounts  via  bank  transfers.  As  you  can 
imagine  this  is  dirty  money  that  needs  to  be  laundered  in 
order  to  be  used  on  legal  markets.  This  is  where  other 
victims enter  the process:  money  mules attracted  by  cyber 
crooks  through  false  job  offers.  They  are  promised  high 
commissions  just  for  receiving  the  stolen  money  in  their 
bank accounts and then send it to foreign accounts – cyber 
crooks’  accounts. These victims not only get their internet 
security compromised, but also their physical security. 

C.  Working format of internet criminals 

Now  we  design  the  proposed  procedure  to  explain  the 
interface  flanked  by  different  criminals  contained  by  the 
the 
subversive  black  work  market.  Explanation  of 
economic aspects of the fact and for each criminal; we will 
highlight  their  function,  what  sort  of  information  and 
merchandise  they  deal,  and  what  the  widespread  rate  for 
such goods and services. 

1. 

 Virus Creator 

Virus  creator  is  malicious  Internet  users  determined  by 
economic earnings and having  a  very limited of technical 
Knowledge  of  computer-networking  and  programming 
language  skills  .They  are  some  times    able  to  find 
vulnerabilities  in  their  organization,  or  they  make  use  of 
newly  public  disclosed  vulnerabilities  and  the  matching 
system.  In  addition,  those  people  comprise  the  technical 
skills work force that develop their own malware based on 
the original vulnerability intelligence and accessible exploit 
codes.  They  sell  their  operational  tools  and  malware  for 
profit, and offer service to their patrons on demand. 

2.  Website Designers 

The second level of persons involved within this market is 
Website  Designers  [5].  These  persons  attract  visitors  to 
their  website  with  the  assist  of  free  stuff  like  free  online 
movies,  online  gaming,  free  music.  These  websites  then 
deceive their web visitors and put up for sale the transfer or 

488 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                           The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue: 

The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13], 
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.74 

e-ISSN: 2251-7545 

their  load  to  the  Envelopes  pirates,  by  host  these  the  web 
based  Trojans  or  other  viruses,  It  results  the  website 
visitors to  be redirect  via   malicious  web  sites to  new  site  
then assault the victims and  systems roughly. If the bother 
is  positive,  a  portion  of  virus  or  malware  is  install  on  the 
victim’s  appliance.  Web  site  Designer’s  can  also 
negotiation  well  recognized  but 
less  security  safety 
measure web sites by exploit probability that exist on these 
sites  by  means  of  the  line  entrée  on  the  attack  machines, 
they then forward the traffic for this web site to one  more 
infected  mechanism,  i.e.,  they  then  sell  the  traffic  of  their 
victim’s  web  site  to  the  proposed  equipment  of  their 
choice. 

3.  Envelopes Pirates 

Envelope  is  a  term  use  in  the  black  -  market  which  mean  
stolen  hacked  couple  of  accounts  and  passwords,  i.e 
account hacking. We are going to use this term all through 
our  paper.  Envelope  Pirates  have  extremely  less  technical 
acquaintance  and  normally  purchase  ready  to  use  Trojan 
viruses  or  even  malware  generator  as  of  Virus  Creator  or 
Website  Designers  [6].  They  do  this  do  to  initiate  a  web-
based  virus  network  from  which  they  can  make  new 
envelopes.  These  pirates  usually  merge  a  internet  base 
Trojan virus in the midst of a conservative Trojan virus for 
larceny certain envelope and make relation of the generate 
Trojan to the web sites. They sell the harvest envelopes to 
the  third  party  which  can  be  called  as  Non  technical 
persons, which we introduce in the next section. 

4.  Non Technical Persons 

Non Technical Persons don’t contain any specific technical 
data  concerning  hacking  plus  making  programmers  but 
they  have  superior  knowledge  of  the  subversive  black 
market  itself.  If  we  take  example  of  games,  they  know 
which on-line game is at present admired and which profit 
can  be  sold  for  a  good  price.  They  purchase  these 
envelopes  of  account  and  password  from  the  Envelopes 
Pirates, and log-in to the objective in order to steal valuable 
practical possessions like equipment. 

5.  Buyers of Envelopes 

Another  group  of  persons  within  the  entire  subversive  are 
the  Buyers  of  Envelopes,  which  could  also  be  but  not 
require  to  be  Non  Technical  persons.  They  put  in  to  the 
movement part of the industry sequence by set up shops on 
the internet usually found at eBay. The research will show 
us  that  the  Buyers  of  Envelopes  typically  purchase  the 
possessions  from  the  underground  subversive  market  on 
internet  system  with  a  very  less  price.  They  then  can  sell 
them to group of actors on the open markets, making large 

489 

amount of profit due to difference of the money flanked by 
buying a product and further advertising it. 

6.  Players 

Another  party  within  the  whole  underground  are  Players. 
They are always in contact with the Non technical persons 
and  Envelope  Buyers.  These  Players  are  always  on  the 
civic marketplaces, creating a large amount of profit due to 
difference  of  the  money  stuck  between  buying  a  product 
and further selling it. 

7.  Market Trends 

Now the market trends and details of flow of black money 
are  shown  In  Figure1,  we  focus  the  general  idea  of  the 
interface  of  the  individual    inside  the  subversive  black 
market.  The  dealing  between  these  persons  inside  the 
bionetwork  take  place  in  dissimilar  location.  The  business 
between  Envelopes  Buyers,  Virus  creators,  and  Web  site 
Designers  take  place  in  the  hidden  black  market  on 
dissimilar  sort  of  internet  systems.  This  structure  also 
provide  a  marketplace  for  Non  Technical  persons  and 
Envelope Buyers. The movement of possessions is open on 
the  internet.  This  is  owing  to  this  cause  that  player  are 
needed  to  discover  for  weak  control  on  the  movement  of 
stolen possessions. 

V. 

IBM's X-Force Compiled Report 

Every year, IBM's X-Force gives a report as in figure2 on 
the  current  situation  of  computer  security  and  its  results, 
what  were  observed  throughout  the  previous  year  and  its 
expected results for future. 

Figure 1. IBM Report 

X-Force  gave  a  record  tells  us  that  a  large  number  of 
vulnerability  attacks  in  2008  there  numbers  were  around 
7,406 in total. It gives a total increase of 13.5 percent over 
2007. Growth in the Medium and High segments fueled the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue: 

The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13], 
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.74 

e-ISSN: 2251-7545 

year  increase  and  more  than  offset  the  reduced  number  of 
minor flaws. Statistics are shown in figure 3. 

Figure 2. Number of Vulnerabilities 

VII. 

Findings of the Research 

Kaspersky Lab detail for year 2012 

VI. 

 Norton Cyber Crime Report Analysis 

Norton  cyber  crime  report  [7]  for  2011  suggests  431 
million  victims  worldwide  lost  $114  billion.  Whereas 
Norton cyber crime report 2012 tells that cyber crime cost 
556 Million victims in 24 countries nearly $110 Billion in 
the year 2012.The Pi graph representation of the year 2012 
is shown in figure 4. 

Norton cyber crime report for 2011 

The Kaspersky Lab detail [8] for year 2012 is as in figure 
5.  According  to  Kaspersky  antivirus  around  35,000  new 
pieces  of  malware  and  125,000  new  malicious  programs 
appear  every  single  day.  Figure  5  clearly  shows  that  main 
objective  of  viruses  is  to  deliver  and  hide  malicious 
program, then to steal data and extort money. 

The results while getting information from various sources 
also  tell  that  every  minute  as  many  as  232  number 
computers[9] be contaminated by malware  or viruses.  The 
fast  pace  at  which  cyber  criminals  are  developing    novel 
malware  programs  is  to  make  it  difficult  for  worldwide 
organizations  for  internet  security  to  manage  risk.  Most 
significant  defense  system  can  be  an  intelligence  sources 
and  awareness  of  the  potential  risks  in  general  public  at 
national  and  international  level.  In  the  coming  years  the 
mutual  effort  by  law  enforcement  agencies  [10]  and 
industry to get better information sharing and teamwork all 
along  with  the  be  in  motion  towards  intelligence-driven 
security will help in giving response to cyber threats in real 
time.  

Government agencies and industries in many countries are 
already increasing efforts to combat Trojan viruses.  Some 
emerging  countries  in  economy  are  also  experiencing  an 
even  greater  virus  threats  due  to  the  less  concern  from 
security  point  of  view  for  the  attacks  by  cybercriminals. 
Attackers  of  virus  are  also  relocating  their  malicious 
behavior such as phishing hosts, Trojans, bot networks and 
spam  to  extra  other  country  from  where  these  attacks  can 
still  be  directed  at  targets  anywhere  in  world  with  less 
effort from security point of view. However, during year of 
2009  a  large  number  of  targeted  attack  occurred  that 
brought  these  types  of  incidents  into  the  spotlight  of  the 
concerned authorities.  The  large  scale  reporting  of  this 
attack  forced  many  firms  to  examine 
their  security 
infrastructure.  Financially  motivated  attacks  by  such 
persons  against  both  firms  and  individuals  remain  a  great 
part of the threat matrix around us. [11].  

VIII. 

Conclusions 

490 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue: 

The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13], 
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.74 

e-ISSN: 2251-7545 

To  wind  up,  malware’s  main  objective  is  to  deliver  and 
hide  malicious  program,  then  to  steal  data  and  extort 
money.  Now  this  black  market  has  flourished  that  much 
that  many  cybercriminals  are  creating  kits  they  can  sell  to 
new incomers in the underground economy of black market 
money. It helps all inexperienced new virus attackers with 
less technical knowledge to cause attacks without too much 
problem.    It  may  continue  to  process  itself  in  2013  and 
even  beyond  to  keep  on  one  step  further  of  the  ever-
changing  approaches,  which  businesses  use  technology. 
Considering the  factors  interface  of  the  individual  persons 
and the data analysis of IBM &Norton cyber crime report , 
at hand are two methods which could be addressed: first of 
all  technologically  and  second  way  by  educating  staff  to 
the  risks  and  best-practice  required  staying  away  from 
these cyber crimes.  

In the years to come we may see gradually more and 
multifaceted  malicious  software  which  are 
intended 
purposely  to  be  stealthy,  something  which  enterprise  must 
to  be  extremely  conscious  of.  Making  staff  aware  of  the 
rising  hazards  accessible  by  smart  phones  and  further 
portable digital devices. Since these are in use by more and 
more  people,  cyber-criminals  will  take  advantage  of  this 
tendency  and 
smugness.  People  must 
comprehend that these devices are  highly complicated and 
capable of having malicious code. Technologically, beside 
the 
system 
administrators  ought  to  run  usual  anti-root  kit  sweep  as 
normal  practice.  With  a  conventional  antivirus  way  out 
may  not  be  sufficient  to  guard  against  a  number  of  of  the 
most  recent  forms  of  malware,  so  a  layered  approach  in 

and  malware 

updates 

linked 

scans, 

usual 

the 

blend  with  dedicated  anti-malware  solutions  would  be 
necessary  and  important.  Thus  beneficiaries  of  this  study 
are  industry,  computer  security  officials,  law  enforcement 
agencies,  and  in  general  anyone  interested  in  better 
understanding cybercrime from the offender point of view. 

References 

[1]  M. Howard, J. Pincus, and J. Wing, “Measuring relative attack surfaces," 

Comp. Sec. in the 21st Century, pp. 109-137, 2005. 

[2]  P. K. Manadhata and J. M. Wing, “An attack surface metric,"  TSE, vol. 

37, pp. 371-386, 2011. 

[3] 

Symantec Global Internet Security Threat Report: Trends for 2009,     

vol. 15, April 2010. 

[4]  L. Wang, A. Singhal, and S. Jajodia, “Measuring the overall security of 
network configurations using attack graphs," in Proc. of DAS'07, 2007, 
pp. 98-112. 

[5]  P.  Mell  and  K.  Scarfone,  A  Complete  Guide  to  the  Common 

Vulnerability Scoring System Version 2.0. CMU, 2007. 

[6]  A.  Ozment,  “Improving  vulnerability  discovery  models,"  in  Proc.  of 

QoP'07, ser. QoP '07. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2007, pp. 6-11. 

[7] 
[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

Norton Cybercrime Report, 2012. 
Kaspersky  Lab  Antivirus  Protection  Insternet  Security,  [Online], 
Available: 

October 

2012, 

29, 

on 

Retrieved 
http://www.kaspersky.com/… 

A.  Arora,  R.  Krishnan,  A.  Nandkumar,  R.  Telang,  and  Y.  Yang, 
“Impact of vulnerability disclosure and patch availability-an empirical 
analysis," in Proc. of WEIS'04, 2004. 

S.  Ransbotham  and  S.  Mitra,  “Choice  and  chance:  A  conceptual 
model  of  paths  to  information  security  compromise,"  ISR,  vol.  20, 
2009. 

Joel  Hruska,  IBM:  Malware  Economics,  Web  Security  Biggest 
Issues  of  2008,  [Online],  Retrieved  on  October  14,  2012,  Available: 
http://arstechnica.com/security/2009/02/malware-economics-web-
security-major-issues-in-2008 

491 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
