                               The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue:  

The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13], 
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.115 

e-ISSN: 2251-7545 

A Security Plan for Smart Grid Systems  

Based On AGC4ISR 

Ghazal Riahi 

Faculty of Computer Science & IT, Payame Noor University,  

Assaluyeh, Iran  

Email: G.riahy@gmail.com 

Abstract —This paper is proposed a security plan for Smart 

Smart  Grid  will  be  characterized  by  a  two-way  flow  of 

Grid  Systems  based  on  AGC4ISR  which  is  an  architecture  for 

electricity  and  information  to  create  an  automated,  widely 

Autonomic  Grid  Computing Systems. Smart  Grid incorporates 

distributed  energy  delivery  network.  Cyber  security  [9]  to 

has  many 

benefits 

of 

distributed 

computing 

and 

prevent unauthorized use of harm, exploitation [10], address 

communications  to  deliver  a  real-time  information  and  enable 

and,  if  necessary,  restoration  of  electronic  information  and 

the  near-instantaneous  balance  of  supply  and  demand  at  the 

device level. AGC4ISR architecture is Organized by Autonomic 

Grid  Computing 

and  C4ISR 

(Command,  Control, 

Communications,  Computers  and  Intelligence,  Surveillance,  & 

Reconnaissance)  Architecture.  In  this  paper  we  will  present  a 

solution for as security plan which will be  consider encryption, 

intrusion  detection,  key  management  and  detail  of  cyber 

communications  systems  and  services  (and  the  information 

contained  therein)  to  ensure  confidentiality  [11],  integrity 

[12] and availability. 

The Smart Grid provides a reliable power supply and self-

healing  power  systems, 

through 

the  use  of  digital 

information,  automated  control,  and  autonomous  systems. 

security in Smart Grids. In this paper we use the cryptography 

The  Smart  Grid  is  “green”.  It  means  that  with  reduce 

for the packet in the C4ISR and we use a key management for 

greenhouse  gases  and  with  supports  renewable  energy 

send  and  receive  a  packet  in  the  smart  grid  because  it  is 

sources,  and  enables  the  replacement  of  gasoline-powered 

necessary for intelligent networks to keeping away from packet 

missing. 

Keywords—Security  Plan,  Encryption,  Intrusion  Detection, 

Key management, C4ISR, AGC4ISR, SAGC4ISR. 

I.INTRODUCTION 

vehicles with plug-in electric vehicles. The Smart Grid [7, 8] 

continuously  monitors  itself  to  detect  unsafe  that  could 

detract  from  its  high  reliability  and  safe  operation.  Higher 

cyber  security  is  built  in  to  all  systems  and  operations 

including  physical  plant  monitoring,  cyber  security,  and 

privacy protection of all users and customers. 

Additional risks to the grid include: 

The  term  “Smart  Grid”  [1]  refers  to  a  modernization  of 

the  electricity  delivery  system  so  it  monitors  protects  and 

 

Increased  use  of  digital  information  and  controls 

technology to improve reliability, security, and efficiency of 

automatically  optimizes  the  operation  of  its  interconnected 

the electric grid [1]. 

elements.  It  incorporates  into  the  grid  the  benefits  of 

distributed  computing  and  communications  to  deliver  real-

 

Increasing 

the  complexity  of 

the  grid  could 

introduce  vulnerabilities  and  increase  exposure  to  potential 

time  information  and  enable  the  near-instantaneous  balance 

attackers and unintentional errors [2]; 

of supply and demand at the device level. This means that the 

760 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue:  

The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13], 
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.115 

e-ISSN: 2251-7545 

 

Dynamic  optimization  of  grid  operations  and 

A.  Encryption  

resources, with full cyber security [1]; 

The security of an encryption method should not depend 

 

Increased  number  of  entry  points  and  paths  for 

on keeping the method secret (i.e. keeping the description of 

potential adversaries to exploit; and Potential for compromise 

the  algorithm  secret),  but  should  depend  solely  on  keeping 

of  data  confidentiality,  including  the  breach  of  customer 

the  key  secret.  To  avoid  attempts  at  smart  grid  activities, 

privacy [2]. 

response  metrics,  capabilities,  monitoring  and  detection 

techniques,  voice  and  data  encryption  are  critical  at 

maintaining  confidentiality  of  the  operational  information. 

Traditionally  [3],  this  would  be 

limited  to 

the  main 

communications  channels,  but  in  a  C4ISR  context  these 

concerns  should  also  address  sensor  data  sources  such  as 

cameras, 

and  biochemical  detection  devices.  This 

requirement is known as the Kerckhoff Principle. These days 

[4], most encryption algorithms are actually made public and 

are  described  in  standards  and  specifications.  Decryption 

keys should be selected in such a  way that it is not possible 

Figure 1 Smart Grid Framework[23] 

for an attacker to guess them. 

Communication  and  collaboration  services  provide 

functionality to communicate and share information. Services 

include  collection,  processing  and  dissemination  of 

information  on  the  situation  [23].  Operational  data  services 

and to evaluate the influence of other parties and also for the 

protection  of  state  information  about  its  status.  Command 

and control services in order to support decision making and 

handling.  Run  and  C4ISR 

systems  connected  and 

environmental  factors  are  involved  in  the  information  flow 

control support obligation. 

Cryptanalyst  point  of  view,  the  problem  is  the  three 

variations of attacks. When he has a lot of encoded text and 

any  text  with  just  the  encoded  text  has  problems.  Codes  in 

the puzzle section of newspapers seems to have these kind of 

issues. When the cryptanalyst has some encoded text and the 

same text, the problem is known to be difficult text. Finally, 

when  the  cryptanalyst  has  the  ability  to  encrypt  text 

fragments and adequate facilities to prepare his defense, and 

he  is  now  issue  a  text  is  selected.  Newspaper  cryptograms 

cryptanalyst can be broken down to detail allows you to ask 

questions such as "What is encryption ABCDEFGHIJKL?'' 

Control  layer  contains  functions  that  support  all  of  the 

features  required  by  the  above  mentioned  services  and 

B. 

Intrusion Detection 

features  such  as  security,  mobility,  and  available  used. 

There  are  several  reasons  why  system-wide  intrusion 

Convergence  layer  ensures  that  it  can  connect  to  a  unified 

detection  and  reporting  is  important  to  DoD.  The  encoding 

manner based on Internet Protocol (IP) and a variety of fixed 

strategies,  mechanisms  to  enable  C4ISR  intrusion  detection 

and wireless networks, belonging to the connection layer can 

has  become  an  imperative.  Most  of  the  monitoring  system, 

be used is done. 

traditional intrusion detection should be the integrated control 

Now we want explain some security strategy in smart grid 

system  that  ties  into  the  infrastructure  of  C4ISR  integration 

and  C4ISR.  Also 

in 

this  case  we  discussion  about 

to provide alerts when a system is compromised when it has 

Encryption, Intrusion Detection, Key Management. 

already been compromised prevent the compromised system 

without  alerting  the  intruder,  and  helps  coordinate  the 

761 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue:  

The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13], 
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.115 

e-ISSN: 2251-7545 

response to identify and arrest the intruder. First [24, 25], and 

II. 

SECURITY PLATFORMS 

obviously,  when  an  intrusion  is  detected  and  reported,  the 

In  this  case  we  want  discussion  about  Cyber  security  in 

considerable resources of the Department of Defense can be 

C4ISR system and Smart Grid system. 

brought to bear to trace the intruder, to  prevent or minimize 

damage,  and 

to  end 

the 

intrusion.  Second,  following 

A.  Cyber Security in C4ISR Systems 

neutralization  of  the  intrusion,  vulnerabilities  in  given 

    Any  computer  network  or  information  system  is 

systems  can  be  remedied  not  only  at  the  location  of  the 

vulnerable  to  two  types  of  attacks  i.e.  passive  attacks  and 

intrusion,  but  throughout  the  DoD  and  other  governmental 

active attacks. The passive attacks can be traffic analysis and 

locations where similar systems may be in operation. Finally, 

release  of  message  contents.  Passive  attacks  are  generally 

a  widespread  information  warfare  threat  to  national  security 

very  difficult  to  detect,  however,  encryption  is  a  common 

as  opposed  to  discrete  localized  challenges  to  individual 

technique  to  prevent  passive  attacks.  Active  attacks  involve 

operations and systems can only be identified if intrusions are 

modification of data streams or the creation of false streams. 

detected and reported on a system-wide basis. 

These 

types  of  attacks  fall 

into  four  categories 

i.e. 

masquerade,  replay,  modification  of  messages  and  denial  of 

C.  Key management 

service  (DoS)[15,  16].  Appropriate  security  mechanisms  are 

A  public-key  and  symmetric  key  combined  approach  is 

designed  and  used  to  detect,  prevent,  or  recover  from  a 

proposed for simplicity and scalability of key management as 

security 

attack.  Various 

security  mechanisms 

are 

well  as  other  desirable  properties.  Secret  and  private  keys 

encipherment,  digital  signatures,  access  control,  data 

from disclosure and modification should always be protected 

integrity,  authentication  exchange,  traffic  padding,  routing 

for the entire life cycle of a button. When creating keys, weak 

control,  notarization,  trusted  functionality,  security  label, 

keys  should  be  rejected.  The  transition  between  the  two 

event detection, auditing, recovery, etc. 

partners  have  a  secret  key  for  symmetric  encryption  via  a 

 Nowadays, 

the 

increasing  reliance  on 

information 

secure channel. The keys are stored securely. If the key is no 

technology,  computer  and  communication  for  military 

longer  needed,  it  should  be  destroyed  in  a  reliable  manner. 

operations there. These factors have made the enemies of the 

The  symmetric  key  [17]  scheme  is  based  on  the  Needham-

hot 

IT 

infrastructure.  C4ISR  all  about 

integration, 

Schroeder authentication protocol, and the public key scheme 

interoperability  and  networking  in  many  systems,  and  it  is 

is  based  on  elliptic  curve  cryptography  for  high  efficiency 

such a large system as we can make it a "system" is. Hence, 

and  strong  security.  The  use  of  public  keys  also  has  a  nice 

more  and  more  opportunities  to  attack  opponents.  These 

property that no static symmetric key is needed between data 

forces  C4ISR  system  designers  additional  measures  against 

aggregators and collectors; this eliminates the possibility that 

enemy attacks, intelligent and determined to make the system 

symmetric keys could be compromised, and it also avoids the 

secure against this type of attack. 

overhead of managing symmetric keys. 

There  are  four  general  vulnerabilities 

that  can  be 

Now in this paper we want to use security platforms that 

experienced  in  C4ISR  systems.  Those  are  unauthorized 

used  both  of  cryptography  and  key  management.  Because  it 

access  to  data,  clandestine  alteration  of  data,  identity  fraud 

is  the  important  architecture  [21,  22]  and  just  one  security 

and  denial  of  service  (DoS)[16].  All  of  these  vulnerabilities 

plan it is not enough. so we have to use both of cryptography 

may  have  the  catastrophic  effects  on  national  interests  of  a 

and key management in the same time. 

country.  For  example,  unauthorized  access  to  data  on  a  C4I 

computer  may  result  in  inflicting  severe  damage  to  a  nation 

by  obtaining  and  using  classified  or  unclassified  sensitive 

762 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue:  

The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13], 
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.115 

e-ISSN: 2251-7545 

information  by  an  adversary.  Similarly,  military  planning 

The  world  has  become  more  unpredictable  and  more 

may be severely affected if clandestine alteration of data on a 

unstable, and new risks have emerged, in particular computer 

C4I computer is done by the enemy. The identity fraud may 

attacks.  Cyber  security  of  digital  information  worldwide 

result  in  modification  of  situational  awareness  through 

network  connection  and  speed  up  the  software  is  released. 

insertion  of  unwanted/changed  information,  issuing  of  fake 

Document automation and paperless exchange fundamentally 

orders,  etc.  All  these  will  affect  the  morale  and  effective 

changed  economic  environment,  social  and  political  life  of 

working  of  the  defense  forces.  By  application  of  DoS  on  a 

the United Nations, they are more vulnerable. 

C4I  system,  the  time  critical  operational  planning  and 

completion of tasks may be affected. 

B.  Cyber Security for Smart Grid System 

   Security  in  C4ISR  systems  is  a  two  dimensional 

In Smart grids cyber security we want check that what is 

problem.  Firstly,  it  means  the  physical  security  of  the 

the important problem in this case. So now we should explain 

facilities  where  different  components/parts  of  the  larger 

that:  

system  of  systems  are  installed.  No  one  can  do  this  better 

Cyber  Security  Model.  Like  for  any  other  network’s 

than  the  military.  However,  the  second  part  which  is  more 

security, the three main objectives that cyber security focuses 

demanding  and  challenging  is  the  information  security 

on  is  availability,  integrity,  and  confidentiality,  that  is, 

(INFOSEC)[5 , 6] which may be called as cyber security; as 

availability  of  power  with  integrity  of  information  and 

it is not clearly understood at all the levels.  

confidentiality of customer’s information. 

The  C4ISR  systems  require  appropriate  measures  and 

 

Availability.  The reason  why  we  have smart grid is 

requirements  for  the  vulnerabilities  discussed  above  for 

“availability”.  The  basic  goal  of  our  network  is  to  provide 

achieving  confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability  of  data 

uninterrupted  power  supply  to  the  users  and  to  match  user 

and  maintaining  system  configuration  through  elaborate 

requirements. 

security  guidelines  and 

accountability  of  personnel 

 

Confidentiality. The grid network is responsible  for 

authorized  to  access  the  information  sources.  Following 

the  protection  of  a  user’s  information.  If  the  data  is  not 

security  services  are 

required 

to  cater 

the  security 

protected, ample information  about the  user can be revealed 

requirements[16]: 

to the attacker. 

•  Authentication:  ascertaining  the  user  identity  through 

 

Integrity.  The  messages received from the  user end 

various  means  such  as  passwords,  fingerprints,  digital 

should  be  authenticated.  The  network  must  ensure  the 

certificates, etc. 

information  is  not  tampered.  Also,  the  source  of  message 

•  Access  Control:  Permission  or  authority  to  perform 

should be authentic. 

specified actions as authorized in policy guidelines. 

Security  for  the  Smart  Grid  information  and  control 

•  Data  Confidentiality:  protection  of  data  against 

networks must include requirements for: [2] 

unauthorized disclosure. 

 

security  policies,  procedures,  and  protocols 

to 

•  Data  Integrity:  The  assurance  that  data  received  and  is 

protect  Smart  Grid  information  and  commands  in  transit  or 

same as transmitted by authorized user. 

residing in devices and systems;  

• Non-repudiation: Providing protection against denial by 

 

authentication  policies,  procedures,  and  protocols; 

participants once participated in communication. 

and  

•  Availability:  Ensuring  availability  of  a  capability  or 

system at all times or whenever desired/required. 

 

Security  policies,  procedures,  protocols,  and 

controls 

to  protect 

infrastructure  components  and 

the 

interconnected networks.  

763 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue:  

The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13], 
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.115 

e-ISSN: 2251-7545 

Privacy and security: The latest, a strong need for privacy 

channels  with  different  bandwidth.  AES  encryption  which 

and  security  for  smart  grid 

there.  Confidentiality  of 

produce the same number of  output bits as input bits. It can 

information relating to individuals, for example, information 

compress  a  bit  too  much,  because  they  are  encrypted  and 

about  the  location  of  vehicles  and  equipment  or  the  use  of 

random in nature. If you need to compress the data, we need 

energy.  Traditional  access  control  mechanisms  are  useful  to 

to  do  before  encryption.  Another  factor  to  be  considered 

prevent unwanted access. However, many situations in which 

based  cryptographic  message  authentication  code  (CMAC), 

it  is  granted  access  to  the  original  data,  but  data  is  further 

which  was  added  as  a  fixed  overhead  to  a  message  is 

limited.  It  also  rules  that  may  apply  to  specific  data  is 

typically 64 bits or 96 bits. The overhead itself is remarkable 

released.  Means  used  to  express  constraints  and  technical 

that  we  are  dealing  with  SMS,  because  they  require  large 

limitations of such  should be supported. So, for example,  in 

bandwidth channel. 

the case of policies should be adapted to allow the WWW is 

a  network  aware  privacy.  In  addition,  the  smart  grid, 

including  participants  with  very  high  security  requirements. 

Participants can access the destructive effects of the disaster. 

Therefore, the communication architecture should be a strong 

sense of security that provides participant at risk,  while still 

allowing access to / from the network remaining (open) grid. 

III. 

A SECURITY PLATFORM FOR SAGC4ISR 

In  order  to  obtain  cyber  security,  we  must  use  different 

keys for data encryption and secure. In this section, we study 

the  various  aspects 

related 

to  encryption  and  key 

management.  We  first  through  the  limitations  of  encryption 

issues and solutions relate to the encryption and then go. 

A.  Constraints 

In this part we wand explain some of the restriction in the 

AGC4ISR [18] and SAGC4ISR [19] which are introduced by 

Mehdi Bahrami et al.: 

Computational constraints. Residential  meters limitations 

when  it  comes  to  computing  power  and  the  ability  to  store 

cryptographic material. Future device requires a fundamental 

cryptographic  functionality,  including  the  ability  to  support 

symmetric  encryption  for  authentication.  Using  low  cost 

hardware  with  embedded  encryption  is  necessary,  but  not 

sufficient 

to  achieve  high  availability, 

integrity  and 

confidentiality of the SAGC4ISR architecture. 

Channel  bandwidth.  Communication  that  will  take  place 

in  a  SAGC4ISR  architecture  will  take  place  over  different 

Figure 2 Four Dimensions of Architecture Integration [20] 

There are four dimensions of architecture integration [20] 

that represent varying degrees of integration scope. Figure  2 

illustrates  these four  dimensions  in  context  with  a  global, 

hierarchical   view   of   war   fighter  operations   and  support. 

Note  that  the  need  to  integrate  multiple  architecture  views 

and  descriptions  is  certainly  not  limited  to  Joint  or  cross-

organizational considerations. The Framework is intended to 

facilitate all four integration dimensions. 

A  first  dimension  involves  a  single  organization  and  its 

operations within a single “echelon.” This single organization 

is  different  from  multi-level  organization  such  as  [8]. In 

 addition  to  the obvious need  to interrelate  the  three  views 

 (and   associated  products)  of  an  Army  tactical  architecture, 

in this case there may be multiple architectures - at  the  same 

 echelon that  cover  different functional areas or viewpoints 

that need to be interrelated,  depending  on  the  purpose  and 

scope  of  the  initiative.  For  example,  the  Army  may  be 

764 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue:  

The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13], 
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.115 

e-ISSN: 2251-7545 

investigating  more  cost-effective  means  of  providing 

logistics  support  to  troops  in  the  field.  This  may   involve 

B. 

Issues of public cryptography 

integrating  the  architecture   views   that   reflect  a   war 

Entropy.  Generation  of  cryptographic  keys  required  to 

fighting  perspective   with   the   views   reflecting   a  logistics-

create an event that is a good source of entropy is unavailable 

support  perspective  to  assess tradeoffs between  C4ISR and 

for many devices. 

logistics investment options. We can  use  this dimension  on 

Cipher  suites.  Cryptographic  suite  that  is  open  about  the 

  autonomic   grid  by   tactical  architecture   for   manage   as 

need to achieve interoperability. Deciding on a block cipher 

 hierarchy  in   grid  networks  because  some   time   we   need 

mode,  the  size  of  the  key  and  asymmetric  ciphers  based 

 mange autonomic node on the network. 

authentication operations. 

A second dimension illustrated in figure 2 still involves a 

Key  management  issues.  Security  protocol  depends  on 

single  organization  (Army),  but 

the 

integration  scope 

the  security  forum.  There  are  two  types  of  security  that  can 

expands  vertically 

to 

include  Army  operations  across 

be  recognized:  (1)  using  a  secret  key,  and  (2)  use  of  a 

multiple  echelons.  In  this  particular  case,  the  organization 

certificate  authority.  If  using  secret  keys,  keys  to  be 

may  be  examining  opportunities  to  streamline  its  operations 

transferred from one device to another. The key to shipping, 

or investments from top to bottom. 

we  need  a  set  of  keys  for  each  pair  of  devices  that  need  to 

A 

third 

integration  dimension 

involves  architecture 

communicate  and  be  well  coordinated.  There  is  also  a 

initiatives that cross-cut multiple organizations (U.S.  And/or 

hardware  alternative  to  this,  but  these  options  are  expensive 

multi-national)  horizontally,  within  a  single  echelon.   An 

and  involve  a  lot  of  overhead.  Digital  certificates  as  an 

example   of   this  dimension   is   an   architecture  whose 

affordable  solution  to  turn  coordination  is  not  required  as  it 

objective  is  to  investigate  opportunities  for  the  various 

was  in  the  public  key  system.  Each  device  requires  only  a 

components  of  DoD  to  exploit  or 

 leverage 

 National 

license  key  and  a  private  key  is  for  management  of  the 

 information 

infrastructure 

 capabilities  and 

 in 

 grid 

installation  is  stable.  However,  PKI  produces  documents  as 

computing so. 

well  as  having  a  certain  amount  of  overhead  may  be 

A   fourth   dimension   of   integration   involves  multiple 

unnecessary for smaller systems. 

organizations  and   multiple  echelons,  where  vertical   and 

Elliptic 

Curve 

Cryptography. 

Cryptographic 

 horizontal  Joint  relationships   need  to  be   articulated   and 

Interoperability  Strategy  (CIS)  by  the  National  Security 

examined.  An  example  of  this  dimension  is  an  architecture 

Agency  (NSA)  approved  encryption  method  of  choice  for 

whose focus is on assessing the effectiveness of intelligence 

government  system  started.  Of  128  or  256-bit  AES 

information  support  to  the  war  fighter.  This  could  involve 

encryption  is  made  for.  Ephemeral  Diffie-Hellman  key 

examining  tradeoffs  between  hierarchical  support  policies 

management model and integrated applications, elliptic curve 

and  practices,  e.g.,  theater-  based  Joint  Intelligence  Center 

digital  signature  algorithm  and  a  secure  hash  algorithm 

dissemination 

to 

lower-echelon 

users 

and 

direct 

(SHA) for hashing. 

dissemination from collectors to forces. 

Connection. Many devices can connect to the key server, 

C.  Encryption and key management solutions 

certificate  authority  certificates,  online  status,  and  no 

In  this  part  we  want  explain  some  of  advantage  and 

protocol 

server.  Many 

SAGC4ISR 

architecture 

disadvantage of Encryption and key management: 

communications  between  devices  connected  to  the  Internet 

General design considerations 

for longer than is typical. 

 

Encryption  should  be  such  that  the  robust  design 

method and the algorithm is free of defects. 

765 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue:  

The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13], 
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.115 

e-ISSN: 2251-7545 

 

The  number  of  random  bits  of  entropy  can  be 

 

Confirmed the issue of certificate policies for which 

achieved by seeds deterministic generator (RBG) prior to the 

the certificate is being used. 

distribution  or  use  of  the  derivative  of  a  function  key  that 

These system can be studied in detail from [13, 14]. 

comes with the device has been solved. 

The  SAGC4ISR  systems  require  appropriate  measures 

 

The  use  of  cryptographic  modules  that  are  used  to 

and  requirements  for  the  vulnerabilities  discussed  above  for 

protect the encryption algorithm. We need time to update this 

achieving  confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability  of  data 

module, the intelligent network can be used for about twenty 

and  maintaining  system  configuration  through  elaborate 

years and replacing them can be an expensive affair. 

security  guidelines  and 

accountability  of  personnel 

 

Encryption  system  failures  may  occur  due 

to 

authorized  to  access  the  information  sources.  Following 

implementation errors, failures, hybrid algorithms,  unsafe  or 

security  services  are 

required 

to  cater 

the  security 

improper  protocol  is  secure.  These  should  be  considered  in 

requirements:  Authentication,  Access  Control,  Data 

the design. 

Confidentiality,  Data  Integrity,  Non-repudiation,  availability 

 

Of the  random number generator is an integral part 

that describe all of them in C4ISR security. And also we can 

of  the  security  system,  breaking  it  protocol  or  encryption 

use the Security for the Smart Grid information that survey in 

algorithm is a compromise. 

the past part. 

 

Should  be 

replaced  by 

authentication 

and 

In  past  part  explain  autonomic  grid  in  C4ISR  and  create 

authorization methods cannot be connected to other systems. 

AGC4ISR  architecture,  after  that  explaining  the  Smart  grid 

 

Availability  must  always  exist  as  dropping  or 

refusing  to  re-establish  a  connection,  it  may  affect  the  life 

connection. 

 

Algorithm  and  key  length  should  be  such  that  the 

desired security strength is obtained. 

 

In order to maintain the security of keying material 

and data authentication, we need it from unauthorized access 

or  manipulation  of  devices  to  protect.  Physical  security  is 

needed for this purpose. 

Key management system for intelligent networks. 

We are using a certificate that is valid, that the certificate 

is  not  expired.  If  the  certificate  is  issued  to  a  device  that  is 

more  reliable,  or  lost  or  stolen,  then  the  certificate  can  be 

revoked. Certificate revocation lists are used for this purpose. 

A  device  that  uses  the  information  in  the  certificate,  the 

relying party (RP). Czech RP a list that should be considered 

in the admission certificate. 

The following points need to be checked 

 

 

 

If the trusted CA certificate has been issued; 

If the certificate is valid and not expired; 

The certificate shall be valid CRL, 

and  added 

to  AGC4ISR  architecture  and  create 

the 

SAGC4ISR architecture. But now we want discussion about 

the very important problem in SAGC4ISR, it is security. 

In this paper we explain some of the security plan that its 

normal for all the network and architecture but now we want 

to use them in our problem. 

For  description  this  problem,  organization  all  parts 

connected with security plan that explained in last part. 

Now we try to use a security plan in this organization: 

First  dimension  take  decisions  like  echelon  from  top  to 

bottom  in  every  organization.  This  decision  need  to  some 

primary information that after hoarding and spent more time, 

people can take decision. But now the important problem in 

this  part  is  security,  because  it  a  natural  part  of  C4ISR  and 

should  be  use  the  strong  security  plan  in  this  part.  Also 

propose  that  use  at  beginning  the  cryptography  for  had  the 

safe  packet  and  for  sent  to  the  next  layer  use  the  key 

management. 

Second  dimension  is  connected  with  different  systems 

that say in last part. Also we need a very secure packet in this 

layer. In last part used the cryptography for all packets,  now 

766 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue:  

The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13], 
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.115 

e-ISSN: 2251-7545 

for connect to another systems can use  the  key management 

[2] G. Locke,P. Gallagher “NIST Framework and Roadmap for Smart Grid 

too. 

Third dimension is computing part. In this part smart grid 

Interoperability  Standards”,  Office  of  the  National  Coordinator  for  Smart 

Grid Interoperability , January 2010. 

[3]  Monica  F.  Farah-Stapleton  et  al.,  “Proposing  a  C4ISR  Architecture 

can  be  get  the  knowledge  and  computing  them  and  sent  to 

Methodology for Homeland Security” 

next  and  specialist  grid.  This  part  Except  for  saving  time 

[4]  Fraunhofer-InstitutSichereTelekooperation  (FhI-SIT).,”Encryption  and 

makes  the  calculations  to  ensure  accuracy  improve.  So  this 

Digital Sig-natures” 

part need to have a secure packet for receive and sent. In last 

[5]  Junaid  Ahmed  Zubairi.  et  al.,”Cyber  Security  Standards,Practices  and 

Industrial Applications: Systems and Methodologies” 

part  that  used  the  cryptography  for  the  packet  and  key 

[6] G. Iyer and P. Agrawal, “Smart power grids,” in Proceedings of the 2010 

management for sending to the next part. So in this part after 

42nd  Southeastern  Symposium  on  System  Theory  (SSST  2010),  pp.  152–

that computing can use that algorithm again. 

155, March 2010. 

Fourth  dimension  is  comported  merging  and  sharing 

[7]  Z.  Vale,  H.  Morais,  P.  Faria,  H.  Khodr,  J.  Ferreira,  and  P.  Kadar, 

“Distributed  energy  resourcesmanagement  with  cyberphysical  SCADA  in 

organization that  how to survey connect this organization to 

the  context  of  future  smart  grids,”  in  Proceedings  of  the  15th  IEEE 

another  organization  or  even  different  nationality.  This 

Mediterranean  Electrotechnical  Conference  (MELECON  2010),  pp.  431–

relation  is  possible  vertically  with  the  same  organization  or 

436, April 2010. 

horizontally with top or button organization. In this part sent 

[8]    Mehdi  Bahrami,  "A  Novel  Self-Recognition  Method  for  Autonomic 

Grid  Networks  Case  Study:  Advisor  Labor  Law  Software  Application." 

and  receive  the  packet  to  another  organization  and  use  the 

Advances in Information Sciences and Service Sciences 3.5 (2011).. 

security  plan,  dependence  to  Destination  organization.  But 

[9]    G.  N.  Ericsson,  “Cyber  security  and  power  system  communication— 

we propose that use key management, because it is designed 

for intelligent networks. So percent of the packet or the key is 

missing it is too few. 

essential parts of a smart grid infrastructure,”  IEEE Transactions on Power 

Delivery, vol. 25, no. 3, Article ID 5452993, pp. 1501–1507, 2010. 

[10] F. Boroomand, A. Fereidunian, M. A. Zamani et al., “Cyber security for 

smart  grid:  a  human-automation  interaction  framework,”  in  Proceedings  of 

Now  we  can  use  this  security  plan  for  SAGC4ISR.  It 

the  IEEE  PES  Innovative  Smart  Grid  Technologies  Conference  Europe 

means  that  we  can  match  every  four  parts  of  AGC4ISR 

architecture  and  SAGC4ISR  architecture  and  create  a  new 

safe architecture.  

IV. 

CONCLUSION 

To the best of our knowledge, at first we deliberation the 

(ISGT Europe 2010), pp. 1–6, October 2010. 

[11] 

“Cyberspace 

policy 

review,” 

http://www.whitehouse.gov/ 

assets/documents/Cyberspace Policy Review final.pdf. 

[12]  “Guidelines  for  smart  grid  cyber  security  vol.  1,  smart  grid  cyber 

security, 

architecture 

and 

high-level 

requirements,” 

2010, 

http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistir/ir7628/nistir- 7628 vol1.pdf. 

[13] 

“Advanced 

encryption 

standard 

(AES),” 

2001, 

http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips197/fips-197 .pdf. 

Smart  grids  with  advantage  and  disadvantage  of  cyber 

[14]  “Implementation  guidance  for  FIPS  PUB  140-2  and  the  cryptographic 

security. In this time, study about some security model. 

module 

validation,” 

2010, 

http://csrc.nist.gov/ 

After  that  we  observation  the  detail  of  some  cyber 

security and security plan in Smart Grids and C4ISR.  

groups/STM/cmvp/documents/fips140-2/FIPS1402IG.pdf. 

[15] ”Computer Networks”, Andrew S. Tanenbaum. 

[16] Stallings, W. (2003). Cryptography and network security principles and 

Finally  deliberation  the  encryption  and  key  management 

practices (3rd ed.). 

for  SAGC4ISR  and  also  result  of  them  is  we  can  use  the 

[17]  ”Fault-Tolerant  and  Scalable  Key  Management  for  Smart  Grid”, 

security plan for SAGC4ISR that discussion in last part. 

Dapeng Wu and Chi Zhou. 

REFERENCES 

[18]  Mehdi  Bahrami,  Ahmad  Faraahi,  and  Amir  Masoud  Rahmani. 

"AGC4ISR,  New  Software  Architecture  for  Autonomic  Grid  Computing." 

Intelligent  Systems,  Modelling  and  Simulation  (ISMS),  2010  International 

[1] D. Dollen,” Report to NIST on the Smart Grid Interoperability Standards 

Conference on. IEEE, 2010. 

Roadmap”, June 17. 2009. 

[19] Mehdi Bahrami, Marziyeh Shahrazadfard, and Tooba Kerdkar. "NSSA: 

A  New  Enterprise  Architecture  for  Network  Setup  without  Any  Network 

767 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               The International Journal of Soft Computing and Software Engineering [JSCSE], Vol. 3, No. 3, Special Issue:  

The Proceeding of International Conference on Soft Computing and Software Engineering 2013 [SCSE’13], 
San Francisco State University, CA, U.S.A., March 2013 
Doi: 10.7321/jscse.v3.n3.115 

e-ISSN: 2251-7545 

Infrastructure."Intelligent Systems, Modelling and Simulation (ISMS), 2011 

Second International Conference on. IEEE, 2011. 

 [20]  US  DoD,  “C4ISR  Architecture  Framework  Version  2.0”,  U.S.  DoD 

Publisher, USA, Dec 1997. 

[21]  Len  Bass,   Paul  Clements,   Rick  Kazman,  "Software   Architecture   in 

 Practice",  Addison Wesley, Second Edition, 2003. 

[22]  B.  Boehm,    "Engineering   Context,"  Proceedings   of   the   First 

 International 

 Workshop  on 

 Architectures 

 for 

 Software 

 Systems. 

 Available  as 

 CMU-CS-TR-95-151 

 from 

 the 

 School 

 of  Computer 

 Science,  Carnegie  Mellon  University, April 1995. 

[23]  C4ISR  FOR  NETWORK-ORIENTED  DEFENSE,  Ericsson  AB  2006, 

White Paper, October 2006. 

[24]  ”Semantic  Web  Technologies  for  a  Smart  Energy  Grid:  Requirements 

and Challenges?”,Andreas Wagner, et al. 

 [25] 

”INFORMATION  AGE  ANTHOLOGY:  National  Security 

Implications of the Information Age”, DAVID  S. ALBERTS and DANIEL 

S. PAPP. 

768 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
