A. Anwar, A. Mahmood, "Cyber security of smart grid infrastructure", The State of the Art in Intrusion Prevention 
and Detection, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, USA, January 2014, pp. 449-472. 

Cyber Security of Smart Grid Infrastructure 

Adnan Anwar, Abdun Naser Mahmood 
School of Engineering and Information Technology 
University of New South Wales 
Canberra, Australia 

Abstract: 

Smart  grid  security  is  crucial  to  maintain  stable  and  reliable  power  system  operation  during  the 

contingency situation due to the failure of any critical power system component. Ensuring a ‘secured 

smart grid’ involves with a less possibility of power grid collapse or equipment malfunction. Due to 

lack  of  the  proper  ‘security  measures’,  a  major  blackout  may  occur  which  can  even  lead  to  a 

cascading  failure.  Therefore,  to  protect  this  critical  power  system  infrastructure  and  to  ensure  a 

reliable  and  an  uninterrupted  power  supply  to  the  end  users,  smart  grid  security  issues  must  be 

addressed with high priority. 

In a smart grid environment, electric power infrastructure is modernized by incorporating the current 

and  future  requirements  and  advanced  functionalities  to  its  consumers.  To  make  the  smart  grid 

happen,  cyber  system  is  integrated  with  the  physical  power  system.  Although  adoption  of  cyber 

system has made the grid more energy efficient and modernized, it has introduced cyber-attack issues 

which  are  critical  for  national  infrastructure  security  and  customer  satisfaction.  Due  to  the  cyber-

attack, power grid may face operational failures and loss of synchronization. This operational failure 

may damage critical power system components which may interrupt the power supply and make the 

system  unstable  resulting  high  financial  penalties.  In  this  chapter,  some  recent  cyber  attack  related 

incidents  into  a  smart  grid  environment  are  discussed.  The  requirements  and  the  state  of  the  art  of 

cyber security issues of a critical power system infrastructure are illustrated elaborately.  

1 Introduction: Cyber Attacks on Smart Grid  

In recent years, power system has faced several cyber related attacks which have raised the question 

regarding  the  security  vulnerabilities  and  its  large  scale  impact  on  the  critical  power  system 

infrastructure. Some significant issues related to cyber-attack on the power grid are discussed in the 

following section. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  In  the  middle  of  2010,  a  computer  worm  ‘Stuxnet’  was  discovered  which  spreads  using 

‘Windows’  operating  system  and    targets  Siemens  industrial  software  and  equipment  to 

unstable  power  system  operation    [1].    This  type  of  cyber-attack  based  on  the  intrusion  of 

computer  virus  targeting  industrial  power  plant  introduces  new  threads  to  both  cyber  and 

physical systems [2].  

2.  On August 14, 2003, large portions of the Midwest and Northeast United States and Ontario, 

Canada,  experienced  an  electric  power  blackout  which  remained  for  up  to  4  days  in  some 

parts by affecting around 50 million people and 61,800 megawatts (MW) of electric load in 

some  parts  of  the  United  States  [3].  Although  this  historical  large  scale  blackout  is  not 

directly  related  to  malicious  activity  of  the  cyber  terrorists,  it  is  caused  by  a  failure  in  the 

software program of the cyber system [3]. 

3.  On September 28, 2003, Italy and some parts of Switzerland faced its largest power supply 

disruption affecting 56 million people in total [3]. This blackout is restored after 18 hours in 

Italy resulting huge financial loss. The blackout happened because of the technical difficulties 

caused by the human error and Ineffective communication within the power grid operators.  

4.  Another  large  blackout  occurred  in  the  south  west  Europe  due  to  the  human  error  on 

November 04, 2006 [3]. Insufficient communication was also  an important issue behind the 

blackout. 

5.  According  to  the  2011  annual  report  of  the  Repository  for  Industrial  Security  Incidents 

(RISI),  around  35%  of  industrial  control  system  (ICS)  security  incidents  were  instigated 

through  the  remote  access  within  the  cyber  system  [4,5].  Power  and  utility  sector  faced 

around 12  cyber  security  incidents between  2004  to 2008  which  is around  20%  increase  of 

this type of cyber incidents compared with the previous 4 years [4]. As ICS and SCADA is 

playing  a  vital  role  in  a  smart  grid  infrastructure,  the  cyber  security  concern  in  increasing 

rapidly.     

From the above discussion, it can be seen that some major cyber-physical vulnerabilities of the smart 

grid are related to the cyber issues. Therefore, Smart Grid Infrastructure Security (SGIS) must address 

the  deliberate  attacks  by  the  cyber  terrorists  and  industrial  espionage,  disgruntled  employees,  user 

errors,  equipment  failures,  and  natural  disasters  [6].    In  order  to  protect  the  critical  smart  grid 

infrastructure, anomaly detection can play a vital role by identifying malicious data in the network.   

The  recent  incidents  related  to  cyber-attacks  in  a  smart  grid  were  discussed  in  this  section  which 

motivates  the  power  system,  communication  and  computer  engineers  and  researchers  for  future 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research  in  this  challenging  area.  In  Section  2,  definitions  and  characteristics  of  a  cyber-physical 

smart grid are discussed. Different aspects affecting the smart grid security are presented in Section 3. 

In Section 4, security requirements of an attack resilient smart grid are discussed. Some possible smart 

grid anomalies are described and reviewed in Section 5. In Section 6, protection techniques of smart 

grid from cyber-attacks are discussed. Finally, Section 7 concludes with references.  

2 Smart Grid Infrastructures 

2.1 Definition of a Smart Grid 

The  Smart  Grid  concept  is  evolved  to  make  the  power  grid  more  energy  efficient  and  intelligent. 

According to the US Department of Energy, smart grid can be defined as: 

“Smart  grid  generally  refers  to  a  class  of  technology  people  are  using  to  bring  utility  electricity 

delivery systems into the 21st century, using computer-based remote control and automation. These 

systems are made possible by two-way communication technology and computer processing that has 

been used for decades in other industries. They are beginning to be used on electricity networks, from 

the power plants and wind farms all the way to the consumers of electricity in homes and businesses. 

They  offer  many  benefits  to  utilities  and  consumers  --  mostly  seen  in  big  improvements  in  energy 

efficiency on the electricity grid and in the energy users’ homes and offices.” 

Traditionally, power grid was designed to transport power from the generation plant to the end-users. 

Therefore, the whole power flow pattern was uni-directional and the control structure was centralized.  

In order to take advantage of the advanced technology to control power flow and to mitigate the ever-

growing  load  demand,  new  communication  techniques  and  distributed  energy  resources  are  being 

incorporated  within  the  physical  power  system  infrastructure.  Integration  of  distributed  generations 

has introduced bi-directional power flows into the grid     . Moreover, energy storage devices, plug-in 

hybrid  electric  vehicles,  and  other  advanced  physical  components  of  the  power  system  have 

introduced  more  complexity  into  the  grid.  On  the  other  hand,  deployment  of  the  communication 

network  (e.g.,  SCADA  system  and  Advanced  Metering  Infrastructure)  has  provided  more  stability, 

reliability,  flexibility  and  efficiency  in  the  operation  and  control  of  this  complex  power  system. 

However, increasingly the vulnerabilities of the physical system are being exposed due to malicious 

attacks on the cyber-physical smart grid infrastructure. Therefore, there is a need to identify the smart 

grid security issues related to cyber security. 

2.2 Ideal Functionalities of a Smart Grid 

Smart  grid  is  the  modernization  of  the  traditional  power  grid  which  should  ideally  have  some 

advanced functionalities [7]: 

 
 
•  Self-healing 
•  Motivates and includes the consumer 
•  Resists attack 
• 
•  Accommodates all generation and storage options 
•  Enables electrical markets 
•  Optimizes assets and operates efficiently 

Increases power quality 

Generally, power system is a massive and complex system and very vulnerable in terms of physical or 

cyber-attack.  The  term  ‘self-healing’  signifies  the  ability  of  the  modern  smart  grid  to  recover  the 

situation  and  become  stable  after  facing  any  interruption.  According  to  the  European  technology 

platform of the Smart Grid, ‘Self-healing’ network not only addresses automated network restoration 

strategies  considering  distributed  energy  resources,  but  also  deals  with  high  level  decentralized 

control  methodologies  to  prevent  blackouts  [8].  Another  key  characteristic  of  smart  grid  is  attack 

resiliency  due  to  the  cyber-physical  attack  of  the  grid.  Power  system  can  be  treated  as  one  of  the 

major  key  public  infrastructures.  Therefore,  damage  of  any  component  of  the  grid  may  cause 

enormous loss in terms of country’s economy and social welfare.  It is very important to protect the 

power grid infrastructure. In a smart grid environment, it is expected that the cyber-physical system 

would be attack resilient which will help to protect the country’s asset and ensure national security.  

3 Security issues of Cyber-Physical smart grid 

In a smart grid, the physical power system and the cyber system of information and communication 

technologies  are  highly  coupled  which  introduced  new  security  concerns  [9].  Smart  grid  security 

issues need to address new challenges for a reliable, safe, efficient and stable operation of the grid. It 

is important to note that current security approaches are either inapplicable, not viable, insufficiently 

scalable,  incompatible,  or  simply  inadequate  which  need  to  be  replaced  by  new  and  advanced 

techniques to ensure the security of the highly massive and complex dynamic smart grid environment 

[9]. 

A  smart  grid  can  be  treated  as  the  combination  of  physical  power  system  components  and  cyber 

system infrastructure including software, hardware and communication requirements [10]. In Figure 

1, a typical smart grid architecture is shown where power will flow from bulk generation plant to end 

users. On the other hand, information flow will occur  in both directions, i.e., in the device level for 

coordination and among the operators and service provider level for efficient and advanced control. 

Therefore, in a smart grid, both cyber and physical system securities are crucial and consideration of 

security  issues  in  cyber  domain  and  physical  power  system  in  isolation  cannot  capture  the  whole 

 
 
 
picture.  According  to  [10],  the  security  issues  of  a  cyber-physical  smart  grid  comprise  of  the 

following issues: 

1.  The physical components of the smart grid  

2.  Control centres and control applications  

3.  The cyber infrastructures for smart grid stable, reliable, and efficient operation and planning 

4.  The correlation between cyber-attacks and the resulting physical system impacts 

5.  The protection measures to mitigate risks from cyber threats 

Secure Communication Flow

Electric Flow

Domain

Markets 

Operations 

Service Provider 

Generation 

Transmission 

Distribution 

Customer 

Figure: Typical smart grid architecture [11] 

The backbone of a smart grid is the physical power system. In recent days, many new types of load 

are being introduced in the grid, including plug-in hybrid electric vehicles. Therefore, power demand 

is  increasing  rapidly  and  grid  is  becoming  more  complex  due  to  the  adoption  of  new  technologies. 

Moreover,  green  technologies  are  increasingly  used  to  make  the  grid  more  sustainable.  These  new 

ideas  and  technologies  are  making  the  grid  more  complex  to  analyse.  In  such  a  complex  cyber-

physical smart grid, the resources are coordinated by the control centre, which can be considered as 

the brain of the smart grid. These control centres are interconnected by  a bidirectional cyber system 

including  communication  network,  software  and  hardware.  Consequently,  the  introduction  of  new 

technologies in the grid is making the cyber-physical system more vulnerable to the cyber threats that 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can degrade the performance of the physical system and even can cause a critical cascading failure of 

the power grid. The potential risks associated with the cyber-physical smart grid include [11]: 

1.  Increased  complexity:  The  interconnection  of  new  technologies  in  the  grid  is  introducing 

greater complexities. 

2.  Risk of cascading failures: In a Smart Grid, the cyber system and the physical system are very 

tightly coupled. Therefore, failure due to a random attack or a targeted attack in either domain 

may affect the other domain and may lead to potential cascading failures. 

3.  Increase in potential adversaries: As the number of network nodes increase, the entry points 

for  attackers  on  the  network  increase  also  increases  introduces  potential  risks.  This  is 

considered as one of the main reasons why  malicious code and related types of attacks and 

intrusions are also increasing for Smart Grid. 

4.  Data privacy issues: In a smart grid, widespread use of Intelligent Electronic Devices (IEDs) 

have  increased  the  data  gathering  and  two-way  information  flows  extensively  which  have 

introduced the problems related to data confidentiality and intrusions of customer privacy. 

4 Security Requirements of a Smart Grid 

The security requirement of a Smart Grid is different from other critical infrastructures. The security 

objectives of the smart grid can be classified into three groups that are discussed below [11]: 

4.1 Data Availability 

This  requirement  of  data  security  is  very  important  and  one  of  the  primary  objective  to  ensure  the 

reliable operation of the smart grid. Generally, availability refers to the “timely and reliable access to 

the use of information” [11]. However, the time latency of the availability depends on the application 

as shown in Table. 1. 

Time Requirements 

Data availability for the specific applications  

<= 4 ms 

Protective relaying 

Sub seconds 

Transmission wide-area situational awareness monitoring  

Seconds 

Minutes 

Substation and feeder SCADA data  

Monitoring  noncritical  equipment  and  some  market  pricing 

information  

 
 
 
 
 
  
Hours 

Meter reading and longer-term market pricing information  

Days/Weeks/Months 

Collecting long-term data such as power quality information  

Table 1: Time latency for different smart grid applications [11]. 

 4.2 Data Integrity 

 Data  integrity  means  source  and  quality  of  data  is  known  and  authenticated.  The  modification  or 

destruction of original data leads to loss of data integration. Loss of data integration may occur due to 

the intrusion in the cyber domain by the attacker or disgruntled employees or by human error. Data 

integrity problem degrades the reliability of the system and with the increased system complexity, this 

problem is rising rapidly. 

4.3 Data Confidentiality 

 This security requirement is important for privacy concern of the end users. Although it has a least 

impact  on  the  smart  grid  reliability,  importance  is  increasing  with  the  deployment  of  advanced 

metering infrastructure and decentralized control within the grid.  

5 Smart Grid Anomalies 

5.1 Anomalies in the State Estimation Program  

In  order  to  fulfil  the  ever  growing  load  demand,  it  is  important  to  operate  the  power  system  at  its 

maximum capacity. For a safe and reliable operation of the power system, operators need to monitor 

and  control  the  system  as  it  progresses  through  its  various  operating  states.  Different  Intelligent 

Electronic  Devices  (IEDs)  e.g.,  like  the  Remote  Terminal  Units  (RTUs)  are  used  to  monitor  the 

system states. However, these measurement data may be corrupted by an intruder or affected by noise 

or may be missing due to the sensor failure. Power system operators need to have confidence about 

the measurement data. For this reason, state estimation is widely used by the power system operators 

to  calculate  the  system  states.  In  addition,  state  estimation  algorithms  can  detect  any  bad  data  and 

provide  high  accuracy  estimation  using  limited  measurement  [12].  The  concepts  of  state  estimation 

for  the  reliable  operation  of  a  power  system  already  exist,  and  have  been  successfully  applied  by 

power  companies.  In  recent  years,  the  importance  of  the  security  of  state  estimation  algorithms  is 

increasing with the growing complexity of the Smart Grid interconnections. In the recent researches, 

it has been shown that the smart grid state estimators are now highly vulnerable to the cyber attacks.   

From the literature of recent cyber security analysis of the state estimation program is basically related 

 
 
 
  
to ‘False Data Injection Attack’ [13-18] and ‘Load Redistribution Attack’ [19-20]. Both of these types 

of attacks are data integrity attack and are discussed next.  

5.1.1  False  Data  Injection  Attack:  During  power  system  operation,  state  estimation  (SE)  is 

important  for  Optimal  Power  Flow  (OPF)  operation,  Contingency  Analysis  (CA),  Automatic 

Generator Control (AGC) etc. A simple block diagram of a power system control centre is shown in 

Figure.  2  where  it  can  be  seen  that  SE  plays  a  vital  role  for  smooth  operation  of  different  Energy 

Management System (EMS) applications. Basically, OPF, CA, and AGC take the output SE data as an 

input to make the intelligent decision.  For the processing purpose, SE receives data from the SCADA 

network.  Due  to  the  ‘False  Data  Injection  Attack’,  SCADA  sends  the  SE  wrong  information  and 

makes the smart grid vulnerable. 

Control Centre 

  State Estimator 

AGC 

OPF 

EMS 

G 

    Operator 

G 

Figure 2: Energy Management System (EMS) working principles [16] 

The states in a power system are the complex voltage magnitude and the angles of each bus. If the 

state vector is X, then 

δ

δ

δ

δ

(cid:27) (cid:3404) (cid:4670)(cid:3)

(cid:2869)(cid:3)

(cid:2870)(cid:3)

(cid:2871) (cid:3)(cid:485) (cid:485)

(cid:2904)
(cid:2924)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:25)(cid:2869)(cid:3)(cid:25)(cid:2870)(cid:25)(cid:2871) (cid:485) (cid:485) (cid:25)(cid:2924)(cid:4671)

(cid:3)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
           
           
           
Generally, the states of the system cannot be obtained directly; therefore, it is important to use the SE 

to  infer  the  states  from  the  measurement  values.  However,  the  measurement  values  may  be  noisy 

which increase the probability of error. As a result, SE can be traditionally formulated as the weighted 

least-square criterion below [14]: 

where, h(x) is the measurement function which represents the measurement of z and w is the weight. 

(cid:2923)
(cid:2870)
(cid:143)(cid:139)(cid:144) (cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:4666)(cid:154)(cid:4667) (cid:3404) (cid:3) (cid:963) (cid:153)(cid:2919)(cid:3)(cid:4666)(cid:156)(cid:2919) (cid:3398) (cid:3) (cid:138)(cid:2919)(cid:4666)(cid:154)(cid:4667)(cid:4667)
(cid:2919)(cid:2880)(cid:2869)

Here m is the maximum number of the measurement.   If there is no error in the measurement, then   

otherwise,  

(cid:156)(cid:2919) (cid:3404) (cid:3) (cid:138)(cid:2919)(cid:4666)(cid:154)(cid:4667)

where  ‘e’  represents  the  error  in  the  measurement.  With  the  deployment  of  smart  grid,  SE  is  now 

(cid:156)(cid:2919) (cid:3404) (cid:3) (cid:138)(cid:2919)(cid:4666)(cid:154)(cid:4667) (cid:3397) (cid:3) (cid:135)(cid:2919)

vulnerable to  cyber-attack.  An  intruder  can  attack  on  the  measurement data  of the  SCADA  system. 

Therefore, the control centre receives the following measured data due to the malicious data attack: 

α

where,  α is an attack vector. A significant number of researches are performed to prevent the false 

(cid:156)(cid:2919) (cid:3404) (cid:3) (cid:138)(cid:2919)(cid:4666)(cid:154)(cid:4667) (cid:3397) (cid:3) (cid:135)(cid:2919)(cid:3) (cid:3397) (cid:3)

(cid:3)

data intrusion which can be divided into three categories as below [13]. 

(i) 

(ii) 

Vulnerability Analysis of State Estimation 

Consequence Analysis 

(iii) 

Development of Countermeasures 

The  class  of  ‘false  data  injection  attack’  in  the  electric  power  grid  is  first  presented  in  [14]  where 

author  shows  that  an  unobservable  attack  can  be  introduced  based  on  a  limited  number  of  meters 

which can significantly degrade the performance of the results obtained from the SE [15]. Although 

bad data detection technique has been well established in the classical SE algorithm,  malicious data 

attack is considered as the ‘worst interacting bad data’ injected by an intruder in [15]. A special type 

of stealth attack is discussed in [16] where the strategies of the defenders and the attackers are also 

investigated. In [17], the authors focus on the economic impact due to the false data injection attack 

on  a  real-time  market  operation  of  a  power  grid.  In  order  to  protect  the  grid  from  the  false  data 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
injection, the strategic placement of Phasor Measurement Units (PMUs) is discussed in [18]. Efficient 

and  accurate  anomaly  detection  technique  can  be  employed  considering  non-linear  AC  state 

estimation model to protect the grid from the intruders. 

5.1.2  Load  Redistribution  attacks  in  a  power  system:  Load  Redistribution  (LR)  attack  is  a  sub-

class  of  false  data  injection  attack.  ED  and  OPF  are  heavily  dependent  on  the  output  of  the  SE. 

Therefore, due to the LR attack, wrong estimation of the states may lead to an uneconomical solution 

and violate the stable operating conditions. Although a significant research has been done based on 

‘False Data Injection Attack’, a few is performed considering LR attack model. LR attack model can 

be formulated as a bi-level programming problem [19]. This LR attack model has been formulated in 

[19] as below: 

(cid:3533) (cid:959)(cid:7)(cid:2914) (cid:3404) (cid:882)
(cid:2914)

(cid:959)(cid:19)(cid:15) (cid:3404) (cid:3398)(cid:22)(cid:9)(cid:484) (cid:14)(cid:7)(cid:484) (cid:959)(cid:7)
(cid:7)(cid:2914)
(cid:7)(cid:2914) (cid:3409) (cid:959)(cid:7)(cid:2914) (cid:3409)
The  LR attack  artificially  increases  or  decreases demand  at the  load  buses although  total  change of 

(cid:3398)

τ

τ

load remains zero as shown in the first equation. SF is the shifting factor matrix and KD is the bus-

load  incidence  matrix.  The  attack  magnitude  of  load 

is  limited  within  an  equality  constraint  as 

shown in the last equation.  To solve the immediate LR attack problem, Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT)-

(cid:959)(cid:7)(cid:2914)

based method is proposed in [20]. Although KKT based method finds the global optimal solution, it is 

computationally very demanding. The efficiency of the proposed method is increased significantly in 

[19] using Benders decomposition. The concept of the most damaging LR attack is discussed from the 

attacker’s  perspective  throughout  the  research  in  [19,20],  significant  contribution  is  yet  to  come 

considering power grid operator’s or defender’s perspective.  

5.2 Anomalies in the Power System Control Centres (PSCC) 

Generally,  power  system  control  centres  receive  information  from  the  sensors  using  the  SCADA 

network and it is the responsibility of the control centres to take intelligent decisions. The decision is 

then send to the actuators to perform actions on the field devices. A typical power system control loop 

is  presented  in  Figure.  3.  It  is  important  to  note  that  an  adversary  can  easily  exploit  vulnerabilities 

along  different  steps  of  the  control  process  of  the  power  system  [21].    The  attack  in  the  PSCC  is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
related to the data integrity attack where information is corrupted, denial of service (DoS) attack, de-

synchronization and timing based attacks [22].    

Automatic  Voltage  Regulator  (AVR)  control,  Governor  Control  (GC),  and  Automatic  Generation 

Control  (AGC)  are  essential  in  the  generation  side  of  a  power  system.  Generally,  the  generation  is 

controlled by local controller (e.g., AVR, GC) or wide area control (e.g., AGC) schemas [21].    

5.2.1 Attacks on the AGC: In a power system, load is changing throughout the time. Therefore, AGC 

is  used  to  balance  the  power  output  from  different  generation  plants  [23].  System  frequency  is 

monitored to take the decision of balancing the load demand and the generation of a system. In this 

secondary frequency control loop, both frequency and tie-line power are measured and send to other 

devices  through  wide  area  communication  (e.g.,  IEC  61850)  [21].  For  control  purpose,  a  point  to 

point communication (e.g., DNP 3.0) is used [21]. As SCADA telemetry system is used for making 

the  decision  of  AGC,  security  issues  need  to  address  to  ensure  a  stable  and  reliable  power  grid 

operation.  

    Control Centre 

Computation 
and Analysis 

Remote/Local 
Control 

Data 
Acquisition 

Actuators 

Control 

Machine/
Device 

Measurement 

Sensors 

Physical System 

Figure 3: A typical power system control loop [10] 

A  reachability  framework  is  developed  in  [24]  to  evaluate  the  impact  of  a  two-area  power  system 

during a cyber attack.  Based on the reachability framework, policy is developed that an attacker can 

follow  to  disrupt  the  power  grid.  Although  the  methodology  of  identification  of  AGC  attack  is 

proposed in [24], protection schemas need to be introduced for ensuring secured operation of AGC.  

In [25],  an approach to develop threat models for control system attacks is proposed. The proposed 

method in [25] is extended to define an attack model for a power system control centre by the authors 

in [26]. In that work, two type of attacks are considered which are ‘min attack’ and ‘max attack’. The 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
objective of these types of attacks is to manipulate the ‘Area Control Error (ACE)’ signal. Generally, 

the AEC is calculated from the difference of the net tie-line power flow to the deviation of frequency 

output [26]. To measure the actual power output and frequency sensors are used. During the attack, 

sensor measured values are manipulated which directly impacts on the system operating conditions.  

5.2.2  Attacks  on  GC:  Due  to  load  incremental  change  of  a  generator,  the  electric  output  power 

exceeds  the  mechanical  input  power  which  leads  to  the  speed  deviation  and  frequency  fall  of  the 

generator  [27]. The reduction  of  generator speed  is  then  detected by  a  sensor in  a  governor  control 

system and necessary control actions are taken to run the generator in a steady-state condition. The 

GC  is  highly  dependent  on  the  local  measurement.  However,  the  modern  generator  governors  use 

standard  communication  protocols  to  correspond  information  with  the  operation  centre  [21].  For 

example, the 800xA Governor of one the leading power and automation expert company ABB, makes 

the  use  of  MODBUS,  HART,  PROFIBUS,  PROFINET,  DeviceNet,  and  IEC  61850  as  a  standard 

FieldBus  and  network  communication  protocol  [28].    Therefore,  an  adversary  can  attack  the  GC 

system through any access point of the communication system. As GC plays a vital role for the stable 

operation of a generator, any cyber-attack can cause enormous disruption of the physical system. 

5.3 Attacks on the FACTS device 

Flexible  Alternating  Current  Transmission  Systems  (FACTS)  devices  make  the  use  of  power 

electronics to stabilize and regulate power flow in a grid. Some applications of the FACTS devices are 

power  flow  control,  load  sharing,  voltage  regulation,  transient  stability  enhancements,  and  power 

system  oscillation  mitigation  [29].  FACTS  devices  help  to  utilize  the  network  in  a  better  way  by 

increasing the capacity of the network with optimal power flow. However, optimal power flow of the 

network  can  not  be  achieved  by  a  single  FACTS  devise  and  therefore  multiple  devices  need  to 

communicate and cooperate with each other during the operation. Therefore, communication link is 

important  among  the  coordinated  FACTS  devices  which  also  increase  the  vulnerabilities  of  cyber 

attacks [30]. To face the new challenges, two approaches are proposed in [30] which are agent-based 

management and improved visualization. Improved security policies and procedures need to address 

to handle the cyber attacks among the coordinated FACTS devices.  

5.4 Malicious modification of network data stored in a database 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Both the unauthorized access and malicious code is dangerous for stable power system operation.  In 

[31], it has been reported that any of these types of attacks can disrupt the power system operation. To 

ensure the security of any power system control centre, requirements, policies and regulatory issues 

are  pre-defined  by  the  NERC,  NIST  and  DOE  [32]  in  the  USA.  However,  alarmingly  it  has  been 

shown [31] that any adversary can manage to get access to the network data stored in a database and 

manipulate the stored data leading to a compromise and failure of the Smart Grid.   

Optimal Power Flow (OPF) is a widely adopted power system analysis tool used in the control centres 

for  intelligent  decision  making.  The  operation  of  OPF  is  highly  dependent  on  the  network 

configuration  data  and  the  measured  data  obtained  from  the  SCADA  system.    The  interruption  of 

power system operation due to the malicious modification of the network data stored in a database is 

discussed in [31]. A method based on Principle Component Analysis (PCA) is proposed to detect the 

anomalies  related  this  type  of  attack.  The  method  is  successfully  applied  in  IEEE  benchmark  test 

systems and has significant impact on false alarm reduction.  

6 Protecting Smart Grid from cyber vulnerabilities 

In  recent  years,  the  vulnerabilities  of  the  smart  grid  has  increased  many  times  due  to  the  wide 

adoption of communication network in different levels of operation and planning of a power grid. To 

protect  the  smart  grid, it  is  important to  protect  the  physical  grid from  three broad  classes of cyber 

attacks [33] mentioned below.  

6.1 Protection from component-wise cyber attack 

To protect the smart grid at the device or component level, a security agent based framework has been 

proposed  in  [32,  34].  The  security  agents  should  be  placed  both  in  field  devices  (e.g.,  IEDs)  and 

substation level (e.g., RTUs) as shown in Fig. 5.  Some key functions of security agents described in 

[32] are: 

1.  Collecting network traffic patters and traffic data analysing 

2. Maintaining data log and reporting 

3. Run security patches and intrusion detection algorithms 

4. Maintain end-to-end security  

5. Alarm management   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To  protect  the  smart  grid  control  system  component,  an  anomaly  detection  technique  has  been 

proposed in [35-36].  In this research, a Rough Classification Algorithm has been used to detect the 

anomaly for improving the security of Power System Control Centres in the Electric Power System 

Critical  Infrastructure.    During  the  security  analysis,  authors  have  considered  two  operation  modes 

(the  normal  and  the  abnormal  operation  mode)  of  the  Smart  Grid.  The  Rough  Classification 

Algorithm  is  used  for  data  reduction  that  enhances  the  performance  of  anomaly  detection  by 

introducing  a  compact  set  of  knowledge-based  rules.  To  protect  the  critical  power  system 

infrastructure a comprehensive framework has been developed in [37]. In this work, SCADA security 

has  been  investigated  considering  real-time  monitoring,  anomaly  detection,  impact  analysis  and 

implementing mitigation strategies as shown in Figure 5. In order to protect the relay from the false 

data attack, a probabilistic neural network based approach has been proposed in [38]. 

 
 
 
Control
Centre

EMS

Security
Agent

Public
Network

RTU/PLC

Security
Agent

Log Server

Security
Agent

Security Switch

Security Agent

Security Agent

Security Agent

Security Agent

IEDs

Protective
Relays

I/O

I/O

I/O

Meter

Meter

Meter

CTs

PTs

CTs

PTs

CTs

PTs

Substation

Figure 4: A security agent based framework for smart grid protection [33] 

As  smart  meters  and  PMUs  are  vulnerable  to  cyber  attacks,  several  research  studies  have  been 

undertaken to learn about the security of the smart meters and PMUs. A strategic placement method 

of PMU components has been developed in [18]. The requirements and architectural directions of the 

IDS for smart meters are discussed in  [39] where a specification based IDS  is used.  In the case of 

AMI  security,  specification  based  IDS  shows  its  superiority  over  the  signature  based  and  anomaly 

based detection techniques due to: [39] 

a. A greater accuracy of specification based IDS in AMI applications 

 
 
 
 
 
 
b.  the  signature  based  IDS  makes  the  use  of  black  list  approach  which  needs  an  attack  data  set.  In 

terms of AMI, it is difficult to prepare an empirical attack data set. 

c. the development of specification based IDS for AMI is cost effective. 

ANOMALY DETECTION

Output Anomaly
Detection

Heterogeneous correlation

Correlation logs from
Substation and
Control Center

Correlate the
different type of
logs from control
center

Homogeneous correlation

Correlate
security event
logs

Correlate
system event
logs

Correlate
file integrity
logs

Preventive/
Remedial
Actions

REAL-TIME MONITORING

Exact
Potential
Evidences

Gather Information

Cyber Aspects

Physical Aspects

Security
Logs

System
Event
Logs

File
Integrity
logs

Critical
Alerts

System
Health
Messages

Preventive/
Remedial
Actions

IMPACT ANALYSIS

Formulate a
hypothesis

Case

What-If
Scenarios?

Effect

Preventive/
Remedial
Actions

MITIGATION STRATEGIES

Decision Making

prevention

Remedial

Change the
Roles of
User
Privilege

Suspend
Suspicious
Users

Relieve the
Overloaded
Lines

Correct
Voltage
Problems

Figure 5: SCADA security framework based on real time monitoring and anomaly detection [37] 

6.2 Protection from Protocol-wise Cyber Attack 

SCADA  is  widely  used  in  critical  power  system  infrastructure.    In  case  of  multiple  stakeholders, 

sometimes ‘authentication’, ‘encryption’ and ‘firewalls’ may not mitigate the security issues in a large 

SCADA  network  [40].  Moreover,  focusing  securing  issues  considering  only  SCADA  network  as  a 

single entity will not solve the problem and therefore, it is important to ensure the cyber security of 

the  individual  devices  in  the  network  [40].  Different  communication  protocols  are  used  among  the 

SCADA  devices  for  successful  automation  and  operation  of  a  smart  grid.  The  evolution  of  the 

proprietary and industrial SCADA protocols started in early 1980s when Modbus, Modbus Plus, and 

proprietary  and  vendor  specific  protocols  were  first  developed  [41].  The  Distributed  Networking 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol (DNP) first appeared in 1990 by Westronic, Inc as an open protocol. The DNP3 protocol is 

based  on  the  IEC  60870-5  protocol.  Although  DNP3  protocol  is  designed  for  reliable  data 

communication,  it  is  still  vulnerable  to  cyber  attack.  Therefore,  a  rule  based  data  set  security  for 

DNP3  devices  is  proposed  in  [40]  to  protect  the  smart  grid  from  cyber  terrorists.  For  simulating 

protocol  attack,  a  SCADA  simulation  framework  is  developed  in  [42]  where  attack  on  a  Modbus 

protocol is illustrated. Guidelines and the best practices for the development of smart grid protocols 

considering design principles are discussed in [43].  

6.3 Protection from Topology-wise Cyber Attacks 

Smart grid is also vulnerable to topology wise cyber attacks. For example, based on the knowledge of 

the power system topologies, an intruder may attack the bad data detection algorithms of the current 

state  estimators  [44].  Another topology  based  cyber attack  is proposed in  [45],  where attack  on the 

electric circuit breaker will cause the isolation of the generation units from the power grid. In [46], it 

has been shown that a cyber attack on conﬁdentiality with proper topological knowledge can lead to 

an integrity and availability attack. Therefore, an information ﬂow security-based model is proposed 

for mitigating these security issues. In [47], an optimum inter-link placement strategy against random 

attacks  in  the  cyber-physical  network  is  proposed  which  demonstrates  that  the  strategy  ensures  a 

better  security  compared  with  all  other  possible  strategies,  including  strategies  using  random 

allocation, unidirectional interlinks, in the case when topology of the cyber and physical network is 

unknown to each other.   

7 Security Issues for Future Smart Grid 

To make the grid smarter, significant initiatives are taken throughout the world. These measures will 

not  only  modernize  the  grid  but  also  improve  the  overall  system  efficiency,  stability  and  obviously 

reliability. But security issues must be maintained to ensure the uninterrupted power supply to the end 

users and to protect the national electricity grid from terrorist attacks.  It is important to mention that a 

properly  designed  defence  framework  against  cyber-attack  should  address  all  aspects  related  to  the 

cyber-crime in a complex cyber-physical electricity grid infrastructure. That means, not only targeted 

cyber-attack should be considered but also, unintentional ICT related anomalies should be addressed, 

e.g., human operator errors, software errors, equipment failures and obviously natural disaster related 

problems.   

In the process of making the power grid smarter, more automated control is being introduced in the 

grid.  The  risk  of  cyber attack  will increase  as the  grid  becomes  more  automated.  Specially,  control 

centres are the main target by the cyber terrorists. Energy utilities are applying advanced techniques 

 
 
 
and  cyber  security  plans  to  avoid  cyber-attacks.  Advanced  intrusion  detection  and  prevention 

techniques  can  be  implemented  in  different  entry  point  of  the  complex  grid.  Security  management 

systems are being implemented in different utilities. Energy providers are also adopting different risk-

management strategies and defence approach against cyber-attack. 

It  is  obvious  that  smart  grid  is  providing  lots  of  benefits  including  energy-efficient  smart  home, 

greener  technology  like  solar  and  wind,  cost-effective  demand-side  management,  smart  charging 

stations  for  electric  cars  and  so  on.  In  order  to  ensure  these  benefits,  smart  grid  security  measures 

must be maintained. 

8 Conclusions: 

In  recent  years,  the  numbers  of  cyber  attacks  are  increasing  rapidly.  The  intelligent  cyber  terrorists 

with detail and advanced power system knowledge may be able to create an integrity, availability or 

confidentiality attack on the network. Protection of smart grid from cyber attack is not only a concern 

of the engineers, researchers and the utility operators; it is also the responsibility of the government to 

ensure the security of this national critical infrastructure.  

This chapter is written for the general readers so that they could be able to easily grasp some of the 

concepts in the area of Cyber Security for Smart Grid. At the beginning, a brief overview of Smart 

Grid and some recent Cyber Security incidents of this critical infrastructure are discussed. The key 

security requirements of a smart grid, which are ‘availability’, ‘integrity’, and ‘confidentiality’, are 

also discussed. Based on the existing research, an overview of Smart Grid anomalies is discussed 

thoroughly. The protection frameworks of smart grid against component-wise, protocol-wise and 

topology-wise cyber-attacks are also reviewed in this chapter.     

Cyber  security  is  very  crucial  for  the  reliable  and  secured  operation  of  a  critical  smart  grid 

infrastructure. At present, only Bad Data Detection (BDD) algorithms are used for data security in the 

state estimation. However, an adversary can attack the cyber-physical grid through any of the entry 

point of the cyber system and impact direly on the physical assets. For enhanced smart grid reliability 

and security, intrusion detection algorithms should be placed throughout system.    

 
 
 
 
 
 
References 

[1] R. McMillan, “Siemens: Stuxnet worm hit industrial systems,” COMPUTERWorld, Sept.14, 
2010. 

[2]  Steven  Cherry,  with  Ralph  Langner  (13  October  2010).  "How  Stuxnet  Is  Rewriting  the 

Cyberterrorism Playbook". IEEE Spectrum. 

[3] U.S.-Canada Power System Outage Task Force, “Final Report on the August 14, 2003 Blackout in 

the United States and Canada: Causes and Recommendations”, April 2004.                                                             

online: https://reports.energy.gov/BlackoutFinal-Web.pdf 

[4]  Annual  report  2011,  The  Repository  for  Industrial  Security  Incidents  (RISI),  Online: 

http://www.securityincidents.net/index.php/products/indepth/risi_annual_report/ 

[5]  2011  REPORT  ON  CONTROL  SYSTEM  CYBER  SECURITY  INCIDENTS,  online: 

http://community.controlglobal.com/content/risi-cyber-incident-report-2011-calendar-year-out-risi-

cybersecurity-pauto-automation-mfg-ma 

[6] The  Smart  Grid  Interoperability  Panel  –  Cyber  Security  Working  Group,  “Guidelines  for  Smart 

Grid  Cyber  Security:  Vol.  1,  Smart  Grid  Cyber  Security  Strategy,  Architecture,  and  High-Level 

Requirements”, August 2010 

[7] NETL, The NETL Modern Grid Initiative Powering our 21st-Century Economy: MODERN GRID 

BENEFITS. Department of Energy, 2007 

[8] Haoming Liu; Xingying Chen; Kun Yu; Yunhe Hou; , "The Control and Analysis of Self-Healing 

Urban Power Grid," , IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol.3, no.3, pp.1119-1129, Sept. 2012 

[9] Yilin Mo; Kim, T.H.-H.; Brancik, K.; Dickinson, D.; Heejo Lee; Perrig, A.; Sinopoli, B., "Cyber–

Physical  Security  of  a  Smart  Grid  Infrastructure," Proceedings  of  the  IEEE ,  vol.100,  no.1,  pp.195-

209, Jan. 2012  

[10] Sridhar, S.; Hahn, A.; Govindarasu, M., "Cyber–Physical System Security for the Electric Power 

Grid," Proceedings of the IEEE , vol.100, no.1, pp.210-224, Jan. 2012 

[11]  The  Smart  Grid  Interoperability  Panel  Cyber  Security  Working  Group,  “Introduction  to 

NISTIR7628  Guidelines 

for  Smart  Grid  Cyber  Security”,  September  2010,  online: 

http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistir/ir7628/introduction-to-nistir-7628.pdf 

[12]  Naka,  S.;  Genji,  T.;  Yura,  T.;  Fukuyama,  Y.,  "A  hybrid  particle  swarm  optimization  for 

distribution state estimation," IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol.18, no.1, pp.60,68, Feb 2003 

 
 
  
[13]  Hug,  G.;  Giampapa,  J.A.,  "Vulnerability  Assessment  of  AC  State  Estimation  With  Respect  to 

False Data Injection Cyber-Attacks," Smart Grid, IEEE Transactions on , vol.3, no.3, pp.1362,1370, 

Sept. 2012 

[14] Y. Liu, P. Ning, and M. K. Reiter, “False data injection attacks against state estimation in electric 

power grids,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Computer Communication Security, 2009, pp. 21–32. 

[15]  Kosut,  O.;  Liyan  Jia;  Thomas,  R.J.;  Lang  Tong,  "Malicious  Data  Attacks  on  the  Smart 

Grid," IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol.2, no.4, pp.645,658, Dec. 2011 

[16] Yi Huang; Esmalifalak, M.; Huy Nguyen; Rong Zheng; Zhu Han; Husheng Li; Lingyang Song, 

"Bad  data  injection  in  smart  grid:  attack  and  defense  mechanisms," Communications  Magazine, 

IEEE , vol.51, no.1, pp.27,33, January 2013 

[17]  Le  Xie;  Yilin  Mo;  Sinopoli,  B.,  "Integrity  Data  Attacks  in  Power  Market  Operations," IEEE 

Transactions on Smart Grid, vol.2, no.4, pp.659,666, Dec. 2011 

[18] Yi Huang; Esmalifalak, M.; Huy Nguyen; Rong Zheng; Zhu Han; Husheng Li; Lingyang Song, 

"Bad  data  injection  in  smart  grid:  attack  and  defense  mechanisms," Communications  Magazine, 

IEEE , vol.51, no.1, pp.27,33, January 2013 

[19]  Yanling  Yuan;  Zuyi  Li;  Kui  Ren,  "Quantitative  Analysis  of  Load  Redistribution  Attacks  in 

Power Systems," IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol.23, no.9, pp.1731,1738, 

Sept. 2012 

[20]  Yanling  Yuan;  Zuyi  Li;  Kui  Ren,  "Modeling  Load  Redistribution  Attacks  in  Power  Systems," 

IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol.2, no.2, pp.382,390, June 2011 

[21] Sridhar, S.; Hahn, A.; Govindarasu, M., "Cyber–Physical System Security for the Electric Power 

Grid," Proceedings of the IEEE, vol.100, no.1, pp.210,224, Jan. 2012 

[22]  Y.-L.  Huang,  A.  A.  Cardenas,  S.  Amin,  Z.-S.  Lin,  H.-Y.  Tsai,  and  S.  Sastry.  (2009). 

“Understanding  the  physical  and  economic  consequences  of  attacks  on  control  systems”,  Int.  J. 

Critical Infrastructure Protect. 

[23]  Robert  Herschel  Miller,  James  H.  Malinowski, “Power  system operation”,  McGraw-Hill 

Professional, 1994 

[24] P. Mohajerin Esfahani, M. Vrakopoulou, K. Margellos, J. Lygeros, and G. Andersson, BCyber 

“Attack in a two-area power system: Impact identification using reachability”, in Proc. Amer. Control 

Conf., Jul. 2010, pp. 962–967. 

 
 
[25]  YuLun  Huang,  Alvaro  Cardenas,  Saurabh  Amin,  Song-Zyun  Lin  ,  Hsin-Yi  Tsai,  S.  Shankar 

Sastry.  "Understanding  the  Physical  and  Economic  Consequences  of  Attacks  Against  Control 

Systems." International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection, 2(3):72-83, October 2009. 

[26]  S.  Sridhar  and  G.  Manimaran,  “Data  integrity  attacks  and  their  impacts  on  SCADA  control 

system”, in Proc. Power Energy Soc. General Meeting, Jul. 2010    

[27] Hadi Saadat, “Power System Analysis”, McGraw-Hill Primis Custom Publishing, 2002  

[28] 

Product  Guide, 

Fiedlbus 

and  Network 

Communications,  ABB,  Online: 

http://www.abb.com/product/us/9AAC115770.aspx   

[29]  D.  P.  Kothari, I.  J.  Nagrath,  “Modern Power  System  Analysis”,Tata  McGraw-Hill  Education, 

2003 

[30]  L.  R.  Phillips,  M.  Baca,  J.  Hills,  J.  Margulies,  B.  Tejani,  B.  Richardson,  and  L.  Weiland, 

Analysis of Operations and Cyber Security Policies for a System of Cooperating Flexible Alternating 

Current Transmission System (FACTS) Devices, Dec. 2005. 

[31]  Valenzuela,  J.;  Wang,  J.;  Bissinger,  N.,  "Real-Time  Intrusion  Detection  in  Power  System 

Operations", IEEE Transactions on  Power Systems, vol.PP, no.99, pp.1,1, 0 

[32] D. Dolezilek and L. Hussey, “Requirements or recommendations? Sorting out NERC CIP, NIST, 

and DOE cybersecurity,” in Proc. 2011 64th Annu. Conf. Protective Relay Engineers, 2011 

[33]  Dong  Wei;  Yan  Lu;  Jafari,  M.;  Skare,  P.M.;  Rohde,  K.,  "Protecting  Smart  Grid  Automation 

Systems  Against  Cyberattacks," ,  IEEE  Transactions  on   Smart  Grid,  vol.2,  no.4,  pp.782,795,  Dec. 

2011 

[34]  Dong  Wei;  Jafari,  M.;  Yan  Lu,  "On  Protecting  Industrial  Automation  and  Control  Systems 

against Electronic Attacks," IEEE International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering, 

vol., no., pp.176,181, 22-25 Sept. 2007 

[35] Coutinho, M.P.; Lambert-Torres, G.; da Silva, L.E.B.; Martins, H. G.; Lazarek, H.; Neto, J.C., 

"Anomaly detection in power system control center critical infrastructures using rough classification 

algorithm," 3rd IEEE International Conference on  Digital Ecosystems and Technologies, 2009, vol., 

no., pp.733,738, 1-3 June 2009 

[36] Coutinho, M.P., Lambert-Torres, G., da Silva L.E.B., Lazarek, H., “Improving Detection Attacks 

in Electric Power System Critical Infrastructure Using Rough Classification Algorithm”, Proceedings 

of the Second International Conference on Forensic Computer Science, No.1, Vol.2, 2007, pps. 18-23, 

Brazil 

 
 
[37]  Chee-Wooi  Ten;  Manimaran,  G.;  Chen-Ching  Liu,  "Cybersecurity  for  Critical  Infrastructures: 

Attack  and  Defense  Modeling," IEEE  Transactions  on   Systems,  Man  and  Cybernetics,  Part  A: 

Systems and Humans, vol.40, no.4, pp.853,865, July 2010 

[38] Su Sheng; Chan, W.L.; Li, K. K.; Duan Xianzhong; Zeng Xiangjun, "Context Information-Based 

Cyber Security Defense of Protection System," , IEEE Transactions on  Power Delivery, vol.22, no.3, 

pp.1477,1481, July 2007 

[39]  Berthier,  R.;  Sanders,  W.H.;  Khurana,  H.,  "Intrusion  Detection  for  Advanced  Metering 

Infrastructures:  Requirements  and  Architectural  Directions," 2010  First 

IEEE 

International 

Conference on  Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm) , vol., no., pp.350,355, 4-6 Oct. 2010 

[40] Todd Mander, Richard Cheung, Farhad Nabhani, Power system DNP3 data object security using 

data sets, Computers & Security, Volume 29, Issue 4, June 2010, Pages 487-500, ISSN 0167-4048 

[41]  C.-W.  Ten  ,  G.  Manimaran  and  C.-C.  Liu   "Cybersecurity  for  electric  power  control  and 

automation systems", Proc. eNetworks Cyberengineering Workshop, IEEE-SMC,  pp.29 -34 2007  

[42]  Queiroz,  C.;  Mahmood,  A.;  Tari,  Z.,  "SCADASim—A  Framework  for  Building  SCADA 

Simulations," IEEE Transactions on  Smart Grid, vol.2, no.4, pp.589,597, Dec. 2011 

[43] Khurana, H.; Bobba, R.; Yardley, T.; Agarwal, P.; Heine, E., "Design Principles for Power Grid 

Cyber-Infrastructure  Authentication  Protocols," 43rd  Hawaii  International  Conference  on   System 

Sciences (HICSS), vol., no., pp.1,10, 5-8 Jan. 2010 

[44]  Le  Xie;  Yilin  Mo;  Sinopoli,  B.,  "Integrity  Data  Attacks  in  Power  Market  Operations," IEEE 

Transactions on  Smart Grid, vol.2, no.4, pp.659,666, Dec. 2011 

[45]  Srivastava,  A.;  Morris,  T.;  Ernster,  T.; Vellaithurai,  C.;  Shengyi  Pan;  Adhikari,  U.,  "Modeling 

Cyber-Physical Vulnerability of the Smart Grid With Incomplete Information," IEEE Transactions on  

Smart Grid, vol.4, no.1, pp.235,244, March 2013 

[46] Mitigating Event Confidentiality Violations in Smart Grids: An Information Flow Security-Based 

Approach," IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol.PP, no.99, pp.1,8, 0 

[47]  Yagan,  O.;  Dajun  Qian;  Junshan  Zhang;  Cochran,  D.,  "Optimal  Allocation  of  Interconnecting 

Links  in  Cyber-Physical  Systems:  Interdependence,  Cascading  Failures,  and  Robustness," IEEE 

Transactions on  Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol.23, no.9, pp.1708,1720, Sept. 2012 

 
 
 
 
Adnan  Anwar  received  the  BSc  degree  in  Electrical  and  Electronic 
Engineering from Islamic University of Technology (IUT), the organization 
of  Islamic  Conference.  He  has  completed  his  Master  by  Research  degree 
from the University of New South Wales, Canberra, Australia. He joined the 
University  of  Asia  Paciﬁc  (UAP)  as  a  lecturer  in  2009.  Currently,  he  is 
working  with  National  ICT,  Australia  (NICTA)  at  the  “Future  Energy 
System” project. His research interest includes computational intelligence for 
the Smart Grid and its applications.  

Adnan Anwar 
Future Energy System 
Optimization Research Group 
National ICT, Australia  
adnananwar@ieee.org 

Abdun  Naser  Mahmood  received  the  BSc  degree  in  Applied  Physics  and 
Electronics and the MSc degree in Computer Science from the University of 
Dhaka,  Bangladesh, in  1997  and  1999, respectively. He  completed  his  PhD 
degree from the University of Melbourne in 2008. He joined the University 
of Dhaka as a lecturer in 2000, Assistant Professor in 2003, when he took a 
leave of absence for his PhD studies. Currently, he is working as a Lecturer at 
the  University  of  New  South  Wales  with  the  School  of  Engineering  and 
Information  Technology.  His  research 
include  data  mining 
techniques  for  network  monitoring  and  algorithm  design  for  anomaly 
detection and intrusion detection. 

interests 

Abdun Naser Mahmood 
School of Engineering and Information Technology 
University of New South Wales  
Canberra 2600, Australia 
a.mahmood@adfa.edu.au 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
