 Vulnerabilities and Attacks Targeting Social 
Networks and Industrial Control Systems 

Dharmendra Singh1, Rakhi Sinha2 , Pawan Songara3 and Dr. Rakesh Rathi4 

1Department of Computer Engineering, Govt. Engineering College, Ajmer 
dharmendra.singh234@gmail.com 
 2Department of Information Technology, Govt. Engineering College, Ajmer 
srakhi16@yahoo.com  
3Aricent Group Of Industries, Gurgaon 
pawansongara@aricent.com  

              4Department of Computer Engineering, Govt. Engineering College, Ajmer 

rakeshrathi4@rediffmail.com  

Abstract: 

Vulnerability is a weakness, shortcoming or flaw in the system or network infrastructure which can be used by 
an attacker to harm the system, disrupt its normal operation and use it for his financial, competitive or other 
motives or just for cyber escapades. 

In  this  paper,  we  re-examined  the  various  types  of  attacks  on  industrial  control  systems  as  well  as  on  social 
networking users. We have listed which all vulnerabilities were exploited for executing these attacks and their 
effects  on  these  systems  and social  networks.  The  focus  will  be  mainly  on  the  vulnerabilities  that  are  used  in 
OSNs  as the convertors which convert the social network into antisocial network and these networks can be 
further used for the network attacks on the users associated with the victim user whereby creating a consecutive 
chain of attacks on increasing number of social networking users. Another type of attack, Stuxnet Attack which 
was  originally  designed  to  attack  Iran’s  nuclear  facilities  is  also  discussed  here  which  harms  the  system  it 
controls  by  changing  the  code  in  that  target  system.  The  Stuxnet  worm  is  a  very  treacherous  and  hazardous 
means of attack and is the first of its kind as it allows the attacker to manipulate real-time equipment. 

Keywords: 

Online social networks, JPGvirus, Stuxnet worm, reverse social engineering attacks, Facebook application. 

1. INTRODUCTION 

The  popularity  of  online  social  networks  (OSN)  [1] is  vastly  growing  in  today’s  world.  The  online 
communities  developed  by  the  OSNs  are  growing  environments  on  the  web  to  support  modern 
interaction  among  the  people  around  the  Globe.  Online  social  networks  are  very  beneficial  for  the 
people  for  keeping  in  touch  with  friends,  family  members  and  other  acquaintances,  for  research 
collaboration,  data  sharing,  social  campaigning  and  other  constructive  purposes.  There  are  various 
social  networks  which  are  put  to  different  purposes  according  to  their  usability.  Some  are  used  for 
professional  and  business  collaborations  like  LinkedIn  [2]  and  XING  [3],  whereas  there  are  other 
OSNs  like  Facebook  [4],  Twitter  [5],  MySpace  [6]  and  Orkut  [7]  which  are  primarily  used  for 
informal friendly interactions, photo and video sharing and entertainment. 

The  massive  acceptance  of  OSNs  by  the  users  provides  opportunity  to  the  attackers  to  create  and 
launch  new  exploit  and  attacks  every  day.  The  growing  popularity  of  facebook  in  turn,  makes  it  a 
popular website vulnerable to reverse engineering attacks [8] and identity thefts and may turn a social 
network into an antisocial network. Antisocial network is the platform for the execution of malicious 
threats  as  well  as  it  provides  unauthorized  accesses  like  Denial  of  Service  attack,  propagation  of 

malware etc. A very large distributed database is used for OSNs and this acts as an advantage to make 
exploitation ideal because OSNs include community of users that share the same interests in the form 
of  applications.  These  users  share  the  same  applications  with  the  help  of  platform  openness.  This 
openness  results  in  a  user  installing  the  application  which  is  malicious  and  infected.  These  above 
characteristics  give  attackers  the  chance  to  manipulate  that  user  to  act  as  antisocial  against  all  the 
internet  users  which  are  connected  to  the  victim  user.  In  upcoming  sections  of  this  paper,  the 
properties of Facebook which is a Real World Social Network are discussed and then the study about 
utilization of these properties to launch attacks on facebook users is explained. 

This survey paper also discusses about Stuxnet [9] which is an intelligently designed worm and uses 
some  vulnerability  in  print  spoolers  and  removable  drives  to  make  its  way  through  windows  based 
systems but ultimately targets industrial control systems. Industrial Control systems (ICS) used for a 
variety of industrial processes like manufacturing and refining, power generation, water management 
etc. [14] This type of critical infrastructure is managed by cyber-physical systems like SCADA [15] 
and  use  of  internet  based  technologies  to  manage  SCADA  systems  make  them  more  susceptible  to 
network based attacks with the intention to modify the code structure of PLCs (Programmable Logic 
Controllers). 

2. BACKGROUND: 

A.  Social Network 

Large  number  of  people  in  the  world  use  social  networking  sites  like  Facebook,  LinkedIn  in  their 
daily life. Facebook is the fastest social networking site which is surfed very much across the globe 
[10]. Developers of the Facebook developed a platform and a large collection of applications for this 
website to make it more effective and interesting to the naive Facebook users.  

Users  use  these  applications  on  facebook  and  share  them  according  to  common  interests  in  their 
groups  or  communities  and  also  invite  their  friends  to  share  the  application.  Many  applications  are 
malicious and harmful among these applications which can affect the users’ personal information and 
also affect their friends in the same facebook community. 

B. Puppetnets 

Puppetnet [11] is an application which is used for the exploitation purpose of World Wide Web. There 
are  different  types  of  links  included  in  the  web  page  which  can  include  many  malicious  links  in 
between  that  can  be  used to  harm  the  users on  social  networking  sites like  facebook,  LinkedIn  etc. 
Adversary or malicious user can also make special pages that include many malicious attacks and if 
the user downloads the malicious data from these links or pages, then the adversary can get benefit 
out of it. 

C. Statistical Distribution of infected machines by Stuxnet Worm in different countries 
of the world: 
When the Stuxnet worm was created, figures pointed out high rate of infection at some specific sites. 
But when the worm’s behaviour was discovered, there was a notable decrease in number of infections 
in the same areas. The following pie chart [16] and table [16] shows percentage of infected systems 
by  Stuxnet  worm  since  2010  for  top  14  countries.  The  most  affected  country  is  Iran  followed  by 
mostly Asian countries. United States has only a small percentage of this infection. The high infection 
rate in some regions and low rate in the others depends on many factors, one of which is good quality 
security software is being used or not that is, in Asian countries most people like to use the free or 
trial  versions  of  antivirus  software  that  do  not  provide  maximum  protection  against  malware, 
malicious websites and they do not provide robust firewalls and shields. 

 
 
Figure1: Pie Chart depicting the percentage spread of Stuxnet Worm infection across the globe 

Table 1: Percentage of Stuxnet Worm infection across the globe 

D. Phases to create and host a facebook application: 

Facebook, a very popular social networking website includes a provision which allows the software 
developers around the globe to develop simple applications which then execute along with facebook 
network and can access user data such as friends’ list, inbox etc [12]. 

To  create  a  facebook  application,  a  developer  application  is  required  to  be  added  to  the  facebook 
account of the developer and the development environment can be chosen from the various facebook 
compatible environments like PHP, JavaScript, Flash/Action Script and Connect. The facebook non-
compliant  environments    are  Android,  ASP.NET,  ASP  (VB  Script,  Jscript  ),  Cocoa,  Cold-  Fusion, 
C++,  C#,  D,  Emacs  Lisp,  Erlang,  Google  Web  Toolkit,  Java,  Lisp,  Perl,  Python,  Ruby  on  Rails, 
Smalltalk,TcI, VB.NET, and Windows Mobile. The client libraries of the above frameworks are not 
yet supported by facebook but are likely to be added to facebook client libraries in future. 

The three essentials to be performed to implement and submit a facebook application are: 

i. A third-party web server where the hosted application will reside. 

 
 
 
 
 
ii. A facebook client library that is installed on hosting server. 

iii. A relational database management solution like MySQL for storing application user database. 

a. Registering a facebook application: 

A developer registers his creation in the form of facebook application by submitting a form specifying 
the  details  like  application  name  and  description,  Canvas  page  URL  and  Canvas  callback  URL.  A 
canvas  page  URL  is  the  introductory  page  of  a  facebook  application  to  which  a  user  is  redirected 
when he chooses to open a particular application whereas; the canvas callback URL is the location of 
the  application  on  its  host  server.  The  developer  then  receives  a  confirmation  from  the  facebook 
development  team  if  the  application  is  selected  and  included  in  the  global  facebook  application 
directory from where the facebook users can now explore and add the application to their account. 

Some facebook elements that come handy to serve the purpose of easy application development are: 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

 Facebook Markup Languag (FBML): FBML as the name suggests, is derived from HTML 
and  includes  tags  with  following  syntax:  <fb:  tagName/>.  With  the  help  of  FBML,  the 
application communicates with user profile to request user data. 
Facebook  Query  Language  (FQL):  Various  tables  have  been  supplied  by  facebook  to  be 
queried for social user data. 
Facebook JavaScript (FBJS): FBJS allows facebook application developers to use JavaScript, 
AJAX  objects,  animation  libraries  and  other  client  libraries  to  develop  versatile  facebook 
applications. 
Facebook  API:  APIs  provide  HTTP  based communication  with  facebook  API  REST  server 
and enables the developer to gather a particular user’s profile information. 

b. FBML canvas page redirection mechanism: 

The  FBML  canvas  page  redirection  mechanism  flow  is  shown  in  the  above  figure[17].    Firstly,  a 
facebook user requests an application from the facebook server. In order to redirect the user’s browser 
to the application’s canvas URL, Facebook server asks for the call-back URL from the hosting server 
through an HTTP post request for retrieving the FBML of the canvas page. If some data is needed by 
the web hosting server, then it also sends an HTTP GET request to the Facebook REST server. After 
completion  of  these  API  method  calls,  the  hosting  server  creates  and  returns  the  FBML  of  the 
requested  application  page  to  the  Facebook  server.  The  facebook  server  then  translates  this  FBML 
into HTML and provides it to the user’s browser. 

1. 

Initial request 
from user 

2. HTML Request 

User 

vii. 

v. 

vi. 

Facebook 
server 

2. Request for FBML 

3.  API call 

4. API response 

FBML response 

Hosting 
server 

Figure2: How an application page is displayed on a user’s browser 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
    
E. Phases of Stuxnet: 

Stuxnet is the most sophisticated and dangerous worm that was introduced in July 2010, by attacking 
Iran’s  nuclear  facilities.  Stuxnet  affects  approximately  60%  of  that  attack  on  Iran  as  reported  by 
Director  of  security  response.  According  to  the  study  done  by  Security  experts  in  Iran,  Stuxnet 
basically affects the Uranium facility due to which its rotational speed increases and decreases and as 
a result violates its normal behaviour.  

Stuxnet  worm  basically  works  in  two  phases:  In  first  phase  that  is  the  “Propagation  phase”,  it 
propagates  through  the  files  and  updates  them.  After  that,  in  the  second  phase  that  is  called  the 
“Injection phase”, it searches for its actual target that is i-e Siemens WinCC  control and monitoring 
systems.  After  finding  them,  it  starts  to  deviate  them  from  their  normal  behaviour.  We  have 
introduced those three vulnerabilities above that can be simulated through Metasploit framework. This 
framework  can  also  be  used  to  write  code  for  different  types  of  vulnerabilities.  The  following 
Figure[16] shows these phases: 

The  Stuxnet  rootkit  spreads  itself  in  four  ways:  with  the  help  of  flash  drives  or  USB  drives,  while 
sharing data on networks or through print spooler or RPC vulnerability. 

Figure 3: Two Phases of Stuxnet Worm 

3. Experimental Evaluation 

3.1 Experimental Evaluation for facebook: 

 3.1.1 OSN as DDoS Platform 
Social  websites  like  Facebook  can  be  exploited  or  infected  through  Distributed  Denial  of  Service 
attack  [13]  by  any  malicious  application  which  generates  self-executable  files  on  victim’s  system. 
When  a  user  works  on  the  system  or  opens  a  file,  image  etc,  which  has  the  hidden  self-executable 

 
files, these  files  are  spread  in  the  whole  system.  The  collection  of  computers  that  generate  harmful 
files upon running malicious application on Facebook is called JPGvirus.  

3.1.2 Experimental Setup 
This consists of creating a JPGvirus but it does not affect any facebook user. A common application 
of  facebook  is  Photo  album  creation.  When  a  facebook  user  clicks  on  a  photo,  it  gets  opened.  The 
attack is preceded in the following way: Special FBML tags are inserted into the code, so whenever a 
user visits that page, a self-executable file named windows.exe is created inside Windows folder in C 
Drive of PC. 
A simple C program is created in the desired directory. Its executable is generated and is attached to 
image  file  with  JPG  extension.  FBML  tag  <fb:iframe/>  is  used  to  include  the  hidden  frames  in 
HTML’s code. A technique which is discussed later is used to protect the privacy of a facebook user 
and  prevent  the  extraction  of  information  from  the  image  requests  that  are  made  by  user’s  system 
compromised by malicious applications. 

Possible misuses in the fashion of Puppetnets: 

I.  Host Scanning 

II. 

III. 

In  this  technique,  hosts  are  scanned  by  the  attacker  for  finding  out  an  open  port. 
Whenever the attacker finds an open port, he will send an HTTP request. 
Embedded Self-Signed Java Applets 
The  common  idea  used in this  is  that java  applets  are  embedded  inside  the  developer’s 
applications and use this technique to create malicious self-signed applets which initiate 
the  attack  by  asking  the  user  to  upload  a  file  through  a  common  file  selector  on  their 
system. When the user uploads some file, then that self-signed applet has full control over 
the disk and accesses the user’s local disk. 
Personal Information Leakage 
The facebook enables the users to have full control over the information provided by it. 
User can also apply some privacy settings to keep their data private but the attacker can 
get the personal information provided by the user and use them to create fake profiles or 
access their accounts by using their personal information if the users install the malicious 
applications created by attacker.   

IV.  Malware Propagation 

Malware  can  be  propagated  by  the  facebook  applications  if  the  server  is  exploited  by 
URL embedded attack vector. When the user uses this application which is infected, this 
malware will be propagated. 

V.  URL Scanner Cloaking 

In this technique, requests coming from some specific users can be filtered by facebook 
URL  scanning  system  and  the  attacker  then  feed  the  customers  with  unwanted 
information or data. Content forging is yet another method of attacking in facebook. 

3.2 Experimental evaluation for Stuxnet: 

All of the three vulnerabilities caused by Stuxnet worm are defined below. This can be understood by 
an architectural diagram in which C&C server behaves as Backtrack 4 and Metasploit Framework acts 
as USB:  

3.2.1 MS08_067_netapi (Server Service) 
This  type  of  vulnerability  is  caused  by  Stuxnet  by  spreading  itself  through  network  either  by  file 
sharing or through shared folders. The PC which has been infected through this worm is connected to 

 
network and has the shared folder. When the other system on the network wants to access that shared 
folder, this vulnerability exploits that system also, through this shared folder or file.  

3.2.2 MS10_061_spoolss (Print Spooler Server) 
The Print Spooler vulnerability caused by Stuxnet worm is MS10-061. This worm affects the systems 
that share a common printer. The effects due to this worm are done in basically two steps: injection 
phase  and  execution  phase.  Injection  phase  involves  copying  infected  files  into  directory  and 
execution phase does the main work of infection by impersonating a client, for instance, by sending 
two files in place of a single file.  

3.2.3 MS10_046_dllloader (.LNK Vulnerability) 
When C&C server gives some specific commands, the coding of some system that is connected to it, 
gets  changed.  Then,  at  the  time  of  execution,  it  will start  giving  alerts. Metasploit framework  is  an 
important tool that is commonly used to exploit different windows vulnerabilities. It is the first way in 
which  Stuxnet  rootkit  distributes  itself  to  other  systems  and  infects  them.  According  to  the  given 
architecture,  this  vulnerability  is  exploited  to  system  containing  Keil  and  proteous.  Due  to  C&C 
server, the coding of system is changed and then the final output of that system will also be changed. 
It  basically  loads  the  icons  of  files  from  CPL  Windows  control  panel  and  changes  the  file  location 
info  field  in  .LNK  header.  In  this  way,  attacker  finally  succeeds  in  gaining  the  access  to  sensitive 
information when user proceeds to that malicious path. 

The above discussed three vulnerabilities can be simulated by using Metasploit Framework integrated 
with Linux Backtrack 4 in the below figure[9]. Basically, security professionals and researchers use 
Metasploit  framework  to  exploit  vulnerabilities,  perform  penetration  testing.  Backtrack  is  an 
extension  of  Linux  which  is  particularly  designed  for  performing  functions  aimed  at  maintaining 
network security for security professionals.  

Figure 4: Network Setup for the Transmission of Stuxnet Worm to the Target System 

 
 
  
 
3.3 Defenses against JPGvirus and Stuxnet vulnerabilities 
The  JPGvirus  and  Stuxnet  vulnerabilities  explained  in  this  paper  can  be  handled  vigilantly  by 
adopting following safety techniques: 
3.3.1 Measures against JPGvirus 
A. Facebook’s Network Security System 
Facebook  uses  some  inbuilt  checks  for  blocking  such  malicious  scripts.  If  some  profile  is  caught 
posting such type of links, it is warned for deactivation by facebook security team. 

Figure 5: Steps for security check by Websense for a facebook internal link 

B. Websense Security Checks 
Websense is a popular computer security firm with which facebook has negotiated so that whenever a 
link is posted or clicked within  facebook, it is examined by Websense ThreatSeeker Cloud and if it 
comes from an untrusted source, a warning message is shown to the user. 
But  due  to  the  dynamic  nature  of  the  web  content, Websense  can  only  check  links  after  posting;  it 
cannot stop them from being posted. This flow can be understood from the figure[17] that is shown 
above. 

3.3.2 Measures against Stuxnet Worm 

Some possible precautions to avoid the Stuxnet vulnerabilities from propagating are: 

A. MS10_061_spoolss vulnerability can be prevented by not allowing any executable file to be printed 
by printer. And if any executable file is allowed to be printed, it should have filename less than 10 
characters. 

B.  MS10_046_dllloader  vulnerability  can  be  prevented  by  not  creating  shortcut  file  of  internet 
explorer.  

4. CONCLUSION 

The number of social networking users is increasing day by day all over the world which makes these 
OSNs more susceptible to the reverse social engineering attacks, one of which is done with the help of 
JPGvirus  discussed  in  this  paper.  We  surveyed  on  how  the  attackers  can  take  advantage  of  the 

 
facebook  feature  that  is,  third-party  web  servers  are  used  to  host  the  facebook  applications.    If  the 
facebook  applications  will  be  hosted  from  the  authentic  facebook’s  servers,  then  these  JPGvirus 
attacks will lose much of their power.  

Another  type  of  worm  which  was  considered  here is Stuxnet  worm,  which  was mainly  designed  to 
cause  the  malfunctioning  of  nuclear  power  plants.  It  was  designed  so  well  that  the  system 
administrator was unaware till its last stage when most of the intended damage was already done and 
its disastrous effects could not be reversed.  

Finally, we aim to provide an understanding about how social network users can be cautious against 
the reverse social engineering attacks by understanding how a JPGvirus works and as far as Stuxnet 
worm is concerned above measures can help in maintaining computer system safety to a large extent. 

REFERENCES 

[1] D. Boyd and N.B. Ellison “social network sites” Definition, History, and scholarship”, J Computer-   
      Mediated Commun., vol 13, No.1, 2007. 

[2] LinkedIn-Relationships Matter, http://www.linkedin.com. 

[3] XING-Social Network for Business Professionals. http://www.xing.com. 

[4] Facebook-Connect and share with the people in your life; http://www.facebook.com. 

[5] Twitter-Social site for professional communities; http://www.facebook.com. 

[6] MySpace, http://www.myspace.com. 

[7] Orkut, http://www.orkut.com. 

[8] “Reverse Social Engineering Attacks” Aleksandr Matrosov, Senior Virus Researcher Eugene Rodionov,  
         Rootkit Analyst David Harley, Senior Research Fellow Juraj Malcho, Head of Virus Laboratory 

[9] “SWAM: Stuxnet Worm Analysis in Metasploit”, Rahat Masood, Um-e-Ghazia, Dr. Zahid Anwar,   
      “Department of Computing School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (SEECS)”, National  
       University of Science and Technology (NUST) Islamabad, Pakistan. 

[10] A. Mislove, M. Marcon, K. P. Gummadi, P. Drushcel, and B. Bhattacharjee. Measurement and Analysis of    
         Online Social Networks. In IMC '07: Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet     
         Measurement, pages 29_42, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM. 

[11] V. T. Lam, S. Antonatos, P. Akritidis, and K.G. Anagnostakis. Puppetnets: misusing web browsers as a  
       distributed attack infrastructure. Tn CCS '06: Proceedings of the 13th ACM conference on Computer and  
       Communications Security, pages 221_234, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM 

[12] Facebook Wiki for Developers, http://wiki.developerforce.com/page/ Facebook Toolkit.. 

[13] “DoS and DDoS Attack’s Possibility Verification on Streaming Media Application” CHEN LeiSoftware  
         School FUDAN University Shanghai, China YE Dejian* Software School FUDAN University Shanghai,   
         China2008 

[14] S. Karnouskos, “Cyber-Physical Systems in the SmartGrid,” in IEEE 9th International Conference on July  
        July 2011. 

[15] S. Karnouskos and A. W. Colombo, “Architecting the next generation of service-based SCADA/DCS  
        system of systems,” in 37th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society (IECON 2011),  
        Melbourne, Australia., 7–10 Nov 2011. [Online]. Available:  
        http//sites.google.com/site/karnouskos/files/2011 IECON ngSCADA.pdf 

[16] Stuxnet Under the Microsope, Security Report, Revision 1.31 by Juraj Malcho, Head of Virus  
        Laboratory, eset laboratories, US. 

[17] Vulnerabilities in Social Networking Sites by Pratibha Jagnere published under 2nd IEEE International  
         Conference on Parallel, Distributed and Grid Computing, 2012 

 
 
 
Authors 

Dharmendra  Singh  has  completed  his  bachelor’s  in  technology  from  Stani 
Memorial  College  of  Engineering  and  Technology  Jaipur.  He  is  currently 
pursuing M.Tech from Government Engineering College, Ajmer. His research 
interests include Network Security and Cyber warfare. 

Rakhi  Sinha  has  obtained  her  bachelor's  degree  in  technology  from  Govt. 
Women's Engineering College, Ajmer. She is currently pursuing her master’s 
from Govt. Engineering College, Ajmer. Her research interests include Cyber 
Espionage and Sabotage. 

Dr. Rakesh Rathi is currently serving as Assistant Professor in the Department 
of Computer Engineering in Government Engineering College, Ajmer. He is a 
CISCO certified academy instructor and is a  member of several professional 
societies. He has taught in various institutions for about 13 years with 6 years 
of  post  graduate  teaching.  He  has  co-authored  and  supervised  many 
international and national publications in conferences and journals.  

 
  
 
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                       
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
