Automation Security 

Timur Z. Mirzoev  

The Department of Electronics and Computer Technology 
College of Technology, Indiana State University, Terre Haute IN, 47807 

January 2007

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Introduction 

Over the past decade, the traditional corporate network has come under siege from a 

proliferation of viruses and malicious intruders.  As a result, numerous network 

security technologies, methodologies, and policies have been developed to secure the 

business system.  In comparison, process control systems, with their reliance on 

proprietary networks and hardware, have long been considered immune to cyber 

attacks.  Now, with the move to open standards such as Ethernet, TCP/IP, and web 

technologies, the plant floor requires its own security procedures to eliminate 

undesirable access to production systems and to maximize the uptime and efficiency 

of process networks1. 

Web-based Automated Process Control systems are a new type of applications that 

use the Internet to control industrial processes with the access to the real-time data.  

Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) networks contain computers and 

applications that perform key functions in providing essential services and commodities (e.g., 

electricity, natural gas, gasoline, water, waste treatment, transportation) to all Americans.  As 

such, they are part of the nation’s critical infrastructure and require protection from a variety 

of threats that exist in cyber space today. By allowing the collection and analysis of data and 

control of equipment such as pumps and valves from remote locations, SCADA networks 

provide great efficiency and are widely used2.  IEEE Standard 1402-2000, Guide for Electric 

Power Substation Physical and Electronic Security, states:  

“The introduction of computer systems with online access to substation information is 

significant in that substation relay protection, control, and data collection systems may 

be  exposed  to  the  same  vulnerabilities  as  all  other  computer  systems.  As  the  use  of 

1 E. Byres, G. Gillespie, Plan for Network security, Industrial Networking, Fall 2002 
2 US Department of Energy, “21 Steps to Improve Cyber Security of SCADA Networks”, retrieved from 
http://www.ea.doe.gov/pdfs/21stepsbooklet.pdf on November 16, 2003 

2 

 
                                           
computer  equipment  within  the  substation  environment  increases,  the  need  for 

security systems to prevent electronic intrusions may become even more important.” 

It is fortunate, that vulnerabilities of computer systems are well known and well 

documented.  However, it is important to successfully apply that knowledge to industrial 

networks.  Figure 1. presents electronic intrusion vulnerabilities for industrial networks.  

Over the last 20 years, there were increasingly more complex, sophisticated, and 

capable control systems installed.  These have included more sophisticated basic and 

advanced regulatory control, advanced process control, optimizers, and artificial 

intelligence3.  The field of intelligent instrumentation is going through a major transition.  

The first "smart" transmitters were pioneered by just a few companies some 15 years ago.  

After a rather slow start in the market, one can say that in the past five years, this technology 

has finally received acceptance in the plant instrumentation and maintenance communities.  

The benefits of intelligent devices-enhanced performance, improved 

Figure 1. Electronic Intrusion Vulnerabilities 

Source: Paul Oman, Edmund O. Schweitzer, III, and Jeff Roberts, “Safeguarding IEDS, Substations, and 

SCADA systems against electronic intrusions”, Schweitzer Engineering Laboratories, Inc. 2001 

3 William L. (Bill) Mostia (1999).  Out of Control.  Control for the Process Industries, July 1999 

3 

 
 
 
                                           
reliability, and the ability to provide self-diagnostics have been recognized as contributors to 

improve the processes they control.  Furthermore, prices have come down significantly, 

thereby making the purchase of intelligent devices affordable and justifiable4.  

It is well-known that IT security has been addressed many times in the past decade.  

Many scary examples of hackers taking over businesses, companies’ web servers and etc., 

indicate the need for continuous improvement of security systems.  Those examples mainly 

show IT vulnerability in business or economic area of peoples’ lives; however, consequences 

of a hacker intruding a power plant security or compromising a web-based automated process 

control system running PLCs (Programmable Logic Controllers) and other control devices 

could result in more dramatic outcomes than just shutting down an e-commerce web server or 

interrupting an online business.   

In October, an Australian man was sent to prison for two years after he was found 

guilty of hacking into a waste management system and causing millions of liters of 

raw sewage to spill out into local parks, rivers, and even the grounds of a Hyatt 

Regency hotel.  He exacted this revenge after the area’s council rejected his job 

application to work as a control engineer at the treatment plant.  It appears that the 

problem may be more widespread than most process engineers believe.  The incident 

database maintained by the British Columbia Institute of Technology Internet 

Engineering Lab now contains more than a dozen cyber attacks involving process 

control process systems in all sectors of manufacturing5. 

In order to successfully protect industrial networks, there should be a plan developed 

for security procedures of industrial networks.  In the next chapters of this paper there will be 

4 Peter L. Schellekens, “A Vision for Intelligent Instrumentation in Process Control”. Control Engineering Online, October 2001. 
5 Eric Byres, “Can’t happen at your site?”  www.isa.org, February 2002 

4 

 
 
 
                                           
some suggestions on how to properly deal with industrial security issues; some possible 

solutions will also be presented. 

Identifying Threats and Risks  

Web-based control systems are becoming more used with everyday and the online-

based network control systems create more possibilities for intruders to invade a network 

control system.  Internet technologies such as RSView32 by Rockwell Automation, LabView 

by National Instruments6 are providing great applications for control networks.  However, it 

is necessary to mention that the network and data integrity are not the primary concern of 

those software packages. 

Motivations for electronic attacks against web-based control systems may follow the 

same patterns seen in attacks on Internet E-commerce sites. They can be categorized into five 

broad groups7: 

1. Hackers are computer users who access unauthorized systems simply because they 

can. The relatively benign hacker is motivated by curiosity or the challenge of 

exploration, without overt malicious intent. Others are malicious with the intent of 

gaining notoriety or causing damage. 

2. Espionage is the act of gaining industrial or political advantage by information 

gathering through both legal and illegal means. Much espionage gathers information 

through publicly available resources such as web pages, product descriptions, and 

promotional literature.  Other espionage activities include insider access, theft, and 

illegal surveillance to acquire confidential information. 

6 Software packages that allow engineers control and view control or device networks via WWW. 
7 Paul Oman, Edmund O. Schweitzer, III, and Jeff Roberts, “Safeguarding  IEDS, Substations, and SCADA systems against electronic 
intrusions”, Schweitzer Engineering Laboratories, Inc. 2001 

5 

 
 
                                           
3. Sabotage is usually rooted in desires for personal, economic, or political gain 

caused through the destruction of your competitor’s assets, organizational structure, 

and/or market share.  “Hactivism” is an emerging form of sabotage where hackers 

deface or damage corporate Information Technology assets in the name of some 

radical cause. 

4. Electronic Theft is the theft of credit and/or personal identity information, 

frequently stored in corporate IT systems, that can be used in subsequent fraudulent 

schemes. Losses in the U.S. alone are estimated to be billions of dollars. 

5. Vandalism is the destruction of property value without personal gain, as distinct 

from sabotage because it is typically haphazard, random, and relatively localized. 

Creation of secure industrial networks is possible only when potential threats and 

risks are identified.  Figure 2. depicts generalization of potential threats. 

Figure 2. Security Risks and Types of Assault 

Source: Siemens, Information Security in Industrial Communications, October 1999 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The following presents an example of threats identified for electric power systems8:  

1. The expanded use of public protocols to interconnect protective equipment and 

SCADA systems (e.g. TCP/IP and UCA over Ethernet LANs/WANs). 

2. Increased dial-in and network access to remote sites through public communication 

services (e.g., public phones, Internet). 

3. Instability in the electric power utility job market, creating disgruntled employees 

and ex-employees, caused by deregulation and mergers. 

4. Increased competition for electricity generation and T&D services creating pressure 

to downsize, streamline, automate and cut costs, also causing disgruntled employees 

and ex-employees. 

5. Instability in the electric power service, caused by deregulation and increased 

competition, creating disgruntled customers. 

6. Increased public access to transmission system data mandated by FERC 888/889. 

7. Increased terrorism worldwide and increased foreign government-sponsored 

terrorism and information warfare targeted against North America. 

8. Rapid growth of a computer-literate population and widespread dissemination of 

hacker tools. 

9. Increased electronic theft, recreational hacking, and hacktivism (i.e., the destruction 

of electronic assets for a political or socioeconomic cause). 

Federal Bureau of Investigation also identified some threats of critical infrastructure 

that are presented in Table 1. 

8 Paul Oman, Edmund O. Schweitzer, III, and Jeff Roberts, “Safeguarding  IEDS, Substations, and SCADA systems against electronic 
intrusions”, Schweitzer Engineering Laboratories, Inc. 2001 

7 

 
 
                                           
Table 1.  Threats to Critical Infrastructure Observed by the FBI 

Source: Federal Bureau of Investigation 

Resulting consequences of a possible intrusion of industrial or SCADA network could 

be as follows9:  

• Shut down the substation or any portion of the subsystem controlled by  the 

compromised device, either immediately or in a delayed manner. 

•  Change  protection  device  settings  to  degrade  reliability  of  the  device  and, 

subsequently, the electric service provided by the substation. 

•  Gather  control  and  protection  settings  information  that  could  be  used  in  a 

subsequent attack. 

9 Paul Oman, Edmund O. Schweitzer, III, and Jeff Roberts, “Safeguarding  IEDS, Substations, and SCADA systems against electronic 
intrusions”, Schweitzer Engineering Laboratories, Inc. 2001 

8 

 
 
                                           
• Change or perturb the data in such a manner as to degrade electric service or 

cause loss of service. 

• Plant malicious code that could later trigger a delayed or coordinated attack. 

•  Shut  down  the  regional  service  controlled  by  that  SCADA  system,  either 

immediately or in a delayed manner. 

• Steal or alter metering data gathered by the SCADA system. 

• Use the SCADA system as a backdoor into the corporate IT system to obtain 

customer credit and personal identity information commonly used in electronic 

theft. 

Development of security procedures for industrial control networks 

In order to successfully protect industrial control networks, E. Byres and G. Gillespie 

suggest protecting control network integrity by starting not from technology, but from 

creation of an industrial cyber security policy.  The authors of the article “Plan for Network 

Security10” present the following characteristics of a typical industrial cyber security policy: 

•  Establish a secure production communication infrastructure and a stable 

processing environment. 

•  Effectively manage the risk of security exposure and intrusion. 

•  Communicate the responsibilities of users, management, and information system 

staff for the protection of information and provide direction toward honoring this 

commitment. 

•  Provide a requirements outline for those staff charged with technical 

implementation. 

•  Promote understanding and compliance with all applicable laws and regulations. 

10 E. Byres, G. Gillespie, Plan for Network security, Industrial Networking, Fall 2002 

9 

 
 
 
                                           
•  Limit company liability and preserve management’s options in the event of a 

security incident. 

The responsibility for an industrial cyber security policy should reside at the highest 

organizational structure.  Below that should be a production-based technical team charged 

with standards implementation, technical management, and enforcement. The consistent 

application of the security policy will reduce the risk and liability of all persons involved11. 

US Department of Energy suggest following these 21 steps to improve industrial 

control network security12: 

1.  Identify all connections to SCADA networks 

2.  Disconnect unnecessary connections to the SCADA network 

3.  Evaluate and strengthen the security of any remaining connections to the SCADA 

network 

4.  Harden SCADA networks by removing or disabling unnecessary services. 

5.  Do not rely on proprietary protocols to protect your system. 

6.  Implement the security features provided by device and system vendors 

7.  Establish strong controls over any medium that is used as a backdoor into the SCADA 

network. 

8.  Implement internal and external intrusion detection systems and establish 24-hour-a-

day incident monitoring. 

9.  Perform technical audits of SCADA devices and networks, and any other connected 

networks, to identify security concerns. 

10. Conduct physical security surveys and assess all remote sites connected to the 

SCADA network to evaluate their security 

11 E. Byres, G. Gillespie, Plan for Network security, Industrial Networking, Fall 2002 
12 US Department of Energy, “21 Steps to Improve Cyber Security of SCADA Networks”, retrieved from 
http://www.ea.doe.gov/pdfs/21stepsbooklet.pdf on November 16, 2003 

10 

 
                                           
11. Establish SCADA “Red Teams” to identify and evaluate possible attack scenarios. 

12. Clearly define cyber security roles, responsibilities, and authorities for managers, 

system administrators, and users 

13. Document network architecture and identify systems that serve critical functions or 

contain sensitive information that require additional levels of protection. 

14. Establish a rigorous, ongoing risk management process. 

15. Establish a network protection strategy based on the principle of defense-in-depth. 

16. Clearly identify cyber security requirements 

17. Establish effective configuration management processes 

18. Conduct routine self-assessments 

19. Establish system backups and disaster recovery plans. 

20. Senior organizational leadership should establish expectations for cyber security 

performance and hold individuals accountable for their performance 

21. Establish policies and conduct training to minimize the likelihood that organizational 

personnel will inadvertently disclose sensitive information regarding SCADA system 

design, operations, or security controls. 

In comparison to business IT security, it might seem that there are no clear security 

guidelines developed for SCADA and web-based control networks.  However, general 

suggestions given here could be extremely useful for each particular industry. 

Recommendations and Conclusions 

Jonathan Pollet argues, that SCADA security is often overlooked13: 

13 Jonathan Pollet, SCADA Security Strategy, PlantData Technologies August 8, 2002 

11 

 
 
 
 
                                           
Now, more than ever, utilities and oil and gas producers are taking precautions 

to  ensure  the  security  of  their  information  systems,  implementing  protections  for 

known  potential  points  of  access  via  the  Internet.    The  problem  lies  in  the  fact  that 

many SCADA systems involve various components that bridge the world between IT 

and Facility Engineering.  There is typically not a lot of teamwork and collaboration 

between  the  IT  security  efforts  and  the  Data  Acquisition  teams  that  are  focused  on 

delivering  field  and  facility  data  reliably  to  company  stockholders  and  end  users.  

Everyone assumes that it is an IT issue, but IT staffs are rarely have the expertise and 

background  in  SCADA  and  industrial  automation  systems  to  adequately  develop 

security tests or measures for these systems. 

A survey by Riptech found that about 70 percent of the operating manuals for 

those systems are available to the public.  These systems for the process industries are 

particularly  vulnerable  because  they  were  not  designed  for  use  with  Internet 

applications. 

The White House report on critical infrastructure protection recommends the three 

following steps to secure network-based infrastructure14: 

“We suggest consideration of these immediate actions prior to the completion of a 

formal risk assessment:  

(1) Isolate critical control systems from insecure networks by disconnection or 

adequate firewalls,  

(2) Adopt best practices for password control and protection, or install modern 

authentication mechanisms,  

(3) Provide for individual accountability through protected action logs or the 

equivalent.” 

14 The White House Office of the Press Secretary, White House Communications on Critical Infrastructure Protection, October 22, 1997: 
http://www.julieryan.com/Infrastructure/IPdoc.html. 

12 

 
                                           
Robert F. Dacey, Director of Information Security Issues of United States General 

Accounting Office, states the following:  

A  significant  challenge  in  effectively  securing  control  systems  is  the  lack  of 

specialized security technologies for these [control networks] systems.  As  I [Robert 

F. Dacey] previously mentioned, the computing resources in control systems that are 

needed to perform security functions tend to be quite limited, making it very difficult 

to  use  security  technologies  within  control  system  networks  without  severely 

hindering performance. 

Although technologies such as robust firewalls and strong authentication can 

be employed to better segment control systems from enterprise networks, research and 

development could help address the application of security technologies to the control 

systems themselves.  Information security organizations have noted that a gap exists 

between current security technologies and the need for additional research and 

development to secure control systems 

Several steps can be considered when addressing potential threats to control 

systems, including15:  

• Researching and developing new security technologies to protect control 

systems.  

• Developing security policies, guidance, and standards for control system 

security.  For example, the use of consensus standards could be considered to 

encourage industry to invest in stronger security for control systems.  

• Increasing security awareness and sharing information about implementing 

more secure architectures and existing security technologies.  For example, a 

15 Robert F. Dacey, Critical Infrastructure Protection, Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Technology, Information Policy, 
Intergovernmental Relations, and the Census, House Committee on Government Reform, United States General Accounting Office, October 

1, 2003 

13 

 
                                           
more secure architecture might be attained by segmenting control networks 

with robust firewalls and strong authentication.  Also, organizations may 

benefit from educating management about the cybersecurity risks related to 

control systems and sharing successful practices related to working across 

organizational boundaries.  

• Implementing effective security management programs that include 

consideration of control system security.  We have previously reported on the 

security management practices of leading organizations.  Such programs 

typically consider risk assessment, development of appropriate policies and 

procedures, employee awareness, and regular security monitoring. 

For standardizing purposes, there are several organizations that perform security 

testing and evaluation of SCADA and control networks.  Table 2. presents those 

organizations. 

Sandia National Laboratories has developed several software packages and 

methodologies, computer aids and etc. in order to find improvement for security of SCADA 

networks.  IDART (Information Design Assurance Red Team) methodology by Sandia 

National Laboratories is presented by Figure 3. 

14 

 
 
Table 2.  Organizations to improve control network security 

Source: Robert F. Dacey, Critical Infrastructure Protection, Testimony Before the Subcommittee on 

Technology, Information Policy, Intergovernmental Relations, and the Census, House Committee on 

Government Reform, United States General Accounting Office, October 1, 2003 

Figure 3.  IDART methodology by Sandia National Laboratories 

Source: http://www.naseo.org/committees/energysecurity/energyassurance/hutchinson.pdf 

15 

 
 
 
 
Siemens Company argues16 that the following are the five steps that could secure a 

network: 

1.  Defining the "Security Policy“ 

A  fundamental  component  of  every  solution  is  a  corporate  "security  policy“,  which 

defines  the  significance  and  organization  of  IT  security  for  the  enterprise.    The 

objectives  of  any  security  policy  are to create binding specifications and to describe 

the basic organization.  The wholesale support of corporate Management is essential if 

this kind of policy is to be effectively implemented throughout the company. 

2.  Security Concept and Security Management 

Specific measures are described within the security concept.  The concept takes into 

account the individual business processes and communication links inside and outside 

the  company.    In  addition,  external  influences  such  as  legal  regulations  and 

requirements  imposed  by  company's  business  associates  are  other  factors  to  which 

consideration has to be given. 

The security management necessary for the measures defined in the security concept 

requires clearly defined responsibilities - in other words, the special security tasks to 

be performed by each and every staff member have to be clearly defined. 

3.  Implementing the Security Measures 

The  measures  selected  are  put  into  practice  during  the  implementation  phase  on  the 

basis  of 

the  previously  defined  security  policy  and 

the  security  concept. 

Implementations  of  this  kind  are  rarely  ready-made,  but  represent  a  customized 

solution in each individual case which takes account of the special requirements of the 

company.  This ensures that the security solution can be harmoniously integrated into 

the existing infrastructure and the associated system architecture. Nevertheless, it may 

16 Siemens, Information Security in Industrial Communications, October 1999 

16 

 
                                           
be  necessary,  despite  this,  to  adjust  individual  business  and/or  communication 

processes  and  to  redesign  them  to  comply  with  the  security  policy.    In  a  few  cases, 

even restrictions or additional effort and cost may be the result. 

4.  Security Consciousness and Training of Staff Members 

The  success  of  all  the  actions  taken  towards  information  security  to  date  is  highly 

dependent upon the attitude of the different staff members.  Without the active support 

of all the persons concerned within the company, it will barely be possible to achieve 

the  specified  security  objectives.  Both  decision-makers  and  all  other  staff  members 

should  therefore  be  induced  to  be  security-conscious.    Suitable  means  for  achieving 

this are regular security information meetings and specific training sessions. 

5.  Control and Monitoring 

So  that  a  specified  security  level  can  be  guaranteed  permanently,  the  measures 

introduced  and  compliance  with  the  security  guidelines  have  to  be  monitored  and 

controlled  at  regular  intervals.    This  is  the  only  way  of  eliminating  existing  gaps  in 

security and detecting potential risks. 

In conclusion, it is important to point out the uniqueness of the security of web-based 

industrial networks and SCADA networks.  It is obvious, that there are potential threats and 

risks associated with industrial control networks.  The battle for IT security must go on, 

especially when dealing with security of industrial control networks. 

17 

 
