Critical Infrastructure Protection: having SIEM 
technology cope with network heterogeneity 

Gianfranco Cerullo, Valerio Formicola, Pietro Iamiglio, Luigi Sgaglione 
Department of Engineering 
University of Naples “Parthenope” 
Naples, Italy 
{gianfranco.cerullo, valerio.formicola, pietro.iamiglio, luigi.sgaglione}@uniparthenope.it 

Abstract—  Coordinated  and  targeted  cyber-attacks  to 
Critical  Infrastructures  (CIs)  are  becoming  more  and  more 
frequent  and  sophisticated.  This  is  due  to:  i)  the  recent 
technology  shift  towards  Commercial  Off-The-Shelf  (COTS) 
products,  and 
socio-political 
ii)  new  economical  and 
motivations.  In  this  paper,  we  discuss  some  of  the  most 
relevant  security  issues  resulting  from  the  adoption  in  CIs  of 
heterogeneous network infrastructures (specifically combining 
wireless  and  IP  trunks),  and  suggest  techniques  to  detect,  as 
well  as  to  counter/mitigate  attacks.  We  claim  that  techniques 
such  as  those  we  propose  here  should  be  integrated  in  future 
Information  and  Event  Management) 
SIEM 
solutions,  and  we  discuss  how  we  have  done  so  in  the  EC-
funded  MASSIF  project,  with  respect  to  a  real-world  CI 
scenario,  specifically  a  distributed  system  for  power  grid 
monitoring. 

(Security 

Keywords—  Critical  Infrastructure  Protection,  Intrusion 
Detection  and  Diagnosis,  Complex  Event  Processing  ,  Security 
Information and Event Management (SIEM) 

I. 

 INTRODUCTION 

Many  daily  operations  currently  rely  on  services 
provided  by  systems  that  are  referred  to  as  Critical 
Infrastructures  (CIs).  Typical  examples  of  CIs  are:  the 
electric grid (including the emerging technologies known as 
smart grids), oil and natural gas production and distribution 
infrastructures,  transportation  systems,  and  water  supply 
networks.  In  the  past,  CIs  consisted  of  components  which 
were  physically  and  logically  separated,  with  well-defined 
interfaces  and  relatively  little  interdependence.  As  market 
needs  evolved  towards  more  efficient  and  innovative 
services,  with  more  demanding  user  requirements  and 
customer expectations,  utility providers had to develop CIs 
where Information Technology (IT) gained  more and  more 
importance.  Current  CIs  include  a  number  of  “cyber 
components”,  which  collectively  account  for  a  significant 
fraction of the overall system. These cyber components are 
currently  connected  through  heterogeneous  networks,  and 
they  are  in  charge  of  activities  that  are  vital  to  the  CI,  and 
ultimately to the society. In particular, independently of the 
specific characteristics of the service they provide and of the 
deployment  context,  virtually  all  CIs  rely  -  to  a  significant 
extent  -  for  their  operation  on  the  existence  and  on  the 

of 

disuse 

dedicated 

dependability  of  the  underlying  network  infrastructure. 
Unfortunately, the increasing interconnectivity,  complexity 
and  heterogeneity  of  the  communication  networks  and 
systems  used  to  connect  such  cyber  components  also 
increase  their  level  of  vulnerability.  Furthermore,  the 
communication 
progressive 
architectures  and  proprietary  networked  components, 
together  with  the  growing  adoption  of  IP-based  solutions, 
exposes  CIs  to  cyber-attacks  coming  from  the  Internet  [1]. 
In  conclusion,  current  CIs  are  characterized  by  a 
vulnerability level similar to the one of other systems which 
are connected to the Internet, and it will be even more so in 
the  future. This  fact is particularly scaring if one considers 
the  dramatic  socio-economic  impact  that  CI  failures  can 
reasons,  developing 
have.  For 
mechanisms 
the  underlying  network 
infrastructure  of  a  CI  from  attacks  and  failures,  in  order  to 
ensure  secure  end-to-end  transmission  of  information  is  of 
paramount  importance.  Currently,  the  main  tool  for  the 
protection  of  complex  distributed  systems  is  Security 
Information  and  Event  Management  (SIEM)  technology. 
Regrettably, current SIEM technology has limited ability to 
cope with network heterogeneity.  

the  above  described 

for  protecting 

This  paper  makes  three  important  contributions.  First, 
we  provide  a  detailed  treatment  of  the  security  issues 
resulting  from  the  adoption  in  CIs  of  heterogeneous  and 
novel  network  solutions,  and  specifically:  Wireless  Sensor 
Networks  and  QoS-enabled  IP  connections.  Second,  we 
propose techniques for enhancing current SIEM technology, 
by  improving  its  capability  of  detecting  and  mitigating 
attacks  targeting  the  heterogeneous  network  infrastructure 
of  a  CI.  Third,  we  show  how  these  techniques  can  be 
implemented  with  respect  to  a  challenging  real  world 
scenario, specifically the Wide Area Monitoring System of a 
power grid. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 
II,  we  provide  an  overview  of  the  current  SIEM  offer,  and 
highlight  its  main  limitations.  In  section  III,  we  present  a 
typical  architecture  of  a  SIEM  system.  In  Section  IV  we 
discuss  how  SIEM  technology  might  detect  and  mitigate 
attacks targeting heterogeneous network infrastructures, with 
respect to the case study of a power grid. Finally Section V 
closes the paper with some final remarks. 

 
 
II.  SIEM TECHNOLOGY: STATE OF THE ART AND GAP 
ANALYSIS 

large  enterprises. 

SIEM products emerged ten years ago as a solution to the 
problem of data overload. They are essentially a combination 
of  previously  unbundled  security  management  services.  A 
SIEM  solution  effectively  combines  elements  of  Security 
(SIM)  with  Security  Event 
Information  Management 
Management  (SEM).  One  of  the  main  features  of  these 
solutions is their advanced log management capabilities. Log 
management is the process of dealing with large volumes of 
computer  generated  log  messages.  The  key  issues  with  log 
management tend to be the sheer volume of the log data and 
the  diversity  of  the  logs.  A  SIEM  product  typically 
correlates,  analyzes,  and  reports  information  from  a  variety 
of  data  sources  such  as  network  devices, 
identity 
management  devices,  access  management  devices  and 
operating  systems.  The  end  result  is  a  holistic  view  of  IT 
security.  There  are  a  number  of  leading  providers  in  this 
area,  most  notably  HP-ArcSight,  EMC-RSA,  and  IBM  (Q1 
Labs)  [2].  HP-ArcSight  is  viewed  by  most  as  the  market 
leader  in  this  area  with  their  Enterprise  Security  Manager 
(ESM),  which  functions  as  an  integrated  product  suite  for 
collecting,  analyzing,  and  assessing  security  and  risk 
information.    Q1  Labs  have  experienced  a  period  of  rapid 
growth  through  their  QRadar  appliances  due  to  their 
targeting  of 
IBM's  QRadar  SIEM 
appliances  provide  log  management,  event  management, 
reporting  and  behavioral  analysis 
for  networks  and 
applications.  QRadar  can  be  deployed  as  an  all-in-one 
solution  for  smaller  environments,  or  it  can  be  horizontally 
scaled  in  larger  environments  using  specialized  event 
appliances.  A 
collection, 
distinguishing  characteristic  of 
the 
collection  and  processing  of  NetFlow  data,  deep  packet 
inspection  (DPI)  and  behavior  analysis  for  all  supported 
event  sources.  RSA,  The  Security  Division  of  EMC  (with 
enVision, NetWitness and Security Analytics) has one of the 
largest  SIEM 
installed  bases.  However,  during  2012, 
competitors continued to identify RSA enVision as the most 
frequently displaced SIEM technology. Customers report ad 
hoc  query  and  report  performance  issues  with  the  enVision 
platform  as  primary  reasons  for  considering  replacement. 
RSA  has  almost  completed  the  transition  from  enVision  to 
RSA  Security  Analytics,  which  incorporates  traditional 
SIEM functionality and is based on the NetWitness platform. 
RSA  Security  Analytics  provides  log  and  full  packet  data 
capture, threat detection, basic security monitoring and basic 
security analytics. The most widely used Open Source SIEM 
is Open Source Security Information Management (OSSIM), 
by  AlienVault,  released  under  the  GPL  license.  The  main 
objective  of  OSSIM  is  correlating  alerts  issued  by  already 
available  security  tools  to  increase  precision  and  recall  of 
security  breach  detection.  OSSIM  provides  integration, 
management, and visualization of events of more than thirty 
open source security tools, and allows the integration of new 
security devices and applications.  

console 
the 

technology 

processing 

and 

is 

We performed a thorough analysis of the available SIEM 
products  and  claim  that  current  SIEM  technology  has  two 
main limitations: 

SIEM  scope  is  mostly  limited  to  infrastructure.  This 
results in the inability to interpret events and incidents from 
other layers - such as the service view, or the business impact 
view  -and/or  from  the  viewpoint  of  the  service  itself.  The 
applicability and expressiveness of SIEM should be extended 
from  the  infrastructure domain,  where  it  is  mostly  confined 
today, to a multi-domain view involving high-level processes 
and  services,  in  order  to  perform  security-related  event 
processing and monitoring at the service level.  

is  worth  emphasizing 

Even at the infrastructure level, current SIEM technology 
has  a 
limited  capability  of  dealing  with  network 
that  network 
heterogeneity.  It 
heterogeneity  will  affect  CIs  more  and  more  in  the  future, 
especially  in  the  case  of  complex  CIs,  where  Commercial 
Off-The-Shelf  (COTS)  components  are  largely  used  and 
network 
on 
communication 
technologies.  Cross-layer  correlation  of  network-related 
security  events  is  key  to  provide  effective  protection  of 
current and future CIs.  

heterogeneous 

relies 

By  proposing  techniques  for  making  SIEM  technology 
capable  of  coping  with  network  heterogeneity  at  the 
infrastructure  level,  we  directly  address  issue  2  (since  we 
improve the capability of SIEM technology of detecting and 
mitigating  attacks  targeting  the  heterogeneous  network 
infrastructure of a CI), and indirectly address issue 1 (since 
we pave the way to multi-level/multi-domain security event 
processing,  a  key  pre-requisite 
the 
performance and the effectiveness of SIEM attack detection 
features). 

improving 

for 

III.  SIEM ARCHITECTURE 

A  typical  SIEM  is  composed  of  six  separate  parts  or 
processes. These parts are the source device, log collection, 
parsing/normalization  of  the  logs,  the  rule  engine,  log 
storage,  and  event  monitoring  and  retrieval  [3].  The  first 
component of a SIEM architecture is the source device that 
produces  information  and  feeds  such  information  into  the 
SIEM.  The  source  device  can  be  an  actual  network  device, 
such  as  a  router,  switch,  or  some  type  of  server,  but  it  can 
also be logs from an application or just about any other data 
that  can  be  acquired,  and  then  stored  and  processed  in  the 
SIEM.  Reports  on  normal  or  suspicious  activities  are 
generated  by  applications  (Web  Server,  DHCP,  DNS,  etc.), 
appliances (router, switch, etc.) or operating systems (Unix, 
Mac OS, Windows, etc.). Typically, most of the reports are 
logs 
format.  Log  Collection 
component  is  responsible  for  gathering  logs  from  source 
devices.  Two  fundamental  collection  methods  are  used  to 
retrieve  logs  from  the  source devices:  the push  method, i.e. 
the source device sends its logs to the SIEM system, and the 
pull method, i.e. the SIEM system reaches out and retrieves 
the logs from the source device. Parsing and Normalization 
component is in charge of parsing the information contained 
in  the  logs  and  translating  it  from  the  native  format  to  a 
format  manageable  by  the  SIEM  engine.  Moreover,  the 
Normalization  component  is  in  charge  of  filling  the  reports 
with  extra  information  required  during  the  correlation 
process.  Rule  and  Correlation  Engines  trigger  alerts  and 
produce  detailed  reports;  they  work  on  the  huge  amount  of 

in  application  specific 

logs generated by the source devices. The Rule Engine raises 
the alert in case specific conditions are detected in the logs, 
while the Correlation Engine correlates information in order 
to produce a more concise and precise report. The correlation 
task  consists  of  matching  multiple  standard  events  from 
different  sources  into a  single  correlated  event. This  task  is 
performed  in  order  to  make  incident  response  procedure 
more  immediate  and  effective  because  it  generates  a  single 
event to be processed by the downstream SIEM components 
instead  of  the  multiple  events  coming  from  various  source 
devices.  Log  Storage  component  stores  logs  for  retention 
purposes and historical queries; usually the storage is based 
on  a  database,  a  plain  text  file  or  binary  data.  Monitoring 
component allows for the interaction between the SIEM user 
and  the  SIEM  framework.  Interactions  include  report 
visualization,  incident  handling,  policy  and  rule  creation, 
database  querying,  asset  analysis,  vulnerability  view,  event 
drilling down, and system maintenance. 

IV. 

IMPROVING SIEM ABILITY TO DEAL WITH NETWORK 

HETEROGENEITY: THE POWER GRID CASE STUDY 

is 

idea 

to  collect 

In this section, we show how an enhanced SIEM system, 
such  as  the  one  developed  in  the  context  of  the  MASSIF 
project [4], can be used to detect attacks exploiting specific 
vulnerabilities  affecting  the  network  trunks  which  compose 
the communication layer supporting a Critical Infrastructure. 
The  basic 
information  at  several 
architectural  levels  and  from  different  domains,  using 
multiple security probes, which are deployed as a distributed 
architecture, to perform sophisticated correlation analysis of 
attack  symptoms.  In  order  to  effectively  assess  the  security 
status of the CI being protected, the results of the monitoring 
activities  performed  at  different  observation  points  need  to 
be  correlated.  Such  observation  points  are  distributed 
throughout  the  network  infrastructure as  well  as  throughout 
the system to be protected. The more diverse the information 
sources  and  the  processing  methods,  the  more  effective  the 
correlation  process.  The  deployment  of  probes  at  different 
observation points located in the communication layer and at 
different  architectural 
level,  operating 
system  level,  application  level,  etc.),  allows  to  fulfill  the 
requirement  of  diversity  of  the  information  sources.  By 
exploiting information diversity, it is possible to improve the 
accuracy  of  the  detection  process,  as  well  as  to  implement 
diagnostic capabilities. 

levels  (network 

infrastructure  can  be  found 

everything  is  synchronous,  that  is  operates  at  the  same 
frequency,  while  different  islands  can  operate  at  different 
frequencies. Phasor Measurement Units (PMUs) are devices 
that  use  Global  Positioning  System  (GPS)  signals  as  a 
common time source and measure power system quantities at 
different  locations  across  a  wide-area  system  at  the  same 
instant  in  time.  A  reference  architecture  for  power  grid 
monitoring  is  composed  of  PMUs  disseminated  throughout 
the  grid,  Phasor  Data  Concentrators  (PDCs)  collecting  and 
correlating  measurement  data  from  the  PMUs,  and  a 
SuperPDC, which is a central PDC that gathers measurement 
data from all remote PDCs and PMUs and makes it available 
to  a  visualization  station.  An  accurate  description  of  the 
power  grid  monitoring  architecture  is  provided  in  [5], 
whereas  more  details  about  security  issues  in  power  grid 
monitoring 
in  [6].  The 
infrastructure  supporting  a  power  grid 
communication 
includes  several  network  technologies,  such  as  Wireless 
Sensor  Networks  (WSNs),  IP-based  wired  network,  and 
satellite  network.  Due  to  the  low  cost  and  high  function, 
wireless  sensors  have  been  deployed  in  power  grid  wildly 
[7]. WSNs are applied through the entire process of the smart 
grid  i.e.  from  the  generation,  transmission  and  distribution, 
and the consumer side. Some of the applications include load 
management  and  control,  wireless  automatic  meter  reading 
(WAMR),  equipment  fault  diagnostic,  remote  monitoring, 
fault  detection,  Advanced  Metering  Infrastructure  (AMI), 
and  residential  energy  management.  In  [8]  an  in  depth 
review  on 
traffic 
requirements  of  several  emerging  smart  grid  applications  is 
performed. In order to meet such requirements utilities from 
all over the word are now facing the key challenge of finding 
the  most  appropriate  technology.  Today,  the  most  widely 
used  protocol  for  communicating  power  grid  measurement 
data  is  IEEE  C37.118  that  can  be  transmitted  over  TCP, 
UDP  or  higher  level  protocols.  The  C37.118  standard  is 
usually  implemented  as  a  client/server  communication 
protocol, where the Phasor Measurement Unit acts as server 
and  the  Phasor  Data  Concentrator  as  a  client.  QoS-enabled 
IP networks are the most suitable communication technology 
for ensuring a resilient transmission of smart grid monitoring 
data  from  the  PMUs  to  the PDC.  Fig. 1  shows  a  view  of  a 
Wide Area Monitoring Infrastructure for power grid.  

the  application  characteristics  and 

In  order  to  process  and  correlate  the  huge  amount  of 
heterogeneous  monitoring  data  the  proposed  SIEM  solution 
relies  on  the  Complex  Event  Processing  (CEP)  technology. 
We present our solution with respect to a case study that well 
illustrates how the deployment of heterogeneous networking 
technologies impacts the security of a CI, specifically a Wide 
Area Monitoring System for power grid. In the following, we 
provide  a  brief  description  of  a 
typical  power  grid 
infrastructure.  An  Electrical  Power  System  (EPS)  (or 
Electrical  System)  includes  all  the  devices  necessary  to 
produce  and  to  transport  electric  power  from  production 
plants  to  final  users.  The  EPS  is  normally  organized  in 
islands,  named  grids  or  power  grids,  interconnected  for 
increased  reliability  and  availability.  Within  an  island 

Fig. 1. A schematic view of a power grid monitoring infrastructure 

 
The  time  synchronization  between  different  PMUs  is 
required to understand the global status of the power grid at 
the same time. This is because events occurring in one part 
of the grid affect operations elsewhere, and they also extend 
to  other  systems  beyond  the  grid  that  rely  on  stable  power. 
Time  synchronized  measurements  produced  by  PMUs  are 
called  synchrophasors.  In  order  to  obtain  simultaneous 
measurements  of  phasors  detected  from  different  PMUs 
installed  across  a  wide  area  of  the  power  system,  it  is 
necessary  to  synchronize  these  times,  so  that  all  phasor 
measurements  belonging 
truly 
to 
simultaneous. Each PMU uses a Global Positioning System 
(GPS) receiver to take a unique timestamp within the global 
system.  One  of  the  main  problems  affecting  smart  grid 
monitoring is the spoofing of the GPS signal provided to the 
GPS  receiver.  The  GPS  signal  can  be  forged  in  order  to 
mislead the GPS receiver that uses it [9]. 

the  same 

time  are 

In  the  following  we  first  discuss  the  security  issues 
introduced  by 
the  above  mentioned 
networking  technologies  and  then  we  present  the  way  the 
MASSIF SIEM system can be used to protect the CI against 
the discussed cyber-security threats. 

the  adoption  of 

A.  Protecting the WSN trunk 

A well-known attack that can be launched by an intruder 
node  against  a  WSN  is  commonly  referred  to  as  Sleep 
Deprivation Attack. This attack can be launched in a variety 
of  ways  depending  on  both  the  particular  routing  protocol 
and  its  specific  implementation  [10].  As  an  example  it  is 
possible to send many broadcast routing packets. The attack 
is amplified if the fake routing packets force some nodes to 
change  their  parents,  since  in  this  case  each  fooled  node 
notifies  the  detected  change  to  all  its  neighbours,  thus 
generating more traffic. Another way to conduct the attack is 
by  sending  unnecessary  routing  requests  (RREQ),  or  by 
sending  forged  routing  reply  (RREP)  packets  that  force  the 
creation of loops in the WSN. In this case, due to the loops, 
packets are forwarded and stay alive longer, hence resulting 
in  unnecessary  retransmissions  and  additional  routing 
messages. The attack has two negative effects on the WSN: 
i) the discharge of batteries of all the nodes along the route 
(the  path  identified  by  triple  arrows  in  Fig.  2)  from  the 
malicious  node  to  the  base  station;  and,  ii)  a  Denial  of 
Service for those nodes whose path towards the base station 
(identified  with  the  symbol  “x”  in  Fig.  2)  crosses  the 
attacked overloaded path to the base station. 

Fig. 2. Sleep deprivation attack and its effects 

In  a  realistic  scenario,  all  packets  reaching  the  base 
station  are  typically  forwarded  to  a  proxy,  which  in  turn 
forwards  them,  on  a  TCP/IP  channel,  to  the  application 
server for final delivery to the real consumer (Fig. 3). Every 
data packet generated by a node and reaching the base station 
is encapsulated into the payload of a TCP packet and sent to 
the  application  server  via  a  VPN.  In  case  of  an  attack,  all 
packets sent by the malicious node will reach the application 
server  which  will  recognize  them  as  valid  packets  (as  they 
are  duplicates  of  valid  packets), 
in  a 
manipulated view of the field.  

thus  resulting 

Fig. 3. Deployment scenario for the WS 

As  an  example  in  our  power  grid  scenario,  the  attacker 
may  prevent  some  nodes  from  sending  measures  to  the 
related  collector,  thus  hiding  changes  in  the  power  grid 
conditions. In order to detect this WSN targeted attacks, we 
developed a SIEM Correlation Engine capable of correlating 
alarms given by a WSN security probe and results given by 
an  application  level  probe  used  to  protect  the  visualization 
server. The  WSN  security  probe  generates  alarms  based  on 
the  analysis  of  the  network  and  periodically  (e.g.  every 
minute) calculates the packet generation rate at every node. 
Such  data  are  sent  to  the  correlation  module  that  analyzes 
them together with alarms triggered by the application level 
probe for packet arrival rates at the application server higher 
than  a  threshold  value  defined  in  the  training  stage.  By 
correlating the data gathered by these two kinds of probes it 
is possible to detect the sleep deprivation attack and even to 
identify  the  ID  of  the  malicious  node.  The  identity  of  the 
malicious  node  can  hence  be  taken  into  account  while 
applying  remediation  and  recovery  actions.  The  SIEM 
system  can  in  fact  trigger  a  reaction  strategy  to  stop  or  at 
least  mitigate  the  effect  of  the  ongoing  attack.  Strategies 
might  be  selected  from  a  list  of  possible  options,  possibly 
reordered  based  on  their  effectiveness  with  respect  to  the 
diagnostic results (e.g., attacker ID, level of damage, class of 
attack),  and  sequentially  applied  until  the  attack  is  stopped. 
Examples  of  possible  reaction  strategies  for  the  described 
attack  are (sorted by  level of effectiveness):  (i) over  the  air 
re-programming  of  the  malicious  node,  (ii)  switch-off  (i.e., 
setting  to  sleep  mode)  of  the  malicious  node,  and  (iii) 
isolation  of  the  malicious  node  and  if  necessary  manual 
shutdown and re-programming of the node. 

B.  Protecting the wired network trunk 

In  this  section  we  illustrate  how  the  MASSIF  SIEM 
system can be used to protect an IP-based network segment 
composing  the  power  grid  monitoring  infrastructure  against 
Distributed  Denial  of  Service  (DDoS)  attacks.  Usually,  a 
DDoS  attack  abuses  network  protocols  in  order  to  saturate 

 
 
Indeed, 

throughout 

the  greater 

the resources of a network server, thus preventing legitimate 
users  from  using  the  provided  service.  Attackers  typically 
attempt  to  saturate  the  limited  resources  of  the  victim 
without  directly  violating  it.  A  common  way  to  perform  a 
DDoS attack is to first of all compromise other hosts which 
the  attacker  will  eventually  orchestrate  during  the  actual 
distributed  attack.  A  typical  DDoS  attack  scenario  involves 
several  components  widely  distributed 
the 
network:  a  “master”  that  initiates  and  orchestrates  the 
distributed  attack,  several  “agents”,  or  “zombies”,  which 
receive  commands  from  the  master  and  launch  the  real 
attack, and a target node, which represents the victim of the 
attack.  We  herein  assume  that  the  attacker  perpetrates  a 
DDoS attack against a web based component of a CI (such as 
the  power  grid  monitoring  application  server).  In  this 
scenario the attacker firstly needs to “recruit” the necessary 
the  available 
computing  power. 
computing power, the stronger the effects of the attack, since 
the  capability  of  the  attacker  to  saturate  the  victim's 
resources  increases.  For  this  reason,  the  attacker  needs  to 
opportunely violate several hosts, in order to recruit them as 
“accomplices”.  There  exist  several  ways  of  compromising 
agent nodes. For example, a Trojan horse might be exploited, 
allowing  the  attacker  to  download  an  agent  on  the  violated 
machine.  Weaknesses  in  the  software  code  that  accepts 
remote connections can also be exploited for the recruitment 
process.  Once  the  victim  has  been  identified,  the  attacker 
launches the attack by running the attack code on the master 
host.  The  master  communicates  with  agents  in  order  to 
instruct  them  about  the  attack  to  perform  against  the  target 
by  means  of  common  packet  flooding  procedures.  The 
distributed flooding is properly orchestrated by the master in 
order  to  amplify  the  effects  of  the  DDoS  attack.  Let  us 
assume  that  each  agent  perpetrates  a  SYN  FLOODING 
attack to the victim host. SYN FLOODING is a well-known 
type of attack, wherein the agent sends a succession of TCP 
SYN requests to the victim without completing the tree-way 
handshake  process  with  the  expected  ACK  message.  Since 
the  victim  reserves  memory  for  handling  the  connection 
associated  with  every  TCP  synchronization  request,  such 
attack  can  rapidly  saturate  the  victim  host's  resources  if the 
SYN  request  sending  rate  exceeds  the  threshold  defined  by 
the  timeout  mechanism  for  the  synchronization  process  on 
the  server  site.  The  detection  process  is  performed  by 
monitoring the system under attack at two different levels: a 
detection module analyzes traffic metrics and compares their 
values  with  specific  patterns  of  activities,  and  alerts  the 
SIEM  system  if  anomalies  are  detected;  another  detection 
module monitors the target machine by controlling operating 
system  parameters  and  identifies  anomalous  values  of  such 
parameters, which are symptoms of the ongoing attack. The 
SIEM system correlates these two classes of symptoms and 
spots a SYN FLOODING attack. Then, it sends an alarm to 
the  reaction  component.  The  level  of  confidence  of  the 
decision-making  process  depends  on  the  seriousness  of  the 
symptoms  as  well  as  on  the  presence  of  both  classes  of 
symptoms.  Network  monitoring  probes  are  disseminated 
throughout  the  network  in  order  to  effectively  observe  the 
evidence of the distributed attack. The remediation process is 
initiated with the reception of an alert event. We assume that 

the  PMU  and  the  PDC  are  connected  through  a  wired 
network exploited by both legitimate users, and by attackers 
performing  their  malicious  actions.  The  attackers  target  a 
web  server,  and  attack  packets  flow  through  one  of  the 
routers  shared  with  the  trunk  between  PMU  and  PDC  as 
well.  Due  to  the  effects  of  the  ongoing  attack,  the 
intermediate shared router is not able to satisfy all incoming 
requests  any  longer.  This  affects  also  the  power  grid 
monitoring  packets  which  are  no  longer  forwarded  by  the 
compromised  router,  resulting  in  loss  of  monitoring  and 
control data. The reaction strategy might consist in a routing 
mechanism  that  allows  the  communication  infrastructure  to 
be resilient to both node/link failures and attacks. The basic 
assumption is that packets belonging to a single flow can be 
split  at  the  edge  of  the  network  and  sent  through  the  core 
infrastructure  along  two  or  more  node-disjoint  paths.  The 
proposed  routing  technique,  called  ‘splitting’,  relies  on  the 
possibility  to  engineer  the  network  traffic  by  explicitly 
routing flows (or even parts of them) and can be effectively 
realized 
(Multi-Protocol  Label  Switching) 
networks  [11]  [12].  Given  the  above  assumptions,  standard 
resilience  techniques  like,  e.g.,  re-routing  of  label  switched 
paths,  can  be  effectively  applied  in  case  the  SIEM  system 
detects an attack: alternative paths can be calculated and the 
traffic which is suffering from the presence of attack packets 
can  be  promptly  re-routed  along  safe  links.  In  the  depicted 
scenario,  the  presence  of  splitting  helps  both  preserve  the 
control  traffic  from  being  impaired by  the  attack  flows  and 
allow  for 
the  prompt  application  of  backup  reaction 
strategies. As an example, in case the smart grid data traffic 
is  routed  along  link-disjoint  paths,  the  path  including  the 
attacked  router  might  be  disabled  and  the  portion  of  smart 
grid  traffic  that  it  was  serving  might  be  immediately  re-
routed  along  the  already  available  safe  path.  Thanks  to  re-
routing  the  attack  does  not  have  a  strong  impact  on  the 
performance experienced by the smart grid data traffic. 

in  MPLS 

C.  Protecting the power grid infrastructure from GPS 

spoofing attack 
PMUs  are  devices  that  use  GPS  signals  as  a  common 
time  source  and  analyze 
the  waveforms  of  different 
transmission  lines  at  different  locations  across  a  wide-area 
system  at  the  same  moment.  In  particular  they  perform  a 
sampling  of  the  waveforms  provided  by  transmission  lines 
and  generate  the  phasors.  These  phasors  are  timestamped 
using  the  same  clock  provided  by  the  GPS  receiver.  These 
synchronized  phasors  are  called  synchrophasors.  Such 
timestamps can be used to compare collected synchrophasors 
with microsecond precision. In fact, the PDC gathers the data 
provided  by  different  PMUs  and  it  performs  a  comparison 
between  the  synchrophasors  to  assess  the  status  of  power 
grid.  A  PDC  can  exchange  phasors  with  PDCs  at  other 
locations  to  perform  a  wide  are  monitoring.  Civilian  GPS 
signals  are  known  to  be  susceptible  to  spoofing  attacks 
which make GPS receivers in range believe that they reside 
at  locations  different  than  their  real  physical  locations.  In 
[13]  the  authors  present  several  GPS  spoofing  attack 
detection techniques. Such techniques rely on signal strength 
and use a threshold-based approach  to detect GPS spoofing 
attacks.  A  possible  technique  consists  in  monitoring  the 

REFERENCES 

[1]  S. Baker, N. Filipiak, and K. Timlin, “In the Dark: Crucial Industries 
2011, 

Cyberattacks”, 
Confront 
http://www.mcafee.com/us/resources/reports/rp-critical-
infrastructure-protection.pdf. 

June 

[2]  M.  Nocolett  and  K.M.  Kavanagh,  “Magic  Quadrant  for  Security 
2013, 

7  May 

and 

Information 
http://www.gartner.com/technology/reprints.do?id=1-
1FJREY1&ct=130509&st=sb. 

Event  Management”, 

[3]  D.R.  Miller,  S.  Harris,  A.A.  Harper,  S.  VanDyke,  and  C.  Blask, 
(SIEM) 

Event  Management 

Security 
Implementation, Network Pro Library, 2010. 

Information 

and 

[4]  E.  Prieto,  R.  Diaz,  L.  Romano,  R.  Rieke,  and  M.  Achemlal, 
“MASSIF:  A  promising  solution  to  enhance  olympic  games  IT 
security”, Global Security, Safety and Sustainability & e-Democracy, 
Lecture  Notes  of  the  Institute  for  Computer  Sciences,  Social 
Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering Volume 99, 2012, 
pp 139-147. 

[5]  M.  Adamiak,  W.  Premerlani,  and  B.  Kasztenny,  “Synchrophasors: 
Definition, 
2006, 
http://www.gedigitalenergy.com/SmartGrid/Sep06/Synchrophasors_P
aper.pdf. 

Measurement, 

Application”, 

and 

[6]  L.  Coppolino,  S.  D'Antonio,  and  L.  Romano,  “Exposing 
vulnerabilities  in  electric  power  grids:  An  experimental  approach”, 
International  Journal  of  Critical  Infrastructure  Protection,  in  press, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcip.2014.01.003. 

[7]  Y. Zhang, X. Li, S. Zhang, and Y. Zhen, “Wireless sensor network in 
smart  grid:  Applications  and  issue”,  2012  World  Congress  on 
Information  and  Communication  Technologies  (WICT),  2020,  pp. 
1204 - 1208. 

[8]  R.H.  Khan  and  J.Y  Khan,  “A  comprehensive  review  of  the 
application  characteristics  and  traffic  requirements  of  a  smart  grid 
communications  network“,Computer Networks,  Volume  57,  Issue  3, 
February 2013, pp. 825-845. 

[9]  A. Garofalo, C. Di Sarno, L. Coppolino, and S. D’Antonio, “A GPS 
Spoofing Resilient WAMS for  Smart Grid”, Dependable Computing 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science Volume 7869, 2013, pp 134-147. 
[10]  L.  Coppolino,  S.  D'Antonio,  L.  Romano,  and  G.  Spagnuolo,  “An 
Intrusion  Detection  System  for  Critical  Information  Infrastructures 
using Wireless Sensor Network technologies”, Proceedings of the 5th 
International  Conference  on  Critical  Infrastructure  (CRIS),  2010, 
pp.1-8. 

[11]  S. Avallone, V. Manetti, M. Mariano, and S.P. Romano, “A splitting 
infrastructure for load balancing and security in an MPLS network”, 
Proceedings  of  the  3rd  International  Conference  on  Testbeds  and 
Research  Infrastructure  for  the  Development  of  Networks  and 
Communities, TridentCom 2007, 2007, pp. 1-6 

[12]  S.  Avallone,  S.  D’Antonio,  F.  Oliviero,  and  S.P.  Romano,  “Use  of 
Traffic  Engineering  Techniques  to  Increase  Resilience  of  SCADA 
Networks”,  Proceedings  of  the  5th  International  Conference  on 
Critical Infrastructure (CRIS), 2010, pp.1-7. 

[13]  J.S.  Warner  and  R.G.  Johnston,  “GPS  Spoofing  Countermeasures”, 
Homeland 
2003, 
Journal, 
http://www.ne.anl.gov/capabilities/vat/pdfs/GPS-Spoofing-CMs-
(2003).pdf. 

December 

Security 

12, 

absolute  GPS  signal  strength,  i.e.  the  observed  signal 
strength  is  compared  to  the  expected  one.  If  the  absolute 
value of the observed signal exceeds some preset threshold, 
then  an  alert  is  raised.  Another  technique  is  to  monitor  the 
relative  GPS  signal  strength.  An  extremely  large  change  in 
relative  signal  strength  could  be  a  symptom  of  an  ongoing 
attack trying to generate a counterfeit GPS signal to override 
the true satellite GPS signals. If the signal increases beyond 
some  preset  threshold,  an  alarm  would  be  generated.  An 
extension  of  the  above  two  techniques  implies  that  the 
relative and absolute signal strengths are tested individually 
for  each  of  the  incoming  satellite  signals.  The  basic 
assumption  is  that  t  if  the  signal  characteristics  are  too 
perfect,  there  is  probably  something  wrong  and  an  alert 
should be issued. A further technique consists in monitoring 
satellite  identification  codes  and  number  of  satellite  signals 
received.  Many  commercial  GPS  receivers  display  satellite 
identification  information,  but  do  not  record  this  data  or 
compare to previously recorded data. Keeping track of both 
the  number  of  satellite  signals  received  and  the  satellite 
in 
identification  codes  over 
determining  if  foul  play  is  occurring.  The  proposed  SIEM 
system  can  be  used  to  detect  GPS  spoofing  attacks  since  it 
includes three security probes, each implementing one of the 
first three above mentioned detection techniques. The alerts 
raised by the security probes are sent to a correlation engine 
which processes and correlates the received alarms and then 
makes the final decision on whether the detected anomalies 
are symptoms of an ongoing attacks or not. 

time  may  prove  helpful 

V.  CONCLUSIONS 

This  paper  addresses  a  key  issue  of  current  and  future 
CIs,  namely  effective  protection  of  the  heterogeneous 
network infrastructure on which they rely. The paper makes 
three  important  contributions.  First,  it  provides  a  detailed 
treatment of the security issues resulting from the adoption in 
CIs  of  heterogeneous  network  solutions,  and  specifically: 
Wireless  Sensor  Networks,  satellite  networks,  and  QoS-
enabled  IP  connections.  Second,  it  proposes  techniques  for 
enhancing  current  SIEM  technology,  by  improving  its 
capability  of  detecting  and  mitigating  attacks  targeting  the 
heterogeneous network infrastructure of a CI. Third, it shows 
how these techniques can be implemented with respect to a 
challenging  real  world example,  specifically  the power  grid 
monitoring infrastructure. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The  research  leading  to  these  results  has  received  funding 
from  the  European  Commission  within  the  context  of  the 
Seventh  Framework  Programme  (FP7/2007-2013)  under 
Grant  Agreement  No.  313034  (Situation  AWare  Security 
Operation  Center,  SAWSOC  Project).  It  has  been  also 
partially  supported  by  the  TENACE  PRIN  Project  (n. 
20103P34XC)  funded  by  the  Italian  Ministry  of  Education, 
University and Research, and by the ”Embedded Systems in 
critical  domains”  POR  Project  (CUP  B25B09000100007) 
funded  by  the  Campania  region  in  the  context  of  the  POR 
Campania FSE 2007-2013, Asse IV and Asse V. 

