A PMU Scheduling Scheme for Transmission of Synchrophasor Data in
Electric Power Systems

K. G. Nagananda, Shalinee Kishore and Rick S. Blum∗

4
1
0
2

c
e
D
1
3

]
T
I
.
s
c
[

2
v
0
9
7
6
.
5
0
4
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—With the proposition to install a large number of
phasor measurement units (PMUs) in the future power grid,
it is essential to provide robust communications infrastructure
for phasor data across the network. We make progress in
this direction by devising a simple time division multiplexing
scheme for transmitting phasor data from the PMUs to a central
server: Time is divided into frames and the PMUs take turns to
transmit to the control center within the time frame. The main
contribution of this work is a scheduling policy based on which
PMU transmissions are ordered during a time frame.

The scheduling scheme is independent of the approach taken to
solve the PMU placement problem, and unlike strategies devised
for conventional communications, it is intended for the power
network since it is fully governed by the measure of electrical
connectedness between buses in the grid. To quantify the per-
formance of the scheduling scheme, we couple it with a fault
detection algorithm used to detect changes in the susceptance
parameters in the grid. Results demonstrate that scheduling the
PMU transmissions leads to an improved performance of the fault
detection scheme compared to PMUs transmitting at random.

Index Terms—PMU placement, scheduling policy, fault detec-

tion, electrical structure, topology.

I. INTRODUCTION

In order to provide near real-time wide area monitoring and
control of power systems, synchrophasor data from PMUs are
provided from across the power system by electric utilities.
Typically, the PMUs are designed to record up to 30 - 60
measurements/second, and phasor data are transmitted to a
centrally located wide area monitoring system (WAMS) server,
where they are archived and recovered for several applications
[1]. The high frequency of measurements by the PMUs and
the applications involving synchrophasor data, together with
the proposition to populate the future grid by a large number
of PMUs, necessitates reliable and robust communications
infrastructure within the power network [2], [3]. In this paper,
we make progress in this direction by devising a simple yet
reliable method for transmission of phasor data from the PMUs
to the WAMS server over dedicated direct communications
links. We begin by summarizing the problem setup and the
methodology developed to achieve the desired objective.

Consider N PMUs installed on the power network. Let
time be divided into frames with the duration of each frame
equal to t units. A time frame is further divided into N slots,
each of duration t
N time units. Within a time frame, the N
PMUs transmit phasor data to the WAMS server via dedicated
channels of ﬁnite capacity. We illustrate this setup in Fig. 1.
In the communications theory literature, this is commonly
referred to as time division multiplexing, and the scheme incurs

∗K. G. Nagananda is with PES University, Bangalore 560085, IN-
DIA, E-mail: kgnagananda@pes.edu. Shalinee Kishore and Rick S.
Blum are with Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 18015, U.S.A. E-mail:
{skishore,rblum}@lehigh.edu

Time frame

t units

t

t

1

2

N 1

2

N 1

2

N

t
N

t
N

t
N

t
N

Fig. 1. Time division multiplexing of PMU transmission.

a delay of (N − 1)t/N time units per frame for each PMU.
Given this setup, a fundamental question that arises is the
following: What is the order in which these N PMUs transmit
to the WAMS server? In other words, what is the transmission
schedule for the N PMUs, so that the WAMS server can
use the received data from the ordered set of PMUs to more
quickly and more reliably determine changes in the system
state. We investigate this question in this paper.

Scheduling policies intended for collecting data from PMUs
should take into account the electrical properties of the power
network being monitored. More precisely, the policy should be
governed by the measure of electrical inﬂuence or connected-
ness between various network components. One way to mea-
sure the connectivity is to characterize the electrical coupling
between buses in the network; the coupling can be obtained by
computing the magnitude of the entries of the singular vectors
obtained from the singular value decomposition (SVD) of the
network matrices [4].

We answer the aforementioned question in two steps:

(1) The ﬁrst step is the classic PMU placement/seclection
problem of obtaining the optimal number (N ) of PMUs
with the goal
to have either complete or incomplete
network observability either in the presence/absence of
zero injection measurements. Here, we consider two cases:
(a) the topology-based PMU placement [5] - [16], where
the optimal number of N PMUs is obtained from the
node degree distribution of the grid; and

(b) the electrical structure-based approach to PMU place-

ment, which was ﬁrst adopted in [17].

(2) Next, we devise the scheduling scheme for the N PMUs.
If B is the number of buses in the network, we construct
the B ×B bus admittance and resistance distance matrices
(see [18, Section III]). For case (1a) stated above, we pick
the N ×N sub-matrix of the B ×B bus admittance matrix
with the rows and columns corresponding to bus locations
where the PMUs are installed. We perform SVD of this
sub-matrix; the absolute values of elements of the resulting
N singular vectors are central to devising the ordering

 
 
 
 
 
 
strategy for PMU transmissions. For (1b), this procedure
is repeated on the resistance distance matrix.

In order to quantify the performance of the scheduling
scheme, we couple it with a fault detection algorithm in
which changes in the bus susceptance parameters are detected.
The detection problem is formulated using a linear errors-
in-variables model, and a generalized likelihood ratio test
(GLRT) based on the total least squares (TLS) methodology
is presented. The performance of TLS-GLRT is analyzed
with and without
the proposed scheduling policy. Results
demonstrate that scheduling PMU transmissions leads to an
improvement in the probability of fault detection.

Some advantages of the proposed scheduling policy are:

1) The topology-based approach to PMU placement (case
(1a)) incorporates less known information, since it neglects
the sensitivity between power injections and nodal phase
angle differences, while case (1b) is based on the complex
networks perspective of the power grid, and was shown to
provide a more comprehensive characterization of the elec-
trical inﬂuence between network components (see [18]).
However, the general framework of the scheduling policy
derived in this work remains unchanged for both cases.
2) In practice, there is a layer of phasor data concentrators
(PDCs) between the PMUs and the WAMS server. Our
scheduling policy is unaffected by the presence of PDCs,
since it is devised from a transmitter-centric viewpoint.

A. Scheduling in the power grid

There are different types of scheduling in power networks
which have been widely examined in the literature. For in-
stance, there are architectures for power scheduling, algorithms
for trafﬁc (e.g., multimedia data) scheduling on the grid, user-
access scheduling procedures for smart power appliances, etc.
In this following we point to a few references, where each
paper concerns a speciﬁc type of scheduling on the grid. In
the interest of space we restrict ourselves to four references,
with due credit to other valuable contributions.

In [19], the authors proposed a power scheduling scheme for
the smart grid from the perspectives of architecture, strategy
and methodology based on the quality of experience (QoE);
the QoE metric quantiﬁes the customers’ degree of satisfac-
tion. A novel approach to QoE modeling was proposed, and
an automatic proactive in-service strategy was employed to
estimate the end user’s QoE. In [20], a multi-time scheduling
scheme, in the framework of Markov decision processes, was
proposed for two classes of energy users, namely, traditional
and opportunistic energy users. The reliability of the power
system operation was analyzed under supply uncertainty as a
result of variable and non-stationary wind generation, demand
uncertainty owing to the stochastic behavior of a large number
of opportunistic users and the coupling between sequential
decisions across multiple timescales.

In [21], the advantages provided by wireless multimedia
sensor networks in conjunction with the beneﬁts of cognitive
radio technology were exploited to devise a priority-based
scheduling scheme for smart grid trafﬁc. The trafﬁc types
included control commands, multimedia sensing data and

meter readings. A joint access and scheduling approach for in-
home appliances (both schedulable and critical) was devised
in [22] to coordinate the power usage to keep the total energy
demand for the home below a target value. Uncertainties in
the variations of electricity prices and distributed wind power
were incorporated into the scheduling scheme to optimize the
performance of the energy management controller.

The scheduling scheme devised in this paper is different
from the above mentioned works in that our scheme is aimed at
ordering the transmission of PMUs for transfer of phasor data
to the WAMS server. Our work is concerned with improving
the communications efﬁciency of the set of PMUs installed on
the grid to quickly and reliably detect changes in the system
state; this paper does not deal with the power and/or trafﬁc
scheduling that have been addressed in the aforementioned
references. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
instance where a scheduling scheme for PMU transmissions
has been reported in the literature.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec-
tion II, we review the PMU placement problem, employing the
topology- and electrical structure-based approaches. The PMU
scheduling scheme is developed in Section III. In Section IV,
we present the fault detection framework. Section V includes
simulation results and related discussion. Section VI concludes
the paper. The advantages of using the electrical structure of
the grid over its topological structure, and the construction of
the resistance distance matrix are relegated to Appendix A.

II. THE PMU PLACEMENT PROBLEM

In this section, we revisit the PMU placement problem from
two different perspectives: (a) topology-based approach and
(b) electrical structure-based approach.

In the general setting, for a power network with B buses and
K branches, and for complete network observability without
zero injection measurements1, the PMU placement problem is
formulated as an integer linear program as follows [6], [7]:

B

min

di

i=1
X

such that Cd ≥ 1,

with

di =

(

1, if a PMU is installed at bus i,
0, otherwise.

(1)

(2)

C is the B × B binary connectivity matrix of the grid, 1
denotes a B × 1 vector of 1’s. The solution to (2) gives the
optimal number (N ) of PMUs to be installed on the grid.
(1) For PMU placement based on the topology of the grid,
the entries of the bus admittance matrix are transformed
into binary form and used in the problem setup (1). In this
case, C is given by

cij = 1, if i = j,
cij = 1, if i and j are connected,
cij = 0, if i and j are not connected.

C : 


(3)

1Zero injection measurements are present when the power system has nodes


without generation or load.

The entries cij of C characterize the electrical connections
between network buses i and j.

(2) For the electrical structure-based PMU placement, matrix
C is derived as shown in Appendix A (see (31)), and this
will be used in the formulation (1). The entries cij of C are
obtained taking into account the sensitivity between power
injections and nodal phase angles differences between
various buses in the grid.

III. SCHEDULING POLICY FOR PMU TRANSMISSION
In this section, we present the scheduling scheme so that the
optimal N PMUs have a predeﬁned order to transmit phasor
data to the WAMS server. In this work, we only consider
complete network observability, and without zero injection
measurements. In the following, b = 1, . . . , B is the bus
number index, while n = 1, . . . , N is the index of the optimal
number of PMUs. We devise the algorithm for the N PMUs
obtained from the topological structure-based placement (case
(1a) in the previous section). The same scheme is readily
applicable for the case where PMU placement is solved by
employing the electrical structure-based approach (case (1b)).
The following is a step-by-step procedure for the proposed

PMU scheduling policy:
1. Obtain the optimal number (N ) of PMUs by solving the

PMU placement problem (1).

2. In the B × B bus admittance matrix, pick those rows and
columns which correspond to the bus numbers where PMUs
are installed. We, therefore, have an N × N sub-matrix.
3. Perform the SVD of the N × N sub-matrix to obtain the
singular values and singular vectors. The N × 1 left and
right singular vectors are denoted un and vn, respectively,
while the singular values are denoted σn.

4. Compute the magnitude of the elements of the vectors
σnun. Note that, the index of each entry of the vector σnun
corresponds to a bus location where a PMU is installed.
5. In the vector σ1u1, i.e., the ﬁrst column of the N × N
sub-matrix, the PMU placed on the entry with the highest
magnitude transmits ﬁrst. Note that, u1 is the eigenvector
corresponding to the largest eigenvalue.

6. The procedure in Step 5 is repeated for the remaining
vectors σnun, n = 2, . . . , N , where the uns are picked
in the decreasing order of the corresponding eigenvalues.
there is a possibility of conﬂict, which is
In Step 6,
explained via an example. Consider two vectors σ1u1 and
σ3u3 used to schedule the transmission of PMUs during
the ﬁrst and third time slots, respectively. Suppose the entry
having the largest magnitude in vector σ1u1 is the same as
the entry having the largest magnitude in vector σ3u3. Then,
the scheduling scheme picks the same PMU for both (ﬁrst
and third) time slots. To resolve this conﬂict, we propose the
following modiﬁcation to the scheduling scheme: for the third
time slot, pick the entry in the vector σ3u3 having the second
largest magnitude. If this entry is not the same as the one
in vector σ2u2 (used to schedule a PMU transmission for the
second time slot), then the PMU placed on that entry is sched-
uled to transmit in the third time slot. This simple procedure is
implemented for all the vectors σnun. Note that, the priority
given to PMU transmissions is solely based on the electrical

connectedness of buses in the network, making it different
from scheduling schemes devised for typical communications
networks. In the next subsection, we explain the scheduling
scheme via an illustration.

A. An illustration

Bus number
1

3

8
11

12
13

14

σ1u1

σ2u2

σ3u3

σ4u4

σ5u5 σ6u6

σ7u7

Time

Fig. 2. Scheduling PMUs for transmission for the IEEE 14-bus network.

We consider the IEEE 14-bus system to illustrate the
scheduling scheme. We obtain the optimal number of PMUs
to be placed on the network employing the electrical structure-
based approach to PMU placement. For sake of brevity, we
consider a single time frame, and implement the following
steps to schedule the transmission of PMUs:
(1) For the 14-bus network, solving (1) yields an optimum of
N = 7 PMUs to be placed on buses numbered 1, 3, 8, 11,
12, 13 and 14 for complete network observability without
zero injection measurements.

(2) In the 14 × 14 resistance distance matrix, pick the rows
and columns numbered 1, 3, 8, 11, 12, 13 and 14, thereby
yielding a 7 × 7 sub-matrix.

(3) Perform the SVD of the 7 × 7 sub-matrix to obtain the 7 ×
1 right and left singular vectors un and vn, respectively,
and the singular values σn, n = 1, . . . , 7. Compute the
magnitude of the elements of the vectors σnun. The index
of each entry of the vector σnun corresponds to a bus
location where a PMU is installed. The seven vectors
σnun, n = 1, . . . , 7 are depicted in Fig. 2, where a column
denotes a vector, while a box in each column denotes an
entry of the vector. The number of boxes in each column
equals the number N of PMUs installed on the bus system.
(4) In the vector σ1u1 (the ﬁrst column in Fig. 2), the entry
having the largest magnitude appears in the last row -
marked in blue. Thus, the PMU placed on bus numbered
14 is scheduled to transmit in the ﬁrst time slot.

(5) In the vector σ2u2 (the second column), the entry having
the largest magnitude appears in the last row, similar
to that in the vector σ1u1, again allocating the PMU
placed on bus numbered 14 to transmit in the second time
slot. However, as described in the scheduling policy, this
conﬂict is resolved by scheduling the PMU placed on the

(7)
(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)
(13)

bus numbered 8, which has the second largest magnitude
in the vector σ2u2, to transmit in the second time slot.
(6) Continuing in this fashion, and employing the conﬂict-
resolution strategy, the PMUs installed on buses 14, 8,
12, 11, 3, 13 and 1 are scheduled to transmit in time slots
numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, respectively.

As mentioned in Section I, the scheduling policy is indepen-
dent of (i) the approach (topology-based or electrical structure-
based) taken to address the PMU placement problem, and (ii)
the dynamic nature of the power system states. In the next
section, we analyze the impact of the scheduling scheme when
it is incorporated into a change detection framework within the
power network.

Let s be a K × 1 vector with elements Sij and let K × 1
vector z(t) be deﬁned to collect Yij(t), for (i, j) ∈ K and
i > j. Thus, (5) can be written as

z(t) = diag(s)Dθ(t),

(6)

where the K × B matrix D is deﬁned as follows: for the kth
branch (ik, jk) ∈ K and ik > jk, Dk,ik = 1 and Dk,jk =
−1. The other elements in the kth row of D are zero. In
practice, the noisy power ﬂow and voltage angle measurements
are given by

˜z(t) = z(t) + wz(t),
˜θ(t) = θ(t) + wθ(t),

IV. A FAULT DETECTION PROCEDURE

where the noise processes are given by

The power system under test is modeled using the direct
current (DC) power ﬂow model with a linear relation between
the active power ﬂow on a transmission line and the difference
of the voltage angles on the two corresponding buses [23]:

power ﬂow = susceptance × voltage angle difference.

(4)

Given the noisy measurements of voltage angle differences
and power ﬂows across various lines in the power network,
we seek to detect changes in the susceptance parameters, i.e.,
whether the susceptance are equal to some nominal known
values, or have changed. We pose the change detection as
a hypothesis testing problem employing a linear error-in-
variables (EIV) model, which allows for noise in both sides of
the linear relationship (4). The standard approach to parameter
estimation in such problems is known as total least squares
(TLS) [24], while hypothesis testing in EIV models have
been addressed by deriving the generalized likelihood ratio
tests (GLRT) [25]. The TLS-GLRT to detect changes in the
susceptance parameters of a grid was ﬁrst proposed in [26].

The PMUs are typically used to obtain the noisy measure-
ments of voltage angle differences and power ﬂows across
the network. In this section, we analyze the performance of
TLS-GLRT to detect changes in the susceptance parameters
when these PMUs are constrained to follow the scheduling
scheme to transmit the noisy measurements to a fusion center,
where the detection algorithm is implemented. Section IV-A
comprises the problem formulation, while the TLS-GLRT
solution is presented in Section IV-B.

A. Problem formulation

Let us consider a power system with B buses and K
branches in the network, which can be modeled as an
undirected graph G = (B, K) with B , {1, . . . , B} and
K , {(i1, j1), . . . , (iK, jK)} denoting the sets of buses and
branches, respectively. The B × 1 vector θ(t) and the B × B
skew-symmetric matrix Y (t) models the voltage angles and
time slot t,
the active power ﬂow between the buses at
respectively. The (i, j)th entry of the matrix S describes the
susceptance between buses i and j: Sij = Sji if (i, j) ∈ K
and Sij = 0 otherwise. From (4), we have

Yij (t) = Sij (θi(t) − θj(t)) ; t = 1, . . . , T.

(5)

wz(t) ∼ N (0, σ2
z
wθ(t) ∼ N (0, σ2
θ

I),
I).

In matrix notation, for T time instants, we have

Z = diag(s)DΘ,
˜Z = Z + Wz,
˜Θ = Θ + Wθ,

where Z and Wz are K × T matrices used to collect T
samples of z(t) and wz(t), respectively, while Θ and Wθ
are of dimension B × T used to collect T samples of θ(t) and
wθ(t), respectively.

The problem is to detect changes in the susceptance vector
s based on the noisy observations ˜Z and ˜Θ. Towards this
end, we assume knowledge of a vector s0 corresponding to the
nominal behavior of the grid and test the following hypotheses:

H0 : s = s0
H1 : s 6= s0.

(

(14)

Under both hypotheses, Z and Θ are unknown and have to
be estimated.

B. TLS-GLRT solution

The TLS-GLRT solution to the aforementioned hypothesis
testing problem assumes Θ, and therefore Z, are deterministic
unknown vectors. The maximum likelihood (ML) estimation
of s, Θ and Z is therefore known as TLS [24]. The TLS-
GLRT is given by

tTLS = log

maxs,Θ

T
t=1 p

maxΘ

T
Q
t=1 p

˜z(t), ˜θ(t); s, θ(t)
(cid:16)
(cid:17)
˜z(t), ˜θ(t); s0, θ(t)
(cid:17)

(cid:16)

Q

where ρ is a ﬁxed threshold. We choose H0 if the statistic is
smaller than ρ, and H1 otherwise. The joint distribution of the
observations is

H1
≷
H0

ρ,

(15)

p

(cid:16)

˜z(t), ˜θ(t); s, θ(t)
(cid:17)

p( ˜z(t); s, θ(t)) ∼ N
p( ˜θ(t); θ(t)) ∼ N

= p( ˜z(t); s, θ(t))p( ˜θ(t); θ(t)),(16)
diag(s)Dθ(t), σ2
z
θ(t), σ2
I
(cid:0)
θ

(17)

(18)

I

(cid:1)

.

,

(cid:0)

(cid:1)

In simpliﬁed form, the TLS-GLRT is given by

tTLS =

1
2

Tr

AT(s0)H −1(s0)A(s0)

−

Tr

AT

(cid:8)
min
s

1
2
A(s) = ˜Z − diag{s}D ˜Θ,
H(s) = σ2
z

I + σ2

(cid:8)

θ diag{s}DDTdiag{s}

(s)H −1

(cid:9)
(s)A(s)

H1
≷
H0

ρ, (19)

(cid:9)

(20)

(21)

The threshold ρ is chosen as follows: given enough samples,

the asymptotic performance of TLS-GLRT under H0 is:
2tTLS ∼ X 2
K ,

(22)

where X 2
K is a Chi-squared random variable with K degrees
of freedom, and K is the dimension of s [27]. This result
is independent of the speciﬁc value of the unknown Θ. A
reasonable approach to choosing the threshold for a given false
alarm rate α is

ρα =

1
2

F

−1
X 2
K

(α),

(23)

−1
X 2
K

where F
of the Chi-squared distribution with K degrees of freedom.

(.) is the inverse cumulative distributive function

−1
X 2
K

(.) that

Some comments on (23) are in order. The physical meaning
of (23) is that if T is large and the assumptions in (5) -
(13) hold, then the test statistic 2tTLS in (22) can be shown
to be a Chi-squared random variable with K degrees of
freedom. Even for moderately large T , the approximation
is often quite accurate. A Chi-squared random variable has
an inverse cumulative distributive function F
is
a common and extensively tabulated function available in
many software packages and whose values are tabulated in
books [27, Chapter 2.2]. Numerous efﬁcient algorithms are
available to compute this function, however, the computational
complexity is not really an issue. In practice, one can chose
a set of desirable false alarm probabilities, α in (23), and the
corresponding thresholds, ρα in (23), can be computed off-line
and stored in a look-up table. Then the system can choose
any of these false alarm probabilities and this will determine
the threshold to employ. Fixing the false alarm probability is
accepted practice in hypothesis testing [27]. Given the ﬁxed
false alarm probability, the test in (19) is chosen to optimize
the probability of detection (Pd) as described in [26]. Note that
in detection theory literature, the probability of false alarm is
the probability of incorrectly choosing H1 when H0 is actually
true, while the probability of deciding on hypothesis H1 when
H1 is indeed true is referred to as the probability of detection
[27, Chapter 3].

V. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In this section, we present simulation results to demon-
strate the performance improvement of the TLS-GLRT fault
detection scheme when the transmission of PMUs follow the
scheduling policy described in Section III compared to its
performance when the PMUs transmit in a round-robin fashion
without a predeﬁned order. Results also enable us to compare
the performance of the detection scheme offered by scheduling
the PMU transmissions, when the PMUs are placed employing
the topology- and electrical structure-based approaches. We

ﬁrst describe the experimental setup, followed by simulation
results and related discussion.

A. Experimental setup

z = σ2

We consider the IEEE 14-bus system with the number of
buses B = 14 and the number of branches K = 20. The noise
θ = 0.01. We perform 104 Monte
variances are given by σ2
Carlo simulations. At each realization, the elements of Θ are
generated independently as standard normal random variables.
The active power ﬂow Y between the buses were obtained
using the power ﬂow algorithm in MATPOWER [28]; the
susceptance vector s was then computed using Y . Under H0,
we use the susceptance parameters given by the test proﬁle.
Under H1, we apply a change of -2% to every element of
s. Here, -2% essentially means that every element of s is
made smaller by a factor of 2%; this number can be arbitrarily
chosen without loss of generality.

Simulations are conducted for one frame lasting 20 time
units. This corresponds to T = 20 in (5). Furthermore, each
frame is subdivided into N slots, where N is the solution to
the PMU placement problem. The setup comprises solving the
hypothesis testing problem (14) after each PMU transmission.
Note that, we need phasor data from all the PMUs to form
the test statistic. In light of the previous statement, we do not
induce a change in the susceptance vector at the ﬁrst time
instant; however, for subsequent time instants, every element
of the susceptance vector s will be changed by -2%. After
each transmission, we use the phasor data that we previously
had from each PMU to form the test statistic.

To analyze the performance of the fault detection scheme
presented in Section IV, we compute the variation of probabil-
ity of detection (Pd) of change in the susceptance parameter
versus time, using a ﬁxed value of false alarm rate (α)
uniformly picked between [0, 0.2] for which the corresponding
threshold is calculated using (23). We then pick a new value
of α ∈ [0, 0.2] and repeat the calculations to obtain the corre-
sponding variation of Pd with time. This procedure is repeated
for different values of α ∈ [0, 0.2], resulting in a set of Pds
versus time. Lastly, we plot the average (over the number of
αs) Pd versus time for two scenarios: (a) when the PMUs
transmit in a random manner without a prescribed scheduling
policy and (b) when the PMUs transmissions are allowed to
follow the scheduling scheme. For both scenarios, we consider
the separate cases of the PMUs being placed employing the
topology- and electrical structure-based approaches.

B. Simulation results

We ﬁrst present the results for the PMU placement problem
for the 14-bus system. For the topology-based approach to
the PMU placement problem, the connectivity matrix is given
by (3). Solving (1), we obtain 4 as the optimum number of
PMUs to be installed on buses 2, 6, 7 and 9. For the electrical
structure-based approach to the PMU placement problem, the
connectivity matrix is given by (31) (see Appendix A). Solving
(1), we obtain 7 as the optimum number of PMUs to be
installed on buses 1, 3, 8, 11, 12, 13 and 14. For both topology-
and electrical structure-based approaches, the objective is to
achieve complete network observability.

d

)

P

(

n
o
i
t
c
e
t
e
d
f
o

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

5

10
Time

d

)

P

(

n
o
i
t
c
e
t
e
d
f
o

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

Random transmission
Scheduled transmission

15

20

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

Scheduling with electrical structure−based PMU placement
Scheduling with topology−based PMU placement
Random transmission,’Location

0

0

5

10
Time

15

20

Fig. 3.
Probability of detection versus time, for one frame lasting 20 time
units, when the PMUs are placed employing the electrical structure-based
approach.

Fig. 5.
Probability of detection versus time, for one frame lasting 20 time
units, to compare the topology- and electrical structure-based approaches to
PMU placement.

d

)

P

(

n
o
i
t
c
e
t
e
d
f
o

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

5

10
Time

Random transmission
Scheduled transmission

15

20

Fig. 4.
units, when the PMUs are placed employing the topology-based approach.

Probability of detection versus time, for one frame lasting 20 time

Following the scheduling policy described in Section III,
for the topology-based approach (where an optimal number
of 4 PMUs are placed on buses numbered 2, 6, 7 and 9), the
transmission schedule is as follows: the PMU placed on bus
7 transmits ﬁrst, followed by those placed on buses 2, 6 and
lastly 9, in that order.

Similarly, for the electrical structure-based approach (where
an optimal number of 7 PMUs are placed on buses numbered
1, 3, 8, 11, 12, 13 and 14), the transmission scheduled is the
same as presented in Section III-A, i.e., the PMUs installed
on buses 14, 8, 12, 11, 3, 13 and 1 transmit in time slots
numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, respectively.

The plots of Pd versus time for one frame lasting 20 time
units when the PMUs are placed employing the electrical
structure- and topology-based approaches are shown in Fig. 3
and Fig. 4, respectively. In each ﬁgure, we also plot Pd versus
time when the PMU-transmissions are random, without a
predeﬁned order/schedule. As seen from the plots, scheduling
the PMU-transmissions results in better detection performance

compared to PMUs transmitting at random. Note that, at the
end of the time frame, after the vector of phasor data from all
the PMUs are updated, the Pd for both scheduled and random
transmissions become the same since we have phasor data
from all the PMUs in both cases.

For the topology-based approach to PMU placement, we
have installed 4 PMUs on the grid, while for the electrical
structure-based approach, there are 7 PMUs. To compare the
scheduling performance between the topology- and electrical
structure-based PMU placements, we modify the experimental
setup as follows. We let the same number of PMUs transmit
for both the topology-based and electrical structure-based
approaches to analyze the detection performance. Speciﬁcally,
we allow only 4 PMUs transmit their phasor data to the control
center for both PMU placement approaches before applying
the scheduling scheme. More precisely, for the topology-based
approach we allow PMUs on buses numbered 2, 6, 7 and 9 to
transmit as before. For the electrical structure-based approach,
we now allow only 4 PMUs on buses numbered 8, 11, 12 and
14 transmit their phasor data. This choice was based on the
magnitudes of the entries in the vectors σnun, n = 1, . . . , 4,
i.e., the ﬁrst four column vectors in the 7 × 7 sub-matrix
described in Section III-A.

The scheduling policy is now applied to the above setup.
Similar to previous experiments, for the topology-based ap-
proach the transmission schedule is as follows: the PMU
placed on bus 7 transmits ﬁrst, followed by those placed
on buses 2, 6 and lastly 9, in that order. For the electrical
structure-based approach, the PMUs installed on buses 14,
8, 12 and 11 transmit, in that order. For both approaches,
each frame (lasting 20 time units) is divided into 4 slots. The
plot of Pd versus time is shown in Fig. 5, where we see that
the electrical structure-based approach has a better detection
performance compared to the topology-based approach.

Finally, we conduct an experiment in which we allow lesser
number of PMUs for the electrical structure-based approach
to transmit compared to the topology-based approach. Specif-
ically, we allow only 3 PMUS (on buses 14, 8 and 12, based

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

Scheduling with electrical structure−based PMU placement
Scheduling with topology−based PMU placement
Random transmission,’Location

d

)

P

(

n
o
i
t
c
e
t
e
d
f
o

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

0

0

5

10
Time

15

20

Fig. 6.
Probability of detection versus time, for one frame lasting 20 time
units, with lesser number of PMUs for the electrical structure-based approach
compared to the topology-based approach.

on the the magnitudes of the entries in the vectors σnun,
n = 1, . . . , 3) to transmit for the electrical structure-based
approach, while continuing with 4 PMUs for the topology-
based approach. The scheduling scheme is applied to both
these cases and the resulting plots are shown in Fig. 6. As
shown in the Fig. 6,
the probability of detection for the
electrical structure-based approach is in fact slightly better
than the topology-based approach. It is important to note that,
the above two modiﬁcations in the experimental setup are
especially useful when there are stringent constraints (e.g.,
bandwidth limitation) for communications on the grid.

Note 5.1: For Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, it should be noted that
we have installed the optimum number of 7 PMUs for the
electrical structure-based approach, so as to achieve complete
network observability. However, we allowed only 4 PMUs
to transmit their phasor data to the control center. Though
the remaining 3 PMUs record phasor data across the lines
on which they are installed, they do not transmit them to
the control unit. So long as phasor data from the “high
priority” buses (i.e., buses having high electrical inﬂuence on
the remaining buses in the network) are obtained, the test
statistic can be computed and the hypotheses test can be tested.
In summary, since the scheduling is based on the electrical
connectedness between buses in the grid, PMUs placed on
buses having a strong electrical inﬂuence with other buses are
given a higher priority. Furthermore, as discussed in Section I,
the electrical structure-based approach provides a stronger
characterization of the electrical inﬂuence between network
components compared to the topology-based approach. There-
fore, the probability of detection of change in the susceptance
parameter is higher when the PMUs are installed based on
the electrical structure-based approach compared to the case
when they are installed using the topology-based approach.
However, both approaches outperform the case when phasor
data from PMUs are transmitted without prior scheduling.

The scheduling scheme proposed in this paper assumes
dedicated direct communications link between the individual
PMUs and the WAMS control center. However, in practice

the communications infrastructure for the power grid encom-
passes many complicated and interrelated operations [29]. For
instance, the integrated control center system (ICCS) provides
user interfaces to view the power grid information and dis-
tributed computing environment to monitor and coordinate the
security of transmission system. Then there is the paradigm
of common information model (CIM) using which information
sharing of power system applications can be achieved using a
common markup language. Such communications overheads
could be termed as “constraints”, since they impede the rate
of transfer of synchrophasor data from the PMUs to the
WAMS server. However, as mentioned in Section I, since
our scheduling policy is transmitter-centric, it is unaffected by
the communications constraints. It should also be noted that
integration of PMU schedulers into existing standards (e.g.,
C37.118.2-2011 [30]) could have a bearing on communication
protocols, data types and formats for phasor data transmission
on the grid. These aspects are relegated to future work.

VI. CONCLUSION

We proposed a time division multiplexing scheme for trans-
mission of phasor data from the PMUs to a central server,
where time was divided into frames and the optimal set of
PMUs within a given time frame take turns to transmit to the
control center. The proposed scheduling policy was governed
by the measure of electrical connectedness between buses in
the power grid. We presented the PMU placement problem
from two different perspectives, namely, topology- and elec-
trical structure-based approaches. For both these approaches,
the scheduling scheme was coupled with a fault detection
algorithm, which was posed as hypothesis testing problem.
The performance of the fault detection, which was formulated
to detect changes in the susceptance parameters of the network,
was shown to improve due to scheduling transmissions from
PMUs compared to transmitting phasor data in a random
manner. Future work would involve scheduling algorithms
with incomplete network observability and WAMS servers
with multiuser reception/detection capability.

APPENDIX A
ON THE ELECTRICAL STRUCTURE OF THE GRID

The electric power grid has received considerable attention
from the perspective of complex networks [31]. In the follow-
ing we brieﬂy present this perspective, which promotes the
electrical structure of the grid over its topological structure.
Then,
the binary connectivity matrix is derived using the
resistance distance between buses in the network.

The study of the electrical structure of the grid was moti-
vated by the following drawbacks suffered by its topological
structure:

1) In [18] (see Section I and references therein), it was
reported that electric grids in different geographical loca-
tions had different degree distributions leading to varied
topological structures.

2) It was also pointed out that the same grid had different
topological structures by carrying out different model-
based analyses. This discrepancy was attributed to the

 
 
 
 
 
weaker characterization of the electrical connections be-
tween network components as provided by the topological
structure.

3) Related reports supporting this line of argument were
found in [32] - [34], where it was shown that, for
many classes of complex networks, characterizing the
network structure using degree distribution alone was
suboptimal and had implications on node synchronization
and performance of the network.

In the context of PMU placement, for the topology-based
the bus admittance matrix plays a central role
approach,
in solving the placement problem. Though the admittance
matrix characterizes the electrical behavior of the network,
the sensitivity between power injections and nodal phase angle
differences can be utilized to better characterize the electrical
inﬂuence between network components. Towards this end, we
derive the resistance distance matrix, which provides a strong
characterization of the electrical inﬂuence between various
network components.

Consider a network with B buses, described by the conduc-
tance matrix G. Let Vj and gij denote the voltage magnitude at
bus j and the conductance between buses i and j, respectively.
The current injection at bus i is then given by

B

Ii =

gijVj .

(24)

j=1
X

G acts as a Laplacian matrix to the network, provided there
are no connections to the ground, i.e., if G has rank B − 1.
The singularity of G can be overcome by letting a bus r have
Vr = 0. The conductance matrix associated with the remaining
B − 1 buses is full-rank, and thus we have
Vk = G−1

(25)

Ik, k 6= r.
the diagonal elements of G−1

kk

kk be denoted g

−1
Let
kk , ∀k,
indicating the change in voltage due to current injection at bus
k which is grounded at bus r. The voltage difference between
a pair of buses (i, j), i 6= j 6= r, is computed as follows:
−1
jj − g

−1
ij − g

−1
ii + g

e(i, j) = g

−1
ji ,

(26)

indicating the change in voltage due to injection of 1 Ampere
of current at bus i which is withdrawn at bus j. e(i, j) is called
the resistance distance between buses i and j, and describes the
sensitivity between current injections and voltage differences.
In matrix form, letting Γ , diag(G−1

+ Γ1T

Ekk = 1ΓT
Erk = ΓT
,
Ekr = Γ.

kk ), we have ∀k 6= r
G−1
kk

kk −

T

,

− G−1

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

(27)

(28)
(29)

The resistance distance matrix E, thus deﬁned, possesses the
properties of a metric space [35].

To derive the sensitivities between power injections and
phase angles, we start with the upper triangular part of the
Jacobian matrix obtained from the power ﬂow analysis, for
the distance matrix to be real-valued:
∂P
∂|V |

∆P =

∂P
∂θ

∆|V |.

∆θ +

(30)

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

∂P
∂θ

(cid:2)

∂P
∂θ

The matrix
will be used to form the distance matrix, by
assuming the voltages at the buses to be held constant, i.e.,
(cid:3)
possesses most of the
∆|V | = 0. It was observed that
properties of a Laplacian matrix. By letting G =
, the
resulting distance matrix E measures the incremental change
in phase angle difference between two buses i and j, (θi −θj),
given an incremental average power transaction between those
buses, assuming the voltage magnitudes are held constant. It
was proved in [18, Appendix] that E, thus deﬁned, satisﬁes
the properties of a distance matrix, as long as all series branch
reactance are nonnegative.

∂P
∂θ

(cid:3)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

For a power grid with B buses and K branches, the distance
matrix E translates into an undirected graph with B(B − 1)
weighted branches. In order to compare the grid with an
undirected network without weights, one has to retain the B
buses, but replace the K branches with K smallest entries in
the upper or lower triangular part of E. This results in a graph
of size {B, K} with edges representing electrical connectivity
rather than direct physical connections. The adjacency matrix
C of this graph is obtained by setting a threshold, λ, adjusted
to produce exactly K branches in the network:

C :

(

˜cij = 1, ∀e(i, j) < λ,
˜cij = 0, ∀e(i, j) ≥ λ.

(31)

To obtain the threshold λ present in (31), we ﬁrst consider the
upper triangular part of the matrix E, and sort the elements
in descending (or ascending) order. We then pick a number of
elements equal to the number of branches in the given power
network. For instance, given the IEEE-14 bus network having
20 branches, we pick the top 20 sorted elements from the
upper triangular part of the matrix E.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Phadke and J. Thorp, Synchronized Phasor Measurements and Their

Applications. Springer, 2008.

[2] ——, “Communication needs for wide area measurement applications,”
in Proc. IEEE 5th International Conference on Critical Infrastructure,
Sep. 2007, pp. 1–7.

[3] S. Kirti, Z. Wang, A. Scaglione, and R. J. Thomas, “On the com-
munication architecture for wide-area real-time monitoring in power
networks,” in Proc. 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences, Jan. 2007, p. 119.

[4] Z. Wang, A. Scaglione, and R. J. Thomas, “Compressing electrical
power grids,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference Smart Grid
Communications, Gaithersburg, MD, Oct. 2010, pp. 13–18.

[5] R. Nuqui and A. Phadke, “Phasor measurement unit placement tech-
niques for complete and incomplete observability,” IEEE Transactions
on Power Delivery, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2381–2388, Oct. 2005.

[6] B. Gou, “Optimal placement of PMUs by integer linear programming,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1525–1526,
Aug. 2008.

[7] ——, “Generalized integer linear programming formulation for optimal
PMU placement,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 23, no. 3,
pp. 1099–1104, Aug. 2008.

[8] T. Baldwin, L. Mili, J. Boisen, M.B., and R. Adapa, “Power sys-
tem observability with minimal phasor measurement placement,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 707–715, May 1993.
[9] B. Milosevic and M. Begovic, “Nondominated sorting genetic algorithm
for optimal phasor measurement placement,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 69–75, Feb. 2003.

[10] J. Zhang, G. Welch, G. Bishop, and Z. Huang, “Optimal PMU placement
evaluation for power system dynamic state estimation,” in Proceedings
of IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technology Conference Europe,
Oct. 2010, pp. 1–7.

[11] B. Xu and A. Abur, “Observability analysis and measurement placement
for systems with PMUs,” in Proceedings of IEEE PES Power Systems
Conference and Exposition, vol. 2, Oct. 2004, pp. 943–946.

[12] S. Azizi, A. Dobakhshari, S. Nezam Sarmadi, and A. Ranjbar, “Optimal
PMU placement by an equivalent
linear formulation for exhaustive
search,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 174–182,
Mar. 2012.

[13] V. Kekatos, G. Giannakis, and B. Wollenberg, “Optimal placement of
phasor measurement units via convex relaxation,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 1521–1530, Aug. 2012.

[14] Q. Li, T. Cui, Y. Weng, R. Negi, F. Franchetti, and M. Ilic, “An
information-theoretic approach to PMU placement
in electric power
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 446–
456, Mar. 2013.

[15] F. H. Fesharaki, R. A. Hooshmand, and A. Khodabakhshian, “A new
method for simultaneous optimal placement of PMUs and PDCs for
maximizing data transmission reliability along with providing the power
system observability,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 100, pp.
43–54, Jul. 2013.

[16] J. E. Anderson and A. Chakrabortty, “PMU placement for dynamic
equivalencing of power systems under ﬂow observability constraints,”
Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 106, pp. 51–61, Jan. 2014.
[17] K. G. Nagananda, “Phasor measurement unit placement in electric power
systems: An electrical structure-based approach,” Aug. 2014, submitted
to IET Generation, Transmissiona and Distribution.

[18] E. Cotilla-Sanchez, P. Hines, C. Barrows, and S. Blumsack, “Comparing
the topological and electrical structure of the North American electric
power infrastructure,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 616–626,
Dec. 2012.

[19] L. Zhou, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, and L. M. Oliveira, “QoE-driven power
scheduling in smart grid: architecture, strategy, and methodology,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 136–141, May 2012.

[20] M. He, S. Murugesan, and J. Zhang, “A multi-timescale scheduling
approach for stochastic reliability in smart grids with wind generation
and opportunistic demand,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 4,
no. 1, pp. 521–529, Mar. 2013.

[21] J. Huang, H. Wang, Y. Qian, and C. Wang, “Priority-based trafﬁc
scheduling and utility optimization for cognitive radio communication
infrastructure-based smart grid,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid,
vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 78–86, Mar. 2013.

[22] C. Chen, K. Nagananda, G. Xiong, S. Kishore, and L. V. Snyder,

“A communication-based appliance scheduling scheme for consumer-
premise energy management systems,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 56–65, Mar. 2013.

[23] J. J. Grainger and W. D. Stevenson, Power System Analysis. McGraw-

Hill, 2003.

[24] S. van Huffel and P. Lemmerling, Total Least Squares and Errors-in-
Variables Modeling: Analysis, Algorithms and Applications. Springer,
2002.

[25] B. Huang, “Detection of abrupt changes of total least squares models and
application in fault detection,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems,
vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 357–367, Mar. 2001.

[26] C. Wei, A. Wiesel, and R. S. Blum, “Change detection in smart grids
using errors in variables models,” in Proceedings on IEEE Sensor Array
Multichannel Signal Processing (SAM) Workshop, Hoboekn, NJ, Jun.
2012, pp. 17–20.

[27] S. M. Kay, Fundamentals Of Statistical Signal Processing: Detection

Theory. Prentice Hall, 2001, vol. 2.

[28] R. Zimmerman, C. Murillo-S´anchez, and R. J. Thomas, “MATPOWER:
Steady-state operations, planning, and analysis tools for power systems
research and education,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 26, no. 1, pp.
12–19, Feb. 2011.

[29] M. Shahidehpour and Y. Wang, Communication and Control in Electric

Power Systems. NJ, USA.: Wiley-Interscience, 2003.

[30] IEEE Standard for Synchrophasor Data Transfer for Power Systems,

IEEE C37.118.2-2011 Std., Dec. 2011.

[31] F. Dorﬂer and F. Bullo, “Synchronization and transient stability in power
networks and non-uniform Kuramoto oscillators,” in Proceedings of
IEEE American Control Conference, Baltimore, MD, 2010, pp. 930–
937.

[32] C. Wu and L. Chua, “Synchronization in an array of linearly coupled
dynamical systems,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I:
Fundamental Theory and Applications, vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 430–447,
Aug. 1995.

[33] C. Wu, “Synchronization in networks of nonlinear dynamical systems
coupled via a directed graph,” Nonlinearity, vol. 18, no. 3, p. 1057,
2005.

[34] F. Atay, T. Biyikoglu, and J. Jost, “Synchronization of networks with
prescribed degree distributions,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and
Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 92–98, Jan. 2006.
[35] D. Klein and M. Randi´c, “Resistance distance,” Journal of Mathematical

Chemistry, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 81–95, 1993.

