Insights from Nature for Cybersecurity 

Elżbieta Rzeszutko and Wojciech Mazurczyk  

Warsaw University of Technology, Institute of Telecommunications 

Warsaw, Poland, 00-665, Nowowiejska 15/19 

Email: E.Rzeszutko@tele.pw.edu.pl, wmazurczyk@tele.pw.edu.pl 

Abstract. The alarming rise in the quantity of malware in the last few years poses a serious challenge 

to the security community  and requires urgent response. However, current countermeasures seem to 

be no longer effective. Thus, it is our belief that it is now time for researchers and security experts to 

turn to  nature  in  the  search  for  novel  inspirations  for  defense  systems.  Nature has  provided  species 

with a whole range of offensive and defensive techniques, which have been developing and improving 

in the course of billions of years of evolution. The extremely diverse living conditions have promoted 

a  large  variation  in  the  devised  bio-security  solutions.  In  this  paper  we  introduce  a  novel 

PROTECTION  framework  in  which  common  denominators  of  the  encountered  offensive  and 

defensive means are proposed and presented. The bio-inspired solutions are discussed in the context 

of  cybersecurity,  where  some  principles  have  already  been  adopted.  The  deployment  of  the  whole 

nature-based  framework  should  aid  the  design  and  improvement  process  of  modern  cyber-defense 

systems. 

Introduction 

The  growing  diversity,  complexity  and  proliferation  of  malware  draws  increasing  attention 

from  researchers  and  security  experts,  as  well  as  ordinary  Internet  users.  However,  current 

countermeasures  seem  to  be  no  longer  effective.  Few  months  ago,  Symantec,  which 

pioneered computer security with its antivirus software in the late 1980s, declared that their 

products  are  able  to  detect  only  about  45%  of  the  potential  threats  [8].  Adding  to  this  an 

almost  exponential  growth  in  newly  detected  malicious  software,  reported  by  security 

vendors in the last few years, we are currently facing a challenge that needs to be addressed 

urgently. The main question is: where should we seek novel ideas and inspiration that could 

aid  the  reengineering  of  our  current  defense  systems.  It  is  our  belief  that  the  answer  is:  in 

nature. 

Nature  has  over  3.8  billion  years  of  experience  in  developing  solutions  to  the  challenges 

facing organisms living in extremely diverse conditions. The estimated number of species is 

counted in millions, and each of them possesses traits ensuring survival advantage. In nature, 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
each organism’s “aim” is to fulfil two goals: to survive and to reproduce. These “goals” can 

be endangered by two main factors: (i) presence and actions of predators (or any “attacker” 

that  could  pose  a  threat  to  an  organism,  e.g.  herbivores  for  plants  or  disease  agents  like 

viruses,  bacteria  or  fungi);  (ii)  inability  to  access  resources  necessary  for  survival  (like 

habitat, water and food). As pointed out by Sagarin and Taylor [1], uncertainty is a starting 

point when considering security in nature – as  every organism tries to decrease it for itself, 

and increase for its potential adversaries.  

In  our  previous  work  [3]  we  have  shown,  on  concrete  examples,  that  analogies  between 

nature and cybersecurity exist.  The main concepts of many current network security threats 

can  be  found  in  the  actions  of  real  predators.  For  example,  an  Anglerfish  (Lophius 

Piscatorius) has eighty long filaments along the middle of its head, the most important being 

the longest one, terminating in a lappet, and is movable in every direction. The angler attracts 

other fish by means of its lure, to seize them with its enormous jaws as they approach. The 

same concept is currently utilized in phishing attacks, where the aim is to attract the potential 

victim and fool it to swallow the bait, e.g. by visiting a phony website which masquerades as 

a legitimate one, and fool the user to give out his credentials. Another example is the Kudzu 

vine  which  proliferates  its  ecosystem  with  astounding  speed  (ca.  30  cm  per  day).  Within 

weeks, just like DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service) attacks for communication networks, it 

can literally  choke all other  growth, including  trees and shrubs, by  making it impossible to 

access the resources necessary for survival – light and nutrients. The same analogies can be 

drawn for security solutions [3]. 

The important observation is that in both worlds a continuous arms race takes place between 

offensive and defensive techniques. Due to the ever-changing scene of battle, unpredictability 

in cybersecurity should be considered with equal attention as it is in nature.  

In  literature  there  have  already  been  a  few  attempts  to  transplant  biologically-inspired 

concepts  to  cybersecurity.  The  most  notable  examples  include:  artificial  immune  systems 

[10],  predator-prey  association  [12],  malware  ecology  [13]  or  epidemic  spreading  [11]. 

Recently, the need to balance the uncertainty between the attacker and the defender has come 

to  light  in  the  form  of  e.g.  various  moving  target  techniques  [1].  However,  in  our  opinion, 

there  is  still  a  notable  lack  of  a  systematic  review  of  the  features,  with  which  nature  has 

equipped  organisms  to  tackle  the  uncertainty  and  adapt  to  risks  posed  by  even  the  most 

skilled predators and the challenging environment.  

This  paper  introduces  the  concept  of  the  bio-inspired  PROTECTION  framework  which  is 

intended  to  show  the  direction  which  the  evolution  of  existing  security  solutions,  and  the 

2 

 
design of future ones, should follow. By inspecting the rules and techniques that are common 

in  nature,  it  was  possible  to  identify  five  vital  features  that,  in  our  opinion,  every 

cybersecurity  solution  should  employ  in  order  to  attain  higher  effectiveness.  We  illustrate 

how,  in  response  to  various  historical  challenges  and  threats,  communication  networks  and 

security measures were (mostly unconsciously) improved to fulfil the framework’s features. 

We also present a case study that validates our framework. 

Adaptability is the key 

In  nature  the  answer  to  unpredictability  is  an  organism’s  ability  to  adapt  i.e.  adjust  its 

structure,  behaviour  and/or  interactions,  triggered  in  response  to  challenges  or  threats 

potentially  endangering  its  survival.  Therefore,  adaptability  permits  reaction  to  challenges 

and threats as they arise in the environment for this particular organism. To be efficient the 

reaction  must  be  made  accurately  and  within  a  reasonable  time.  The  need  for  adaptability 

propels an organism’s evolution. 

Sagarin et al. [1], [4] identified three most important features that have allowed organisms to 

survive  and  adapt  throughout  billions  of  years  –  namely:  decentralization,  redundancy  and 

cooperation,  and  showed  how  they  generally  relate  to  public  security  and  also  to  the  ICT 

world.  It  is  our  belief  that  these  features  do  not  completely  reflect  the  “whole  picture”  of 

adaptability. Main differences between our approach and Sagarin’s et al. can be summarized 

as  follows:  (i)  our  approach  attempts  to  determine  how  knowledge  about  nature  can  be 

practically  projected  onto  cybersecurity  while  Sagarin  et  al.  provided  very  general 

considerations  on  how  organisms’  functioning  improved  over  time  and  how  it  relates  to 

societal and homeland security [1], [4]; (ii) Sagarin et al. pointed three main features with the 

aid  of  which  adaptability  is  realized  and  how  it  projects  onto  general  success  of  a  security 

solution.  

We  argue  that,  besides  the  mentioned  components,  two  more  features  are  vital  for 

adaptability:  responsiveness  and  heterogeneity,  hence,  there  should  be  five  of  them  which 

collectively  form  the  PROTECTION  framework  (Fig.  1).  The  more  components  a  given 

solution covers, the more adaptable it becomes. 

Fig. 1 PROTECTION framework for adaptability.  

3 

 
 
 
The features that form the PROTECTION framework with corresponding concrete examples 

from  nature  (cybersecurity  examples  will  be  provided  separately  in  the  following  sections) 

are:  

(i) 

Responsiveness – understood as an accurate and reactive, not proactive, behaviour 

once  an  alarming  condition  is  arising/sensed.  Prediction  of  challenges  is  seen  as 

inaccurate  and  energy  demanding  (too  costly).  Biology  has  equipped  us  with  a 

great implementation of such a responsive solution. Despite our heavily relying on 

the brain to govern our wellbeing, we are equipped with special neural pathways, 

or reflex arcs, which permit us to react instantaneously when a sensor is provoked. 

The electric impulses do not take the longer route from the sensor via the brain to 

the effector organ, but travel only to the spinal cord, where appropriate reaction is 

automatically triggered. Thus the reaction time is as short as possible. 

(ii) 

Heterogeneity – the larger the number of genotypic variations in a given species, 

the larger is the cumulative chance for survival. Moreover, it may also involve a 

differentiation  and  specialization  of  roles.  Heterogeneity  enables  evasion  of  the 

attacker’s interest  –  the greater the diversity, the less potential benefit of putting 

effort  into  targeting  a  rare  entity  of  an  organism  or  a  computer  system.  Certain 

species of moths have benefited from their natural diversification of phenotypes. 

The  antipredatory  adaptation  of  Peppered  Moths  was  their  speckled  camouflage 

that came in many hues. But the Industrial Revolution altered their habitat – trees 

were sooted and barren of any lichens. The species as a whole survived, because 

natural selection favoured the darker shaded variant of moths, which reproduced 

freely to sustain the population. 

(iii)  Decentralization  –  may  come  in  many  forms,  e.g.  in  the  form  of  diverse 

localizations,  or  distributed  control  (increased  autonomy).  It  capacitates  prompt 

response  to  an  emerging  threat.  This  is  particularly  visible  in  non-solitary 

organisms,  e.g.  insects,  forming  social  relationships  (e.g.  ants  or  bees)  as  they 

have  developed  complex  means  of  communicating  information  gathered  by 

members of the community to the collective benefit of all. 

(iv) 

Redundancy – nature does not always strive to be optimal in its design and utilizes 

this feature to increase the chance for success. Redundancy is seen as the source 

of  resilience:  surplus  resources  allocated  to  a  task  prove  essential  when  critical 

events  occur.  Redundancy  in  nature  can  take  different  forms  –  some  lizards 

perform  tail  autotomy  to  evade  capture,  the  lost  limb  is  not  crucial  and  can  be 

4 

 
regenerated over time; animals living in communities duplicate certain roles, thus 

the loss of a single member of a group is not significant. 

(v) 

Cooperation  is  coined  as  means  to  push  the  limits  of  adaptability.  Organisms 

forming  symbiotic  relationships  with  others  can  together  overcome  problems, 

which  would  otherwise  be  insurmountable.  For  example,  ants  protect  vulnerable 

aphids  from  predators  in  exchange  for  nurturing  sugary  honeydew  produced  by 

the latter. Both parties benefit from this relationship.  

Noting  the  parallelism  between  relationships  and  challenges  present  in  nature  and  in  the 

virtual  world  (as  mentioned  in  [3]  and  in  the  Introduction),  the  proposed  PROTECTION 

framework, in our opinion, can be conveniently projected to illustrate historical challenges, as 

well as current trends and developments, in communication networking and cybersecurity.  

When  looking  into  the  development  of  communication  networks  one  can  observe  that  they 

consecutively introduce features from the PROTECTION framework to improve their overall 

effectiveness.  An  overview  of  the  communication  networks’  evolution  in  this  context  is 

necessary as they form a sort of “canvas”, or a virtual environment, for the threats, and thus 

they have significant influence on the cybersecurity measures.  

Communication networks and adaptability 

The  evolution  of  communication  networks  follows  a  steady  transition  from  centralized  and 

homogenous  systems  towards a more dispersed  architecture.  The most notable example are 

the  P2P  (Peer-to-Peer)  networks.  The  response  to  the  single  point  of  failure  weakness  of 

centralized networking and the client-server limitations was the introduction of P2P network 

design.  The  decentralization  feature  was  achieved  by  distributing  control  and  transport 

functions  among  the  peers.  At  the  same  time  responsiveness  was  ensured  by  amending  the 

vulnerabilities of the previous design, i.e. resiliency increased as the network became capable 

of undisrupted operation even if its fragment was malfunctioning.  

Decentralization  was  also  the  key  to  a  particular  service  development  –  let  us  consider  IP 

telephony.  Classical,  centralized  VoIP  (Voice  over  IP)  solutions  have  been  suffering  issues 

related  to  NAT  (Network  Address  Translation)  and  firewall  traversal.  On  the  other  hand, 

Skype, due to its P2P design, experiences no such problems. The solution to these problems 

was decentralization and heterogeneity. Two roles that each Skype node can be assigned are 

differentiated  depending  on  the  node’s  network  capabilities:  a  Super  Node  (SN)  or  an 

Ordinary Node (ON). Typically, SNs cooperate while determining user’s location in a Skype 

5 

 
 
 
network  and  participate  during  the  signalling  phase  of  any  call.  They  also  help  ONs  to 

establish and relay a call if they are behind a NAT.  

Meanwhile,  another  P2P  service  –  BitTorrent  has  taken  advantage  of  redundancy  and 

improved significantly the effectiveness of its transmissions as compared with previous P2P 

file sharing systems. In BitTorrent, from the network perspective, every resource is divided 

into many duplicate fragments and is available from multiple sources (the so called seeds and 

leechers).  The  more  copies  of  the  original  resource  in  the  network,  the  better,  because 

different fragments of the same item can be downloaded simultaneously. 

The PROTECTION framework and cybersecurity 

As  mentioned,  the  PROTECTION  framework  is  suitable  for  describing  the  evolution  of 

cybersecurity  –  the  threats,  as  well  as  the  countermeasures,  and  the  aspects  that  should  be 

taken  into  account  when  designing  new  security  mechanisms.  It  is  our  belief  that  the  more 

features of this framework will be incorporated into a security solution, the more adaptable, 

effective and consequently more secure it will become. 

Looking into existing threats and countermeasures in cybersecurity, one or even a few of the 

framework’s  components  can  already  be  found.  We  argue  that,  in  many  cases,  they  have 

naturally and unconsciously emerged in the process of evolution.  In the rest of this section 

we will provide examples from cybersecurity (both offensive and defensive measures) which 

will refer to the five introduced features of the PROTECTION framework.  

Considering  decentralization,  let  us  take  botnets  as  an  example.  First,  they  were  built  in  a 

centralized  manner,  however,  as  they  were  easier  to  defeat  this  way,  they  adapted  and 

evolved  to  P2P  design.  They  became  more  difficult  to  detect  and  eliminate.  At  the  other 

extreme,  from  the  security  solutions’  perspective,  the  development  of  Intrusion  Detection 

Systems  (IDSs)  also  proved  that  decentralization  is  a  good  approach  –  localizing  many 

“probes” (IDS sensors) increased the chance of successful threat detection. 

Likewise,  both  offensive  and  defensive  techniques  in  cybersecurity  take  advantage  of 

responsiveness.  However,  many  security  approaches  are  designed  to  try  to  predict  future 

threats  rather  than  to  effectively  react  to  the  existing,  arising  ones.  A  convenient  example 

describing  this  tendency  is  SPIT  (SPAM  over  Internet  Telephony)  which,  a  few  years  ago, 

was envisioned as a serious threat to future IP telephony systems, and some efforts have been 

made to mitigate it before it even appeared [7]. Yet, it turned out not to be a problem of the 

same magnitude as SPAM, and currently not many countermeasures are utilized in practice. 

In  terms  of  offensive  techniques,  the  responsiveness  is  somewhat  more  natural  because  the 

6 

 
 
main  challenge  is  to  find  a  vulnerability,  most  likely  a  zero-day,  and  this  always  involves 

reacting  and  adjusting  to  the  existing  security  measures.  The  actions  are  dictated  by  the 

conditions  –  an  attacker  must  find  a  single  vulnerability  or  a  limited  number  of  them  to 

successfully  compromise  a  network,  while  the  defender  must  manage  the  whole,  often 

complex and heterogenic security system with an unknown number of security gaps. Taking 

the  security  solutions’  perspective,  the  reactive  behaviour  is  visible  in  the  Intrusion 

Prevention System (IPS) part of IDS/IPS system. Until recently the typical response to a new 

threat  has  been  attained  by  creating  a  new  malware  signature,  which  capacitated  future 

detection and prevention (an analogy to an immune system can be identified). However, this 

approach  for  combating  malware  is  no  longer  effective  because  of  the  vast  amount  of 

malicious code with different signatures and the emergence of polymorphic and metamorphic 

malware that never uses the same signature more than once. 

Generally, cooperation among cybercriminals, especially until few years ago, has been more 

visible  and  more  effective  than  between  cybersecurity  experts  (however  now  finally  the 

situation  starts  to  change).  The  black  hat  community  has  been  more  willing  to  share  their 

knowledge, experience and “tools” than the white hat community, where everything comes at 

a price. An example  of an attack that strongly  benefits  from  cooperation is  the well-known 

black  hole  attack  on  MANETs’  (Mobile  Ad-hoc  Networks)  popular  routing  algorithms.  It 

relies on a malicious node deliberately injecting bogus routing information into the network 

to  redirect  the  legitimate  traffic  to  a  non-existent  node.  The  negative  impact  is  amplified 

when  a  group  of  malicious  nodes  cooperates  with  each  other  while  generating  falsified 

routing  information.  From  the  security  solutions’  perspective,  a  recently  proposed  security 

solution that benefits from cooperation is the SocialScan [5] that enables distributed, friend-

to-friend  suspicious  objects’  scanning  service  with  priorities  governed  by  levels  of  social 

altruism.  

Heterogeneity  in  cybersecurity  is  a  result  of  increasing  diversity  of  devices,  systems  and 

services  in  communication  networks.  Typically,  to  defend  a  network,  a  combination  of 

various  security  systems 

is  applied.  Simultaneously,  heterogeneity  is  exploited  by 

cybercriminals who utilize a whole range of malware  tools. There is  a  plethora of  malware 

variants  that  continuously  evolve  to  exploit  new  security  vulnerabilities.  According  to  Av-

Test  just  during  2014  over  140  million  forms  of  new  malware  have  been  identified  in  the 

wild.  Cybercriminals  exploit  heterogeneity  to  hide  the  true  nature  of  their  malware  – 

polymorphism, variable “decoy” parts of source code or instruction substitution are meant to 

7 

 
obfuscate  the  true  purpose  of  the  program,  evade  detection,  and  slow  down  the  reverse-

engineering process. 

In  the  ICT  world  redundancy  is  viewed  as  profoundly  related  to  resilience,  rather  than 

security.  When  applied  to  the  latter  case,  it  is  usually  treated  as  an  additional,  dispensable 

cost. Moreover, applying many redundant security systems at the same location often results 

in  ambiguous  behaviour  (e.g.  multiple  firewalls  on  the  same  device).  One  cybersecurity 

solution  employing  redundancy,  is  the  honeypot,  as  it  is  basically  a  clone  of  some  existing 

system, but established and tuned to learn the behaviour and/or the tools  of cybercriminals. 

The recent trend in malware evolution implicates that redundancy is a valued trait. Previous 

worms  typically  utilized  a  single  zero-day  vulnerability,  but  more  recent  malware,  like  the 

infamous  Stuxnet,  attacked  Windows  systems  using  four  unprecedented  zero-day 

vulnerabilities. Similarly, it has been observed that certain attacks are conducted by means of 

double injection of the same malicious code, with the aid of two different exploits  – just to 

make sure that the infection takes hold. 

Case study 

Advanced  Persistent  Threats  (APTs)  have  been  a  plague  affecting  large  organisations  and 

governments  in  the  past  few  years.  These  stealthy  and  insidious  campaigns  are  carried  out 

with  the  employment  of  significant  financial  and  human  resources  to  obtain  information  of 

potential intelligence value. Operation Aurora is one notable example of APT put to life and 

conducted at an unprecedented scale [15]. 

The events linked to Operation Aurora and the subsequent steps taken by the compromised 

organisations show how the elements of the PROTECTION framework can be put to life to 

the  benefit  of  those  involved  in  a  security  incident.  In  early  2010,  Google  was  the  first  to 

admit  that  it  had  been  hacked  [16],  alongside  some  US  government  institutions  and  other 

large  companies.  The  attack was linked to Chinese sources, and deemed  a serious threat to 

national security. 

Instead  of  confining  the  information  about  the  breach  (as  various  companies  often  did 

earlier),  Google  took  the  responsive  approach  –  it  took  the  risk  of  spoiling  its  image  as  an 

“impregnable  fortress”,  and  publicly  stated  that  it  had  been  compromised.  This  in  turn 

prompted other “smaller” victims to come to light, which triggered a whole chain of events. 

First of all, Google turned to NSA (National Security Agency) to establish cooperation [17] 

in  order  to  jointly  investigate  the  extent  of  damage  caused  by  Aurora.  With  Google’s 

8 

 
 
resources  and  NSA’s  experience  it  was  possible  to  develop  a  tool  for  attack  detection  and 

response. 

Actually, the created tool was heterogenous – it consisted of two independent modules. The 

first,  Turmoil,  was  responsible  for  identifying  the  symptoms  of  an  impending  attack,  while 

the second – Turbine, was intended for emergency countering [18]. Turbine’s behavior could 

either  be  conservative  –  suppressing  the  flow  of  unwanted  traffic  or  more  proactive  – 

launching a counterattack. Decentralization was an important success factor here – Google’s 

vast  infrastructure  permitted  creation  of  numerous,  dispersed  points  of  sensing,  enabling 

prompt response to an emerging threat. 

Lastly,  redundancy  comes  into  light.  Although  collaboration  of  Google  and  NSA  was 

sufficient to mitigate the immediate perils linked to Aurora, it was decided that other victims 

and  potential  targets  should  be  involved  in  the  cyber-attack  countering  process  [18]. 

Institutions of the so-called critical infrastructure were identified and regularly briefed on the 

current risk factors. This approach yielded an increase in security awareness among company 

management and limited the number of possible entry points for future attacks.  

Lessons learnt 

The main lesson from nature for cybersecurity is that no security solution is effective forever. 

The  process  of  constant  adaptation  and  evolution  applies  to  both  defensive  and  offensive 

techniques  in  nature  and  in  cybersecurity.  Moreover,  even  in  nature,  the  best  protection 

cannot  guarantee  complete,  unfaltering  security.  For  example,  the  most  wanted  defence 

mechanism, a replica of which every cybersecurity professional would embrace, is the human 

immune  system.  Its  features,  like  autonomy  (i.e.  instant  identification  and  response  to  an 

invading pathogen with no guidance from the brain) and self-learning, seem to be desired in 

every  (future)  security  mechanism.  However,  even  at  the  level  of  complexity  and 

sophistication  that  the  human  immune  system  has  achieved,  one  cannot  claim  its  100% 

reliability. The recent surge of the Ebola virus in Africa with a death rate of approximately 

50% has once again proven its susceptibility. This happened despite the couple of centuries 

people have dedicated to trying to push the limits of immunity by  developing and applying 

vaccines. In other words, people exploit the self-learning capability of the immune system, to 

manually  strengthen  it,  by  injecting  weakened  pathogens  to  trigger  the  generation  of 

antibodies.  Ebola  escaped  the  known  pattern,  as  its  origin  is  probably  animal-related  and 

appearances  among  humans  have  been  extremely  rare  so  far,  and  thus  its  eradication  has 

9 

 
 
never  been  attempted.  Overall,  despite  the  fact  that  the  immune  system  is  never  100% 

effective, it can achieve high reliability for limited spans of time.  

Hence,  when  projected  onto  cybersecurity,  we  may  state  that:  (i)  no  practical  security 

solution can ever be 100% reliable and (ii) some security solutions can be highly effective but 

rather for a short period of time. The following examples from cybersecurity illustrate these 

claims. An example for (i) is SPAM, which has been an issue (a more or less significant one) 

to  communication networks for more than 20  years now. Over all these years, even though 

there  are  some  solutions  that  can  limit  the  problem,  SPAM  has  persisted,  adapted  and 

spanned to new “territories” e.g. social media. An illustration of (ii) is DES (Data Encryption 

Standard)  encryption  algorithm  developed  in  the  early  1970s  at  IBM.  It  was  approved  as  a 

federal standard in November 1976 and was recommended  and utilized till 2001. However, 

the rapid development of CPU power led to the point where in July 2012, security researchers 

David  Hulton  and  Moxie  Marlinspike  were  able  to  recover  the  DES  encryption  keys  using 

brute force in less than 24 hours [6]. Therefore, all the confidential data encrypted with DES, 

even  if  it  was  considered  secure  20  years  ago,  is  no  longer  so.  So,  let  us  accept  that  no 

practical, persistent and  perfect security solution  exists. Of course, some security measures, 

like the OTP (One-Time Pad) cipher were mathematically proved as unbreakable. However, 

they turned out to be impractical and hard to deploy in real-life systems and networks. 

The  other  lessons  from  nature  for  cybersecurity  are  that:  (i)  a  security  expert  should  never 

underestimate a potential threat – some researchers even go a step further and conclude that 

even overestimating  the risk is  a good strategy in  many  circumstances  [14]; (ii) one should 

react as soon as the threat emerges, not when it escalates – the reaction time is crucial;  (iii) 

threats  evolve  at  least  at  the  pace  of  security  solutions  if  not  faster;  (iv)  the  threat  may  be 

effectively  mitigated  but  often  the  solution  is  short-lived.  The  failure  to  contain  the  Ebola 

virus  in  Africa  before  it  proliferated  and  threatened  to  become  a  worldwide  epidemic  is  an 

example of how the abovementioned rules were not taken into account. If local authorities of 

the  countries  where  the  disease  was  first  diagnosed,  as  well  as  the  WHO,  had  not 

underestimated the risks and reacted together decidedly, the impact of Ebola and the number 

of deceased would be limited. Moreover, the first infections by this virus were noted back in 

1976 and there was ample time to work on a vaccine that could effectively defend humankind 

in  the  future.  However  now,  as  the  virus  spread,  the  risk  has  amplified  as  the  virus  might 

mutate and cause even more severe damage. A potential cure would then be even harder to 

create, not to mention the soaring cost of combating the epidemic. 

10 

 
We  argue  that  (future)  cybersecurity  solutions  should  take  advantage  of  nature,  hence  be 

designed, developed and deployed in a way that covers as many features from the proposed 

PROTECTION  framework  as  possible.  This  in  turn  can  potentially  yield  products  that  are 

adaptation-ready,  extensible  and  effective.  Noting  that  current  cyber  threats  possess  traits 

from the discussed framework (as proved earlier), it becomes obvious that so should security 

systems.  Moreover,  we  believe  that,  among  the  presented  features  in  proposed  framework, 

the biggest potential for cybersecurity lies in cooperation and redundancy. Until recently the 

cooperation  feature  has  been  significantly  undervalued,  while  redundancy  is  unjustly 

considered  for  security  as  a  waste  of  resources.  Putting  appropriate  stress  on  these  two 

features should open some new paths.  A good example of a successful implementation of the 

cooperation  component  of  the  PROTECTION  framework  (besides  presented  in  Case  Study 

Section)  is  the  system  of  industry  consortiums  called  ISACs  (Information  Sharing  and 

Analysis  Centers)  [9]  organized  by  the  US  Department  of  Homeland  Security.  ISACs 

federate  cybersecurity  defense  information  and  distribute  it  to  all  of  its  members  and  they 

have  fostered  much  cooperation  between  security  communities  within  each  of  the  given 

industries – there is e.g. Financial Services ISAC (FS-ISAC) or the Defense Industrial Base 

ISAC  (DIB-ISAC).  This  is  evidence  that  cooperation  within  the  white  hat  community  is 

improving, and soon may be quite effective in mitigating the global threats.  

References 

[1] Okhravi  H,  Hobson  T,  Bigelow  D,  Streilein  W.    Finding  Focus  in  the  Blur  of  Moving-

Target Techniques. IEEE Security & Privacy, vol.12, no. 2, pp. 16-26, Mar.-Apr. 2014 

[2] Sagarin R, Taylor T. Natural security: how biological systems use information to adapt in 

an unpredictable world. Security Informatics, September 2012, pp. 1-14 

[3] Mazurczyk  W,  Rzeszutko  E.  Security  –  a  perpetual  war:  lessons  from  nature.  IEEE  IT 

Professional, January/February 2015 

[4] Sagarin  R.  Bio-hacking:  Tapping  Life's  Code  to  Deal  with  Unpredictable  Risk.  IEEE 

Security & Privacy, vol.11, no. 4, pp. 93-95, July-Aug. 2013 

[5] Probst  M,  Park  JC,  Kasera  SK.  Exploiting  Altruism  in  Social  Networks  for  Friend-to-

Friend  Malware  Detection.  2nd  IEEE  Conference  on  Communications  and  Network 

Security (CNS), October 2014. 

[6] Hulton  D,  Marlinspike  M.  Defeating  PPTP  VPNs  and  WPA2  Enterprise  with  MS-

CHAPv2. DEFCON 20, 2012. 

11 

 
 
 
 
[7] Dantu  R,  Kolan  P.  Detecting  SPAM  in  VoIP  networks.  Proc.  of  USENIX,  SRUTI  

Workshop, pp. 31-38, July 2005. 

[8] D. Yardon, “Symantec Develops New Attack on Cyberhacking”, Wall Street Journal, 

May 2014, URL: 

http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702303417104579542140235850578 

[9] Information Sharing and Analysis Centers, URL: 

http://www.isaccouncil.org/memberisacs.html 

[10] Hofmeyr S A, An Immunological Model of Distributed Detection and Its Application to 

Computer Security, Ph.D. Thesis, University of New Mexico, 1999. 

[11] Zou C C, Gong W, Towsley D, Gao L, The monitoring and early detection of internet 

worms, IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking (TON) 13 (5) (2005) 961–974.  

[12] Ford R, Bush M, Bulatov A, Predation and the cost of replication: New approaches to 

malware prevention?, Computers & Security, Volume 25, Issue 4, June 2006, Pages 257-

264 

[13] Crandall J R, Ladau J, Ensafi R, Shebaro B, Forrest S, The Ecology of Malware, 

Proceedings of the New security paradigms Workshop (NSPW '08), pp. 99-106, Lake 

Tahoe, CA, USA. 

[14] Blumstein  D T,  Fourteen lessons from anti-predator  behaviour,  In: Natural  security: A 

Darwinian approach to a dangerous world (R. Sagarin and T. Taylor, eds.). U. California 

Press, 147-158, 2008. 

[15] Zetter  K,  Google  Hack  Attack  Was  Ultra  Sophisticated,  New  Details  Show,  Wired 

Magazine, January 2010. 

[16] Drummond  D,  A  new  approach  to  China,  Google  Inc.,  January  2010.  URL: 

http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2010/01/new-approach-to-china.html 

[17] Nakashima E, Google to enlist NSA to help it ward off cyberattacks, Washington Post, 

February 

2010, 

URL: 

http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-

dyn/content/article/2010/02/03/AR2010020304057.html 

[18] Harris S, @War: The Rise of the Military-Internet Complex, Eamon Dolan, 2014. 

12 

 
 
