The International Arab Journal of Information Technology, Vol. 10, No. 4, July 2013 

An Implementation Framework (IF) for the 
National Information Assurance and Cyber 
Security Strategy (NIACSS) of Jordan 

Ahmed Otoom1 and Issa Atoum2 
1National Information Technology Center, Jordan 
2Information Technology Department, Philadelphia University, Jordan 

Abstract:  This  paper  proposes  an  implementation  framework  that  lays  out  the  ground  for  a  coherent,  systematic,  and 
comprehensive approach to implement the National Information Assurance and Cyber Security Strategy (NIACSS) of Jordan. 
The Framework 1). Suggests a methodology to analyze the NIACSS, 2). Illustrates how the NIACSS analysis can be utilized to 
design strategic moves and develop an appropriate functional structure, and 3). proposes a set of adaptable strategic controls 
that govern the NIACSS implementation and allow achieving excellence, innovation, efficiency, and quality.The framework, if 
adopted,  is  expected  to  harvest  several  advantages  within  the  following  areas:  information  security  implementation 
management,  control  and  guidance,  efforts  consolidation,  resource  utilization,  productive  collaboration,  and  completeness. 
The framework is flexible and expandable; therefore, it can be generalized. 

Keywords:  Strategy  implementation  framework,  security  management,  cyber  security,  information  assurance,  and  strategic 
controls. 

Received December 6, 2011; accepted May 22, 2012; published online August 5, 2012 

1. Introduction 

Information 

The  National  Information  Assurance  and  Cyber 
Security Strategy (NIACSS) developed recently by the 
Ministry  of 
and  Communications 
Technology  (MoICT)  of  Jordan  represents  only  the 
first  step. The  Government  of  Jordan (GoJ)  will  most 
likely  be  confronted  with  challenges  that  will  emerge 
from  the  implementation  of  this  Strategy.    According 
is  facing 
to  Alrawabdeh  [1], 
challenges related to a number of social, technological, 
financial  and  legal  issues.  As  a  result,  there  is  an 
inevitable  need  to  develop  well-defined  plans  that 
anticipate and address these challenges before they are 
triggered. 

the  Arab  World 

According  to  the  MoICT,  the  NIACSS  is  intended 
to  augment  the  overall  national  security  strategy  for 
Jordan. The NIACSS identifies strategic objectives and 
national  priorities.  The  strategic  objectives  aim  to: 
strengthen National security, minimize risks to Critical 
National  Infrastructure  (CNI),  minimize  damage  and 
time,  enhance  economy  and  National 
recovery 
prosperity, 
and 
Information  Assurance  (CS&IA)  awareness.  National 
priorities  address  the  critical  needs  required  to  guide 
the  implementation  towards  achieving  the  National 
objectives.  The  national  priorities  cover  the  following 
areas: risk  management, Jordan  Computer  Emergency 
Response Team (JO-CERT), awareness, standards and 
policies,  international  cooperation,  securing  national 

increase  Cyber  Security 

and 

information  systems  and  networks,  CNI  protection, 
legal 
National  Encryption  Center 
regulatory  regime.  A  successful  implementation  will 
demand  collaboration  within  government,  with 
international partners, with the private sector, and with 
the citizenry of Jordan [12].  

(NEC),  and 

implementation 

Most  of  the  international  information  security 
strategies include guidelines in order to facilitate their 
implementation  [5,  7,  16].  Phahlamohlaka  et  al.  [14] 
suggest  an  Awareness  Toolkit  as  an  approach  to 
the  strategy  of  South  Africa.  Other 
implement 
researchers 
from 
tackle  strategy 
different  perspectives  and  to  different  extents,  for 
example  proper  controlling  is  suggested  to  ensure 
security  governance  [15],  and  Information  Security 
Management  System  (ISMS)  standards  [8]  and  ISMS 
evaluation  [6]  are  being  continually  explored  to  their 
crucial 
the 
international efforts are dedicated to their countries or 
to specific organizations within these countries; hence, 
without  major  alteration,  most  of  these  efforts  cannot 
be generalized or be globally reused. 

to  CS&IA.  Most  of 

importance 

first  step 

This paper considers the NIACSS to only represent 
the 
the  expected 
towards  achieving 
objectives. McConkey [11] suggests that even the most 
technically  perfect  strategic  plan  will  serve  little 
purpose if it is not implemented. According to a survey 
published  by  (KPMG),  a  large  professional  service 
network,  69%  of  project  failures  are  due  to  improper 
implementation of project management methodologies 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The International Arab Journal of Information Technology, Vol. 10, No. 4, July 2013 

[17].  The  implementation  of  the  NIACSS  is  no 
exception; thus top level management must commit to 
a  persistent  implementation  mechanism  utilizing  the 
appropriate  resources  in  order  to  fulfil  the  NIACSS 
implementation.  The 
should  be 
managed  utilizing  a  proper  methodology;  hence  this 
paper tries to add value in this area. 

implementation 

to 

implement 

the  NIACSS.  The 

This  paper  tries  to  answer  the  major  question  that 
will  be  triggered just  after  the  anticipated  approval  of 
the NIACSS; “What is the implementation framework 
that the GoJ is going to adopt in order to implement the 
NIACSS?”  Therefore,  this  paper  presents  a  proposed 
Implementation  Framework  (IF)  that  lays  out  the 
ground for a coherent, systematic, and comprehensive 
approach 
IF 
consolidates the implementation efforts, suggests a set 
of  strategic  controls  that  enable  decision  makers  to 
have  full  control  on  the  implementation  process  that 
empowers  them  to  take  the  right  decisions  once  these 
decisions are needed, facilitates the implementation of 
the  NIACSS  and  engages  the  involved  parties  into  a 
productive  collaboration  as  quickly  as  possible; 
otherwise  the  NIACSS  will  become  obsolete  as  time 
goes  on.  By  adopting  the  IF,  involved  parties  will 
follow  a  well-defined  systematic  approach  towards 
achieving  the  strategic  objectives.  Moreover,  the  IF 
makes the implementation of the NIACSS manageable 
by breaking it down into smaller components utilizing 
the  “divide  and  conquer”  principle.  The  IF  is  flexible 
and  expandable  so  it  can  be  generalized  rather  than 
being limited to NIACSS. 

First,  the  IF  is  introduced  and  broken  down  into 
several  major  components  that  are  illustrated  with 
examples  where  applicable.  Then, 
is 
concluded  and  a  list  of  possible  topics  for  future 
research is provided, respectively. 

the  paper 

2. Implementation Framework 

According to Fred David, A strategic planning process 
shown  in  Figure  1  consists  of  the  following:  strategy 
formulation,  strategy  implementation,  and  strategy 
evaluation [3]. 

Strategy 
Formulation 

Strategy 
Implementation 

Strategy 
Evaluation 

Figure 1. Strategic planning process [3]. 

Successful strategy formulation does not necessarily 
result in successful strategy implementation [4]. The IF 
fits  in  the  strategy  implementation  phase;  strategy 
formulation  and  evaluation  are  outside  the  scope  of 
this  paper.  The  high  level  block  diagram  of  the  IF  is 
shown in Figure 2. It serves to give a broad view of the 
IF. The IF consists of four major components: 

•  NIACSS Analysis. 

•  National Information Assurance and Cyber Security 

Agency (NIACSA). 

•  Strategic Moves. 
•  Objectives. 

The  IF  essentially  helps  transforming  the  National 
CS&IA from the current state to the future state.  Both 
current and future states related to CS&IA are directly 
or  indirectly  documented  in  the  NIACSS;  though 
further  analysis  is  required  to  make  knowledge  about 
these  states  more  valuable  and  understandable. 
Initially, the IF proposes a methodology to analyze the 
NIACSS  and  break 
into  well-defined 
components. Then, the analysis results are used to: 
1.  Guide the design and the establishment of an entity 
responsible  for  the  strategy  implementation;  called 
the NIACSA. 

it  down 

2.  Determine the strategic moves that are necessary to 

achieve the national objectives. 

Finally, the IF suggests that the NIACSA, develop and 
deploy  a  set  of  controls  to  govern  the  transformation 
process. The NIACSS has already anticipated a critical 
need  to  establish  the  NIACSA  to  act as  a focal  entity 
responsible for the implementation of the NIACSS, but 
the details of this entity are left to the implementation 
phase.  Later  on,  in  section  2.2  of  this  paper,  we  will 
see  how  the  IF  facilitates  the  establishment  of  this 
entity.  The  following  subsections  will  explore  the 
major components of the IF in more details. 

2.1. NIACSS Analysis 

The rationale behind NIACSS analysis is as follows:  
1.  We  need  to  break  the  NIACSS  into  manageable 
understandable  components;  usually  those  who 
implement  the  strategy  likely  be  different  people 
from  those  who  formulate  it.  Therefore,  care  must 
be 
implementers 
understand the strategy and the reasoning behind it. 
Otherwise, the implementation might not succeed or 
faced with resistance. 

the  NIACSS 

taken  so 

that 

2.  The  output  of  the  NIACSS  analysis  will  greatly 
the 

the  organizational  structure  of 

determine 
NIACSA.  

3.  We need to be able to determine the strategic moves 
that  map  the  NIACSS  towards  achieving  the 
identified  objectives;  so  we  guarantee  a  full 
coverage of the NIACSS and eliminate any possible 
redundancy across these strategic moves. 

To  accomplish  the  analysis,  we  apply  the  concept  of 
“Viewpoints” 
software 
engineering  to  gather  and  validate  requirements;  for 
more details refer to [9, 10, 13]. 

is  being  used 

that 

in 

As shown in Figure 2, The NIACSS is taken as an 
input  to  the  analysis  process.  The  analysis  team  may 
include, but is not limited to, members from: MoICT, 
National  Information  Technology  Center  (NITC), 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Implementation Framework (IF) For the National Information Assurance … 

Internet  Service  Providers  (ISPs),  health  sector,  IT 
business experts, and security departments. It may also 
be  useful  to  include  team  members  from  people  who 
participated  in  the  NIACSS  development.  The  more 
professional and diverse the team, the more successful 
the  analysis  output  will  be.  The  “viewpoints”  of  the 
team are gathered, incorporated, and summarized. The 
analysis 
team  must  resolve  conflict,  generate  a 
reconciled  understanding, and  make  sure that analysis 
is complete.  An example on a “viewpoints” technique 
applied to the NIACSS is shown in Figure 3, it is given 
to illustrate the point and it is not meant to be thorough 
nor comprehensive. 

Figure 2. Proposed implementation framework. 

Figure 3.  Example on “Viewpoints” applied to NIACSS. 

2.2. NIACSA 

The  NIACSA  will  be  the major  entity  responsible  for 
the  implementation  of  the  NIACSS.  This  entity  does 
not exist yet and it has to be established. The NIACSA 
is foreseen as a central national entity for governmental 
and  non-governmental  organizations  regarding  all 
information  assurance  and  cyber  security  related 
issues.    The  transition  from  strategy  formulation  to 
strategy implementation shifts the responsibility to this 

structure, 

entity. This arises several central implementation needs 
that  include,  but  not  limited  to:  annual  objectives, 
organizational 
resources, 
commitment plan, change plan, strategic controls, and 
continuous  improvement.  We  will  discuss  all  of these 
needs  in  the  following  subsections  except  for  the 
strategic controls and continuous improvement that are 
discussed later on in sections 2.4 and 2.5, respectively. 

allocating 

2.2.1. Annual Objectives 

The  objectives  listed  in  the  NIACSS  are  long  term 
objectives  that  may  take  years  to  achieve.  Therefore, 
we  suggest  breaking  these  long  term  objectives  down 
into annual objectives. Annual objectives will help the 
NIACSA  allocate  resources  gradually  and  expand  its 
organizational  structure  as  needed.  Moreover,  the 
NIACSA  will  be  able  to  assist  its  performance  and 
measure  its  progress  towards  achieving  long  term 
objectives  via  incrementally  achieving  these  annual 
objectives. 

2.2.2. NIACSA Organizational Structure 

Bernard [2] proposes that organization structure should 
follow  strategy  and  should  be  crafted  to  facilitate  the 
realization  of  the  strategy.  David  [4]  illustrates  that 
changes  in  strategy  lead  to  changes  in  organizational 
structure and structure should be designed to facilitate 
the  strategic  pursuit  of  a  firm  and,  therefore,  follow 
strategy.    This  paper  suggests  that  structure  should 
empower  the  employees  and  engage  them  into  a 
collaborative environment. It must be adaptable to help 
the NIACSA be effective and able to provide CS&IA 
products and services in an efficient manner. 

The  NIACSS  has  already  anticipated  the  need  to 
establish  the  NIACSA,  but  no  implementation  details 
about  this  entity  were  given.  The  NIACSS  suggests 
changes  in  the  way  that  the  nation  should  approach 
CS&IA.  Therefore,  the  organization  structure  should 
enable the NIACSA to allocate the required resources 
in order to achieve the NIACSS objectives. 

This paper highlights how the organization structure 
is critically related to the IF. There are 7 basic types of 
organizational  structures:  functional,  divisional  by 
geographic  area,  divisional  by  product,  divisional  by 
customer,  divisional  process,  Strategic  Business  Unit 
(SBU),  and  matrix.  We  will  only  take  the  functional 
structure  as  an  example  to  illustrate  the  point.  The 
functional  structure  is  a  centralized  structure  that  is 
most  widely  used  because  it  is  the  simplest  and  least 
expensive of the seven alternatives. Building a detailed 
organization  structure  that  considers  the  7  basic  types 
is outside the scope of this paper and is left for future 
research. 

Figure  4  shows  the  organizational  structure  as  a 
function  of  strategy;  not  the  reverse.  The  mapping 
process should guarantee that the identified outputs of 
the  analysis  phase  including:  functions,  assessments, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The International Arab Journal of Information Technology, Vol. 10, No. 4, July 2013 

objectives,  and  strategic  moves  are  mapped  into  the 
organizational structure. While organizational structure 
must enable strategy, it must also take into account the 
pragmatic issues of culture, management style, reward 
systems,  administrative  and  strategic  controls,  and 
continuous  improvement.  It  might  also  be  useful  to 
look  into  some  similar  international  organizations  to 
reuse, customize or build upon existing experience. 

Figure 5 shows an example of a possible high level 

organizational structure for the NIACSA. 

Figure 4. Organization structure as a function of strategy. 

Figure 5. Example-high level organizational structure for NIACSA. 

2.2.3. Resource Allocation 

financial 

The  NIACSA  will  need  to  allocate  four  types  of 
resources, 
resources, 
resources:  human 
technological and physical resources. Without effective 
resource  allocation,  the  strategy  execution  will  render 
to failure. Resource allocation should not be based on 
political  or  personal  factors.  The  NIACSA  should  be 
able  to  allocate  resources  to  fill  the  positions  created 
by  the  new  structure.  Moreover,  resource  allocation 
can  be  gradually  performed  according  to  the  annual 
resource 
objectives  2.2.1.  Although, 
allocation  is  a  major  factor,  it  will  not  guarantee 
strategy implementation success that depends on many 
other  factors  like  controls  and  commitment  that 
efficiently  utilize  resources  towards  achieving  the 
required  objectives.  Resource  allocation  for 
the 
NIACSA  is  suggested  to  be  covered  in  dedicated 
studies; hence it is suggested as one of future research 
topics. 

effective 

2.2.4. Commitment Plan 

Successful strategy implementation is firmly linked to 
commitment.  The  human  part  in  the  implementation 

process  makes  a  difference.  Commitment  plan  will 
demonstrate  management’s  commitment  to  strategy 
implementation.    For  the  implementation  to  succeed, 
human  issues  of  building  and  sustaining  commitment 
must  be  addressed  to  minimize  resistance.  Individuals 
should  not  be  left  skeptical  or  jaded.  The  NIACSA 
must  first  build  the  commitment  of  leadership  teams 
that  will  influence  and  shape  the  commitments  of  the 
staff. Individuals and NIACSA departments should be 
willing  to  sacrifice  and  work  enthusiastically  to  meet 
the challenges that will inevitably emerge just after the 
establishment of the NIACSA. 

2.2.5. Change Plan 

to  cooperate  and  engage 

The  NIACSS  implementation  will  have  to  bring 
different  entities 
in  a 
consolidated  effort  towards  achieving  the  required 
objectives.  These  entities  include,  but  not  limited  to: 
governmental  organizations,  private 
sector,  and 
probably  some  international  entities.  Each  of  these 
entities  will  have  its  own  goals  and  may  try  to  resist 
changes  that  are  not  of  their  interests.  Therefore,  a 
change plan will anticipate and minimize this possible 
resistance to change.  Failing  to  have such  a  plan  may 
allow  likely  overt  and  covert  resistance  result  in 
strategy implementation failure. 

2.3. Strategic Moves 
Strategic  moves  are  actions  taken  to  achieve  one  or 
more objectives.  Strategic Moves are prescriptive and 
purposeful;  they  identify  exactly  what  is  to  be  done 
and  directly  act  to  achieve  their  objectives.  Strategic 
moves  must  not  contradict  each  other;  rather,  they 
should complement. 

This  paper  suggests  that  Strategic  Moves  are 
implementation 
designed  as  a  set  of  coherent 
programs. Each implementation program is broken into 
a  set  of  complementary  manageable  tactical  projects. 
After identifying the set of programs and projects, they 
are  prioritized  and  ordered.  When  projects  are 
independent,  we  suggest  using  a  tool  such  as  the 
matrix shown in Figure 6. However, for interdependent 
projects, we suggest using PERT charts such as the one 
shown in Figure 7. 

High 

Medium 
Low 

t
s
o
C

4 

5 

2 
1 
High 
Priority (Pay Off) 

3 
2 
Medium 

6 

5 
2 
Low 

Figure 6. Independent project ordering. 

Figure  8  shows  an  Example  on  a  partial  set  of 
strategic moves. This example is given to clarify how 
the  concept  of  strategic  moves  is  applied  to  the 
NIACSS;  it  is  not  intended  to  be  thorough  nor 
comprehensive.  This  Example  selects  the  awareness 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Implementation Framework (IF) For the National Information Assurance … 

and training program from a set of available programs 
and breaks it down into a set of projects such that each 
project contributes to the achievement of one or more 
strategic  objectives  and  each  objective  is  achieved  by 
implementing one or more projects. 

Figure 7. Interdependent projects ordering. 

Figure 8. Strategic moves example. 

2.4. Strategic Controls 

and 

efficiency, 

innovation, 

The  NIACSA  should  deploy  a  set  of  applicable 
strategic  controls  that  are  considered,  from  IF’s  point 
of view, very significant to the success of the NIACSS 
implementation.  Strategic  controls  should  allow 
decision  makers  determine  whether  the  NIACSA  is 
achieving 
quality. 
Moreover, they will enable decision makers make any 
necessary  adjustments  and  improvements  as  early  as 
possible in the implementation process. These Controls 
should  be  adaptable  to  the  culture  and  they  should 
evolve with the NIACSA. The NIACSA should be able 
to  add, enhance,  or  delete controls  as  needed. The  set 
of  strategic  controls  may  include,  but  not  limited  to: 
quality,  monitoring,  schedule,  human  resources  and 
incentives, 
performance, 
project  management, 
evaluation and correctness, vigilance, etc. 

Quality  controls  will  be  applied  throughout  the 
whole  process  to  make  sure  that  plans  are  complete, 
correct,  and  best  possible  for  the  NIACSA.  The 
NIACSA will need to monitor the implementation and 
peruse  periodic  reviews  to  determine  its  performance 
and  assess  the  progress.  The  implementation  of  the 
NIACSS  should  be  time  bounded  which  triggers  the 
need to deploy scheduling controls. The NIACSA will 
have  to  develop  and  utilize  incentive  measures  to 
encourage  employees  to  work  towards  achieving  the 
identified  objectives.  Vigilance  will  enable 
the 
NIACSA to proactively scan the environment in order 
to  deal  with  unanticipated  events  of  strategic  value. 

These new or unforeseen events may make it necessary 
to  change  ongoing  plans.  As  the  environment  and 
requirements  change  overtime,  corrective  actions  will 
be  necessary  to  guarantee  that  the  implementation 
process is effective in reaching what the NIACSS is set 
out  to  achieve.    The  bottom  line  is  that  the  NIACSA 
should  deploy  all  necessary  strategic  controls  that 
enable  it  to  efficiently  manage  and  control  the 
implementation of the NIACSS towards achieving the 
required objectives within specified timeframes. 

2.5. Continuous Improvement 

The  NIACSA  should  be  committed  to  an  ongoing 
continuous  improvement  process  to  improve  all  of  its 
possible products, services, or processes. 

2.6. Objectives 

The NIACSA must deploy all necessary administrative 
and strategic controls to achieve the national objectives 
identified in the NIACSS. These objectives will guide 
the  planning,  expose  priorities,  and  form  a  basis  for 
organization,  collaboration  and  evaluation.  For  the 
sake  of  completeness,  here  we  want  to  highlight  two 
major  issues:  long  term  objectives  should  be  broken 
down into annual objectives (section 2.2.1) and there is 
a  need  to  come  up  with  more  accurate  measures  to 
these  objectives  so  that  implementation  progress  can 
be assessed and controlled. 

3. Future Research 

in 

for 

this 

regard 

Implementing  the  NIACSS  is  a  big  challenge;  both 
technically  and  financially.  The  GoJ  needs  to  support 
researchers 
efficient 
implementation  within  limited  resources.  This  paper 
pinpoints  several  areas  that  may  require  further 
research: 
• Perform  a  complete  analysis  for  the  NIACSS 
according to the framework described in section 2.1. 
• Build  a  complete  and  detailed  organizational 

an 

structure for the NIACSA by considering:  
a.  Different types of organizational structures.  
b.  Duties and jobs description.  
c.  Scope and size.  
d.  Resource allocation.  
e.  Working processes and procedures. 
• Develop Change and Commitment Plans. 
• Investigate 
possible 

outsourcing 

to 

several 

components of the NIACSA. 

• Build a financial plan. 

4. Conclusions 
This  paper  presents  an  IF  that  aims  to  guide  the 
implementation  efforts  of  the  NIACSS.  It  proposes  a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The International Arab Journal of Information Technology, Vol. 10, No. 4, July 2013 

coherent systematic IF that tackles the implementation 
of the NIACSS as a whole.  

The  framework  starts  by  analyzing  the  NIACSS. 
Then, it shows how the output of the analysis phase is 
used  to  guide  the  establishment  of  the  NIACSA  and 
the design of strategic moves necessary to achieve the 
national  objectives.  It  also  suggests  and  discusses 
several  strategic  controls  necessary  to  govern  the 
execution of the strategic moves towards achieving the 
required  objectives.  The  set  of  strategic  controls 
includes,  but  not  limited  to:  quality,  monitoring, 
schedule, 
management, 
incentives, 
performance, evaluation, and vigilance. 

project 

The  framework,  if  adopted,  is  expected  to  harvest 
several advantages within these areas: implementation 
management, 
efforts 
consolidation, 
productive 
collaboration, and completeness. 

control 
resource 

utilization, 

guidance, 

and 

Although, this framework is designed to implement 
the NIACSS, we believe it is flexible, expandable, and 
can be generalized. Other strategies and corresponding 
strategic  moves  can  be  added  easily  without  vital 
changes to the baseline framework. 

Disclaimer 

This paper does not represent the thoughts, intentions, 
plans  or  strategies  of  the  NITC,  Jordan’s  MoICT,  or 
any other Governmental or nongovernmental entity; it 
is  solely  the  opinion  of  the  authors.    The  NITC, 
MoICT,  and/or  any  other  entities  are  not  responsible 
for  the  accuracy  of  any  of  the  information  supplied 
herein. 

Acknowledgements 

The  authors  would  like  to  thank  the  NITC  for  giving 
the  first  author  of  this  paper  a  key  role  in  the 
development  and  the  implementation  of  the  NIACSS. 
We  are  also  grateful  to  Eng.  Fahd  Batayneh  and  Dr. 
Mohammad  Al-Hammouri 
valuable 
comments  and  fruitful  discussions.  Last  but  not  least, 
we wish to thank Miss Auhood Majali for editing this 
paper. 

their 

for 

References 
[1]  Alrawabdeh  W.,  “Internet  and  the  Arab  World: 
Understanding  the  Key  Issues  and  Overcoming 
the  Barriers,”  The International  Arab  Journal  of 
Information Technology, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 27-33, 
2009. 

[2]  Bernard  H.,  The  Art  of  Strategic  Planning  for 
Information  Technology,  John  Wiley  &  Sons, 
USA, 2001. 

[3]  David  F.,  “How  Companies  Define  Their 
Mission,”  Long  Range  Planning,  vol.  22,  no.  3, 
pp. 90-97, 1989. 

[4]  David  F.,  Strategic  Management  Concepts  and 

Cases, 3rd edition, Prentice Hall, 2009. 

[5]  DoD,  “Department  of  Defense  Strategy  for 
Operating in Cyberspace July 2011,” available at: 
http://www.defense.gov/news/d20110714cyber. 
pdf, last visited 2012. 

[6]  Heasuk  J.,  Seungjoo  K.,  and  Dongho  W., 
“Advanced  Information  Security  Management 
Evaluation  System,”  KSII  Transactions  on 
Internet  and  Information  Systems,  vol.  5,  no.  6, 
pp. 1192-1213, 2011. 

[7]  HM  Government,  A  Strong  Britain  in  an  Age  of 
Uncertainty: the National Security Strategy, The 
Stationery Office, 2010.  

[8]  Humphreys 

E., 

“Information 

Security 
Management  System  Standards,”  Datenschutz 
und  Datensicherheit-DuD,  vol.  35,  no.  1,  pp.  7-
11, 2011. 

[9]  Kotonya G. and Sommerville I., “Viewpoints for 
Requirements  Definition,” Software  Engineering 
Journal, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 375-387, 1992. 

[10]  Leite 

J.  and  Freeman  P.,  “Requirements 
Validation through Viewpoint Resolution,” IEEE 
Transactions  on  Software  Engineering,  vol.  17, 
no. 12, pp. 1253-1269, 1991. 
[11]  McConkey  D.,  “Planning 

in  a  Changing 
Environment,” Business Horizons, vol. 31, no. 5, 
pp. 64-72, 1988. 

[12]  MoICT,  “National  Information  Assurance  and 
at: 
Cyber  Security 
http://www.moict.gov.jo/ar_MoICT_NIASS1492
011.aspx, last visited 2011. 

(NIACSS),” 

available 

[13]  Nusibeh  B.,  Kramer    J.,  and  Finkelstein  A.,  “A 
Framework  for  Expressing  the  Relationships 
between  Multiple  Views 
in  Requirements 
Specifications,”  IEEE  Transactions  on  Software 
Engineering , vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 760-773, 1994. 
[14]  Phahlamohlaka  L.,  Vuuren  J.,  and  Coetzee  J., 
“Cyber  Security  Awareness Toolkit  for  National 
Security:  An  Approach  to  South  Africa’s  Cyber 
Security Policy Implementation,” in Proceedings 
of  Southern  African  Cyber  Security  Awareness, 
Botswana, pp. 1-14, 2011. 

[15]  Von  R.,  Thomson  K.,  and  Maninjwa  P., 
“Information  Security  Governance  Control 
through Comprehensive Policy Architectures,” in 
Proceedings  of 
Information  Security  South 
Africa, Johannesburg, pp. 1-6, 2011. 

[16]  White-House,  “The  Comprehensive  National 
Cybersecurity Initiative,” Executive Office of the 
President  of  the  United  States,  available  at: 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/cyb
ersecurity.pdf, last visited 2012. 

[17]  Wikipedia, 

“Project  Management  Office,” 
http://en.wikipedia.org/ 
last  visited 

available 
at: 
wiki/Project_management_office, 
2011. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Implementation Framework (IF) For the National Information Assurance … 

Ahmed Otoom is the DG’s Advisor 
for the Implementation of the E-Gov 
Information  Strategies  and  Policies, 
National 
Information  Technology 
Center, Jordan. He received his PhD 
degree  in  computer  science  from 
Amman  Arab  University  in  2007, 
dual MS degrees in computer science and information 
technology  management  from  the  Naval  Postgraduate 
School,  USA  in  2000  and  a  BS  degree  in  Computer 
Science from Mutah University in 1992. He has more 
than 19 years of experience in project management and 
IT-related projects. During 1992-2010, he worked as a 
system  analyst,  developer,  and  researcher  for  the  IT 
Directorate  in  Royal  Jordanian  Air  Force.  During  the 
same  period,  he  also  taught  many  computer  science 
classes  in  the  Prince  Feisal  Technical  College  and 
Alzaytoonah  University  of  Jordan,  respectively.  His 
major  areas  of  interest  include  computer  security, 
operating  systems  and 
large 
heterogeneous information system 

interoperability 

in 

in 

Issa  Atoum  is  a  Master  Student  at 
Philadelphia  University,  Jordan.  He 
than  15  years  of 
has  more 
IT 
experience 
professional 
services,  project  management  and 
quality  assurance.  He  is  a  certified 
Professional 
Project  Manager 
(PMP®), ITIL®V3 and ISO/IEC 20000. He worked as 
a  project  manager  for  the  government  of  Abu  Dhabi 
and Dubai, UAE for mid and large scale projects in the 
domain of security and IT services. His major areas of 
interest  are:  computer  security,  semantic  web  and  e-
government.  

 
 
