International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

APPLICATIONS OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
TECHNIQUES TO COMBATING CYBER CRIMES: A 
REVIEW 

Selma Dilek1, Hüseyin Çakır2 and Mustafa Aydın3 

1Department of Computer Engineering, Graduate School of Natural and Applied 
Sciences, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey 
2Department of Computer and Educational Technologies, Faculty of Education, Gazi 
University, Ankara, Turkey 
3Cyber Defence and Security Center, Informatics Institute, Middle East Technical 
University, Ankara, Turkey 

ABSTRACT 

With  the  advances  in  information  technology  (IT)  criminals  are  using  cyberspace  to  commit  numerous 
cyber crimes. Cyber infrastructures are highly vulnerable to intrusions and other threats. Physical devices 
and  human  intervention  are  not  sufficient  for  monitoring  and  protection  of  these  infrastructures;  hence, 
there is a need for more sophisticated cyber defense systems that need to be flexible, adaptable and robust, 
and able to detect a wide variety of threats and make intelligent real-time decisions. Numerous bio-inspired 
computing  methods  of  Artificial  Intelligence  have  been  increasingly  playing  an  important  role  in  cyber 
crime detection and prevention. The purpose of this study is to present advances made so far in the field of 
applying  AI  techniques  for  combating  cyber  crimes,  to  demonstrate  how  these  techniques  can  be  an 
effective tool for detection and prevention of cyber attacks, as well as to give the scope for future work. 

KEYWORDS 

Cyber  Crime,  Artificial  Intelligence,  Intelligent  Cyber  Defense  Methods,  Intrusion  Detection  and 
Prevention Systems, Computational Intelligence 

1. INTRODUCTION 

With  the  advances  in  information  technology  (IT)  criminals  are  using  cyberspace  to  commit 
numerous  cyber  crimes.  Growing  trends  of  complex  distributed  and  Internet  computing  raise 
important  questions  about  information  security  and  privacy.  Cyber  infrastructures  are  highly 
vulnerable to intrusions and other threats. Physical devices such as sensors and detectors are not 
sufficient for monitoring and protection of these infrastructures; hence, there is a need for more 
sophisticated IT that can model normal behaviors and detect abnormal ones. These cyber defense 
systems need to be flexible, adaptable and robust, and able to detect a wide variety of threats and 
make intelligent real-time decisions [1, 2].  

With the pace and amount of cyber attacks, human intervention is simply not sufficient for timely 
attack analysis and appropriate response. The fact is that the most network-centric cyber attacks 
are carried out by intelligent agents such as computer worms and viruses; hence, combating them 
with intelligent  semi-autonomous  agents  that  can  detect,  evaluate,  and  respond  to  cyber  attacks 
has  become  a  requirement.  These  so  called  computer-generated  forces  will  have  to  be  able  to 
manage  the  entire  process  of  attack  response  in  a  timely  manner,  i.e.  to  conclude  what  type  of 

DOI : 10.5121/ijaia.2015.6102                                                                                                                       21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

attack is occurring, what the targets are and what is the appropriate response, as well as how to 
prioritize and prevent secondary attacks [3]. 

Furthermore, cyber intrusions are not localized. They are a global menace that poses threat to any 
computer system in the world at a growing rate. There were times when only educated specialist 
could  commit  cyber  crimes,  but  today  with  the  expansion  of  the  Internet,  almost  anyone  has 
access  to  the  knowledge  and  tools  for  committing  these  crimes.  Conventional  fixed  algorithms 
(hard-wired  logic  on  decision  making  level)  have  become  ineffective  against  combating 
dynamically evolving cyber attacks. This is why we need innovative approaches such as applying 
methods of Artificial Intelligence (AI) that provide flexibility and learning capability to software 
which will assist humans in fighting cyber crimes [4, 5] 

AI offers this and various other possibilities. Numerous nature-inspired computing methods of AI 
(such  as  Computational  Intelligence,  Neural  Networks,  Intelligent  Agents,  Artificial  Immune 
Systems,  Machine  Learning,  Data  Mining,  Pattern  Recognition,  Fuzzy  Logic,  Heuristics,  etc.) 
have  been  increasingly  playing  an  important  role  in  cyber  crime  detection  and  prevention.  AI 
enables us to design autonomic computing solutions capable of adapting to their context of use, 
using  the  methods  of  self-management,  self-tuning,  self-configuration,  self-diagnosis,  and  self-
healing. When it comes to the future of information security, AI techniques seem very promising 
area of research that focuses on improving the security measures for cyber space [2, 6, 7]. 

The  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  present  advances  made  so  far  in  the  field  of  applying  AI 
techniques for combating cyber crimes, to demonstrate how these techniques can be an effective 
tool for detection and prevention of cyber attacks, as well as to give the scope for future work. 

2. CYBER CRIMES: DEFINITION, ISSUES 

The  rapid  development  of  computing  technology  and  internet  had  a  lot  of  positive  impact  and 
brought  many  conveniences  in  our  lives.  However,  it  also  caused  issues  that  are  difficult  to 
manage such as emergence of new types of crimes.  For instance, common crimes such as theft 
and  fraud  attained  new  form  of  “Cyber  Crimes”  through  information  technology.  Moreover,  as 
this  technology  continues  to  evolve,  criminal  cases  change  correspondingly.  Every  day  we  are 
faced with increasing number and variety of cyber crimes, since this technology presents an easy 
way  for  criminals  to  achieve  their  goals.  Furthermore,  information  technology  facilitates 
globalization of these crimes by erasing country borders and making it much harder to monitor, 
detect, prevent or capture cyber criminals [8, 9, 10].  

Information  technology  is  increasingly  being  both  targeted  and  used  as  a  tool  for  committing 
crimes.  Electronic  devices  and  other  high-tech  products  enable  criminals  to  commit  cheap  and 
easy  crimes.  Computers,  phones,  Internet  and  all  other  information  systems  developed  for  the 
benefit of humanity are susceptible to criminal activity. Crimes that target information technology 
systems  typically  target  e-mail  accounts,  bank  accounts,  computers,  servers,  websites,  personal 
data,  and  digital  records  of  private  and  public  institutions.  These  crimes  are  also  known  as 
“Digital  Crimes”,  “Computer  Crimes”,  “Crimes  of  Information  Technologies”,  “Network 
Crimes”  or  “Internet  Crimes”.  Cyber  crimes  consist  of  offenses  such  as  computer  intrusions, 
misuse of intellectual property rights, economic espionage, online extortion, international money 
laundering, non-delivery of goods or services and a growing list of other offenses facilitated by 
Internet [8, 10, 11].  

Although “cyber crime” has become a common phrase today, it is difficult to define it precisely. 
Most of the existing definitions were developed experimentally. Gordon and Ford (2006) define 
cyber  crime  as:  “any  crime  that  is  facilitated  or  committed  using  a  computer,  network,  or 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

hardware device” where “computer or device may be the agent of the crime, the facilitator of the 
crime, or the target of the crime” [12]. Dictionary.com defines cyber crime as “criminal activity 
or  a  crime  that  involves  the  Internet,  a  computer  system,  or  computer  technology”  [13].  Fisher 
and Lab (2010) defined cyber crime as “crime that occurs when computers or computer networks 
are involved as tool, locations, or targets of crime” [14]. 

Every  day  the  amount  of  digital  data  stored  and  processed  on  computers  and  other  computing 
systems  increases  exponentially,  with  people  communicating,  sharing,  working,  shopping,  and 
socializing  using  computers  and  Internet.  Language  and  country  barriers  have  disappeared  and 
virtual world has become more populated than ever. The concept of crime is present when dealing 
with  people,  therefore  cyber  space  has  not  stayed  isolated  from  the  concepts  of  crime  and 
criminals either [11]. Brenner (2010) argues that “most of the cyber crime we see today simply 
represents the migration of real-world crime to cyberspace which becomes the tool criminals use 
to commit old crimes in new ways.“ [15]. 

3. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND INTRUSION DETECTION 

AI  (also  called  machine  intelligence  in  the  beginning)  emerged  as  a  research  discipline  at  the 
Summer Research Project of Dartmouth College in July 1956. AI can be described in two ways: 
(i) as a science that aims to discover the essence of intelligence and develop intelligent machines; 
or  (ii)  as  a  science  of  finding  methods  for  solving  complex  problems  that  cannot  be  solved 
without applying some intelligence (e.g. making right decisions based on large amounts of data). 
In  the  application  of  AI  to  cyber  defense,  we  are  more  interested  in  the  second  definition. 
Research interest in AI include ways to make machines (computers) simulate intelligent human 
behavior such as thinking, learning, reasoning, planning, etc. [5, 7, 16].  

The  general  problem  of  simulating  intelligence  has  been  simplified  to  specific  sub-problems 
which  have  certain  characteristics  or  capabilities  that  an  intelligent  system  should  exhibit.  The 
following characteristics have received the most attention [17, 18, 19]: 

a)  Deduction,  reasoning,  problem  solving  (embodied  agents,  neural  networks,  statistical 

approaches to AI); 

b)  Knowledge representation (ontologies); 
c)  Planning (multi-agent planning and cooperation); 
d)  Learning (machine learning); 
e)  Natural Language Processing (information retrieval – text mining, machine translation); 
f)  Motion and Manipulation (navigation, localization, mapping, motion planning); 
g)  Perception (speech recognition, facial, recognition, object recognition); 
h)  Social Intelligence (empathy simulation); 
i)  Creativity (artificial intuition, artificial imagination); and 
j)  General Intelligence (Strong AI). 

Classic  AI  approaches  focus  on  individual  human  behavior,  knowledge  representation  and 
inference methods. Distributed Artificial Intelligence (DAI), on the other hand, focuses on social 
behavior, i.e. cooperation, interaction and knowledge-sharing among different units (agents). The 
process of finding a solution in distributed resolution problems relies on sharing knowledge about 
the problem and cooperation among agents. It was from these concepts that the idea of intelligent 
multi-agent technology emerged. An agent is an autonomous cognitive entity which understands 
its environment, i.e. it can work by itself and it has an internal decision-making system that acts 
globally  around  other  agents.  In  multi-agent  systems,  a  group  of  mobile  autonomous  agents 
cooperate in a coordinated and intelligent manner in order to solve a specific problem or classes 
of problems. They are somewhat capable of comprehending their environment, making decisions 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

and communicating with other agents [4]. Multi-agent technology has many applications, but this 
study will only discuss applications to defense against cyber intrusions (See Section 4.2).   

Intelligent  agents  systems  are  just  a  part  of  a  much  larger  AI  approach  called  Computational 
Intelligence  (CI).  CI  includes  several  other  nature-inspired  techniques  such  as  neural  networks, 
fuzzy  logic,  evolutionary  computation,  swarm  intelligence,  machine  learning  and  artificial 
immune  systems.  These  techniques  provide  flexible  decision  making  mechanisms  for  dynamic 
environments  such  as  cyber-security applications.  When we  say ‘nature-inspired’,  it means that 
there  is  a  growing  interest  in  the  field  of  computing  technologies  to  mimic  biological  systems 
(such as biological immune system) and their remarkable abilities to learn, memorize, recognize, 
classify  and  process  information.  Artificial  immune  systems  (AISs)  are  an  example  of  such 
technology [2]. 

AISs  are  computational  models  inspired  by  biological  immune  systems  which  are  adaptable  to 
changing environments and capable of continuous and dynamical learning. Immune systems are 
responsible  for  detection  and  dealing  with  intruders  in  living  organisms.  AISs  are  designed  to 
mimic  natural  immune  systems  in  applications  for  computer  security  in  general,  and  intrusion 
detection systems (IDSs) in particular [20]. 

Genetic  algorithms are  yet  another example of an  AI technique,  i.e. machine learning approach 
founded  on  the  theory  of  evolutionary  computation,  which  imitate  the  process  of  natural 
selection.  They  provide  robust,  adaptive,  and  optimal  solutions  even  for  complex  computing 
problems. They can be used for generating rules for classification of security attacks and making 
specific rules for different security attacks in IDSs [21, 22]. 

Many methods for securing data over networks and the Internet have been developed (e.g. anti-
virus software, firewall, encryption, secure protocols, etc.); however, adversaries can always find 
new ways to attack network systems. An intrusion detection and prevention system (IDPS) (See 
Fig.  1)  is  software  or  a  hardware  device  placed  inside  the  network,  which  can  detect  possible 
intrusions  and  also  attempt  to  prevent  them.  IDPSs  provide  four  vital  security  functions: 
monitoring, detecting, analyzing, and responding to unauthorized activities [23, 24].  

Figure 1. A typical IDPS [24]. 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) consist of artificial neurons that can learn and solve problems 
when  combined  together.  Neural  networks  that  have  ability  to  learn,  process  distributed 
information, self-organize and adapt, are applicable to solving problems that require considering 
conditionality,  imprecision  and  ambiguity  at  the  same  time.  When  neural  networks  consist  of  a 
large number of artificial neurons, they can provide a functionality of massively parallel learning 
and  decision-making  with  high  speed,  which  makes  them  suitable  for  learning  pattern 
recognition, classification, and selection of responses to attacks [5, 7]. 

3.1 Desired Characteristics of an IDPS 

An IDPS should have certain characteristic in order to be able to provide efficient security against 
serious attacks. Those characteristics include the following [25]: 

•  Real-time intrusion detection – while the attack is in progress or immediately afterwards, 
•  False positive alarms must be minimized, 
•  Human supervision should be reduced to minimum, and continuous operation should be 

ensured, 

•  Recoverability from system crashes, either accidental or those resulting from attacks, 
•  Self-monitoring ability in order to detect attackers’ attempts to change the system, 
•  Compliance to the security policies of the system that is being monitored, and 
•  Adaptability to system changes and user behavior over time. 
• 

4. APPLICATIONS OF AI TO DEFENSE AGAINST CYBER CRIMES 

Available  academic  resources  show  that  AI  techniques  already  have  numerous  applications  in 
combating  cyber  crimes.  For  instance,  neural  networks  are  being  applied  to  intrusion  detection 
and  prevention,  but  there  are  also  proposals  for  using  neural  networks  in  “Denial  of  Service 
(DoS)  detection,  computer  worm  detection,  spam  detection,  zombie  detection,  malware 
classification  and  forensic  investigations”  [5].  AI  techniques  such  as  Heuristics,  Data  Mining, 
Neural Networks, and AISs, have also been applied to new-generation anti-virus technology [7]. 
Some  IDSs  use  intelligent  agent  technology  which  is  sometimes  even  combined  with  mobile 
agent  technology.  Mobile  intelligent  agents  can  travel  among  collection  points  to  uncover 
suspicious  cyber  activity  [2].  Wang  et  al.  (2008)  stated  that  the  future  of  anti-virus  detection 
technology is in application of Heuristic Technology which means “the knowledge and skills that 
use some methods to determine and intelligently  analyze  codes to detect the unknown virus by 
some rules while scanning” [7]. This section will briefly present related work and some existing 
applications of AI techniques to cyber defense.   

4.1. Artificial Neural Network Applications 

ANN  is  a  computational  mechanism  that  simulates  structural  and  functional  aspects  of  neural 
networks  existing  in  biological  nervous  systems.  They  are  ideal  for  situations  that  require 
prediction, classification or control in dynamic and complex computer environments [26]. 

Chen  (2008)  designed  NeuroNet  –  a  neural  network  system  which  collects  and  processes 
distributed information, coordinates the activities of core network devices, looks for irregularities, 
makes  alerts  and  initiates  countermeasures.  Experiments  showed  that  NeuroNet  is  effective 
against low-rate TCP-targeted distributed DoS attacks [27]. 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

Linda  et  al.  (2009)  presented  the  Intrusion  Detection  System  using  Neural  Network  based 
Modeling  (IDS-NNM)  which  proved  to  be  capable  of  detecting  all  intrusion  attempts  in  the 
network communication without giving any false alerts [28].  

Barika et al. (2009) presented a detailed architecture of a distributed IDS based on artificial neural 
network for enhanced intrusion detection in networks [29].  

Itikhar et al. (2009) applied neural network approach to analyzing DoS attacks. Their experiments 
showed that their neural network approach detects DoS attacks with more accuracy and precision 
than other approaches [30]. 

Wu  (2009)  presented  a  hybrid  method  of  rule-based  processing  and  back-propagation  neural 
networks  for  spam  filtering.  Their  approach  proved  to  be  much  more  robust  compared  to  other 
spam  detection  approaches  that  use  keywords,  because  spamming  behaviors  frequently  change 
[31].  

Salvador  et  al.  (2009)  presented  a  novel  approach  for  Zombie  PCs  detection  based  on  neural 
networks. Experiments showed how their approach is computationally efficient, easy to deploy in 
real network scenarios and achieves good Zombie detection results [32]. 

Bitter  et  al.  (2010)  presented  host-based  and  network-based  intrusion  detection  systems  with  a 
special  focus  on  systems  that  employ  artificial  neural  networks  to  detect  suspicious  and 
potentially malicious traffic [26]. 

Al-Janabi and Saeed (2011) designed  a neural network-based IDS that can promptly detect and 
classify various attacks [33]. 

Barman  and  Khataniar  (2012)  also  studied  the  development  of  IDSs  based  on  neural  network 
systems.  Their  experiments  showed  that  the  system  they  proposed  has  intrusion  detection  rates 
similar to other available IDSs, however, it proved to be at least 20.5 times faster in detection of 
DoS attacks [34]. 

4.2. Intelligent Agent Applications 

Intelligent agents  are  autonomous computer-generated forces that  communicate  with each other 
to share data and cooperate with each other in order to plan and implement appropriate responses 
in  case  of  unexpected  events.  Their  mobility  and  adaptability  in  the  environments  they  are 
deployed in, as well as their collaborative nature, makes intelligent agent technology suitable for 
combating cyber attacks. 

Rowe (2003) developed a “counterplan” system which can prevent particular cyber attack plans 
using multi-agent planning together with some novel inference methods [35].  

Gou  et  al. (2006)  designed  MWDCM  -  a  multi-agent  system  for  computer  worm  detection  and 
containment  in  metropolitan  area  networks,  which  automatically  contains  the  propagation  of 
worms that waste a lot of network bandwidth and cause router crashes. The experiments showed 
that their system effectively thwarts worm propagation even at the high worm infection rates [36].  
Phillips  et  al.  (2006)  presented  a  distributed  agent  coalition  system  that  preserves  normal 
operation, implements operational and security strategy, handles unforeseen events, and protects 
against malicious insiders, errors and attacks in distributed electric power grids [37]. 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

Helano and Nogueira (2006) introduced a synthesis based mobile intelligent multi-agent system 
approach for combating cyber intrusions. They implemented their system in Prolog and applied it 
to combating DoS and distributed DoS attacks automatically and without human intervention [4]. 
Kotenko  and  Ulanov  (2007)  proposed  a  framework  for  adaptive  and  cooperative  defense 
mechanisms against Internet attacks. Their approach is based on intelligent multi-agent modeling 
and  simulation,  where  groups  of  intelligent  agents  interact  and  adjust  their  configuration  and 
behavior according to the network condition and severity of attacks. They tested their approach 
on  investigating  distributed  DoS  attacks  and  defense  mechanisms.  The  results  showed  that 
cooperation  and  ability  to  adapt  in  intelligent  agent  groups  considerably  raises  defense 
effectiveness [38]. 

Herrero  et  al.  (2007)  presented  a  flexible  and  adaptable  Mobile  Visualization  Connectionist 
agent-based  IDS  which  system  facilitates  the  intrusion  detection  in  dynamic  networks.  In  their 
approach, intelligent agents use artificial neural network to detect intrusions in a network [39].  
Fu  et  al.  (2007)  presented  an  abstract  model  for  anomaly  detection  in  networks,  inspired  by 
biological immune system, which is based on multi-agent technology. They applied it to host and 
network layer in order to respond to intrusions and mitigate the damage and infection [40]. 

Edwards et al. (2007) researched the potential of intelligent agent technology for improving the 
operation  and  response  of  power  grids,  preventing  known  attacks  and  reducing  or  eliminating 
their  consequences.  They  presented  a  MLSM  –  a  Multi-Layered  Security  Model  prototype  that 
provides  protection  from  invalid  input  and  ability  to  detect  and  recover  from  unknown  attack 
strategies (e.g. malicious input from the Internet or local disruption to the agents) [41]. 

Kotenko  et  al.  (2010)  studied  multi-agent  based  approaches  to  the  investigation  and  defense 
against  botnets  that  are  rapidly  spreading  across  the  Internet  and  being  used  to  commit  various 
cyber crimes such as performing vulnerability scans, distributed DoS attacks, and sending huge 
amounts  of  spam  e-mails.  They  described  the  framework  and  implementation  details  of  such 
systems [42]. 

Ye and Li (2010) presented an ad hoc network security architecture based on AIS using mobile 
intelligent  multi-agents  of  two  types:  detection  agents  and  counterattack  agents.  Their 
architecture,  which  improves  security  and  protection  of  mobile  ad  hoc  networks,  combines  the 
advantages  of  both  AIS  and  intelligent  agent  technology  and  has  traits  of  distribution,  self-
adaption, self-learning, and expandability [43]. 

Wei et al. (2010) proposed a theoretical layered approach for protecting power grid automation 
systems  against  cyber  attacks  which  may  come  from  either  the  Internet  or  internal  networked 
sources.  One  of  the  components  of  their  framework  are  security  agents  some  of  which  are 
intelligent  and  have  ability  to  detect  intrusive  events  and  activities  within  the  controllers.  The 
results obtained by testing a prototype of the proposed approach showed that their system is able 
to  manage  and  mitigate  some  common  vulnerability  issues  of  power  grid  automation  systems 
[44]. 

Doelitzscher et al. (2011) introduced SAaaS – a cloud incident detection system Security Audit as 
a Service. Their system is based on intelligent autonomous agents which are aware of underlying 
business  flows  of  deployed  cloud  instances;  thus  providing  flexibility  and  supported  cross 
customer event monitoring of a cloud infrastructure [45].  

Shosha  et  al.  (2011)  proposed  a  distributed  IDS  based  on  a  community  collaboration  between 
multiple  agents  for  detecting  cyber  intrusions  in  Supervisory  Control  and  Data  Acquisition 
(SCADA) networks. The proposed architecture also incorporates the SCADA network topology 
and connectivity constraints [46].  

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

Ionita and Ionita (2013) proposed a multi intelligent agent based approach for network intrusion 
detection using data mining [47]. 

4.3. Artificial Immune System Applications 

AISs, just like the biological immune systems which they are based on, are employed to uphold 
stability  in  a  changing  environment.  The  immune-based  intrusion  detection  comprises  the 
evolution  of  immunocytes  (self-tolerance,  clone,  variation,  etc.)  and  antigens  detection 
simultaneously.  An  immune  system  produces  antibodies  to  resist  pathogens  and  the  intrusion 
intensity  can  be  estimated  by  variation  of  the  antibody  concentration.  Therefore,  AISs  play  an 
important role in the cyber security research [48]. 

Sirisanyalak  and  Sornil  (2007)  presented  an  AIS-based  e-mail  feature  extraction  approach  for 
spam  detection.  The  performance  evaluation  results  showed  that  the  proposed  method  is  much 
more  efficient  in  spam  detection  than  other  existing  systems,  with  very  low  false  positive  and 
false negative rates (0.91% and 1.95% respectively) [49].  

Lebbe  et  al.  (2007)  analyzed  various  AIS  models  used  in  IDSs  and  introduced  Danger  Theory 
(DT)  in  AIS  as  a  method  for  danger  response  in  wireless  mesh  networks.  For  classification  of 
network  dangers  they  used  Self-organizing  Maps  (SOMs)  as  classifiers.  Their  experiments 
validated their proposal of applying DT to security of wireless mesh networks [50]. 

Hong  (2008)  presented  an  AIS-based  hybrid  learning  algorithm  for  anomaly  detection  in 
computer systems [20]. 

Gianini  et  al.  (2009)  proposed  an  extension  of  AIS  model  for  computer  system  security  to 
ambient  intelligence  domain.  Their  extended  model  can  provide  perceptual  functions  and 
detection capabilities with device intelligence (e.g. multimedia sensor system interpretation) [51]. 
EshghiShargh  (2009)  also  studied  the  benefits  of  AI  in  general,  and  AISs  in  particular,  for 
improving IDSs by investigating different IDS designs based on AISs. The results showed how 
AIS approach to IDS design can be fruitful for future applications [52]. 

Chao and Tan (2009) proposed a novel virus detection system based on AIS. The experimental 
results showed that virus detection system they proposed has a “strong detection ability and good 
generalization performance” [53]. 

Danforth  (2009)  investigated  the  possibility  of  expanding  AISs  for  classification  of  web  server 
attacks, which could help system administrator with a warning about the severity of the attack and 
assist in mitigation of direct attacks [54]. 

Mohamed and Abdullah (2009) presented an AIS-based security framework for securing mobile 
ad hoc networks, which is scalable, robust, and has traits of distributability, second response and 
self-recovery. Their architecture resolved some limitations found in the previous related studies 
such as scalability and bandwidth conservation [55].  

Qiang  and  Yiqian  (2010)  proposed  an  AIS-based  network  security  situation  assessment  model 
which  can  make  real-time  and  quantitative  security  situation  assessment  of  the  system,  and 
provide  support  required  to  make  real-time  adjustments  of  the  defense  measures.  Theoretical 
analysis  and experiments showed the effectiveness of the model in real-time anomaly detection 
for network security [56]. 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

Rui and Wanbo (2010) proposed an AIS-based self-learning intrusion response model which can 
recognize  and  classify  unknown  attacks.  Their  model  has  a  dynamic  response  decision-making 
mechanism  which  can  adjust  the  defensive  tactics  according  to  the  changes  in  the  environment 
and keep the system safe with the minimum cost. The experiments showed that their model has 
qualities such as self-adaptation, rationality, quantitative calculation, and that it provides efficient 
intrusion response [48]. 

Endy  et  al.  (2010)  used  SOMs  to  visualize  the  topology  of the  data  in  order  to  perform  cluster 
analysis of the textual documents related to cyber terrorism [57].  

Yang et al. (2011) presented a network security evaluation model for quantitative analysis of the 
degree  of  intrusion  danger  level  based  on  AIS  theory,  and  demonstrated  its  advantages  over 
traditional models for network security evaluation [58]. 

Liu  et  al.  (2011)  introduced  an  AIS-based  intrusion  detection  mechanism  into  the  Internet  of 
Things  (IoT)  environment,  which  simulates  self-adaptation  and  self-learning  mechanisms  via 
dynamic  adaptation  to the environment.  The  analysis  of their proposal showed that their model 
provides a new effective intrusion detection for the Internet of Things [59]. 

Zhang  et  al.  (2011)  proposed  SGDIDS  –  a  new  hierarchical  Distributed  Intrusion  Detection 
System  for  improving  cyber  security  of  the  Smart  Grid.  Their  system  consists  of  an  intelligent 
module (among other modules) which uses AIS to detect and classify malicious data and possible 
cyber  attacks.  Simulation  results  showed  that  their  system  is  applicable  to  identification  of 
malicious network traffic and improving system security [60]. 

Ansari and Inamullah (2011) proposed an enhancement for the anomaly detection based on AIS 
and  showed  how  their  model  improves  AIS  performance  in  applications  such  as  anomaly 
detection,  ensuring  security,  detecting  errors  and  performing  data  mining  in  mobile  ad  hoc 
networks [61]. 

Fang et al. (2012) proposed an AIS for phishing detection through memory and mature detectors. 
The  analysis  showed  that  their  system  is  unique  and  more  flexible  and  adaptive  than  other 
existing phishing detection systems [62].  

Mavee and Ehlers (2012) proposed IISGP – a new AIS-based model for Smart Grid protection. 
Basically, they aimed to design a bio-inspired AIS model for intrusion detection, access control 
and anomaly detection in critical infrastructures  which are  becoming increasingly dependent on 
cyber technology [63]. 

Kumar and Reddy (2014) developed a unique agent based intrusion detection system for wireless 
networks  that  collects  information  from  various  nodes  and  uses  this  information  with  an 
evolutionary AIS to detect and prevent the intrusion via bypassing or delaying the transmission 
over  the  intrusive  paths.  The  experimental  results  showed  that  the  system  is  well  suited  for 
intrusion detection and prevention in wireless networks [64]. 

4.4. Genetic Algorithm and Fuzzy Sets Applications 

Kim et al. (2004) proposed a learning algorithm for anomaly detectors which can detect attacks 
using  genetic  algorithm.  They  applied  their  algorithm  to  an  artificial  computer  security  system 
and showed its effectiveness in intrusion detection [65]. 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

Sekeh and Bin Maarof (2009) proposed a fuzzy host-based intrusion detection system that uses 
data mining technique and the services of the underlying operating system calls. The simulation 
results showed that the proposed system improves the performance, and decreases the size of the 
database, time complexity, and the rate of false alarms [66]. 

Mabu  et  al.  (2011)  described  a  novel  fuzzy  network  intrusion  detection  method  based  on 
class-association-rule mining in genetic network programming. The proposed method is flexible 
and efficient for both misuse and anomaly detection in networks and it is capable of dealing with 
the  mixed  databases  which  contain  both  discrete  and  continuous  attributes  to  mine  important 
class-association rules needed for improved intrusion detection. The experiments and evaluation 
of  the  proposed  method  demonstrated  that  this  approach  provides  competitively  high  detection 
rates in comparison with other machine-learning techniques [67]. 

Ojugo  et  al.  (2012)  presented  GAIDS  –  a  Genetic  Algorithm  Rule-Based  Intrusion  Detection 
System  for  improving  system  security,  confidentiality,  integrity  and  resource  availability  in 
networked settings. The proposed system uses a set of classification rules obtained from network 
audit data and the support-confidence framework, used as fitness function to evaluate the quality 
of each rule [68]. 

Hassan (2013) designed an IDS based on genetic algorithm and fuzzy logic for efficient detection 
of various intrusive activities within a network. The system is adaptable and  cost-effective as it 
can update rules once new intrusive activities become known. The experiments and evaluations 
results showed that the proposed system achieved reasonable intrusion detection rate [69]. 

Jongsuebsuk  et  al.  (2013)  proposed  a  network  IDS  based  on  a  fuzzy  genetic  algorithm.  Fuzzy 
rules  are  used  to  classify  network  attack  data,  whereas  genetic  algorithm  optimizes  finding 
appropriate fuzzy rule in order to obtain the optimal solution. The evaluation results showed that 
the proposed IDS can detect network attacks in real-time (or within 2-3 seconds) upon the arrival 
of data arrives to the detection system with the detection rate of over 97.5% [70]. 

Chaudhary et al. (2014) developed an anomaly based fuzzy intrusion detection system to detect 
the packet dropping attacks in mobile ad hoc networks. The simulation results demonstrated that 
proposed system has the capability to detect the packet dropping attacks with high positive and 
low false positive rates under all speed levels of mobile nodes [71].  

Benaicha et al. (2014) presented a network intrusion detection model based on Genetic Algorithm 
approach with an improved initial population and selection operator used to optimize the search 
of  attack  scenarios  in  audit  files  and  provide  the  subset  of  potential  attacks  within  realistic 
processing  time.  They  employed  genetic  algorithm  approach  because  it  boosts  the  performance 
and reduces the false positive rate [72]. 

Padmadas et al. (2014) presented a layered genetic algorithm-based intrusion detection system for 
monitoring  activities  in  a  given  environment  to  determine  whether  they  are  legitimate  or 
malicious based on the available information resources, system integrity and confidentiality. The 
experimental  results  showed  that  the  proposed  system  efficiently  detect  R2L  attacks  with  90% 
accuracy [73]. 

4.5. Other AI Applications 

In this section we give examples of various other and hybrid applications. 
Machado  et  al.  (2005)  presented  a  novel  network  intrusion  detection  model  based  on  mobile 
intelligent agent technology and AISs. They also implemented their design and showed that it is 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

capable of differentiating between various attacks, security violations, and several other security 
breaches. The experimental results showed that their model offers a significant upgrade compared 
to previous work in the field [74]. 

Pei  and  Song  (2008)  focused  on  improving  the  performance  of  intrusion  detectors  of  IDSs,  so 
they proposed a hybrid approach which uses the searching performance of immune algorithm to 
generate  fuzzy-detectors.  The  experiments  showed  the  great  searching  capability  of  immune 
algorithm. Results also showed that fuzzy detection rules reduce the frangibility of detectors and 
improve the detection precision [75]. 

Zhou (2009) proposed a method for merging AIS technique and neural networks to construct an 
intrusion  detection  model  capable  of  both  anomaly  detection  and  misuse  detection.  Evaluation 
and experimental results showed high intrusion detection accuracy with low false alarm rate [76]. 
Golovko  et  al.  (2010)  also  proposed  using  AISs  and  neural  networks  for  attack  detection  in 
computer systems. They described principles and architecture of such an attack detection system 
[77].  

Elsadig  et  al.  (2010)  described  a  novel  approach  for  bio-inspired  intrusion  prevention  and  self-
healing system. They presented a novel AIS-based intrusion prevention system (IPS) which uses 
intelligent  multi-agent  system  for  non-linear  classification  method  to  identify  the  abnormality 
behavior and detect, prevent and heal harmful or dangerous events network system [78]. 

Zhou et al. (2011) presented an AIS-based IDS for combating virus with “virus”. They implanted 
“virus” and cloned variation of “virus” into immune IDS based on e-learning in order to improve 
immunity of the system and eliminate invasion or attack behaviors [79].  

Ou et al. (2011) proposed ABAIS - a multi-agent based AIS for IDSs with learning and memory 
capabilities.  Immune  response  to  malicious  activity  is  activated  by  either  computer  host  or 
security  operating  center.  Experimental  results  showed  that  ABAIS  can  effectively  detect 
malicious intrusions [80].   

Meng  (2011)  researched  the  holistic  intelligence  of  Neuro-Endocrine-Immune  system  and 
presented  an  artificial  homeostasis  security-coordination  model.  A  prototype  of  the  model  was 
implemented for E-Government system. The study showed that artificial homeostasis model can 
integrate  different  security  products  to  coordinate  in  intrusion  detection,  security  management, 
and prevention of potential attacks or system security vulnerabilities [81]. 

Dove  (2011)  researched  abnormal  behavior  detection  and  the  limitations  of  looking  only  for 
known  attack  patterns  in  cyber  domain  and  suggested  that  these  issues  can  be  addressed  by 
having a model that engages in continuous learning and re-profiling of normal behavior and uses 
a  sense-making  hierarchy  to  reduce  false  positive  rates.  The  architecture  is  based  on  process 
patterns inspired by biological immune system combined with hierarchical sense-making [82]. 
Jiang  et  al.  (2011)  proposed  a  bio-inspired  host-based  multilayered  intrusion  detection  system 
using multiple detection engines and sequential pattern recognition. The results showed that their 
model efficiently classifies unknown behaviors and malicious attacks and that it can successfully 
identify  the  region  where  abnormalities  are  likely  to  occur  with  lower  false  positive  rate 
compared to other existing schemes. They also argued that their study provides the basis for an 
intelligent  and  computationally  simple  real-time  approach  for  detecting  unknown  malware  and 
malicious attacks in large-scale complex networks [83]. 

Ferreira et al. (2011) presented an IDS based on the wavelet and ANN that is applied to the well 
know  Knowledge  Discovery  and  Data  Mining  KDD.  Their  experiment  showed  high  intrusion 
detection rate [84]. 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

Wattanapongsakorn  et  al.  (2012)  presented  a  simple  network-based  intrusion  detection  and 
prevention system (IDPS) which uses several machine learning algorithms to detect and classify 
network attacks. They tested it in an online network environment and the results showed that the 
proposed IDPS offers high detection rate for the main attack types (Probe and DoS) within a few 
seconds,  and also automatically protects the computer network from the attacks. It also worked 
well for unknown types of network attacks [85].  

Aziz  et  al.  (2012)  developed  an  AIS-inspired  network  intrusion  detection  system  is  which  uses 
detectors  generated  by  a  genetic  algorithm  combined  with  deterministic-crowding  niching 
technique. They achieved an overall average detection rate of 81.74% [86]. 

Patel et al. (2013) presented a state-of-the-art IDPSs with possible solutions to intrusion detection 
and prevention in cloud computing which is an attractive target for potential cyber attacks. They 
identified  relevant  requirements  for  an  ideal  cloud  based  IDPS:  autonomic  computing  self-
management, ontology, risk management, and fuzzy theory [24]. 

Barani  (2014)  proposed  GAAIS  –  a  dynamic  intrusion  detection  method  for  Mobile  ad  hoc 
Networks  based  on  genetic  algorithm  and  artificial  AIS.  GAAIS  is  self-adaptable  to  network 
topology changes. The performance of the proposed system was evaluated for detection of several 
types of routing attacks such as Flooding, Blackhole, Neighbor, Rushing, and Wormhole attacks. 
The  experimental  results  demonstrated  that  it  is  more  efficient  when  compared  to  similar 
approaches [87]. 

4.6. Advantages of AI Applications to IDPSs 

AI techniques introduce numerous advantages into intrusion detection and prevention (see Table 
1). 

Table 1. Advantages that some AI techniques bring to intrusion detection and prevention. 

Technology  Advantages 

Artificial 
Neural 
Networks 

Intelligent 
Agents 

Artificial 
Immune 
Systems 

Parallelism in information processing; 
Learning by example; 
Nonlinearity – handling complex nonlinear functions; 
Superiority over complex and perplexing differential equations; 
Resilience to noise and incomplete data; 
Versatility and flexibility with learning models; 
Intuitiveness – as they are an abstraction of biological neural networks [26]. 
Mobility; 
Helpfulness – they always attempt to accomplish their tasks having  
contradictory objectives; 
Rationality – in achieving their objectives; 
Adaptability – to the environment and user preferences; 
Collaboration – awareness that a human user can make mistake and provide 
uncertain or omit important information; thus, they should not accept 
instructions without considerations and checking the inconsistencies with the 
user [4]. 
Dynamic structure; 
Parallelism and distributed learning – using data network communications and 
parallelism in detection and elimination tasks; 
Self-adaptability  and self-organizing – updating intrusion marks without 
human involvement; 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

Robustness; 
Selective response – removing malicious activity by the best means available;  
Diversity – each detector node generates a statistically unique set of non-self 
detectors; 
Resource optimization; 
Multi-layered structure – attackers cannot succeed with their malicious 
activities by circumventing only one layer, since multiple layers of different 
structures are in charge of monitoring a single point. 
Disposability – not being dependent on a single component which can be easily 
replaced by other components [52, 56, 88]. 
Robustness; 
Adaptability to the environment; 
Optimization – providing optimal solutions even for complex computing 
problems; 
Parallelism – allowing evaluation of multiple schemas at once; 
Flexible and robust global search [21, 86]. 
Robustness of their interpolative reasoning mechanism; 
Interoperability – human-friendliness [89, 90]. 

Genetic 
Algorithms 

Fuzzy Sets 

5.  LIMITATIONS  OF  CURRENT  ANOMALY  DETECTION/PREVENTION 
SYSTEMS 

Although anomaly detection systems offer the opportunity to detect previously unknown attacks, 
they have some important limitations that need to be tackled. The main issue is the difficulty of 
making a solid model of what acceptable behavior is and what an attack is; hence, they may give 
a high number of false positive alarms, which may be caused by atypical behavior that is actually 
normal and authorized, since normal behavior may  easily  and readily  change.  Other limitations 
include the following [25, 26, 29]: 

• 

• 

• 

In order for the anomaly detection system to be able to characterize normal patterns and 
create a model of the normal behavior, wide-ranging training sets of the normal system 
activities are needed. Any change in the system’s normal patterns must lead to necessary 
update of the knowledge base.  
If  the  detection  and  prevention  system  inaccurately  classifies  a  legitimate  activity  as  a 
malicious one, the results can be very unfortunate since it will attempt to stop the activity 
or change it. 

•  An intrusion detection system, no matter how efficient, may be disabled by  attackers if 

they can learn how the system works. 
In  heterogeneous  environments  there  is  also  an  issue  of  integrating  information  from 
different sites. 

•  Another  problem  involves  supplying  intrusion  detection  systems  that  will  conform  to 
legal regulations, security requirements and/or service-level agreements in real world. 

6. SCOPE FOR FUTURE WORK 

Cyber security needs much more attention. Given human limitations and the fact that agents such 
as  computer viruses  and worms are intelligent, network-centric environments require  intelligent 
cyber  sensor  agents  (or  computer-generated  forces)  which  will  detect,  evaluate  and  respond  to 
cyber attacks in a timely manner [3].  

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

Application of AI techniques in cyber defense will need planning and future research. One of the 
challenges  is  knowledge  management  in  network-centric  warfare,  hence  a  promising  area  for 
research  is  introduction  of  modular  and  hierarchical  knowledge  architecture  in  the  decision 
making  software.  Rapid  situation  assessment  and  decision  superiority  can  only  be  guaranteed 
with automated knowledge management. It is also foreseeable that the grand goal of AI research 
–  development  of  artificial  general  intelligence  -  can  be  reached  in  not  so  distant  future  which 
would  lead  to  Singularity  described  as  “the  technological  creation  of  smarter-than-human 
intelligence”.  Nevertheless,  it  is  of  crucial  importance  that  we  have  the  ability  to  use  better  AI 
technology in cyber defense than the one offenders possess [5]. 

Furthermore, a lot more research needs to be done before we are  able to construct trustworthy, 
deployable  intelligent  agent  systems  that  can  manage  distributed  infrastructures.    Future  work 
must  search  for  a  theory  of  group  utility  function  to  allow  groups  of  agents  to  make  decisions 
[37]. 

For future work in enhancing IDPSs, unsupervised learning algorithms and new techniques will 
be  considered  together  to  create  hybrid  IDPS  which  will  improve  the  performance  of  anomaly 
intrusion detection [85]. Moreover, combining all kinds of AI technologies will become the main 
development trend in the field of anti-virus technology [7]. 

Even  though  computational  intelligence  techniques  have  been  widely  used  in  the  field  of 
computer  security  and  forensics,  there  are  certain  ethical  and  legal  problems  that  arise  as  the 
technology rapidly expands. Some of these problems are privacy concerns or power issues on the 
ethical side or questions of due process on the legal side. A wide range of both ethical and legal 
questions  come up in the light of the potential autonomy of this technology.  Questions like “to 
what  extent  can  an  artificial  neural  network  replace  human  judgment”,  “to  what  degree  do  we 
want  to  allow  technology  to  take  human  roles”  or  “what  legal  precedent  can  be  applied  to 
machines” will need to be answered [91].   

7. CONCLUSION  

The fast development of information technology had a lot of positive impact and brought many 
conveniences into our lives. However, it also caused issues that are  difficult to manage such  as 
the  emergence  of  cyber  crimes.    As  the  technology  continues  to  evolve,  criminal  cases  change 
correspondingly.  Every  day  we  are  faced  with  increasing  number  and  variety  of  cyber  crimes, 
since  this  technology  presents  an  easy  way  for  criminals  to  achieve  their  goals.  Critical 
infrastructures are especially vulnerable.  

Application of AI techniques are already being used to assist humans in fighting cyber crimes, as 
they provide flexibility  and learning capabilities to IDPS software. It has become obvious wide 
knowledge  usage  in  decision  making  process  requires  intelligent  decision  support  in  cyber 
defense which can be successfully achieved using AI methods.  

Available  academic  resources  show  that  AI  techniques  already  have  numerous  applications  in 
combating  cyber  crimes.  This  paper  has  briefly  presented  advances  made  so  far  in  the  field  of 
applying  AI  techniques  for  combating  cyber  crimes,  their  current  limitations  and  desired 
characteristics, as well as given the scope for future work.  

REFERENCES 

[1]  H.  Chen,  F.  Y.  Wang,  (2005)  “Guest  Editors'  Introduction:  Artificial  Intelligence  for  Homeland 

Security”, IEEE intelligent systems, Vol. 20, No. 5, pp. 12–16. 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

[2]  D. Dasgupta, (2006) “Computational Intelligence in Cyber Security”, IEEE International Conference 

on Computational Intelligence for Homeland Security and Personal Safety (CIHSPS 2006), pp. 2–3 

[3]  M. R. Stytz, D. E. Lichtblau, S. B. Banks, (2005) “Toward using intelligent agents to detect, assess, 
and  counter  cyberattacks  in  a  network-centric  environment”,  Ft.  Belvoir  Defense  Technical 
Information Center, 1. Edition, Alexandria, VA. 
J.  Helano,  M.  Nogueira,  (2006)  “Mobile  Intelligent  Agents  to  Fight  Cyber  Intrusions”,  the 
International Journal of Forensic Computer Science (IJoFCS), Vol. 1, pp. 28-32. 

[4] 

[5]  E.  Tyugu,  (2011)  “Artificial  intelligence  in  cyber  defense”,  3rd  International  Conference  on  Cyber 

Conflict (ICCC 2011), pp. 1–11. 

[6]  A.  Patel,  M.  Taghavi,  K.  Bakhtiyari,  J.  Celestino  Júnior,  (2012)  “Taxonomy  and  Proposed 
Architecture  of  Intrusion  Detection and Prevention  Systems for Cloud Computing”, Y.  Xiang et al. 
(Eds.), Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 441 458. 

[7]  X.  B.  Wang,  G.  Y.  Yang,  Y.  C.  Li,  D.  Liu,  (2008)  ”Review  on  the  application  of  Artificial 
Intelligence  in  Antivirus  Detection  System”,  IEEE  Conference  on  Cybernetics  and  Intelligent 
Systems, pp. 506 509. 

[8]  H. Çakir, E. Sert, (2011) “Bilişim Suçlari Ve Delillendirme Süreci”, Örgütlü Suçlar ve Yeni Trendler. 
O.  Ö.  Demir,  M.  Sever,  (Eds.),  Uluslararası  Terörizm  ve  Sınıraşan  Suçlar  Sempozyumu  (UTSAS 
2010) Seçilmiş Bildirileri, Ankara: Polis Akademisi Yayınları, Ankara, pp. 143. 

[9]  N. Doğan, (2008) “Türkiye’de Bilişim Suçlarına Bakış”, Popüler Bilim, Vol. 8, No. 3, pp. 14-17. 
[10]  A.  S.  Poonia,  A.  Bhardwaj,  G.  S.  Dangayach,  (2011)  “Cyber  Crime:  Practices  and  Policies  for  Its 
Prevention”,  The  First  International  Conference  on  Interdisciplinary  Research  and  Development, 
Special No. of the International Journal of the Computer, the Internet and Management, Vol. 19, No. 
SP1. 

[11]  H.  Dijle,  N.  Doğan,  (2011)  “Türkiye’de  Bilişim  Suçlarına  Eğitimli  İnsanların  Bakışı”,  Bilişim 

Teknolojiler Dergisi, Vol. 4, No. 2. 

[12]  S. Gordon, R. Ford, (2006) “On the definition and classification of cybercrime”, Journal in Computer 

Virology, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 13 20. 

[13]  http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/cybercrime, (24/11/2014) 
[14]  B.  S.  Fisher,  S.  P.  Lab,  (2010)  Encyclopedia  of  Victimology  and  Crime  Prevention,  SAGE 

Publications, Vol. 1, pp. 251, USA. 

[15]  S. W. Brenner, (2010) Cybercrime: Criminal Threats from Cyberspace, Greenwood publishing group, 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data, USA. 

[16]  E.  S.  Brunette,  R.  C.  Flemmer,  C.  L.  Flemmer,  (2009)  “A  review  of  artificial  intelligence”, 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Autonomous Robots and Agents, pp. 385 392. 
[17]  J.  S.  Russell,  P.  Norvig,  (2003)  Artificial  Intelligence:  A  Modern  Approach,  2nd  edition,  Upper 

Saddle River, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, USA. 

[18]  G.  Luger,  W.  Stubblefield,  (2004)  Artificial  Intelligence:  Structures  and  Strategies  for  Complex 

Problem Solving, 5th edition, Addison Wesley. 

[19]  Artificial Intelligence, Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Artificial_intelligence, (24/11/2014) 
[20]  L. Hong, (2008) “Artificial Immune System for Anomaly Detection”, IEEE International Symposium 

on Knowledge Acquisition and Modeling Workshop, pp. 340 – 343. 

[21]  N.  A.  Alrajeh,  J.  Lloret,  (2013)  “Intrusion  Detection  Systems  Based  on  Artificial  Intelligence 
Techniques in Wireless Sensor Networks,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, Vol. 
2013, Article ID 351047. 

[22]  S. Shamshirband, N. B. Anuar, M. L. M. Kiah, A. Patel, (2013) “An appraisal and design of a multi-
agent  system  based  cooperative  wireless  intrusion  detection  computational  intelligence  technique,” 
Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Vo. 26, pp. 2105–2127. 

[23]  K.  P.  Kaliyamurthie,  R.  M.  Suresh,  (2012)  “Artificial  Intelligence  Technique  Applied  to  Intrusion 
Detection”, International Journal of Computer Science and Telecommunications, Vol. 3, No. 4, pp. 20 
25. 

[24]  A  Patel,  M.  Taghavi,  K.  Bakhtiyari,  J.  Celestino  Junior,  (2013)  “An  intrusion  detection  and 
prevention  system  in  cloud  computing:  A  systematic  review”,  Journal  of  Network  and  Computer 
Applications, Elsevier, Vol. 36, pp. 25–41. 

[25]  A.  Patel,  Q.  Qassim,  Z.  Shukor,  J.  Nogueira,  J.  Júnior,  C.  Wills,  (2010)  “Autonomic  Agent-Based 
Self-Managed  Intrusion  Detection  and  Prevention  System,”  Proceedings  of  the  South  African 
Information  Security  Multi-Conference  (SAISMC  2010),  Port  Elizabeth,  South  Africa,  May  17-18, 
2010. 

35 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

[26]  C. Bitter, D.A. Elizondo, T. Watson, (2010) “Application of Artificial Neural Networks and Related 
Techniques  to  Intrusion  Detection”,  IEEE  World  Congress  on  Computational  Intelligence  (WCCI 
2010), pp. 949 – 954. 

[27]  Y.  Chen,  (2008)  “NeuroNet:  Towards  an  Intelligent  Internet  Infrastructure”,  5th  IEEE  Consumer 

Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC 2008), pp. 543 547. 

[28]  L.  Ondrej,  T.  Vollmer,  M.  Manic,  (2009)  “Neural  Network  Based  Intrusion  Detection  System  for 
Critical Infrastructures”, Proceedings of International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, pp. 1827 
1834. 

[29]  F.  Barika,  K.  Hadjar,  N.  El-Kadhi,  (2009)  “Artificial  neural  network  for  mobile  IDS  solution”, 

Security and Management, pp. 271–277. 

[30]  A.  Iftikhar,  B.A.  Azween,  A.  S.  Alghamdi,  (2009)  “Application  of  artificial  neural  network  in 
detection  of  dos  attacks,”  Proceedings  of  the  2nd  ACM  international  conference  on  Security  of 
information and networks, pp. 229–234. 

[31]  C.  H.  Wu,  (2009)  “Behavior-based  spam  detection  using  a  hybrid  method  of  rule-based  techniques 
and neural networks,” Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 36, Issue. 3, Part: 1, pp. 4321–4330. 
[32]  P.  Salvador,  A.  Nogueira,  U.  Franca,  R.  Valadas,  (2009)  “Framework  for  Zombie  Detection  using 
Neural  Networks”,  Fourth  International  Conference  on  Internet  Monitoring  and  Protection  (ICIMP 
'09), pp.14 – 20. 

[33]  S.  T.  F.  Al-Janabi,  H.  A.  Saeed,  (2011)  “A  Neural  Network  Based  Anomaly  Intrusion  Detection 

System”, Developments in E-systems Engineering (DeSE), pp. 221 – 226. 

[34]  D.  K.  Barman,  G.  Khataniar,  (2012)  “Design  Of  Intrusion  Detection  System  Based  On  Artificial 
Neural  Network  And  Application  Of  Rough  Set”,  International  Journal  of  Computer  Science  and 
Communication Networks, Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 548-552. 

[35]  N.  C.  Rowe,  “Counterplanning  Deceptions  To  Foil  Cyber-Attack  Plans”,  Proceedings  of  the  2003 
IEEE Workshop on Information Assurance, United States Military Academy, West Point, Information 
Assurance Workshop, pp. 203  210. 

[36]  X.  Gou,  W.  Jin,  D.  Zhao,  (2006)  "Multi-agent  system  for  worm  detection  and  containment  in 

metropolitan area networks", Journal of Electronics, Vol. 23, No. 2, pp. 259-265. 

[37]  L. Phillips, H. Link, R. Smith, L. Weiland, (2006) Agent-Based Control of Distributed Infrastructure 

Resources, U.S. Department of Energy, Sandia National Laboratories, USA. 

[38]  I.  Kotenko,  A.  Ulanov,  (2007)  “Multi-Agent  Framework  fo  Simulation  of  Adaptive  Cooperative 
Defense  Against  Internet  Attacks”,    International  Workshop  on  Autonomous  Intelligent  Systems: 
Agents and Data Mining (AIS-ADM 2007), Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, vol. 4476, pp. 212–
228. 

[39]  E.  Herrero,  M.  Corchado,  A.  Pellicer,  A.  Abraham,  (2007)  “Hybrid  multi  agent-neural  network 
intrusion detection with mobile visualization”, Innovations in Hybrid Intelligent Systems, Vol. 44, pp. 
320 328. 

[40]  H. Fu, X.  Yuan, K. Zhang, X. Zhang, Q.  Xie, (2007) “Investigating Novel Immune-Inspired  Multi-
Agent Systems for Anomaly Detection”, The 2nd IEEE Asia-Pacific Service Computing Conference, 
pp. 466 472. 

[41]  D. Edwards, S. Simmons, N. Wilde, (2007) “Prevention, Detection and Recovery from Cyber-Attacks 
Using  a  Multilevel  Agent  Architecture”,  IEEE  International  Conference  on  System  of  Systems 
Engineering (SoSE '07), pp. 1 – 6. 

[42]  I. Kotenko, A. Konovalov, A.Shorov, (2010) “Agent-Based modeling and Simulation of Botnets and 

Botnet Defence”, Proceeding of Conference on Cyber Conflict (CCD COE). 

[43]  X. Ye, J. Li, (2010) “A Security Architecture Based on Immune Agents for MANET”, International 

Conference on Wireless Communication and Sensor Computing (ICWCSC 2010), pp. 1 5. 

[44]  D. Wei, Y.  Lu, M. Jafari, P. Skare, K. Rohde, (2010) “An Integrated Security System  of Protecting 

Smart Grid against Cyber Attacks”, Innovative Smart Grid Technologies (ISGT), pp. 1 7. 

[45]  F.  Doelitzscher,  C.  Reich,  M.  Knahl,  N.  Clarke,  (2011)  "An  Autonomous  Agent  Based  Incident 
Detection  System  for  Cloud  Environments,"  IEEE  Third  International  Conference  on  Cloud 
Computing Technology and Science (CloudCom), pp.197-204. 

[46]  A. F. Shosha, P. Gladyshev, W. Shinn-Shyan, L. Chen-Ching, (2011) "Detecting cyber intrusions in 
SCADA  networks  using  multi-agent  collaboration,"  16th  International  Conference  on  Intelligent 
System Application to Power Systems (ISAP), pp.1-7. 

[47]  I. Ionita, L. Ionita, (2013) "An agent-based approach for building an intrusion detection system," 12th 

International Conference on Networking in Education and Research (RoEduNet), pp.1-6. 

36 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

[48]  L.  Rui,  L.  Wanbo,  (2010)  “Intrusion  Response  Model  based  on  AIS”,  International  Forum  on 

Information Technology and Applications (IFITA), Vol. 1, pp. 86 – 90. 

[49]  B.  Sirisanyalak,  O.  Sornil,  (2007)  “An  artificial  immunity-based  spam  detection  system“,  IEEE 

Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC 2007), pp. 3392 3398. 

[50]  M. A. Lebbe, J. I. Agbinya, Z. Chaczko, F. Chiang, (2007) “Self-Organized Classification of Dangers 
for  Secure  Wireless  Mesh  Networks”,  Australasian  Telecommunication  Networks  and  Applications 
Conference, pp. 322 – 327. 

[51]  G.  Gianini,  M.  Anisetti,  A.  Azzini,  V.  Bellandi,  E.  Damiani,  S.  Marrara,  (2009)  “An  Artificial 
Immune  System  approach  to  Anomaly  Detection  in  Multimedia  Ambient  Intelligence”,  3rd  IEEE 
International Conference on Digital Ecosystems and Technologies, pp. 502 – 506. 

[52]  A. EshghiShargh, (2009) “Using Artificial Immune System on Implementation of Intrusion Detection 

Systems”, Third UKSim European Symposium on Computer Modeling and Simulation, pp. 164 168. 

[53]  R.  Chao,  Y.  Tan,  (2009)  ”A  Virus  Detection  System  Based  on  Artificial  Immune  System”, 

International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Security, Vol. 1, pp. 6 – 10. 

[54]  M.  Danforth,  (2009)  “Towards  a  Classifying  Artificial  Immune  System  for  Web  Server  Attacks”, 

International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications, pp. 523 – 527. 

[55]  Y.  A.  Mohamed,  A.  B.  Abdullah,  (2009)  “Immune  Inspired  Framework  for  Ad  Hoc  Network 

Security”, IEEE International Conference on Control and Automation, pp. 297 – 302. 

[56]  H.  Qiang,  T.  Yiqian,  (2010)  “A  Network  Security  Evaluate  Method  Base  on  AIS”,  International 

Forum on Information Technology and Applications (IFITA), Vol. 2, pp. 42 – 45. 

[57]  E.  Endy,  C.  Lim,  K.  I.  Eng,  A.  S.  Nugroho,  (2010)  “Implementation  of  intelligent  searching  using 
self-organizing  map  for  webmining  used  in  document  containing  information  in  relation  to  cyber 
terrorism”,  Second 
in  Computing,  Control,  and 
Telecommunication Technologies, pp. 195 – 197. 

International  Conference  on  Advances 

[58]  J.  Yang,  T.  F.  Wang,  C.  M.  Liu,  B.  Li,  (2011)  “Improved  Agent  Model  for  Network  Security 
Evaluation  Based  on AIS”, Fourth International  Conference on Intelligent Computation Technology 
and Automation (ICICTA), Vol. 1, pp. 151 – 154. 

[59]  C.  Liu,  J.  Yang,  Y.  Zhang,  R.  Chen,  J.  Zeng,  (2011)  “Research  on  Immunity-based  Intrusion 
Detection  Technology  for  the  Internet  of  Things”,  Seventh  International  Conference  on  Natural 
Computation (ICNC), Vol. 1, pp. 212 – 216. 

[60]  Y.  Zhang,  L.  Wang,  W.  Sun,  R.  C.  Green  II,  M.  Alam,  (2011)  “Artificial  Immune  System  based 
Intrusion Detection in A Distributed Hierarchical Network Architecture of Smart Grid”, IEEE Power 
and Energy Society General Meeting, pp. 1 – 8. 

[61]  M.  S.  A.  Ansari,  M.  Inamullah,  (2011)  “Misbehavior  detection  in  mobile  ad  hoc  networks  using 
Artificial Immune System approach”, IEEE 5th International Conference on Advanced Networks and 
Telecommunication Systems (ANTS), pp. 1 – 6. 

[62]  X.  Fang,  N.  Koceja,  J.  Zhan,  G.  Dozier,  D.  Dipankar,  (2012)  “An  Artificial  Immune  System  for 
Phishing Detection”, IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence (WCCI 2012), pp.1 7. 
[63]  S. M. A. Mavee, E. M. Ehlers, (2012) “A Multi-Agent Immunologically-Inspired Model for Critical 
Information  Infrastructure  Protection”,  IEEE  11th  International  Conference  on  Trust,  Security  and 
Privacy  in  Computing  and  Communications,  pp.  1089  –  1096.  [64]G.V.P.  Kumar,  D.K.  Reddy, 
(2014)  "An  Agent  Based  Intrusion  Detection  System  for  Wireless  Network  with  Artificial  Immune 
System (AIS) and Negative Clone Selection," International Conference on Electronic Systems, Signal 
Processing and Computing Technologies (ICESC), pp. 429-433. 

[65]  D.  W.  Kim,  J.  W.  Yang,  K.  B.  Sim,  (2004)  “Adaptive  Intrusion  Detection  Algorithm  based  on 
Learning Algorithm”, The 30th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, Vol. 3, 
pp. 2229 – 2233. 

[66]  M.  A.  Sekeh,  M.  A.  Bin  Maarof,  (2009)  "Fuzzy  Intrusion  Detection  System  via  Data  Mining 
Technique  with  Sequences  of  System  Calls,"  Fifth  International  Conference  on  Information 
Assurance and Security (IAS '09.), Vol.1, pp.154-157. 

[67]  S.  Mabu,  C.  Chen,  L.  Nannan,  K.  Shimada,  K.  Hirasawa,  (2011)  "An  Intrusion-Detection  Model 
Based  on  Fuzzy  Class-Association-Rule  Mining  Using  Genetic  Network  Programming,"  IEEE 
Transactions  on  Systems,  Man,  and  Cybernetics,  Part  C:  Applications  and  Reviews,  Vol.41,  No.1, 
pp.130-139. 

[68]  A.A. Ojugo, A.O. Eboka, O.E. Okonta, R.E Yoro (Mrs), F.O. Aghware, (2012) “Genetic Algorithm 
Rule-Based  Intrusion  Detection  System  (GAIDS),”  Journal  of  Emerging  Trends  in  Computing  and 
Information Sciences, Vol. 3, No. 8, pp. 1182 – 1194. 

37 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

[69]  M. Md. M. Hassan, (2013) “Network Intrusion Detection System Using Genetic Algorithm and Fuzzy 
Logic”, International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer and Communication Engineering, 
Vol. 1, No. 7. 

[70]  P. Jongsuebsuk, N. Wattanapongsakorn, C. Charnsripinyo, (2013) "Real-time intrusion detection with 
fuzzy  genetic  algorithm,"  10th  International  Conference  on  Electrical  Engineering/Electronics, 
Computer, Telecommunications and Information Technology (ECTI-CON), pp.1-6. 

[71]  A. Chaudhary, V. N. Tiwari, A. Kumar, (2014) "Design an anomaly based fuzzy intrusion detection 
system  for  packet  dropping  attack  in  mobile  ad  hoc  networks,"  IEEE  International  Conference  on 
Advance Computing (IACC), pp. 256-261. 

[72]  S. E. Benaicha, L. Saoudi, S. E. Bouhouita Guermeche, O. Lounis, (2014) "Intrusion detection system 

using genetic algorithm," Science and Information Conference (SAI), pp. 564-568. 

[73]  M.  Padmadas,  N.  Krishnan,  J.  Kanchana,  M.  Karthikeyan,  (2013)  "Layered  approach  for  intrusion 
detection  systems  based  genetic  algorithm,"  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Computational 
Intelligence and Computing Research (ICCIC), pp.1-4. 

[74]  R. B. Machado, A. Boukerche, J. B. M. Sobral , K. R. L. Juca, M. S. M.A. Notare, (2005) “A Hybrid 
Artificial  Immune  and  Mobile  Agent  Intrusion  Detection  Based  Model  for  Computer  Network 
Operations”,  Proceedings  of  the  19th  IEEE  International  Parallel  and  Distributed  Processing 
Symposium, pp. 191a. 

[75]  Z.  Pei,  J.  Song,  (2008)  “Application  of  Immune  Algorithm  to  Generate  Fuzzy-detector  in  Intrusion 
detection”, Fourth International Conference on Natural Computation (ICNC), Vol. 5, pp. 183 186. 
[76]  Y. P. Zhou, (2009) “Hybrid Model based on Artificial Immune System and PCA Neural Networks for 

Intrusion Detection”, Asia-Pacific Conference on Information Processing, Vol. 1, pp. 21 – 24. 

[77]  V.  Golovko,  M.  Komar,  A.  Sachenko,  (2010)  “Principles  of  Neural  Network  Artificial  Immune 
System  Design  to Detect Attacks  on  Computers”, International  Conference  on  Modern  Problems  of 
Radio Engineering, Telecommunications and Computer Science (TCSET), pp. 237. 

[78]  M. Elsadig, A. Abdullah, B. B. Samir, (2010) “Immune Multi Agent System for Intrusion Prevention 
and  Self  Healing  System  Implement  a  Non-Linear  Classification”,  International  Symposium  in 
Information Technology (ITSim), Vol. 3, pp.1 – 6. 

[79]  Z. S. Jing , S. W.  Li, R. Hui,  C. Z. Ting, Y. Yu, (2011) “Research  of Intelligent  Immune Intrusion 
Detection  System  about  Combating  Virus  with  “Virus””,  IEEE  2nd  International  Conference  on 
Software Engineering and Service Science (ICSESS), pp. 753 756. 

[80]  C.M.  Ou,  Y.T.  Wang,  C.R.  Ou,  (2011)  “Intrusion  Detection  Systems  Adapted  from  Agent-based 
Artificial Immune Systems”, IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems, pp. 115 – 122. 
[81]  Q.  Meng,  (2011)  “An  Immune-Neuroendocrine-Inspired  Inspired  Artificial  Homeostatic  Security-
Coordination  Model  for  E-Government  System”,  2nd  International  Conference  on  Artificial 
Intelligence, Management Science and Electronic Commerce (AIMSEC), pp. 6960 6963. 

[82]  R.  Dove,  (2011)  “Self-Organizing  Resilient  Network  Sensing  (SornS)  with  Very  Large  Scale 
Anomaly Detection”, IEEE International Conference on Technologies for Homeland Security (HST), 
pp. 487 – 493. 

[83]  F.  Jiang,  M.  Frater,  J.  Hu,  (2011)  “A  Bio-inspired  Host-based  Multi-engine  Detection  System  with 
Sequential  Pattern  Recognition”,  Ninth  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Dependable,  Autonomic 
and Secure Computing, pp. 145 – 150. 

[84]  E.W.T.  Ferreira,  G.A.  Carrijo,  R.  de  Oliveira,  N.V.  de  Souza  Araujo,  (2011)  "Intrusion  Detection 
System  with  Wavelet  and  Neural  Artifical  Network  Approach  for  Networks  Computers,"  Latin 
America Transactions, IEEE (Revista IEEE America Latina) , Vol. 9, No. 5, pp. 832-837. 

[85]  N.  Wattanapongsakorn,  S.  Srakaew,  E.  Wonghirunsombat,    C.  Sribavonmongkol,  T.  Junhom,  P. 
Jongsubsook,  C.  Charnsripinyo,  (2012)  “A  Practical  Network-based  Intrusion  Detection  and 
Prevention  System”,  IEEE  11th  International  Conference  on  Trust,  Security  and  Privacy  in 
Computing and Communications, pp. 209 – 214. 

[86]  A. S. A. Aziz, M. A. Salama, A. Hassanien, S. E. Hanafi, (2012) “Artiﬁcial Immune System Inspired 

Intrusion Detection System Using Genetic Algorithm”, Informatica, Vol. 36, pp. 347 358. 

[87]  F.  Barani,  (2014)  "A  hybrid  approach  for  dynamic  intrusion  detection  in  ad  hoc  networks  using 
genetic  algorithm  and  artificial  immune  system,"  Iranian  Conference  on  Intelligent  Systems  (ICIS), 
pp.1 6. 

[88]  P. K. Harmer, P. D. Williams, G. H. Gunsch, G. B. Lamont, (2002) “An Artificial Immune System 
Architecture  for  Computer  Security  Applications”,  IEEE  transactions  on  evolutionary  computation, 
Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 252¬ 280. 

38 

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence & Applications (IJAIA), Vol. 6, No. 1, January 2015 

[89]  S.  Sharma,  S.  Kumar,  M.  Kaur,  (2014)  “Recent  Trend  in  Intrusion  Detection  using  Fuzzy-Genetic 
Algorithm,”  International  Journal  of  Advanced  Research  in  Computer  and  Communication 
Engineering, Vol. 3, No. 5. 

[90]  A.  Einipour,  (2012)  “Autonomic  Agent-Based  Self-Managed  Intrusion  Detection  and  Prevention 
System”, Global Journal of Computer Science and Technology Neural & Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 
12, No. 11, Version 1.0. 

[91]  B. Stahl, D. Elizondo, M. C. Mayer, Y.  Zheng, K. Wakunuma, (2010) “Ethical and Legal Issues of 
the  Use  of  Computational  Intelligence  Techniques  in  Computer  Security  and  Computer  Forensics”, 
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1 8. 

Authors 

Selma Dilek is a graduate student in Computer Engineering at the Graduate School  of 
Natural and Applied Sciences, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey. She obtained her B.Sc. 
in  Computer  Science  (major)  and  Electrical  and  Electronic  Engineering  (minor)  from 
the  University  Sarajevo  School  of  Science  and  Technology,  Sarajevo,  Bosnia  and 
Herzegovina,  and  B.Sc.  in  Computer  Science  from  Buckingham  University,  UK.  Her 
publications have appeared in an international journal and conference proceedings. Her 
research  interests  include  Wireless  Sensor  Networks,  Network  Security,  Operating 
Systems, Algorithm Design, Robotics, and Artificial Intelligence.  

Hüseyin Çakır is an assistant professor of Computer and Educational Technologies, at 
the Faculty of Education, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey. He obtained his Bachelor’s 
and  Master’s  degree  in  Computer  Education  from  Gazi  University,  and  PhD  in 
Educational  Technologies  from  Ankara  University,  Turkey.  His  publications  have 
appeared in various national and international journals and conference proceedings. His 
research  interests  include  Computer  Hardware  and  Software,  Educational  Software, 
Computer  Assisted  Education,  Web  Based  Education,  Visual  Programming,  Internet 
and Web Technologies, 3D Graphics, Animation, Educational Technology, Multiple Intelligences, Traffic 
Education, Forensic Computing, and Artificial Intelligence. 

Mustafa  Aydın  is  a  PhD  student  in  Information  Systems  at  the  Graduate  School  of 
Informatics, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey. He obtained his B.Sc. 
and M.Sc. degrees in Electrical and Electronics Engineering from Gazi University and 
Hacettepe University, Turkey, respectively. He is also a member of Cyber Defence and 
Security  Center  of  Middle  East  Technical  University.  His  research  interests  include 
Information Technologies and Systems Security, Information Technology Management 
and Audit, Cyber Defence, Machine Learning, Data Mining and Statistics.  

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
