Towards a Systematic View on Cybersecurity Ecology 

Wojciech Mazurczyk1, Szymon Drobniak2 and Sean Moore3 
1 Warsaw University of Technology, Institute of Telecommunications, Poland, email: wmazurczyk@tele.pw.edu.pl 
2 Jagiellonian University, Institute of Environmental Sciences, Poland, email: szymek.drobniak@uj.edu.pl 
3 Centripetal Networks, USA, email: smoorephd@gmail.com 

Abstract —Current network security systems are progressively 
showing  their  limitations.  One  credible  estimate  is  that  only 
about 45% of new threats are detected. Therefore it is vital to 
find  a  new  direction  that  cybersecurity  development  should 
follow.  We  argue  that  the  next  generation  of  cybersecurity 
systems  should  seek  inspiration  in  nature.  This  approach  has 
been  used  before  in  the  first  generation  of  cybersecurity 
systems;  however,  since  then  cyber  threats  and  environment 
have evolved significantly, and accordingly the first-generation 
systems have lost their effectiveness. A next generation of bio-
inspired  cybersecurity  research  is  emerging,  but  progress  is 
hindered  by  the  lack  of  a  framework  for  mapping  biological 
security  systems  to  their  cyber  analogies.  In  this  paper,  using 
terminology  and  concepts  from  biology,  we  describe  a 
cybersecurity  ecology  and  a  framework  that  may  be  used  to 
bio-inspired 
systematically 
cybersecurity. 

research 

develop 

and 

Keywords: bio-inspired cybersecurity, cybersecurity ecology, bio-
mimetic systems, cyber-ecosystem. 

I.   INTRODUCTION 

It  is  estimated  that  current  commercially  available  anti-
virus products are able to detect only 45% of the new threats 
that Internet users face each day [1]. Moreover, the number 
functionality  of  malicious  software  utilized  by 
and 
cybercriminals, as well as its sophistication and complexity, 
is  constantly  increasing.  As  a  result,  the  average  length  of 
time  between  initial  injection  of  a  threat  into  the  network 
and  its  discovery  is  increasing  every  year,  and  is  now 
measured  in  months  (according  to  Verizon’s  “2014  Data 
Breach  Investigations  Report”),  if  not  years.    Additionally, 
current defense systems are largely static and not sufficiently 
adaptable  to  cope  with  the  attackers’  changing  tools  and 
tactics.  The  inability  to  provide  trusted  secure  services  in 
contemporary  communication  networks  could  potentially 
have a tremendous socio-economic impact on both E2E and 
E2C  global  markets.  Because  currently  available  cyber 
defenses  are  progressively  showing  their  limitations,  it  is 
imperative to find a new direction for cybersecurity research 
and development to follow. 

We propose that the network security community should 
look  into  nature  for  new  approaches  to  cybersecurity,  both 
offensive  and  defensive.  Current  and  future  cybersecurity 
solutions should be designed, developed, and deployed in a 
way  that  will  fully  leverage  the  experience,  learning,  and 
knowledge from on-going biological evolution.  Conversely, 
the community should also look to nature to anticipate how 
the threat may evolve, and respond accordingly.  

The  most  notable  pros  and  cons  of  the  bio-inspired 

cybersecurity approach are detailed below.  

First,  nature  has  over  3.8  billion  years  of  experience  in 
developing  solutions  and  adaptations  to  the  challenges  that 
organisms  face  living  in  extremely  diverse  environmental 
conditions. The estimated number of (largely undiscovered) 
species  is  tens  of  millions,  and  each  of  them  possesses 
survival  and 
specific  and  unique 
propagation  of  their  own  genes.  The  key  process  of  living 
organisms  that  has  led  to  the  persistence  of  the  most 
successful  forms  and  behaviors  is  evolution.  Evolution  has 
developed  optimal  solutions  for  situations  analogous  to  the 
threats faced by computer network systems. 

facilitating 

traits 

Second,  for  ages  people  have  sought  inspiration  from 
nature. Some relevant modern examples include biomimicry, 
which  is  the  inspiration  of  such  inventions  as  Velcro  tape 
and  "cat's  eyes"  (retroreflective  road  markings).  Computer 
science  has  also  taken  a  page  out  of  nature’s  book  by 
developing  biologically  inspired  techniques  like  genetic 
algorithms,  neural  and  sensor  networks,  etc.    Although  at 
first glance there  may not appear to be a direct relationship 
between  cybersecurity  and  the  patterns  present  in  nature, 
closer  inspection  reveals  that  the  essence  of  most  known 
Internet  attacks  and  defence  mechanisms  has  analogies  in 
nature.  For example the Kudzu vine is able to penetrate its 
ecosystem  with  an  astounding  speed  of  ca.  30cm/day. 
Within  a  short  time  it  can  choke  all  other  vegetation, 
including  trees  and  shrubs,  by  blocking  access  to  the 
resources  necessary  for  survival  –  light  and  nutrients.  The 
essence is just like in DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service) 
attacks  for communication  networks  where  legitimate  users 
are  deprived  of  the  resources  that  they  are  entitled  to  like 
access  to  the  service,  bandwidth,  CPU  time,  etc.  Similar 
analogies  can  be  drawn  for  other  offensive  techniques  as 
well  as  for  security  solutions,  as  observed  and described  in 
[2]. 

bodies 

Another powerful analogy is the “arms race” (a form of a 
coevolution involving an aggressor developing its offensive 
mechanisms  and  a  victim/host  evolving  countermeasures  in 
the  form  of  defensive  barriers).  “Arms  race”  is  often 
observed between e.g. predators and prey in nature.  Similar 
dynamics  can  be  also  found  in  interactions  involving  hosts 
and  parasites,  with  the  former  constantly  trying  to  invade 
evolving 
host 
the 
countermeasures  preventing 
abovementioned  cases  bear  many  resemblances  with  a 
“malware-security  systems”  scenario  (or  more  generally 
“attackers-defenders”) where there is a continual contention 
to  develop  offensive/defensive  measures  as  fast  as  possible 
to  at  least  temporarily  dominate  the  other  side.  Thus,  it  is 
readily apparent that in both nature and cyber world, entities 
must  evolve  permanently  and  adapt  to  ever-changing 

constantly 
invasion.  Both 

latter 
the 

and 

the 

 
environments.  In biology this phenomenon – an organism’s 
need to continually adapt and evolve to avoid extinction – is 
called the Red Queen hypothesis [19].  It was named after a 
character from Lewis Carroll’s book "Through the Looking-
Glass". In this book the Red Queen described her country as 
a place where “…it takes all the running you can do, to keep 
in  the  same  place”.  Exactly  the  same  process  can  be 
observed  in  cybersecurity  and  in  biological  systems  where 
there is a constant need for adaptation of offensive/defensive 
level  of  adaptation 
to  maintain  a  certain 
techniques 
permitting survival and reproduction/propagation. 

to  make 

these  first-generation  defenses 

Bio-inspired  cybersecurity  is  not  a  new  idea.    The  first 
generations of cybersecurity research were bio-inspired, e.g., 
the  immune  system  inspired  defense  methods  based  on 
signature  analysis,  as  well  as  methods  for  handling 
polymorphic  threats (which  are analogous  to,  e.g.,  different 
influenza  strains).    Since  then,  however,  the  threats  have 
evolved 
less 
effective.    In  order  to  survive,  cybersecurity  must  be 
evolved/adapted  accordingly  to counter  the  new  threats.    A 
next generation of bio-inspired cybersecurity research is now 
emerging;  however,  we 
and 
achievements  to  be  scattered  because  the  field  lacks  a 
framework.  This paper aims at filling this gap by defining, 
based on the terminology and concepts known from biology, 
the  cybersecurity  ecology 
terms).  This 
cybersecurity ecology will enable a rigorous analysis of the 
existing  relationships  between  entities  in  the  cybersecurity 
ecosystem.    Such  a  systematic  view  of  cybersecurity  will 
allow  the  research  community  to  analyze  and  compare 
biological  organisms’  interactions  with  those  from  the 
virtual  world  in  order  to  identify  differences,  deficits  and 
potentially new promising approaches to cybersecurity. 

the  knowledge 

(and  related 

find 

We  need  to  be  cautious,  however,  that  the  mappings 
from nature to the cyber world are not always “1-to-1”, i.e., 
the  analogies  are  not  always  perfect.  Some  of  the  reasons 
that exact mappings are not always possible include:  
  Many  mechanisms  and  relationships  in  nature  are  very 
complex and not yet understood sufficiently to correctly 
map them to the virtual world; 
In  nature,  individual  organisms  within  a  species  are 
disposable, and death is a critical  driver of evolutionary 
adaptation;  but  for  many  security-critical  systems  (e.g. 
military,  utilities,  and  other  critical  infrastructure)  any 
loss, compromise, or corruption is unacceptable;  

 

  The  main  goal  for  any  organism  is  to  survive  and 
reproduce, whereas our computers / networks have many 
different goals (specific tasks and functions). 

Despite  these  imperfect  mappings  we  strongly  believe 
that  there  are  still  many  important  lessons  from  nature  that 
can  benefit  and  improve  cybersecurity.  Moreover,  if  we 
follow  a  Sapir-Whorf  hypothesis  [31],  which  states  that  
language  has  a  direct  impact  on  thoughts,  then  finding 
analogies  between  cybersecurity  and  nature  with 
its 
accompanying terminology, concepts and solutions can have 
a  tremendous  impact  on  the  way  we  think  about  solving 
cybersecurity  problems.    New  mechanisms  and  ideas  may 
emerge.  Therefore,  the  systematic  view  for  bio-inspired 

cybersecurity  that  we  are  proposing  should  help  to  unveil 
new promising directions that could be pursued to discover 
and develop effective next-generation security solutions.  

The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 
summarizes the state-of-the-art in bio-inspired cybersecurity. 
In  Section  3  the  analogy  between  the  biology-based 
ecosystem  and  the  cyber-ecosystem,  including  potential 
interactions,  is  drawn.  Section  4  describes  some  promising 
research directions for cybersecurity. Finally, the last section 
concludes our work. 

II.  RELATED WORK 

The  existing  literature  includes  many  attempts  to  map 
biological  concepts  to  cybersecurity.    And,  many  of  these 
attempts  have  successfully  transitioned  to  cybersecurity 
technologies  and  systems 
in  common  use  nowadays, 
including  anti-virus,  intrusion  detection,  threat  behavior 
analysis,  honeypots,  counterattack,  etc.  [2].  As  already 
mentioned  in  the  previous  section,  current  research  on  bio-
inspired  cybersecurity  is  fragmented and  lacks  a  systematic 
approach.  A primary cause is the diversity of aspects from 
nature  that  can  be  used  as  inspiration  for  cybersecurity 
research.  Current  research  may  be  broadly  segmented  into 
two groups, depending on how an inspiration is drawn: 
  when  inspiration  is  drawn  from  a  given  organism’s 
characteristic  feature/defense  mechanism  (internal  or 
external).  Internal  mechanisms  include,  for  example,  an 
immune  system.    External  mechanisms  include  e.g. 
various camouflage and mimicry techniques; 

  when  inspiration  is  drawn  from  various  inter-organism 
e.g.,  predator-prey 

includes, 

this 

interactions  – 
associations. 

2.1  Bio-inspired  cybersecurity  inspired  by  an  organism’s 
characteristic feature/defense mechanism 

In  order  to  effectively  avoid  detection/observation  an 
organism  can  hide  or  conceal  its  presence  by  using 
camouflage  or  mimicry 
the 
organism’s external appearance [17]. 

that  modify 

techniques 

all 

solutions 

embraces 

Camouflage 

that  utilize 
individual’s physical shape, texture, coloration, illumination, 
etc.  to  make  animals  difficult  to  spot.  This  causes  the 
information about their exact location to remain ambiguous. 
Examples  of  animals  that  can  easily  blend  into  the 
background include the chameleon (family Chameleonidae) 
which  can  shift  its  skin  color to  make  it  similar  to  ambient 
lighting  and  background  coloration;  stick  and  leaf  insects 
(order  Phasmotodea)  that  take  the  physical  form  of  a 
wooden  stick  or  a 
leaf;  orchid  mantis  (Hymenopus 
coronatus) that resembles a tropical orchid  which, although 
quite conspicuous, is difficult to detect against a background 
of  developed  flowers.    Camouflage  often  occurs  on  levels 
other  than  visual  recognition:  e.g.,  many  viruses  code 
pathways  and  molecular  signaling  systems  that  mimic  host 
cell  transduction  mechanisms  –  by  doing  so  the  virus  can 
easily invade the cell and take control of the metabolism and 
immunological system of an individual [20].  In cyber space 
various  information  hiding  techniques,  e.g.  steganography, 

 
 
 
can  be  utilized  to  provide  means  to  hide  the  location  of 
confidential  data  within  an  innocent-looking  carrier  or  to 
otherwise 
across 
covert 
communication networks [18]. 

communication 

enable 

Patterns  and/or  colorations  can  be  also  used  to  confuse 
the predator, i.e., to make information about the prey hard to 
interpret. Such so-called “disruptive” camouflage is possible 
and  can  be  seen  in,  e.g.,  a  herd  of  zebras  (Equus  quagga) 
where it is difficult for an attacking lion to identify a single 
animal  in  a  herd  when  they  flee  in  panic.  Patterns  of 
contrasting stripes purportedly degrade an observer’s ability 
to judge the speed and direction of moving prey, and they do 
so  by  exploiting  specific  mechanisms  associated  with  the 
way  brain  processes  visual  information  on  movement  [21].  
An  analogous  idea  is  utilized  by  various  moving  target 
techniques/defense  in  cyberspace,  which  distribute  the 
uncertainty  between  the  attacker  and  the  defender  more 
fairly.  For  example,  some  first-generation  solutions  made 
periodic  changes  in  a  host’s  appearance  from  the  network 
perspective,  in  order  to  mitigate  the  effectiveness  of  target 
reconnaissance  [8].  Second-generation  solutions  include, 
e.g.,  an ant-based  cyber defense  which  is a  mobile resilient 
security  system  that  removes  attackers’  ability  to  rely  on 
prior  experience,  without  requiring  motion  in  the  protected 
infrastructure [12]. 

Mimicry characterizes the cases in which an organism’s 
attributes  are  obfuscated  by  adopting  the  characteristics  of 
another  living  organism.  In  particular,  this  means  that  the 
prey  can  avoid  attack  by  making  the  predator  believe  it  is 
something  else,  e.g.,  a  harmless  species  can  mimic  a 
dangerous  one.    The  prey  hides  information  about  its  own 
identity  by  impersonating  something  that  it  is  not.  For 
example,  harmless  milk  snakes  (Lampropeltis  sp.)  mimic 
venomous  coral  snakes (Micrurus  sp.)  to  confuse predators 
which are less likely to launch an attack in expectation of a 
venomous  harmful  bite.  Cybersecurity  solutions  that  utilize 
the  same  idea  include  various  traffic  type  obfuscation 
techniques, e.g., traffic morphing [16]. 

Organisms’  internal  systems  may  also  inspire  new 
cybersecurity  approaches.    There  are  many  recent  studies 
attempting  to  map  features  and  functions  of  the  human 
immune  system  to  cyber  space  [3,  9,  10,  11].  Immune 
systems  use  a  diversity  of  receptors  to  detect  external 
antigens (alien proteins).  These variations are not inherited 
but instead are generated via recombination in the process of 
V(D)J (somatic) recombination, which generates repertoires 
of receptors undergoing clonal selection and reinforcement – 
preparing them for effective action against antigens, with the 
lowest possible  level of autoagression (e.g.  reaction against 
an  organism’s  own  proteins)  [22].  The  resultant  Artificial 
Immune  Systems  (AIS)  are  designed  to  mimic  certain 
properties  of  the  natural  immune  system.  In  cybersecurity 
their main application is anomaly and misbehavior detection. 
AIS  typically  rely  on  one  of  four  major  paradigms:  (i) 
negative  selection  algorithm  [3];  (ii)  clonal  selection 
algorithm  [9];  (iii)  dendritic  cell  algorithm  [10]  or  (iv) 
idiotypic  networks  models  algorithms  [11].  The  first 
generation  AIS  (i  and  ii)  utilized  only  simple  models  of 
human  immune  systems,  so  the  resulting  performance  was 

not comparable with its human counterpart. Recent AIS (iii 
and  iv)  are  more  rigorous  and  better  correspond  to  natural 
immune systems. 

2.2  Bio-inspired  cybersecurity  inspired  by  organisms’ 
interactions  
In  nature,  there  are  many  interactions  between  organisms 
that potentially may serve as inspirations for cybersecurity. 

level  of  species  diversification 

For example, several studies focus on various aspects of 
predator-prey  associations.  In  [13]  the  authors  make  the 
predator-prey  analogy  for  the  Internet  and  investigate  how 
different  levels  of  species  diversification  can  serve  as  a 
defensive  measure.    They  considered  each  type  of  a 
species  and 
vulnerable  device  as  a  heterogeneous 
is 
investigated  what 
necessary  to  prevent  a  malicious  attack  from  causing  a 
failure  to  the  entire  network.    Subsequently,  in  [5]  it  was 
discovered  that  the  cost  to  the  predator  in  seeking  its  prey 
drastically impacts the predation process. In particular it has 
been  observed  that  even  fairly  simple  strategies  for  raising 
the  cost  of  predation  can  result  in  significant  reduction  in 
outbreak  size.  Other  studies  utilize  biological  models  of 
epidemic  spreading 
(a  special  case  of  antagonistic 
interaction between  the pathogen  and  the  victim)  to  predict 
or analyze malware outbreaks [14], [15].  

Finally, 

the  relationships  and 

interactions  between 
existing  malware  (so  called  malware  ecology)  have  been 
investigated in [6]. Numbers of interactions, both accidental 
and  intentional,  between  different  types  of  malware  were 
analyzed and the main conclusion was to seek ecologically-
inspired  defense  techniques,  because  many  ideas  from 
ecology  can  be  directly  applied  to  all  aspects  of  malware 
defense.  

From  the  studies  presented  above  we  can  conclude  that 
bio-inspired cybersecurity is a wide, diverse, emerging, and 
evolving  research  field.    However,  from  the  research 
perspective,  we  see  many  “loose  ends”  that  need  to be  tied 
by  using  a  more  systematic  approach,  which  we  next 
propose. 

III.  CYBERSECURITY ECOLOGY 

In  this  section,  first  we  systematically  review  the  key 
terms  from  biology  related  to  ecology.  Then  by  borrowing 
and adjusting the original biology-based definitions, we will 
describe the most important components of cyber-ecosystem 
and then of cybersecurity ecology.  

3.1 Cyber-ecosystem 
In  biology  the  term  ecology  is  defined  as  the  field  of  life 
sciences  analyzing  and  studying 
interactions  among 
organisms and/or their environment. This means that it deals 
with  the  structure  and  functioning  of  ecosystems.  An 
ecosystem  is  defined  as  a  community  of  living  organisms 
(biotic  components)  together  with  the  nonliving  (abiotic) 
components  of  their  environment  that  interact  as  a  system. 
components, 
Apart 
interconnected  by  various  interactions,  the  ecosystem  is 
fueled  by  energy,  usually  in  the  form  of  electromagnetic 
radiation  (if  production  in  an  ecosystem  is  sun-driven,  i.e. 

the  biotic 

abiotic 

from 

and 

 
 
accomplished  by  green  plants)  and  chemical  energy  (if  an 
ecosystem  relies  on  chemosynthetic  bacteria).  Both  biotic 
and abiotic factors can influence an organism. For example, 
climate  change  or  an  atypically  large  number  of  predators 
can negatively impact some species [23]. 

In  every  ecosystem  the  energy  flow  is  crucial  as  each 
ecosystem  is  energy-based  and  is  capable  of  transforming, 
accumulating,  and  circulating  energy.  In  nature  the  flow  of 
energy  is  encapsulated  in  a  food  chain,  and  a  concept  of 
trophic  levels  is  utilized  to  illustrate  the  position  that  an 
organism occupies in a food chain (Fig. 1, left). Depending 
on how energy is obtained, two groups of organisms can be 
distinguished:  producers  (that  are  able  to  manufacture  their 
own 
and 
chemical/radiation  energy)  and  consumers  (that  feed  on 
producers and/or other consumers) [24]. 
  Ecology can be viewed as one of the approaches to study 
complex  and  dynamic  systems.  Thus,  if  we  are  able  to 
understand how ecosystems and related concepts map to the 
cybersecurity field then the usefulness of various ecological 
methodologies  can  be  evaluated.  If  such  mappings  are 
successful  then  application  of  many  mathematical  ecological 
systems models to cyber systems can be investigated. 

components 

inorganic 

using 

food 

  Based on the above terms and definitions from ecology, 
we  want  to  systematically  recreate  an  analogous  taxonomy 
for the cyber world.  
  Let us define cyber-ecosystem as a community of cyber-
organisms i.e. non-human actors e.g. applications, processes, 
programs, defensive and offensive systems (analogues to the 
biotic  components)  that  interact  between  themselves  and 
with  the  environment  (abiotic  components).  Let  us  also 
assume  that  the  environment  in  which  biotic  components 
reside  and  interact  is  a  communication  network,  e.g.  the 
Internet,  and  it  constitutes  a  nonliving  (abiotic)  component 
with its hardware, links and interconnections.  

In  the  cyber-ecosystem  (the  same  as  in  nature)  both 
biotic  and  abiotic  factors  can impact  a  cyber-organism.  For 
example, malicious software can be utilized to compromise 
a  user’s device  defenses and steal  his/her  confidential data. 
On the other hand a failure of the link/networking device or 
network  congestion  influence  a  cyber-organism’s  ability  to 
communicate and exchange information. 

In  such  a  defined  cyber-ecosystem  we  are  particularly 
interested  in  the  network  of  interactions  among  cyber-
organisms,  and  between  cyber-organisms  and 
their 
environment. 
  As  mentioned  above,  in  nature  the  key  resource  is 
energy.  In  communication  networks,  the  analogous  key 
resource  is  different  kinds  of  information,  including  user 
personal  or  user-generated  data,  but  also  information  about 
his/her behavior. In such a cyber-ecosystem, information can 
be  transformed,  accumulated,  and/or  circulated  (similar  to 
energy in ecosystems). 
  To  have  more  clear  analogies  between  ecosystems  and 
cyber-ecosystems  the  role  of  the  humans  in  the  present 
context is constrained to these roles: 
  Producers  which  possess  and  generate  information  that 
forms  a  desirable  resource  for  the  consumers  (e.g.  the 

tools that attackers or digital marketing companies use to 
obtain desired information). 

  Components  of  the  offensive/defensive  solutions.  For 
example,  a  bot  herder  typically  issues  command  to  the 
bot  that  he  controls  so  he  is  an  inevitable  “part”  of  the 
ID/PS  (Intrusion 
botnet.  Another  example 
Detection/Prevention  System)  which  is  configured  and 
monitored by a security specialist.  

is  an 

  A part of “evolutionary force”. Humans influence cyber-
organisms  by  changing  their  code,  functionalities  and 
applications.  In  this  way  an  evolution  is  achieved. 
Typically,  attackers  try  to  outwit  the  defenders  by 
developing  malicious  software  that  will  be  capable  of 
overcoming  existing  defense  mechanisms/systems. 
Conversely,  defenders  develop  their  defenses  to  be 
“immune”  to  the  existing  threats.  Thus,  both  sides  are 
taking part in a cyber “arms race”. 

Considering  the  above,  it  is  possible  also  for  the  cyber 
world to characterize certain “cyber food chains” and/or 
cyber-trophic  levels  (Fig.  1,  right).  Consumers  can 
become 
cyber-prey 
(defender)  depending  on  the  location  in  the  cyber  food 
chain. Producers always take the role of cyber-prey. 

(attacker)  or 

cyber-predator 

Fig. 1 Food chains and trophic levels in an exemplary ecosystem 
(left) and a cyber-ecosystem (right). 

3.2 Cyber-ecology and its subtypes 
By means of a  simple analogy  we  can define the following 
terms  that  rigorously  describe  the  toolbox  of  cybersecurity 
ecology: 
  Cyber Ecology (CE) as a field that analyzes and studies 
their 

cyber-organisms 

among 

and/or 

interaction 
environment. 

  Cybersecurity  Ecology  (CSE)  analyzes  and  studies 
interactions among cyber-organisms and between cyber-
organisms  and  their  environment  that  influence  their 
security. CSE is a subfield of CE. 

  Attacker–Defender Ecology (ADE) describes interactions 
between  cyber-organisms  which  take  roles  of  attackers 
and defenders in the specific cyber-ecosystem (e.g. in the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internet).  As  noted  before  such  relationship  can  be 
regarded not only as predation but also as parasitism. It is 
also  worth  noting  that  such  interactions  reside  in 
different locations of the cyber food chain and depend on 
the trophic level (Fig. 1). ADE is a part of CSE. 

  Attackers  Ecology  (AE)  illustrates  interactions  between 
attackers (cyber-organisms) in a given cyber-ecosystem. 
The  possible  interactions  encompass  both  antagonistic 
and  non-antagonistic  ones  and  depend  on  the  context. 
Attackers  can  predate  or  parasite  on  each  other,  but  the 
relationship  can  be  of  a  symbiotic  or  a  cooperative 
nature. AE is a part of CSE. 

  Defenders Ecology (DE) provides insights into potential 
interactions  between  the  defenders  (cyber-organisms), 
and  it  incorporates  mostly  non-antagonistic  ones.  It 
includes both external defense mechanisms (interactions 
of  malware  and  defense  systems  resulting  in  defense) 
and  internal  properties  (analogous  to  animal  immune 
systems). DE is a part of CSE. 

The  abovementioned  terms  e.g.  AE  can  be  further  divided 
into  e.g.  malware  ecology,  botnet  ecology,  etc.  The 
relationships  between  the  terms  defined  in  this  and  in 
previous sections are illustrated in Fig. 2. 

antagonistic  interactions)  [23].  The  interactions  can  be 
defined as follows: 
  predation: a way of obtaining resources by killing/eating 
bodies  of  other  organisms;  results  in  the  death  of  the 
prey;  predation  involves  complex  cycles  of  prey  and 
predator  abundances  described  by  mathematical  models 
such as the Lotka-Volterra equations system ([23], [25]), 
which  can  be  utilized  to  design  the  most  optimal 
strategies of defense or offense, depending on which side 
of  the  predation-prey  system  the  focal  cyber-organism 
currently  is.  In  communication  networks  ransomware 
can be treated as a predator as it is “killing” the host by 
encrypting  vital  information  it  stores  and  unless  the 
ransom is paid this resource is “destroyed/lost” i.e. user’s 
data cannot be retrieved; 

rise 

to  a 

fruitful 

  parasitism:  interaction  involving  obtaining  resources  by 
eating  other  entities  but  not  killing  them  [23],  [25];  it 
gave 
field  of  epidemiological 
parasitology,  with  mathematical  models  and  defense 
systems  that  could  be  directly  implemented  in  the 
context  of  cyber-epidemics.  As  already  mentioned  the 
current  trend,  especially  for  sophisticated  malware  such 
as  Advanced Persistent Threats  (APTs),  is  more  similar 
to  a  parasite-host  scenario  than  a  predation-prey  one.  It 
means  that  it  is  more  likely  that  the  malicious  software 
will  be  active  on  an  infected  host  for  a  long  time  and 
obtaining its resources in a transparent manner; 

  symbiosis:  positive 

this  could 

involving  obligatory 
interaction 
interaction  of  two  or  more  entities,  necessary  for  all 
parties  for  survival  and  successful  propagation.  In 
cybersecurity 
include  analysis  of  both 
attackers  and  defenders  symbiosis.  For  example,  for 
malware  infection  scenario  it  is  common  that  the  first 
infection  is  initially  performed  by  exploiting  some 
vulnerability  on  the  host  machine  and  this  allows  later 
for  the  second  part  of  malware  to  be  downloaded  and 
executed  in  order  to  perform  malicious  actions  for  the 
cybercriminal; 

Fig. 2 Main components and interactions in a cyber-ecosystem 
(Interactions: 1-predation, 2-parasitism, 3-symbiosis, 4-
cooperation, 5-sexual interactions, 6-competition). 

3.3 Cyber-ecosystem interactions 
The  structure  and  stability  of  an  ecosystem  in  nature  is 
determined  by  the  set  of  interactions  that  interconnect 
different entities. Interactions can be roughly classified into 
antagonistic interactions (between species; mainly predation 
and  parasitism),  non-antagonistic  interactions  (between  and 
within species; cooperation, symbiosis) and sexual selection-
driven  interactions  (within  species).  In  all  three  classes, 
interacting entities coevolve, responding reciprocally to their 
current  states 
loop 
in  a  positive/negative 
mechanism  (also  known  as  the  arms-race  dynamics  for 

feedback 

  cooperation:  facultative  interaction  of  an  individual 
within  one  species  or  members  of  different  species, 
increasing  the  fitness  and  survival  of  other  individuals 
(the  acceptors  of  cooperation)  often  at  the  cost  of  the 
focal individual (the giver of cooperative behavior) [23], 
[26],  [27];  in  communication  networks  cooperation 
should  be  recognized  not  only  as  a  way  of  reinforcing 
defense  mechanisms  but  also  as  a  potential  threat  (a 
deceiver  malware  might  exploit  cooperating  inclination 
of  the  system,  wreaking  havoc  in  its  structures).    A 
recent real-world example is  the  sharing of  cyber threat 
indicators  as  prescribed 
the  US  Cybersecurity 
in 
Information Sharing Act of 2015; 

  sexual interactions: occur exclusively within species and 
are channeled toward combining, in the most desired and 
effective  way,  the  genes  of  females  and  males  so  that 
they  maximize  the  fitness  of  offspring  [28];  from  the 
point of view of cyber-ecosystems the  models of sexual 
selection based on compatible genes [29] are particularly 
interesting  as  they  may  serve  as  mechanisms  for 

 
 
 
 
  competition: 

this 

the  most  optimal 
sets  of 
producing  dynamic 
combinations of entities and their mutations that provide 
maximum  protection 
evolving  malware. 
against 
Moreover,  using  knowledge  of  how  sexual  selection 
works, it may be interesting to study how to become the 
most “unattractive” victim to the potential attacker. 
relationship 

is  symmetrical  and 
involves both organisms competing for the same pool of 
resources. Inherently the relationship between organisms 
can be broken without any harm to neither of the sides – 
as  both  influences  are  negative  their  cessation  benefits 
both 
network 
environment this interaction can occur e.g. between two 
types of  malware trying  to  infect the  same  host  –  when 
one  of  them  succeeds  it  tries  to  “secure”  the  host  by 
patching the exploit used by the other type of malicious 
software. Competition can also occur between defenders 
when  few  similar  defense  systems  (e.g.  anti-virus 
software) are run together and they impact each other in 
a negative way. 

communication 

competitors. 

In 

interactions 

involving 
ecology”,  and  encompasses  all 
detrimental effects of one organism on another, be it a direct 
or  indirect (e.g.  via  shared  resources)  effect. In  this  section 
we  discuss  consequences  of  such  a  categorization  and 
review 
the  most  prominent  models  of  antagonistic 
interactions, while pinpointing their weaknesses [32]. 

interactions 

4.1.  Similarities  between  parasitic  and  predatory 
interactions 
The  strong  distinction  between  parasitic  and  predatory 
relationships  results  mostly  from  an  old  methodology  of 
categorizing  nature  [33].  In  fact,  all  kinds  of  antagonistic 
ecological 
and 
competition)  share  a  common  suite  of  components,  which 
differ  only  in  the  strength/presence/direct  character  of  the 
specific connections. All interactions involve conventionally 
at  least  two  organisms  (aggressor  and  victim,  or  two 
competitors  in  the  competition  model)  that  influence  each 
other  positively  and/or  negatively,  and  use  each  others’ 
resources [32]. 

(predation, 

parasitism 

A point of view of cyber-ecology may be to treat these 
interactions  as  purely  mechanistic  descriptions  of  cyber-
the  consequences  of 
looking  at 
systems  –  without 
interactions themselves  and  on  the  dynamics  they  describe. 
However,  growing  evidence  suggests  that  the  interactions 
not only influence the fitness and performance of entities but 
also  significantly  modify  their  physiology/performance  in 
the interaction, altering the outcome of competition/synergy 
[30].  Such  elastic  responses  of  interacting  entities  to  the 
interaction  itself  may  have  a  significant  role  in  cyber-
ecosystems, as they may serve to design more efficient ways 
of  controlling  cyber-ecosystems  and  reacting  to  unknown, 
emerging threats. 

As indicated in Section II, existing work focuses mainly 
on  predator-prey  association.  However,  an 
interesting 
observation is that the relationship between current malware 
and host is in essence closer to parasitism than to predation. 
This means that the goal of the current malware is to live off 
the  infected  host  (and  the  longer  it  remains  undetected,  the 
better)  but  not  to  immediately  cause  significant  harm  or 
permanent damage.  

In  the  following  section  we  will  review  the  most 
important  natural-enemy 
including 
parasitism  models,  and  we  will  assess  how  this  knowledge 
can be used for cybersecurity purposes. 

ecology  models 

IV.  NATURAL ENEMY ECOLOGY IN NATURE – UNIFYING 
ANTAGONISTIC INTERACTIONS 

The  field  of  antagonistic  interactions  in  ecological  studies 
has  so  far  been  dominated  by  a  very  sharp  distinction 
between  predator-prey 
interactions  and  parasite-host 
interactions.  As  pointed  out  recently  such  interactions  are, 
however,  much  closer  to  each  other,  and  together  with  a 
third  class 
form  a  unified  group  of 
antagonistic interactions involving the aggressor, the victim 
and  resources  that  are/may  be  available  to  one  or  both 
entities  [32]. This  has led  to  the emergence of a  new  field-
of-study in ecology, which is broadly termed “natural enemy 

(competition) 

Competition:  the  least  antagonistic  of  all  interactions;  the 
roles  of  the  interacting  organisms  are  indistinguishable  and 
both  exert  mutually  negative  influence  on  the  other.  The 
relationship  is  symmetrical  and  involves  both  organisms 
competing  for  the  same  pool  of  resources.  Inherently  the 
relationship  between  organisms  can  be  broken  without  any 
harm  done  to  neither  of  the  sides:  as  both  influences  are 
negative their cessation benefits both competitors [32]. 

Predation:  occurs  when  the  aggressor  kills  the  victim 
directly  and  feeds  on  its  tissue  –  therefore  it  is  inherently 
asymmetrical;  predation  involves  very  short  time-scales, 
much shorter than timescales necessary for the evolution of 
low-level  (molecular,  immunological)  defense  mechanisms 
and, thus, prey evolves defenses in such system mostly at the 
higher,  organismal  (e.g.  morphology  and  behavior)  level 
[34].  Instead  of  immunological  mechanisms  prey  benefits 
more  by  evolving  learning-like  mechanisms  that  are  much 
more  flexible  on  one  hand  and  can  evolve  within  long 
generation  times  on  the  other  hand.  Because  predators 
consume  their  victims,  they  are  regarded  as  residing  on  a 
different, higher trophic level than prey [32]. 

transmission 

Parasitism:  in  this  form  of  interaction  the  aggressor  feeds 
on the victim but does not kill it. Predatory interactions are 
inherently fatal whereas parasitic interactions have led to the 
phenomenon  of  intermediate  virulence,  which  maximizes 
parasite 
to  other  hosts.  The  relationship 
between  parasites  and  hosts  is  much  more  intimate  and 
occurs  at  time-scales  and  generation  times  that  allow  the 
evolution of complex genetic (e.g. bacterial Crispr-Cas [35]) 
and  immunological  (e.g.  vertebrate  acquired  immunity, 
invertebrate  Toll 
in 
victims/hosts. 

receptors)  defense  mechanisms 

It is clear that all three relationships are slightly different 
and  involve  different  levels  of  inter-organismal  contact. 
However they all draw from the same population processes 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to  population  growth  and  decline.  Moreover, 
related 
sometimes  parasitism  and  predation  are  hard  to  delineate.  
For  example,  caterpillars  feeding  on  plants  could  be 
regarded as predators, but they do not kill their victims and 
dwell on the surface of victim, as ectoparasites.  Mosquitos 
feed on the tissues of their victims (like parasites) but apart 
from this they  display many  properties of predators (longer 
generation  time,  short  interaction  timescale,  high  turnover 
rate  of  attacked  victims).  Recent  literature  has  also  pointed 
that  although  seemingly  different,  parasitic  and 
out 
predatory  interactions  may  give  rise  to  similar  ecological 
patterns. Some prominent examples include: 
  The  evolution  of 

inducible  defenses  and  attack 
anticipation  [36]:  predation  is  often  associated  with 
behaviors and traits that are active and use resources only 
in  the  presence  of  predators  –  similar  mechanisms  may 
be present in the parasite-host systems where organismal 
systems (e.g. immunological) may optimize their activity 
window to match the activity window of aggressors, 
  Enemy-mediated  facilitation  [37]:  in  the  presence  of 
more  than  one  aggressor,  host/prey  communities  may 
evolve  mechanisms  that  make  use  of  prey-specific 
resistance  to  aggressors  and  indirect  ecological  effects 
that  result  from  variation  in  prey/host  susceptibility  to 
aggressors, 

  Managing the threshold of transmission: in parasite-host 
systems  there  are  specific  host  densities  below  which 
parasites  are  unable  to  effectively  spread  and  persist;  a 
similar  concept  might  be  applied  to  the  predator-prey 
systems,  where  by  managing  the  densities  of  particular 
predators (“superpredators” that affect prey densities the 
most)  the  population  may  be  maintained  at  a  desired 
level of prey density, avoiding extinction due to random 
fluctuations in predation pressures [32]. 

4.2. Models of antagonistic interactions 
The  ecological  literature  has  developed  a  number  of 
mathematical  descriptions  of  the  predator-prey  or  parasite-
host  interactions  and  not  surprisingly,  and  in  line  with  the 
abovementioned  unifying  considerations,  all  these  models 
can  be  adjusted  for  the  description  of  both  predation  and 
parasitism  interactions.  The  most  prominent  and  the  oldest 
model  is  the  Lotka-Volterra  (L-V)  model  [33]  that  binds 
together aggressor and victim densities and models changes 
in 
assumed 
predation/parasitism  rate.  The  model  is  defined  using  a 
system of two differential equations:  

according 

densities 

these 

an 

to 

𝑑𝑥
𝑑𝑡

= 𝑟𝑥 − 𝑎𝑦𝑥 

𝑑𝑦
𝑑𝑡

= −𝑟′𝑦 + 𝑎′𝑥𝑦 

where  x  and  y  denote  prey  and  predator  densities,  r  and  r’ 
describe  population  growth/decline  of  prey/predator 
populations,  whereas  a/a’  quantify  the  rate  of  encounters 
between  prey  and  predators.  The  solution  of  this  system 
describes  the  oscillatory  behavior  of  prey  and  predator 

densities. The L-V model was quickly considered simplistic 
(e.g.  the  assumption  of  constant  encounter  rates  a/a’  was 
considered as biologically unrealistic) and a number of other 
models have been developed. However, ecologists agree that 
all available models are just special cases of the L-V model, 
which  in  turn  still  remains  the  most  important  model  for 
antagonistic interactions among organisms [33]. 

The models that followed the L-V system focused mostly 
on  making  some  of  its  assumptions  more  realistic.  For 
example,  the  Nicholson-Bailey  model  expanded  on  the 
results from the L-V system and generalized them to discrete 
generations  of  prey  and  predators  (the  L-V  system  was 
developed  under  the  assumption  of  continuous  overlapping 
generations). More advanced models, e.g. the Holling model 
[38],  the  Ivlev  model  [39],  and  the  Watt  model  [40] 
remained  in  the  reality  set  by  the  Lotka-Volterra  model, 
changing and adjusting only the encounter function (i.e. the 
function that binds prey and predator densities together with 
time, providing the dynamics of the encounter rates between 
interacting individuals).  

A proper integration of the existing models into the field 
of  cybersecurity  will  likely  involve  a  revision  of  the 
assumptions of different models of antagonistic interactions 
and relating them to the specific features of communication 
networks.  Specific  comparisons  are  necessary  to  elucidate 
the  shared  features  and  assumptions  at  the  interface  of 
biological  and  cyber  systems  –  such  comparative  analysis 
can  then  identify  models  that  are  the  most  accurate  in 
describing  cyber  reality  with  respect  to  the  antagonistic 
interactions. 

if 

can  be  present 

4.3 Antagonistic (parasitic) mimicry: Batesian mimicry 
Even without clear exploitation of material resources of the 
hosts,  parasitism 
information 
content/reliability is being exploited by one organism at the 
expense  of  the  costs  born  by  the  other  organism  [41].  One 
well-documented  example  of  such  behavior  is  parasitic 
mimicry,  which  is  relatively  inexpensive  to  the  mimicking 
organism  as  it  is  not  associated  with  weapons/toxins  this 
organism is pretending to have [42]. A well-known example 
is  the  Chrysotoxum  festivum  hoverfly  that  resembles  toxic 
and  stinging  insects  from  the  Hymenoptera  group.  By 
the  hoverfly  avoids  being 
expressing  warning  colors 
attacked and eaten, and on the other hand it does not have to 
invest resources in actually having a sting. 

Parasitic (Batesian) mimicry, due to its inexpensive nature, 
could  readily  be  used  in  security  applications  in  cyber 
systems.  The  mimic  could  be  the  security  algorithm  that 
could adopt some  features of the actual  hostile software to 
approach it and infiltrate without being detected [41]. Most 
existing models of Batesian mimicry operate on the balance 
between  costs  of  being  detected  and  the  benefits  of 
expressing certain masking phenotypes. Such models could 
be used to derive parameter ranges that ensure full masking 
in the cyber-ecosystem at the expense of the lowest possible 
resource allocation. 

 
 
 
 
 
4.4. Non-antagonistic interactions 

the 

dynamics 

Non-antagonistic  interactions  are  more  difficult  to  classify 
and organize, mostly because they combine intra- and inter-
species  processes.  There  exists  no  single  model  of 
synergistic  interactions  similar  to  the  seminal  Lotka-
Volterra  model;  however,  we  have  several  ways  of 
expressing 
interactions 
mathematically.  Non-antagonistic  interactions  that  play 
major  roles  in  development  of  cybersecurity  solutions 
encompass  all  of  the  above  sexual  selection/mate  choice 
processes,  and  symbiotic  interactions.  Both  have  the 
potential to substantially inform efforts to develop effective 
cybersecurity strategies; both also remain largely unstudied 
on  a  large,  inter-species  comparative  level  and  thus  are 
attractive targets of comparative biological research. 

such 

of 

4.5 Symbiotic interactions 

Symbiosis  is  thought  to  underlie  all  life  on  Earth  as, 
according  to  the  endosymbiosis  hypothesis,  all  eukaryotic 
cells are descendants of several prokaryotic organisms that 
merged together as symbionts, which gave rise to currently 
observed  organelles  such  us  chloroplasts  and  mitochondria 
[43]. Currently the most commonly known and well-studied 
examples of such interactions may serve as good models to 
derive  mathematical  parameters  that  can  be  used  in 
developing  cybersecurity  solutions.  From  an  evolutionary 
perspective,  the  symbiotic  interactions  can  be  readily 
modelled using the same mathematical reasoning as the one 
used in the Lotka-Volterra system, by modifying parameters 
of the equations so that interacting units benefit each other 
instead of harming [44]. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  cybersecurity  applications, 
symbiotic  interactions  may  potentially  play  roles  in  two 
scenarios.  For  one,  symbionts  in  a  cyber-ecosystem  could 
be  used  to  strengthen  the  protective/immunizing  effects  of 
applied 
techniques.  Multiple  symbiotic  entities  could 
enforce each others’ defensive strategies and achieve fuller 
protection  of  the  whole  system.  On  the  other  hand, 
symbiotic  interactions  are  intricately  associated  with  other 
close interactions. In fact, the Lotka-Volterra-like model of 
symbiotic interactions [44] predicts that they can easily turn 
into  parasitic 
the 
environment  of  symbionts  (e.g.  if  available  resources 
become  more  asymmetrically  exploited  by  one  of  the 
symbionts).  Thus,  such  models  are  also  able  to  provide  a 
testing space where a range of parameters that maintain the 
beneficial  symbiotic  interactions  could  be  tested.  In  fact, 
such models can also be used to derive alternative scenarios 
of  fighting  cyber  parasites  –  if  it  is  possible  to  “mutate” 
them and modify their responsiveness to the environment – 
changing a parasitic interaction into a symbiotic one with an 
artificially introduced additional organism [45]. 

if  conditions  shift 

interactions 

in 

interactions  occurs 

in 
A  special  case  of  synergistic 
cooperating  organisms  when  individuals  bear  costs  (often 
the  highest  fitness  costs, 
i.e.  by  postponing/entirely 
abandoning  reproduction)  and  benefit  other  individuals  by 
helping them (usually in the form of raising their offspring) 
[27]. The dynamics of such interactions is best known in the 
altruistic  forms  of  cooperation,  where  it  is  predicted  and 
described  by  the  Hamilton  inequality  [46]  that  binds  costs 
of the donor, benefit of the receiver, and their coefficient of 
relatedness that defines how costs and benefits are balanced 
on both sides of the interaction [46], [47]. In the context of 
this project, however, it is of a marginal importance – much 
more  important  kinds  of  cooperating  interactions  will  be 
those  encountered  between  non-related  individuals.  Such 
non-kin  cooperation  can  easily  be  incorporated  in  our 
system  (as  reciprocal  sharing  of  costs  and  achieved 
benefits),  however  this  field  of  ecology  is  still  strongly 
underrepresented  and  no  quantitative  models  exist  that 
could be used and developed in the context of the proposed 
project. 

4.6 Sexual selection 

From  the  point  of  view  of  cybersecurity,  sexual  selection 
may  be  the  most  difficult  but  also  the  most  potent 
interaction  that  could  be  exploited  [48].  The  biggest 
difficulty comes from the fact that sexual selection operates 
through  choice  of  the  most  suitable  mates  and  thus  would 
require  creating  and  maintaining  a  population  of  sexually 
reproducing  entities  that  would  use  cycles  of  selection  in 
order to evolve new, more effective ways of fighting enemy 
software  [28].  It  is  an  important  question  how  such 
selection would operate and currently evolutionary biology 
describes 
selection 
mechanisms. 

two  major 

classes  of 

sexual 

The first one, called “the good genes hypothesis” poses that 
selective  individuals  (in  nature  usually  females)  choose 
certain partners (usually  males) because they provide them 
with  “good  genes”  that  increase  offspring  viability  and 
fitness  [49].  Such  indirect  genetic  benefits  have  been 
demonstrated  in  many  animal  studies  and  are  a  well-
documented, although still weakly understood phenomenon 
[28], [29]. 

The  second  class  of  sexual  selection  drivers  falls  into  the 
“Fisherian runaway” category, where the preference of one 
sex (females) evolves as a self-perpetuating mechanism that 
exploits  certain  male  traits  and  is  fueled  by  a  positive 
feedback  loop  generated  by  the  strong  genetic  correlations 
between  female  preference  and  male  display  traits  [48], 
[49].  This  second  form  of  sexual  selection  has  also  been 
suggested  to  occur  in  nature  –  however  it  is  much  more 
difficult to find its place in the cybersecurity reality as this 
form of sexual selection is not directly associated with any 

fitness benefits  to females (apart from choosing  males that 
can  actually  afford  to  have  exaggerated  and  overgrown 
traits). 

Both  models  of  sexual  selection  are  governed  by  one 
common  mathematical  model  [50]  that  integrates  female 
preference (P), male display (D) and residual fitness effects 
(F). If we denote variance and covariance of specific traits 
as  V  and  C  (e.g.  V(P)  –  variance  in  preference;  C(PD)  – 
covariance between display and preference), b_s and b_n as 
respective selection gradients resulting from  sexual (s) and 
natural (n) selection, the joint dynamics of these traits  may 
be described as: 

Δ (

𝐷̅
𝑃̅
𝐹̅

) = (

) × ([

𝑏_𝑛(𝐷)
𝑏_𝑛(𝑃)
𝑏_𝑛(𝐹)

] +

.
.

𝑉(𝐷) 𝐶(𝑃𝐷) 𝐶(𝐹𝐷)
𝐶(𝐹𝑃)
𝑉(𝑃)
𝑉(𝐹)
.
𝑏_𝑠(𝐷)
𝑏_𝑠(𝑃)
𝑏_𝑠(𝐹)

𝑢(𝐷)
𝑢(𝑃)
𝑢(𝐹)

]) + (

[

), 

where  u  denotes  respective  changes  in  phenotypes’ 
values  due 
to  mutation.  Different  combinations  of 
parameters  of  this  model  yield  different  modes  of  sexual 
selection,  and  exploration of  these  values  within  the  ranges 
that are realistic to cyber systems will help uncover types of 
interactions that would be the most efficient in cybersecurity 
applications. 

V.  POTENTIAL BIO-INSPIRED RESEARCH DIRECTIONS FOR 
CYBERSECURITY 

After  defining  key  terms  related  to  cybersecurity  ecology, 
and  describing  most  important  models  that  characterize 
interactions between organisms in nature, the next step is to 
develop  a  “procedure”  that  will  result  in  the  potential  new 
research directions. The steps of such a procedure related to 
interactions are illustrated in Fig. 3. 

First, it is important to map existing offensive/defensive 
measures as well as interactions in both types of ecosystems. 
From  the  biology  perspective  this  includes  performing 
rigorous  meta-analyses  describing  comparatively  and 
phylogenetically 
defense/offense 
diversity 
mechanisms  present  in  nature  and  their  complexity  (e.g. 
their costs,  the  most optimal uses, their  diversity  at  various 
level of life organization). 

the 

of 

In the next step, the missing components in the virtual world 
that  could  be  potentially  ported  from  nature  should  be 
identified. All of the most promising candidates that do not 
have  counterparts  in  cyber  space  will  form  a  list  of  most 
suitable bio-inspirations. 

Fig. 3 Comparing interactions and components between ecology 
and cybersecurity ecology. 

In  the  last  step,  it  is  also  possible  to  identify  security-
related  components  that  exist  in  cybersecurity  but  that  are 
not  sufficiently  effective.  Then,  insights  from  mechanisms 
and relationships that exist in nature could provide important 
feedback  on  how  these  security  techniques  could  be 
improved. 

To  summarize,  we  believe  that  currently  the  most 

from 

promising research directions include: 
  Drawing 
further 

inspirations 

the  particular 
organism’s  characteristic  feature/defense  mechanism. 
For  example,  such  features  like  aposematism  (warning 
signal that is associated with the unprofitability of a prey 
item  to  potential  predators)  or  autotomy  (where  an 
animal  sheds  or  discards  one  or  more  of  its  own  body 
parts  to  elude  or  distract  the  predator)  could  readily 
become an inspiration for future cybersecurity solutions. 
  Careful  investigation  and  applying  knowledge  from  the 
mentioned  nature-based 
already 
observed  the  malware-host  scenario  is  more  similar  to 
association. 
parasite-host 
Therefore,  more  research  attention  should  be  turned  to 
the  models  and  achievements  of  biology  in  this  field. 
This  could  provide  many  new,  interesting  insights. 
Another research direction that we  believe has not been 
sufficiently explored is sexual interactions where e.g. the 
methods to become an attractive/unattractive target could 
be analyzed. 

interactions.  As 

predator-prey 

than 

to 

  Comparative  analysis  of  the  features  of  parasitic  and 
predatory systems  that expose their common underlying 
mechanisms  leading  to  their  description  within  the 
natural  enemy  framework.  Such  common  properties  of 
these  antagonistically  interacting  systems  may  be  the 
most  effective  points  (in  a  way  identified  by  long 
evolutionary  history  of  such  systems)  where  new 
approaches to cybersecurity can be developed. The most 
promising  avenues  in  this  group  of  issues  include  (i) 
induced/anticipatory mechanisms that lower the costs of 
maintaining  active  defense  mechanisms;  (ii)  enemy-
driven  facilitation  –  which,  by  exploiting  multiple 
enemies, may lead to the establishment of reinforcement 
mechanisms  that  increase  the  effectiveness  of  enemy 
elimination;  (iii)  transmission  threshold  management 
which  can  provide  tools  to  minimize  the  effort  in 
eliminating  threats,  while  maximizing  the  achieved 
security gain. 

 
 
 
 
VI.  CONCLUSIONS 

This paper presents a systematic ecology-based approach to 
cybersecurity.  Based  on  the  observation  of  the  significant 
fragmentation of achievements and knowledge in the field of 
bio-inspired  cybersecurity,  we  propose  a  cyber-ecosystem, 
cybersecurity ecology, and related terminology that may be 
used 
study  offensive/defensive  mechanisms  and 
interactions  among  cyber-organisms  and/or  between  cyber-
organisms  and  their  environment.  In  our  opinion  this  helps 
to  identify  new  potential  future  research  directions  for  bio-
inspired cybersecurity. 

to 

REFERENCES 

[1]  D.  Yardon,  “Symantec  Develops  New  Attack  on  Cyberhacking”, 
URL: 
Wall 
http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB100014240527023034171045795421
40235850578 

Journal, 

Street 

2014, 

May 

[2]  W.  Mazurczyk,  E.  Rzeszutko,  Security  –  a  perpetual  war:  lessons 
from  nature.  IEEE  IT  Professional,  vol.  17,  no.  1,  pp.  16-22, 
January/February 2015 

[3]  Hofmeyr  S  A,  An  Immunological  Model  of  Distributed  Detection 
and  Its  Application  to  Computer  Security,  Ph.D.  Thesis,  University 
of New Mexico, 1999. 

[4]  Zou  C  C,  Gong  W,  Towsley  D,  Gao  L,  The  monitoring  and  early 
detection of internet worms, IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking 
(TON) 13 (5) (2005) 961–974.  

[5]  Ford  R,  Bush  M,  Bulatov  A,  Predation  and  the  cost  of  replication: 
New  approaches  to  malware  prevention?,  Computers  &  Security, 
Volume 25, Issue 4, June 2006, Pages 257-264 

[6]  Crandall J R, Ladau J, Ensafi R, Shebaro B, Forrest S, The Ecology 
of  Malware,  Proceedings  of  the  New  security  paradigms  Workshop 
(NSPW '08), pp. 99-106, Lake Tahoe, CA, USA. 

[7]  Blumstein  D  T,  Fourteen  lessons  from  anti-predator  behaviour,  In: 
Natural  security:  A  Darwinian  approach  to  a  dangerous  world  (R. 
Sagarin and T. Taylor, eds.). U. California Press, 147-158, 2008. 
[8]  Okhravi H, Hobson T, Bigelow D, Streilein W.  Finding Focus in the 
Blur of Moving-Target Techniques. IEEE Security & Privacy, vol.12, 
no. 2, pp. 16-26, Mar.-Apr. 2014 

[9]  de  Castro,  L.  N.,  &  Von  Zuben,  F.  J.  (2000).  The  clonal  selection 
algorithm with engineering applications. In Genetic and Evolutionary 
Computation Conference (GECCO) (pp. 36-37). Las Vegas, USA 
[10]  Greensmith,  J.  (2007).  The  dendritic  cell  algorithm,  PhD  Thesis, 

University of Nottingham, UK. 

[11]  Hart,  E.,  &  Timmis,  J.  (2008).  Application  areas  of  AIS:  The  past, 
the present and the future. Applied Soft Computing, 8, 191-201. 
[12]  Fink, G.A.; Haack, J.N.; McKinnon, A.D.; Fulp, E.W., "Defense on 
the  Move:  Ant-Based  Cyber  Defense,"  Security  &  Privacy,  IEEE  , 
vol.12, no.2, pp.36,43, Mar.-Apr. 2014 

[13]  Sean  P.  Gorman,  Rajendra  G.  Kulkarni,  Laurie  A.  Schintler,  and 
Roger  R.  Stough.  2004.  A  predator  prey  approach  to  the  network 
structure  of  cyberspace.  In  Proceedings  of  the  winter  international 
synposium  on 
technologies 
(WISICT '04). Trinity College Dublin 1-6. 

Information  and  communication 

[14]  Kephart  J,  White  S.  Measuring  and  modeling  computer  virus 
prevalence.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  1993  IEEE  computer  society 
symposium on research in security and privacy, Oakland, California; 
May 24–25, 1993. p. 2–14. 

[15]  Romualdo  Pastor-Satorras  and  Alessandro  Vespignani,  Epidemic 
Spreading in  Scale-Free  Networks,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett. 86, 3200,  April 
2001 

[16]  Hooman Mohajeri Moghaddam, Baiyu Li, Mohammad Derakhshani, 
and  Ian  Goldberg.  2012.  SkypeMorph:  protocol  obfuscation  for  Tor 
bridges.  In  Proceedings  of  the  2012  ACM  conference  on  Computer 

and  communications  security  (CCS  '12).  ACM,  New  York,  NY, 
USA, 97-108 

[17]  G.  D.  Ruxton,  T.  N.  Sherratt,  ,  and  M.  P.  Speed.  Avoiding  Attack: 
The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Warning Signals and Mimicry. 
Oxford University Press, 2004. 

[18]  E.  Zielinska,  W.  Mazurczyk,  K.  Szczypiorski 

in 
Steganography - Communications of the ACM, vol 57, No.2, March 
2014, pp. 86-95 

-  Trends 

[19]  Stenseth  N.C.,  Smith  J.M.  1984.  Coevolution  in  Ecosystems:  Red 

Queen Evolution or Stasis? Evolution 38(4): 870-880. 

[20]  Moore  P.S.,  Boschoff  C.,  Weiss  R.A.,  Chang  Y.  1996.  Molecular 
Mimicry of Human Cytokine and Cytokine Response Pathway Genes 
by KSHV. Science, 274(5293): 1739-1744. 

[21]  How  MJ,  Zanker  JM.  2014.  Motion  camouflage  induced  by  zebra 

stripes. Zoology. 117(3): 163-170. 

[22]  Delves  P.J.,  Martin  S.J.,  Burton  D.R.,  Roitt  I.M.  2011.  Essential 

Immunology. Wiley-Blackwell. 

[23]  Krebs  C.J.  2009.  Ecology:  the  experimental  analysis  of  distribution 

and abundance. Bejamin Cummings, San Fransisco, USA. 

[24]  Rooney  N,  McCann  KS.  2012.  Integrating  food  web  diversity, 
structure and stability. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 27(10: 40-
46. 

[25]  Ings  TC.  Et  al.  2009.  Review:  Ecological  networks  –  beyond  food 

webs. Journal of Animal Ecology 78(1) 253-269. 

[26]  Axelrod  R,  Hamilton  WD.  1981.  The  evolution  of  cooperation. 

Science, 211(4489): 1390-1396. 

[27]  Riolo  RL,  Cohen  MD,  Axelrod  R.  2001.  Evolution  of  cooperation 

without reciprocity. Nature 414: 441-443. 

[28]  Andersson M. 1995. Sexual selection. Princeton University Press. 
[29]  NeffBD,  Pitcher  TE.  2005.  Genetic  quality  and  sexual  selection:  an 
integrated  framework  for  good  genes  and  compatible  genes. 
Molecular Ecology, 14(1): 19-38. 

[30]  Miner  BG,  Sultan  SE,  Morgan  SG,  padilla  DK,  Relyea  RA. 
Ecological consequences of phenotypic plasticity. Trends in Ecology 
and Evolution 20(12): 685-692 

[31]  Whorf  BL.  Language,  thought,  and  reality:  selected  writings  of 
Benjamin  Lee  Whorf.  In:  Carroll  JB,  editor.  Cambridge,  MA:  MIT 
Press; 1956 

[32]  R.  Raffel,  L.B.  Martin,  J.R.  Rohr.  2008.  Parasites  as  predators: 
unifying  natural  enemy  ecology.  Trends  in  Ecology  and  Evolution 
23(11): 610-618. 

[33]  T.  Royama.  1971.  Comparative  study  of  models  for  predation  and 
parasitism. Researches of Population Ecology 13(Supp 1): 1-91. 
[34]  M.F.  Benard.  2004.  Predator-induced  phenotypic  plasticity  in 
organisms  with  complex  life  histories.  Annual  Review  of  Ecology 
Evolution and Systematics 35: 651-673. 

[35]  R. Sorek, V. Kunin, P. Hugenholtz. CRISPR — a widespread system 
that  provides  acquired  resistance  against  phages  in  bacteria  and 
archaea. Nature Reviews Microbiology 6: 181-186. 

[36]  S.  Altizer,  A.  Dobson,  P.  Hosseini,  P.  Hudson,  M.  Pascual,  P. 
Rohani. 2006. Seasonality and the dynamics of oinfectious diseases. 
Ecology Letters 9: 467-484. 

[37]  J.F.  Bruno,  J.J.  Stachowicz,  M.D.  Bertness.  2003.  Inclusion  of 
facilitation into  ecological  theory.  Trends  in  Ecology  and  Evolution 
18(3): 119-125. 

[38]  C.S. Holling. 1961. Principles of insect predation. Annual Review of 

Entomology 6:163-182. 

[39]  V.S. Ivlev. 1955. Experimental ecology of the feeding of fishes. Yale 

University Press, New Haven, USA. 

[40]  K.E.F.  Watt.  1961.  Mathematical  models  for  use  in  insect  control. 

Canadian Entomology Supplement 19: 1- 62. 

[41]  D.W. Franks. 2005. Modelling the Evolution of Warning Signals and 
mimicry  with  Individual-Based  Simulations.  University  of  Leeds, 
leeds, UK. 

[42]  D.W.  Pfennig,  W.R.  Harcombe,  K.S.  Pfennig.  2001.  Frequency-

[47]  M.A.  Nowak.  2006.  Five  rules  for  the  evolution  of  cooperation. 

dependent Batesian mimicry. Nature 410(323): 134-136. 

Science 314(5805): 1560-1563. 

[43]  D.  Futuyma. 2015. Evolution.  Sinauer  Associates,  Sunderland, MA, 

USA. 

[44]  C.  Neuchauser,  J.E.  Fargione.  2004.  A  mutualism–parasitism 
to  plant–mycorrhizae 

continuum  model  and 
interactions. Ecological Modelling 177(3-4): 337-352. 

its  application 

[45]  K.L.  Cheney,  I.M.  Cote.  2005.  Mutualism  or  parasitism?  The 
variable  outcome  of  cleaning  symbioses.  Proceedings  of  the  Royal 
Society B 1(2): 12-19. 

[46]  R.  Axelrod,  W.D.  Hamilton.  1981.  The  evolution  of  cooperation. 

Science 211(4489): 1390-1396. 

[48]  Z.  M.  Prokop,  Ł.  Michalczyk,  S.M.  Drobniak,  M.  Herdegen,  J. 
Radwan.  2010.  META‐ANALYSIS  SUGGESTS  CHOOSY 
FEMALES  GET  SEXY  SONS  MORE  THAN  “GOOD  GENES”. 
Evolution 66(9): 2665-2673. 

[49]  S.  M.  Drobniak,  A.  Arct,  M.  Cichoń.  2015.  Extrapair  paternity  and 
genetic  similarity—we  are  not  quite  there  yet:  a  response  to 
comments on Arct et al. Behavioral Ecology 26(4): 973-974. 

[50]  H.  Kokko,  M.D.  Jennions,  R.  Brooks.  2006.  Unifying  and  testing 
models of sexual selection. Annual review of Ecology Evolution and 
Systematics 37: 43-66. 

 
 
