4th Cyber Security and Privacy EU Forum, CSP Forum 2015, Revised Selected Papers, to Appear.
Author’s accepted version.

5
1
0
2

l
u
J

1
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
0
8
9
5
0
.
6
0
5
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Towards a New Paradigm for Privacy and
Security in Cloud Services

Thomas Lor¨unser1, Charles Bastos Rodriguez2, Denise Demirel3, Simone
Fischer-H¨ubner4, Thomas Groß5, Thomas L¨anger6, Mathieu des Noes7,
Henrich C. P¨ohls8, Boris Rozenberg9, and Daniel Slamanig10

1 AIT Austrian Institute of Technology, Vienna
2 ATOS Spain S.A., Spain
3 Technische Universit¨at Darmstadt, Germany
4 Karlstad University, Sweden
5 Newcastle University, UK
6 University of Lausanne, Switzerland
7 Commissariat `a l’´energie atomique et aux ´energies alternatives, France
8 University of Passau, Germany
9 IBM Haifa Research Lab, Israel
10 Graz University of Technology, Austria

Abstract. The market for cloud computing can be considered as the
major growth area in ICT. However, big companies and public authori-
ties are reluctant to entrust their most sensitive data to external parties
for storage and processing. The reason for their hesitation is clear: There
exist no satisfactory approaches to adequately protect the data during its
lifetime in the cloud. The EU Project Prismacloud (Horizon 2020 pro-
gramme; duration 2/2015-7/2018) addresses these challenges and yields
a portfolio of novel technologies to build security enabled cloud services,
guaranteeing the required security with the strongest notion possible,
namely by means of cryptography. We present a new approach towards
a next generation of security and privacy enabled services to be deployed
in only partially trusted cloud infrastructures.

Keywords: Secure cloud computing, cryptography, privacy, informa-
tion theoretic security, usability, security by design

1

Introduction

Today, cloud computing is already omnipresent and starts pervading all aspects
of our life, whether in the private area or in the business domain. The annual
market value related to cloud computing is estimated to be in the region of USD
150 billion, and will probably grow by the year 2018 to around USD 200 bil-
lion [35,32]. The European Commission (EC) promotes in its strategy ”Digital
Agenda for Europe / Europe 2020” the rapid adoption of cloud computing in
all sectors of the economy to boost productivity. Furthermore, the EC concludes
that “cloud computing has the potential to slash users’ IT expenditure and to

 
 
 
 
 
 
enable many new services to be developed. Using the cloud, even the smallest
ﬁrms can reach out to ever larger markets while governments can make their
services more attractive and eﬃcient even while reining in spending.” [14].

However, besides these advantages of cloud computing, many new problems
arise which are not yet suﬃciently solved, especially with respect to informa-
tion security and privacy. The fundamental concept of the cloud is storage and
processing by a third party, i.e., the cloud or service provider, which actually
invalidates the traditional view of a perimeter in IT security. In fact, the third
party becomes part of the company’s own computation and storage IT infras-
tructure albeit not being under its full control. This situation is very problematic
and recent incidents show that economic incentives and legal tools used to in-
crease trust in the service provider, e.g. Service Level Agreements, are by far not
suﬃcient to guard personal data and trade secrets against illegal interceptions,
insider threats, or vulnerabilities exposing data in the cloud to unauthorized par-
ties. While being processed by a provider, data is typically neither adequately
protected against unauthorized read access, nor against unwanted modiﬁcation,
or loss of authenticity. Consequently, in the most prominent cloud deployment
model today – the public cloud – the cloud service provider necessarily needs to
be trusted. Security guarantees with respect to user data can only be given on
a contractual basis and rest to a considerable extent on organisational (besides
technical) precautions. Hence, outsourcing IT tasks to an external shared infras-
tructure builds upon a problematic trust model. This situation inhibits many
companies in the high-assurance and high-security area to beneﬁt from external
cloud oﬀerings: for them conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability are of such
major importance that adequate technical measures are required—but state-of-
the-art ICT can currently not provide them. Moreover, individuals using public
cloud services face a considerable privacy threat too, since they typically expose
more information to services than required to perform the task. In all cases, in
the end the cloud user is responsible for his or her data and outsourcing sensi-
tive tasks to an external entity does not remove this burden. Therefore, novel
security and privacy preserving methods need to be developed to facilitate cloud
usage even for organisations dealing with sensitive information.

In this work we present a new approach towards cloud security which is de-
veloped by the Prismacloud consortium within the EU Horizon 2020 research
framework. The vision of Prismacloud is to develop the next-generation of
cryptographically secured cloud services with security and privacy built in by
design. For us, the only reasonable way to achieve the required security properties
for outsourced data storage and processing is by adopting suitable cryptographic
mechanisms. Prismacloud shall impact through the development of next gen-
eration secure cloud services (i) to achieve beneﬁcial impact in society, industry,
and research in Europe (ii) to remove a major inhibitor against cloud adoption
in security relevant domains (iii) by developing cloud applications, that preserve
more privacy for citizens, (iv) for delivering input and strengthening the position
of European industries, (v) to strengthen European research in a ﬁeld with high
research competition.

2 A New Take on Cloud Security

2.1 Relevance and Project Objectives

The importance of security for cloud computing is now widely accepted [10,15,28]
and security research for cloud computing is gaining tremendous momentum. It
is of major importance for security research to catch up with the rapid devel-
opments in cloud computing before the ongoing transition to the cloud reaches
critical areas. Future solutions for cloud deployment must be secure by design
and provide end-to-end security for users to the best extent possible.

In the long-term, cloud computing will inﬂuence many important aspects of
our lives and will likely have an enormous impact on our society. The European
Commission already recognised the potential future impact of cloud computing
for all of us and has issued a cloud computing strategy [14] to protect European
citizens from potential threats, while simultaneously unleashing the potential of
cloud computing, for both the industry/public sector as well as for individuals.
Many initiatives with these goals are currently either ongoing, or are going to
be formed in the nearer future, and a substantial eﬀort is put into cloud secu-
rity research through the EU-research framework. However, there are still many
unsolved problems and there is ample room for innovation. We will contribute
innovations to that ﬁeld and are targeting the development of next-generation
secure and trustworthy cloud environments. The ambition of Prismacloud is
to build trustworthy cloud services on top of untrusted infrastructure by the
development and application of adequate cryptography and methodologies.

The main objectives of Prismacloud are: (i) to develop next-generation
cryptographically secured services for the cloud. This includes the development
of novel cryptographic tools, mechanisms, and techniques ready to be used in
a cloud environment to protect the security of data over its lifecycle and to
protect the privacy of the users. The security shall be based on ’by design’
principles. (ii) to assess and validate the project results by fully developing and
implementing three realistic use case scenarios in the areas of e-government,
healthcare, and smart city services. (iii) to conduct a thorough analysis of the
security of the ﬁnal systems, their usability, as well as legal and information
governance aspects of the new services.

2.2 State of the Art
Ongoing research activities like SECCRIT, Cumulus, and PASSIVE1 are ex-
tremely valuable and will be setting the standards and guidelines for secure cloud
computing in the next years. However, these approaches consider the cloud in-
frastructure provider as being trustworthy in the sense that no information of
the customers, i.e., tenants, will be leaked, nor their data will be tampered with.
The cloud infrastructure provider, however, has unrestricted access to all phys-
ical and virtual resources and thus absolute control over all tenants’ data and
1 EU-FP7:

http://www.cumulus-project.eu/,

http://www.seccrit.eu/,

http://ict-passive.eu/

resources. The underlying assumption is, that if the cloud provider performs ma-
licious actions against its customers, in the long run, he or she will be put out of
business – if such doings are revealed. However, this assumption is very strong,
especially considering the ongoing revelation of intelligence agencies’ data gath-
ering activities. Data disclosure may even be legally enforced in a way completely
undetectable by the cloud provider’s customers.

Through auditing and monitoring of cloud services, some of the malicious
behaviour of outsiders and insiders (e.g. disgruntled employees with administra-
tor privileges) may be detectable ex-post, however, that does not help a speciﬁc
victim to prevent or survive such an attack. Moreover, advanced cyber-attacks
directly targeting a speciﬁc victim can barely be detected and prevented with
cloud auditing mechanisms or anomaly detection solutions. These methods are
more eﬃcient for the detection of large scale threats and problems and for mak-
ing the infrastructure itself resilient, while keeping an acceptable level of service.
Other projects, like TClouds and PRACTICE2 take cloud security a step
further: TClouds already considers the impact of malicious provider behaviour
and tries to protect users. However, it is not strongly focusing on comprehen-
sive integration of cryptography up to the level of end-to-end security. PRAC-
TICE, in contrast, is well aligned with our idea of secure services. However, it
focuses mainly on the preservation of data conﬁdentiality for processing, when
outsourced to the cloud. This is achieved by means of secure multiparty compu-
tations and concepts from fully homomorphic encryption. Prismacloud is com-
plimentary to these concepts and enhance them with cryptographic primitives
for the veriﬁcation of outsourced computation and other relevant functionality
to be carried out on the data in the untrusted cloud.

Research activities in context of privacy in cloud computing were and are
currently conducted by various projects like ABC4Trust, A4Cloud and AU2EU3.
Prismacloud complements these eﬀorts by relying on and further developing
privacy-enhancing technologies for the use in cloud based environments.

2.3 Main Goal and Innovations

The main goal of Prismacloud is to enable the deployment of highly critical
data to the cloud. The required security levels for such a move shall be achieved
by means of novel security enabled cloud services, pushing the boundary of
cryptographic data protection in the cloud further ahead. Prismacloud core
innovations include: (i) Techniques for outsourcing computation with veriﬁable
correctness and authenticity-preservation for allowing secure delegation of com-
putations to cloud providers. (ii) The provision of cryptographic techniques for
the veriﬁcation of claims about the secure connection and conﬁguration of the
virtualized cloud infrastructures. (iii) Addressing user privacy issues by cryp-
tographic data minimization and anonymization technologies. (iv) Improving
anonymization techniques for very large data sets in terms of performance and

2 EU-FP7: http://www.tclouds-project.eu, http://www.practice-project.eu/
3 EU-FP7: https://abc4trust.eu, http://www.a4cloud.eu, http://www.au2eu.eu

utility. (v) A distributed multi-cloud data storage architecture for sharing data
among several cloud providers and thus improving data security and availabil-
ity. Dynamically updating distributed data by means of novel techniques shall
avoid vendor lock-in and promote a dynamic cloud provider market, while pre-
serving data authenticity and facilitating long term data privacy with proac-
tive secret sharing. (vi) Advanced format and order preserving encryption and
tokenisation schemes for seamless integration of encryption into existing cloud
services. (vii) The Prismacloud work program is complemented with activities
addressing secure user interfaces, secure service composition, secure implemen-
tation in software and hardware, security certiﬁcation, and an impact analysis
from an end-user view. In order to converge with the European Cloud Com-
puting Strategy, a strategy for the dissemination of results into standards is
developed. (viii) As feasibility proof, three use cases from the ﬁelds of SmartC-
ity, e-Government, and e-Health will be fully implemented and evaluated by the
project participants.

3 Veriﬁability of Data, Processing and Infrastructure

3.1 Veriﬁable and Authenticity Preserving Data Processing

Veriﬁable computing aims at outsourcing computations to one or more untrusted
processing units in a way that the result of a computation can be eﬃciently
checked for validity. General purpose constructions for veriﬁable computations
have made signiﬁcant process over the last years [36], there are already various
implemented systems which can be deemed nearly practical, but are not yet
ready for real-world deployment. Besides general purpose systems, there are
other approaches that are optimized for speciﬁc (limited) classes of computations
or particular settings, e.g, [2,16,8].

In addition to veriﬁability of computations, another interesting aspect is to
preserve the authenticity of data that is manipulated by computations. Tools
for preserving authenticity under admissible modiﬁcations are (fully) homomor-
phic signatures (or message authentication codes) [7]. Besides this general tool,
there are signatures with more restricted capabilities, like redactable signatures
introduced in [24,34], which have recently shown to oﬀer interesting applica-
tions [31,21]. These and other functional and malleable signatures will be devel-
oped further within Prismacloud to meet requirements set by cloud applica-
tions.

By combining these cryptographic concepts, Prismacloud aims at provid-
ing tools that allow to realize processes (with potentially various participating
entities) that guarantee to preserve the authenticity and provide veriﬁable of
involved data and computations respectively.

3.2 Integrity and Certiﬁcation of Virtualized Infrastructure

The area of structural integrity and certiﬁcation of virtualized infrastructures
bridges between three areas: attestation of component integrity, security assur-
ance of cloud topologies and graph signatures [18,19] to connect these areas.

Attestation is the process in which a trusted component asserts the state of a
physical or virtual component of the virtualized infrastructure, on all the layers
of it. Cloud security assurance refers to a research area and line of cloud security
tools, in which recent proposals included the analysis of cloud topologies for se-
curity properties. Graph signatures, that is, signatures on committed graphs are
a new primitive we investigate within Prismacloud. Such a signature scheme
allows a recipient of a signature to commit a hidden graph and have an issuer
sign the recipient-committed graph while joining it with an issuer-committed
graph. The resulting signature allows the recipient to prove in zero-knowledge
properties of the graph, such as connectivity isolation.

Within Prismacloud we develop and optimize the use of graph signatures
for practical use in virtualized infrastructures. Their application allows an audi-
tor to analyse the conﬁguration of a cloud, and issue a signature on its topology.
The signature encodes the topology as a graph in a special way, such that the
cloud provider can use it to prove in zero-knowledge high-level security properties
such as isolation of tenants to veriﬁers, such as the tenants, without disclosure
of secret information. Further, we will bride between cloud security assurance
and veriﬁcation methodology and certiﬁcation by establishing a framework that
issues signatures and proves security properties based on standard graph models
of cloud topologies and security goals in formal language (VALID).

4 User Privacy Protection and Usability

4.1 Privacy Preserving Service Usage

For many services in the cloud it is important that users are given means to
prove their authorisation to perform or delegate a certain task. However, it is not
always necessary that users reveal their full identity to the cloud, but only prove
by some means that they are authorised, e.g., possess certain rights. The main
obstacle in this context is, that a cloud provider must still be cryptographically
reassured that the user is authorised.

Attribute-based anonymous credential (ABC) systems have proved to be an
important concept for privacy-preserving applications as they allow users to
authenticate in an anonymous way without revealing more information than
absolutely necessary to be authenticated at a service and there are strong eﬀorts
to bring them to practice4. Well known ABC systems are for instance the multi-
show system Idemix [5] and the one-show system U-Prove [29]. Recently also
some alternative approaches for ABC systems from malleable signature schemes
[6,9] and a variant of structure-preserving signatures [22] have been proposed.

In Prismacloud we aim at improving the state of the art in anonymous cre-
dential systems and group signature schemes with a focus on their application
in cloud computing services. Besides traditional application such as for anony-
mous authentication and authorization we will also investigate their application
to privacy-preserving billing [11,33] for cloud storage and computing services.

4 e.g., ABC4Trust: https://abc4trust.eu/

4.2 Big Data Anonymization

Anonymizing data sets is a problem which is often encountered when providing
data for processing in cloud applications in a way, that a certain degree of privacy
is guaranteed. However, e.g. achieving optimal k-anonymity is known to be an
NP-hard problem. Typically, researchers have focused on achieving k-anonymity
with minimum data loss, thus maximizing the utility of the anonymised results.
But all of these techniques assume that the dataset to be anonymised is relatively
small (and ﬁts into computer memory). In the last few years several attempts
have been made to tackle the problem of anonymising large datasets.

In Prismacloud, we aim to improve existing anonymisation techniques in
terms of both performance and utility (minimizing information loss) for very
large data sets. We strive to overcome deﬁciencies in current mechanisms, e.g.
size limitations, speed, assumptions about quasi-identiﬁers, or existence of total
ordering, and implement a solution suitable for very large data sets. In addition,
we propose to address issues related to distribution of very large data sets.

5 Securing Data at Rest

5.1 Conﬁdentiality and Integrity for Unstructured Data

Protecting customer data managed in the cloud from unauthorised access by the
cloud provider itself should be one of the most basic and essential functionalities
of a cloud system. However, the vast majority of current cloud oﬀerings does
not provide such a functionality. One reason for this situation is, that current
cryptographic solutions can not be easily integrated without drastically limiting
the capabilities of the storage service.

In PRISMACLOUD, we aim at researching and developing novel secure stor-
age solutions with increased ﬂexibility based on secret sharing. Secret sharing
was invented in the late nineteen-seventies and has become a vital primitive in
many cryptographic tasks. It can also be used to provide conﬁdentiality for data
at rest with strong security in a key-less manner when working in a distributed
setting. Various systems have been proposed during the last years, but most of
them work in rather naive single user approaches and require a trusted proxy
in their setting. First approaches to support multiple users have been proposed
in a combination with quorum based meta-data management, but still rely on
passive storage nodes. Recently, a new type was proposed, using active nodes
to fully delegate secure multi-user storage to the cloud. It combines eﬃcient
Byzantine protocols with various types of secret sharing protocols to cope with
diﬀerent adversary settings in a ﬂexible way. However, many desired features, as
well as a trustworthy distributed access control mechanism are still missing.

Our goal is to develop eﬃcient and ﬂexible secret sharing based storage so-
lutions for dynamic environments, like the cloud, supporting diﬀerent adversary
models (active, passive, mixed). The research will focus on the design of multi-
user storage systems in a distributed fashion, without single-point-of-trust and
single-point-of-failure and how they can be extended with access privacy.

5.2 Long-term Security Aspects and Everlasting Privacy

To provide protection goals, such as integrity, authenticity, and conﬁdentiality
in the long-term, classic cryptographic primitives like digital signatures and en-
cryption schemes are not suﬃcient. They become insecure when their security
properties are defeated by advances in computer power or cryptanalytic tech-
niques. Thus, the only approach known to address long-term conﬁdentiality is
by using proactive secret sharing, e.g. [20]. In this approach, the data is split into
several shares that are stored in diﬀerent locations and are renewed from time
to time. Although secret sharing is needed to provide long-term conﬁdentiality,
there is no approach that considers performing publicly or privately veriﬁable
computations or integrity preserving modiﬁcations on secret shares yet. Besides
the distributed storage of data, to provide everlasting privacy (or conﬁdential-
ity) for data processed in a publicly veriﬁable manner, the information published
for auditing needs to be information-theoretically secure. Only a few solutions
address this and only for speciﬁc problems, such as veriﬁable anonymisation of
data [4] and veriﬁable tallying of votes, e.g. [26]. No general applicable solution
is provided, nor do existing approaches show how authenticated data can be
processed in a publicly veriﬁable way. Therefore, we aim at providing solutions
for proactive secret sharing of authenticated data and techniques that allow for
privately and publicly veriﬁable computations.

5.3 Cryptography for Seamless Service Integration

Considering existing applications in the cloud, it may be impossible to trans-
parently add security features later on, e.g., to store encrypted data in the
same database table used for unencrypted data, and applications running on
the database may be unable to use the encrypted data, causing them to crash
or alternatively, to output incorrect values. Standard encryption schemes are
designed for bit-strings of a ﬁxed length, and can therefore signiﬁcantly alter the
data format, which may cause disruptions both in storing and using the data.

To address this problem, techniques like Format-Preserving Encryption (FPE),

Order-Preserving Encryption (OPE) and Tokenizaiton have emerged as most
useful tools. In FPE schemes the encrypted ciphertexts have the same format as
the messages, i.e. they can be directly applied without adapting the application
itself. OPE schemes on the other hand, maintain the order between messages in
the original domain, thus allowing execution of range queries on encrypted data.
In Prismacloud we aim to address the shortcomings of the existing FPE
and OPE schemes. It can be shown that existing FPE schemes for general for-
mats, e.g. name, address, etc., are ineﬃcient, lack in their security level, and do
not provide a clear way for format deﬁnition, thus making them practically un-
usable. We propose to address both issues (security and eﬃciency) and develop
an FPE scheme for general formats that: (i) is more eﬃcient; (ii) provides an ac-
ceptable security guarantee; (iii) supports complex format deﬁnition; (iv) could
be employed to solve practical problems, e.g. data sharing for cluster of private
clouds. For OPE we aim to analyze further the existing approaches from both

security and performance perspectives (and/or develop our own technique) and
implement the option that provides a suitable security-functionality trade-oﬀ for
a given set of applications/use cases.

6 Methodology, Tools and Guidelines for Fast Adoption

6.1 Holistic Security Models

The paradigm of service orientation [13] has increasingly been adopted as one
of the main approaches for developing complex distributed systems out of re-
usable components called services. We want to use the potential beneﬁts of this
software engineering approach, but not build yet another semi-automated or
automated technique for service composition. However, combining the building
blocks of Prismacloud correctly would require the developers to have a solid
understanding of their cryptographic strength.

To allow composing the building blocks into secure higher level services, we
will identify which existing models for the security of compositions are adequate
to deal with the complexity and heterogeneity. Prismacloud will adopt work-
ing and established solutions and assumes that the working way of composing
services can be a way to allow secure composition. When each service can be de-
scribed using standard description languages this allows extending composition
languages [3] to provide further capabilities, e.g., orchestrations, security, trans-
action, to service-oriented solutions [30]. In Prismacloud we want to reduce the
complexity further, just like recently, mashups [12] of web APIs provided means
for non-experts to deﬁne simple workﬂows. Within Prismacloud we will de-
velop a description of not only the functionality of each cryptographic building
block but also of their limitations and composability.

6.2 Human Computer Interaction (HCI) Concepts

Cryptographic concepts such as secret sharing, veriﬁable computation or anony-
mous credentials, are fundamental technologies for secure cloud services and to
preserve end users’ privacy by enforcing data minimization. End users are still
unfamiliar with such data minimization technologies that are counterintuitive
to them and for which no obvious real-world analogies exist. In previous HCI
studies, it has been shown that users have therefore diﬃculties to develop the
correct mental models for data minimisation techniques such as anonymous cre-
dentials [37] or the new German identity card [23]. Moreover, end users often
do not trust the claim that such privacy-enhancing technologies will really pro-
tect their privacy [1]. Similarly, users may not trust claims of authenticity and
veriﬁability functionality of malleable and of functional signature schemes. In
our earlier research work, we have explored diﬀerent ways in which compre-
hensive mental models of the data minimization property of anonymous cre-
dentials can be evoked on end users [37]. Prismacloud extends this work by
conducting research on suitable metaphors for evoking correct mental models

for other privacy-enhancing protocols and cryptographic schemes used in Pris-
macloud. Besides, it researches what social trust factors can establish trust in
Prismacloud technology and how this can be matched into the user interfaces.

6.3 Secure Cloud Usage for End-Users

The cloud computing services market is currently soaring and already in the
range of USD 100 billion, with an outlook onto a bright economic future with
projected steep annual growth rates varying between 10 and 20% [35,32]. The
huge interest in inﬂuencing market development and securing a proper share
of the market is also visible in the manifold industry-driven standardization ef-
forts5. Following Key Action 1 “Cutting through the Jungle of Standards” of
the European Commission’s Cloud Computing Strategy [14], we will take a cau-
tious approach with regard to a potential introduction of project results into a
standardization process.

The crucial role of data security in cloud applications is widely recognized.
Previous studies have shown the vulnerability of information and communication
technology systems, and especially also of cloud systems, to illegal and criminal
activities [17]. We will take a critical appraisal of the secure cloud systems pro-
posed in Prismacloud and will analyze, whether they live up to the security
promises in practical application. We will give an indication for individuals, and
for corporate and institutional security managers, what it means in practice to
entrust sensitive data in speciﬁc use cases to systems claiming to implement,
e.g.,“everlasting privacy” [27].

Besides licit use, we will assess the impact of potential criminal uses and
misuses of the secure cloud infrastructures to foster, enhance, and promote cy-
bercrime. We want to anticipate threats resulting from misuse, deception, hijack-
ing, or misappropriation by licit entities. We will map implications originating
in technical details and in the operation or usage of systems in speciﬁc environ-
ments, to high level security objectives which can be understood and relied on
in high-level security management practice [25].

7 Conclusion

According to the importance of the project goals, i.e., to enable secure depend-
able cloud solutions, Prismacloud will have a signiﬁcant impact in many areas.
On a European level, Prismacloud’s disruptive potential of results lies in its
provision of a basis for the actual implementation and deployment of security
enabled cloud services. Jointly developed by European scientists and industrial
experts, the technology can act as an enabling technology in many sectors, like
health care, e-government, smart cities. Increasing adoption of cloud services,
with all its positive impact on productivity, and creation of jobs may be stimu-
lated. On a societal level, Prismacloud potentially removes a major roadblock

5 several consortia are listed at http://cloud-standards.org

towards the adoption of eﬃcient cloud solutions to a potential beneﬁt of the
end-users. Through the use of privacy-preserving data minimization functional-
ities, and depersonalization features, the amount of data being collected about
end-users may eﬀectively be reduced, maintaining the full functionality of the
services. We will explicitly analyse potential negative consequences, and po-
tential misuses (cybercrime) of secure cloud services. The potential impact for
European industry is huge: Prismacloud results may contribute to pull some
of the business currently concentrated in the United States of America to Europe
and create sustainable business opportunities for companies in Europe. Equally
important is the potential impact of Prismacloud for the European scientiﬁc
community, as its results will be very much on the edge of scientiﬁc research.

References

1. Andersson, C., Camenisch, J., Crane, S., Fischer-H¨ubner, S., Leenes, R., Pearson,
S., Pettersson, J.S., Sommer, D.: Trust in PRIME. In: ISSPIT. pp. 552–559 (2005)
2. Backes, M., Fiore, D., Reischuk, R.M.: Veriﬁable delegation of computation on

outsourced data. In: ACM CCS. pp. 863–874. ACM (2013)

3. Beek, M.t., Bucchiarone, A., Gnesi, S.: A Survey on Service Composition Ap-
proaches: From Industrial Standards to Formal Methods. Tech. Rep. 2006-TR-15
(2006)

4. Buchmann, J., Demirel, D., van de Graaf, J.: Towards a Publicly-Veriﬁable Mix-
Net Providing Everlasting Privacy. In: Financial Crypto. pp. 197–204 (2013)
5. Camenisch, J., Herreweghen, E.V.: Design and implementation of the idemix

anonymous credential system. In: ACM CCS. pp. 21–30. ACM (2002)

6. Canard, S., Lescuyer, R.: Protecting privacy by sanitizing personal data: a new
approach to anonymous credentials. In: ASIA CCS. pp. 381–392. ACM (2013)
7. Catalano, D.: Homomorphic Signatures and Message Authentication Codes. In:

SCN. LNCS, vol. 8642, pp. 514–519. Springer (2014)

8. Catalano, D., Marcedone, A., Puglisi, O.: Authenticating computation on groups:
New homomorphic primitives and applications. In: ASIACRYPT. LNCS, vol. 8874,
pp. 193–212. Springer (2014)

9. Chase, M., Kohlweiss, M., Lysyanskaya, A., Meiklejohn, S.: Malleable signatures:
New deﬁnitions and delegatable anonymous credentials. In: CSF. pp. 199–213.
IEEE (2014)

10. Cloud

Security Alliance:

Cloud

security

alliance

website

(2009),

https://cloudsecurityalliance.org, (online 31.3.2015)

11. Danezis, G., Kohlweiss, M., Rial, A.: Diﬀerentially Private Billing with Rebates.

In: IH. LNCS, vol. 6958, pp. 148–162. Springer (2011)

12. Di Lorenzo, G., Hacid, H., Paik, H.y., Benatallah, B.: Data integration in mashups.

ACM Sigmod Record 38(1), 59–66 (2009)

13. Erl, T.: Service-oriented architecture: concepts, technology, and design. Pearson

Education India (2006)

14. European

Commission:
potential

European
of

the

leashing
http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/european-cloud-computing-strategy,
(online 31.3.2015)

computing

europe”

cloud

in

cloud

computing

strategy

“un-
(2012),

15. European
for
Cloud
mation
http://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/Resilience-and-CIIP/cloud-computing

Infor-
repository,

Security–ENISA:

computing

Network

Agency

Union

and

16. Fiore, D., Gennaro, R., Pastro, V.: Eﬃciently veriﬁable computation on encrypted

data. In: ACM CCS. pp. 844–855 (2014)

17. Ghernaouti-Helie, S.: Cyber Power - Crime, Conﬂict and Security in Cyberspace.

EPFL Press (2013)

18. Groß, T.: Certiﬁcation and eﬃcient proofs of committed topology graphs. In:

CCSW. ACM (2014)

19. Groß, T.: Signatures and Eﬃcient Proofs on Committed Graphs and NP-

Statements. In: Financial Crypto. LNCS, Springer (2015)

20. Gupta, V.H., Gopinath, K.: G2

its vsr: An information theoretical secure veriﬁable
secret redistribution protocol for long-term archival storage. In: Security in Storage
Workshop. pp. 22–33. SISW ’07, IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA
(2007), http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SISW.2007.9

21. Hanser, C., Slamanig, D.: Blank digital signatures. In: ASIA CCS. ACM (2013)
22. Hanser, C., Slamanig, D.: Structure-Preserving Signatures on Equivalence Classes
and Their Application to Anonymous Credentials. In: ASIACRYPT. LNCS, vol.
8873, pp. 491–511. Springer (2014)

23. Harbach, M., Fahl, S., Rieger, M., Smith, M.: On the Acceptance of Privacy-
Preserving Authentication Technology: The Curious Case of National Identity
Cards. In: PETS. pp. 245–264. Springer (2013)

24. Johnson, R., Molnar, D., Song, D., Wagner, D.: Homomorphic Signature Schemes.

In: CT-RSA. pp. 244–262. LNCS, Springer (2002)

25. Laenger, T.: Information Security and the Enforcement of Secrecy: The Practical
Application of Quantum Key Distribution. Ph.D. thesis, Univ. of Lausanne (2013)
26. Moran, T., Naor, M.: Split-ballot voting: Everlasting privacy with distributed trust.

ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur. 13(2) (2010)

27. M¨uller-Quade, J., Unruh, D.: Long-Term Security and Universal Composability.

J. Cryptology 23(4), 594–671 (2010)

28. National Institute of Standards and Technology–NIST: Cloud computing program,

http://www.nist.gov/itl/cloud/index.cfm, online (31.3.2015)

29. Paquin, C., Zaverucha, G.: U-prove cryptographic speciﬁcation v1.1, revision 3.

Tech. rep., Microsoft Corporation (2013)

30. Pfeﬀer, H., Linner, D., Steglich, S.: Modeling and controlling dynamic service com-
positions. In: Computing in the Global Information Technology. pp. 210–216. IEEE
(2008)

31. P¨ohls, H.C., Samelin, K.: On updatable redactable signatures. In: ACNS. pp. 457–

475. LNCS, Springer (2014)

32. PRWeb:

A

cloud

computing

forecast

summary

gartner

from idc,
http://www.prweb.com/releases/2013/11/prweb11341594.htm,
31.3.2015)

and kpmg,

study by

citing

a

for
accenture

2013-2017
(2013),
(online

33. Slamanig, D.: Eﬃcient Schemes for Anonymous yet Authorized and Bounded Use

of Cloud Resources. In: SAC. LNCS, vol. 7118, pp. 73–91. Springer (2011)

34. Steinfeld, R., Bull, L.: Content Extraction Signatures. In: ICISC. Springer (2002)
35. Transparency Market Research: Cloud computing services market – global
(2012),
analysis

industry size,
http://www.transparencymarketresearch.com/cloud-computing-services-market.html,
(online 31.3.2015)

and forecasts

2012-2018

trends,

share,

36. Walﬁsh, M., Blumberg, A.J.: Verifying Computations without Reexecuting Them.

Commun. ACM 58(2), 74–84 (2015)

37. W¨astlund, E., Angulo, J., Fischer-H¨ubner, S.: Evoking comprehensive mental mod-

els of anonymous credentials. In: iNetSeC. pp. 1–14 (2011)

