Comparing victims of phishing and malware attacks 
Unraveling risk factors and possibilities for situational crime prevention 

E.R. Leukfeldt 
Faculty of Humanities and Law, Open University of the Netherlands 

Cybersafety Reseach Group, NHL University of Applied Sciences & Police Academy of the Netherlands 

e.r.leukfeldt@nhl.nl 

the  same  crime  script, 

Abstract—This paper compares the risk factors for becoming 
a  victim  of  two  types  of  phishing:  high-tech  phishing  (using 
malicious  software)  and  low-tech  phishing  (using  e-mails  and 
telephone  calls).  These  risk  factors  are  linked  to  possibilities  for 
situational  crime  prevention.  Data  from  a  cybercrime  victim 
survey  in  the  Netherlands  (n=10,316)  is  used.  Based  on  routine 
activity theory, the multivariate analyses include thirty variables. 
There  are  many  similarities  between  the  two  types  of  attacks. 
Both  have  almost 
for  example. 
Furthermore, analyses show that both criminal groups are happy 
with  almost  any  victim  they  can  get  and  do  not  discriminate 
between  the  rich  and  poor.  There  are  also  differences  between 
high- and low-tech victimization. First, almost none of the online 
visibility variables had any effect on the risk of becoming victim 
to  low-tech  attacks.  Victims  of  high-tech  attacks  tell  a  different 
story.  There  is  a  clear  connection  between  victimization  and 
spending time in the online world. The second difference can  be 
found  within  online  accessibility.  Again,  none  of  the  variables 
mattered  when  it  came  to  the  low-tech  attacks.  The  malware 
analysis,  however, 
technical 
infrastructure  does  affect  the  risk  of  victimization.  The  findings 
show  situational  crime  prevention  has  to  be  aimed  at  groups 
other  than  just  the  users  themselves.  Criminals  are  primarily 
interested in popular online places and the onus is on the owners 
of  these  virtual  places  to  protect  their  visitors  from  getting 
infected. 

victims’ 

shows 

that 

the 

Keywords—malware;  phishing;  cybercrime;  situational  crime 
prevention 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

both 

it  comes 

Everybody 

disappointing 

is  at  risk  when 

to  phishing 
victimization.1    This  conclusion  was  drawn  last  year  by 
Leukfeldt based upon an analysis of phishing victims. [1]  The 
conclusion  was 
intriguing. 
Disappointing because no one, clearly defined group could be 
pinpointed  who  are  at  increased  risk  of  victimization.  This 
makes target hardening a lot more difficult and limits specific 
prevention  campaigns  aimed  at  particular  groups,  e.g.  those 
who engage in dangerous online activities. Intriguing because, 
based  on  routine  activity  theory,  it  was  expected  that,  besides 
financial  characteristics  (value),  online  activities  (visibility) 

and 

and  online  accessibility  in  particular  would  play  a  role  in 
determining the extent to which someone is a suitable target for 
these internet fraudsters. 

Not  one  of  the  “digital”  equivalents  of  visibility  and 
accessibility, however, seemed to matter. The paper concluded 
that phishers apparently do not select their victims based on the 
digital  trail  victims  leave  when  engaging  in  online  activities, 
nor do they search for technical flaws in operating systems or 
browsers to get to users. A possible explanation was that it is 
the  phisher’s  tactic  to  approach  large  groups  of  potential 
victims  through,  for  example,  spam.  In  this  way,  a  fraudster 
can basically reach anybody with an internet connection and an 
e-mail account. 

A  recent  study  into  phishing  networks  shows  a  phishing 
group  which  does  indeed  use  such  a  method.  [2]  The  group 
sends out as many e-mails as possible to Dutch citizens. In the 
e-mail  it  is  stated  that  the  security  of  their  internet  banking 
account needs to be updated or the account will be closed.2  All 
the receiver has to do is click on the link in the e-mail to go to 
the  bank’s  secure  website.  Of  course,  this  is  a  fake  bank 
website under the control of the criminals. Once someone tries 
to  log  in,  this  information  goes  to  the  criminals.  From  this 
moment on, the criminals have access to the bank accounts of 
the  victims.  Due  to  a  layered  security  policy,  however,  the 
criminals  are  not  yet  able  to  transfer  money  from  these 
accounts.  This  requires  unique  transaction  authentication 
codes.  The  phisher  then  simply  makes  a  telephone  call  to 
victims to try to obtain these codes. The caller poses as a bank 
employee and claims to need that code in order to complete the 
new  security  settings.  Information  from  the  victim’s  bank 
account is used to gain trust (e.g. the first (spam) e-mail about 
the  new  security,  but  also  the  type  of  account,  registered 
names, last transactions, etc.). 

The  modus  operandi  outlined  above  supports 
the 
conclusion  from  the  2014  article  that  phishers  use  a  trawling 
method. [1] Indeed, these phishers did not select their victims 
based  on  the  digital  trail  they  leave  when  engaging  in  online 
activities,  nor  did  they  seek  for  technical  flaws  in  operating 
systems  or  browsers.  Overall,  technology  (in  this  case  the 
internet, e-mail and websites) is only used in the early stage of 

1  Phishing  is  the  process  aimed  at  finding  out  users' 
personal  information  by  posing  as  a  trusted  authority  using 
such digital means as e-mail. 

2  Or  a  similar  message.  The  goal  is  to  make  the  person 

click on the link in the e-mail. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
                                                           
the  crime.  A  major  part  of  the  crime  script  consists  of  using 
social  engineering  on  victims.  This  explains  why  digital 
equivalents  of  the  traditional  elements  of  the  routine  activity 
theory show no effect on victimization. 

The study into phishing networks [2], however, also shows 
that  other  types  of  networks  exist.  These  criminals  do  rely 
heavily  on  technology  to  execute  their  attacks.  They  use 
malware3,    not  only  to  steal  user  credentials  but  also  to 
intercept transaction authentication methods or to alter transfers 
that victims have made. Indeed, these attacks depend more on 
technology than on social engineering. This raises the question 
whether  the  digital  versions  of  the  routine  activity  theory 
elements – value, inertia, visibility and accessibility (VIVA) –
play a role within malware victimization. 

A  subsequent 2015  study    into  the  applicability  of  routine 
activity  theory  to  cybercrimes4  indeed  shows  that  digital 
equivalents  of  VIVA  affect  the  risk  of  becoming  a  victim  of 
malware  [3].  This  paper  brings  these  two  studies  together, 
compares  the  risk  factors,  tries  to  explain  the  differences 
between  the  two  types  of  offences  and  discusses  which 
situational crime prevention methods are most suitable for the 
prevention of both low-tech and high-tech phishing.  

Firstly,  Section  2  briefly  describes  the  expectations  based 
upon  routine  activity  theory.  The  data  and  methods  are 
described in Section 3. Section 4 contains a description of the 
risk factors of malware victimization. Furthermore, the results 
of phishing and malware victimization are compared. The last 
section  contains  a  conclusion  and  discussion  about  the 
differences  and  similarities  between  the  two  types  of  attacks, 
their victims and possibilities for situational crime prevention. 

II.  SUITABLE TARGETS: EXPECTATIONS BASED ON ROUTINE 
ACTIVITY THEORY

5 

to 

theory 

routine  activity 

This  paper  uses 

find 
characteristics or behavior of victims which makes them more 
attractive  to  criminals.  Routine  activity  theory  claims  that 
opportunity  structures  influence  the  prevalence  of  deviant 
the 
behavior.  [4]  These  structures  are 
combination  of  the  presence  of  a  motivated  offender  and  a 
suitable  target,  and  the  absence  of  a  capable  guardian.  There 
are four elements that determine the extent to which a victim 
appeals  to  a  motivated  offender:  value,  inertia,  visibility  and 
accessibility.  Below,  a  brief  description  is  given  of  each 
element and its digital equivalent, followed by the hypothesis. 

influenced  by 

3  Malware  is  short  for  malicious  software.  Examples 

include viruses, worms, trojan horses and spyware. 

4  The  focus  of  this  study  was  not  to  identify  risk  factors, 
but  to  examine  whether  the  classic  elements  (value,  inertia, 
visibility and accessibility) of  routine  activity theory can  still 
be used as a framework to study cybercrime. 

5 This paper compares the results of malware victimization 
with  the  findings  of  an  earlier  study.  Hence,  the  same 
theoretical  framework  is  used  and  the  same  variables  will  be 
used  to  test  the  hypotheses.  This  section,  therefore,  contains 
only a brief summary of the expectations based on the routine 
activity in the 2014 and 2015 study. [1][3] 

The first element is value. Offenders are particularly 
interested  in  goals  to  which  they  assign  value  for  whatever 
reason. In the case of phishing, the size of a bank account may 
be  interesting  as  the  profit  potential  is  higher.  Studies  show 
households with higher incomes are more at risk of becoming 
victims of identity theft. [5][6] 

• 

H1:  Victims  have  significantly  higher  income  and 

financial assets than non-victims. 

The  second  element  is  inertia.  Traditionally,  inertia  is 
described  simply  as  the  weight  of  the  item.  Small  electronic 
goods, for example, are easier to steal than heavy cumbersome 
objects.  In  the  case  of  information  theft,  this  seldom  applies 
(only with extremely large databases, at most). For this reason, 
the multivariate analysis excluded inertia. 

Visibility  is  the  third  element.  Visibility  refers  to  the 
conspicuousness  of  objects  criminals  want,  for  example, 
expensive  items  in  a  living  room  that  can  be  seen  from  the 
street.  A  number  of  studies  on  cybercrimes  show  online 
activities such as downloading or spending time in online chat 
boxes  contribute  to  making  someone  a  suitable  target  simply 
because they increase visibility. [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [19] [22] 
[23] [24] In the case of phishing and malware, the question is 
which  (and  to  what  extent)  online  activities  actually  provide 
suitable  targets.  Respondents  were  asked  to  indicate  what 
activities  they  conducted  online  (and  how  frequently).  These 
were later classified in two categories: activities with a low or 
high  level  of  online  visibility.  Activities  within  the  first 
category  are  e-mail,  targeted  browsing  and  using  direct 
messaging  platforms  like  online  messaging  services  and 
Skype.  Activities  in  the  second  category  are  untargeted 
browsing,  using  online  chat  rooms,  online  gaming,  online 
buying,  actively  using 
forums,  active  social 
internet 
networking and twittering. 

• 

H2:  Victims  conduct  significantly  more  highly 

visible online activities than non-victims. 

The last element is accessibility. Accessibility is related to 
the  construction  of  communities,  placing  goods  in  easily 
accessible  locations  and  other  features  of  everyday  life  that 
make  it  easy  for  offenders  to  come  into  contact  with  their 
target. Accessibility is also relevant in the online world. Users 
need software, such as operating systems and web browsers, to 
enter the online world. Motivated offenders abuse weaknesses 
in  software  to  attack  users.  A  relatively  large  group  of 
to  find  new 
is  constantly 
motivated  offenders 
weaknesses  in  software  and  shares  information  on  (potential) 
holes on forums (a number of studies describe these forums). 
[12][13][14[15][16]  Indeed, so much is known about abusing 
weaknesses in popular software that users of popular software 
are  more  accessible  to  criminals  than  users  of  less  popular 
software. 

trying 

2 

 
 
                                                           
 
 
 
 
 
• 

H3: Victims use popular (commonly used) operating 
systems and web browsers significantly more often than non-
victims. 

There  are  also  factors  which  make  potential  victims  less 
accessible  for  attackers.  There  is,  for  example,  anti-virus 
software which protects users against malware. Users become 
less  accessible  to  a  criminal  when  they  take  protective 
measures  by  installing  and  updating  antivirus  software. 
Furthermore,  technical  knowledge  might  also  be  a  protective 
factor. The less users know about the software and equipment 
they  use,  the  less  they  know  about  the  risks  they  run.  In 
addition,  the  victim’s  awareness  of  online  risks  may  also 
determine  their  accessibility.  Internet  users  who  are  aware  of 
the  risks they run online are better able to anticipate  risk and 
are therefore less likely to become victims. [10][11] 

• 

H4:  Victims  have  significantly 

less  up-to-date 

antivirus software than non-victims. 

• 

H5:  Victims  have  a  significantly  lower  level  of 

computer literacy than non-victims. 

• 

H6:  Victims  have  a  significantly  lower  level  of  risk 

awareness than non-victims. 

III.  DATA AND METHODS 

Both the phishing and malware analyses are based upon a 
secondary analysis of a Dutch cybercrime victim survey [17].  
The  representative  sample 
included  10,314  respondents 
(response rate of 47%). The malware analysis involved 8,378 
respondents  (89%)  who  used  the  internet  and  answered 
questions  about  malware  infections.  Furthermore,  data  from 
the SSB (Social Statistical Database) of Statistics Netherlands 
was used in order to gain insight into the financial situation of 
respondents.  See  Arts  and  Hoogteijling  for  a  detailed 
description [18].   

The  dependent  variable  –  phishing  victim  –  was  coded 
dichotomously  (1=victim,  0=no  victim).  Respondents  were 
asked about phishing attacks that resulted in financial damage 
in  the  last  twelve  months.  Of  the  9,163  respondents  who 
reported  using  the  internet,  53  were  victims  of  phishing 
(0.6%). 

The dependent variable – malware victim – was also coded 
dichotomously (1=victim, 0=not a victim). Respondents  were 
asked  whether  they  had  noted  during  the  past  twelve  months 
that malware was present on their computer. Response options 
were:  “yes”,  “no”  and  “I  do  not  know”.  Of  the  9,163 
respondents  who  used  the  internet,  16.7  percent  reported 
having malware on their computer(s). 

The  independent  variables  were:  (1)  sociodemographic 
traits  such  as  gender,  age,  marital  status,  educational  level 
(coded  in  eight  categories  from  ‘no  education’  to  ‘university 
education’) and employment (12 hours per week or more); (2) 
additional financial data (personal income, household income, 
value  of  financial  assets,  amount  of  savings),  added  in 

collaboration  with  Statistics  Netherlands.  More  about  this  in 
the next paragraph (3) frequency of online activities, rated by 
respondents on a four point scale; and finally (4), accessibility 
factors,  such  as  computer  skills  (a  composite  variable  of 
knowledge  about 
internet 
connection,  web  browser  and  virus  scanner)  and  risk 
awareness (a composite  variable of ten propositions,  such  as: 
“I  open  attachments  or  files  from  unknown  senders”  and  “I 
use different passwords for different accounts”). Other factors 
include type of operating system, web browser, and possessing 
an up-to-date virus scanner.  

the  used  operating  system, 

To gain insight into the financial situation of respondents, 
data  from  the  SSB  (Social  Statistical  Database)  of  Statistics 
Netherlands  were  linked  to  the  dataset  of  Domenie  et  al 
(2013).  The  SSB  is  a  database  which  is  not  publically 
accessible.  It  is  only  accessible  to  members  of  Dutch 
Universities. It consist of more than 40 linkable records about 
various subjects which are mutually matched. Data is provided 
to Statistics Netherlands by different government agencies like 
the  police,  IRS  and  social  welfare  agencies.  A  detailed 
explanation  of  the  composition  of  the  SSB  files  is  given  by 
Arts and Hoogteijling [18]. In order to link datasets with data 
from the SBB, a social security number or name and address is 
required.  Statistics  Netherlands  then  creates  a  so-called  RIN 
number (an internal person identification number) to link data 
to individuals from different files. The researcher is then able 
to  analyze  data  on  a  new  file  which  is  managed  by  Statistics 
Netherlands, and from which the social security number and / 
or  name  and  address  have  been 
removed.  Statistics 
Netherlands checks the output because any information which 
can  be  made  publically  may  not  be  traceable  to  individual 
persons.;  

Like any research, a number of comments can be made on 
the  analyzed  data.  First  of  all,  victim  surveys  rely  on  the 
answers  of  respondents.  It  might  not  be  easy  for  respondents 
to  distinguish  phishing  and  malware  attacks  form  each  other.  
Furthermore, only online activities have been studied. Perhaps 
offline activities or psychological characteristics (also) play a 
role  in  phishing  victimization.  The  dataset  of  the  Dutch 
cybercrime survey [17] and additional data sets from Statistics 
Netherlands,  however,  did  not  provide  such  information. 
Other  studies  have  found  evidence  that  offline  behavior  does 
influence  online  victimization.  [19]  In  addition,  in  previous 
research, a link with other theories was found, such as the self-
control  theory.  Although  self-control  is  rooted  in  offender 
studies, there is growing evidence that self-control also affects 
victimization [21][22]. In future studies, both offline behavior 
and such theories should be integrated in order to understand 
victimization better. 

Finally,  a  comment  on  the  usefulness  of  the  presented 
multivariate  analysis  for  (police)  practice.  The  data  of  this 
article  was  collected  in  2011.  The  (technical)  developments 
within  the  cybercrime  field  take  place  with  great  speed.  This 
also  applies  to  a  crime  form  such  as  phishing.  To  perform  a 
successful  phishing  attack,  criminals  at  all  times  use  social 
engineering  (persuading  a  user  to  do  something  which  they 
normally would not do, for example, giving information about 
their internet banking account), whether or not combined with 
malware  (an  email  with  an  infected  attachment  or  a  website 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
where  the  visitor's  computer  is  infected).  Trend  reports  show 
an increase in the use of malware by phishers. Perhaps now or 
in the future, other risk factors play a role. 

IV.  SUITABLE TARGETS: RISK FACTORS COMPARED 

Table 1 shows the results of both the multivariate analysis 
of  phishing  and  malware  victims.  Even  at  first  glance,  it  is 
clear there are differences between the two. Below the results 
are  described  for  each  of  the  elements  of  routine  activity 
the  analysis  (value,  visibility  and 
theory 
accessibility). 

included 

in 

A.  Value (hypothesis 1) 

Financial characteristics of respondents do not play a role 
in  phishing  victimization.  None  of  the  variables  related  to 
someone’s  wealth  (e.g.  income  or  savings)  explains  an 
increased or decreased risk of phishing victimization. Table 1 
shows  that  most  of  the  financial  characteristics  do  not  play  a 
role  within  malware  victimization  either.  One  variable, 
however, is related to the risk of becoming a victim: the level 
of someone’s personal income. The effect, however, is not in 
the  expected  direction:  the  lower  the  personal  income,  the 
higher  the  probability  of  becoming  a  victim.  Why  a  lower 
income increases the risk of malware victimization is unclear. 
This should be the subject of further research. 

The analysis clearly shows that phishing attacks (both low-
tech  and  high-tech)  are  not  only  aimed  at  potential  victims 
with  high  levels  of  funds  in  their  bank  account.  Again,  there 
seems  to  be  no  evidence  for  so-called  spear-phishing  attacks 
on  specific  targets  with  lots  of  money.  Apparently,  these 
criminals  are  happy  with  anything  they  can  get  and  do  not 
discriminate between the rich and poor.  

[Table 1] 

B.  Visibility (hypothesis 2) 

The visibility variables are divided into activities with high 
and  low  visibility.  Regarding  phishing,  none  of  the  activities 
with high visibility are related to victimization. Some of these 
activities, however, do appear to increase the risk of malware 
victimization. 

Perhaps  the  most  obvious  one  is  downloading.  The  more 
one  downloads,  the  greater  the  chance  of  getting  a  malware 
infection. Other studies already showed downloading can be a 
risky  activity.  One  of  the  ways  to  infect  computers  is  by 
letting the user open a file which contaminates the computer. 
All the criminal has to do is make sure the user opens the file. 
This  can  be  done  by  disguising  malware  as  a  nice  picture  or 
including it in the download  of (what the  users thinks is) the 
latest movie or software. Another option is that users are lured 
to websites which offer the latest downloads of  whatever. As 
soon as the user enters the site, malware is transmitted. 

This last explanation might also be true for online games. 
This activity also increases the risk of victimization. Again, if 
users are actively looking for new games to play online, they 
might end up at infected sites which pretend to offer the latest 
online games. 

Buying goods online is another activity with high visibility 
which  increases  risk  of  malware  victimization.  A  possible 
explanation can be found in the goal of malware: intercepting 
user credentials to commit fraud. People who buy more often 
online are also likely to pay more often online, or at least have 
to share their financial credentials more often online  with the 
company  or  persons  with  whom  the  business  is  done. 
Attackers  simply  have  more  opportunities 
intercept 
credentials.  

to 

This last explanation is in line with the other type of online 
activities  which  enlarge  chances  of  malware  victimization: 
frequency  of  internet  use,  targeted  and  untargeted  browsing. 
The more users carry out these common activities, the greater 
the chance of becoming a  malware  victim. When it comes  to 
phishing  victimization,  only  targeted  browsing  seemed  to  be 
risk  enhancing.  This  was  an  unexpected  finding  with  the 
possible explanation that not phishing, but malware infections 
caused  this  effect.  Users  can  get  contaminated  by  visiting 
infected websites. These website are not by definition located 
in the dark alleys of the internet. In recent years, for example, 
many  popular,  legitimate  websites  had  advertisements  which 
were  contaminated  and  infected  visitors  to  that  website.  The 
conclusion  was  that  “Internet  users  who  visit  all  kinds  of 
(legitimate)  sites  are  at  greater  risk.”  This  explanation  is 
clearly being confirmed by the current analysis: being online, 
surfing  the  web  (both  targeted  and  untargeted)  is  a  risk-
enhancing activity for malware infections.  

C.  Accessibility (hypothesis 3-6) 

Again,  when  it  comes  to  phishing  victimization,  none  of 
the  factors  in  relation  to  accessibility  have  a  risk-increasing 
effect. This applies to both online accessibility (use of popular 
operating systems and web browsers) and protective measures 
to  reduce  accessibility  (up-to-date  virus  scanner,  computer 
knowledge  and  risk  perception).  Apparently,  in  the  case  of 
phishing,  technical  accessibility  is  not  of  major  importance. 
This  corresponds  with  the  modus  operandi  of  phishing 
networks covered in the introduction: technology is only used 
in  the  early  stage  of  the  crime;  the  major  part  of  the  crime 
script  consists  of  using  social  engineering  on  victims.  No 
large-scale, high-tech attacks, but tailored low-tech attacks.  

But what about malware? Table 1 shows that the use of a 
certain  operating  system  and  web  browser  is  risk  increasing. 
Users  with  a  Windows  operating  system  have  an  increased 
risk  of  malware  victimization.  This  may  be  because  this  is  a 
widely used operating system. It is simply more profitable for 
criminals  to  write  malware  for  this  system  because  there  are 
more  potential  victims.  It  also  appears  that  users  have  an 
increased  risk  of  victimization  with  the  Firefox  browser.  At 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the  time  of  data  collection  for  this  study  this  was  the  most 
popular browser after Internet Explorer.6 

Another  technical  aspect  without  any  effect  on  both 
phishing  and  malware  victimization  is  the  use  of  a  virus 
scanner.  The  conclusion  made  in  2014  article  [1]  remains 
intact:  a  virus  scanner  cannot  guard  against  mail  that 
persuades  users  to  provide  personal  information  (low-tech 
attack). It might protect against some forms of malware (high-
tech attack), but only to known variants. New variants are not 
detected  (yet).  Virus  scanners  also  do  not  protect  against 
criminals who abuse zero-day exploits (a flaw in software for 
which there is no patch at a certain moment). 

V.  CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION 

There  are  many  similarities  between  (low-tech)  phishing 
attacks and (high-tech)  malware attacks. Both type  of attacks 
have, for example, almost the same crime script. Furthermore, 
both groups of criminals are happy with anything they can get 
and do not discriminate between the rich and poor.  

There  are  also  differences.  Firstly,  regarding  the  effect  of 
online  visibility,  almost  none  of  the  variables  had  any  effect 
on  phishing  victimization.  The  victims  of  malware,  however, 
tell  a  different  story.  There  is  a  clear  connection  between 
spending time in the online world and victimization. There are 
two  types  of  activities  which  ensure  a  higher  chance  of 
becoming  a  victim,  namely  downloading  and  online  gaming. 
The  second  difference  can  be 
found  within  online 
accessibility.  Again,  none  of  the  variables  mattered  when  it 
came to phishing. The malware analysis, however, shows that 
users  with  certain  (popular  and  widely  used)  operating 
systems  and  web  browsers  do  have  an  increased  risk  of 
victimization. 

What  do  these  findings  mean  for  situational  crime 
prevention?  The  conclusion  regarding  phishing  victimization 
was  that  everybody  is  at  risk.  Opportunities  for  prevention 
campaigns  aimed  at  a  specific  target  group  or  dangerous 
online activities are limited. Situational crime prevention will 
have  to  come  from  a  different  angle,  for  example,  the  banks 
taking on the role of capable guardian. 

At  first  glance, 

the  malware  analysis  shows  more 
opportunities  for  prevention  campaigns  aimed  at  specific 
groups because there are a number of variables which are risk 
enhancing. When we take a closer look, however, the analysis 
shows that obvious – and relatively easy to adjust – protective 
variables, like using a virus scanner, computer knowledge and 
online risk perception, have no effect on victimization.  

The  risk  seems  to  come  from  two  different  angles.  The 
first one is spending more time online. Just visiting all sorts of 
(legitimate)  websites  is  risk  enhancing.  More  research  on 
exactly  how  and  where  victims  got  infected  has  to  be  done, 
but  in  the  light  of  routine  activity  theory  it  is  expected  that 
criminals  aim  their  attacks  at  popular  online  places  (like  the 
recent infections of advertisements on popular websites). The 

6  http://gs.statcounter.com/#browser-NL-monthly-201101-

201106 

more visitors a website has, the larger the amount of potential 
victims.  The  second  group  who  is  at  risk  are  people  who  are 
looking  for  downloads  or  online  games.  Again,  the  law  of 
large  number  applies:  popular  downloads  and  games  can  be 
used to trick as many potential victims as possible to visit an 
infected website, or to download an infected file.  

These  findings  underline  the  conclusions  of  the  2014 
article  [1]:  situational  crime  prevention  has  to  be  aimed  at 
other  groups  than  just  the  users  themselves.  The  malware 
analysis  shows  there  is  an  important  role  for  owners  of 
(popular)  websites.  Indeed,  criminals  are  interested  in  these 
online  places  and  the  owners  of  these  places  have  to  protect 
their visitors from getting infected.  

Furthermore,  the  current  analysis  points  out  the  way  for 
further  (in-depth)  studies.  Firstly,  classic  methods 
like 
interviews  with  victims  might  shed  light  on  some  of  the 
findings.  What  type  of  websites  are  the  victims  actually 
visiting?  Do  they  know  on  which  site  or  because  of  which 
download they got infected? Why did they visit that particular 
website?  Did  they  have  a  feeling  something  was  wrong? 
Subsequently, more pioneering methods like analyzing logs of 
user  activity  from  Internet  Service  Providers  or  examining 
computers  and  browsers  of  users  their  selves  by  researchers 
might provide better insight into actual activities of victims. In 
addition  to  this,  criminal  networks  need  to  be  analyzed  more 
systematically.  Leukfeldt’s  study  [2]  showed  that  criminal 
networks  with  the  same  crime  script  may  have  major 
differences  in  their  nature  (low-tech  vs.  high-tech).  As  the 
current  analysis  shows,  this  might  affect  the  type  of  victim 
they target. Insight into what other types of networks there are 
(origin  and  growth,  type  and  role  of  offenders,  criminal 
capabilities, etc.) might give us insight in how these networks 
actually select their victims. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This  study  is  part  of  the  Dutch  Research  Program  Safety 
and Security of Online Banking. This program is funded by the 
Dutch banking sector, represented by the Dutch Banking Asso-
ciation  (NVB),  the  Police  Academy  and  the  Dutch  National 
Police. Executive organizations are the Open University of the 
Netherlands,  the  Dutch  Police  Academy  and  NHL  University 
of Applies Sciences. 

The original dataset is obtained from the study of Domenie 
et al (2013). This research was funded by the Nation Unit and 
the  Cybercrime  Program  of  the  Dutch  police.  Executive 
organizations  were  the  Open  University  of  the  Netherlands, 
NHL University of Applies Sciences, Dutch Police  Academy, 
Leiden University and the Statistics Netherlands. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

[2] 

 Leukfeldt ER. Phishing for suitable targets in the Netherlands. Routine 
activity 
theory  and  phishing  victimization.  In:  Cyberpsychology 
behavior and social networking. 2014a; 17(8) 551-555. 
  Leukfeldt ER. Cybercrime and social ties. Phishing in Amsterdam. In: 
Trends in Organized Crime. 2014b; 17(4) 231-249. 

5 

 
 
  
                                                           
 
 
[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

  Leukfeldt  ER,  Yar,  M.  (2015  -  accepted)  Applying  routine  activity 
theory  to  cybercrime:  A  theoretical  and  empirical  analysis.  In:  Deviant 
Behavior. 
  Felson  M,  Clarke  RV.  (1998)  Opportunity  makes  the  thief:  Practical 
theory  for  crime  prevention.  In:  Webb  B.  (ed.)  Police  Research  Series, 
paper 98. London: Home Office. 
  Anderson  KB.  Who  are  the  victims  of  identity  theft?  The  effect  of 
demographics.  Journal  of  Public  Policy  and  Marketing,  2006;  25,  160-
171 
  Langton  L,  Planty  M.  (2010)  Victims  of  identity  theft,  2008. 
Washington, Bureau of Justice Statistics. 
  Hinduja  S,  Patchin  JW.  Cyberbullying:  An  exploratory  analysis  of 
factors related to offending and victimization. Deviant Behavior, 2008; 
29, 129-156. 
  Holt  TJ,  Bossler  AM.  Examining  the  applicability  of  lifestyle-routine 
activities  theory  for  cybercrime  victimization.  Deviant  Behavior,  2009; 
30, 1-25. 
  Wilsem  van  JA.  Digitale  en  traditionele  bedreiging  vergeleken.  Een 
studie  naar  risicofactoren  van  slachtofferschap.  Tijdschrift  voor 
Criminologie, 2010; 1, 73-87.  

[10]    Choi  KS.  Computer  crime  victimization  and  integrated  theory:  An 
empirical assessment. International Journal of Cyber Criminology, 2008; 
1, 308-333. 

[11]    Marcum,  C.  “Identifying  potential  factors  of  adolescent  online 
victimization  for  high  school  seniors’,  International  Journal  of  Cyber 
Criminology 2008; 2(2) 346-67. 

[12]    Peretti  KK.  Data  breaches:  What  the  underground  world  of  "carding" 
reveals. Santa Clara Computer and High Technology Law Journal, 2008; 
25, 345-414. 

[13]    Holt JT, Lampke E. Exploring stolen data markets online: products and 

market forces. Criminal Justice Studies, 2009; 1, 33-50. 

[14]    Lu Y, Luo X, Polgar M, Cao Y. Social network analysis of a criminal 
hacker community. Journal of Computer Information Systems, 2010; 31-
41. 

[15]    Soudijn  MRJ,  Zegers  BCHT.  Cybercrime  and  virtual  offender 
convergence  settings.  In:  Trends  in  Organized  Crime,  2012;  15,  111-
129. 

[16]    Décary-Hetú  D,  Dupont  B.  The  social  network  of  hackers.  Global 

Crime, 2012, 3, 160-175. 

[17]    Domenie  MML,  Leukfeldt  ER,  van  Wilsem  JA,  Jansen  J,  Stol  WP. 
(2013)  Victims  of  offenses  with  a  digital  component  among  Dutch 
citizens. Hacking, Malware, personal and financial crimes mapped. The 
Hague: Eleven International Publishers. 

[18]   Arts  CH,  Hoogteijling  EMJ.  (2002)  Het  Sociaal  Statistisch  Bestand 
1998  en  1999.  [The  Social  Statistics  Database  1008  and  1999]  CBS, 
Sociaal-economische maandstatistiek, december 2002. 

[19]  Bossler, A.M. and T.J. Holt. 2009. “On-line activities, guardianship, and 
malware  infection:  an  examination  of  routine  activities  theory.” 
International Journal of Cyber Criminology 3(1) 400-420. 

[20]  Wilsem  van,  J.A.  2011a.  “Worlds  tied  together?  Online  and  non-
domestic  routine  activities  and  their  impact  on  digital  and  traditional 
threat victimization.” European Journal of Criminology 8(2) 115-127. 

[21]  Wilsem  van,  J.A.  2011b.  “Bought  it,  but  never  got  it’  Assessing  risk 
factors  for  online  consumer  fraud  victimization.”  European  Sociologic 
Review 29(2): 168-178. 

[22]  Hitchings, A. and H. Hayes. 2009. “Routine activity theory and phishing 
victimization: Who gets caught in the ‘net’?” Current Issues in Criminal 
Justice 20(3) 433-451. 

[23]  Reyns,  B.,  B.  Henson  and  B.S.  Fisher.  2011.  “Being  pursued  online. 
Applying  Cyberlifestyle-Routine  activities  theory  to  cyberstalking 
victimization.” Criminal Justice and Behavior 38(11) 1149-1169. 
[24]  Pratt,  T.C.,  K.  Holtfreter  and  M.D.  Reisig.  2010.  “Routine  online 
activities  and  Internet  fraud  targeting:  Extending  the  generality  of 
routine activity theory.” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 
47(3) 267-297. 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Logistic regression of phishing and malware victims 

Constant 

Value 

Personal income 

Household income 

Financial assets  

Financial possessions 

Savings 

Online visibility 

Phishing [1] 

B 

-10,685 

.000 

-.002 

.000 

.000 

.000 

S.E. 

3,176 

.006 

.007 

.001 

.001 

.000 

Malware [3] 

B 

-6.296*** 

-.005** 

.002 

.000 

.000 

.000 

S.E. 

.591 

.001 

.001 

.000 

.000 

.000 

Frequency of internet use 

.231 

.498 

.233** 

.091 

Online activities with low visibility 

Targeted browsing 

Direct communication: e-mail 

Direct communication: MSN. Skype 

Online activities with high visibility 

Chatting in chat boxes 

Online gaming 

Active on online forums 

Active on social network sites 

Twitter 

Downloading 

Untargeted browsing 

Buying online 

Digital accessibility 

OS: Windows 

Browser: Internet Explorer 

Browser: Google Chrome 

Browser: Firefox 

Browser: Opera 

Browser: Safari 

No virus scanner 

Computer knowledge 

Online risk perception 

Nagelkerke R2 

N 

* p<0,01; ** p<0,001 

.519* 

.197 

.066 

.187 

-.006 

-.132 

.135 

-.024 

-.331 

.016 

.159 

-.122 

-.115 

-.072 

.0353 

.491 

.128 

.255 

.643 

-.145 

5.0 

8,379 

.253 

.199 

.151 

.208 

.167 

.261 

.153 

.229 

.331 

.144 

.369 

.649 

.383 

.360 

.356 

1.049 

.636 

.562 

.504 

.266 

.048 

.041 

.034 

.053 

.034 

.051 

.034 

.050 

.033 

.033 

.084 

.184 

.085 

.076 

.082 

.265 

.188 

.154 

.090 

.059 

.156** 

-.049 

-.020 

-.015 

.084* 

.142 

-.015 

.014 

.078* 

.139*** 

.387*** 

.912*** 

.125 

.089 

.173* 

.289 

-.362 

-.111 

.167 

-.007 

8.4 

8,378 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
