August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

5
1
0
2

g
u
A
3
1

]
I
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
6
1
3
0
.
8
0
5
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Chapter 1

Community detection and role identiﬁcation in directed
networks: understanding the Twitter network of the
care.data debate

Benjamin R. C. Amor‡,†, Sabine I. Vuik∗, Ryan Callahan∗, Ara Darzi∗,
Sophia N. Yaliraki†, and Mauricio Barahona‡
‡Department of Mathematics, †Department of Chemistry,
and ∗Institute of Global Health Innovation,
Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, U.K.

With the rise of social media as an important channel for the debate
and discussion of public aﬀairs, online social networks such as Twitter
have become important platforms for public information and engagement
by policy makers. To communicate eﬀectively through Twitter, policy
makers need to understand how inﬂuence and interest propagate within
its network of users.
In this chapter we use graph-theoretic methods
to analyse the Twitter debate surrounding NHS England’s controversial
care.data scheme. Directionality is a crucial feature of the Twitter so-
cial graph - information ﬂows from the followed to the followers - but
is often ignored in social network analyses; our methods are based on
the behaviour of dynamic processes on the network and can be applied
naturally to directed networks. We uncover robust communities of users
and show that these communities reﬂect how information ﬂows through
the Twitter network. We are also able to classify users by their diﬀer-
ing roles in directing the ﬂow of information through the network. Our
methods and results will be useful to policy makers who would like to
use Twitter eﬀectively as a communication medium.

1. Introduction

The care.data programme is a scheme proposed by NHS England for col-
lating patient-level data from all GP surgeries in England into a centralised
national Health and Social Care Information Centre (HSCIC) database.1
This scheme would complement existing hospital records to create a linked
primary- and secondary-care database, which could be used for improving
healthcare provisioning and for medical research. The potential beneﬁts
of such a database are well-recognised;2,3 however, poor communication4

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

2

B. Amor, S. Vuik, R. Callahan, A. Darzi, S. N. Yaliraki & M. Barahona

prior to the roll-out of the scheme in early-2014, alongside concerns around
privacy, data security, and the possibility of the sale of data,5 led to the
eventual postponement of the scheme.6 In the months leading up to the
initial roll-out, these issues had become a major topic amongst Twitter
users interested in healthcare as well as data privacy issues.

Twitter is a popular social network that allows users to post and read
short messages with fewer than 140 characters. With 300 million active
monthly users, it has become an inﬂuential digital medium for debates,
mobilising support or opposition, and directing people towards other on-
line material.7 Twitter thus provides a means for policy makers to engage
with the general public and to use it as an eﬀective communication plat-
form, alongside more traditional methods of public engagement. In order to
use Twitter eﬀectively, it is important to understand how information and
inﬂuence spreads within its network of users.8,9 The ﬂow of information
through Twitter depends on the pattern of connections between users,10
i.e., what Twitter calls the ‘social graph’. Tweets from a particular user
appear on the ‘timeline’ of that user’s ‘followers,’ and these followers are
then able to respond or ‘retweet’ the message, propagating the informa-
tion on to their own followers. Within Twitter the directionality of links
is therefore critically important; anybody is free to follow and retweet the
President of the United States, but, for most users, to be retweeted by
the President would be a signiﬁcant event! It is clear that this asymme-
try is a crucial ingredient deﬁning how information propagates through the
network.

Extracting information of the detailed directed structure of the Twitter
social graph is therefore a key step towards understanding the evolution of
a debate on a particular issue, particularly for policy makers who would
like to reach the widest possible audience and eﬀectively inﬂuence the de-
bate. Concepts from graph theory and network analysis can be applied to
address such questions. In particular, community detection is the graph-
theoretical problem of identifying meaningful subgroups within a network.11
Within Twitter, this might correspond to groups of users who share similar
interests, or who are engaging with each other on a particular topic. Al-
though previous studies have used community detection methods to analyse
Twitter networks,12,13 these have generally ignored the directionality of the
edges. Indeed, most of the widely-used community detection methods are
deﬁned for undirected networks and are not easily adapted to the directed
case.14

In contrast, we use here two methods, Markov Stability15–19 and Role-

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

Community and role detection in directed networks

3

Based Similarity (RBS),20,21 which are based on the behaviour of dynamical
processes on the network and can thus be seemlessly applied to directed
networks. Since they are ﬂow-based, these methods naturally explore how
information and inﬂuence propagate across the network of Twitter users,
i.e., the communities and roles found by our analysis reﬂect the process of
information spreading on the network. Markov Stability is a community
detection method which identiﬁes groups of nodes in the graph in which the
ﬂow of a diﬀusion process becomes trapped over a particular time scale.18
Role-based similarity ﬁnds groups of nodes based on the similarity of the
in- and out-ﬂow patterns, i.e., how ﬂows enter and leave each node based
on paths of all lengths. RBS thus provides a deeper insight into the ﬂow
roles of individual users within the network than traditional classiﬁcations
into leaders and followers, or hubs and authorities.22 We have previously
used these methods to analyse a network of inﬂuential Twitter users during
the 2010 London riots.22

In this chapter, we apply and extend these methods to analyse a set of
tweets relating to the care.data programme, demonstrating how the infor-
mation derived from graph-theoretical analyses of Twitter data can pro-
vide insight to policy makers on how to eﬀectively engage with a Twitter
audience. For a discussion of the implications of our research for policy
makers see Ref. 23; here we present in greater detail the technical back-
ground to the analysis, as well as additional, extended results. We begin
in Sections 2 and 3 by explaining the mathematics of the Markov Stability
and Role-Based Similarity methods. In section 4 we describe how we con-
struct diﬀerent directed networks of Twitter users from the set of tweets,
based on declared interest (follower relationships) and active participation
(retweets). We apply our methods to these networks in section 5, revealing
the diﬀerent communities involved in the care.data debate and the diﬀerent
roles played by users within the debate.

2. The Markov Stability community detection methodology

A frequent goal in network analysis is to partition the graph into mean-
ingful subgroups, or communities, leading to a mesoscopic description of
the network that can be extremely useful for making sense of large and
complex data sets. The communities so obtained can also help reveal how
global structure and function emerges from local connections. The liter-
ature contains a large number of methods for community detection (see
Ref. 11 for a review). The variety of community detection methods reﬂects

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

4

B. Amor, S. Vuik, R. Callahan, A. Darzi, S. N. Yaliraki & M. Barahona

the fact that there cannot be a universal deﬁnition of what constitutes a
‘good’ partition of the network. However, most methods follow heuristics
based on structural and combinatorial features of the network: typically
a subset of nodes is thought of as a good community if the connections
between the nodes within the subset are denser than the connections with
nodes outside of the subset.11 Such heuristics are applied through optimi-
sations of a variety of quality functions. A quality function based on this
idea underlies the popular modularity method24.

In addition to the well-known limitations of many of these methods,
(such as the ‘resolution limit’,25 the intrinsic presence of a particular scale,
or the bias towards overpartitioning into clique-like communities26,27),
structural quality functions are not easily adapted to directed networks.28,29
On the other hand, the Markov Stability community detection method is
based on the behaviour of dynamical processes on the network and, as such,
it applies naturally to both undirected and directed networks.17,18 Further-
more, since Markov Stability is based on the ﬂow of a Markov process on
the graph, and not on structural features such as edge density, it can de-
tect non-clique-like communities.26 Other methods have been proposed to
detect communities based on diﬀusion processes, including Infomap30 and
Walktrap,31 yet these methods do not concentrate on fully exploiting the
transient information contained in the dynamics corresponding to the anal-
ysis of paths at all lengths. It is this dynamical zooming that allows Markov
Stability to extract information of the graph at all scales and the plausibil-
ity of diﬀerent coarse-grained descriptions of the graph over diﬀerent time
scales. For a full description of the method see Refs. 15,17,18,26. Here we
focus on the speciﬁcs of the application to directed networks; we start by
outlining the necessary mathematical formalism for random walks on di-
rected networks, and then introduce the Markov Stability quality function
and discussing some practical issues related to its optimisation.

2.1. Random walks on directed networks and Markov Sta-

bility

2.1.1. Preliminaries

A directed graph with N nodes can be encoded by an N × N adjacency
matrix A, where Aij = 1 if there is a directed edge from node i to node j,
and Aij = 0 otherwise. Nodes in directed graphs have an out-degree (given
by the sum of rows of the adjacency matrix, din = A1) and an in-degree
(given by the sum of columns, dout = AT 1).

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

Community and role detection in directed networks

5

The evolution of the probability distribution of a simple discrete-time
random-walk on a directed network deﬁned by the (non-symmetric) adja-
cency matrix A (cid:54)= AT is given by

pt+1 = ptD−1

outA = ptMdir,

(1)

where pt is a 1 × N vector, Dout = diag(dout), and Mdir = D−1
outA is the
Markov transition matrix. If the graph is strongly connected (i.e., if any
node can be reached from any other node) and aperiodic, then the random
walk is ergodic with stationary distribution π, the dominant left eigenvector
of Mdir, i.e., π = πMdir. The entries of π are the PageRank of the nodes in
the graph, a well known variant of the eigenvector centrality which is used
by the Google search algorithm.

In general, real-world networks will not be strongly connected and so
the dynamics are not guaranteed to be ergodic. A common approach for
ensuring the dynamics are ergodic is to use the ‘Google trick’ of random
teleportation: if the random-walk is at a node with at least one out-link,
then with probability α it will follow one of its outlinks, and with proba-
bility 1 − α it will ‘teleport’ to a random node in the graph with uniform
probability. If it is at a node with no out-links, then it will teleport with
probability 1. The transition matrix for such a random-walk is

Mdir(α) = α Mdir + [(1 − α) I + α diag(a)]

11T
N

(2)

where a is a dangling-node indicator vector (ai = 1 if i has no out-links
and ai = 0 otherwise). The customary value used for α is 0.85, which we
adopt below. The equivalent continuous-time random-walk is governed by

˙p = −p (I − Mdir(α)) ,

and the transition matrix for the continuous time random-walk is then

P (t) = exp(−t(I − Mdir(α)).

(3)

(4)

2.1.2. Directed Markov Stability: deﬁnitions and optimisation

The Markov Stability community detection method is based on the analysis
of a dynamical process - such as the random-walk described above - on the
network. The underlying idea is that the behaviour of dynamical processes
on a network can reveal meaningful information about the structure of the
graph. Intuitively, ‘good’ communities are regions of the network in which
the dynamical process is coherent over a particular time scale. In the case
of random walks (akin to diﬀusion processes), a good community is deﬁned

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

6

B. Amor, S. Vuik, R. Callahan, A. Darzi, S. N. Yaliraki & M. Barahona

as a subgraph on which the diﬀusion is well mixed and trapped over a
given time scale. By allowing the random-walk to evolve for progressively
longer times, the method acts as a ‘zooming lens’, uncovering structure
(if present) at all scales. This dynamical zooming allows the method to
extract a multi-resolution description without prescribing a scale for the
partitions. In addition, the method can ﬁnd not only the standard clique-
like communities, but also non-clique communities, which are of interest in
geographic, engineering and social systems.

Operationally, the method works by optimising a time-dependent qual-
ity function as follows. A particular partition of the network is represented
by the N × c community indicator matrix H. Each row of H corresponds
to a node and each column a community:
if node i is in community j
then Hij = 1 and the rest of row i is zeros. We then deﬁne the clustered
autocovariance matrix as

R(t, H) = H (cid:2)ΠP (t) − πT π(cid:3) H T := HQH T ,

(5)

where Π = diag(π) and P (t) is the random-walk transition matrix over time
t (e.g., for the discrete-time simple random walk this is M t
dir). Note that in
the undirected case, Q = ΠP (t) − πT π is the actual autocovariance matrix
of the diﬀusion process deﬁned by P (t), whereas for directed networks the
matrix Q is not symmetric and so it is not an autocovariance in the strict
sense. The entries of the R matrix have an intuitive interpretation in terms
of the random-walk: R(t, H)ij is the probability of starting in community
i at stationarity and being at community j at t discounting the probability
of two independent random-walkers being in i and j at stationarity. The
diagonal entries R(t, H)ii can therefore be seen as a measure of the extent
to which community i traps the ﬂow of the process over time t. The overall
‘quality’ of the partition, in terms of trapping the ﬂow of the diﬀusion
process, is the sum of these diagonal entries, and we deﬁne the Markov
Stability of a partition as

r(t, H) = trace R(t, H) = trace HQH T .

(6)

Markov Stability can be used to evaluate the quality of a particular partition
found by whichever means or, alternatively, we can use it as an objective
function to be maximised over the space of all possible partitions at each
value of the Markov time, t. This latter approach is followed in the examples
below to ﬁnd good communities with high Markov Stability.

For Markov time t, we maximise Markov Stability (6) over the space of
all possible network partitions H. This optimisation is NP-complete,32 and

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

Community and role detection in directed networks

7

so we use the heuristic greedy Louvain algorithm,33 which has been shown
to provide an eﬃcient optimisation of this function both in benchmarks and
in real-life examples. Note that although the Louvain algorithm is formu-
lated for symmetric matrices, and the matrix Q is not symmetric, we can
optimise the directed Markov Stability objective function (6) by exploit-
ing the fact that trace(H T QH) = 1
2 trace(H T (Q + QT )H) and optimising
this symmetrised function. The greedy Louvain algorithm is deterministic,
but the outcome of the optimisation is dependent on the random initialisa-
tion seed. We therefore run the algorithm 100 times with diﬀerent random
seeds and choose the partition with the highest Markov Stability. We also
record the variability in the ensemble of optimised solutions by computing
the average normalised variation of information (VI), a measure of the dis-
tance between two partitions34, between all pairs in the ensemble of 100
optimised partitions. A low VI signiﬁes that there is little diﬀerence be-
tween the obtained partitions, and we use this as an indication that the
community structure of the network at this scale is robust.

By optimising the Markov Stability r(t, H) across a range of times t
(usually spanning several orders of magnitude), we obtain a sequence of
progressively coarser partitions. We do not expect to ﬁnd relevant structure
at all scales. Meaningful communities are chosen according to a double
measure of robustness: they should be optimal, according to their Markov
Stability, over long expanses of time, making them robust across time scales;
they should have low values of their VI, making them robust solutions to
the optimisation problem.

3. Finding ﬂow roles in directed networks using Role-Based

Similarity

In the above discussion, Markov Stability was introduced as a method for
identifying groups of nodes based on the ﬂow of information retained within
them over time. We now introduce another graph-theoretical method that
uses ﬂow for a diﬀerent purpose; namely, to identify instead groups of in-
dividuals who, although not necessarily close within the Twitter network,
have similar patterns of incoming and outgoing ﬂows at all scales. Such
groups can be identiﬁed as ﬂow roles in the network (e.g., source-like or
sink-like in the simplest cases), and can be found through a node similarity
measure called role-based similarity (RBS).21,35 Once this RBS node simi-
larity is obtained, we transform it into role-based similarity graph through
the use of the relaxed minimum spanning tree (RMST) algorithm. The

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

8

B. Amor, S. Vuik, R. Callahan, A. Darzi, S. N. Yaliraki & M. Barahona

analysis of this RBS similarity graph reveals the existence of groups of
nodes with similar roles in the network. These two methods are outlined
below.

3.1. Role-based similarity

Each node in the network is assigned a ‘proﬁle vector’ that encodes the pat-
tern of in-ﬂows and out-ﬂows passing through that node, computed from
the numbers of incoming and outgoing paths of all lengths from that node.
The cosine similarity between the proﬁle vectors of all nodes is then com-
puted to obtain the RBS similarity matrix. Two nodes are similar if they
have similar in- and out-patterns of network ﬂow through them for all path
lengths.21,22,35

Formally, consider a graph with N nodes and adjacency matrix A (cid:54)= AT .
The proﬁle vector for a node is a 1 × 2Kmax vector: the ﬁrst Kmax entries
describe the number of paths of length 1 to Kmax < N − 1 which begin at
that node, and the second Kmax entries give the number of paths which end
at that node (scaled by a tunable constant). These vectors can be computed
straightforwardly by observing that the entries of successive powers of the
adjacency matrix give the number of paths of increasing lengths between
any two nodes (i.e. (Ak)ij is the number of paths of length k between nodes
i and j). The proﬁle vectors are then the row vectors of the N × 2Kmax
matrix given by

(cid:122)
(cid:34)

X(α) =

. . .

incoming
(cid:125)(cid:124)
AT

(cid:19)k

(cid:18) α
λ1

1 . . .

(cid:122)

. . .

(cid:123)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:18) α
λ1

outgoing
(cid:125)(cid:124)
(cid:19)k

(cid:123)
(cid:35)

A

1 . . .

,

(7)

where α ∈ (0, 1) and λ1 is the largest eigenvalue of A. The choice of
α changes the rate of convergence of the terms ((α/λ1)AT )k, and hence
controls the relative inﬂuence of the large-scale structure of the graph. For
small α, the RBS similarity is based mostly on short paths, i.e., local neigh-
bourhoods. For instance, in the limit α → 0 only din and dout are taken
into account. Conversely, using larger values of α leads to proﬁle vectors
which include more global information from the graph.

The RBS similarity of two nodes i and j is then given by the cosine

distance between their proﬁle vectors

Yij =

xixT
j
(cid:107)xi(cid:107)(cid:107)xj(cid:107)

,

(8)

where xi and xj are the ith and jth rows of X.

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

Community and role detection in directed networks

9

3.2. Relaxed minimum spanning tree

The similarity matrix Y deﬁned by (8) can be thought of as a complete,
weighted graph on the nodes, with edges between every pair of nodes
weighted by the cosine similarity of their respective proﬁle vectors. Note
however that the matrix Y also represents the similarity between tran-
sient (forward and backward) time courses of the linear dynamics on the
network. Given the intrinsic continuity of this dynamic representation,
we obtain a sparser projection through the use of the relaxed minimum
spanning tree (RMST) algorithm, a method to obtain a graph-theoretical
projection that captures the underlying continuous geometry of the vectors
being considered—here, the points are the proﬁle vectors, which lie in a
2Kmax-dimensional space.20,22,36

The algorithm proceeds as follows: the minimum spanning tree (MST)
of the complete graph Y is calculated. For each pair of points i and j the
edge Yij is then added to the graph if it is not too much larger than than
the largest edge weight in the MST path between i and j. Formally the
edges in the RMST are given by

(cid:40)

RMSTij =

1 if yij < mlinkij + γ(dk
0 otherwise,

i + dk

j ),

(9)

where mlinkij is the largest edge weight in the MST path between nodes i
and j, dk
i is the distance from node i to its kth nearest neighbour and γ is
a positive parameter (here we have used k = 1 and γ = 0.5). The term γdk
i
is a measure of the local density around every point.

4. Twitter data of the care.data debate:

follower and

retweet networks

The networks analysed here are obtained from a set of tweets relating to
the care.data debate. All tweets sent between 1 December 2013 and 27
March 2014 containing the text “care.data”, “caredata” or “care data”
were obtained from the provider Gnip a. There were 36,745 tweets from
10,031 accounts. The data included the tweeters screen name, the tweet
text and the date and time the tweet was sent. Lists of followers of each
user in the data set were obtained using the Twitter API (this was carried
out in April 2015).

awww.gnip.com

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

10

B. Amor, S. Vuik, R. Callahan, A. Darzi, S. N. Yaliraki & M. Barahona

Fig. 1.
this chapter.

Interpretation of the nodes and edges in the two directed networks studied in

We then constructed two directed networks (Fig. 1): (a) the usual net-
work of followers (‘who follows whom’) amongst the users who appeared in
the data set; and (b) the weighted network of retweets (‘who has retweeted
whom and how much’). We study the largest connected components of
these two networks: the follower network has a single connected compo-
nent with N = 10, 031 users (nodes) and E = 472, 428 edges, corresponding
to declared following; the largest connected component of the retweet net-
work has N = 7303 nodes and E = 14542 edges, corresponding to actual
retweet activity during this period. The follower network (a) is analysed in
Sections 5.1–5.5, whereas the retweet network (b) is studied in Section 5.6.
Using directed Markov Stability, we identify communities in both net-
works. The communities of users obtained in the network of followers are
called interest communities, whereas the communities found in the retweet
network are referred to as conversation communities. To provide a visual
representation of the common interests within interest communities, and
the topics of discussion within conversation communities, we have used the
proﬁle text (self-descriptions) of the users and the text of their tweets, usu-
ally in the form of word clouds. It is important to remark that the text of
the tweets and self-descriptions is only used a posteriori to illustrate our
ﬁndings. The follower network is also used to identify roles in the network
using the RBS-RMST algorithm, as described in Section 3.

5. Results

5.1. Identiﬁcation of interest communities in the follower

network

By applying the ﬂow-based community detection method Markov Stability
to the directed graph of follower relations we identify interest communi-
ties: groups of users between whom information, interest and inﬂuence is

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

Community and role detection in directed networks

11

Fig. 2.
Interest communities identiﬁed by Markov Stability in the follower network.
The word clouds show the most commonly appearing words in the personal proﬁles of
the users in the diﬀerent communities.

propagated. As seen in our previous studies of Twitter networks, the di-
rectionality of the edges is important for capturing this information ﬂow;
communities in undirected networks are diﬀuse and blurred compared to
those in the equivalent directed network.22 Our computations of the di-
rected Markov Stability across times shows a long plateau between Markov
times 4.3 and 6.1 accompanied by a low variation of information, indicat-
ing that the 13-way partition found during this period is robust. Below, we
concentrate on this partition although other levels of resolution can provide
diﬀerent information.

The 13-way partition is composed of four large communities (comprising
99.16% of the users) and nine minor communities, which were not consider
further. As shown in Figure 2, our a posteriori analysis of the most fre-
quently appearing words in the users’ personal proﬁles (self-descriptions)
reveals that the three major interest communities correspond to: health-
care professionals, politicians and political activists, and self-confessed ‘data
geeks’ and media types. The most common words in the self-descriptions
of the healthcare community were ‘health’, ‘nhs’, and ‘care’; the politics
community featured words such as ‘labour’, ‘politics’, and ‘people’; and
the media/data community users used words such as ‘data’, ‘geek’, and

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

12

B. Amor, S. Vuik, R. Callahan, A. Darzi, S. N. Yaliraki & M. Barahona

‘science’. The care.data programme is a healthcare scheme, but the issues
surrounding its implementation concerned the proper user of personal data
and related security and privacy issues. The fourth largest community pre-
sented a mixed set of words including ‘healthcare’/‘health’/‘medical’, but
also ‘data’, ‘technology’ or ‘business’. Interestingly, a closer analysis of the
users of this community revealed that this group was mainly US-based,
and only collaterally participating in the debate due to interest both in
data issues and the relevance of NHS reforms to healthcare reforms in the
US. Our analysis thus conﬁrms that the nature of the debate is reﬂected in
the diﬀerent interests of those Twitter users who actively engaged with the
debate.

5.2. Audience of the interest communities

Although Twitter is an open platform, in which anybody is able to create
a free account and participate, the analysis of personal proﬁles suggests
that users who engaged in the care.data debate had pre-existing personal
interest in the issues being discussed (healthcare, privacy and data security,
politics etc.). To understand the global reach of the debate outside the
network analysed, we collected the follower list of each user in our network,
i.e., all the Twitter users who could have seen a tweet or retweet related
to care.data. The number of unique followers was 9.6 million - nearly
as many as could be reached by a prime-time Saturday night television
advert - demonstrating the clear potential of Twitter as a medium for policy
communications (although it is likely that some of these users are ‘fake’
accounts).

Our analysis reveals relatively little overlap between the outside fol-
lowers of the diﬀerent communities: 70% of followers of the politics group,
76% of followers of the media/data group, 54% of followers of the healthcare
group, and 64.4% of the US group followed only people in that particular
interest community (Fig. 3). To ensure that a wide and diverse audience
is reached, it is therefore important for policy makers to understand and
engage with the diﬀerent communities in the debate.

Table 1 shows the users within each community with the largest num-
ber of followers. Users in the media/data community with large numbers
of followers include the satirist Armando Iannucci (@Aiannucci); the physi-
cian and popular science writer Ben Goldacre (@bengoldacre); and the
blogger and digital rights activist Cory Doctorow (@doctorow). Users in
the healthcare community with a large reach include the British Medical

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

Community and role detection in directed networks

13

Fig. 3. Total unique followers of users in each of the four main interest communities

Table 1. Top users by number of followers in the three main interest communities.

Media/Data

Politics

Healthcare

User
Aiannucci
bengoldacre
thetimes
doctorow
digiphile
WiredUK
cyberdefensemag
pzmyers
tom watson
arusbridger

No. Followers User

No. Followers User

422829
378681
360178
359954
236273
224780
189766
163682
161073
153233

Asamsakti* (81%)
davidicke
walkon crafters* (85%)
HouseofCommons
NHAparty
labourpress
OccupyLondon
IndyVoices
politicshome
sahil anas

596380
131739
117813
68802
64416
58264
56773
52191
50554
46096

Dr Sean 001 * (82%)
bmj latest
NHSChoices
DHgovuk
mencap charity
TheStrokeAssoc
NHSEngland
TheEIU
TheBMA
GdnHealthcare

No. Followers
226264
161007
159852
139876
84889
67491
65673
60561
47059
44587

* Users in italics have > 80% estimated fake followers (percentage in parenthesis)

Journal (@bmj latest), the English NHS (@NHSChoices), and the Depart-
ment of Health (@DHGovuk). The three users with the most followers in
the politics community were slightly unusual: a user posting mainly pho-
tos of art (@Asamsakti), the controversial conspiracy theorist David Icke
(@davidicke), and a support group for amputees (@walkon crafters). How-
ever, using an online toolb we found that 81% of followers of @Asamsakti
and 85% of the followers of @walkon crafters are estimated to be ‘fake’
user accounts. Less surprising were the oﬃcial accounts for the political
party the National Health Action party (@NHAparty), the Labour Press
Team (@labourpress), and the anti-capitalist protest group Occupy London
(@OccupyLondon).

bwww.twitteraudit.com

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

14

B. Amor, S. Vuik, R. Callahan, A. Darzi, S. N. Yaliraki & M. Barahona

5.3. Sentiment analysis of tweets

To determine the sentiment of the discussion and identify some of the topics
of discussion, we manually analysed a sample of 250 tweets from the dataset
(Table 2). Very few of the tweets were classiﬁed as positive (3-5%), the rest
being neutral or negative. This is characteristic of how Twitter is used—
spikes in tweet activity around a particular event tend to be of a negative
nature.37 Interestingly, however, the proportion of tweets from users in the
healthcare community which were classiﬁed as negative was lower than in
the politics and media/data communities.

There were also diﬀerences in the content of the negative tweets between
the three interest communities. We divided concerns into three distinct
classes:

(1) Implementation. Concerns regarding information provision, the opt-

out process, and communication with the public.

(2) Scheme concept. Concerns about privacy, sharing of personal data,

and the use/sale of the data.

(3) Execution. Concerns around security, eﬀectiveness of pseudonymisa-

tion, and cyber attacks.

While all three communities were predominantly negative about the
care.data scheme, each focused on diﬀerent arguments. The politic com-
munity mainly discussed the scheme concept of sharing personal data, as
well as the security concerns that are associated with it. The healthcare
and media/data communities on the other hand were primarily concerned
about the implementation of the care.data project, concentrating on the
contested opt-out arrangement and perceived lack of communication to the
public.

5.4. Bridgeness between communities

The communities identiﬁed in the follower network are regions where a
dynamical process is likely to become trapped, so information ﬂows less
readily between these communities than within them. This suggests that
relatively few links could act as a ‘bridge’ between communities and could
be eﬀective at propagating the ﬂow from one to another. An example of
such a connection would link one user who is following inﬂuential individuals
in one community and another who is being followed by many people in
another community (Fig. 4). To identify the ‘bridges’ from community
C1 to community C2, we calculate the shortest paths between all pairs of

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

Community and role detection in directed networks

15

Table 2. Sentiment and content analysis of a random sample of 250 tweets.

Healthcare

Politics Media/Data

Tweet sentiment

Major concerns

Positive
Negative
Neutral

Implementation1
Scheme concept2
Execution3

5%
58%
37%

65%
28%
7%

4%
75%
21%

28%
43%
29%

3%
62%
35%

54%
35%
11%

1 information provision, the opt-out process, communication to the public
2privacy, sharing of personal data, use/selling of the dataset
3security concerns, re-identiﬁcation, cyber attacks

nodes (i, j), where i ∈ C2 and j ∈ C1. Note that the ﬂow of information
if there is an edge from
is in the opposite direction to that of the edges:
node i to node j, then content produced by user j is consumed by user
i. The bridgeness (centrality) of an edge is then deﬁned as the proportion
of shortest paths which pass through that edge - this is equivalent to the
classic betweeness centrality measure, but now only shortest paths between
speciﬁc subgroups of the nodes are considered. Such information could be
useful for policy-makers who ﬁnd they have more success in engaging users
in community C1 than in C2 - since they will be able to target those users
in C1 who are most able to propagate that information on to C2.

As an illustration of the type of information that can be extracted, we
have considered the bridging links with the highest bridgeness centrality
(A more nuanced view
between the three largest communities (Fig. 4).
can be obtained by considering a longer list of bridges and their proﬁles,
see Table 3.) The highest bridgeness centrality for ﬂow from the poli-
tics community to the healthcare community is the link from Roy Lilley
(@RoyLilley) to the National Health Action party (@NHAparty). Roy Lil-
ley is followed by 44.4% of users in the healthcare community, and the NHA
party is following 41.0% of users in the politics community. The highest
bridgeness centrality for ﬂow in the opposite direction (from the healthcare
community to politics) is the link from the NHA party to NHS healthcare
professional Helen Bevan (@helenbevan). The NHA party is being followed
by 53.2% of the politics community and Helen Bevan is following 19.1%
of the healthcare community. The partial asymmetry here is interesting:
within the politics community, the NHA party has a large number of fol-
lowers (53.2%) and a large number of users it follows (41.0%), meaning it

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

16

B. Amor, S. Vuik, R. Callahan, A. Darzi, S. N. Yaliraki & M. Barahona

Fig. 4. Bridgeness. a) To identify the users important for information ﬂow between two
communities, we compute the shortest paths for all pairs of nodes (i, j) where j ∈ C1, i ∈
C2 and identify the between-community edges which feature in these shortest paths most
often. Shortest paths are likely to go through UserA (who is being followed by many
users in C2) and UserB (who is following many people in C1). b) Links with highest
bridgeness centrality between interest communities - note that the ﬂow of information is
in the opposite direction to that of the edges.

is able to act as both a broadcaster of information to this community and
a receiver of information from it. In contrast, Roy Lilley is followed by a
large proportion of people in the healthcare community (44.4%) but follows
relatively few (3.4%); he is therefore more likely to act as a broadcaster of
information to the community. Helen Bevan follows a larger proportion
of the healthcare community (19.6%), and is therefore exposed to a larger
amount of the content generated by its users.

A similar asymmetric pattern is observed for information ﬂow between
the healthcare and media/data communities, and between the media/data
and politics communities. The highest bridgeness centrality for healthcare
to media/data is via the link from Ben Goldacre (@bengoldacre) to Julia
Cox (@JuliaHCox), whereas the highest bridgeness centrality for ﬂow in
the opposite direction is via the link between the Mencap charity (@men-
cap charity) and the Open Rights Group (@OpenRightsGroup). Flow from
politics to media/data is via the link between Armando Iannucci and the
NHA party, whereas ﬂow from media/data to politics is via the the link
between the NHA party and the software company ﬁgshare (@ﬁgshare).

The asymmetry observed in the bridgeness centralities reinforces the

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

Community and role detection in directed networks

17

Table 3. The top 5 bridging edges in the boundaries across interest communities
ranked according to their bridgeness ratio (BR). The bridgeness ratio of an edge is
the number of shortest paths from C1 to C2 which pass along that edge divided by
the expected number of paths to pass along any edge at that boundary. A high BR
means that a disproportionally large number of shortest paths pass through this edge.
Due to the asymmetry of the information ﬂow from followed to follower, the rele-
vant edges are diﬀerent depending of the direction in which the boundary is crossed.

Politics → Media/Data

BR

Politics → Healthcare

BR Media/Data → Healthcare

@NHAparty → @ﬁgshare
@NHAparty → @PaulLomax
@NHAparty → @PaulbernalUK
@NHAparty → @rahoulb
@haloefekti → @cyberdefensemag

59.9
52.5
52.2
43.1
41.6

@NHAparty → @helenbevan
@NHAparty → @Richard GP
@butNHS → @helenbevan
@NHAparty → @BWMedical
@NHAparty → @H20MCR

277.8 @bengoldacre → @JuliaHCox
200.6 @bengoldacre → @WelshGasDoc
91.3
82.3
79.8

@bengoldacre → @PharmaceuticBen
@bengoldacre → @Azeem Majeed
@bengoldacre → @bmj latest

Media/Data → Politics

BR

Healthcare → Politics

BR

Healthcare → Media/Data

@Aiannucci → @NHAparty
@tom watson → @roberthenryjohn
@bengoldacre → @grahamemorris
@laurakalbag → @NHAparty
@bengoldacre → @carolinejmolloy

208.9 @RoyLilley → @NHAparty
51.8
50.8
46.1
45.9

@ManchesterCCGs → @KayFSheldon
@bmj latest → @NHAparty
@stevenowottny → @KayFSheldon
@clarercgp → @NHAparty

203.8 @mencap charity → @OpenRightsGroup
108.5 @bmj latest → @psychemedia
91.8
49.1
48.3

@bmj latest → @ﬁgshare
@JuliaHCox → @bainesy1969
@Jarmann → @bainesy1969

BR

62.9
48.8
44.0
40.8
37.1

BR

35.7
32.2
30.5
30.3
27.3

notion that directionality is crucial for understanding patterns of informa-
tion ﬂow through the network.
It also suggests that, depending on the
users someone is following and being followed by, individuals might play
diﬀerent roles in propagating the ﬂow of information through the network.
We explore this idea in more detail in the following section.

5.5. Identifying roles in the follower network

To identify the diﬀerent roles played by users in propagating the ﬂow of
information via the Twitter social graph, we constructed the RBS-RMST
similarity graph for the follower network. We then used Markov Stability
on this similarity graph to identify groups of nodes with similar in-ﬂow and
out-ﬂow patterns. We ﬁnd a robust partition of the similarity graph into 6
groups, which correspond to 6 distinct roles for the Twitter users according
to their ﬂow patterns (Fig. 5a). The meaning of the 6 roles identiﬁed can
be understood by considering the aggregated in- and out-ﬂows in the social
graph for each of the roles; by computing the in- and out-degree for each
role; and by obtaining the proportion of their friends who lie in a diﬀerent
interest community. All of these characterisations are presented in Fig. 5
b-d.

The combined information from all these measures allows us to describe

the identiﬁed roles as:

(1) Leaders: users with higher in-degree (number of followers) than out-

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

18

B. Amor, S. Vuik, R. Callahan, A. Darzi, S. N. Yaliraki & M. Barahona

Fig. 5. Role communities in the role-based similarity graph. a) Role-based similarity
graph obtained using the RBS-RMST algorithm, there are 6 robust communities cor-
responding to diﬀerent user roles. b) The original follower network coarse-grained into
role communities, the arrows are proportional in size to the number of users in one role
community who follow users in the the other role community. c) average in-degree and
out-degree of users in the 6 role communities. d) Kernel density estimates for the distri-
butions of the proportion of a user’s friends lying outside their own interest community.
e) Cumulative distribution of retweets for the diﬀerent role communities.

degree. Users in this group tend to follow few people, mainly in the
mediator group.

(2) Mediators: users with roughly the same same in-degree and out-degree
who are both following and being followed by users in all other groups.
(3) Listeners: users with few followers, and who are following a small num-

ber of people from primarily the ‘Leader’ group.

(4) Diversiﬁed listeners: users with few followers, but who are following a
larger and more diverse group of users than the ‘Listener’ category.
(5) Peripheral followers: users who are following a very small number of

other users and are being followed by no-one.

(6) Peripheral followed : users who are being followed by a small number

of users but are following no-one.

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

Community and role detection in directed networks

19

The users with the largest number of followers in the ‘Leader’ role are
the physician and science writer Ben Goldacre; former Chair of the Council
of the Royal College of General Practitioners Clare Gerada (@clarercgp);
and the account of the Department of Health. In the ‘Mediator’ role, the
NHA party, the Joseph Rowntree Foundation (@jrf uk), and Care Quality
Commision board member Kay Sheldon (@KayFSheldon) have the largest
number of followers.

We calculated the proportion of each user’s friends (users they are fol-
lowing) who are in a diﬀerent interest community from themselves (as calcu-
lated in Section 5.1) for each of the diﬀerent roles (Fig. 5d). The diversiﬁed
listeners have the greatest proportion of friends outside their own interest
community, which conﬁrms that these users are following a broad range of
other accounts involved in the care.data debate. The mediators and lead-
ers also tend to follow a signiﬁcant number of people outside their own
interest community. The listeners and peripheral listeners follow predom-
inantly others within the same interest community, suggesting that their
involvement or interest was focused on one particular aspect of the debate.
To understand how the diﬀerent roles identiﬁed in the follower network
translate into actual participation in the care.date debate we calculated the
distributions of retweets for each of the role communities (Fig. 5e). There
is a clear separation between the ‘Leader’ category, which garners the most
re-tweets, and the follower categories ‘Listener’ and ‘Diversiﬁed Listener’,
which are rarely retweeted, with the ‘Mediator’ category lying in-between
but closer to the ‘Leader’ group. These results suggest that identifying users
who have ‘Leader’ and ‘Mediator’ roles in follower networks can predict
those users who are likely to have greatest inﬂuence in the debate. We now
explore the structure of the retweet network obtained from the collected
tweet corpus.

5.6. Conversation communities in the retweet network

The Twitter social graph (i.e., the follower network studied above) encodes
the possibility of information ﬂow through Twitter—tweets from a user you
are following will appear on your timeline and you have the opportunity to
retweet them or send a related tweet. Of course, most people cannot and do
not engage actively with all information they are exposed to. Since we have
the set of all tweets concerning care.data, we are able to explore the actual
ﬂow of information on this speciﬁc topic. To allow us to understand the
issues being discussed, and the groups of people who are actively engaging

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

20

B. Amor, S. Vuik, R. Callahan, A. Darzi, S. N. Yaliraki & M. Barahona

Fig. 6. The conversation communities identiﬁed in the retweet network. The word
clouds show the most commonly appearing words in the tweets sent by users within the
community.

with each other through Twitter, we have therefore analysed the network
of retweets (‘who retweets whom and how much’) using our community
detection framework to ﬁnd conversation communities. We then interpret
the results through an a posteriori summary of the text of the tweets in
the obtained groups.

Applying Markov Stability, we identify a robust partition of the retweet
network into 8 conversation communities (Fig. 6). Table 4 shows how par-
ticipants within each conversation community are split between the three
largest interest communities (healthcare, media/data, politics). The con-
versation communities contain an uneven split of users from the interest
communities: except conversations 5 and 8, all conversations are dominated
by users from a particular interest community. This result conﬁrms that
in the care.data debate there is a greater ﬂow of information between users
with similar interests, and this implies that interest communities (identi-
ﬁed from the network of follower relations) provide a good indication of
how information is likely to ﬂow through the Twitter network.

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

Community and role detection in directed networks

21

Table 4. Mix of users in the 8 conversation communities according to the 3 main interest
communities. The + and − signs indicate whether the observed number of users is above
or below expectation. All conversation communities (except Conversation 4) are signiﬁcant
(p < 0.001,(∗∗∗)) according to a chi-square statistic calculated for each row independently.

Politics Media/Data Healthcare

Conversation 1
Conversation 2
Conversation 3
Conversation 4
Conversation 5
Conversation 6
Conversation 7
Conversation 8

201(−)
427(−)
834(+)
0(−)
65(+)
29(−)
66(−)
754(+)

113(−)
778(+)
532(−)
2(+)
54(+)
261(+)
15(−)
632(+)

808(+)
334(−)
290(−)
0(−)
1(−)
16(−)
161(+)
311(−)

‘Healthcare’-dominated (∗∗∗)
‘Media/Data’-dominated (∗∗∗)
‘Politics’-dominated (∗∗∗)

‘Politics’ & ‘Media/Data’ (∗∗∗)
‘Media/Data’-dominated (∗∗∗)
‘Healthcare’-dominated (∗∗∗)
‘Politics’ & ‘Media/Data’ (∗∗∗)

To identify the topics being discussed within the diﬀerent conversations,
we extracted the text of the tweets and retweets sent by users within each
group and produced word clouds with the most frequent words used in those
conversations (Fig. 6). Conversation 1 centred primarily around healthcare
professionals discussing the impact of the scheme on patients, containing
words such as ‘patient’, ‘public’, and ‘people’. The media and data tweeters
in conversation 2 were more opinionated, using words like ‘mess’, ‘wrong’,
and ‘sorry’. In conversation 3, political activists discussed privacy issues
such as the ‘opt out arrangement, the selling (‘sold) of ‘records’ to ‘insur-
ance’ companies, and the involvement of the controversial digital services
company Atos. Conversation 6 was dominated by data geeks, who dis-
cussed ‘medical records and privacy issues. Finally, conversation 8 brought
together users from both the healthcare and data communities in a more
general discussion.

6. Conclusion

By applying the multiscale ﬂow-based community detection method
Markov Stability to follower networks of Twitter users, we have identi-
ﬁed separate participating groups in the debate concerning the healthcare
programme care.data. We have shown that users within these groups share
similar interests, and that the audience of Twitter users outside the net-
work (i.e.
those who did not participate in discussion of care.data, but
follow someone who did) are distinct for the diﬀerent communities. By
analysing the retweet network, we have identiﬁed speciﬁc topics being dis-

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

22

B. Amor, S. Vuik, R. Callahan, A. Darzi, S. N. Yaliraki & M. Barahona

cussed in diﬀerent conversation communities. Furthermore, by comparing
the communities found in the follower and retweet networks, we have shown
that the actual ﬂow of information (in the form of retweets) is heavily in-
ﬂuenced by the network of follower relations. Using role-based similarity,
we have classiﬁed the users in the care-data debate according to the role
they play in propagating information across the network. The information
uncovered by these methods could be of great value to policy makers, who,
in order to target the largest possible audience, need to understand the dif-
ferent communities and the diﬀerent roles played by the individuals within
them.

References

1. NHS England. The care.data programme - collecting information for the
www.england.nhs.uk/

health of
[Online]. Available from:
ourwork/tsd/care-data/ [Accessed: 26 May 2015].

the nation.

2. W. Raghupathi and V. Raghupathi, Big data analytics in healthcare: promise
and potential, Health Information Science and Systems. 2(1), 3 (2014).
3. Darzi, Ara. Care.data will close the gap between outsiders and those
in the loop . [Online]. Available from: http://www.hsj.co.uk/comment/
darzi-caredata-will-close-the-gap-between-outsiders-and-those-in-the-loop/
5067686.article [Accessed: 26 May 2015].

4. Vallance, Chris. Adults ‘unaware of NHS data plans’. [Online]. Available
from: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-26187980 [Accessed: 26 May
2015].

5. Editorial, Power to the people, Nature. 505(7483) (2014). doi: doi:10.1038/

505261a.

6. Triggle, Nick. Giant NHS database rollout delayed. [Online]. Available from:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-26239532 [Accessed: 26 May 2015].
7. C. Honey and S. C. Herring. Beyond microblogging: Conversation and col-
laboration via twitter. In System Sciences, 2009. HICSS’09. 42nd Hawaii
International Conference on, pp. 1–10 (2009).

8. S. Wu, J. M. Hofman, W. A. Mason, and D. J. Watts. Who says what
to whom on twitter. In Proceedings of the 20th international conference on
World wide web, pp. 705–714 (2011).

9. K. Lerman and R. Ghosh, Information contagion: An empirical study of
the spread of news on digg and twitter social networks., ICWSM. 10, 90–97
(2010).

10. D. M. Romero, B. Meeder, and J. Kleinberg. Diﬀerences in the mechanics of
information diﬀusion across topics: idioms, political hashtags, and complex
contagion on twitter. In Proceedings of the 20th international conference on
World wide web, pp. 695–704 (2011).

11. S. Fortunato and C. Castellano. Community structure in graphs. In Compu-

tational Complexity, pp. 490–512. Springer (2012).

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

Community and role detection in directed networks

23

12. M. Conover, J. Ratkiewicz, M. Francisco, B. Gon¸calves, F. Menczer, and

A. Flammini. Political polarization on twitter. In ICWSM (2011).

13. L. Weng, F. Menczer, and Y.-Y. Ahn, Virality prediction and community

structure in social networks, Scientiﬁc reports. 3 (2013).

14. F. D. Malliaros and M. Vazirgiannis, Clustering and community detection in
directed networks: A survey, Physics Reports. 533(4), 95–142 (2013).
15. J.-C. Delvenne, S. N. Yaliraki, and M. Barahona, Stability of graph commu-
nities across time scales, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
107(29), 12755–12760 (2010).

16. J. C. Delvenne, S. N. Yaliraki, and M. Barahona, Stability of graph commu-
nities across time scales (Mar., 2009). URL http://arxiv.org/abs/0812.
1811v4.

17. J.-C. Delvenne, M. T. Schaub, S. N. Yaliraki, and M. Barahona. The stability
of a graph partition: A dynamics-based framework for community detection.
In Dynamics On and Of Complex Networks, Volume 2, pp. 221–242. Springer
(2013).

18. R. Lambiotte, J.-C. Delvenne, and M. Barahona, Random walks, markov pro-
cesses and the multiscale modular organization of complex networks, Network
Science and Engineering, IEEE Transactions on. 1(2), 76–90 (2014).

19. R. Lambiotte, J. C. Delvenne, and M. Barahona, Laplacian dynamics and
multiscale modular structure in networks (Dec., 2008). URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/0812.1770.

20. M. Beguerisse-D´ıaz, B. Vangelov, and M. Barahona. Finding role commu-
nities in directed networks using role-based similarity, markov stability and
the relaxed minimum spanning tree. In IEEE Global Conference on Signal
and Information Processing, GlobalSIP 2013, Austin, TX, USA, December
3-5, 2013, pp. 937–940 (2013). doi: 10.1109/GlobalSIP.2013.6737046. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/GlobalSIP.2013.6737046.

21. K. Cooper and M. Barahona. Role-based similarity in directed networks.

URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1012.2726 (Dec. , 2010).

22. M. Beguerisse-D´ıaz, G. Gardu˜no-Hern´andez, B. Vangelov, S. N. Yaliraki, and
M. Barahona, Interest communities and ﬂow roles in directed networks: the
twitter network of the uk riots, Journal of The Royal Society Interface. 11
(101), 20140940 (2014).

23. S. Vuik, B. Amor, R. Callahan, S. Yaliraki, M. Barahona, and A. Darzi, Un-
derstanding communities on twitter to better target policy communications,
Submitted (2015).

24. M. E. Newman, Modularity and community structure in networks, Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences. 103(23), 8577–8582 (2006).
25. S. Fortunato and M. Barth´elemy, Resolution limit in community detection,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 104(1), 36–41 (2007).
26. M. T. Schaub, J.-C. Delvenne, S. N. Yaliraki, and M. Barahona, Markov
dynamics as a zooming lens for multiscale community detection: non clique-
like communities and the ﬁeld-of-view limit, PloS one. 7(2), e32210 (2012).
27. M. T. Schaub, R. Lambiotte, and M. Barahona, Encoding dynamics for mul-
tiscale community detection: Markov time sweeping for the map equation,

August 14, 2015

0:30

World Scientiﬁc Review Volume - 9in x 6in

twitter˙chapter

24

B. Amor, S. Vuik, R. Callahan, A. Darzi, S. N. Yaliraki & M. Barahona

Physical Review E. 86(2), 026112 (2012).

28. E. A. Leicht and M. E. Newman, Community structure in directed networks,

Physical review letters. 100(11), 118703 (2008).

29. Y. Kim, S.-W. Son, and H. Jeong, Finding communities in directed networks,

Physical Review E. 81(1), 016103 (2010).

30. M. Rosvall and C. T. Bergstrom, An information-theoretic framework for
resolving community structure in complex networks, Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences. 104(18), 7327–7331 (2007).

31. P. Pons and M. Latapy, Computing communities in large networks using

random walks., J. Graph Algorithms Appl. 10(2), 191–218 (2006).

32. U. Brandes, D. Delling, M. Gaertler, R. Gorke, M. Hoefer, Z. Nikoloski, and
D. Wagner, On modularity clustering, Knowledge and Data Engineering,
IEEE Transactions on. 20(2), 172–188 (2008).

33. V. D. Blondel, J.-L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, and E. Lefebvre, Fast un-
folding of communities in large networks, Journal of Statistical Mechanics:
Theory and Experiment. 2008(10), P10008 (2008).

34. M. Meil˘a, Comparing clusterings - an information based distance, Journal of

Multivariate Analysis. 98(5), 873–895 (2007).

35. K. Cooper. Complex networks: similarity and dynamics. PhD thesis, Imperial

College London (2010).

36. B. Vangelov. Unravelling Biological Processes using Graph Theoretical Algo-
rithms and Probabilistic Models. PhD thesis, Imperial College London (2014).
37. M. Thelwall, K. Buckley, and G. Paltoglou, Sentiment in twitter events,
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology. 62
(2), 406–418 (2011).

