Cybernetic modeling of Industrial Control Systems:  
Towards threat analysis of critical infrastructure 

Abhinav Biswas 
Technical Officer, IT Services Division, 
Electronics Corporation of India Limited, ECIL 
Hyderabad, India 
abhinavbiswas@ecil.gov.in 

Sukanya Karunakaran 
Technical Officer, Corporate Research & Development, 
Electronics Corporation of India Limited, ECIL 
Hyderabad, India 
sukanya_karun@ecil.co.in

security  approaches 

Abstract  —  Industrial  Control  Systems  (ICS)  encompassing 
resources for process automation are subjected to a wide variety 
of  security  threats.  The  threat  landscape  is  arising  due  to 
increased adoption of Commercial-of-the-shelf (COTS)  products 
as  well  as  the  convergence  of  Internet  and  legacy  systems. 
Prevalent 
for  protection  of  critical 
infrastructure  are  scattered  among  various  subsystems  and 
modules  of  ICS  networks.  This  demands  a  new  state-of-the-art 
cybernetic  model  of  ICS  networks,  which  can  help  in  threat 
analysis  by  providing  a  comprehensive  view  of  the  relationships 
and interactions between the subsystems. Towards this direction, 
the principles of the Viable System Model (VSM) are applied to 
introduce  a  conceptual  recursive  model  of  secure  ICS  networks 
that can drive cyber security decisions.  

Keywords—Control  systems,  Critical  infrastructure  protection; 

Viable System Model; ICS networks; Cyber security; 

I.   INTRODUCTION 

Industrial  Control  Systems  (ICS)  are  an  integral  part  of  a 
nation's critical infrastructure providing requisite resources for 
process control automation of critical entities like power grids, 
emergency  communications  systems,  air 
traffic  control 
networks, nuclear power plants etc. Control & Instrumentation 
(C&I)  systems  of  critical  infrastructure  are  so  vital  that  the 
potential  disruption  of  such  entities  would  have  a  debilitating 
impact  on  national  security,  industrial  economy,  public  safety 
etc.  and  hence  need  to  be  protected  from  deliberate  sabotage 
attacks. Historically, C&I systems were closed and often built 
on  specialized  proprietary  protocols  and  interfaces.  However, 
nowadays  C&I  systems  are  adopting  components  from  open 
Commercial-of-the-shelf  (COTS)  technology  for  increased 
flexibility  and  cross  platform  compatibility.  The  old  esoteric 
systems  are  being  replaced  with  new  open  products  that  have 
connectivity  to  corporate  intranets  and,  in  some  cases,  the 
public  Internet.  However,  this  paradigm  shift  in  adopting 
openness  and  Internet  connectivity  is  achieved  at  the  cost  of 
decreased security against digital intrusion. Modern embedded 
systems are riddled with vulnerabilities, which are subjected to 
potential  cyber  threats  like  state-sponsored  external  attacks  as 
well  as  malicious  insider  threats.  Hence,  it  has  become  a 
challenge  for  researchers  to  introduce  requisite  security  and 

sufficient  safety  features  in  modern  ICS  networks  to  counter 
the  newly  posed  threats.  Furthermore,  since  the  C&I  systems 
typically  have  much  longer  life  cycle  than  commercial  IT 
systems, there is an increasing demand for a security assurance 
model  of  ICS  networks  that  encompasses  the  entire  running 
cycle of C&I systems. 

Majority  of  the  prevalent  ICS  security  approaches  are 
adaptations of conventional methods for securing traditional IT 
systems which address only a part of the threat landscape and 
are not specifically tailored for elements of ICS networks like 
sensors/actuators  etc.  Also  in  traditional  ICS  network  designs 
the identification of threats and vulnerabilities is conducted in 
each domain of the ICS network separately and independently, 
omitting 
field 
components.  Therefore,  a  novel  holistic  approach  that  can 
overcome  these  drawbacks  of  past  approaches  is  the  need  of 
the hour for ICS network security. 

interactions  between 

the  underlying 

the 

Hence, this article introduces a conceptual recursive model 
of  a  secure  ICS  network  that  can  withstand  the  challenges  of 
modern  threats  by  adopting  the  principles  of  Viable  System 
Model  (VSM).  Towards  this  direction,  an  intuitive  7-level 
secure  network  design  model  is  proposed  that  provides  a 
holistic  view  of  the  critical  sections  of  ICS  networks.  The 
proposed  model  uses  the  cybernetic  construct  of  VSM  to 
methodologically  emphasize  the  relationships  and  interactions 
between  different  entities  within  &  outside 
ICS 
Infrastructure  system.  The  article  demonstrates  how  a  layered 
design  principle  can  ease  threat  visualization  &  help  increase 
security assurance at all levels. 

the 

  More specifically, this article’s key contributions are: 

•  A  formal  demonstration  of  the  seven-layered 
cybernetic model of ICS networks based on VSM 
principles. 

• 

Illustration  of 
and 
interactions between the different C&I systems at 
each layer of VSM. 

relationships 

recursive 

•  Threat 

analysis 

regarding 
susceptibility to modern cyber attacks and how to 
combat them. 

layers 

all 

of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
II.  BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 

confront 

targeted-attacks 

that  deal  with 

Government  organizations 

critical 
infrastructure  nowadays 
like 
Advanced  Persistent  Threats  (APT),  which  are  destined  for 
specific  industrial  sabotage.  APTs  are  coordinated  cyber 
attacks  that  target  the  specific  industry  over  a  persistent  time 
period  of  months  or  even  years  and  try  to  penetrate  into  the 
ICS  network  stealthily  using  advanced  malware  that  exploit 
zero-day  vulnerabilities.  C&I  systems  comprise  a  plethora  of 
loosely coupled COTS systems like Supervisory Control And 
Data  Acquisition  (SCADA)  systems,  Programmable  Logic 
Controllers  (PLCs),  Remote  Terminal  Units  (RTUs)  etc.  that 
demand for 24/7 remote access for engineering, operations or 
technical  support  and  hence  are  jellied  with  the  corporate 
network. As the modern dynamics of ICS networks is moving 
towards this sort of interconnected architecture, it is indirectly 
opening doors for the external attackers to penetrate. Further, 
since  COTS  technology  is  open  and  flexible,  software  driven 
C&I systems are now being subjected to hacking and targeted 
attacks like APTs much more than before. 

Another  contemporary  threat  faced  by  ICSs  is  that  of 
Insider  attacks.  Insiders  are  confided  members/operators  who 
have  administrative  credentials  to  resources  and  knowledge 
about  the  network  architecture.  An  insider  with  malicious 
intent can be very dangerous to the security of ICS networks. 
With  the  adaptation  of  novel  technologies,  threats  to  C&I 
systems may also arise due to negligent operational mistakes, 
inappropriate  testing,  wrongly  defined  security  policy  and 
even  lack  of  knowledge  about  information  security.  These 
inherent  threats  if  exploited,  may  not  only  partially  paralyze 
the  services  but  may  introduce  catastrophic  failure  of  other 
critical  infrastructure  services  due  to  cascading  effects  of  the 
inter-related functional areas. 

Ralph  [1]  explains  the  devastating  success  of  Stuxnet 
malware that was used to infect the SCADA systems of Iran's 
nuclear facilities. Stuxnet contained a PLC rootkit that led the 
centrifuges  to  spin  out  of  control  and  ultimate  reactor 
meltdown.  The  proliferations  of  sophisticated  Stuxnet-like 
malware  such  as  Duqu,  Flame,  and  Gauss  in  recent  years 
reveal the imminence of modern threats and the shortcomings 
of  our  detection  and  response  counter-measures.  Hence,  in 
order  to  address  ICS  security,  it  is  indeed  a  necessity  for 

organizations to adopt a defensive security framework that can 
maintain the confidentiality, integrity and availability (CIA) of 
information  at  all  levels.  The  intrusions  and  risks  can  be 
mitigated  only  by  a  proactive  defense-in-depth  approach 
starting  from  the  bottom  level  of  field  data  acquisition  to  the 
top level of data sharing with the external world. Considering 
the  fact  that  ICSs  are  often  very  long-lived  installations  and 
the  duration  of  innovation  cycles  in  ICSs  is  very  different 
from  those  in  conventional  Information  and  Communication 
technology  (ICT),  this  new  level  of  demand  for  security 
assurance has necessitated the requirement to build up a secure 
ICS network model that is viable enough to generate effective 
deterrents and countermeasures against the known threats. 

Critical 

ICSs  as 

Infrastructure 

security  assurance  and 

risk 
assessment  methods  are  divided  into  two  distinct  categories 
viz. the sectorial approach referring to those which treat each 
sector  separately  and  the  flow  approach  that  follows  a 
systemic  approach  examining 
interconnected 
networks.  Most  prevalent  approaches  [2]  fall  into  the  first 
category,  which  has  limitations  when  it  is  applied  in  cross-
sectorial  environments.  The  resilience  concerns  are  not 
addressed  or  exist  only  implicitly.  Wang  [3]  proposed  an 
excellent  simulation  environment 
for  SCADA  security 
analysis taking into account the interdependencies to an extent 
and 
network 
communications,  but  without  considering  cyber-threats  that 
are not network-driven. The proposed model described in this 
article falls in the second category that utilizes VSM in a much 
more  flow-oriented  manner  for  identification  of  threats.  The 
inherent  scalable  nature  of  the  VSM  ensures  resilience 
whereas  its  systemic  behavior  allows  the  investigation  of  the 
critical components and emerging interconnections. 

resilience 

provided 

focusing 

on 

by 

The VSM paradigm 

Stafford  Beer  [4]  originally  designed  the  Viable  System 
Model (VSM) to model the viability of an autonomous system. 
A  viable  system  needs  to  meet  the  demands  of  survival  in  a 
changing  environment  and  must  be  adaptable.  The  VSM 
expresses a cybernetic model for viable systems that is capable 
of  autonomy  and  divides  this  system  into  three  fundamental 
parts viz. Management, Operations and Environment as shown 
in  Fig.  1a.  The  Operations  part  involves  all  the  jobs  that  take 

Fig. 1 (a) Typical Viable System Model (VSM); (b) Systemic representation of recursive nature of VSM 

 
 
isolation.  In  the  proposed  VSM  this  concept  of  isolation  is 
further  extended  into  segregated  recursive  layers  as  per  the 
viability of ICS network. The proposed ICS VSM is stratified 
into 7 levels of recursion labeled from L7 to L1 as follows: 

•  L7 ICS Network Management 

•  L6 IT Operation Network 

•  L5 ICS-DMZ Operations 

•  L4 Production Operations 

•  L3 Process Control Network 

•  L2 Control System Network 

•  L1 Device Network. 

L7 ICS Network Management 

The  L7  layer  provides  the  overall  view  of  ICS  enterprise 
network,  addressing  all  the  upper  level  systems  starting  from 
IT Operations Network (L6) to the Field Device Network (L1). 
Fig.  2  depicts  the  top  level  VSM  representation  of  ICS 
enterprise,  which  is  divided  into  three  parts  viz.  'L7  ICS 
Network  Management',  'Operational  Units'  and  'Controllers  & 
Dependencies'  (Environment)  based  on  VSM  principles.  Each 
Operational  Unit  recursively  functions  as  a  VSM  in  itself. 
Quality  control  and  inspection  audits  of  all  Operational  Units 
are  coordinated  through  the  Executive  Directors  whereas, 
market  analysis  and  competitor  assessment  are  carried  out  by 
the Marketing & Planning Directors.   

place  inside  the  system  while  the  Management  part  controls 
operations, ensures stability, facilitates adaptations to the future 
the  organizational  policies.  The 
trends  and  structures 
Environment entails all the external entities that exchange data 
with the system.  

Another  important  aspect  related  to  VSM  is  that  of 
recursivity, which is based on the premise that all autonomous 
systems are composed of a series of sub-systems, each having 
self-organizing  and  self-regulatory  characteristics.  Each  of  the 
sub-systems contain further sub-systems, and so on, right down 
to the level of the last viable component and at whatever level 
they  occur,  are  by  definition  autonomous.  All  the  viable  sub-
systems  contain  the  capacity  to  adapt  to  the  changes and  deal 
with the complexity relevant for their autonomous functioning. 
Fig. 1b depicts a visual representation of the recursive nature of 
the VSM.  

The  VSM  provides  a  comprehensive  tool  to  specify 
information  flows,  design  system  strategies  and  examine 
missing  components.  The  inherent  dynamics  of  VSM  can  be 
used to expose vulnerabilities of an ICS network by modeling 
cyber-attacks against the various systems of the model.  Bill & 
Matthew  [5]  exemplified  the  use  of  VSM  in  cyber-security 
domain, as a framework for analysis of potential vulnerabilities 
to an organization’s information systems. Their work is limited 
to a single VSM disregarding its recursive nature and does not 
provide any information regarding the VSM’s relationship with 
the  environment  as  well  as  other  organizations.  In  another 
approach [6] the authors have shown the use of VSM to model 
Information  Security  Governance  by  adopting  and  simulating 
the standard BS ISO/IEC 27035. Since their research follows a 
checklist-based  approach  using  the  implementation  of  a 
security standard to model the VSM, it focuses exclusively on 
compliance  measures  and  omits 
regarding 
technical protection mechanisms. Also, their work focuses on a 
typical  corporate  network  and  is  not  specifically  tailored  for 
ICS  networks.  In  yet  another  approach  [7],  the  authors  used 
VSM as a framework for enhancing traditional risk assessment 
methods  of  SCADA  systems.  In  this  work,  only  the  SCADA 
server  was  modeled  as  VSM  for  identification  of  risk  agents 
without the consideration of other ICS components. 

information 

systems 

Hence,  we  introduce  a  recursive  model  of  secure  ICS 
networks  by  comprehensively  modeling  the  critical  cyber-
in  a  novel  manner. 
physical 
Furthermore,  the  proposed  model  takes  into  consideration  the 
relationships  and  interactions  between  the  different  entities 
within and outside the ICS infrastructure, and hence provides a 
holistic view of ICS networks. 

layer-by-layer 

III.  PROPOSED VSM FOR ICS NETWORKS 

In  ICS  security  a  gap  exists  between  academia  and 
industrial  practice.  Academic  research  focuses  on  highly 
sophisticated attacks and countermeasures, whereas the failure 
of many real-world deployments is due to a lack of the simplest 
security best practices. To close this gap, a layered defense-in-
the 
depth  framework 
identification  of  feasible  best  practices.  Generally,  operations 
team always has high availability and reliability in mind, with 
low downtime mandates and cyber-security is not a significant 
concern  for  them.  Hence,  introduction  of  security  into  C&I 
systems  requires  tight  integration  of  security  and  control 
system expertise to address security risks and needs. 

is  required,  which  can  simplify 

With the introduction of IT controls in industrial processes 
several best-practice system models have emerged that rely on 

Fig. 2 VSM for L7 ICS Network Management 

At ﬁrst glance, VSM at this top level may seem simple and 
obvious.  However,  the  lack  of  an  overall  well-coordinated 
system  may  result  in  signiﬁcant  effects  to  the  operations  in 
lower  layers.  For  example,  a  less  effective  inspection  of 
internal  security  systems  may  result  in  existence  of  unnoticed 
critical  vulnerabilities,  which  could  have  been  protected  from 
exploitation  if  requisite  initiatives  were  taken  on  time.  Thus, 
even  at  this  level  threats  that  derive  from  poor  organizational 
management  of  the  ICS  enterprise  can  be  identiﬁed.  For 
security  assurance  at  this  layer,  the  enterprise  must  ensure 

 
 
 
to  policies  relating 

compliance 
information  security 
standards  &  must  conduct  regular  audits  to  inspect  and  verify 
security operations in lower layers. 

to 

Also, the more susceptible wireless communication devices can 
be  minimized  or  barred  wherever  possible  to  prevent  digital 
intrusion. 

L1 Device Networks 

L2 Control System Network 

The  L1  layer  represents  the  VSM  of  field  device  network 
consisting of sensors and actuators for monitoring & control of 
physical  processes.  Sensors  and  actuators  are  generally  wired 
directly 
to  microprocessor-based  controllers  called  IEDs 
(Intelligent  Electronic  Devices).  IEDs  receive  data  from 
sensors  and  can  issue  control  commands  to  actuators,  such  as 
tripping  circuit  breakers  if  they  sense  voltage,  current,  or 
frequency  anomalies  in  order  to  maintain  the  desired  values. 
The  IEDs  are  closely  linked  with  real-time  systems  called 
PLCs  &  RTUs  for  centralized  control.  PLCs  use  Fieldbus 
communication  protocols  to  communicate  with  array  of  field 
devices.  RTUs  are  more  suitable  for  wide  geographical 
telemetry  and  often  use  wireless  communications.    Fig.  3 
depicts the VSM representation of the field network, which is 
three  parts  viz. 
'L1  Device  Network' 
into 
divided 
(Management), 
'Field  Entities' 
'Devices'  (Operations)  and 
(Environment) as per VSM design principles. 

The  L2  layer  represents  the  VSM  of  control  system 
network  consisting  of  various  control  modules  like  sensor 
control,  drive  control,  batch  control,  safety  control  etc.  as 
shown in Fig. 4. The VSM is divided into three parts viz. 'L2 
Control  System  Network'  (Management),  'Control  System 
Modules'  (Operations)  and  'Control  Entities'  (Environment). 
The  telemetry  data  received  by  PLCs  of  each  control  module 
are deterministically processed in real-time using control logic 
algorithms and ladder logic sequences stored in PLCs' memory. 
Most  PLCs  are  programmed  using  application  software 
running  on  personal  computers  called  PLC  Terminals  which 
are connected to the PLC through Ethernet, RS-232 or RS-485 
cabling.  

Fig. 4 VSM for L2 Control System Network  

Fig. 3 VSM for L1 Device Network 

The  impact  of  cyber-attacks  in  L1  layer  is  much  higher, 
because  it  can  directly  disrupt  physical  processes.  Generally, 
field  devices  apply  COTS  components  to  custom  boards  with 
processor  architectures  like  ARM,  Power,  Motorola  68k  etc. 
similar  to  those  in  non-ICS  embedded  systems.  Most  of  these 
field  devices  implement  only  rudimentary  security  features, 
such  as  requiring  a  passcode  to  alter  configuration,  and  some 
do  not  have  any  security  protections.  Evident  attacks  [8] 
exploiting  these  inherent  hardware  flaws  violate  the  often-
made  wrong  assumption  that  field  devices  aren’t  vulnerable 
because they are isolated from the business network & Internet. 
Thus,  it  is  necessary  to  implement  security  controls  at  this 
essential layer considering the criticality of physical processes. 
Some  security  control  measures  may  be  like  implementing 
granularity control of bandwidth with restrictions in the rate of 
flow  of  information  (up  to  a  very  low  order  of  few  bits  per 
second)  sufficient  enough  to  cater  transmission  of  field  data. 

The  control  algorithms  running  in  the  PLCs  of  L2  control 
modules  determine  the  critical  functioning  of  C&I  systems. 
Most  deployed  PLCs  contain  COTS  Operating  Systems  like 
VxWorks and OS-9 as well as embedded Windows and Linux 
variants.  Vulnerabilities  and  exploits  for  these  Operating 
Systems (OSs) exist much as they do for regular desktop OSs 
such  as  Microsoft  Windows.  PLCs  can  be  attacked  indirectly 
by  gaining  control  of  terminals  that  communicate  with  them. 
This is what happened in the case of Stuxnet worm. Currently 
many  PLCs  accept  new  logic  without  any  authentication,  and 
often  don’t  allow  inspection  of  their  state.  Hence,  in  order  to 
protect  control  module  PLCs,  communication  and  interaction 
among them should be secure and trustworthy. Trustworthiness 
can  be  implemented  through  the  use  of  software  or  hardware 
such  Hardware  Security  Modules  (HSM).  Any  new  code 
update  should  be  authenticated  and  authorized  using 
cryptographic 
execution.  Though 
cryptographic  techniques  can  be  resource  intensive  for  PLCs, 
but if algorithms and protocols are rightly optimized it is worth 
the  security.  Integrity  checks  for  executable  software  can  also 
be enforced at boot up time.  

techniques 

before 

 
 
 
L3 Process Control Network 

L4 Production Operations 

The  L3  layer  represents  the  VSM  of  process  control 
network  that  is  used  to  transmit  instructions  to  the  L2  control 
network using centralized SCADA systems. Fig. 5 depicts the 
VSM,  which  is  divided  into  three  parts  viz.  'L3  ICS  Network 
Management',  'Process  Control  Systems'  (Operations)  and 
(Environment)  as  per  VSM  design 
'Process  Controls' 
principles.  The  L3  layer  consists  of  systems  like  Batch 
management  systems,  Alerting,  Alarm  systems,  Historian 
Archive systems etc., which interact and communicate with L2 
controls. The key requirements for this layer are robustness and 
determinacy.  Robustness  involves  connection  redundancy, 
reduced  sensitivity  to  Electromagnetic  Interference  (EMI), 
good  error  checking  &  correction  etc.  whereas  determinacy 
involves  guaranteed  network  access,  high  availability  of 
priority systems etc.  

Fig. 5 VSM for L3 Process Control Network  

  As  C&I  systems  are  discontinuing  the  use  of  proprietary 
protocols  and  adopting  new  COTS  components  for  increased 
flexibility,  exposure  to  cyber  threats  has  increased.  Many 
modern  data  acquisition  systems  of  process  control  network 
rely on Ethernet, TCP/IP, and Windows technology instead of 
old serial communication protocols like Modbus, and hence are 
more  vulnerable  due  to  interoperability  with  regular  IT 
network. In addition to this, legacy devices and protocols bear 
a  variety  of  vulnerabilities,  which  are  difficult  or  even 
impossible  to  be  patched  due  to  lack/end  of  support.  In  many 
cases,  replacement  of  these  legacy  systems  with  new,  more 
secure systems just isn’t feasible. Also, it's evident that legacy 
systems  are  insecure-by-design  and  as  replacements  are  not 
always  possible,  they  must  be  secured  by  indirect  means. 
Secure 
like  Public  Key 
Infrastructure  (PKI)  can  be  established  based  on  electronic 
certificates,  digital 
signatures  and  cryptographic  keys. 
Application whitelisting is another security control that may be 
implemented  in  this  layer.  Also,  operations  team  must  not 
assume  security  just  by  ensuring  obscurity  of  protocols, 
isolation  of  networks,  and  assuming  disinterest  in  potential 
attackers. Rather, they must proactively plan for prevention of 
sophisticated cyber-attacks and spread requisite awareness. 

communication 

technologies 

and 

(Operations) 

The  L4  layer  represents  the  VSM  of  the  Production 
operations of an ICS enterprise like Distributed Control System 
(DCS)  management,  Asset  management,  Quality  &  Reporting 
etc.  Fig.  6  depicts  the  VSM,  which  is  divided  into  three  parts 
viz.  'L4  Production  Operations'  (Management),  'Production 
'Control  Room  Systems' 
Systems' 
(Environment).  ICS  control  rooms  or  supervisory  stations 
consist  of  multiple  servers,  distributed  software  applications, 
various electronic knobs, switches, HMI panels, large displays 
etc.  Servers  are  often  configured  in  a  dual-redundant  or  hot-
standby  mode  for  providing  high  availability  (continuous 
control  and  monitoring)  in  case  of  a  server  malfunction  or 
hardware failure. The operators interact with SCADA systems 
through  the  HMI  displays  to  remotely  operate  field  systems, 
troubleshoot  problems,  develop  and  initiate  reports,  and 
perform  other  operations  related  to  centralized  administration 
of distributed C&I systems.  

Fig. 6 VSM for L4 Production Operations 

The  HMI  screens  provide  the  easiest  method  for  clear 
understanding  of  the  underlying  C&I  processes.  Each  ICS 
vendor  uses  different  schema  and  naming  conventions  for  the 
SCADA points database in Historian servers, but nearly every 
C&I system assigns each sensor, pump, breaker, etc., a unique 
number.  On  the  communications  protocol  level,  the  field 
devices  are  simply  referred  to  by  that  unique  number.  An 
attacker  that  gains  a  foothold  on  HMI  systems  directly  or 
indirectly can quite easily discover the point reference numbers 
and  hence  exploit  the  SCADA  systems.  Generally,  L4 
production  systems  are  protected  by 
isolating  network 
interfaces  with  multi  degree  firewalls  into  a  separate  De-
Militarized  Zone  (DMZ)  to  segregate  them  from  the  L3 
Process Control Network.  

L4  Production  systems  face  a  major  threat  from  insiders. 
Examples include disabling of air conditioning in a data center 
or allowing chemical processes to occur longer than equipment 
tolerance levels etc. Insiders may even alter information about 
key  processes  at  the  source  of  the  data  to  present  different 
information  to  production  systems  and  hence  mislead  other 
operators.  Therefore,  specific  access 
to  system 
administration and documents containing operating procedures, 
blueprints, ladder logic diagrams, etc. of critical systems should 
be limited by the principle of least privilege and separation of 
duties.  Log  analyzer  tools  must  be  used  for  monitoring  of 
system  logins,  suspicious  behavior  patterns,  new  system 

rights 

 
connection attempts etc. Such monitoring technologies are also 
introducing  capabilities  to  integrate  with  physical  security 
systems.  For  example,  initiating  a  monitoring  sequence  to 
follows  the  operator’s  access  to  specific  buildings,  rooms  and 
workstations based on RFID badge swipe timings. This access 
can  be  automatically  validated,  logged  and  then  compared 
against the employee’s approved work schedule. 

L5 ICS-DMZ Operations 

The  L5  layer  represents  the  VSM  of  De-Militarized  Zone 
(DMZ)  Operations  of  an  ICS  datacenter,  which  isolate  and 
protect  the  ICS  perimeter  network  from  the  regular  enterprise 
IT network. Fig. 7 depicts the VSM, which is divided into three 
parts  viz.  'L5  ICS-DMZ  Operations'  (Management),  'DMZ 
'Perimeter  Network' 
Servers/Systems' 
(Environment).  The  L5  DMZ  Operations  include  firewall 
administration,  Intrusion  detection  &  prevention  (IDS/IPS), 
Network  Access  Control  (NAC),  sandboxing  operations, 
update  services  &  patch  management  etc.  Modern  control 
centers  use  a  combination  of  Unix,  Windows,  and  web-based 
management  tools  for  centralized  administration  and  security 
of L4 production servers.  

(Operations)  and 

determine vulnerabilities can negatively impact L4 production 
servers and L3 Process control systems. If the implementation 
of  communication  protocols  is  not  robust  because  of  poorly 
written  network  daemons  or  issues  with  legacy  systems,  a 
simple port scanning may result in slow performance or lead to 
a  crash  and  subsequent  denial  of  service.  Hence,  some 
organizations  adopt  network  policies  that  forbid  traditional 
VA/PT  assessments  on  production  networks.  As  a  solution  to 
this SCADA specific passive assessment tools are coming up, 
which do not impact production systems and can be automated 
to  run  only  in  non-peak  hours.  One  significant  problem  these 
VA/PT tools can't resolve is that of protection of C&I servers 
from  advanced  malware  exploiting  zero-day  vulnerabilities. 
Traditional  defense  mechanism 
like  Intrusion  Detection/ 
Prevention  Systems  (IDS/IPS)  or  Network  Antivirus  use 
signature based detection technologies and hence cannot detect 
zero-day  threats.  Modern  security  solutions  like  Malware 
Sandboxing  systems  are  coming  up  which  apply  dynamic 
analysis of executable code in a virtual sandbox environment to 
proactively  detect  suspicious  code  behavior  and  block 
execution. 

Moreover, the threats to L5 systems generally arise due to 
operational  negligence,  inappropriate  testing,  vulnerable  end-
points,  wrongly  defined  security  policies  and  even  false 
perception  of  security.  Hence,  just  an  assumption  that  having 
industrial  firewalls  and  VPN  solutions  offers  sufficient 
protection, can pose significant threat at this layer.  Datacenter 
managers  must  review  compliance  of  clearly  defined  cyber 
security  controls  and  verify  implementation  of  necessary 
security patch updates. 

L6 IT Operation Network 

and 

The  L6  layer  represents  the  VSM  for  IT  operations  of  an 
ICS  network.  Fig.  8  depicts  the  VSM,  which  is  divided  into 
three  parts  viz.  'L6  IT  Network  Operations'  (Management), 
'Datacenter  Operations' 
'IT  Network  Resources' 
(Environment) as per VSM principles. This layer encompasses 
IT 
facility-related  components 
operations  like  ERP,  Mail,  VPN,  Intranet  &  Internet  services 
etc.  along  with  administration  of  remote  Datacenters  and 
Disaster  Recovery  sites.  The  Chief  Information  Officer  (CIO) 
of  the  ICS  enterprise  centrally  coordinates  quality  control  and 
inspection audits of all L6 IT Operations.   

support  enterprise 

that 

Fig. 7 VSM for L5 ICS-DMZ Operations 

integrity  checkers 

Inspectability, the capability to monitor a system’s internal 
state is the backbone of traditional security tools. Most desktop 
security tools observe the behavior, output, and code signature 
patterns  of  system  processes.  This  is  how  virus  scanners 
identify  malware  and  how 
identify 
modifications  to  important  system  files.  Similarly,  network 
intrusion  detection  systems  rely  on  the  ability  to  inspect 
network  traffic.  Forensics  and  reverse-engineering  tools  too 
require the ability to inspect code and binaries both statically & 
dynamically  as  they  run  on  a  system.  Embedded  systems  and 
legacy  devices  are  much  less  inspectable  than  desktop 
computers  due  to  lack  of  tools  and  suitable  interfaces.  Hence, 
inspection capability is generally possible only in higher VSM 
levels  above  L3.  Some  control  system  vendors  have  started 
addressing 
issue  by  developing  external  SCADA 
monitoring systems. 

this 

Security  administrators  use  Vulnerability  Assessment  and 
Penetration  Testing  (VA/PT)  tools  to  discover  and  exploit 
vulnerabilities.  However, 
techniques  of  port 
scanning,  service  fingerprinting,  and  rapid  probing  hosts  to 

the  active 

Fig. 8 VSM for L6 IT Network Operations 

 
 
The L6 IT Operation Network layer is very critical; in the 
sense,  a  security  breach  here  provides  a  gateway  to  penetrate 
into  lower  levels.  Also,  the  L6  systems  &  services  are  quite 
diverse in nature and more risk-prone due to connectivity with 
Internet. Hence, a plethora of security systems are required in 
this  layer  ranging  from  contemporary  antivirus,  firewalls, 
IDS/IPS,  secure  web/mail  gateways  to  modern  malware 
sandboxing,  DLP  (Data  Loss  Prevention)  and  SIEM  (Security 
Information  and  Event  Management)  systems.  SIEM  systems 
provide  a  comprehensive  platform  to  detect,  monitor,  record 
and  analyze  security  events,  for  real-time  identification  of 
threats  through  centralized  correlation  of  logs  generated  from 
various  network  entities 
like  servers,  end-user  systems, 
firewalls  etc.  SIEMs  empower  security  administrators  by 
providing an all-in-one proactive security management solution 
to  correlate  events  from  multiple  sources.  SIEMs  with 
advanced  communication  profiling  technologies  can  also  be 
extended to lower layers, which can detect suspicious attempts 
like sending of critical data through uncommon network paths. 
Often  in  L3,  L4  and  L5  operations,  engineers  have  a  detailed 
view  of  what  their  process  is  doing  but  no  idea  of  what  their 
network is doing. This is because; current security monitoring 
tools provide too much data and not enough information. The 
plant  floor  is  flooded  with  data  and  alerts  on  potential  safety, 
production, maintenance, inventory, and environmental issues. 
Security  information  gets  lost  in  the  noise.  Hence,  a  good 
SIEM  system  must  figure  out  how  to  get  the  right  security 
information at the right time without generating false positives 
and without flooding the dashboard with unnecessary data. 

Another  important  aspect  of  the  L6  layer  is  disaster 
management  or  the  recovery  of  information/system  after 
occurrence  of  an  unavoidable  intrusion/malware  attack.  To 
address  this,  virtualization  technologies  are  heavily  used  for 
management of IT resources. Virtual Machine (VM) snapshots 
and  clones  can  shrink-wrap  operational  systems  for  fast 
recovery and provide features like fail-over, High-Availability 
(HA)  and  Fault  Tolerance  (FT).  Virtualization  also  helps  in 
reduction  of  hardware  maintenance  &  operational  costs. 
Though the penetration of  virtualization in lower layers is not 
as  much  as  in  L6  layer,  but  modern  L3  SCADA  systems  and 
L4  production  systems  are  adopting  virtual  infrastructure  day 
by  day.  However,  virtualization  has  increased  the  attack 
surface  because  of  the  hypervisor  layer  in  the  middle.  A 
compromise  of  the  hypervisor  could  result  in  the  compromise 
of  all  hosted  workloads/VMs.  Also,  the  lack  of  visibility  and 
controls  on  internal  virtual  networks  created  for  VM-to-VM 
communications  blinds  network-based 
IPS/IDS  systems. 
Hence,  agent-less  virtual  anti-virus  appliances  are  coming  up 
that  provides  malware  protection 
these 
appliances  provide  an  agent-less  approach  the  processing 
doesn’t burden the individual VMs. The drawback to some of 
these  appliances  is  that  they  only  provide  antivirus  protection 
to VMs and not the additional application control, IDS/IPS and 
web  filtering  contained  in  more  traditional  appliances.  Other 
security measures in virtualization may be like implementation 
of  MAC  address  filtering,  placing  of  virtual  switches  into 
inspection  by  SIEMs, 
promiscuous  mode 
introducing virtual firewalls for VMs in different VLANs etc. 

to  VMs.  Since 

for  packet 

IV.  IMPLEMENTATION INSIGHTS 

ICS  security  requires  tight  integration  of  information 
security  and  industrial  control  system  expertise.  Engineers 
know  that  control  is  impractical  if  the  accuracy  of  inputs  and 
the  reliability  of  outputs  are  questionable.  Security  experts 

know  that  security  without  integration  with  operations  is 
ineffective. All this is known for years, and may seem obvious, 
but  this  relationships,  interactions  and  organizational  issues 
(management,  coordination  etc.)  can't  be  neglected  if  security 
issues  are  to  be  addressed.  One  of  the  striking  features  of  the 
proposed ICS VSM is that it is built upon these relationships, 
which  makes  it  easy  adaptable  and  automatable  for  industry 
practitioners  to  implement  it  in  the  real  world.  The  inherent 
structure of VSM dynamics is highly employee-oriented, with 
a segregated level of trust and control at different levels. Each 
managerial  entity  of  the  model  is  provisioned  with  only 
necessary  &  sufficient  control  authorities  based  on  the 
principal of least privilege. Similarly, each operational entity is 
restricted  to  do  only  requisite  operations  that  are  intended  for 
them with minimum deviation from their original line of work. 
This  tends  to  equate  the  adaptation  requirements  of  both 
security  and  operational  workforce,  because  it  streamlines  the 
best  practices  of  both  the  worlds.  The  VSM  model  clearly 
demonstrates how the managers at each layer have to identify 
the demands of security expertise, while maintaining the focus 
on operations and environment.  

is  where 

the  VSMs.  This 

Also, the higher the level of VSM, the more stringent is the 
requirement  to  balance  the  demands  of  different  entities  and 
steer the system as a whole. The lessons learnt from the above 
analysis  of  each  VSM  layer  reveal  that,  defense-in-depth 
security strategies for various entities depend on their positions 
within 
the  key  benefit  of 
implementing  ICS  VSM  lies.  It  identifies  the  important  areas 
where security control is needed while depicting the impact of 
their compromise on other entities as well. This helps security 
decision  makers  make  the  right  decision  by  enabling  them  to 
put more emphasis on the critical areas. The ICS VSM brings 
out the insight that security initiatives at a particular VSM layer 
not  just  protects  the  entities  within  the  layer,  but  also  is 
responsible  for  the  security  of  the  recursive  entities  in  the 
layers below & above it. Hence, with VSM as a reference, the 
decision makers are empowered to adopt a much more graded 
approach for implementation of security controls. 

V.  CONCLUSION 

The  paper  demonstrated  the  application  of  principles  of 
VSM  to  holistically  model  the  critical  cyber-physical  systems 
of an  ICS  infrastructure. The recursive  nature of  VSM helped 
in  identifying  the  relationships  &  interactions  among  the  self-
organizing & self-regulatory subsystems of ICS infrastructure. 
From the context of VSM it is evident that the viability of the 
whole ICS network is inextricably linked with the viability of 
its  subsystems  at  different  recursion  levels  and  therefore  each 
subsystem functions as a VSM in itself. The VSMs from the L7 
ICS management layer to the L1 field device network provided 
a framework to understand the complexity of C&I systems and 
helped  in  the  analysis  of  their  susceptibility  against  modern 
cyber-attacks. The paper discussed some key security issues in 
each  VSM  layer  and  their  respective  mitigation  measures.  A 
detailed  granular  security  analysis  of  all  practical  possibilities 
at each layer is not addressed in this paper, as the intention was 
to just introduce the promising potential of VSM as a vehicle to 
drive ICS security decisions. 

The  paper  also  discussed  how  the  implementation  of  ICS 
VSM empowers the industry practitioners & security decision 
makers  to  successfully  identify  critical  areas  of  ICS  networks 
and implement requisite security controls at different levels of 
recursion. The proposed ICS VSM serves as a dynamic tool to 
specify  information  flows,  identify  bottlenecks,  design  system 

 
 
strategies  and  examine  missing  components 
that  hinder 
security mitigation efforts. The VSM can also be used as input 
to  regular  risk  management  tools.  Furthermore,  a  quantitative 
risk evaluation process can be developed that can make use of 
the  ﬁndings  of  the  VSM  to  compute  risks.  As  part  of  future 
work  attribute-based  modeling  schemes  are  being  evaluated, 
where each sub-component will embody certain characteristics 
based on its position within the VSMs and integrate them with 
decision and game theoretic models to quantify their behavior 
in different situations. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  R.  Langner,  "Stuxnet:  Dissecting  a  Cyberwarfare  Weapon,"  Security  & 

Privacy, IEEE, vol. 9, pp. 49-51, 2011. 

[2]  S.M.  Rinaldi,  J.P.  Peerenboom,  T.K.  Kelly,  "Identifying,  understanding, 
and analyzing critical infrastructure interdependencies," Control Systems, 
IEEE , vol. 21, pp. 11-25, 2011 Dec. 

[3]  Wang  Chunlei,  Fang  Lan,  "A  Simulation  Environment  for  SCADA 
Security  Analysis  &  Assessment,"  Measuring  Technology  Mechatronics 
Automation, International Conference, vol. 1, 2010, pp. 342-347. 

[4]  Stafford  Beer,  Brain  of  the  Firm:  The  Managerial  Cybernetics  of 

Organization.: Wiley, 1972. 

[5]  Bill Warren, Matthew Hutchinson, "Information warfare: using the viable 
system model as a framework to attack organisations," Australian journal 
of information systems (AJIS), vol. 9, pp. 67-74, 2002. 

[6]  Gary  Wills,  Lester  Alqurashi,  "A  Viable  System  Model  for  Information 
Security  Governance:  Establishing  a  Baseline  of  the  Current  Information 
Security  Operations  System,"  in  Security  and  Privacy  Protection  in 
Information Processing Systems.: Springer, 2013, pp. 245-256. 

[7]  Ioanna  Topa,  Tryfonas,  Theodoros  Spyridopoulos,  "A  Holistic  Approach 
for  Cyber  Assurance  of  Critical  Infrastructure  with  the  Viable  System 
Model," in ICT Systems Security and Privacy Protection.: Springer, 2014, 
vol. 428, pp. 438-445. 

[8]  S. Bhunia, M.S. Hsiao, S. Narasimhan, "Hardware Trojan Attacks: Threat 
Analysis  and  Countermeasures,"  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE,  vol.  102,  pp. 
1229-1247, Aug 2014. 

 
 
 
