User-Centred Security Education: A Game Design to
Thwart Phishing Attacks

∗
Nalin Asanka Gamagedara Arachchilage
Australian Centre for Cyber Security
University of New South wales at the Australian Defence Force Academy
nalin.asanka@adfa.edu.au

5
1
0
2

v
o
N
1
1

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
5
4
3
0
.
1
1
5
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1.

INTRODUCTION

Security exploits can include cyber threats such as com-
puter programs that can disturb the normal behaviour of
computer systems (viruses), unsolicited e-mail (spam), ma-
licious software (malware), monitoring software (spyware),
attempting to make computer resources unavailable to their
intended users (Distributed Denial-of-Service or DDoS at-
tack), the social engineering, and online identity theft (phish-
ing) [4]. One such cyber threat, which is particularly dan-
gerous to computer users is phishing [7] [2] [4]. Phishing
is well known as online identity theft, which aims to steal
sensitive information such as username, password and online
banking details from its victims. Automated anti-phishing
tools have been developed and used to alert users of poten-
tially fraudulent emails and websites. However, these tools
are not entirely reliable in detecting phishing attacks [12] [3].
Even the best anti-phishing tools missed over 20 percent of
phishing websites [14]. Because “human” is the weakest link
in information security [11] [3] [4]. It is not possible to com-
pletely avoid the end-user, for example in personal computer
use, one mitigating approach for computer and information
security is to educate the end-user in security prevention [3]
[13] [12] [14] [8] [4].

The aim of this research study focuses on a design and
development of a game prototype for mobile platforms to
educate individuals about phishing attacks. Therefore, the
study asks how does one identify which issues the game de-
sign needs to be addressed? The elements of a game de-
sign framework developed by Arachchilage and Love [3] for
avoiding phishing attacks were used to address the game
design issues. Our mobile game design aimed to enhance
the users’ avoidance behaviour through their motivation to
protect themselves against phishing threats. Garera et al.
[9] strongly argue it is often possible to diﬀerentiate phish-
ing websites from legitimate ones by carefully looking at the
URL. Therefore, this mobile game prototype designed to
teach people to identify legitimate URLs from mimic ones.
A think-aloud study was conducted, along with a pre- and
post-test, to assess the game design framework though the
developed mobile game prototype. The study results showed
a signiﬁcant improvement of participants’ phishing avoid-
ance behaviour in their post-test assessment. Furthermore,
the study ﬁndings suggest that participants’ threat percep-
tion, safeguard eﬀectiveness, self-eﬃcacy, perceived sever-
ity and perceived susceptibility elements positively impact
threat avoidance behaviour, whereas safeguard cost had a
negative impact on it.

Figure 1: The game design framework [3]

2. GAME DESIGN ISSUES

To answer these issues, the elements of a game design
framework [3] were incorporated into the mobile game pro-
totype context. The game design framework (Figure 1) de-
scribes individual computer users’ behaviour in avoiding the
threat of malicious information technologies such as phish-
ing attacks [3]. The framework examined how individuals
avoid phishing threats by using given anti-phishing game
based education.

Consistent with the game design framework (Figure. 1)
[3], the users’ phishing threat avoidance behaviour is deter-
mined by avoidance motivation, which, in turn, is aﬀected
by perceived threat. Perceived threat is inﬂuenced by per-
ceived severity and susceptibility as well as their combina-
tion. Users’ avoidance motivation is also determined by
the three constructs such as safeguard eﬀectiveness, safe-
guard cost, and self-eﬃcacy.
In addition, the game de-
sign framework posits that perceived threat is inﬂuenced
by the combination of perceived severity and susceptibil-
ity. Whilst the game design framework informs the issues
that the game design needs to address, it should also in-
dicate how to structure this information and present it in
a game context. Therefore, the game design based on a
story attempts to develop threat perceptions, making indi-
viduals more motivated to avoid phishing attacks and use
safeguarding measures. Finally, the elements of the game
design framework were incorporated into the mobile game
prototype to enhance individuals’ phishing threats avoid-

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
ance behaviour through their motivation to protect them-
selves from phishing attacks.

3. STORY AND MECHANISM

Storytelling techniques are used to grab attention, which
can also help to focus on interesting aspects of reality [1].
Stories can be based on personal experiences or famous tales
or they could also be aimed at building a storyline that
associates content units, inspires, or reinforces.

The game prototype is based on a scenario of a character
of a small ﬁsh and ‘his’ teacher who live in a big pond. The
more appropriate, realistic and content relevant the story,
the better the chances that it will trigger users. The main
character of the game is the small ﬁsh, who wants to eat
worms to become a big ﬁsh. The game player roll plays
as a small ﬁsh. However, he should be careful of phishers
those who try to trick him with fake worms. This repre-
sents phishing attacks by developing threat perception in
the game storyboard design. Each worm is associated with a
website address (URL), which appears in a dialog box. The
game was designed with a total of 10 URLs to randomly
display including ﬁve good worms and ﬁve bad worms. The
small ﬁsh’s job is to eat all the real worms which associate
legitimate website addresses and reject fake worms which
associate with fake website addresses before the time is up.
This attempts to develop the severity and susceptibility of
the phishing threat in the game storyboard design. The
other character is the small ﬁsh’s teacher, who is a matured
and experienced ﬁsh in the pond.
If the worm associated
with the URL is suspicious and if it is diﬃcult to identify,
the small ﬁsh can go to ‘his’ teacher and request help. The
teacher could help him by giving some tips on how to identify
bad worms. For example, “website addresses associate with
numbers in the front are generally scams,” or “a company
name followed by a hyphen in a URL is generally a scam”.
Whenever the small ﬁsh requests help from the teacher, the
score will be reduced by certain amount (in this case by 100
seconds) as a payback for safeguard measure. This attempts
to address the safeguard eﬀectiveness and the cost needs to
pay for the safeguard in the game storyboard design.

The game prototype consists of total 10 URLs to ran-
domly display worms including ﬁve good worms (associated
with legitimate URLs) and ﬁve fake worms (associated with
phishing URLs).
If the user correctly identiﬁed all good
worms while avoiding all fake worms by looking at URLs,
then he will gain 10 points (in this case each attempt pos-
sible to score 1 point).
If the user falsely identiﬁed good
worms or fake worms, each attempt loses one life out of
total lives remaining to complete the game.
If the user
requested help from the big ﬁsh (in this case small ﬁsh’s
teacher) each attempt loses 100 seconds out of total remain-
ing time to complete the game, which is 600 seconds. There-
fore, self-eﬃcacy of preventing from phishing attacks will
be addressed in the game storyboard design when the user
comes across throughout the game.

4. GAME DESIGN

The game was initially sketched in a storyboard using ink
pen, post-it notes, and papers based on the above mentioned
story [1] [13]. To explore the viability of using a game for
preventing phishing attacks, a working prototype model was
developed for a mobile telephone on Android platform and

Figure 2: The mobile game prototype on Android
platform

which is shown in Figure 2. Because most signiﬁcant feature
of a mobile environment is “mobility” itself such as mobility
of the user, mobility of the device and mobility of the service
[10]. It enables users to be in contact while they are outside
the reach of traditional communicational spaces [5]. For
example, one can play a game on his mobile device while
travelling on the bus or train, or waiting in a queue.

The player is given instructions before starting the game.
Then the main menu of the mobile game prototype appears,
along with underwater background and the corresponding
sound eﬀects. A light water bubbling sound is played in the
background throughout the game to make the user feel that
they are in the pond. A URL is displayed with each worm;
where the worms are randomly generated.

If the worm associated with URL is legitimate, then the
user is expected to tap on the worm in order to increase their
score. However, if the user fails to identify the legitimate
URL, then remaining lives will be reduced by one point.
On the other hand, if the worm associated with the URL
is phishing, then the user is also expected to tap on the
“AVOID” button to reject the URL, in order to increase the
score. If the user fails to do this, then remaining lives will
be reduced by one point. If the worm associated with the
URL is suspicious and if it is diﬃcult to identify, the user
can tap on the big ﬁsh (in this case, teacher ﬁsh) to request
help. Then some relevant tips will be displayed just below
the URL. For example, “website addresses associate that
have numbers in the front are generally scams.” Whenever
the user taps on the big ﬁsh, the time left is reduced by 100
points (in this case 100 seconds). Finally, the user gains 10
points if all given URLs were correctly identiﬁed within 5
lives and 600 seconds.

5. RESULTS

The current study empirically evaluated the game de-
sign framework introduced by Arachchilage and Love (2013)
through a prototype of an educational mobile game. A
think-aloud study was conducted, along with a pre- and
post-test, to assess the game design framework. The study
used 20 participants with each one participating for approx-
imately one-hour.

2

Proceedings of the 11th Symposium On Usable Privacy
and Security (SOUPS), 2014.

[2] N. A. G. Arachchilage and M. Cole. Design a mobile
game for home computer users to prevent from
phishing attacks. In Information Society (i-Society),
2011 International Conference on, pages 485–489.
IEEE, 2011.

[3] N. A. G. Arachchilage and S. Love. A game design

framework for avoiding phishing attacks. Computers
in Human Behavior, 29(3):706–714, 2013.

[4] N. A. G. Arachchilage and S. Love. Security awareness

of computer users: A phishing threat avoidance
perspective. Computers in Human Behavior,
38:304–312, 2014.

[5] O. Boyinbode and D. Ng’ambi. Mobilect: an

interactive mobile lecturing tool for fostering deep
learning. International Journal of Mobile Learning and
Organisation, 9(2):182–200, 2015.

[6] J. Brooke. Sus-a quick and dirty usability scale.

Usability evaluation in industry, 189(194):4–7, 1996.

[7] R. Dhamija, J. D. Tygar, and M. Hearst. Why
phishing works. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human Factors in computing systems,
pages 581–590. ACM, 2006.

[8] J. S. Downs, M. Holbrook, and L. F. Cranor.

Behavioral response to phishing risk. In Proceedings of
the anti-phishing working groups 2nd annual eCrime
researchers summit, pages 37–44. ACM, 2007.

[9] S. Garera, N. Provos, M. Chew, and A. D. Rubin. A

framework for detection and measurement of phishing
attacks. In Proceedings of the 2007 ACM workshop on
Recurring malcode, pages 1–8. ACM, 2007.

[10] D. Parsons, H. Ryu, and M. Cranshaw. A study of

design requirements for mobile learning environments.
In null, pages 96–100. IEEE, 2006.

[11] S. Purkait. Phishing counter measures and their
eﬀectiveness–literature review. Information
Management & Computer Security, 20(5):382–420,
2012.

[12] S. Sheng, B. Magnien, P. Kumaraguru, A. Acquisti,
L. F. Cranor, J. Hong, and E. Nunge. Anti-phishing
phil: the design and evaluation of a game that teaches
people not to fall for phish. In Proceedings of the 3rd
symposium on Usable privacy and security, pages
88–99. ACM, 2007.

[13] K. N. Truong, G. R. Hayes, and G. D. Abowd.

Storyboarding: an empirical determination of best
practices and eﬀective guidelines. In Proceedings of the
6th conference on Designing Interactive systems, pages
12–21. ACM, 2006.

[14] Y. Zhang, J. I. Hong, and L. F. Cranor. Cantina: a

content-based approach to detecting phishing web
sites. In Proceedings of the 16th international
conference on World Wide Web, pages 639–648. ACM,
2007.

Figure 3: The individual participant’s score during
their engagement with the mobile game prototype.

Initially, we evaluated the participants subjective satis-
faction of the mobile game prototype using SUS (System
Usability Scale) scoring approach introduced by Brooke [6].
The score was signiﬁcantly high, 83.62 out of 100 (≈ 84%)
[6]. The research study employed Paired-samples t-test to
compare the means scores for the participants’ pre- and post-
tests (Pallant, 2007). The results are encouraging. Par-
ticipants, who played the mobile game, scored 56% in the
pre-test and 84% in the post-test. There was a statistically
signiﬁcant increase in the post-test ((Pre-test: M= 56.00,
SD=17.911 and Post-test: M=84.00, SD=13.139), t(19)=
-7.97, p<0.005 (two-tailed)).

There was a signiﬁcant improvement of 28% of the partici-
pants’ phishing avoidance behaviour in the post-test (p<0.005
(two-tailed)). Eighteen participants scored above 80%, whilst
ﬁve of them scored full marks (100%) in the post-test. All
participants scored above 50 percent in their post-test. The
individual participant’s score during their engagement with
the mobile game prototype is shown in Figure 3.
It has
been seen that a considerable improvement of overall par-
ticipants’ phishing avoidance behaviour through the mobile
game prototype. Finally, the study ﬁndings revealed that
participants’ threat perception, safeguard eﬀectiveness, self-
eﬃcacy, perceived severity and perceived susceptibility el-
ements positively impact their threat avoidance behaviour,
whereas safeguard cost had a negative impact on it.

6. CONCLUSION

This research focuses on a design and development of a
game for mobile platforms to educate computer users to
thwart phishing attacks. It asks how does one identify which
issues the game design prototype needs to be addressed?
The elements of a game design framework developed by
Arachchilage and Love [3] for avoiding phishing attacks were
incorporated into the mobile game prototype design context.
The objective of our proposed game prototype was to teach
user how to identify phishing website addresses (URLs).The
study employed SUS, as the ﬁrst step to assess the subjec-
tive satisfaction of mobile game prototype interface. Then,
a think-aloud study was conducted along with a pre- and
post-test in order to evaluate the game design framework.
The current study ﬁndings revealed that the overall mobile
game prototype enhanced user avoidance behaviour by mo-
tivating them to protect themselves from phishing attacks.

7. REFERENCES
[1] N. A. Arachchilage, I. Flechais, and K. Beznosov. A

game storyboard design for avoiding phishing attacks.

3

