Six Potential Game-Changers in Cyber Security:  
Towards Priorities in Cyber Science and Engineering 

Alexander Kott 
US Army Research Laboratory  
2800 Powder Mill Road 
Adelphi, Maryland     20783 
United States 

alexander.kott1.civ@mail.mil 

Ananthram Swami 
US Army Research Laboratory  
2800 Powder Mill Road 
Adelphi, Maryland     20783 
United States 

ananthram.swami.civ@mail.mil 

Patrick McDaniel 
Computer Science and Engineering 
Pennsylvania State University 
360A IST Building 
University Park, PA     16802 
United States 

mcdaniel@cse.psu.edu 

(A version of this paper was presented as a keynote talk at the NATO Symposium on Cyber Security Science 
and Engineering, 13-14 October 2014, Tallinn, Estonia. This paper is approved for public release, distribution 
unlimited.) 

1.0  INTRODUCTION 

The fields of study encompassed by cyber science and engineering are broad and poorly defined at this time. As 
national  governments  and  research  communities  increase  their  recognition  of  the  importance,  urgency  and 
technical richness of these disciplines, a question of priorities arises: what specific sub-areas of research should 
be  the  foci  of  attention  and  funding?    In  this  paper  we  point  to  an  approach  to  answering  this  question.  We 
present results of a recent workshop that explored possible “game-changers” or disruptive changers that might 
occur in cyber security within the next 15 years. We suggest that such game-changers may be useful in focusing 
attention  of  research  communities  on  high-priority  topics.  Indeed,  if  a  drastic,  important  change  is  likely  to 
occur, should we not focus our research efforts on the nature and ramifications of the phenomena pertaining to 
that change?   

1 - 1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
In the last few years, terms like “Science of Cyber,” or “Science of Cyber Security,” or “Cyber Science” have 
been  appearing  in  use  with  growing  frequency.  For  example,  the  US  Department  of  Defense  defined  “Cyber 
Science” as a high priority for its science and technology investments [1], and the National Security Agency has 
been exploring the nature of the “science of cybersecurity” in its publications [2]. There are a number of reasons 
for  the  rise  of  interest  in  science  of  cyber.  A  key  motivator  is  the  recognition  that  development  of  cyber 
technologies  is  handicapped  by  the  lack  of  scientific  understanding  of  the  cyber  phenomena,  particularly  the 
fundamental laws, theories, and theoretically-grounded and empirically validated models [3]. The US President’s 
National  Science  and  Technology  Council  [4]  stressed  the  lack  of  such  fundamental  knowledge,  and  its 
importance.  

While there are many in the cyber security community who agree with the need for science of cyber—whether it 
merits an exalted title of a new science or should be seen merely as a distinct field of research within one or 
more  of  established  sciences—the  exact  nature  of  the  new  science,  its  scope  and  boundaries  remain  rather 
unclear. 

As proposed in [5] [6], the primary objects of research in cyber security are: 

•  Attacker(s) A along with the attackers’ networks and tools (especially malware) and techniques Ta 

•  Defender  D  along  with  the  defender’s  defensive  tools  and  techniques  Td,  and  operational  assets, 

networks and systems Nd 

•  Policy P, a set of defender’s assertions or requirements about what event should and should not happen. 

To simplify, we may focus on cyber incidents I: events that should not happen.  

This  allows  one  to  summarize  the  classification  of  major  problem  groups  in  cyber  security.  Below,  for  each 
subclass,  example  of  common  problems  in  cyber  security  research  and  practice  are  added,  for  the  sake  of 
illustration: 

•  Td, Ta, I → Nd, e.g., synthesis of network’s structure, planning and anticipation of network’s behavior, 

assessing and anticipating network’s security properties 

•  Nd, Ta, I → Td, e.g., design of defensive tools, algorithms, planning and control of defender’s course of 

action, assessing and anticipating the efficacy of defense  

•  Td, Nd, I → Ta, e.g., identification of structure of attacker’s code or infrastructure, discovery, anticipation 

and wargaming of attacker’ actions, anticipating the efficacy of attacker’s actions  

•  Td, Nd, Ta → I, e.g., detection of intrusions that have occurred, anticipation of intrusions that will occur 

Clearly, within the broad outlines of such problem classes, one finds endless opportunities for specific research 
topics. The question of priorities among these topics, particularly from the perspective of military R&D funding 
managers, deserves plenty of pondering.  

The thoughts offered in this article, although primarily the responsibility of the authors, have been triggered and 
shaped to a large extent by a long-term cyber security research planning meeting convened by the Cyber 
Collaborative Research Alliance (Cyber CRA – see cra.psu.edu, also: 
http://www.arl.army.mil/www/default.cfm?page=1417). Sponsored by the US Army Research Laboratory, 
Cyber CRA is a collaborative effort of the US Government researchers and a consortium of universities, led by 
the Pennsylvania State University, to advance the theoretical foundations of cyber science.   

The  overall  objective  of  the  Cyber  Security  CRA  is  to  develop  a  fundamental  understanding  of  cyber 

1 - 2 

 
 
phenomena,  including  aspects  of  human  attackers,  cyber  defenders,  and  end  users,  so  that  fundamental  laws, 
theories, and theoretically grounded and empirically validated models can be applied to a broad range of Army 
domains, applications, and environments. This multi-year, basic research program aims to develop and advance 
the state of the art of Cyber Security in the following areas: 

•  The Risk Research Area  seeks to develop theories and  models that relate fundamental properties and 
features of dynamic risk assessment algorithms to the fundamental properties of dynamic cyber threats, 
Army's networks, and defensive mechanisms.  Intuitively, this discipline seeks to understand what assets 
are at risk and what is the impact of those risks being realized. 

•  The Detection Research Area seeks to develop theories and models that relate properties and capabilities 
of  cyber  threat  detection  and  recognition  processes/mechanisms  to  properties  of  a  malicious  activity, 
and  of  properties  of  Army  networks.  Detection  falls  into  a  larger  scientific  exploration  of  the 
identification and understanding of “situational awareness”. 

•  The  Agility  Research  Area  seeks  to  develop  theories  and  models  to  support  planning  and  control  of 
cyber  maneuver  (i.e.,  “maneuver”  in  the  space  of  network  characteristics  and  topologies)  that  would 
describe how control and end-state of the maneuver are influenced by fundamental properties of threats, 
such  as  might  be  rapidly  inferred  from  limited  observations  of  a  new,  recently  observed  threat.  This 
discipline seeks to understand what remediation actions are possible and effective for a given adversary 
or attack, as well as estimating their costs. 

Each of the above Research Areas must take into take into account that the human is central to cyber security, as 
a  significant  part  of  the  problem  as  well  as  the  solution.  In  the  cyber  security  domain  there  are  three  human 
elements: the user/Soldier, attacker/adversary and the analyst/defender, acting as individuals or as group(s).  

To inform its research program planning, the Cyber CRA decided to explore the likely trends and changes in 
cyber  security  technologies  over  the  next  fifteen  years.  The  two-day  exploratory  meeting  took  place  in 
Scottsdale, AZ, in May 2014. The meeting emphasized eliciting the industry-driven perspective, as opposed to 
the more commonly explored views of academia. 

A total of 26 organizations, the majority of them from the industry, were represented at the meeting. In addition 
to corporate organizations—ranging from major multinational developers of hardware and software to smaller 
cyber-security  firms—several  academics  with  strong  industry  ties,  and  several  US  Department  of  Defense 
laboratories joined the meeting. 

2.0  THE SIX POTENTIAL GAME-CHANGERS 

In our view, the meeting yielded six major themes that may be seen as reasonably likely game-changers in the 
cyber technology landscape in the next ten to twenty years. We discuss them below, in the following order. The 
first two are potential changes in the cyber environment; the next two are technology trends that are already in 
effect but might grow to a qualitatively greater strength; and the last two are the less likely but potentially highly 
influential breakthroughs in cyber technology capabilities. 

2.1  New Computing Paradigms 

The first game changer is the potential emergence of new computing paradigms, ranging from nano-computing, 
quantum  computing,  DNA-based  computing,  etc.,  to  new  system  and  network  architectures,  such  as  cloud 
architectures taken to extremes. These novel paradigms might in the span of just a few years drastically change 

1 - 3 

 
 
the market and technology of cyber security, making most current technologies obsolete. 

Nanocomputing and analog computing, for example in sensor applications, may require qualitatively new types 
of  exploits  and  defenses.  Quantum  computing  and  networking  are  already  feeding  lively  disputes  about  their 
alleged inherent security versus alleged opportunities for hacking. Wearable computing sharpens the challenges 
of  usability  and  user  perceptions  and  behaviors,  and  privacy  concerns.  These  challenges  will  be  even  greater 
when  a  computing  device  and  network  augments  and  even  invades  the  human,  as  in  the  case  of  prosthetics, 
exoskeletons, and brain-computer interfaces.  Internet of Things (IoT) greatly increases opportunities for cyber 
attacks but might also offer new approaches to defense, e.g., collective defense of multiple devices.  

Wearable and IoT computing will likely create demand for custom devices, designed and fabricated to specific 
customer’s specifications. A device may even be designed and fabricated by the user himself—compare this to 
the  current surge  of  popularity  of  3D  printing  and  small  hobby  computers.  Each unique  device  will  require a 
customized cyber defense mechanism.   

Biologically  inspired  approaches  to  cyber  security,  such  as  artificial  immune  systems,  may  attract  growing 
interest,  especially  as  they  offer  promises  of  autonomous  self-healing  and  adaptation  to  previously  unknown 
threats. However, they may also bring inherent unpredictability and complexity of their behaviors. 

An  example  of  an  innovative,  biologically-inspired  computational  and  communication  paradigm  is  the  Gaian 
Database (Fig. 1), a dynamic distributed federated database [7].  The US Army Research Laboratory (ARL) and 
the  UK  Ministry  of  Defense  (MoD)  partly  funded  the  research  and  development  of  the  Gaian  DB,  and  ARL 
researchers  contributed  to  the  experimental  development  of  the  technology  [8].  In  2013,  it  was  deployed  and 
successfully demonstrated at the NATO Intelligence Fusion Centre (NIFC) at RAF Molesworth, UK. Gaian is 
particularly useful for connecting and integrating highly heterogeneous, mobile computing devices, ranging from 
a large-scale data center to thousands of handsets—reminiscent of a tactical Army environment.  

1 - 4 

 
 
Figure 1: Gaian platform is particularly useful for connecting and integrating highly heterogeneous, 
mobile computing devices in coalition environments. 

Self organizing bio-inspired Gaian offers a number of features that pose new challenges to both cyber defenders 
and  cyber  attackers.  It  is  based  on  the  collaboration  model  with  no  central  point  of  control;  hides  data  and 
database heterogeneity and compensates for data & schema mismatch; provides data location transparency but 
include provenance; effectively copes with dynamic modification of network and data topology [7]. Distributed 
formal policy based techniques are used to control access to data and the flow of data through the network—very 
useful in coalition warfare where coalition partners may have different policies on access and use of the data 
they collect and manage. 

The  example  hints  at  some  of  the  challenges  of  dealing  with  novel  computing  paradigms.  It  is  necessary,  in 
parallel, with developing a new computing and communication paradigm, to perform a systematic analysis of 
new  devices  and  architectures  from  the  cyber  security  perspective.  This  must  be  done  proactively,  before  the 
paradigm is productized, implemented, and deployed, at which time it may become a victim of innovative cyber 
attacker with unpredictable ramifications to the users. However, scientific foundations, engineering approaches, 
standards and methodologies that could support such a concurrent analysis are currently lacking. 

2.2  Reaching the Threshold of Complexity 

The second game-changer is the potential crossing  of a threshold of network complexity that brings us into a 
new  territory  beyond  the  limits  of  conventional  system  manageability  and  human  comprehension.  This 
qualitative  phase  change 
interdependence, 
heterogeneity  and  dynamics—might  defeat  conventional  approaches  of  current  science  and  engineering 

technology  complexity—enormous  size,  connectivity, 

in 

1 - 5 

Distributed formal policy based techniques are used to control access to data and the flow of data through the networkDistributed Dynamic Federated Database (DDFD)or GaianDatabase is based on “store locally and query from anywhere” principleN11N1N0N3N4N5N2N6N9N10N8N7QueryQuery 
 
disciplines.  

This trend could be engendered in part by the near-inevitable Internet of Things, proliferation of cyber-physical 
systems,  and  enormous  growth  of  social  networks  throughout  currently  under-involved  countries.  Such  a 
discontinuity  might  invalidate  much  of  the  assumption  underpinning  current  cyber  security.  For  example,  a 
participant of our meeting expressed this sentiment, “Our products are already far too complex, so complex that 
nobody  in  our  corporation  can  possibly  fully  understand  them,  and  this  just  keeps  getting  worse.”  Arguably, 
increased complexity of our systems enhances the adversary’s opportunities for asymmetric attacks. 

Of course, predictions of collapse of internet due to its excessive size and complexity have been  made in the 
past, and have been proven spectacularly misguided. The ever-growing complexity of Internet and other highly 
complex systems is exceeded only by their remarkable adaptability and resiliency. However, it can be observed 
that the size and diversity of the computing systems is often an advantage for those who would defend it.   Here, 
however,  we  are  concerned  not  about  exceeding  the  limits  of  Internet,  but  rather  the  limits  of  human 
comprehension (and cyber defense) of such complex systems. 

A new level of development in the sciences of complexity, and corresponding qualitatively novel advances in 
tools  of  complex  system  analysis,  modeling  and  synthesis,  will  be  required  to  cope  with  the  change.    Such 
sciences and engineering tools would need to address enormous multitudes of explicit and emergent interactions 
and  highly  nonlinear  and  dynamic  dependencies  within  the  system.  These  theories  and  tools  would  also  deal 
with  cyber  strengths,  vulnerabilities  and  control  aspects  of  the  system  that  encompasses  a  wide  diversity  of 
individual nodes, including human nodes, with their relatively unpredictable physical and cognitive behaviors. 
New approaches will be needed to measurements of complexity, to finding or predicting tipping points.  New 
hierarchical constructs that reduce unstable and unanticipated interactions may emerge that would help deal with 
complexity. 

Cyber security is particularly challenged by the complex, multi-genre nature of networks that combine several 
distinct genres—networks of physical resources, communication networks, information networks, and social and 
cognitive networks. Study of systems such as multi-genre networks is relatively new; instead, it is customary in 
research and engineering literature to focus on a view of a network comprised of homogeneous elements, (e.g., a 
network of communication devices, or a network of social beings). Yet, most if not all real-world networks are 
multi-genre—it is hard to find any real system of a significant complexity that does not include a combination of 
interconnected  physical  elements,  communication  devices  and  channels,  data  collections,  and  human  users 
forming  an  integrated,  inter-dependent  whole.  The  ARL  Network  Science  CTA  (www.ns-cta.org)  focus  is  on 
modeling, influencing and understanding the co-evolution of such interacting mutli-genre networks [9]. 

When we consider multiple genres of networks, the total number of links that connect any two elements grows 
significantly. Perrow [10] explains that catastrophic failures of systems emerge from high complexity  of links 
which  lead  to  interactions  that  the  system’s  designer  cannot  anticipate  and  guard  against.  System’s  safety 
precautions  can  be  defeated  by  hidden  paths,  incomprehensible  to  the  designer  because  the  links  are  so 
numerous, heterogeneous, and often implicit. Greater connectivity we recognize in a multi-genre network helps 
us  see  more  of  the  overall  network’s  complexity,  and  hence  the  potential  influences  on  its  robustness  and 
resiliency [11]. 

However,  numerous  challenges  arise  in  dealing  with  impacts  of  network  complexity  on  cyber  security.  For 
example,  the  cyber  research  community  lacks  insights  into  stability,  controllability  and  observability  of 
networks, especially those of very large scale and of multi-genre nature. Little is understood about the impact of 
social-cognitive  links  and  information-element  links  on  the  overall  network  complexity  [11a].  From  an 

1 - 6 

 
 
engineering perspective, it would be highly desirable to have design approaches that would enable dynamic, on-
demand  segmentation  of  a  potentially  unstable  network  into  subnets  with  limited  and  strictly  controlled 
connectivity between them. Yet, such designs and design tools are currently absent.    

2.3  Big Data Analytics 

The third game-changer is  the emergence of big data analytics—predictive and highly autonomous—in cyber 
security. This is a current trend, still immature but already noticeable and influential. Cyber analytics does have a 
potential to become truly big (world-scale), predictive or anticipative in its analytical conclusions (i.e., it would 
anticipate  new  cyber  threats  and  malicious  activities  in  actionable  details  and  time  frames),  and  highly 
autonomous, i.e., able to operate with little or no participation of human cyber analysts. If the potential of this 
trend is realized, cyber defense will acquire a new degree of potency.  

Because  some  of  the  most  promising  applications  of  big  data  analytics  are  found  in  medical  and  biomedical 
research [12], analogies between cyber security and such field as epidemiology are useful. For example, Gil, et al 
[13],  describe  an  approach  inspired  by  genetic  epidemiology  where  features  of  a  computer  host—such  as  the 
network services active on a computer—are statistically linked to the kinds of threats to which that host is likely 
to  be  susceptible.  This  is  similar  to  the  tools  used  in  genetics  to  identify  statistical  associations  between 
mutations and diseases, and like in the case of genetic epidemiology relies on availability of large volumes of 
data, especially when rare conditions are of interest.  

Much of the power of big data analytics is likely to derive from aggregating and correlating a broad range of 
highly  heterogeneous  data.  As  the  history  of  the  field  of  information  fusion  has  demonstrated,  the  related 
challenges  are  very  formidable.  When  heterogeneity  of  the  data  is  further  complicated  by  their  noise, 
incompleteness and massive scale characteristic of cyber data—the challenges become even greater [14]. Much 
work is also needed in developing new analytical algorithms for inferring well-hidden and possibly deception-
protected  information  from  massive  collections  of  heterogeneous,  rapidly  evolving  data.  And  while  cyber 
defenders need anticipative results from such analytic algorithms, it is not clear to which extent such anticipation 
is even theoretically feasible. 

Threats, however, are also likely to evolve, possibly utilizing a form of such analytics for their own purposes. 
The adversary may use his own big data analytics to uncover information about our vulnerabilities and defenses. 
In addition, the adversary may use our own big data analytics, in at least two ways. He might be able to access 
parts of our data storages or analytic facilities, gaining a remarkably rich view of our capabilities and their limits. 
He may also provide our data collecting devices with deceptive, misleading, or probing data. Means to anticipate 
such actions will be needed and their impact estimated [14a, 14b]. 

Other challenges in this area include the lack of methods and standards for efficiently preserving and tagging the 
collected,  highly  heterogeneous  information  with  meta-data  useful  for  future  processing  for  a  variety  of 
purposes.  Some  early  work  on  fully  homomorphic  encryption  in  the  US-UK-ITA  holds  promise  for 
computationally  feasible  processing  of  data  while  preserving  privacy  [15]  [16].  Also  lacking  are  standards, 
languages  and  recommended  practices  for  bringing  and  aggregating  information  from  diverse  organizations, 
especially  in  a  multi-national  environments,  where  different  nations  may  have  different  constraints  on release 
and use of information.  Another challenge in this area is the now-ubiquitous Big Data problem: collection of 
data from different layers of the OS and protocol stack, and across the network leads to an explosion of data; 
processing of this data is made difficult by the inability to communicate to a fusion center or to even fit into 
memory  for  local  processing  [17];  mining  the  low-dimension  information-rich  manifold  remains  a  challenge 

1 - 7 

 
 
[18]. 

2.4  Resilient Self-Adaptation 

The  fourth  game-changer  would  be  potential  breakthroughs  in  approaches  based  on  resilient  self-adaptation, 
where  cyber  security  derives  largely  from  the  system’s  agility,  moving  target  defense  (e.g.,  Fig.  2),  cyber 
maneuvering,  autonomous  response,  self-healing  and  other  such  autonomous  or  semi-autonomous  behaviors 
[19].  Because  it  is  unlikely  that  practically  invulnerable,  impenetrable  systems  and  networks  can  be  built 
consistently  and  economically,  it  might  be  beneficial  to  shift  a  significant  fraction  of  design  resources  from 
reducing vulnerabilities to increasing resiliency. Here, a resilient system is a system that may experience a major 
loss of capability due to a cyber attack, but recovers these capabilities sufficiently rapidly and fully so that the 
overall mission of the system proceeds successfully. Note the focus on a mission; resiliency is meaningful only 
in the context of a mission. 

For  example,  promising  results  exist  for  approaches  where  a software  residing  on  a  host  like  a  mobile  phone 
performs  self-healing—by  applying  patches  or  other  forms  of  self-rewriting  its  code—in  response  to  its  own 
abnormal behavior it detects [20]. Recovery at the network scale can benefit from approaches such as reported 
by Mell and Harang [21] that perform a post-intrusion triage to highlight the most likely infected nodes, so that 
the remediation efforts would produce the highest degree of resiliency. 

Figure 2: Approaches called Moving Target Defense or Cyber Maneuver aim to confuse the attacker 
regarding the true structure and functions of the defended network.) 

However,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  a  few  of  these  approaches  are  already  implemented  by  researchers  and  by 
hardware and software providers, overall this space of approaches remains to be researched and exploited. Their 
broad applicability, feasibility and ultimate value remain to be proven and at this time are far from certain. If 
successful, however, this trend could drastically change the current cyber security industry. 

Novel design and analysis methods, along with new architectural patterns would need to emerge to make design 
for resiliency an accepted and successful practice. Elements of suitable approaches could be gleaned from work 

1 - 8 

 
 
 
on autonomous designs [21a, 21b] and adaptive, dynamic planning [21c]. Still, challenges of such designs are 
manifold.  For  example,  effective  autonomous  self-adaptation  or  self-healing  seems  to  call  for  a  degree  of 
machine intelligence that may be far ahead of what can be currently imagined. It may also increase the system’s 
complexity, which in itself is a concern and a potential multiplier of vulnerabilities as we discuss in this article. 
Given the diversity and unpredictability of complex attacks and their circumstances, practical resiliency can only 
be  probabilistic  in  nature—not  a  comforting  thought  for  the  operators  of  the  system.  Besides,  a  resilient  self-
adaptation  of  the  system  is  likely  to  conflict  with  the  operators’  desire  for  understandable  and  predictable 
behaviors  and  outcomes.  Further,  self-adaptation  brings  with  it  challenges  of  resistance  to  external  control, 
which may not be desirable. 

From  the  perspective  of  practical  engineering,  it  would  help  to  stabilize  the  use of  terminology  that  currently 
ranges  somewhat  interchangeably  from  Moving  Target  Defense  to  Cyber  Maneuver  [22]  to  Agility  to  Rapid 
Recovery,  etc.    These  are  probably  best  assigned  to  specific  phases  of  defense,  e.g.,  prior  to  compromise 
(perhaps MTD), during the compromise (e.g., Cyber Maneuver), etc.   

2.5  Design of Mixed Trusted Systems 

The  fifth  game-changer  is  the  potential  emergence  of  new  design  methods  for  security-minded,  flexible, 
modifiable  systems  that  combine  and  accommodate  un-trusted  and  legacy  hardware  and  software,  as  well  as 
clean-slate components. The sources of untrusted software and hardware (whether new or legacy) are numerous, 
ranging from dubious supply chains to ever-growing complexity of new components to convergence of business 
systems with personal systems and across the continually expanding multi-national environments. This ubiquity 
of diverse computing infrastructure and the necessary reliance on less advanced and secure networks require new 
means to enhance cyber security without necessarily fixing the vulnerabilities in the conventional sense.  

Related ideas are explored, for example [23], where a trusted core element is introduced within an autonomic ad 
hoc sensor networks when some nodes are untrusted, corrupted or malicious. Trust-based schemes, implemented 
by a trusted core, result in significant improvement in the state estimation procedure, and the interplay between 
estimation  and  trust  updates  quickly  isolates  malicious  nodes.  Alternatively,  a  trust  management  protocol,  as 
opposed to a trust core, could be used to apply trust-based intrusion detection to assess the trustworthiness and 
maliciousness of sensor nodes [24] [25]. 

To  be  broadly  applicable,  this  game-changer  would  entail  creation  of  major,  qualitatively  new  design 
methodologies  and  tools  that  enable  synthesis  of  complex  systems  by,  for  example,  reinforcing  untrusted 
components with clear-slate and highly trusted “braces” (compare to seismic resistant insulating bearings, etc.). 
Such designs would also include components that could be rapidly and inexpensively modified to defend against 
new threats as they are discovered. Formal methods would have to see a breakthrough, or yet unknown semi-
formal but highly reliable methods would need to emerge.  

The  new  design  tools  would  need  to  unobtrusively  encourage  developers  toward  more  secure  and  verifiable 
systems and architectures. Such tools would not merely ensure that the design is secure, but will also tell the 
designers and maintainers of the system why the design is secure (e.g., stating explicitly security assumptions, 
rationale, proof, arguments, constraints, etc.), and where the design can be modified without compromising its 
security.  The  resulting  designs  must  balance  security  against  usability,  meeting  the  needs  of  the  mission  and 
cognitive  demands  of  users.  The  tools  would  need  to  account  for  emergent  properties  of  accidental  or 
unexpected  composition  and  reconfiguration  of  components.  To  support  such  approaches,  the  precision  of 
security-related standards and requirements would need to improve significantly. 

1 - 9 

 
 
2.6  Active and Proactive Responses 

The  sixth  game-changer  involves  the  potential  emergence  of  approaches  to  active  and  proactive  responses  to 
threat  sources,  strategy-oriented  approaches,  offence-based  techniques,  alternative  security  postures,  deception 
and  psychological  mechanisms.  Currently,  little  is  understood  regarding  the  shape  or  possibility  of  such 
methods, especially in view of legal and policy uncertainties surrounding the cyber security in general, and any 
active responses to cyber threats in particular. If such developments were to accelerate, they could change the 
calculus  of  attacker-defender  relations,  and  engender  an  entirely  new  generation  of  technologies.  The  long 
history and extensive knowledge of strategy and tactics in conventional conflicts might offer important insights, 
but also could be misleading and limiting in some cases.  

To enable and guide the developments in such approaches, many assumptions, often implicit and long ingrained 
in our understanding of dealing with adversaries—from crime fighting and law enforcement to armed conflict—
may need to be explicitly examined and perhaps questioned. Issues are broad and inadequately understood in the 
context of cyber security. Examples include: moral standards versus national and international legal standards; 
non-territorial  nature  of  the  cyber  space;  impact  of  cultural  differences  and  biases;  interactions  of  cyber  and 
physical spaces and activities; public versus private spaces; definitions of strengths and weaknesses our ours and 
our adversaries. 

Like in conventional conflicts, such approaches might aim to defeat the adversary’s ability and will to wage the 
conflict by holding the adversary at risk. The risk to the adversary may take multiple forms: economic costs of 
cyber  attacks;  possibility  of  retaliation  (cyber  or  conventional);  concerns  of  falling  for  a  deception;  internal 
dissent and infighting, etc.  

Human  factors  are  of  critical  importance  in  cyber  security  as  they  are  in  all  forms  of  warfare.  For  example, 
situational awareness of the adversary determines the adversary’s ability to conduct effective attacks against the 
friendly networks while defending his resources against our counter-actions.  Although [26] there are significant 
differences between situational awareness in conventional and cyber conflicts, similarities are sufficiently strong 
to enable transfer of lessons and techniques learned in conventional conflicts to cyber security.  

In all cases, advanced capabilities of the adversary have to be assumed. Regardless of details, such approaches 
will  benefit  from  greater  situational  awareness,  e.g.,  knowing  our  own  and  adversary’s  architectures  and 
infrastructure, and sensing capabilities. Also needed would be languages that clearly and precisely articulate the 
situation; cultural intelligence and adversary modeling; and deep insights into individual and collective cognitive 
processes of the adversary. 

3.0  CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

Considering the relatively long time horizon, it would be foolhardy to suggest that all these six game-changers, 
or  even  any  one  of  them,  will  emerge  as  envisioned  here,  if  at  all.  It  is  reasonable,  however,  to  suggest  that 
paying special attention to the related developments—or lack thereof—will benefit cyber security researchers, 
technologists,  and  their  funding  organizations.  Furthermore,  to  prioritize  efforts  towards  cyber  science  and 
engineering,  it  would  be  appropriate  to  give  extra  weight  to  those  topics  that  contribute  to  potential  game 
changers, such as those we outline in this paper. 

Specific recommendations for advancement of cyber science and engineering can be offered for each of the six 
game-changers.  With  regard  to  the  potential  emergence  of  new  computing  paradigms  systematic,  proactive 
analysis  of  security  of  newly  emerging  devices  and  architectures  should  be  given  consideration,  along  with 
analytical approaches, methodologies and standards generalized for a broad range of paradigms. Also needed is 

1 - 10 

 
 
synthesis  of  customized  cyber  defense  mechanism,  perhaps  such  as  self-evolving  artificial  immune  systems, 
along with means to predict their security properties. 

With respect to reaching a threshold of network complexity research is needed on controllability, observability, 
and  stability  of  large,  multi-genre  (i.e.,  including  social-cognitive  and  informational  aspects)  networks;  also 
important are means for near-real time  measurements  of complexity properties and for finding tipping points; 
approaches  to  controlling  non-determinism;  as  well  as  engineering  design  paradigms  and  tools  that  can 
dynamically semi-isolate network segments and control the behaviors of and between the segments.  

To leverage the ongoing trend towards the big data analytics, the research community should seek  means  for 
fusion of heterogeneous, noisy and incomplete information on massive scales; and new analytical algorithms for 
inferring well-hidden and possibly deception-protected information from massive collections of rapidly evolving 
data. In addition, methods and standards are necessary for tagging the data with meta-information, and standards, 
languages and recommended practices for bringing data from diverse organizations, often with divergent policies 
on access and utilization of the data.    

Approaches based on resilient self-adaptation will benefit from a clear taxonomy of  methods and concepts of 
moving target defense, cyber maneuver and such, and from leveraging applicable, mature research disciplines, 
e.g.,  cryptography  and  key  distribution  for  MTD,  control  theory  for  cyber  maneuver  and  recovery.    Priority 
should be given to novel methods for analysis and design centered on resiliency properties of systems.  

Potential  emergence  of  new  design  methods  and  tools  that  synthesize  complex  systems  from  trusted  and 
untrusted components will require theoretical foundations, currently absent, for system theory with components 
at  heterogeneous  levels  of  security  and  trust.  To  overcome  currently  slow  progress  in  formal  methods, 
consideration should be given to possible use of semi-formal and approximate methods. 

Finally,  with  respect  to  active  and  proactive  responses,  approaches  that  employ  forms  of  deception  or 
concealment—that  is  the  means  to  mislead  the  adversary  regarding  our  networks  and  his  effects  on  our 
networks—are likely to be less controversial and easier to implement than others in this broad and challenging 
space of techniques. 

1 - 11 

 
 
REFERENCES 

[1] Lemnios, Zachary J., Testimony Before the United States House of Representatives  Committee on Armed 
Services, Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities, March 1, 2011,  
http://www.acq.osd.mil/chieftechnologist/publications/docs/ASDRE_Testimony_2011.pdf 

[2] Longstaff, Tom “Barriers to achieving a science of cybersecurity”, The Next Wave, Vol. 19, No. 4, 2012; 
http://www.nsa.gov/research/tnw/tnw194/article5.shtml 

[3]  JASON,  “The  Science  of  Cyber  Security,”  Report  JSR-10-102,  MITRE,  McLean  VA,  November  2010, 
http://www.fas.org/irp/agency/dod/jason/cyber.pdf 

[4]  National  Science  and  Technology  Council,  “Trustworthy  Cyberspace:  Strategic  Plan  for  the  Federal 
Cybersecurity Research and Development Program,”  December 2011;  
http://www.nitrd.gov/fileupload/files/Fed_Cybersecurity_RD_Strategic_Plan_2011.pdf 

[5]  Kott,  Alexander.  “Towards  Fundamental  Science  of  Cyber  Security.”  In  Network  Science  and 
Cybersecurity, pp. 1-13. Springer New York, 2014. 

[6]  McDaniel,  Patrick,  Brian  Rivera,  and  Ananthram  Swami.  "Toward  a  Science  of  Secure  Environments." 
Security & Privacy, IEEE 12, no. 4 (2014): 68-70.  

[7] Bent, Graham, Patrick Dantressangle, David Vyvyan, Abbe Mowshowitz, and Valia Mitsou. “A dynamic 
distributed federated database.” In Proc. 2nd Ann. Conf. International Technology Alliance. 2008.  

[8]  Toth,  Andrew,  Tien  Pham,  Todd  Karr,  Graham  Bent,  Dominic  Harries,  and  Alan  Knox.  “Coalition 
Warfare  Program  (CWP):  secure  policy  controlled  information  query  and  dissemination  over  a  Bices 
network.” In SPIE Defense, Security, and Sensing, pp. 87420F-87420F. International Society for Optics and 
Photonics, 2013.  

[9]  Basu,  Prithwish,  Ben  Baumer,  Amotz  Bar-Noy,  and  Chi-Kin  Chau.  "Social-Communication  Composite 
Networks." 2013.  

[10] Perrow, C. “Normal Accidents: Living with High Risk Technologies,” Princeton University Press, 1984.  

[11]  Kott,  Alexander,  and  Tarek  Abdelzaher.  “Resiliency  and  Robustness  of  Complex  Systems  and 
Networks.” Adaptive, Dynamic, and Resilient Systems (2014): 67.  

[11a] Kott, Alexander. "Information warfare and organizational decision-making." (2006). 

[12] Howe, Doug, Maria Costanzo, Petra Fey, Takashi Gojobori, Linda Hannick, Winston Hide, David P. Hill 
et al. “Big data: The future of biocuration.” Nature 455, no. 7209 (2008): 47-50.  

[13] Gil, Santiago, Alexander Kott, and Albert-László Barabási. “A genetic epidemiology approach to cyber-
security.” Scientific Reports 4 (2014).  

[14]  Kott,  Alexander,  and  Curtis  Arnold.  “The  promises  and  challenges  of  continuous  monitoring  and  risk 
scoring.” IEEE Security and Privacy 11, no. 1 (2013): 90-93.  

1 - 12 

 
 
[14a]  Kott,  Alexander,  and  Michael  Ownby.  Tools  for  real-time  anticipation  of  enemy  actions  in  tactical 
ground operations. DEFENSE ADVANCED RESEARCH PROJECTS AGENCY ARLINGTON VA, 2005. 

[14b] Kott, A., L. Ground, and J. Langston. "Estimation of battlefield attrition in a course of action analysis 
decision  support  system."  Military  Operations  Research  Society  Workshop  on  Land  and  Expeditionary 
Warfare. 1999. 

[15]  Gennaro,  Rosario,  Jonathan  Katz,  Hugo  Krawczyk,  and  Tal  Rabin.  "Secure  network  coding  over  the 
integers." In Public Key Cryptography–PKC 2010, pp. 142-160. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010.  

[16]  Katz,  Jonathan,  Aishwarya  Thiruvengadam,  and  Hong-Sheng  Zhou.  "Feasibility  and  infeasibility  of 
adaptively  secure  fully  homomorphic  encryption."  In  Public-Key  Cryptography–PKC  2013,  pp.  14-31. 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.  

[17]  Papalexakis,  Evangelos  E.,  Christos  Faloutsos,  and  Nicholas  D.  Sidiropoulos.  "Parcube:  Sparse 
parallelizable tensor decompositions." In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 521-
536. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012.  

[18]  U.S.  Army  Research  Laboratory  A  Report  on  Army  Science  Planning  and  Strategy  March  2014. 
http://www.arl.army.mil/www/pages/2401/Army_Science_Planning_and_Strategy_Report.pdf 

[19] Jajodia, Sushil, Anup K. Ghosh, Vipin Swarup, Cliff Wang, and X. Sean Wang. Moving Target Defense. 
Springer, 2011. 

[20]  Azim,  Tanzirul,  Iulian  Neamtiu,  and  Lisa  Marvel.  “Towards  Self-healing  Smartphone  Software  via 
Automated Patching.” (2014). 

[21]  Mell,  Peter  M.;  Richard  Harang;  “Using  Network  Tainting  to  Bound  the  Scope  of  Network  Ingress 
Attacks.”  Proceedings  of  The  Eighth  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Software  Security  and  Reliability 
(SERE 2014), San Francisco, CA, June 30-July 2, 2014 

[21a]  Kott,  A.  S.,  J.  H.  May,  and  C.  C.  Hwang.  "An  Autonomous  Artificial  Designer  of  Thermal  Energy 
Systems:  Part  1—Theoretical  Considerations."  Journal  of  engineering  for  gas  turbines  and  power  111.4 
(1989): 728-733. 

[21b] Kott, Alexander, Gerald Agin, and D. Fawcett. "Configuration tree solver: A technology for automated 
design and configuration." Journal of Mechanical Design 114.1 (1992): 187-195. 

[21c]  Sadeh,  Norman  M.,  and  Alexander  Kott.  "Models  and  Techniques  of  Dynamic  Demand-Responsive 
Transportation  Planning."  http://www.  cgi.  com/web2/govt/models.  html  SAMPO  (System  for  Advanced 
Management of Public Transport Operations), 1995–1997 

[22]  Torrieri,  Don,  Sencun  Zhu,  and  Sushil  Jajodia.  “Cyber  maneuver  against  external  adversaries  and 
compromised nodes.” In Moving Target Defense II, pp. 87-96. Springer New York, 2013. 

[23] Somasundaram, Kiran K., and John S. Baras. “Performance improvements in distributed estimation and 
fusion induced by a trusted core.” In  Information Fusion, 2009. FUSION’09. 12th International Conference 

1 - 13 

 
 
 
 
 
on, pp. 1942-1949. IEEE, 2009. 

[24] Bao, Fenye, Ray Chen, MoonJeong Chang, and Jin-Hee Cho. “Trust-based intrusion detection in wireless 
sensor networks.” In Communications (ICC), 2011 IEEE International Conference on, pp. 1-6. IEEE, 2011. 

[25]  Chan,  Kevin,  Jin-Hee  Cho,  and  Ananthram  Swami.  Impact  of  Trust  on  Security  and  Performance  in 
Tactical Networks. Army Research Lab, Adelphi, MD, Computational And Information Sciences Directorate, 
2013.  

[26]  Kott,  Alexander,  Norbou  Buchler,  Kristin  E.  Schaefer,  “Kinetic  and  Cyber.”  In  Cyber  Defense  and 
Situational Awareness, Springer, 2014 (to appear) 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The authors are grateful to Andrew Toth of the US Army Research Laboratory and Dr. Cliff Wang of the Army 
Research  Office  for  information  about  several  of  the  research  examples  mentioned  in  this  paper  and  to  John 
MacLeod for editing and correcting the manuscript. 

1 - 14 

 
 
 
