A Critical Survey of Privacy Infrastructures

B H Priyanka1 and Ravi Prakash2

5
1
0
2
c
e
D
0
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
0
2
7
0
.
2
1
5
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

the

the

last

two decades,

Abstract— Over

scale and
complexity of the Internet and its associated technologies built
on the World Wide Web has grown exponentially with access
to Internet as a facility occupying a prime place with other
amenities of modern lives. In years to come, usage of Internet
may unravel more pleasant surprises for us as far as novelty
in its usage is concerned. As a democratic function of Internet,
and relying on the open model on which it has been built,
there has been concerted efforts in the direction of privacy
protection and use of privacy enhancing tools which have
gained tangible traction. Innovation in use of VPN, TLS/SSL
and cryptographic tools are a testimony to it. Another popular
is Tor which has gained widespread popularity as it
tool
is being increasingly used by anonymity seeking users to
effectively maintain their discretion while surﬁng the web.

However, there is a darker side to increased proliferation
of Internet in our everyday routine. We are certainly not
living in a utopian age and there are potentials of misuse of
Internet as well. Across every nook and cranny of Internet’s
sprawling virtual world, there are cyber criminals lurking n
dangerous alleys to use the very same Internet as malevolent
tool to abuse it and cause ﬁnancial, physical and social harm to
ordinary people. Failing to manage the widespread spawning
of World Wide Web has rendered it weak against misuse. In
last few decades especially, Internet has been inundated with
malware, ransomware, viruses, Trojans, illegal spy tools and
what not created with malignant sentiments. In this paper, we
will analyze few of the subverting privacy infrastructures.

I. INTRODUCTION

A cursory look at

the major security breaches in the
last
few years like hacking of big multinational ﬁrms
(Sony, Amazon etc.), online payment agencies, stealing of
credit card information have revealed a glaring truth about
vulnerability of even most secure digital infrastructure to be
compromised and subsequently cause massive ﬁnancial loss
in terms of millions of dollars. Modus operandi of cyber
criminals is increasingly becoming stealthy and pervasive.
As a natural evolution of internet, there has been progress
in privacy enhancing technologies like Tor, VPN, etc. which
have potential to be used in maintaining genuine anonymity,
but at the same time are facing threats of subversion. In
this paper, we analyze following topics and their perceived
threats:

1. Botnets

2. Tor

1College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University,

Boston, MA, USA, email: bhadravathihalesh.p@husky.neu.edu

2 Bengaluru, Karnataka, INDIA, email: ravi 1010@hotmail.com

3. VPN

4. Wi-Fi

While discussing each of the above topics, we present a
brief background, current scenario and future assessment.
Also, in the conclusion part, we suggest our estimates with
respect to mitigating their threats.

II. BOTNETS

A. Background

A Botnet is a generic name given to a cluster of computers
which is managed by an adversary for mala ﬁde usage. So,
essentially a botnet is a network of compromised computers
which are called bots. Internet Relay Channels (IRC) which
rely on text based communication amongst a group of peers
were in vogue during the dawn of Internet era. It was only
natural that they were the debut targets of botnet cyber
criminals.

In 1999, bots were created to establish a connection to the
IRC channel, which in turn was capable of triggering an IRC
client communication towards IRC server. Subsequently,
bots could control the channel itself and hence spy on the
entire network. The bot, would then connect to a certain
chat room which could then entice multiple bots to join the
channel, thereby enabling the botmaster (one who controls
the actions of several bots in the network) to cause threats
to the IRC servers. This behavior is still evident in the
W32/Vulcanbot attack on websites of
the human-rights
activists.

Botnets shone into limelight, when a series of distributed
Denial of Service attacks were launched on popular
websites like Yahoo, Ebay, Dell and Amazon in the year
2000. Eventually, researchers and the security experts denied
the fact that these DoS attacks were actually caused by a
botnet, but deduced the fact that the botnets pose a serious
threat to the soundness of the Internet in the future. Few
of the renowned bots are SDBot, SpyBot, Conﬁcker, Zeus,
Waledac, Mariposa and Kelihos.

B. Threats posed by Botnets

Botnets have been key players in subverting the privacy
infrastructure and the cryptography mechanisms used
by Internet users to ensure privacy. Major threats being
Distributed DoS which bombards the server with multiple

 
 
 
 
 
 
requests eventually leading to the exhaustion of
the
bandwidth and the resources, sending out enormous amount
of spams to the users, accessing the systems comprising of
critical data to fetch the private/secret information of the
users and modifying the source code to inject additional
malware to exploit the vulnerabilities exposed.

C. Bunito Botnet

Recent works on analysis of Bunito Botnet show that
cyber criminals had employed a server to widely distribute
the botnet infected proxies to the users and have utilized this
as a main source of capital. There has been a considerable
increase in the percentage of users who have been infected
with this Bunito botnet in the last decade. Users primarily
use the VPN service to connect
to a private network
securely through a VPN service provider and are oblivious
of the fact that the VPN service providers through which
they connect are fraudulent and are under the nefarious
inﬂuence of Bunito botnet. VIP72 is a well-known VPN
service that has gained disrepute due to the kind of
anonymity they provide with respect to the proxies and also
because of their close knit connection with the Bunito botnet.

1) Botnets & TLS: TLS/SSL are usually used by
legitimate users for genuine security needs. Security is
achieved by employing cryptographic functions at transport
layer to establish secure communication channel. However,
creators of botnets have been no less enterprising in
embracing new security apparatus like TLS/SSL for abuse.
A botnet named Rustock was unearthed using same TLS
encryption mechanism for spreading huge amount of spams.
Security ﬁrms across the world have observed gradual
increase in TLS based spam.

2) Mobile Botnets: There has been unprecedented in-
crease in users of smartphones, tablets and other smart digital
devices which run on a plethora of Operating Systems like
Android, Tizen, iOS and Windows. Hence, it is not amusing
to see mobile platforms as next logical target of botnets.
Mobile botnets work exactly as the botnets which infect the
computers, mainly exploiting the vulnerabilities found in the
mobile Operating System. The hacker uses the privileges
of the root user to send text messages, calls, media, etc.
RootSmart, BBproxy, Android snooping, DroidDream are
some of the several well-known mobile botnets which have
gained attention in the recent years.

III. TOR

Tor, an acronym for The Onion Router,

is a freely
available software which provides enhanced privacy features
to the users through a network of computers which persevere
hard to reduce or completely eliminate digital footprint
of the users and vanquishes traces of the communication
that the user makes, be it with another computer or just
browsing on the Internet. Tor, unlike botnet did not come
into existence because of any criminal pursuit, but due to

genuine academic interest.

Its public history dates back to the year 1995, when
the US Naval Research Lab started analyzing and funding
Onion Routing which gradually led to open sourcing of
the Tor project and was made available to general public.
Subsequently, widespread reception of Tor software took
place by anonymity seeking users who were actively looking
for a viable and reliable alternative.

It was

the democratic and secular ethos enshrined
in the modelling, functioning and usage of Tor which
made it a favorite of
freedom seeking activists who
despised unsolicited snooping on their online activities. In
March 2011, The Tor Project received the Free Software
Foundation’s 2010 Award for Projects of Social Beneﬁt. The
citation read, ”Using free software, Tor has enabled roughly
36 million people around the world to experience freedom
of access and expression on the Internet while keeping them
in control of
their privacy and anonymity.” Its network
has proved pivotal in dissident movements in many countries.

Crypto anarchism as a movement had huge gains from
using Tor in areas like political dissidence, whistleblowing,
cyber activism etc. It helped people associated with such
movements to evade censorship, prosecution and escape
repressive regimes.
Intelligence agencies also used Tor
model to evade espionage from non-friendly countries.

A. Threats posed by Tor

Given the alacrity with which nefarious activities take
place in cyberspace, it was no wonder that criminals saw
it as another avenue for plying their illegal trade. Abusers
of Tor have posed a severe threat
to data and network
integrity by performing a range of disruptive activities
like sending emails with malware infected content and
launching Distributed DoS attacks to the servers . Within
the comfortable veil of secrecy, the dark side of Tor gets
even more darker.

Service providers like Freedom hosting which promoted
child abuse, Silk Road, Black Market Reloaded, The Armory
and The General Store which illegally dealt with selling
and buying of drugs, arms and ammunitions are few of the
hidden sites associated with Tor.

Silk Road, a popular online market place for trade of
illegal drugs was launched in the year 2001, which provided
complete anonymity of both the sellers and buyers. It also
sold numerous fake documents such as driver’s license,
hacked Amazon accounts, fake passports, hacked Netﬂix
account details and fake credit card statements. Silk Road
used Bitcoin as a mode of its payment by its users, which
is an innovative distributed crypto currency system which
provides no traces about the payments done online. There
was a tremendous surge in the transactions carried on Silk

Road which made it become very much conspicuous to the
security organizations in US.

1) Tor as a Malware: Researchers recently exposed
malware that
infected point-of-sale terminals at several
dozen retailers in the US and other countries and successfully
captured customers’ payment card data. Chewbacca, as
the crime ware was called, removes the memory bits and
dumps into ﬁles. It then uses regular expressions and other
programming techniques to extract data that was copied
from credit and debit cards. Chewbacca also captured
sensitive data using a generic key logger.

2) Tor

insecure

coupled with

protocols: Another
there is a prevalence of
glaring issue with Tor is that
insecure protocols such as POP3 which use plaintext for
communication. It has successfully demonstrated that
it
is possible to see passwords by logging exit trafﬁc on routers.

3) Tor with mobile applications: As in case of prevalence
of botnets on mobile applications, Tor has found both use
and misuse on mobile platforms. There are plenty of mobile
applications which ensure that all trafﬁc is routed through
Tor networks guaranteeing privacy. Applications like Orbot
and Orweb to name a few are readily available.

Consistency in the usage of same Operating System like
Android or iOS which use Tor for a long period of time,
gives chance to the sophisticated cyber criminals to exploit
the vulnerabilities in these platforms. The malware which
infects the operating system of the mobile devices can gather
all personal data of the users, be it contacts, images, any
other sensitive data stored in the memory cards, hack the
text messages, track the location of the user using the GPS
technology and also the internal speciﬁcations of the device
itself.

IV. VIRTUAL PRIVATE NETWORKS

A. Background

Virtual Private Network (VPN) is one of the well-known
privacy infrastructure that has been trending in the past few
years. It is a private network that uses Internet to provide
a secured data transmission across a channel,
thereby
having access to all the resources of the remote network
directly. VPN, as a form of Wide Area Network(WAN)
provides various services like ﬁle sharing, audio and video
conferencing, email or instant messaging, is popular due
to its cost effectiveness and its coverage area be it intranet
or internet. Mainly used by the IT employees to remotely
access the corporate websites, VPN is a convenient and
efﬁcient means of connecting to the private network of
companies. Not only restricted to corporate companies, VPN
is now a sophisticated and advanced privacy technology
which any user can use.

B. Threats posed by VPN

1) Hola VPN: There have been quite a few instances
of misuse of commercial VPN services. For example, a
commercial private VPN hola misused the resources of its
clients without any disclosure. It was only after exposure,
the malpractice of the operators of hola vpn came
that
into limelight where they sold connections of their users to
another Tor like vpn called Luminati.

2) Heartbleed Virus: Heartbleed virus took IT sector by
storm when it exposed chinks in the armour of OpenSSL
implementation. IT ﬁrms across the world scurried to patch
the bug as OpenSSL is widely used for security. VPN
implementation built on OpenSSL are extremely vulnerable
and it will take years to evaluate, assess and remedy the
impact of Heartbleed virus.

V. WIRELESS FIDELITY

technology brought

A Wireless Local-area Network (LAN) uses radio waves
to connect devices. Wi-Fi
radical
changes in the way internet was accessed. Convenience,
mobility, productivity, cost effectiveness were some of
its hallmark technology which led to its wide adoption.
Although, satisfactory security infrastructure is in place for
Wi-Fi, however even Wi-Fi is not completely reliable.

Recently, security researchers managed to demonstrate
how the unauthenticated data packets in the 802.11 wireless
LAN protocol can be used as a covert channel to control
malware on an infected computer. 802.11 protocol relies
on clients and access points exchanging informational
data packets before they authenticate or associate with
each other, and this trafﬁc is not
typically monitored
by network security devices. Tom Neaves, a managing
consultant at Trustwave, developed a proof-of-concept tool
called Smuggler that
leverages these packets, known as
wireless management frames, to communicate with malware.

VI. CONCLUSIONS AND THE WAY FORWARD

A. Botnet

Botnets will continue to dominate security landscape
in years to come for sure. The need of the hour is to
scrupulously plug the existing loopholes to decimate the
threats of botnets. Cyber criminals will certainly innovate
newer mechanism to spread the botnet but a vigilant security
model in place which takes care of intrusion prevention and
detection will alleviate the risks in long term.

B. Tor

Popularity of Tor is ever increasing and its supporters are
ardent advocates of the internet freedom. Hence, prognosis
of Tor project looks good. But, the Tor infrastructure must
be regularly updated to deal with new contingencies and
impinge on its anonymity model. Much to the chagrin

[18] ”White paper: Remote AccessAttack Vectors- Threats, Findings and

Remedies”

[19] Wiﬁ malware- http://www.computerworld.com/article/2844286/wi-ﬁ-trafﬁc-can-be-used-as-covert-communication-channel-for-malware.html
[20] Nicolas Christin, ”Traveling the Silk Road: A measurement analysis

of a large anonymous online marketplace”

of
repressive regimes who don’t prefer activists using
Tor to voice their opinion, are the one looing for new
way to scuttle or hack the Tor infrastructure. Also, off
late, hackers have increasingly made efforts to inﬁltrate
Tor and spread malware through it. As it
is an open
source project, Tor needs a vibrant and thriving community
of volunteers which can keep it going strongly and faithfully.

C. VPN

VPN has become the de facto standard for secure
access to digital infrastructure. There are wide range of
VPN deployments across the world using a gamut of
technologies. As expected with any popular technology,
VPNs are also prone to vulnerabilities as Heartbleed virus
which was mentioned above. There is a pressing need to
create global standard for VPN which adheres to stringent
security ideals in implementation and in practice.

D. Wi-Fi

Use of Wi-Fi and its complimentary technologies have
spread like wildﬁre. Organizations across the world are
exhorting their members to move to BYOD model. Hence,
it becomes imperative to ensure that Wi-Fi access is safe
and authorized. Also, there is scope for newer techniques
and models to be used in Wi-Fi for ensuring secure network
alarms.

REFERENCES

[1] Amirali Sanatinia, Guevara Noubir, ”OnionBots: Subverting Privacy
Infrastructure for Cyber Attacks, in Proceedings of the IEEE/IFIP
International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks
(DSN15), 2015.

[2] Ahmad Karim, Syed Adeel Ali Shah, Rosli Bin Salleh, Muhammad
Arif, Raﬁdah Md Noor and Shahaboddin Shamshirband, ”Mobile
Botnet Attacks an Emerging Threat: Classiﬁcation, Review and Open
Issues”

[3] Botnets and TLS - http://www.mailchannels.com/2010/03/all-about-tls-encrypted-spam-part-1/
[4] Rustock Articles on web
[5] Malwarebytes and Sentrant, ”Anonymizing VPN Services as a Botnet

Monetization Strategy”

[6] Zheng Bu, Pedro Bueno, Rahul Kashyap and AdamWosotowsky,

”Whitepaper- The new era of Botnets”

[7] Michael Bailey, Evan Cooke, Farnam Jahanian, Yunjing Xu and

Manish Karir, ”A Survey of Botnet Technology and Defenses”

[8] Brett Stone-Gross, Marco Cova, Lorenzo Cavallaro, Bob Gilbert, Mar-
tin Szydlowski, Richard Kemmerer, Christopher Kruegel and Giovanni
Vigna, ”Your Botnet is My Botnet: Analysis of a Botnet Takeover”

[9] Botnet - http://us.norton.com/botnet/
[10] Botnet - https://www.f-secure.com/en/web/labs global/botnets
[11] Hola VPN - http://fortune.com/2015/05/29/hola-luminati-vpn/
[12] Brian Wippich, ”Detecting and Preventing Unauthorized Outbound

Trafﬁc”

[13] Damon McCoy1, Kevin Bauer1, Dirk Grunwald1, Tadayoshi Kohno2
and Douglas Sicker, ”Shining Light in Dark Places: Understanding
the Tor Network”

[14] Vincenzo Ciancaglini, Marco Balduzzi, Max Goncharov and Robert

McArdle, ”Deeweb and Cybercrime

[15] ”Android malware using TOR”, http://www.pcworld.com/article/2102080/
android-malware-using-tor-anonymity-network-makes-a-debut.html
[16] Markus Huber, Martin Mulazzani, and Edgar Weippl, ”Tor HTTP

Usage and Information Leakage”

[17] Ritika kajal, Deepshikha Saini and Kusum Grewal, ”Virtual Private

Network”

