The Ethics of Hacking: Should It Be Taught?  
Nicole Radziwill, Jessica Romano, Diane Shorter, and Morgan Benton 

Poor software quality can adversely affect application security by increasing the potential for a 
malicious breach of a system. Because computer security and cybersecurity are becoming such 
relevant topics for practicing software engineers, the need for educational opportunities in this 
area is steadily increasing. Universities and colleges have recognized this, and have started to 
offer programs in cybersecurity. At face value, these new programs may not appear 
controversial, but developing their curriculum requires answering a complex ethical question: 
Should programs teach hacking to their students? Even though there are different types of 
hackers, media reports of cybersecurity incidents tend to reserve the “hacker” label for cyber 
criminals, which overlooks the value in hacking (and, by extension, teaching students to hack). 
This article examines the full spectrum of hacking behavior, as well as arguments for and 
against including hacking in education programs, and recommends that hacking skills be 
considered an essential component of an education and practice in software quality assurance. 

Key words: application security, cybersecurity, ethics, hacking, software engineering, software 
engineering education 

INTRODUCTION 
The definition of “hacker” has evolved since the beginning of computing. Traditionally, the term 
was used to refer to a radical programmer who aggressively explored creative solutions to 
problems. However, Falk (2014) and Prasad (2014) explain that hackers are now generally 
divided into two categories: “white hat” and “black hat” (a distinction that originated at McAfee 
Corporation, developer of virus protection software). White hats use their talents to subvert 
criminal activities, while black hats use their abilities for malicious and illegal purposes. They 
introduce a third category: the “gray hat” hacker who gains unauthorized access to computing 
resources for the express purpose of helping organizations identify and resolve security issues. 
Although this type of hacker is not specifically malevolent, they do gain unauthorized access to 
the computing resources they feign to exploit, and so operate in an ethical gray area. 

Despite their intentions of goodwill, gray hat hacking can have unsettling social consequences. 
In the spring of 2015, CNN reported that cybersecurity consultant Chris Roberts was detailed 
after allegedly hacking into the control systems of more than 20 United Airlines commercial 
flights (Perez 2015). Even though he claimed that his actions were intended solely to raise 
awareness of critical security issues in the aircraft’s software, it is not difficult to imagine the 
negative consequences that might arise if a malevolent “black hat” hacker attempted the same 
things. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Security has long been a key aspect of software quality assurance. Khan (2010) characterizes the 
taxonomy of testing as including tests for correctness (based on features and use cases), 
performance, reliability, and security. He includes “ethical hacking” at the same level as security 
auditing, risk assessment, and penetration testing. Others (for example, Alexander 2003) have 
promoted using “misuse cases” as a mechanism to enhance the sensitivities of software 
designers. The Certified Software Quality Engineer (CSQE) Body of Knowledge includes 
security in six different elements of its taxonomy, but does not prescribe the approaches that can 
or should be taken to ensure secure software (ASQ 2008). 

The question, then, is not whether attention to (and education about) security is significant, but 
whether hacking skills specifically should be promoted as a means to develop skills in assurance, 
application design, and quality assurance. 

ETHICAL THEORIES APPLIED TO HACKING 
Whether “ethical hacking” even exists lies at the core of this question. Falk (2014) examined 
ethical objections to gray hat hacking using three ethical theories: utilitarianism, Kant’s maxims 
and categorical imperative, and Aristotle’s virtue ethics. Utilitarianism considers the outcomes of 
an action or behavior and asks whether it optimizes pleasure while minimizing pain. Because 
only black hat hacking seeks to maximize the pain inflicted on other parties (typically 
technological or political), it is the only variant of hacking considered unethical in terms of 
utilitarianism.  

Kant’s maxims establish personal rules for self-conduct that are similarly appreciated by others, 
and his categorical imperative explores the underlying motivations for actions (whether they are 
motivated by good or by ill). Using this basis for judgment, the black hat hacker is also the only 
one demonstrating unethical behavior. However, Kant might consider the actions of the black hat 
to be ethical, if through malicious intent and illegal channels a hacker seeks to weaken or slow 
the advance of an enemy (or terrorist).  

Aristotle’s virtue ethics approach asks whether an actor is exercising his or her virtues (which 
could also loosely be considered skills or talents) to perform a “morally right action.” Clearly, 
white hats and gray hats both believe their intent is morally right, but in the case of the gray hat, 
the organization whose resources are being exploited may not feel this way. Perhaps even black 
hats feel that their actions are morally right as well, particularly if they are taking down an 
enemy. 

Despite the inherent subjectivity of these considerations, Falk (2014) argues that the gray hat 
hacker is just a black hat in a morally ambiguous state. She recommends that “gray hacking is a 
morally wrong action and as such should be neither condoned by administrators, managers, or 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other personnel, nor practiced by well-meaning computer professionals.” By extension, since 
these techniques should not be practiced, she would also argue that they should not be taught. 

OTHER ARGUMENTS AGAINST TEACHING HACKING 
Most hackers don’t start off with malevolent intent, or the hopes of gaining information to sell 
for a profit. After interviewing six black hat hackers, Xu, Hu, and Zhang (2013) discovered that 
the pursuit of hacking often starts off with innocent motives, such as simply wanting to know 
more about computers, or being able to modify school computers to allow playing games even 
though it was against school policy. Hacker groups formed as clubs on campus, starting with 
students who were just curious, to others who were interested in learning how to steal exam files 
from professors’ computers. Though these hackers started without ill intent, “since they were 
rarely caught and disciplined, they formed the moral value that as long as they do no harm to 
others, it is not wrong to benefit themselves” (Xu, Hu, and Zhang 2013). 

This is a dangerous precedent to set. Teaching hacking in schools provides young people (who 
may not have developed their own abilities in ethical reasoning) the tools and the knowledge to 
access secure networks. With this knowledge, they may stumble into black hat situations and 
face legal consequences. For example, in April 2014, a Western University student was caught 
after hacking into the Canada Revenue Agency (the Canadian equivalent of the U.S. Internal 
Revenue Service). Although he was a very bright student, his ethical reasoning was influenced 
by a previously established moral value, his lawyer argued. At 14, the student had hacked into 
his school board’s computer systems and had not been punished for it, sending him the message 
that it was “OK to hack” (Bogart 2014; Ha 2014). 

Another problem is that some students view hacking as a game, or as an easy way to achieve 
personal benefits, even though the damage it can cause is tremendous. Turgeman-Goldschmidt 
(2008), while exploring the sense of meaning hackers get from their pursuits, noted that they are 
often motivated by a sense of competition with other developers as well as the highly adrenalized 
sensations that come from experiencing thrills and fun. In the fall of 2014, a Georgia Tech 
student was caught altering the public calendar of a rival school’s football team to say “Get Ass 
Kicked by Georgia Tech” on a particular game date. It was not reported, however, whether the 
computer engineering student learned his hacking skills in class or as a hobby (Johnson 2015). 
An electrical engineering student at Purdue reported using his hacking skills to change his grades 
on more than one occasion (Weinstein 2014). Another student used his hacking skills to hijack 
webcams to catch young women in various stages of undress (Humphries 2008).  

The impacts of hacking are sensitive and highly context dependent. Hacking is a “conscious 
activity dependent on specific technical skills, operational knowledge of computers, networks, 
and advanced technological understanding” (Sharma 2007). Given the current age of moral 

 
 
 
 
 
    
 
uncertainty and relativism, Sharma uses cognitive and criminological theories to argue that ethics 
and the ability to differentiate between ethical and unethical behavior should be introduced to 
educational programs as early as possible. However, he stops short of recommending that 
hacking be part of the curriculum. 

These examples show that younger students may not have the maturity or ethical reasoning to be 
entrusted with the tools to access and manipulate secure networks. However, conversely, perhaps 
this provides an even stronger case for engaging young students in the practice of ethical 
reasoning by stimulating their interest in hacking. 

THE BENEFITS OF INSTRUCTIONAL HACKING 
Some researchers and practitioners argue for the benefits of including hacking in educational 
programs, pointing out that as the Internet of Things expands and technology is increasingly 
embedded in people’s daily lives, the threat of cyber attacks also increases. As hackers “develop 
sophisticated methods to penetrate security efforts, the threats of cybersecurity breaches [will] 
continue to have a large prominence in the minds of management teams across all types of 
businesses” (Beckett 2015). These proponents pose the question: How is an organization 
supposed to effectively defend against hackers when their technical staff knows very little about 
hacking?  

At the same time, the job market for security professionals is on the rise and cybersecurity has 
become a national priority in the United States. According to a Price Waterhouse Coopers study, 
the cost of cybersecurity for businesses has doubled in the past four years (Beckett 2015). 
Attention to these issues is now seen as “a tangible way to contribute to the national security 
effort. For academia, it is also a changing environment when universities can play a role in 
enhancing the corporate and military abilities to respond quickly to threats” (Kallberg 2013). The 
workforce requirements are expected to increase significantly over the next decade; it will be 
natural for universities to seek targeted ways to make cybersecurity education broadly effective 
(Fourie et al. 2014). 

White hat hacking is already being supported, at least informally, at some schools. For example, 
students from the Sa d Business School at the University of Oxford are helping find ways to 
identify and treat Ebola patients in Africa. In cooperation with healthcare workers and 
experimental versions of vaccines, “software developers are now part of the campaign, putting 
together novel tools which could save lives” (Baraniuk 2014). 

Programs focusing on ethical hacking are also starting to emerge. Pike (2013) interviewed 206 
industry professionals in cybersecurity to obtain guidance for “ethical hacking” educational 
programs, and discovered that support for integrating hacking into the curriculum was 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
unanimous. He also identified several critical success factors for making these programs work. 
These include modeling ethical behaviors, cultivating social interactions and relationships with 
white hat interest groups and law professionals, engaging in competitions where ethical 
reasoning must play a role, ensuring that successful individual and team efforts receive 
recognition, and providing ongoing skills development for hackers. Some educators have 
proposed specific principles and methods for integrating technical education with the 
development of ethical reasoning skills (Bratus, Shubina, and Locasto 2010). 

Even though cybersecurity professionals are currently in high demand, specialized programs are 
limited, and nearly all computer science programs do not require cybersecurity coursework to 
graduate. Furthermore, effective education will be strongly interdisciplinary, requiring “cyber 
defense research teams to address not only computer science, electrical engineering, software 
and hardware security, but also political theory, institutional theory, behavioral science, 
deterrence theory, ethics, international law, international relations, and additional social 
sciences” (Kallberg and Thuraisingham 2012). Addressing the emerging national and 
international challenges will require a broader approach to enhancing exposure, which may not 
be achieved through dedicated cybersecurity programs. 

Regardless of whether or not students are taught hacking skills, hackers will still exist. If the 
practical skills associated with hacking or cybersecurity are not taught in schools, it means that 
all hackers will be self-taught in their technical skills and will be less likely to devote the same 
interest and attention to ethics and ethical reasoning in the context of cybersecurity. If hacking 
becomes a part of educational curricula, at least the schools and universities that include the 
material will have the ability to teach ethical hacking, promoting conscious ethical practices and 
lowering the likelihood that students will use their knowledge maliciously.  

CONCLUSION 
The expanding workforce pressure for computer and cybersecurity professionals, the steady 
increase in overall risk and increase in the potential for risk exposure, and the ethical and 
practical considerations discussed in this article all suggest a general consensus that ethical 
hacking should be taught in educational programs. The lingering debate is, if hacking is taught in 
schools, will it breed cybersecurity professionals who will keep networks and economies safe? 
Or, will it just give more young people the means to become black hat hackers?  

Based on the ethical theories considered earlier, one practical approach to mitigate this risk 
would be for educational programs to focus on navigating the moral and ethical concerns of gray 
hat hacking scenarios. “Ethical hackers” would still be educated to have the same deep technical 
skills and abilities as black hat hackers, and may even perform identical operations. However, 
they would learn their skills in the context of different hacking scenarios, and be required to 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
explore the complex context of their technical decisions with respect to all stakeholders 
(including society in general).  

Software quality professionals know that security considerations must be factored into the design 
and development of software applications. Their skills in security could be strengthened even 
further by developing additional proficiency in hacking techniques while exploring ethical 
reasoning to fully understand the boundaries between white hat and gray hat situations. There is 
a need for case study development to support this path. 

REFERENCES 
Alexander, Ian. 2003. Misuse cases: Use cases with hostile intent. Software IEEE 20, no. 1:58-
66. 

American Society for Quality (ASQ). 2008. Certified Software Quality Engineer (CSQE) Body 
of Knowledge. Available at: http://asq.org/cert/resource/docs/csqe_bok.pdf. 

Baraniuk, Chris. 2014. Hackers fight Ebola. New Scientist 224, no. 2996:23-24. 

Beckett, Phil. 2015. An intelligent approach to security. Network Security 2015, no. 2:18-20. 

Bogart, Nicole. 2014. Hacker charged in CRA heartbleed breach straight-engineering 
student. Global News (April 16). Available at: http://globalnews.ca/news/1274997/hacker-
charged-in-cra-heartbleed-breach/. 

Bratus, Sergey, Anna Shubina, and Michael E. Locasto. 2010. Teaching the principles of the 
hacker curriculum to undergraduates. In Proceedings of the 41st ACM Technical Symposium on 
Computer Science Education, 122-126. 

Falk, Courtney. 2014. Gray hat hacking: Morally black and white. CERIAS Tech Report, 2004-
20. Lafayette, IN: Center for Education and Research in Information Assurance and Security, 
Purdue University.  

Fourie, Leon, Hinne Hettema, Paul Watters, Hossein Sarrafzadeh, Tamsin Kingston, and 
Shaoning Pang. 2014. The global cybersecurity workforce: An ongoing human capital crisis. 
16th Annual International Conference on Managing in an Interconnected World: Pioneering 
Business and Technology Excellence, Baku, Azerbaijan. 

Ha, Tu Thanh. 2014. Student accused in CRA case engaged in ethical hacking in high 
school. The Globe and Mail (April 17). Available at: 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/student-accused-in-cra-case-engaged-in-ethical-
hacking-while-in-high-school/article18053586/. 

Humphries, Matthew. 2008. Student caught hacking Webcams while fixing laptops to spy on 
women. Geek (August 7). Available at: http://www.geek.com/news/student-caught-hacking-
webcams-while-fixing-laptops-to-spy-on-women-577162/. 

Johnson, Joe. 2015. Georgia Tech student indicted for UGA website hack. Online Athens 
(January 1). Available at: http://onlineathens.com/sports/college-sports/2014-12-30/georgia-tech-
student-indicted-uga-website-hack. 

Kallberg, Jan, and Bhavani Thuraisingham. 2012. Towards cyber operations: The new role of 
academic cyber security research and education. In IEEE International Conference on 
 Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), 132-134.  

Khan, Mohd Ehmer. 2010. Different forms of software testing techniques for finding 
errors. International Journal of Computer Science Issues 7, no. 3:11-16. 

Perez, Evan. 2015. FBI: Hacker Chris Roberts claimed to hack into flights CNN (May 18). 
Available at: http://www.cnn.com/2015/05/17/us/fbi-hacker-flight-computer-systems/index.html. 

Pike, Ronald E. 2013. The “ethics” of teaching ethical hacking. Journal of International 
Technology and Information Management 22, no. 4:4. 

Prasad, S. Tulasi. 2014. Ethical hacking and types of hackers. International Journal of Emerging 
Technology in Computer Science & Electronics (IJETCSE) 11, no. 2:24-27. 

Sharma, Rahav. 2007. Peeping into a hacker’s mind: Can criminological theories explain 
hacking? ICFAI Journal of Cyber Law 6, no. 4:34. 

Turgeman-Goldschmidt, Orly. 2008. Meanings that hackers assign to their being a 
hacker. International Journal of Cyber Criminology 2, no. 2:382-396. 

Weinstein, Adam. 2014. College hacker gets jail for changing his grades to straight As. Gawker 
(March 3). Available at: http://gawker.com/college-hacker-gets-jail-for-changing-his-grades-to-
str-1535130942. 

Xu, Zhengchuan, Qing Hu, and Chenghong Zhang. 2013. Why computer talents become 
computer hackers. Communications of the ACM 56, no. 4:64-74. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
