International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN FOR A
SMALL TO MEDIUM SIZED HOSPITAL
Charles DeVoe1 and Syed (Shawon) M. Rahman, Ph.D.2

1 Capella University, Minneapolis, USA

cdevoejr@capellauniversity.edu

2Computer Science Faculty, University of Hawaii-Hilo, Hilo, USA
and Adjunct Faculty, Capella University, Minneapolis, USA

ABSTRACT

SRahman@Hawaii.edu

Those  that  do  are  poorly  trained  and ill  equipped.

Most  small  to  medium health  care  organizations  do  not have  the  capability  to  address  cyber  incidents
These  health  care
within  the  organization.
organizations  are  subject  to  various  laws that  address  privacy  concerns,  proper  handling  of  financial
information,  and Personally  Identifiable  Information. Currently an  IT  staff  handles  responses  to  these
incidents in an Ad Hoc manner. A properly trained, staffed, and equipped Cyber Incident Response Team
is  needed  to  quickly respond to these  incidents to  minimize  data  loss,  and  provide  forensic  data  for  the
purpose of notification, disciplinary action, legal action, and to remove the risk vector. This paper1 will use
the  proven  Incident  Command  System  model  used  in  emergency  services  to  show  any  sized  agency  can
have an adequate CIRT.

KEYWORDS

Incident Response, Cyber Incidents, Incident Response Team, HIPAA, HITECH Act

1

Introduction

Many  small  to  medium  health  care  organizations  often  fail  to  see  the  need  for  a  Computer
Incident Response Team (CIRT) or feel they do not have the resources needed to implement one.
This paper will address the need and justification for a CIRT as well as explain how to implement
one  with  limited  resources.      First  there  will  be  a  discussion  considering  the  legal  implications
which  also  addresses  the  ethical  needs  for  protecting  patient  information  including  Personally
Identifiable  Information  (PII).    Subsequent  to  this  a  brief  overview  of  the  Incident  Response
process  will  be  given.    The  following  sections  will  describe  the  methodology,  the  Emergency
Services Incident Command System (ICS), followed by an adaption of the ICS to the CIRT.  The
paper ends with a discussion of the skill set required by CIRT members and the tools they will
need.

1 This work is partially supported by EPSCoR award EPS-0903833 from the National Science

Foundation (NSF) to the University of Hawaii, USA
DOI : 10.5121/ijnsa.2013.5201

1

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

It is important to recognize that no institution is exempt from attack or compromise. In January
of 2012 the Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis Center (MS-ISAC) published its list of
emerging  trends  and threats  for  2012 [ HYPERLINK \l  "Pel12" 1 ].    The  MS-ISAC  lists the
following emerging trends and threats:

• Mobile devices and Applications – The use of mobile devices and applications continue

to grow.  As they grow so do the attacks and the attack vectors.

• Hacktivism – Attacks carried out by activist to send a political or social message.  Groups

•

•

include Anonymous and Lulz.
Search  Engine  Optimization  (SEO)  Poisoning - Cyber  criminals  will  take  advantage  of
the 24-hour news cycle to target visitors searching on the most popular keywords or sites
and  infect  users  via  sites  designed  to  look  like  legitimate  news  services,  Twitter  feeds,
Facebook  posts/emails,  LinkedIn  updates,  YouTube  video  comments,  and  forum
conversations. We expect cyber criminals to take advantages of notable news events such
as the London Olympics, U.S. presidential elections, and Mayan calendar predictions.
Social Engineering - The use of rogue anti-virus to entice users into clicking on malicious
links, fake registry cleanup, fake speed improvement software, and fake back-up software
mimicking popular personal cloud services.

• Advanced  Persistent  Threat - a  long-term  pattern  of  targeted  hacking  attacks  using
subversive  and  stealthy  means  to gain  continual,  persistent  exfiltration  of  intellectual
capital.
Spear Phishing Attacks – These attacks are targeted at particular individual and appear to
be legitimate emails.  This attacks are typically conducted by a person seeking financial
gain, trade secrets or sensitive information

•

Each  and  every  one  of  these  threats  has  a  human  element  to  it. Humans  unlike  machines,  do
make  mistakes,  are  prone  to  errors,  and  can  be  coerced  into  giving  out  information that  is
personal in nature or proprietary. Given all of this, there is no reason to believe that the number
of  incidents  will  decline;  in  fact,  given  the  ever  increasing  sophistication  of  the  hackers  it  is
believed the number of incidents will increase 1].

In April of 2011 it was reported that since 2009, 10.8 million people have been affected by data
breaches  according  to  The  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services.    These breaches
occurred in 265 separate incidents [ HYPERLINK \l "How11" 2 ].  Incidents include things like
loss  of  equipment,  improperly  handling  obsolete  data,  attack  from  a  hacker,  phishing,  social
engineering, and infection via email or visiting a malicious web site. Once an incident occurs it is
critical  that  it be  handled  properly  to determine  the  extent  of  the  problem  and  to  minimize  the
impact.

The  Information  Technology  (IT)  group  will  typically  focus  on  making  the  system  operational
again. That is, they will rebuild the system, clean the system to remove the infection, restore the
system from backup, block the attacking vector, or a combination of these. There is much more
that is needed to properly handle, the incident and ensuing investigation; forensic data is required
to determine what data if any was taken, by whom, and how.   Obtaining the evidence allows the
organization to determine what entities have been affected.  Additionally, it addresses if there is
the need for personnel actions, if law enforcement should be involved, or both. This information
can then be used by the organization to patch holes; change polices; or fix the problem.

2

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

For  these  reasons  a  dedicated  Cyber  Incident  Response  Team  (CIRT)  is  needed to  properly
respond  to  incidents  and  gather  evidence. A  CIRT  focuses  on  six  functions  Preparation,
Identification,  Containment,  Eradication, Recovery,  and  Follow  Up 3].    These  functions  will
assure a systematic and appropriate response enabling a rapid and thorough recovery, minimizing
the loss of data and downtime.   Following proper procedures will preserve system data such that
a  forensic  analysis  can  be  done.    This  analysis  will  provide  details  of  how,  when,  where,  and
what.  Knowing this the organization can prevent future incidents over the same attack vector and
detect  evidence  to  support  personnel  and  legal  actions. This  data  is  also  necessary  to  support
reporting requirements to individuals as well as regulatory agencies. It is imperative that senior
management supports the effort and provides proper authority to operate the CIRT.

1.1 Background of the Study

Most health care organizations have implemented and installed preventive measures that include
firewalls at the border, Intrusion Protection System (IPS), host based Intrusion Detection System
(IDS), anti-virus  software,  WEB  content  filtering  (i.e.  WebSense),  and  switched  networks
(segmenting  functional  groups).    End  users  have  been  trained  in  proper  procedure  and  the
safeguarding  of  information.    Strong,  effective,  policies  have  been  developed  to  protect
information.    Even  with  all  of  this  protection,  breaches,  infections,  and  human  errors  will  still
happen.    Equipment  is  lost,  stolen, or misplaced.    Anti-virus  software only detects  50%  of  all
viruses and is vendor dependent [ HYPERLINK \l "Vir12" 4 ]. New viruses are constantly being
developed and  old  ones  are  modified  to  avoid  detection.  Not  only  must  the  hospital  protect
corporate data and systems, it must also protect industrial control systems, and the physical access
electronic.  Even the best protection plans can be breached.

When  an  incident  is  discovered  in  the  current  system  an  ad  hoc  response  is  executed.    System
administrators and technicians who are untrained in incident response will first attempt to get the
system operational before attempting to preserve evidence or determine the extent of the breach.

2 Legal and Ethical Implications

While  many  laws  apply  to  computer  crimes  special  attention  must  be  given  to  the  rights  and
protections of the individual when responding to an incident. Of primary concern here are the 4th
amendment  protections  of  the  U.S.  Constitution,  the  Computer  Fraud  and  Abuse  Act,  and  the
Electronic Communications Privacy Act. Each incident should be approached form the point of
view  that  a  crime  has  been committed; this  provides  the  highest  level  of  diligence  and assures
proper evidence gathering.  It is imperative that the rights of the individual be protected so as to
not violate due process.

Additionally, the responder must be aware of their responsibilities and limits; one could actually
face criminal or civil penalties or legal action if proper procedures are not followed. This section
will address  these  concerns. The  content  in  this  section  is  not  meant  to  be  an  exhaustive
examination of the legal issues, it is meant to bring awareness about the laws involved.

2.1 HIPAA

The  hospital  is  a  covered  entity  under  the  HIPAA  privacy  rule.    As  such  the  Protected  Health
Information  (PHI)  of  patients  must  be  safeguarded  and  handled  appropriately.    Improperly

3

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

handing this information creates an incident.  PHI is any information that relates to the person’s
past,  present  and  future  health  condition,  the  care  received,  or  anything  to  do  with  payments.
Employment records are exempt 5].  There are no restrictions on de-identified information.

In general the data may be used and released to the individual; for treatment, payment, and health
care operations; for the public interest and benefit; and limited data sets where the PHI has been
removed.  In the case of the public interest or benefit, PHI may be released to law enforcement;
workers  compensation;  when  there  is  a  serious  threat  to  health  and  safety;  Health  oversight
activities;  Victims  of  abuse  neglect  or  domestic  violence;  and  for  Public  Health  Activities [
HYPERLINK \l "HIP09" 6 ] .  PHI is not to be used for marketing or any other unauthorized
purpose.

2.2 HITECH Act

The HITECH Act was implemented as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009.  Under this act HIPAA was strengthened to include fines, and a data breach notification 7].
In order to determine if a breach actually occurred the Hospital must perform an investigation to
determine what data may have been breached.  Civil Penalties are listed in Table 1:

Table 1 – List of HITECH Civil Penalties [ HYPERLINK \l "HIP09" 6 ]

Violation category

Each violation All such violations of an identical

provision in a calendar year

Did Not Know

Reasonable Cause

Willful Neglect—Corrected

$100–$50,000

$1,500,000

$1,000–
$50,000

$10,000–
$50,000

$1,500,000

$1,500,000

Willful
Corrected

Neglect—Not

$50,000

$1,500,000

2.3 Amendment IV

The  right  of  the  people  to  be  secure  in  their  persons,  houses,  papers,  and  effects, against
unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon
probable  cause,  supported  by  oath  or  affirmation,  and  particularly  describing  the  place  to  be
searched, and the persons or things to be seized.

The fourth amendment protections only apply in cases where law enforcement or the government
are involved 8].  Government involvement includes actions performed on behalf of a government
representative.  As an example of this, a system administrator can view the files on a server of a
user and there are no fourth amendment protections.  However, if a member of law enforcement
asks the same administrator to view those files the administrator is now working at the direction
of  law  enforcement  and  fourth  amendment protections  apply.    In  this  case  a  search  warrant  is
required.

4

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

It  should  also  be  noted  that  there  are  no  Fourth  Amendment  protections  in  all  cases  where  the
government  is  involved.    For  there  to  be  a  fourth  amendment  issue  there  must  first  be  a
reasonable expectation  of privacy. In  Katz  v.  United  States,  389  U.S. 347 (1967),  the  Supreme
Court  held  that  the  Fourth  amendment  protects  people  not places.    Justice  Stewart  issuing  the
majority opinion stated: "What a person knowingly exposes to the public, even in his own home
or  office,  is  not  a  subject  of  Fourth  Amendment  protection.  But  what  he  seeks  to  preserve  as
private,  even  in  an  area  accessible  to  the  public,  may  be  constitutionally  protected." [
HYPERLINK \l "Joh67" 9 ]
There  are  also  no  fourth  amendment  protections  for  items  that
are in plain view.

In the age of high technology with enhanced viewing capabilities the question of using thermal
imaging  devices,  highly  sensitive  listening  systems, Satellite  imagery,  etc. have  come  into
question.  In KYLLO V. UNITED STATES 10] Kyllo held that the use of a thermal imaging
camera to detect heat emanating from the home was a violation of the fourth amendment.  In this
case Agent William Elliott used an infrared camera from the public street to scan the residence to
detect the use if high intensity lights in an indoor marijuana growing operation. The government
argued that the camera only  measured the IR coming from the part of the structure that was in
plain view and thus did not violate any rights.  However, the justices applied Katz to this ruling
stating,  “We rejected such a mechanical interpretation of the Fourth Amendment in Katz, where
the  eavesdropping  device  picked  up  only  sound  waves  that  reached  the  exterior  of  the phone
booth. “  In concluding Justice Scalia stated “Where, as here, the Government uses a device that
is  not  in  general  public  use,  to  explore  details  of  the  home  that  would  previously  have  been
unknowable  without  physical  intrusion,  the  surveillance  is  a “search”  and  is  presumptively
unreasonable without a warrant.”

Interestingly in DOW CHEMICAL CO. v. UNITED STATES [ HYPERLINK \l "Bur86" 11 ]
the courts found that the use of aerial photography was acceptable: The Court notes that EPA did
not use "some unique sensory device that, for example, could penetrate the walls of buildings and
record conversations." Nor did EPA use "satellite technology" or another type of "equipment not
generally available to the public."

For  the  incident  responder  at  this  company  fourth  amendment  rights  are  not  of  much  concern
unless law enforcement or the government are involved.  In those cases it the responder needs to
be  aware  of  these  restrictions  and  assure  that  law  enforcement  is  acting  appropriately.      It  is
imperative that the employees react appropriately to request from law enforcement; should there
be  questions  or  issues  the  request  should  be  forwarded  to  the  legal  department  and  senior
management.

2.4 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act

This  is  the  first  law specifically  targeting  computers  and  computer  systems.  The  law  targets
systems  under  direct  control  of  a  federal  entity,  financial  institution,  or  computers  involved  in
commerce.  This  law  made  it  a  crime  to  gain  unauthorized  access  to  computer  system  to  gain
information  concerning  national  security,  financial  records,  or  information  from  any  agency
within United States government. Originally passed in 1984 this law has seen several revisions.

5

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

The  Computer  Fraud  and  Abuse  Act  (CFAA)  covers  crimes  where  the perpetrator  has
“knowingly accessed a computer without authorization or exceeding authorized access,” 12].  It is
generally  accepted  that  without  authorization  pertains  to  outsiders  (hackers)  while  exceeding
authorized access applies to insiders.  The CFAA covers seven areas:

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

obtaining national security information
compromising confidentiality
trespassing in a government computer
accessing to defraud and obtain value
damaging a computer or information
trafficking in passwords
threatening to damage a computer

The incident responder needs to be highly cognizant and fully aware if this law for two reasons.
The  responder  must  assure  that  they  do  not  break  the  law  by  exceeding  their authority  or
authorized  access.    Secondly,  the  responder  must  be  able  to  identify  potential  acts  of  criminal
activity.

2.5 Electronic Communications Privacy Act

2.5.1 THE ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS PRIVACY ACT

This law deals with the “Interception and disclosure of wire, oral, or electronic communications”
as stated in 18 U.S.C. § 2510-22 (Title I) (United States Code: Title 18,CHAPTER 119); Title I
of this law prohibits the interception of electronic communications. It also prohibits the use and
manufacture of devices intended to intercept electronic communications. However as with most
laws there are exceptions; the law provides Internet Service Providers (ISP) with the authority to
intercept communications “in the normal course of his employment while engaged in any activity
which is a necessary incident to the rendition of his service”. This law also provides procedures
for  law  enforcement  in  the  event  that  surveillance  of  electronic  communications  is  required.  It
also  prohibits  the  use  of  illegally  obtained  information  as evidence. This  law  was  originally
passed in 1986.

2.5.2

STORED COMMUNICATIONS ACT

18  U.S.C.  §  2701-12  (Title  II)  covers  “Stored  wire  and  electronic  communications  and
transactional records access” (United States Code: Title 18, CHAPTER 121). This law addresses
unauthorized access (including privilege escalation) for users who “…obtains, alters, or prevents
authorized access  to  a  wire  or  electronic  communication  while it  is in electronic  storage”. This
law  also  has exceptions  allowing  the  owner  of  the  system  for  maintenance,  backups,  and  other
needed services. Of interest in this section is that if the owner the system finds evidence of “…an
emergency involving danger of death or serious physical injury to any person” or in cases of child
exploitation. This law was originally passed in 1986.

2.6

Security Breach Notification

According to  The  National Council  of  State  Legislatures  “Forty-six states,  the  District  of
legislation
Columbia,  Guam,  Puerto Rico and 

Islands  have 

the  Virgin 

enacted 

6

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

requiring notification  of  security  breaches  involving  personal  information.” [ HYPERLINK \l
"Nat12" 13 ].    The  importance  here  is  that  the  organization  must  determine  what  data  was
breached and whom notification must go to.  It is in the best interest of the organization to keep
the number of notifications minimal to reduce cost and maintain a good reputation.

3 Cyber Incident Defined

NIST Special Publication 800-61 states, “A computer security incident is a violation or imminent
threat  of  violation  of  computer  security  policies,  acceptable  use  policies,  or  standard  computer
security practices.” For the purposes of this plan an incident will also be defined as any illegal
activity  involving  Hospital  computers,  data  or  both.    This  definition  assumes  that  adequate
polices are in place to protect the intellectual property of the organization; the PII of employees,
customers, and partners; and Protected Health Information (PHI) of patients.

Incidents  are  created  when  events  are  triggered  that  give  an  indication  of  an  adverse  action.
Events are things like IDS signature triggers, anti-virus detection, firewall detecting a host going
to  a  known  malicious  domain,  a  phishing  email  is  opened,  or  a  firewall  blocking  a  connection
attempt. Even something like a “slow computer” is an event. Not all events produce incidents
some are simply false positives. An example would be a web filter blocking certain content on a
web  page.    For  example,  a  user  visits  a  legitimate  site  like  cnn.com;  on  that  page  are  various
advertisements and links that redirect the user to other web sites.  If the browser attempts to pre-
fetch the links and resolve them it may appear an end user attempted to access an unauthorized
web site.  In reality, the user did no such thing.

Incidents  can  occur  at  random  times and  there  can  be  multiple  incidents  occurring  at  the  same
time.   The complexity of the incident can also vary as can the duration.   A simple virus infection
may only require cleaning the host while a data breach or discovery of illegal activity may take an
extensive investigation and lengthy remediation.  Finally, it is entirely possible to have multiple
incidents that are all connected and interrelated.  As can be seen, the response to the incident may
vary  in  size,  scope,  and  necessary  resources.    The incident  response  team  needs  the  ability  to
maintain control and grow as the incident grows.

In  addition  to  the  typical  cyber  incident  (i.e.  hacking,  malware,  data loss)  there  are  also  the
response to physical attacks.  These include things like theft, fire, flood, building collapse, bomb
threats, etc.

4

Incident Response Procedure

When responding to an incident it is important to only tell people who have a need to know about
the incident. It is possible that an insider is violating law or policy.  Allowing them to know they
are  being  watched  or  investigated  gives  them  the  opportunity  to  destroy  valuable  evidence.
Throughout the process take good notes.

4.1 Preparation

In the preparation phase user expectations are set, as well as assuring system administrators are
properly prepared.  This is also the place where polices are set for the IRT to include the scope,

7

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

responsibilities,  when  to  call  executives  management  and when  to  call  law  enforcement.    This
plan in fact is part of the preparation phase.

As part of the preparation it is imperative that a logon warning banner be placed on all systems.
This banner not only sets the expectation that end users will be monitored but it also serves notice
that there is no expectation of privacy.  By so doing, it makes the task of analyzing events much
easier as it removes the need to get approvals from senior management.

Also addressed here is the need to notify law enforcement and when.  There are times when Law
enforcement  must  be  notified,  for  example  when  there  is  a  serious  safety  or  life  threat  to  the
general public, in cases of child pornography, in cases of potential abuse to name a few.  There
are also reasons not to involve law enforcement.  In so doing the organization loses control of the
case; in fact there are now two cases with different objectives.  The organization wishes to get
systems  back  on  line  and  operational  while  law  enforcement  wishes  to  gather  evidence and
prosecute  a  crime.    In  this  case,  the  hospital  also  risks  equipment  seizure  by  the  authorities.
Finally, it may be desirable not to report the issue to eliminate negative publicity.
Policy must also be developed for critical systems such that there are regular backups.  This will
allow for restoration of the system should a compromise occur.

4.2

Identification

The goal here is to examine the events, analyze them, and determine if there is an incident.  As
mentioned previously, not all events are incidents.  Examples of this are phishing emails that are
not opened, a user on a Linux system surfing to a web site with a known windows exploit, and a
large increase in ftp traffic that is authorized.

4.3 Containment

The purpose of this phase is to eliminate further damage.  There is the short term  goal and the
long term goal.  In the short term the desire is to stop communications with the hacker, botnet, or
other external entity.  Additionally, the system needs to be isolated to stop the spread of the virus
or malware.  Some methods of doing this are to unplug the network cable, disable the switch port,
put in ACLs on routers or firewalls, and as a last resort unplug the power.  Unplugging the system
is not advised as this results in the loss of critical data and evidence concerning the running state
of the system.  Most importantly, try to keep a low profile, do not let the attacker now that you
have discovered their activity.

Also at this time make a system image to include the file system, and memory. When performing
forensic analysis later always use a copy of these images.  Keep the original pristine for evidence
purposes.  Take pictures of the area and the current state of the screen.

Long  term  containment  involves  applying  patches  to  the  affected  system  and  other  similar
systems.    Consider  changing  passwords  and  adding  firewall  rules.  Remove  any  accounts  that
were used by the attacker and shutdown hacker processes.  Subsequent to these actions the virus
or malware must be eradicated.

8

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

4.4 Eradication

During  eradication the  system  is  cleaned and attacker  artifacts  are removed.    This is  where the
forensic analysis will help.  If the malware can be identified a simple search on the internet will
reveal the characteristics of the malware. It may be necessary to use a VM or sand box to run the
malware and observe what it is doing.

Find the most recent clean backup to restore the system.  This backup should also be checked for
the presence of the malware or attacker.  If a rootkit was installed this will modify the operating
system  itself,  in  this  case  reformat  the  hard  drive  and  reinstall  the  operating  system.    Once  the
system is restored perform a vulnerability scan using Nessus and patch all vulnerabilities.

4.5 Recovery

Prior to putting the system back into production check the operation of the system against the test
plan and baseline documentation.  This should be done by the system administrator and the owner
of the system. The owner of the system makes the final decision on putting the system back into
production.  Once in production monitor the system closely and check carefully for signs of re-
compromise.
4.6 Follow Up

In the follow up phase the lessons learned are documented.  A report is generated detailing how
the  attacker  got  in,  what  was  done,  how  the  issue  was  found,  and  what  was  done  to  fix  it.    It
should also include recommendations to prevent future attacks by the same method.

4.7

Seven Deadly Sins

1. Failure to report or ask for help
2.
Incomplete or nonexistent notes
3. Mishandling or destroying Evidence
4. Failure to create working images
5. Failure to contain or eradicate
6. Failure to prevent re-infection
7. Failure to apply lessons learned.

5 Methodology

Responding  to  cyber  incidents is  much  like  responding  to  a  fire  or  medical  emergency.    In  all
cases  the  first  responders  must  assess  the  situation,  determine  what  resources  may  be  needed,
evaluate  the  severity  of  the  situation,  determine  a  strategy  and  tactics,  and  finally  assure  safe
operations.    The fire  and  emergency  services  have  been  responding  to  emergencies  for  many
decades  and  have  developed  very  good  procedures  and  methods  for  doing  so.  The  fire  service
uses an Incident Command System (ICS), which is proven and can be easily adapted for use in
cyber incident response. The ICS is designed to handle incidents of all sizes and complexity and
can grow and shrink as the incident grows and shrinks.

9

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

5.1 The Incident Command System (ICS)

The  fire  service  has  a  well-designed  and  proven  system  that  is  used  for  responding  to  various
incidents.  Cyber incidents can be thought of as fires within computer systems and networks.   As
such, it is a simple task to adapt the ICS to cyber incidents.

The ICS was  developed  in  the  1970’s  in  response  to several  catastrophic  fires  in  the  urban
interface in California 14]. This system is designed to allow inter-agency operation for incidents
small to large and complex. The ICS is based on following 14 management characteristics that
provide strength and efficiency to the total system [ HYPERLINK \l "FEM12" 15 ].

• Common  Terminology – Assures  that  all  participants  are  using  the  proper

terminology for incident response and required resources.

• Modular  Organization – This  allows  for  a  compartmentalized approach  that  allows
resources or functions to be brought in based on the complexity and severity of the
incident.

• Management by Objectives – Establishes all-encompassing objectives and goals
•

Incident  Action  Planning – Provides  a  centralized  approach  to  the planning  of the
response to the incident as well as setting priorities.

• Manageable Span of Control - Span of control defines how many people (or things)

•

each individual can manage.  The typical range is 3 to 7 with 5 being optimal.
Incident Facilities and Locations – Numerous and varied facilities may be needed for
incident, these include command posts, staging areas, rest areas, etc.

•

• Comprehensive  Resource  Management – This  means  to  maintain  a  comprehensive
view of resource utilization.  Resources in this case include equipment and personnel.
Integrated  Communications – Establishes a  common  communication system  to
address the equipment, systems, and protocols necessary to achieve integrated voice
and data communications.

• Establishment  and  Transfer  of  Command – In  the  beginning  of  any  incident
command (who is n charge?) must be established.  As the incident grows it may be
necessary to transfer the command, this requires a briefing that includes the current
status, the plan, and other important information

• Chain  of  Command  and  Unity  of  Command – The  chain  of  command  assures  that
subordinates  report  to  supervisors.    The  concept  actually  comes  form  the  military
where it is not desirable to have privates reporting to generals.

• Unified Command – This is a concept that allows various agencies and entities with

different functional, geographical and legal authority to work together.

• Accountability – This  is  management  of  personnel  and  resources  involved  in  the

incident.

• Dispatch/Deployment – Personnel and resources only respond when requested.
•

Information  and  Intelligence  Management – This  is  the  process of gathering,
analyzing,  assessing,  sharing,  and  managing  incident-related  information  and
intelligence.

The incident command sections are defined as follows 15]:

• Command – Incident Commander (IC), Public Information Officer, Liaison Officer

10

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

• Operations – Manages the tactical operations
•

Planning – Resources,  Situation,  Documentation  (Understanding  the  situation,
establish Priorities, and Strategy)

• Logistics – Communication, Food, Supply, Facilities
•
•

Finance/Administration – Procurement, Compensations, Claims, Cost
Intelligence/Investigations – Post incident investigation or intelligence gathering.

Not  all  components  of  the  ICS  are  invoked  at  every  emergency  incident. Each  component  is
invoked as needed. It is possible that the incident commander will also be the operations chief,
planning  chief,  logistics  chief,  and  finance  chief.      To  show  how  this  works  the  following
scenarios are provided.

Scenario 1 – The incident is a small shed (10 ‘ x 10’) on fire with no other structures, vehicles, or
combustibles  nearby.    A 5-man team  with  one  truck arrives; the  ranking  officer (Lieutenant)
assesses the  scene.    This  officer  assumes  the  role  of  incident  commander  (Command) and
develops a plan for fighting the fire (Planning).  He then directs the subordinates on the tactical
operations for extinguishing the fire (Operations).

Scenario 2 – A large two family home in a remote location is on fire.  The first arriving officer
(Lieutenant) takes  command  of  the  incident and  establishes  a  command  post. He  notes  the
structure  is  50%  involved  and  that  additional  resources  will  be  required.
The  incident
commander (IC) calls for additional teams to be deployed.   As the teams arrive a higher-ranking
officer  (Captain)  takes  over  the  command.    In  so  doing  he  is  briefed  by  the  lieutenant  before
assuming  command.    The  lieutenant  is  then  reassigned  to  the  operations  section  where  he  will
lead  an  attack  team.    Other  teams  are  assembled  to  supply  water,  and  provide  support  for  the
operations.    As  this  is  a  lengthy  incident,  the  logistics  section  is  established  to  provide
refreshments and food.

No  two  emergencies  are alike; it  is  possible  that  the  emergency  incident  may  also  require  law
enforcement, hazardous materials or environmental experts, medical, heavy construction, or any
It  should  be  noted  that  even  if  a  chief  is  called  in  by  captain  or
other  numerous  resources.
lieutenant the chief does not have to take over control of the incident.  The chief can act in an
advisory role. As  can  be  seen,  this  model  allows for  the  expansion  and  inclusion  of  these
resources as needed.    Additionally, recognizing the potential need for these resources allows for
pre-planning and establishing contacts.

5.2 Converting the ICS to Cyber Space

To convert the ICS from the fire service to the cyber world is a relatively straightforward process.
Of the 14 management principles 3 are modified slightly

•

•

Incident  Facilities  and  Locations – When  responding  to  cyber  incidents  the  need  for  a
well-known command post, staging areas, rest areas, etc. are not needed.  However, there
is a need for secured workspaces, forensics labs, and other such facilities. Additionally, it
is critical that a primary incident responder be assigned.
Integrated  Communications – A  communication  system  may  or  may  not  be  required
depending  on  the  type  of  incident  and  the  sensitivity  of  the  data.    The  plan  should
however address the need for multiple communication mediums.  That is, if the system

11

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

under attack is the phone systems or the email system there needs to be another means of
communication available.   This is also dependent upon the size of the geographic area
covered.

• Dispatch/Deployment – It  may  be  necessary  to  send  incident  responders  to  outreach
locations or remote sites.  In this case there must be control of who is sent where, with
what resources and mission assignments.

As with the management functions the sections are very straightforward as well.   In this section
the various roles will be spelled out as they pertain to cyber incident response.

Command – The Incident Commander (IC) is responsible for managing the incident from start to
finish.  Transfer of authority for a multi-day incident is not required.  The individual responsible
for the response will be available 24 X 7, however they are not required to be on site at all times.
The Public Information Officer will be utilized only on breaches that involve outside agencies or
the  public.    The Liaison  Officer is  typically  not  utilized.    The  function  of  this  officer  is  to
facilitate communications between agencies and leverage outside resources.   The liaison officer
may  be  needed  in  cases  where  law  enforcement  is  required  or  coordination  between  partner
organizations is required.

• Operations – Manages the tactical operations
•

Planning – Resources,  Situation,  Documentation  (Understanding  the  situation,  establish
Priorities, and Strategy)

• Logistics – Communication, Food, Supply, Facilities
•
•
•

Finance/Administration – Procurement, Compensations, Claims, Cost
Intelligence/Investigations – Post incident investigation or intelligence gathering.

To consider how this works in the realm of cyber incidents examine the following scenarios.

Scenario  1:    The  corporate  anti-virus  console  has  detected  a  piece  of  malware  on  an  end  users
computer.    The  system  administrator  notifies  the  IRT  who  sends  a  member  of  the  team  out  to
investigate.    The  responder  finds  the  malware, examines  the  system  for  compromise,  and
determines if further action is required.  He reports back to the manger who concurs.  The system
is then cleaned by the IT department and reinstalled.

Scenario 2: While reviewing log files the network administrator notices that one workstation is
downloading a large amount of data to an external IP address.   The incident response team gets
the  log  files  and  begins  analyzing  them.    They  find  that  the  files  are  being  sent  to a  personal
Roadrunner account.  This could now be an indication of a policy violation or illegal activity.  To
assure  the  investigation  is  handled  properly  the  legal  department  is  activated  along  with  HR
department. The CEO is informed of the downloads and based on the size they could potentially
contain sensitive information.  As the team continues to dig the find that one of the people in the
engineering department is downloading facility information so that he can work on this at home.
While not illegal, this is a violation of policy and will be handled by the supervisor and HR.

Scenario 3:  This scenario is the same as the previous only this time the employee is a clerk who
is downloading patient PPI.  The PPI includes names, Social Security numbers, addresses, billing
information (to include credit card numbers) and treatments.   In this case not only has corporate
policy been violated but laws may also have been broken.   Addressing this incident requires that

12

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

Legal, HR, Finance, facility security, and senior management be involved.  Senior managers may
decide to call in law enforcement to assure that data and evidence are collected and gathered in
accordance  with  proper  procedures.      As  the  investigation  progresses  it  is  determined  that  the
employee is taking the data and selling to identify thieves.   This now constitutes a data breach,
which requires the Public Information officer involvement.  In a coordinated effort the employee
will  be  arrested,  accounts  will  be disabled, facility  access  removed,  and  the  employee  will  be
fired.  Subsequently, press releases will be written and affected end users will be notified of the
breach by the Public Information office.  In this incident the CEO will be called in and will take
over control.  In so doing the ISO well have a meeting with the CEO who will be briefed on the
status and the plan.  The ISO will then focus on remediation and forensics while the CEO directs
others in preparing the legal, HR, and Public Information responses.

Using the above three scenarios one can easily see how the incident response can grow and be
managed  in  an  orderly  fashion.
It  should  be  noted  that  even though  the  CEO is  called into an
incident the  CEO  does not  have  to  take  over  control of  the incident. His  function  could  be  an
advisory one.  In the case of all serious incidents the CEO should be notified. One should also
consider the situation where there are multiple incidents occurring at the same time.  Using this
model a unified command post is established with individual teams reporting back.  Again, the
system can grow as needed.

6

Incident Response Team

6.1

IRT Member Skills

Incident  Responders  should  hold  at  least  one  reputable  forensics  certification  available  from
organizations  like  SANS,  GIAC  Certified  Forensics  Analyst  (GCFA),  or  International
Association of Computer Investigative Specialist (IACIS) Certified Forensic Computer Examiner
(CFCE).    In  the  opinion  of  the  author,  the  independent  certifications  are  better  than  the  ones
offered up by vendors like EnCase.

6.2 Lab

When building an incident response laboratory one needs to assure that the facility is secure and
only used by authorized individuals.  All investigations should be treated as if they will be used
for the enforcement of a crime. The key is to remember the need to know rule, thus restricting
investigators to knowledge of only their own investigations.  Some things to consider are:

• Locking evidence cabinets.
• Locking room
• TEMPEST Certified – Not necessary, but nice to have.  In this regard it may be
advantageous to implement some of the features to make the investigative room
more secure.

• Workstations with ample work space (approximately 150 sq. ft.)
• Limited view of workstation screen.
• Budgeting  for  additional  systems  each  year  to  maintain  compatibility  with

hardware and software advancements

• An inventory of Operating Systems to include old and obsolete systems.
• Regulated Access.

13

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

There  should  be  adequate  numbers  of  forensics  workstations.    It  is  recommended  that  the
Forensic Recovery of Evidence Device (FRED) from Digital Intelligence be used as the forensic
workstation. More information can be found at http://www.digitalintelligence.com/products/fred/.
Figure 2 depicts an image of the FRED.  As can be seen this is not a typical workstation and has
many features needed to perform a forensics investigation. In Addition to the FRED the system
also needs a copy of Forensic Tool Kit (FTK) for performing the investigations and analysis. The
FRED cost $6,000 and FTK for one year is $4,000.

Figure 1 Forensic Recovery of Evidence Device [ HYPERLINK \l "Dig12" 16 ] (FRED)

6.3

Jump Kit

The  Jump  Kit  contains  the  tools  and  utilities  needed  to  respond  to  an  incident. The  jump  kit
should be stored in a small suitcase or backpack and it should contain the following equipment:

Table 2 Jump Kit Contents

Item

Cost

Purpose

Traveler's  Choice  Rome  29  in.
Hardshell Spinner Suitcase
Dell Latitude E6220

Cat  6  Network  cables  (including
crossover)

Cisco 
Switch with sfp Fiber uplink

2960CG-8TC-L  Gigabit

to  hold and 

transport  Jump  Kit

Used 
Equipment
Laptop  to  be  used  for  Data  Gathering  and
analysis tools

$90

$800

$50

$700

Used to allow sniffing of the network activity.

Peripheral  cables—USB,  Firewire,
parallel, serial, console

$100

Used  to  connect  to  various  devices  and
provide data transfers.

BackTrack Live DVD

$0

Contains a clean version of Linux with many
pre-installed analysis and forensic tools

Notebooks, pens, pencils

$50

Notebooks should have numbered pages.

14

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

Item

Camera

Cost

$100

Purpose

Used  to  photograph  area  and  state  of  the
computer upon arrival.

1 Terabyte  Hard Drive

$120

Used to get forensic images.

UltraBlock 
Write Blocker

eSATA 

IDE-SATA

$400

Used during  the  acquisition  of  an  image  to
prevent writing to the original hard disk.

$20

Pliers, 

small

$100

Flashlight

Screwdrivers, 
Wrenches

Call List

Used  to  open  cases  and  systems.    May  be
needed for disconnecting or removing system.

A list with the names and contact information
of all Team Members, Additional Resources,
and outside contacts.

In addition to this the kit shall also have a Corporate Credit Card with $5,000 limit.

6.4 Recommend Software tools.

a)

Linux/Unix tools

• R-Linux
• BackTrack
•
dd command
•
SleuthKit
• WireShark

b)

Windows Tools

• VMWare Player
•
ProDiscover
• Hex Edit
• WireShark
•
steghide
•
stegdetect
•
Sawmill
•
FINALeMAIL

6.5 Additional Resources

6.5.1 HUMAN RESOURCES.

The HR department should be involved in cases of policy violation, illegal activity, or both.

15

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

6.5.2

FINANCE

Will be used in the event resources, supplies, or equipment must be purchased

6.5.3 LEGAL

The Legal department should be contacted and involved in cases of data breach, illegal activity,
and when legal questions arise.

6.5.4 CEO

It is imperative that the CEO be involved in major incidents; CAT 1, CAT 2, and CAT 3 from
Table 2.  These incidents have a severe impact on the operation and reputation of the organization
as well as legal and personnel implications.

6.5.5

PHYSICAL SECURITY

Physical Security needs to be involved for cases of theft, unauthorized physical access, and cases
where employees are to be escorted off the premises.

6.5.6

PUBLIC RELATIONS

Public relations must get involved when there will be a press release or breach notifications.

6.5.7 LAW ENFORCEMENT

In the event that there is evidence of a crime the agency should have law enforcement contacts
documented.  Law enforcement should only be brought in by the legal department or the CEO;
unless the crime involves those individuals.

7

Initial Reporting.

When reporting an incident the following information is required. Sample form in Appendix
•
Point of contact information including name, telephone, and email address
•
Incident Category Type (e.g., CAT 1, CAT 2, etc., see table)
•
Incident date and time
•
Source IP, port, and protocol (If Known)
• Destination IP, port, and protocol (If Known)
• Location of the system(s) involved in the incident
• Method used to identify the incident (e.g., IDS, audit log analysis, system administrator,

end-user complaint)

• Description of the Incident.

8 Classifying and Prioritizing Incidents

i.

The US-CERT lists that reporting categories for US Agencies along with reporting time
requirements [17].  A category 1 incident carries the highest priority while a category 6
carries  the  lowest  priority.    It  is  useful  to  use  these  categories  as  a  guide  to  assigning

16

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

urgency remembering this is just a guideline.  These categories are listed and described in
table 3. It should be noted that for purposes of this organization CAT 3 and CAT 4 have
been exchanged.

Table 3 Incident Categories

Category Name
CAT 1

Unauthorized
Access

CAT 2

Denial 
of
Service (DoS)

CAT 3

CAT 4

CAT 5

Improper
Usage
Malicious
Code

Scans/Probes/
Attempted
Access

CAT 6

Investigation

Description
In  this  category  an  individual  gains  logical  or  physical  access
without  permission 
to  a federal  agency  network,  system,
application, data, or other resource
An  attack  that successfully prevents  or  impairs  the  normal
authorized  functionality  of  networks,  systems  or  applications  by
exhausting  resources.  This  activity  includes  being  the  victim  or
participating in the DoS
A person violates acceptable computing use policies.

Successful installation  of  malicious  software  (e.g.,  virus,  worm,
Trojan horse, or other code-based malicious entity) that infects an
operating system or application.
This category includes any activity that seeks to access or identify
a computer, open ports, protocols, service, or any combination for
later exploit. This activity does not directly result in a compromise
or denial of service
that  are  potentially  malicious  or
Unconfirmed
anomalous  activity  deemed  by  the  reporting  entity  to  warrant
further review.

incidents 

Table 4 prioritizes  the  various  systems  and  identities  the  risk. Criticality  is  a  measure  of  the
importance to the operation of the hospital.  Risk is a measure of how susceptible the system is.

System

Function

Table 4 – System Criticality

Email

Patient Care

Used  for  internal  communications  between  staff.
External  communications  to  vendors  and  partners.
PPI  and  PHI  are  not  authorized  using  email. The
email server is located in the DMZ and is running as a
bastion host.  The only services ports open are port 25

The patient care system includes patient check in, as
well  as  all  data  pertaining  to  treatments.    This
includes  scheduled  services  (i.e.  X-Ray,  Physical
therapy,  Lab,  etc),  prescribed  medications,  special
instructions.  Medications

Criticalit
y

Risk

low

high

high

low

Finance  and
Accounting

The  Finance  and  accounting  systems  interface  with
numerous  insurance  companies  as  well  as  the  credit
card processing facility

medium

medium

17

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

System

Function

Human
Resources

Public  Web
Server

Facilities

Desk Top

Human Resources systems contain the information on
all 
training,
qualifications, work schedules.

their  PPI,

employees 

including 

The  Public  Web  server  only  provides  basic
information about the hospital and its services. There
is  no  sensitive  information  on  this  system – the
system does not process payments

the  environmental  systems  within 

The  facilities  engineering  system  monitors  and
controls 
the
hospital.  It also monitors fuel levels, generator status,
and  levels  of  oxygen  in  the  storage  tanks.    It  is  not
connected to he internet, there is a dial up system for
remote management.

Desktop  systems  are  in  use  by  ordinary  users  who
may  not  recognize  the  risk  or  attempted  attack.
Typically, an attack on a desktop system will enable
an attacker to gain access to other resources.

Criticalit
y

Risk

low

low

low

medium

high

low

medium

high

Using tables 3 and 4 as a guide the analysts can now score incidents.  Start by assigning values as
follows high=1, medium=2, low =3; CAT 1=1, CAT 2=2, etc.  Criticality to the operation is of
more importance than the risk or exposure.  To obtain the score for the incident use the formula
score = CAT + (2 x Criticality) + risk.  These scores can then be used as a guide in prioritizing
incidents.

9 Conclusion

An incident response team is vital to the operation of any organization.  The organization does
not necessarily need all of the capabilities for a complete response, but it should know where to
turn  for  help  when  an  incident  occurs.    Realizing  that  a  cyber-incident  is  actually  a  cyber-
emergency,  one  can  then  apply  the  proven  techniques  of  emergency  response  and  emergency
management to the cyber incident.

The Incident Command System (ICS) has been in use in the Emergency services field since the
1970’s .  This model can be easily adapted to cyber incidents to allow a proper response to any
size incident. The major emphasis must be on planning, this allows the organization to determine
its abilities and limitations as well as identify additional resources that may be  needed.  Proper
planning  will  allow  the  organization  to  respond  rapidly,  properly,  and  provide  for  the  proper
mitigation and analysis.  The time to plan is before the incident, not during.

18

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

10 References

[1] William 

F 

Pelgrin. 

(2012, 

January)  Center 

for 

Internet 

Security.

[Online].

http://msisac.cisecurity.org/newsletters/2012-01.cfm

[2] Howard 

Anderson. 

(2011, 

April) 

Gov 

Info 

Security. 

[Online].

http://www.govinfosecurity.com/articles.php?art_id=3576&opg=1

[3] Karen Scarfone, Tim Grance, and Kelly Masone. (2008, March) National Institute of Standards and

Technology.

[4] Virus Total. (2012, June) Virus Total. [Online]. https://www.virustotal.com/statistics/

[5] HHS - Office  for  Civil  Rights.  (2003,  May)  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services.
[Online]. http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/summary/privacysummary.pdf

[6] HIPAA Administrative Simplification, October 2009.
(2012) 
[7] HIPAA 

Survival 

Guide. 

hipaasurvivalguide.com. 

[Online].

[8]

[9]

http://www.hipaasurvivalguide.com/hitech-act-summary.php
Jonathan  Marks.  (2012)  FindLaw.com.  [Online].  http://criminal.findlaw.com/criminal-rights/when-
the-fourth-amendment-applies.html
John  Stewart.  (1967,  October)  Cornell  Law  School
http://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/historics/USSC_CR_0389_0347_ZO.html

- Legal  Information  Institute.  [Online].

[10] Antonin  Scalia.  (2001,  June)  Cornell  Law  School
http://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/99-8508.ZO.html

- Legal  Information  Institute.  [Online].

[11] Warren 

Burger. 

(1986, 

May) 

Findlaw.com. 

[Online].

http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=476&invol=227

[12] Cornell 

University 

Legal 

Information 

Institute. 

[Online].

http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/18/1030

[13] National  Conference  of  State  Legislatures.  (2012,  December)  National  Conference  of  State
http://www.ncsl.org/issues-research/telecom/security-breach-notification-

[Online]. 

Legislatures. 
laws.aspx

[14] FEMA. 

(2008, 

May) 

FEMA 

training 

Materials. 

[Online].

http://www.training.fema.gov/EMIWeb/IS/ICSResource/assets/reviewMaterials.pdf

[15] FEMA. (2012) www.fema.gov. [Online]. http://www.fema.gov/emergency/nims/ICSpopup.htm
[16] Digital 

Intelligence. 

Intelligence. 

December) 

Digital 

(2012, 

[Online].

http://www.digitalintelligence.com/products/fred/
(2012)  US-CERT. 

[Online].

[17] US-CERT. 

requirements.html

http://www.us-cert.gov/government-users/reporting-

[18] Jaikumar 

Vijayan. 

[Online].
http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9225170/Tennessee_insurer_to_pay_1.5_million_for_breac
h_related_violations

ComputerWorld.com. 

March) 

(2012, 

[19] Moira  J  West-Brown  et  al.  (2003,  April)  US-CERT.  [Online].  http://www.cert.org/archive/pdf/csirt-

handbook.pdf

19

International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA), Vol.5, No.2, March 2013

Author
Author
Author

Charles  DeVoe is  a  CERT  analyst  with  the  Center for  Internet  Security,  MS-ISAC
Charles  DeVoe is  a  CERT  analyst  with  the  Center for  Internet  Security,  MS-ISAC
Charles  DeVoe is  a  CERT  analyst  with  the  Center for  Internet  Security,  MS-ISAC
division.  Charles has a Masters of information Security from Capella University and a
division.  Charles has a Masters of information Security from Capella University and a
division.  Charles has a Masters of information Security from Capella University and a
Bachelor  of  Science  in  Electrical  Engineering  from  Union  college,  Schenectady  NY.
Bachelor  of  Science  in  Electrical  Engineering  from  Union  college,  Schenectady  NY.
Bachelor  of  Science  in  Electrical  Engineering  from  Union  college,  Schenectady  NY.
Current  interest  are  information  security,  incident  response,  malware  analysis,  mobile
Current  interest  are  information  security,  incident  response,  malware  analysis,  mobile
Current  interest  are  information  security,  incident  response,  malware  analysis,  mobile
device forensics, and computer systems forensics
device forensics, and computer systems forensics
device forensics, and computer systems forensics

Dr.  Syed  (Shawon)  M.  Rahman is  an  assistant  professor  in  the  Department  of
Dr.  Syed  (Shawon)  M.  Rahman is  an  assistant  professor  in  the  Department  of
Dr.  Syed  (Shawon)  M.  Rahman is  an  assistant  professor  in  the  Department  of
Computer  Science  and  Engineering  at  the  University  of  Hawaii-Hilo  and  an  adjunct
Computer  Science  and  Engineering  at  the  University  of  Hawaii-Hilo  and  an  adjunct
Computer  Science  and  Engineering  at  the  University  of  Hawaii-Hilo  and  an  adjunct
faculty of School of Business and Information Technology at the Capella University.  Dr.
faculty of School of Business and Information Technology at the Capella University.  Dr.
faculty of School of Business and Information Technology at the Capella University.  Dr.
Rahman’s research interests include software engineerin g education, data visualization,
Rahman’s research interests include software engineerin g education, data visualization,
Rahman’s research interests include software engineerin g education, data visualization,
information  assurance  and  security,  web  accessibility,  software  testing  and  quality
information  assurance  and  security,  web  accessibility,  software  testing  and  quality
information  assurance  and  security,  web  accessibility,  software  testing  and  quality
assurance.  He  has  published  more  than  85  peer-reviewed  papers.  He  is  a  member  of
assurance.  He  has  published  more  than  85  peer-reviewed  papers.  He  is  a  member  of
assurance.  He  has  published  more  than  85  peer-reviewed  papers.  He  is  a  member  of
many professional organizations including ACM, ASEE, ASQ, IEEE, and UPE.
many professional organizations including ACM, ASEE, ASQ, IEEE, and UPE.
many professional organizations including ACM, ASEE, ASQ, IEEE, and UPE.

20
20
20

