Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

Mark Evans, Leandros A. Maglaras*, Senior Member, IEEE, Ying He and Helge 
Janicke 

School of Computer Science and Informatics, De Montfort University, Leicester, UK 
*Leandros.maglaras@dmu.ac.uk 

Abstract 

There  continue  to  be  numerous  breaches  publicised  pertaining  to  cyber 
security despite security practices being applied within industry for many 
years.    This  article  is  intended  to  be  the  first  in  a  number  of  articles  as 
research into cyber security assurance processes.   This article is compiled 
based  on  current  research  related  to  cyber  security  assurance  and  the 
impact  of  the  human  element  on  it.    The  objective  of  this  work  is  to 
identify  elements  of  cyber  security  that  would  benefit  from  further 
research  and  development  based  on  the  literature  review  findings.    The 
results outlined in this article present a need for the cyber security field to 
look  in  to  established  industry  areas  to  benefit  from  effective  practices 
such  as  human  reliability  assessment,  along  with  improved  methods  of 
validation  such  as  statistical  quality  control  in  order  to  obtain  true 
assurance.  The article proposes the development of a framework that will 
be based upon defined and repeatable quantification, specifically relating 
to  the  range  of  human  aspect  tasks  that  provide,  or  are  intended  not  to 
negatively affect cyber security posture.    

1.  Introduction  

Information  security  management  has  grown  significantly  over  the  last  25  years 
and  is  now  a  common  and  regular  item  within  the  public  domain.    With  buzz 
words  such  as  hacking  and  cyber  security  being  included  within  headlines  and 
being  a  common  topic  of  conversation  amongst  everyday  technology  users, 
information security is at the forefront of people’s minds.  The National Initiative 
for Cybersecurity Careers and Studies [1] defines cyber security within its glossary 
as ‘The activity or process, ability or  capability or state whereby information and 
communications systems and the information contained therein are protected from 
and/or defended against damage, unauthorized use or modification, or exploitation.   
These  security-related  terms  have  changed  over  the  years  as  information  security 
community leaders pushed the terms information security management through to 
information  assurance (IA) up the agenda  and eventually bursting into the public 
domain, including under its current guise of cyber security specifically addressing 
electronic aspects. However, the objectives have always been the same which is to 
primarily  protect  information  which  we  process  and  are  responsible  for.    Also, 
equally importantly there appears to be a lack of understanding within the security 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

community as to what cyber security actually is.  For example, Health Information 
Trust Alliance [2] states that ‘cybersecurity does not address non-malicious human 
threat  actors,  such  as  a  well-meaning  but  misguided  employee’.    Based  on  this 
observation this article focusses on the human factor of cyber security assurance. 
However, despite the huge surge in interest and acceptance of information security 
management,  incorporating  cyber  security,  there  still  appear  to  be  gaps  and 
weaknesses within industry and practice.  This is evident due to the large numbers 
of  significant  security  incidents  and  data  breaches  that  are  being  publicised  on  a 
regular basis including  recent  incidents  affecting Carphone Warehouse in August 
2015, TalkTalk in October 2015, Vtech in November 2015 and inadvertent email 
disclosure by the Bank of England in May 2015.  

As  a  result  of  the  continuing  publication  of  high-profile  security  breaches, 
organisations  are  increasing  focus  [3]  and  looking  for  ways  to  improve  their 
assurance  in  order  to  protect  their  brand  and  reputation,  as  well  as  to  prevent  or 
reduce  the  associated  financial  impacts  [4].    This  generates  a  picture  of  the 
inadequacy of current assurance methods for both industry and society.  Assurance 
techniques  and  approaches,  in  addition  to  technology,  are  required  which  will 
protect  organisations  and  the  public  as  a  whole  from  continuing  costly  cyber 
security  breaches.    There  exist  technology  related  breaches  occurring  due  to 
malicious  individuals  exploiting  vulnerabilities  in  technology  on  a  regular  basis 
and  these  are  expected  to  continue  [5]  as  these  security  hacks  are  now  quick  to 
appear  in  the  media  due  to  general  public  interest.    Interestingly,  and  perhaps 
surprisingly to those outside the security community, 50% of the worst breaches in 
the last year were caused by inadvertent human error, rising from 31% the previous 
year [5].  Therefore, half of significant security incidents that are occurring are due 
to  a  particular  element  which  has  not  changed  since  the  inception  of  information 
security management.  That element is people and the unintentional mistakes and 
errors that they make.   

1.1. Motivation 

The motivation for this article is to take a holistic look at the current status of cyber 
security  based  upon  published  research  and  recognised  survey  results  in  order  to 
identify  areas  of  weakness,  and  propose  areas  of  further  research  which  would 
advance the field of cyber security and therefore benefit wider society.  This article 
intends to  look  outside of the current  practices within  cyber security  and identify 
information  and  research  from  specialised  fields  and  industry  sectors  that  are 
established  and  proved  to  be  effective  that  could  be  potentially  applied  and 
assessed to understand whether positive improvements could be realised.    

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

1.2. Contributions 

This article makes the following contributions: 

1.  It  reviews  current  materials  relating  to  cyber  security  breaches,  assurance 

research and mechanisms and publishes findings  

2.  Looks  into  the  significance  of  the  human  element  on  cyber  security 

assurance  

3.  Proposes  further  research  using  non-standard  cyber  security  assurance 
mechanisms  that  are  currently  applied  within  other  fields  and  highlight 
possible implications such as resourcing overhead. 

The article from this point forward will be structured as follows.  The article will 
look  in  to  publicised  cyber  security  data  breaches  and  then  move  on  to  defining 
assurance  and  subsequently  identifying  current  assurance  methods  and  standards 
currently adopted by organisations.  The document will then progress on to human 
factor statistics pertaining to cyber security assurance and related human behaviour 
that  underpins  these  statistics.    The  article  then  moves  on  to  mechanisms  for 
measurement  and  assessment  used  outside  of  the  cyber  security  field  that  could 
benefit  the  current  state  of  cyber  security  based  on  the  negative  aspects  earlier 
captured within the article.    

2.  Publicised cyber security data breaches 

There have been significant volumes of serious healthcare related data breaches [6] 
despite  the  introduction  of  the  Information  Governance  Toolkit  (IGT)  with  7255 
NHS  data  breaches  between  2011  and  2014  [7]  and  showing  a  trend  of  volume 
increases whereby there was a 101% increase from 2013 to 2014 [8].  Outside of 
the  UK  the  trend  continues  with  unintentional  exposure  of  private  or  sensitive 
information being 83% higher for healthcare organisations than other industries but 
the lowest performing industry in incident response [9]. Dunn [8] also reported that 
93% of breaches were due to human error and 95% of data loss in the UK is due to 
the cultural factors of people [10]. 
The UK Government 2015 security breaches survey [5] found that there had been 
an increase in the number of security breaches from 81% of large organisations to 
90% indicating why security breaches are perceived to continue and be an expected 
element  of  business  now  and  in  the  future  that  cannot  be  completely  eradicated.  
The survey also identified that nearly 9 out of 10 large organisations surveyed now 
suffer some form of security breach suggesting that these incidents are now a near 
certainty.  The  report  also  stated  that  businesses should  ensure  they  are  managing 
the risk accordingly, and despite the increase in staff awareness training, people are 
as  likely  to  cause  a  breach  as  viruses  and  other  types  of  malicious  software.  

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

Interestingly the survey found that levels of security awareness delivered had gone 
up compared to the previous year even though staff related breaches had also risen.  
The survey showed that 72% of large organisations now deliver ongoing security 
awareness  training  to  their  staff  compared  with  68%  the  previous  year.    This 
highlights that simply pushing out standard security awareness information to the 
employees of an organisation is not an effective means of cyber security assurance 
in relation to human behaviour.  

3.  Assurance Definition 
According to the National Institute of Standards and Technology [11], assurance is 
defined  as  being  ‘Grounds  for  confidence  that  the  other  four  security  goals 
(integrity,  availability,  confidentiality,  and  accountability)  have  been  adequately 
met by a specific implementation.  Therefore, having that in mind, it is difficult for 
responsible people residing at the top of the organisational hierarchy such as Chief 
Executive Officers, Boards, Managing Directors, Owners and Senior Managers to 
have confidence or guarantee that the information that their respective organisation 
is  responsible  for  processing  is  adequately  secured.    This  issue  has  been 
compounded by the change of terminology used over the years including utilisation 
of the term assurance incorrectly where it is actually referring to the underpinning 
controls or countermeasures being applied.   
CESG  [12]  identified  four  elements  of  assurance  within  an  assurance  model.  
These four elements were intrinsic assurance, extrinsic assurance, implementation 
assurance  and  operational  assurance.    Based  on  the  published  cyber  security 
incidents and breaches in the areas of operational assurance and extrinsic assurance 
within the field of cyber security this article will focus on those areas.  CESG [12] 
defines  operational  assurance  as  the  activities  necessary  to  maintain  the  product, 
system  or  service’s  security  functionality  once  it  has  entered  operational  use.  
Extrinsic assurance is also defined as any activity independent of the development 
environment which provides a level of trust in the product, system or service.  

3.1. Assurance Methods  

There  seems  to  be  a  current  position  within  common  standards  whereby  security 
assurance  programmes  need  to  be  flexible  [13]  and  require  the  organisation  to 
determine  what  needs  to  be  monitored  and  the  method  of  monitoring  as  stated 
within  clauses  9.1a  and  9.1b  by  the  British  Standards  Institution  [14].    Standard 
assurance activities have been static for some time and not evolved at the pace of 
technology  and  cyber security.   It  is  essential to  have  an agile security  assurance 
framework  in  place  to  meet  the  needs  of  differing  organisations  and  bodies.  
However, the current frameworks are very broad and despite being in existence for 
some time does not appear to be fully addressing cyber security specific assurance 
requirements  as  the  breaches  and  statistics  outlined  in  this  article  have  shown.  

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

According  to  PWC  [5]  the  most  common  form  of  cyber  risk  assurance  is 
information  /  cyber  security  risk  assessment  with  64%  of  organisations  adopting 
this method.  This position entirely relies upon the level of experience available to 
the  organisation  to  interpret  requirements,  quantify  findings  effectively,  develop 
and  source  assurance  methods  and  tools,  and  finally  communicate  the  cyber 
security  status.    This  lack  of  consistency  and  clarity  means  that  very  few 
applications  of  cyber  security  assurance  are  the  same  and  therefore  the  industry 
could  benefit  from  a  more  prescriptive  hierarchy  of  standards.    These  standards 
should  offer  greater  practical  guidance  to  organisations  and  providing  clear 
quantification mechanisms for vulnerabilities associated with the human aspects of 
cyber  security  as  are  currently  in  place  for  technical  vulnerabilities  using  the 
Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS).  This survey response shows that 
methods  of  assurance  in  relation  to  cyber  security  have  not  changed  in  order  to 
match the current climate.  Despite schemes being developed to provide assurance 
for  Internet-facing  technology  such  as  the  CESG  Cyber  Essentials  Scheme  [15] 
there  is  no  wider  assurance  equivalent  and  also  no  published  methodology 
addressing the assurance required relating to the human factors of cyber security.  
This includes clear quantification, enabling levels of cyber security effectiveness to 
be  applied  and  acted  upon  in  a  consistent  manner.      These  factors  are  very 
important  as  human  interaction  is  still  an  essential  element  of  cyber  security 
despite the ever-changing technologies being made available to support assurance 
goals.  These human activities include routine processing of electronic confidential 
or  sensitive  data  through  to  the  regular  implementation  and  configuration  of 
technical changes by computer system support personnel.  This is a diverse range 
of  cyber  security-related  activity  that  are  essential  but  in  isolation  to  not  enable 
oversight and assurance. 
Based  on  published  scientific  papers  and  technical  reports  there  appears  to  be  a 
heavy  focus on implementing the underpinning security controls  which, although 
essential,  does  not  include  the  confirmation  that  that  these  controls  have  been 
applied correctly or as intended in order to attain assurance.  This again makes the 
point that greater emphasis needs to be applied to assurance activities rather than 
just application of controls.  An example of this is the McCumber cube [16] which 
has  been,  and  continues  to  be,  heavily  utilised  and  enhanced  within  information 
security practices.   

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

Figure  1. Conceptual model indicating assurance requirements  encompassing the 
McCumber Cube  

3.2. Common standards 

There  are  a  number  of  mechanisms  in  existence  and  operation  currently  which 
support  cyber  security  assurance  [17].    These  include  risk  assessment,  risk 
treatment, risk management, security testing and auditing.  Despite these numerous 
mechanisms,  news  of  high-profile  security  breaches  are  occurring  and  being 
publicised on a continuing frequent basis [18] and the impact of these breaches in 
financial terms doubled from 2013 to 2014 [19]. 
Research has shown that ISO/IEC 27001 remains the leading general standard for 
security management [5] and from a health perspective the key security standards 
underpinning the NHS Information Governance Toolkit are ISO/IEC 27001/2 [20].  
Also,  interestingly,  the  main  drivers  for  securing  sensitive  data  was  compliance 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

with  standards  [9]  rather  than  a  primary  desire  to  protect  the  data  for  the  right 
ethical  reasons.    Research  identified  that  51  of  the  63  Information  Security 
Assurance requirements within the UK Health and Social Care Information Centre 
(HSCIC) Information Governance Toolkit originated from the ISO27000 series of 
standards  including  ISO/IEC  27001  :2013,  ISO  27002:2013,  27005:2009  and 
associated  applicable  controls.      The  other  most  prominent  requirement  origins 
included  the  Data  Protection  Act  1998,  Caldicott  Report  and  Principles,  and  the 
NHS Information Security Code of Practice.  
Cherdantseva and Hilton [21] state ‘an attempt to cover the entire knowledge area 
forces  decisions  to  be  taken  that  may  launch  a  polemic’.  This  suggests  that  the 
current  broad  standards  based  on  the  principles  of  confidentiality,  integrity  and 
availability  are  too  broad  and  therefore  not  effective  specifically  in  relation  to 
cyber  security  which  is  a  view  supported  by  the  number  of  publicised  cyber 
security data breaches.  Originally the ISO/IEC 27001 standard, initially known as 
BS  7799-2,  was  utilised  to  address  business  continuity  planning  and  disaster 
recovery  testing  due  to  the  fact  that  no  accepted  standard  covering  this  area  was 
available.  Now with ISO 22301, Business Continuity Management, being utilised 
this has allowed security professions to quite rightly focus on the security aspects 
of  these  areas  rather  than  them  both  in  entirety  falling  within  the  availability 
principle.    With  other  overlapping  standards  that  can  be  certified  against  such  as 
ISO/IEC 20000-1:2011, Information Technology – Service Management, covering 
security  management  aspects  such  as  change  management,  release  management, 
asset management and also BS 10012, Personal Information Management, used to 
develop  a  personal  information  management  system  in  accordance  with  Data 
Protection  legislation.    Given  the  current  statistics  captured  within  this  article 
therefore    there  is  a  need  to  develop  a  framework  and  hierarchy  that  allows 
whereby formal certification and assurance in relation to cyber security should be 
both  re-scoped  and  also  made  more  stringent  in  order  to  provide  effective 
assurance.    This  would  also  include  specific  assurance  for  the  human  aspect  of 
cyber security assurance.  

4.  Current cyber security human factor statistics 
There  have  been  a  number  of  studies  and  surveys  undertaken  relating  to  varying 
aspects  of  cyber  security;  the  SANS  Healthcare  Cyber  Security  Survey  [9],  The 
Insider Threat Spotlight Report 2015 [22], Department for Business Innovation and 
Skills,  2014  Information  Security  Breaches  Survey  [19],  and  the  PWC  US 
Cybercrime  survey  [23]  to  name  but  a  few.  The  Insider  Threat  Spotlight  Report 
2015 [22] stated that companies were more concerned by inadvertent insider threat 
data leak breaches than malicious data breaches.  However, there is no evidence of 
this  level  of  concern  in  industry  and  the  cyber  security  community  in  terms  of 
change of practice.  According to the SANS Healthcare Cyber Security Survey [9], 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

51% considered the negligent insider as the chief threat.  Yet within the ‘Looking 
Forward’ section of the document there was no mention of human security testing 
and  in  fact  [23]  states  that  only  28%  of  organisations  are  conducting  employee 
monitoring.   
The  very  informative  PWC  2015  Information  Security  Breaches  Survey  [5] 
highlighted  significant  statistics  and  information  pertaining  to  staff-related 
breaches  which  featured  notably  in  the  survey.  Key  findings  included  that  three-
quarters of large organisations suffered a staff-related breach and nearly one-third 
of small organisations had a similar occurrence, which had risen up from 58% for 
large organisations and 22% for small organisations compared to the previous year.  
These statistics show the difficulty of applying cyber security controls concerning 
human  behaviour  and  interaction  with  confidential  and  sensitive  information.  
Within  larger  organisations  there  are  more  processes  to  assure  and  a  smaller 
number of information security personnel per employee.  To support this finding it 
was also found within the survey that 72% of companies where the security policy 
was  poorly  understood  had  staff  related  breaches,  which  again  could  be  down  to 
the low ratio of information security personnel to employees to be able  to clearly 
communicate  the  policy  to  all  staff.  The  PricewaterhouseCoopers  LLP,  US 
cybercrime: Rising risks, reduced readiness key findings from the 2014 US State of 
Cybercrime Survey [23] found that for healthcare, the number of respondents who 
reported unintentional exposure of private or sensitive information was 83% higher 
than overall respondents and a critical shortcoming for a highly regulated industry 
that deals in sensitive personal information. 
The  continued  evolution  of  technology  is  hugely  beneficial  globally  and  in  all 
areas of life.  However, these advances in technology, including a focus on ease of 
use  and  communication  have  brought  with  them  significant  changes  to  the  cyber 
security landscape including broader opportunities for people within organisations 
at  all  levels  access  to  information  and  also  made  it  easier  to  collate,  remove  and 
circulate vast volumes of sensitive data [24] at the touch of a button with very little 
organisational diligence and assurance. Research found that 92% of organisations 
allowed  access  to  calendar  and  email  via  mobile  devices.    However,  52%  also 
allow respondents to access health records information from mobile devices [9].  It 
was also publicised that 15% of large organisations had a security or data breach in 
the  last  year  involving  smartphones  or  tablets  which  is  up  from  7%  the  previous 
year [5]. 
Whilst  the  internet  and  email  has  revolutionised  how  people  communicate  in  the 
workplace, the rise of technology designed to improve collaboration, productivity 
and innovation has been matched by a rise of employee-related breaches affecting 
organisations.    It  was  stated  that  communications  and  collaboration  applications 
are  most  vulnerable  to  insider  attack  and  that  the  perceived  increase  in  insider 
attacks  is  due to  3 areas:  awareness/training, data on mobile devices,  and lack of 
data protection strategy or solution [22].  The PWC Information Security Breaches 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

Survey  [5]  also  reported  that  people  are  the  main  vulnerabilities  to  a  secure 
enterprise.  The  survey  respondents  believe  that  inadvertent  human  error  (48%), 
lack of staff awareness (33%) and weaknesses in vetting individuals (17%), were 
all  contributing  factors  in  causing  the  single  worst  breach  that  organisations 
suffered. Regardless of the motivation of an insider, be it a deliberate act of theft or 
designed  to  embarrass  an  organisation;  or  if  the  breach  was  inadvertent  due  to  a 
lack  of  internal  controls,  the  threat  from  ‘insiders’  has  not  diminished  across  the 
UK [5]. 
Delving  a  little  deeper  into  the  statistics  reveals  that  inadvertent  human  error 
caused half of the single worst security breaches for all respondents in 2015. This 
was  a  marked  increase  of  over  60%  year  on  year,  and  continues  the  trend  since 
2013 where accidental or inadvertent action by individuals was the main cause for 
the single worst breach [5].   The cyber security incidents that typically fly under 
the media radar are insider events.  It  was found that 28% of respondents pointed 
the  finger  at  insiders,  which  includes  trusted  parties  such  as  current  and  former 
employees, service providers, and contractors [23]. 
Although  there  is  evidence  of  empirical  studies  that  have  taken  place,  research 
found that only few have been performed in terms of IT governance [25] but also 
further  research  is  required  relating  to  human  behaviour  and  the  relationship 
between  social  influence  and  behavioural  intent  [26].    Shahri,  Ismail  and  Rahim 
[10] also highlighted that improving security within the healthcare organisation by 
adequate education and training can increase the basic knowledge and judgement 
of users about information security; and it can help to prevent the human errors and 
carelessness, but little empirical evidence supported these claims.   

5.  Human Behaviour  

Research  suggests  that  human  behaviour  is  not  consistent  and  can  be  strongly 
influenced by relationships, there is also a general naïve belief that bad things only 
happen  to  other  people  [26].    Research  also  found  that  people  were  willing  to 
undertake risky practices.  Individuals were actually rewarded as they were seen as 
helpful  for  allowing  an  event  to  take  place  without  applying  security  controls  or 
practice [27]. 
During  the  literature  review  research  into  other  aspects  of  assurance  and  human 
behaviour were also investigated.  These included the use of fear appeals and also 
user perceptions of risky behaviour pertaining to computer security.  Fear appeals 
are persuasive communications that include an element of fear in order to receive 
an outcome desired by management [26].   A positive fear appeal would promote a 
‘danger  control  process’  which  can  lead  to  a  successful  outcome  as  the  message 
recipient  undertakes  a  cognitive  process  to  avert  a  threat.    Fear  appeals  are 
traditionally  used  within  healthcare  and  marketing  such  as  to  promote  anti-

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

smoking.  Johnston and Warkentin [26] also outlined a Fear Appeals Model (FAM) 
incorporating  components  such  as  perceived  threat  severity,  perceived  threat 
susceptibility, response efficacy, self-efficacy, social influence which then leads to 
behavioural intent.  Johnston and Warkentin [26] also states that the study aids the 
practice of information security management by exposing the inherent dangers of 
user  autonomy  and  that  end  users  are  not  consistent  in  their  behaviours  which  is 
why a ‘one-size fits all’ approach to cyber security awareness and training does not 
offer  adequate  assurance.    A  view  that  is  backed  up  by  the  current  incident 
statistics highlighted earlier in this article.  Also associated with the human conduct 
aspect  of  cyber  security,  was  the  undertaking  of  risky  behaviour  whereby  people 
would undertake activity despite a known risk associated with the action.  Johnston 
and  Warkentin  [26]  state  that  individuals  exhibit  a  rather  naïve  belief  that  bad 
things only happen to other people and Aytes and Connolly [27] commented that 
the self-image of sophisticated, security-savvy users does not track very well with 
their training and actual behaviours.  In addition, there is a very interesting concept 
included by Aytes and Connolly [27] which stated: ‘The vast majority of the time, 
users  can  share  passwords,  open  e-mail  attachments  without  checking  them  for 
viruses, and so forth, with no negative consequences.  They are in fact rewarded in 
this  behaviour,  because  they  are  either  seen  as  helpful  (in  the  case  of  sharing 
passwords) or they save time (by not scanning for viruses).    
In relation to the fear appeal mechanism highlighted within this article, it has been 
shown  that  fear  appeals  [26]  in  isolation  do  not  provide  effective  or  adequate 
assurance,  as  per  its  definition  and  organisations  should  not  rely  upon  this 
mechanism.    The  message  could  be  misunderstood,  forgotten  or  even  ignored 
based on perceptions, relationships and social influence.  Therefore, this approach 
should be used as an alerting mechanism only and in order to introduce assurance 
requires feedback to the fear appeal sender to confirm compliance.  This could be a 
return  confirmation  message,  scan,  assessment,  report,  test  or  audit.    A  good 
to 
analogy  here  would  be 
confirm/guarantee  delivery  as  set  out  later  in  this  article.    Defined  assurance  is 
essential  for  effective  information  security  management  as  Aytes  and  Connolly 
[27]  state:  ‘The  findings  suggest  that  it  is  unlikely  that  computer  users  will 
significantly  change  their  behaviour  in  response  to  simply  being  provided  with 
additional information regarding computing risks and practices/ and ‘…likely that 
organisations will have to enforce compliance when the risks warrant it’. 

in  computer  networking 

the  use  of  TCP 

6.  Measurement and Assessment 

Metrics  within  cyber  security  is  very  important  as  it  enables  current  state  to  be 
quantified  and  subsequently  enable  understandable  and  repeatable  results  to  be 
communicated.  It also allows organisations to understand, or set, what is or is not 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

tolerable or acceptable.  An example of this is the use of the common vulnerability 
scoring  system  (CVSS)  [28]  which  is  used  to  establish  the  severity  of  known 
technical  security  vulnerabilities  within  computer  systems  and  software.    This 
allows  organisations,  following  a  technical  assessment,  to  identify  the  current 
vulnerabilities faced, confirm what is an acceptable level of exposure and address 
findings based on priority.  However, there is no equivalent to this with regard to 
human  behaviour  within  mainstream  cyber  security  practices  despite  security 
incidents  and  breaches  pertaining  to  insiders  equalling  those  relating  to  external 
threat actors. An example of a measurement technique used within some areas of 
industry is statistical quality control (SQC).   
Service organisations have lagged behind manufacturing firms in their use of SQC.  
The  reason  for  this  that  SQC  requires  measurement  and  it  is  difficult  to  measure 
quality  of  a  service  [29]  which  is  the  primary  reason  why  there  is  currently  no 
consistent  cyber  security  approach,  quantification  technique,  nor  associated 
accepted  value  with  regard  to  human  behaviour  and  its  vulnerabilities.    This 
information  is  essential  to  enable  organisations  to  make  quality  decisions.    For 
example, Rauscher  and  Cox [30] stated “My board has no way  of knowing what 
we should be spending on cyber security.  I could ask for 10 times as much or half 
of  my  budget”.    Also,  “…every  successful  quality  revolution  has  included  the 
participation  of  upper  management.    We  know  of  no  exceptions”.    The  PWC 
Information Security Breaches Survey [5] also found that 14% of respondents have 
never briefed their board on security risks, and in addition to this statistic 21% of 
organisations  have  not  briefed  their  board  in  the  last  year  showing  a  significant 
shortcoming  in  terms  of  business  leaders  being  able  to  provide  the  assurance 
required  as  outlined  earlier  in  this  article.    It  was  also  commented  that  some 
activities, whereby direct results cannot be measured, or feedback will be delayed, 
rendered  it  ineffective  as  management  information.  An  example  of  this  could  be 
the  handling  of  patient  identifiable  information  or  other  protected  or  classified 
material [31].   
As already stated, currently within the cyber security community there are defined 
mechanisms  for  assessing  threats,  vulnerabilities  and  risks  in  relation  to  tangible 
aspects  such  as  computer  systems  and  physical  environments.    With  regard  to 
human behaviour the cyber security community generally appears to be accepting 
of  the  fact  that  there  is  no  mainstream  mechanism  for  assessment  and 
quantification.    However, within some industries this has been addressed through 
the  use  of  human  reliability  assessment  (HRA)  and  numerous  underpinning 
techniques  that  have  been  developed.    HRA  involves  the  use  of  qualitative  and 
quantitative  methods  to  assess  the  human  contribution  to  risk  and  has  been  used 
within high reliability industries such as petro-chemical, nuclear and aviation [32].  
According  to  Gu  et  al.  [33]  human  reliability  is  a  term  used  to  describe  human 
performance such as the ability of a human to complete a given task without any 
errors in given conditions in a given time period. Gu et al. [33] also states that the 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

human factors of people involved in  information security  can be  categorised into 
cognition,  physiology,  psychology  and  ability  and  also  demonstrates  how 
incorporating HRA in to the risk assessment function significantly affects the risk 
assessment output.  This  could  subsequently affect  the resultant  activity taken by 
an  organisation  and  again  emphasises  the  importance  of  reliable  assurance 
activities  and  information.    French  et  al.  [34]  support  this  view  as  they  state  that 
effective HRA not only complements sound technical risk analysis of the physical 
systems, but also helps organisations develop their safety culture and manage their 
overall  risk.    Indeed,  arguably  it  is  through  this  that  HRA  achieves  its  greatest 
effect.    There  are  many  varied  methods  available  for  HRA  and  one  of  these  is 
called Human Error Assessment & Reduction Technique (HEART) which is a first 
generation HRA developed in 1985 with subsequent techniques further developed 
and adapted from HEART. 
HEART is well validated error analysis and quantification technique [32] utilised 
in order to provide proactive quantification of human behaviour.  It is intended to 
be  a  fast  an  easy  method  for  identifying  the  risks  associated  with  human  error.   
Therefore, HEART should  be a technique which is  applicable to  any  situation or 
industry where human reliability is important, such as cyber security. 
HEART  matches  the  identified  task  to  one  of  eight  generic  task  categories  [35].  
These are: 

I. 
II. 

Totally unfamiliar, performed at speed with no idea of likely consequences 
Shift or restore system to a new or original state on a single attempt without 
supervision or procedures. 

III.  Complex task requiring high level of comprehension and skill. 
IV. 
Fairly simple task performed rapidly or given scant attention. 
V.  Routine, highly-practiced, rapid task involving relatively low level of skill. 
VI.  Restore or shift a system to original or new state following procedures, with 

some checking. 

VII.  Completely familiar, well designed, highly practiced routine task occurring 
several  times  per  hour,  performed  to  highest  possible  standards  by  highly 
motivated,  highly  trained  and  experienced  person,  totally  aware  of 
implications of failure, with time to correct potential error, but without the 
benefit of significant job aids. 

VIII.  Respond correctly to system command even when there is an augmented or 
automated  supervisory  system  providing  accurate  interpretation  of  system 
stage 

 The  HEART  process  then  requires  the  analysist  or  assessor  to  identify  the 
applicable error producing conditions (EPC’s) from a list of options ranging from 
‘little  or  no  independent  checking  or  testing  of  output’  through  to  ‘operator 
inexperience’.  From this information calculations and formulae embedded within 
HEART are used to establish an overall human error probability (HEP) value to the 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

identified  task.    The  HEART  technique  key  elements  within  the  quantification 
process are shown in Figure 2. 

Classify Generic Task Type 

Assign a nominal 
Human Error 
Probability (HEP) to 
the identified task 

Determine Error 
Producing 
Conditions (EPC)  
that may affect the 
identified task 

Determine the 
Assessed Proportion 
of Affect (APOA) for 
each EPC  

Calculate the HEP for 
the identified task 

Figure 2. HEART quantification process 

HEART  is  an  established  first  generation  technique  for  predicting  human 
reliability  and  identifying  ways  of  reducing  human  error.    It  should  be  possible 
based on the HEART process to relatively easily apply this technique to the cyber 
security filed for cyber security affecting tasks performed by people.  The HEART 
methodology takes in to account the task and the person performing the task rather 
than the technical process.  However, the scope and error focus of the assessment 
may  be  too  narrow  [34]  through  the  application  of  a  first  generation  technique.  
Second and third generation HRA techniques consider wider contexts in terms of 
the environment and human emotion.  The assessment must take into account the 
aggregated effect of people performing multiple tasks which may introduce greater 
likelihood of a cyber security breach or incident. 

7.  The Proposed Framework 

Due to the large number of data breach cyber security incidents, it is evident that 
further  research  needs  to  be  undertaken  to  establish  why  such  a  large  number  of 
security incidents are due to human behaviour.  The lack of formal cyber security 
assurance  relating  to  human  behaviour  set  out  within  this  article  is  a  significant 
area of concern.  There is use of the term assurance but in some cases this appears 
to  be  entirely  focussed  upon  the  underpinning  security  controls  with  greater 
emphasis on the technical elements.  This approach doesn’t provide real assurance 
through  activities  including  assessment,  quantification  and  reporting  in  order  to 
provide  confirmation  that  that  these  controls,  including  to  address  the  risk  of 
human error, have been applied correctly or as intended.   
As shown by the publicised cyber security incidents and breaches it is evident that 
the  current  common  security  standards  leveraged  by  organisations  to  adequately 
cater for human error and the associated vulnerabilities, despite current prominent 
reports  and  surveys,  require  enhanced  focus  and  attention  relating  to  human 
behaviour  and  error  aspect  of  cyber  security.    For  example,  one  of  the  35  main 
security categories outlined within BS ISO/IEC 27002:2013 specifically addresses 
technical  security  weaknesses  (12.6  Technical  Vulnerability  Management)  but 
there 
to  human  factor 
vulnerabilities.  Key  cyber  security  areas  should  be  defined  and  refined  through  a 
separate modular certification approach rather than rely upon standards such as BS 

is  no  equivalent  within 

the  standard  pertaining 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

ISO/IEC  27002:2013.    These  standards  are  too  broad  and  overlap  with  other 
related standards as outlined in this article.  Effective modular assurance could be 
achieved  through  separate  certification  for  cyber  security  practices  based  on  the 
distinct differences in current incidents and breaches. 
Given the volumes of human factor related cyber security breaches and incidents, it 
is  evident  that  the  use  of  cyber  security  awareness  training  is  important  but 
organisations  should  consider  how  effective  this  approach  is  in  isolation  if  the 
number  of  these  breaches  and  incidents  continue  to  increase  and  whether 
awareness  alone  is  effective  in  the  current  climate  or  whether  this  should  be 
enhanced through a cyber security human reliability assessment. Boards and senior 
management  should  consider  whether  they  are  taking  sufficient  steps  to  ensure  a 
culture  of  strict  and  effective  security  pertaining  to  human  error  as  internal, 
accidental factors remain the largest cause of cyber security breaches [5]. 
A  technology  scenario  where  return  confirmation  rather  than  a  one-way 
communication,  as  a  form  of  assurance,  has  been  applied  is  the  use  of  the 
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) within TCP/IP (Internet Protocol) computer 
networking.  TCP is one of the main protocols in TCP/IP networks. Whereas the IP 
protocol deals only with packets, TCP enables two hosts to establish a connection 
and exchange streams of data. TCP guarantees delivery of data and also guarantees 
that packets will be delivered in the same order in which they were sent.  Without 
the  use  of  TCP  there  would  just  be  an  assumption  that  the  connection  had  been 
successfully  established  and  data  delivered.    Another  computer  networking 
protocol  which  does  not  undertake  message  receipt  confirmation  is  the  User 
Datagram Protocol (UDP); a connectionless protocol which provides a direct way 
to  send  and  receive  data  and  is  used  primarily  for  broadcasting  messages  over  a 
computer  network.    Therefore,  a  cyber  security  analogy  using  these  protocols 
would be: 

  TCP - Security Manager of an organisation sends out an email alert to staff 
asking them to remove all client personal data from their desktop computer 
hard drives and store it on networked file servers where the data is secured 
and backed up on a regular basis.  However, the Security Manager also asks 
the  message  recipients  to  acknowledge  receipt  and  understanding  of  the 
instruction and confirm when the task has been completed. 

  UDP  –  Security  Manager  of  an  organisation  sends  out  a  broadcast  email 
alert  to  staff  asking  them  to  remove  all  client  personal  data  from  their 
desktop computer hard drives and store it on networked file servers where 
the data is secured and backed up on a regular basis. 

Obviously  the  UDP  form  of  confirmation  is  much  quicker  and  requires  less 
management and interaction, however the Security Manager in the scenario above 
would not be able to provide assurance that the task had been completed or even 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

the instruction received by the intended recipients.   Whereas, the TCP form would 
require confirmation to be sent to the Security Manager that would allow a greater 
degree  of  assurance  that  the  instruction  had  been  received  by  the  intended 
recipient, understood, and that the staff members believe they have complied with 
the  requirement.    In  order  to  attain  full  assurance  a  form  of  independent  testing 
would need to be undertaken with results checked and communicated.  Only then 
could  the  organisation  really  provide  assurance  that  all  personal  data  had  been 
moved on to the central server as per the instruction. 

Figure 3.1. TCP Connection Process  

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

Figure 3.2. Assurance process 

Organisations  generally  now  understand  that  they  should  be  measuring  and 
monitoring  their  security  controls  through  common  channels  now  such  as 
penetration  testing,  vulnerability  assessment,  risk  assessment,  audit,  patching 
reports,  incident  statistics,  and  anti-virus  software  updates  and  coverage  with 
internal  audit and information/cyber risk assessment being the most common [5].  
These  forms  of  assurance  are  definitely  required  and  essential  but  when  the 
management  information  they  are  providing  is  analysed  they  are  ultimately 
retrospective and technology focussed.  Therefore, the human error with regard to 
cyber  security  has  been  found  to  be  either  too  difficult,  not  able  to  provide 
financial reward, or felt to be not required despite the headlines we are often faced 
with.      Human  reliability  assessment  methodologies  and  techniques  have  been 
developed and implemented within other industries but not cyber security to date.  
Methodologies  such  as  HEART  were  developed  approximately  20  years  ago  but 
still have not flowed in to mainstream information security practice in addition to 
the  use  of  formal  measurement  techniques  such  as  Statistical  Quality  Control 
(SQC) which are common in manufacturing environments [29].  The difficulties of 
quantifying human reliability within cyber security have not been developed and is 
not currently within mainstream information security practice.  The cyber security 
community should include a greater focus on quantification of all areas, including 
human reliability, to provide clear quality management information to Boards and 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

senior  management  within  organisations  which  in  turn  will  allow  greater  cyber 
security assurance to be attained.  
With  some  technique  modification,  including  adjusting  evaluation  focus  to  the 
human error potential  pertaining to  the use of, and concurrent  access  to,  multiple 
data  stores  and  applications  which  could  result  in  cyber  security  incidents  and 
breaches,  the  adaption  of  HEART  or  another  HRA  technique  could  benefit  the 
cyber security community. 
In  order  to  provide  real  assurance  there  must  be  a  cyclic  or  return  flow  of 
information between the instigator and elements within scope of the activity, but in 
many  cases  this  is  not  the  case.    For  example,  in  order  to  provide  assurance  an 
instruction  must  be  communicated,  a  change  implemented,  a  form  of  check 
undertaken, and the results of the check confirmed against the initial instruction as 
can be seen below in Figure 4.   

Instruction 
Communicated 

Results 
Confirmed 

Change 
Implemented 

Check 
Undertaken 

Figure 4. Basic Assurance Cycle 

This article has shown that a defined assurance model is required that interconnects 
with  the  models  already  developed  such  as  the  McCumber  cube  in  order  to 
enhance cyber security as shown in  Figure  1.   Following the literature  review an 
assurance  framework  is  proposed  that  integrates  human  reliability  assessment, 
statistical quality control and a vulnerability scoring system that pertains to human 
rather than technical vulnerabilities.  The framework should also be suitable for all 
cyber  security  affecting  tasks  performed  by  humans  from  routine  processing  of 
personal data through to technical application of security updates by administrative 
personnel.    Further  research  and  development  in  this  area  should  be  undertaken, 
and  as  well  as  looking  at  the  actual  framework  should  also  research  methods  of 
completion  that  could  potentially  ease  the  resourcing  burden  associated  with  the 
task.  Based on an organisational compliance program associated with human error 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

related  to  the  protection  of  electronic  systems  and  data  tests  are  proposed  to 
establish the comparable accuracy of the assessment being performed by a security 
professional,  non-security  personnel  and  also  employee  self-assessment.    A 
conceptual  high-level  model  of  the  proposed  assurance  framework  is  shown  in 
Figure 5. 

Figure 5. Proposed high-level cyber security human vulnerability model 

There  is  an  overhead  associated  with  the  proposed  assurance  framework  in  that 
organisations  are  required  to  invest  in  applying  greater  resources  and  time  to 
meeting  assurance  requirements.    This  will  therefore  require  greater  focus, 
attention and expenditure within cyber security assurance as this framework is not 
looking  to  introduce  efficiencies  but  to  enhance  effectiveness  which  at  this  time 
comes  with  increased  resource  obligations.    These  resource  requirements  could 
come  from  internal  resources  or  be  external  independent  resources  as  undertaken 
currently as part of technical security testing techniques.   

8.  Conclusion 
As outlined within this article, organisations and society continue to be affected by 
both  regular  and  similar  cyber  security  breaches.    These  breaches  pertain  to 
technical  implementations as well as routine processing of confidential  electronic 
information.  Despite this range of activities, it has been proven that half of these 
have human error at their core. Therefore, there should be increased empirical and 
theoretical research in to human aspects of cyber security based on the volumes of 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

human error related incidents in order to establish ways in which mainstream cyber 
security practice can benefit.   
This  article  has  demonstrated  that  there  is  further  research  required  in  to  cyber 
security  assurance  and  quantification  in  relation  to  human  factors  to  develop  an 
effective  assurance  framework.    This  approach  would  benefit  the  field  of  cyber 
security as a common useable solution is not currently available and organisations 
are relying upon independent skills and knowledge of individuals.  It is proposed 
that  a  specific  framework  is  developed  based  upon  defined  and  repeatable 
quantification specifically relating to the range of human aspect tasks that provide, 
or  are  intended  not  to  negatively  affect  cyber  security  posture.      Techniques  that 
this  framework  should  be  built  upon  include  human  reliability  assessment, 
statistical  quality  control and a cyber security human aspect  vulnerability scoring 
system.  In conclusion, the cyber security community should continue to progress 
and develop but it must not forget its roots and the obvious statistics that indicate 
we have not  yet addressed the risks associated with the one consistent element of 
cyber security, the human error.   

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

9.  References 

Big 

Data 

2015 

2014. 

PWC. 

Survey.  

Security 

Breaches 

Breaches. 

Brother  Watch. 

[1]  National  Initiative  for  Cybersecurity  Careers  and  Studies.  Explore  Terms:  A 
Glossary  of  Common  Cybersecurity  Terminology  [Online]  https://niccs.us-
cert.gov. Available from: https://niccs.us-cert.gov/glossary [Accessed 03/12/2015]. 
[2]  Health  Information  Trust  Alliance.  Healthcare’s  Model  Approach  to  Critical 
Infrastructure Cybersecurity. 2014. https://hitrustalliance.net. 
[3]  KPMG.  “Cyber  Security:  Are  consumer  companies  up  to  the  challenge?”. 
2014. http://www.kpmg.com 
[4]. Cabinet Office. Cost of cyber crime study 2011. https://www.gov.uk 
Information 
[5] 
https://www.gov.uk/government 
[6]  Murphy  M.  NHS  tops  the  list  for  serious  data  breaches  last  year  [Online] 
Available 
ComputerworldUK.com. 
from:http://www.computerworlduk.com/security/nhs-tops-list-for-serious-data-
breaches-last-year-3607138/[Accessed 06/06/2015] 
[7] 
NHS 
http://www.bigbrotherwatch.org.uk/wp-content/ 
[8]  Dunn  J.    Data  breaches  in  UK  healthcare  sector  double  since  2013,  ICO 
numbers  show.  2014.  [Online]  Computerworld  UK.com.  Available  from: 
http://www.computerworlduk.com/news/security/data-breaches-in-uk-healthcare-
sector-double-since-2013-ico-numbers-show-3589814/ [Accessed 06/06/2015] 
[9]  Filkins  B.    New  Threats  Drive  Improved  Practices:  State  of  Cybersecurity  in 
Health  Care  Organizations.  2014.  https://www.sans.org/reading-room.  SANS 
Institute 
[10]  Shahri  A,  Ismail  Z,  Rahim  N.  Security  Effectiveness  in  Health  Information 
System:  Through  Improving  the  Human  Factors  by  Education  and  Training. 
Australian Journal of Basic and Applied Sciences 2012, 6(12): p. 226-233. 
[11]  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology.  NISTIR  7298,  Revision  2,  
Glossary 
2013. 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications:  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology 
Interagency or Internal Report 7298r2. 
[12] CESG. Good Practice Guide No. 30 Assurance of ICT Systems and Services. 
2012. CESG Information Assurance Portal. 
[13] Information Security Forum. Information Security Assurance-An overview for 
implementing an information assurance programme. 2010. https://www.isflive.org 
[14] British Standards Institution. BS ISO/IEC 27001:2013 Information technology 
– Security techniques – Information security management systems – Requirements. 
London: British Standards Institution (BSI) 
[15]  CESG.  Cyber  Essentials 
https://www.cesg.gov.uk/servicecatalogue/cyber-essentials/Pages/cyber-
essentials.aspx [Accessed 03/12/2015] 

cesg.gov.uk.  Available 

Information 

[Online] 

Security 

Terms. 

from: 

Key 

of 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

[16]  Maconachy  W  et  al.  A  Model  for  Information  Assurance:    An  Integrated 
Approach.  Proceedings  of  the  2001  IEEE,  Workshop  on  Information  Assurance 
and Security, United States Military Academy, West Point, NY 
[17]  Department  for  Business  Innovation  and  Skills.  UK  cyber  security  research 
report. 2013. https://www.gov.uk 
[18]  HM  Government.  FTSE  350  cyber  governance  health  check  tracker.  2013.   
https://www.gov.uk 
[19]  Department  for  business  innovation  and  skills.  2014  Information  Security 
Breaches Survey.  https://www.gov.uk 
[20] Health and Social care Information Centre. Checklist Guidance for Reporting, 
Managing  and  Investigating  Information  Governance  and  Cyber  Security  Serious 
Incidents Requiring Investigation v5.1. 2015. https://www.igt.hscic.gov.uk 
[21]  Cherdantseva  Y,  Hilton  J.  A  Reference  Model  of  Information  Assurance  & 
Security.  In  Availability,  Reliability  and  Security  (ARES)  2013  Eighth 
International Conference on. p. 546-555. IEEE (2013) 
[22]  Information  Security  Community  on  LinkedIn.  Insider  Threat  Spotlight 
Report 2015. Crowd Research Partners 
[23] PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP. US cybercrime: Rising risks, reduced readiness 
Key findings from the 2014 US State of Cybercrime Survey. http://www.pwc.com 
[24]  Department  for  Communities  and  Local  Government.  Understanding  Local 
Cyber Resilience. 2015. www.gov.uk/dclg 
[25]  Brown  A.E,  Grant  G.G.,  'Framing  the  Frameworks:  A  Review  of  IT 
Governance  Research',  Communications  of  the  Association  for  Information 
Systems, vol. 15, no. May. 2005. pp. 696-712 
[26]  Johnston  A,  Warkentin  M.  Fear  Appeals  and  Information  Security 
Behaviours: An Empirical Study.  http://www.uab.edu/cas. MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 
No. 3/September 2010 
[27] Aytes K, Connolly T. Computer Security and Risky Computing Practices: A 
Rational  Choice Perspective.  Journal  of Organizational  and  End User Computing 
16. 3 (2004):1 p. 22-40 
[28]  FIRST.ORG.  About  CVSS  [Online]  first.org.  2015.  Available  from: 
http://www.first.org/cvss [Accessed 13/12/2015]. 
[29] Goonatilake R, Bachnak R, Herath S. Statistical Quality Control Approaches 
to  Network  Intrusion  Detection.    International  Journal  of  Network  Security  &  Its 
Applications (IJNSA), Vol.3, No.6, November 2011 
[30] Rauscher K, Cox E. Measuring the Cyber Security Problem.  2013. EastWest 
Institute. ISBN: 978-0-9856824-3-9 
[31] Brotby W. Information Security Management: A definitive guide to effective 
security monitoring and measurement. Auerbach Publications, 2009 
[32] Lyons et al. Human reliability analysis in healthcare: a review of techniques. 
International Journal of Risk & Safety in Medicine, 16 (2004), pp. 223–237 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Behaviour as an aspect of Cyber Security Assurance  

[33] Gu T, et al. Research on the Calculation Method of Information Security Risk 
Assessment Considering Human Reliability. In: 2014 International Conference on 
Reliability,  Maintainability  and  Safety  (ICRMS),  Guangzhou  ,  August  2014. 
China, Curran Associates, Inc., Jul 2015. pp. 457-462. 
[34]  French  S,  et  al.  Human  reliability  analysis  :  a  critique  and  review  for 
managers. Safety Science, Vol.49 (No.6). 2011. pp. 753-763. ISSN 0925-7535 
[35] Kirwan B. The validation of three human reliability quantification techniques 
–  THERP,  HEART  and  JHEDI:  Part  I  –  Technique  descriptions  and  validation 
issues. Applied Ergonomics 27(6). 1996. 359–373. 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
