A Framework to Prevent QR Code Based Phishing Attacks

T.T. Dayaratne
WSO2
Sri Lanka
thusithathilina@gmail.com

Abstract—Though   the   rapid   development   and   spread   of
Information   and   Communication   Technology   (ICT)
making people's life much more easier, on the other hand it
causing some serious threats to the society. Phishing is one
of the most common cyber threat, that most users falls in.
This   research   investigate   on   QR   code   based   phishing
attacks   which   is   a   newly   adopted   intrusive   method   and
how to enhance the awareness and avoidance behavior of
QR   based   phishing   attacks   through   the   user   centric
security education approaches using game based learning.

Keywords-component; phishing; QR codes; learning.

I.

 INTRODUCTION

The penetration of the Internet and smartphones has enable
ample   of   opportunities,   where   its'   users   can   shop,
communicate, do payments, etc... with few clicks or taps[1].
That makes smartphones and the internet are essential parts of
everyday life. With more and more people using internet and
smartphones, intruders are trying to target these audience with
malicious intents. 

Social engineering techniques along with phishing is one of
the   most   recurrent   cyber   threat,   that   people   can   easily   falls
in[2].   Phishing   is   considered   as   a   semantic   attack   and
commonly interpreted as online identity theft[3]. Masquerading
as a trustworthy entity in order to capture sensitive data of a
particular user is not a new phenomena. Scam emails which
directs   users   to   fraudulent   website   is   the   commonly   used
approach for phishing. But that has come to a new dimension
along with the new developments in IT world. Phishing attacks
based   on   QR(Quick   Response)   codes   is   the   most   recent
oxygenating factor for the attackers. 

QR code was originated in Japan[4] originally to track the
automotive components in the industry. But with the popularity
it among various industries, make a rapid development for the
original QR code and now it can hold link, plain text, SMS text
message, addresses, URLs, Geolocation, email, phone numbers
or   contact   information.   High   information   density   and
robustness   makes   2-dimensional   barcodes   known   as   QR
Codes, a popular choice among various industries that appear
in more places in the urban environment for various purposes
over traditional bar codes. Marketing and online-payments[5]
are 2 most common industries which uses QR codes heavily.
URL encoding to make information instantly available is the
most common use case among these industries. QR Codes can
be described as paper-based hyperlinks, which directs users to
websites. Since it provides a way to access a brand's website
more quickly than by manually entering a URL, according to
the e marketers and google trends [6], [7] this been adopted
over   millions   of   smartphone   users.   QR   codes   also   allows
marketers to target their desired groups on specific locations. 

Though the  properties  of  QR  code  makes  marketers  life
much   easier   and   effective,   on   other   hand   security
vulnerabilities exist itself in code and in its’ readers yields QR
codes to be used as a novel tool for phishing attacks.

II.

STATE OF ART – KEY LITERATURE

The fundamental misbelief of the smartphone users, that the
smartphone is safer than a typical PC is a recipe for disaster.
Due  to this  misbelief  and  for  convenience  and  ease  of  use,
users   and   even   developers   have   overlooked   many   of   the
lessons learned from the past relate to phishing [8]. Thompson
and Lee in their study highlighted that  users make different
insecure choices when the context of the situation changes, if
user   have   to   make   a   decision   as   part   of   the   solution   for   a
security   weakness.   Further   they   have   shown   that   since   QR
codes are often embedded in physical objects such as posters,
billboards, that increase users’ perception of safety as they feel
that   they   are   sort   of   real   and   tangible   thing   instead   of   an
untrusted website link. This leads users are more vulnerable to
QR   based   phishing   attacks   than   the   traditional   phishing
methods.

Several studies have shown that QR codes can be used as
an attack vector for many security threats. Keiseberg et al have
conducted a proof of concept phishing attack using QR code.
Further   in   their   study   they   have   shown   dangers   of   possible
attacks  utilizing  manipulated  QR   codes  and  highlighted  that
proper   input   sanitization   is   need   to   be   performed   prior   to
processing the contained data [9]. Amin et al in their study of
malicious QR codes in wild state that they have found about
150 malicious QR codes that were designed to direct victims to
phishing sites or direct users to either exploit or intermediate
sites. Spoofed versions of   password-protected websites, fake
versions of the Google Play app market, malware distributed
via   direct   download   links   were   the   common   threats   [10].
Though the number is quite less the consequences and impact
can't be simply ignored. 

Vidas et al. carried out two experiments to understand the
impact   of   QR   based   phishing   which   they   have   named   as
QRshing in the city of Pittsburgh. In QRishing experiment they
found   that   curiosity   is   the   main   motivation   for   smartphone
users   to   scan   a   code[11].   A   similar   experiment   was   also
conducted   by   Seeburger   et   al[12].   Along   with   those   2
experiments and Adrian and Katharina in their QR Inception:
Barcode-in-Barcode  Attacks[13]   research,   highlight   the   need
for   further   research   on   adequate   tools   to   support   the
smartphone   user   to   detect   potential   threats   in   QR   codes.
Research also highlighted that most QR code readers do not
provide feasible tools to automatically detect malicious intents
embedded in QR codes .

Keiseberg et  al  in their QR  Code Security: A Survey of
Attacks and Challenges for Usable Security research, defined
specific requirements which required to develop a multi-layer

guidelines as a first step toward the development of a secure
QR code processing environment. They have also highlighted
that   the   usable   security   design   guidelines   and   security
awareness as open research challenges in the field [14].

People   have   also   investigate   on   user   centric   security
education approaches in order to designing proper systems to
prevent phishing attacks. Arachchilage & Love have conducted
a research on computer user’s knowledge in order to prevent
phishing attacks[15]. In their study, they have shown that lack
of   knowledge  to  prevent   phishing  threats,   cause   users  more
susceptible for attacks and educational games can be used to
educate people in order to thwart phishing attacks. In [1, 16,
17, 18] they evaluated the effectiveness of a mobile game in
order to protect computer users against phishing attacks. From
the results it can be clearly seen that gaming based learning
approaches   are   much   effective   than   traditional   approaches.
Also user centric approaches can be used to enhance the users’
behaviour   by   motivating   them   to   protect   themselves   from
phishing attacks.

However,  though   a   considerable   amount   of   research   are
being   conducted   in   the   field   of   phishing   attacks   and   user
centric approaches to prevent phishing attacks, since QR based
phishing attack is a quite new phenomena, a very few research
have been carried out on this field. And the conducted research
has also highlights that, computer users are still the weakest
link when comes to information security. Therefore there is a
lack of a proper study which investigate on how to use user
centric   security   education   in   order   to   prevent   the   QR   code
based phishing attacks.

In order to fill that gap, this research will investigate on
ways of enhancing the awareness and avoidance behavior of
QR   based   phishing   attacks,   through   user   centric   security
education approaches[18], using game based learning.

III. RESEARCH OBJECTIVE & METHODOLOGY

The objective of research is to identify and design a novel
game   design   framework  with   quantitative   and   qualitative
analysis  that   can   be   used   to   mitigate   the   risk   of   QR   based
phishing attacks. 

The research procedure would be as follows.

Existing work and ways of QR codes can be used as attack
vector for phishing attacks would be investigate as the initial
step of the research, in order to get a deep understanding about
the topic. With the knowledge obtain by reviewing the existing
work, a qualitative analysis will be carried out. This would be a
laboratory study in order to identify and understand the users
perspective relates to the problem. The plan is to recruit about
50 voluntary participants for the study. They will be provided a
questionnaire to identify their motivation factors to scan QR
codes in public.

As   the   the   second   phase,   a   quantitative   analysis   will   be
carry out to identify the victims of QR code based phishing
attacks. In order to do so. Set of QR codes would be placed in
public and some of those QR codes would be manipulate to
redirect  users to phihing websites, where simulated phishing
attacks will be conducted while carefully observing the users’
behaviors. Users will be requested to scan QR codes without
prior   notice   about   the   consequences.   In   this   phase   we   are
guaranteeing that no actual rather simulated attacks.

Set of guidelines for secure usage of QR code will identify
and developed based on the user experiment results, identifying
main  concerns/usages   which  will  be  used   to  secure  the  QR
code usage in terms phishing attacks is the main objective of
this phase. The next phase is to develop a framework to prevent
the QR based phishing attacks, based on the guidelines that are
being   identified   in   prior   phase.   Guidelines   will   be   further
improved and fine tuned with the help of security and usability
experts  in  the   filed   and  used  in  the  framework.  As  the  last
phase, a educational game will be develop using the identified
framework in order to raise awareness and avoidance behavior
of  QR   based  phishing  attacks   and  it  would  be  evaluated  to
investigate   the   successiveness   of   the   developed   framework.
Evaluation process will be carried out as a quantitative analysis
through a user study. Two controlled user groups will be used
to evaluate the framework, where one group will be exposed to
the   identified   framework   while   other   group   will   not.
Effectiveness of the framework will be evaluated based on the
result, of this study. Finally the experiment and the results will
be presented through the thesis.

The   research   will   be   carry   out   through   the   following   6

phases.

1. Review and Analysis Phase  (Month 1-8)

2. Discovery Phase (Month 9-18)

3. Development phase I (Month 19-23)

4. Development phase II (Month 24-27)

5. Evaluation phase (Month 28-32)

6. Thesis write-up and publication (Month 33-36)

REFERENCES
[1] Arachchilage,  N.A.G.,  Love,  S.  and  Maple,  C.,”Can  a   Mobile  Game
Teach   Computer   Users   to   Thwart   Phishing  Attacks?”.   arXiv   preprint
arXiv:1511.01622., 2015

[2] The   5   cyber

face.
http://www.infoworld.com/article/2616316/security/the-5-cyber-attacks-
you-re-most-likely-to-face.htm

 l Accessed 15 January 2016.

  attacks   you're   most

likely  

to  

[3] Arachchilage,   N.A.G,   and   Love,   S.   "A   game   design   framework   for
avoiding phishing  attacks."  Computers in Human Behavior  29, no. 3
(2013): 706-714.

[4] History of  QR Code,  http://www.qrcode.com/en/history/, Accessed 15

[5]

[6]

January 2016.
Jung,   J.,   Somerstein,   R.   and   Kwon,   E.S.   "SHOULD   I   SCAN   OR
SHOULD   I   GO?:   YOUNG   CONSUMERS'MOTIVATIONS   FOR
SCANNING   QR   CODE   ADVERTISING."  International   Journal   of
Mobile Marketing 7.3 (2012).
eMarketer.  US  Ahead   of   Western   Europe   in   QR   Code   Usage,   2013.
http://www.emarketer.com/Article/US-Ahead-of-Western-Europe-QR-
Code-Usage/1009631. Accessed 31 December 2015.

[7] Google.

QR

Code

interest,

2015.

http://www.google.com/trends/explore#geo=FR-J&q=qr+codes.
Accessed 31 December 2015.

[8] Thompson, N. and Lee, K. "Are QR codes the next phishing risk?." ACS

Information Age (2012): 36-37.

[9] Kieseberg, P. Schrittwieser, S. Leithner, M. Mulazzani, M. Weippl, E.
Munroe, L. and Sinha, M. "Malicious pixels using qr codes as attack
vector." In Trustworthy Ubiquitous Computing, pp. 21-38. Atlantis Press,
2012.

[10] Kharraz, A, Kirda, E. Robertson, W. Balzarotti, D. and Francillon, A.
"Optical   delusions:  A study   of   malicious   QR   codes   in   the   wild."   In
Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN), 2014 44th Annual IEEE/IFIP
International Conference on, pp. 192-203. IEEE, 2014.

 
 
 
 
 
 
[11] Vidas, T., Owusu, E., Wang, S., Zeng, C., Cranor, L. F., & Christin, N.
(2013). QRishing: The susceptibility of smartphone users to QR code
phishing attacks. In Financial Cryptography and Data Security (pp. 52-
69). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

[12] Seeburger, J. No cure for curiosity: linking physical and digital urban
layers.   In  Proceedings   of   the   7th   Nordic   Conference   on   Human-
Computer   Interaction:   Making   Sense   Through   Design,   pp.   247–256.
ACM, 2012.

[13] Dabrowski,   A.   Krombholz,   K.   Ullrich,   J.   and   Weippl,   E.R.   "QR
inception: Barcode-in-barcode attacks." In Proceedings of the 4th ACM
Workshop on Security and Privacy in Smartphones & Mobile Devices,
pp. 3-10. ACM, 2014.

[14] Krombholz, K., Frühwirt, P. Kieseberg, P. Kapsalis, L. Huber, M. and
Weippl, E. "QR code security: A survey of attacks and challenges for

usable  security."   In  Human Aspects  of  Information  Security,  Privacy,
and Trust, pp. 79-90. Springer International Publishing, 2014.

[15] Arachchilage,   N.A.G.   and   Love,   S.,   Security   awareness   of   computer
users: A phishing threat avoidance perspective.  Computers in Human
Behavior, 38, pp.304-312. 2014. 

[16] Arachchilage, N. A. G., and M. Cole. "Designing a mobile game for
home computer users to protect against “phishing attacks”." Intenatioal
Journal for e-Learning Security (IJeLS) 1, no. 1/2 (2011).

[17] Arachchilage   N.A.,  Tarhini  A,   Love   S.   Designing   a   mobile   game   to
thwarts malicious IT threats: A phishing threat avoidance perspective.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07093. 2015.

[18] Arachchilage,   N.A.G.,   User-Centred   Security   Education:   A   Game
Design to Thwart Phishing Attacks.  arXiv  preprint arXiv:1511.03459.
2015.

