Building Cyber-Physical Energy Systems

Grigore Stamatescu, Iulia Stamatescu, Nicoleta Arghira, Vasile Caloﬁr, Ioana F˘ag˘ar˘as¸an
Department of Automatic Control and Industrial Informatics
University ”Politehnica” of Bucharest, Romania
Email: {grig, iulia, nicoleta, vasile, ioana}@shiva.pub.ro

6
1
0
2

y
a
M
3
2

]

Y
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
0
9
6
0
.
5
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The built environment, as hallmark of modern
society, has become one of the key drivers of energy demand. This
makes for meaningful application of novel paradigms, such as
cyber-physical systems, with large scale impact for both primary
energy consumption reduction as well as (micro-) grid stability
problems. In a bottom-up approach we analyze the drivers of
CPS design, deployment and adoption in smart buildings. This
ranges from low-level embedded and real time system challenges,
instrumentation and control issues, up to ICT security layers
protecting information in a world of ubiquitous connectivity. A
modeling and predictive control framework is also discussed with
outlook of deployment for HVAC optimization to a new facility
for research from our campus.

I. INTRODUCTION

By including a vast array of networked measurement, com-
munication and control devices [1], modern buildings offer
a fertile ground for blending the physical and virtual worlds
under a common paradigm. This is also due to the fact that
the various subsystems that enable efﬁcient operation of the
building: heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC),
power metering, access control [2] and security, have to offer a
uniﬁed view to the facilities administrator at the management
level. As buildings have been estimated to consume almost 40
% of the primary energy resources, there is a key incentive for
a wide range of stakeholders to contribute to the improvement
of system efﬁciency in buildings. Experimental test-beds can
be scaled up and replicated in order to validate the economics
of the proposed approaches.

Cyber-physical systems offer potential for an integrative
approach to model, design and implement complex systems
at a large scale. Rather than providing some clear design
paths, they offer a ﬂexible concept which allows considerable
freedom to the designer. Applications of CPS can be already
found in the automotive and embedded domains, security,
process control and factory automation and others. A critical
component has been identiﬁed as providing the required secu-
rity policies and algorithms at the information layer which
concern both software and hardware elements. As we are
considering large and complex systems, vulnerabilities are able
to propagate and cause ireversible damage [3].

Recent references have coined the term cyber-physical en-
ergy systems (CPES) [4] when discussing the integration of
computing, communication and control in the energy domain.
This includes generation, both conventional and renewables,
transport and distribution, energy storage [5], as well as
the consumer side. To test and validate CPES, several test-
beds have been implemented which integrate measurement

and control hardware, SCADA software frameworks, and a
range of communication protocols and networking hardware.
In [6] the challenges for sustainable energy grids have been
discussed. The key argument revolves around solving the issue
of increasing adoption of variable renewable energy sources
in connection with energy storage and demand-side strategies.
CPES is seen as an essential class of CPS and one that can
contribute to this critical challenge through a 3M: monitor,
model and mitigate methodology and large-scale control at
both ends.

The purpose of this paper is focused on discussing the
extension of CPES towards smart buildings. We argue that
this approach is viable as one of key elements to drive energy
efﬁciency gains in buildings. Three main pillars related to
HVAC control, electrical load monitoring and forecasting and
smart grid integration are identiﬁed. We propose a case study
of how the integration and deployment of a builiding CPES
for thermal optimization can be applied in regard to modeling
and software toolchain to a new building in our campus.

II. BUILDING CPES COMPONENTS

As fundamental elements of a building CPES paradigm,
we identify three main functions where the application of
such systems can provide signﬁcant impact from an economic,
environmental and social perspective: optimal HVAC control,
local management of electric loads and smart grid integration.
These are subsequently elaborated upon.

A. HVAC modeling and control

Control and optimization of the HVAC system is perhaps the
most important task of a smart building due to its broad impact
on the quality of life of its occupants and to the economic bot-
tom line of the building operator. Small efﬁciency increments
can represent very large cost savings when considering the
scale at which these systems operate.

As an important reference, a large scale demonstrator for
a real building was put in place in the Opticontrol project
[7]. The main goal was to design a predictive control strategy
for a Swiss ofﬁce building, to be validated against a more
conventional rule-based system already in place. Alternatively,
experimental validation for scenario-based MPC is described
in [8]. Cascaded MPC controllers for ventilation requirements
(CO2 concentration) and temperature are implemented. These
act as high level set-point generators for the lower level PI
controllers which are embedded in the air handling units and
room radiators. A standard sampling time of 10 minutes is

 
 
 
 
 
 
used in conjunction with an 8 hours weather and occupancy
prediction horizon. Results show the ﬂexibility of the SMPC
strategy in accomodating weather and occupancy uncertainty.
An useful tool is the Building Resistive Capacitive Mod-
eling toolbox for MATLAB. This provides a straight forward
means to generate simpliﬁed thermal models from building
information or by directly converting existing models e.g.
Energy+ input data ﬁles [9]. The core modeling method by
using the BRCM is shown in Figure 1. It relies on the
basic idea of separating the core thermal dynamics from the
external heat ﬂuxes assigned to the HVAC equipment and
system structure, as well as outside and internal inﬂuences
from weather, occupancy, internal loads, etc.

Fig. 1. Modular modeling aproach for HVAC using BRCM

Based on this high-level concept, we exemplify the state
space formulation that is achieved which, in its linearized
form, is suitable for predictive controller synthesis. The full
discrete state space model of the building is listed below:

x[k + 1] = Ax[k] + Buu[k] +

nu(cid:88)

i=1

Bxuix[k]ui[k]+

+ Bvv[k] +

nv(cid:88)

i=1

Bvuiv[k]ui[k] + d[k]

(1)

In summary, some key research topics are identiﬁed as:
• simple but accurate thermal models, suitable for real-time

optimization;

• integrated modeling and control framework across the

existing infrastructure and toolchain;

• experimental long-term deployments and validations to

highlight cost savings.

B. Electrical energy: monitoring and power quality issues

The monitoring and prediction of electrical energy con-
sumption at the building level has been approached by many
researchers. A series of contributions offer software based
solutions to deal with improving the energy usage of IT
equipment or even whole datacenters. In [10] the authors
present a method to quantify the energy baseline of a smart
building, to which subsequent improvements can be related.

The LoCal project was focused on developing a system
framework to aggregate data from multiple heterogeneous
measurement points and allow an intelligent decision support
system to assint the building manager to optimize energy usage
and detect failures.

Power quality issues are investigated at a large scale through
complex equipment providing synchronized measurement that
are placed at key nodes of the grid. These phasor measure-
ment units (PMUs) are usually installed by utilities and grid
operators which are able to justify large investments against
grid stability. Recent work [11] has approached smaller scale
deployments at the microgrid/home level. The system is used
to measure and communicate microgrid voltage, frequency and
phase angle with reasonable precision and delay over WiFi and
LTE links.

Key research topics:
• energy disaggregation to from power meter data series to

pinpoint individual loads and their classiﬁcation;

• load forecasting;
• micro-monitoring of local power quality indicators;
• new mechansims for user awareness and engagement for

energy efﬁciency.

C. Demand response through Smart Grid integration

At a higher level, considering the fact that a smart building
is usually interconnected and carries out bidirectional commu-
nication with the electrical grid, algorithms have to be put in
place to synchronize it to outside evolutions. Demand response
(DR) strategies assume the adjustment of the building’s load
in reaction to grid conditions e.g. peak periods, where a
contractual obligation or economic beneﬁts might bring upon
a temporary reduction in the building’s energy requirements.
The electrical grid is moving from a load-following to a
load-shaping strategy. In this context, methods to control the
demand side resources have to be developed. The concept of
demand dispatch appears as a complement to the Supply Dis-
patch. Demand dispatch represents a possible end state that can
optimize grid operations beyond what can be achieved with
Supply Dispatch alone. Supply Dispatch relies on generation
following the load while Demand Dispatch allows load to
follow the generation enabling full optimization of both supply
and demand. It enables the management of consumers loads
(RES owned by consumers, storage capacities and controllable
loads). The load dispatch is deﬁned as an operating model used
by grid operators to dispatch behind-the-meter resources in
both directionsincreasing and decreasing load as viewed at the
system levelas a complement to supply (generation) dispatch
to more effectively optimize grid operations [12].

In [13] several data-driven methods and tools are discussed
for implementation in an open DR assistant tool. Existing basic
rule-based approaches are compared to an intelligent method
using regression trees to forecast DR events. The types of
data that have been used included weather data, scheduling
information and building subsystem states.The DIADR project
[14] represents a salient proof-of-concept where both open
software and hardware components have been integrated into
a unitary intelligent energy management system.

Key research topics:
• reliable automated demand response algorithms;
• standardization;
• building-utility communication.

III. CASE STUDY - PRECIS

In this section we point out how one the three drivers,
namely HVAC control, of building CPES implementations can
be applied on a real building. Our target application concerns
a new building from our campus, commissioned in December
2015 (Figure 2). It is a 7-ﬂoor facility with an overall area of
around 9000 sqm which includes research laboratories, ofﬁce
spaces, multifunctional rooms and an auditorium.

Fig. 3. Graphical model with AHU placement

In Figure 4, the visualization screen for the primary heating
loop is presented, starting from the link to the campus-wide
heating loop, pumps and measurement points and the interface
to the secondary circuits across the ﬂoors. Auxiliary systems
which use the heating loop are also depicted such as: water
heater, several radiators or the air handling units.

Fig. 2. Target building - PRECIS research center

The HVAC system is composed of a heating/cooling loop
and an air loop for ventilation, which work in parallel to
achieve the desired comfort set-points. The heating/cooling
loop uses chillers for the cold circuit and is connected to the
main campus plant at the heating circuit level. Thermal energy
is delivered to the zones by means of basic 4-pipe fan coils
which rely on three-way valves to mix up the thermal agent
and a variable speed fan which blows air over the coil. The air
loop satisﬁes ventilation constraints by bringing in air from the
outside, with an economizer function that enables recirculation
of the already heated/cooled air for energy efﬁciency. To a
lesser extent, the AHUs are able to also warm up or cool
the air if needed. An existing building management system
(BMS) based on Honeywell technology is put into place. It
handles the data aggregation from the network of BACNET
compatible equipment and controllers, while providing visu-
alization, actuation and alarming functionality in a central
location. An important drawback at this point is that control
at the room level is local-only with the BMS not being aware
of the conditions in the individual thermal zones. Figure 3
highlights the graphical depiction of the building, along with
the placement of the ﬁve air handling units, CTA1-5.

Fig. 4. Example screen of the current BMS solution - Heating system view

Our proposal for a pilot system implementation for building
CPES addresses zone-level control of temperature by design-
ing a supervisor control and optimization framework. The
main goal is to formulate the optimization problem for a model
predictive controller which minimizes energy cost under a
series of constraints: comfort, phyisical, outside conditions.
Weather information can be requested from a local network
of sensing nodes or using on-line services which can also
provide forecast data. As a tool to collect data in real-time
from multiple data sources, we use the web-based middleware
SMAP [15] which has been proven a reliable, open solution
even for very large scale deployments. It provides a library of
drivers to poll various instruments like sensors, ﬂow and power
meters, and more generic data sources such as OPC servers,
but also detailed documentation on writing customized drivers
for other equipment. A graphical engine allows visualization

through the OPC server at

of the data streams in real-time. As alternative, data can be
exchanged using industry standard protocols with compatible
the BMS. The system
device,
integration over the communication backbone is shown in
Figure 5. The aim is to mirror some of the BMS functionality
without interfering with its mission-critical operation. As we
initially focus on a subset area for zone-level monitoring and
control the proposed system is able to function in parallel and
relate to the BMS for energy baselines and validation.

Fig. 5. System integration via BACNet

A sample ﬂoor layout is provided in Figure 6. The thermal
zones i.e. constant temperature volumes of air, are illustrated
and correspond to rooms, as follows: zones Z1-Z4 and Z7
are research laboratories, Z5-Z6 are two ofﬁce spaces, Z8
is a common/meeting room and the zone Z0 accounts for
the hallways and auxiliary spaces. The ﬁve laboratories are
roughly the same area while differing in their orientation
which inﬂuences the pattern of solar gain throughout
the
day. By installing room level controllers which measure local
parameters: temperature, CO2, window status, and provide the
required outputs to actuate the 4-pipe fan coils, local control
is implemented. As the controllers are able to communicate
over the network, the SMAP server is able to gather data
about the room conditions and relay the decision of the control
framework to the local actuators. Feedback will be collected
from the occupants of the zones in the pilot deployment in
order to quantify and improve the acceptance of a centralized
strategy for HVAC control.

Fig. 6. Thermal zone layout

IV. CONCLUSION
The paper discussed the three core elements that enable the
CPES paradigm in smart buildings. These concerned thermal
and electrical energy management and smart grid integration.
As initial step, the proposal for a system architecture has been
described to deploy predictive control of temperature at the
zone level. Future work is concerned with the design and
deployment of a pilot system implementation, accompanied by
long-term validation. By federating clusters of smart buildings
also a smart campus can be achieved.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work has been partially supported by a grant of the
Romanian National Authority for Scientiﬁc Research, CNDI-
UEFISCDI, project code PN-II-PT-PCCA-2011-3.2-1616.

REFERENCES

[1] G. Stamatescu, C. Chit¸u, C. Vasile, I. Stamatescu, D. Popescu, and
V. Sgˆarciu, “Analytical and experimental sensor node energy modeling
in ambient monitoring,” in 2014 9th IEEE Conference on Industrial
Electronics and Applications, June 2014, pp. 1615–1620.

[2] D. H. A. Abhinandan Majumdar, Zhiru Zhang, “Characterizing the
beneﬁts and limitations of smart building meeting room scheduling,” in
7th International Conference of Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS), 2016.
[3] K. Paridari, A. E.-D. Mady, S. La Porta, R. Chabukswar, J. Blanco,
A. Teixeira, H. Sandberg, and M. Boubekeur, “Cyber-physical-security
framework for building energy management system,” in 7th Interna-
tional Conference of Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS), 2016.

[4] T. H. M. et al., “Engineering future cyber-physical energy systems:
Challenges, research needs, and roadmap,” in North American Power
Symposium (NAPS), 2009, 2009, pp. 1–6.

[5] G. Stamatescu, I. Stamatescu, N. Arghira, I. F˘ag˘ar˘asan, and S. S. Iliescu,
“Embedded networked monitoring and control for renewable energy
storage systems,” in Development and Application Systems (DAS), 2014
International Conference on, May 2014, pp. 1–6.

[6] J. Taneja, R. Katz, and D. Culler, “Deﬁning cps challenges in a
sustainable electricity grid,” in Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS), 2012
IEEE/ACM Third International Conference on, April 2012, pp. 119–128.
[7] D. Sturzenegger, D. Gyalistras, M. Morari, and R. S. Smith, “Model
predictive climate control of a swiss ofﬁce building: Implementation,
results, and cost -beneﬁt analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Control
Systems Technology, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 1–12, Jan 2016.

[8] A. Parisio, D. Varagnolo, M. Molinari, G. Pattarello, L. Fabietti, and
K. H. Johansson, “Implementation of a scenario-based mpc for hvac sys-
tems: an experimental case study,” IFAC Proceedings Volumes, vol. 47,
no. 3, pp. 599 – 605, 2014.

[9] G. Stamatescu and I. Stamatescu, “Open and closed loop simulation for
predictive control of buildings,” in 24th Mediterranean Conference on
Control and Automation (MED’16), 2016.

[10] J. Kleissl and Y. Agarwal, “Cyber-physical energy systems: Focus on
smart buildings,” in Design Automation Conference (DAC), 2010 47th
ACM/IEEE, June 2010, pp. 749–754.

[11] Z. Huang, T. Zhu, H. Lu, and W. Gao, “Accurate power quality monitor-
ing in microgrids,” in 2016 15th ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Information Processing in Sensor Networks (IPSN), 2016.

[12] N. Arghira, L. Hawarah, S. Ploix, and M. Jacomino, “Prediction of
appliances energy use in smart homes,” Energy, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 128
– 134, 2012.

[13] M. Behl, A.

Jain, and R. Mangharam, “Data-driven modeling,
control and tools for cyber-physical energy systems,” CoRR, vol.
abs/1601.05164, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1601.
05164

[14] T. P. et al., “Deep demand response: The case study of the citris building
at the university of california-berkeley,” in ACEEE Summer Study on
Energy Efﬁciency in Buildings, 2012.

[15] S. Dawson-Haggerty, X. Jiang, G. Tolle, J. Ortiz, and D. Culler, “smap:
A simple measurement and actuation proﬁle for physical information,”
in Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Embedded Networked
Sensor Systems, 2010, pp. 197–210.

