Cyber Attack Surface Analysis of Advanced Metering Infrastructure 

James Christopher Foreman 
School of Engineering Technology 
Purdue University 
West Lafayette, IN, USA 
jchrisf@purdue.edu 

Dheeraj Gurugubelli 
Dept. of Computer and Information Technology 
Purdue University 
West Lafayette, IN, USA 
dgurugub@purdue.edu

Abstract—  Cyber  attacks  on  critical  infrastructure  have  been  an  issue  of  importance  in  industry  over  the  past  several 
years, as well as a focus of academic research. Cyber attacks of various types and magnitude have been on the rise target-
ed  specifically  at  power  grids.  A  successful  attack  on  the  power  grid  could  result  in  significant  impacts  including  grid 
shutdown, cascading failures, damage to the infrastructure, and potential harm to people. Power grid infrastructure are 
critical  in  nature;  they  enable  operations  for  residential,  commercial,  industrial,  and  government  users  across  critical 
infrastructure  such  as  water,  communication,  banking,  transportation,  manufacturing,  and  more.  The  compromise  of 
these operations introduces threats, which span from economic to public safety. The Advanced Metering Infrastructure 
(AMI) is now being rapidly deployed throughout the power grid, and is an enabling technology for smart grid. Identifying 
the attack surface is a necessary step in achieving cyber security in smart grids and AMI. The purpose of this paper is to 
quantify and examine the cyber attack surface of AMI in order to lay the foundation for mitigating approaches to AMI 
cyber security.  

Keywords— AMI Security, Power grid, Critical Infrastructure, Attack Surface 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

The security of Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) has recently become an area of interest as its deployment 
has grown. The affinity towards AMI by utility companies, energy markets, and regulators is primarily to facilitate 
near real-time collection of power flow and usage data. This will allow utilities to provide dynamic pricing services, 
demand response, and perform better management of the power grid, although these new abilities increase the attack 
surface [1,2]. Smart meters are installed at homes, buildings, and other facilities of the power consumer and thus, the 
vast number in deployment will be in the many of millions [3,4].  

Like any nascent system, AMI have yet to establish security measures to handle cyber attacks beyond rudimentary 
measures commonly employed in general, e.g., network encryption. A cyber attack is an attempt by hackers to dam-
age or destroy a computer network or system. Attacks can vary in complexity, magnitude, and impact. A cyber at-
tack on AMI may involve intelligence gathering, infecting the target AMI systems, AMI exploitation, exfiltration of 
data from various attack points of AMI, and maintaining control [5,6,7]. The cyber attack surface can be defined by 
the methods an environment or a system can be attacked by an adversary to introduce or retrieve data from that envi-
ronment or system. A targeted attack on AMI could potentially result in shutdown of the power grid, disabling ener-
gy delivery systems [8]. This could have devastating effects on government, trade, commerce, banking, transporta-
tion and other important aspects, which rely on energy to operate [2]. A compromise of AMI may also result in an 
invasion of privacy [9], and provide a surface from which to extract information from users such as Internet activity, 
financial, or health records.  

Cyber security of AMI was recently a topic of major interest at a Black Hat conference where some vulnerabilities 
and simulated attacks were demonstrated [10]. Yi et al [11] demonstrated a specific denial of service attack where an 
attacker may select any node and disrupt traffic on the AMI network. Attackers may also compromise a smart meter 
to change energy usage data or fabricate other meter data [12]. Cleveland [13] discussed an example of a possible 
scenario of a smart hacker cracking AMI security and sending 5 million remote disconnect commands. Attacks on 
critical  infrastructure  in  general  have  been  on  the  rise  and  a  survey  [14]  conducted  by  McAfee  indicates  in  one 
year’s time that one in four have been the victims of cyber extortion or threatened cyber extortion; denial of service 

 
 
 
 
attacks had increased from 50% to 80% of respondents; and approximately two-thirds have found malware designed 
to sabotage their systems. 

The key contribution of this paper is the timely study of the AMI attack surface given the rapid deployment of AMI. 
As of 2012, over 43 million smart meters have been installed in the U.S., 89% of which are residential with the re-
mainder to commercial and industrial consumers [4]. According to the Institute for Electric Efficiency smart meter 
deployment projections, approximately 65 million smart meters will be deployed in the U.S. by 2015 [3]. The cost 
of AMI is huge given this scale, and frequent replacement with more secure units is extremely cost prohibitive. This 
research  adds  value  in  a  concurrent  way  by  aiding  understanding  of  AMI  cyber  security  exposure,  which  enables 
utilities to be more informed regarding the security posture of AMI. 

II.  PREVIOUS WORK IN AMI ATTACK SURFACE 

Security concerns with respect to the power grid resulted in a set of compliance standards developed by the North 
American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC). These are the Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP) standards, 
which was a first step towards the cyber security compliance regulations for power grids [15]. These standards pri-
marily focus on the identification and protection of cyber critical assets in the power grid infrastructure. NIST has 
also developed a set of standards for the interoperability of assets comprising the smart power grid, i.e., Framework 
and Roadmap for Smart Grid Interoperability Standards [16], which briefly addresses the need for cyber security 
standards and the components of these standards. An overall strategy for implementing cyber security in AMI is also 
presented in Chapter 6 of this text, but only from a generalist point of view and with no analysis of the attack surface 
or specific vulnerabilities. 

Schukat [17] attempts to achieve a holistic view of the cyber threat landscape in smart grid infrastructure. His re-
search focused on Machine-to-Machine (M2M) communication, the role of PKI, and authentication protocols used 
for mitigating cyber risk. He discusses that energy systems are going through a paradigm shift towards better and 
smarter solutions driven by factors like economic cost, efficiency, environmental impact, etc. The smarter the sys-
tems get, the more complex they got. He argues that the IP-based systems and open standards in the modern energy 
systems, whilst beneficial for many reasons, pose potential risk to the attack surface of energy systems.  

Hahn and Govindarasu [18] proposed a security model, which is capable of representing various privilege states and 
discusses the various attack paths an attacker could take. Using this model, they attempted to produce an exposure 
metric that could help evaluate the completeness of security mechanisms in place in the smart grid. They discussed 
the necessity to support the grid and its security mechanisms in place through developing a security model, which 
would concentrate on the critical information necessary to protect the grid. They also mentioned that the complexity 
of  the  AMI  infrastructure  and  constrained  network  bandwidth  could  limit  the  security  monitoring.  Their  proposed 
exposure analysis algorithm could be used to quantify the exposure of the information objects within the smart grid. 
Though  their  paper  could  be  helpful  in  providing  quantitative  metrics  to  evaluate  risk  in  smart  grids,  it  does  not 
thoroughly discuss the complete surface attack of AMI. 

Searle  and  McParland  [19]  at  Lawrence  Berkeley  National  Laboratory  attempted  to  provide  a  non-proprietary  in-
sight into the AMI systems and smart meters within AMI. He further discusses some security issues and vulnerabili-
ties that could lead to potential attacks. Accordingly, studying both the components of AMI systems and the higher 
architecture will promote meaningful and open understanding of the cyber security risks involved by installing smart 
meters in HAN [19]. Though this paper briefly discusses the architecture and components of AMI, its primary focus 
is limited to potential cyber attacks at the HAN level, a thorough discussion of the Smart Energy Profile (SEP), and 
security vulnerabilities in the communication standards. 

III.  AMI AS CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE 

The AMI is the point of interface between the utility power provider and the end consumer of power. As such, it is a 
critical point in the power delivery system. The AMI can provide valuable information to the utility including real-
time voltages, currents, power flow, power factor, etc., as well as tracking accumulated power usage by the consum-
er for billing purposes. The AMI also provides power control by connecting and disconnecting the consumer from 
the power grid. Attacks that compromise the integrity of the AMI can result in a loss of situational awareness and 
even control of the power grid by utilities [2]. Such attacks also have the potential to cut power from consumers, 
which include homeowners, businesses, hospitals, and other critical infrastructure such as water and telecommunica-

 
   
tions [2]. The deployment scale of AMI results in many thousands to millions of users within a power utility’s net-
work, so the potential for widespread disruption and harm is significant.  

Illustrated in Fig. 1 is an example of a power grid network topology. The AMI is intimately integrated with the pow-
er  delivery  process  and  the  power  grid,  which  is  comprised  of  physical  devices,  such  as  transformers  and  circuit 
breakers. Disruption in AMI can create instability in this physical process potentially damaging equipment and caus-
ing physical harm to individuals utilizing the power grid. Smart meters comprising the AMI are distributed through-
out a metropolitan area, usually serving thousands to millions of users. The effects of attacks can even migrate to 
other utilities and metropolitan areas, perhaps even on a national scale.  

C/I

C/I

~

Utility Power Generator

Power Grid

Smart Meters, Homes

R

R

R

R

Feeder/Connection
- Other Metro Area
- Other Utility

C/I

C/I

More 
Residential 
Blocks

More 
Commercial
Industrial
Blocks (C/I)

Residential Block (R)

Figure 1 – Power grid network topology. 

Types of attacks that are directed at the power grid itself include the following: 

•  Denial  of  Power  (DoP)  –  Attacks  on  individual  smart  meters  to  deny  power  service  to  a  consumer.  This 

type of attack could be directed at critical users resulting in significant harm. 

•  Theft of Power (ToP) – Attacks on individual smart meters to facilitate theft of power from the utility. Con-
sumers that are purposefully disconnected from the power utility may surreptitiously re-connect to obtain 
power. The data within a smart meter may also be altered to misrepresent power usage on any number of 
smart meters. 

•  Disruption of Grid (DoG) – If a large group of smart meters are compromised, they can be connected and 
disconnected in rapid or chaotic sequences, which results in instability in the power grid. On a large enough 
scale,  the  power  grid  will  be  unable  to  absorb  this  transient  behavior  and  may  partially  fail  resulting  in 
widespread power loss. 

IV.  AMI ATTACK SURFACE 

A.  Smart Meters 
Smart meters are the primary point of data collection for power grid energy consumption. They facilitate a dense and 
large-scale  metrology  of  the  power  grid  operating  characteristics  of  voltage,  frequency,  power  factor,  etc.  Lastly, 
smart meters also facilitate the automated connection and disconnection of consumers to the power grid. Figure 2 
illustrates the block diagram of a typical smart meter with potential attack vectors.  

 
 
Wireless network attacks

Local IR port

ZigBee
radio

Microcontroller
PIC or similar

900MHz
mesh radio

Serial bus attacks

Mains 
dis/connect

Serial bus links

Metrology board

Sensors
- Voltage, current
- Accumulated usage

Figure 2 – Typical smart meter block diagram. 

The design of the smart meter incorporates two network communication radios, and often a local infrared serial port 
for maintenance. This results in a broadened attack surface. Physical access to the meter adds another attack surface 
since  internal  serial  links  are  typically  unsecured  and  based  on  common  protocols.  Essentially,  every  smart  meter 
becomes a multi-network terminal on the AMI information network. The microcontroller, radios, and firmware are 
driven by low cost, and as such minimal capability, since most utilities will need to purchase smart meters  by the 
millions.  Smart  meters  send  usage  statistics  to  utility  companies  at  a  relatively  high  refresh  rate  of  minutes  to  se-
conds. Coupled with their vast number in deployment, an immense flood of big data is made available to the utili-
ties.  This  enables  dashboarding  of  power  grid  operation,  automated  operation  and  recovery,  dynamic  pricing,  and 
more usage-based services to the consumer, but at the cost of privacy and vulnerability to cyber physical attacks.  

B.  AMI Information / Communication Network 
The  AMI  communications  network  is  primarily  comprised  of  the  smart  meter,  the  Smart  Meter  Data  Collector 
(SMDC), and the network linking these, typically a wireless Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum (FHSS) mesh or 
other cellular network. The AMI information network also includes the link to the Home Area Network (HAN) on 
the consumer side, typically WiFi or ZigBee®, and the link to utility’s WAN, typically Ethernet infrastructure. The 
AMI  communications  network  is  geographically  distributed  throughout  a  metropolitan  area  alongside  the  power 
grid. The scale of this network can consist of hundreds to thousands of SMDC, each capable of serving thousands of 
smart meters, thus many thousands to a few millions. This is illustrated in Fig. 3 with potential attack vectors. 

Attacks on mesh and cellular WAN

Physical attack 
on SMDC

WiFi / ZigBee 
attacks

t
e
n
r
e
t
n

I

100s

1000s

HAN
- WiFi
- ZigBee

SM

Utility
- Mesh
- Cellular

Power lines

Attacks originating
from home computing

Figure 3 – AMI information network. 

Smart Meter
Data Concentrator

t
e
n
r
e
t
n

I

Utility
Ethernet -
WAN -

Utility

Internet attacks
on utility

The vast number of devices coupled with the simplicity of individual smart meters results in a huge network of high-
ly similar actors that are typically ill equipped to handle cyber security technologies for attack prevention. Another 
complication given the cost of deploying such a large number of devices is that devices are expected to have a long 
lifetime, perhaps twenty years or more, which means that hardware will remain constant for long periods of time. 
This  contributes  to  a  long  lifetime  for  vulnerabilities  even  once  known  since  upgrades  are  difficult  or  limited  in 
scope. Therefore, the compromise of even a single smart meter through focused attack or reverse engineering poten-
tially provides access to the AMI network as a whole. It is also interesting to note in Fig. 3 that the Internet bounds 
the AMI information network on both sides. This, coupled with the extensive use of multiple wireless technologies 
and geographic dispersion, results in an attack surface of unprecedented scale. 

 
 
C.  Home Area Network 
The HAN is the consumer side of AMI. The HAN begins with a wireless link, typically ZigBee, from the smart me-
ter to a consumer gateway device in the home. The consumer gateway also acts as a bridge between the smart meter 
ZigBee  network  and  the  consumer’s  home  devices,  such  as  smart  appliances  and  energy  monitors.  The  consumer 
gateway will incorporate the ZigBee and Wi-Fi radios in addition to a Linux microkernel computer, usually contain-
ing an embedded web server. The gateway collects energy usage data, network status and text messages from the 
utility for display to the consumer on the gateway itself or a remote monitor. The gateway also forwards demand-
response  and  energy-pricing  signals  to  the  smart  appliances  for  their  information.  This  gateway  may  also  serve  a 
connection  to  smart  appliances,  whose  operating  parameters  can  be  influenced  by  the  smart  meter.  For  example, 
smart clothes dryer can be configured to dry clothes only when the price or demand for energy is low.  

HAN
- WiFi
- ZigBee

SM

Gateway

Smart Appliances
- Refridgerator, Range, Washer, Dryer, etc.

Figure 4 – Consumer gateway in AMI network. 

The motivation for consumers to participate is additional energy cost savings in an intelligent, automated, and real-
time approach. The consequence of this benefit is a new attack surface through these embedded devices, which typi-
cally have reduced processing power to incorporate sufficient cyber attack mitigating technologies. 

The HAN is also the network that interfaces with the consumer’s home computing systems and Internet connection. 
Consumers will likely want to monitor and collect information, perhaps even enabling Internet access by the utility 
for advanced energy usage statistics on individual appliances, or by themselves to remotely control appliances when 
away from home. A compromise of the HAN side of AMI has the potential to disrupt the lives of consumers on an 
intimate level, physically within their home, and provides an access point back to the Internet. This model also ex-
tends  to  commercial  and  industrial  users  who  want  the  same  capabilities  for  their  enterprise.  Fig.  5  demonstrates 
some of the probable attacks through the HAN side of AMI. 

Attacking the HAN allows appliances 
and HVAC to be compromised

Privacy 
invasion
attacks

Home Energy
Monitoring

Attacks can also 
compromise 
home computing

Home Area 
Network

t
e
n
r
e
t
n

I

Shared Interface with
Home Computing

i

i

F
W

Smart
Appliances

HVAC
Control

Attacks across networks

Figure 5 – HAN devices and probable attacks. 

D.  Smart Meter Data Collectors and Head End 
The Smart Meter Data Collector (SMDC) is a hardware computing device, based on a Linux microkernel, that ag-
gregate the massive real-time data from a bank of smart meters by providing a collection and management point for 
the  utility.  Typically,  a  few  thousand  smart  meters  are  managed  per  SMDC  utilizing  multiple  FHSS  mesh  radios. 
The SMDC then provides a link directly to the utility via hardwired Ethernet or some other WAN backbone. The 
SMDC is usually responsible for cryptographic key management for the smart meters as well. Their position in the 
AMI information network is illustrated in Fig. 3 and the block diagram for a typical SMDC is shown in Fig. 6. The 
SMDC is subject to the same types of attacks as the smart meter. 

 
 
900MHz FHSS
mesh radios

Embedded 
Linux system

s
k
c
a
t
t
a
g
n
m
m
a

i

j

i

o
d
a
R

Serial bus

Ethernet 
WAN

Ethernet TCP/IP 
attacks

Serial bus attacks

Figure 6 – Smart meter data collector. 

The AMI Head-End (AMI-HE) is the AMI management platform at the utility installation. The AMI-HE centralizes 
management of the whole AMI and provides data warehousing for all collected data. This is also the interface point 
for  the  utility  infrastructure  from  which  billing,  Outage  Management  Systems  (OMS)  for  restoration,  Energy  and 
Distribution Management Systems (EMS/DMS) for dispatch and system monitoring, and Meter Data Management 
Systems (MDMS) from which other AMI management functions derive. The AMI-HE is typically wholly contained 
within  the  corporate  WAN  as  an  enterprise  computing  platform  and  as  such,  is  secured  by  typical  cyber  security 
policies  practiced  in  corporate  systems.  As  such,  the  focus  of  this  paper  will  remain  within  the  AMI  information 
network depicted in Fig. 3. 

E.  Protocols and Software  
As illustrated in Fig. 3, AMI utilizes several different communication links and subsequently, several protocols, all 
of which provide an attack surface. AMI is enabled through the ANSI C12.22 standards, which define data messag-
ing standards for smart meter AMI networks. The protocol describes transporting C12.19 table data [20] for interop-
erability  among  AMI  devices  with  AES  encryption.  The  attack  surface  of  this  protocol  includes  weak  encryption, 
key discovery through reverse engineering or physical access, as in Figs. 2 and 6, which affords access to the data 
tables allowing reconfiguration, data collection/corruption and other control functions. 

The ZigBee Alliance’s Smart Energy Profile 2.0 Public Application Protocol Specification (SEP 2.0) [21] is a set of 
interoperability standards to connect consumer-side HAN devices to the smart grid. Illustrated in Fig. 7, is an illus-
tration of the SEP 2.0 stack and potential attacks on its attack surface.  

Figure 7 – SEP attack surface, adapted from [22,23]. 

Many software tools for hacking and cracking AMI are becoming prevalent such as the KillerBee framework and 
toolset [24]. The framework allows users to build their own tools for eavesdropping, emulating devices, etc. for ex-
ploiting ZigBee and IEEE 802.15.4 networks. 

Grochocki et al [25] investigated attacks on the smart meter to data collector (SMDC) mesh radio network, includ-
ing the development of an attack tree. Some of these attacks have been illustrated in Fig. 6 on the SMDC itself. The 
attack  surface  of  the  RF  communication  link  is  of  particular  interest  since  the  SMDC  interfaces  with  many  thou-
sands  of  smart  meters  and  access  to  the  device  can  be  easily  obtained  physically  through  Ethernet  and  unsecured 
serial as well as medium range RF where radios are readily available to facilitate such attacks, e.g., WiMAX, 3G/4G 
LTE, cellular, etc. 

It  should  be  noted  that  many  AMI  devices  rely  on  secret  communication  codes  and  algorithms  embedded  in  the 
hardware with the hope of maintaining security through obscurity [25]. There has been some difficulty in coopera-
tion between vendors and cyber-security researchers in an effort to protect intellectual property and competitiveness. 

 
 
 
 
However, physical and/or RF access to the smart meters and SMDCs can expose these codes with some knowledge 
of  hardware  and  reverse  engineering  [11].  Once  exposed,  the  obscurity  aspect  is  negated,  along  with  any  security 
afforded.  According  to  a  researcher  at  IOActive,  all  it  takes  for  an  attacker  to  gain  command  and  control  over  a 
smart  meter  is  $500  worth  of  equipment  and  materials  and  a  background  in  electronics  and  software  engineering 
[11]. This could mean en masse manipulation of service to residential and business facilities.  

V.  MOTIVATION OF ATTACKERS 

Motivation  is  an  important  factor  in  order  to  understand  and  respond  to  cyber  attacks.  Cyber  attacks  targeted  to-
wards  AMI  are  usually  motivated  by  terrorism  to  disrupt  a  nation’s  critical  infrastructure.  Even  casual  crack-
ers/hackers seeking to test their skills are attracted to such a prominent target. Industrial espionage and other busi-
ness disruptions, whether politically motivated or not, are another key motivation. Additionally, some attacks may 
seek to utilize AMI as a launching point for other Internet attacks by virtue of the vast number of devices, their abil-
ity  to  initiate  many-pronged  attacks,  and  even  their  ability  to  hide  malicious  or  criminal  data  through  dispersion 
among many nodes [26]. According to research by Ponemon, the organizations managing the U.S. critical infrastruc-
ture facilities are not well prepared for the attacks, if any take place [27]. All nations are vulnerable without making 
the  smart  meters  resilient.  Smart  meters  have  been  game  changers  for  cyber  attackers,  affording  them  a  rich  new 
resource for widespread disruption [28].  

Beyond the DoP, ToP, and DoG attacks on the power grid introduced in Section III, symptoms of AMI network at-
tacks  include:  unauthorized  web  pages  posted  on  Internet-connected  web  servers  collecting  data,  outbound  data 
transmissions using unknown protocols and ports, huge compressed file transmissions over AMI networks, unusual 
data load between data collectors and the smart meters, and unusual log entries.  

VI.  CONCLUSION 

AMI is an enabling technology for new initiatives in electrical power and its deployment plays an intimate role in 
electrical power delivery. Given the recent paradigm shift towards rapid and large-scale deployment, the attack sur-
face is rapidly increasing. AMI equipment vendors have also taken an approach largely based on closed and proprie-
tary security solutions in a false effort to maintain security, which deters evaluation and further research by the sci-
entific  community  –  although  there  are  signs  that  this  trend  is  slowing  changing  towards  open  standards  [29].  A 
cyber security roadmap for AMI systems can be architected only with complete understanding of the attack surface 
of AMI. It has been demonstrated that a compromised AMI can severely disrupt the power grid and all critical infra-
structure that rely on power. It is important to note that AMI is a global initiative with eventual deployment in any 
nation with a managed power grid. The first step in mitigating these attacks is to catalog the devices and protocols in 
order to scope the attack surface. This will establish the knowledge required to begin the process of reducing this 
attack surface through resiliency of the exposed points. In this paper, the attack surface has been established with the 
inclusion of some of the most prominent attack vectors into this surface.  

REFERENCES 

[1]  Sridhar, S.; Hahn, A.; Govindarasu, M., "Cyber attack-resilient control for smart grid," Innovative Smart Grid 
Technologies (ISGT), 2012 IEEE PES, vol., no., pp. 1-3, 16-20 Jan. 2012. DOI: 10.1109/ISGT.2012.6175567. 
[2]  Schukat, M., "Securing critical infrastructure," Digital Technologies (DT), 2014 10th International Conference 

on, vol., no., pp.298-304, 9-11 July 2014. DOI: 10.1109/DT.2014.6868731. 

[3]  The Edison Foundation, “Utility-Scale Smart Meter Deployments, Plans, and Proposals,” 2012. Online: 
http://www.edisonfoundation.net/iee/documents/iee_smartmeterrollouts_0512.pdf, retrieved Oct 2014. 

[4]  Energy Information Administration, Frequently Asked Questions, Online: 

http://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id=108&t=3, retrieved Oct 2014. 

[5]  E.D. Knapp and R. Samani, Applied Cyber Security and the Smart Grid. Elsevier, pp. 147-159, 2013. 
[6]  E.D. Knapp and R. Samani, Applied Cyber Security and the Smart Grid. Elsevier, pp. 57-86, 2013. 
[7]  E. Luiijf, “Understanding Cyber Threats and Vulnerabilities,” J. Lopez et al. (Eds.): Critical Information Infra-

structure Protection, LNCS 7130, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 52-67, 2012. 

 
 
 
[8]  Department of Energy Office Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability, “Roadmap to Achieve Energy Deliv-
ery Systems Cyber security,” Online: http://energy.gov/oe/downloads/roadmap-achieve-energy-delivery-
systems-cybersecurity-2011, retrieved Oct 2014. 

[9]  F. G. Marmol, C. Sorge, O. Ugus, G. M. Perez, “Do not snoop my habits: preserving privacy in the smart grid,” 

IEEE Communication Magazine, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 166-172, May 2012. 
[10] E. Naone, “Hacking the Smart Grid,” MIT Technology Review 2010. Online: 

http://www.technologyreview.com/news/420061/hacking-the-smart-grid/, retrieved Sep 2014. 

[11] Ping Yi; Ting Zhu; Qingquan Zhang; Yue Wu; Jianhua Li, “A denial of service attack in advanced metering 
infrastructure network,” Communications (ICC), 2014 IEEE International Conference on, vol., no., pp. 1029-
1034, 10-14 June 2014. DOI: 10.1109/ICC.2014.6883456.  

[12] P. McDaniel and S. McLaughlin, “Security and privacy challenges in the smart grid,” IEEE Security & Privacy, 

vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 75-77, 2009. 

[13] Cleveland, F.M., “Cyber security issues for Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI),” Power and Energy Soci-
ety General Meeting - Conversion and Delivery of Electrical Energy in the 21st Century, 2008 IEEE, vol., no., 
pp. 1-5, 20-24 July 2008. 

[14] S. Baker, N. Filipiak, and K. Timlin, “In the Dark: Crucial Industries Confront Cyber Attacks,” McAfee Second 
Annual Critical Infrastructure Protection Report, Center for Strategic and International Studies, McAfee Incor-
porated, Online: http://www.mcafee.com/us/resources/reports/rp-critical-infrastructure-protection.pdf, retrieved 
Oct 2014. 

[15] North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC), Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP) Standards, 

Online: http://www.nerc.com/pa/Stand/Pages/CIPStandards.aspx, retrieved Oct 2014. 

[16] National Institute for Standards and Technology Office of the National Coordinator for Smart Grid Interopera-
bility, “Framework and Roadmap for Smart Grid Interoperability Standards,” NIST Special Publication 1108, 
release 1.0, Online: http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/releases/upload/smartgrid_interoperability_final.pdf, re-
trieved Oct 2014. 

[17] Schukat, M., “Securing critical infrastructure,” Digital Technologies (DT), 2014 10th International Conference 

on, vol., no., pp. 298-304, 9-11 July 2014. DOI: 10.1109/DT.2014.6868731. 

[18] Hahn, A. and Govindarasu, M., “Cyber Attack Exposure Evaluation Framework for the Smart Grid,” Smart 

Grid, IEEE Transactions on, vol.2, no.4, pp. 835-843, Dec 2011. DOI: 10.1109/TSG.2011.2163829. 

[19] Searle, J. and McParland, C., “HAN Attack Surface and the Open Smart Energy Gateway Project,” Lawrence 
Berkeley National Laboratory May 2013 Report, Online: http://drrc.lbl.gov/sites/all/files/lbnl-6013e_0.pdf, re-
trieved Nov 2014. 

[20] American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and Association of Edison Illumination Companies (AEIC), 

“SmartGrid/AEIC AMI Interoperability Standard Guidelines,” Online: http://aeic.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/07/AEIC-Guidelines-v2.1-2012-07-26clean.pdf, retrieved Oct 2014. 
[21] ZigBee Alliance, Smart Energy Profile 2.0 Public Application Protocol Specification, Online: 

http://www.zigbee.org/Standards/ZigBeeSmartEnergy/SmartEnergyProfile2.aspx, retrieved Oct 2014. 

[22] Aravinthan, V.; Namboodiri, V.; Sunku, S.; Jewell, W., “Wireless AMI application and security for controlled 
home area networks,” Power and Energy Society General Meeting, 2011 IEEE, vol., no., pp.1-8, 24-29 July 
2011. 

[23] R. Meyer, “Security Issues and Vulnerability Assessment of Zigbee Enabled Home Area Network Implementa-

tions,” Master of Science Project, Spring 2012, Department of Computer Science, California State University 
Sacramento, Online: http://csus-dspace.calstate.edu/bitstream/handle/10211.9/1833/zigbee2.pdf?sequence=2, 
retrieved Oct 2014. 

[24] Framework and toolset for KillerBee, Online: https://code.google.com/p/KillerBee/, retrieved Oct 2014. 
[25] Grochocki, D.; Huh, J.H.; Berthier, R.; Bobba, R.; Sanders, W.H.; Cardenas, A.A.; Jetcheva, J.G., “AMI 

threats, intrusion detection requirements and deployment recommendations,” Smart Grid Communications 
(SmartGridComm), 2012 IEEE Third International Conference on, vol., no., pp. 395-400, 5-8 Nov 2012. DOI: 
10.1109/SmartGridComm.2012.6486016. 

[26] S. McLaughlin, D. Podkuiko, and P. McDaniel, “Energy Theft in the Advanced Metering Infrastructure,” 

CRITIS'09 Proceedings of the 4th international conference on Critical information infrastructures security, pp. 
176-187, 2009. 

[27] Ponemon Institute, “Critical Infrastructure: Security Preparedness and Maturity,” July 2014, Online: 

http://www.hunton.com/files/upload/Unisys_Report_Critical_Infrastructure_Cyber security.pdf, retrieved Oct 
2014. 

[28] R. Anderson and S. Fuloria, “Who controls the off switch?” 2010 First IEEE International Conference on 

Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), Gaithersburg, MD, USA, Oct 2010. 

[29] R. Acra and M. Thaker, “Internet Standards Come to the Advanced Metering Infrastructure,” Electric Energy 

T&D Magazine, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 36-39, Sep 2010. 

 
