6
1
0
2

l
u
J

9

]
T
G
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
9
5
2
0
.
7
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING

1

Security Pricing as Enabler of Cyber-Insurance
A First Look at Differentiated Pricing Markets

Ranjan Pal, Member, IEEE, {Leana Golubchik, Konstantinos Psounis}, Senior Member, IEEE,
Pan Hui, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Despite the promising potential of network risk management services (e.g., cyber-insurance) to improve information
security, their deployment is relatively scarce, primarily due to such service companies being unable to guarantee proﬁtability. As a
novel approach to making cyber-insurance services more viable, we explore a symbiotic relationship between security vendors (e.g.,
Symantec) capable of price differentiating their clients, and cyber-insurance agencies having possession of information related to the
security investments of their clients. The goal of this relationship is to (i) allow security vendors to price differentiate their clients based
on security investment information from insurance agencies, (ii) allow the vendors to make more proﬁt than in homogeneous pricing
settings, and (iii) subsequently transfer some of the extra proﬁt to cyber-insurance agencies to make insurance services more viable.
In this paper, we perform a theoretical study of a market for differentiated security product pricing, primarily with a view to ensuring that
security vendors (SVs) make more proﬁt in the differentiated pricing case as compared to the case of non-differentiated pricing. In order
to practically realize such pricing markets, we propose novel and computationally efﬁcient consumer differentiated pricing mechanisms
for SVs based on (i) the market structure, (ii) the communication network structure of SV consumers captured via a consumer’s
Bonacich centrality in the network, and (iii) security investment amounts made by SV consumers. We validate our analytical model
via extensive simulations conducted on practical SV client network topologies; main results show (through those simulations) that (a)
a monopoly SV could improve its proﬁt margin by upto ≈ 25% (based on the simulation setting) by accounting for clients’ investment
information and network locations, whereas in an oligopoly setting, SVs could improve their proﬁt margins by upto ≈ 18%, and (b)
differentiated security pricing mechanisms are fair among SV consumers with respect to the total investment made by a consumer.
To the best of knowledge, the proposed differentiated pricing framework is the ﬁrst of its kind in the security products domain, and is
generally applicable to usecases beyond the one investigated in this work.

Index Terms—Security, Monopoly, Oligopoly, Pricing, Bonacich Centrality, {Market, Nash} Equilibrium, Randomized Algorithms

(cid:70)

1 INTRODUCTION

The infrastructure, the users, and the services offered
on computer networks today are all subject to a wide
variety of risks. These risks include distributed denial
of service attacks, intrusions of various kinds, eaves-
dropping, hacking, phishing, worms, viruses, spams,
etc. Network users (both individuals and organizations)
have traditionally resorted to antivirus and anti-spam
software, ﬁrewalls, intrusion-detection systems (IDSs),
and other add-ons to reduce the likelihood of being af-
fected by threats. Currently, a large industry (companies
like Symantec, McAfee,) as well as considerable research
efforts are centered around developing and deploying
methods to detect threats and anomalies in order to
protect the cyber infrastructure and its users from the
negative impact of the anomalies.

1.1 Technology Drawbacks and Risk Management

Inspite of improvements in risk protection techniques
over the last decade due to hardware, software and
cryptographic methodologies, it is impossible to achieve
perfect/near-perfect cyber-security protection [1][2]. The im-
possibility arises due to a number of reasons (see [1] for
details): (i) scarce existence of sound technical solutions,
(ii) difﬁculty in designing solutions catered to varied

R.Pal is with the department of Computer Science, University of Southern
California, CA, USA. E-mail: rpal@usc.edu.
L. Golubchik is jointly with the departments of Computer Science and Electri-
cal Engineering, University of Southern California. E-mail: leana@usc.edu.
K. Psounis is jointly with the departments of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, University of Southern California. E-mail: kpsou-
nis@usc.edu.
P. Hui is jointly with the department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, and Telekom Innovation
Labs (Y-Labs), Berlin. E-mail: pan.hui@telekom.de.

intentions behind network attacks, (iii) misaligned in-
centives between network users, security product ven-
dors, and regulatory authorities regarding each taking
upon them a proper liability to protect the network, (iv)
network users taking advantage of the positive security
effects generated by other user investments in security,
in turn themselves not investing in security and resulting
in the free-riding problem, (v) customer lock-in and
ﬁrst mover effects of vulnerable security products, (vi)
absence of popular vulnerability markets, e.g., settings
where vulnerabilities are traded for money, (vii) difﬁ-
culty measuring risks resulting in challenges to design-
ing pertinent risk removal solutions, (viii) the problem
of a lemons market [3], whereby security vendors have
no incentive to release robust products in the market,
(ix) liability shell games played by product vendors,
and (x) user naiveness in optimally exploiting feature
beneﬁts of technical solutions. In view of these inevitable
barriers to 100% risk mitigation, the need arises for
alternative methods of risk management in cyberspace.
In this regard, some security researchers in the recent
past have identiﬁed cyber-insurance as a potential tool
for effective risk management.

Cyber-insurance is a risk management technique via
which network users transfer their risks to an insurance
company (e.g., ISP, cloud provider), in return for a fee,
i.e., the insurance premium. Researchers vouching for
the use of cyber-insurance believe that cyber-insurance
would lead to the design of insurance contracts that
would shift appropriate amounts of self-defense liability
on the clients, thereby making the cyberspace more
robust. Here the term ‘self-defense’ implies the efforts by
a network user to secure their system through technical
solutions such as anti-virus and anti-spam software,
ﬁrewalls, using secure operating systems, etc. Cyber-
insurance can also potentially be a market solution that
can align with economic incentives of cyber-insurers,

 
 
 
 
 
 
SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING

2

users (individuals/organizations), policy makers, and
security software vendors, i.e., the cyber-insurers will
earn proﬁt from appropriately pricing premiums, se-
curity risks will be appropriately shared among net-
work users and the latter will seek to hedge potential
losses by jointly buying insurance and investing in self-
defense mechanisms, the policy makers would ensure
the increase in overall network security, and the security
software vendors could go ahead with their ﬁrst-mover
and lock-in strategies, and at the same time experience
an increase in their product sales via forming alliances
with cyber-insurers.

1.2 Research Motivation
We motivate our work on differentiated security pricing
by ﬁrst raising the issue of moderate/unviable cyber-
insurance markets, and then introducing the concept of
price differentiating security products, and how it might,
as an idea, resolve the problem of unviable insurance
markets. We emphasize here that the use case of cyber-
insurance markets is just one instance where the concept of
price differentiating security products might be applicable.

1.2.1 Moderate Cyber-Insurance Markets
The total cyber-insurance business currently amounts to
US$ 2 billion, whereas the total cost of security breaches
to the global economy amounts to a whopping US$ 445
billion [4]. There are presently over 30 insurance carriers
in the United States offering cyber-insurance contracts,
and as of 2015, these carriers report signiﬁcant yearly
increases (up to approximately 25%) in their client base,
which has primarily been corpororate organizations (ref.
Betterley Report). However, the current inability to bridge
the US$ 443 billion gap could be overcome if the cyber-
insurance business were to spread to individuals rather
than only industries and organizations. A major road-
block is the potential inability of the cyber-insurers to
make strictly positive proﬁt at all times [5][2][6], pri-
marily due to the high degree of non-transparency of
risk information between the insurer and the insured
in a networked setting. Hence, the need of the hour is to
design alternative mechanisms that allow cyber-insurers to
make positive proﬁt at all times without relying on the
degree of information transparency between the insurer
and the insured, and in-turn enable wide-spread adoption of
cyber-insurance products amongst individuals human users,
industries, and organizations.
Our Main Idea - We envision price differentiation of
security products amongst SV consumers to be a mech-
anism that will make cyber-insurance markets more
viable, without it requiring information on insurance
parameters such as premium or coverage.

1.2.2 A Need for Price Differentiating Security Products
Security products (e.g., antivirus software) are one of the
main sources of protection for Internet users to prevent
their communication devices from being hacked. An
important factor on the basis of which cyber-insurance
companies charge premiums to their clients (users) is the
latters’ expected risk value, which in turn is a function of,
along with other parameters, the robustness of security
protection adopted by the clients. In practice, most users
do not take advantage of the full power of a security
product, either due to the ignorance of using the product
effectively, or being willfully careless. In both cases, these
users, along with the careful and security knowledgeable

users, usually pay the same price for a security product
available in the market. Our idea in this paper is to
make SVs charge/price users (consumers) heterogenously
but proportionately, based on their security behavior. We
hypothesize, based on price differentiation principles in eco-
nomics, that in doing so the security vendors would make more
proﬁt compared to their usual uniform pricing mechanism.
As a result, they could symbiotically transfer a portion
of their proﬁt amounts to cyber-insurers in return for
the latter providing the vendors with (i) information
about consumer security behavior that they collect, and
(ii) vendor lock-in privileges. The making of extra proﬁt
by the cyber-insurers in this symbiotic environment can
improve their chances of ensuring market viability.
Goal: In this paper, our two-fold goal is to (i) prove our hy-
pothesis that proportionately fair heterogenous security prod-
uct pricing among Internet users generates more proﬁts for
SVs compared to uniform pricing, and (ii) realize a practical,
computationally efﬁcient way to achieve price heterogeneity.

1.3 Research Contributions
We make the following contributions in this paper.

1) We propose a pricing environment consisting of
security vendors (SVs) and their clients, and
mathematically model the vendor-client interaction
mechanism that accounts for client security invest-
ment, and the positive externalities caused due to
them (see Section 2).

2) We propose a static and heterogenous product
pricing mechanism for SV clients based on the
client (consumer) logical network and their se-
curity investment amounts. Our proposed static
pricing mechanism also subsumes the uniform and
binary pricing (different prices for two different
user types) mechanisms as special cases of the
general heterogenous pricing mechanism. The lat-
ter two pricing mechanisms are of use when the
SV might be constrained in practice (e.g., due
to policy issues) to adopt differentiated pricing
schemes on security products. Our proposed pric-
ing mechanisms are based on Stackelberg games
[22]. We show in theory that there always exists
a unique Nash equilibrium value of the SV prices
and investments of their corresponding consumers,
for the pricing game entailed by the mechanisms.
In addition, we also show that despite the exis-
tence of a unique Nash equilibrium, the design of
an optimal binary pricing mechanism is an NP-
Hard problem, for which we design an efﬁcient
randomized-approximation algorithm. Finally, us-
ing spectral graph theory, we also derive tight
bounds on the ratio of the proﬁt margins for a
monopoly SV, with and without taking into account
network externalities (see Section 3).

3) We conduct an extensive numerical evaluation
study for monopoly and oligopoly SV settings to
highlight the effects of consumer overlay network
on SV heterogenous pricing outcomes. Speciﬁcally,
for practical real world topologies like scale free
graphs and trees (more details in Section 4), we
show that (i) the per-unit product price charged
by an SV is proportional to the Bonacich central-
ity of consumers in their overlay network, thus
obeying the results obtained in theory from Sec-
tion 3, and (ii) the total cost incurred by every
consumer (network user) in security investments

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING

3

is nearly equal, and amounts to a constant that
is independent of the underlying network topol-
ogy. The latter point implies consumer fairness (a
notion similar to network neutrality) because no
matter how a consumer is placed in an overlay
network, he pays the same total amount in security
investments as any other consumer in the network,
even though his per-unit security investment price
charged by an SV is proportional to the amount
of positive externalities he generates via his invest-
ments. Via simulation results, we also observe that
(i) a monopoly SV could improve their current proﬁt
margins by ≈ upto 25% (based on the simulation
setting) by accounting for client location informa-
tion in the consumer network and his investment
information, whereas (ii) in an oligopoly setting, SVs
could increase their current proﬁt margins by ≈
upto 18% (see Section 4).

As a ﬁnal comment, to the best of our knowledge, the
proposed differentiated pricing framework is the ﬁrst of
its kind in the security products domain, and is generally
applicable to usecases beyond the one investigated in
this work.

1.4 Related Efforts
As mentioned above, with respect to the pricing eco-
nomics of security products, ours is the ﬁrst work on
differentiated security product pricing for consumers
interacting via a network. In this section, we ﬁrst provide
a brief description of existing research related to non-
homogenous pricing in a network, where externalities
and the network structure are accounted for. We then
state the differences of this work with our preliminary
results [13].
Network and Investment Dependent Pricing - Given
a set of prices, our model takes the form of a network
game among interacting consumers. Recent papers that
study such games include [7][8][9][10]. A key modeling
assumption in [7][8][9], that we also adopt in our setting,
is that the payoff function of a consumer takes the form
of a linear-quadratic function. Ballester et al. [7] were the
ﬁrst to note the linkage between Bonacich centrality and
Nash equilibrium outcomes in a single stage game with
local payoff complementarities. Our characterization of
optimal prices when the monopolist can perfectly price
differentiate is reminiscent of their results, since prices
are inherently related to the Bonacich centrality of each
consumer. However, both the motivation and the analysis are
quite different, since ours is a two-stage game, where a
monopolist chooses prices to maximize revenue subject
to equilibrium constraints. Also, [8] and [9] study a
similar game and interpret their results in terms of
public good provision. A number of recent papers [11]
[12] make the assumption of limited knowledge of the
logical network structure, i.e., they assume that only the
degree distribution is known, and thus derive optimal
pricing strategies that depend on this ﬁrst degree mea-
sure of externalities of a consumer. In our model, we
make the assumption that the monopolist has complete
knowledge of the logical network structure and, thus,
obtain qualitatively different results: the degree is not
the appropriate measure of inﬂuence due to externality, but
rather prices are proportional to the Bonacich centrality of the
agents. On the technical side, note that assuming more
global knowledge of the network structure increases the
complexity of the problem in the following way: if only

Symbol
ui(·)
N
hij
xi
G
−−→x−i
B(·)
c
pi

Meaning
utility of user (consumer) i in consumer-seller model
number of consumers of an SV
externality effect of user j on user i
amount of self-defense goods consumed by user i
matrix representing externality values between user pairs
vector of self-defense amounts of users apart from i
Bonacich centrality vector of users in a logical network
constant marginal manufacturing cost to SV
price per unit of self-defense good consumed by i

TABLE 1: Notation

the degree of a consumer is known, then essentially there
are as many different types of consumers as there are
different degrees. This is no longer true when more is
known: then, two consumers of the same degree may
be of different type because of the difference in the
characteristics of their neighbors, and therefore, optimal
prices charged to consumers may be different. Also, as
major differences from the above mentioned works, (i) for the
monopoly setting, we derive tight bounds on the ratio of the
proﬁt margins for an SV, with and without taking into account
network externalities, and (ii) We study (via simulations)
network price differentiation in oligpolistic markets consisting
of multiple competing SVs.
Differences with Preliminary Results [13] - In a previ-
ous effort [13] related to this paper, we had formalized
the differentiated pricing problem for network users and
proved it to be NP-Hard (for the binary pricing case). In
this paper, we surmount the computational challenges
of the binary pricing problem and propose an approx-
imation algorithm for that problem (see Section 3.3,
Theorem 5 and its proof.). Also, in contrast to [13], in this
paper we (i) validate the effectiveness of our proposed
algorithm via extensive simulations run on monopoly
and competitive security vendor markets, for practical
network topologies (see Section 4), and (ii) mathemat-
ically characterize the difference (via ratio bounds) in
proﬁt for SVs with and without price differentiation
(see Section 3.2, Theorem 3 and its proof), for general
topologies.

2 SYSTEM MODEL
In this section we propose our seller-buyer system
model. We ﬁrst, we qualitatively describe the general en-
vironment comprising SVs (the sellers), their clients (the
buyers), and the agencies (e.g., cyberinsurance ﬁrms)
that might beneﬁt from SV pricing mechanisms. We then
describe the SV pricing rationale. Finally, we analytically
deﬁne the seller-buyer interaction framework. A sum-
mary of main notation is shown in Table 1.

2.1 General Setting
We consider a system where potentially multiple security
vendors exists in a market. We assume that all network
users have access to some paid security software, e.g.,
antivirus software, developed by a given security vendor
1. We assume that SV clients form a logical network
(e.g., via Gmail, Facebook, Twitter, etc.). These networks
are the most common substrate for facilitating social

1. It is a well known fact that many Internet users use free pirated
versions of anti-virus software, or sample free versions. For simplicity,
we do not consider this issue in the paper. However, we believe
that this issue can be resolved by regulatory agencies via appropriate
policies and mandates so that every user is ofﬁcially associated with
a particular security vendor.

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING

4

engineering attacks that are currently amongst the most
common cyberattack methods in practice [14]. However,
our work is also applicable to non-logical network struc-
tures.

With respect to a cyber-insurance setting (the example
setting for our paper motivating price differentiation
by SVs), the SVs can form a symbiotic relationship
with ISPs, which can act as a cyber-insurance agency.
In view of recent recommendations made by an FCC
advisory committee2, ISPs have committed to taking
steps to combat cyber-security threats (e.g., enforcing
antibot conduct code, executing the ability to monitor,
trace, analyse, and block trafﬁc without violating privacy
rules, and educating Internet users to access the web
safely. Thus, we envision a future where SVs can work
in collaboration with ISPs to make cyber-space secure.
The ISPs can act as cyber-insurers, where a client locks-
in with particular SV through an ISP providing service to
the client. This could happen if while signing an Internet
agreement with the ISP, the client is required to buy
security products by a particular vendor in a symbiotic
business relationship with an ISP.

2.2 SV Pricing Rationale

We consider SVs adopting a heterogenous product pric-
ing mechanism that is based on the logical communica-
tion network of its consumers and their corresponding
security investments. The motivation for heterogenous
pricing manner is for an SV to make more proﬁt from
its security products compared to that obtained from
uniform pricing, through extra client information ob-
tained from ISPs. In addition, it would also seem fair to
price network users heterogenously due to the differing
amounts of positive externalities they generate through
their security investments. With a uniform pricing mech-
anism, some users pay more compared to the externality
they generate, and vice versa, thereby leading to the
existence of free-riders in the network. One way for
SVs to envision a free-rider free network is to deploy a
heterogenous pricing scheme for their clients. A thing to
note here is that price heterogeneity or discrimination
in general might not go down well with consumers,
primarily raising network neutrality concerns. However,
SVs can get topology and security investment related
information about their clients from ISPs (and hence
proportionately estimate client generated externalities)
through disclosure agreements signed between the ISP,
the SV, and their clients, as part of a mandate imposed by
the government [15]. In doing so, the SVs can convince
consumers of a heterogenous but fair pricing mechanism
in operation that will raise fewer eyebrows.

2.3 Seller-Buyer Interaction

To mathematically illustrate the buyer-seller interaction,
for simplicity of analysis, in this section we only consider
a monopoly setting with a single SV serving clients
forming a logical network. In this regard, we assume
that a monopolistic SV (seller) has N clients (consumers),
connected via a logical network and using self-defense
products manufactured by the SV. Each consumer i (cid:15) N

2. FCC chairman Julius Genachowski spoke at the Cybersecurity
Bipartisan Policy Center on the role of ISPs in improving cybersecurity
(2012).

has a utility function, ui(·), given as

ui(xi, −→x−i, pi) = αixi − βix2

i + xi ·

(cid:88)

j

hijxj − pixi,

(1)

where xi, a continuous variable, is the amount of self-
defense/self-protection features consumed or invested in
−→x−i is the vector of self-defense investments
by user i,
of users other than i, and pi is the price charged by
the SV to user i per unit of self-defense investment
consumed by i. In reality, SV products are bundled in
a package which is priced as a single item. However,
every bundled package has a number of features which
different users use differently, and the effectiveness of
a user’s security protection would depend on how he
uses those features [14]. In that light, we assume that xi
is continuous. Here pi is the equilibrium market price
set by the SV (in case of a competitive setting, the
equilibrium price is set after competing with other SVs in
the security product business.). αi, βi, hij are constants.
αi, βi are constants associated with a user’s individual
investments xi, and hij is the amount of externality user
j exerts on user i through his per unit investments.
Here hij ≥ 0 and hii = 0, ∀i. xi
is assumed to be
continuous for analysis tractability reasons. The ﬁrst and
second term in the utility function denote the utility to a
user solely dependent on his own investments, the third
term is the positive externality effects of investments
made by other users in the network on user i, and
the fourth term is the price user i pays for consuming
xi units of self-defense goods manufactured by the SV.
We assume here that xi is bounded. It is well known
that the quadratic nature of the utility function allows for a
tractable analysis and offers a nice second-order approximation
to higher order concave payoffs, while preserving the properties
of utility functions for risk-averse users. The insight into
why quadratic functions serve as a good approximation to
higher order concave functions is related to the point in the
function curve when the law of diminishing returns starts to
hold. For different cost functions the point is different, but
inherently it exists on every curve. So the trends one observes
by analyzing (or simulating) general concave costs is the same
as those observed by analyzing (simulating) quadratic concave
functions.

The SV accounts for the strategic investment behavior
(after it would have set its prices) of users it provides
service to, and decides on an optimal pricing scheme that
arises from the solution to the following unconstrained
optimization problem.

max−→p

(cid:88)

i

pixi − cxi,

−→p are the vectors of prices charged by the SV to
where
its consumers, and xi is the amount of self-defense goods
consumed by consumer i after the SV sets its prices. c
is the constant marginal cost to the SV to manufacture a
unit of any of its products. For the analysis that follows
in the paper, we will assume for all i, (i) 2βi > (cid:80)
j (cid:15) N hij
and (ii) αi > c. Assumption (i) implies that the concavity
of user utility functions and that the optimal investment
level of network users are bounded, and assumption
(ii) implies that all network users purchase a positive
amount of security product manufactured by the SV.

3 THE SV PRICING MECHANISM
Our goal in this section is to (i) study and analyze opti-
mal pricing mechanisms for SVs and the corresponding

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING

5

security investments of their clients (consumers), and (ii)
to draw potential relationships between the structure
of the client network with SV prices and consumer
investments. We ﬁrst describe a single-period two-stage
Stackelberg pricing game between an SV and its con-
sumers. We then state the mathematical results related
to the pricing game equilibria for the monopoly setting
under both, the heterogenous and the uniform pricing
scenarios, and provide the relevant practical implications
of the results. Finally, we address the problem of design-
ing an optimal pricing mechanism for the binary pricing
scenario, which is a special case of the heterogenous
pricing scenario, but is NP-hard. For simplicity, we do
not analyse the oligopoly setting of SVs for closed form
expressions of game parameters at equilibria. However,
we conduct simulation experiments on the oligoply set-
ting (see Section 4).

3.1 Deﬁning the Pricing Game

Our proposed SV pricing mechanism entails a one-
period, two-stage Stackelberg pricing game consisting of
the following two steps.

1) The SV chooses a price vector

−→p so as to maximize
its proﬁts via the following optimization problem.

max−→p

(cid:88)

i

pixi − cxi,

We consider three types of consumer pricing sce-
narios in the paper:

• Scenario 1 - the SV does not price discriminate
−→p
amongst its consumers and all elements of
are identical, i.e., pi = p, ∀i.

• Scenario 2 (binary pricing) - the SV charges two
types of prices per unit of user investment: a
regular price denoted as preg for each user in
a particular category, and a discounted price,
denoted as pdsc for other users,

• Scenario 3 - the SV charges different prices to

different consumers.

2) Consumer i chooses to consume xi units of self-
defense products, so as to maximize his utility
ui(xi, , −→x−i, pi) given the prices chosen by the SV.
Since the pricing strategy is the output of a dynamic
consisting of two stages, we will analyze the subgame
perfect Nash equilibria (SPNE) of this game, instead of
just focussing on traditional Nash equilibria. A strategy
proﬁle is a SPNE if it represents a Nash equilibrium
of every subgame of the original game. Informally, this
means that if (1) the players played any smaller game
that consisted of only one part of the larger game and
(2) their behavior represents a Nash equilibrium of that
smaller game, then their behavior is a subgame perfect
equilibrium of the larger game. Every ﬁnite extensive
game, like ours, has a subgame perfect equilibrium [16].

3.2 Results - Pricing Strategy

In this section, we state results related to the pricing
strategy arising from the game equilibria and analyze the
intuition and practical implications behind those results.
We ﬁrst comment on the equilibria of the second stage
of the two-stage pricing game, given a vector of prices
−→p , the second stage of our pricing game is
−→p . Given
a subgame and we denote it as Gsub. We then have the

following theorem. The proof of the theorem is in Section
6.
Theorem 1. Gsub has a unique Nash equilibrium and is
represented in closed form as

+

(cid:88)

1
2βi

xi = BR(−→x−i) =

αi − pi
2βi
where BR(−→x−i) is the strategic best response of user i when
other users in the network consume −→x−i. In the case when
SV does not price discriminate its consumers, the Nash
equilibrium vector of user investments is given by

hijxj,

(2)

j(cid:15)N

−→x = (Q − G)−1(−→α − −→p

(3)
where −→p is the optimal uniform per unit investment price
charged by the SV to all its consumers, and Q is a matrix that
takes values 2βi at location (i, j) if i = j and zero otherwise.

−→
1 ),

Theorem Intuition and Implications: The intuition behind
a unique sub-game perfect Nash equilibrium is the fact
that increasing one’s consumption (security investment)
incurs a positive externality on his peers, which further
implies that the game involves strategic complementarities3
[16], and therefore the equilibria are ordered. This mono-
tonic ordering results in a unique NE [17]. The beneﬁt
of dealing with a single equilibrium vector for Gsub is
the ease with which the SV can decide on its optimal
strategy.

Optimal Pricing Strategy We now discuss the optimal
pricing strategy for the SV given that the users self-
protect according to the Nash equilibrium of Gsub. Before
going into the details we ﬁrst deﬁne the concept of a
Bonacich centrality in a network of heterogenous users.
The Bonacich centrality measure [18] is a sociological
graph-theoretic measure of network inﬂuence. It assigns
relative inﬂuence scores to all nodes in the network
based on the concept that connections to high-scoring
nodes contribute more to the score of the node in ques-
tion than equal connections to low-scoring nodes. In
our work, the Bonacich measure of a user reﬂects his
inﬂuence on other users of the network via the positive
externalities generated by him through his self-defense
investments4. Formally, let G be a matrix deﬁning the
logical network of N users (consumers), and having in
its entries the hij values. Let D be a diagonal matrix, and
−→w be a weight vector. The weighted Bonacich centrality
vector is given by

B(G, D, −→w ) = (I − GD)−1−→w ,
where (I − GD)−1 is well-deﬁned and non-negative.

(4)

We now have our ﬁrst result regarding the optimal
prices charged by the SV to its consumers. The proof of
the theorem is in Section 6.
Theorem 2. The unique optimal price vector −→p charged by
the SV is given by
−→α + c ·
2
where G(cid:48) = G+GT

−→
w(cid:48)) − GT Q−1B(G(cid:48), Q−1,

+ GQ−1B(G(cid:48), Q−1,

−→
w(cid:48)),
(5)

−→
w(cid:48) =

−→p =

and

−→
1

−→
1

.

−→α −c·
2

2

3. In economics and game theory, the decisions of two or more
players are called strategic complements if they mutually reinforce one
another.

4. The use of the concept of Bonacich centrality in externality driven

networks is explained in [7]

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING

6

In the case when the SV does not price discriminate its con-
sumers, the unique optimal price (same for every consumer)
charged per consumer is given by

p =

−→
1 T (Q − G)−1(−→α + c
1 T (Q − G)−1−→
−→
1

−→
1 )

.

1
2

(6)

Theorem Intuition and Implications: The optimal price
vector in the no price discrimination case is independent
of individual node centralities, whereas in the price
discrimination case the optimal price vector depends on
the Bonacich centrality of individual users. The intuition
behind the result is the fact that users tend to invest
in security mechanisms proportional to their Bonacich
centrality (and in turn generate proportional amount of
network externalities) in the Nash Equilibrium [19][20].
Therefore it makes sense for the SV to charge users based
on their Bonacich centralities when price discrimination
is possible. In addition, Equation (5) has three parts to
its price vector expression. The ﬁrst subexpression is that
part of the price vector that is topology invariant. The
second subexpression is that part of the price vector
that is topology variant and reﬂects the markup price
charged to network users for the positive externalities
they gain due to the security investments of other users.
Finally, the third subexpression is that part of the price
vector which is topology variant and reﬂects user price
discounts for the beneﬁts they provide to other users in
the network through their security investments.

We now state the following result regarding proﬁt
amounts made by an SV in pricing scenarios 1 and 3.
The proof of the theorem is in Section 6.

Theorem 3. The proﬁts, P0 and P1, made by an SV when the
latter does not (does) account for user investment externalities
are given by does not:

P0 =






(cid:32) −→α − c ·
2

(cid:33)T

−→
1

(Q − G)−1

(cid:32) −→α − c ·
2

(cid:33)


−→
1



(7)

and does:



P1 =



(cid:32) −→α − c ·
2

(cid:33)T

−→
1

(Q − G(cid:48))−1

(cid:32) −→α − c ·
2

(cid:33)


−→
1



. (8)

Assuming Q − G to be positive deﬁnite, the bounds of the
ratio of proﬁts in these two cases is given by

0 ≤

1
2

+ λmin(K) ≤

P0
P1

≤

1
2

+ λmax(K) ≤ 1,

(9)

where R = Q − G and λmin(·), λmax(·) denote the minimum
and maximum eigenvalues of their arguments respectively,
and K =

(cid:16) RR−T +RT R−1
4

(cid:17)

.

In brief, the main intuition behind the theorem result
is that an SV can make more proﬁts when accounting
for network externalities compared to when it does not.
The inuition here is that more informed pricing implies
more proﬁt. We postpone a more detailed explanation of
the theorem intuitions and its implications to Section 4,
as we ﬁnd it appropriate to ﬁrst plot the ratio of P0
for
P1
instances of different graph topologies to gain a better
understanding of the theorem implications.

3.3 The Case of Binary Pricing
In reality, the idea of charging multiple different prices
to various consumers may not be very practical to
implement, primarily because of the difﬁculty to select
different classes of users paying different prices. To make
things simpler, an SV can opt to charge two types of
prices for two different classes of consumers: (i) a dis-
counted price, pdsc, for consumers who have signiﬁcant
positive inﬂuence on the security of a network based on
their network location and the amount of investments
made, (ii) and a regular price, preg for the other con-
sumers. Thus, the ﬁrst goal of an SV is to determine
the subset of consumers who should be offered the
discounted price so as to maximize the SVs own proﬁts.
Given that preg and pdsc are exogenously speciﬁed, the

proﬁt optimization problem for an SV is given by
−→
1 )T (Q − G)−1(−→α − −→p )

M aximize (−→p − c

s.t. pi (cid:15) {preg, pdsc}, ∀i (cid:15) N.
Note here that the expression, (Q − G)−1(−→α − −→p ), in
the objective function is the NE investment amount
of users in self-defense mechanisms. Thus, we have a
combinatorial optimization problem for maximizing the
proﬁts of an SV. In order to investigate the tractability
of the problem, we ﬁrst formulate it in the following
manner:

OP T : M aximize (δ−→y + c(cid:48)−→

1 )T (Q − G)−1(

−→
α(cid:48) − δ−→y )

s.t. yi (cid:15) {−1, 1}, ∀i (cid:15) N.

−→
a(cid:48) = −→a − pT ,
Here δ = preg − pT , where pT = preg+pdsc
and c(cid:48) = pT − c ≥ δ. Note that using these variables,
−→p =
the feasible price allocation can be expressed as
δ−→y + pT . Our next result comments on the intractability
of solving OPT. The proof of the result which is in Section
6, is based on the reduction of OPT from the well-known
MAX-CUT problem [21].

2

,

Theorem 4. Given that preg and pdsc are exogenously
speciﬁed by the SV, in the binary pricing case an SV’s proﬁt
optimization problem, OPT, is NP-hard.

Theorem Intuitions and Implications: The i, jth entry of
(Q − G)−1 gives a measure of how much the edge
between i and j contributes to the centrality of consumer
i. Therefore, the MAX-CUT interpretation roughly sug-
gests that the optimal solution of the pricing problem is
achieved when the monopolist tries to price discriminate
consumers that inﬂuence each other signiﬁcantly, how-
ever, at the same time takes into account the consumers’
value of consumption in the absence of network effects.
The NP-hard nature of the pricing problem implies the
impracticality of computing optimal prices in practice
and thus drives the need to design schemes to com-
puting optimal binary prices up to a certain acceptable
approximation. The following theorem states the result
of approximating optimal prices charged in the binary
pricing case. The theorem exploits the relation of OPT to
the MAX-CUT problem, and establishes that there exists
an algorithm that provides a solution with a provable
approximation guarantee. The proof of the theorem is in
Section 6.
Theorem 5. Let WOP T be the optimal value for problem
OPT. Then, there exists a randomized polynomial-time algo-
rithm that outputs a solution with objective value Walg such

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING

7

that E[Walg] + r > 0.878(WOP T + r), where
−→
−→
r = δ2−→
a(cid:48) −AT c(cid:48)−→
a(cid:48) −2δ2T race(A),

1 |−c(cid:48)−→

−→
1 T |A

−→
1 +δ

1 T A

1 T A

and

A = (Q − G)−1

Theorem Implications: Clearly, if r ≤ 0, which, is the
case when δ is small, this algorithm provides at least
an 0.878-optimal solution of the problem. On the other
hand, if r > 0, we obtain 0.878 optimality after a constant
(r) addition to the objective function. This suggests that
for small r > 0, the algorithm still provides near-optimal
solutions.

4 NUMERICAL EVALUATION
In this section, we perform an extensive numerical eval-
uation study of monopoly and oligopoly SV pricing
markets comprising of (i) autonomous SVs and (ii)
rational, non-colluding consumers connected through
a logical communication network. Through numerical
simulations, we aim to address the following questions:
1) What is the relationship between SV prices and the

client network topology?

2) For any given pricing scenario, how does the net-
work location of a consumer relate with their total
security investment amount?

3) Are the SV pricing schemes fair to network users?
4) How does the peformance of SV pricing schemes
differ between the monopolistic and oligopolistic
market settings?

4.1 Parameters and Markets
Parameter Setting: We deal with preferential attach-
ment (PA) and random tree network topologies in this
work (see Section 4.2 for details). For both monopolistic
and oligopolistic market settings, the model parameters
(e.g., PA and random tree networks) are as follows:
c = 0.5, αi = 2, βi ∈ {2, 2.5, 3} (for the preferential
attachment mechanism), and βi = |G|
20 (for random trees),
for all i (cid:15) N . The parameters αi and βi are chosen to
make sure that the utility function of each client is twice
differentiable and strictly increasing. We assume that
the inﬂuence matrix G is such that for all i, hij = 1
,
di
where di is the number of non-negative entries in row
i of G. Due to several competing SVs serving clients
on the same network G in an oligopolistic setting, we
assume that information on the estimates of externalities
generated by consumer investments can be exchanged
for free amongst the competing SVs in a truthful manner.
Market Setting: For the purposes of simulation, we
assume a monopolistic market setting with one SV, and
an oligoplistic setting with two SVs. To simulate the
oligopolistic competition between the SVs, each SV ﬁrst
plays a Stackelberg price game amongst its clients as in
the monopoly setting to reach a Stackelberg equilibrium
price vector that is either single priced or binary priced,
and then repeatedly plays with its competing SV in
multiple rounds to converge upon a sub-game perfect
market Nash equilibrium price vector. This dynamic
repeated pricing game between competing SVs is played
with the mindset of an SV being able to prevent its clients
from switching to a different SV after each round. Finally,
on convergence, each SV and its clients play the sub-
game perfect Nash equilibrium strategies. In our work

we practically obtain the Stackelberg equilibrium (for the
monopoly setting) and the market Nash equilibrium (for
the oligopoly setting) price vectors in an iterative fashion
using the standard ﬁctitous play technique in game theory
[22].

4.2 Topology Formation
We choose preferential attachment graphs as one topol-
ogy type as they represent real world social/logical
network interactions [23]. A random graph formed by
the PA process can have two extremes: (i) a new born
user can inﬂuence users born earlier, i.e., G1
ij > 0 for
all i, j and j born after i, and (ii) only older users
inﬂuence new users, i.e., G1
ij > 0 for all i, j and j
born before i. We can thus form a family of PA graphs
parameterized by µ (cid:15) [0, 1], which we call the ‘inﬂuence
value’, such that Gµ is a linear combination of G1 and
G2, i.e., Gµ = µG1 +(1−µ)G2. Here µ is a parameter that
controls the inﬂuencing nature of a user in a PA graph
w.r.t. the positive externality effects of their security
investments made on users born before and later. A µ
value of 1 generates random graph G1, whereas a µ
value of 0 generates random graph G2. For networks
of size 500, we generate 50 random PA graphs for each
different value of µ ranging from 0 to 1 in steps of
0.1. As an example, each point in a sub-plot in Figure
1 is the average of the 50 random P0
values obtained
P1
per value of µ (the x-axis). Each sub-plot is the average
of 50 graphs for a particular value of β, the scale-free
exponent parameter for PA graphs, β (in many papers
also denoted as γ) is known to generally lie between
[2, 3], and for our experiments we choose three discrete
values of β: 2, 2.5, and 3.

We choose tree topologies as they often represent
corporate and enterprise social networks. Since a single
SV is likely to serve these sort of networks, we do not consider
and oligopolistic setting for these networks. In this work, we
consider random trees of speciﬁc types. Given a constant
λ > 0, a depth-d Poisson tree T (λ, d) with parameter
λ where depth d is constructed as follows: the root
node has degree which is a random variable distributed
according to a Poisson distribution with parameter λ.
All the children of the root have outdegrees which are
also random, with the same distribution. We continue
this process until either the process stops at some depth
d(cid:48) < d, where no node in level d(cid:48) has any children or until
we reach level d. In this case, all the children of nodes
in level d are deleted and the nodes in level d becomes
leaves. In this paper, we ﬁx d = 999999, to represent =. ∞.
Note that star topologies are formed as a special case of
tree topologies. We generate P0
plots for tree graphs of
P1
size 500 in Figure 2, in the same manner as we generate
PA graphs above, i.e., based on inﬂuence values. Each
point in the sub-plots is the average of 50 instances for
a ﬁxed value of λ. For our work we let λ ∈ {1, 3, 5}.
For the purposes of simulation we assume for all i that
βi = |G|
20 and αi − c = 1. We also assume that for each i
the hij values are equal to 1
, where di is the number of
di
non-negative entries in row i of G.

4.3 Plot Observations and Insights
Proﬁt Improvement: Our plot results for(i) the preferen-
tial attachment graphs for both the monopoly and oligopoly
setting (see Figures 1,3) and (ii) tree topology graphs for

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING

8

Fig. 1: 500 Node Proﬁt Ratio (Monopoly) for (a) β = 3 (left), (b) β = 2.5 (middle), and (c) β = 2 (right) [PA Graphs]

Fig. 2: 500 Node Proﬁt Ratio (Monopoly) for (a) β = 1 (left), (b) β = 3 (middle), and (c) β = 5 (right) [Tree Topology]

Fig. 3: Proﬁt Ratio (Oligopoly with 3 iterations) for (a) β = 1 (left), (b) β = 3 (middle), and (c) β = 5 (right) [PA Graphs]

Fig. 4: 500 Node Proﬁt Ratio (Oligopoly) for (a) β = 1 (left), (b) β = 3 (middle), and (c) β = 5 (right) [PA Graphs]

the monopoly setting only (see Figure 2) show that (a)
the provable proﬁt ratio bounds are not reasonably tight
enough, and are less than 15,
implying the fact that an SV
can do better in terms of proﬁt when it has full informa-
tion compared to the case when it is not informed about
consumer externality values and their network location
properties, and (b) the gap between the ratio obtained
from simulations and its lower bound decreases with
increase in µ (inﬂuence) values. The reason for the trend
in (b) can be explained as follows: note that the gap
between the ratio obtained by simulations and its lower
bound denotes the proﬁt loss of the security vendor from
ignoring the network externalities during the pricing
process. This gap will be larger for lower values of µ
as it implies that nodes with higher centrality values
are affecting nodes with low centrality values and the
insurer is not taking this externality into account while
charging its clients, thereby reducing proﬁts. When µ
values are high, the insurer does not take into account
the externality effects of low centrality users on high
centrality users, which does not affect the proﬁts as
much.
Implications from Theorem 3: As observed from the
plots in Figure 1 related to preferential attachment
graphs, the proﬁts to the SV are greater when it accounts
for externalities than when it does not, and an SV could

5. Here ‘1’ is the trivial upper bound. However, for the simulations
in this work, the non-trivial upper bound obtained is very close to 1.

make up to approximately 25% extra proﬁts (based on
our model) with complete information for monopoly
markets, and up to approximately 18% in oligopoly
markets (see Figure 3). This is intuitive in the sense that
the SV has more user information when knowing about
the externalities and can price optimally to increase
its proﬁts. However, in reality it is difﬁcult to mea-
sure/observe the externalities. Thus, in spite of getting
topological information from the insurer, an SV might
have to price its products without taking externalities
into account. The proﬁts for the non-price discrimination
scenario are encapsulated as a special case of P1 when
G has all entries equal except the zero diagonal entries.
We also observe from Figure 1 that (i) the plot trends
are invariant of the graph topology, i.e., with different
β values, the sub-plots look nearly the same, and (ii)
increasing the network size does not affect the plot
trends either.

Our plot results for random tree graphs in the monopoly
setting are very similar to those of preferential attach-
ment graphs (see Figure 2), for reasons noted above
except that for inﬂuence values between 0.7 and 1.0, the
proﬁt ratio curve increases towards values in the range
[.95 .99] and then decreases. This trend is due to the
fact that at an inﬂuence value of around 0.8, the graph
topology and investment externalities have little effect
on the optimal prices charged by the SV, and as a result
the difference between P0 and P1 is minimal. Intuitively,

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING

9

Fig. 5: 50-Node Plots for (a) Per-Unit SV Prices (left) and (b) Total User Investment (right) when β = 3(PA Graph Topology)

Fig. 6: 50-Node Plots for (a) Per-Unit SV Prices (left) and (b) Total User Investment (right) when λ = 3 (Tree Topology)

Fig. 7: 50-Node Plots for Total User Investment when β = 3 (PA Graphs) in an Oligopoly Setting

this happens because when deciding what price to offer
to a user, the monopolist considers the trade-off between
proﬁt loss due to (potentially) subsidizing the user and
increase in proﬁts due to the user’s externality inﬂuence
over their peers. The proﬁt loss is proportional to the
security investment of the user, and it increases with the
inﬂuence of the network on this user. The proﬁt increase
term, on the other hand relates to the inﬂuence of the
agent on the rest of the network. At an inﬂuence value of
0.8, the proﬁt loss nearly equals proﬁt gain and network
and externality effects does not affect the proﬁt ratio
by a signiﬁcant margin. For all other inﬂuence values,
the effects of the network and investment externali-
ties are non-signifcant. We emphasize that the rationale
proposed here also applies to the trends observed on
preferential attachment graphs, but there the peak point
is achieved for an inﬂuence value of 1.
Oligopoly - Converging and Non-Converging Scenar-
ios: In Figures 3 and 4, we speciﬁcally see the difference
in market output for two autonomous SVs. In Figure 3,
we plot the proﬁt ratios for SV1 and SV2 when we run
three iterations of the two stage pricing game involving
the SVs and their clients. We see a gap in the proﬁt ratio
between the two SVs due to the non-convergence of the
SV and client strategies, within three iterations. How-
ever, in Figure 4, when we plot the proﬁt ratios under
game convergence (achieved speedily, in approximately
eight iterations), we observe the similarity in the proﬁt
ratios for both the SVs. The gap in the proﬁt ratio per-
formance between the market convergence and market
non-convergence settings is intuitive and a reﬂection of
reality where businesses take mutiple rounds to stabilize.
Topology Dependent Pricing and Investments: In the

monopoly setting, if the monopolist is only allowed to
charge a uniform per-unit price to all its clients, the
optimal price is computed to be p0 = 1 per unit of invest-
ment, for one instance of a 50-node (user) PA generated
network with β = 3. For the same network instance
we plot the heterogenous prices charged to users, in
Figure 5a. We observe that the per-unit prices decrease with
the increase in the centrality of nodes. For the two-price
case, we primarily focus on obtaining the sets of users
paying the discounted and regular price respectively,
based on the users’ security investment amounts. For a
given instance of a 50-node network we ﬁrst assume that
the prices are given exogenously and are pL = 0.85, and
pH = 1.15, i.e., a 15 percent deviation from the optimal
single uniform price. We emphasize here that our value
of 15% is arbitrarily chosen based on our experience
of binary prices of certain products in our day-to-day
lives in Los Angeles. Next, we compute the optimal
user investment for that same 50-node network instance,
when (i) the monopolist can only use the binary pricing
scheme, and (ii) when it can perfectly price discriminate.
The corresponding total consumption levels for all users
for the three different pricing scenarios are given in
Figure 5b. We repeat the same process for an arbitrary
instance of a 50-node graph formed using the random
tree generation process noted above. Here, the optimal
uniform price per client is computed to be p0 = 1.2
per unit of investment, and we again adopt the 15%
deviation rule for binary prices. We report the results
in Figure 6a and 6b. For the oligopoly setting in PA
networks, we plot total consumption level for all clients
of both the SVs in Figures 7a and 7b on iteratively
achieving a unique subgame perfect Nash equilibria.

010203040500.80.911.11.21.3Network User # (in increasing order of centrality)Price charged by SV  Heterogenous PricingUniform PricingBinary Pricing0102030405011.21.41.61.82Network User # (in increasing order of centrality)Total User Investment   Heterogenous Pricing Uniform Pricing Binary Pricing 051015202530354045500.80.911.11.21.31.41.5Network User # (in increasing order of centrality)Price Charged by SV   Heterogenous Pricing Binary Pricing Uniform Pricing051015202530354045501.41.61.822.22.42.6Network User # (in increasing order)Total User Investment   Heterogenous Pricing Binary Pricing Uniform PricingSUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING

10

The plot results suggest that for each of the three pric-
ing scenarios in both monopoly and oligopoly markets,
the resulting consumption (amount in security invest-
ments) proﬁles are similar. We observe that the users
who are the most inﬂuential, i.e., inﬂuence the rest of
the users more than they are inﬂuenced, consume the
largest amounts of the good. This observation supports
the theoretical result in [19][20]. Moreover, as predicted
by our analysis, it is precisely these consumers that are
offered the most favorable per-unit consumption prices
(in the heterogenous pricing case) by the monopolist (as
seen from Figures 5a and 6a.). The combination of these two
observations also leads us to the fact that the total cost incurred
by a network user is nearly a constant in the heterogenous
pricing setting, thus leading to consumer fairness. Finally,
even when the monopolist is constrained to charging
two prices, it tries to favor those central consumers, who
end up getting the discounted price (see Figures 5a and
6a.).
Relaxing Model Assumptions: We made a few impor-
tant assumptions to simplify the model analysis that we
relax while conducting a simulation study to verify the
strength and necessity of the assumptions. For simula-
tion purposes we have not assumed Q − G to necessarily
be positive deﬁnite, and still we observe trends of proﬁt
ratio, P0
, to follow results in Theorem 3. This implies that
P1
the assumption that Q − G should be positive deﬁnite
for Equation (9) to hold, is not an important one, even
though from an analysis perspective, positive deﬁnite-
ness of the matrix Q−G ensures closed form expressions
bounds. We also do not enforce 2βi > (cid:80)
of P0
j (cid:15) N hij
P1
for simulation purposes and observe that optimal user
investments are bounded for many random samples of
PA and tree topologies.
Takeaway Message in Relation to Network Effects:
We have shown through both theory and simulations
that heterogenously pricing network users based on their
location and security investment amounts in a consumer
overlay network is fair for each consumer (since the
product of the consumption amount and the per unit
price is nearly a constant for every user), and at the same
time allows the SV to make more proﬁts than it would
make in case of uniform pricing (as in the current market
scenario). This is true for both the monopoly as well as
the oligopoly setting. The extra proﬁt in turn allows SVs
to transfer some proﬁt to cyber-insurance agencies in a
symbiotic relationship with them.

5 CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we studied a market for differentiated
security product pricing, primarily with a view to ensur-
ing that security vendors (SVs) make more proﬁt in the
differentiated pricing case compared to the case of non-
differentiated pricing. We have mathematically modeled
the proﬁt made by security vendors, and proposed a
novel consumer differentiated pricing mechanism for
SVs based on (i) their consumers’ logical network lo-
cations and (ii) security investment amounts made by
the consumers. We validated our analytical model via
extensive simulations conducted on practical SV client
topologies, and showed that a monopoly SV could im-
prove their current proﬁt margins by upto ≈ 25% (based
on the simulation settings) by accounting for client lo-
cation in the consumer network and their investment
information, whereas in an oligopoly setting, SVs could
increase their current proﬁt margins by approximately

upto ≈ 18%. Speciﬁcally, the intuition behind our results
(as shown via both theory and simulations) is that price
discriminating consumers in proportion to the Bonacich
centrality of individual users results in maximum proﬁt
for an SV. In addition, we showed that our proposed SV
pricing mechanism also ensures consumer fairness (a no-
tion similar to network neutrality) at market equilibrium
by (i) charging each consumer a per unit product usage
price based on (a) their location in the logical network
and (b) the amount of positive externality they generates
through his security investments, and (ii) equally costing
each client nearly a constant total amount in security
investments, irrespective of the client’s overlay network
location. Finally, we also tackled the combinatorial NP-
hard problem of SVs optimally price discriminating con-
sumers when there are only two price categories, i.e.,
regular and discounted. In this regard, we designed a
randomized-approximation algorithm to the binary pric-
ing problem that provides an approximation guarantee
of 0.878 within the optimal solution of the total proﬁt
made by an SV.

6 PROOFS OF THEOREMS

In this section we provide the proofs of Theorems 1-5.
We ﬁrst state and prove the relevant lemmas required
for the proof of Theorem 1.
Lemma 1. The game Gsub is supermodular6.
Proof. The payoff/utility functions are continuous, the
strategy sets are real compact subsets, and for any two
≥ 0. Hence Gsub is supermod-
consumers i, j (cid:15)N ,
ular. (cid:4)
Lemma 2. The spectral radius of Q−1G is smaller than
1, and the matrix I − Q−1G is invertible.
−→v be an eigenvector of Q−1G with λ being
Proof. Let
the corresponding eigenvalue, with |vi| > |vj| for all
j (cid:15) N . We have the following equation due to the fact
that (Q−1G)−→v = λ−→v .

∂2ui
∂xi∂xj

|λvi| = |(Q−1Gi)−→v | ≤

(Q−1G)ij |vj | ≤

(cid:88)

j (cid:15) N

1
2βi

|vi|

(cid:88)

j (cid:15) N

hij <

vi
2

.

(10)
Here (Q−1G)i denotes the i−th row of (Q−1G). Since the
equation holds for any eigenvalue-eigenvector pair, the
spectral radius of (Q−1G) is strictly smaller than 1. Now
observe that each eigenvalue of I − Q−1G can be written
as 1 − λ. Since the spectral radius of Q−1G is strictly
smaller than 1, none of the eigenvalues of I − Q1G is
zero, and thus the matrix is invertible. (cid:4)
Proof of Theorem 1. Since Gsub is a supermodular game,
the equilibrium set has a minimum and a maximum
−→x denote the maximum of the equi-
element [17]. Let
librium set and let S be such that xi > 0 only if i (cid:15) S.
If S = φ there cannot be another equilibrium point,
−→x = 0 is the maximum of the equilibrium set.
since
Assume for a contradictory purpose that S (cid:54)= φ and
−→
˜x , of the game. By the
there is another equilibrium
supermodularity property of Gsub, xi ≥ ˜xi, ∀i (cid:15) N . Allow
−→
˜x are not
k to equal argmaxi (cid:15) N xi − ˜xi. Since
equal, we have xk − ˜xk > 0. Since at NE no consumer
has an incentive to increase or decrease his consumption,

−→x and

6. In supermodular games, the marginal utility of increasing a
player’s strategy increases with the increases in other players’ strate-
gies.

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING

we have

xk − ˜xk ≤

Gk(−→x −

−→
˜x ) =

1
2βk

1
2βk

(cid:88)

j

hkj(xj − ˜xj), (11)

where Gk is the k − th row of G. But we have

1
2βk

(cid:88)

j

hkj(xj − ˜xj) ≤

xk − ˜xk
2βk

(cid:88)

j

hkj < xk − ˜xk

(12)

Thus, we reach a contradiction and Gsub has a unique
Nash equilibrium. (cid:4)

Proof of Theorem 2. We have from Lemma 1 that
Q − G is non-singular and as a result the following
equation holds.

−→p = −→α −(Q−G)

(cid:18)

Q − G −

GT − G
2

(cid:19)−1 −→α − c ·

−→
1

2

(13)

Equation (4) can we rewritten as

−→p = −→α −

(cid:18)

I −

GT − G
2

(Q − G)−1

(cid:19)−1 −→α − c ·

−→
1

2

By the matrix inversion lemma [24], we have

(cid:18)

I −

GT − G
2

(Q − G)−1

(cid:19)−1

= I +

GT − G
2

(cid:18)

Q −

GT + G
2

(cid:19)−1

(15)

Thus, from Equation (5) it follows that

−→p =

−→
1

α + c
2

−

GT − G
2

(cid:18)

Q −

GT + G
2

(cid:19)−1 −→α − c
2

−→
1

(16)
Applying Equation(7) and using the deﬁnition of
weighted Bonacich centrality, we get

−→p =

−→
1

−→α + c ·
2

+ GQ−1B(G(cid:48), Q−1,

−→
w(cid:48)) − GT Q−1B(G(cid:48), Q−1,

−→
w(cid:48))

and thus prove Theorem 2. (cid:4)

Proof of Theorem 3. The optimal price vector of the
SV without and with the consideration of externality
effects are given by the following equations.

−→p0 =

−→α + c ·
2

−→
1

.

(17)

and

−→p1 = −→α − (Q − G)

(cid:18)

Q −

G + GT
2

(cid:19)−1

α − c ·

2

−→
1

.

(18)

The corresponding consumption vectors are given by

and

−→x0 = (Q − G)−1

−→x1 = (Q − G(cid:48))−1

−→α − c ·
2

−→
1

.

−→α − c ·
2

−→
1

.

It then follows that

P0 = (−→p0 − c ·

−→
1 )T −→x0 =

−→
1

−→α − c ·
2

(Q − G)−1

−→α − c ·
2

(19)

(20)

−→
1

.

(21)

11

(22)

and

P1 = (−→p1 − c ·

−→
1 )T −→x1,

P1 can be re-written as

P1 = X − Y,

where

X = 2

(cid:32) −→α − c ·
2

−→
1

(cid:33)T (cid:18) R + RT

2

(cid:19)−1 (cid:32) −→α − c ·
2

(cid:33)

−→
1

,

and

Y =

(cid:32) −→α − c ·
2

−→
1

(cid:33)T (cid:18) R + RT

2

(cid:19)−1 (cid:32) −→α − c ·
2

(cid:33)

−→
1

.

Thus, we have

P1 =






(cid:32) −→α − c ·
2

(cid:33)T

−→
1

(Q − G(cid:48))−1

(cid:32) −→α − c ·
2

(cid:33)


−→
1

,



(14)

Now let

−→v = α−c·

2

−→
1

. We have

=

P1
P0

−→v T (Q − G(cid:48))−1−→v
−→v T (Q − G)−1−→v

(cid:17)−1 −→x
−→x
(23)
Since R−T +R−1
are symmetric positive deﬁ-
nite matrices, we have from the Rayleigh-Ritz Theorem
[25] the following.

−→x T (cid:16) R+R(cid:48)
−→x T R−1+R−T

≤ max||−→x =1||

and RT +R

2

2

2

2

.

K = λmax

(cid:32)(cid:32)

R−1 + R−T
2

(cid:33)−0.5 (cid:32)

R + RT
2

(cid:33)−1 (cid:32)

R−1 + R−T
2

(cid:33)−0.5(cid:33)

,

−→x T (cid:16) R+R(cid:48)
where K = max||−→x =1||
. Note that for any
−→x T R−1+R−T
real matrix A and invertible matrix B, the eigenvalues
of A and B−1AB are identical. Thus, it follows that

(cid:17)−1−→x
−→x

2

2

(24)

K = λmax

(cid:18) 2I + RRT + RT R−1
4

(cid:19)−1

.

(25)

the

Now since
are real and belong to [−2, 2],
(cid:17)
(cid:16) 2I+RRT +RT R−1
4

eigenvalues of RR−T + RT R−1
the eigenvalues of

are positive, and we have

λmax

(cid:18) 2I + RRT + RT R−1
4

(cid:19)−1

=

1
λmin

(cid:18) 2I + RRT + RT R−1
4

(cid:19)

.

(26)

Similarly we obtain

max||−→x =1||

−→x T R−1+R−T
−→x T (cid:0) R+R(cid:48)

−→x
(cid:1)−1 −→x

2

2

= λmax

(cid:18) 2I + RRT + RT R−1
4

(cid:19)

.

From the above two equations it follows that

1
2

+ λmin

(cid:18) 2I + RRT + RT R−1
4

(cid:19)−1

≤

P0
P1

,

and

P0
P1

≤

1
2

+ λmax

(cid:18) 2I + RRT + RT R−1
4

(cid:19)−1

.

(27)

(28)

(29)

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING

12

We have thus proved our theorem. (cid:4).

In order
well known MAX-CUT problem [21] is as follows:

to prove Theorem 4, we ﬁrst state the

(cid:88)

max

(i,j) (cid:15) E

Wij(1 − xixj)

s.t. xi (cid:15) {−1, +1}, ∀i (cid:15) V,

where W denotes a matrix of binary weights consisting
of 0s and 1s. The solution to this problem corresponds
let S be the agents who were
to a cut as follows:
assigned value 1 in the optimal solution. Then it is
straightforward to see that the value of the objective
function corresponds to the size of the cut deﬁned by
S and V − S. The problem can also be re-wriiten as

P 0 : min −→x T W −→x

s.t. xi (cid:15) {−1, +1}, ∀i (cid:15) V.

Now consider the following related problem:

P 1 : min −→x T W −→x

s.t. xi (cid:15) {−1, +1}, ∀i (cid:15) V,

where W is a symmetric matrix with rational entries that
satisfy 0 < W T = W < 1. In the proof of Theorem 4, we
will ﬁrst show that P 1 is NP-Hard by reducing from
MAX-CUT. We will then reduce P1 to OPT to claim the
correctness of our theorem.
Lemma 3. P1 is NP-Hard.
Proof. We prove our claim by reducing P1 from P0. Let
W be the weight matrix in an instance of P0. Let W(cid:15) =
1
2 ((cid:15) + W ), where (cid:15) is a rational number between 0 and
−→x in P0
1
2n2 and |V | = n. Observe that for any feasible
or P1, it follows that

2−→x T W(cid:15)(−→x ) − n2(cid:15) ≤ −→x T W −→x ≤ 2−→x T W(cid:15)(−→x ) + n2(cid:15).

2 , the cost of P0 for any feasible vector

Because the objective of P0 is always an integer and
−→x can be
n2(cid:15) < 1
obtained from the cost of P1 by scaling and rounding.
Therefore, since P0 is NP-Hard, it follows that P1 is also
NP-Hard. (cid:4).
Proof of Theorem 4. Having proved P1 to be NP-Hard,
we now prove Theorem 4 by reducing OPT from P1. We
consider special instances of OPT where G = GT , c = 0,
−→α = [α, ....., α], and α = preg + pdsc. OPT can then
and
be re-casted as

OP T 2 : min −→x T (Q − G)−→x

s.t. xi (cid:15) {−1, +1}, ∀i (cid:15) N.

Now consider an instance of P1 with W > 0. Note that
because x2

i = 1, P1 is equivalent to

min −→x T (W + γI)−→x

s.t. xi (cid:15) {−1, +1}, ∀i (cid:15) V,

where we choose γ as an integer such that

γ > 4 · max{ρ(W ),

(cid:88)

i,j

Wi,j
mini,jWij

}

and ρ(·) is the spectral radius of its argument. The
deﬁnition of γ implies that the spectral radius of W
γ is
less than 1. Therefore we have

(W +γI)−1 =

(cid:18)

I −

1
γ

1
γ

(W −

(cid:19)

).....

.

W 2
γ

) −

W 2
γ

W 2
γ3 (W −
(cid:17)
W − ( W 2
γ )

(cid:16)

(30)
Since all entries of W and
are positive, the
above equality implies that the off-diagonal entries of
(W +γI)−1 are negative. Therefore (W +γI)−1 = (Q−G)
for some diagonal matrix Q and some G ≥ 0. Thus, it
follows that

((Q − G)

−→
1 )k =

(cid:18)

(cid:18) 1
γ

I −

W
γ

+

W 2
γ2 ....

(cid:19) −→
1

(cid:19)

.

k

(31)

Since W > 0, we have
(cid:32)

((Q − G)

−→
1 )k ≥

1
γ

(cid:32)

1 +

−

−→
1

W
γ

) −

W 2−→
1
γ2

(cid:33)

....

(cid:33)

−→
1

.

k

From the deﬁnition of γ it
((cid:80)

i.j Wij )

−→
1 ≤ 1
)
4

−→
1 . The above inequality implies that

follows that W
γ

(

γ

−→
1

≤

((Q − G)

−→
1 )k ≥

(cid:32)

1 −

1
γ

1
4

(cid:32) ∞
(cid:88)

l=0

(cid:19)l(cid:33)(cid:33)

(cid:18) 1
4

=

(cid:19)

(cid:18) 2
3

1
γ

> 0.

(32)
Thus, P1 can be reduced to an instance of OPT2 by
deﬁning Q and G according to (W + γI)−1 = (Q − G).
Therefore it follows that OPT2, and hence OPT, are
NP-Hard. (cid:4).

In order to prove Theorem 5, we ﬁrst describe a
semideﬁnite programming (SDP) relaxation for the
following optimization problem:

max

1
4

(cid:88)

i,j

wij(1 − xixj))

subject to

xi (cid:15) {−1, +1} ∀i (cid:15) V

This optimization problem can be reduced to

max

1
4

(cid:88)

i,j

wij(1 − νiνj)

subject to

νi (cid:15) Sn ∀i (cid:15) V

where νi · νj denotes the regular inner product of vectors
νi, νj (cid:15) Rn, and Sn denotes the n-dimensional unit sphere,
i.e., Sn = {−→x (cid:15) Rn|−→x · −→x = 1}.. We next show that this
optimization problem leads to a semideﬁnite program.
Consider the collection of vectors {ν1, ....., νn} such
that νi (cid:15) Sn. Deﬁne a symmetric matrix Y (cid:15) Rn×n such
that Yij = νiνj and Yii = 1. It can be seen that Y = F T F .
where F (cid:15) Rn×n is such that F = [ν1, ......., νn]. This
implies that Y ≥ 0. Conversely, consider a positive
semideﬁnite matrix Y (cid:15) Rn such that Yii = 1. Since Y
is positive semideﬁnite, there exists F (cid:15) Rn×n (which can
be obtained from Cholesky factorization of the original

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING

13

matrix) such that Y = F T F , it follows that νi · νi = 1.
These arguments imply that the feasible set in

max

1
4

(cid:88)

i,j

wij(1 − νiνj)

goal. We have the following lemma to characterize the
approximate solution to our semi-deﬁnite program.
Lemma 4. Let z ≥ (cid:80)
optimization problem:

ij|. The solution to the following

i,j |Q(cid:48)

max−→x T Q−→x + 2

−→
d T −→x + z

subject to

νi (cid:15) Sn ∀i (cid:15) V

subject to

can be equivalently written as

xi (cid:15) {−1, 1}, i (cid:15) {1, ...., n},

max

1
4

(cid:88)

i,j

wij(1 − νiνj)

Yi,i = 1 ∀i (cid:15) V, Y ≥ 0

subject to

We now show a way to obtain a provable approximation
guarantee for binary quadratic optimization problems of
the form:

max−→x T Q−→x + 2

−→
d T −→x + z

subject to

xi (cid:15) {−1, 1}, i (cid:15) {1, ...., n},

−→
d , and

−→z have rational entries. We observe
where Q,
−→x T Q−→x = T race(Q) + −→x T ˜Q−→x , where ˜Q = Q −
that
diag(Q) and xi (cid:15) {−1, +1}. Thus, the diagonal entries of
the Q matrix as part of the constant term, and we can
assume that diag(Q) = 0 without any loss of generality.
We can also assume that Q is symmetric. Now consider
the following optimization problem:

subject to

max[−→x ; y]T Q(cid:48)[−→x ; y] + z

xi (cid:15) {−1, +1}, i (cid:15) {1, ....., n},

yi (cid:15) {−1, +1},

where Q(cid:48) is given by the following matrix:

(cid:32)

Q(cid:48) =

Q
−→
d T

(cid:33)

.

−→
d
0

−→
Since [−→x ; y]T Q(cid:48)[−→x ; y] = −→x T Q−→x +2y
d T −→x , it follows that
−→x and the optimal objective values of the
the optimal
previous two optimization problems are equal. Relaxing
the previous optimization problem we get

max

(cid:88)

ij

νi · νjQ(cid:48)

ij + z

subject to

νi (cid:15) Sn+1, i (cid:15) {1, ....., n, n + 1},

and obtain an equivalent semideﬁnite program (SDP) by
deﬁning Yij = νiνj as follows:

subject to

max

(cid:88)

ij

YijQ(cid:48)

ij + z}

Yii = 1, i (cid:15) {1, ....., n, n + 1},

Y ≥ 0.

using the randomized algorithm in [26] achieves at least
0.878 times the optimal objective value of the problem.

Proof. Let W denote the objective value of a solution the
algorithm provides. WM denote the optimal solution of
the underlying quadratic optimization mentioned in the
lemma, and WP denote the optimal value of the SDP
relaxation, then the corresponding optimal value can be
given as

(cid:88)

WP =

Q(cid:48)

ijνi · νj + z.

i,j

The solutions of the problem provided by the random-
ized algorithm in [26] gives us the expected contribution
of given agents i and j to the objective function as
1 − 2 arccos(νi,νj )
Q(cid:48)
. Hence, the expected value of a
ij
solution is given as

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

π

E[W ] =

(cid:18)

(cid:88)

ij

1 − 2

arccos(νi, νj)
π

(cid:19)

Q(cid:48)

i,j + z.

i,j |Q(cid:48)

Now since z ≥ (cid:80)
ij|, it follows that both WM and
E[W ] are non-negative, also since WP corresponds to the
optimal solution of the relaxation, it follows that WP ≥
WM . Using these it follows that

WP =

(cid:88)

Q(cid:48)

ij(1 + νi · νj) +

(cid:88)

|Q(cid:48)

ij(1 − νi · νj) + z2

i,j:Q(cid:48)

ij >0

i,j:Q(cid:48)

ij <0

and

where

and

E[W ] = W1 + W2.

W1 =

(cid:88)

i:jQ(cid:48)

ij >0

(cid:18)

Q(cid:48)
ij

2 − 2

(cid:19)

arccos(νi, νj)
π

W2 =

(cid:88)

i,j:Q(cid:48)

ij <0

|Qij|2

arccos(νi, νj)
π

+ z2.

Here z2 = z − (cid:80)
and 1 − arccosx
that E[W ] > 0.878WP ≥ 0.878WM , where α = 0.878. (cid:4)
A corollary of this result is

i,j |Q(cid:48)
2 (1 − x)
2 (1 + x) for all x (cid:15) [−1, +1], it follows

ij| > 0. Since arccosx

≥ α

≥ α

π

π

E[W ] +

(cid:88)

ij

|Q(cid:48)

ij| − z > 0.878(WM +

|Q(cid:48)

ij| − z).

(cid:88)

ij

Using this semideﬁnite relaxation one can obtain an
approximate solution to the original problem. We adopt
an approach used by the authors in [26] to achieve this

Proof of Theorem 5. Applying the corollary from Lemma
4, the solution to the monopolist’s pricing problem leads
to satisfying the claims in Theorem 5. (cid:4).

SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING

14

REFERENCES
[1] R. Anderson and T. Moore, “Information security economics and

beyond,” in Information Security Summit, 2008.

[2] M. Lelarge and J. Bolot, “Economic incentives to increase security
in the internet: The case for insurance,” in IEEE INFOCOM, 2009.
[3] G. A. Akerlof, “The market for lemons - quality uncertainty and
the market mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 84,
no. 3, 1970.

[4] M. Thompson, “Why cyber-insurance is the next big thing,” in

CNBC Report, 2014.

[5] R. Pal, L. Golubchik, K. Psounis, and P. Hui, “Will cyber-insurance
improve network security: A market analysis,” in IEEE INFO-
COM, 2014.

[6] N.Shetty, G.Schwarz, M.Feleghyazi, and J.Walrand, “Competitive

cyber-insurance and internet security,” in WEIS, 2009.

[7] C. Ballester, A. Calv ´o-Armengol, and Y. Zenou, “Who’s who in
networks. wanted: the key player,” Econometrica, vol. 74, no. 5,
pp. 1403–1417, 2006.

[8] Y. Bramoull´e and R. Kranton, “Public goods in networks,” Journal

[9]

of Economic Theory, vol. 135, no. 1, pp. 478–494, 2007.
J. Corbo, A. Calv ´o-Armengol, and D. C. Parkes, “The importance
of network topology in local contribution games,” in Internet and
Network Economics, pp. 388–395, Springer, 2007.

[10] A. Galeotti and S. Goyal, “Inﬂuencing the inﬂuencers: a theory of
strategic diffusion,” The RAND Journal of Economics, vol. 40, no. 3,
pp. 509–532, 2009.

[11] A. Galeotti, S. Goyal, M. O. Jackson, F. Vega-Redondo, and
L. Yariv, “Network games,” The review of economic studies, vol. 77,
no. 1, pp. 218–244, 2010.

[12] A. Sundararajan, “Local network effects and complex network
structure,” The BE Journal of Theoretical Economics, vol. 7, no. 1,
2007.

[13] R. Pal, L. Golubchik, K. Psounis, and P. Hui, “On a way to
improve cyber-insurer proﬁts: When a security vendor becomes
the cyber-insurer,” in IFIP Networking, 2013.

[14] Symantec, “Personal communication,”
[15] R. Bohme and G. Schwartz, “Modeling cyber-insurance: Towards

a unifying framework,” in WEIS, 2010.

[16] A. Mas-Collel, M. D. Winston, and J. R. Green, Microeconomic

Theory. Oxford University Press, 1995.

[17] D. M. Topkis, Supermodularity and Complementarity. Princeton

University Press, 1998.

[18] P. B. Bonacich, “Power and centrality: A family of measures,”

American Journal of Sociology, vol. 92, 1987.

[19] R. Pal and P. Hui, “Cyber-insurance for cyber-security: A topo-
logical take on modulating insurance premiums,” Performance
Evaluation Review, vol. 40, no. 3, 2012.

[20] R. Pal and P. Hui, “On differentiating cyber-insurance contracts:
A topological perspective,” in IEEE/IFIP Internet Management Con-
ference, 2013.

[21] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson, Computers and Intractability: A
Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness. W. H. Freeman and
Company, 1979.

[22] D.Fudenberg and J.Tirole, Game Theory. MIT Press, 1991.
[23] A. L. Barabasi and R. Albert, “Emergence of scaling in random

networks,” Science, vol. 286, 1999.

[24] C. D. Meyer, Matrix Analysis and Applied Linear Algebra. SIAM

[25] R. A. Horn and D. D. Johnson, Matrix Analysis. Cambridge

Press, 2000.

University Press, 2005.

[26] M. Goemans and D. Williamson, “Improved approximation algo-
rithms for maximum cut satisﬁability problems using sem-deﬁnite
programming,” Journal of the ACM, vol. 42, 1995.

Ranjan Pal is a Research Scientist at the Uni-
versity of Southern California (USC), afﬁliated
with both the Electrical Engineering and Com-
puter Science departments, where he co-leads
the Quantitative Evaluation and Design Group
(QED). He received his PhD in Computer Sci-
ence from USC in 2014, and was the recipient
of the Provost Fellowship throughout his PhD
studies. During his PhD, Ranjan held visiting
scholar positions at the School of Engineering
and Applied Science, Princeton University, USA,
and Deutsch Telekom Research Laboratories
(T-Labs), Berlin, Germany. His primary research interests lie in the
performance modeling, analysis, and design of cyber-security, privacy,
communication networks, and the Smart Grid, using tools from eco-
nomics, game theory, applied probability, algorithms, information theory,
and mathematical optimization. His research on cyber-insurance has
generated press interests from USC News, and MIT Technology Review.
Ranjan has also consulted on cyber-insurance for Accel Partners.
Ranjan is a member of the IEEE and the ACM.

Leana Golubchik is a Professor in the Com-
puter Science and EE-Systems Departments at
USC. Prior to that she was an Assistant Profes-
sor and then an Associate Professor at the Uni-
versity of Maryland at College Park and an As-
sistant Professor at Columbia University. Leana
received her PhD from UCLA in 1995. She is a
past Chair (2003 - 2005) and Vice Chair (2001
- 2003) of ACM SIGMETRICS (2003 - 2005)
and a member of its Board of Directors (1999
- 2001, 2005 - 2007). She was a guest co-editor
issues of IEEE TKDE, the Parallel
for special
Computing Journal, and the International Journal of Intelligent Systems,
a program co-chair of the 2001 Joint ACM SIGMETRICS/Performance
Conference and MIS99, and a program committee member of numer-
ous conferences. Leana received several awards, including the NSF
CAREER award, the Okawa Foundation award, and the IBM and NSF
Doctoral Fellowships. She is a member of the IFIP WG 7.3 and Tau Beta
Pi.

Konstantinos Psounis (M ‘98 - SM ‘08) is
an Associate Professor of Electrical Engineer-
ing and Computer Science at the University of
Southern California. He received his ﬁrst degree
from the department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering of National Technical University of
Athens, Greece, in June 1997, and the M.S.and
PhD degrees in Electrical Engineering from
Stanford University, California, in January 1999
and December 2002 respectively. Konstantinos
models and analyzes the performance of a va-
riety of wired and wireless networks. He also
designs methods, algorithms, and protocols to solve problems related
to such systems. He is a senior member of both IEEE and ACM.

Pan Hui is an Assistant Professor of Computer
Science and Engineering at the Hong Kong Uni-
versity of Science and Technology. He is also
a Distinguished Scientist at Deutsche Telekom
Laboratories (T-Labs), Berlin. He received his
PhD from Computer Laboratory,University of
Cambridge. During his PhD, he was also afﬁli-
ated with Intel Research Cambridge. Before that
he was with University of Hong Kong for his
Mphil and bachelor degree. His research inter-
ests include delay tolerant networking, mobile
networking and systems, planet-scale mobility
measurement, social networks, and the application of complex network
science in communication system design.

