A New Approach to SMS Steganography using 
Mathematical Equations 

Min Yang Lee, Vahab Iranmanesh*, Juan C. Quiroz 
Faculty of Science and Technology 
Sunway University 
Bandar Sunway, Malaysia 
12050431@imail.sunway.edu.my, vahab.iranmanesh@gmail.com, juanq@sunway.edu.my

Abstract—In the era of Information Technology, cyber-crime has 
always  been  a  worrying  issue  for  online  users.  Phishing,  social 
engineering, and third party attacks have  made people reluctant 
to  share  their  personal  information,  even  with  trusted  entities. 
Messages  that  are  sent  via  Short  Message  Service  (SMS)  are 
easily  copied  and  hacked  by  using  special  software.  To  enforce 
the  security  of  sending  messages  through  mobile  phones,  one 
solution 
is  a 
technique that hides a secret message in the SMS. We propose a 
new  approach  for  SMS  steganography  that  uses  a  mathematical 
equation  as  the  stego  media  in  order  to  transmit  the  data.  With 
this approach, we can hide up to 35 characters (25%) of a secret 
message on a single SMS with maximum of 140 characters.  

is  SMS  steganography.  SMS  Steganography 

Keywords- Short Message Service (SMS); Information Hiding; 

SMS Steganograpy; Mathematical Equation.  

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

Steganography 

that  has  been 
is  a  security  method 
implemented  through  generations.  Steganography  is  a  word 
stemming from the ancient Greek with the meaning of covered 
writing [1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 21]. The technique hides sensitive 
information into a cover media, such as a text file [1, 2, 4], an 
image [7, 8], a video [1, 7, 10] or even an audio file [7, 11, 16, 
20].  The  cover  media  is  created  to  prevent  a  third  party  from 
becoming 
information  being 
transmitted  [17].  With  stenography  there  are  slight  changes 
made  to  the  cover  media,  which  cannot  be  perceived  by  the 
human eye or ear if the embedding is well-designed [1, 2, 4, 7]. 
Fig.  1  shows  the  general  framework  of  a  Steganographic 
system.  The  main  components  of  the  Steganographic  system 
are: 

suspicious  about  hidden 

  Secret  message  (s):  A  message  that  required  to  be 

transmitted. 

  Secret key (k): A key that required to embed the secret 

message (s). 

  Cover media (c): A file or data that is used to embed 

the secret message (s).    

Figure 1. Steganographic System 

Short  message  service  (SMS)  is  one  of  the  widely  used 
services  by  mobile  users  [12,  15,  18,  19].  In  particular,  SMS 
steganography is classified as one of the most difficult hiding 
methods among other steganography techniques due to its less 
redundant  bits  [5].  In  each  SMS,  only  140  characters  can  be 
sent, and most of the properties of the SMS texts are  fixed. A 
mathematical  equation  is  an  equality  containing  one  or  more 
variables, but may also include mathematical symbols such as 
constants,  operations,  and  functions.  Equations  can  be  simple 
or  complex,  and  as  long  as  expressions  are  well-formed,  an 
equation may be short or as long as needed.  In this paper, we 
propose  a  new  approach  in  SMS  Steganography  using  an 
equation  the  cover  text  to  hide  a  secret  message  (s).  Our 
approach can store up to 25% of the secret message (s) in each 
SMS.  

The  rest  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  Section  2 
describes  the  related  works  in  SMS  steganography.  Section  3 
describes  our  proposed  steganography  method.  Section  4 
discusses our findings, and Section 5 presents conclusions and 
directions for future work. 

  Stego  media  (sm):  A  file  or  data  with  the  embedded 

II. 

RELATED WORK 

secret message (s).  

A.  Format Based Steganography 

Format-based  steganography  utilizes  the  formatting  of  the 
cover  media  to  hide  a  secret  message  (s).  It  modifies  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
existing format—such as white spaces, the size of the text, the 
printing  type,  etc.—to  hide  the  secret  message  (s)  [1,  2,  22]. 
This technique prevents suspicion from the  naked  human eye, 
but it cannot fool a computer. For instance, if the gap between 
two words contained two blank spaces, a  computer can easily 
detect it. On the other hand, if the secret message (s) is hidden 
by resizing the text of the cover media, the computer may not 
be able to detect  it, but it  would be  visible to the human eye. 
We  next  discuss 
steganography 
approaches. 

format-based 

several 

message (s). Similar to the previous approaches discussed, the 
secret  message  (s)  will  be  destroyed  either  by  retyping  or  by 
using Character Recognition Programs (OCR).  

1)  Line-Shifting 

In this method, the secret message (s) is hidden by shifting 
the  line  of  the  text  vertically,  up  or  down,  or  leaving  the  line 
unmoved  [1,  3,  5,  11,  13].  The  shifting  of  the  line  is  not 
obvious to the human eye because it also shifts about 1/300 of 
an  inch. This approach is suitable for printed text because the 
shifted 
line  can  be  easily  measured  by  using  special 
measurement  instruments.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  text  is 
retyped or if Character Recognition Programs (OCR) are used 
on the cover text, the secret message (s) will be destroyed. Fig. 
2 shows a fragment of the document using line shifting coding.  

Figure 4.  Character Coding Example 

4) 

 White Space 

This  technique  hides  the  secret  message  (s)  using  white 
space. The white spaces can be added either at the end of each 
sentence, at the end of a line, between words, or even after one 
paragraph of text [1, 5, 11, 13]. Having white spaces at the end 
of  text  is  common,  making  it  less  suspicious  to  third  parties. 
However,  this  method  has  a  limitation  of  storing  secret 
information. The hiding capacity is based on the amount of text 
in  the  file.  If  the  text  is scanned  with a  text  editor  with auto-
correct, the white spaces can be easily detected thus destroying 
the  secret  message  (s).  Fig.  5  shows  a  fragment  of  the 
document  using  white  space  encoded  text.  Additional  white 
space has been added to the end of each line to store the secret 
message (s). 

Figure 2.  Line Shift Coding [1] 

2)  Word-Shifting 

Word shifting entails hiding the secret message (s) between 
the  gaps  of  words.  In  general, a  single  space  is  used  between 
two words. In word shifting, we purposely insert two  or more 
blank  spaces  to  hide  the  secret  message  (s)  [1,  3,  5,  11,  13]. 
This  method  is  very  common  for  printed  text  and  is  not 
obvious  to  the  human  eye.  However,  if  someone  carefully 
compared  the  modified  text  (stego  text)  and  the  original  text 
(cover  text),  the  difference  would  be  obvious.  Moreover,  the 
information  will  also  be  destroyed  by  retyping  or  by  using 
Character  Recognition  Programs  (OCR).  Fig.  3  shows  a 
fragment of a document using word shifting. 

Figure 3.  Word Shifting Example [1] 

3)  Character Coding 

Character coding hides the secret message (s) by modifying 
features of the cover text. An example of feature coding is the 
end  of  the  text  character  being  sketched  out  or  shortened  in 
order to hide the secret message (s)  [1, 5, 11, 13]. This method 
is  able  to  store  tremendous  amount  of  information  without 
raising suspicions. This is because people tend to think that the 
modified  character  is  the  result  of  a  printing  or  formatting 
error.  Fig.  4  shows  a  fragment  of  a  document  with  character 
coding technique, where italics has been used to hide the secret 

Figure 5.  White Space Encoded Text [1] 

5)  Abbreviation  

This 

technique  hides 

the  secret  message  (s)  using 
abbreviations. Abbreviations are the shortened form of a word 
or phrase. This approach is able to store little information into 
the  text  because  the  text  are  all  shortened  into  few  letters  or 
even  just  single  letter  [3,  5,  11].  In  practice,  one  must  make 
sure  that  the  used  abbreviations  are  not  arranged  in  a  weird 
sequence that could gain suspicion. Table I shows examples of 
a few abbreviations.  

B.  Linguistic Steganography 

Linguistic  Steganography  is  a  technique  that  modifies  the 
character in the text instead of the formatting. Most often it will 
modify the size of character and the words to store the  secret 
message  (s)  [1,  2].  In  the  following,  several  linguistic 
steganography approaches are discussed. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  

EXAMPLE OF ABBREVIATIONS 

Abbreviations 

Meaning 

R.S.V.P. 

P.S. 

E.T.A. 

B.Y.O.B. 

Respond, If You Please 

Post Script 

Estimated Time Of Arrival 

Bring Your Own Bottle 

1)  Syntactic Method 

This  method  hides  secret  message  (s)  using  punctuation 
marks,  such as  a period (.),  a comma (,),  a question mark (?), 
etc.  [3,  5].  Using  punctuation  is  a  very  common  practice  in 
SMS, but the challenge is making sure  that  the punctuation  is 
used  at  the  correct  places  to  avoid  suspicion.  Fig.  6  shows  a 
fragment  of  a  document  using  syntactic  technique  to  hide  a 
secret message (s). The secret message (s) is hidden using the 
comma (,) and the question mark (?).    

Figure 6.  Syntactic technique example 

2)  Word Spelling 

Word  spelling  technique  explains  how  the  secret  message 
(s) is hidden  in English words. The English spelling  for some 
words in the United States (US) and the United Kingdom (UK) 
is  different.  For  instance,  ‘Color’  is  the  US  spelling  and 
‘Colour’  is  the  UK  spelling.  In  this  case,  we  can  use  the 
additional  ‘u’  to  hide  a  secret  message  (s).  This  method  is 
considered not secure because the US and the UK use some of 
these words differently [1, 3]. Hence, to avoid suspicions, only 
English  words  that  look  similar  to  both  US  and  UK  spelling 
can be used. Table II shows examples of the different spelling 
in US and UK for a few words.  

TABLE II.  

AMERICAN VS BRITISH ENGLISH 

American English (United States) 

British English (United Kingdom) 

Center 

Fiber 

Liter 

Color 

Centre 

Fibre 

Litre 

Colour 

C.  Text Steganography using Persian/Arabic Letters 

In  this  approach,  the  secret  message  (s)  is  hidden  using 
Persian  or  Arabic  letters.  Persian and Arabic  letters  contain  a 
number of points/dots in the letters, which allows hiding of the 
secret message (s) by altering the dots of the letters [1, 11, 13]. 
In the Persian language, there are a total of 18 letters out of 32 
that  have  points/dots.  Unfortunately,  the  approach  is  only 
applicable  for  Persian  and  Arabic  users  and  not  for  English 
users.  The  English  language  only  has  2  letters  that  include 
points/dots. So it is not ideal to implement it in English. Fig. 7 
shows the alteration of a Persian/Arabic letter to store a secret 
message  (s)  by  moving  the  dot  slightly  lower  than  the  actual 
character.  

Figure 7.  Persian/Arabic letter [1] 

D.  SMS Steganography using Emoticons 

This  approach  hides 

the  secret  message  (s)  using 
emoticons,  with  each  emoticon  assigned  to  a single  letter  [5]. 
For  instance,  ‘:)  :/  :(’  can  represent  the  secret  message  (s)  
‘you’.  However,  using  emoticons  in  a  roll  to  send  a  secret 
message  (s)  might  gain  suspicion  from  a  third  party,  so  this 
method is recommended to be used in multiple messages. Fig. 
8  shows  an  example  of  using  emoticons  to  map  the  secret 
message  (s).  The  secret  message  (s)  is  “HELLO”,  with  each 
emoticon representing one character. 

Figure 8.  Example of using emoticons 

E.   SMS Steganography using Sudoku Puzzle 

This technique hides a secret message (s) in a 9x9 Sudoku 
puzzle. The secret message (s) can be embedded into any rows 
and columns of the puzzle [14]. The recipient will then receive 
the Sudoku puzzle, and a special program is used to extract the 
secret message (s). The idea of storing the secret message (s) in 
the Sudoku puzzle is by permutations. The numbers will be the 
hint  that  stores  the  secret  message  (s).  Fig.  9  shows  a  secret 
message  (s)  hidden  in  one  of  the  rows  or  columns  of  the 
Sudoku puzzle. 

Figure 9: Sudoku technique example 

III. 

PROPOSED METHOD 

An  equation  is  the  most  fundamental  math  statement.  It 
uses equality to express the relation of values and mathematical 
operations.  An  equation  can  be  formed  with  an  arbitrary 
number  of  variables  and  mathematical  symbols,  such  as 
constants,  operations,  and  functions.  Equations  are  frequently 
used  in  math  related  questions.  Based  on  the  question,  the 
equations can be simple or complex. Therefore, we propose to 
use equations to hide a message communicated over SMS. By 
designing cover text (c) to look like a game or a math tutoring 
session, secret message (s) s can be hidden in equations.  

Fig. 10 shows the proposed methodology framework using 
equations  for  SMS  steganography.  The  next  subsections 
explain the mapping, embedding, and extraction steps.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1%46–46^27^29*37*63^14*41*49= 

(1) 

  We  then  convert  equation  (1)  into  a  different  equation  by 
taking  each  number,  and  adding  to  the  number  the  mapped 
value  of  the  operator  coming  after  the  number.  That  is,  the 
assigned  operator  value  will  be  added  to  the  value  located  at 
the  front  of  each  operator.  For  example,  from  Table  V  the 
mapped value for the modulo (%) operator is 62. The value 62 
is  then  added  to  the  number  in  front  of  the  operator  (the 
number 1), resulting in the number 63. Next, the mapped value 
of the subtraction operator, 5, is added to the number in front of 
the operator, 46, resulting in the value 51. This is repeated for 
all the operators, resulting in the final stego media (sm) shown 
in equation (2):   

63%51-220^201^107*115*237^92*119*130= 

(2)  

  Adding  the  mapped  value  of  each  operator  to  the  mapped 
value  of  each  letter  further  obfuscates  the  hidden  message. 
Even if a third party were to obtain the mapping table for the 
letters  and  numbers,  it  would  not  be  sufficient  to  break  the 
hidden message. The third party would need to also obtain the 
operator key map in order to crack the secret message (s).  

TABLE III.  

UPPERCASE AND LOWERCASE MAPPING TABLE 

Letter  Value  Letter  Value  Letter  Value  Letter  Value 

A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

G 

H 

I 

J 

K 

L 

M 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

N 

O 

P 

Q 

R 

S 

T 

U 

V 

W 

X 

Y 

Z 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

a 

b 

c 

d 

e 

f 

g 

h 

i 

j 

k 

l 

m 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

32 

33 

34 

35 

36 

37 

38 

39 

n 

o 

p 

q 

r 

s 

t 

u 

v 

w 

x 

y 

z 

40 

41 

42 

43 

44 

45 

46 

47 

48 

49 

50 

51 

52 

  The mapping table and the operator key map are examples. 
In  practice,  multiple  mapping  tables  and  key  maps  can  be 
created and shared between the communicating parties.  When 
the sender chooses one of the key maps, the key map selection 
is  embedded  into  the  pre-defined  cover  text  as  the number  of 
points associated with a math quiz. For example, the following 
message hints to use key map 2: “Math Quiz (2 Pts) Answer:”. 
With this hint, the receiver chooses the same key map in order 
to  extract  the  secret  message  (s).  Finally,  the  generated  stego 
media  (sm)  will  be  the  default  cover  text  and  the  generated 
equation,  such  as:  “Math  Quiz  (2  Pts)  Answer:  63%51-
220^201^107*115*237^92*119*130=”. 

Figure 10. Framework of proposed idea 

into  random  values, 

the  English  alphabet—uppercase  and 

A.  Mapping 
  Our  mapping  technique  is  implemented  by  first  changing 
to  further 
the  secret  message  (s) 
complicate  message identification  by  a third party. Each  letter 
of 
the 
numbers  0-9,  and  whitespace,  have  their  own  values  that  are 
pre-set. Table III shows each uppercase and lowercase letter of 
the  English  alphabet  mapped  to  a  value  between  1  and  52. 
Table  IV  shows  the  mapping  of  the  numbers  0-9  and 
whitespace to the numbers 53-63. Finally,  Table V shows the 
mapping  of  several  operators  to  numbers.  For  instance,  the 
secret message (s)  “Attack now” would mapped to the values 
1,  46,  46,  27,  29,  37,  63,  40,  41  and  49.  Tables  III-V  are 
provided  as  example  mappings,  as  each  character  may  be 
mapped to different values in order to hide a message.  

lowercase, 

B.  Embedding 
  With  the  mapped  values  from  the  previous  step,  we  next 
embed  the  values  into  an  equation.  In  order  to  create  the 
equation,  we  use  a  different  key  map  (k).  Table  VI  is  an 
example of an operator key map (k), consisting of seven basic 
operators with a value that will change the mapped value when 
it is embedded in the equation. 

  The  basic  concept  of  hiding  the  mapped  value  is  by 
randomly selecting operators, and adding the selected operators 
between  the  mapped  values.  For  example,  the  mapped  value 
from the previous step is 1, 46, 46, 27, 29, 37, 63, 14, 41 and 
49, representing the  secret message  (s) “Attack Now”. A first 
operator  is  randomly  selected  from  Table  VI,  and  added 
between  the  values  1  and  46.  Then  a  second  operator  is 
randomly selected again from Table VI, and added between the 
values  46  and  46,  and  so  on.  After  the  last  value,  the  last 
assigned operator will always be the equal operator in order to 
form an equation with standard formatting. An example of the 
resulting equation would be as in (1): 

 
 
 
 
 
is  about  22%.  In  addition,  the  capacity  can  be  increased  by 
reducing the length of the equation, but there will be a tradeoff 
between  security  and  capacity.  By  shortening  the  characters 
representation  for  each  secret  message  (s),  the  equation  can 
hide  more  secret  characters,  but  it  will  raise  the  level  of 
suspicion. 

Figure 11.   Generating a stego media based on an equation.  

Figure 12. Extracting a hidden message from a stego media.  

to 

the 

As  compared 

format  based  steganography 
techniques, one of our advantages is that the secret message (s) 
will not be destroyed either by using OCR or retyping the stego 
media (sm). As compared to the system proposed in [5], where 
the  sender  has  to  create  sentences  with  emoticons  that  both 
make  sense  and  do  not  raise  suspicion,  the  proposed  system 
helps in creating the stego  media  (sm) that has a low level  of 
suspicion to third parties and hackers.  

TABLE IV.   NUMBERS AND SPACE  MAPPING TABLE 

Numeric 

Mapping Value 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

0 

“ ” 

53 

54 

55 

56 

57 

58 

59 

60 

61 

62 

63 

Operators 

^ (Exponentiation) 

+ (Addition) 

- (Subtraction) 

* (Multiplication) 

/ (Division) 

% (Modulo) 

= (Equals) 

TABLE V.  

OPERATOR KEY MAP 

Positive Value 
(Embedding) 
174 

Negative Value 
(Extracting) 
-174 

32 

5 

78 

100 

62 

81 

-32 

-5 

-78 

-100 

-62 

-81 

C.  Test Application 

Fig. 11 shows an Android application that was developed to 
test our SMS steganography method. The application includes 
two interfaces, one for sending a secret message (s) and another 
for retrieving a secret message (s). The sender inputs the secret 
message  (s)  on  an  input  field  and  chooses  the  key  map  to 
embed  the  secret  message  (s).  The  application  generates  the 
stego  media  (sm)  at  the  bottom  of  the  interface,  allowing  the 
user to copy and send the stego media (sm) via any messaging 
application.  Fig.  12  illustrates  the  interface  for  extracting  the 
secret  message  (s)  from  the  stego  media  (sm).  The  stego 
message  (s)  is  copied  from  the  corresponding  messaging 
application  and  pasted  into  the  input  field.  The  number  of 
points  associated  with  the  quiz  is  used  to  select  the  key  map. 
The extracted secret message (s) is selected at the bottom of the 
interface.  

IV. 

DISCUSSION  

The  idea  of  using  an  equation  as  part  of  the  stego  media 
(sm) can be challenging in terms of capacity, as each character 
of  the  secret  message  (s)    (s)  will  be  consuming about  3  to  4 
characters in a 140 character SMS.  

Table VI  shows that the initial cover text—“Math Quiz (2 
Pts) Answer: ”—has 26 characters, which occupies 19% of the 
140 characters of the SMS. The maximum length of the secret 
message (s) that can be hidden per SMS is 31 characters, which 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE VI.   AMOUNT OF SECRET MESSAGE (S)  AND CAPACITY USED  

Secret message 
(s)   

Number of 
Characters 

(No message) 

RUN 

Sunway 

High Five 

I Love Sunway 

Kill him ASAP 
after noon 

Kill him ASAP 
after noon thanks 

0 

3 

6 

9 

13 

24 

31 

Cover Text Used 
(140 characters 
MAX) 
26 

39 

50 

60 

75 

113 

139 

Capacity Used 
(%) 

19% 

27% 

35% 

43% 

54% 

81% 

99% 

Comparing to another proposed system, in [14] the capacity 
is limited because the secret message (s) is hidden in only one 
of  the  rows  or  columns  of  the  9x9  Sudoku  puzzle.  In  our 
proposed system, the equation gets longer with the amount of 
secret message (s) being hidden without a size limitation, and it 
minimizes  suspicion  because  equations  come  in  varying  sizes 
and values.    

One  of  the  limitations  of  our  proposed  system  is  that  we 
make the assumption of one way communication. Although the 
stego message (sm) is sending a quiz to the receiver, we do not 
expect the receiver to  send a response (an answer to the quiz) 
the 
the  sender.  From  a  hacker’s  point  of  view, 
to 
communication  will  seem  as  a  math  tutoring  session  where  a 
teacher is broadcasting questions to a numbers of students.  

the 

Another 

limitation  of 

equation  based  SMS 
steganography is that if the equations are too random, this itself 
may raise suspicions. For example, it is unusual to have a math 
question where a number is raised to the power  of 107 or 92, 
because the answer would be astronomical.  Thus, it would be 
beneficial  to  limit  the  use  of  certain  operators,  make  the 
selection of operators less random, or use  single digit mapped 
values.  All  of  these  factors  would  make  the  equations  more 
realistic,  the  corresponding  answers  would  be  reasonable, 
which in turn would make the communication less suspicious.  

V. 

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK  

This  paper  proposes  a  new  SMS  steganography  approach 
using  mathematical  equations.  In  this  method,  the  secret 
message (s) is embedded in the equation and combined with a 
pre-defined  cover  text  to  create  the  stego  media  (sm).  With 
both  of  the  combination  of  the  pre-defined  text  and  equation, 
hackers  and  other  third  parties  would  likely  presume  that  the 
communication  is  a  tutoring  or  a  game  session  between  two 
texters, without raising suspicions.  

For  future  work,  we  plan  to  support  more  symbols  and 
special  characters.  We  would  also  like  to  address  the  use  of 
Chinese or Persian characters in the secret message (s). For our 
test  application,  we 
two  way 
communication between sender and receiver. Finally, different 
types  of  equations,  such  as  linear  equations,  polynomial 

implement 

intend 

to 

equations,  etc  from  other  domains,  such  as  physics  equations 
and  chemical  equations,  have  the  potential  to  provide  a  rich 
character set for hiding secret message (s) s (s).  

REFERENCES 

International 

[1]  H.  Singh,  P.  Kumar,  K.  Saroha.  2009.  A  survey  on  Text  Based 
Steganography.  Proceedings  of  the  3rd  national  Conference.  New  Delhi: 
INDIACom 6.  
[2]  Rakhi,  S.  Gawande.  2013.  A  Review  on  Steganography  Methods. 
International  Journal  of  Advanced  Research  in  Electrical,  Electronics  and 
Instrumentation Engineering, vol. 2, Issue 10.   
[3]  S.  Gupta,  D.  Gupta.  2011.  Text-Steganography:  Review  Study  & 
Comparative  Analysis.  International  Journal  of  Computer  Science  and 
Information technologies, vol. 2(5). 
[4]  A.  Kumar,  Km.  Pooja.  2010. Steganography  –  A  Data  Hiding  Approach. 
International Journal of Computer Application, vol. 9 – No.7.  
[5]  Tatwadarshi  P.  Nagarhalli.  2014.  A  New  Approach  to  SMS  Text 
Steganography  using  Emoticons. 
Journal  of  Computer 
Application.  
[6]  L.  Y. Por,  T.  F.  Ang  and  B.  Delina. 2008.  WhiteSteg  –  a  new  scheme  in 
information  hiding  using  text  steganography.  WSEAS  Transactions  on 
Computers, vol. 7, pp. 735-745.  
[7]  M.  Agarwal.  2013.  Text  Steganography  Approaches:  A  Comparison. 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Application (IJNSA)), vol. 5. 
[8] C. Badgaiyan, A.  K. Dewangan, B. K. Pandey. 2012. A SURVEY PAPER 
ON  SMS  BASED  STEGANOGRAPHY.  International  Journal  of  Advanced 
Computer and Mathematical Sciences, vol.3, Issue 4, pp. 441-455. 
[9]  R.  Bhuvaneshwari,  P.  Archana,  S.  Mahalakshmi.  2013.  Secure 
Transmission  of  Sensitive  Data  Using  System  Fonts  Approach.  IJREAT 
International Journal of Research in Engineering & Advanced Technology. 
[10]  K.  Aditya  Kumar,  S.  Pabboju,  N.  M.  S.  Desai.  2014.  Advance  Text 
Steganography  Algorithms:  An  Overview.  International  Journal  of  Research 
and Applications (IJRA), 1(1), pp. 31-35. 
[11]  M.  Shirali-Shahreza,  M.  Hassan.  Shirali-Shahreza.  2007.  Text 
Steganography in SMS. International Conference on Convergence Information 
Technology, pp. 2260-2265. 
[12]  R.  Bhuvaneshwari,  P.  Archana,  S.Mahalakshmi.  2013.  Secure 
Transmission  of  Sensitive  Data  using  System  Fonts  Approach.  IJREAT 
International Journal of Research in Engineering & Advanced Technology. 
[13] R. Amirtharajan, P. Muralidharan, R.Rajesh, R. Srideve, J.B.B. Rayappan. 
2013. Short Message (Service) as Key for Steganography. Research Journal of 
Information Technology, vol. 5, Issue 2, pp. 113-124. 
[14] M. Shirali-Shahreza, M. Hassan. Shirali-Shahreza. 2008. Steganography in 
SMS by Sudoku Puzzle. IEEE, pp. 884-847. 
[15]  M.  Kashif.  2014.  Secure  SMS  communication  using  encryption  gateway 
and digital  signature. International Conference on Computational Science and 
Engineering (CSE), pp. 1430-1434.  
[16]  S.  Bhattacharyaa,  I.  Banerjee,  and  G.  Sanyal.  2011.  A  survey  of 
steganography  and  steganalysis  technique  in  image,  text,  audio  and  video  as 
cover carrier, Journal of global research in computer science, 2(4). 
[17]  I.  V.  S.  Manjo.  2010.  Cryptography  and  steganography.  International 
journal of computer application. 1(12).   
[18] M.Shirali-shahreza. 2006. Stealth steganography in SMS. Proceedings of 
the  third  IEEE  and  IFIP  international  conference  on  wireless  and  optical 
communications networks (WOCN).  
[19]  K.  F.  Rafat.  2009.  Enhanced  text  steganography  in  SMS.  International 
conference on computer, control and communication, pp. 1-6. 
[20]  M.  Shirali-Shshreza.  2007.  Improving  mobile  banking  security  using 
steganography.  Fourth  international  conference  on  information  technology, 
pp.885-887. 
[21] W. S. Bhaya. 2011. Text hiding in  mobile phone simple  message  service 
using fonts. Journal of computer science 7(11), pp. 1626-1628. 
[22]  W.  S.  Bhaya,  A.  M.  Rahma,  D.  AL-Nasrawi.  2013.  Text  steganography 
based on font type in MS-Word documents. Journal of Computer Science 9(7), 
pp 898-904. 

 
