Security Monitoring of the Cyber Space 
Claude Fachkha 
Concordia University, Canada  

ABSTRACT 

Billions of users utilize the largest and more complex network of information, namely, the Internet. Despite 
the fact that this IT critical infrastructure provides various communication services, adversaries are abusing 
the Internet security and privacy to execute cyber attacks for various reasons. To cope with these threats, 
security operators utilize various security tools and techniques to monitor the cyber space. An efficient way 
to monitor and infer threat activities online is to collect information from trap-based monitoring sensors. 
This  chapter  primarily  defines  the  cyberspace  trap-based  monitoring  systems  and  their  taxonomies. 
Moreover, it  presents  the state-of-the-art  in terms of research contributions  and techniques,  tools  and 
technologies.  Furthermore,  it  identifies  the  gaps  in  terms  of  science  and  technology.  Additionally,  it 
presents  some  case  studies  and  practical  approaches  corresponding  to  large-scale  cyber  monitoring 
systems such as Nicter. In this context, we further present some related security policies and legal issues 
on network monitoring. In a nutshell, the chapter aims to provide an overview on the Internet monitoring 
space and provides a guideline for readers to help them understand the concepts of observing, detecting 
and analyzing cyber attacks through network traps. 

Key words: cyber, hackers, darknet, greynet, IP gray space, honeypot, honeytoken. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

As  of  today,  the  Internet,  the  network  of  networks,  provides  information  sharing  and  communication 
systems to more than 7 billion users [1]. This number is dramatically increasing as humans are becoming 
more  dependent  on  social  media/networks,  mobiles,  telecommunication,  gaming,  dating  websites  in 
addition  to  various  cloud  services  and  facilities. This  increase rises the  size  of information  sharing  and 
hence created the term Big Data. This term has become the focus, the challenge and the exclamation mark 
for  Internet  Service  Providers  (ISPs),  organizations,  law  enforcements  and  government  agencies.  For 
example, the questions are how to handle such large amount of information? How to analyze the traffic and 
how to secure and control such big data?  

In regard to privacy, security and control, this cyberspace challenge takes an appeal of a continuous conflict 
due to the fact that computer attack tools and techniques are  becoming  more intelligently designed and 
hackers  are  capable  of  launching  worldwide  impacting  attacks  for  various  reasons  such  as  large-scale 
Denial-of-Service [2], cyber-terrorism, information theft, hate crimes, defamation, bullying, identity theft 
and fraud. For instance, the Flame code, the most complex malware ever found, is a new generation of 
malware discovered in 2012 that aims to target nuclear power plants machines [3]. This obviously open the 
door of a new cyber war impacting the whole world including critical physical infrastructure such as power 
plants,  nuclear,  etc..  Further,  the  existence  of  widely  available  encryption  and  anonymizing  techniques 
makes the surveillance and the investigation of cyber attacks much harder problem.  In this context, the 
availability of relevant cyber threat collecting and monitoring systems is of paramount importance.  

 
 
 
 
In this content, we attempt in this chapter to find answers to the following questions: 

 How do we investigate large-scale cyber events?
 What is the state of the art of cyber security monitoring systems?
 Who has the capability to monitor the cyberspace?
 What are the privacy and security policies behind security analysis and deployment?

Answering  the  above  questions  can  help  security  operators  to  understand  the  objectives  of  network 
monitoring  technologies,  their  corresponding  pros  and  cons,  their  deployments,  their  traffic  analysis 
processes, their embedded threats, the difference among them as well as their research gaps. Moreover, the 
readers can have an overview on the security policies and legal issues that mostly unknown for network 
operators and even adversaries.  

The rest of this chapter is organized as follows. Section II presents the background information on various 
network  monitoring  concepts  and  cyber  threats.  Section  III  provides  the  state  of  the  art  of  trap-based 
monitoring tools. Section IV discusses the security policies and legal issues in network monitoring. Section 
V presents the trend and the future research directions. Finally, Section V summaries and concludes with a 
discussion on the monitoring systems and research. 

2. BACKGROUND

This section provides an overview on the major elements of this chapter, namely, the trap-based 
monitoring systems and their embedded cyber threats. 

2.1 Trap-based Cyber Security Monitoring Systems 
The Internet involves several telecommunication elements and machines such as servers/clients, network 
infrastructure (routers, switches, etc.), services (email, web, etc.) and databases, among many others. One 
way to monitor the information sharing among these devices is to build network management tools based 
on  SNMP  services  [4].  In  addition  to  managing  the  Internet,  several  security  monitoring  systems  exist 
online. These methods run over various network layers such as physical, network and application as well 
as covers various areas such as storage, access control, etc. Trap-based monitoring sensors are systems 
that aim to trap adversaries online. The purpose is to collect insights on the attack traces and activities 
such  as  probing/scanning  for  vulnerable  services,  worm  propagation,  malware  downloads  and  other 
command-and-control activities such as executing DDoS cyber attacks using Botnet [5]. Figure 1 depicts 
a basic concept of trap-based sensor and monitoring on the Internet.  

Figure 1: Basic Monitoring Systems using Trap Sensors 

As shown in the figure above, a trap monitoring sensor is deployed on the Internet address space to attract 
malicious users. In some cases, these trap sensors run on unused but routable IP address, hence, all traffic 
destined  to  them  is  considered  suspicious  and  therefore  requires  further  investigation.  The  trap  attracts 
adversaries by running vulnerable services. As shown in the above figure, once these attackers connect to 
the sensors, all the malicious  traffic  is forwarded  from the sensor to the monitoring systems for further 
analysis.  In  the  rest  of  this  chapter,  we  discuss  the  state  of  the  arts  of  these  monitoring  systems,  their 
deployments, their embedded threats as well as their pros and cons. 

2.2 Trap-based Embedded Cyber Threats 
Several cyber threats exist on the Internet, we define below the major threats that can be found through the 
analysis of sensor-based monitoring systems. 

Scanning/Probing: Scanning, also known as reconnaissance activities, is the first step in a cyber attack life 
cycle. Adversaries run scanning activities to infer vulnerabilities on the Internet. Once a machine is found 
vulnerable,  the  attacker  attempts  to  control  or  infect  this  host  based  on  the  inferred  vulnerability.  For 
instance, an attacker check for vulnerabilities in remote access services first before trying to access remotely 
and  take  control.  Scanning  various  in  natures,  strategies  and  approaches.  Moreover,  several  scanning 
techniques exists such as stealthy, sweep, open and half open scans, among others [6]. 

Botnet:  Botnet  can  be  used  as  a  platform  for  adversaries.  It  is  designed  to  command  and  control 
compromised machines. Hence, it aims to provide a powerful tool for hackers distribute and amplify their 
attacks. A typical botnet consists of three major elements, a bot master, command-and-control (C&C) hosts 
and bots/zombies of compromised machines. A bot master controls an army of bots through C&Cs. For 
instance, a bot master can order all bots to flood (send extensively) large number of requests to one single 
victim to exhaust or/and deny its resources. Further, a bot master can send spams on the Internet through 
his botnet infrastructure. Several botnet infrastructure exists such centralized (IRC-based) and decentralized 
(P2P-based) [7].  

Denial  of  Service:  Denial  of  Service  attacks  are  characterized  by  an  explicit  attempt  to  prevent  the 
legitimate use of a service. DDoS attacks employ multiple attacking entities (i.e., compromised 
Machines/bots) to achieve their intended aim which mainly targets depleting bandwidth and host resources 
(e.g., CPU usage). In general, botnet is an impeccable tool to execute DDoS attacks with high impact [8].  

Exploit: Exploit is a software or a sequence of commands that tackles bugs, glitches or/and vulnerabilities 
in computer  system  for the  purpose  of  executing  malicious  acts  such  as  gaining  control,  accessing  root 
privileges, compromising and infecting exposed machines [9].   

Malware:  Malware  is  a  piece  of  code  designed  to  perform  malicious  activities.  Malware  comes  with 
various types such as viruses, worms, trojans, etc.  Each of these types has different features and families. 
Some of these features can include propagation and replication. For instance, worms are known to have 
self-propagating activities. Malware can damage computer services in many ways  like in compromising 
machines, stealing information, taking control, corrupting system files, exhausting resources, etc. [10].  

3.  TRAP-BASED CYBER MONITORING SYSTEMS 
 

In this section, we provide a state-of-art study on the main trap-based monitoring systems. 
The purpose of this section is to offer the reader a guideline on monitoring systems, namely, 
darknet, IP gray space, honeypot, greynet, honeytokens, etc. Therefore, we aim to answer 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the following questions: How do we investigate large-scale cyber events? What is the state of the 
art of cyber security monitoring systems? 

3.1 Darknet 
Darknet, also known as network telescopes [11], Internet background radiation or blackhole, is a chunk of 
Internet address space running on unused but routable IP addresses. Therefore, all traffic destined to them 
is  more  likely  suspicious.  To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  darknet  research  and  analysis  started  in  the 
beginning of the 1990th when Bellovin leveraged the unused address space to uncover malicious activities 
[12]. Few years later, darknet research and analysis started to become more attractive for researchers. At 
that  time,  darknet  was  found  as  a  good  source  to  collect  security  insights  online.  Some  of  the  projects 
include the analysis of Internet threat through darknet such as DDoS [13], worms [14], scanning [15] as 
well as misconfiguration [16].  

3.1.1 Darknet Deployment 
This section represents an overview of darknet deployment. The first step in darknet technique is to deploy 
a sensor monitoring system. Therefore, understanding the network architecture is a most. Thus, a careful 
configuration  must  be  done  on  the  dynamic  host  server  or  the  upstream  router  to  forward  unreachable 
packets to the darknet sensors. Two major elements must be done for this deployment setup, namely, the 
storage and network requirements and the deployment techniques. First, it is critical to identify the exact 
storage and network requirements for a darknet system. In order to collect darknet data, PCAP and Netflow 
formats are the most suitable for this network traffic. The amount of darknet packets received are based on 
the  placement  of  the  sensors,  the  size  of  the  monitored  IPs  and  the  configuration  setup.  In  terms  of 
placement, previous studies has shown that the traffic collected by two different but equally sized darknet 
is not the same. In terms of size of the darknet and network requirements, a study has shown that a small 
/24 sensor has approximately a rate of 9 packets per second, while a /16 sensor receives 75 packets per 
second, and a large /8 monitor receives over 5000 packets per second [16]. Second, in terms of deployment 
techniques,  there  are  mainly  three  major  darknet  deployment  approaches:  i)  the  first  is  to  simply  send 
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) replies for each dark address to the router. This technique, although it 
is simple, it works well when the darknet addresses are well known and are limited in size. When the unused 
addresses reach thousands or million, the monitoring activity becomes less efficient; ii) the second approach 
is considered more scalable and link a static range of IP address block to  the monitor. This is a simple 
approach but it needs the dark address block to be specifically separated for analysis; iii) the third approach 
is done by forwarding all non-configured packets to the sensor. It is like forwarding all unused packets of 
an organization network to the sensor. The above mentioned methodologies deal with unused and reachable 
dark addresses. However, to capture unused and non-reachable packets, RFC 1918 [17] specifies some IP 
ranges that fit in this category. We refer the reader to [16] for more information regarding these techniques 
and how to implement them. 

3.1.2 Darknet Data 
In terms of protocols, TCP packets are the most common traffic found on darknet, UDP packets are the 
second and ICMP packets are the third [18, 19]. Moreover, in terms of threat types, the majority of the 
inferred traffic consists of scanning and worms activities [18, 19], backscatter traffic from DDoS victims 
[13]  whereas  the  minority  consists  of  misconfiguration  of network  devices  such  as routers.  Concerning 
scanning  and  worm  scenarios,  the  attack  aims  to  scan  or  probe  the  Internet  address  space  looking  for 
gathering  information  (e.g.,  vulnerabilities  in  services)  or  infecting  machines  (e.g.,  downloading  a 
malware), etc.. In regard to backscatter traffic scenario, the adversary sends a flood of requests signed by 
the IP address (spoofed) to the victim. Subsequently, the victim replies to the flood by sending backscattered 
(reply) packets to the sensors. In this scenario, the assumption is that the attacker chooses a spoofed IP 
address that belongs to the monitored darknet space. In another DDoS cases, the attacker flood the Internet 
with requests spoofed by the address of the victim. Hence, all open services (e.g.,  DNS resolver) found 

 
 
 
online will reply to the victim with amplified replies [36]. For all aforementioned cases, while generating 
these malicious activities, some of this traffic might reach the darknet sensor and hence become available 
for  IT  investigators.  Subsequently,  security  operators  can  study  the  traffic  (e.g.,  analyze  the  speed  and 
impact of the attack) and understand the malicious strategy that are being used on the Internet. This exercise 
might help in detecting, preventing, mitigating and even attributing cyber attacks.   

3.1.3 Darknet: Pros and Cons 
Since darknet monitors solely unused address space, the major advantage of this approach is the security 
aspect on the monitor side. In other word, only uni-directional traffic (towards darknet sensor) is captured 
on the darknet. Recall that, unused address space do not communicate, and hence darknet is called passive 
monitoring.  The security advantage of this approach is that darknet sensors are safe and not threaten by the 
attack. Further, darknet deployment is considered easy to deploy since it is passive (run in a listening mode) 
and do not require interaction with the adversary. On the other hand, the major disadvantage of darknet is 
the  collection  of  data.  Since  there  is  no  interaction  with the  adversary,  investigators  will  not detect  the 
complete  attack  scenario  but  only  the  first  stage  of  it.  For  example,  IT  analysts  can  infer  the  scanning 
attempt for vulnerability but cannot save the malware (e.g., the executable) used while using this scanning 
attack. Therefore, compared to other monitoring systems, information gathered on darknet is considered 
low. 

3.2 IP Gray Space 
These addresses refer to devices that are not assigned to any host throughout a given time period (e.g. 1 
hour, 1 day). In concept, IP gray space is very similar to darknet. The only difference is that IP gray space 
addresses are unused for a limited time only, whereas darknet addresses are permanently unused. Unlike 
darknet analysis techniques which can potentially be evaded, IP gray space might be harder to detect by an 
attacker since they are active and operating as a regular machine at some periods of time. The aim of this 
experiment is to confuse the adversaries while they are trying to gain some information from the targeted 
address space. For instance, after a successful compromising a machine that is running in active mode, the 
adversaries try  to  control the  victim  using  a  C&C.  However,  since this  active machine  might  switch  to 
inactive mode, the security operators might trick the attackers (e.g., botmaster) and infer their malicious 
next-step activities.  Obviously,  the assumption is that  adversaries  do  still  believe  that  the compromised 
machine is still under their control [20, 21].   

3.2.1 IP Gray Space Deployment 
As mentioned above,  IP gray space addresses have mainly two status, namely, active and inactive. The 
analysis of IP gray space is done when the addresses are in passive (inactive mode). Therefore, in order to 
deploy IP gray space, you need a setup similar to darknet deployment in Section 3.1.1 when the addresses 
are in the inactive mode. However, when the addresses switches to active mode, the setup is switch to a 
regular active hosts online. Another way to deploy IP gray space, is simply disconnect an active machine 
for a limited period of time and sniff all incoming packets destined to its addresses. In literature, there is no 
detailed guideline to follow on deploying IP gray space network. For further information on IP gray space, 
we refer the reader to [20].  

3.2.2 IP Gray Space Data 
Since IP gray space is darknet for a specific period of time or has both active and inactive modes, collected 
inactive traffic can be darknet data (DDoS, scanning, misconfiguration) plus active traffic (Botnet C&C, 
malware) data. Therefore, assuming the IP gray space deployment is correctly done, analyzing its space can 
be  more  relevant  and  insightful  than  examining  darknet  data.  For  example,  since  darknet  monitor  only 
unused IP addresses (in passive/inactive mode), it is unlikely to find on its sensors interactive activities 
such  as  botnet/malware  communication.  In  contrary,  IP  gray  space  monitoring  can  infer  these 
communication as its addresses can run in active mode for a certain period of time.  

 
 
 
 
3.2.3 IP Gray Space: Pros and Cons 
Obviously, IP gray space monitoring holds the disadvantages and advantages of darknet while running in 
passive mode. However, while running in active mode, the IP gray space might have the following pros 
and  cons.  Regarding  the  advantages,  as  mentioned  before,  more  data  will  be  collected  such  as 
malware/botnet  communication  and  hence  more  insights  can  be  inferred.  Regarding  the  disadvantages, 
running in active mode will provide adversaries with capabilities of attacking monitoring servers (sensors). 
Therefore, the deployment of IP gray space requires more attention and has more challenges than deploying 
darknet.  

3.3 Honeypot 
This is a computer system, mostly connected to the Internet that is configured to trap attackers. Honeypots 
are similar in nature to darknet with more specific goals. Honeypots, in general, require more resources 
than darknet since the aim is to interact with the adversary. There are 3 major types of honeypots, namely 
low, medium and high interactive honeypots. Types are differentiated based on their interactivity level with 
the initiator of the communication. On one hand, a low-interactive honeypot, is a simple solution configured 
to interact with the intruder at a basic level by emulating services (e.g., send ECHO Reply message to an 
ECHO Ping Request). Further, a medium-interactive honeypot is similar to low-interactive one but with 
further interactions and more emulated services for more data capturing and analysis (e.g., reply SYN ACK 
to a SYN request). On the other hand, a high interactive honeypot is a computer system that do not emulate 
some services. Instead, it runs a complete vulnerable or non-patched operating system and applications such 
as an OS version on a virtual machine. Note that a collection of honeypots form a honeynet [22]. 

3.3.1 Honeypot Deployment 
Similar to other monitoring systems, honeypot deployment depends on several factors such as the location 
of the sensor, configuration of the sensor, and most importantly, the type of the sensor (low, medium, high). 
First, a major factor in honeypot deployment is choosing the location. A good practice exercise recommends 
installing several honeypot in separate locations and separate from the production system to prevent liability 
issues [23]. The more distributed are the sensors, the better are the extracted insights and the vision. Second, 
configuring  a  honeypot  changes  based  on  the  need  of  the  analysts.  For  instance,  setting  up  a  highly-
interactive honeypot with capabilities to detect botnet is less challenging than deploying a low-interactive 
honeypot to monitor solely scanning activities. In any case, the deployment of low-interactive honeypot is 
close to darknet deployment whereas deploying high-interactive honeypot must be done in a way to emulate 
the operation of a regular machine. Therefore, a practical way to deploy high-interactive honeypot is to run 
the trap on a virtual machine (VM) [24] and run this service in a safe environment. A practical honeypot 
deployment is found in [25]. 

3.3.2 Honeypot Data 
Honeypot is probably the best source for collecting security information due to the fact that these sensors 
can save the complete (bi-directional) communication or session with the adversary. Therefore, through 
honeypot, traces can track all attack stages such as scanning/probing for vulnerabilities, exploits, P2P and 
C&C communications, malware download activities, storing executable malicious codes, drop locations, 
etc.  Several  researchers  investigate  honeypot  and  extract  various  useful  information  on  adversaries 
operation and strategies. For more information on honeypot data collection we refer the reader to [22, 26]. 

3.3.3 Honeypot: Pros and Cons 
Honeypots, similar to any other trap-based monitoring system, have their own pros and cons. In terms of 
advantages, despite the fact that honeypot deployment is more complex than passive monitoring systems 
such as darknet, however, the technology today made implementing and running a honeypot a simple and 
flexible monitoring system. Most importantly, honeypots capture various security information regarding 
adversaries methodologies and techniques. The honeypot stored information is larger and more insightful 

 
 
 
 
than the darknet ones. In terms of the disadvantages, honeypots, since they interact with adversaries, this 
make  this  operation  challenging.  For  instance,  security  operators  must  be  very  careful  to  avoid  being 
detected  by  the  hacker  and/or  get  infected  or/and  become  compromised.  If  the  attackers  discover  any 
suspicious  monitoring  services,  they  might  block  the  traced  communication  or  even  send  irrelevant 
information  to  confuse  investigators.  Therefore,  deploying  the  honeypot  sensor  might  require  more 
attention than other trap-based sensors such as darknet where monitoring do not require interaction with 
the adversary [24].   

3.4 Greynet 
This network is sparsely populated with darknet inactive addresses interspersed with active IP addresses. 
In other word, greynet uses both darknet (passive) and honeypots (active) on the same monitoring space 
during the same period of time. The purpose is to make the monitored IP block more attractive trap for the 
attacker. For example, a range of IPs that have both darknet and other active sensors running some fake 
services (i.e., reply to ICMP ECHO requests) might trick the attackers and have them think that the whole 
range of IPs in this monitored block is an appropriate organization target.  

3.4.1 Greynet Deployment 
Obviously,  since  greynet  is  an  address  space  containing  both  darknet  and  honeypot,  this  means  that 
deploying  a  greynet  require  deploying  both  darknet  and  honeypot.  Therefore,  deploying  greynet  is 
considered  the  most  complex  among  all  aforementioned  trap-based  monitoring  systems.  For  instance, 
security analyst must distinguish between the passive and active monitoring traces and check for a possible 
link among them;  at first, attackers might probe unused addresses (passive host) looking for vulnerable 
services  and  at  second,  the  same  or  even  other  attackers  might  target  a  honeypot  (active  host)  while 
searching for an active bot. This scenario might confuse investigators while collecting and interpreting this 
case to infer the pattern and the link among traces, if any. Research in this area is still required, for more 
information on greynet, we refer the reader to [27].      

3.4.2 Greynet Data 
Through Greynet, researchers and security operators can benefit from the fact that darknet and honeypot 
traces  can  be  trapped.  Therefore,  in  terms  of  passive  monitoring,  greynet  can  detect  scanning,  DDoS 
activities as well as misconfiguration. Moreover, in terms of active monitoring, greynet can identify botnet 
C&C activities, malware communication, drop locations of stolen information, etc. In a nutshell, greynet 
can  trap  various  malicious  activities  and  strategies  that  covers  from  the  first  until  the  last  action  of  a 
malicious activity.  

3.4.3 Greynet: Pros and Cons 
Clearly,  greynet  holds  the  pros  and  cons  of  both  darknet  and  honeypot  monitoring  systems. 
In regard to the advantage of greynet; first, a greynet is probably the most attractive space for adversaries 
to the fact that it represents a typical organization network having both active and inactive hosts. Hence, 
the more data is available for analysis. More importantly, greynet can be used to identify various scanning 
techniques and strategies [21]. On the other hand, some of the disadvantages behind greynet analysis is the 
amount and the variety of traces available for analysis. Consequently, analyzing greynet traffic is similar to 
monitoring  a  network  organization  data. The analysis  of  greynet, in contrary  to darknet  for  instance,  is 
complex to the fact that the traffic is coming from various types of sensors and hence mixing various types 
of attacks and strategies.  

3.5 Honeytokens 
Honeytokens were introduce in 2003 by Augusto Paes de Barros. Honeytokens are technologies that go 
beyond regular honeypots. In fact, honeytokens are honeypots without machines (sensors, computers, etc.). 
In other word, honeytokens are digital entities. Therefore, honeytokens have all the advantages of traditional 

 
 
 
 
 
honeypots and extend their capabilities beyond physical machines [29].  In practice, honeytokens can be, 
but not limited to, the following digital entities: a credit card number, a bogus login or any other information 
that can be stolen. The concept falls behind the following steps: First, security operators publish or make 
the aforementioned information accessible to adversaries. Second, assuming that hackers take control over 
these information and hence, security operators can monitor, track and trace-back hackers’ activities.  

3.5.1 Honeytokens Deployment 
Since honeytokens deployment do not require physical entity, running them is considered simple and fast. 
In order to elaborate more on the deployment of honeytokens, we provide the following scenario. Imagine 
cyber security experts are investigating online credit card thefts. Therefore, for monitoring such malicious 
activities, the experts provide a bogus credit card information online (e.g., on a specific bank database) and 
wait for malicious activities on this bogus data. Any activities that run on this credit card information is 
considered a violation to the system’s usage policy and hence needs to be investigated. It is noteworthy to 
note that in general, there is no designed algorithm or configured rules to deploy a honeytoken [29].  

3.5.2 Honeytokens Data 
Honeytokens, similar to any other monitoring system, do not solve all security issues. However, it can help 
in some security applications such as identifying source of attack and tracing the motive and the behavior 
of adversaries. Therefore, honeytokens analyzed data contains mainly traces of the attack, namely, handling 
stolen  information,  storing  stolen  information,  tracing-back  adversaries  and  their  networks,  discovering 
malicious users or users with malicious intent, etc. It is significant to note that honeytokens traps can be in 
the form of any file or information such as Office documents (PowerPoint, Excel, Word), pdf, databases, 
SIN, credit card info, bank accounts, signatures, login credentials, etc.  

3.5.3 Honeytokens: Pros and Cons 
With regard to the advantage of honeytokens, as mentioned before, this technology is considered easy to 
deploy and extremely effective with low cost. Honeytokens accuracy in detecting malicious users is higher 
than other trap-based monitoring system to the fact that its digital trap is more attractive and realistic to 
adversaries since it  provide  them  assets  (e.g.,  financial).  For instance,  from  a  law  enforcement  point  of 
view, tracing back a bogus credit card might have more impact than inferring scanning activities. Further, 
a major advantage of this technology is the deployment which do not require configuration or/and setup of 
hardware  devices.  Hence,  this  technology  operates  dynamically  and  in  a  mobile  manner.  Instead  of 
deploying a sensor on a specific IP address space, honeytokens operate independent of their locations (e.g., 
web-based). In regard to the disadvantage of this technology, honeytokens cannot trap all network-based 
information that destined to an IP address space due to the fact that, as mentioned earlier, honeytokens is a 
digital entity. Therefore, honeytokens fail to trap data regarding scanning activities, worm propagation, etc. 

3.6 Comparative Study 
In this section, we provide a comparative study of the trap-based monitoring systems, namely, darknet, IP 
grey space, honeypot, greynet and honeytokens. 

3.6.1 Feature Comparison  
This section compares the aforementioned monitoring systems based on the following features: 

Interactivity:  The  interactivity  is  the  measure  of  the  interaction  level  between  an  adversary  and  the 
monitoring  system.  For  example,  a  darknet,  which  is  inactive  and  passive  monitoring,  do  not  require 
interaction with adversaries whereas a high-interactive honeypot require a high interactive communication. 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Complexity: The complexity is the measure of the difficulties in setting up a monitoring system. In other 
word, how complex is to deploy a monitoring sensor. For instance, setting up a greynet which can run also 
honeypot, might be more complex than deploying solely a darknet. 

Data  Collection:  The  data  collection  measure  the  quantity  of  data  collected  from  the  trap  sensor.  For 
instance,  obviously,  high  interactive  honeypot  which  stores  bi-directional  communication  might  collect 
more information than a darknet that saves solely unidirectional data. 

Security: The security feature measure the security level of implementing sensor on the monitoring side. 
For instance, the security of deploying a high interactive honeypot is high as the monitoring sensor might 
be threatened to become compromised.  

Interactivity  Complexity  Data Collection  Security 

Type 

Monitoring System 
Darknet 
IP Gray Space 
Low-interactive Honepot 
Medium-interactive Honepot 
High-interactive Honepot 
Greynet 
Honeytoken 
N: Null – L: Low – M: Medium – H: High – S: Safe – V: Vulnerable 

IP-based 
IP-based 
IP-based 
IP-based 
IP-based 
IP-based 
Digital-based 

N 
N 
L 
M 
H 
N-LMH 
N-L 

L 
L 
L 
M 
H 
LMH 
L 

L 
L 
L 
M 
H 
LMH 
LMH 

S 
S 
V 
V 
V 
S-V 
S 

Table 1. Monitoring Systems - Feature Comparison 

Table 1 provides a comparison of network monitoring systems based on several features, namely, type of 
sensor, interactivity with the adversary, complexity of deployment, data collection or information gathering 
and the security on the monitoring sensor. First, Darknet and IP gray space share similar features due to the 
fact that the latter is darknet but running for a specific period of time. These two safe monitoring systems 
are  running  in  passive  mode  (null  interactivity)  and  their  deployment  and  data  gathering  entities  are 
considered low compared to other monitoring systems. Second, in regard to honeypots, the interactivity, 
the  complexity  and  the  data  gathering  are  mostly  proportion  to  each  other.  For  instance,  the  more  the 
interaction with the adversary, the more complex is the design and the more data is collected. However, 
concerning the security aspect, all honeypots which have interactive feature can be vulnerable in terms of 
security. Third, since greynet consists of darknet and honeypot, it is considered the more comprehensive 
monitoring system and therefore, it could have all the possibilities in terms of interactivity, complexity, 
data collection and security. Finally, honeytokens are the only digital-based entity which has null to low 
interactivity with the adversary depending on the monitored digital entity and low complexity due to the 
simplicity of running it. Further, this secure and safe monitoring system can have low to high data collection 
depending on the investigation focus. 

Although some trap-based monitoring systems could have hybrid capabilities (e.g., running in both darknet 
and honeypot), Table 1 provided a high level understanding on typical trap-based sensors and highlighted 
the thin and gloomy lines that separate among them.   

3.6.1 Address Space Distribution 
In  this  section  we  provide  a  comparison  between  IP-based  monitoring  systems.  Therefore,  we  omit 
honeytokens monitoring sensors which are digital-based entities. In order to visualize the address space 
distribution, Figure 2 depicts the address space scenarios of darknet, IP gray space, honeypot and greynet.  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
Figure 2. Monitoring Systems – Address Space Distribution 

First,  the  darknet  IP  address  space  contains  only  unused  addresses  running  in  passive  (inactive)  mode. 
Second, the IP gray space (at time 2) is similar to darknet, however, the same address space was already 
active in a previous period of time (time 1). Third, honeypots can run in any types of network, either solely 
on a network as shown in Figure 2 or with active hosts or passive host. The latter case represents the final 
scenario which is the greynet address distribution.  

3.7 Case Studies 
In this section, we provide two case studies based on the aforementioned monitoring systems. The first is 
based on a darknet traffic analysis whereas the second focused on honeypots.   

3.7.1 Darknet-Based Case Study: DAEDALUS-VIZ  
The first case study represents DAEDALUS-VIZ [30] which is one of the large-scale cyber security projects 
(Nicter)  that  is  based  on  the  monitoring  and  the  analysis  of  one  type  of  trap-based  monitoring  system, 
namely, darknet. DAEDALUS-VIZ allows security operators to understand visually and in near real time 
the worldwide overview of security alerts. Moreover, the project provides high interactive and flexible tools 
to facilitate the investigation of large-scale cyber threats. An overview of the 3D visualization capability of 
this project is shown in Figure 3. 

Figure 3. DAEDALUS-VIZ Overview [30] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DAEDALUS-VIZ visualizes various darknet threat, namely, internal darknet alerts that are based on local 
scans in addition to external darknet alerts that are based on global scans and backscattered traffic from 
victims of DDoS [13]. In addition, the project provides a novel technique to map IPv4 addresses on a sphere 
and  other  visualization  shapes.  Further,  to  the  near  real  time  processing,  storing  and  displaying  of 
information, DEADALUS-VIZ provides an overview system accompanied with drill down capabilities to 
investigate traces packet per packet. This is all running in an interactive platform which provides flexibility 
in viewpoint change, zooming capabilities, pausing/resuming services, among others.  Most importantly, 
the system is customizable based on the investigator’s need. Hence, security operators can change color, 
shape, size and position of the platform through a user friendly interface. Further, this visualization tool 
allows investigators to fine-grained data filtering operations.   

3.7.2 Honeypot-Based Case Study: Situational Awareness of Large-Scale Botnet Probing 
Events 
In this case study, we elaborate on a methodology to infer Botnet probing activities through Honeynets 
(multi honeypots). This case study do not solely infer the malicious activities, but also detect the strategy 
of  the  attack,  its  intention,  its  uniformity  and  coordination  features.  Figure  4  depicts  the  architecture 
overview of the botnet probing detection and inference system.  

Figure 4. System Architecture [31] 

As shown above, the architecture is mainly composed of two main elements, namely the detection and the 
inference  subsystems.  In  the  detection  phase,  the  system  takes  honeypots  information  as  input,  than  it 
classifies traffic before extracting events. The output of the later exercise divide the output into 3 categories, 
namely, misconfiguration, worm, and botnet. Since this system aims to infer botnet information, the second 
subsystem  takes  as  input  the  botnet  data  for  further  analysis.  The  later  subsystem  is  capable,  through 
statistical and probabilistic algorithms, to infer the monotonicity of the botnet, the hit list data, in addition 
to the uniformity and independency of the strategy [31]. At the final stage, botnet traces that share similar 
properties are grouped as one botnet probing event. The output of the approach detected and inferred 203 
botnet events that belong to 13 types of probes tackling various services such as HTTP, VNC, NetBIOS, 
MySQL, Telnet, etc. 

4.  SECURITY POLICIES AND LEGAL ISSUES 

A cybercrime happens when both the action and the will are present. This section provides information on 
the  security  policies  and  legal  issues  while  monitoring  the  Internet.  Therefore,  we  aim  to  answer  the 
following questions: Who has the capability to monitor the cyberspace? What are the privacy and security 
policies behind security analysis and deployment?  

 
 
 
 
 
Since monitoring sensors (e.g., honeypot) are used to analyze data that is probably based on interactions 
with users (e.g., adversaries), these monitors might turn to legal responsibilities and several factors might 
turn  them  into  liability.  In  this  section,  we  provide  an  overview  on  the  legal  and  security  aspects  of 
deploying, monitoring and analyzing monitoring data.  

In  the  United  States,  there  are  at  least  three  legal  concerns  to  consider  while  deploying  an  interactive 
monitoring system. First, understanding the laws that restrict the owner of the security monitoring systems 
to monitor user activities. Second, addressing the risk and understanding that the monitoring system might 
be  used  by  adversaries  to  harm  others.  Third,  considering  the  fact  that  adversaries  can  argue  that  the 
monitoring service was operating undercover and entrapped them. In order to make things work perfectly, 
the  owner  of  a  trap-based  monitoring  system  is  recommended  to  ask  a  lawyer  before  implementing  an 
interactive  cyber  sensor.  Further,  it  is  noteworthy  to  mention  that  cyber  policies  and  restrictions  might 
change depending on the country where the sensor is being deployed or/and the data is being analyzed.  

4.1 Users Monitoring 
Running and operating a monitoring system might be a simple exercise. However, having the legal right to 
monitor network activities of users might be the issue. Many sources might have restrictions on monitoring 
the cyber space such as privacy and employment policies, terms-of-service agreement, state and provincial 
laws, etc. Any violation of these laws might lead to civil liability and even criminal sanctions.  
It is noteworthy to mention that monitoring cyber activities today takes a big attraction as it produces an 
exclusive insights for security operators, organizations, law enforcement agencies, governments and even 
adversaries.  

4.1.1 Fourth Amendment 
The Fourth Amendment limits the authority of government representatives to search or seize for evidence 
without first obtaining a search warrant from a judge. Since monitoring activities online could constitute a 
search and seizure, operating a monitoring system under a government agency direction might allow the 
Fourth Amendment of the US Constitution to restrict the monitoring process [22]. Further, if the Fourth 
Amendment law applies, the evidence obtained from monitoring systems can be suppressed at trial and even 
individual can face a lawsuit. Only individuals who have a reasonable expectation of privacy can criticize 
the aforementioned law and complain that the examination was unconstitutional under Fourth Amendment. 
In  general,  in  a  lawsuit,  hackers  do  not  have  a  reasonable  motive  to  support  their  malicious  actives. 
However,  a  private  investigator,  who  is  not  under  the  government  direction  might  analyze  monitoring 
systems data without obeying to the above mentioned amendment.   

4.1.2 Wiretap Act 
The  Wiretap  Act  forbids  any  individual  to  intercept  or/and  sniff  network  communications  unless  an 
exception registered in the act is applied. Even if an adversary do have a reasonable expectation of privacy 
while  trapped  in  a  monitoring  system,  under  the  Wiretap  Act,  this  does  not  provide  permission  of 
monitoring. It is noteworthy to mention that violating this act can lead to civil liability and even a federal 
offence. Several exceptions belong to this act such as the Provider Protection and the Consent of a Party 
exceptions. Owners of monitoring systems could use these two exceptions to listen to user activities online. 
However, if the analysis is done under the government’s authorities, the owners can utilize the Computer 
Trespasser exception to monitor cyber communication. Provider Protection exception allows the owner to 
monitor data if and only if the purpose of this monitoring activities is to protect the owner’s rights or/and 
property from malicious use of the Internet such as fraud, theft, etc.  
Note  that,  cyber  security  laws  are  still  not  robust  due  to  the  fact  that  this  topic  is  considered  new  and 
technology is changing in a rapid manner. For instance, the laws do not include yet honeypot in the Provider 
Protection exception.  

 
 
 
 
Concerning the Consent of a Party exception, the owner can monitor the traffic only after providing the 
consent  from  the  other  entity.  By  doing  this  act,  the  other  entity  agrees  to  be  monitored.  In  practice, 
honeypot owners can post/display a consent banner for users who access their monitoring systems. In this 
case, all users who access this network will be able to see, read and accept the terms on the consent banner. 
In today’s world, this is similar to the case when ISP customers call their company by phone and the voice 
operator inform the users that this phone call might be recorded for a certain reason. It is noteworthy to 
mention  that  consent  banner  might  not  work  on  all  network  services  and  must  be  specific  or  general 
depending on the service used [22].  

4.1.3 Patriot Act 
The Computer Trespasser is another exception that is part of the US Patriot Act that was passed in 2001. 
This  exception  allows  government  to  monitor  hackers  in  some  cases  without  securing  a  warrant.  This 
exception applies to users that are acting as a government agents to monitor adversaries’ activities if: i) the 
network’s operator has legally allow the capture; ii) the user who is performing the monitoring service is 
affiliated  to  a  lawful  investigation;  and  iii)  if  the  person  has  a  convincing  reason  and  believe  that  the 
monitored traces will be appropriate to the investigation. This act might be useful when the honeypot is 
running under the operation of government or law enforcement agencies.  

4.2 Harming others 
While communication with hackers, monitoring system might be easily compromised. Therefore, security 
operators  must  be  careful  to  reduce  the  risk  of  harming  others  unintentionally.  Hackers  can  control 
monitoring systems, their bandwidth and network resources to turn them into malicious tools. Some good 
practices used on the monitoring systems include listening to their output traffic, controlling its parameters 
such  as  rates/bandwidth,  filtering  out  suspicious  activities  and  dropping  blocking  services/domains/IPs 
when  necessary.  This  exercise  require  not  just  proper  deployment  of  sensors,  but  also  maintaining 
monitoring sensors’ activities. Otherwise, monitoring systems can easily and rapidly be transformed to a 
network  entity  that  belongs  to  adversaries  (e.g.,  bot).  Consequently,  this  entity  can  be  used  for  storing 
malicious files, stolen information, and distributing malicious content such as child pornography and spam 
emails, etc.  

4.3 Entrapment 
The supreme court defines entrapment as “the conception and planning of an offense by an officer, and his 
procurement of its commission by one who would not have perpetrated it except the trickery, persuasion, 
or fraud of the officers” [32].  Entrapment  can  be  a  concern  for  honeypot  owners  due  to  the  fact  that 
criminals can use it in an attempt to evade conviction. However, a defendant that was not induced by law 
enforcement authorities to commit a crime cannot utilize the entrapment to defend the case. It is notable to 
mention that entrapment policies apply solely in the context of criminal prosecution and hence, it is not 
applicable to private security monitoring owners.  

5.  FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS 

For future work, security operators are required to look deeply into, but not limited to, the following areas: 

 

IPv6 Security: IPv6 is going to be the new era of Internet address space due to the fact that IPv4 
addresses  are  about  to  get  congested.  Further,  hackers  are  always  one  step  beyond  security 
operators and hence they will focus on new systems to abuse it. IPv6 is one of the most promising 
targets [34]. For instance, amplified DDoS attacks, which are based on the size of the packets, can 
be more harmful when using IPv6 (rather than IPv4) since IPv6 packet is larger in size. Moreover, 
IPv6 packets have built-in packet-level encryption and considered more secure than IPv4 traffic, 
hence,  it  might  cause  more  challenges  for  network  operators  to  investigate  malicious  behavior 

 
 
 
 
 
 
within its traffic. As of today, the majority of the current deployment, monitoring and analysis is 
based on IPv4 traffic. Very few works are done on IPv6 [33]. Therefore, security operators and 
researchers are recommended to focus on this area by setting up more IPv6 monitoring sensors to 
uncover cyber attacks that are embedded in IPv6 traffic.  

  Cloud Security: Cloud is going to be the first service used on the cyber space. On the cloud, the 
number of services, users and data is enormous. Therefore, adversaries will consider the cloud as 
the best place to attack due to the fact that enormous architecture means large impact and easy to 
obfuscate.  Several  cloud  security  issues  exist  today  [35]  and  very  few  security  measures  are 
deployed. All security operators must think in an enormous scale while installing security services 
on the cloud. This might require merging several security operators and systems to cope with the 
cloud  security  challenge  such  as  a  centralized  large-scale  cyber  monitoring  service  using  trap-
based monitoring systems as well as firewalls and antivirus tools.   

6.  CONCLUSION 

Internet users are growing intensely in numbers due to the advanced in computer applications today such 
as  social  media,  cloud  services,  online  shopping,  among  others.  Consequently,  information  sharing  in 
general and  security  in  particular  became  a  challenge  for  network  operators,  Internet  service  providers, 
organizations, law enforcement agencies and governments. This provocation is raised due to the lack of big 
data  handling,  storing,  monitoring  and  analyses.  In  order  to  cope  with  this  challenge,  several  cyber 
monitoring systems are used on different IP layers such as networks and applications. In this work, we have 
discussed that one of the best techniques to monitor the cyber space is to trap adversaries by installing 
monitoring systems such as darknet, IP gray space, honeypot, greynet and honeytokens. In general, these 
systems  run  on  unused  but  routable  address  space,  and  hence  all  traffic  destined  to  them  might  be 
suspicious. Darknet and IP gray space operate in passive (inactive) mode whereas honeypot and greynet 
can  operative  in  active  mode.  Among  all  the  aforementioned  trap-based  monitoring  systems,  only 
honeytokens is based on a digital entity, whereas the others are focused on IP services. It is noteworthy to 
mention that some monitoring systems provide hybrid services and can operate in different modes (passive 
and  active)  like  honeyd  [28].  Since  each  type  of  monitoring  system  has  its  own  advantages  and 
disadvantages, a good practice is to deploy several services to cover all security aspects. Note that, these 
systems do not replace other security monitoring and detection services such as intrusion detection systems. 
In contrary, trap-based monitoring services must run in parallel with IDS and other security services such 
as firewalls and antivirus tools. Therefore, hybrid monitoring systems are considered to be the best options 
to  choose  while  deploying  a  security  monitoring  system.  This  chapter  discussed  various  cyber  security 
threats  that  can  be  inferred  by  analyzing  traces  from  the  above  mentioned  monitoring  systems  such  as 
scanning/probing  activities,  DDoS  attacks,  worm  propagation,  botnet  C&C,  and  malware  infections.  In 
general,  passive  monitoring  is  decent in  inferring  scanning/probing  and  DDoS activities  whereas active 
monitoring, which is interactive with the adversary, is more attractive to botnet and malware activities.   
In general, we have seen that deploying passive network monitoring systems is easier than installing and 
configuring an active monitoring systems. Nevertheless, the easiest trap-based monitoring system to deploy 
is  the  honeytoken  which  is  based  on  providing  a  bogus  digital  information  such  as  fake  credit  card 
information to an adversary and then monitoring its activities to infer insights on the malicious behavior 
such as the intention of the attack. However, in general, implementing a trap-based monitoring system is 
becoming an easy task today as some commercial organizations provide services to install a ready-to-go 
sensor or even provide the extracted data extracted from the sensor even without deploying it at the client 
side. Finally, concerning the security policies and legal issues, we have seen that cyber security laws are 
still in a gray area due to the fact that cyber security is still considered a new topic and therefore several 
laws are not applicable to specific areas such as trap-based monitoring systems. As a result of the rapid and 
recent growth in cyber technology, more laws must be updates and new ones must be created.   

 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Internet World Stats: World Internet Users and Population Stats: 

http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm  

[2] Technical Details Behind a 400Gbps NTP Amplification DDoS Attack:  
http://blog.cloudflare.com/technical-details-behind-a-400gbps-ntp-amplification-ddos-attack 

[3] Nakashima, E., Miller, G., & Tate, J. (2012). US, Israel developed Flame computer virus to slow 
Iranian nuclear efforts, officials say. The Washington Post online, 1-4. 

[4] Stallings, W. (1998). SNMP, SNMPv2, SNMPv3, and RMON 1 and 2. Addison-Wesley Longman 
Publishing Co., Inc.. 

[5] Freiling, F. C., Holz, T., & Wicherski, G. (2005). Botnet tracking: Exploring a root-cause methodology 
to prevent distributed denial-of-service attacks (pp. 319-335). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

[6] Allman, M., Paxson, V., & Terrell, J. (2007, October). A brief history of scanning. In Proceedings of the 
7th ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement (pp. 77-82). ACM. 

[7] Dagon, D., Gu, G., Lee, C. P., & Lee, W. (2007, December). A taxonomy of botnet structures. 
In Computer Security Applications Conference, 2007. ACSAC 2007. Twenty-Third Annual (pp. 325-339). 
IEEE. 

[8] Mirkovic, J., Dietrich, S., Dittrich, D., & Reiher, P. (2004). Internet Denial of Service: Attack and 
Defense Mechanisms (Radia Perlman Computer Networking and Security). Prentice Hall PTR. 

[9] Wang, H. J., Guo, C., Simon, D. R., & Zugenmaier, A. (2004, August). Shield: Vulnerability-driven 
network filters for preventing known vulnerability exploits. In ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication 
Review (Vol. 34, No. 4, pp. 193-204). ACM. 

[10] Skoudis, E. (2004). Malware: Fighting malicious code. Prentice Hall Professional. 

[11] Moore, D. (2003). Network Telescopes: Tracking Denial-of-Service Attacks and Internet Worms 
Around the Globe. In LISA. 

[12] Bellovin, S. M. (1992, September). There be dragons. In UNIX Security Symposium III 
Proceedings (pp. 1-16). 

[13] Moore, D., Shannon, C., Brown, D. J., Voelker, G. M., & Savage, S. (2006). Inferring internet denial-
of-service activity. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS), 24(2), 115-139. 

[14] Moore, D., & Shannon, C. (2002, November). Code-Red: a case study on the spread and victims of 
an Internet worm. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Internet measurement (pp. 
273-284). ACM. 

[15] Bou-Harb, E., Debbabi, M., & Assi, C. (2013). A systematic approach for detecting and clustering 
distributed cyber scanning. Computer Networks, 57(18), 3826-3839. 

[16] Bailey, M., Cooke, E., Jahanian, F., Myrick, A., & Sinha, S. (2006, March). Practical darknet 
measurement. In Information Sciences and Systems, 2006 40th Annual Conference on (pp. 1496-1501). 
IEEE. 

[17] Groot, G. J. D., Rekhter, Y., Karrenberg, D., & Lear, E. (1996). Address Allocation for Private 
Internets. 

 
 
 
[18] Pang, R., Yegneswaran, V., Barford, P., Paxson, V., & Peterson, L. (2004, October). Characteristics 
of internet background radiation. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet 
measurement (pp. 27-40). ACM. 

[19] Wustrow, E., Karir, M., Bailey, M., Jahanian, F., & Huston, G. (2010, November). Internet background 
radiation revisited. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement (pp. 
62-74). ACM. 

[20] Jin, Y., Zhang, Z. L., Xu, K., Cao, F., & Sahu, S. (2007, June). Identifying and tracking suspicious 
activities through IP gray space analysis. In Proceedings of the 3rd annual ACM workshop on Mining 
network data (pp. 7-12). ACM. 

[21] Jin, Y., Simon, G., Xu, K., Zhang, Z. L., & Kumar, V. (2007, April). Gray’s anatomy: Dissecting 
scanning activities using IP gray space analysis. In Proceedings of the 2nd USENIX workshop on 
Tackling computer systems problems with machine learning techniques (pp. 1-6). USENIX Association. 

[22] Spitzner, L. (2003). The honeynet project: Trapping the hackers. IEEE Security & Privacy, 1(2), 15-
23. 

[23] Lilien, L., Kamal, Z. H., Bhuse, V., & Gupta, A. (2006). Opportunistic networks: the concept and 
research challenges in privacy and security. Proc. of the WSPWN, 134-147. 

[24] Mokube, I., & Adams, M. (2007, March). Honeypots: concepts, approaches, and challenges. 
In Proceedings of the 45th annual southeast regional conference (pp. 321-326). ACM. 

[25] Provos, N. (2004, August). A Virtual Honeypot Framework. In USENIX Security Symposium (Vol. 
173). 

[26] Provos, N., & Holz, T. (2007). Virtual honeypots: from botnet tracking to intrusion detection. Pearson 
Education. 

[27] Harrop, W., & Armitage, G. (2005, November). Defining and evaluating greynets (sparse darknets). 
In Local Computer Networks, 2005. 30th Anniversary. The IEEE Conference on (pp. 344-350). IEEE. 

[28] Provos, N. (2003, February). Honeyd-a virtual honeypot daemon. In 10th DFN-CERT Workshop, 
Hamburg, Germany (Vol. 2) 

[29] Spitzner, L. (2003). Honeytokens: The other honeypot. 

[30] Inoue, D., Eto, M., Suzuki, K., Suzuki, M., & Nakao, K. (2012, October). DAEDALUS-VIZ: novel real-
time 3D visualization for darknet monitoring-based alert system. In Proceedings of the Ninth International 
Symposium on Visualization for Cyber Security (pp. 72-79). ACM. 

[31] Li, Z., Goyal, A., Chen, Y., & Paxson, V. (2011). Towards situational awareness of large-scale botnet 
probing events. Information Forensics and Security, IEEE Transactions on, 6(1), 175-188. 

[32] Mikell, W. E. (1942). The Doctrine of Entrapment in the Federal Courts. University of Pennsylvania 
Law Review and American Law Register, 245-265. 

[33] Baker, F., Harrop, W., & Armitage, G. (2010). IPv4 and IPv6 Greynets. 

[34] Warfield, M. H. (2003). Security implications of IPv6. Internet Security Systems,4 (1), 2-5. 

[35] Kandukuri, B. R., Paturi, V. R., & Rakshit, A. (2009, September). Cloud security issues. In Services 
Computing, 2009. SCC'09. IEEE International Conference on (pp. 517-520). IEEE. 

[36] Fachkha, C., Bou-Harb, E., & Debbabi, M. (2013). Fingerprinting Internet DNS Amplification DDoS 
Activities. arXiv preprint arXiv:1310.4216. 

ADDITIONAL READING SECTION 

  Krawetz, N. (2004). Anti-honeypot technology. Security & Privacy, IEEE, 2(1), 76-79. 
  Pouget, F., Dacier, M., & Pham, V. H. (2005, March). Vh: Leurre. com: on the advantages of 

deploying a large scale distributed honeypot platform. In In: ECCE 2005, E-Crime and Computer 
Conference. 

  Pouget, F., & Dacier, M. (2004, May). Honeypot-based forensics. In AusCERT Asia Pacific 

 

Information Technology Security Conference. 
Joshi, R. C., & Sardana, A. (2011). Honeypots: A New Paradigm to Information Security. 
Science Publishers. 

  Curran, K., Morrissey, C., Fagan, C., Murphy, C., O'Donnell, B., Fitzpatrick, G., & Condit, S. 

(2005). Monitoring hacker activity with a Honeynet. International Journal of Network 
Management, 15(2), 123-134. 

  Yegneswaran, V., Barford, P., & Paxson, V. (2005). Using honeynets for internet situational 

awareness. In Proc. of ACM Hotnets IV. 

KEY TERMS & DEFINITIONS (SUBHEAD 1 STYLE)  

DDoS: A Distributed DoS (DDoS) is among the most sever cyber attack where adversary bombards the 
victim with large amount of data/requests in order to exhaust its bandwidth or/and network and host 
resources. 

DNS amplification: One type of DDoS attack where the attacker try to send amplified replies to the 
victim in order to exhaust its bandwidth or/and network and host resources. 

Malware:  A malware is a piece of code that is malicious. 

ISP: An Internet Service Provider is a certified organization for providing Internet services.   

Firewall: A firewall is a computer hardware or software that has an aim to control the security of the 
network by applying rule set on the incoming and outgoing traffic.  

Antivirus: An Antivirus is a computer software with an aim to prevent, detect, identify and remove 
malicious malware and viruses.  

SNMP: Simple Network Management (SNMP) protocol is used for managing devises in a network.  

IRC: Internet Relay Chat (IRC) is a computer program used to transfer text message between two entities.  

P2P: Pear-to-Pear (P2P) is a communication technology where each client can be either client or server. 

CPU:  The  Central  Processing  Unit  (CPU)  is  a  hardware  device  inside  a  computer  machine  that  is 
responsible on performing basic and logical computer operations. 

Root:  In  Unix  Operating  Systems,  Root  is  equivalent  to  a  super  user  with  usually  full  administrative 
privileges. 

Backscatter: In a communication protocol, backscatter traffic are packets or traffic that is based on the 
reply packets (e.g., SYN-ACK, ACK).  

 
 
 
Spoof: IP address spoofing is the phenomenon of forging the source IP address for concealing the identity 
of the sender or impersonating another identity (e.g. victim).  

ARP: In multiple access networks, the Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) is designed to resolve network 
layer addresses to link layer addresses.  

TCP: The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is one of the major transport protocol that operates on top 
of the IP protocol. The aim of this protocol is to transmit data in a reliable manner.  

UDP:  Similar  to  the  TCP  protocol,  the  User  Datagram  Protocol  (UDP)  is  another  core  element  on  the 
transport layer. The aim of this protocol is to transmit data in a fast manner.   

ICMP  ECHO: The  Internet  Control  Message  Protocol  (ICMP)  is  a  core  element  on the  IP  layer. This 
protocol is responsible on the control and error handling of messages among devices such as routers. ICMP 
messages are many. ECHO message is one type of ICMP. 

VM: A Virtual Machine (VM) is a computer program that emulates a real (physical) machine. A virtual 
machine can be used for several purposes such as (testing, learning, etc.). 

HTTP: The  Hypertext Transfer  Protocol  (HTTP) is  a  fundamental  data  communication  process  for the 
World  Wide  Web  (www).  It  consists  of  an  application  protocol  for  distributing  and  collaborating 
hypermedia data systems. 

VNC: A Virtual Network Computing is a remote desktop sharing protocol used to control another device.   

NetBIOS: A Network Basic Input/output System (NetBIOS) provides communication services related to 
session layer of the Internet and permitting Local Area Network communications among devices.  

MySQL:  MySQL  is  one  of  the  most  famous  open  source  database  with  an  aim  to  store,  organize  and 
retrieve information.  

Telnet:  Telnet is a network service that provides an interactive text-based communication facilities through 
a virtual terminal network.  

