IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

Bring-Your-Own-Device (BYOD): An Evaluation of Associated Risks to Corporate Information Security 

Dr. Ezer Osei Yeboah-Boateng is a Senior Lecturer at the Ghana Technology University College (GTUC) 

Ezer Osei Yeboah-Boateng, Ph.D  

Francis Edmund Boaten 
Francis Edmund Boaten is the CTO of DiscoveryTel Ghana and holds a Masters in Telecommunications  

ABSTRACT 

This study evaluates the cyber-risks to Business Information Assets posed by the adoption of Bring-Your-
Own-Device  (BYOD)  to  the  workplace.  BYOD  is  an  emerging  trend  where  employees  bring  and  use 
personal  computing  devices  on  the  company’s  network  to  access  applications  and  sensitive  data  like 
emails,  calendar  and  scheduling  applications,  documents,  etc.  Employees  are  captivated  by  BYOD 
because  they  can  have  access  to  private  items  as  well  as  perform  certain  job  functions  while  being 
unrestricted to their desks. This is however usually done on the blind side of management or the system 
administrator;  a  situation  that  tends  to  expose  vital  and  sensitive  corporate  information  to  various 
threats  like  unwanted  network  traffic,  unknown  applications,  malwares,  and  viruses.    Expert  opinions 
were  elicited  in  this  exploratory  study.  The  study  evaluated  the  characteristics  of  BYOD,  assessed 
associated risks, threats and vulnerabilities. The findings indicate that little or no security measures were 
instituted  to  mitigate  risks  associated  with  BYOD.Though,  profound  benefits  abound  with  BYOD 
adoption, they could be eroded by security threats and costs of mitigation in curing breaches. The most 
significant risk was found to be Data Loss which was in consonance with similar studies on Smartphone 
security risks. Some mitigation measures are then recommended. 

Keywords:  BYOD, Vulnerabilities, Threats, Risks, Policies, Malware, Technology Adoption. 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

The  use  of  the  Internet  has  assumed  ubiquity,  affecting  the  way  we  live,  work  or  play.  Similarly,  the 
emerging  concept  of  Bring-Your-Own-Device  (BYOD),  though,  relatively  new  paradigm  has  caught  on 
amongst  many  and  has  assumed  tele-commuting  purposes.    This  has  been  exacerbated  by  the 
proliferation of mobile and/or portable devices, such as smartphones, tablets, iPads, notebooks, as well 
as laptops. 

In this study we adopted a similar mobile or portable device definition from(Yeboah-Boateng & Amanor, 
Phishing, SMiShing & Vishing: An Assessment of Threats against Mobile Devices, 2014) and heretofore 
call them smartphones.   

Another contributing factor is the relative low cost of the smartphone and subsequently, its ease of use 
at the workplace for both voice and data services.  The smartphone is characterized by its contemporary 
advanced  features  and  the  numerous  applications  (Apps)  that  are  populated  with  it.    From  the 
perspective  of  computer  architecture,  it’s  basically  an  embedded  portable  computer,  equipped  with 
interactive, mostly Java-based Apps, running on flexible operating systems (OSs) such as Android, iOS, 
RIM, Windows Mobile, to name a few.  The paradigm of running these smartphones on mostly free-and-
open-source  software  (FOSS), have  made  its adoption and use  very plausible  and versatile  (Hogben & 
Dekker, 2010).   

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 12 

 
IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

The key drivers of BYOD adoption and use have been, of course, the proliferation of smartphones, the 
integral usage  of both personal and corporate-provided devices, as well as the  need to stay  in touch, 
keep abreast with corporate developments “as-you-go”, and tele-commuting for work purposes.  Other 
factors such as, keen competition and the  need to meet the  expectations of tech-savvy, less-forgiving 
customers(Yeboah-Boateng, Cyber-Security Challenges with SMEs in Developong Economies: Issues with 
Confidentiality, Integrity & Availability (CIA), 2013) have culminated into increased productivity.  BYOD 
offers the needed ubiquity – thus, embracing the anywhere, anytime approach to business.  Accordingly, 
organizations  are  coming  to  terms  with  the  need  for  a  BYOD  strategy  in  order  to  authenticate  and 
authorize  employees  to  use  BYOD  on  enterprise  networks,  which  would  inure  to  the  benefits  of  the 
organization. 

Inspite of the above, BYOD presents network externalities which could impact on the corporate security 
framework  of  re-defining  the  uncertainties  of  network  perimeter  and  to  safeguard  the  information 
assets  to  ensure  confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability  (CIA)  (Yeboah-Boateng,  Cyber-Security 
Challenges  with  SMEs  in  Developong  Economies:  Issues  with  Confidentiality,  Integrity  &  Availability 
(CIA), 2013)(Ernst & Young, 2013). 

Problem Formulation 

1.1 
A key concern with BYOD is invariably it and/or management of the organization may not be aware of 
personally-owned  devices  accessing  corporate  resources.  Where  any  of  these  are  in  the  known,  the 
needed  technical  support  may  not  also  be  forth  coming  or  provided.    Studies  show  that  there  is  an 
increased cyber-risk posed to the sensitive corporate information assets of any business when “foreign” 
and/or  unauthorized  devices  access  the  corporate  network  (Yeboah-Boateng,  Using  Fuzzy  Cognitive 
Maps (FCMs)  To Evaluate  The  Vulnerabilities  With ICT Assets Disposal Policies, 2012). A compromised 
mobile  device  with  access  to  the  corporate  network  could  serves  as  susceptible  entry  points  for 
nefarious  activities  within  the  network  and  possibly  with  access  to  sensitive  information.  For  any 
organization  therefore  to  adopt  BYOD,  it  is  imperative  that  appropriate  security  measures  be  put  in 
place to successfully mitigate against the negative effects of the phenomenon. 

In a related development, mobile infections are said to be growing at a disturbing rate, with a whooping 
increase of 17% in the first half of 2014, as compared with a rate of 20% for the entire 2013 (Aittokallio, 
2014).    Similarly,  mobile-related  cyber-attacks  is  reported  to  cost  UK  businesses  £18  billion  in  lost 
revenue and £16 billion in increased IT expenditure per year resulting from breaches (CEBR, 2015).  The 
report apparently indicates that the mobile devices compromises are a widespread menace, with 81% of 
UK  businesses  recording  a  breach  in  2014  (CEBR,  2015).  In  fact,  experts  believe  that  if  nothing  done 
about the cyber-risk menace, the  

Throughout the  world, organizations are faced with cybersecurity breaches  mostly resulting in breach 
costs (e.g., incident response forensics, clean-up, legal), reputation and brand damage, and lost revenue 
due  to  downtime  and  so  on  (Yeboah-Boateng,  Cyber-Security  Challenges  with  SMEs  in  Developong 
Economies: Issues with Confidentiality, Integrity & Availability (CIA), 2013). To exacerbate the already 
precarious situation, most SMEs in developing economies  consider themselves  as not having any data 
attractive to threat agents, and are free from attacks, however, the contrary is true as most companies 
usually have data on employees, customers, suppliers, partners, and even intellectual properties which 
have  the  potential  of  attracting  attacks(Yeboah-Boateng,  Cyber-Security  Challenges  with  SMEs  in 
Developong Economies: Issues with Confidentiality, Integrity & Availability (CIA), 2013). 

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 13 

IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

Studies  have  clearly  shown  that  the  problem  posed  by  BYOD  is  rooted  in  ignorance,  and  therefore 
promoting education on security issues associated with BYOD would immensely contribute in addressing 
the risks and help mitigate the negative effects. The key issues of concern in this study are; 

1.  What  are  the  Risks,  Threats,  and  Vulnerabilities  associated  with  the  adoption  of  BYODs  as 

working tools in the workplace? 

2.  What are the most significant risks that organizations in developing economies are exposed to, 

as a result of BYOD adoption? 

3.  What mitigation measures can be adopted to address the risks associated with BYOD?  
4.  What are the characteristics of BYOD use in the workplace? 

The study sought to assess the Risks, Threats and Vulnerabilities associated with the adoption of BYODs 
in the workplace, and to evaluate the most significant Risk that businesses are exposed to, as a result of 
BYOD adoption. Also, we explore  some  mitigation measures available  to address  the  associated risks, 
and to evaluate some characteristics of BYOD use in the workplace. 

This  introductory  section  dealt  with  the  overview  of  BYOD  and  its  concerns  in  adoption  and  use  on 
corporate  networks.    The  ensuing  sections  are  the  literature  review,  followed  by  the  research 
methodology,  and  then  the  results  and  analysis. 
  We  conclude  with  some  discussions  and 
recommendations. 

2.  LITERATURE REVIEW 

This  section  reviews  the  concept  of  Bring  Your  Own  Device  (BYOD)  and  its  associated  risks  to  the 
corporate  information  assets.  It  then  proceeds  to  assess  specific  Risks,  Threats,  and  Vulnerabilities, 
associated  with  BYOD  adoption  and  use,  and  also  explains  strategies  that  can  be  adopted  for  their 
mitigation.  

2.1  Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)  
Bring  Your  Own  Device  (BYOD)  is  a  new  development  in  the  workplace  where  employees  are 
encouraged to access company resources like corporate e-mails, calendars and scheduling, documents, 
applications and so on with their personal devices, either for work or for personal use (Ghosh, Gajar, & 
Rai, 2013). 

BYODs  are  usually  portable  mobile  computing  devices,  and  are  used  for  numerous  computing 
applications and services. For purposes of this study, BYODs include Smartphones, Laptops, Notebooks, 
iPads, Tablets, etc. and adopted the term “smartphone” for these BYOD devices. These devices  could 
run  on  any  operating  system,  like  Android,  iOS,  or  RIM  and  possess  peculiar  features  like  their  small 
physical size  and light weight, advanced computing features, including processing power and storage, 
making  them  extremely  useful  and  versatile.  They  likewise  have  the  capability  to  connect  from 
anywhere via hotspots anytime within and outside the workplace.  

In  the  early  2000s  when  the  first  BlackBerry  was  out-doored,  industries  saw  the  paybacks  of  remote 
email and calendar access and began providing smartphones which came with network access to many 
employees, successfully establishing the idea of anywhere anytime connectivity.  

Intel, in 2009, first acknowledged the movement towards BYOD, when employees progressively sought 
to use their personal mobile devices in the office. The management made a good judgement and instead 
of overlooking the potential risk, they accepted the technology, and came up with an operational policy 

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 14 

 
IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

for  personal  devices.  The  result  was  improved  connectivity  to  Intel's  network,  greater  worker 
throughput and enhanced security procedures (Field, 2011). 

The endorsement of smartphones went beyond business users when Apple’s iPhone was released. Later 
Android and Windows Mobile Phone 7 also came along. Features extended beyond traditional email and 
web browsing, and now  devices  have  the  capability of photography, running customized applications, 
viewing  rich  content  websites  with  Flash  and  JavaScript,  establishing  Wi-Fi  connections,  establishing 
virtual private network (VPN) connections, as well as acting as tethering or hotspots(Belletati, 2014).  

2.2  BYOD Associated Vulnerabilities 
The  ensuing  sub-sections  review  literature  on  vulnerabilities  presented  by  BYOD  use.  Generally, 
vulnerabilities  are  weaknesses  or  flaws  inherent  in  a  computer  system,  which  make  corporate 
information and applications susceptible, and consequently are exploited by threat agents. 

Vulnerabilities facilitating Malware  
Malware is one of the leading threats to mobile devices (Yeboah-Boateng & Amanor, Phishing, SMiShing 
& Vishing: An Assessment of Threats against Mobile Devices, 2014)therefore any vulnerability leading to 
or making it plausible for a malware to be installed on a mobile device needs to be addressed. Malware 
include viruses, Trojans, spyware, financial malware, ransomware and so on.  

User Permissions Issues  
Most platforms require a user’s permission for applications to access various types of data on the device 
at  the  time  of  installation  of  the  application.  It  is  often  very  cumbersome  to  review  and  change  the 
permissions  users  have  granted  at  the  time  of  installation  and  also  there  is  no  means  to  set  global 
policies  for  permissions  granted,  for  instance  to  generally  instruct  that  no  apps  should  be  installed 
requesting location information for marketing purposes(Ernst & Young, 2012).  

Encryption Issues  
There  are conspicuous weaknesses  in some  implementations of mobile  device  encryption(Whitman & 
Mattord,  Management  of  Information  Security,  2004),  if  any  at  all,  which  makes  data  protection  on 
these  devices  extremely  porous.  Attackers  can  capitalize  on  this  weakness  once  they  have  physical 
access to a lost or stolen device or when under repairs. The effectiveness of encryption schemes largely 
depends  on  the  technical  procedures  and  measures  used  for  managing  cryptographic  keys(Nunoo, 
2013).  

User Awareness Issues 
The lack of user awareness or user naivety can be blamed for unintentional disclosure of data and other 
vulnerabilities, as for instance most users are completely ignorant of the implications of consenting to 
certain kinds of data disclosure through the installation process as we have discussed earlier. 

2.3  BYOD related Threats & Associated Risks 
The following sub-sections review literature on threats and risks presented by BYOD use.  

Data Leakage due to Lost or Stolen Devices 
Data Leakage can be the result of an attacker accessing data on a misplaced or stolen mobile device with 
unprotected  memory.  BYODs  are  usually  in  high  demand  and  handy,  and  are  likely  to  be  stolen  or 
misplaced or undergo repairs. If data on the  BYOD  memory  or its removable  media is not adequately 
secured  by  encryption,  an  attacker  can  access  that  information(Causey,  2013).  BYODs  often  contain 
valuable  information  like  credit  card  data,  bank  account  numbers,  passwords  or  PINs,  contact 

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 15 

IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

information and so on. They are often the  user’s main store of personal information because  of their 
portable  nature. Business  mobile  devices  often contain corporate  emails and documents and as such, 
may contain sensitive data.  

Incidental Data Disclosure 
Data can be disclosed unintentionally by the user of a mobile device. Many users are either unaware or 
tend  to  forget  that  data  is  being  transmitted  or  received,  and  most  are  even  completely  ignorant  of 
privacy settings that can prevent this. Users are usually naïve about functionality of device applications 
so even though they may have given clear consent, they may not be aware that an application collects 
and  publishes  personal  data(Yeboah-Boateng,  Cyber-Security  Challenges  with  SMEs  in  Developong 
Economies:  Issues  with  Confidentiality,  Integrity  &  Availability  (CIA),  2013)(Whitman  &  Mattord, 
Pinciples  of  Information  Security,  2011).  A  typical  example  is  location  information  used  in  social 
networks, messages or uploaded image metadata. Inadvertent revelation of location information tends 
to  enable  attackers  to  track  users  and  so  allow  hijacking,  or  robbery  of  vehicles  having  valuable 
merchandises. Location information is often contained within photo files and by giving an app access to 
the photo file, a user may be inadvertently revealing their location.  

Improper Decommissioning 
Improper decommission or the transfer of a mobile device to another user without removing sensitive 
data can result in an attacker gaining access  to the data on it (Yeboah-Boateng, Using Fuzzy Cognitive 
Maps (FCMs) To Evaluate The Vulnerabilities With ICT Assets Disposal Policies, 2012). Due to a growing 
awareness of identity theft many people and organizations now destroy or wipe computer hard drives 
prior to decommissioning. Unfortunately, the same is not yet happening with mobile devices used in the 
workplace with sensitive corporate data. Similarly, devices being recycled are on the increase. According 
to  a  market  analysts,  ABI  Research  predicted  that  by  2012  over  one  hundred  (100)  million  mobile 
devices  will  be  salvaged  every  year  to  be  re-used  (Hogben  &  Dekker,  2010).  It  cannot  be  over-
emphasized that mobile devices contain large amounts of sensitive information which may be valuable 
to an attacker. A study conducted by ENISA in 2010 revealed that, out of the 26 business smartphones 
bought second-hand on eBay, 4 contained information from which the owner could be identified while 7 
contained enough data to identify the owner's employer(Hogben & Dekker, 2010). One smartphone was 
traced to a senior sales director of a company, and his call history, address book entries, diary, and e-
mails, were recovered. 

Phishing & SMiShing 
Phishing or SMiShing can result from an attacker using phony applications, SMS, or email that appear 
unpretentious to collect user credentials like password, PINs, or credit card information(Yeboah-Boateng 
&  Amanor,  Phishing,  SMiShing  &  Vishing:  An  Assessment  of  Threats  against  Mobile  Devices,  2014). 
Phishing  attacks  are  well-known  threats  for  users  of  traditional  computers  and  are  increasingly 
becoming  a  concern  for  mobile  devices  and  platforms  alike  for  several  reasons.  For  instance,  the 
reduced  screens  sizes  of  these  devices,  makes  it  easy  for  attackers  to  camouflage  useful  hints  like 
whether the website uses SSL, that users rely on to decide whether or not to submit credentials. Also, 
app-stores provide a new way of phishing by giving attackers the chance to place counterfeit apps in the 
app-store, looking like authentic apps, as well as these devices provide additional channels that can be 
used for phishing, using SMS in the  case  of SMiShing. Users may  be less  cautious about SMS phishing 
messages, and finally even though users may be aware of the risk of phishing in traditional computers, 
most are unaware of the same type of risk in mobile devices. 

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 16 

IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

Malware  
There  are  many  types  of  malicious  software  (malware)  and  are  referred  to  by  different  names 
depending on the function. Common malwares include Spyware, Virus, Financial Malware, Surveillance 
Malware, Ransomware, Trojan horse, etc.  

Network Spoofing   
A Network Spoofing attack can be the result of an attacker deploying a fake network Access Point and 
users unknowingly connecting to it. The attacker thereafter hijacks the user communication to carry out 
additional  attacks  such  as  Phishing.  For  mobile  device  users,  the  risk  is  even  higher  because  security 
indicators like a ‘trusted SSL connection’ indicator are harder to find or missing on these devices. 

Network Congestion  
Network congestion can result from network resource overload due to many mobile devices connecting 
to the corporate network and depleting scarce resources and rendering them unavailable to legitimate 
users.  Thus,  the  availability  security  dimension  is  said  to  have  been  compromised  of  breached.  The 
uptake  of  smartphones  usage  and  mobile  Internet,  have  increased  the  risk  of  network  congestion 
through either signaling overload or data capacity overload(Karygiannis & Owens, 2002).  

2.4  Mitigation Measures  
For  each  risk  explained  there  are  certain  measures  which  could  be  adopted  to  mitigate  the  negative 
effects of realizing the risk. The following sub-sections identify these measures based on individual risks. 

Data Leakage  
To  mitigate  against  the  risk  of  Data  Leakage,  mobile  devices  should  always  be  configured  with  an 
inactivity  timer  set  together  with  automatic  lock.  This  would  at  least  make  it  more  difficult  for  an 
attacker  to gain access  to the  data of a lost or stolen device. Also regular backups of data on mobile 
devices  should  be  made.  In  most  cases,  an  automatic  backup  procedure  would  be  most  appropriate. 
This  would  at  least  ensure  that  sensitive  and  important  data  is  retained  even  after  the  device  goes 
missing, and encryption should be implemented for mobile device memory and removable media. This 
would ensure confidentiality and prevent Data Leakage on the unexpected event of a device loss(CITRIX, 
2013). 

Unintentional Data Disclosure  
In  order  to  mitigate  against  the  risk  of  Unintentional  Data  Disclosure,  extreme  caution  should  be 
observed  dealing  with  permission  requests  when  using,  or  most  especially,  when  installing  device 
apps(Nitze,  2014).  For  instance,  a  social  networking  app  may  request  access  to  the  smartphone’s 
address  book  in  order  to  publish  it  on  the  Internet.  Utmost  caution  should  be  observed  with  such 
requests.  It  is  also  recommended  that  default  privacy  settings  of  mobile  device  apps  or  services  be 
reviewed and the  settings changed if need be. For instance,  the  settings regarding whether or not to 
attach location information to photos,  to social network posts, and so on need to be reviewed before 
permission is granted or denied.  

Decommissioned Devices 
Prior  to  decommissioning  or  recycling,  an  appropriate  procedure  needs  to  be  observed.  This  usually 
would include  memory  wipe  processes and this should apply to  both removable  media and on-board 
memory. There are standard procedures for memory wipe which ensure that data on the devices do not 
get leaked. Any of such procedures can be adopted, such as the NIST standard(NIST-800, 2012).  

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 17 

 
IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

Phishing & SMiShing Attacks 
Whereas  cyber-attacks  have  become  sophisticated,  the  end-users  remain  unsophisticated.  Security 
education, training and awareness (SETA) should be created for this risk as most users are naïve about 
the  fact  that  it  could  occur  on  mobile  devices  just  as  with  traditional  computers(Yeboah-Boateng  & 
Amanor,  Phishing,  SMiShing  &  Vishing:  An  Assessment  of  Threats  against  Mobile  Devices,  2014).  A 
cynical  attitude  should  be  adopted  to  messages,  content  and  software,  especially  when  coming  from 
unfamiliar sources via SMS, Bluetooth, email, and the likes.  

Malware – Spyware, Surveillance, Virus, Financial Malware etc. 
To  protect  against  various  kinds  of  malware,  always  configure  mobile  device  to  request  for  a  PIN  or 
password before allowing new apps to be installed. This would prevent deliberate malware installation 
when  an  attacker  gains  physical  access  to  a  device.  This  could  also  have  the  potential  of  preventing 
certain  social  engineering  attacks.  Also,  resource  usage  on  mobile  devices  should  be  closely  and 
constantly monitored for anomalies. Anomalies would be an indication that a malware may have been 
installed  on  the  device(Ernst  &  Young,  2012).  And  finally,  for  mobile  devices  with  sensitive  corporate 
information, a whitelist of apps should be  defined, and app installation on those  devices  restricted to 
the  list.  This  is  because  many  apps  are  given  easy  read-access  to  the  contact  or  address  book 
information on devices, and information on such devices could be extremely sensitive, so it is necessary 
to restrict malicious apps from gaining access.  

Network Spoofing  
To protect against network spoofing, always use secure connections for corporate data communications 
like VPNs and SSL which ensure that communications are encrypted and  always configure pre-installed 
public key certificates for all corporate servers, email, Intranet, etc. and configure clients to reject any 
certificate other than those configured(Juniper Networks, 2012).  

Network Congestion 
To  minimize  network  congestion  and  address  signaling  overload,  any  mechanisms  that  change  how 
frequently a mobile  device  switches  between idle  and active  mode, such as the  3GPP Fast  Dormancy 
mechanism can be adopted. With regards to data capacity as opposed to signaling overload, solutions 
such as LTE and WiMAX have the potential for enhancements in spectral efficiency, amount of data that 
can be transmitted over the air using the same amount of allocated spectrum(Juniper Networks, 2012).  

3.  METHODOLOGY 

This section presents the methodology and approach used for the study. The research design used was 
exploratory.    It  started  by  exploring  through  a  systematic  Literature  Review,  the  Risks,  Threats,  and 
Vulnerabilities presented by the adoption and use of BYOD, explaining their features and characteristics. 
It  then  proceeded  to  evaluate  Mitigation  measures  that  could  be  adopted  to  mitigate  against  the 
negative effects of the explained Risks. It further proceeded to estimate the Most Significant Risk from 
the taxonomy of Risks.  

The  matrix  used to estimate  the value  of risk  was  based on that used in the European Networks  and 
Information  Security  Agency  (ENISA)  2010  report(Hogben  &  Dekker,  2010)which  was  derived  from  a 
product of the Likelihood and Impact of each Risk. The Likelihood and Impact of each identified Risk was 
determined in consultation with a group  of experts.  These were Information Technology and Security 
professionals  working  in  various  organizations.  These  experts  were  required  to  indicate  the  plausible 

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 18 

 
IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

Likelihood, from the tuple {“Very  Low” to Very High”} and Impact, {“Very Low” to Very High”} of each 
Risk. The average value of each Risk is reported in section 4. The model is summarized in the diagram 
below. 

Figure 3-1: Schematic for Risk determination (Source: (Hogben & Dekker, 2010)) 

The  value  of  the  Impact  and  Likelihood  were  assigned  values  from  “1  to  5”,  depending  on  their 
perceived severity. The Risk is considered a product of Likelihood and Impact, therefore to estimate the 
Risk,  given  the  value  of  the  Impact  and  that  of  Likelihood,  the  product  of  the  assigned  values  are 
calculated. A risk value of “1 – 4” is considered “Low”. A value of “5 – 14” is considered “Medium”, and 
“15 – 25” is considered “High”.  

Population and Sampling 
The  population for this research consisted of IT functionaries  and Security professionals, who manage 
various enterprise networks. It was perceived that these professionals possess the requisite knowledge 
to provide the required information to get the most accurate results from the study.  

The sampling method employed was expert sampling which is a purposive sampling method. Purposive 
sampling considers  the  judgement of the  researcher when it comes  to  selecting the  units like people, 
cases  or  organizations,  events,  pieces  of  data  and  so  on  that  are  to  be  studied.  Seventy-five  (75)  ICT 
functionaries and security professionals were targeted via emails, but only fifty-six (56) responses were 
received, which forms the basis of analysis in this study. 

4.  RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 

This section presents the results and analysis from the study. 

Characteristics of BYOD use 

4.1 
This sub-section analyses the data on the characteristics of BYOD. 

Perception on Risk to Information Security posed by the adoption of BYOD 
The chart below depicts the information gathered from respondent’s perception on risk to Information 
Security posed by BYOD adoption.  

Five (5) respondents, representing 8.9% were of the view that it was not a problem at all. Two (2) of the 
respondents, representing 3.6% thought it was not much of a problem. Twenty-four (24) respondents, 
representing  42.9%  towed  a  middle  line  and  agreed that  it  was  somewhat  of  a  problem,  twelve  (12) 
representing  21.4%  said  it  was  definitely  a  problem,  while  thirteen  (13)  representing  23.2%  affirmed 
that it was definitely a problem. 

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 19 

LikelihoodVery Low = 1Low = 2Medium = 3High = 4Very High = 5ImpactVery Low = 112345Low = 2246810Medium = 33691215High = 448121620Very High = 5510152025 
IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

Figure 4-1Perception on risk to Information Security posed by the adoption of BYOD (Source: Field 
Work, August 2015) 

The  general  information  therefore  gathered  from  the  response  to  this  question  is  that  respondents 
agree that BYOD poses risks to information security. However the distribution clearly tells us that there 
is still some measure of ambiguity as opposed to being definite about the associated risks. This gives an 
impression  that  the  issues  concerning  risks  associated  with  BYOD  use  are  not  clearly  understood  and 
appreciated. 

Company information accessed by BYODs on the corporate network 

4.2 
The  figure  below  depicts  the  information  gathered  from  respondent’s  type  of  corporate  information 
accessed by BYODs. 

Fifteen  (15)  respondents,  representing  26.8%  accessed  email  only.  Another  fifteen  (15)  of  the 
respondents,  representing  26.8%  accessed  email  and  calendar  &  scheduling  applications.  All  other 
responses with smaller frequencies accessed emails together with other applications. Eight (8) however 
accessed none. 

Figure Error! No text of specified style in document.-2Corporate Information accessed by BYOD 

(Source: Field Work, August 2015) 

This  clearly  shows  that  the  most  accessed  application  by  BYOD  was  email,  followed  by  calendar  and 
scheduling  applications.  This  affirms  the  risk  exposure  to  corporate  information  since  sensitive 

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 20 

 
 
 
 
IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

corporate  emails  most  often  reside  on  employees  BYODs,  therefore  an  unprotected  device,  not 
supported by IT poses the greatest danger to corporate information assets(Moody & Walsh, 1999). 

Types of Security Measures used on Mobile Devices 
The figure below depicts the information gathered from respondent’s type of security measures used on 
employee’s devices. 

Sixteen  (16)  respondents,  representing  28.6%  said  they  used  passwords  or  PINs  only  to  secure  their 
devices.  Thirteen  (13)  of  the  respondents,  representing  23.2%  used  passwords  or  PINs  together  with 
automatic locks, three (3) respondents, representing 5.4% used passwords or PIN, automatic locks and 
anti-malware,  five  (5)  respondents,  representing  8.9%  used  passwords  or  PIN,  automatic  locks,  anti-
malware,  remote  wipe,  and  VPN,  two  (2)  respondents,  representing  3.6%  used  passwords  or  PIN, 
automatic  locks  and  remote  wipe,  two  (2)  respondents,  representing  3.6%  used  passwords  or  PIN, 
automatic locks, remote wipe, and VPN, seven (7) representing 12.5% used automatic lock only, three 
(3) representing 5.4% used remote wipe only, two (2) representing 3.6% used VPN only, while two (2) 
representing 3.6% used no security measures at all. 

The  inference  gathered  from  the  responses  is  that  passwords  and  PINs  are  the  most  used  security 
measures, followed closely by automatic locks, since  most of the  other security measures are used in 
conjunction with passwords or PINs, and automatic locks. It is striking to note that a very important and 
easily available security measure like anti-malware and remote wipe which enable you to remotely wipe 
all data on a lost device has a very low use rate. This clearly highlights ignorance in security awareness 
and practices  amongst employees, which in turn increases the  risk  exposure  of corporate  information 
assets(Jeon, Kim, Lee, & Won, 2011). 

Figure Error! No text of specified style in document.-3: Security measures used on BYOD (Source: Field 

Work, August 2015) 

BYOD Policy deployed in organizations 

4.4 
The  figure  below  depicts  the  information  gathered  from  respondent’s  BYOD  policy  deployed  in 
organization. 

Nine  (9)  respondents,  representing  16.1%  affirmed  that  BYODs  were  allowed  and  subsidized  in  the 
organization.  Fifteen  (15)  of  the  respondents,  representing  26.8%  affirmed  that  BYODs  were  allowed, 
but not subsidized. Eighteen (18) representing 32.1% confirmed that BYODs were completely prohibited 

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 21 

 
IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

in the organization, while fourteen (14) representing 25% said there was no policy regarding BYODs at 
all.  

Figure Error! No text of specified style in document.-4: BYOD use policy (Source: Field Work, August 

2105) 

An  interesting  inference  can  be  drawn  from  the  responses  received  from  this  subsection,  and  the 
responses from subsection 4.2.2 on Corporate Information accessed by BYOD. In this subsection, 32.1% 
affirmed that BYODs were prohibited, whereas 25% claimed there was no policy, implying that 57.1% of 
respondents  did  not  have  support  for  BYOD.  However  in  the  above  section  4.2.2  only  14.3%  of 
respondents indicated that they did not access any corporate information at all. It is therefore clear that 
some  employees whose  organizations do not have  support for BYODs still use  them on the  corporate 
network, which tend to increase the risk exposure to information security. 

4.5  Risk Analysis 
This section analyses the data on the Risk Analysis section of our questionnaire. 

Data Leakage  
The  table  and chart below  depict responses  received regarding respondents perceived risk  from Data 
Leakage. 

 Four (4) of the respondents representing 7.1% perceived the risk as “Low”. Ten (10) representing 17.9% 
perceived the risk as “Medium”, while forty-two (42) representing 75% perceived risk as “High”. 

Figure Error! No text of specified style in document.-5: Risk from data leakage (Source: Field Work, 

August 2015) 

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 22 

 
 
IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

Results show that respondents clearly appreciate the risk to Information Security posed by data leakage, 
and the majority of them perceived this risk as high. This is not too surprising as the features of BYODs 
being portable and small is size make it susceptible to theft or loss, which invariably results in sensitive 
data, if not properly secured, falling into wrong hands. 

Attacks on decommissioned mobile devices 
The  figure  below  depict  responses  received  regarding  respondents  perceived  risk  from  attacks  on 
decommissioned mobile devices or smartphones. 

 Six  (6)  of  the  respondents  representing  10.7%  perceived  the  risk  as  “Low”.  Twenty-three  (23) 
representing  41.1%  perceived  the  risk  as  “Medium”,  while  twenty-seven  (27)  representing  48.2% 
perceived risk as “High”. 

Figure Error! No text of specified style in document.-6 Risks from attacks on decommissioned devices 

(Source: Field Work, August 2015) 

Results from this survey was also somewhat clear that the risk posed by decommissioned devices was 
high, however  a good number of respondents also perceived the  risk  as medium most likely because 
most BYODs were privately owned and therefore did not follow strict policies for decommissioning. 

Unintentional disclosure of data 
The  figure below  depicts responses  received regarding respondents perceived risk  from unintentional 
disclosure of data. 

 Four  (4)  of  the  respondents  representing  7.1%  perceived  the  risk  as  “Low”.  Twenty-five  (25) 
representing  44.6%  perceived  the  risk  as  “Medium”,  while  twenty-seven  (27)  representing  48.2% 
perceived risk as “High”. 

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 23 

 
 
IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

Figure Error! No text of specified style in document.-7: Risk from unintentional disclosure of data 

(Source: Field Work, August 2015) 

The  results  from  the  survey  on  the  risks  posed  by  unintentional  disclosure  of  data  is  similar  to  that 
gotten from decommissioned devices for good reason, as these two risks are related because attacks on 
improperly decommissioned devices would usually result in unintentional disclosure of data. 

Phishing or SMiShing 
The  figure  below  depicts  responses  received  regarding  respondents  perceived  risk  from  Phishing  or 
SMiShing.  Four (4) of the respondents representing 7.1% perceived the risk as “Low”. Twenty-three (23) 
representing  41.1%  perceived  the  risk  as  “Medium”,  while  twenty-nine  (29)  representing  51.8% 
perceived risk as “High”. 

Figure Error! No text of specified style in document.-8: Risk from Phishing or SMiShing (Source: Field 

Work, August, 2015) 

Majority of the respondents for the survey on phishing and SMiShing perceived the risk as high even 
though a sizable percentage also perceived it as medium. This is a clear indication that the risk posed by 
phishing or SMiShing in BYODs is quite well appreciated, even though it was previously considered a 
threat in traditional computers and laptops. 

Spyware 
The figure below depicts responses received regarding respondents perceived risk from Spyware.  Nine 
(9)  of  the  respondents  representing  16.1%  perceived  the  risk  as  “Low”.  Nineteen  (19)  representing 
33.9%  perceived  the  risk  as  “Medium”,  while  twenty-eight  (28)  representing  50%  perceived  risk  as 
“High”. 

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 24 

 
 
 
IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

Figure Error! No text of specified style in document.-9: Risk from Spyware (Source: Field Work, August 

2015) 

The risk posed by spyware was generally perceived as high and indicated by 50% of respondents. Being 
classified a malware, spyware are not the most commonly encountered malware as the negative effects 
usually go unnoticed, and this is reflective the other 50% of the respondents indicating a perceived risk 
of medium and low. 

Financial Malware 
The  figure  below  depicts  responses  received  regarding  respondents  perceived  risk  from  Financial 
Malware.  Seven (7) of the respondents representing 12.5% perceived the risk as  “Low”. Twenty-eight 
(28)  representing  50%  perceived  the  risk  as  “Medium”,  while  twenty-two  (21)  representing  37.5% 
perceived risk as “High”. 

Figure Error! No text of specified style in document.-10: Risk from Financial Malware (Source: Field 

Work, August 2015) 

Again, in the survey for financial malware, 50% of respondents perceived the risk as medium. This can 
be attributed to the fact that the target of this type of malware is financial information; however there is 
generally  a  limited  use  of  BYODs  and  smartphones  for  financial  transactions  amongst  the  surveyed 
population,  as  the  general  adoption  of  online  transactions  has  been  rather  low  due  to  skeptics  on 
security concerns. 

Viruses 
The  figure below  depicts responses  received regarding respondents perceived risk  from Viruses.  Four 
(4) of the respondents representing 7.1% perceived the risk as “Low”. Twelve (12) representing 21.4% 
perceived the risk as “Medium”, while forty (40) representing 71.4% perceived risk as “High”. 

Figure Error! No text of specified style in document.: Risk from Virus (Source: Field Work, August 2015) 

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 25 

 
 
 
IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

Viruses however, are the most commonly encountered malware, and this is indicative of a high 
percentage of respondents indicating a perception of high risk. 

Network Congestion 
The  figure  below  depicts  responses  received  regarding  respondents  perceived  risk  from  Network 
Congestion.  Fourteen (14)  of  the  respondents representing 25%  perceived the risk  as “Low”.  Sixteen 
(16)  representing  28.6%  perceived  the  risk  as  “Medium”,  while  twenty-six  (26)  representing  46.4% 
perceived risk as “High”. 

Figure Error! No text of specified style in document.: Risk from Network Congestion (Source: Field 

Work, August 2015) 

The perception of risk from network congestion from the responses is quite neutral and therefore can 
be considered that respondents generally do not perceive network congestion as much of a problem. 

Network Spoofing 
The  figure  below  depicts  responses  received  regarding  respondents  perceived  risk  from  Network 
Spoofing.  Nine (9) of the respondents representing 16.1% perceived the risk as “Low”. Twenty-one (21) 
representing 37.5% perceived the risk as “Medium”, while twenty-six (26) representing 46.4% perceived 
risk as “High”. 

Figure Error! No text of specified style in document.:.Risk from Network Spoofing (Source: Field Work, 

August 2015) 

The perception to the risk associated with network spoofing is pretty much similar to that of network 
congestion, as seen from the  responses  and respondents generally do not perceive  that as much of a 
problem. 

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 26 

 
 
 
 
 
IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

Relative Importance Index of Risk 
The figure below depicts the relative importance index of the various risks. 

Most Significant Risk

0.89

0.88

0.82

0.80

0.79

0.78

0.77

0.75

0.74

1.00
0.80
0.60
0.40
0.20
0.00

Figure Error! No text of specified style in document.14: Relative Importance Index of identified risks 

(Source: Field Work, August 2015) 

The  most  significant  risk  was  evaluated  from  all  the  responses  from  the  analysis  of  the  various  risks. 
Data Leakage  was  found  to be the  highest, followed closely by Virus, which is very common as it has 
been inherited from traditional computers. The reasons for Data Leakage being perceived as the most 
significant risk is that, its portable nature exposes it to theft or loss, and if data on these devices are not 
properly protected, its loss can invariably result in data leakage. 

5.  CONCLUSION 

This  section  discusses  the  major  findings,  the  implications  for  organisations,  and  makes  some 
recommendations based on the findings. 

Study Findings 
There were several interesting observations and findings gained from this research. 

Firstly, it was observed from respondent’s perception of BYOD use that it posed cybersecurity challenges 
to corporate information assets.  

Secondly, a lot more people  were  using BYODs on the  corporate  networks  without the knowledge  of 
management, and there were no specific policies covering BYOD use in many organisations which posed 
an increased security threat to  corporate  information assets. Particularly, in response  to the question 
“What kind of corporate information do you access with your BYOD?” only eight (8) representing 14.3% 
responded “None”, implying that forty-eight (48) representing 85.7%  did use  BYODs on the  corporate 
network.  However,  in  contrast,  in  response  to  the  question  “What  is  the  BYOD  use  policy  in  your 
organisation?” eighteen (18) representing 32.1% responded that it was prohibited, while fourteen (14) 
representing 25%  responded that there  was  no policy at all. This confirms that in most organisations, 

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 27 

 
 
IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

BYOD use  is not  being monitored and controlled appropriately in order to effectively and successfully 
mitigate against the risky impacts. 

Thirdly, it was determined that the most significant risk identified was that of data leakage which was in 
consonance with the ENISA 2010 report on a study into smartphone security risks.  

Fourthly,  many  people  do  not  use  security  measures  available  to  mitigate  against  risks.  This  can  be 
deduced from responses to the question, “What security measures do you use on your BYOD?”, where it 
was obvious that the “Remote Wipe” feature that could remotely control a lost device had a very low 
rate of use, even though the most significant risk identified was found to be data leakage. 

In conclusion, the phenomenon of BYOD is  here  to stay  and in the near future, as the cost of BYODs 
decrease  and  therefore  become  more  available,  the  number  of  BYODs  connecting  to  the  corporate 
network  is  bound  to  increase  and  therefore  there  is  the  need  for  management  to  embrace  the 
development  by  understanding  the  risks,  leveraging  the  benefits,  and  adoptthe  necessary  security 
measures to mitigate against the risky effects. 

Recommendations 
From the research findings, the researcher recommends that management needs to keep close track of 
the BYOD phenomenon, in order to control its development to achieve a positive rather that a negative 
effect on business. 

Areas that need to be addressed are as follows: 

1.  Enhance employee security awareness  
2.  BYOD use policy adoption 
3.  Monitoring and control of BYOD use 

Further Research 
The  researcher  recommends  that  further  studies  be  conducted  into  evaluating  the  impact  of 
cybersecurity breaches on the business. This would give management a clear picture on what they stand 
to lose thereby helping to encourage investments into appropriate mitigation strategies. 

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 28 

 
 
 
 
IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

References 
Aittokallio, A. (2014). Mobile Malware Infection Rate Accelerating. Telecoms.Com. 

Belletati, G. (2014). Building Digital Workplaces: The BYOD Approach. Universita Ca' Fascan Venezia. 

Causey, B. (2013, January 1). Strategy: How to Conduct an Effective IT Security Risk Assessment. 

Information Week. Retrieved from 
http://reports.informationweek.com/abstract/21/9796/Security/Strategy:-How-to-Conduct-an-
Effective-IT-Security-Risk-Assessment.html  

CEBR. (2015). The Business and Economic Consequences of Inadequate Cybersecurity. Center for 

Economic & Business Reserach (CEBR). 

CITRIX. (2013). Best Practices to make BYOD simple and secure: A Guide to Selecting Technologies and 

Developing Policies for BYOD. Citrix Systems, Inc. 

Ernst & Young. (2012). Mobile Device Security - Understanding Vulnerabilities & Managing Risks. Ernst & 

Young (EY). 

Ernst & Young. (2013). Security & Risk Considerations for your Mobile Device Program. Ernst & Young 

(EY). 

Field, T. (2011). BYOD: Manage the Risks. Retrieved August 20, 2015, from 

http://www.bankinfosecurity.co.uk/interviews/byod-manage-risks-i-1327 

Ghosh, A., Gajar, P. K., & Rai, S. (2013). Bring-Your-Own-Device (BYOD): Security Risks and Mitigating 

Strategies. Journal of Global Research in Computer Science, 4(4). 

Hogben, G., & Dekker, M. (2010). Smartphone Security: Information Security Risks, Opportunities and 

Recommendations for Users. London: ENISA. 

Jeon, W., Kim, J., Lee, Y., & Won, D. (2011). A Practical Analysis of Smartphone Security. Howne: 

Department of Cyber Investigation Police. 

Juniper Networks. (2012). 2011 Mobile Threats Report. Retrieved 08 21, 2015, from 

https://www.juniper.net/us/en/local/pdf/additional-resources/jnpr-2011-mobile-threats-
report.pdf 

Karygiannis, T., & Owens, L. (2002). Wireless Network Security for 802.11, Bluetooth, and Handheld 

Devices. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). 

Moody, D., & Walsh, P. (1999). Measuring The Value of Information: An Asset Valuation Approach. 

European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS 99) (pp. 1-17). Melbourne: European 
Conference on Information Systems (ECIS 99). 

NIST-800. (2012). Guide for Conducting Risk Assessements. National Institute of Standards & Technology. 

Nitze, A. (2014). The Case for Web Technologies in Mobile Business Apps. Web Technologies for Business 

Apps, 87-96. 

Nunoo, E. M. (2013). Smartphone Information Security Risks. Stockholm: Lulea University of Technology. 

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 29 

IJITE                                      Vol.04 Issue-08, (August, 2016)                      ISSN: 2321-1776 
International Journal in IT and Engineering, Impact Factor- 5.343 

Whitman, M. E., & Mattord, H. J. (2004). Management of Information Security (illustrated ed.). Course 

Technology. 

Whitman, M. E., & Mattord, H. J. (2011). Pinciples of Information Security (4th ed.). 

Yeboah-Boateng, E. O. (2012, October). Using Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (FCMs) To Evaluate The 

Vulnerabilities With ICT Assets Disposal Policies. International Journal of Electrical & Computer 
Sciences IJECS-IJENS, 12(5), 20-31. 

Yeboah-Boateng, E. O. (2013). Cyber-Security Challenges with SMEs in Developong Economies: Issues 
with Confidentiality, Integrity & Availability (CIA). Copenhagen: Institut for Elektroniske 
Systemer, Aalborg Universitet. 

Yeboah-Boateng, E. O., & Amanor, P. M. (2014, April). Phishing, SMiShing & Vishing: An Assessment of 

Threats against Mobile Devices. Journal of Emerging Trends in Computing and Information 
Sciences, 5(4), 297-307. 

A Monthly Double-Blind Peer Reviewed Refereed Open Access International e-Journal - Included in the International Serial Directories 
International Journal in IT and Engineering 

                                                http://www.ijmr.net.in email id- irjmss@gmail.com  

Page 30 

 
 
 
