International Journal of Computer Application (2250-1797)  

Volume 5– No. 6, October 2015 

Multi-Tenancy Issues with Service Delivery in Developing 
Economies: Privacy, Trust and Availability Concerns 

Ezer Osei Yeboah-Boateng, Ph.D.#1, Akosua Boakyewaa Appiah-Nketiah#2, 

#1 Faculty of Informatics, Ghana Technology University College (GTUC), Accra, and 
eyeboah-boateng@gtuc.edu.gh 
#2 Graduate Student, Coventry University, Accra Campus, and loctovia@gmail.com 

ABSTRACT  

Cloud computing is a new paradigm and innovation in the technology service delivery. It 
is utilized for IT-enabled value creation.  The capex-free nature of cloud service delivery renders 
it very attractive to many SMEs.  But it is saddled with multi-tenancy issues; prominent under 
this study are concerns of privacy, trust and availability.  How do end-users trust providers with 
their sensitive data?  How secured and confidential are their corporate assets? Amidst the 
perennial power outages (a.k.a. “Dumsor”), what is the acceptable available uptime?  We 
sampled and interviewed cloud service providers (CSPs) as well as end-users in Ghana, a 
developing economy.  We also gleaned through some secondary data to ascertain some 
operational concerns.  The results indicate that security and service level agreements (SLAs) are 
key concerns in respect of privacy and trust issues.  Similarly, perennial power outages and 
security were key availability concerns.  This was expected as end-users use cloud services for 
mission critical information assets, and so requires high availability.  The implications are that 
the cyber-security concerns ought to be addressed if SMEs in developing economies are to adopt 
and accept cloud computing resources for IT-enabled competitive advantage.  

Key words:Multi-Tenancy, Cloud Computing, Privacy, Trust, Availability. 

Corresponding Author:Dr. Ezer Osei Yeboah-Boateng (eyeboah-boateng@gtuc.edu.gh) 

INTRODUCTION 
Computing  and  Internet  usage  amongst  organizations  are  deemed  as  vital  tools  needed  to 
make  business  decisions  and  products  deployment  [1].  Cloud  computing  is  a  new 
technological  paradigm  and  one  of  the  emerging  trends  in  computing  and  businesses.  
Coupled with that, is a business model to save cost and deploy scalable computing resources 
in fast and efficient manner [2]. With the help of cloud computing, information can now be 
accessed anywhere irrespective one‟s country of domicile. The adoption and utilization of this 
paradigm  shift,  called  Cloud  computing,  has  become  pervasive,  though  Ghana  and  other 
developing economies are relatively slower in taking full advantage of the technology [3] 
Cloud  computing is  an  IT service delivery model  that makes remote resources available for 
many tenants via a server on a pay-as-you-go basis. At the moment, there is dearth of cloud 

82 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Application (2250-1797)  

Volume 5– No. 6, October 2015 

computing literature on developing economies; so this exploratory study seeks to assess some 
multi-tenancy issues, such as Trust, Privacy and Availability. 
The capex-free nature of cloud service delivery renders it very attractive to many SMEs.  In 
spite of that, it is saddled with multi-tenancy issues; prominent under this study are concerns 
of trust, privacy and availability.  How do end-users trust providers with their sensitive data?  
How secured and confidential are their corporate assets? Amidst the perennial power outages 
(a.k.a. “Dumsor”), what is the acceptable available uptime? 
This paper is organized as follows:  this preamble deals with the background and it‟s followed 
by  the  literature  review  on  cloud  computing  and  associated  multi-tenancy  issues.    The 
methodology is presented next, followed by the results and analysis, and the implications of 
those concerns are discussed in the conclusion. 

LITERATURE REVIEW 
The cloud as a sharing technology is one of the most breathtaking phenomena in the age of 
the internet as it dissolves physical barriers and opens up new possibilities. Zabalza et al. [4] 
defined  cloud  computing  as  an  information  technology  (IT)  deployment  model,  based  on 
virtualization, where resources, in terms of infrastructure, applications and data are deployed 
via the internet as a distributed service by one or several service providers where the services 
are scalable on demand and can be priced on a pay-per-use basis. Cloud computing systems 
essentially grant access to large pools of data and computational resources via an assortment 
of  interfaces  similar  to  existing  grid  and  HPC  resource  management  and  programming 
systems [5].  
Calheiros et al. [6]stated that “cloud computing focuses on delivery of reliable, secure, fault-
tolerant,  sustainable,  and  scalable  infrastructures  for  hosting  internet-based  application 
services.”  
Multi-tenancy  involves sharing an application instance among numerous tenants (set of users 
sharing  a  general  access  with  particular  privileges  to  that  software  instance.)  usually  by 
providing each tenant a dedicated ”share” of the instance, which is cut off from other shares 
with regard to performance and data privacy [7]. 
There  is  no  standardized  definition  of  cloud  computing,  however,  the  study  explain  cloud 
computing and relates it to multi-tenancy as an technology service delivery model that makes 
remote computing resources available for numerous  tenants (multi-tenancy) at a time through 
a server on a pay-as-you-go basis. 

CLOUD PROSPECTS AND SERVICE DELIVERY 
Generally, there exist three (3) kinds of deployment models:  public cloud, private cloud and 
hybrid cloud. 

Private Clouds 
This  type  of  model  doesn‟t  bring  much  in  terms  of  cost  efficiency  [8].  It  is  also  called  an 
internal  cloud  [9]. This can be compared to  purchasing, building  and maintaining  your own 
infrastructure.  Notwithstanding  this,  it  has  a  huge  favor  tipping  toward  security.    Security 
issues  in  private  clouds  can  be  addressed  through  VPN  (secure-access)  and  even  firewall 
systems. Not surprisingly different countries have different laws and regulations for managing 
and  handling  data  mostly  because  of  the  differences  in  law  jurisdictions  which  can  hinder 
business if cloud is under different jurisdiction.  

83 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Application (2250-1797)  

Volume 5– No. 6, October 2015 

Public Clouds 
Zabalza et al. [4] refer to the it as a standard model of Cloud Computing, where the service is 
available  to  anyone  on  the  Internet  infrastructure  for  free  or  by  paying  certain  amount  of 
money. The infrastructure utilized is usually made accessible to the public. It is mainly owned 
by  cloud  service  providers  (CSP)  selling  or  delivering  cloud  services.  Some  popular  public 
cloud services are Amazon EC2 (Elastic Cloud), Google AppEngine and SalesForce.com [9]. 

Hybrid Clouds 
Usually, a hybrid cloud is made up of two or more clouds (private, or public). 

Multi-Tenancy Issues 
With the onset of every technology, there are usually  opportunities that emanate from them. 
There are also corresponding challenges that are associated with them, and cloud computing 
is  no  exception.  Private  cloud  is  most  optimized  among  the  models  in  security  as  several 
researches [10] confirm is a very big concern in the clouds especially in multi-tenancy. Users' 
concerns  about  security  and  privacy  of  data  and  applications  remain  a  roadblock  to  cloud 
adoption. Even though options are available for securing data in the cloud technologically, but 
many  prospective  as  well  as  cloud  users  fall  short  in  giving  adequate  sincere  thought  to 
securing the systems. This is an issue that not only Content Service Providers (CSVs) but all 
stakeholders must tackle through efforts, further research and development. 
The transfer of legacy systems to the cloud has also proved to be problematic because of the 
expertise available in companies, and also because this act requires thoughtfulness and careful 
handling in tailoring the application and interfaces as required. 
Network Access can become a „headache‟ literally. The whole idea of cloud computing relies 
on  the  constant  nature  of  network  access.  Ensuring  appropriate  high-bandwidth  network 
connectivity  is  crucial  to  successfully  using  the  cloud.  However,  many  users  as  well  as 
Internet  service  providers  overlook  the  enhancement  of  their  network  infrastructure  and 
capacity to handle increased traffic (both from and to the cloud). 
To realize the benefits of clouds, an enterprise must develop a comprehensive cloud strategy 
that also  examines and addresses potential risks, including cloud  unavailability and failures, 
as  well  as  compliance  requirements,  as  applicable.  Trusting  the  cloud  doesn't  eliminate  the 
need for risk management or disaster recovery in a business. 

Multi-Tenancy in the Cloud 
Multi-tenancy  falls  under  a  broad  umbrella  of  „Shared  Technology‟  in  Cloud  computing. 
Shared  technology  can  be  explained  as  a  combination  of  operations  utilized  by  multiple 
entities,  such  as  co-location  tenants  in  a  data  center.  Different  researchers  have  come  forth 
with different and equally similar definitions for multi-tenancy, among which are:  

Afkham[11]  explains  multi-tenancy  as  the  utilization  of  the  same  service  or 
application provided by the CSP regardless of the underlying resources by two or 
more 
explain  multi-tenancy 
asresourcesharing  in  Cloud  computing  while  further  explaining  a  resource  as 
anyreusable object  in  the Cloud  infrastructure.  

Subashini&Kavitha[12] 

customers. 

also 

This study employs multi-tenancy as the distribution of cloud resources with emphasis on the 
delivery of the cloud services amongst sets of concurrent users. Although this also means that 

84 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Application (2250-1797)  

Volume 5– No. 6, October 2015 

the client and any possible attacker will also share the same server (a very  likely  conducive 
environment  for  the  attacker).  Following  [12]‟s  definition,  the  reusable  objects  they 
mentioned  must  be  cautiously  restricted    and    supervised    because  they  can  become  the 
susceptible points of failure within the system and  provide  access to any intrusion or back 
door.  The  issues  of  multi-tenancy  vulnerabilities  and  possible  susceptibilities  in  respect  of 
trust and privacy are further highlighted in [13]and [14]. They demonstrated how the severity 
of risk are associated with the layers in the service delivery.  These layers are depicted in the 
data center shown below: 
A  cloud  data  center  gives  us  a  clear  picture  of  what  goes  on  in  the  cloud  infrastructural 
environment. A typical data center according to [5] may look like depicted below: 

Figure Error! No sequence specified.: data center [5] 
Other issues in multi-tenancy are privacy concerns from the re-usability  of  resource  objects  
through  data  surplus (a client with  storage  access space from aCSP can perform deliberated 
scans to  find sensitive that might  have been an unintentional  leftover from  Virtualization in 
Multi-tenancy of other customers [13]. 
One  significant    challenge    in    security    in  Cloud    Computing  is    the    trade-off    between  
security and  cost. Commenting on the issues, Tim Watson of De  Montfort University, notes 
in [15] as captured in [13, p. 2], that„„...although one provider may offer a wonderfully secure 
service    and    another    may    not,    if    the    latter    charges    half    the  price,    the    majority    of  
organizations    will    opt    for    it    as    they  have  no  real  way  of  telling  the  difference”.  If 
customers  rely  only  on  price  as  the  main  determinant  of  Cloud  service  without  considering 
security among other aspects, then security might end up being costly for them.  

Trust Concerns in the Clouds 
There is no universally accepted definition for the complex terminology: trust.  It is a mental 
state comprising the objective to accept vulnerability based upon positive expectations of the 
intentions or behavior of another” [16] Issues of trust arise from the scenario that customers 
are not in charge of their cloud resources, therefore have to rely on CSPs to protect their data 
from any form of security breaches or in the case a security breach actually occurs, still rely 
on CSPs for law suits, penalties incurred from breach of SLAs, insurance actions. Reputation 
and  security  of  CSPs  can  build  upon  the  trust  with  a  client  or  potential  one,  stabilize  an 
existing  one  or  invariable  decline  trust  between  the  entities.  Trust  can  be  lost  quickly:  “a 
single violation of trust can destroy years of slowly accumulated credibility”. [10] 

85 

 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Application (2250-1797)  

Volume 5– No. 6, October 2015 

Issues of trust exist and play an important role mainly in the public clouds where users have to 
rely on their CSPs for their data security but the situation may be slightly different in Private 
Clouds because security is done on-premises of the user and therefore they may even have a 
hand in controlling their security measures as it will not be solely relying on the CSPs. Some 
level  of  trust  may  exist  between  a  client  and  his  CSP  (a  weak  type  of  trust)  or  sometimes 
issues may bring about no level of trust (lack of it) at all usually from the client side.  When 
there is  no form  of trust  at  all (even the weak type of trust), this means that  there will be a 
non-existent relationship between client and CSP and therefore no delivery of service and no 
adoption of service either. This just goes to say that some level of trust must exist for cloud 
service  delivery  to  go  smoothly.  Transparency  of  operations  must  exist  for  the  client  to  put 
some  level  of  trust  in  the  CSPs  because  as  stated  earlier,  client  have  no  control  of  their 
information  in  the  cloud  (especially  on  the  technical  handling  of  the  data  and  they  must 
therefore trust the CSPs in order to relinquish their sensitive data to them) [10]. 
When  suspicion  comes  into  the  picture  from  lack  of  transparency,  distrust  will  certainly 
follow  and  this  will  lead  to  no  service  solicited  and  therefore  rendered.  Security  of  cloud 
rendered by a CSP can give room for trust. If inadequate security components exist or CSPs 
have  bad  security  reputation,  clients  will  be  reluctant  to  patronize  their  services  by  putting 
sensitive data in the clouds.  According to  [10]: “Trust is key to adoption of Software-as-a-
Service (SaaS), and transparency is an important mechanism”. Furthermore, trust mechanisms 
need to be propagated right along the chain of service provision.  

Privacy Concerns 
Privacy is an indispensable human right that includes the right to be left alone [10]. Privacy 
threats in the cloud may be slightly different because it dissents in relation to the type of cloud 
scenario,  nature  of  information  (confidential  or  public).  This  can  show  the  degree  to  the 
privacy threat (high or low). 
In  a  multi-tenant  environment,  privacy  should  be  considered  in  these  paramount  areas  [17]: 
Verification and identity management, Access control, Trust management, Security issues in 
service delivery, Privacy of data and its protection. A person who signs up for cloud services 
with  a  CSP  therefore  reserves  the  right  for  his  data  to  be  left  alone  by  putting  systematic 
measures in place to verify and manage the identities of persons who access the data, secure 
the data. The CSP has to build on trust issues with the client by prioritizing privacy. 

Availability of Cloud Data 
This has to deal with reliability of data at all times to authorized clients even in times of data 
breaches,  network  issues  and  any  other  problem  that  may  arise  [17]:  The  underlying  fact  is 
that the client after signing up with a CSP should have access to his data at all times.  CSPs 
therefore have to borne all the costs in maintaining the availability of data. On the other hand, 
details can be stipulated in the SLAs or any other contract that exist between the two parties 
and any other third-party. 

Addressing Trust, Privacy and Availability Issues 
Addressing issues of privacy, availability and trust requires effort on both clients and CSPs. 
Clients  should  know  what  constitute  confidential  data  to  them  to  restrict  sending  those 
through the CSPs to the cloud. CSPs on the other hand should strive to help new clients who 
have  little  ideas  in  this  sector  to  segregate  their  data  into  private  and  public.  Also,  SLA‟s 

86 

 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Application (2250-1797)  

Volume 5– No. 6, October 2015 

drawn between the two parties should be comprehensive enough with security measures, data 
availability  (guaranteed  and  or  allowed  up  and  downtimes  in  relation  to  service), 
contingencies for data loss, disaster recovery plans, ownership of data and what is allowed to 
be done with data in terms of third-party organizations. At the end of the day, cloud services 
usage is a question of tradeoffs between security, privacy, compliance, costs and benefits. [10] 

Service Delivery Frameworks 
Cloud computing like any other technology employs certain frameworks for its adoption. We 
would briefly explore a theoretical framework adopted for this study: the service jungle.   
We  explore  in  detail  the  “service  jungle”  theory  [18]as  the  main  basis  of  this  research;  a 
theoretical  base  that  does  not  dwell  on  a  single  model  but  will  cut  across  all  the  cloud 
deployment models as well as the service delivery models.  
CSPs in the delivery of their services may incur cost increases  without corresponding profit 
margins  and  returns.  The  decreasing  margin  therefore  decreases  the  company‟s  competitive 
advantage and this may lead to the processes known as the “service jungle”.  
The service jungle occurs when an organization‟s competitive position is eroded and leads to 
the situation where they  offer an unfathomable number of services (mainly added services), 
but  cannot  charge  for  it.  [18]This  framework  integrates  the  individualities  of  service 
management,  improvement  programs  and  managerial  behaviors[18].  CSPs  should  strive  to 
stay out of the service jungle and into the more lucrative “service garden” that avoids all the 
setbacks of the service jungle. 

METHODOLOGY 
Research  of  this  type  and  in  this  field  must  be  meaningfully  carried  out  with  a  careful 
planning process. The researcher employed interviews and secondary data review as the main 
methodologies to conduct this study. 

Research Design  
 A mixed design that combined descriptive and explanatory approach was employed to meet 
the objectives of the study.  

Population 
The population considered for the study embraces all Organizations in Ghana but will further 
dwell  on  the  organizations  that  use  ICT  services  such  as  data  centers,  storage  services, 
application  services,  Internet  services  etc.  The  samples  are  carefully  selected  to  include  IT 
managers, Chief  Information Officers (CIO s), Security Functionaries, Corporate Executives 
and decision makers. This  section of the  population  can also be  a distinguishing feature  of  
the    notional  constructs    that    this    study    is  determining    to    explore.  Purposive  sampling 
technique  was  utilized  to  overcome  sample  selection  bias.  However,  the  section  under 
consideration will not be large enough in relation to the entire population that could have been 
studied.    The  two  methodologies  employed  were  considered  above  all  others  because  the 
research seeks an in-depth understanding into a practice that already exists but is piloted by 
few organizations within Ghana. 

87 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Application (2250-1797)  

Volume 5– No. 6, October 2015 

Interviews 
Interviews are question forms which are completed through dialogue (information is obtained 
through inquiry and recorded by enumerators) with the respondent [19]They are more costly 
than questionnaires, but  they are better for more complex questions, low literacy or less co-
operation.  An  interview  falls  within  three  distinct  categories  [19]Informal  conversational 
interviews,  Semi-structured  interviews  and  Standardized  open-ended  interviews.  Interviews 
were considered as a methodology for this research because: 
a) 
hand; 
b) 
to explain the subject matter very well which is what is important in this research; 
c) 

Interviews are handy for attaining an increasing insight and perspective into the topic at 

It will allow the respondents (stakeholders and or IT experts in the selected companies) 

Interviews are generally useful for gathering concepts quotes and stories.  

Secondary Data  
This  can  be  bluntly  put  as  “second-hand”  scrutiny  and  analysis.Hinds  et  al.[20]in  their 
explained  secondary  analysis  of  qualitative  data  as  the  use  of  on  hand  data  to  discover 
answers  to  research  questions  which  are  different  from  those  inquired  about  in  the  original 
research.  Secondary  data  itself  is  and  can  be  supportive  in  structuring  successive  primary 
research and, can grant a baseline with which to weigh your primary data collection results 
against.  

Data Analysis 
We would employ the Relative  Importance  Index as  a quantitative measure for the study to 
gain more insight into the issues discovered by ranking them in terms of critically applied to 
them by the interviewees. Also, we will analyze the qualitative issues discussed by tabulating, 
grouping issues, comparing and make meaning out of them. 

FINDINGS AND IMPLICATIONS 
The research has discussed Multi-tenancy issues in cloud computing in the Ghanaian setting. 
A broad categorization was given to all the data collected using the type of company as basis 
(i.e.  Multinational  Companies  vs.  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  (SME‟s)).  We  also 
compared  data  from  the  interviews  with  our  adopted  theory:  “service  jungle”  and  other 
secondary data gathered. 
Multinational company or multinationals is a company that spans countries and international 
markets  physically  with  branches,  subsidiaries,  factories  etc  but  are  all  under  the  control  of 
the headquarters in the home country. There are many factors we can use to describe SMEs. 
The  researcher  would  prefer  to  describe  SMEs  with  the  number  of  employees  in  the 
organization because inflation in developing economies might render categorization invalid if 
economic  data  is  used.  This  study  would  describe  an  SME  as  any  company  that  has  an 
employee head-count of at least two hundred and fifty (250). From data gathered, 25% of the 
organizations  under  consideration  are  Multinationals  and  the  remaining  75%  of  the 
Organizations were SMEs. 

Cloud Computing Practices in Corporate Ghana 
From  data  gathered,  we  can  deduce  that  the  in  the  delivering  of  services,  50%  of  Multi-
nationals  empower  resellers  in  all  their  Ghanaian  dealings  so  that  it  is  Ghanaian  companies 

88 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Application (2250-1797)  

Volume 5– No. 6, October 2015 

that  end  up  dealing  with  the  clients.  The  other  50%  on  other  hand  takes  advantage  of  their 
current client-base to deliver their services even though they advertise and head-hunt as well 
as Brokers or resellers in the industry. 
All  companies  under  consideration  are  unique  and  cannot  really  be  compared  to  each  other 
because they all provide different services that make them unique individually, however, we 
can compare their services (similar ones). 
In  all  37.5%  of  all  companies  under  consideration  have  developed  their  platform  for 
delivering  the  services  and  62.5%  rely  on  external  entities  or  act  as  Brokers  of  the  service.  
Interviewees were asked to explain why some of their services were more costly than that of 
their foreign counterparts. The study revealed that due to  the current  power crises in  Ghana 
(Dumsor), 75% of all the companies under consideration had their servers outside of Ghana. 
This cuts down the cost relatively but there are issues of laws in the host country for the CSPs 
to  consider.  The  other  25%  when  asked  explained  that  even  though  their  situation  was 
different (servers are located in Ghana), they still incur extra cost of operations from the fuel 
they constantly purchase to sustain their in-house generators. 

Multi-Tenancy Concerns with Cloud Computing in Ghana 
One  of  the  main  challenge  faced  by  these  institutions  in  delivering  the  service  stems  from 
lack of Confidence in the System by the users. Data gathered showed that individuals have 
no  problem  in  Ghana  opening  a  bank  account  or  buying  a  new  SIM  card  from  any  of  the 
telecommunications  while  giving  out  their  personal  data  to  be  registered    but  are  very 
skeptical about putting their data on the internet and subsequently the cloud. An interviewee 
gives a scenario of their cloud ticketing system used for an event at the National Theatre of 
Ghana, he states that at the commencement of the program, it would usually be found out that 
80% of the viewers would purchase their ticket at the entrance and only a few would purchase 
online.  He  continues  by  stating  that:  “Daily  transactions  that  are  done  in  the  cloud  end  up 
being  duplicated  on  paper  for  „safe-keeping‟  ”.  It  would  be  quite  a  while  before  a  proper 
confidence and trust can be put in the system for Ghanaians to feel safe enough to leave the 
paper-trail. 
The „Ghanaian Mentality’ as many would call it which simply refers to the negative attitude 
we have toward the treatment of our data that may end up online as a result of local scenes 
from “Sakawa” (way of duping for individuals via the internet with their personal details or 
impersonating someone to do that). This just brings up issues of privacy of data that is put up 
in  the  cloud.    ‘Dumsor’  has  become  a  very  popular  terminology  in  Ghana  from  some  few 
years back to  describe the power outages and crises currently  plunging the nation. This  has 
affected almost all businesses in Ghana and we have had many reactions from downsizing to 
closing up of many SME‟s. The Dumsor has affected the budding cloud  sector in Ghana as 
well.  From  the  data  gathered,  it  became  known  that  75%  of  the  companies  under 
consideration  operate  servers  outside  Ghana.  This  is  to  cut  costs  because  the  one  company 
that  operates  a  server  in  Ghana  has  to  spend  extra  on  fuel  for  generators  to  keep  servers 
running  around  the  clock.  However  this  75%  also  encounter  issues  of  privacy  and  other 
Laws in the countries they host their servers. When the data is hosted in external countries, it 
cuts down costs for the SME‟s but has its own issues. The data is now subject to the laws of 
the host country and also the data takes much to go around and come back to the client. 

89 

 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Application (2250-1797)  

Volume 5– No. 6, October 2015 

Dealing With Challenges Discovered. 
To  deal  with  the  challenges  identified  requires  a  lot  of  effort  on  the  companies  involved  as 
well  as  the  government  of  Ghana.  If  the  companies  continue  to  deliver  good  services  and 
protect the data of clients well, it will gradually minimize the negative mentality and boost the 
confidence level of clients and prospective ones in the cloud system. 
This  they  can  achieve  by  drawing  up  good  and  comprehensive  SLAs.  The  organizations 
should strive and let potential and existing clients know of their security mechanisms because 
they are already in place and that should build on the foundation trust of the client. 
Also the government  has  a major role to  play in eventually solving or mitigating the power 
problem  to  enable  companies  move  their  servers  in  Ghana.  This  will  eventually  make  sure 
data is  available to  the user at  all times needed.   Policies and laws should be brought  up to 
protect  the  data  of  individuals  who  access  the  cloud  because  this  would  in-turn  help  the 
country as a whole. 
The bank of Ghana already has a policy that prohibits any banking information of individuals 
to  be  kept  outside  Ghana  therefore  the  SME‟s  that  have  banks  as  clients  deploy  the  private 
cloud to host their data on local servers. 
Since Cloud Computing is  a new  and emerging  paradigm  in  Ghana, it is  advised that CSPs 
work together to build a strong base and platform but also stay in a healthy competition with 
each other to ensure that Cloud Computing strives well in Ghana. 

Extent of Implications Due Trust, Privacy and Availability 
It was realized from the data collected and analyzed that Privacy of data and Availability of 
data is both positively related to Trust. 
Trust has no physical model for calculation but if a business strives to protect the data privacy 
for its clients and put active measures to make sure that data is available at all times, it will 
improve on the low trust that exist between the user and the CSP. Once there is patronage of 
cloud service from the CSP, there exist some level of trust (weak) between the CSP and his 
Client and it is the actions and or inactions of the CSP that will build upon this trust or destroy 
it. [10] 
From  all  data  gathered  we  uncovered  that  “Whoever  provides  the  data  to  be  used  owns  it”. 
This just means that, whoever owns the data has absolute control about how it is utilized. But 
is this really the case in situations where there is third party CSPs involved? 
Data gathered shows that the Reseller or Broker CSP forms a higher margin of 62.5% than the 
independent  developer  CSPs  in  Ghana  who  form  37.5%.    These  CSPs  therefore  deal  with 
Third-parties in  the  client  data handling.  The SLA however stipulates everything  about  the 
data usage, security and availability. Third-party organizations only utilize information based 
on the term stipulated in their contract and SLA with the said company on behalf of the client. 
The client should however be made aware that these go on in their data handling. 
An implication realized was that if the users are aware of the location of their data (which is 
usually not the case), they will have a semblance of trust for their CSPs for trusting them with 
that  information.  Alternatively  when  this  is  not  the  case,  the  users  should  be  made 
comfortable that even if their data is in servers outside of Ghana, CSPs will respect the rights 
to the privacy of their data in the countries they are hosted in. 

All  the  CSPs  discussed  had  one  form  of  security  or  another  ranging  from  AES  encryption, 
Military  Grid  Encryption,  SSL  certificates,  Dedicated  VPN  (Virtual  Private  Network)  and 

90 

 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Application (2250-1797)  

Volume 5– No. 6, October 2015 

many more, only 25% of these CSPs had regular third-party audits on their security standards. 
A good security measure breeds trust, helps protect the privacy of the data and this also makes 
sure the data is protected and can be made available to the user at all times. Also CSPs should 
be  diligent  about  the  staff  they  hire  and  keep  them  focused  in  the  work  they  do  by  fully 
motivating their staff to since they come into contact with the client‟s data. According to the 
service Jungle theory, these other tasks of external audits and Staff Handling and motivation 
are usually not part of the general cost handling techniques of the organization but these tasks 
add value to what the CSPs do by invariably increasing the trust clients have in them and this 
will eventually keep CSPs out of the service jungle. 

Relative Importance Index 
The formula for the Relative Importance Index (RII) utilized is 
Where w = weight given to the issues raised by the respondents; a = the highest weight  
n= total number considered 

 (0 ≤ RII ≤ 1) 

𝑎+𝑛

∑𝑤

Table Error! No sequence specified.: Ranking of Issues using RII (from the highest to the 
least) 
TRUST 
Security 

PRIVACY 
Security 

RII   
0.4 

RII  
0.3 

RII 
0.4 

SLA 
Third-Party  Due 
Diligence 
Disaster 
recovery 
techniques  
Key 
management 
Service 
Transparency 
Staff control 

Data  protection 
techniques 
Sensitive 
non-sensitive 
data 

vs. 

0.3 
0.1 

0.1 

0.05 

0.02 

0.01 

0.01 

0.01 

SLA 
Remote  Server 
Issues 
Privacy Laws  

CSPs 

Can 
view data? 
Encryption 
Management 
External 
Audits 
Data deletion 

Third-party 
CSPs 

0.3 
0.1 

0.1 

0.1 

0.04 

0.03 

0.02 

0.01 

AVAILABILITY 
Power 
outages 
(„dumsor‟) 
Security 
SLA 

0.2 
0.1 

Continuity 
service  

of 

0.1 

Unauthorized 
access  
Server Issues  

issues  on 

Legal 
data 
Data quality 

Data Monitoring & 
Access 

0.1 

0.5 

0.03 

0.01 

0.01 

From  the  table,  each  of  the  three  categories  under  trust,  privacy  and  availability  were 
allocated  a  Relative  Importance  index  of  1  to  rank  issues  discovered  and  subsequently 
addressed.  It  is  evident  that  and  even  though  the  indexes  are  different  under  the  distinct 
categories, Security and the SLA as well as Power issues are prioritized in all and the issues 
with the lowest indexes are key management and staff control, data deletion and finally data 
monitoring and access and legal issues on data respectively. 

91 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Application (2250-1797)  

Volume 5– No. 6, October 2015 

CONCLUSION 

A new paradigm  has  emerged in  the technology  field  that is  putting all researchers on their 
toes and goes by the name Cloud Computing. Developing nations like Ghana is trying to keep 
up with this paradigm so as not to be left out by the developed nations.  The study aimed to 
find out about multi-tenancy issues and concerns of trust, privacy and availability under the 
giant umbrella of cloud computing. 

Summary of Findings 
This study assessed how the service of Cloud solutions is delivered in Ghana with particular 
emphasis  on  multi-tenancy  issues  in  trust,  privacy  and  availability.  We  sampled  eight 
companies  in  Ghana that  deliver such services  and thoroughly  examined the delivery in the 
Ghanaian market against the three issues in multi-tenancy. We further explored literature from 
various  researchers  and  authors  of  articles,  journals  and  books  and  utilized  interviews  and 
secondary data review as our methodology.  
Throughout this research, we have explained cloud computing as a new paradigm in Ghana in 
which  CSPs  host  client  data  at  a  remote  location  for  him  access  anywhere  with  the  right 
credentials. We further went on to find out what multi-tenancy is (we likened this terminology 
to many tenants living in an apartment complex and sharing resources but also keeping a level 
of  privacy)  and  looked  into  issues  and  implications  due  to  trust,  privacy  and  availability  of 
data.  
From  the  study,  we  found  out  that  privacy  and  availability  positively  impact  on  trust  (an 
immeasurable component). We explained trust as the total believe that something or someone 
is safe and reliable; privacy as the non-disturbance of online data by unscrupulous people and 
availability as having data at one‟s disposal.  We found that good security standard adopted 
by Ghanaian companies help to protect the privacy and availability of data and these in turn 
improve  on  trust  between  CSP  and  client.  We  sampled  eight  CSPs  in  Ghana  as  our  sample 
and even though this may not be a total representative of all CSPs in Ghana, issues uncovered 
are paramount in all CSPs in Ghana. 
The  Relative  Importance  Index  used  in  this  study  helped  us  rank  the  issues  uncovered. 
Security issues and SLA were ranked the highest in Trust and Privacy but „Power problems‟ 
was ranked first in „availability of data‟. This may have been because the study was based in 
Ghana  and  at  a  time  where  Power  issues  popularly  known  as  „Dumsor‟  is  a  paramount 
problem for its citizens. 
In conclusion, cloud computing is indeed a new paradigm in Ghana [2] but has a long way to 
travel  in  Ghana.  Even  though  the  study  just  dwelled  on  Service  delivery  in  Multi-tenancy 
issues in trust, privacy and availability, we found out many general issues that may hold this 
industry back as well as issues specific to Ghana and suggested ways to deal with them. 
As  [21]  indicated  in  her  book  about  varying  privacy  laws  in  different  countries,  we  found 
from  this  study  that  Ghana  is  no  different  and  there  are  no  clear  law  (that  individuals  are 
aware of) to protect privacy of data. 
Finally, the SLA, we found, is a contract that exist between CSPs and their client and contains 
all issues of data handling, availability, data usage, services, up and down times and all other 
issues and component that may arise out of the correspondent between the CSP and the client 

92 

 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Application (2250-1797)  

Volume 5– No. 6, October 2015 

before, during and even after the contract ends. We again found out that CSPs have disaster 
recovery plans put in place for data protection and availability to enhance client trust. 
Recommendation for Further Research 
It is recommended for the improvement of service delivery in this sector in the future that a 
comprehensive study is made into the Ghanaian laws on data privacy and how they are used. 
This can also be compared to laws in countries that host Ghanaian servers remotely. 

REFERENCE 

[1]   E. O. Yeboah-Boateng, Cyber-Security Challenges with SMEs in Developing Economies: 

Issues of Confidentiality, Integrity & Availability (CIA), 1 ed., Copenhagen: Institut for 
Elektroniske Systemer, Aalborg University, 2013.  

[2]   E. O. Yeboah-Boateng and K. A. Essandoh, "Factors Influencing the Adoption of Cloud 
Computing by Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in Developing Economies.," 
International Journal of Emerging Science and Engineering (IJESE), vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 13-
20, 2014.  

[3]   E. O. Yeboah-Boateng and K. A. Essandoh, "Cloud Computing: The Level Awareness 

Amongst SMEs in Developing Economies," Journal of Emerging Trends in Computing and 
Information Sciences, vol. 4, no. 11, pp. 832-839, 2013.  

[4]   J. Zabalza, R. Rio-Belver, J. Gavilanes and G. & Garechana, "Benefits Related to Cloud 

Computing in the SMEs," 6th International Conference on Industrial Engineering and 
Industrial Management. XVI Congreso de Ingeniería de Organización. Vigo, 2012.  

[5]   R. N. Calheiros, R. Ranjan, C. A. De Rose and R. & Buyya, "Cloudsim: A novel framework 
for modeling and simulation of cloud computing infrastructures and services," 2009.  
[6]   R. N. R. R. D. R. C. A. &. B. R. Calheiros, "Cloudsim: A novel framework for modeling 

and simulation of cloud computing infrastructures and services," 2009.  

[7]   R. Krebs, ""Architectural Concerns in Multi-tenant SaaS Applications"," Karlsruhe, 

Germany, 2012.  

[8]   M. Neeraj, "Primary Cloud Deployment Models," 2014. [Online]. Available: 

http://cloudtweaks.com/2012/07/4-primary-cloud-deployment-models/. [Accessed 26 July 
2015]. 

[9]   A. Osman and A. Musah, "Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in the Cloud in 

Developing Countries: A Synthesis of the Literature and Future ResearchDirections," 
Journal of Management and Sustainability;, vol. 5, no. 1, 2015.  

[10]  P. Siani and B. Azzedine, "Privacy, Security and Trust Issues Arising from Cloud 

Computing," Bristol, UK, 2010.  

[11]  A. e. a. Afkham, "Multi-Tenant SOA middleware for cloud computing," IEEE 2rd 

International Conference on Cloud Computing, 2010.  

[12]  S. Subashini and K. V., "“A Survey on security issues in service delivery models of cloud 

computing,”," Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 2011.  

93 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Application (2250-1797)  

Volume 5– No. 6, October 2015 

[13]  H. AlJahdali, A. Albatli, P. Garraghan, P. Townend, L. Lau and J. Xu, "Multi-Tenancy in 

Cloud Computing," in SOSE '14 Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE 8th International 
Symposium on Service Oriented Systems Engineering, Washington, DC, 2014.  

[14]  I. Hussai and I. Ashraf, "Security Issues in Cloud Computing - A Review," International 

Journal of Advanced Networking and Applications, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2240-2243, 2014.  

[15]  M. T. Khorshed, A. S. Ali and S. A. Wasim, A Survey on gaps, threat remediation 

challenges and some thoughts for proactive attack detection in cloud computing, Future 
Generation Computer Systems, 2012.  

[16]  D. e. a. Rousseau, "Not so Different After All: a Cross-discipline View of Trust," 

Management Review, vol. no. 3, no. 23, pp. pp. 393-404, 1998.  

[17]  K. Kumar, "OVERVIEW OF CLOUD COMPUTING ARCHITECTURE: SERVICE 

DELIVERY MODELS, SECURITY& PRIVACY ISSUES AND TRUST," IJRET: 
International Journal of Research in Engineering and Technology, vol. 2, no. 12, pp. 607-
609, 2013.  

[18]  H. Gebauer, "A Dynamic Theory of Service Management: Implications for Managing 

Service Improvements Avoiding the“Service Jungle”". 

[19]  Docrep, "Interviews," 2015. [Online]. Available: 

http://www.fao.org/docrep/003/x2465e/x2465e09.htm#b8-6.3.3%20Interviews. [Accessed 
26 July 2015]. 

[20]  P. S. e. a. Hinds, "The possibilities and pitfalls of doing a secondary analysis of a qualitative 

data set. Qualitative Health Research, 7(3),," pp. 408-424..  

[21]  S. Baase, A gift of fire: Social, legal, and ethical issues for computing and the Internet., 3rd 

ed., Prentice Hall, 2008.  

94 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
