(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:2)(cid:5)(cid:9)(cid:2)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:11)(cid:2)(cid:12)(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:16)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:17)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:2)(cid:12)(cid:13)

(cid:18)(cid:13)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:8)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:11)(cid:13)(cid:8)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:22)(cid:23)(cid:24)(cid:13)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:18)(cid:13)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:25)(cid:23)(cid:6)(cid:26)(cid:14)(cid:20)(cid:16)(cid:2)(cid:25)(cid:4)(cid:19)(cid:5)

(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:2)(cid:5)(cid:9)(cid:2)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:11)(cid:2)(cid:12)(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:16)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:17)(cid:4)(cid:3)(cid:2)(cid:12)(cid:13)

(cid:18)(cid:13)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:8)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:11)(cid:13)(cid:8)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:22)(cid:23)(cid:24)(cid:13)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:18)(cid:13)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:25)(cid:23)
(cid:26)(cid:14)(cid:20)(cid:16)(cid:2)(cid:25)(cid:4)(cid:19)(cid:5)

(cid:27)(cid:7)(cid:28)(cid:6)(cid:27)(cid:7)(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:32)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:2)(cid:14)(cid:13)(cid:11)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:6)(cid:28)(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:8)(cid:17)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:12)
(cid:27)(cid:7)(cid:28)(cid:6)(cid:27)(cid:7)(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:26)(cid:31)(cid:32)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:2)(cid:14)(cid:13)(cid:11)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:6)(cid:28)(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:8)(cid:17)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:12)

Abstract 

The  research  reported  in  this  book  focuses  on  developing  a  framework  for 

game  design to protect computer users against phishing attacks. A comprehensive 

literature  review  was  conducted  to  understand  the  research  domain,  support  the 

proposed  research  work  and  identify  the  research  gap  to  fulfil  the  contribution 

to knowledge.  Two studies and one theoretical design were carried out to achieve 

the aim of this  research reported in this book. A quantitative approach was used 

in  the  first  study  while engaging both quantitative and qualitative approaches in 

the second study. The  first study reported in this book was focused to investigate 

the  key  elements  that  should  be  addressed  in  the  game  design  framework  to 

avoid  phishing  attacks.  The  proposed  game  design  framework  was  aimed  to 

enhance  the  user  avoidance  behaviour 

through  motivation  to  thwart  phishing 

attack.  The  results  of  this  study  revealed  that  perceived  threat,  safeguard 

effectiveness,  safeguard  cost,  self-efficacy,  perceived 

severity  and  perceived 

susceptibility  elements  should  be  incorporated  into  the  game  design  framework 

for  computer  users  to  avoid  phishing  attacks  through  their  motivation.  The 

theoretical design approach was focused on designing a mobile game  to  educate 

computer  users  against  phishing  attacks.  The  elements  of  the  framework  were 

addressed in the mobile game design context. The main objective of the  proposed 

mobile  game  design  was  to  teach  users  how  to  identify  phishing  website 

addresses  (URLs),  which  is  one  of  many  ways  of  identifying  a  phishing  attack. 

The  mobile  game  prototype  was  developed  using  MIT  App  inventor  emulator. 

In  the  second  study,  the  formulated  game  design  framework  was evaluated 

through  the  deployed mobile game prototype on a HTC One X touch screen smart 

phone. Then a  discussion  is  reported  in  this  book  investigating  the  effectiveness 

of the developed  mobile  game  prototype  compared  to  traditional  online  learning 

to  thwart  phishing  threats.  Finally,  the  research  reported  in  this  book  found 

that  the  mobile  game  is  somewhat  effective  in  enhancing  the  user’s  phishing 

awareness.  It  also  revealed  that  the  participants  who  played  the  mobile  game 

were  better  able  to  identify  fraudulent  websites  compared  to  the  participants 

who  read  the  website  without  any  training.  Therefore, the research reported in 

this  book  determined  that  perceived  threat,  safeguard  effectiveness,  safeguard 

cost,  self-efficacy,  perceived  threat  and  perceived  susceptibility  elements  have 

i 

 
 
a  significant  impact  on  avoidance  behaviour  through  motivation  to  thwart 

phishing attacks as addressed in the game design framework. 

ii 

 
Acknowledgements 

I would like to express my deepest gratitude to many people for their continuous 

support  and  encouragement,  without  which  this  achievement  would  not  have 

been  possible. In particular, I am extremely grateful to my supervisors: Dr Steve 

Love  and  Dr  Mark  Perry  of  the  Department  of  Information  Systems  and 

Computing  at  Brunel  University, London. Dr Steve Love whose insight changed 

the  way  I  view  the  research,  without  whose  support  there  would  not  be  an 

appearance of this book.  I would like to thank him for his enthusiastic guidance, 

invaluable  advice,  immense  patience  and  also  encouragement  when  times  were 

tough  throughout  my  PhD  journey  and  making  my  stay  at  Brunel  University 

memorable and wonderful. 

Thanks  to  Dr  Melissa  Cole  who  helped  me  to  open  my  eyes  to  see  the  world 

as a researcher.  Thanks also  go  to  Dr Tim  French  who pushed  and  continuously 

encouraged me to start a PhD journey in the first place. For my ability to survive 

the  research  office  environment  I  owe  a  lot  to  Professor  Carsten  Maple  and 

Professor  Yong Yue at the University of Bedfordshire who offered relentless cheer 

and  support.  I  also  would  like  to  thank  my  academic  staff  mates  in  the 

Department  of  Computer  Science and Technology at University of Bedfordshire. 

Thanks also to Jeremy Baxter and Gareth Hirst from the technical support unit in 

the  Department  of  Information  Systems  and  Computing  at  Brunel  University, 

who  generously  provided  experimental  equipment  and  software  licenses,  which 

significantly  enhanced  the  quality of  the  experiments  conducted.  A  big  thank  to 

you  all of the students, colleagues and friends who participated in the studies and 

experiments conducted for this book. 

I  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  academic  staff,  colleagues  and  friends  in  the 

Department  of  Information  Systems  and  Computing  at  Brunel  University  for 

their  invaluable assistance and advice contributed to this research. 

iii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Special thanks must go to my dearest parents Nanda and Somapala, who have always 

encouraged  me  in  my  academic  pursuits,  given  me  the  self-belief  to  take  on  new 

challenges  and  supported  me  wholeheartedly  which  act  like  butterfly  wings  in  my 

future. 

iv 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This book is dedicated to my lovely Mother and Father 

v 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

Abstract 

Acknowledgement 

List of Figures 

List of Tables 

List of Publications 

Chapter 1 

Introduction 

1.1 Overview 

1.2 Outline of Research Problem 

1.3Theoretical Background 

1.4 Aims and Objectives 

1.5 The Research Approach 

1.6 Structure of Book 

1.7 Summary 

Chapter 2 

Literature Review 

2.1 Introduction 

2.2 Computer Users’ Security Behaviour 

2.3 Cyber Security Threats 

2.4 Phishing Threats 

2.4.1 Why Do People Fall for Phishing Attacks? 

2.4.2 Automated Software Tools for Phishing Detection 

2.4.3 Anti-Phishing Education 

2.5 Educational Games 

2.5.1 Mobile Game Based Learning 

2.6 Summary and Conclusion 

Page 

i 

iii 

x 

xi 

xii 

1 

1 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

9 

10 

10 

10 

16 

20 

24 

26 

30 

34 

39 

43 

vi 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 

Research Methodology 
3.1 Introduction 
3.2 Overview of the Research Approach Used in this Book 
3.3 Setting up the Laboratory 
3.4 Data Collection 

3.4.1 Questionnaire 
3.4.2 The Think-aloud Approach 

3.5 Data Analysis 
3.6 Summary 

Chapter 4 

A Game Design Framework to Avoid “Phishing Attacks” 
4.1 Introduction 
4.2 Aims and Objectives 
4.3 Pilot Study 

4.3.1 Questionnaire Design 
4.3.2 Participants 
4.3.3 Procedure 
4.3.4 Results 
4.3.5 Summary 

4.4 Main Study 

4.4.1 Participants 
4.4.2 Procedure 
4.4.3 Results 
4.4.4 Model Testing 
4.4.5 Game Design Framework 
4.4.6 Discussion 

4.5 Summary 

Chapter 5 

45 

45 

45 

49 

50 

50 

55 

58 

60 

61 

61 

63 

64 

64 

67 

67 

68 

69 

69 

69 

70 

71 

71 

74 

75 

78 

Designing a Mobile Game for Computer Users to Thwart “Phishing Attacks” 79 
5.1 Introduction 
5.2 Aims and Objectives 

79 
80 

vii 

 
5.3 Game Design Issues 
5.4 What to teach? 
5.5 Game Description 

5.5.1 Story and Mechanism 
5.5.2 Technology 
5.6 Game Based Learning 

5.6.1 Learning Science Principles 
5.6.2 Mobile Game Design 

5.7 Storyboard Design 
5.8 Mobile Game Prototype 
5.9 Summary 

Chapter 6 

Evaluation of Game Design Framework Using a Mobile Game Prototype 
6.1 Introduction 
6.2 Aims and Objectives 
6.3 Pilot Study 

6.3.1 Data Collection Techniques 
6.3.2 Questionnaire Design 
6.3.3 Experimental Protocol Design 
6.3.4 Participants 
6.3.5 Procedure 
6.3.6 Results 
6.3.7 Summary 

6.4 Main Study 

6.4.1 Participants 
6.4.2 Procedure 
6.4.3 Data Collection Instruments 
6.4.4 Results Analysis 
6.4.5 SUS Study Results 
6.4.6 Think-aloud Study Results 
6.4.7 Summary of Results 
6.4.8 Discussion 

6.5 Summary 

81 

82 

82 

83 

85 

87 

87 

89 

90 

99 

102 

104 

104 

106 

107 

108 

108 

110 

112 

113 

114 

116 

117 

117 

119 

121 

121 

122 

124 

129 

130 
136 

viii 

 
138 

138 

139 

140 

142 

143 

144 

148 

150 

152 

152 

Chapter 7 

Discussion of Mobile Game Prototype and Public Anti-phishing Educational 

Website 
7.1 Introduction 
7.2 Mobile Game Prototype 
7.3 Public Anti-phishing Educational Website 

7.3.1 Participants 
7.3.2 Procedure 

7.4 Results 
7.5 Research Implications 
7.6 Summary 

Chapter 8 

Discussion and Conclusion 
8.1 Introduction 
8.2 Summary of the Studies’ Findings 

153 
8.2.1 Developing a Game Design Framework to Thwart Phishing Attacks  153 
8.2.2 Developing a Mobile Game for Computer Users to Thwart Phishing 

Attacks 
156 
8.2.3 Evaluating the Game Design Framework through the Mobile Game  156 

8.3 Originality of the Research 
8.4 Limitations and Future Work 
8.5 Summary 

References 

Appendixes 

159 

160 

162 

163 

193 

ix 

 
List of Figures 

Page 

Figure 2.1: Phishing attacks: most targeted industry sectors, 3rd Quarter 2012 

(APWG, 2013) 
Figure 2.2: Phishing attacks: most targeted industry sectors, 4th Quarter 2012 

(APWG, 2013) 

Figure 2.3: High-level system architecture for the anti-phishing evaluation test 

bed (Zhang, et al., 2007) 

Figure 3.1: Experiment room in the second study 

Figure 4.1: Research model derived from TTAT (Liang and Xue, 2010) 

Figure 4.2: Model testing results 

Figure 4.3: The Game Design Framework 

Figure 5.1:The Storyboard of the anti-phishing mobile game design 

Figure 5.2: Main Menu of the game prototype design displayed on MIT App 

Inventor Emulator. (Appendix 3) 

23 

23 

27 

49 

62 

72 

75 

97 

100 

Figure 5.3: Game Over message on the MIT App Inventor Emulator (Appendix 3)100 

Figure 5.4: Out of Lives message on the MIT App Inventor Emulator 

(Appendix 3) 

Figure 5.5 Your time is up message on MIT App Inventor Emulator 

(Appendix3) 

Figure 6.1: Experimental protocol: Think-aloud user study instructions 

Figure 7.1: Welcome page of APWG Public Education (APWG, 2003) 

Figure 7.2: Educational redirect program section of APWG Public Education 

(APWG, 2003) 

Figure 7.3:  Total correctness for the test groups. N=20 in all conditions. 

The game condition shows the greatest improvement (by 29%) 

Figure 7.4:  The individual participant’s score during their engagement with 

the mobile game prototype 

Figure 7.5:  The individual participant’s score during their engagement with 

the APWG public education initiative website 

101 

101 

111 

141 

141 

145 

146 

147 

x 

 
 
List of Tables 

Table 2.1: The APWG Phishing Activity Trends Report, 4th Quarter 2012 

(APWG, 2013) 

Page 

22 

Table 2.2: Number of phishing sites correctly identified by anti-phishing tools. 

Note, SpoofGuard’s catch rate is estimated after time 0 (Zhang, et al., 2007) 

28 

Table 2.3 Number of legitimate sites (out of 516 tested) falsely identified as phishing 

sites by anti-phishing tools (Zhang, et al., 2007) 

Table 4.1: A sample set of questionnaire 

Table 4.2: Participants demographics in the pilot study 

Table 4.3: Cronbach’s alpha scores for the questionnaire constructs in the pilot 

study 

Table 4.4: Participants demographics in the main study 

Table 4.5 Cronbach’s alpha scores for the questionnaire constructs in the 

main study 

Table 5.1: Scoring scheme and consequences of the player’s action 

Table 5.2: List of URLs displayed in the game 

Table 5.3: A list of requirements for the game design sketch 

Table 6.1: A set of SUS questionnaire items 

Table 6.2: Participants demographics in the pilot study 

Table 6.3: Participants demographics in the main study 

Table 6.4: List of ten website addresses used in pre-test 

Table 6.5: List of ten website addresses used in post-test 

Table 6.6: Summary of System Usability Scale of the mobile game prototype 

Application 

Table 6.7: Overview of results 

Table 7.1: Participant demographics 

Table 7.2: Paired Samples t-test Statistics 

Table 7.3: Paired Samples Test 

29 

66 

67 

68 

70 

71 

84 

86 

93 

109 

113 

118 

120 

120 

123 

125 

142 

145 

145 

xi 

 
 
 
 
 
Publications 

The  following  peer  reviewed  papers  have  been  published  as  a  result  of  the  research 

conducted for this book. 

(cid:2)  Arachchilage,  N.  A.  G.,  Love,  S.,  &  Beznosov,  K.  (2016).  Phishing  threat 

avoidance  behaviour:  An  empirical  investigation.  Computers  in  Human 

Behavior, 60, 185-197. 

(cid:2)  Arachchilage, N. A. G., 2013. “Gaming for Security”, iTNOW, The Magazine 

for the IT Professional, British Computer Society, The Charted Institute for IT, 

March 2013, Volume 55, Issue 1, pp. 32-33. 

(cid:2)  Arachchilage,  N.  A.  G.  and  Love,  S.,  2013.  A  game  design  framework  for 

avoiding  phishing  attacks,  Computers  in  Human Behavior,  Volume  29,  Issue 

3, p.706-714 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2012.12.018 

(cid:2)  Arachchilage,  N.  A  G.,  Love,  S.  and  Scott,  M.,  2012.  Designing  a  Mobile 

Game  to  Teach  Conceptual  Knowledge  of  Avoiding  “Phishing  Attacks”, 

International  Journal  for  e-Learning  Security  (IJeLS),  2  (1/2),  March  -  June 

2012, pp.127 – 132, ISSN 2046-4568. 

(cid:2)  Arachchilage,  N.  A.  G.  and  Cole,  M.,  2011.  Designing  a  mobile  game  for 

home  computer  users  to  protect  against  “phishing  attacks”,  International 

Journal for e-Learning Security (IJeLS), 1 (1/2), March - Jun 2011, pp.19 -26, 

ISSN: 2046-4568. 

(cid:2)  Arachchilage, N. A.  G. and Cole, M., 2011. Design a mobile game for home 

computer  users  to  prevent  from  “phishing  attacks”,  International  Conference 

on  Information  Society  (i-Society  2011,  in  Proc.  IEEE),  27-  29 June  2011, 

London, United Kingdom, pp.485-489, ISBN: 978-0-9564263-8-3. 

xii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 

Introduction 

1.1 Overview 

This  book  examines  the  security  awareness  issues  surrounding  computer  use  with 

particular  attention  to  a  malicious  IT  threat  avoidance  perspective.  Security  exploits 

can  include  malicious  IT  threats  such  as  computer  programs  which  can  disturb  the 

normal  behaviour  of  computer  systems  (viruses),  malicious  software  (malware), 

unsolicited  e-mail  (spam),  monitoring  software  (spyware),  attempting  to  make 

computer resources unavailable to its intended users (Distributed Denial-of-Service or 

DDoS attack), the art of human hacking (social engineering) and online identity theft 

(phishing).  These  attacks  are  prepared  to  target  either  financial  or  social  gain  (Ng, 

Kankanhalli  and  Xu,  2009;  Workman,  Bommer  and  Straub,  2008;  Woon,  Tan  and 

Low, 2005). For example, a DDoS attack could target a bank in order to break down 

their email server and the attacker can exhort a lump sum of money to give the email 

server back to the bank. 

On the other hand, perhaps some people are on a mission of fun and accomplishment 

rather  than  financial  or  social  gain.  For  example,  teenager  scan  hack  ‘his’  friend’s 

Facebook  account  to  have  fun  or  show  off  their  capabilities.  The  BBC  has  reported 

that one  in four  young Britons  attempts to access Facebook accounts of their friends 

just for fun as claimed by a survey (BBC News, 2010). This situation could be severe 

with  the  rapid  growth  of  information  and  communication  technology.  The  same 

broadcasting corporation has recently reported that the police have arrested a 17-year- 

old  boy  alleged  to  be  the  spokesman  for  a  notorious  hacking  group  (BBC  News, 

2012).  This  poses  a  danger  not  only  to  individuals  but  also  to  the  entire  society  as 

pervasiveness  of  Internet  technology  today  provides  a  paradise  to  hackers  for  their 

‘hactivism’. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Why is it that security breaches and human hacking increase regularly? This is mainly 

because people tempt to disclose their personal information to public via online. It can 

be  through  Facebook,  Twitter,  Hi5,  Orkut,  Skype  and  even  more  professional  social 

networking sites like LinkedIn. Previous research has revealed that  the human factor 

is  still  infancy  and  a  major  threat  in  the  field  of  information  security  (CNN.  com, 

2005  and  Pike,  2011).  Therefore,  this  research  comprehends  the  need  of  which  the 

human aspect of  performing security can be influenced to avoid malicious  IT threats 

in the context of computer use. Current work in the emerging field of “usable security” 

is to design and develop a tool to educate computer users to protect  themselves against 

malicious IT threats. 

Computer users play a significant role in helping to make cyberspace a safer place for 

everyone  due  to  the  Internet  technology  growth.  Internet  technology  is  so  pervasive 

today  that  it  provides  the  backbone  for  modern  living  enabling  ordinary  people  to 

shop,  socialize  and  be  entertained  all  through  the  use  of  their  home  computers.  As 

people’s reliance on Internet technology grows, so the possibility of hacking and other 

security breaches  increases  (Liang and Xue, 2010). Therefore, the message “security 

is vital” should be spread to all computer users (Ngand Rahim, 2005). 

In  addition,  as  organizations  have  become  increasingly  ‘virtual’  there  has  been  a 

technological  shift  from  work  to  the  domestic  environment  (O'Brien,  et  al.,  1999). 

Employees  are  free  to  work  at  home  or  bring  unfinished  work  home  due  to  the 

pervasiveness  of  Internet  technology.  This  increases  the  opportunity  for  individual 

users to open themselves to vulnerable IT threats. Unlike employees in organisations, 

these  computer  users  at  home  are  unlikely  to  have  a  sufficient  IT  infrastructure  to 

protect  themselves  from  malicious  IT  attacks,  or  may  not  have  proper  standard  or 

strict  IT  security  policies  in  place.  For  example,  most  computer  users  are  not  IT 

professionals  and  lack  a  high  degree  of  computer  literacy  to  set  up  a  secure  home 

computing system (Doswell, 2008). In addition, computer users tend to display unsafe 

computer  behaviour  which  is  particularly vulnerable  to  malicious  IT  threats.  Further 

examples are of browsing unsafe websites, downloading suspicious software, sharing 

passwords  among  family  and  peers  and  using  unprotected  home  wireless  networks 

(Liang and Xue, 2010). 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2 Outline of Research Problem 

One  such  IT  threat  that  is  particularly  dangerous  to  computer  users  is  phishing 

(Dhamija,  Tygar  and  Hearst,  2006).  This  is  a  type  of  semantic  attack  (Schneier, 

2000), in which victims  get  invited by scam  emails to visit fraudulent websites. The 

attacker  creates  a  fraudulent  website  which  has  the  look-and-feel  of  the  legitimate 

website.  Users  are  invited  by  sending  scam  emails  to  access  the  fraudulent  website 

and  steal  their  money.  Phishing  attacks  get  more  sophisticated  day  by  day  as  and 

when  attackers  learn  new  techniques  and  change  their  strategies  accordingly 

(Kumaraguru,  et  al.,  2007).  The  most  popular  is  email  (James,  2005;  Richmond, 

2006).  Phishing  emails  occupy  a  variety  of  tactics  to  trick  people  to  disclose  their 

confidential  information  such  as  usernames,  passwords,  national  insurance  numbers 

and credit/debit card numbers. For example, asking people to take part in a survey or 

urging people to  verify their  bank  account  information,  in  which,  they  must  provide 

their  bank  details  to  be  compensated.  The  increasing  sophistication  of  these 

techniques  makes  it  a  challenge  to  protect  individual  users  against  phishing  attacks 

(Drake, Oliver and Koontz, 2006). 

A number of automated software tools have been developed to help users to identify 

fraudulent  emails  and  websites  (Kumaraguru,  et  al.,  2007;  Arachchilage  and  Love, 

2014).  For  example,  Ye  and  Sean  (2002)  and  Dhamija  and  Tygar  (2005)  have 

developed  a  prototype  called  “trusted  paths”  for  the  Mozilla  web  browser  that  is 

designed  to  help  users  verify  that  their  browser  has  made  a  secure  connection  to  a 

trusted website. However, these systems  are  not  totally reliable  in  detecting  phishing 

attacks  (Sheng,  et  al.,  2007;  Abbasi,  Zahedi and Chen, 2012). In addition, previous 

research has revealed that the available  anti-phishing tools such as CallingID Toolbar, 

Cloudmark  Anti-Fraud  Toolbar,  EarthLink  Toolbar,  Firefox  2,  eBay  Toolbar  and 

Netcraft Anti-Phishing Toolbar are  insufficient to combat phishing threats (Robila and 

Ragucci,  2006).  On  the  one  hand,  software  application  designers  and  developers 

with  the  help  of  computer  security  experts  will  continue  to  improve  phishing  and 

spam detection. However, the human  factor risk is still high and human is the weakest 

link  in  information  security  (Purkait,  2012;  CNN.  com,  2005).  On  the  other  hand, 

human factor risks can be mitigated by educating users against phishing threats (Brody, 

Mulig and Kimball, 2007; Robila and 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Ragucci, 2006; Arachchilage and Cole, 2011; Abbasi, Zahedi and Chen, 2012;  Purkait, 

2012). 

Computer  users  are  susceptible  for  phishing  attacks  (Dhamija,  Tygar  and  Hearst, 

2006;  Kumaraguru,  et  al.,  2007;  Purkait,  2012;  Arachchilage  and  Love,  2014; 

Arachchilage, 2013). This is because users can have a lack  of security  awareness and 

sensitive trust decisions that they  make during online  activities such as online banking 

transactions  or  bill  payments.  To  protect  individual  users  against  phishing  threats, 

phishing education needs to be considered  (Kumaraguru, et al., 2007; Abbasi, Zahedi 

and  Chen,  2012;  Purkait,  2012).  Previous  studies  have  reported  end-user  education 

as a frequently recommended  approach to  countering  phishing  attacks  (Hiner,  2002; 

Wu,  Miller  and  Garfinkel,  2005;  Allen,  2006; Kumaraguru, et al., 2008; Purkait, 

2012). Therefore, this research work effort is  to  investigate  how  to  better  educate 

computer  users  to  protect  themselves  against  phishing attacks. 

1.3 Theoretical Background 

Previous research has noticed that technology alone is insufficient to ensure critical IT 

security 

issues.  So  far,  there  has  been  little  work  on  the  end  user  behaviour  of 

performing  security  and  preventing  users  from  attacks  which  are  imperative  to  cope 

up with malicious IT threats such as phishing attacks (Anderson and Agarwal, 2006; 

Aytes and Terry, 2004; Liang and Xue, 2009; Ng and Rahim, 2005; Susan, Catherine 

and  Ritu,  2006;  Woon,  Tan  and  Low,  2005;  Workman,  Bommer  and  Straub,  2008; 

Purkait, 2012). Many discussions have terminated with the conclusion of “if we could 

only remove the user from the system, we would be able to make it secure” (Gorling, 

2006). Where it is not possible to completely eliminate the user, for example in home 

use, the best possible approach for computer security is to educate the user in security 

prevention  (Mitnick  and  Simon,  2002;  Schneier,  2000).  Previous  research  has 

revealed how well designed user security education can be effective (Kumaraguru, et 

al., 2007; Sheng, et al., 2007). This could be web-based training materials, contextual 

training  and  embedded  training  to  improve  users’  ability  to  avoid  phishing  attacks. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therefore,  the  research  work  reported  in  this  book  attempts to  find an  effective way 

of educating people to identify and prevent phishing websites. 

So, how does one can  educate the computer user to protect against  phishing attacks? 

To address the issue, the research work reported in this book focuses on developing a 

game  design  framework  for  computer  users  to  protect  themselves  from  phishing 

attacks.  This  concept  is  based  on  the  notion  that  not  only  can  a  computer  game 

provide education (Raybourn and Waern, 2004), but also games potentially provide a 

better  learning  environment,  because  they  motivate  the  user  and  keep  attention  by 

providing immediate feedback (Amory and Seagram, 2003; Prensky, 2001). Still, the 

game  based  education  indicates  its  potential  to  improve  learning.  The  game  at  least 

moves  users  into  a  different  state  where  they  are  mentally  ready  for  learning  by 

creating  the  right  environment  and  where  they  also  already  experience  some  social 

oriented learning (Parsons, Ryu and Cranshaw, 2006). 

Sheng,  et  al.  (2010)  have  conducted  a  role-play  survey  with  1001  online  survey 

respondents to study who falls for phishing attacks. The study discovered that women 

are more susceptible than men to phishing attacks and participants between  the ages 

of  18  and  25  are  more  susceptible  to  phishing  than  other  age  groups.  The  studies 

reported  in this book  were  targeted towards  to  examining  participants’  phishing 

threat  avoidance  behaviour  by using  game  based  anti-phishing  education.  Therefore, 

participants included ages ranged from 18 to 25 were students from Brunel University 

and  University  of  Bedfordshire  (including  people  who  were  concerned  about 

computer security). 

1.4 Aims and Objectives 

The aim  of  the  research  reported in  this  book  is  to  investigate  how  one  can  educate 

computer users against phishing threats. The proposed research work accomplishes by 

developing  a  game  design  framework  as  a  tool  to  educate  computer  users  to  thwart 

phishing attacks. 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The research objectives are as follows: 

(cid:2)  To investigate the level of security challenges for computer users with respect 

to phishing threats. 

(cid:2)  To explore the knowledge gap of the research with the published literature. 
(cid:2)  To  investigate  the  key  elements  that  should  be  addressed  in  a  game  design 

framework to thwart phishing attacks. 

(cid:2)  To  develop  a  mobile  game  prototype  based  on  the  proposed  game  design 

framework. 

(cid:2)  To evaluate the game design framework through the mobile game prototype. 
(cid:2)  To  investigate  the  effectiveness  of  the  mobile  game  prototype  compared  to 

traditional online learning. 

(cid:2)  To formulate a game design framework to thwart phishing attacks. 

1.5 The Research Approach 

A  comprehensive  literature  review  is  conducted  to  understand  the  research  domain, 

support  the  work  of the proposed  research  and identify the research  gap  to  fulfil  the 

contribution to knowledge.  A cognitive activity is also used to illustrate some of the 

difficulties with understanding challenges for computer users with respect to phishing 

threat. 

Two  studies  and  one  theoretical  design  were  used  for  the  research  work  reported  in 

this book. There are several  research  methodology approaches  existing in  IS  (Oates, 

2006).  For  example,  qualitative  approach,  quantitative  approach  and  mixed  method 

approach. A quantitative research approach was engaged in the first study while using 

both  quantitative  and  qualitative  approaches  in  the  second  study.  Furthermore,  the 

data were collected using a questionnaire, a usability study and a think-aloud study. 

The first study reported in this book focused on developing a game design framework 

for computer users to thwart phishing attacks. The study asked what key elements that 

should  be  addressed  in  the  game  design  framework.  The  game  design  framework 

enhances  the  user’s  avoidance  behaviour  though  motivation  to   thwart   phishing 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attacks.  Therefore,  this  is  a  positivist  approach  (Oates,  2006).  A  questionnaire  was 

designed and used in this study to  evaluate the proposed game design framework for 

computer users to thwart phishing attacks. 

The second study reported in this book attempted to empirically evaluate the proposed 

game  design  framework  though  the  mobile  game  prototype.  This  sounds  more 

interpretive  because  the  study  focuses  on  determining  the  user’s  impact  on  the 

proposed  game  design  framework  after  playing  the  mobile  game  prototype.  A 

questionnaire was designed and used in the second study to assess the user subjective 

satisfaction  of  a  mobile  game  prototype  interface. Then  a  think-aloud study  was 

employed  along  with  a  pre-  and  post-test  to  assess  the  proposed  game  design 

framework through the mobile game prototype. 

1.6 Structure of Book 

The reminder of this book is structured in the following manner. Using the literature, 

survey  studies  and  experiments,  Chapter  2  explores  how  to  protect  computer  users 

against phishing threat with a particular focus on security education. Therefore, game 

based  security  education  is  explored.  In  addition,  the  computer  user’s  security 

behaviour is observed in order to structure the literature into a meaningful story.  The 

chapter contains a number of sections, which are: computer users’ security behaviour; 

Cyber  security  threats;  Phishing  threats;  Educational  games. This  can  be  used  to 

identify similarities and disparities between research and the current knowledge gap. 

A detailed description of the research approach employed is offered in Chapter 3. The 

chapter  is  divided  into  five  main  sections,  which  are:  Overview  of  the  research 

question; Overview of the research approach used in this book; Setting up laboratory; 

Data collection; Data analysis. 

Chapter  4  describes  the  first  study.  The  aim  of  this  study  was  to  develop  a  game 

design  framework  for  computer  users  to  protect  themselves  from  phishing  attacks. 

The chapter reports the first study of this book in detail. Aims and objectives, pilot 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
study,  main  study,  model  testing  and  game  design  framework  are  then  explained. 

Finally, the results are reported and discussed and a chapter summary is presented. 

Chapter 5 discusses a theoretical mobile game design approach for computer users to 

thwart  phishing  attacks.  The  chapter  is  divided  into  nine  main  sections  which  are: 

Aims  and  objectives;  Game  design  issues;  Game  description;  Game  based  learning; 

Learning  science  principles;  Mobile  game  design;  Storyboard  design;  Mobile  game 

prototype. 

Chapter  6  describes  the  second  study.  In  this  chapter  the  game  design  framework 

(presented in Chapter 4) was assessed through a mobile game prototype (presented in 

Chapter 5). This chapter reports the second study of the book in detail. The research 

approach is presented, including the sampling technique, data collection instruments, 

procedure and data analysis. The results are then presented, followed by a discussion 

section, concluding with a chapter summary. 

Chapter 7 is a discussion chapter that focuses on investigating the effectiveness of the 

developed  mobile  game  prototype  (presented  in  Chapter  5)  compared  to  traditional 

online  learning  to  thwart  phishing  threats.  Furthermore,  it  discusses  the  implications 

for  the  research  work  reported  in  this  book.  Therefore,  an  evaluation  study  is 

conducted  to examine  the  effectiveness of  the  developed  mobile  game prototype 

compared to traditional online learning to thwart phishing threats. To accomplish this 

study, a website developed by Anti-Phishing Work Group (APWG) for the purpose of 

public  anti-phishing  education  initiative  was  employed  as  a  traditional  web  based 

learning  source.  This  chapter  reports  the  evaluation  study of  the  book  in  detail.  The 

research  approach  is presented,  including  the  sampling  technique,  data collection 

instruments, procedure and data analysis. The results are then presented, followed by 

implications for research, concluding with a chapter summary. 

Finally,  the  book  ends  up  with  presenting  a discussion  and  conclusion  in  Chapter  8. 

The  chapter  highlights  a  summary  of  the  research  findings  of  this  book  and  the 

contribution  to  knowledge  of  the  research  work  reported  in  this  book.  The  chapter 

also  identifies  potential  limitations  of  this  research  and  opens  up  opportunities  for 

future work that may extend the current research findings. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.7 Summary 

This introduction chapter presented a brief explanation of the research work reported 

in  this book.  A background  to  the  research  was  explained  and then  the  research  aim 

and  objectives  were  presented.  The  methodological  approach  that  undertakes  to 

achieve  the  research  aim  of  this  book  was  then  introduced.  Finally,  the  structure  of 

the book was presented. 

The  next  chapter  is  a  detailed  background  of  relevant  research.  This  provides  a 

background discussion for the aim and objectives of this research. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 

Literature Review 

2.1 Introduction 

The research reported in this book focuses on how to educate computer users against 

phishing threat with particular focus on game based learning. The research related to 

computer  users’  phishing  threats  avoidance  behaviour  and  game  based  learning  is 

reviewed in order to organise the literature into a meaningful story, which can be used 

to  identify  similarities  and  disparities  between  research  and  gap  in  the  current 

knowledge. First, computer users’ security behaviour is examined to give the reader a 

background  of  importance  of  the  research  work  reported  in  this  book.  More  recent 

work related to cyber threats in computer use is addressed in detail. The dangerous of 

phishing threat is then stressed highlighting the current state of  security education to 

thwart  phishing  threats.  After  that,  the  importance  of  game  based  learning  in  the 

educational  context  is  discussed.  Moreover,  mobile  game  based  learning  approaches 

were  discussed  in  order  to  provide  a  better  education  for  computer  users  to  thwart 

phishing threats.  Finally,  a  summary is  given  to  highlight  the  main  points  of interest 

relating to the problem at hand. 

2.2 Computer Users’ Security Behaviour 

The computer user plays a vital role in protecting the cyberspace; however the  security 

of computers is left to the initiative of the user (Ng and Rahim, 2005). This is  mainly 

because sensitive trust decisions are made during their online activities; such  as online 

banking  transactions.  The  pervasiveness  of  Internet  technology  provides  media 

enabling them to engage with online activities such as online shopping, banking a n d  

e n t e r t a i n i n g  m uch  e a s i l y.   Unfortunately, m o s t  c o m p u t e r  u s e r s  a r e  

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unaware  of  this  technique  and  will  open  a  back  door  for  hackers.  This  is  one  of  the 

main  reasons  to  increase  a  possibility  of  hacking  and  other  security  breaches. 

Therefore,  it  is  worth  looking  into  human  aspects  of  security  within  their  regular 

computer use. 

Protection Motivation Theory (PMT) describes that motivation to protect oneself from 

threats is related to the individual’s cognitive beliefs that one is personally vulnerable 

to  the threat  (Tu  and  Yuan, 2012).  However, there is  relatively little research  on  the 

human aspect of performing computer security  and how it can be influenced to  practice 

security (Ng, Kankanhalli and Xu, 2009). 

Why is the human aspect security so important? Of course, it is challenging knowing 

the complexity of human behaviour and lack of computer literacy in the computer use. 

This  enables  researchers  and  security  practitioners  to  reveal  possible  ways  of 

protecting them from malicious IT threats. Personal computers are a popular target by 

intruders  (Doswell,  2008;  Rogers,  2006),  because  they  are  interested  in  what  users’ 

store  in  their  computers.  For  example,  confidential  personal  information  such  as 

usernames,  passwords  and  bank  account  details.  On  the  other  hand  it  can  argue  that 

individual computer users can be easily fooled due to the lack of security awareness in 

their  computer  use.  Therefore,  understanding  the  user’s  security  behaviour  in  the 

context of computer use is important to protect them from malicious IT attacks. 

Furthermore, it is not just only money-related information that they are after, they also 

would be interested in the computer user’s resources such as hard disk space, Internet 

connection and fast processors. They might use these resources of the computer user 

to  attack  someone  else  on  the  Internet.  For  example,  hackers  can  access  into 

someone’s laptop illegally to compromise his office computers. The worst situation is 

this kind of attack cannot be traced in most of the cases. 

Why  do  hackers  pay  attention  for  personal  computer  users  specifically?  Personal 

computer  environment  is  typically  insecure  and  also  easy  to  break  into  individual 

computer  systems  compared 

to  office  environment  (Rogers,  2006).  This 

is 

problematic,  because  many  personal  computer  users  may  not  realise  that  they  are 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exposed  to  vulnerabilities  and  therefore  need  to  secure  their  personal  computer 

systems. 

The  complexity  of  individual  computer  systems  is  ever  increasing  due  to  the  rapid 

development  of  Information  and  Communication  Technology  (Hui,  2007).  For 

example,  this  could include  broadband  Internet  access,  audio  and  video  systems,  file 

sharing  and  network  printing  services.  However,  on  the  one  hand,  this  could  be  a 

positive  remark  to  assume  that  the  trend  to  embrace  individual  technologies 

continuing  growth.  On  the  other  hand,  combating  against  malicious  IT  threats  in  the 

computer use would be a great challenge. 

The environment of personal computer systems operates considerably different from a 

typical  organisational  environment  (Art  and  Glenn,  2005).  A  centralised  decision 

making power that exercises operational control over the aspect of computer systems 

management  by 

the  organisational  environment.  This  enables 

to  manage 

organisational  environment  occupying  sufficient  IT  infrastructure  and  strict  IT 

security  policies and procedures developed by professional security experts.  Therefore, 

employees  adhere  to  best  practices  within  the  organisational  context.  For  example, 

this includes predetermined installation of software applications such anti-  virus and 

anti-spyware,  proper  firewall  configurations,  locking  the  systems  down  to  prevent 

unauthorized software installation  and use  strong  passwords policies  and  backup 

procedures.  Furthermore,  in  the  managed  organisation  setup  may  occupy  system 

administrators to keep computers up-to-date and properly protect against  malicious IT 

threats.  This  might  be  because  organisations  want  to  typically  manage  their  IT 

infrastructure relieving the end user from his responsibility. 

However,  personal  computer  environment  does  not  typically  have  this  sort  of 

managed  set  up  with  the  advantages  of  resource  intensive  central  management 

authority (Art and Glenn, 2005).  In addition, systems maintenance  and configuration 

functions are left to the individual user. The reliance upon a system administrator is a 

less  optimal  solution  due  to  the  lack  of  education,  awareness,  training  and 

professionalism  in  the  unmanaged  personal  computer  environment.  Despite  this,  still 

social networking websites are wide spread among individual computer users, friends, 

peers and families. This unmanaged personal computer environment along with their 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
engagement of social networking websites enable to disclose a rich set of confidential 

information  to  hackers  for  them  to  succeed  with  the  attacks.  Therefore,  the  scale  of 

the  threat  may  dramatically  increase  due  to  the  pervasiveness  of  unmanaged 

individual computers connected to high-speed broadband services. 

Human aspect of security in the computer use could be concerned as the most exciting 

and  challenging area  in  Information Security because  general  users  are not  equipped 

with a certain degree of computer literacy (Liang and Xue, 2009a; 2010b). However, 

in  many  occasions,  teenagers  are  given  the  responsibilities  to  look  after  home 

computer systems as concerned their better exposure to latest technology (Hui, 2007). 

The  worst  situation  could  be  most  teenagers  are  interested  to  contribute  as  full-time 

unpaid  workers  at  home  providing 

technical  support,  administration  and 

troubleshooting services. Perhaps this can be a false assumption as long as concern is 

with their computer security knowledge. 

It is sometimes much easier and less risky to manipulate humans who have access to 

sensitive  information  rather  than  try  and  break  into  systems  straight  away  (Pike, 

2011).  For  example,  spear  phishing  attack,  which  is  an  e-mail  spoofing  fraud, 

attempting to target a specific user or an organisation. 

Unfortunately  most  computer  users  have  a  lack  of  security  awareness  due  to  the 

deficiency of education, professionalism and training (Hui, 2007). Security  awareness, 

attitude  towards  trust  and  privacy  protection  depend  on  cultural  background  and 

society  norms  (Hui,  2007).  Hofstede  describes  a  number  of  cultural  values  indices 

to  measure  cultural  differences  between  societies  (Hofstede,  1991;  Hofstede,  2003). 

As  Hofstede  defines  Collectivism,  represents  a  preference  for  a 

tightly-knit 

framework  in  the  society  in  which  individuals  can  expect  their  relatives,  peers  or 

members  of  a  particular  in-group  to  look  after  them  in  exchange  for  unquestioning 

loyalty.  Therefore,  the  culture  may  play  a  significant  role  in  shaping  peoples’ 

attitudes 

towards  privacy 

(Kumaraguru  and  Cranor,  2005).  For  example, 

collectivism in some societies has created a better trust attitude among each other and 

therefore  they  may  not  hesitate  to  share  online  identities  such  as  usernames, 

passwords  and  credit  or  debit  card  details  among  peers  and  family.  Similarly,  they 

may not  attempt  to  have  a proper  authentication  mechanism to  access  their  wireless 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
network  or  share  home  wireless  networks  authentication  such  as  usernames  and 

passwords  among  their  neighbours.  This  poor  security  behaviour  in  computer  use 

exposes computer users to vulnerable malicious IT attacks or security breaches. 

Computer  users  should  realise  that  they  are  responsible  for  their  own  personal 

computer’s  security  as  the  same  way  that  they  are  responsible  for  having  insurance 

when  they  buy  a  house  or  vehicle.  However,  knowledge  about  the  human  aspect  of 

performing computer security is yet far from complete (Anderson and Agarwal, 2006; 

Aytes and Terry, 2004; Liang and Xue, 2009; Ng and Rahim, 2005; Susan, Catherine 

and  Ritu,  2006;  Woon,  Tan  and  Low,  2005;  Workman,  Bommer  and  Straub,  2008; 

Purkait,  2012).  The  purpose  of  the  research  reported  in  this  book  is  to  investigate 

how  one  can  educate  computer  users  to  combat  phishing  threats.  Therefore,  the 

introduced game design framework to educate computer users against phishing  attacks 

is  coming  from  an  IS  perspective.  The  study  attempted  to  empirically  investigate 

what key  elements that should be incorporated into the game design  framework  for 

computer  users  to  avoid  phishing  attacks  through motivation.  The  elements  of  a 

theoretical  model  derived  from  Technology Threat  Avoidance  Theory  (TTAT) were 

used to address in the game design framework (Liang and Xue, 2010). 

The model  investigates  how individuals  avoid  malicious  IT  threats  by using  a  given 

safeguarding  measure.  The  safeguarding measure  does  not  necessarily have  to  be  an 

IT source such as anti-phishing tools; rather it could be behaviour such as game based 

anti-phishing  education  (Liang  and  Xue,  2010).  Liang  and  Xue  (2010)  revealed  that 

computer users’  IT threat avoidance behaviour is predicted by avoidance motivation, 

which,  in  turn,  is  determined  by perceived  threat,  safeguard  effectiveness,  safeguard 

cost and self-efficacy. Furthermore, they stressed that computer users develop a threat 

perception when they believe that the malicious IT is likely to attack them (perceived 

susceptibility)  and  the  negative  consequences will  be  severe  if  they  are attacked 

(perceived  severity).  When  threatened,  computer  users  are  more  motivated  to  avoid 

the  threat  if  they  believe  that  the  safeguarding  measure  is  effective  (safeguard 

effectiveness), inexpensive (safeguard cost) and they have confidence in using it (self- 

efficacy).  Moreover,  they  found  that  perceived  threat  and  safeguard  effectiveness 

have a negative interaction effect on avoidance motivation. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Liang  and  Xue  (2010)  developed  the  measurements  based  on  their  theoretical 

meaning and relevant literature. Perceived threat was measured by a number of items 

created on the basis of its substantive meaning (Rosenstock, 1974). The items  assessed 

participants’  perception  of  the  potential  harms,  peril  or  danger  that  a  malicious  IT 

threat  (in  this  case  spyware)  imposes.  They  developed  the  scales  for  perceived 

susceptibility  based  on  the  research  related  to  health  behaviour  (Saleeby,  2000); 

which assess the likelihood and possibility of a malicious IT threat occurrence. 

TTAT  forms  that  computer  users’  IT-related  well-being  includes  two  dimensions: 

information  privacy  and  computer  performance  where  a  malicious  IT  attack  could 

damage both dimensions (Liang and Xue, 2009). Therefore,  computer users’ severity 

perceptions should relate to the two dimensions. To develop a list of items to measure 

perceived  severity,  they  referred  to  the  privacy  literature  in  IS  (Smith,  et  al.,  1996) 

and  practitioner journals  that  point  out  the  negative impacts  of  a malicious  IT  threat 

(Schultz,  2003;  Shaw,  2003;  Sipior,  et  al.,  2005;  Stafford  and  Urbaczewski,  2004). 

The items measured based on computer users’ concerns about both the loss of  personal 

information and degraded computer performance related to processing speed,  Internet 

connection and software applications. 

Liang and Xue (2010) developed the items of safeguard effectiveness based on  relevant 

health behaviour research (Champion and Scott, 1997; Saleeby, 2000). They  used the 

items for safeguard cost from Milne, et al. (2002) and Saleeby (2000). They  assessed 

self-efficacy  with  the  items  developed  by  Compeau  and  Higgins  (1995),  making 

minor adjustments to adapt it to the malicious IT threat context (in this case spyware 

context).  The  items  developed  to  measure  avoidance  motivation  were  based  on 

behavioural  intention  measures  from  technology  adoption  research  (Davis,  1989; 

Davis,  et  al.,  1983),  with  a  focus  on  malicious  IT  threat  avoidance  rather  than  IT 

adoption. Finally, Liang and Xue (2010) measured IT threat avoidance behaviour with 

two self-developed items. 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2.3 Cyber Security Threats 

Cyber  security  threats  are  critical  issues  continuously  faced  by  people  in  their 

computer  use  (Bishop,  2003).  This  is  due  to  more  and  more  individual  users 

experiencing  the  immense  benefit  of  Internet  technology.  However,  Internet 

technology  brings  new  and  dangerous  malicious  IT  threats  to  the  society  regularly 

such as viruses, malicious software (malware), unsolicited e-mails (spam), monitoring 

software (spyware), the art of human hacking (social engineering) and online identity 

theft (phishing).  Attackers find easy ways to break into  individual computer systems 

due to the lack of security countermeasures. For example, most of the time, individual 

users’  Internet  connection  is  always  turned  on  when  using  high-speed  broadband 

connection.  They  may  not  have  secure  authentication  techniques  such  as  strong 

usernames  and  password.  Therefore,  attackers  can  easily  find  a  way  and  attack  this 

kind of unmanaged computer system. 

How do hackers break into individuals computer systems? (Rogers, 2006) There is no 

particular  standard  way  of  breaking  into  a  system.  In  some  cases,  they  send  emails 

with  attached  viruses.  Opening  the  attachment  happens  to  activate  the  virus.  Then 

hackers  may  use  this  as  an  entry  point  to  break  into  the  computer  system.  Once 

hackers are compromised the computer system, then they can easily accomplish their 

tasks  by  installing  new  malicious  programs.  For  example,  hackers  can  collect  the 

information about users without their knowledge by installing spyware. The presence 

of spyware  is  usually hidden  from  the user  and  can  be difficult  to  detect.  Therefore, 

the art of manipulating human into performing actions (Social engineering) causes to 

succeed cyber-attacks. 

Social engineering is one of the main strategies that attackers use in the first place. It 

is  a  method  (Allen,  1993;  Hiner,  2002;  Pike,  2011;  Timko,  2008)  that  gains 

information  from  people  without  directly  asking.  Social  engineering  is  a  constant 

cyber threat as people give away too much information in social media (Allen, 1993; 

Hiner,  2002;  Timko,  2008).  This  could  be  through  Internet  enable  services  such  as 

Facebook, Twitter, Hi5,  Orkut, Skype  and  even  more professional social networking 

website like LinkedIn. Security practitioners argue that this happens due to the lack of 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
security  awareness,  professionalism  and  training,  the  poor  computer  user  opens  the 

back  door  for  hackers  using  social  networking  websites  (Allen,  1993;  Hiner,  2002; 

Pike, 2011). 

In  addition,  hackers  may  attempt  to  find  out  the  user’s  IT  security  measures  in  a 

preparation for hacking attacks. In this case, victims could be contacted and asked to 

complete  a  telephone  or  email  survey,  which  is  most  of  about  general  IT.  But  there 

would be a small section at the end asking what firewall, anti-virus products and other 

security tools in individual uses. To motivate participants who engaged in the survey, 

there  may  be  a  price  draw  such  as  an  Apple  iPad  if  they  complete  the  survey 

successfully.  Therefore,  social  engineering is  hard  to  stop,  yet  a  fancy tool  in  which 

hackers urge innocent people to give away sensitive information. 

Virus  programs  are  another  severe  threat  faced  by  computer  users  (Foreman,  2004). 

Viruses are usually a set of programs, which can disturb the normal behaviour of the 

computer system.  For example,  once viruses  are  on  the computer  system,  they often 

occupy  whole  hard  disk  by  replicating  files  and  ultimately  exploit  it.  Therefore, 

computer users must be careful when installing third party software applications from 

unknown vendors. This would be the same way as someone ringing the doorbell and 

wanted to come into the house to sell something. At this stage, the house owner needs 

to make a decision whether or not to let him in. The problem is people who visit home 

to sell phony products or services. Once inside, they may try to steal valuable items or 

try  to  harm  in  an  armed  robbery.  Therefore,  it  is  important  to  watch  them  carefully 

while  they  were  in  the  house.  Similarly,  viruses  can  also  infect  personal  computer 

systems  in  many  ways  such  as  through  flash  drives,  floppy  disks,  CD-ROMs, 

websites,  emails  and  downloaded  files  (Rogers,  2006).  Therefore,  it  is  advisable  to 

scan  for  viruses  before  each  time  use  them.  For  example,  when  receiving  an  email 

with  an  attachment  or  inserting  a  flash  drive  to  the  computer  system,  need  to  scan 

them for  viruses before using  it.  The  problem is  how  many  computer  users  are 

practicing this? 

What can one do if a house appliance broke? The response would be try to repair or 

by  calling  a  repairperson  get  the  work  done,  or  replace  it  with  new  one.  Software 

programs work much the same way. For example, what happens when the operating 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system  itself  malfunctioned  due  to  a  cyber-attack?  To  restoring  the  function  that  it 

provides  is  important.  Therefore,  the  most  appropriate  solution  would  be  installing 

patches that fix the bugs provided by a trusted vendor before intruders have a chance 

to exploit by the malicious attack. For example, the Microsoft provides patches for all 

windows  operating  systems  on  their  website  (Microsoft,  2012).  The  BBC  reported 

that Microsoft  has recommended for all their customers to install patches as soon  as 

possible  or  update  to  the  latest  version  of  the  web  browser  for  “improved  security” 

after  they  found  out  Internet  Explorer  is  the  weakest  link  in a  sophisticated  and 

targeted cyber-attack on Google in January, 2010 (BBC News, 2010). However, it is 

important  to  consider  how  many  computer  users  did  realise  the  worth  of  installing 

patches in order to protect their web browser. 

We have heard stories about receiving a letter or parcel through postal services that in 

some  way  caused  harm.  For  example,  Anthrax-laden  letters  caused  the  death  of  5 

people  while  infecting  17  others  seriously  in  2001  (Centre  for  Counter  Proliferation 

Research,  2002).  In  the  same  way  computer  users  may  receive  lots  of  emails  each 

day,  most  of  them  which  are  unsolicited.  Those  unsolicited  emails  can  use  social 

engineering techniques to lure people by entering the contest or the prize that you may 

have won. The attacker may attempt to encourage opening and  reading the email by 

the receiver. There is not much harmful in only opening and reading those emails, but 

on  clicking  links  and  downloading  attachments  in  emails  is  extremely  dangerous. 

Emails  attached  to viruses  and  worms  are  very common  (Rogers, 2006),  which  may 

cause much harm for the computer system. For example, once an email-born virus is 

opened, it may spread to all the contacts in the email address book. This may even be 

more  harmful  as  the  attack  spread  among  the  people.  Therefore,  the  computer  user 

should create awareness of avoiding this kind of cyber threats. 

The  job  of  a  security  guard  is  to  assess  everybody  who  wants  to  enter  or  leave  the 

premises.  The  guard  decides  if  he  or  she  should  continue  to  enter  or  be  stopped.  In 

other words, the guard keeps unwanted people out and only permits authorised people 

to enter to the premises by checking their identities. Firewall also acts similar to same 

way  as  the  security  guard.  It  observes  the  traffic  when  sending  or  receiving  data 

packets  from  another  computer  via  the  Internet  (Rogers,  2006).  Finally,  it  decides 

whether or not to send the packet to the receiver. If the data packet is suspicious, then 

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
he may not send to the receiver. Therefore, proper configuration of a firewall is very 

important  in  individual  computer  use.  Otherwise,  there  may  be  a  threat  of  receiving 

suspicious data packets, which can cause harm to personal computer system. Clearly, 

users  should  be  aware  of  best  security  practices  to  protect  themselves  from  cyber 

security threats in their computer use (Anderson  and Agarwal, 2006; Ng and Rahim, 

2005; Susan, Catherine and Ritu, 2006). 

Every  house  has  doors,  windows  and  sometimes  keys  to  lock  and  protect 

householders  from  strangers.  People  should  be  discouraged  of  sharing  the  key  with 

strangers, sometimes even close friends or neighbours. Using passwords for emails or 

social networking accounts work much the same way. Therefore, it is worth noticing 

to  use  strong  passwords  in  individual  computer  use.  Why  should  use  strong 

passwords? This is one of the major sources of leaking users’ information to hackers. 

For example, computer users can attempt to proceed with online transactions in their 

day-to-day  life.  Before  proceeding  with  the  online  transaction  they  need  to  register 

with the website providing personal details such as username, password, date of birth 

and  address. The  hacker  can  attack  by  trying  every  possible  combination of  the 

password (searching likely possibilities). If the password is weak, the attack could be 

successful.  This  is  a  trial-and-error  process  where  the  hacker  tries  until  the  right 

password is found. This type of attack is well known amongst computer users and so 

called  dictionary  attack  (Rogers,  2006).  The  attack  method  would  be  effective 

although it takes a long time to success. 

Among  the  other  malicious  IT  threats  that  exist  in  the  cyberspace  such  as  viruses, 

malware, spam and spyware, online identity theft which is well known as phishing is 

particularly  dangerous  to  computer users  (Arachchilage  and  Cole,  2011).  This is 

because phishing attacks are easy to success and hard to stop. 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2.4 Phishing Threats 

“Sometimes  a  ‘friendly’  email  message  tempts  recipients  to  reveal  more  online  than 

they  otherwise  would,  playing  right  into  the  sender’s  hand”  (Jagatic,  et  al.,  2007). 

Phishing is one of the rapidly growing online crimes, in which, the attacker attempts 

to  fraudulently  gain  sensitive  information  from  the  victim  by  impersonating  a 

trustworthy entity (Anderson, 2001; Iacovos and Sasse, 2012; Purkait, 2012). Victims 

are  lured  by  an  email  asking  to  log  onto  a  website  that  appears  legitimate,  but  it’s 

actually created  to  steal  their  confidential  information  such  as usernames,  passwords 

and  banking  details.  Though  phishing  websites  are  shut  down  once  identified,  new 

ones  spring  up  daily.  However,  it  is  often  difficult  to  shutdown  phishing  websites 

quickly  due  to  cross-border  jurisdictional  problems  (Kumaraguru,  et  al.,  2010).  As 

reported  in  Anti-Phishing  Work  Group  (APWG)  phishing  websites  stay  online 

average 4-5 days (APWG, 2006; Kumaraguru, et al., 2010). 

Online  crimes  like  phishing  attacks  are  easy  to  do,  but  hard  to  stop,  because  these 

attacks  involve  social  and  psychological  techniques  along  with  technical  tools.  For 

example,  the  attacker  can  send  an  email  insisting  the  victim  logs  on  to  his  bank 

website for identity verification. Actually, the bank website is a fake site which has a 

look  and  feel  of  the  legitimate  website.  Hackers  may  use  their  technical  skills  to 

develop fake websites whilst using social engineering techniques attempting to reveal 

victims  more  online.  Phishing  is  a  type  of  semantic  attack,  which  synbookes  social 

engineering  techniques  along  with  technical  skills  to  make  the  attack  successful 

(Downs,  Holbrook  and  Cranor,  2007).  Social  engineering  attacks  are  increasingly 

being used to bypass robust secure systems due to the weakness of human tendency to 

trust (Kumaraguru and Cranor, 2009). 

Phishing threat has been problematic for online shoppers in the past 15 years (Iacovos 

and Sasse, 2012). The probability of an online consumer coming through  a phishing 

website is considerably high due to the growth of online transactions. The UK police 

revealed  in  a  recent  investigation,  seven  out  of  top  10  Google  search  results  for  a 

popular  brand  of  boots  were  advertised  in  fraudulent  websites  which  have  the  same 

look  and  feel  of  legitimate  websites  (Iacovos  and  Sasse,  2012).  Furthermore,  it  has 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been  reported  that  one  in  12  online  customers  of  buying  event  tickets  have  been 

caught by fake ticket websites, with the average loss of each victim being £80. 

Stajano  and  Wilson  (2011)  have  described  the  ‘need  and  greed  principle’,  which 

attackers  exploit  successfully.  Once  the  attacker  knows  what  users  want,  they  can 

easily manipulate. In fact, most online shoppers are behind good deals. So they tempt 

to use web search engines to look for  what they want. Once they are presented very 

tempting  offers  with  links  to  websites,  they  do  not  give  up  the  opportunity  to  save 

money that they do not have to spend. This grand opportunity is taken by hackers to 

commit online fraud  activities. Perhaps, online shoppers may be too  late  in realising 

what  has  actually  happened.  As  a  consequence,  they  may  lose  all  their  money  on 

credit or debit cards. 

Over the last decade phishing attacks have increased dramatically in the World Wide 

Web  (Purkait,  2012;  Arachchilage  and  Love,  2013).  This  is  because  phishing  has 

become  the  most  common  channel  for  thieves  to  steal  personal  information  to  aid 

them  in  identity  theft  (Mercuri,  2006;  Brody,  et  al.,  2007;  Anderson,  et  al.,  2008; 

Eisenstein,  2008).  Therefore,  phishers  are  now  aiming  computer  users  and 

organisations  all  over  the  world  (Sullins,  2006).  Previous  studies  have  shown  a 

steady  increase  in  phishing  activities  as  well  as  the  related  cost.  Phishing  activity 

trend  report  published  by  APWG  (2013)  in  April  2013  reported  76,123  unique 

phishing sites detected from October 2012 through December  2012 as shown in Table 

2.1. Furthermore, the report emphasised that 142,862 unique  phishing  e-mail  reports 

(campaigns) received by APWG from its consumers  in the  same  period.  It  is  worth 

to  notice  that usually  56.04  percent  of  phishing  attacks  contain some form of target 

name  in  URL.  Therefore,  the  end  user  phishing  URL  awareness need should be 

considered to combat phishing threats. 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Table  2.1:  The  APWG  Phishing  Activity  Trends  Report,  4th  Quarter  2012 

(APWG, 2013) 

It  has  been  seen  that  phishing  attacks  against  online  game  players  have  a  massive 

increase (Figure 2.1 and 2.2). This increase is from 2.7 percent of all phishing attacks 

in  Q3  (3rd  Quarter  2012)  to  14.7  percent  in  Q4  (4th Quarter  2012).  The  financial 

service industry continued to be the most-targeted sector in the fourth quarter of 2012 

while  payment  services  being  close  behind.  Furthermore,  as  stated  in  the  phishing 

activity trend reports, the most targeted victims for the attacks are personal computer 

users  (APWG,  2013).  This  is  mainly  because  most  online  gamers  are  personal 

computer users. 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  2.1:  Phishing  attacks:  most  targeted  industry  sectors,  3rd  Quarter  2012 

(APWG, 2013) 

Figure  2.2:  Phishing  attacks:  most  targeted  industry  sectors,  4th  Quarter  2012 

(APWG, 2013) 

PhishTank,  the  online  website  which  collects  information  on  web  sites  engaged  in 

phishing activities received 25,021 valid submissions of phishing websites only in the 

month  of  January  2013  (PhishTank,  2013).  Furthermore,  the  website  stated  860  (3 

percent    of    valid    phishes    that    month)    phishes    used    an    IP    address    (i.e. 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://12.34.56.78)  and  24,169  (or  97  percent)  used  a  domain  name  (i.e. 

http://example.com) in that month. Therefore, the criminals use a variety of tactics to 

enticing  people  into  visiting  fake  websites  and  persuading  them  to  disclose  their 

personal information. 

Disclosing customer confidential information such as personal information or banking 

details  to  fake  websites,  can  lead  not  only  to  immediate  financial  losses  but  also  to 

become  a  victim  of  identity  theft  or  its  consequences  (Brody,  Mulig  and  Kimball, 

2007; Iacovos and Sasse, 2012; Kumaraguru, et al., 2007). For example, this can lead 

to  damage  a  person’s  credit  rating  or  being  linked  to  illegal  or  criminal  activities. 

Furthermore,  this  sort  of  situation  could  lead  to an  overall  loss  of trustworthiness  of 

online  consumers  shopping  and  discourage  them  from  engaging  online  financial 

transactions.  Therefore,  phishing  is  considered  as  a  dangerous  threat  that  exists  in 

cyberspace.  However,  academic  researchers  and  security  practitioners  are  constantly 

in  a  battle  against  phishing  threats  (Brody,  Mulig  and  Kimball,  2007;  Dahamija, 

Tygar  and  Hearst,  2006;  Downs,  Holbrook  and  Cranor,  2007;  Garera,  et  al.,  2007; 

Iacovos  and  Sasse,  2012;  Kumaraguru,  et  al.,  2007a;  2007b;  Robila  and  Ragucci, 

2006; Sheng, et al., 2007; Wu, Miller and Garfinkel, 2006). 

Previous research has reported on phishing falls into three categories: research related 

to  understand  why  people  fall for  phishing  attacks, what tools to protect  people 

against  phishing  attacks  and  methods  for  educating  people  not  to  fall  for  phishing 

attacks  (Arachchilage  and  Cole,  2011;  Iacovos  and  Sasse,  2012;  Kumaraguru,  et  al., 

2007a; 2008b; Sheng, et al., 2007). Furthermore, it is important to dig deeper into the 

above categories in order to provide a better solution for phishing threats. 

2.4.1 Why Do People Fall for Phishing Attacks? 

Dhamija, Tygar and Hearst (2006) conducted a laboratory-based experiment showing 

twenty-two  participants  to  twenty  websites,  asking  them  to  determine  which  ones 

were legitimate. They found out that participants made mistakes on the test 40 percent 

of  the  time.  Furthermore,  they noted  that  23  percent  of  their  participants  ignored  all 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cues in the web browser address bar and status bar as well as all security indicators. A 

considerable  amount  of  literature  work  has  been  reported  that  this  is  one  of  major 

reasons  why  people  fall  for  phishing  attacks  (Downs,  Holbrook  and  Cranor,  2007; 

Kumaraguru,  et  al.,  2007a;  2007b;  Sheng,  et  al.,  2007;  Wu,  Miller  and  Garfinkel, 

2006). 

It is important to note that users’ perception of such phishing threats  may encourage 

them  to  avoid  potential  vulnerabilities.  Downs,  Holbrook  and  Cranor  (2006)  have 

conducted  a  role  playing  study aimed  at  understanding  why people  fall  for  phishing 

emails  and  what  cues  they  look  for  to  avoid  such  attacks.  Their  research  finding 

revealed  two  key things.  First,  even  those people  that  are  aware of phishing attacks, 

they do not think their potential vulnerabilities or strategies to trace phishing attacks. 

Second, while people can secure themselves from known risks, they have difficulties 

of  generalising  their  known  to  unfamiliar  risks.  Wu,  Miller  and  Garfinkel  (2006) 

stated that many users do not understand phishing attacks or realise how sophisticated 

such  attacks  can  be.  A  possible  reason  for this  would  be  the  user’s lack  of  phishing 

threat perception. 

Wu,  Miller  and  Garfinkel  (2006)  evaluated  three  simulated  anti-phishing  toolbars  to 

determine  how  they  were  effective  at  protecting  users  from  visiting  fraudulent 

websites.  They  revealed  that  many  participants  ignored  passive  toolbar  security 

indicators and instead used the site’s content to decide whether or not it is a fraudulent 

website. In some cases participants did not notice warning signals and in other cases 

they assumed  warnings were invalid  though  they noticed  them. Perhaps the  possible 

reason  would  be  users  struggle  to  interact  with  toolbars  due  to  a  lack  of  usability. 

Therefore, it is advisable to conduct usability studies to determine how users interact 

with security toolbars. 

In  a  follow-up  study,  the  authors  tested  anti-phishing  toolbars  to  generate  pop-up 

warning messages that blocked access to fraudulent web sites until overridden by the 

user.  These  pop-up  warning  messages  reduced  the  rate  at  which  users  fell  for 

fraudulent  websites.  However,  it  did  not  completely  eliminate  all  users  from  falling 

for phishing websites. The authors  concluded in their research that Internet users are 

not  very  good  at  interpreting security warnings  and  familiar with  common  phishing 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
attacks  techniques  and  strategies.  Furthermore,  they  recommended  user  education  to 

phishing prevention and online safety practices. 

Reuven Harrison, co-founder of Tufin Technologies which commissioned the survey, 

told the BBC  that  young people need better education in order to protect themselves 

from  hacking  and  other  security  breaches  (BBC  News,  2010).  Sheng,  et  al.  (2010) 

have  conducted  a  role-play  survey  instrument  administered  to  1001  online  survey 

respondents  to  study  who  falls  for  phish.  The  study  revealed  that  women  are  more 

susceptible than men to phishing; further, participants between the ages of 18 and 25 

are  more  susceptible  to  phishing  than  other  age  groups.  Participants  were  selected 

from  a  diverse  group  of  staff  and  students,  including  people  who  were  concerned 

about computer security. 

Kumaraguru, et al. (2009) conducted a real world evaluation of anti-phishing training 

with  515  participants,  which  extended  their  previous  work  “PhishGuru”.  In  this  real 

world  study,  they  focused  on  long-term  anti-phishing  knowledge  retention  and  the 

reaction  to  two  received  training  emails.  It  has  been  reported  that  17.5  percent  of 

participants  still  entered  their  personal  details  into  simulated  phishing  websites  after 

28 days from the first email message. This was a considerable improvement from the 

40.1 percent measured in a control group before the study. However, the study  revealed 

that  one  in  five  users  is  vulnerable  for  phishing  attacks.  They  also  found  that 

participants  between  the  age  group  of  18  to  25  years  were  consistently  more 

vulnerable to phishing attacks than older participants. 

2.4.2 Automated Software Tools for Phishing Detection 

Anti-phishing  tools  are  now  provided  by  Internet  service  providers  (Sheng,  et  al., 

2007;  Iacovos  and  Sasse,  2012;  Sanchez  and  Duan,  2012),  for instance,  available  as 

web  browser  toolbars.  There  are  currently  various  anti-phishing  tools  available  for 

free  downloading  (Zhang,  et  al.,  2007).  CallingID  Toolbar,  Cloudmark  Anti-Fraud 

Toolbar,  EarthLink  Toolbar,  Firefox  2,  eBay  Toolbar  and  Netcraft  Anti-Phishing 

Toolbar are a few examples. However, these tools are not entirely reliable in detecting 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phishing  attacks  (Aggarwaly,  Rajadesingan  and  Kumaraguru,  2012;  Sanchez  and 

Duan, 2012; Sheng, et al., 2007; Wu, Miller and Garfinkel, 2006). Even the best anti- 

phishing tools missed over 20 percent of phishing websites (Zhang, et al., 2007). 

Zhang,  et al. (2007) have developed an automated test bed for testing available  anti- 

phishing  tools.  Their  automated  anti-phishing  test  bed  was  implemented  in  C#  and 

was  comprised  of  2000  lines  of  code.  Figure  2.1  shows  the  high-level  system 

architecture used by Zhang, et al. (2007). 

Figure  2.3:  High-level  system  architecture  for  the  anti-phishing  evaluation  test 

bed (Zhang, et al., 2007) 

The  task  manager  gets  an  updated  list  of  Unified  Resource  Locators  (URLs)  from  a 

phishing feed and then sends those URLs to a set of workers. Each worker retrieves a 

web page, checks whether the web page was labelled as a phishing scam or not, and 

sends  the  result  back  to  the  task  manager  to  aggregate  all  of  the  results.  The  task 

manager  and  workers  are  grouped  together  because  they  can  be  run  on  the  same 

machine or on separate machines. The experiment was conducted through automating 

this  process  by  extracting  URLs  from  a  feed  of  validated  phishing  URLs  and/or  by 

using  own  heuristics  to  select  phishing  URLs  from  a  feed  of  invalidated  phishing 

email messages. 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
They  used  200  verified  phishing  URLs  and  516  legitimate  URLs  to  test  the 

effectiveness of ten popular anti-phishing tools. Their findings revealed that only one 

tool, namely ‘SpoofGuard’, was able to consistently identify more than 90 percent of 

phishing  URLs  correctly.  Nevertheless,  it  also  incorrectly  identified  42  percent  of 

legitimate URLs as phish. Other tools varied considerably depending on the source of 

phishing URLs as shown in Table 2.2 as provided by Zhang, et al. (2007). Wrongly 

identified  positive  (False  positives)  results  are  summarised  in  Table  2.3  as  provided 

by Zhang, et  al. (2007).  Of these  remaining tools, only one correctly identified over 

60 percent of phishing URLs. However, it is interesting to note that attackers and tool 

developers are continuously on an arms race. 

Table  2.2:  Number  of  phishing  sites  correctly  identified  by  anti-phishing  tools. 

Note, SpoofGuard’s catch rate is estimated after time 0 (Zhang, et al., 2007) 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table  2.3  Number  of legitimate  sites  (out  of  516  tested)  falsely  identified  as 

phishing sites by anti-phishing tools (Zhang, et al., 2007) 

Dhamija, Tygar and Hearst (2006) showed that anti-phishing indicators developed in 

automated  software  tools  are  ineffective  due  to  a  significant  percentage  of  users’ 

ignorance  towards  passive  indicators  (Iacovos  and  Sasse,  2012).  Even  though  users 

noticed  indicators,  they  may  not  understand  what  they  signify.  In  addition, 

inconsistent  placing on  heterogeneous  web  browsers  makes  the  task  of  identifying  a 

phishing site difficult. 

Schechter (2007) reported that 53 percent of their research study participants still tried 

to access a web site after their tasks were interrupted by a security-warning message. 

They  also  revealed  in  the  same  study  that  deletion  of  Hyper  Text  Transfer  Protocol 

Security  (HTTPS)  did  not  make  any  effect  on  participants  disclosing  their  personal 

details  on  a  site.  Furthermore,  97  percent  of participants  were tempted to  enter their 

personal details even after website authentication images were removed. 

Abbasi,  Zahediand  Chen  (2012)  conducted  an  experiment  involving  over  400 

participants to evaluate the impact of anti-phishing tools’ accuracy on users’ ability to 

avoid  phishing  attacks.  Each  participant  was  given  a  high  accuracy  (90  percent)  or 

low accuracy (60 percent) tool and asked to make a decision on several legitimate and 

phishing websites. Their experimental results revealed that participants using the high 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accuracy anti-phishing tool performed much better than those using the less accuracy 

tool in terms of avoiding phishing attacks. However, even users of the high accuracy 

tool often ignored its correct recommendations. Therefore,  the authors suggested that 

while the accuracy of anti-phishing tools is a critical factor, reducing the success rates 

of  phishing  attacks  require  other  considerations  such  as  enhancing  the  user’s 

awareness of phishing. 

For  the  mentioned  reasons,  the  current  study  concludes  effective  anti-phishing 

education must complement any technical measures to enhance users’ ability to detect 

phishing attacks (Kumaraguru, et al., 2007a, 2007b; 2008; Robila and Ragucci, 2006). 

2.4.3 Anti-Phishing Education 

It has been shown that both academic institutions and government organisations have 

made a significant effort to provide end user education to enable public understanding 

of security (Iacovos and Sasse, 2012; Arachchilage, Tarhini, Love, 2015; Arachchilage, 

2015). The Anti-Phishing Work Group (APWG) is a  non-profit  organisation  working 

to  provide  anti-phishing  education  to  enhance  the  public  understanding  of  security. 

They  cover  various  areas:  1)  What  is  a  phishing  threat?  2)  How  can  it  be  severe? 

3)  What  is  the  usefulness  of  having  a  safeguarding  measure?  4)  Where  to  report  a 

suspected  phishing  email  or  website?  and  5)  Phishing  education  to  thwart  phishing 

attacks. The US Computer Emergency Readiness Team  also offers free advice on its 

website  about  common  security  breaches  for  computer  users  who  have  a  lack  of 

computer literacy. 

While  a  great deal  of  effort has  been  dedicated  to  resolving  the  phishing  threat 

problem  by  prevention  and  detection  of  phishing  emails,  URLs  and  web  sites,  little 

research  has  been  done  in  the  area  of  educating  users  to  protect  themselves  from 

phishing attacks  (Iacovos and Sasse, 2012).  Therefore, more  research  needs  to  focus 

on anti-phishing education to protect users from phishing threats. 

However,  is  anti-phishing  training  or  education  effective? Even  though  there  are 

usability experts who claim that user education and training does not work (Sheng, et 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
al.,  2007;  Evers,  2007),  other  researchers  have  revealed  that  well  designed  end-user 

education  could  be  a  recommended  approach  to  combating  phishing  attacks  (Allen, 

1993;  Hiner,  2002;  Iacovos  and  Sasse,  2012;  Kumaraguru,  et  al.,  2008;  Schechter, 

2007; Sheng, et al., 2007;Timko, 2008). In line with Herley (2009), also Iacovos and 

Sasse  (2012)  and  other  researchers  argue  that  current  security education  on  phishing 

threats offers little protection to end users, who access potentially malicious websites 

(Kumaraguru et al., 2009; Sheng, et al., 2007; Arachchilage and Love, 2014). 

Another  reason  for  ineffectiveness  of  current  security  education  for  phishing 

prevention is because security education providers assume that users are keen to avoid 

risks and thus likely to  adopt behaviours that might protect them.  Iacovos  and Sasse 

(2012)  claimed  that  security  education  should  consider  the  drivers  of  end  user 

behaviour  rather  than  warning  users  of  dangers.  Therefore,  well-designed  security 

education should develop threat perception where users are aware that such a threat is 

present  in  the  cyberspace.  It  should  also  encourage  users  to  enhance  avoidance 

behaviour through motivation to protect them from malicious IT threats. 

Kumaraguru, et al. (2007) designed and evaluated an embedded training email system 

that  teaches  people  to  protect  themselves  from  phishing  attacks  during  their  normal 

use of email. The authors conducted lab  experiments contrasting the  effectiveness of 

standard  security  notices  about  phishing  with  two  embedded  training  designs  they 

developed. They found that embedded training works better than the current practice 

of sending security notices. 

Robila  and  Ragucci  (2006)  evaluated  the  impact  of  end  user  education  in 

differentiating  phishing  emails  from  legitimate  ones.  They  provided  an  overview  of 

phishing education, targeting on context aware attacks and introduced a new strategy 

for  end  user  education  by  combining  phishing  IQ  tests  and  class  room  discussions. 

The technique involved displaying both legitimate and fraudulent emails to users and 

asking  them  to  identify  the  phishing  attempts  from  the  authentic  emails.  The  study 

concluded that users identified phishing emails correctly after having the phishing IQ 

test and classroom discussions. Users also acknowledged the usefulness of the IQ test 

and classroom discussion. Researchers at Indiana University also conducted a similar 

study of 1700 students in which they collected websites frequently visited by students 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and  either sent  them  phishing messages  or spoofed  their email  addresses  (Jagatic, et 

al., 2007). 

Sheng,  et  al.  (2007)  conducted  a  study  to  evaluate  participants’  ability  to  identify 

fraudulent websites before and after spending15 minutes engaged in one of their three 

anti-phishing  training  activities:  playing  the  game;  reading  an  anti-phishing  tutorial 

created based on the game; or reading existing online training materials. They found 

that  participants  who  played  the  game  were  better  able  to  identify  phishing  websites 

after  engaging  15  minutes  of  training  compared  to  participants  in  other  conditions. 

They reported the false-positive rate (phishing website identified as real) was reduced 

from  30  percent  to  14  percent,  and  the  false-negative  rate  (legitimate  website 

identified  as  fake)  was  reduced  from  34  percent  to  17  percent.  However,  they  also 

reported  31  percent  of  users  could  still  not  differentiate  between  good  websites  and 

bad  ones.  Iacovos  and  Sasse  (2012)  argued  that  the  probability  of  an  online  buyer 

coming  across  a  phishing  website  is  relatively  high,  because  nowadays  many  fake 

websites  appear  in  popular  web  search  engines  results  such  as  Google  and  Yahoo. 

Therefore,  teaching  people  how  to  use  search  engines  to  find  legitimate  websites  is 

yet crucial and problematic. 

Tseng, et al. (2011) also developed a game to teach users about phishing based on the 

content  of  the  website.  The  authors  proposed  the  phishing  attack  frame  hierarchy to 

describe  stereotype  features  of  phishing  attack  techniques.  The  inheritance  and 

instantiation  properties  of  the  frame  model  allowed  them  to  extend  the  original 

phishing  pages  to  increase  game  contents.  Finally,  they  developed  an  anti-phishing 

educational game  to  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  proposed  frame  hierarchy.  The 

evaluation  results  showed  that  most  of  the  lecturers  and  experts  were  satisfied  with 

this proposed system. 

To date, end user education on phishing threat has tried to encourage  users to check 

URLs,  but resulted in limited success (Iacovos  and Sasse, 2012). Kumaraguru, et  al. 

(2007) conducted a research on teaching “Johnny not to fall for phish,” which focused 

on  educating  users  about  phishing  and  helping  them  to  make  better  trust  decisions. 

They came across a number of challenges in the anti-phishing education in particular: 

users are not motivated to learn security; security is secondary task for most users; it 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is difficult to teach people how to identify threats without also increasing their  tendency 

to misjudge non-threats as threats. 

Kumaraguru, et al. (2007) also designed educational materials using learning science 

principles to teach users not to fall for phishing attacks. Their  focus was to motivate 

users to pay attention to the training materials. This is due to the fact that in most of 

the situations users ignore security educational materials. 

The  possible  phishing  attacks  can  be  identified  in  several  ways,  such  as  carefully 

looking  at  the  website  address,  so  called  Universal  Resource  Locator  (URL),  signs 

and content of the web page, the lock icons and jargons of the webpage, the context of 

the email message, and the general warning messages displayed in the website  (Downs, 

Holbrook  and  Cranor,  2007;  Wu,  Miller  and  Garfinkel,  2006).  Previous  research 

has  identified  that  existing  anti-phishing  techniques  based  on  URLs  are  not  robust 

enough for phishing detection (Garera, et al., 2007; Sheng, et al., 2007; Iacovos  and 

Sasse,  2012).  Iacovos  and  Sasse  (2012)  stated  that  two  main  approaches  have  been 

used  to  protect  users  against  phishing:  anti-phishing  indicators  and  end-user 

education.  However,  Dhamija,  Tygar  and  Hearst  (2006)  emphasised  that  the  first 

approach  is  still  ineffective  because  a  significant  percentage  of  users  ignore  passive 

indicators. They conducted a laboratory-based experiment showing 22 participants to 

20  websites  and  asking  them  to  determine  which  ones  were  legitimate.  The  results 

revealed  that  23  percent  of  the  participants  ignored  all  cues  in  the  web  browser 

address bar, and status bar as well as all security indicators.  This is due to the users’ 

lack of phishing URL awareness (Dhamija, Tygar and Hearst, 2006; Liang and Xue, 

2009; 2010). Garera, et al. (2007) emphasised that it is often possible to tell whether 

or not a particular URL belongs to a phishing website without having any knowledge 

of  the  corresponding  page  information.  In  their  study,  they  have  identified  several 

fine-grained heuristics that can be used to distinguish between a phishing URL and a 

benign  URL.  The  classification  technique  based  on  these  heuristics  achieved  an 

accuracy  of  97.3  percent  demonstrating  that  URL  analysis  alone  can  reach  a  high 

degree of accuracy in phishing detection. 

The  research  work  reported  in  Chapter  5  of  this  book  attempts  to  design  a  mobile 

game for computer users to protect themselves from phishing attacks. The objective 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of mobile game design is to teach  users how to  avoid phishing URLs. However, the 

mobile  game  design  should  create  the  awareness  of  identifying  the  features  of 

potential  phishing  URLs.  For  example,  legitimate  websites  usually  do  not  have 

numbers 

at 

the 

beginning 

of 

their 

URLs 

such 

as 

http://81.153.192.106/.www.hsbc.co.uk. 

Anandpara,  et  al.  (2007)  revealed  that  users  who  read  existing  online  training 

materials  are  overly  cautious  and  identify  many  legitimate  sites  as  fraudulent  sites. 

However, they do not learn useful techniques for identifying phishing attacks because 

many  of  the  online  training  resources  do  not  teach  specific  cues  and  strategies 

(Kumaraguru,  et  al.,  2007).  Even  most  existing  training  materials  were  not  designed 

based on learning science principles (Kumaraguru, et al., 2007). Therefore, it has been 

suggested that researchers and system developers should attempt to apply e-Learning 

science  principles  to  maximise  the  effectiveness  of  training  materials.  Learning  by 

doing, immediate feedback, contiguity principle, personalisation principles and story- 

based-agent  environment  principles  could  be  used.  Furthermore,  e-Learning  theories 

can be used to enhance the motivation of players in the game design. 

The  lack  of  motivation  is  one  of  the  main  barriers  when  educating  the  end  user  in 

phishing  detection  and  prevention  (Tseng,  et  al.,  2011).  Therefore,  the  game-based 

learning  approach  utilises  interactive  activities  and  interesting  multimedia  as  a 

suitable solution for motivating end-users for phishing education (Sheng, et al., 2007). 

2.5 Educational Games 

Educational  games  and  simulations  have  become  increasingly  acknowledged  as  an 

enormous and powerful teaching tool  that may result in an “instructional revolution” 

(Walls, 2012; Cone, et al., 2007; Foreman, 2004). The main reason is that game based 

education allows users to learn through experience and the use of virtual environment 

while leading them to approach problem solving through critical thinking.

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Educational  games  have  become  an  important  part  of  the  social  and  cultural 

environment  (Walls,  2012;  Papastergiou,  2009;  Oblinger,  2004).  Those  games  are 

particularly interesting and pervasive among children and adolescents  and are ranked 

as the most popular activity in computer use (Downes, 1999; Harris, 1999; Mumtaz, 

2001).  McFarlane,  Sparrowhawk  and  Heald  (2002)  conducted  a  study  on  7-16  year 

old students in the UK and revealed most of them were regular game players in home 

computer use. 

Zyda (2005) describes Serious Games as “a mental contest, played with a computer in 

accordance  with  specific  rules,  which  uses  entertainment  to  further  government  or 

corporate  training,  education,  health,  public  policy  and  strategic  communication 

objectives”.  Michael  and  Chen (2005) proposed the following thematic classification 

based  upon  Zyda’s  definition  of  Serious  Games;  Military  Games,  Government 

Games,  Educational  Games,  Corporate  Games,  Healthcare  Games,  Political  and 

Religious  Games.  However,  educational  games  are  quite  useful  as  an  effective 

teaching  medium  (Froschauer,  et  al.,  2010)  because  it  enables  users  to  learn  in  an 

interactive and attractive manner. 

There  is  a  considerable  amount  of  published  studies  in  the  literature  describing  the 

role  of  games  in  the  educational  context.  Bellotti,  et  al.  (2009)  designed  a  Massive 

Multiplayer  Online  Game  (MMOG)  for  high-school  called  ‘SeaGame’  to  promote 

best  practices  in  sea-related  behaviours,  such  as  sailing  or  beach  surveillance.  The 

main  focus  of  the  ‘SeaGame’  was  to  embed  the  educational  content  into  a  gaming 

context  in  a  meaningful,  homogeneous  and  compelling  whole,  where  the  player  can 

enjoy  learning while having fun. Therefore, this type of games helps people to  improve 

their best practices in behaviour. 

In  addition,  game  based  education  is  further  useful  in  motivating  players  to  change 

their behaviour. Gustafsson and Bang (2008) designed a  pervasive  mobile-based  game 

called  ‘Power  Agent’  to  educate  teenagers  and  their  families  to  reduce  energy 

consumption in their homes. They attempted to transform the home environment and 

its devices into a learning arena for hands-on experiences with electricity usage. The 

results suggested that the game concept was more efficient in engaging teenagers and 

their families to reduce their energy consumption during the game sessions. 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore,  game  based  learning  can  be  effective  not  only  for  changing  people’s 

behaviour,  but  also  for  developing  their  logical  thinking  to  solve  mathematical 

problems. Eagle (2009) designed and empirically investigated ‘Wu’s Castle’, which is 

a  2D  (2-Dimensional)  role-playing  game  where  students  can  develop  C++  code  to 

solve in-game problems. The results showed that ‘Wu’s Castle’ is more effective than 

a  traditional  programming  assignment  for  learning  how  to  solve  problems  on  arrays 

and loops. 

People  nowadays  travel  a  lot  due  to  a  mobile  and  global  life  style  and  affordable 

transportation costs. Generally travelers and tourists are interested to know about the 

culture and traditions before they arrive to the place. Reading books is often too-time 

consuming as many of them have a very busy life, juggling work, chores and family 

and  friends.  Therefore,  it  is  worth  for  them  if  the  information  is  quickly  accessible. 

‘Travel in Europe’ (Bellotti, et al., 2008) and ‘Second China Island’ (Fishwick, et al., 

2008;  Henderson,  et  al.,  2008),  are  two  projects  developed  concentrating  on  cultural 

heritage and tourism  respectively.  ‘Travel in  Europe’ (TiE) focused to implement  an 

innovative  means  to  promote  and  reveal  cultural  heritage.  It  promoted  the  user’s 

interaction within online virtual representations of European cities and encouraged the 

user to accomplish missions in a treasure hunt manner. ‘The Second China Island’ is a 

3D (3-Dimensional) space developed in the ‘Virtual World of Second Life’ in order to 

experience the content of China and its culture virtually by the user. 

The  literature  revealed  that  well-designed  games  focusing  on  education  could  be 

helpful  for  learning  even  when  used  without  assistance.  The  ‘Anti-phishing  Phil’ 

game developed by Sheng, et al. (2007) reported results confirm  that games educate 

people  about  phishing  and  other  security  attacks  in  a  more  effective  way  than  other 

educational approaches such as reading anti-phishing tutorial or reading existing  online 

training  materials.  Anido,  et  al.  (2011)  designed  a  framework,  which  was 

developed as an open source software system that supports personalised learning with 

focus  on  serious  games  and  simulations.  They  claimed  that  the  most  successful 

achievement  of  the  project  was  easy-to-use,  interoperable  and  powerful  expressive, 

educational and adaptive system that enabled teachers with no  technical expertise to 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
design,  develop  and  execute  e-Games  through  a  comprehensive  platform  and  in  a 

number of devices and environments. 

Video  games education is used  more  and  more  within  schools to  teach  children 

various  subjects  such  as  English,  Mathematics  and  Geography  (Wang,  Fsdahl  and 

Morch-Storstein,  2008;  Walls,  2012).  Previous  studies  have  reported  video  games 

education is to be effective in terms of children’s learning (Gee, 2003; Jenkins, 2002; 

Papert,  1998;  Wang,  Fsdahl  and  Morch-Storstein,  2008;  Walls,  2012).  School 

children  are  able  to practice  certain skills using  video  games  in a computer  lab 

supervised  by  a  teacher.  Previous  research  showed  that  the  use  of  dynamic  video 

games  within  the  classroom  could  be  beneficial  to  improve  children’s  academic 

achievements and motivation (Rosas, et al., 2003). Game based education is not only 

attractive  to  school  children  but  also  to  students  in  universities  (Sharples,  2000). 

Several studies have shown how video games can be used in higher education (Baker, 

Navarro and Hoek, 2003; Natvig,  Line and Djupdal, 2004; Navarro and Hoek, 2004; 

Wang,  Fsdahl and Morch-Storstein, 2008; Walls, 2012). Nevertheless, Wang,  Fsdahl 

and Morch-Storstein (2008) strongly believed that this area needs to be explored more 

extensively. 

A  number  of  educational  games  have  been  designed  and  developed  to  protect 

computer users and to assert security issues in the cyberspace (Cone, et al., 2007). For 

example,  some  educational games  teach  information  assurance  concepts,  whereas 

others  teach  pure  entertainment  with  no  basis  in  information  assurance  principles  or 

reality. However, there is little research on engagement in the virtual world that also 

combines the human aspect of security (Sheng, et al., 2007). Therefore, it is worth to 

investigate  further  on  game  based  learning  in  order  to  protect  computer  users  from 

malicious IT threats such as phishing attacks. 

In the past, educational games have received attention not only from the academic and 

research  community,  but  also  from  the  UK  government  (Oblinger,  2004).  The  BBC 

reported that the UK government has planned to introduce corporation tax relief from 

April  2013  for  the  video  games,  animation  and  high-end  television  industries  (BBC 

News,  2012).  Furthermore,  they  mentioned  that  the  government  wanted  to  promote 

the UK as the technological centre of Europe.  This is mainly because multiple 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
improvements  of  the  learning  experience  are  attributed  to  educational  games  and 

game  based  educational  learning,  as  they  have  increasing  potential  to  influence  and 

enhance students’ motivation. It is believed that games technologies have potential to 

improve the learning process in multiple ways (Torrente, et al., 2010). 

One of the most well-established facts in the educational game research is the ability 

to enhance players’ motivation towards learning as they are able to retain their  attention 

and keep  them engaged and immersed with games (Gee, 2003; Ghazvini,  Earnshaw, 

Robison  and  Excell,  2009a;  2009b;  Gunter,  Kennyand  Vick,  2008;  Malone, 1981; 

Quinn, 2005). Other interesting facts of educational games are: 

-  The provision of immersive gaming environments that can be freely explored 

by players and promote self-directed learning (Oblinger, 2004; Squire, 2003) 
-  The  immediate  feedback  process with perception  of  progress (Freitas  and 

Oliver, 2006; Ghazvini, et al., 2009a; 2009b; Gunter, Kenny and  Vick, 2008; 

Quinn, 2005) 

-  Their relation to constructivist theories and  support of learning in  augmented 

environment (Ghazvini, et al., 2009a; 2009b; Prensky, 2001) 

It  has  been  shown  that  games  are  being  extensively  spread  among  users  due  to  the 

pervasiveness  of  mobile  devices  and  technologies.  The  BBC  reported  ‘World  of 

Warcraft’s’  developers  have  already  confirmed  they  are  looking  at  bringing  the  hit 

video game to mobile devices (BBC News, 2012). Today, mobile devices can be used 

to  play  most  of  the  games  due  to  the  fact  that  the  software  scale  of  these  games  is 

becoming smaller.  This  is  an  enormous  challenge  to  academic  researchers  and  cyber 

security experts who try to find solutions to protect people from malicious IT threats. 

Researchers have strongly argued that the mobile game based education has potential 

and worth  researching for cyber security awareness (Cone,  et al., 2007;  Ghazvini, et 

al., 2009a; 2009b; Shih, Hou and Wu, 2011). 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.5.1 Mobile Game Based Learning 

The  pervasiveness  of  cellular  phones  and  related  technologies  among  the  youth  has 

made  them  an  ideal  platform  to  provide  educational  content  for  learning  informally 

anywhere  and anytime  (Molnar and  Martinez, 2011). Mobile devices have become  a 

significantly  important  part  of  people’s  lives  due  to  a  pervasive  platform  that  they 

carry out almost all the time. Unlike desktop computers, mobile phone penetration is 

significantly  higher  in  emerging  economies,  leapfrogging  landlines  and  broadband 

access (ITU ICT-Eye Free Statistics, 2012). This worldwide ubiquity has contributed 

to enhance game based education through mobile devices. A large collection of  existing 

educational  mobile  games  provides  the  evidence  for  the  increase  of  mobile  game 

based education (Molnar and Martinez, 2011; Daher, 2010). 

Mobile  game  based  learning  is  a  method  where  users  are  given  the  opportunity  to 

perform learning activities using a game or a series of games through mobile devices 

such as cellular phones and smart phones (Denk, Weber and Belfin, 2007; Ghazvini, 

et al., 2009a; 2009b; Klopfer, 2008; Kurkovsky, 2009). Those digital games based on 

mobile devices can offer fidelity of simulations and problem solving tasks, which are 

challenging,  entertaining  and interacting for  students  and  thus  enhance  their  learning 

motivation.  Therefore,  learning security awareness  concepts  using mini  games  based 

on  handheld  devices  will  become  one  of  the  key  challenges  and  future  trends  in 

mobile  game  based  education  (Cone,  et  al.,  2007;  Shih,  Hou  and  Wu,  2011). 

Although,  mobile  gaming  is  one  of  the  most  important  application  areas  in 

educational  technology,  the  literature revealed  that  relatively few  educational  mobile 

games have  been  designed  effectively  than  other  types in existence  (Hosein and 

Beharry, 2010). 

Mobile  gaming  started  with  the  ‘snake’  game  on  a  Nokia  handset  in  1997  and  has 

progressed  to  the  ‘Angry  Birds’  game  (Chasey,  2010;  Shih,  Hosein  and  Beharry, 

2010;  Hou  and  Wu,  2011).  Domestic  mobile  online  games  began  to  increase  since 

2004  due  to  the  rapid  growth  of  handheld  devices  and  related  wireless  technologies 

such as cellular phones, pagers, PDA, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, and 3G (Garner, et al., 2006; 

Zhu,  et  al.,  2009).  Furthermore,  emerging  wireless  technologies  and  open  Internet

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
standards allow communication across heterogeneous mobile devices via the network 

(Gee,  2003).  Portable  heterogeneous  devices  are  central  to  mobile  game  based 

learning,  since  they  provide  access  to  the  learning  content  in  a  game  based 

environment. 

Educational  researchers  and  software  developers  have  recognised  those  devices  and 

technologies  as  powerful  resources  to  support  game based  learning (Andrews,  et  al., 

2003;  Facer,  et  al.,  2004;  Gee,  2003;  Roschelle  and  Pea,  2002;  Wegerif,  2003).  The 

mobile  game  industry  professionals  have  analysed  that  today’s  online  game  is 

tomorrow’s  mobile  platform;  they  also  predict  a  great  potential  growth  in  domestic 

mobile  phone  games  (Zhu,  et  al.,  2009).  It  has  been  shown  that  major  mobile 

communication  operators,  network  operators,  mobile  device  manufactures  and 

software  developers  attempt  to  develop  games  for  mobile  platforms  to  increase 

income. The BBC reported Google Android shipments have increased by 886 percent 

while  Apple  showing  the  second  largest  growth  in  the  smart  phone  sector  with  61 

percent growth in the year 2010 (BBC News, 2010). It has been emphasised that the 

overall  smart  phone  sector  grew  by  64  percent  in  the  same  year.  The  same 

broadcasting corporation reported in 2012 that Apple has almost doubled its profits in 

the  first  three  months  of  the  year  and  35  million  Apple  iPhones  were  sold  in  that 

quarter,  which  was almost  double  the  level to  the  year  ago  (BBC  News,  2012). 

Therefore,  academic  researchers  and  educational  specialists  can  benefit from  this 

growth  of  devices  and  related  technologies  to  provide  better  learning  in  the 

educational context. 

Some innovators strongly argue that desktop computers will disappear from the  society 

while new handheld devices and their interfaces will  turn  into  ubiquitous,  pervasive, 

invisible  and  embedded  technologies  or  devices  in  the  souring  environment 

(Shneiderman, 1987). It is also believed that those devices will be focused on context- 

awareness,  attentive  and  perceptive,  sensing  users’  desires  and  providing  feedback 

through  ambient  displays  that  glow,  hum,  change  shape  or  blow  air.  Furthermore, 

some  researchers  and  technology  experts  predict  advanced  mobile  devices  that  are 

wearable, or even implemented under the human skin. For example, through adapting 

technology  like  individual  wireless  sensors  that  can  be  used  to  track  users  entering 

premises. 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile games and related technologies  can also enrich family and  peer relationships 

(Shneiderman, 1987). For example, mobile multiplayer games aid to develop a strong 

relationship  among  users,  which  is  useful  to  share  their  knowledge,  expertise  and 

experience likewise, emotions and love among each other. It has been seen that some 

of those relationships perhaps end up with future marriage. 

Currently,  there  is  an  enormous  trend  in  games  technology  targeting  on  dedicated 

handheld  programming  devices  such  as  Nintendo  DS  and  PlayStation  Portable  or 

PDAs and mobile phones (Denk, Weber and Belfin, 2007; Klopfer, 2008; Kurkovsky, 

2009). For example, touch-based interfaces introduced on Nintendo DS or  iPhone/iPod 

changed  computer  based  educational  games  to  the  emerging  mobile- based platform. 

Those touch-based interfaces enable the player to interact with digital  objects  within 

the  game  environment  more  easily  than  navigating  through  the  keyboard.  As  a 

consequence  of those  emerging  mobile  technologies, iPhone  and  Android devices 

and low-cost apps stores are awash with games. 

It  has  been  proved  that  mobile  games  can  improve  recruitment  and  retention  by 

capturing players’ enthusiasm (Kurkovsky, 2009). The mobility is a significant feature 

that supports the use of mobile games (Parsons, Ryu and Cranshaw, 2006). It  can  be 

conceptualised  in  many  ways  such  as  mobility  of  the  user,  mobility  of  the  service 

and  mobility  of  the  device.  For  example,  the  mobility  feature  behind  the  mobile 

gaming  environment  enables  players  to  use  the  game  while  they  are  away  from the 

communication  space.  Most  users  play  casual  games  in  short  breaks  (Kurkovsky, 

2009);  during  class  breaks,  travelling  on  a  bus  or  train,  and  while  waiting 

for 

transportation or waiting in a queue. 

Although previous research on educational games has  struggled to prove that mobile 

game based learning can seriously contribute to the education arena, other research in 

this area has revealed that signs of change have been detected (Molnar and Martinez, 

2011).  Banerjee,  et  al.  (2007)  discovered  that  mobile  game  based  educational  can 

significantly  enhance  the  learning  process  when  used  to  study.  Kam,  et  al.  (2009) 

have  also  shown  that  the  use  of  mobile  game  based  education  can  improve children 

literacy  (Tian,  2010).   Furthermore, previous research has developed meta-level 

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reflections on learning strategies through mobile game based education (Facer, et al., 

2004). 

There have been many attempts using mobile gaming for teaching; widely popular in 

game  based  education  are,  for  example,  puzzle  games  (Hosein  and  Beharry,  2010). 

Previous research has in many attempts identified and defended mobile gaming as an 

educational tool. Costabile, et al. (2008) conducted an experimental study to  explore 

how a mobile phone can be used to teach archaeology through game based learning. 

Yordanova (2007) has explained the overall importance of mobile learning integrated 

with  technology  in  education.  Furthermore,  basic  characteristics,  advantages  and 

existing challenges related to mobile learning are addressed in a study by Kurkovsky 

(2009).  Kurkovsky’s  study  shows  how  mobile  game  based  learning  can  be  used  to 

engage  students  in  Computer  Science  courses  from  an  early  stage  on  (Yordanova, 

2007).  The  study concluded  that  the  mobile  games  helped  students  to  relate to  their 

course materials and to establish strong connections to real world applications. 

Also,  the  mobile  gaming  environment  has  become  a  mammoth  in  the  entertainment 

sector  (Wang,  Fsdahl  and  Morch-Storstein,  2008).  The  reasons  are  convenience,  low 

cost, enhancement of creativity and community of the mobile games. The popularity 

of mobile games is due to the ability to take them anywhere once the game has been 

downloaded  to  the  mobile  device.  Creative  mobile  games  can  be  designed  and 

developed  to  a  much  lower  cost  than  console  games.  While  mobile  phones  were 

originally  created  for  communication,  the  core  values  presented  for  users  in  mobile 

games are a distinct advantage. 

Mobile devices and related technologies such as mobile phones, PDAs, pagers, Wi-Fi, 

Bluetooth  and  3G  are  increasingly  seen  as  fertile  ground  for  the  development  of 

resources  to  support  mobile  game  base  learning.  There  is  an  increasing  interest  of 

young people for a digital culture outside of  school and towards the interaction with 

mobile and games technologies, as opposed to desktop PC applications (Facer, et al., 

2004;  Holloway  and  Valentine,  2003;  Facer,  et  al.,  2003).  Educational  researchers 

have  identified  these  tools  and  technologies  as  powerful  resources  in  supporting 

learning experience and encouraging the development of cognitive skills (Andrews, et 

al.,  2003;  Facer,  et  al.,  2004;  Gee,  2003;  Roschelle  and  Pea,  2002;  Wegerif,  2003). 

42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For  example,  mobile  phone  camera,  Internet,  Wi-Fi  or  Bluetooth  are  available  in 

almost all smart phones. It is also known that more and more games use these features 

(Baillie, et al., 2010; Elina and Koivisto, 2010). According to the Office for National 

Statistics  (2011),  almost  half  of  the  UK  Internet  users  are  connected  to  the  Internet 

using  a  mobile  phone  while  away  from  the  home  or  office.  The  figure  was  up  22 

percent  from  the  year  2009  to  2011  (Office  for  National  Statistics,  2011)  game 

developers  can  utilise  this  knowledge  and  existing  tools  and  technologies  to  design 

and develop effective educational mobile games. 

Mobile  games  and  related  technologies  have  become  more  and  more  complex  and 

pervasive  over  the  last  years;  currently  they  look  like  console  and  PC  games 

(Korhonen and Koivisto, 2006). The volume of mobile phone ownership is certainly 

greater  than  desktop  PC  ownership  in  the  UK  (Office  for  National  Statistics,  2011). 

Widespread  ownership  of  mobile  phones  may  ensure  high  market  penetration  for 

game  developers.  The  mobile  phone  ownership  in  the  UK  has  been  dramatically 

increased by 45 percent during the last ten years (Office for National Statistics, 2011). 

Therefore,  designing  and  developing  games  for  pervasive  platforms  enables  and 

enhances the user’s accessibility. 

2.6 Summary and Conclusion 

This chapter discussed the existing research in the field of online  usable security and 

mobile  gaming  in  order  to  provide  the  necessary  background  for  this  book  and  in 

order to support the research question. Previous studies have reported that technology 

alone  is  insufficient  to  ensure  critical  IT  security  issues.  There  has  not  been  much 

research  work  on  the  human  behaviour  of  performing  security  or  the  protection  of 

user  against  attacks,  which  are  imperative  to  cope  with  malicious  IT  threats  such  as 

phishing attacks. However, well-designed security education can be effective to  protect 

the end-user against these malicious IT attacks. 

One  objective  of  the  background  work  reported  in  this  book  was  to  find  effective 

ways to educate people to identify and prevent phishing attacks. The literature showed 

43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the importance of educating people to identify and prevent themselves from phishing 

attacks  as  the  best  possible  approach.  Furthermore,  it  discussed  the  notion  that  not 

only  can  a  computer  game  provide  education  but  also  that  games  can  potentially 

provide  a  better  learning  environment.  Moreover,  it  indicated  mobile  games  to 

improve the potential learning experience. 

The  next  chapter  will  describe  the  research  methods,  which  were  employed  to 

undertake the studies reported in this book. 

44 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 

Research Methodology 

3.1 Introduction 

The  following  chapter  contains  four  constituent  parts.  The  first  part  describes  the 

research  approach  used  in  this  book.  Then,  the  setup  of  the  laboratory  for  the 

experiments  is  discussed.  After  that,  the  data  collection  techniques  employed  in  this 

research  work  are  addressed.  Finally,  the  analytical  procedures  applied  to  the 

collected data are presented. 

3.2 Overview of the Research Approach Used in this Book 

Two  studies  and  one  theoretical  design  were  incorporated  for  the  research  work 

reported  in  this  book.  Several  research  methodology  approaches  exist  in  the 

Information  Systems  literature  (Creswell,  2003;  Oates,  2006),  for  example,  the 

qualitative approach, the quantitative approach and the mixed method approach. 

Quantitative  research  refers  to  studies,  which  produce  results  that  are  concluded  by 

statistical  analyses  and  summary.  Quantitative  data  analysis  generally  means 

producing data or evidence based on numbers. Researchers who follow this approach 

attempt to gather data by employing different strategies such as questionnaire surveys 

and  experiments.  Quantitative  data  is  primarily  used  and  analysed  by  positivist 

researchers  (Oates,  2006),  but  critical  and  interpretive  researchers  sometimes  also 

generate such data. 

On  the  other  hand,  qualitative  research  approach  refers  to  studies  with  findings  that 

are not concluded by statistical analysis and summary.  The data obtained from 

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
qualitative  research  are  usually  gathered  from  case  studies, 

interviews  and 

observations.  Qualitative  data  includes  non-numeric  data  such  as  words,  sounds  and 

images.  Furthermore,  qualitative  data  can  be  used  to  describe  social  behaviour  and 

individual  groups.  Quantitative  data  is  the  main  kind  of  data  used  and  analysed  by 

interpretive  and  critical  researchers  (Oates,  2006),  but  can  be  generated  by positivist 

researchers too. 

In  the  mixed  method  approach,  researchers  gather  both  quantitative  and  qualitative 

data  to  provide  the  best  answer  to  the  research  question.  This  approach  starts  by 

gathering  statistical  data  using  a  quantitative  method  (such  as  a  survey)  and  then 

gathers qualitative data from interviews using a qualitative method. This mixed  method 

approach  can  be  useful  in  that  it  can  make  best  use  of  both  the  quantitative  and 

qualitative approaches. 

The  first  study  used  a  quantitative  approach  and  both  quantitative  and  qualitative 

approaches  were  used in  in the second.  The first study attempted  to  develop  a game 

design  framework  for  computer  users  to  thwart  phishing  attacks.  As  a  research 

methodology,  although  a  qualitative  approach  could  have  been  used  in  this  research 

study,  a  quantitative  approach  was  chosen  because  it  offered  the  flexibility  to 

represent the general population of computer users; quantitative research approach is 

also  highly penetrated  approach  in  IS  (Oates, 2006). Additionally,  this  study focused 

on  investigating  the  key  elements  that  should  be  addressed  in  the  game  design 

framework,  which  enhances  the  user  avoidance  behaviour  through  motivation  to 

protect  themselves  from  phishing  attacks.  Quantitative  research  methods  are  mostly 

associated  with  the  philosophical  paradigm  of  positivism  (Oates,  2006).  Therefore, 

this sounds more like a positivist approach. 

The other philosophical paradigm is the interpretive approach; which does not prove 

or  disprove  a  hypobook,  as  compared  to  positivist  research  (Oates,  2006).  If  the 

research  is  based  on  surveys  or  experiments,  it  is  more  likely  to  be  based  on 

positivism. Therefore, the first study reported in this book takes a positivist approach 

since  it  is  survey-based  and  tests  hypobook  derived  from  a  research  model. 

Positivism is more appropriate for this research study, because it enhances the user’s 

phishing threat avoidance behaviour. 

46 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  second  study  was  focused  on  evaluating  the  proposed  game  design  framework 

through  the  mobile  game  prototype  developed  in  MIT  App  Inventor  Emulator.  The 

study  has  employed  a  quantitative  approach  as  the  first  step  to  measure  the  user’s 

subjective  satisfaction  of  the  mobile  game  prototype  interface.  Then  the  study 

followed  by  a  qualitative  approach  as  the  second  step  in  order  to  determine  users’ 

impact  on  the  framework  after  playing  the  mobile  game  prototype.  Quantitative 

research  methods  are  mostly  associated  with  the  philosophical  paradigm  of 

interpretivism  (Oates,  2006).  Therefore,  this  research  study  looks  more  like  an 

interpretive  approach,  because  it  focuses  on  determining  the  user’s  impact  on  the 

proposed game design framework after playing the mobile game prototype. 

Hypotheses are formal statements whose predictions are derived from the evidence of 

past research work and theory or simply the result of a  guess (Breakwell, Hammond 

and Fife-Schaw, 1995). For example, researchers start developing theories about their 

topic of the research territory. This leads to a statement based on the theory that can 

be  tested  through  an  empirical  investigation.  Hypotheses  are  tested  by  manipulating 

one  or  more  variables  (Preece,  Rogers  and  Sharp,  2002).  An  experiment  is  then 

designed  to  prove  or  disprove  the  defined  hypobook  (Oates,  2006).  Robson  stated 

that  an  experiment  encompasses:  assigning  participants  to  different  conditions; 

manipulating  one  or  more  independent  variables;  measuring  the  effects  of  this 

manipulation  on  one  or  more  of  the  dependent  variables;  and  controlling  all  other 

variables (Robson, 2002). 

There  are  two  types  of  experiments:  those  performed  in  the  laboratory  setting  and 

those  conducted  in the field,  the  so-called  “real world”  (Oates,  2006). When  an 

experiment  is  laboratory-based,  the  participant  would  normally  use  the  system  in  a 

controlled  environment.  For  example,  an  experiment  is  performed  in  the  Microsoft 

Usability  Laboratory.  An  advantage  of  the  laboratory-based  experiment is that  it 

allows  the  control  of  variables  in  order  to  correctly measure  cause  and  effect  of  the 

system  (Coolican,  2004).  For  example,  all  participants  can  utilise  the  same  mobile 

device throughout the experiment. This allows measuring  participants’ behaviour  more 

precisely and keeping conditions identical for them. 

47 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Coolican  (2004)  has  identified  some  weaknesses  of  the  field  experiment:  lack  of 

control  brings  problem  of  extraneous  variables;  difficult  to  replicate  the  experiment 

and  record  data  accurately  and  most  commonly  ethical  problems.  The  ethical  aspect 

of the experiment would be more concerned, especially when it comes to investigate 

participants’ computer security related behaviour involving sensitive information such 

as usernames, passwords or online banking details. There might be a risk to disclose 

their personal information to public in the real world experiment if they are unaware 

that it is an experiment. Therefore, the experiment is more robust and reliable when it 

is performed under a controlled environment. 

In  addition,  the  laboratory-based  experiment  can  be  occupied  with  technologies  and 

equipment,  which  enables  for  data  recordings  while  offering  the  participant  an 

environment free from day-to-day distractions. Janssen and Ostrom (2006)  have  stated 

that  the  laboratory-based  experiments  provide  a  very  abstract  and  controlled 

environment,  in  which,  researchers  test  very  precise  hypotheses.  On  the  other  hand, 

this environment allows the control of variables where all participants can utilise  the 

same  equipment.  The  main  reason  to  conduct  this  experiment  in  a  laboratory  is 

because  all  participants  should  be  accessible  for  pre-  and  post-tests  based  on  a 

computer  connected  to  the  Internet.  Additionally,  the  researcher  should  be  able  to 

record  the  data  accurately during  the  experiment.  Therefore,  it  would  be  ideal  to  set 

up  a  lab  before  the  experiment  begins  with  all  required  equipment  rather  than 

arranging a fieldwork. 

Previous  research  has  reported  on  investigating  the  human  aspect  of  security 

behaviour  using  laboratory-based  experiments.  Dhamija,  Tygar  and  Hearst  (2006) 

conducted  a  laboratory  experiment  with  a  group  of  twenty-two  participants  to 

categorize  why  people  fall  for  phishing  attacks.  Egelman,  Cranor  and  Hong  (2008) 

conducted  a  laboratory-based  experiment  asking  participants  to  buy  a  product  on 

eBay and sent them a related eBay fake phishing email. Downs, Holbrook and Cranor 

(2006) also performed in a two-part laboratory study with 20 participants to analyses 

the  reasons  why  people  fall  for  phishing  attacks.  Therefore,  it  is  worth  mentioning 

that  the  laboratory-based  experiments  are  very  useful  to  researchers  who  wish  to 

investigate specifically the human aspect of security behaviour in a given situation. 

48 

 
 
 
 
 
 
For  the  mentioned  reasons,  a  survey  study  based  on  the  quantitative  approach  was 

reported in Chapter 4, whilst a laboratory study based on the qualitative approach was 

reported in Chapter 6. The first study introduced in Chapter 4 was related to develop a 

game  design  framework  for  computer  users  to  thwart  phishing  attacks.  The  second 

study  conducted  in  Chapter  6  was  focused  to  evaluate  the  game  design  framework 

using a mobile game prototype. 

3.3 3 Setting up the Laboratory 

It is important to define the research environment and conditions including the physical 

characteristics  in  order  to  carry  out  a  laboratory  based  experiment  (Rates,  2004). 

Furthermore,  it  requires  a  quiet  and  closed  experimental  room  where  only  the 

participant  and  the  experimenter  sit  together  at  some  point.  The  experimental  study 

room  is  equipped  with  necessary  hardware  devices  such  as  a  computer,  Internet 

access, network cards and Internet  cable. Additionally, required software needs to be 

pre-prepared for the experimental study. Therefore, the laboratory study was reported 

in Chapter 6 arranged as follows (Figure 3.1). 

Figure 3.1: Experiment room in the second study 

49 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.4 Data Collection 

A  number  of  instruments  were  employed  to  gather  necessary  data  for  the  research 

work reported in this book. The data were collected using a questionnaire, a usability 

study and a think-aloud study. Each of these instruments is described in the following 

section. 

3.4.1 Questionnaire 

A  questionnaire  is  a  flexible  and  basic  research  technique  for  collecting  structured 

information  from  individuals  (Coolican,  2004).  Zaharias  and  Poylymenakou  (2009) 

argued that a questionnaire is one of the useful methods of gathering data in scientific 

research.  It  is  widely used  to  recognise  participants’  opinions,  preference, judgments 

and  the  patterns  of  behaviour  in  a  particular  structure.  A  questionnaire  drives 

participants  directly  to  research  topics  helping  them  to  clearly  see  the  focus. 

Furthermore,  the  same  questionnaire  can  be  delivered  to  all  participants  in  order  to 

maintain  the  consistency  of  the  data  collection  process. In  addition,  an  anonymous 

response style encourages participants to response truthfully, especially when they are 

talking about controversial issues (Walliman, 2001). Moreover, questionnaires can be 

delivered electronically (Root and Draper, 1983), which is also cheaper and takes less 

time compared to other methods (Zaharias and Poylymenakou, 2009). 

There  are  some  basic  principles  that  the  researcher  should  bear  in  mind  when 

designing  a  questionnaire  (Brooke,  1996;  Coolican,  2004;  Kirakowski  and  Corbett, 

1988). First, requesting the minimum of information needed for the research purpose; 

because  most  respondents  do  not  wish  to  spend  a  long  time  answering  questions  or 

their  answers  may  depend  on  their  mood.  In  addition,  the  questionnaire  should  not 

address  questions  that  are  no  longer  used  or  that  can  be  obtained  from  elsewhere. 

Second, the researcher has to make sure that the participant can answer questions. For 

example,  a  question  like  “how  many hours have you  used the Internet this  year?” is 

difficult  to  answer precisely for most  people. Third, the researcher has  to  make sure 

that the participant should answer questions honestly and accurately. If the question is 

50 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
difficult, it is unlikely to be answered honestly and accurately. Although the question 

was  being  answered,  it  would  be  more  based  on  well-known  public  opinion  rather 

than  the  individual’s  real  belief.  Therefore,  the  researcher  should  avoid  including 

difficult  questions  in  designing  a  questionnaire.  Finally,  the  researcher  has  to  make 

sure all  questions  will  be answered  without  any  rejections, because participants  may 

refuse to answer sensitive questions. 

Thus,  the  questionnaire  is  considered  to  be  an  appropriate  technique  to  collect  data 

related to users’ perception of usability  (Brooke, 1996; Kirakowski and Corbett,  1988). 

The  use  of  a  questionnaire  and  attitude  scale  provides  simplicity and  speed  for  the 

evaluation method being used. For example, in most cases participants have to  travel 

to  the  laboratory  to  go  through  the  evaluation  exercises  lasting  between  20  minutes 

and  an  hour.  As  can  be  imagined,  participants  might  be  discouraged  if  they  come 

across any problems since no assistance was given. If they were presented with a short 

and  simple  questionnaire,  which  encompasses  to  assess  subjective  reactions  to 

the 

system usability, it is very likely that they would not reject to complete it. 

A  questionnaire  was  designed  and  employed  for  each  study  in  this  research  work. 

Details about each questionnaire will be presented in the related study later in  chapters 

4 and 6 of this book. However, a questionnaire was used in the first study,  evaluated 

a  game  design  framework  for  computer  users  to  thwart  phishing  attacks.  Another 

questionnaire  was  designed  and  employed  in  the  second  study  to  measure  the  user 

subjective  satisfaction  of  a  mobile  game  prototype  interface.  Falthzik  and  Carroll 

(1971) conducted email questionnaire survey of industrial organizations about the rate 

of  return  for  closed  versus  open-ended  questions.  Of  100  firms  receiving  an  “open- 

ended” question, 27 percent returned them while 78 percent of 100 receiving a  “closed” 

question  returned  them.  Furthermore,  they  stated  that  “closed”  questions  are  easier 

and  cheaper  to  analyse,  ensuring  that  the  form  in  which  the  data  gathered  correctly 

for  the  type  of  analysis  planned  and  also  provides  a  more  meaningful  basis  for 

comparison. In addition, the alternatives presented with the “closed” question may  help 

the participant  to understand  the question  clearly.  On  the  other  hand,  “open-  ended” 

questions  are  more  appropriate  when  the  issue  is  complex,  the  relevant  dimensions 

and critical factors are unknown and most importantly exploration is the 

51 

 
 
 
 
 
 
main  goal  of  the  research  work  (Falthzik  and  Carroll,  1971).  Therefore,  “closed” 

questions were used in both the questionnaires that have many forms such as: 
(cid:2)  Yes or No types of questions: e.g. “Do you use a mobile phone?” 
(cid:2)  One true answer: e.g. “Please select your gender?” 
(cid:2)  Choosing from different available answers; e.g.  “Experience of using mobile 

devices” 

1.  Mobile Phone 
2.  Smart Phone 
3.  Personal Digital Assistant (PDA) 
4.  Tablet PC 

A 5-Point Likert scale was used in the questionnaires of both the studies. Likert scales 

are used to assess attitudes, beliefs and opinions and also have been extensively used 

for  evaluating  the  subjective  user  satisfaction  with  products.  The  researcher  should 

design  each  scale  to  be  a  unitary  measuring  instrument  rather  than  an  opinion 

questionnaire.  There  are  numerous  types  of  popular  scales  that  are  mentioned  by 

Coolican  (2004):  equal  appearing  intervals;  the  semantic  differential;  and  summated 

rating. 

Thurstone  (1931)  introduced  “equal  appearing  intervals”  on  the  scale  a  score 

equivalent  to  the  strength  of  each  statement  that  a  participant  agrees  with  is  given. 

The researcher has to go through the following steps in order to structure this scale: 

1.  Present a number of both positive and negative statements towards the attitude 

object. 

2.  Ask a group of judges to rate the statements ranging from 1 (highly negative) 

to 11 (highly positive). 

3.  Find  scale  values  by  obtaining  the  mean  value  of  all  the  ratings  for  each 

statement. 

4.  Reject statements which judges rated in a different way. 
5.  The overall attitude score is the total of all scale values on items participants 

agreed with. 

52 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, this scale is still problematic. The judges cannot be utterly natural. It is also 

quite difficult to select most discriminating statements from the items which have the 

same scale value. 

Osgood,  Suciand  Tannenbaum  (1957)  introduced  “the  semantic  differential  scale”, 

which can be used to measure the connotative meaning of an object for an individual. 

For  example,  a  participant  is  asked  to  mark  a  scale  between  bi-polar  adjectives 

according to their feeling where the object holds on the scale as given below: 

“Doctor” 

good _ _ _ _ _ _ _ bad 

weak _ _ _ _ _  _ strong 

active _ _ _ _ _ _ passive 

Furthermore,  they  state  that  all  bi-polar  pairs  can  be  attached  to  the  next  three 

general  meaning factors: 'active' (along with 'slow-fast', 'hot-cold') is an example 

of the  activity  factor;  'strong'  (along  with  'rugged-delicate',  'thick-thin')  is  an 

example  of  potency  factor;  and  'good'  (along  with  'clean-dirty',  'pleasant-

unpleasant')  is  an  example of the estimative factor. 

The  semantic  differential  scale  produces  good  reliability  values  and  correlates 

well  with  other  attitude  scales.  However,  this  is  also  again  problematic  when 

participants  have  a  tendency  towards  a  'position  response  bias'  where  they 

usually  rate  at  the  extreme end of the scale or not using the extreme at all without 

considering possible  weaker or stronger responses. 

Likert (1932) introduced “the summated rating” that  needs  to  following steps  in 

order  to structure in a scale: 

1.  This  is  similar  to  the  proposed  Thurstone’s  (1931)  scale;  present  a 

set  of  favourable and unfavourable statements about an attitude object. 

53 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  Then  ask participants  to  provide  their  response  to  each  statement  using a 

scale  ranging  between  strongly  disagree  to  strongly  agree.  For  example, 

“A mobile  game is a good provider of learning” can be scaled as follows: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

Strongly 

disagree 

Disagree 

Neutral 

Agree 

Strongly 

agree 

Scales  typically  range  from  1  to  3  points,  to  a  maximum  of  1  to  9  points,  but 

it  is  usually agreed that obtaining the middle ground, by using scales of 1 to 5, or 

1 to 7, is  the most effective method (Dix, et al., 2004).  For the work reported in 

this  book,  it  was therefore decided to use a scale of 1 to 5 as the above example 

shows. Each value  of  the  scale  can  be  used  as  a score for  the  individual item  of 

each  respondent.  For  example,  ‘5’  will  be  the  score  for  strongly  agree  with  the 

satisfactory item while it will be “1” for strongly disagree with an  unsatisfactory 

item.  Finally,  adding  the  scores  of  each  item together will  provide  the overall 

attitude score. 

It can argue that the score “3” is not very clear, because it is known "undecided". 

It  might  correspond  to  no  opinion  or  an  on-the-fence  opinion  and  therefore  the 

central  value (in this case “3”) of the scale is quite unclear. For example, 50 out of 

100  would  be  “undecided”  in  an  overall  scale  ranging  from  “strongly  for”  and 

“strongly against”  responses. However, Coolican  (2004) stated that a number of 

advantages of using the  Likert scale technique: it enables to complete and maintain 

respondents’  direct 

involvement; it has been  proven to  have a higher degree  of 

validity  and  reliability;  and 

it  is  effective  at  measuring  changes  over  time. 

Furthermore, he describes that attitude  scales are highly structured measures which 

respondents provide the most appropriate  response.  Therefore,  a  Likert scale  was 

used  in  this  research  work  as  its  advantages  stated by Coolican (2004). 

54 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.4.2 Think-aloud Approach 

The  thinking  aloud  is  an  approach,  which  has  traditionally  been  used  as  a 

psychological  research  method  (Ericsson  and  Simon,  1984;  Neilsen,  1993). 

However,  ‘usability  king’  Neilson  Jacobson  has  stated  this  approach  is  being 

heavily  used  by  evaluating  human  computer  interfaces  (Neilsen,  1993). 

Furthermore,  he  describes  that  conducting  a  think-aloud  experiment  with  real 

participants  is  one  of  the  most  fundamental  evaluation  approaches  in  software 

applications testing. The testing  process involves participants using the system or 

prototype  to complete a  predetermined  set  of  tasks  while  being  observed  and 

verbalised 

their 

thoughts  and  comments.  The  observations,  thoughts  and 

comments are then analysed to address the  research question. 

There  is  a  large  volume  of  published  studies  that  critically  discuss  the  think-

aloud  approach  (Dix,  et  al.,  2004;  Hertzum  and  Jacobsen,  2001;  Neilsen,  1993; 

Nielsen,  Clemmensen  and  Yssing,  2002;  Nørgaard  and  Hornbaek,  2006;  Preece, 

Rogers and  Sharp, 2002; Ramey, et al., 2006). Ramey, et al. (2006) describes that 

think-aloud  is 

the  most  important  approach  in  system  evaluation,  because  it 

discovers more  problems than any other existing measure. Perhaps, this is the main 

reason that think-  aloud  is  more popular  as  frequently applied  techniques  among 

the  academic  researchers  and  industrial  expertise  (Nielsen,  Clemmensen  and 

Yssing, 2002). 

The  most  significant  benefit  of  the  think-aloud  approach  is  that  it  enables  to 

design 

the  system  from  actual  users,  who  are  representatives  of  general 

population.  Participants provide the researcher an understanding of their views of 

using  the  system based on verbalising their thoughts. This enables the researcher 

to  recognize  participants’  major  confusions  (Neilsen,  1993).  The  think-aloud 

process  is  used  for 

researchers  to  gain  participants’  behaviour  through  an 

examination. This examination  analysis can reveal the causes of system problems. 

In addition, participants’ voice and  behaviour  provides  insight  into  their  effective 

reactions  such  as  frowns,  sighs  and  scowls  which  convey  dissatisfaction, 

frustrations or maybe happiness. Therefore,  observational  data  gathered  through 

a  think-aloud  approach  is  quite  beneficial  and  powerful to design a system. 

55 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  think-aloud  method  is  flexible  so  that  it  provides a  vital  benefit for  system 

evaluators. Some researchers realise that the think-aloud approach can affect the type 

and  amount  of  data  collected.  Therefore,  they  may  attempt  to  manipulate  the  think- 

aloud session to make sure the exploration of research areas to match the objectives of 

the  experiment  (Ramey,  et  al.,  2006).  This  is  a  significant  benefit  of  the  approach, 

when concerning on certain aspects of an interface such as designing a game interface 

for  learning.  In  addition,  this  approach  can  help  identify  the  suspected  areas  to  be 

problematic or to uncover reasoning for problems. 

Despite  these  advantages  of  the  think-aloud  approach  there  are  some  bottlenecks, 

which  are  worth  concerning  when  evaluating  this  technique.  Ramey,  et  al.  (2006) 

describe  the  validity and  reliability of  the  think-aloud  approach  has been  overlooked 

due to its usefulness in convincing researchers that problems exist. However, it would 

have  been  important  to  concern  the  lack  of  soundness  when  investigating  the 

effectiveness of this approach. 

Dix, et al. (2004) stated that the usefulness of the think-aloud approach is influenced 

by  the  effectiveness  of  observation  and  subsequent  analysis.  This  depends  on 

researchers  who  facilitate  to  conduct  think-aloud  sessions.  As  suggested  by  Preece, 

Rogers and Sharp (2002), the system evaluation though users is strongly controlled by 

the researcher, who is in charge of the test. On the one hand, this is an advantage for 

practitioners to  ensure  goals  of the systems  evaluation.  However, on  the  other  hand, 

the  think-aloud  approach  does  not  provide  necessary  guidelines  for  researchers  to 

perform reliable analysis (Hertzum and Jacobsen, 2001). This is due to a combination 

of  unclear  goal  analysis,  unclear  evaluation  procedures  and  unclear  problem  criteria. 

In addition, Norgaard and Hornbaek (2006) argued that improper setting up of think- 

aloud  sessions  and  incomplete  analysis  of  results  could  generate  research  findings, 

which  may  not  represent  the  actual  user  experience.  These  issues  can  enhance  the 

possibility of inconsistency in research findings from different researchers. 

The interruptive role of the researcher may cause  for inconsistency in the think-aloud 

approach,  which  leads  to  the  lack  of participants’  concentration  (Preece,  Rogers  and 

Sharp,  2002  and  Ramey,  et  al.,  2006).  Perhaps  the  researcher  forces  participants  to 

spend more or less time on a certain aspect of system evaluation, which could mislead 

56 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to represent participants’ natural use of advices. Norgaard and Hornbaek (2006) stated 

that  the  researcher  vary  the  way  they  conduct  the  think  aloud  sessions  because  they 

desire participants to confirm known issues which they may have foreseen or already 

known problems. 

The laboratory environment where think aloud sessions take place is unnatural which 

may  affect  participants’  behaviour.  Participants  interact  with  the  system  during  the 

think  aloud  test  while  verbalising  their  comments  in  a  completely  unnatural 

environment whilst being observed. Therefore, they tempt to comment based on their 

experience  while  completing tasks  in  the laboratory environment.  This  may increase 

their  cognitive  load,  which  impacts  their  problem  solving  behaviour  (Nielsen, 

Clemmensen and Yssing, 2002; Preece, Rogers and Sharp, 2002; Ramey,  et  al.,  2006). 

In addition, participants are not allowed to take phone calls, check emails, talk  to their 

friends,  or  occupy  with  any  task,  which  they  may  regularly  do  in  their  normal  life 

(Preece,  Rogers  and  Sharp,  2002).  Furthermore,  observation  in  the  laboratory 

environment is also an obstructive approach where participants are usually aware that 

they are being monitored by the researcher (Dix, et al., 2004). 

The results of think aloud sessions are limited to what they truly represent in terms of 

the user population to test the system. Conducting think aloud experiment with a large 

sample  size  is  time  and  resources  consuming,  therefore,  the  findings  of  such 

evaluation  typically  reflect  on  a  few  users  (Hong  and  Landay,  2001).  The  literature 

revealed  that  ongoing  disagreements  around the sample population size to  conduct  a 

think aloud test. Generally between five to fifteen participants are advised. However, 

‘usability  king’  Nielson  suggests  that  five  participants  are  enough  to  find  major 

problems (Neilsen, 1993). 

In  summary,  Dix,  et  al.  (2004)  stressed  the  simplicity  of  the  think-aloud  approach. 

This technique is described as a “quick and dirty” approach gaining a huge number of 

results  quickly  via  using  a  simple  methodology  (Preece,  Rogers  and  Sharp,  2002; 

Ramey,  et  al., 2006).  Nielson (1993) stated  that the wealth of qualitative  data which 

may  collect  from  a  relatively  small  number  of  participants  taking  part.  Although, 

qualitative data is known valuable, this research study compares findings gained from 

such data, with findings derived from quantitative data reported in Chapter 4 of this 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
book.  In  addition,  the  idea  of  strengthening  findings  of  this  book  by  combining 

finding  from  methods  which  independently  collect  both  quantitative  (questionnaire) 

and qualitative (think-aloud) data will be reported. 

3.5 Data Analysis 

The  study  reported  in  chapter  4,  empirically  investigated  what  key  elements  that 

should  be  addressed  in  the  game  design  framework  for  computer  users  to  thwart 

phishing  attacks.  A  theoretical  model  therefore  derived  from  Technology  Threat 

Avoidance  Theory  (TTAT)  was  used  in  the  game  design  framework.  Because  the 

model  examined  how  users  avoid  malicious  IT  threats  using  a  given  safeguarding 

measure.  A  quantitative  analysis,  based  on  Likert  style  questionnaire,  approach  was 

adopted  to  evaluate  the  game  design  framework  described  in  this  study.  Then  the 

study instrumented SPSS, which is a statistical software package for data analysis was 

developed by IBM (Davis, Bagozzi and Warshaw, 1983). It is much easier to use and 

the most commonly used statistical techniques. 

The  statistical  tests  applied  to  the  data  must  ensure  whether  or  not  the  data  can  be 

analysed during the planning stage of the study.  This will allow the hypobook to be 

either  supported  or  rejected  (Breakwell,  Hammond  and  Fife-Schaw,  1995).  As  the 

first  step  of  this study,  Cronbach’s  alpha,  which  is  known  as  a  coefficient  alpha  was 

calculated to measure the reliability of the questionnaire (Pallant, 2007). In addition, 

the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) value measure was used to assess the adequacy of the 

sample  size.  Then  the  study  employed  a  multiple  regression  analysis  to  test  the 

theoretical  model  derived  from  TTAT  was  used  in  the  game design  framework  with 

the following parameters: phishing attack and  anti-phishing education as  a malicious 

IT  threat  and  safeguarding  measure  respectively.  The  multiple  regression  analysis  is 

based  on  correlation,  but 

it  allows  more  sophisticated  investigation  of 

the 

interrelationship  among  a  set  of  variables  (Davis,  Bagozzi  and  Warshaw,  1983). 

Furthermore,  it  enables  to  discover  how  well  a  set  of  variables  is  able  to  predict  a 

particular  outcome.  Bryman  and  Cramer  (2005)  describes  that  one  of  the  most  vital 

explanations  of  the  relationship  between  variables  is  the  correlation.  The  degree  of 

58 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
correlation  between  variables  indicates  the  strength,  significance  and  the  direction 

(positively or negatively) of the relationship. The study reported in chapter 6 focused 

on  evaluating  the  game  design  framework  through  the  developed  mobile  game 

prototype  using  MIT  App  Inventor  Emulator.  Although,  the  proposed  game  design 

framework  through  an  empirical  investigation  reported  in  chapter  4,  it  would  have 

been  more  beneficial  to  determine  users’  impact  on  the  framework  after  their 

engagement  with  the  mobile  game  prototype.  The  lack  of  user  satisfaction  causes 

difficulties  for  them  to  interact  with  the  system  (Pinelle,  Wong  and  Stach,  2008), 

which may hinder their learning take place.  Therefore, the study engaged  a usability 

study using Systems Usability Scale (SUS), which is a quantitative analysis based on 

Likert style questionnaire, as the first step to evaluate the user subjective satisfaction 

of  the  mobile  game  prototype  interface.  The  SUS  is  a  simple,  but  yet  a  reliable 

questionnaire consisting of 10 items that use to evaluate the subjective perception of 

an  individual  to  interact  with  the  software  system  without  considering  the  personal 

sense of taste (Brooke, 1996; Finstad, 2006). Tullis and Stetson (2004) have revealed 

that SUS yield among the most reliable results across sample sizes compared to other 

questionnaires  such  as  Questionnaire  for  User  Interface  Satisfaction  (QUIS)  and 

Computer  System  Usability  Questionnaire  (CSQU)  (Finstad,  2006).  Their  findings 

concluded  that,  sample  sizes  of  at  least  12-14  participants  are  required  to  get 

reasonably  reliable  results.  The  SUS  uses  a  five-point  Likert  scale  with  anchors  for 

strongly agree and strongly disagree.  Therefore, data gathered using SUS to evaluate 

the user subjective satisfaction  of  the  mobile game prototype interface  was  analysed 

by using SPSS version 18. 

Then a think-aloud study was employed along with a pre and post-test to evaluate the 

game design framework. This study attempted to evaluate participants’ understanding 

and awareness of phishing attacks through the mobile game prototype. Furthermore, it 

emphasises  what  key  elements  that  should  be  addressed  in  the  game  design 

framework.  Therefore,  an  experimental  protocol  was  designed  including  user  study 

instructions  for  participants  to  follow  up  the  think-aloud  study.  According  to 

Norgaard and Hornbaek’s (2006) study, the data analysis was conducted in  two  phases. 

As  the  first  step,  the  study  segmented  the  recordings  applying  keywords  to  each 

segment. Then the study attempted to analyse and try to form a coherent  interpretation 

of segments that shared keywords as the second step. 

59 

 
 
 
 
 
3.6 Summary 

This  methodology  chapter  has  discussed  the  general  methodologies  and  techniques 

used for the work conducted of this book. First, an overview of the research question 

was  presented.  Then,  the  general  research  approach  was  discussed  along  with  a 

justification of the selection approach. After that, a comprehensive explanation of the 

data  collection  techniques  and  procedures  was  given.  Finally,  an  explanation  of  the 

data analysis process and the tests that have been conducted to draw conclusions from 

the studies reported in this book were presented. 

60 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4 

A Game Design Framework to Avoid 
“Phishing Attacks” 

4.1 Introduction 

The design of games is a double-edged sword. When its power is properly harnessed 

to  serve  good purposes,  it  has tremendous  potential  to  improve human performance. 

However,  when  it  is  exploited  for  violation  purposes,  it  can  pose  huge  threats  to 

individuals and society. Therefore, the design of educational games is not an easy task 

and  there  are  no  all-purpose  solutions  (Moreno-Ger,  et  al.,  2008).  The  notion  that 

game  based  education  offers  the  opportunity  to  embed  learning  in  a  natural 

environment, has repeatedly emerged in the research literature (Andrews, et al., 2003; 

Facer, et al., 2004; Gee, 2003; Roschelle and Pea, 2002; Wegerif, 2003; Walls, 2012). 

The premise behind this study is to develop a game design framework, which  enhances 

user avoidance behaviour through motivation  to protect themselves against  phishing 

attacks.  A  theoretical  model  derived  from  Technology  Threat  Avoidance  Theory 

(TTAT) was used to develop the game design framework, which is shown in  Figure 

4.1  (Liang  and  Xue,  2010).  The  TTAT  describes  individual  IT  users’  behaviour of 

avoiding  the  threat  of  malicious  information  technologies  such  as  phishing  attacks 

(Liang  and  Xue,  2009).  The  model  examines  how  individuals  avoid  malicious  IT 

threats  by  using  a  given  safeguarding  measure.  The  safeguarding  measure  does  not 

necessarily  have  to  be  an  IT  source  such  as  anti-phishing  tools;  rather it could be 

behaviour such as anti-phishing education (Liang and Xue, 2010). 

Consistent  with  TTAT  (Liang  and  Xue,  2009),  the  user’s  IT  threat  avoidance 

behaviour  is  determined  by  avoidance  motivation,  which,  in  turn,  is  effected  by 

perceived  threat.  Perceived  threat  is  also  influenced  by  the  interaction  of  perceived 

61 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
severity  and  susceptibility.  User’s  avoidance  motivation  is  also  determined  by 

three  constructs such as safeguard effectiveness, safeguard cost and self-efficacy. 

Figure 4.1: Research model derived from TTAT (Liang and Xue, 2010) 

Safeguard  effectiveness 

is  described  as 

the 

individual  assessment  of  a 

safeguarding  measure  regarding  how  effectively  it  can  be  applied  to  avoid  the 

malicious IT threat (Liang and Xue, 2010). For example, the individual assessment 

regarding  how  effectively  anti-phishing  education  can  be  applied  to  avoid  a 

phishing  attack.  Safeguard  cost  is  a  payback  for  safeguard  effectiveness.  This 

refers  to  the  physical  and cognitive efforts such as time, money, inconvenience 

and comprehension required  using the safeguard measure (Liang and Xue, 2009). 

Self-efficacy 

is  defined  as  individuals’  confidence  in  taking  the  safeguard 

measure.  This  is  an  important  determinant  of  avoidance  motivation.  Previous 

research  has  revealed  that  individuals  are more motivated to perform IT security 

related behaviours as the level of their self-  efficacy  increases  (Kaiser,  1974;  Ng, 

Kankanhalli  and  Xu,  2009;  Woon,  Tan  and  Low, 2005). In addition, the research 

model  posits  that  avoidance  motivation  is  influenced  by an  interaction  between 

perceived threat and safeguard effectiveness. 

62 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The TTAT identifies the issues that the game design framework needs to address. 

The  proposed  game  design  framework  attempts  to  develop  threat  perceptions 

such  that  individuals  will  be  more  motivated  to  avoid  phishing  attacks  and  use 

safeguarding  measures. A key aspect of this is that they realise the effectiveness 

of  safeguarding  measures, lower safeguard costs, and increase self-efficacy. 

Sheng,  et  al.  (2010)  have  conducted  a  role-play  survey  with  1001  online 

survey  respondents  to  study  who  falls  for  phishing  attacks.  The  study  revealed 

that  women  are more susceptible than men to phishing and participants between 

the  ages  of  18  and  25  are  more  susceptible  to  phishing  than  other  age  groups. 

Participants  were  included  from  a  diverse  group  of  staff  and  student,  including 

people  who  were  concerned  about  computer  security.  The  current  study  was 

targeted towards to examine participants’  phishing threat avoidance behaviour by 

using  anti-phishing  education.  Therefore,  the  survey  was  only  administered  to 

participants’ ages ranged from 18 to 25 those who  had not already completed the 

questionnaire before. 

4.2 Aims and Objectives 

This research study is the first step in the development of a game design framework 

to  enhance  user  avoidance  behaviour  through  motivation  to  thwart  phishing 

attacks.  The  aim  of  this  study  is  to  investigate  what  are  the  key  elements  that 

should be addressed  in the game design framework to avoid phishing attacks. 

The objectives are as follows: 
(cid:2)  To  identify  the  key  elements  that  should  be  addressed  in  the  game  

design  framework to avoid phishing attacks. 

(cid:2)  To evaluate the game design framework using phishing  attack (malicious IT 

threat) and game based anti-phishing education (safeguarding measure). 

(cid:2)  To formulate a game design framework to thwart phishing attacks. 

63 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.3 Pilot Study 

A  pilot  study  is  a  rehearsal,  which  is  conducted  before  the  main  study  takes  place 

(Milne,  Orbell  and  Sheeran,  2002;  Compeau  and  Higgins,  1995;  Sonderegger  and 

Sauer,  2010).  It  helps  the  researcher  to  determine  whether  or  not  the  study  is 

appropriate in terms of reliability and validity. If any problems are encountered during 

the pilot study, adjustments are made before the main study.  A quantitative analysis, 

based  on  Likert  style  questionnaire,  approach  was  adopted  to  evaluate  the  game 

design framework described in this study. 

4.3.1 Questionnaire Design 

The  questionnaire  was  constructed  based  on  Liang  and  Xue’s  theoretical  model  and 

relevant research literature (Liang and Xue, 2009; Liang and Xue, 2010; Rosenstock, 

1974;  Saleeby,  2000;  Smith,  Milberg  and  Burke,  1996;  Champion  and  Scott,  1997; 

Higgins,  1995;  Davis,  1989;  Davis,  Bagozzi  and  Warshaw,  1983).  Perceived  threat 

was  measured  on  the  basis  of  substantive  meaning  (Rosenstock,  1974).  The 

questionnaire  items  related  to  this  aspect  assessed  respondents’  perception  of  the 

likely  harm,  danger,  peril  or  damage  that  a  phishing  attack  imposes.  Perceived 

susceptibility was developed based on health behaviour research (Saleeby, 2000); and 

was used to evaluate the likelihood and possibility of a phishing attack’s occurrence. 

TTAT speculates that computer users’ well-being includes two dimensions: computer 

performance and information privacy. However, Liang and Xue (2009) argued that a 

malicious IT attack could damage both dimensions. Therefore, severity perception of 

computer users should relate to the two dimensions. Perceived severity was measured 

by  the  number  of  items  based  on  the  privacy  literature  in  IS  (Smith,  Milberg  and 

Burke,  1996)  and  practitioner  research  that  report  the  negative  impact  of  phishing 

attacks (Brody, Mulig and Kimball, 2007; Dhamija, Tygar and Hearst, 2006; Downs, 

Holbrook and Cranor, 2006a, 2007b; Grinter, et al., 2006; Jagatic, et al., 2007; Miller 

and  Garfinkel,  2005;  Schneier,  2000;).  The  items  developed  in  their  research  were 

based on users’ concerns about both the loss of personal and confidential information 

64 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and  degraded  computer  performance  related  to  processing  speed,  Internet 

connection,  and software applications. 

The  items  of  safeguard  effectiveness  were  developed  based  on  relevant  health 

behaviour  research  (Downs,  Holbrook  and  Cranor,  2007;  Saleeby,  2000).  For 

example, a number of items in this subscale were derived for safeguard cost based 

on  Milne, Orbell and Sheeran and Saleeby’s studies (Champion and Scott, 1997; 

Saleeby,  2000).  Self-efficacy  was  measured  with  items  developed  by  Compeau 

and  Higgins  (1995),  making  minor  amendments  to  adapt  it  to  the  anti-phishing 

education  context. The number of items developed for avoidance motivation was 

based  on  the  behavioural  intention  measures  from  technology adoption  research 

(Davis,  1989;  Compeauand  Higgins,  1995),  with  a  focus  on  threat  avoidance 

rather  than  IT  adoption. Finally, threat avoidance was measured with three self-

developed items. 

Therefore, the pilot study questionnaire contained four items for perceived threat, 

four  items  for  perceived  severity,  three  items  for  perceived  susceptibility,  four 

items  for  safeguard  effectiveness,  three  items  for  safeguard  cost,  six  items  for 

self-efficacy, 

three  items  for  avoidance  motivation,  and  three  items  for 

avoidance  behaviour.  In  total  30  items  were  evaluated  using  a  five-point  scale 

Likert  at  1=  ‘Strongly  disagree’  and  5=  ‘Strongly  agree’.  A  sample  set  of 

questionnaire  is  shown  in  Table  4.1.  A  complete set of questionnaire is shown 

in Appendix 1. 

65 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4.1: A sample set of questionnaire 

1.   Perceived Susceptibility 

disagree 

Disagree 

Neutral 

Agree 

agree 

Strongly 

Strongly 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

It is extremely likely that my 

computer will be infected by a 

phishing attack in the future 

My chances of getting phishing 

attacks are great. 

I feel phishing attack will not infect 

my computer in the future 

2.   Perceived Severity 

A phishing attack would steal my 

personal information from my 

computer without my knowledge 

Phishing attack would invade my 

privacy 

I feel phishing attack would not steal 

my personal information from my 

computer without my knowledge 

I feel phishing attack would not 

invade my privacy 

Strongly 

Strongly 

disagree 

Disagree 

Neutral 

Agree 

agree 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

3.   Perceived Threat 

disagree 

Disagree 

Neutral 

Agree 

agree 

Strongly 

Strongly 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

Phishing attacks pose a threat to me 

A phishing attack is a danger to my 

computer 

It is risky to use my computer if it 

being phishing attacked 

I feel a phishing attack will not cause 

any harm to my computer 

66 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.3.2Participants 

A  pilot  study  questionnaire  survey  was 

run  with  sixteen 

first  year 

undergraduate 

students  from  the  Department  of  Information  Systems  and 

Computing,  Brunel  University,  London. Participants were invited by walking to 

the Data and Information  practical  lab  session  asking  for  their  help.  A  summary 

of  the  demographics  of  the  participants in the pilot study is shown in Table 4.2. 

Table 4.2: Participant demographics in the pilot study 

Characteristics 

Amount 

Sample Size 

Gender 

Male 

Female 

Age range (18 - 25) 

Average hours spent per week on the 

Internet 

0-5 

6-10 

11-15 

16-20 

20+ 

4.3.3 Procedure 

16 

10 

6 

16 

0% 

19% 

12% 

19% 

50% 

The pilot study questionnaire survey was conducted in-person.  First, participants 

were  asked them to go through model consent form (see Appendix  1). Then the 

individual  participants  were  asked  whether  or  not  they  knew  what  the  term 

“Phishing Attack”  means. Those who gave a positive response were asked to give 

a  short  verbal  description  to  confirm  their  understanding,  whilst  negative 

responders  were  read  a  brief  definition  of  phishing  attack  and   given   a  short  

verbal   description.   Then 

67 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants  were  asked  to  complete  the  questionnaire  items,  which  consist  of 

eight  constructs  such  as  perceived  severity,  perceived  susceptibility,  perceived 

threat, 

safeguard  effectiveness, 

safeguard  cost, 

self-efficacy,  avoidance 

motivation  and  avoidance behaviour.  They were already informed  that  they are 

of course welcome to  clarify them any questions when difficulty of understanding. 

This strategy was used to determine the participants’ readability and understanding 

of  questionnaire  items  during  the  pilot  study.  Therefore,  the  corresponding 

adjustments were addressed  before the main study. 

4.3.4 Results 

The  pilot  study  instrumented  SPSS,  which  is  a  statistical  software  package  for 

data  analysis;  was  developed  by  IBM  (Davis,  Bagozzi  and  Warshaw,  1983). 

Cronbach’s  alpha, which is known as a coefficient alpha was used to measure the 

internal  consistency  of  the  questionnaire  (Pallant,  2007).  Previous  research  has 

indicated that  an alpha score that is greater than 7.0 indicates that there is a good 

level  of internal  scale  consistency  (Pallant,  2007;  Cronbach,  1951;  Zaharias  and 

Poylymenakou,  2009).  Therefore,  Cronbach’s  alpha  was  calculated  for  each 

construct  of  the  questionnaire and is summarised in Table 4.3. 

Table  4.3:  Cronbach’s  alpha  scores  for  the  questionnaire  constructs  in  the 

pilot  study 

Constructs 

Cronbach’s alpha(>0.70) 

Perceived Susceptibility 

Perceived Severity 

Perceived Threat 

Perceived Safeguard Effectiveness 

Perceived Safeguard Cost 

Self-Efficacy 

Avoidance Motivation 

Avoidance Behaviour 

0.716 

0.869 

0.770 

0.904 

0.938 

0.798 

0.751 

0.880 

68 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.3.5 Summary 

Based on the feedback obtained from the wording of some measurement items of 

each  construct was slightly revised. The final questionnaire contained  four items 

for  perceived  threat,  four  items  for  perceived  severity,  three  items  for  perceived 

susceptibility,  four  items  for  safeguard  effectiveness,  three  items  for  safeguard 

cost,  six  items for self-efficacy,  three items for  avoidance motivation, and  three 

items  for  avoidance  behaviour.  Therefore,  total  30  items  were  used  in  the  main 

study to  measure  8  constructs  in  the  research  model  using  a  five-point  scale 

Likert  at  1=  ‘Strongly disagree’ and 5= ‘Strongly agree’ (see Appendix 2). 

4.4 Main Study 

The same questionnaire employed in the pilot study was used in the main  study. 

The  aim of the survey was to identify the key elements that should be addressed 

in  the  game design framework. Therefore, the 30 items were used to measure the 

8  constructs of Liang and Xue’s theoretical model using a five-point scale Likert 

at  1=  ‘Strongly  disagree’  and  5=  ‘Strongly  agree’.  Pallant  (2007)  argued  that 

the  sample  size calculation is approximately equal to Likert scale (in this case 5) 

into  the number  of  items  (in  this  case  30)  measure.  Therefore,  the  main  study 

survey was  conducted  with 151 participants. 

4.4.1 Participants 

The  questionnaire  was  administrated 

to  151  participants,  who  were 

undergraduate  students  from  Brunel  University  and  Bedfordshire  University. 

Participants’ ages  ranged  from 18  to 25, with a  gender split of  67  percent  male 

and  33  percent  female.  They  had  average  of  16  -20  hours  per  week  of  Internet 

experience  (SD=1.19).  Each  participant  took  part  in  the  survey  on  a  fully 

voluntary  basis.  A  summary  of  the  demographics of the participants in the main 

study is shown in Table 4.4. 

69 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4.4: Participant demographics in the main study 

Characteristics 

Amount 

Sample Size 

Gender 

Male 

Female 

Age range (18 - 25) 

Average hours spent per week on the 

Internet 

0-5 

6-10 

11-15 

16-20 

20+ 

4.4.2 Procedure 

151 

101 

50 

151 

3% 

12% 

14% 

14% 

57% 

The  questionnaire  was  handed  out  to  participants’  in-person  by  the  researcher 

(Appendix  2).  First,  the  nature  of  the  research  was  explained  to  each  participant 

individually  and  they  were  given  an  informed  consent  form  to  read  and  sign 

(Appendix 1). They were also told that they were free to withdraw from the study 

at  any  time without having to give a reason for withdrawing. Then the individual 

participants  were  asked  whether  or  not  they  knew  what  the  term  “Phishing 

Attack”  means.  Those who gave  a positive response were  asked  to  give a  short 

verbal  description  to  confirm  their  understanding,  whilst  negative  respondents 

were  read  a  brief  definition  of  a  phishing  attack  and  also  given  a  short  verbal 

description. Then  participants  were  asked  to  complete  the  questionnaire,  which 

measured  the  eight  constructs;  perceived  severity,  perceived  susceptibility, 

perceived  threat,  safeguard  effectiveness, safeguard cost, self-efficacy, avoidance 

motivation  and  avoidance  behaviour.  After  completing  the  questionnaire, 

participants  were  thanked  for  their  valuable time and effort in taking part in the 

study. 

70 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.4.3 Results 

As  in  the  pilot  study,  Cronbach’s  alpha  was  calculated  for  each  construct  to 

measure  the  internal  consistency  of  the  questionnaire  items.  The  results  of  this 

analysis  are  summarised  in  Table  4.5.  Previous  research  has  been  shown  the 

minimum  level  of  Cronbach’s alpha  is  0.7  to  be  internally  consistent  of  a  set 

of  items as  a  group  (Cronbach, 1951; Pallant, 2007; Zaharias and Poylymenakou, 

2009). 

Table  4.5:  Cronbach’s  alpha  scores  for  the  questionnaire  constructs  in  the 

main  study 

Constructs 

Perceived Susceptibility 

Perceived Severity 

Perceived Threat 

Perceived Safeguard 

Effectiveness 

Perceived Safeguard Cost 

Self-Efficacy 

Avoidance Motivation 

Avoidance Behaviour 

Cronbach’s alpha 

(>0.70) 

0.730 

0.766 

0.701 

0.803 

0.805 

0.714 

0.753 

0.762 

In  addition,  the  Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin  (KMO)  value  measure  was  used  to  assess 

the  adequacy of the sample and the KMO value should be greater than 0.6 for a 

satisfactory analysis to proceed (Cronbach and Meehl, 1955). For the sample used 

in  this study the KMO = 0.718. 

4.4.4 Model Testing 

The  study  employed  a  multiple  regression  analysis  to  test  the  Liang  and  Xue’s 

theoretical  model  using  the  following  parameters:  phishing  attack  and  anti-

phishing 

71 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
education  as  a  malicious  IT  threat  and  safeguarding  measure  respectively.  This 

is  because  to  address  the  research  question  in  this  study,  which  is,  what  key 

elements  should  be  addressed  in  the  game  design  framework  to  enhance 

avoidance  behaviour  through  motivation  for  computer  users  to  thwart  phishing 

attacks.  Multiple  regressions  analysis  is  not  only  just  one  statistical  technique, 

but  also  a  family  of  techniques  that  can  be  used  to  explore  the  relationship 

between one continuous  dependent variable and a number of independent variables 

or predictors (Davis,  Bagozzi  and  Warshaw,  1983).  Multiple  regression  analysis 

is  based  on  correlation,  but  permits  a  more  sophisticated  investigation  of  the 

interrelationship  among  a  set  of  variables.  Therefore,  this  statistical  technique 

makes it ideal for investigating what  elements interrelated  to  enhance  avoidance 

behaviour  through  motivation  for  computer  users  to  thwart  phishing  attacks  in 

the  game  design  context.  Moreover,  it  assists  to  identify  the  best  predictor 

elements from the theoretical model that  enhance  avoidance  behaviour  through 

motivation  in  the  game  design  framework.  The  model  testing results are shown 

in Figure 4.2. 

Figure 4.2: Model testing results 

72 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The model calculated R square value for perceived threat, avoidance motivation and 

avoidance  behaviour,  which  was  defined  as  how  much  of  variance  in  the  dependent 

variable  is  explained  by  its  independent  variables  in  the  model  (Davis,  Bagozzi  and 

Warshaw,  1983).  In  the  results  for  the  model  in  this  study 36  percent  of  variance is 

explained in perceived threat, 22 percent of variance in avoidance motivation, and 15 

percent  of  variance  in  avoidance  behaviour.  Pearson  correlation  analysis  was  then 

employed to describe the strength and direction of the linear relationship between two 

constructs.  The  results  indicate  that  perceived  threat  is  significantly  determined  by 

perceived  severity  (r  =  .499**,  and  Sig.  =  .000)  and  perceived  susceptibility  (r  = 

.357**,  and  Sig.  =  .000).  Avoidance  motivation  is  significantly  determined  by 

perceived  threat  (r  =  .386**,  and  Sig.  =  .000).  According  to  Liang  and  Xue’s  and 

Baron  and  Kenny’s  research,  these  results  show  that  the  influences  of  perceived 

susceptibility  and  severity  on  avoidance  motivation  are  fully  mediated  by  perceived 

threat. 

As  Figure  4.2  shows,  avoidance  motivation  is  also  significantly  determined  by 

safeguard effectiveness (r = .381**, and Sig. = .000), self-efficacy (r = .162*, Sig. = 

.047)  and  Safeguard  cost  (r  =  -.112*,  Sig.  =  .037).  Finally,  avoidance  motivation  is 

found to be significantly influenced by avoidance behaviour (r = .390**, and Sig. = 

.000). 

To  evaluate  the  interaction  effects  of  both  perceived  susceptibility  and  severity  and 

perceived  threat  and  safeguard  effectiveness,  Chin,  Marcolin  and  Newsted’s  (2003) 

product-indicator  approach  was  used.  Interaction  variables  were  created  by  cross 

multiplying the items of perceived susceptibility and severity and perceived threat and 

safeguard  effectiveness  (Liang  and  Xue,  2010).  As  Figure  4.2  shows,  the  interaction 

between perceived severity  and susceptibility was statistically  significant on  perceived 

threat (r = .588**, and Sig. = .000). Finally, the interaction between  perceived threat 

and safeguard effectiveness was statistically significant on avoidance  motivation (r = 

.452**, and Sig. = .000). 

In  summary,  the  model  testing  results  provided  support  to  all  of  the  hypotheses. 

Moreover, age, gender and Internet experiences were included as control variables on 

avoidance motivation and avoidance behaviour in the model testing. However,  none 

73 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of these control variables was found to have a statistically significant effect on either 

avoidance motivation or avoidance behaviour. This is similar to the finding of  Liang 

and Xue’s (2010) empirical study. 

4.4.5 Game Design Framework 

This study empirically investigated what key elements that should be addressed in the 

game  design  framework  for  computer  users  to  avoid  phishing  attacks  through 

motivation.  The  elements  of  a  theoretical  model  derived  from  TTAT  were  used  to 

address  in  the  game  design  framework.  Figure  4.2  shows  the  model  testing  results. 

The  model  accounts  for  36  percent  of  variance  in  perceived  threat,  22  percent  of 

variance in avoidance motivation, and 15 percent of variance in avoidance behaviour. 

Perceived  threat  is  significantly  determined  by  perceived  severity  (r  =  .499**,  and 

Sig.  =  .000),  perceived  susceptibility  (r  =  .357**,  and  Sig.  =  .000)  and  their 

interaction (r = .588**, and Sig. = .000). Therefore, perceived severity and perceived 

susceptibility elements addressed in the game design framework for computer users to 

thwart  phishing  attacks.  As  Figure  4.2  shows,  avoidance  motivation  is  significantly 

determined by perceived threat (r = .386**, and Sig. = .000), safeguard effectiveness 

(r = .381**,  and Sig. = .000), and  safeguard cost  (r =  -.112*, Sig. = .037), and self- 

efficacy (r = .162*, Sig. = .047). However, it is interesting to note that safeguard cost 

negatively  effects  avoidance  motivation  though  it  is  significantly  determined  by 

avoidance motivation.  This  is  because  the  user’s  motivation  to  avoid the  IT  threat  is 

expected  to  be  reduced  by the  potential  cost  of  using  the  safeguard  measure  (Liang 

and  Xue,  2010).  Therefore,  perceived  threat,  safeguard  effectiveness,  safeguard  cost 

and self-efficacy elements should be addressed in the game design framework. Finally, 

avoidance motivation is found significantly influence avoidance behaviour (r 

= .390**, and Sig. = .000). 

In  summary,  this  study  results  provided  support  to  determine  what  elements that 

should  be  addressed  in the  game  design  framework  for  computer  users  to  avoid 

phishing  attacks 

through  motivation.  Therefore,  perceived 

threat,  safeguard 

effectiveness,    safeguard    cost,    self-efficacy,    perceived    threat    and    perceived 

74 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
susceptibility  elements  were  addressed  in  the  game  design  framework.  The 

game  design framework is shown in Figure 4.3. 

Figure 4.3: Game Design Framework (Arachchilage and Love, 2013) 

4.4.6 Discussion 

This study empirically investigated a game design framework for computer users 

to thwart phishing attacks. Therefore, phishing attack and anti-phishing education 

were  considered as a malicious IT threat and safeguarding measure respectively 

in order to  test a theoretical model derived from TTAT (Liang and Xue, 2010). 

The study paid  particular  attention  to  threat  perception  because  it  plays  a  vital 

role  in  influencing  computer  users’  avoidance behaviour.  Data  analysis  results 

showed in the Figure 4.2,  the model is able to explain a considerable amount of 

variance in users’ motivation to avoid IT threats (22 percent) and actual avoidance 

behaviour (15 percent).  Therefore,  this  study  conveys  a  simple,  yet  powerful 

message  to  motivate  computer  users  to  avoid malicious IT threats.

75 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  amount  of  variance  in  users’  avoidance 

behaviour  is  quite  low  thus  it  is  significant  (Pallant,  2007).  There  is  a  possible 

explanation  for  this  result.  When  users  decide  that  the  IT  threat  can  be  avoided  by 

using  the  safeguarding  measure,  they  may  take  a  problem-focused  coping  approach. 

However,  when  the  IT  threat  could  not  be  avoided  completely,  they  may  take  an 

emotion-focused coping approach (Liang and Xue, 2010; Liang and Xue, 2009; Rhoa 

and Yub, 2011). Lazarus and Folkman  (1984) asserted two types of coping could be 

performed  to  deal  with  the  threat;  problem-focused  and  emotion-focused.  Problem- 

focused coping referred to adaptive behaviors that take a problem-solving approach. It 

directly deals with the malicious  IT threat by taking  a safeguarding measure such as 

updating  password  regularly,  disabling  cookies,  and  installing  and  configuring 

safeguarding  IT.  When  people  face  the  problem  as  a  challenge,  they  seem  to  take  a 

problem-oriented  coping  behavior  and  treat  the  problem  as  a  thing  that  can  be 

controlled. In contrast, emotion-focused coping, the problem identified as a threat and 

loss, people tend to perceive it as a thing cannot be solved by them and hence, take an 

emotional  coping  behavior.  Beaudry  and  Pinsonneaut  (2001)  stated  that  if  users 

perceive the malicious IT threat, they take problem-focused coping or if they believe 

that  the  threat  is  not  avoidable,  they  will  inactively  avoid  the  threat  by  performing 

emotion-focused coping.  Therefore,  it can be argued in the current study,  that users’ 

emotion-focused  coping  behaviour  would  have  caused  for  avoidance  behaviour  of 

phishing threat, which will account for the variance of avoidance behaviour. 

Computer users have to be convinced and feel that such malicious IT threats exist in 

the cyberspace and are avoidable. The study found some evidence in the data analysis 

results  that  the  model  is  able  to  explain  a  respectable  amount  of  variance  in  threat 

perception  (36  percent).  This  figure  is  little  higher  than  Liang  and  Xue’s (2010) 

empirical  study,  which  is  33  percent.  Therefore,  perceived  threat  element  is 

significantly important to address in the game design framework for computer users to 

enhance  avoidance  behaviour 

through  motivation  to  thwart  phishing  attacks. 

Furthermore, the study demonstrates threat perception that users need to be aware of 

likelihood  and  severity  of  being  attacked  by  malicious  IT  threat.  If  users  actually 

perceive  the  threat,  they  are  more  motivated  to  avoid  it.  The  safeguarding  measure 

was  evaluated  from  three  aspects;  taking  into  account  safeguard  effectiveness,  cost 

76 

 
 
 
 
 
 
related to safeguard measure and users confident of using the safeguard. If the level 

of  effectiveness  of  the  safeguarding  measure  is  high  then  users  are  more 

motivated to  avoid threats. So, the safeguard effectiveness element is important in 

the game design  framework for computer users to thwart phishing threats. Users’ 

high  confidence  in  taking the safeguard measures influences their motivation to 

avoid  threats.  Therefore,  self-efficacy  should  also  be  included  in  the  game 

design  framework  for  avoiding  threats through motivation. 

When the safeguard cost is high, users  are less motivated to avoid threats.  Liang 

and  Xue  (2009  and  2010)  describes  when  time,  money,  inconvenience  and 

comprehension  needed  to  use  the  safeguarding  measure  is  high,  users  are  less 

motivated  to  avoid  threats. The current study results also demonstrated safeguard 

cost  negatively  affects  avoidance  motivation.  Therefore,  safeguard  cost  should 

address in the game design  framework, as a payback to safeguarding effectiveness. 

Liang and  Xue’s   (2010)  model  testing  results  did  not  support  the  interaction 

between  perceived  severity  and  susceptibility  on  perceived  threat.  Surprisingly, 

this  study  revealed  that  perceived  threat  is  significantly  determined  by  the 

interaction  between  perceived  severity  and  susceptibility (r = .588**, and Sig. = 

.000). 

Moreover,  this  study  emphasises  that  avoidance  motivation  is  significantly 

determined  by  the  interaction  of  perceived  threat  and  safeguarding  measure  (r 

= 

.452**,  and  Sig.  =  .000).  This  result  contradicts  with  Liang  and  Xue’s  (2010) 

findings  regarding  the  interaction  between  perceived  threat  and  safeguard 

effectiveness  on  avoidance  motivation.  However,  they  suggest  the  interaction 

between perceived threat  and  safeguard  effectiveness  can  be  viewed  from  two 

perspectives.  First,  when  the  threat level is high, perceived threat can be viewed 

to  negatively  moderate  the 

relationship  between  safeguard  effectiveness  and 

avoidance motivation. Second, when  the level  of safeguard effectiveness  is  high, 

it can be viewed to negatively moderate  the relationship between perceived threat 

and  avoidance  motivation.  However,  this  study does provide evidence to address 

the interaction  effect of perceived threat  and  safeguard effectiveness in the game 

design framework. 

77 

 
 
 
 
 
 
4.5 Summary 

This  study  attempted  to  develop  a  game  design  framework,  which  enhances 

computer  users’  avoidance  behaviour  through  motivation  to  prevent  themselves 

from  phishing  attacks. The study empirically investigated what elements should 

address  in  the  game  design  framework  for  computer  users  to  thwart  phishing 

attacks.  A  theoretical  model  derived  from  TTAT  was  used  develop  the  game 

design framework. To test the model,  phishing attack and anti-phishing education 

were considered as a malicious IT threat  and safeguarding measure respectively. 

Finally,  the  current  study  results  provided  support  to  define  what  are  the  key 

elements  that  should  be  addressed  in  the  game  design  framework  for computer 

users 

to 

thwart  phishing  attacks.  Therefore,  perceived  threat,  safeguard 

effectiveness,  safeguard  cost, 

self-efficacy,  perceived  severity  and  perceived 

susceptibility elements should be  incorporated  into  the  game  design  framework 

for  computer  users  to  avoid  phishing  attacks through motivation. 

The  next  study  in  Chapter  5  will  attempt  to  design  and  evaluate  a  mobile 

game  prototype  using  MIT  App  Inventor  Emulator  as  a  tool  to  educate 

computer  users  against  the  dangers  of  phishing  attacks.  The  study  will  use  the 

game  design  framework developed on the results from the study reported in this 

chapter. 

78 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 

Designing a Mobile Game for 
Computer Users to Thwart “Phishing 
Attacks” 

5.1 Introduction 

The current study focuses on designing a mobile game as a tool to educate computer 

users  creating  awareness  of  phishing  attacks.  Phishing  is  an  online  identity  theft, 

which  aims  to  steal  sensitive  information  such  as  username,  password  and  online 

banking  details  from  victims.  To  prevent  this,  phishing  education  needs  to  be 

considered (Downs, Holbrook and Cranor, 2007; Kumaraguru, et al., 2007 and Sheng, 

et al., 2007). Mobile games can facilitate to embed learning in a natural environment. 

Therefore, this study attempts to introduce a mobile game design prototype based on a 

story,  which  simplifies  and  exaggerates  real  life.  The  study  derived  a  game  design 

framework,  which  was  introduced  in  Chapter  4  (Figure  4.2).  It  describes  how  users 

avoid  malicious  IT  threats  using  a  given  safeguarding  measure.  Furthermore,  the 

study  findings  help  to  define  what  are  the  elements  that  should  be  addressed  in  the 

game design framework for computer users to thwart phishing attacks. Therefore, the 

study findings suggests perceived threat, safeguard effectiveness, safeguard cost, self- 

efficacy,  perceived  severity  and  perceived  susceptibility  elements  that  should  be 

addressed in the game design framework for computer users to avoid phishing threats 

through motivation. 

The current study attempts to design and then develop a mobile game prototype using 

MIT  App  Inventor  Emulator  as  an  educational  tool  to  protect  computer  users  from 

phishing  attacks.  The  MIT  App  Inventor  emulator  is  a  visual  “blocks”  programing 

language  that  was  initially developed  by Google  and  then  moved  to  MIT  centre  for 

mobile learning for further research and developments (Wolber, 2011). To accomplish 

79 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this  study,  the  elements  of  the  game  design  framework  were  addressed  in  the 

mobile  game  design  prototype  context.  Furthermore,  the  mobile  game  design 

principles were  used  as  guidelines  for  structuring  and  presenting  information  in 

the  game  design  context.  The  overall  mobile  game  design  was  aimed  to 

enhance  computer  users’  avoidance  behaviour  through  motivation  to  protect 

themselves  against  phishing 

threats.  The  prototype  game  application  was 

developed on MIT App Inventor  Emulator that supports mobile Android platform. 

Finally,  for  testing  the  application  through  users,  the  mobile  game  prototype 

application was deployed on a HTC One X  touch  screen  smart  phone.  The  study 

believes that training computer users to protect  themselves against phishing attacks 

through a mobile game prototype would be an aid  to enable the cyberspace a secure 

environment. 

5.2 Aims and Objectives 

The  aim  of  this  research  study  is  to  design  a  mobile  game  prototype  as  an 

educational 

tool  to  teach  computer  users  to  protect  themselves  against  phishing 

attacks. Therefore,  it asks the following questions: The first question is how does 

the system developer  identify which issues the game needs to be addressed? Once 

the  developer  has  identified  the  salient  issues,  they  are  faced  with  second 

question,  what  principles 

should  be  used  to  structure  this  information.  The 

elements of the game design  framework  proposed  in  Chapter  4  (Figure  4.2)  were 

used  to  address  those  mobile  game design issues  and  the mobile game design 

principles were used as guidelines for  structuring  and  presenting  information  in 

the  game  design  context.  Then  a  game  prototype  was  designed  for  mobile 

android platform using  MIT  App  Inventor  Emulator. 

The objectives are as follows: 
(cid:2)  To  identify  the  elements  that  should  be  addressed  in  the  mobile  game 

design prototype for computer users to avoid themselves from phishing attacks. 

(cid:2)  To  design  a  storyboard  for  the  game  based  on  a  story,  which  simplifies 

and  exaggerates real life. 

(cid:2)  To design and develop the mobile game design prototype using MIT App 

Inventor  Emulator for computer users to thwart phishing attacks. 

80 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.3 Game Design Issues 

The  main  focus  of  the  proposed  game  design  is  to  educate  computer  users  to 

thwart  phishing  attacks.  To  answer  this  question  issues  drawn  from  the  game 

design  framework  of  threat  avoidance  will  be  used  to  explore  the  principles 

needed  for  structuring  the  design  of  the  game  in  the  context  of  computer  use. 

The  game  design  theoretical  framework  introduced  in  Chapter  4  (Figure  4.2) 

describes  individual  IT  users’  behaviour  of  avoiding  the  threat  of  malicious 

information technologies such as  phishing attacks. The framework examined how 

individuals  avoid  IT  threats  by  using  a  given  safeguarding  measure.  The 

safeguarding measure does not necessarily have to  be  an  IT  source  such  as  anti-

phishing tools; rather it could be behaviour (Liang and  Xue, 2010). 

Consistent  with  the  game  design  framework  introduced  in  Chapter  4  (Figure 

4.2),  users’ IT threat avoidance behaviour is determined by avoidance motivation, 

which,  in  turn,  is  affected  by perceived  threat. Perceived  threat  is  influenced  by 

perceived  severity  and  susceptibility  as  well  as  their  interaction.  The  user’s 

avoidance  motivation is also determined by the three constructs such as safeguard 

effectiveness,  safeguard  cost  and  self-efficacy.  In  addition,  the  game  design 

framework  posits  that  perceived  threat  is  influenced  by  an  interaction  between 

perceived  severity  and 

susceptibility.  Moreover,  avoidance  motivation  is 

influenced by the interaction effect  of perceived threat and safeguard effectiveness. 

Whilst  the  proposed  game  design  framework  forms  the  issues  that  the  game 

design  needs to address, it should also indicate how to structure this information 

and present  in  a  game  context.  Therefore,  the  mobile  game  design  attempts  to 

develop threat perceptions, making individuals more motivated to avoid phishing 

attacks  and  use  safeguarding measures. 

81 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.4 What to teach? 

Possible  phishing  attacks  can  be  identified  in  several  ways,  such  as  carefully 

looking  at the website address, so called Universal Resource Locator (URL), signs 

and content  of  the  web  page,  the  lock  icons  and  jargons  of  the  webpage,  the 

context  of  email  message,  and  the  general  warning  messages  displayed  in  the 

website  (Downs,  Holbrook  and  Cranor,  2007;  Wu,  Miller and  Garfinkel,  2005). 

Previous  research  has  identified that existing anti-phishing techniques based on 

URLs are not robust enough  for phishing detection (Garera,  et  al.,  2007;  Iacovos 

and  Sasse,  2012;  Sheng,  et  al.,  2007). Garera, et al. (2007) strongly argued it is 

often  possible  to  differentiate  phishing  websites  from 

legitimate  ones  by 

carefully  looking  at  the  URL  without  having  any  knowledge  of  the  content 

of  the  corresponding  website  or  sings  and  symbols  such  as  “VeriSign”  signs 

and  “Padlock”  icons.  Therefore,  in  this  research  argues that teaching people not 

to  fall  for  phishing  through  URLs  is  still  infancy,  but  yet  well-designed  anti-

phishing education based on URLs can contribute to stop users  falling for phishing. 

The objective  of the anti-phishing mobile  game  design,  reported  in this book,  is 

to  teach user how to identify the phishing website addresses (URLs). Therefore the 

game  design should develop an awareness of identifying the  features of website 

addresses.  For  example,  legitimate  websites  usually  do  not  have  numbers  at  the 

beginning  of  their URLs such as http://81.153.192.106/www.hsbc.co.uk. 

5.5 Game Description 

The  proposed  mobile  game  design  is  described  in  two  parts;  story  along  with 

mechanism and technology used to develop the game. 

82 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.5.1 Story and Mechanism 

Funny stories are a  great  tonic for maintaining users’ attraction in  eLearning (Taran, 

2005). Storytelling techniques are used  to  grab  attention, which  also  exaggerates  the 

interesting  aspect  of  reality.  Stories  can  be  based  on  personal  experiences  or  famous 

tales or it could also be aimed to build a storyline that associates content units, inspire 

or reinforce. 

The game is based on a scenario of a character of a small fish and ‘his’ teacher who 

live in a big pond. The  more appropriate, realistic and content relevant the story, the 

better  the  chances  that  it  will  trigger  users.  The  main  character  of  the  game  is  the 

small fish, who wants to eat worms to become a big fish. The game player role-plays 

as a small fish. However, he should be careful of phishers those who try to trick him 

with  fake  worms.  This  represents  phishing  attacks  by  developing  threat  perception. 

Each worm is associated with a website address, so called Unified Resource Locator 

(URL) which appears as a dialog box. The small fish’s job is to eat all the real worms 

which  associate  legitimate  website  addresses  and  reject  fake  worms  which  associate 

with  fake  website  addresses  before  the  time  is  up.  This  attempts  to develop  the 

severity and susceptibility of the phishing threat in the game design. 

The other character is the small fish’s teacher, who is a mature and experienced fish in 

the  pond.  If  the  worm  associated  with  the  URL  is  suspicious  and  if  it  is  difficult  to 

identify, the small fish can go to ‘his’ teacher and request help. The teacher could help 

him  by  giving  some  tips  on  how  to  identify  bad  worms. For  example,  “website 

addresses  associate  with  numbers  in  the  front  are  generally  scams,”  or  “a  company 

name followed by a hyphen in a URL is generally a scam”. Whenever the small fish 

requests help from the teacher, the time left score will be reduced by certain amount 

(in  this  case  by  100  seconds)  as  a  payback  for  safeguard  measure.  This  attempts  to 

address the safeguard effectiveness and the cost needs to pay for the safeguard in the 

game design. 

The  game  prototype  design  consists  of  total  10  URLs  to  randomly  display  worms 

including  five  good  worms  (associated  with  legitimate  URLs)  and  five  fake  worms 

83 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(associated with phishing URLs). If the user correctly identified all good worms 

while  avoiding all fake worms by looking at URLs, then he will gain 10 points 

(in this case each attempt possible to score 1 point). If the user falsely identified 

good  worms  or  fake  worms,  each  attempt  loses  one  life  out  of  total  lives 

remaining to complete the  game  (Figure.  5.4).  If  the  user  requested  help  from 

the  big  fish  (in  this  case  small  fish’s teacher) each attempt loses 100 seconds 

out  of  total  remaining  time  to  complete  the  game,  which  is  600  seconds 

(Figure.  5.5). The  consequences  of  the  player’s  actions are shown in Table 5.1 

Table 5.1: Scoring scheme and consequences of the player’s action 

Good worm 

Bad worm 

(associated with legitimate URL) 

(associated with phishing URL) 

Player 

Correct, gain 10 points 

False negative, (each attempt loses 

eats 

(each attempt  = 1 point) 

one life out of 5 lives) 

Player 

False positive, (each attempt loses 

Correct, gain 10 points 

reject 

one life out of 5 lives) 

(each attempt= 1 point) 

Request 

Each attempt loses 100 out of 600 

Each attempt loses 100 out of 600 

help 

seconds 

seconds 

The  game  is  designed  to  randomly  generate  worms  associate  with  URLs.  The 

user is  presented a worm each time associated with a different URL. The URL 

can be either  phishing or legitimate. When the user moves from the beginning 

to  the  end  of  the  game,  the  complexity  of  URLs  is  dramatically  increased. 

This  helps  the  user  to  gain  the  conceptual  knowledge  of  identifying  URLs. 

Therefore, self-efficacy of preventing  from phishing attacks will be addressed in 

the game design. 

The  game  design  is  based  on  a  story and  presented  to  the  player  using digital 

objects.  By  creating  attractive  digital  objects  in  the  game  design,  not  only 

immerse  in  an  augmented  physical  environment,  but  also  immerse  into  an 

augmented  social  environment.  The  overall  game  design  attempts  enhance 

individual users’ avoidance  behaviour through motivation to protect themselves 

against phishing attacks. 

84 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.5.2 Technology 

The storyboard technique pays attention on people who will use the solution and 

the  value  it  will  bring.  Stories  are  rich,  the  fleshed-out  descriptions  of  settings; 

people,  activities, goals, motivations and values presented in a coherent, causally 

well  connected way  to form a pictorial representation (Gruen, 2000). The process 

of  creating a story through a storyboard ensures the factors necessary  to create an 

effective  solution.  Therefore,  the  game  design  was  initially  sketched  in  a 

storyboard  using ink pen, post-it notes and papers based on the above-mentioned 

story and then  implemented using MIT App Inventor emulator. 

The content of the game  including URLs and training tips  was hard coded  using 

MIT  App  Inventor  emulator.  The  emulator  provided  a  great  deal  of  flexibility 

and  made  easy  to  quick  update  the  content  in  developing  the  mobile  game 

prototype. This is one  of  the  main  reasons  to  use  MIT  App  Inventor  emulator 

to  develop  a  low-fidelity  prototype. The current research employed the approach 

of the URL classification used  in  Sheng,  et  al.  (2007)  and  Dhamija,  Tygar  and 

Hearst  (2006)  studies.  Therefore,  the  game  was  designed  total  10  URLs  to 

randomly  display  including  five  good  worms  and  five bad  worms.  The  list  of 

URLs is shown in Table 5.2. 

Attractive  digital  objects  were  integrated  such  as  sounds  and  graphics  with  the 

game  to  better  engage  the  user  within  the  gaming  environment.  For  example,  a 

sound  effect  to  provide  a  feedback  to  the  player  based  on  his  selection  of 

either  good  or  bad  worms. In  addition,  a  light  water  bubbling  sound  was 

played  in  the  background  throughout the game to feel the player that he lives in 

the pond. 

85 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 5.2: List of URLs displayed in the game 

Game Focus 

Real or 

Phishing 

Examples 

Appropriate 

URL 

Real 

http://www.nationwide.co.uk/d 

efault.htm 

“Tips/ Training messages” 

from big fish 

"URLs with well-known domain 

and correctly spelled are 

legitimate" 

http://147.46.236.55/PayPal/lo 

"Don't trust URLs with all 

IP address 

URL 

Miss spelled 

URL 

Appropriate 

URL 

Sub domain 

URL 

Similar and 

Phishing 

gin.html 

Phishing  www.paypa1.com 

numbers in the front" 

"Don't trust URLs with 

misspelled known websites" 

"URLs with well-known domain 

Real 

www.smile.co.uk/ 

and correctly spelled are 

Phishing 

www.argos.co.uk.myshop.com 

names that contained a part of the 

legitimate" 

"Don't trust URLs with large host 

well-known web address" 

"Company name followed by a 

deceptive 

Phishing 

http://www.msn-verify.com/ 

hyphen usually means, it's a scam 

domains 

Appropriate 

URL 

Real 

http://www.halifax.co.uk/about 

online/home.asp 

Similar and 

website" 

"URLs with well-known domain 

and correctly spelled are 

legitimate" 

“Companies don't use security 

deceptive 

Phishing 

www.ebay-security.com 

related keywords in their 

domains 

Miss spelled 

URL 

Appropriate 

URL 

Phishing  www.online.ll0ydstsb.co.uk 

Real 

https://ibank.barclays.co.uk/ 

domains” 

"Don't trust URLs with 

misspelled known websites" 

"URL with 'https://’ usually a 

legitimate website" 

86 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.6 Game Based Learning 

The game based education system in learning environment is an increasingly relevant 

trend (Kumaraguru, et al., 2007). Although, the motivational and immersive factors of 

game  based  learning  have  been  researched  in  literature,  there  is  still  a  lack  of 

systematic  design  and  development  behind  educational  games  (Moreno-Ger,  et  al., 

2008). This poor design and development cause little success in game based learning 

(Kumaraguru,  et  al.,  2007;  Sheng,  et  al.,  2007).  The  objective  of  the  mobile  game 

design,  reported  in  this  study,  is  to  teach  computer  users  to  thwart  phishing  attacks. 

Therefore,  the  study  attempts  to  design  a  mobile  game  prototype  based  on  learning 

science principles along with mobile game design principles to ensure users learn how 

to avoid phishing URLs. 

5.6.1 Learning Science Principles 

The  current  study  employed  several  learning  science  principles  to  the  game  design. 

Learning  science  literature  claims  that  effective  learning  takes  place  if  the  teaching 

methodology  is  goal-oriented,  contextual  and  interactive  and  challenging  (Quinn, 

2005).  Learners  have  specific  goals  to  achieve with  the  goal-oriented learning.  They 

are being challenged and trained during the process of achieving the goal. Learning is 

more  effective  if  related  materials  are  presented  in  an  attractive  form within  the 

context  where  learners  can  relate  to.  There  is  a  large  volume  of  published  studies 

describing  the  effectiveness  of  games  for  interactive  teaching  conceptual  and 

procedural  knowledge  (Gee,  2003).  For  example,  a  URL  consists  of  a  protocol  part 

and  a  domain  name  part.  Therefore,  checking  a  URL  assigned  to  a  worm,  which 

contained an IP address, is likely a phishing URL. 

In  particularly  game  based  education,  learning  science  has  established  an  interactive 

environment that enhances the user motivation when adhere to design principles in the 

educational  game  context  (Gee,  2003;  Quinn,  2005;  Repenning  and  Lewis,  2005). 

Therefore, this research study employed three learning science principles to design  a 

87 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mobile  game  prototype:  reflection,  story-based  agent  and  conceptual-procedural 

knowledge (Sheng, et al., 2007). 

The reflection principle is a process which learners are made to stop and think about 

what they are learning.  In other words, the  content  of teaching  throughout the  game 

should  reflect  on  learners.  Educational  games  provide  an  opportunity for  learners  to 

reflect  their  new  subject  knowledge  learned  (Donovan,  Bransford  and  Pellegrino, 

1999).  This  principle  is presented  in  the  game  design  context,  providing  a  real  time 

audio feedback on each worm based on the user’s decision. This helps the user to stop 

and  think  for  a  while  and  then  reflect  on  the  knowledge  gained  from  each  worm 

associated with either real or phishing URLs. 

The  story-based  agent  environment  principle  helps  to  guide  learners  throughout  the 

learning process  using agents  or  characters.  These  characters  can  be  verbal  or  visual 

objects  such  as  cartoon  or  real-life  characters.  The  story-based  agent  environment 

principle  describes  how  the  use  of  story-based  agents  enhances  the  learning  process 

(Repenning  and  Lewis,  2005;  Sheng,  et  al.,  2007).  The  current  study  employed  a 

number of agents such as small fish and ‘his’ teacher. Moreover, the story starts with 

a  scenario  of  a  character  of  a  small  fish  and  ‘his’  teacher  who  live  in  a  big  pond. 

People learn from stories, because stories are easy to remember and the way organise 

events in a meaningful framework.  The story telling technique tends to stimulate the 

cognitive  process  of  the  learner  (Klein,  1999;  Mayer,  2001).  Previous  research  has 

revealed  that  story  based  agent  conditions  perform  better  learning  than  non-story 

based agent conditions (Maldonado, et al., 2005; Moreno, et al., 2001). 

The  conceptual-procedural  knowledge  principle  influences  one  another  in  mutually 

supportive ways  and builds an iterative process  (Johnson and Koedinger,  2002). The 

current  study  employed  conceptual-procedural  knowledge  principle  by  displaying  a 

randomly generated  worm associated  with a  URL each time. The URL  can be either 

fake  or  real.  When  the  user  moves  the  game  from  the beginner level  to  the end,  the 

complexity  of  different  URLs  is  dramatically  increased.  This  helps  to  develop  the 

procedural knowledge of URLs in the game design. A URL has a format that consists 

of a protocol part and a  domain name part.  When the user moves through the game, 

URLs assigned to each worm are checked. In this process, the user learns the different 

88 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
patterns  of  URLs.  In  addition,  the  game  design  attempts  to  teach  the  user  specific 

procedural  tips  such  as  “Don't  trust  URLs  with  all  numbers  in  the  front”  or  “Don't 

trust URLs with misspelled known websites”. Therefore, this attempts to address the 

conceptual-procedural knowledge of URLs in the game design context. 

5.6.2 Mobile Game Design 

The  above-mentioned  scenario  based  on  the  theoretical  framework  empirically 

investigated  in  Chapter  4,  should  combine  with  a  set  of  guidelines  that  focused  on 

designing  an  educational  mobile  game  (Amory  and  Seagram,  2003;  Prensky,  2001). 

This  set  of  guidelines  is  known  as  game  design  principles,  which  describe  how  the 

user interacts with the mobile game. Prensky (2001) has proposed that a mobile game 

can be described in terms of six structural elements. Those elements were used in the 

game design as guidelines for structuring and presenting information. 

1.  Rules:  rules  organise  the  game.  The  story  developed  in  the  mobile  game 

design based on the game design framework describes the rules. 

2.  Goals and objectives: goals and objectives are the player struggle to achieve. 

The player has a goal to solve the task. This is designed in the mobile game to 

complete  it  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  by  eating  real  worms  associated 

with legitimate URLs while avoiding fake worms associated with fake URLs. 
3.  Outcome and feedback: outcome and feedback measure the progress against 

goals.  The  user  obtains  the  real  time  feedback  on  the  current  status  in  the 

game. For instance, when the player taps on a real worm, which is associated 

with a legitimate URL, a real time audio feedback is played “wow well done”. 

Similarly,  when  the  player  taps  on  a  fake  worm,  which  is  associated  with  a 

fraudulent URL, also a real time audio feedback is displayed “oh try again”. 
4.  Conflict,  competition,  challenge,  and  opposition  leading  to  players’ 

excitement: These are addressed in the mobile game design as the opportunity 

to gain points against the given lives of the player. 

5.  Interaction:  Interaction  is  the  social  aspect  in  the  game  design.  This  is 

accomplished  by  providing  a  real  time  feedback,  fantasy  and  rewards  or 

89 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gaining  points  in  the  game  design.  By  creating  attractive  digital  objects  such 

as a big fish (in this case, the teacher),  worms and  pond  in  the  game design, 

not  only immerse  the player  in  an  augmented physical  environment,  but  also 

immerse into an augmented social environment. 

6.  Representation  or  story:  This  exaggerates  the  interesting  aspect  of  reality. 

The representation is addressed in the game design through the scenario or the 

story  developed  using  digital  objects  such  as  the  small  fish  (game  player), 

‘his’ teacher, and worms. 

Furthermore,  the  work  not  only focuses  on  the  design  of  a  mobile  game  (Korhonen 

and Koivisto, 2006), but also it should focus on the usability of the  game application 

(Gong  and  Tarasewich,  2004).  The  usability  of  the  game  design  often  attempts  to 

recreate a typical  playing environment  to emulate how a player would typically play 

the game in the real world while allowing him to achieve the goal. For example, the 

player should notice when something in the game changes such as decreasing the time 

period to complete as they move throughout the game or move the digital objects in 

the game using the keys in the keypad, touch stick or finger without any difficulty. 

The game scenario and design principles (a set of guidelines) were combined together 

to focus on  designing an  educational mobile  game  for  computer  users  to thwart 

phishing  attacks.  Therefore,  the  current  study  attempts  to  design  a  storyboard  based 

on the game scenario and design principles as the initial step for the game. 

5.7 Storyboard Design 

A storyboard is a short graphical representation of a narrative, which can be used for a 

variety  of  tasks  (Truong,  Hayes  and  Abowd,  2006).  The  exercise  of  creating 

storyboards has drawn from a long history with particular communities such as those 

for  developing  films,  television  program  segments  and  cartoon  animations  (Gruen, 

2000).  Storyboarding is  a  common  technique  in  Human  Computer  Interaction  (HCI) 

to demonstrate the system interfaces and contexts of use (Truong, Hayes and Abowd, 

2006).  One  of  the  best  ways  to  visualise  the  game  is  “storyboarding”  it  to  create  a 

90 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sequence  of  drawings  that  shows  different  scenes  and  goals  (Gruen,  2000). 

Storyboard sketches  are used  in  this  study to  do  brainstorming and  getting down  the 

general flow of the game on a paper. Stories are rich; the fleshed-out descriptions of 

settings,  people,  motivation,  activities,  goals  and  values  presented  in  a  coherent  and 

causally connected way. 

As interactive computing moves off the desktop to mobile devices, storyboards should 

demonstrate  not  only  the  details  related  to  the  specific  interface  design  context  but 

also  the  high  concepts  surrounding  the  user’s  motivation  and  emotion  during  the 

systems use (Truong, Hayes and Abowd, 2006). This is because the lack of the user’s 

motivation can cause less satisfaction in the system use. This situation leads the user 

reluctant to engage the system, which also directly causes not to produce the expected 

level of output by the system. Storyboards can illustrate a visualise scenario of how an 

application  feature  works  in  designing  new  technologies.  The  designer  creates  an 

information  design  scenario  that  specify  the  representation  of  a  task’s  objects  and 

actions  that  may  help  the  end-user  perceive,  interpret  and  make  sense  of  proposed 

functionalities.  The interaction  design scenario specifies  how  the  user  would  interact 

with the system to perform new activities. Therefore, in the current study, the process 

of  creating  a  story  can  influence  to  keep  the  game  player’s  attention  to  the  factors 

necessary to make an effective solution. 

The story-based design methods can be beneficial in two  specific ways (Rosson and 

Carroll,  2001).  First,  use  case  descriptions  are  important  in  understanding  how 

technology reshapes user activities. Second, the story can be created before the system 

is  built  and  its  impacts  are figured  out.  Thus,  it  has  been  shown  that  designers often 

use storyboards to visualise the depiction of information. 

There is a number of existing research utilised storyboarding  tools such as Silk  (Landay 

and  Myers,  1996),  DENIM  (Lin,  et  al.,  2000)  and  DEMAIS  (Bailey,  Konstan  and 

Carlis, 2001) to create interaction scenarios to convey how the end-user interacts  with 

the  envisioned  system.  However,  designers  brainstorm  individually  their  design 

alternatives while capturing their ideas in quick sketches still using ink pen or pencil 

and papers (Truong, Hayes and Abowd, 2006). Because this is the easiest and  quickest 

way  to  visualise  the  idea  instead  of  using  drawing  tools  such  as  Microsoft 

91 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PowerPoint  and  Microsoft  Paint,  or  much  more  advanced  graphics  tool  such  as 

Adobe  Photoshop  and  Adobe  Illustrator.  In  addition,  paper  prototypes  are  low-

fidelity  prototypes  more  license  to  suggest  changes.  A  prototype  design  can  be 

either  hi-  fidelity or low-fidelity prototype. There are some important trades  off 

here in  developing  high-fidelity  prototypes  and  low-fidelity  prototypes.  The  hi-

fidelity  prototype does look and  feel like a more real to the user. Consequently, 

users may be  more reluctant to critique the interface. Therefore, a quick and dirty 

paper prototype is  more  powerful  to  design  storyboards  (Sefelin,  Tscheligi  and 

Giller, 2003). A list of  requirements for the game design sketch is shown in Table 

5.3. Finally, the storyboard  was  sketched  using  ink  pen,  post-it  notes  and  papers 

based  on  the  above  story  and  game  design  principles,  which  is  shown  in  Figure 

5.1  (Truong,  Hayes  and  Abowd,  2006). 

92 

 
 
 
 
a
l
.
,

2
0
0
9
)
.

2
0
0
8
;

N
g

,

e
t

m
a
l
i
c
i
o
u
s

I
T
a
t
t
a
c
k
w

i
l
l
n
e
g
a
t
i
v
e
l
y
a
f
f
e
c
t
h
i
m
o
r

h
e
r

(
L
i
a
n
g
a
n
d
X
u
e
,
2
0
0
9
;
2
0
1
0
;

W
o
r
k
m
a
n
,

e
t

a
l
.
,

t
h
e

p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
t
h
r
e
a
t

i
n

t
h
e

g
a
m
e

d
e
s
i
g
n
.

a
d
d
r
e
s
s
e
s
w
h
i
l
e

r
e
j
e
c
t
i
n
g
f
a
k
e
w
o
r
m
s
w
h
i
c
h

i
s

u
p
.

T
h
i
s

a
t
t
e
m
p
t
s

t
o

d
e
v
e
l
o
p
t
h
e

s
u
s
c
e
p
t
i
b
i
l
i
t
y
o
f

a
s
s
o
c
i
a
t
e
w

i
t
h

f
a
k
e
w
e
b
s
i
t
e

a
d
d
r
e
s
s
e
s
b
e
f
o
r
e

t
h
e

t
i

m
e

a
l
l

t
h
e

r
e
a
l

w
o
r
m

s
w
h
i
c
h
a
s
s
o
c
i
a
t
e

l
e
g
i
t
i

m
a
t
e
w
e
b
s
i
t
e

i
n
d
i
v
i
d
u
a
l
’
s

s
u
b
j
e
c
t
i
v
e
p
r
o
b
a
b
i
l
i
t
y
t
h
a
t

a

.
3
5
7
*
*
,

a
n
d
S
i
g
.

=

.
0
0
0
)
.

b
o
x
.

T
h
e

s

m
a
l
l

f
i
s
h
’
s

(
t
h
e
g
a
m
e

p
l
a
y
e
r
)

j
o
b

i
s

t
o

e
a
t

P
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
s
u
s
c
e
p
t
i
b
i
l
i
t
y
i
s

d
e
s
c
r
i
b
e
d

a
s

a
n

i
n
f
l
u
e
n
c
e
s
o
n
p
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
t
h
r
e
a
t

(
r
=

a
w
e
b
s
i
t
e

a
d
d
r
e
s
s

(

U
R
L
)

w
h
i
c
h
a
p
p
e
a
r
s

a
s

a
d
i
a
l
o
g

1

.

P
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
S
u
s
c
e
p
t
i
b
i
l
i
t
y

P
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
s
u
s
c
e
p
t
i
b
i
l
i
t
y
s
i
g
n
i
f
i
c
a
n
t
l
y

E
a
c
h
w
o
r
m
d
i
s
p
l
a
y
e
d

i
n

t
h
e

g
a
m
e

i
s

a
s
s
o
c
i
a
t
e
d
w

i
t
h

T
a
b
l
e

5
.
3
:

A

l
i
s
t

o
f

r
e
q
u
i
r
e
m
e
n
t
s

f
o
r

t
h
e

g
a
m
e
d
e
s
i
g
n
s
k
e
t
c
h

  T
h
e

e
l
e
m
e
n
t
s
o
f

t
h
e
g
a
m
e
d
e
s
i
g
n
f
r
a
m
e
w
o
r
k

Q
u
e
s
t
i
o
n
n
a
i
r
e

s
u
r
v
e
y
r
e
s
u
l
t
s

G
a
m
e
d
e
s
i
g
n
s
k
e
t
c
h

9
3

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
0
0
9
;

2
0
1
0
)
.

p
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
s
u
s
c
e
p
t
i
b
i
l
i
t
y
(
r
=

.
3
5
7
*
*
,

w

i
t
h

p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
U
R
L
s
.

T
h
i
s

r
e
p
r
e
s
e
n
t
s

p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g

w
h
i
c
h

a
n

i
n
d
i
v
i
d
u
a
l

p
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
s

t
h
e
m
a
l
i
c
i
o
u
s

I
T

d
e
t
e
r
m
i
n
e
d
b
y
p
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
s
e
v
e
r
i
t
y
(
r

b
i
g
f
i
s
h
.

H
o
w
e
v
e
r
,
h
e

s
h
o
u
l
d
b
e

c
a
r
e
f
u
l
o
f
p
h
i
s
h
e
r
s

t
h
r
e
a
t

a
s

d
a
n
g
e
r
o
u
s
o
r
h
a
r
m
f
u
l

(
L
i
a
n
g
a
n
d
X
u
e
,

=

.
4
9
9
*
*
,

a
n
d
S
i
g
.

=

.
0
0
0
)
,

t
h
o
s
e
w
h
o

t
r
y
t
o

t
r
i
c
k

h
i
m
w

i
t
h

f
a
k
e
w
o
r
m
s

a
s
s
i
g
n
e
d

P
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
t
h
r
e
a
t

i
s

d
e
s
c
r
i
b
e
d
a
s

t
h
e

e
x
t
e
n
t

t
o

2
2
p
e
r
c
e
n
t
)

i
s

s
i
g
n
i
f
i
c
a
n
t
l
y

g
a
m
e

p
l
a
y
e
r
)
,

w
h
o
w
a
n
t
s

t
o

e
a
t

w
o
r
m

s

t
o

b
e
c
o
m
e

a

3

.

P
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
T
h
r
e
a
t

P
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
t
h
r
e
a
t

(

R
s
q
u
a
r
e
v
a
l
u
e
=

T
h
e
m
a
i
n
c
h
a
r
a
c
t
e
r
o
f

t
h
e
g
a
m
e

i
s

t
h
e

s

m
a
l
l

f
i
s
h

(
t
h
e

a
n
d
S
i
g
.

=

.
0
0
0
)

a
n
d

t
h
e
i
r

i
n
t
e
r
a
c
t
i
o
n

a
t
t
a
c
k
s
b
y
d
e
v
e
l
o
p
i
n
g
t
h
r
e
a
t
p
e
r
c
e
p
t
i
o
n
i
n
t
h
e
g
a
m
e

W
o
o
n

,

e
t

a
l
.
,

2
0
0
5
;

W
o
r
k
m
a
n
,

e
t

a
l
.
,

2
0
0
8
)
.

w

i
l
l

b
e

s
e
v
e
r
e

(
L
i
a
n
g
a
n
d
X
u
e
,

2
0
0
9
;

2
0
1
0
;

c
o
n
s
e
q
u
e
n
c
e
s

c
a
u
s
e
d
b
y
a
m
a
l
i
c
i
o
u
s

I
T
a
t
t
a
c
k

p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
t
h
r
e
a
t

i
n
t
h
e

g
a
m
e
d
e
s
i
g
n
.

g
a
m
e
.

T
h
i
s

a
t
t
e
m
p
t
s

t
o

d
e
v
e
l
o
p
t
h
e

s
e
v
e
r
i
t
y
o
f

t
h
e

w
h
i
c
h

a
n

i
n
d
i
v
i
d
u
a
l

p
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
s

t
h
a
t

n
e
g
a
t
i
v
e

.
4
9
9
*
*
,

a
n
d
S
i
g
.

=

.
0
0
0
)

l
i
f
e
o
u
t

o
f

t
o
t
a
l

l
i
v
e
s

r
e
m
a
i
n
i
n
g
t
o

c
o
m
p
l
e
t
e

t
h
e

P
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
s
e
v
e
r
i
t
y
i
s

d
e
s
c
r
i
b
e
d

a
s

t
h
e

e
x
t
e
n
t

t
o

i
n
f
l
u
e
n
c
e
s
o
n
p
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
t
h
r
e
a
t

(
r
=

g
o
o
d
w
o
r
m

s
o
r

f
a
k
e
w
o
r
m

s
,

e
a
c
h
a
t
t
e
m
p
t

l
o
s
e
s
o
n
e

2

.

P
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
S
e
v
e
r
i
t
y

P
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
s
e
v
e
r
i
t
y
s
i
g
n
i
f
i
c
a
n
t
l
y

I
f

t
h
e

s

m
a
l
l

f
i
s
h

(
t
h
e

g
a
m
e
p
l
a
y
e
r
)

f
a
l
s
e
l
y
i
d
e
n
t
i
f
i
e
d

P
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
t
h
r
e
a
t

s
i
g
n
i
f
i
c
a
n
t
l
y

(
r
=

.
3
8
6
*
*
,

a
n
d
S
i
g
.

=

.
0
0
0
)
.

i
n
f
l
u
e
n
c
e
s
o
n
A
v
o
i
d
a
n
c
e
m
o
t
i
v
a
t
i
o
n

e
f
f
e
c
t

(
r
=

.
5
8
8
*
*
,

a
n
d
S
i
g
.

=

.
0
0
0
)

d
e
s
i
g
n
.

9
4

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
0
1
0
;

W
o
o
n
,

e
t

a
l
.
,
2
0
0
5
)
.

t
h
e

s
a
f
e
g
u
a
r
d
m
e
a
s
u
r
e

(
L
i
a
n
g
a
n
d
X
u
e
,
2
0
0
9
;

i
n
c
o
n
v
e
n
i
e
n
c
e

a
n
d
c
o
m
p
r
e
h
e
n
s
i
o
n
r
e
q
u
i
r
e
d

u
s
i
n
g

s
a
f
e
g
u
a
r
d
i
n
t
h
e
g
a
m
e
d
e
s
i
g
n
.

a
t
t
e
m
p
t
s

t
o

a
d
d
r
e
s
s

t
h
e

c
o
s
t

n
e
e
d
s

t
o

p
a
y

f
o
r

t
h
e

c
o
g
n
i
t
i
v
e

e
f
f
o
r
t
s

s
u
c
h
a
s

t
i

m
e
,

m
o
n
e
y
,

(
r
=
-
.
1
1
2
*
,

S
i
g
.

=

.
0
3
7
)
.

s
e
c
o
n
d
s
)

a
s

a

p
a
y
b
a
c
k

f
o
r

s
a
f
e
g
u
a
r
d

m
e
a
s
u
r
e
.

T
h
i
s

e
f
f
e
c
t
i
v
e
n
e
s
s
.

T
h
i
s

r
e
f
e
r
s

t
o
t
h
e
p
h
y
s
i
c
a
l

a
n
d

n
e
g
a
t
i
v
e
l
y
o
n
a
v
o
i
d
a
n
c
e
m
o
t
i
v
a
t
i
o
n

r
e
d
u
c
e
d

b
y

a

c
e
r
t
a
i
n

a
m
o
u
n
t

(
i
n

t
h
i
s

c
a
s
e

b
y

1
0
0

S
a
f
e
g
u
a
r
d
c
o
s
t

i
s

a
p
a
y
b
a
c
k
f
o
r

s
a
f
e
g
u
a
r
d

s
i
g
n
i
f
i
c
a
n
t
l
y
i
n
f
l
u
e
n
c
e
s
,
b
u
t

h
e
l
p

f
r
o
m

t
h
e

t
e
a
c
h
e
r
,

t
h
e

t
i

m
e

l
e
f
t

s
c
o
r
e

w

i
l
l

b
e

5

.

P
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
S
a
f
e
g
u
a
r
d
C
o
s
t

P
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
s
a
f
e
g
u
a
r
d
c
o
s
t

W
h
e
n
e
v
e
r

t
h
e

s

m
a
l
l

f
i
s
h

(
t
h
e

g
a
m
e

p
l
a
y
e
r
)

r
e
q
u
e
s
t
s

a
l
.
,

2
0
0
9
;

W
o
o
n
,

e
t

a
l
.
,

2
0
0
5
)
.

a
v
o
i
d
t
h
e
m
a
l
i
c
i
o
u
s

I
T

t
h
r
e
a
t

(
L
i
a
n
g
a
n
d
X
u
e
,

2
0
0
9
;

2
0
1
0
;

A
n
d
e
r
s
o
n

a
n
d
A
g
a
r
w
a
l
,

2
0
0
6
;

N
g
,

e
t

s
a
f
e
g
u
a
r
d
e
f
f
e
c
t
i
v
e
n
e
s
s

i
n
t
h
e
g
a
m
e
d
e
s
i
g
n
.

t
o

i
d
e
n
t
i
f
y

b
a
d

w
o
r
m

s
.

T
h
i
s

a
t
t
e
m
p
t
s

t
o

a
d
d
r
e
s
s

t
e
a
c
h
e
r

c
o
u
l
d

h
e
l
p

h
i
m
b
y

g
i
v
i
n
g

s
o
m
e

t
i
p
s

o
n

h
o
w

p
l
a
y
e
r
)

c
a
n

g
o

t
o

‘
h
i
s
’

t
e
a
c
h
e
r

a
n
d

r
e
q
u
e
s
t

h
e
l
p
.

T
h
e

r
e
g
a
r
d
i
n
g
h
o
w
e
f
f
e
c
t
i
v
e
l
y
i
t

c
a
n
b
e

a
p
p
l
i
e
d
t
o

a
n
d
S
i
g
.

=

.
0
0
0
)
.

i
s

d
i
f
f
i
c
u
l
t

t
o

i
d
e
n
t
i
f
y
,

t
h
e

s

m
a
l
l

f
i
s
h

(
t
h
e

g
a
m
e

i
n
d
i
v
i
d
u
a
l

a
s
s
e
s
s
m
e
n
t
o
f

a

s
a
f
e
g
u
a
r
d
i
n
g
m
e
a
s
u
r
e

a
v
o
i
d
a
n
c
e
m
o
t
i
v
a
t
i
o
n
(
r
=

.
3
8
1
*
*
,

w
o
r
m
a
s
s
o
c
i
a
t
e
d
w

i
t
h

t
h
e
U
R
L

i
s

s
u
s
p
i
c
i
o
u
s

a
n
d

i
f

i
t

S
a
f
e
g
u
a
r
d
e
f
f
e
c
t
i
v
e
n
e
s
s

i
s

d
e
s
c
r
i
b
e
d
a
s

t
h
e

s
i
g
n
i
f
i
c
a
n
t
l
y
i
n
f
l
u
e
n
c
e
s

o
n

i
s

a
m
a
t
u
r
e
d

a
n
d

e
x
p
e
r
i
e
n
c
e
d

f
i
s
h

i
n

t
h
e

p
o
n
d
.

I
f

t
h
e

4

.

P
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
S
a
f
e
g
u
a
r
d
E

f
f
e
c
t
i
v
e
n
e
s
s

P
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d
s
a
f
e
g
u
a
r
d
e
f
f
e
c
t
i
v
e
n
e
s
s

T
h
e

o
t
h
e
r

c
h
a
r
a
c
t
e
r

i
s

t
h
e

s

m
a
l
l

f
i
s
h
’
s

t
e
a
c
h
e
r
,

w
h
o

9
5

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
0
0
8
)
.

2
0
0
5
;

N
g

,

e
t

a
l
.
,

2
0
0
9
;

2
0
0
5
;

W
o
r
k
m
a
n
,

e
t

a
l
.
,

(
L
i
a
n
g
a
n
d
X
u
e
,
2
0
0
9
;
2
0
1
0
;

K
a
i
s
e
r
,
1
9
7
4
;

N
g
,

K
a
n
k
a
n
h
a
l
l
i

a
n
d
X
u
,
2
0
0
9
;

W
o
o
n
,

T
a
n
a
n
d
L
o
w

,

d
e
s
i
g
n
.

p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
a
t
t
a
c
k
s
w

i
l
l
b
e

a
d
d
r
e
s
s
e
d
i
n
t
h
e
g
a
m
e

U
R
L
s
.

T
h
e
r
e
f
o
r
e
,

s
e
l
f
-
e
f
f
i
c
a
c
y
o
f
p
r
e
v
e
n
t
i
n
g
f
r
o
m

o
f

U
R
L
s

i
s
d
r
a
m
a
t
i
c
a
l
l
y
i
n
c
r
e
a
s
e
d
.

T
h
i
s
h
e
l
p
s

t
h
e

u
s
e
r

t
o

g
a
i
n

t
h
e

c
o
n
c
e
p
t
u
a
l

k
n
o
w
l
e
d
g
e

o
f

i
d
e
n
t
i
f
y
i
n
g

p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
o
r

l
e
g
i
t
i

m
a
t
e
.

W
h
e
n

t
h
e
u
s
e
r

m
o
v
e
s

f
r
o
m

t
h
e
b
e
g
i
n
n
i
n
g
t
o
t
h
e

e
n
d
o
f

t
h
e
g
a
m
e
,

t
h
e

c
o
m
p
l
e
x
i
t
y

w

i
t
h

a
d
i
f
f
e
r
e
n
t

U
R
L

.

T
h
e
U
R
L
c
a
n
b
e

e
i
t
h
e
r

S
e
l
f
-
e
f
f
i
c
a
c
y
i
s

d
e
s
c
r
i
b
e
d

a
s

i
n
d
i
v
i
d
u
a
l
s
’

o
n

a
v
o
i
d
a
n
c
e
m
o
t
i
v
a
t
i
o
n
(
r
=

.
1
6
2
*
,

a
s
s
o
c
i
a
t
e
w

i
t
h
U
R
L
s
.

T
h
e

s

m
a
l
l

f
i
s
h

(
t
h
e

g
a
m
e

c
o
n
f
i
d
e
n
c
e

i
n
t
a
k
i
n
g
t
h
e

s
a
f
e
g
u
a
r
d
m
e
a
s
u
r
e

S
i
g
.

=

.
0
4
7
)
.

p
l
a
y
e
r
)

i
s

p
r
e
s
e
n
t
e
d

a
w
o
r
m
e
a
c
h

t
i

m
e

a
s
s
o
c
i
a
t
e
d

9
6

6

.

S
e
l
f
-

E

f
f
i
c
a
c
y

S
e
l
f
-
e
f
f
i
c
a
c
y
s
i
g
n
i
f
i
c
a
n
t
l
y
i
n
f
l
u
e
n
c
e
s

T
h
e
g
a
m
e

i
s

d
e
s
i
g
n
e
d

t
o

r
a
n
d
o
m
l
y
g
e
n
e
r
a
t
e
w
o
r
m
s

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
97 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.1: The Storyboard of the anti-phishing mobile game design 
(continued) 

98 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.8 Mobile Game Prototype 

This  research  study  implemented  a  mobile  game  prototype  for  computer  users 

to  thwart  phishing  attacks  based  on  the  above  mentioned  storyboard  design.  To 

explore  the viability of using a game to prevent from phishing attacks, a working 

prototype  model was developed for a mobile telephone using MIT App  Inventor 

Emulator (Fig.  2).  Google  app  inventor  is  an  application  originally  introduced 

by Google and now  maintained by MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology), 

which  is  also  a  high  level  visual  programming  tool  (Wolber,  2011).  It  uses  a 

visual “blocks” language for  creating  mobile applications, which is easy  and less 

time  consuming  to  develop  prototypes  compare 

to 

the  other 

traditional 

programming  languages  (MIT  App  Inventor,  2012).  Therefore,  this  study 

employed  MIT  App  Inventor  Emulator  as  a  visual block programming language 

to create a mobile game prototype model, which  is shown in Figure 5.2, 5.3, 5.4 

and 5.5. 

The  advantage  of  creating  a  workable  mock-up  enables  designers  to  visually 

convey  the  envisioned  interaction  for  a  specific  class  of  applications  (Truong, 

Hayes  and  Abowd,  2006).  For  example,  a  mobile  game  mock-up  can  act  as 

the  low-fidelity  prototype  versions  of  the  application,  thus  designers can  use  to 

study the usability of  the overall application. 

99 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Teacher 

“Avoid” 

Displaying URLs 
button 

Displaying tips from teacher. For 
example,  “URLs with well-known 
domain and correctly spelled are 
legitimate” 

   Worm 

Figure 5.2: Main Menu of the game prototype design displayed on the MIT 

App  Inventor Emulator. (Appendix 3) 

Game Over message 

Player scored 9 

out of 10 

Figure 5.3 Game Over message on the MIT App Inventor Emulator. 

(Appendix 3) 

100 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Out of Lives message 

Lives = 0 

Figure 5.4: Out of Lives message on the MIT App Inventor Emulator. 

(Appendix 3) 

Your time is up 
message 

Time Left = 0 

Figure  5.5:  Your  time  is  up  message  on  the  MIT  App  Inventor  Emulator 

(Appendix 3) 

101 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The player is given instructions before starting the game. Then the main menu of the 

mobile  game  mock-up  is  appeared  along  with  underwater  background  sound  effects 

(Figure 5.2). A light water bubbling sound is played in the background throughout the 

game to make the user feelthat he is in the pond. A URL is displayed with each worm 

and the worms are randomly generated. 

If the worm associated with the URL is legitimate, then the user is expected to tap on 

the  worm  in  order  to  increase  the  score.  However,  if  the  user  fails  to  identify  the 

legitimate URL, then the remaining lives will be reduced by one point. On the other 

hand, if the worm associated with the URL is phishing, then the user is also expected 

to tap on “AVOID” button to reject the URL in order to increase the score. If the user 

fails  to  do  this,  then  the  remaining  lives  will  be  reduced  by  one  point.  If  the  worm 

associated with the URL is suspicious and if it is difficult to identify, the user can tap 

on big fish (in this case, teacher fish) to request help. Then some relevant tips will be 

displayed  just  below  the  URL.For  example,  “website  addresses  associate  with 

numbers  in  the  front  are  generally  scams.  Whenever  the  user  taps  on  the  big  fish 

asking help, the time left is reduced by 100 points (in this case 100 seconds). 

Finally,  the  user  will  gain  10  points  if  all  the  given  URLs  were  correcly  identifed 

within 5 lives and 600 seconds to complete the game. 

5.9 Summary 

The  current  research  study  focuses  on  designing  a  mobile  game  as  a  tool  to  educate 

computer users by creating awareness of phishing attacks. It addressed two questions: 

The first question is how does the systems developer identify which issues the  game 

needs to be addressed?  Then they are faced with  the second question, what principal 

should  guide  them  to  structure  this  information?  The  study  employed  a  theoretical 

game design framework introduced in Chapter 4 (Figure 4.2) in order to address those 

game designing issues and mobile game design principles along with learning science 

principles were used as a set of guidelines for structuring and presenting information 

in  the  game  design  context.  The  objective  of  the  anti-phishing  mobile  game  design 

102 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prototype  was  to  teach  the  user  how  to  identify  phishing  website  addresses 

(URLs),  which is one of the many ways to identify a phishing attack. The overall 

game design  was targeted to enhance avoidance behaviour through motivation to 

protect  computer  users  from  phishing  attacks.  This  study believes  by  educating 

computer  users  against  malicious  IT  threats  would  make  a  considerable 

contribution to enable the cyberspace  a secure environment. 

As  previously elaborated,  this  chapter has  attempted  to design  and  then  develop 

a  mobile game prototype for computer users to thwart phishing attacks. The next 

chapter  will  discuss  how  the  theoretical  game  design  framework  introduced  in 

Chapter  4  (Figure  4.2)  was  evaluated  through  the  developed  mobile  game 

prototype. 

103 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6 

Evaluation of Game Design 
Framework Using a Mobile Game 
Prototype 

6.1 Introduction 

This study focuses on evaluating the game design framework introduced in Chapter 4 

through  the  mobile  game  prototype  developed  using  MIT  App  Inventor  Emulator. 

Even  though,  the  game  design  framework  was  introduced  using  an  empirical 

investigation,  it  would  have  been  further  useful  to  determine  users’  impact  on  the 

framework  after  playing  the  mobile  game  prototype.  Sefelin,  Tscheligi  and  Giller 

(2003)  reported  based  on  an  empirical  investigation  that  low-fidelity prototypes  help 

users  to  understand  and  criticise the overall  system  and  also  provide  suggestions  for 

its  improvement.  From  a user perspective,  it  would  be much  easier to  get  the  user’s 

reliable  and  accurate  feedback  of  the  game  design  framework  after  the  engagement 

with  the  game  prototype.  This  is  due  to  the  facts  that  they  can  see  how  the  mobile 

game  prototype  works  and  understand  the  practical  implication  of  it.  Therefore,  the 

mobile game prototype application was deployed on a HTC One X touch screen smart 

phone to conduct the current experiment on users. 

In  recent  years,  there  has  been  an  increasingly  amount  of  literature  on  usability  and 

user experience in the gaming context (Bernhaupt, et al., 2008; Nacke, 2009). While a 

variety of definitions of the term usability have been suggested, ISO 9241-11 usability 

standard defines usability as  “the extent to which a product can be used by specified 

users  to  achieve  specified  goals  with  effectiveness,  efficiency  and  satisfaction  in  a 

specified  context  of  use”(ISONORM  9241  Part  1-17,  2008;  Korhonen,  Elina  and 

Koivisto, 2006;  Nacke,  2009). Effectiveness is  the ability of  users to  complete tasks 

using the system and the quality of the output of those tasks. Efficiency is the level of 

104 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resources  consumed  in  order  to  perform  those  tasks.  Satisfaction  is  the  user’s 

subjective  reaction  of performing tasks  in  the system  use.  In  general,  it  is extremely 

difficult to define the usability  of a system without exactly specifying who the intended 

end-users  of  the  system  are,  what  the  performing  tasks  are  and  what  the 

characteristics  of  the  physical,  social  and  organisational  environments  are,  in  which 

the system will be used (Brooke, 1996). 

The  potential  demand  of  mobile  games  is  attracting  the  interest  of  a  lot  of  different 

sectors and industries, including the education industry though game based education. 

Game based education provides joy and fun when it provides sufficient challenges for 

the  player  (Korhonen,  Elina  and  Koivisto,  2006).  However,  mobile  games  still  face 

some  obstacles such  as  limited memory,  limited  processor  power  and  limited screen 

size  (Hashim,  Ahmad  and  Rohiza,  2010;  Tolentino,  et  al.,  2011).  In  addition, 

educational mobile games are yet in their infancy due to the lack of potential education 

and entertainment;  they  are  also  often  qualified  as  boring  and  without  challenges 

(Van Eck, 2006). 

Thinking  beyond  issues  related  to  fun  and  challenges,  usability  of  mobile  game 

interfaces  is  another  issue  that  affects  user  satisfaction  (Tolentino,  et  al.,  2011).  For 

example,  the  lack  of  user  satisfaction  can  be  caused  by  difficulty  in  understanding 

commands,  little  intuitiveness,  inappropriate  response  time,  excessive  or  insufficient 

amount  of  information,  and  faulty  navigations  through  the  mobile  game  interface 

(Pinelle, Wong and Stach, 2008). Tolentino, et al. (2011) stated that there is a positive 

correlation  between  in-game  experience  and  user  satisfaction.  Korhonen,  Elina  and 

Koivisto (2006) claimed that a good gaming experience has high requirements of the 

user  interface  design.  Furthermore,  they  state  that  the  user  interface  should  be 

designed  to  be  convenient,  reliable  and  usable so  that  the player  can  enjoy the  game 

and have fun rather than struggle with the interface. 

In  addition,  it  is  worthwhile  to  state  that  the  game  design  interface  itself  has  a 

responsibility to attract players and retain with the game without frustrating them and 

leading them to quit playing the game. Higher education institutions constantly claim 

that   poorly   designed   game   based   education   can   cause   the   lack   of   students’ 

105 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
satisfaction,  which  causes  obstacles  to  effective  education  (Munoz-Organero,  et  al., 

2010; Irvine and Thompson, 2003). 

Difficulties  in  interaction  with  the  mobile  game  interface  provide  obstacles  for  the 

player to progress and navigate through the game. When the player cannot precede the 

game against the offered  challenges, it is more likely that he is unable  to absorb the 

information  to  learn.  Consequently,  learning  through  the  game  does  not  take  place. 

Korhonen, Elina and Koivisto (2006) stated that the general usability of mobile games 

is a significantly important factor in terms of measuring how the player interacts with 

the game. If players are not interested in the user interface, they hence do not want to 

struggle with it. In other words, the user interface of the mobile game should facilitate 

them to continue the game play without having a specific attention to it. Therefore, to 

identify the  general  usability aspect of mobile  game prototype  application developed 

in Chapter 5 is an important goal. This focuses on the player's success in dealing with 

the interface. A set of questionnaire items was used to evaluate the general aspects of 

interface usability in the mobile game prototype. 

The study reported in Chapter 4 empirically investigated as the first attempt what key 

elements that should be addressed in the  game design framework for computer users 

to avoid phishing attacks through motivation. This research study  is the second  attempt 

to  empirically  evaluate  the  game  design  framework  introduced  in  Chapter  4 

(Arachchilage,  Love and Beznosov, 2016).  The  game  design  framework  describes 

what elements influence to enhance the user  avoidance behaviour through motivation 

to thwart phishing attacks. 

6.2 Aims and Objectives 

The aim of this research study is to evaluate the game design framework introduced in 

Chapter  4  through  the  mobile  game  prototype.  The  current  study  also  answers  the 

question: can a mobile game be designed that protects users against phishing attacks? 

The objectives are as follows: 
(cid:2)  To identify the elements that should be addressed in the game design framework 

to avoid phishing attacks. 

106 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(cid:2)  To explore which elements impact on the game design framework after the 

user’s  engagement with the mobile game prototype. 

(cid:2)  To formulate a game design framework to thwart phishing attacks. 

6.3 Pilot Study 

The current  pilot  study employed  a usability study  of the  game  prototype  as  the 

first  step  to  assess  the  subjective  satisfaction  of  the  mobile  game  prototype 

interface. This  is based on the notion that mobile game based learning takes place 

if  participants  are  satisfied  with  the overall  game prototype.  Then  followed  by a 

think aloud experiment  as  the  second  step  of  the  research  along  with  a  pre  and 

post-test to assess the game  design framework introduced in Chapter 4 through the 

mobile game prototype. 

Think-aloud  testing  is  a  widely  employed  prototype  testing  method  in  the  area 

of  Human-Computer  Interaction  (Nørgaard  and  Hornaek,  2006).  Previous 

research  has  reported  that  it  is  a  widely  used  as  instrument  to  study  cognitive 

processes,  such  as  problem  solving,  human-computer  interaction,  reading  and 

writing  (Rooden,  1998).  Participants  in  a  think-aloud  study  are  asked  to  carry 

out  a  task  or  series  of  tasks,  while verbalising their thoughts. The experimenter 

records all verbalisations  and  writes them down in a verbal report. Finally,  the 

recorded and written data is analysed  in  accordance  to  the  research  question(s). 

The  current  pilot  study  employed  a  quantitative  data  analysis  approach  to 

evaluate  the  usability  of  the  game  prototype  whilst a qualitative data analysis 

approach  is  used  for  the  think-aloud  study.  The  main  purpose  of  a  think-aloud 

study along  with  a  pre-  and  post-test  is  to  evaluate  the  game  design framework 

after the usability study of the mobile game prototype. 

The  pilot  study  was  conducted  along  with  a  pre-  and  post-test  before  the  main 

study  took  place.  This  was  launched  to  assess  the  game  design  framework 

introduced  in  Chapter 4 through the mobile game prototype deployed on a HTC 

One X touch screen  smart  phone.  If  any problems  were  encountered  during  the 

pilot study, corresponding  adjustments were addressed in the main study. 

107 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.3.1 Data Collection Techniques 

The pilot study employed both qualitative and quantitative data collection approaches. 

A  quantitative  data  collection  technique  was  employed  to  collect  data  about  the 

usability  of  the  mobile  game  prototype.  Therefore,  a  set  of  questionnaire  items  was 

used  to  evaluate  the  general  aspects  of  interface  usability  of  the  mobile  game 

prototype.  In  addition,  a  think-aloud  study  was  employed  to  collect  data  about  the 

user  impact  on  the  game  design  framework  introduced  in  Chapter  4  through  the 

mobile  game  prototype.  A  qualitative  data  analysis  approach  was  employed  to 

evaluate  the  game  design  framework.  Therefore,  an  experimental  protocol  was 

designed to conduct the think-aloud study along with the pre- and post-test. 

6.3.2 Questionnaire Design 

A variety of questionnaires has been designed and reported in the literature to  measure 

the  general  usability  of  interactive  systems,  including  Questionnaire  for  User 

Interaction  Satisfaction  (QUIS)  (Chin,  Diehl  and  Norman,  1988),  System  Usability 

Scale  (SUS)  (Brooke,  1996),  Computer  System  Usability  Questionnaire  (CSQU) 

(Lewis, 1995) and Microsoft Production Reaction Cards (Benedek and Miner, 2002). 

In the industry, some usability laboratories have been using their own questionnaire to 

assess subjective reactions of participants in a usability test (Tullis and Stetson, 2004). 

The current research study employed a tool called the SUS, which is used to measure 

users’ subjective satisfaction of mobile game interface usability. 

John Brooke (1996) initially developed the SUS while he was working in the Digital 

Equipment  Corporation.  The  SUS  is  a  commonly  known,  freely  distributed,  simple 

and  reliable  questionnaire  consisting  of  10  items  that  aim  to  evaluate  the  subjective 

perception  of  the  individual  interacting  with  software  without  considering  personal 

taste  (Brooke,  1996;  Finstad,  2006).  Tullis  and  Stetson  (2004),  as  well  as  Finstad 

(2006)  have  revealed  that SUS provides  superior  assessments compared  to other 

questionnaires  such  as  QUIS  and  CSQU.  Their  results  concluded  that,  for  the 

conditions of the study,  sample sizes of at least 12-14 participants are needed to  get 

108 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reasonably reliable results. The SUS uses a five-point  Likert scale with anchors 

for  strongly agree  and  strongly disagree.  However,  Finstad  (2006)  revealed  that 

a  significant amount of non-native English speakers failed to understand the word 

“cumbersome”  in  Item  8  of  the  SUS,  that  is,  “I  found  the  system  to  be  very 

cumbersome  to  use”  (Finstad,  2006;  Lewis  and  Sauro,  2009).  Since  the  current 

usability  study  represents  participants  from  a  multinational  background,  the 

word  “cumbersome”  was  replaced  with  “awkward”  as  Finstad  (2006)  stated  in 

his  study.  Finally,  a  set  of  questionnaire  items  was  reproduced  from  Brooke’s 

SUS  to measure  the users’ subjective satisfaction of the mobile game prototype 

interface as shown in  Table 6.1. 

Table 6.1: A set of SUS questionnaire items 

No 

Statement 

Disagree 

Agree 

Strongly  Disagree  Neutral  Agree  Strongly 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

1 

2 

3 

I think that I would like to use this 

mobile game frequently 

I found the mobile game 

unnecessarily complex 

I thought the mobile game was easy 

to use 

I think that I would need the support 

4 

of a technical person to be able to use 

this mobile game 

5 

6 

I found the various functions in this 

mobile game were well integrated 

I thought there was too much 

inconsistency in this mobile game 

I would imagine that most people 

7 

would learn to use this mobile game 

very quickly 

8 

I found the mobile game very 

awkward to use 

109 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 

I felt very confident using the mobile 

game 

I needed to learn a lot of things 

10 

before I could get going with this 

mobile game 

6.3.3 Experimental Protocol Design 

An  experimental  protocol  was  designed  to  carry  out  a  think-aloud  study  along 

with  a  pre-  and  post-test  to  evaluate  the  game  design  framework.  The 

experimental protocol  included user instructions that helped participants to carry 

out the think-aloud study,  which is presented in Figure 6.1. 

110 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Experimental Protocol: Think-aloud User Study Instructions 

This  experiment  –  “User  Study”  contributes  to  evaluate  a  game  design  framework  for 

personal  computer users to  thwart phishing attacks. There  are some  instructions  you need  to 

follow in the  order given below. 

Session 1: Phishing test (Pre-test) 

(cid:2)  Task  Description:  You  are  given  10  suspect  “phishing”  websites  and  are  required 

to  identify legitimate websites from phishing websites. Phishing is an online identity 

theft,  which aims to steal sensitive information such as username, password and online 

banking  details from victims. For example, the attacker creates a fraudulent website 

which  has  the  look-and-feel of the legitimate website. Users are invited to fraudulent 

websites by sending  emails and steal their money. The test is PC based,with the overall 

score being displayed at  the end of the test. 

(cid:2)  Task:  To  take  the  test,  please  type  the  link  below  into  the  web  address  (URL)  of 

your  browser and follow the instructions given to you.  

http://people.brunel.ac.uk/~cspgnag/index.php 

Session 2: Playing the mobile game 

(cid:2)  Task  Description:  The  mobile  game  prototype  is  designed  and  implemented  to 

teach  home computer users to prevent themselves from phishing attacks. 

(cid:2)  Task:  You  are  given  fifteen  minutes  to  complete  the  mobile  game  training  activity. 

The  experimenter will help you with the game, which runs on Samsung Galaxy Mini 

handset.  As you do so, you are asked to express your opinions and comments to the 

mobile game  in  the specific  context  of knowledge,  understanding and  awareness of 

phishing attacks. After  the  mobile  game  training  activity,  you  are  asked  to  complete 

a  survey  to  evaluate  your  subjective satisfaction of mobile game prototype interface. 

Session 3: Phishing test (Post-test) 

(cid:2)  Task Description: You are given more 10 suspect “phishing” websites and are required 

to  identify legitimate websites from phishing websites. The test is PC based, with the 

overall  score being displayed at the end of the test. 

(cid:2)  Task:  To  take  the  test,  please  type  the  link  below  into  the  web  address  (URL)  of 

your  browser and follow the instructions given to you.  

http://people.brunel.ac.uk/~cspgnag/index1.php 

Figure 6.1: Experimental protocol: Think-aloud user study instructions 

111 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.3.4 Participants 

The  questionnaire  pilot  study  was  conducted  with  eight  participants’  in-person 

to  observe  a  wide  array  of  questions  relating  to  measure  the  user’s  subjective 

satisfaction  of  the  mobile  game  prototype  interface.  The  results  indicated  a 

significantly  higher  usability  score;  therefore  an  initial  hypobook  was  formed 

and  subsequently  used  to  inform  the  main  think  aloud  study.  Otherwise,  some 

work  is needed  in  order  to  refine  and  redesign  the  mobile  game  prototype  until 

results indicate reasonable higher  usability scores. 

The  above  mentioned  usability  study  was  followed  by  a  think-aloud  study  with 

the  same  participants.  A  think-aloud  pilot  study  along  with  a  pre-  and  post-test 

was  run  with  eight  participants’  in-person  to  observe  their  understanding, 

knowledge and  awareness  of  phishing  attacks through  a  mobile  game  prototype, 

so  that  an  initial  hypobook could be formed and subsequently used to inform the 

main study. 

Virzi  (1992)  revealed  that  90  percent  of  problems  through  the  prototype  testing 

were  identified  in  a  study  with  less  than  ten  participants.  However,  usability 

expert Jakob  Nielsen  (2000)  encouraged  researchers to  use only five participants 

in  a  prototype  testing  during  the  pilot  study.  He  argued  that  using  more  than 

ten  participants  may  have  a  very low  ratio  of  problems  discovered  to  resources 

consumed. 

Sheng,  et  al.’s  (2010)  study  showed  participants  between  the  ages  of  18  to  25 

are  more  susceptible  for  phishing  attacks  than  other  age  groups.  Therefore, 

undergraduate  students’  ages  ranged  from  18  to  25  of  the  department  of 

Computer  Science  and  Technology  at  the  University  of  Bedfordshire,  UK,  who 

are  computer  users,  were  recruited  while  attending  their  Applied  Programming 

practical  lab  sessions.  For  the  purpose  of  this  study,  each  individual  participant 

was  taken  to  a  vacant  room  after  finishing  their  practical  lab  session.  Before 

launching the pilot study, the permission  was taken from the field chair and head 

of  department.  A  summary of  demographics  in the pilot study is shown in Table 

6.2. 

112 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 6.2: Participant demographics in the pilot study 

Characteristics 

Amount 

Sample Size 

Gender 

Male 

Female 

Age (18 - 25) 

Experience using mobile device 

Mobile phone 

Smart phone 

Average hours per week on the Internet 

0-5 

6-10 

11-15 

16-20 

20+ 

6.3.5 Procedure 

8 

6 

2 

8 

2 

6 

0 

2 

3 

0 

3 

The pre- and post-tests were based on an Apple MacBook where the participants will 

receive  their  score  at  the  end  of  each  test.  First  and  foremost,  each  individual 

participant was explained the nature of the think-aloud experimental study and asked 

to sign a consent form (see Appendix 1). They were also informed that the experiment 

is  about  testing  their  understanding of  phishing  threat awareness  through  the mobile 

game prototype. Then the individual participants were asked whether they knew what 

the term ‘phishing attack’ means. Those who gave a positive response were asked to 

give  a  short  verbal  description  to  confirm  their  understanding,  whilst  negative 

responders  were  read  a  brief  definition  of  phishing  attack  and  gave  a  short  verbal 

description.  To  begin  the  experiment,  participants  were  asked  to  follow  think-aloud 

user  study  instructions  given  in  the  experimental  protocol  (Figure  6.1).  They  were 

also informed that they are welcome to clarify anything related to the experiment. In 

the pre-test, participants were presented with ten  websites and  asked to differentiate 

113 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phishing  websites  from  legitimate  ones.  After  evaluating  10  websites,  participants 

were  given  fifteen  minutes  to  complete  a  mobile  game  based  training  activity  on  a 

HTC  One  X  touch  screen  smart  phone.  Initially,  the  game  was  designed  with  10 

suspect  URLs  where  the  participant’s  responsibility  is  to  identify  legitimate  URLs 

from  phishing  ones.  Brooks  (1996)  stated  that  the  SUS  is  generally  used  after  the 

respondent has had an opportunity to use the system being evaluated, however before 

any  debriefing  or  discussion  takes  place.  Therefore,  after  engaging  15  minutes  with 

the  mobile  game  activity,  participants  were  asked  to  fill  in  a  survey  (SUS 

questionnaire items in Table 6.1), which was used to measure participants’ subjective 

satisfaction  of mobile  game prototype interface. The survey was  followed  by a  post- 

test  where  participants  were  shown  ten  more  websites  to  evaluate.  The  score  was 

recorded  during  the  pre-  and  post-tests  to  observe  how  participants’  understanding 

and awareness of phishing threat developed through the mobile game based learning. 

More  than  half  of  the  websites  were  phishing  websites  based  on  popular  brands, 

whilst the rest were legitimate websites from popular brands.  For the purpose of this 

test,  recently  being  attacked  phishing  websites  were  captured  from  PhishTank.com 

(PhishTank,  2011)  from  November  1  to  November  28,  2011.  All  phishing  website 

URLs were selected within 7 hours of being reported. During the mobile game based 

training  activity  and  post-test  a  think-aloud  study  was  employed  where  participants 

talked  about  their  opinions  and  experience  of  phishing  threat  awareness  and 

understanding through the mobile game prototype. 

6.3.6 Results 

The initial focus of this study was to evaluate the general usability of a mobile game 

prototype.  Therefore,  the  usability  study  employed  SPSS,  which  is  a  statistical 

software package for its data analysis. 

Cronbach’s alpha was used to measure the internal consistency of how closely related 

a set of items  are as  a group (Pallant, 2007).  Previous  research  has  revealed  that the 

given  alpha  greater  than  0.70  is  adequate  with  the  number  of  items  in  the  scale 

(Cronbach,  1951;  Pallant,  2007;  Zaharias  and  Poylymenakou,  2009).  Therefore, 

114 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cronbach’s  alpha  was  calculated  (Cronbach’s  alpha  =  0.878)  for  a  set  of  SUS 

questionnaire items to measure the internal consistency among them. 

In  the  current  experiment,  participants  talked  about  their experience and  opinions  of 

mobile  game  prototype  to  thwart  phishing  threats.  The  results  were encouraging; 

however  it  highlighted  some  areas  where  the  mobile  game  prototype  needed 

improvements. 

This research study revealed that the mobile game was somewhat effective at teaching 

participants  to  look  at  the  URL  in  their  browser’s  address  bar  when  assessing  a 

website whether or not legitimate. Participants scored 49 percent in the pre-test and 78 

percent in the post-test of identifying phishing or legitimate websites after playing the 

mobile  game.  There  is  a  considerable  improvement  of  participants’  results of  29 

percent  in  the  post-test  during  the  pilot  study.  Therefore,  the  study  findings  provide 

evidence that the mobile game prototype can teach personal computer users to thwart 

phishing  attacks.  All  the  participants  responded  that  their  decisions  were  based  on 

looking at the address bar when evaluating the second set often websites in the post- 

test.  Furthermore,  they  stated  that  they  made  only  very  few  attempts  to  look  at  the 

address  bar  when  evaluating  the  first  ten  websites  in  the  pre-test.  There,  many 

participants  used  incorrect  strategies  to  determine  the  website  legitimacy.  For 

example,  one  of  the  common  strategies  consisted  of  checking  whether  or  not  the 

website  was  designed  professionally.  However,  this  may  not  be  a  useful  strategy  as 

many  phishing  websites  are  exact  replica  of  legitimate  websites.  The  attacker  can 

easily  mimic  any  professional  website  from  the  source  code  of  the  particular  page 

provided  by 

the  browser.  Moreover,  they  highlighted  that  the  mobile  game  was 

somewhat  effective  at  teaching  different  patterns  of  URLs  to  differentiate  phishing 

URLs from legitimate ones. 

The  study  findings  showed  that  the  participants  learned  most  of  the  URL-related 

concepts  that  tried  to  teach  using  the  mobile  game  prototype.  For  example  most 

participants  seemed  to  understand  that  URLs  beginning  with  numbers  are  usually  a 

sign  of  scam.  However,  the  study  found  that  some  participants  applied  the  lessons 

learned from the mobile game incorrectly. For example, some participants misapplied 

the  rule  about  URLs  that  have  all  numbers  in  the  front  are  usually  scams  through 

115 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www2.fdic.gov  as a phishing website because the URL contained the number 2  after 

the  “www”.  This  is  because  the  mobile  game  prototype  was  not  included  the  URL 

contained the numbers after the www such as www2 or www4. However, participants 

were  tested  on  their  ability  to  identify  the  above  type  of  URLs  in  the  post-test. 

Therefore,  the  URL  ‘www2.fdic.gov’  included  in  the  mobile  game  prototype  before 

launching the main study. 

6.3.7 Summary 

The current  pilot  study attempted  to  evaluate  the  participants’  subjective satisfaction 

of  the  mobile  game  prototype  interface.  Therefore,  the  study  employed  SUS 

developed by John Brook with 10 items using a five-point Likert scale at 1= ‘Strongly 

disagree’ and 5= ‘Strongly agree’. The study recruited eight participants, ages ranged 

from  18  to  25  from  the  department  of  Computer  Science  and  Technology  at  the 

University  of  Bedfordshire,  UK.  The  participants  filled  in  the  questionnaire  after 

engaging  15  minutes  with  the  mobile  game  prototype  deployed  on  a  HTC  One  X 

touch  screen  smart  phone.  Based  on  the  feedback  of  the  survey  study,  Cronbach’s 

alpha was calculated to measure the internal consistency of a set of SUS questionnaire 

items. This value (Cronbach’s alpha = 0.878) was significantly higher than Nunnally 

recommended  a  minimum  level  of  Cronbach’s  alpha,  which  is  0.70  (Zaharias  and 

Poylymenakou,  2009).  Therefore,  the  current  usability  survey  followed  by  a  think- 

aloud study since participants were satisfied with mobile game prototype. 

The think-aloud pilot study along with a pre- and post-test employed to evaluate the 

game  design  framework  introduced  in  Chapter  4.  A  pilot  test  of  the  mobile  game 

prototype  was conducted through  a user study;  the same eight participants  who used 

in the usability study were tested on their ability to identify phishing websites from a 

set  of legitimate  and  phishing websites  before  (pre-test)  and  after (post-test)  playing 

the mobile game.  In  addition, they talked about their experience and opinions of the 

mobile  game  prototype  to  thwart  phishing  threats.  The  pilot  study  results  were 

encouraging and the study found that the mobile game prototype could teach personal 

computer users to thwart phishing attacks. However, it highlighted some areas where 

116 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the  mobile  game  prototype  needed  some  improvements.  Those  highlighted  issues 

were addressed in the mobile game prototype before conducting the main study. 

6.4 Main Study 

The  same  usability  study  and  think-aloud  experiment  used  in  the  pilot  study  were 

employed  in  the  main  study.  Therefore,  the  main  study  used  a  set  of  SUS 

questionnaire  items  developed  in  the  pilot  study  (Table  6.1). A  quantitative  data 

analysis approach using a survey was occupied to assess the subjective satisfaction of 

the  mobile  game  prototype  interface  through  the  participants.  Then  the  survey 

followed  by  a  think-aloud  study,  along  with  pre-  and  post-tests  as  used  in  the  pilot 

study. 

The  think-aloud  experiment  was  employed  to  evaluate  the  game  design  framework 

introduced in Chapter 4. The think-aloud study attempted to investigate how the user 

impacts  on  the  elements  of  the  proposed  mobile  game  design  framework  to  make 

phishing  awareness  after  their  engagement  with  the  mobile  game  prototype. 

Therefore, the study employed the experimental protocol developed in the pilot study 

(Figure  6.1).  The  researcher  recorded  all  the  verbalisations  made  during  the  think- 

aloud  study.  A  qualitative  data  analysis  approach  was  then  occupied  to  evaluate  the 

game design framework through the mobile game prototype. 

6.4.1 Participants 

The think-aloud study along with a pre- and post-test was run with 20 participants to 

observe  their  understanding,  knowledge  and  awareness  of  phishing  attacks  through 

the  mobile  game  prototype.  Participants  were  recruited  from  the  Brunel  University, 

London,  UK,  who  are  computer  users.  They  were  invited  to  participate  by  sending 

email messages and posting a message on Facebook asking for their help. They were 

invited  to  the  St.  John’s  building  computer  laboratory  at  Brunel  University.  Before 

117 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conducting  the  think-aloud  study,  the  permission  was  taken  from  the  ethical 

committee at Brunel University, as well as from the participants themselves. 

Participants’ ages ranged from 18 to 25, with a gender split of 65 percent male and 

35  percent  female.  The  majority  has  more  than  20  hours  per  week  of  Internet 

experience.  All of them had the experience of  Internet  shopping at least a single 

time.  Furthermore,  all  of  them  had  experience  in  using  a  smart  phone  for  more 

than  a  year.  Each  participant  took  part  in  the  think-aloud  study  on  a  fully 

voluntary  basis.  A  summary of demographics in the main study is shown in Table 

6.3. 

Table 6.3: Participants demographics in the main study 

Characteristics 

Amount 

Sample Size 

Gender 

Male 

Female 

Age (18 - 25) 

Education 

Less than high school diploma 

High school diploma 

Undergraduate degree 

Postgraduate degree 

Average hours per week on the Internet 

0-5 

6-10 

11-15 

16-20 

20+ 

20 

13 

7 

20 

0 

4 

16 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

20 

118 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.4.2 Procedure 

The data collection was made using the think-aloud study along with a pre and post- 

test.  The 

think-aloud  study  was  conducted 

in-person  with  each  participant 

approximately one hour. First and foremost, each individual participant was explained 

the nature of the think-aloud experimental study and asked to sign a consent form (see 

Appendix 1). They were informed that the think-aloud experiment is about testing the 

participant’s  understanding  of  phishing  threat  awareness  through  the  mobile  game 

prototype.  They  were  also  told  that  they  are  free  to  withdraw  from  the  experiment 

study at any time and without having to give a reason for withdrawing. To begin the 

experiment, participants were  asked  to follow  think-aloud user  study  instructions 

given in the experimental protocol that is shown in Figure 6.1. The pre and post-tests 

were based on an Apple MacBook Pro computer where the participants  receive their 

score at the end of each test. 

In  the  pre-test,  participants  were  presented  with  the  same  ten  websites  as  those 

participants were in the pilot study and asked them to identify phishing websites from 

legitimate ones. A list of ten website addresses were used in pre-test is shown in Table 

6.4. After evaluating the  first 10 websites, participants were given fifteen minutes to 

complete a mobile game based training activity on a HTC One X touch screen smart 

phone. After engaging 15 minutes with the mobile game prototype, participants were 

asked to fill in a survey. The SUS questionnaire items of the survey used to measure 

the users’ subjective satisfaction of the mobile game prototype interface that is shown 

in  Table 6.1.  Then  participants  were shown  the  same  ten more websites  in  the post- 

test as those participants were in the pilot study. A list of ten website addresses used 

in post-test is shown in Table 6.5.  The score was recorded  during the pre- and  post- 

tests, to observe participants’ understanding and awareness of phishing threat through 

the  given  mobile  game  prototype.  More  than  half  of  the  websites  were  phishing 

websites based on popular brands, whilst the rest is legitimate websites from popular 

brands. For the purpose of this experiment, recently being attacked phishing websites 

were  taken  from  PhishTank.com  (PhishTank,  2011)  from  November  1  to  November 

28,  2011.  All  phishing  website  URLs  were  captured  within  seven  hours  of  being 

reported.  Participants  talked  about  their  opinions  and  experience  of  phishing  threat 

119 

 
 
 
 
 
 
awareness through the mobile game prototype during the study. Moreover, they 

talked  about their opinions in terms of motivation, behaviour, threat perception, 

threat  severity  and  susceptibility,  cost,  knowledge  and  effectiveness  of  mobile 

game  prototype to protect themselves from phishing threats. 

Table 6.4: List of ten website addresses used in pre-test 

Website address 

Real or 
Phishing 

Phishing 

Phishing 

Real 

Phishing 

Real 

Website Name 

Santander 

PayPal 

HSBC 

Halifax 

eBay 

Phishing 

Western Union 

Phishing 

eBay 

Real 

Nationwide 

Phishing 

Money:hq 

Phishing 

HSBC 

Table 6.5: List of ten website addresses used in post-test 

Real or 
Phishing 

Phishing 

Website Name 

Website address 

PayPal 

Phishing 

HABBO 

Real 

FDIC 

Phishing 

Littlewoods 

Real 

Lloyds TSB 

Phishing 

Facebook 

Phishing 

Santander 

Real 

Phishing 

Phishing 

UPS 

eBay 

AOL 

120 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.4.3 Data Collection Instruments 

The  data  collection  was  done  through  observations,  field  notes,  audio  recording 

and  fill in a survey from 20 think-aloud sessions, and that is, the period of time 

from  the  participant  arrival  to  the  test  and  until  the  participant  leaves.  Each 

participant  spent  approximately one hour with the experiment. 

The  data  collection  of  the  main  study  was  occupied  in  two  phases.  First,  data 

were  collected  by  asking  participants  to  fill  in  the  survey  (Table  6.1)  after 

engaging  15  minutes  with  the  mobile  game  prototype.  This  technique  was 

employed  to  assess  the  users’  subjective  satisfaction  of  mobile  game  prototype 

interface. A quantitative data  analysis approach was employed to analyse the data 

collected from the survey.  Second, the data collected from the think-aloud method 

and participants’ score of pre  and  post-tests.  A  qualitative  data  analysis  approach 

employed  to  analyse  the  data  collected from the think-aloud study. 

6.4.4 Results Analysis 

The  findings  of  this  research  study  aims  to  determine  whether  or  not  the 

participant  avoidance  behaviour  enhances 

through  motivation 

to  protect 

themselves from  phishing attacks through the mobile game prototype. The think-

aloud  study  results  discussed  how  the  mobile  game  prototype  impacts  on  game 

design  framework  elements  introduced  in  Chapter  4  such  as  perceived  threat, 

safeguard  effectiveness,  safeguard  cost,  self-efficacy,  perceived  severity  and 

perceived susceptibility. In  addition,  pre-  and  post-tests  were  used  to  determine 

whether  or  not  anti-phishing  education  takes place after  the game  play activity. 

Moreover,  the  study  findings  contributed to the existing literature concerning the 

view that the mobile game based  education approach for preventing malicious IT 

threats  (such  as  phishing  attacks)  is  effective. 

121 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.4.5 SUS Study Results 

The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  evaluate  the  general  usability  of  the  mobile  game 

prototype.  Therefore,  the  usability  study  employed  SPSS,  a  statistical  software 

package for data analysis, developed by IBM (Finstad, 2006). 

The SUS survey study showed the initial pool of items to 20 regular computer users to 

elicit  feedback  through  a  questionnaire  survey  after  engaging  15  minutes  with  the 

mobile  game  prototype.  Based  on  the  feedback  of  the  survey  study,  initially, 

Cronbach’s alpha was calculated to measure the internal consistency of a set of items 

as  a  group  (Cronbach’s  alpha  =  0.901).  Nunnally  has  suggested  that  the  minimum 

level  of  Cronbach’s  alpha  is  0.70.  Therefore,  the  study  continued  to  assess  the 

subjective user’s satisfaction of mobile game prototype interface. 

The  current  usability  study,  which  aimed  to  evaluate  the  mobile  game  prototype, 

employed the SUS scoring approach introduced by Brooke (1996). The SUS produces 

a  single  number  representing  a  composite  measure  of  the  general  usability  of  the 

mobile  game  prototype  application.  To  obtain  the  SUS  score  of  the  mobile  game 

prototype,  initially  the  sum  of  score  contributions  from  each  item  was  calculated. 

Each item's score contribution ranges from 0 to 4. For items 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9 the score 

contribution  is  the  scale  position  minus  1.  For  items  2,  4,  6,  8  and  10,  the  score 

contribution is 5 minus the scale position. Finally, multiply the sum of the scores by 

2.5  to  obtain  the  overall  value  of  mobile  game  prototype  usability.  The  SUS  scores 

range from 0 to 100. Therefore, to accomplish this study, the user satisfaction with the 

mobile  game  prototype  application  deployed  on  a  HTC  One  X  touch  screen  smart 

phone was measured using the SUS. The scores are summarized in Table 6.6. 

In general,  the  participants’  subjective  satisfaction  of  the  mobile  game  prototype 

application was significantly high with 84 percent (83.62 out of 100) (Brooke, 1996). 

Participants  also  noted  that  they  found  the  mobile  game  prototype  application  to  be 

very  usable  and  felt  that  they  could  learn  its  usage  very  quickly.  This  is  mainly 

because  the  game  player  had  to  follow  three  functionalities,  which  are  easy  to 

remember when interacting with the mobile game. First, tap on the worm to make it 

122 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
eat if the worm was associated with a legitimate website address. Second, tap on the 

“avoid” button if the worm was associated with a fake website address. Third, tap on 

the  “big  fish”  image  icon  (the  small  fish’s  teacher)  to  request  help  if  the  worm 

associated  with  the  website  address  is suspicious  and  difficult  to  identity.  Therefore, 

the minimum number of functionalities that could easily be remembered to complete 

the  game  helped  to  enhance  the  participant  subjective  satisfaction  of  mobile  game 

interface  usability.  Moreover,  participants  demonstrated  they  had  higher  confidence 

after using the mobile game prototype.  Participants were also  able to learn  the game 

quickly and they stated they are quite interested in using the mobile game frequently. 

Table  6.6:  Summary  of  System  Usability  Scale  of  the  mobile  game  prototype 

application 

No 

Statement 

Average 

Standard 

Score 

Deviation 

1 

I think that I would like to use this mobile game frequently 

3.95 

0.759 

2 

I found the mobile game unnecessarily complex 

1.50 

0.607 

3 

I thought the mobile game was easy to use 

4.55 

0.510 

4 

5 

6 

7 

I think that I would need the support of a technical person 

to be able to use this mobile game 

I found the various functions in this mobile game were 

well integrated 

I thought there was too much inconsistency in this mobile 

game 

I would imagine that most people would learn to use the 

mobile game very quickly 

1.70 

0.865 

4.20 

0.696 

1.65 

0.671 

4.45 

0.686 

8 

I found the mobile game very awkward to use 

1.60 

0.503 

9 

I felt very confident using the mobile game 

4.35 

0.587 

10 

I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going 

with this mobile game 

Average Overall Satisfaction Score 

(Ranges from 0-100) 

1.60 

0.754 

83.62 

123 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total Score = 33.45 

SUS Score = 33.45*2.5 = 83.62 

In  summary,  the  survey  result  analysis  showed  that  the  participants’  subjective 

satisfaction  of the  mobile  game  prototype was  significantly high.  Therefore,  and 

since  participants  showed  higher  degree  of  satisfaction  using  the  mobile  game 

prototype,  the study continued with a think-aloud result analysis. The think-aloud 

study  results  showed  the  impact  of  mobile  game  prototype  on  the  elements  of 

game design  framework  introduced  in  Chapter  4.  Furthermore,  pre-  and  post-

tests  demonstrated  whether or not the anti-phishing education took place through 

the mobile game  prototype. 

6.4.6 Think-aloud Study Results 

The  data  analysis  of  the  think-aloud  study  was  conducted  in  two  phases,  which 

were  based  on  Norgaard  and  Hornbaek’s  (2006)  study.  First,  the  study 

segmented  the  recordings  through  the  application  of  keywords  to  each  segment. 

The  purpose  of  having  a  think-aloud  study  was  to  evaluate  the  game  design 

framework through the  mobile  game  prototype.  The  keywords  were  taken  from 

the  elements  in  the  game  design  framework  introduced  in  Chapter  4  (Fig  4.3). 

Therefore,  the  audio  recordings  were  mainly  segmented  into  eight  keywords: 

avoidance  behaviour,  avoidance  motivation,  perceived 

threat,  safeguard 

effectiveness,  safeguard  cost,  perceived  severity,  perceived  susceptibility  and 

self-efficacy.  Second,  the  study  attempted  to  analyse and try to form a coherent 

interpretation  of  segments  that  shared  keywords.  Therefore,  the  study  findings 

were  organised  in  eight  areas.  Table  6.7  summarises 

these  areas  and  main 

findings within each of them. 

124 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A
v
o
i
d
a
n
c
e

O
R

m
o
t
i
v
a
t
i
o
n

I

f
e
e
l

g
a
i
n
i
n
g
m
o
b
i
l
e
g
a
m
e
b
a
s
e
d
e
d
u
c
a
t
i
o
n

2
0

“

W
o
w
T
h
i
s

g
a
m
e

i
s

g
r
e
a
t
!

C
a
n

I
d
o
w
n
l
o
a
d

i
t

f
r
o
m

t
h
e

I
n
t
e
r
n
e
t
?
”

“
Y
e
s
,

t
h
i
s
g
a
m
e

i
s

i

m
p
o
r
t
a
n
t
,
b
e
c
a
u
s
e

a
t

t
h
e

e
n
d
o
f

t
h
e
d
a
y
i
t
’
s
o
u
r

t
o

a
v
o
i
d

p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
a
t
t
a
c
k
s

a
g
a
i
n
”

I
’

m

i
n
t
e
r
e
s
t
e
d

i
n

p
l
a
y
i
n
g

t
h
e
m
o
b
i
l
e

g
a
m
e

“
T
h
i
s
g
a
m
e

i
s

r
e
a
l
l
y
i
n
t
e
r
e
s
t
i
n
g
,

I

t
h
i
n
k

I

l
o
v
e

t
o
p
l
a
y
i
t

a
g
a
i
n
a
n
d

t
o

a
v
o
i
d

p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
a
t
t
a
c
k
s

i
s

s
o
m
e
w
h
a
t

m
o
n
e
y
,

w
e

d
o

n
o
t

w
a
n
t

t
o

l
o
s
e

i
t
”

u
s
e
f
u
l

“
I

l
i
k
e

t
o
p
l
a
y
t
h
e

g
a
m
e

a

l
i
t
t
l
e

l
o
n
g
e
r
”

“
I

w
o
u
l
d

r
e
c
o
m
m
e
n
d

t
h
i
s
g
a
m
e

t
o
m
y
f
a
m

i
l
y
,

p
e
e
r
s

a
n
d

f
r
i
e
n
d
s
”

1
2
5

“

W
o
w

!
T
h
i
s
g
a
m
e

i
s
u
s
e
f
u
l

a
n
d
a

f
a
n
t
a
s
t
i
c

i
d
e
a
”

T
a
b
l
e
6
.
7
:

O
v
e
r
v
i
e
w
o
f

r
e
s
u
l
t
s

N
r
e
f
e
r
s

t
o

t
h
e
n
u
m
b
e
r
o
f

s
e
s
s
i
o
n
s

i
n
w
h
i
c
h
a
f
i
n
d
i
n
g
w
a
s

m
a
d
e

(
o
u
t

o
f
1
4

s
e
s
s
i
o
n
s

i
n
t
o
t
a
l
)

a
t
t
e
n
t
i
o
n

A
r
e
a

o
f

M
a
i
n
f
i
n
d
i
n
g
s

N

E
x
a
m
p
l
e

o
f
q
u
o
t
e
s

A
v
o
i
d
a
n
c
e

O
R

a
t
t
a
c
k
s

b
e
h
a
v
i
o
u
r

U
p
d
a
t
i
n
g
k
n
o
w
l
e
d
g
e

t
h
r
o
u
g
h
t
h
e
m
o
b
i
l
e

p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
”

2
0

b
o
o
k
s
,

a
r
t
i
c
l
e
s
o
r
p
a
p
e
r
s
”

“
I

l
i
k
e

t
o
p
l
a
y
t
h
e

g
a
m
e

t
o
l
e
a
r
n
a
b
o
u
t
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
r
a
t
h
e
r

t
h
a
n
r
e
a
d
i
n
g

I
p
l
a
y
t
h
e
m
o
b
i
l
e

g
a
m
e

t
o
a
v
o
i
d

p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g

“
T
h
e
g
a
m
e
w
a
s
u
s
e
f
u
l

a
n
d

I

l
i
k
e
d
t
o
p
l
a
y
t
h
e

g
a
m
e

t
o
a
v
o
i
d

a
t
t
a
c
k
s

t
h
e

s
c
o
r
e
s
o
f
p
r
e

a
n
d
p
o
s
t
-
t
e
s
t
”

g
a
m
e

i
s
v
e
r
y
u
s
e
f
u
l

t
o
a
v
o
i
d
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g

“
Y
o
u
c
a
n
s
e
e
m
y
a
v
o
i
d
a
n
c
e
b
e
h
a
v
i
o
u
r
h
a
s

i
n
c
r
e
a
s
e
d
b
y
l
o
o
k
i
n
g
a
t

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
s
u
s
c
e
p
t
i
b
i
l
i
t
y

O
R

P
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d

f
u
t
u
r
e

s
e
v
e
r
i
t
y

P
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d

t
h
r
e
a
t

P
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d

O
R

k
n
o
w
l
e
d
g
e

b
e

i
n
f
e
c
t
e
d
b
y
a
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g

a
t
t
a
c
k
i
n
t
h
e

P
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
a
t
t
a
c
k
w
o
u
l
d

i
n
v
a
d
e
m
y
p
r
i
v
a
c
y

I
t

i
s

e
x
t
r
e
m
e
l
y
l
i
k
e
l
y
t
h
a
t

m
y
c
o
m
p
u
t
e
r

w

i
l
l

O
R

c
o
m
p
u
t
e
r

P
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
a
t
t
a
c
k
s

p
o
s
e

a

t
h
r
e
a
t

t
o
m
y

c
o
m
p
u
t
e
r

A
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
a
t
t
a
c
k

i
s

a

d
a
n
g
e
r

t
o
m
y

i
n
f
o
r
m
a
t
i
o
n

f
r
o
m
m
y
c
o
m
p
u
t
e
r

w

i
t
h
o
u
t

m
y

A
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g

a
t
t
a
c
k
w
o
u
l
d

s
t
e
a
l

m
y

p
e
r
s
o
n
a
l

g
r
e
a
t
.

M
y
c
h
a
n
c
e
s
o
f
g
e
t
t
i
n
g
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
a
t
t
a
c
k
s

a
r
e

p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
a
t
t
a
c
k
i
n
t
h
e

f
u
t
u
r
e
”

2
0

“
I
t

i
s

v
e
r
y
e
a
s
i
l
y
t
h
a
t

I

c
a
n

f
a
l
l

f
o
r
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
”

“
Y
e
s
,

I
n
o
w

f
e
e
l

t
h
a
t

m
y
c
o
m
p
u
t
e
r

a
l
s
o
m
a
y
b
e

i
n
f
e
c
t
e
d
b
y
a

i
n
f
e
c
t
e
d
b
y
a
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
a
t
t
a
c
k
”

“
H
m
m

,

t
h
e
r
e

i
s

a
h
i
g
h
p
r
o
b
a
b
i
l
i
t
y
t
h
a
t

m
y
c
o
m
p
u
t
e
r

a
l
s
o
w

i
l
l
b
e

2
0

d
e
b
i
t

c
a
r
d
d
e
t
a
i
l
s
”

“
P
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
a
t
t
a
c
k
e
r
s

c
a
n
u
s
e
m
y
p
e
r
s
o
n
a
l
d
e
t
a
i
l
s

f
o
r

c
r
i

m
e
s
”

“
P
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
a
t
t
a
c
k
s
w
o
u
l
d
s
t
e
a
l

m
y
b
a
n
k
i
n
g
d
e
t
a
i
l
s
”

“
P
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
a
t
t
a
c
k
s
w
o
u
l
d
s
t
e
a
l

m
y
u
s
e
r
n
a
m
e
,
p
a
s
s
w
o
r
d
s
,

c
r
e
d
i
t
o
r

2
0

a
t
t
a
c
k
e
r
s

s
t
e
a
l
o
u
r

m
o
n
e
y
”

“
I

f
e
e
l
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
t
h
r
e
a
t

i
s
h
a
r
m
f
u
l

t
o
m
y
c
o
m
p
u
t
e
r
”

“
Y
e
s
,

I

f
e
e
l
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
t
h
r
e
a
t

i
s
d
a
n
g
e
r
o
u
s

t
o
m
y
c
o
m
p
u
t
e
r
”

“
Y
e
s
,

I

f
e
e
l
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
i
s

a

h
u
g
e

t
h
r
e
a
t
,

b
e
c
a
u
s
e

a
t

t
h
e

e
n
d
o
f

t
h
e
d
a
y

e
v
e
r
y
t
h
i
n
g
i
s

d
o
n
e
”

“
Y
e
s
,

t
h
i
s

i
s

a

s
i

m
p
l
e
g
a
m
e

a
n
y
b
o
d
y
c
a
n
p
l
a
y
”

“
I

w

i
l
l
b
e

t
h
e

f
i
r
s
t
o
n
e
w
h
o
w

i
l
l
b
u
y
t
h
i
s
g
a
m
e
,

t
e
l
l

m
e
w
h
e
n

1
2
6

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I
t

w

i
l
l

t
a
k
e

l
e
s
s

t
i

m
e

t
o

g
a
i
n
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g

e
d
u
c
a
t
i
o
n
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
t
h
e
m
o
b
i
l
e
g
a
m
e

“
T
h
e
g
a
m
e

i
s

s
i

m
p
l
e
”

g
a
m
e
,

i
f
d
o
w
n
l
o
a
d
e
d

f
r
o
m

t
h
e

I
n
t
e
r
n
e
t

S
a
f
e
g
u
a
r
d

O
R

c
o
s
t

I
t

w

i
l
l

l
e
s
s

c
o
s
t

m
o
n
e
y
t
o

g
a
i
n

a
n
t
i
-

1
8

“
I

l
i
k
e

t
o
d
o
w
n
l
o
a
d
t
h
e

g
a
m
e

f
o
r

f
r
e
e
”

“
T
h
e
g
a
m
e

d
o
e
s

n
o
t

t
a
k
e

l
o
n
g
t
i

m
e

t
o

p
l
a
y
”

p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
e
d
u
c
a
t
i
o
n
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
t
h
e
m
o
b
i
l
e

“
I
d
o
n
’
t

m
i
n
d
t
o

p
a
y
f
o
r

t
h
i
s

g
a
m
e
”

S
e
l
f
-
e
f
f
i
c
a
c
y

O
R

2
0

i

m
p
o
r
t
a
n
t
”

I

f
e
e
l

g
a
i
n
i
n
g
a
n
t
i
-
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
k
n
o
w
l
e
d
g
e

“
Y
e
s
,

t
h
i
s
g
a
m
e

t
a
u
g
h
t

m
e
h
o
w

t
o
i
d
e
n
t
i
f
y
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
U
R
L
s
”

I
g
a
i
n
e
d
k
n
o
w
l
e
d
g
e

a
b
o
u
t
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
a
t
t
a
c
k
s

“
Y
e
s
,

t
h
i
s

g
a
m
e

i

m
p
r
o
v
e
d
m
y
k
n
o
w
l
e
d
g
e

a
b
o
u
t

p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
”

t
h
r
o
u
g
h

t
h
e
m
o
b
i
l
e

g
a
m
e

“
I
n
t
h
e
p
a
s
t
,

I

r
e
a
l
l
y
d
i
d
n
’
t

c
h
e
c
k
t
h
e
U
R
L
s
,
n
o
w

I
k
n
o
w

i
t

i
s
v
e
r
y

a
t
t
a
c
k
s

S
a
f
e
g
u
a
r
d

O
R

e
f
f
e
c
t
i
v
e
n
e
s
s

T
h
e
m
o
b
i
l
e

g
a
m
e

b
a
s
e
d
e
d
u
c
a
t
i
o
n

i
n
c
r
e
a
s
e
d
m
y
k
n
o
w
l
e
d
g
e

a
b
o
u
t
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g

b
e
u
s
e
f
u
l

f
o
r
d
e
t
e
c
t
i
n
g
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
a
t
t
a
c
k

T
h
e
m
o
b
i
l
e

g
a
m
e

b
a
s
e
d
e
d
u
c
a
t
i
o
n
w
o
u
l
d

g
a
m
e
”

k
n
o
w
l
e
d
g
e
b
y
r
e
a
d
i
n
g
a

b
o
o
k
o
r

a
r
t
i
c
l
e

a
b
o
u
t
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
”

“
I
d
o
n
’
t

t
h
i
n
k
t
h
a
t

I

w
o
u
l
d

n
o
t

b
e

a
b
l
e

t
o

g
e
t

t
h
i
s

m
u
c
h

o
f

2
0

“
A
c
t
u
a
l
l
y
,

I

l
i
k
e
d
t
h
e
w
a
y
h
o
w

t
h
e

g
a
m
e

t
e
a
c
h
e
s
”

“
T
h
i
s
m
o
b
i
l
e
g
a
m
e

i
s
u
s
e
f
u
l

a
n
d
f
a
n
t
a
s
t
i
c

f
o
r

l
e
a
r
n
i
n
g
”

“
T
h
i
s
m
o
b
i
l
e

g
a
m
e

t
e
a
c
h
e
s

h
o
w

t
o

a
v
o
i
d

p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
t
h
r
e
a
t
”

“
Y
e
s
,

I

l
e
a
r
n
t

a

l
o
t

a
b
o
u
t
d
e
t
e
c
t
i
n
g
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
a
t
t
a
c
k
s

t
h
r
o
u
g
h
t
h
e

o
n
e
s
”

“
Y
e
s
,

t
h
e
g
a
m
e

r
e
a
l
l
y
h
e
l
p
s

m
e

t
o
i
d
e
n
t
i
f
y
g
o
o
d
w
e
b
s
i
t
e
s

f
r
o
m
b
a
d

1
2
7

 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
h
e
l
p
e
d
m
e

f
o
r
d
e
t
e
c
t
i
n
g
p
h
i
s
h
i
n
g
a
t
t
a
c
k
s

b
e
f
o
r
e
p
l
a
y
i
n
g
t
h
e
g
a
m
e
.
”

t
h
r
o
u
g
h
t
h
e
m
o
b
i
l
e
g
a
m
e
d
o
e
s

r
e
a
l
l
y

“
I
d
i
d
n
’
t

k
n
o
w

t
h
e
m
e
a
n
i
n
g
o
f

‘
h
t
t
p
s
:
/
/
’

i
s

s
e
c
u
r
e
v
e
r
s
i
o
n

o
f

h
t
t
p

b
a
d
w
e
b
s
i
t
e
”

o
f

t
h
e
w
e
b
s
i
t
e
b
e
f
o
r
e
p
l
a
y
i
n
g
t
h
e

g
a
m
e
”

“
N
o
w

I
k
n
o
w
h
o
w

t
o
i
d
e
n
t
i
f
y
t
h
e
d
i
f
f
e
r
e
n
c
e
b
e
t
w
e
e
n
t
h
e

g
o
o
d
a
n
d

“
I
d
i
d
n
o
t
k
n
o
w
b
y
l
o
o
k
i
n
g
a
t

t
h
e
U
R
L
I
c
a
n
d
e
c
i
d
e

t
h
e

l
e
g
i
t
i

m
a
c
y

p
a
t
t
e
r
n
s
o
f

U
R
L
s
”

“
Y
e
s
,

I

t
h
i
n
k
t
h
a
t

t
h
e

g
a
m
e
w
a
s

r
e
a
l
l
y
g
o
o
d
i
n
t
e
a
c
h
i
n
g
d
i
f
f
e
r
e
n
t

1
2
8

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.4.7 Summary of Results 

The  current  study  empirically  evaluated  the  game  design  framework  introduced 

in  Chapter 4 (Figure. 4.3) through the mobile game prototype developed using MIT 

App  Inventor Emulator. Therefore, a think-aloud study was conducted along with 

the pre-  and post-test to assess the framework. The study employed 20 participants 

with each  participant  participating  for  an  approximately one-hour  session.  In  the 

pre-test,  participants  scored  55  percent  and  after  the  game  play  activity  in  the 

post-test  their  score  was  84  percent.  There  is  a  significant  improvement  of  29 

percent  of the  participants’  phishing  avoidance  behaviour  compared  to  the  pre-

test.  This  is  a  significant 

improvement  of  overall  participants’  phishing 

avoidance  behaviour  through  the mobile  game. 18  participants  scored  above 80 

percent  whilst  five  participants  scored  full marks  (100 percent) in  the post-test. 

However,  all  participants  scored  above  50  percent  in  their  post-test.  Therefore, 

study results  concluded  that  the  mobile game prototype is somewhat effective at 

teaching participants to look at URLs  in their browser’s address bar when assessing 

the website legitimacy. 

In  addition,  all  participants  talked  about  their  opinions  about  phishing  threat 

awareness  after  using  the  mobile  game  in  the  think-aloud  study.  All  of  them 

believed  that the mobile game was somewhat effective to enhance their avoidance 

behaviour 

through  motivation  to  protect  themselves  against  phishing  attacks. 

Furthermore,  they  talked about their opinion on how the mobile game prototype 

impacts on game design  framework elements introduced in Chapter 4.  The  game 

design  framework  elements  are  perceived  threat,  safeguard  effectiveness, 

safeguard cost, self-efficacy, perceived  severity and perceived susceptibility. The 

study  revealed 

that  perceived 

threat, 

safeguard  effectiveness,  perceived 

susceptibility,  perceived  severity  and  self-efficacy  positively  impacted  while 

safeguard cost negatively impacted on avoidance behaviour  through motivation to 

protect themselves against phishing threats. Therefore, the  current  study  findings 

provided  evidence  of  addressing  the  above  elements  in  the  game  design 

framework for personal computer users to thwart phishing threat. 

129 

 
 
 
 
 
 
6.4.8 Discussion 

The main study employed 20 regular computer users ages ranged from 18-25  year in 

order  to elicit audio feedback of phishing threat  awareness through the mobile game 

prototype. All participants were personal computer users and had some experience of 

Internet shopping. They also had some experience of using a smart phone for at least 

one year. The data were collected in 20 think-aloud study sessions along with pre- and 

post-tests  where  each  participant  spent  approximately one  hour  in  each  session.  The 

study results found that the mobile game prototype teaches personal computer users to 

protect  themselves  from  phishing  attacks.  The  participants  scored  55  percent  in  the 

pre-test  and  84  percent  in  the  post-test  after  playing  the  mobile  game  in  the  main 

study. The overall score had been increased by 29 percent in the post-test in the main 

study. Five participants scored full marks (100 percent) during their post-tests, while 

eighteen  participants  scored  above  80  percent.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that 

participants’  avoidance  behaviour  has  increased  in  the  post-test,  after  playing  the 

game.  Furthermore,  twelve  participants  stated:  “You  can  see  my  phishing  knowledge 

has  increased  by looking  at  the  scores  of  pre and  post-tests”.  These  results  back  up 

the  findings  of  Liang  and  Xue’s  (2010)  theoretical  model.  The  model  explained  a 

considerable  amount  of  variance  in  users’  avoidance  behaviour  (21  percent).  Their 

findings  showed  actual  avoidance  behaviour  is  significant  to  avoid  spyware  attacks 

using  given  anti-spyware  software  as  a  safeguarding  measure.  In  addition,  the  game 

design framework introduced through an empirical investigation in Chapter 4, showed 

that  users’  avoidance  behaviour  is  significantly  important  to  combat  phishing  threat 

using a given game based anti-phishing education (safeguarding measure). The game 

design  framework  explained  a  considerable  amount  of  variance  in  participants’ 

avoidance  behaviour,  which  is  15  percent.  Therefore,  the  current  study  results 

described that participants had a great impact on the avoidance behaviour element of 

the game design framework after playing the mobile game prototype. 

All  participants  talked  about  their  opinions  and  experience  of  phishing  threats 

awareness  through  the  mobile  game  in  the  think-aloud  study.  All  of  them  were 

convinced  that  the  mobile  game  is  somewhat  effective  to  enhance  avoidance 

behaviour  through  motivation  to  protect  them  from  phishing  threat.  Their  common 

130 

 
 
 
 
 
 
argument was that books, papers, articles and lecture notes are still in infancy boring. 

Those  materials  cannot  provide  fun  with  immediate  feedback  whereas  this  type  of 

mobile game based education can  actually provide both. This would have motivated 

them to play the game to learn about phishing threats. One participant responded that: 

“I will now go and read more about phishing threats”. This statement describes how 

much  they  were  motivated  to  learn  about  phishing  threats.  Another  participant  also 

stated: “I will recommend this game to my family, peers and friends”. This shows that 

they  are  really  motivated  to  share  their  experience  with  others.  All  participants  said 

that this mobile game is really interesting and that they would love to play it again and 

again.  Therefore,  the  current  study  conveys  a  simple,  yet  powerful  message  that  the 

mobile game prototype enhances  the motivation of personal computer users to avoid 

phishing  attacks.  This  backs  up  the  findings  of  Liang  and  Xue’s  (2010)  theoretical 

model.  The  model  explained  a  considerable  amount  of  variance  in  users’  avoidance 

motivation  (56  percent).  Their  findings  showed  that  users’  IT  threat  avoidance 

behaviour  is  determined  by  avoidance  motivation.  In  addition,  the  game  design 

framework  introduced  in  Chapter  4,  showed  that  users’  avoidance  motivation  is 

significantly  important  to  combat  phishing  threat  and  also  avoidance  behaviour  is 

determined by avoidance motivation. Therefore, the current study results showed that 

the  mobile  game  prototype  has  a  significant  impact  on  the  avoidance  motivation 

element of the game design framework. 

All  twenty  participants  said  that  they  felt  that  such  phishing  threats  exist  in  the 

cyberspace after playing the game and they believed that an attack might occur at any 

time  to  their  personal  computer  systems.  The  threat  perception  enhanced  their 

motivation to avoid phishing threats. One participant stated: “I feel phishing is a huge 

threat after playing the game, because at the end of the day attackers may steal our 

sensitive information such as username, password and credit/debit card information if 

we are unaware of phishing threats”. Furthermore, the participant mentioned that the 

risk  of  being  phished  is  relatively  high  due  to  the  pervasiveness  of  Internet 

technology. Participants rated the danger to be very high, in case that a real phishing 

attack  occurs.  A  few  participants  discussed  the  fact  that  attackers  could  not  only 

disclose their sensitive information  but also use that information for crimes which is 

even more dangerous. One participant stated: “I think phishing attacks not only steal 

my money, but attackers can also use my personal information for crimes”. Therefore, 

131 

 
 
 
 
 
it seemed like severity and susceptibility of phishing attacks have developed through 

the  mobile  game  prototype  where  participants  perceived  phishing  as  a  dangerous 

threat. This findings support the findings of Liang and Xue’s (2010)  theoretical  model. 

They  argued  that  computer  users  have  to  be  convinced  and  feel  that  such  malicious 

IT  threats  exist  in the  cyberspace and  are avoidable.  Users’ failure to  feel  the  threat 

perception  causes  them  to  not  act  to  avoid  it.  Their  data  analysis  results  found  that 

the  model  is  able  to  explain  a  respectable  amount  of  variance  in  threat  perception 

(33 percent). However, this figure is slightly lower than the finding of the game design 

framework  introduced  in  Chapter  4,  which  is  36 percent.  The current  study findings 

demonstrated the threat perception that users need to  be aware of  the  likelihood  and 

severity  of  being  attacked  by  phishing  threat.  One  participant  stated:  “Now  I  must 

be  really  careful  of  when  I  do  online  transactions”.  The  study  revealed  that  users 

perceived that  such a threat is existent in the cyberspace: they also sensed  that there 

is  likelihood  and  that  it could be severe if the threat  actually occurred.  The  findings 

demonstrated  that  the  mobile  game  prototype  had  a  significant  impact  on  perceived 

severity  and  susceptibility  elements  of  the  game  design  framework.  Therefore,  the 

perceived  threat  element  is  significantly  important  to  address  in  the  game  design 

framework for computer users to enhance avoidance behaviour through  motivation to 

thwart phishing attacks 

All  twenty  participants  believed  that  the  mobile  game  prototype  is  an  effective 

safeguarding  measure  to  thwart  phishing  threat.  One  participant  stated:  “Now  only  I 

realised  the  worth  of  looking  at  the  URL  to  identify  good  website  from  bad  ones.  I 

never  knew  that  the  attacker  can  mimic  URLs  to  launch  a  phishing  attack  before 

playing  the  game.”  All  participants  mentioned  that  the  mobile  game  prototype  is  an 

effective approach that motivated them to learn about phishing threat. Therefore, they 

believed the mobile game is an effective way of educating people to combat phishing. 

Furthermore,  they  described  that  mobile  game  prototype  enhanced  their  avoidance 

motivation to identify good websites from bad ones, helping to avoid phishing threat. 

Their main argument was reading books or articles to learn phishing threat is neither 

practical nor interesting, but rather time consuming and boring. One  participant  stated: 

“Reading  books  or  articles  take  much  longer  yet  boring  where  this  mobile  game 

delivers  the  same  knowledge  effectively  and  easy  to  learn  with  fun  and  less  time”. 

Moreover, participants stressed that the mobile game was somewhat effective 

132 

 
 
 
 
 
in  gaining  knowledge  with  fun.  When  they  were  stuck  in  the  middle  of  playing  the 

game  they  could  always  ask  for  help.  One  of  the  most  important  things  was  that 

participants  got  immediate  feedback  during  the  game.  One  participant  stated:  “The 

game  is  very  effective  in  identifying  good  URLs  from  bad  ones.  If  I’m  not  sure  the 

legitimacy of URL, then I can always ask ‘BIG’ fish in the game.” The finding of the 

current  study  showed  that  the  mobile  game  is  an  effective  safeguarding  measure  to 

thwart phishing attacks. One participant stated: “I like to play this game not because I 

have fun with the game, but I will learn something”. It can be argued that if the mobile 

game  prototype  is  effective,  then  it  influences  to  enhance  participants’  avoidance 

motivation  to  thwart  phishing  attacks.  Therefore,  the  current  findings  supported  the 

findings  of  Liang and Xue’s  (2010)  theoretical model.  They empirically investigated 

that  safeguard  effectiveness  can  motivate  users  to  avoid  malicious  IT  threats.  In 

addition, the game design framework introduced in Chapter 4, empirically proved that 

the  safeguard  effectiveness  element  should  be  addressed  in  the  game  design 

framework for personal computer users to thwart phishing threat. Therefore, the  current 

study  provided  evidence  that  avoidance  motivation  is  significantly  determined  by 

safeguard effectiveness in the game design framework. 

All participants in the think-aloud study stated that the game is simple and it does not 

take too long to play. They mentioned that they would only like to download the game 

online if it was freely available. One participant stated: “If the game is too expensive 

and  takes  too  long  to  play,  I  don’t  buy  it  then.”  However,  a  couple  of  participants 

showed their interest of purchasing the mobile game online. One participant stated: “I 

like to buy the game online. I’m a  bit more suspicious if a useful game is online for 

free  download.  Because  it  can  be  a  virus  attack  sometimes.”  The  other  participant 

said: “I do not hesitate to pay for useful things. I really liked the game. Therefore, I 

would pay for it”. Participants’ motivation to play the game is determined by the cost 

that  they  have  to  pay  to  download  the  game  and  the  time  it  takes  to  play  the  game 

(Liang  and  Xue,  2010).  When  the  game  is  freely  available  online  and  does  not  take 

too  long  to  play,  participants  showed  their  motivation  to  play  the  game  to  avoid 

phishing  threat.  It  explained  that  avoidance  motivation  is  determined  by  safeguard 

cost  that  describes  time  and  money  efforts  for  playing  the  mobile  game.  Therefore, 

the  safeguard  cost  element  should  be  addressed  in  the  game  design  framework  for 

personal  computer  users  to  thwart  phishing  threat.  Furthermore,  the  current  study 

133 

 
 
 
 
 
findings backed up the findings of the game design framework introduced in Chapter 

4.  It  empirically  investigated  that  safeguard  cost  had  a  negative  impact  on  users’ 

avoidance behaviour through motivation to protect themselves from phishing attacks. 

In  addition,  the  current  findings  supported  the  findings  of  Liang  and  Xue’s  (2010) 

theoretical model. Their findings also revealed safeguard cost negatively impacted on 

users’  avoidance  motivation  thwart  phishing  attacks.  Therefore, the  current  study 

provides evidence to address the safeguard cost in the game design framework. 

All  participants  believed  that  the  mobile  game  prototype  was  somewhat  effective  in 

teaching how to identify good URLs from bad ones. The evidence was obvious from 

the  scores of pre- and post-tests.  In the pre-test, participants scored 55 percent  while 

in  the  post-test,  after  playing  the  game,  they scored  84  percent.  The  score  has  been 

increased  by  29  percent  in  the  post-test.  The  score  of  post-tests  supported  opinions 

and  statements  observed 

in 

the 

think-aloud  study.  Therefore, 

the  findings 

demonstrated that learning has taken place through the mobile game prototype, which 

reflected  on  the  score  of  participants’  post-test.  A  few  participants  responded  that 

before playing the game they had not known https:// is for indicating a secure version 

of  “http”,  which  allows  secure  online  transactions  such  as  transferring  money  via 

online  banking.  For  example,  one  participant  stated:  “I  learnt  a  lot  of  things  about 

phishing which I had not known 30 minutes ago. For example, I hadn’t known ‘s’ of 

https stands for ‘security’”. Almost all participants responded that before playing the 

game they did  not  know  the  different  patterns  of  URLs  which  attackers  use  to  trick 

people to  fall  for phishing.  For  example,  the URLs  beginning with  numbers  such  as 

http://147.46.236.55/PayPal/login.html are usually scams. Furthermore, they said that 

they  did  not  know  “www2”  or  “www3”  is  a  legitimate  format  of  URLs.All 

participants  concluded  saying,  “I  learnt  a  lot  of  new  things  about  phishing  which  I 

had  not  known  through the  mobile  game”.  All  participants  believed  that  the  mobile 

game  prototype  was  somewhat  effective  in  teaching  participants  to  identify  good 

URLs  from  bad  ones.  The study argued  that  effective learning about  phishing  threat 

through the mobile game motivated participants to avoid phishing attacks. The current 

study findings supported the findings of game design framework introduced in  Chapter 

4.  It empirically investigated self-efficacy positively impacts on users’  motivation to 

thwart phishing attacks. The current findings also backed up the finding  of  Liang  and 

Xue’s  (2010) theoretical  model.  Their findings  also  revealed  that  self- 

134 

 
 
 
 
 
efficacy  that  reflected  on  users’  knowledge  about  phishing  attacks,  positively 

impacted  on  users’  avoidance  motivation  to  thwart  phishing  attacks.  Therefore, 

current  study  findings  provided  evidence  to  address  the  self-efficacy  in  the 

game  design framework. 

Many  authors  argued  that  the  current  security  education  on  phishing  threats 

still  provides  little  protection  to  end-users  (Herley,  2009;  Iacovos  and  Sasse, 

2012;  Kumaraguru,  et  al.,  2009;  Sheng,  et  al.,  2007).  However,  a  considerable 

amount of the  literature  claimed  that well-designed  end-user  security  education 

could  be  a  recommended  approach  to  combating  phishing  attacks  (Allen,  2006; 

Hiner,  2002;  Iacovos  and  Sasse,  2012;  Kumaraguru,  et  al.,  2008;  Schechter, 

2007; Sheng, et al.,  2007; Timko,  2008).  Sheng, et al. (2007)  conducted  a  study 

about anti-phishing education comparing the effectiveness of a game with existing 

online  training  materials  and  a  tutorial  they  created  based  on  the  game.  They 

found  that  participants  who  played  the  game  performed  better  at  identifying 

phishing  websites  than  participants  who  completed  the  two  other  types  of 

training.  This  is  accordance  with  the  current  study,  which  found  that  some 

evidence  of  well-designed  mobile  game  based  education  could protect personal 

computer  users from  phishing  attacks. In  addition, this study attempted to assess 

the  game  designed  framework  introduced  in  Chapter 4 (Figure. 4.3) through the 

mobile game prototype. 

However,  only  five  participants were  able  to successfully  differentiate legitimate 

websites  from  phishing  websites  by  looking  at  URLs  in  the  post-study.  The 

current  study identified possible explanations for these results. The mobile game 

functioned  properly, but was still a low-fidelity prototype. Previous research has 

claim  the  necessity  of  high-fidelity  prototypes  for  ubiquitous  computing 

applications  such  as  mobile  applications,  because  low-fidelity  approaches  are 

insufficient  to  precisely  capture  interactivity  (Lim,  et  al.,  2006;  Liu  and 

Khooshabeh, 2003). It would have  been useful to develop  a high-fidelity mobile 

game  prototype  with  some  attractive  graphics with visual objects and then test on 

users. In addition, limited display size of  the  mobile  phone might have  caused a 

problem for participants especially those who  have visual problems. 

135 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Previous research revealed that mobile ubiquitous applications are still in their  infancy 

due  to  the  limitations  of  processor  power,  memory  and  specifically  screen  size 

(Hashim,  Ahmad  and  Rohiza,  2010;  Tolentino,  et  al.,  2011).  Other  than  this, 

participants  would  have  played  the  game  much  longer  than  they  were  given.  One 

participant stated: “If I played the game a bit longer, I would have scored more marks 

in  the  post-test”.  In  this  case,  the  participants  had  enough  time  to  familiar  with  the 

gamming environment. Furthermore, it would also have been useful if the amount of 

URLs  included  in  the  game  were  increased.  Then  participants  would  have  had  the 

opportunity  to  test  their  phishing  knowledge  on  various  types  of  URLs.  They  may 

also  have experienced  different  combination  of  URLs  patterns that  would  help them 

to develop self-confidence in their knowledge about phishing threat. 

In  summary,  this  study  found  that  the  mobile  game  prototype  enhanced  the  user 

avoidance  behaviour  through  increasing  the  motivation  to  protect  themselves  from 

phishing  attacks  after  the  game  play.  Furthermore,  the  results  provided  support  to 

assess  the  game  design  framework  introduced  in  Chapter  4  (Figure.  4.3).  Therefore, 

the  study  highlighted  that  perceived  threat,  safeguard  effectiveness,  safeguard  cost, 

self-efficacy, perceived threat and perceived susceptibility elements have a significant 

impact  on  avoidance  behaviour  through  motivation to thwart  phishing attacks as 

addressed in the game design framework. 

6.5 Summary 

A game design framework has been introduced in Chapter 4 (Figure. 4.3) through an 

empirical  investigation.  The  study  findings  showed  the  game  design  framework 

enhances  computer  users’  avoidance  behaviour  through  motivation  to  prevent 

themselves  from  phishing  attacks.  The  current  study  started  as  a  second  attempt  to 

evaluate the  game design framework through  a  mobile  game prototype  developed in 

Chapter 5. Even though the game design framework was empirically evaluated in the 

Chapter  4,  it  would  have  been  useful  to  stress  the  participants’  impact  on  the 

framework after their engagement with the game play activity. The study employed a 

usability  study  using  SUS  as  the  first  step  to  assess  the  subjective  satisfaction  of 

136 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mobile game prototype interface. Then,  a think-aloud study was employed along 

with  a  pre-  and  post-test  in  order  to  evaluate  the  game  design  framework.  An 

experimental  protocol  was  designed,  which  included  user  study  instructions 

for  participants  to  undertake the think-aloud study. 

Finally,  the  current  study  found  the  results  were  encouraging.  In  the  pre-test, 

participants  scored  55  percent  whilst  scoring  84  percent  in  their  post-test.  The 

study  findings  showed  that  learning  has  taken  place  through  the  mobile  game 

prototype.  Participants’  avoidance  behaviour  has  also  been  increased  by  29 

percent,  which  is  reasonably  high.  Therefore,  the  mobile  game  prototype  was 

able  to  teach  participants 

to  protect 

themselves  from  phishing  attacks. 

Furthermore,  the  study  found  that  the  mobile  game  prototype  enhanced  user 

avoidance  behaviour  through  motivating  to  protect  themselves  from  phishing 

attacks after the game play event. Finally, the study  highlighted  perceived  threat, 

safeguard  effectiveness,  safeguard  cost,  self-efficacy,  perceived  threat  and 

perceived  susceptibility  elements  have  a  significant  impact  on  avoidance 

behaviour through motivation to thwart phishing attacks as addressed in the  game 

design framework in Chapter 4 (Figure. 4.3). 

Chapter  7  will  focus  a  discussion  investigating  the  effectiveness  of  the 

developed  mobile  game  prototype  compared  to  traditional  online  learning  to 

thwart  phishing  threats. Moreover, it will discuss the implications of the research 

work reported in this  book. 

137 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7 

Discussion 
of  Mobile  Game 
Prototype  and Public Anti-phishing 
Educational Website 

7.1 Introduction 

The study reported in Chapter 6 showed that the developed mobile game prototype 

is  somewhat  effective  in  teaching  computer  users  on  how  to  identify  phishing 

URLs.  The  overall  mobile  game  prototype  was  designed  to  enhance  the  user’s 

avoidance  behaviour  through  motivation  to  protect  themselves  against  phishing 

attacks.  A  discussion  reported  in  this  chapter examines  the  effectiveness  of the 

developed mobile  game  prototype  compared  to  traditional  online  learning  to 

thwart  phishing  threats.  Furthermore, it discusses the implications of the research 

work  reported  in  this  book.  Therefore,  an  evaluation  study  is  conducted  to 

investigate  the  effectiveness  of  the  developed mobile game prototype compared 

to  traditional  online  learning  to  thwart  phishing  threats.  To  accomplish  this 

study,  a  website  developed  by  Anti-Phishing  Work  Group  (APWG)  for  the 

purpose of public anti-phishing education initiative was  employed as a traditional 

web based learning source. A think-aloud experiment along  with a pre- and post-

test  was  conducted  through  a  user  study.  Total  40  participants  were  asked  to 

follow  think-aloud  user  study  instructions  given  in  an  experimental  protocol. 

Participants  were  assigned  into  two  groups:  20  participants  with  a  group  those 

who played the mobile game (as the study reported in Chapter 6) and the other 

20  participants  with  another  group  those  who  read  the  APWG  public  education 

initiative  website.  Finally,  the  study  used  Paired-samples  t-test  to  compare  the 

means  scores  for  the  participants’  pre-  and  post-tests  while  analysing  the  data 

gathered  from 

the  think-aloud  study.  The  study  findings  revealed  that  the 

participants who played  the  mobile  game  were  better  able to identify fraudulent 

websites  compared  to  the  participants who read the website without any training. 

138 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.2. Mobile Game Prototype 

The  study  reported  in  Chapter  5,  developed  a  mobile  game  prototype  as  an 

educational  tool to teach  computer  users  how  to  protect  themselves  against  phishing 

threats.  The study asked  the  following  questions:  The first  question  is  how  does  one 

identify  which  issues  the  game  needs  to  be  addressed?  Once  the  salient  issues  were 

identified,  the  second  question  is  what  principles  should  guide  the  structure  of  this 

information. The elements from the game design framework introduced in Chapter 4 

(Figure  4.3)  were  used  to  address  those  mobile  game  design  issues  and  the  mobile 

game design principles were used as a set of guidelines for structuring and presenting 

information  in  the  mobile  game  design  context.  The  objective  of  the  anti-phishing 

mobile  game  prototype  was  to  teach  the  user  how  to  identify  phishing  URLs.  The 

overall  mobile  game  design  was  focused  to  enhance  avoidance  behaviour  through 

motivation of computer users to thwart phishing threats. 

The study reported in Chapter 6 included total 20 participants, the age range between 

18  and  25,  from  a  diverse  group  of  staff  and  students  at  Brunel  University  and  the 

University  of  Bedfordshire,  including  people  who  were  concerned  about  computer 

security.  The  pre-  and  post-tests  were  based  on  Apple  MacBook  Pro  where  the 

participants  received  their  score  at  the  end  of  each  test.  Total  20  participants  were 

asked to follow think-aloud user study instructions given in an experimental protocol. 

They  were  also  informed  that  they  are  welcome  to  clarify  anything  related  to  the 

experiment.  In  the  pre-test,  participants  were  presented  with  ten  websites  (shown  in 

Table  6.4)  and  asked  to  differentiate  phishing  websites  from  legitimate  ones.  After 

evaluating 10 websites, participants were given fifteen minutes to complete a mobile 

game based training activity on a HTC One X touch screen smart phone. Initially, the 

game  was  designed  with  10  suspect  URLs  (shown  in  Table  5.2)  where  the 

participant’s responsibility is to identify legitimate URLs from phishing ones. 

Then  the  study  employed  System  Usability  Scale  (SUS)  to  measure  the  users’ 

subjective satisfaction of the mobile game interface usability since the work reported 

in  Chapter  6  developed  the  mobile  game  prototype.  Therefore,  after  engaging  15 

minutes with the mobile game activity, 20 participants were asked to fill in a survey 

139 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as  shown  in  Table  6.6.  Then  all  20  participants  followed  a  post-test  where 

participants  were  shown  ten  more  websites  to  evaluate  (shown  in  Table  6.5). 

The  score  was  recorded  during  the  pre-  and  post-tests  to  observe  how 

participants’  understanding  and awareness of phishing threats developed through 

the mobile game based training  activity. 

During  the  mobile  game  based  training  activity,  a  think-aloud  study  was 

employed  where  the  participants  were  asked  to  talk  about  how  they  identified 

phishing URLs  from legitimate ones. Additionally, they talked about their opinions 

and experience of  phishing threat awareness and understanding through the mobile 

game prototype. 

7.3 Public Anti-phishing Educational Website 

The  Anti-Phishing  Work  Group  (APWG)  was  established  in  2003  as  an 

industry  association focused on amalgamating the global response to cyber-crime 

(Anti-  Phishing  Work  Group,  2003).  The  organisation  provides  a  forum  for 

public such as  responders  and  managers  of  cyber-crime  to  discuss  phishing  and 

other  cyber-crime  issues,  to  consider  potential  technology  solutions,  to  access 

data  logistics  resources  for  cyber-security  applications  and  for  cybercrime 

forensics,  to  cultivate  the  university  research  community  dedicated  to  cyber-

crime  and 

to  advise  government, 

industry,  law  enforcement  and  treaty 

organisations on the nature of cybercrime. 

The public  phishing education section  of  the  Anti-Phishing Work  Group website 

is  developed  for  learning  more  about  phishing  education.  For  example,  what  is 

phishing  threat,  how  it  could  be  severe,  what  is  the  usefulness  of  having  a 

safeguarding  measure, where to report a suspected phishing email or website and 

phishing  education  to  thwart  phishing  attacks.  Therefore,  the  public  Anti-

phishing  education  initiative  section  of  the  APWG  website  was  used  as  a 

traditional  online  learning  source in this research study, which is shown in Figure 

7.1 and 7.2. 

140 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.1: Welcome page of APWG Public Education (APWG, 2003) 

Figure 7.2: Educational redirect program section of APWG Public Education 
(APWG, 2003) 

141 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.3.1 Participants 

Sheng,  et  al.  (2010)  conducted  a  role-play  survey  with  1001  online  survey 

respondents  to  study  who  falls  for  phishing  attacks.  Their  study  showed 

participants  between  the  ages  of  18  to  25  are  more  susceptible  for  phishing 

attacks than other age  groups.  The  current  study  included  20  participants  from 

a  diverse  group  of  staff and  students  at  Brunel  University  and  the  University 

of  Bedfordshire,  including  people  who  were  concerned  about  computer 

security.  Participants’  ages  ranged  from  18  to  25, with a gender split of 67 

percent male and 33 percent female. They had average of  more  than  20  hours 

per  week  of  Internet  experience.  Each  participant  took  part  in  the  think-aloud 

study  on  a  fully  voluntary  basis.  A  summary  of  the  demographics  of  the 

participants in the think-aloud study is shown in Table 7.1. 

Table 7.1: Participant demographics 

Characteristics 

Amount (Mobile 

Amount 

game prototype) 

(APWG educational website) 

Sample Size 

Gender 

Male 

Female 

Age (18 - 25) 

Experience using mobile 

device 

Mobile phone 

Smart phone 

Average hours per week on 

the Internet 

0-5 

6-10 

11-15 

16-20 

20+ 

20 

13 

7 

20 

0 

20 

0 

0 

0 

0 

20 

20 

13 

7 

20 

0 

20 

0 

0 

0 

0 

20 

142 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.3.2 Procedure 

The  pre-  and  post-tests  were  based  on  Apple  MacBook  Pro  where  the 

participants  received their score at  the end of each test. First and foremost, each 

individual  participant  was  explained  the  nature  of  the  think-aloud  experimental 

study  and  asked 

to  sign  a  consent  form.  They  were  also  informed  that  the 

experiment is about testing  their understanding of phishing threat awareness using 

APWG public education initiative  website.  Then  the  individual  participants  were 

asked  whether  they  knew  what  the  term  ‘phishing  attack’  means.  Those  who 

gave  a  positive  response  were asked to give a short verbal description to confirm 

their  understanding,  whilst  negative  responders  were  read  a  brief  definition  of 

phishing attack and gave a short  verbal description. To begin the experiment, total 

20 participants were asked to follow  think-aloud user study instructions given in 

an experimental protocol. They were also  informed that they are welcome to clarify 

anything related to the experiment. 

In the pre-test, participants were presented with ten websites (shown in Table 6.4) 

and  asked to differentiate phishing websites from legitimate ones. After evaluating 

first  10  websites,  participants  were  asked  to  walkthrough  the  APWG  public 

education  initiative  website  for  15  minutes.  Then  all  20  participants  followed  a 

post-test where  participants  were  shown  ten  more  websites  to  evaluate  (shown 

in  Table  6.5).  The  score was recorded during the pre-  and post-tests to observe 

how  participants’  understanding  and  awareness  of  phishing  threats  developed 

through the APWG public  education initiative website. 

During  the  mobile  game  based  training  and  public  education  initiative  website 

reading  activities,  a  think-aloud  study  was  employed  where  participants  talked 

about 

their  opinions  and  experience  of  phishing 

threat  awareness  and 

understanding  through  either mobile game prototype or APWG public education 

initiative website. 

143 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.4 Results 

In  the  think-aloud  experiment,  participants  talked  about  their  experience  and 

opinions  of  either  mobile  game  prototype  or  APWG  public  education  initiative 

website  to  thwart  phishing  threats.  The  results  were  encouraging;  however  it 

highlighted  some  areas  where  the  APWG  public  education  initiative  website 

needed improvements. 

The study reported in Chapter 6, measured the participants’ subjective satisfaction 

of  the  mobile  game  prototype  using  the  SUS  scoring  approach  introduced  by 

Brooke  (1996).  The  score  was  significantly  high  with  84  percent  (83.62  out  of 

100) (Brooke,  1996). Then the current research study employed Paired-samples t-

test to compare the  means scores for the participants’ pre- and post-tests (Pallant, 

2007). Participants who  played the mobile game, scored 55 percent in the pre-test 

and  84  percent  in  the post-  test  of  identifying  phishing  or  legitimate  websites 

after  playing  the  mobile  game  prototype  (Table  7.2  and  Table  7.3).  There  was 

a  statistically  significant  increase  in  the post-test of participants who played the 

mobile  game  ((Pre-test:  M=  55.00,  SD=17.911  and  Post-test:  M=84.00, 

SD=13.139), t(19)= -7.97, p<0.005 (two-tailed)) 

compared to those who read APWG public education initiative website (Pre-test: 

M=  60.00,  SD=  17.770  and  Post-test:  M=  62.50,  SD=25.930,  t(19)=  -0.036, 

p>0.005 

(two-tailed)). 

It has been seen that there is a considerable improvement of participants’ results of 

29  percent in the post-test after their engagement with the mobile game prototype 

(p<0.005  (two-tailed)).  This  is  a significant improvement  of overall  participants’ 

phishing  avoidance  behaviour 

through 

the  mobile  game  prototype.  18 

participants  scored above 80 percent whilst five participants scored full marks (100 

percent) in the  post-test.  However,  all  participants  scored  above  50  percent  in 

their  post-test.  The  overall  participants’  score  is  shown  in  Figure  7.3. 

Additionally,  the  individual  participant’s score during their engagement with the 

mobile game prototype is shown  in Figure 7.4. 

144 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 7.2: Paired Samples t-test Statistics 

Pair 1 

Pair 2 

MobilePreTest 

MobilePostTest 

WebPreTest 

WebPostTest 

Paired Samples Statistics 

Mean 

55.00 

84.00 

60.00 

62.50 

N 

20 

20 

20 

20 

Std. Deviation 

Std. Error Mean 

17.911 

13.139 

17.770 

25.930 

4.005 

2.938 

3.974 

5.798 

Table 7.3: Paired Samples Test 

Paired Samples Test 

Paired Differences 

Mean 

Std. 

Std. Error 

Deviation 

Mean 

95% Confidence Interval 

of the Difference 

Lower 

Upper 

-28.500 

15.985 

3.574 

-35.981 

-21.019 

df 

Sig. 

(2-tailed) 

19 

.000 

t 

- 

7.973 

-2.500 

31.267 

6.992 

-17.133 

12.133 

-.358 

19 

.725 

Pair 1 

MobilePreT - 

MobilePostT 

Pair 2 

WebPreT - 

WebPostT 

84 

55 

60

63 

Mobile Pre Test 

Mobile Post Test 

Web Pre Test 

Web Post Test 

90 

80 

70 

60 

50 

40 

30 

20 

10 

0 

)

%

e
r
o
c
S
(

s
s
e
n
t
c
e
r
r
o
C

l
a
t
o
T

Mobile Pre Mobile Post 

Web Pre 

Web Post 

Test 

Test 

Test 

Test

Figure  7.3:  Total  correctness  for  the  test  groups.  N=20  in  all  conditions.  The 

game condition shows the greatest improvement (by 29%). 

145 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The individual participant’s score with 
mobile game prototype 

%

e
r
o
c
S

80 

60 

40 

20 

Mobile Pre Test 

Mobile Post Test 

1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8    9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Number of Participants (Think-aloud sessions) 

Figure 7.4: The individual participant’s score during their engagement with 

the  mobile game prototype  

All participants responded that their decision was based on looking at the address 

bar  (URL)  when  evaluating  the  second  set  of  ten  websites  in  the  post-test. 

Furthermore,  they  stated  that  they  made  only  very  few  attempts  to  look  at  the 

address  bar  when  evaluating the  first  ten  websites  in  the  pre-test.  There,  many 

participants used  incorrect  strategies  to  determine  the  website  legitimacy.  For 

example,  one  of  the  common  strategies  consisted  of  checking  whether  or  not 

the  website  was  designed  professionally.  However,  this  may  not  be  a  useful 

strategy as  many phishing websites  are  an  exact  replica  of  legitimate  websites. 

The attacker can easily mimic any  professional  website  from  the  source  code 

of  the  particular  page  provided  by  the  browser.  Moreover,  all  participants 

highlighted  that  the  mobile  game  was  somewhat  effective  at  teaching  different 

patterns of URLs to differentiate phishing URLs from  legitimate ones. 

Participants those who read the APWG public education initiative website, scored 

60  percent  in  the  pre-test and  63  percent  in  the  post-test  of  identifying 

phishing  or 

legitimate  websites  after  reading  the  APWG  public  education 

initiative  website  (Table  7.2).  There  is  a  slightly  little  improvement  of 

participants’ results of 3 percent in the  post-test  during the think-aloud  study. 7 

participants scored below 50 percent whilst

146 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
five participants scored above 80 percent in the post-test. Only 12 participants scored 

above  50  percent  in  the  post-test.  None  of  the  participants  scored  full  marks  (100 

percent)  in  their  post-test.  The  overall  participants’  score  is  shown  in  Figure  7.3. 

Additionally,  the  individual  participant’s  score  during  their  engagement  with  the 

APWG public education initiative website is shown in Figure 7.5. It can therefore be 

argued that participants were not much aware of how to avoid phishing threats by just 

reading  the  APWG  public  education  initiative  website.  The  current  research  study 

identified possible explanations to these results. All participants who read the website 

during the think-aloud study stated that they are bored of reading the website, since it 

contains  a  lot  of  text.  Their  argument  was  reading  a  website  to  gain  phishing 

knowledge does consume a lot of time though it is useful in the long run. Only a few 

participants  responded  that  their  decision  was  based  on  looking  at  the  address  bar 

when evaluating the second set of ten websites in the post-test. 

The individual participant's score with 
APWG public education initiative website 

%

e
r
o
c
S

80 

60 

40

20

0

Web Pre Test 

Web Post Test 

1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8    9   10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20 
Number of participants (Think-aloud sessions) 

Figure 7.5: The individual participant’s score during their engagement with the 

APWG public education initiative website 

Furthermore, they described that the website does tell us to look at the URL; however, 

it does not tell us how to identify good URLs from bad ones more specifically. They 

also believed that the website does not provide a way of testing their knowledge. For 

example, it would be useful to give the user a test after reading the website for self- 

assessment their knowledge  gained against phishing attacks. This  helps to obtain an 

immediate  feedback  on  what  they  have  learnt.  Additionally,  video  tutorials  can  be 

147 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
embedded  into  the  website  where  the  user  can  better  engage  with  learning  process. 

Therefore,  the  current  study  concluded  that  the  mobile  game  prototype  is  somewhat 

effective in teaching computer users to thwart phishing attacks than traditional online 

learning. 

7.5 Research Implications 

The  research  work  reported  in  this  book  focuses  on  how  one  can  educate  computer 

users  against  phishing  threats,  because  phishing  attacks  continuously  jeopardise 

innocent  computer  users  (Iacovos  and  Sasse,  2012;  Kumaraguru  and  Cranor,  2009; 

Purkait,  2012).  Usability experts  claim  that  end-user education  and  training does  not 

work to combat against phishing (Sheng, et al., 2007; Evers, 2007). It can therefore be 

argued  that  existing  anti-phishing  security  education  such  as  through  web-based 

training,  contextual 

training  and  embedded 

training  materials  has  not  been 

appropriately  designed  for  users.  Yet  theory-based  empirical  research  that  enhances 

computer  users’  phishing  awareness  through  their  voluntary  IT  threat  avoidance 

behaviour  is  lacking  (Iacovos  and  Sasse,  2012;  Purkait,  2012).  The  current  research 

study findings revealed that the participants who played the mobile game were better 

able to identify fraudulent websites compared to the participants who read the APWG 

public education initiative website without any training. This is because the developed 

mobile game prototype was based on the game design framework introduced in  Chapter 

4. The framework formulated through an empirical investigation to enhance  computer 

users’  phishing  threat  avoidance  behaviour  though  their  motivation.  The  study 

incorporated perceived threat, safeguard effectiveness, safeguard cost, self-  efficacy, 

perceived  severity  and  perceived  susceptibility  elements  into  the  game  design 

framework  for  computer  users  to  thwart  phishing  attacks.  As  a  result,  the  current 

study  found  that  the  mobile  game  is  somewhat  effective  in  enhancing  the computer 

user’s  phishing  awareness.  Therefore,  it  is  worth  understanding  how  the  human 

aspect  of  avoiding  malicious  IT  threats  can  influence  in  designing  security 

education.  For  example,  when  designing  security  education  though  web-based 

training  materials.  Furthermore,  it  can  argue  this  proposed  game  design  framework 

148 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not only can protect computer users from phishing attacks but also other cyber-attacks 

such as botnets, zombies, virus, trojans, spyware, spam, malware, etc. 

The  research  reported  in  this  book  can  inform  IT  security  education  programs  in 

several  aspects.  First,  it  recommends  the  worth  of  security awareness,  education  and 

training programs.  Individuals  are  more motivated  to  avoid  malicious  IT  threats  and 

use  of  safeguarding  measures  if  these  security  educational  programs  help  them  to 

develop  threat  perceptions,  comprehend  the  effectiveness  of  safeguarding  measures, 

lower  safeguard  costs  and  increase  their  self-efficacy.  Second,  this  research  suggests 

that  security  awareness  and  training  programs  should  stress  both  the  likelihood  of 

malicious IT threats and the severity of losses caused by the threats. The game design 

framework introduced in Chapter 4 suggests that emotion-focused coping behaviour is 

a  possible  culprit  that  confuses  users’  motivation  systems  at  high  threat  levels. 

Therefore,  public  security  education  initiatives  should  draw  attention  to  possible 

emotion-focused coping approaches and help computer users to understand how they 

unintentionally 

engage 

in  emotion-focused  coping  behaviour. 

  Furthermore, 

individuals  should  be  trained  how  to  stop  emotion-focused  coping  behaviour  when 

they  are  dealing  with  malicious  IT  threats.  Such  training  and  education  would  help 

computer  users  to  emphasis  on  the  problem-focused  coping  approach,  thus  reducing 

the negative effects of high threat perceptions. 

Most organisations do conduct security education, training and awareness programs to 

regulate  employees’  malicious  IT  threat  avoidance  behaviour  and  adhere  to  best 

security practices against malicious IT threats (Gordon, et al., 2006). However, users 

at home in a non-work setting are free from those regulations and acting on their own 

and are easily prey to malicious  IT threats.  In  addition, organisations may consist of 

either  a  centralised  or  decentralised  IT  security  environment  (Warkentin  and 

Johnston, 2006). In the centralized organisational IT security environment, security is 

managed  at  the  enterprise  level  and  employees  have  no  choice  to  opt  out.  Those 

organisations  with  centralised  IT  security  environment  may  have  sufficient  IT 

infrastructure and strict IT security policies and procedures developed by professional 

security  expertise.  In  contrast,  in  the  decentralized  organisational  IT  security 

environment,  employees  involve  in  voluntary  protective  actions  such  as  configuring 

and  enabling  their  personal  firewall/proxy  and  updating  their  own  antivirus  and/or 

149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
anti-phishing software. These employees in the decentralised IT security environment 

are  highly  likely  to  engage  in  unsafe  computer  behaviours  and  become  the  weakest 

link in their organisational security system. Therefore, security education, training and 

awareness  are needed to  help these uses to combat against malicious  IT threats. The 

mobile game prototype design introduced in Chapter 5 as an educational tool focused 

to  teach  computer  users  how  to  protect  themselves  against  phishing  attacks.  This  is 

because  mobile  games  can  facilitate  to  embed  learning  in  a  natural  environment. 

Therefore, a game based learning approach can contribute to the effectiveness of such 

IT security programs. 

Some organisations such as banks provide help and guidance on their official website 

to protect their customers against phishing scams. In addition, they provide free anti- 

virus software such as Kaspersky Internet Security for their customers. However, the 

studies reported in Chapter 6 and 7 revealed that reading articles, books, lecture notes 

or webpages  to  gain  anti-phishing  knowledge is still  in infancy boring.  On  the other 

hand,  how  many  of  computer  users  are  competent  enough  to  properly  install, 

configure  and  use  anti-virus  software  on  their  personal  computer  system  is 

questionable  today.  Most  of  them  believe  that  by  only  installing  an  anti-virus 

application  does  entirely  protect 

their  computer  system  from  cyber-attacks. 

Unfortunately, this is not true. However, organisations like banks should be aware the 

human  element  is  the weakest  link  in  personal  computer  use  and  need  to  better 

educate them to combat malicious  IT threats. This can be achieved by allowing their 

customers  to free  download  security  educational games  (e.g.  the  game prototype 

developed in Chapter 5) for their computers and mobile devices. 

7.6 Summary 

The current study attempted to evaluate the effectiveness of a mobile game compared 

to  a  traditional  website  in  order  to  protect  computer  users  against  phishing  attacks. 

Therefore,  a  mobile  game  prototype  was  developed  based  on  the  game  design 

framework  introduced  in  Chapter  4  (Figure  4.3)  that  aimed  to  enhance  avoidance 

behaviour through motivation to protect computer users against phishing threats. The 

APWG  public  education  initiative  website  was  used  as  a  traditional  web  based 

150 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
learning  source.  The  experiment  was  conducted  through  a  user  study.  A  think-

aloud  study  was  employed  along  with  a  pre-  and  post-test  with  total  40 

participants, where  20 participants were asked to play the mobile game prototype 

(as reported in Chapter 

6)  and  the  other  20  participants  were  asked  to  read  the  website.  The  study 

findings  revealed that the participants, who played the mobile game, were better 

able  to  identify fraudulent  websites than the participants,  who read  the  website. 

Therefore,  the study believes  that  teaching computer users how to prevent from 

phishing  threats  using  a  mobile  game,  would  contribute 

to  enable 

the 

cyberspace  a  secure  environment. 

However, only  five participants who played  the  game were able to  successfully 

differentiate  legitimate  websites  from  phishing  websites  by  looking  at  URLs  in 

the  post-study.  The  current  study  identified  possible  explanations  for  these 

results.  The  mobile  game  functioned  properly,  but  was  still  a  prototype.  It  is 

useful  to  develop  a  proper  mobile  game  rather  than  a  prototype  with  some 

attractive graphics with visual  objects,  including  more  complex  URLs  and  then 

test  on  a  different  sample  size  to  confirm  these  findings.  In  addition,  limited 

display  size  of  the  mobile  phone  might  have  caused  a  problem  for  participants 

especially  those  who  have  visual  problems.  Additionally,  it  can  argue  that  if 

participants  were allowed  to  play the  game  much  longer they would have scored 

more in the post-test. Future research can be conducted  with a larger sample size 

allowing participants to play the game much longer using a  high-fidelity mobile 

game rather than a prototype. 

Chapter 8 will focus a discussion based on the findings of Chapter 4, 5, 6 and 7 

with  focus on the relevant literature. It will highlight some limitations and areas 

of  improvements.  Furthermore,  it  will  open  more  branches  for  future  research 

based on  these studies. 

151 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8 

Discussion and Conclusion 

8.1 Introduction 

This  book  addressed  the  security  awareness  issues  concerning  computer  use  with 

specific  attention  to  phishing  threats.  Phishing  is  a  type  of  semantic  attack  that  is 

particularly  dangerous  in  computer  use  (Downs,  Holbrook  and  Cranor,  2007; 

Schneier,  2000).  It  is  well  known  as  an  online  identity  theft  that  attempts  to  steal 

sensitive information such as username, password and online banking details from its 

victims.  The  attacker  generally  synbookes  the  social  engineering  element  as  well  as 

the  technical  element  to  launch  an  attack  (Jagatic,  et  al.,  2007).  It  could  be  easy  to 

hinder  the  technical  element  by  developing  necessary  software  tools  such  as  anti- 

phishing  software.  Though,  it  is  hard  to  stop  the  social  engineering  element  because 

most  computer  users  tend  to  disclose  their  sensitive  information  through  social 

networking  websites.  This  could  be  through  Internet  enabled  services  such  as 

Facebook, Twitter,  Hi5,  Orkut, Skype  and  even  more professional  social  networking 

websites like LinkedIn. Furthermore, users can have a lack of security awareness and 

struggle to make sensitive trust decisions during online activities, such as online bill 

payments  or  banking transactions.  These  are  one  of  the major  reasons  that  computer 

users  are  susceptible  to  phishing  attacks  (Kumaraguru,  et  al.,  2007).  Therefore,  the 

computer  user’s  contribution  is  vital  to  make  the  cyberspace  a  safer  place  for 

everyone. 

The  purpose  of  this  book  was  to  investigate  how  to  create  awareness  on  computer 

users to protect themselves from phishing attacks. The motivation behind this research 

was  that  phishing  attacks  get  more  sophisticated  day  by  day  as  and  when  attackers 

learn  new  techniques  and  change  their  strategies  accordingly.  As  a  result,  innocent 

152 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people disclose their confidential information such as usernames, passwords  and 

credit  or  debit  card  information  to  hackers  via  the  Internet.  As  reported  in  the 

Anti-  Phishing  Working  Group  (APWG)  in  2011,  approximately  one  in  every 

300  emails  circulating over the web is considered to contain elements pointing to 

phishing  (APWG, 2012). Furthermore, they claimed that compared with the total 

numbers of  phishing  attacks  recorded  in  2010,  phishing  numbers  have  increased 

significantly  through  2011.  The  BBC  has  also  constantly  reported  increasing 

phishing  scams  over  the  years.  One of the most  recent scams  targeted  LinkedIn 

users  through  email  scams  after  hackers  leaked  more  than  six  million  user 

passwords online (BBC News, 2012). 

The  previous  chapters  reported  in  this  book  have  discussed  the  underlining 

research  domain,  highlighted  the  importance  of  anti-phishing  education  to 

thwart  phishing  threats and investigated ways to improve the situation. The final 

chapter of this book  will discuss and summarise the findings of the research and 

report limitations, which  still leave room for improvement and further exploration. 

8.2 Summary of the Studies’ Findings 

Two  studies  and  one  theoretical  design  were  incorporated  into  the  research 

work  reported in this book as presented below. 

8.2.1  Developing a Game Design Framework  to Thwart Phishing 

Attacks 

The  research  work  reported  in  Chapter  4  empirically  investigated  the  key 

elements  that  should  be  addressed  in  the  game  design  framework  for  computer 

users to thwart  phishing attacks. The elements of a theoretical model derived from 

TTAT, were used  in the game design framework. The main findings of this study 

revealed  that  perceived  threat,  safeguard  effectiveness,  safeguard  cost,  self-

efficacy,  perceived  severity  and  perceived  susceptibility  elements  should  be 

incorporated into the game  design framework for computer users to avoid phishing 

attacks through motivation. 

153 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  study  was  particularly  concerned  about  threat  perception  because  it  plays  an 

important  role  in  influencing  the  computer  user’s  avoidance  behaviour. The  data 

analysis  results  in  Chapter  4  showed  that  the  model  explained  users’  motivation  to 

avoid IT threats influences their actual avoidance behaviour. Therefore, it conveyed a 

powerful message to motivate computer users to avoid malicious IT threats. A similar 

conclusion has been made by Liang and Xue (2010). Furthermore, when users  decided 

that the IT threat can be avoided by using a given safeguarding measure, they  may take 

a problem-focused coping approach. However, when the IT threat could not  be avoided 

completely,  they  may  take  an  emotion-focused  coping  (Liang  and  Xue,  2010;  Rhoa 

and  Yub,  2011).  A  similar  conclusion  has  been  made  by  Beaudry  and  Pinsonneaut 

(2001).  They  stated  that  if  users  perceive  the  malicious  IT  threat,  they  take  a 

problem-focused  coping  approach;  if  they  believe  that  the  threat  is  not  avoidable, 

they  will  inactively  avoid  the  threat  by  performing  a  emotion-focused  coping 

approach. 

The  study revealed  that  the  perceived  threat  element  is  significantly  important  to  be 

addressed  in  the  game  design  framework  for  computer  users  to  enhance  avoidance 

behaviour  through  motivation  to  thwart  phishing  attacks.  This  is  because  computer 

users  need  to  be  convinced  and  feel  that  such  malicious  IT  threats  exist  in  the 

cyberspace and are avoidable. Users’ failure to perceive the threat causes passive and 

inactive behaviour. Furthermore, the study described threat perception that users need 

to  be  aware  of likelihood  and  severity of being  attacked  by malicious  IT  threat.  The 

study  described  that  users  feel  that  such  a  threat  exists  in  the  cyberspace;  they 

acknowledged  its  likelihood  and  also  the  severeness  if  the  particular  threat  actually 

occurred.  If  users  actually  perceive  the  threat,  they  are  more  motivated  to  avoid  it. 

Therefore,  the  study  concluded  that  perceived  susceptibility  and  severity  elements 

should be addressed in the game design framework for computer users to truly  perceive 

the threat. 

The study found  that  the  safeguard  effectiveness  element  should  be  addressed  in  the 

game  design  framework  for  computer  users  to  thwart  phishing  threats.  The 

safeguarding measure was evaluated from three aspects; taking into account safeguard 

effectiveness, costs related to the safeguard measure and users confidence of using the 

safeguard to  avoid  malicious  IT  threats.  When the  level  of  effectiveness  of  the 

154 

 
 
 
 
 
 
safeguarding  measure  is  high  then  users  are  more  motivated  to  avoid  threats. 

Furthermore,  users’  high  confidence  in  taking  the  safeguard  measure  influenced 

to  enhance the motivation of avoiding threats.  Therefore, the study revealed  that 

self-  efficacy should also be addressed in the game design framework for avoiding 

threats  through motivation. 

The  current  study  revealed  that  safeguard  costs  negatively  affect  the  avoidance 

motivation.  When  the  safeguard  cost  is  high,  then  users  are  less  motivated  to 

avoid  threats. A similar conclusion has been made by Liang and Xue (2010); they 

described 

that  when  time,  money,  inconvenience  and  comprehension  are 

required  to  use  the  safeguarding  measure  is  high,  then  users  are  less  motivated 

to avoid threats (Liang  and Xue, 2009a; 2010b). Therefore, safeguard costs should 

be  addressed  in  the  game  design  framework  as  a  payback  to  safeguarding 

effectiveness.  However,  Liang  and  Xue’s  (2010)  study  did  not  support  the 

interaction  between  perceived  severity  and  susceptibility  on  perceived  threat. 

Unexpectedly, this study  found that perceived  threat  is  significantly  determined 

by  the  interaction  between  perceived  severity  and  susceptibility. 

Moreover, the current study did provide evidence to address the interaction effect 

of  perceived threat and safeguard effectiveness in the game design framework. The 

study  revealed  that  avoidance  motivation  is  significantly  determined  by  the 

interaction  of  perceived  threat  and  safeguard  effectiveness.  This  provided 

contradicting  results  to  Liang  and  Xue’s  (2010)  findings.  However,  they 

elaborated 

that 

the 

interaction  between  perceived 

threat  and  safeguard 

effectiveness  can  be  viewed  from  two  perspectives.  First,  when  the  threat  level 

is  high,  perceived  threat  can  be  viewed  to  negatively  moderate  the  relationship 

between  safeguard  effectiveness  and  avoidance  motivation. Second,  when  the 

level of  safeguard  effectiveness is high,  it can  be  viewed  to  negatively  moderate 

the  relationship  between  perceived  threat  and  avoidance motivation. 

155 

 
 
 
 
 
 
8.2.2  Developing  a  Mobile  Game  for  Computer  Users  to  Thwart 

Phishing Attacks 

The aim of this theoretical study reported in Chapter 5 focused on designing a mobile 

game as a tool to educate computer users by creating awareness of phishing attacks. It 

addressed  two  issues:  first,  which  key  elements  should  be  addressed  in  the  mobile 

game?  Second,  which  principal  should  be  used  to  address  these  elements?  The 

elements derived from the game design framework introduced in Chapter 4 were used 

to address in the mobile game context. Mobile game design principles were used as a 

set  of  guidelines  for  structuring  and  presenting  those  elements  in  the  mobile  game 

design context. The main objective of the anti-phishing mobile game design prototype 

was to teach users how to identify phishing website addresses (URLs) which is one of 

many  ways  to  identify  a  phishing  attack.  The  overall  game  design  was  targeted  to 

enhance  avoidance  behaviour  through  motivation  to protect computer users from 

phishing attacks. 

This  study  has  attempted  to  develop  a  mobile  game  prototype  based  on  the  design 

using  MIT  App  Inventor.  Finally,  the  developed  mobile  game  prototype  application 

was deployed on a HTC One X touch screen smart phone. 

8.2.3  Evaluating  the  Game  Design  Framework  through  the  Mobile 

Game 

The final research study reported in Chapter 6 focused on evaluating the game design 

framework  (presented  in  Chapter  4)  through  the  mobile  game  prototype  developed 

using  MIT  App  Inventor  Emulator  (presented  in  Chapter  5).  The  objective  of  this 

study was to determine users’ impact on the framework after playing the mobile game 

prototype, which will help to emphasis the game design framework to avoid phishing 

attacks.  In  addition,  pre-  and  post-tests  were  employed  in  this  study  to  determine 

whether or not users’ phishing awareness has been improved through the mobile game 

prototype.   Finally,   this   finding   elaborated   whether   or   not   the   user   avoidance 

156 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
behaviour  enhances  through  motivation  to  protect  themselves  from  phishing  attacks 

through the mobile game prototype. 

All  participants  in  the  study were  personal  computer users  and  had  some  experience 

of  Internet shopping. They also had some experience of using a smart phone at least 

one  year.  The  study  results  revealed  that  the  mobile  game  prototype  enhanced  their 

phishing  awareness.  Participants  scored  55  percent  in  the  pre-test  and  84  percent  in 

the post-test, after playing the mobile game. The overall score had been increased by 

29  percent  in  the  post-test,  which  is considered  as  a  significant  improvement  of 

participants’  phishing  awareness. These findings illustrated that  the  mobile  game 

prototype  could  enhance  participants’  avoidance  behaviour  through  motivation  to 

protect themselves from phishing attacks. In addition, all participants believed that the 

mobile game prototype is somewhat effective in enhancing their avoidance behaviour 

through motivation to thwart phishing attacks. Therefore, the study concluded that the 

game had a significant impact on avoidance behaviour through avoidance motivation 

to  thwart  phishing attacks  as  addressed  in  the  game design  framework in  Chapter 4. 

These results back up the finding of Liang and Xue’s (2010) theoretical model. They 

argued  and  empirically  revealed  that  users  with  a  stronger  avoidance  motivation  are 

more likely to engage in the avoidance behaviour of using the safeguard. 

All  participants  said  that  they  perceived  that  such  a  threat  could  exist  in  the 

cyberspace  and threat perception enhanced their motivation to avoid it while playing 

the  game.  They  believed  that  the  risk  of  being  phished  is  relatively high  due  to  the 

pervasiveness  of  Internet  technology.  However,  if  the  actual  attack  occurred,  they 

believed that the danger caused by the attack would be high. Therefore, it elaborated 

that the game attempted to develop both severity and susceptibility of phishing attacks 

where participants perceived phishing as a threat which danger to their computer use. 

These findings concluded that the game had a significant impact on both severity and 

susceptibility  elements  as  addressed  in  the  game  design  framework  in  Chapter  4.  A 

similar  conclusion  can  be  found  in  Liang  and  Xue’s  (2010)  theoretical  model.  They 

concluded  that  computer  users  have  to  be  convinced  and  feel  that  such  malicious  IT 

threats  exist  in  the  cyberspace  and  are  avoidable.  Users’  failure  to  feel  the  threat 

perception causes them will not act to avoid it. 

157 

 
 
 
 
The  study  found  that  the  mobile  game  prototype  is  an  effective  approach  that 

motivated  participants  to  learn  how  to  avoid  phishing.  Their  main  argument 

was  reading  books  or  articles  to  learn  phishing  threat  are  neither  practical  nor 

interesting,  but it is rather time consuming and boring. However, the notion of a 

game  teaching  people  about  phishing  is  quite  interesting.  Moreover,  it  enables 

to  gain  knowledge  with  fun.  The  current  study  found  that  the  mobile  game 

prototype  is  usable.  It  can  therefore be argued that if the game is neither usable 

nor effective, the overall score of  the  post-test  would  not  be  increased  by  a  29 

percentage.  Therefore,  the  study  concluded  that  the  game  is  an  effective 

safeguard  measure  which  motivated  participants  to  avoid  phishing  threat  as 

addressed  in  the  game  design  framework  in  Chapter  4.  A  similar  conclusion 

can  be  found  in  previous  studies  (Anderson  and  Agarwal, 2006; Ng, Kankanhalli 

and Xu, 2009; Woon, Tan and Low, 2005; Liang and  Xue, 2010). 

All participants showed interest in playing the game if it is simple and not taking 

too  long to  play.  Furthermore,  most  of them  would  have  liked  to  download  the 

game  for  free.  The study found  that  participants’  motivation  to  play the  game  is 

determined by  the cost that they have to pay for downloading and the time taken 

to play it. Therefore,  the  study  concluded  that  the  cost  of  the  game  influences 

participants’  motivation  to  avoid  phishing  threat  as  addressed  in  game  design 

framework in  Chapter 4.  A similar conclusion  can  be found in  Liang and  Xue’s 

(2010) theoretical  model, where they stated that safeguard cost negatively impact 

on  users’  avoidance  motivation to thwart phishing attacks. 

All  participants  believed  that  the  mobile  game  prototype  is  somewhat  effective 

in  teaching  them  to  identify  good  URLs  from  bad  ones.  The  study  argued  that 

participants’  effective  learning  through  the  game  would  enhance  their  behaviour 

to  avoid  phishing  threats.  On  the  other  hand  this  was  proved  by the  increase  of 

participants’  overall  score  by  29  percent  in  the  post-test.  Therefore,  the  study 

concluded  that  the  game  developed  participants’  self-efficacy,  which  has  a 

correlation 

to  knowledge  to  combat  phishing  threat.  This  result  backs  up  the 

finding of Liang and  Xue’s  (2010)  theoretical  model,  which  has  stated  that  self-

efficacy  that  reflected  on  users’  knowledge  about  phishing  attacks,  positively 

impacts on users’ avoidance  motivation to thwart phishing attacks. 

158 

 
 
 
 
 
 
In  summary,  this  study  found  that  the  mobile  game  is  somewhat  effective  in 

improving  the  user  phishing  avoidance  behaviour  after  their  engagement  with 

the  mobile game.  In  addition, the study findings supported to evaluate the  game 

design  framework  through  the  mobile  game  prototype.  Therefore,  the  study 

highlighted  perceived threat, safeguard effectiveness, safeguard cost, self-efficacy, 

perceived  threat  and  perceived  susceptibility  elements  have  a  significant  impact 

on  avoidance  behaviour  through  motivation  to  thwart  phishing  attacks  as 

addressed  in  the  game  design framework. 

8.3 Originality of the Research 

There  are  studies  in  the  literature  investigating  how  to  educate  people  to 

protect  themselves from malicious IT attacks such as phishing threats. This book 

contributed  to  develop  a  game  design  framework  for  computer  users  to  protect 

themselves  from  phishing attacks.  Therefore, the originality of the first study, in 

Chapter 4, is the idea  of introducing a game design framework to avoid phishing 

attacks through an  empirical  investigation.  The  elements  of  a  theoretical  model 

derived  from  TTAT,  were  used  to  address  the  game  design  framework.  The 

literature  did  not  report  a  study  that  gave  the  opportunity  to  the  researcher  to 

introduce a game design framework to  avoid phishing attacks based on TTAT. 

Likewise,  the  work  discussed  in  Chapter  5  of  this  book  focuses  on  designing 

a  mobile  game  for  computer  users  to  thwart  phishing  attacks.  The  elements 

derived  from  the  game  design  framework  introduced  in  Chapter  4  were  used  to 

address  the  mobile  game  while  using  mobile  game  design  principles  as  a  set 

of  guidelines  for  structuring  and  presenting  those  elements  in  the  mobile  game 

design context.  Therefore,  this  mobile  game  design  is  original  and  has  not  been 

published  in  any  previous  research  studies.  The  strength  of  this  study  is  the 

approach of  the design that  was based on the game design framework introduced 

in Chapter 4. 

159 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Similarly,  the  work  reported  in  Chapter  6  focuses  on  evaluating  the  game 

design  framework (presented in Chapter 4) through the mobile game prototype 

developed  using  MIT  App  Inventor  Emulator  (presented  in  Chapter  5).  The 

strength  of  this  work  is  the  evaluation  process  that  was  carried  out  after 

designing  the  game  framework.  Therefore,  the  game  design  framework  is 

original and has not been published in any  previous studies. 

One  of  the  distinguishing  characteristics  reported  in  the  research  work  of  this 

book  from  the  literature  work  is  the  methodological  approach.  This  research 

depended on  the quantitative and qualitative data that have been gathered from 

participants.  The  unique  feature  is  that  the  qualitative  data  of  this  study  were 

gathered  from  a  think-  aloud study along with pre and post-test in a laboratory 

based  experiment. These data  allowed  the  researcher  to  determine  whether  or 

not  participants’  phishing  awareness  has  been  improved  through  the  mobile 

game  prototype.  Moreover, the data collected  from quantitative approach gave 

a possibility to support the findings that were  concluded from quantitative work. 

8.4 Limitations and Future Work 

In the first instance the research work of this book has several limitations. The 

study  reported in Chapter 4 of this book focused on developing a game design 

framework  for  computer  users  to  thwart  phishing  attacks.  First,  the  study 

recruited  university  students’ ages ranged from 18 to 25 years as a convenience 

sample. However, university students do not represent the population of general 

computer  users.  They  are  younger,  may  have  more  computer  skills  and  are 

probably  more  knowledgeable  about  malicious  IT  threats  than  average  users. 

Therefore,  researchers  should  be  cautious  when  generalising  these  findings  to 

other computer users. Nevertheless, this  study  is  more  focused  on  developing 

a  game  design 

framework 

to  avoid  phishing  attacks  rather  than  on 

generalisability. Therefore, it is justifiable to use a subset of the  computer user 

population as the sample size. In addition, it is practically infeasible to  collect a 

random sample from the entire population of computer users. Future research  is 

required to confirm these research findings using different samples. 

160 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Second,  the  study  selected  phishing  attacks  as  malicious  IT  and  anti-phishing 

education  as  the  safeguarding  measure  in  order  to  empirically  investigate  the  game 

design  framework.  However,  this  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  the  source  of  a 

malicious  IT  threat  and  the  safeguarding  measure  must  be  an  IT  and  behaviour 

respectively.  The  source  of  a  malicious  IT  threat  could  be  rather  a  person  (e.g.,  a 

hacker  or  an  attacker) or  an  event (e.g.,  denial  of  service)  and  the  safeguarding 

measure could be an  IT  (e.g., anti-phishing tool or anti-virus application) or inaction 

(e.g.,  stop  downloading  freebies).  Therefore,  future  research  can  be  conducted  with 

different  malicious  IT  threat  sources  and  safeguarding  measures  to  observe  whether 

the findings of this study will remain as same. 

The  theoretical  designing  approach  reported  in  Chapter  5  focused  on  designing  a 

mobile game as a tool for computer users to protect themselves from phishing attacks. 

The objective of the developed anti-phishing mobile game was to teach user how to 

identify  phishing  website  addresses  which  is  one  of  many  ways  of  identifying  a 

phishing attack. Furthermore, future research can be conducted to design and develop 

a mobile game to teach other areas such as signs and content of the web page, the lock 

icons  and  jargons  of  the  webpage,  the  context  of  the  email  message  and  the  general 

warning messages displayed in the website. 

The study reported in Chapter 6 of this book focuses on  evaluating the  game  design 

framework  through  the  mobile  game  prototype  developed  using  MIT  App  Inventor 

Emulator. Although the mobile game functioned properly, it would have  been useful 

to  design  and  develop  a  high-fidelity  mobile  game  prototype  with  some  attractive 

graphics and visual objects to better interact with the user. Perhaps this may enhance 

their satisfaction of interacting with the game which presumably helps to improve the 

phishing  awareness  through  the  game.  Therefore,  a  future  research  would  benefit 

from  evaluating  the  game  design  framework  through  a  high-fidelity  mobile  game 

prototype.  In  addition,  a  different  combination  of  phishing  and  legitimate  websites 

can  be  used  in  pre-  and  post-tests  to  make  sure  the  mobile  game  prototype  creates 

awareness  to  avoid  phishing threats.  Furthermore,  as  future  research,  the  same  study 

reported  in  Chapter  6  can  be  conducted  through  a  simulated  phishing  attack  in  a 

laboratory-based  environment.  This  helps  to  observe how  people  are susceptible  for 

161 

 
 
 
 
 
 
real  life  phishing  attacks  before  and  after  their  engagement  with  the  mobile 

game  prototype. 

The  study  reported  in  Chapter  7  examined  the  effectiveness  of  the  developed 

mobile  game prototype compared to traditional online learning to thwart phishing 

threats. The  study  findings  showed  that  the  participants  who  played  the  mobile 

game were better  able to identify fraudulent websites compared to the participants 

who read the website  without  any training.  Future  research  can  be  conducted  to 

investigate  a  set  of  design  guideline to  better design  traditional  online learning 

systems to thwart phishing  threats. This can be based on the elements of the game 

design framework that  enhanced  computer  users’  avoidance  behaviour  thorough 

motivation  to  protect  themselves against phishing attacks. 

8.5 Summary 

This  chapter  discussed  the  main  findings  of  the  research  work  and  a  detailed 

discussion of the main finding has been presented. Furthermore, the contribution 

of the research work and its originality has been illustrated. Finally, limitations and 

areas 

for  future  work  were  discussed  to  open  up  more  opportunities  for 

forthcoming  research. 

162 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 

Abbasi,  A.,  Zahedi,F.M.  and  Chen,  Y.,  2012.  Impact  of  Anti-Phishing  Tool 

Performance  on  AttackSuccess  Rates,  2012  IEEE  International  Conference  on 

Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), 11-14 June 2012, pp.12 – 17. 

Aggarwaly,  A.,  Rajadesingan,  A. 

and  Kumaraguru, 

P., 

2012. 

PhishAri:Automatic  Realtime  Phishing  Detection  on  Twitter,  Seventh  IEEE 

APWG eCrime Researchers  Summit    (eCRS),    Las    Croabas,    Puerto    Rico,   

pp.    22-25,    Available    at: 

<http://precog.iiitd.edu.in/Publications_files/AA_AR_PK_eCRS_2012.pdf>, 

(Accessed 3 December 2012) 

Allen,  M.,  2006.  Social  Engineering:  A  means  to  violate  a  computer  system. 

Tech.  rep., SANS Institute. 

Amory, A. and Seagram. R., 2003. Educational Game Models: Conceptualization 

and  Evaluation, South African Journal of Higher Education, 17 (2), pp.206-217. 

Anandpara,  V.,  Dingman,  A.,  Jakobsson,  M.,  Liu,  D.  and  Roinestad,  H.,  2007. 

"Phishing  IQ  Tests  Measure  Fear,  Not  Ability",  Proceedings  of  Financial 

Cryptography and Data Security, 11th International Conference, pp.362-366. 

Anderson,  C.  L.,  and  Agarwal,  R.,  2006.  Practicing  Safe  Computing:  Message 

Framing, Self-View,  and Home Computer User Security Behaviour  Intentions, 

International Conference on Information Systems, Milwaukee, WI, 1543-1561. 

Anderson,  R.,  2001.  Security  Engineering:  A  Guide  to  Building  Dependable 

Distributed Systems, London, Wiley Computer Publishing. 

Andrews,  G.,  Woodruff,  E.,  MacKinnon,  K.A.  and  Yoon,  S.,  2003.  Concept 

development  for  kindergarten  children  through  a  health  simulation,  Computer 

Assisted Learning, 19, pp.209–219. 

163 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anido,  L., Burgos, D., Caeiro, M., Torrente, J., Fernández, M., González,  J., Manso, 

M.,  Ortega,  M.,  Rodríguez,  D.,  and  Fernández-Manjón,  B.,  2011.  Game  Tel:  an 

Approach  to  Multi-Format  and  Multi-Device  Accessible  Engineering  Education, 

Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE 2011), Rapid City, South Dakota, USA. 

APWG,2006. 

Phishing 

Activity 

Trends 

Report, 

Available 

at: 

<http://www.antiphishing.org/reports/apwg_report_August_2006.pdf>, 

(Accessed 

on 21August 2012). 

APWG, 

2012. 

Anti-Phishing  Working 

Group. 

Available 

at: 

<http://www.antiphishing.org/>, (Accessed on 10 August 2012). 

APWG,  2013.  Phishing  Activity  Trends  Report,  4th  Quarter  2012,  Available  at:  < 

http://docs.apwg.org/reports/apwg_trends_report_Q4_2012.pdf  >,  (Accessed  on  27 

April 2013). 

APWG,  2013.  Welcome 

to  APWG  Public  Education,  Available 

at:< 

http://education.apwg.org/>, (Accessed on 10 March 2013) 

Arachchilage  ,  N.  A.  G.  and  Cole,  M.,  2011.  Designing  a  mobile  game  for  home 

computer  users  to  protect  against  “phishing  attacks”,  International  Journal  for  e- 

Learning Security (IJeLS), 1 (1/2), pp.19 -26. 

Arachchilage, N. A. G. and Cole, M., 2011. Design a mobile game for home computer 

users  to  prevent  from  “phishing  attacks”,  Information  Society  (i-Society),  27-29 

June 

2011, 

485-489, 

Available 

at: 

<http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=5978543&isnumber=59 

784>, (Accessed 22 December 2011). 

Arachchilage, N. A. G., & Love, S. (2013). A game design framework for avoiding  

phishing attacks. Computers in Human Behavior, 29(3), 706-714. 

Arachchilage, N. A. G., & Love, S. (2014). Security awareness of computer users: A  

phishing threat avoidance perspective. Computers in Human Behavior, 38, 304-312. 

164 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arachchilage, N. A. G., Love, S., & Beznosov, K. (2016). Phishing threat avoidance   

behaviour: An empirical investigation. Computers in Human Behavior, 60, 185-

197. 

Arachchilage, N. A. G. (2013). Gaming for Security. ITNOW, 55(1), 32-33. 

Arachchilage, N. A. G., Tarhini, A., & Love, S. (2015). Designing a mobile game to  

thwarts malicious IT threats: A phishing threat avoidance perspective. arXivpreprint  

arXiv:1511.07093. 

Arachchilage,   N.A.G.,   User-Centred   Security   Education:   A   Game Design to  

Thwart Phishing Attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.03459.2015. 

Art,  C.  and  Glenn,  D.,  2005.  Modelling  End  User  Behaviour  to  Secure  a  PC  in  a 

Unmanaged    Environment,    AMCIS    2005    Proceedings,    449,    Available    at: 

<http://aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2005/44>,(Accessed on 11 January 2012). 

Aytes, K. and Terry, C., 2004. Computer Security and Risky Computing Practices: A 

Rational  Choice  Perspective,  Journal  of  Organizational  and  End  User  Computing, 

16 (2), pp.22-40. 

Bailey,  B.P,  Konstan,  J.A.  and  Carlis,  J.V.,  2001.  DEMAIS:  Designing  Multimedia 

Applications  with  Interactive  Storyboards,  Proceedings  of  the  Ninth  ACM 

International  Conference  on  Multimedia,  Ottawa,  Canada  ,  30  September  –  5 

October 2001, pp.241-250. 

Baillie,  L.,  Morton,  L.,  Moffat,  D.  and  Uzor,  S.,  2010.  Capturing  the  response  of 

players  to  a  location-based  game,  Personal  and  Ubiquitous  Computing,  12  June 

2010. 

Baker, A., Navarro, E. O. and Hoek. A. V. D., 2003. Problems and Programmers: an 

Educational  Software  Engineering  Card  Game,  Proceedings  of 

the  25th 

International  Conference  on  Software  Engineering,  ICSE’03,  pp.614  –  619, 

Washington, DC, USA. 

Banerjee,  A.,  Cole,  S.,  Duflo,  E.  and  Linden,  L.,  2007.  Remedying  education: 
165 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Evidence  from  two  randomized  experiments  in  India,  Quarterly  Journal  of 

Economics, 122 (3), 1235-1264. 

BBC News, 2010. Google Android phone shipments increase by 886%, Available at: 

<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-10839034>, (Accessed 25 April 2012). 

BBC  News, 

2010.  Hacking 

‘fun’ 

for  British 

teens,  Available 

at: 

<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/8574259.stm>, (Accessed 16 August 2012). 

BBC News, 2012. Apple doubles quarterly profits to $11.6bn  (£7.2bn),Available at: 

<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-17835234>. (Accessed 25 April 2012). 

BBC   News,   2012.   Budget   2012:   Tax   breaks   for   games   industry,Available   at: 

<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-17464478>, (Accessed 23 April 2012). 

166 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   BBC  News,  2012.  LinkedIn  users  targeted  in  email  scam  after  hack,  Available  at: 

<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-18351986>. (Accessed 25 April 2012). 

BBC News, 2012. Team Poison hacking inquiry: UK teenager arrested, Available at: 

<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-18017387>, (Accessed 16 August 2012). 

BBC News, 2012. World of Warcraft developers weigh mobile gaming app,Available 

at: <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-17456453>. (Accessed 25 April 2012). 

BBC.   News,   2010.   Microsoft   patches   Internet   Explorer   hole,   Available   at: 

<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/8469632.stm>, (Accessed 30 May 2011). 

Beaudry,  A.,  and  Pinsonneault,  A.,  2001.  IT-induced  adaptation  and  individual 

performance:  a  coping  acts  model,  Twenty-Second  International  Conference  on 

Information Systems, pp.475-480. 

Bellotti,  F.,  Berta,  R.,  Gloria,  A.  D.  and  Primavera,  L.,  2009.  Enhancing  the 

educational value of video games, Computers in Entertainment, 7 (2), pp.1–18. 

Bellotti,  F.,  Berta,  R.,  Gloria,  A.  D.  and  Zappi,  V.,  2008.  Exploring  gaming 

mechanisms  to  enhance  knowledge  acquisition  in  virtual  worlds,  DIMEA  ’08, 

Proceedings  of  the  3rd  international  conference  on  Digital  Interactive  Media  in 

Entertainment and Arts, New York, NY, USA, pp.77–84. 

Benedek, J. and Miner, T., 2002. Measuring desirability: New methods for evaluating 

desirability  in  a  usability  lab  setting,  Proceedings  of  UPA  2002  Conference, 

Orlando, FL, 8-12 July 2002. 

Bernhaupt,  R.,  Ijsselsteijn,  W.,  Mueller,  F.  F.,  Tscheligi,  M.  and  Wixon,  D.,  2008 

Evaluating  User  Experiences in Games, CHI  '08  extended  abstracts on  Human 

factors  in  computing  systems,  Florence,  Italy,  ACM,  3905-3908,  Available  at: 

<DOI =10.1145/1358628.1358953>,(Accessed 25 May 2012). 

167 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bishop, M., 2003. What is computer security?, Security & Privacy, IEEE , 1 (1), 67- 

69,  January -  February 2003,  Available  at:  <doi: 10.1109/MSECP.2003.1176998>, 

(Accessed 20December 2011). 

Breakwell,  G.,  Hammond,  S.  M.  and  Fife-Schaw,  C.,  1995.  Research  methods  in 

Psychology, London, Sage. 

Brody, R. G., Mulig, E. and Kimball, V., 2007. Phishing, pharming and identity theft, 

Academy of Accounting and Financial Studies, 11, pp.43-56. 

Brooke, J., 1996. SUS: A Quick and Dirty Usability Scale, In Usability evaluation in 

industry,  Jordan,  P.W.,  Thomas,  B.,  Weerdmeester,  B  .A.  and  McClelland,  I.L., 

(Eds.),  Usability  Evaluation  in  Industry,  London:  Taylor  &  Francis,  Available  at: 

<http://www.cee.hw.ac.uk/~ph/sus.html>, (Accessed 27April 2012). 

Centre  for  Counter  Proliferation  Research,  2002.  Anthrax  in  America:  a  chronology 

and        analysis        of        the        Fall        2001        attacks,        Available        at: 

<http://www.ndu.edu/centercounter/ANTHRAX%20CHRONOLOGY.pdf>, 

(Accessed 30 May 2011). 

Champion, V. and Scott, C., 1997. Reliability and validity of breast cancer screening 

belief scales in African American women, Nursing Research, 6 (46), pp.331-337. 

Chasey,  J.,  2010.iTNOW,  The  Magazine  for  the  IT  Professional,  British  Computer 

Society, The Charted Institute for IT, November 2010. 

Chin,  J.  P.,  Diehl,  V.  A.  and  Norman,  K.,  1988.  Development of  an  instrument 

measuring user satisfaction  of the  human-computer interface, Proceedings  of ACM 

CHI          '88,          Washington,          DC,          213-218,          Available           at: 

<http://www.acm.org/~perlman/question.cgi?form=QUIS 

and 

http://www.lap.umd.edu/QUIS/index.html>. (Accessed 28April 2012). 

Chin,  W.  W.,  Marcolin,  B.  L.  and  Newsted,  P.  R.,  2003.  A  Partial  Least  Squares 

Latent Variable Modeling Approach for Measuring Interaction Effects: Results from 

168 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a Monte Carlo Simulation Study and an Electronic Mail Emotion/Adoption Study, 

Information Systems Research, (14) 2, pp.189-217. 

CNN.   com,   2005.   A   convicted   hacker   debunks   some   myths,   Available   at: 

<http://www.cnn.com/2005/TECH/internet/10/07/kevin.mitnick.cnna/index.html>, 

(Accessed 04 April 2011). 

Compeau, D. R. and Higgins, C. A., 1995. Computer self-efficacy: development of a 

measure and initial test, MIS Quarterly, 19, pp.189-211. 

Cone, B. D., Irvine, C. E., Thompson, M. F. and Nguyen, T. D., 2007. A Video Game 

for cyber Security Training and Awareness, Computers & Security, 26, 63-72. 

Coolican, H., 2004. Research  Methods and Statistics in Psychology. 4th  ed.  London, 

Hodder and Stoughton. 

Costabile, M. F., Angeli, A. C. D., Lanzilotti, R., Ardito, C., Buono, P. and Pederson, 

T.,  Explore!  possibilities  and  challenges  of  mobile  learning,  Proceeding  of  the 

twenty-sixth  annual  SIGCHI  conference  on  Human  factors  in  computing  systems, 

05-10  April  2008,  Florence,  Italy  Availbale  at:  <doi>10.1145/1357054.1357080>, 

(Accessed 30 April 2012). 

Creswell, J.  W.,  2003. Research design,  qualitative, quantitative  and  mixed  methods 

approaches. London, Sage. 

Cronbach,  L.  J.  and  Meehl,  P.  E.,  1955.  Construct  validity  in  psychological  test, 

Psychological Bulletin, 52, pp.281–302. 

Cronbach,  L.  J.,  1951.  Coefficient  alpha  and  the  internal  structure  of  tests, 

Psychometrika, 16, pp.297-334. 

Cunliffe, D., Kritou, E. and Tudhope, D., 2001. Usability evaluation for museum web 

sites, Museum Management and Curatorship, 19 (3), pp.229-252. 

169 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Daher,  W.,  2010.  Building  mathematical  knowledge  in  an  authentic  mobile  phone 

environment, Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 26 (1), 85-104. 

Davis,  F.  D.,  1989.  Perceived  Usefulness,  Perceived  Ease  of  Use  and  User 

Acceptance of Information Technology, MIS Quarterly, 13 (3), pp.319-338. 

Davis, F. D., Bagozzi, R. P. and Warshaw, P. R., 1983. User Acceptance of Computer 

Technology:  A  Comparison  of  Two  Theoretical  Models,  Management  Science,  35 

(8), pp.982-1003. 

Denk, M., Weber, M. and Belfin, R., 2007. Mobile learning challenges and potentials, 

Int. J. Mob. Learn. Organ., 1, pp.122-139. 

Dhamija,  R.  and  Tygar,  J.  D.,  2005.  The  battle  against  phishing:  Dynamic  Security 

Skins.  Proceedings  of  the  2005  Symposium  on  Usable  Privacy  and  Security, 

Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,  July 06  - 08,  2005,  SOUPS  '05,  ACM Press,  New York, 

NY, 

93, 

pp.77-88. 

Availbale 

at: 

<DOI= 

http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1073001.1073009>, (Accessed 20 March 2011). 

Dhamija, R., Tygar, J. D. and Hearst, M., 2006. Why phishing works, Proceedings of 

the  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  Montréal, 

Québec,  Canada,  April  22  -  27,  2006.  Eds.  CHI  '06.  ACM  Press,  New  York,  NY, 

581-590.  Available 

at:  <DOI=http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1124772.1124861>, 

(Accessed 15 May 2011). 

Dix, A., Finlay, J., Abowd, G. and Beale, R., 2004. Human-Computer Interaction 3rd 

ed., Prentice Hall. 

Doswell,  F.,  2008.  A  case  study on  computer  security for  non-expert  computer  user, 

Proceedings  of  the  46th  Annual  Southeast  Regional  Conference  on  XX  (ACM-SE 

46),        ACM,        New        York,        USA,        pp.361-365,        Available        at: 

<http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1593105.1593201>, (Accessed 15May 2012). 

170 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Downes,  T.,  1999. Playing with  computing technologies  in  the  home. Education  and 

Information Technologies, 4 (1), pp.65–79. 

Downs, J. S., Holbrook, M. and Cranor, L. F., 2007. Behavioural response to phishing 

risk,  Proceedings  of  the  anti-phishing  working  groups  -  2nd  annual  eCrime 

researchers  summit,  pp.37-44,  October  2007,  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania, Available 

at: <doi=10.1145/1299015.1299019>, (Accessed 25 March 2011). 

Downs,  J.  S.,  Holbrook,  M.  and  Cranor,  L.,  2006.  Decision  strategies  and 

susceptibility to phishing, Proceedings of the Second Symposium on Usable Privacy 

and  Security,  Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania,  SOUPS  '06,  vol.  149.ACM  Press,  New 

York,       USA,       79-90,       July       12       -       14,       2006,       Available       at: 

<DOI=http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1143120.1143131>.(Accessed 10 January 2012). 

Drake,  C.  E.,  Oliver,  J.  J.  and  Koontz,  E.  J.,  2006.  Mail  Frontier  Anatomy  of  a 

Phishing 

Email, 

February 

2006, 

Available 

at: 

<http://www.mailfrontier.com/docs/MF_Phish_Anatomy.pdf>,  (Accessed  03  April 

2011). 

Eagle, M., 2009. Level up: a framework for the design and evaluation of educational 

games,  Proceedings  of  the  4th  International  Conference  on  Foundations  of  Digital 

Games, FDG ’09, New York, NY, USA: ACM 2009, pp.339–341. 

Egelman,  S.,  Cranor,  L.  F.,  and  Hong,  J.,  2008.  You’ve  been  warned:  An  empirical 

study  of  the  effectiveness  of  web  browser  phishing  warnings,  Proceedings  of  the 

twenty-sixth  annual  SIGCHI  conference  on  Human  factors  in  computing  systems, 

April 05-10, 2008, Florence, Italy <doi=10.1145/1357054.1357219>, (Accessed 10 

January  2011). 

Elina,  M.  I.  and  Koivisto,  2006.  Mobile  games  2010,  Proceedings  of  the  2006 

international  conference  on  Game  research  and  development,  1-2,  4  -  6  December 

2006, Perth, Australia. 

171 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ericsson  K.  A.  and  Simon,  H.  A.,  1984.  Protocol  analysis:  Verbal  reports  as  data. 

Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 

Evers,   J.,   2007.   Security   Expert,   User   education   is   pointless,   Available   at: 

<http://news.com.com/2100-7350_3-6125213.html>, (Accessed 12 June 2011). 

Facer, K., Furlong J., Furlong, R. and Sutherland, R., 2003. Screen Play: Children and 

Computing in the Home. Routledge Falmer, London. 

Facer,  K.,  Joiner,  R.,  Stanton,  D.,  Reid,  J.,  Hull,  R.  and  Kirk,  D.,  2004.  Savannah: 

mobile gaming and learning, Computer Assisted Learning, 20, pp.399–409. 

Falthzik,  A.  M.  and  Carroll,  S.  J.,  1971.  Rate  of  Return  for  Closed  Versus  Open- 

Ended  Questions  in  a  Mail  Questionnaire  Survey  of  Industrial  Organizations, 

Psychological Reports 29, I l2l- II22. 

Finstad,  K.,  2006.  The  System  Usability  Scale  and  Non-Native  English  Speakers, 

Usability Studies, 4 (1), pp.185-188. 

Fishwick, P. A., Henderson, J., Fresh, E., Futterknecht, F. and Hamilton, B. D., 2008. 

Simulating  culture:  an  experiment  using  a  multi-user  virtual  environment, 

Proceedings of the 40th Conference on Winter Simulation, WSC ’08, pp.786–794. 

Foreman,  J.,  2004.  Video  game  studies  and  the  emerging  instructional  revolution, 

Innovate,  1,  Avaliable  at:  <http://www.innovateonline.info/>,  (Accessed  29  April 

2012). 

Freitas,  S.  D.  and  Oliver,  M.,  2006.  How  can  exploratory  learning  with  games  and 

simulations  within  the  curriculum  be  most  effectively  evaluated?,Computers  & 

Education, 46, pp.249-264. 

Froschauer,  J.,  Seidel,  I.,  Gartner,  M.,  Berger,  H.  and  Merkl,  D.,  2010.  Design  and 
evaluation  of  a  serious  game  for  immersive  cultural  training,  16th   International 

172 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conference   on   Virtual   Systems   and   Multimedia   (VSMM   ‘10),   October   20- 

23,COEX Seoul Korea. 

Garera, S., Provos, N., Chew, M. and Rubin, A. D., 2007. A framework for detection 

and measurement of phishing attacks, Proceedings of the 2007 ACM workshop on 

Recurring malcode, Alexandria, Virginia, USA, November 2007. 

Garner, P., Mullins, I., Edwards, R. and Coulton,  P.,  2006. Mobile Terminated SMS 

Billing & #8212, Exploits and Security Analysis, Third International Conference on 

Information Technology: New Generations,  ITNG 2006, pp.294 - 299, 10-12 April 

2006, Available at: <doi: 10.1109/ITNG.2006.94>,(Accessed 12 May 2012). 

Gee,  J.,  2003.  What  video  games  have  to  teach  us  about  learning  and  literacy, 

Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan, New York. 

Ghazvini, F. F., Earnshaw, R., Robison, D. and Excell, P., 2009b. The MOBO City: A 

Mobile  Game  Package  for  Technical  Language  Learning,  International  Journal  of 

Interactive Mobile Technologies (iJIM), 3 (2), pp.19-24. 

Ghazvini,  F.,  Earnshaw,  R.A.,  Robison,  D.  and  Excell,  P.S.,  2009a.  Designing 

Augmented  Reality  Games  for  Mobile  Learning  Using  an 

Instructional- 

Motivational  Paradigm,  International  Conference  on  CyberWorlds,  CW 

'09, 

pp.312-319, 

7-11 

September 

2009, 

Available 

at: 

<doi: 

10.1109/CW.2009.27>,(Accessed 12 July 2012). 

Gong, J. and Tarasewich, P., 2004. Guidelines for Handheld Mobile Device Interface 

Design,  Proceedings  of  Decision  Sciences  Institute,  Annual  Meeting,  Boston, 

Massachusetts, 3751-3756. 

Gordon, L. A., M. P. Loeb, W. Lucyshyn, and R. Richardson. (2006) 2006 CSI/FBI 

computer crime and security survey. Computer Security Institute. 

173 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gorling, S., 2006. The Myth of User Education, Proceedings of the 16th Virus Bulletin 

International  Conference,  Royal  Institute  of  Technology,  Department  of  Industrial 

Economics  and  Management  (INDEK),  October  11-13,  Montréal,  Canada.  < 

SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=938695>, (Accessed 28 August 2012). 

Grinter,  R.,  Rodden,  T., Aoki,  P.,  Cutrell,  E., Jeffries,  R.  and  Olson,  G.,  2006.  Eds. 

CHI 

'06.  ACM  Press,  New  York, 

pp.601-610,  Available 

at 

:< 

DOI=http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1124772.1124861>, (Accessed 15 May 2011). 

Gruen,  D.,  2000,  Storyboarding  for  design:  An  overview  of  the  process.  Cambridge 

MA 

USA: 

Lotus 

Research, 

Available 

at: 

<http://www.research.ibm.com/cambridge>, (Accessed 11 March 2012). 

Gunter, G. A., Kenny, R. F. and Vick, E. H., 2008. Taking educational games seriously: 

using the RETAIN model to design endogenous fantasy into standalone  educational 

games,  Educational  Technology  Research  and  Development,  56  (5),  pp.511-537. 

Gustafsson,  A.  and  B˚ang,  M.,  2008.  Evaluation  of  a  pervasive  game  for  domestic 

energy  engagement  among  teenagers,  ACE  ’08,  Proceedings  of  the  2008 

International Conference on Advances in Computer Entertainment  Technology,  New 

York, NY, USA, pp.232–239. 

Harris, S., 1999. Secondary school students’ use of computers at home, British  Journal 

of Educational Technology, 30 (4), pp.331–339. 

Hashim,  A.S.,  Ahmad,  W.F.W.  and  Rohiza,  A.,  2010.  A  study  of  design  principles 

and  requirements  for  the  m-learning  application  development,  2010  International 

Conference  on  User  Science  and  Engineering  (i-USEr),  13-15  December  2010, 

pp.226-231, Available at: <doi: 10.1109/IUSER.2010.5716757>, (Accessed 21April 

2012). 

Henderson,  J.  Fishwick,  P.,  Fresh,  E.,  Futterknecht,  F.  and  Hamilton,  B.,  2008.  An 

immersive learning simulation environment for Chinese culture, Proceedings of the 

174 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interservice/ Industry, Simulation, and Education Conference (I/ITSEC), New York, 

NY, USA. 

Herley,  C.,  2009.  So  Long,  and  No  Thanks  for  the  Externalities:  The  Rational 

Rejection  of  Security Advice  by  Users,  Proc.  New  Security Paradigms  Workshop, 

ACM, 2009, pp.133–144. 

Hertzum  and  Jacobsen,  2001.  The  Evaluator  Effect:  a  chilling  fact  about  usability 

evaluation methods. International Journal of HCI, 13 (4), pp.41-443. 

Hiner, J., 2002. Change your company’s culture to combat social engineering attacks, 

November 2002,  Available at:  <http://articles.techrepublic.com.com/5100-1035_11- 

1047991.html>, (Accessed 02 May 2011). 

Hofstede,  G.,  1992.  Cultural  and  Organizations  -  Software  of  the  Mind  Intercultural 

Cooperation and its importance for survival, McGraw-Hill. 

Hofstede, 

G., 

2003. 

Geert 

Hofstede 

Analysis, 

Available 

at: 

<http://www.cyborlink.com/besite/hofstede.htm>, (Accessed 06 October 2012). 

Holloway,  S.  and  Valentine,  V.,  2003.  Cyberkids:  children  in  the  information  age. 

Routledge, London. 

Hong,  J.  and  Landay,  J.,  2001.  WebQuilt:  A  Framework  for  Capturing  and 

Visualizing the Web Experience, WWW 10, 1-5 May 2001, Hong Kong, ACM. 

Hosein,  M.,  Beharry,  S.,  2010.  Educational  Leisure on  a  Mobile  Phone  Using Quick 

Play, Engineering and Applied Sciences, 5(2), pp.96-100. 

Hui,  C.  P.,  2007.  How  to  Study  Home  Users,  TKK  T-110.5190,  Seminar  on 

Internetworking. 

175 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Iacovos,  K.  and  Sasse, A. M.,  2012.  Security Education  against  Phishing:  A Modest 

Proposal for a Major Rethink, Security & Privacy,  IEEE , 10 (2), pp.24-32, March- 

April 2012, Available at: <doi: 10.1109/MSP.2011.179>, (Accessed 18 July 2012). 

Irvine,  C.  E.,  &  Thompson,  M.,2003.  Teaching  objectives  of  a  simulation  game  for 

computer security. NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL MONTEREY CA. 

ISONORM  9241  Part  1-17,  2008.  Ergonomic  Requirements  for  Office  Work  with 

visual display terminals, Standard 2008. 

ITU 

ICT-Eye  Free  Statistics,  2012.  Available  at:  <http://www.itu.int/ITU- 

D/ict/statistics/>, (Accessed 03 May 2012). 

Jagatic,  T.,  Johnson, N.,  Jakobsson, M.  and  Menczer,  F.,  2007.  Social Phishing, 

Communications of the ACM, 50 (10), pp.94-100. 

James, L., 2005. Phishing Exposed, Syngress, Canada 

Janssen,  M.  A.  and  Ostrom,  E.,  2006.  Empirically  based,  agent-based  models, 

Ecology          and          Society,          11          (2),          37,          Available          at: 

<http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol11/iss2/art37/>, (Accessed 29 July 2012). 

Jenkins,  H.,  2002.  How  should  we  teach  kids  Newtonian  physics?  Simple  Play 

computer games, Technology Review, March 2002. 

Johnson,  B.  R.  and  Koedinger,  K.  R.,  2002.  Comparing  instructional  strategies  for 

integrating  conceptual  and  procedural  knowledge,  Proceedings  of  the  Annual 

Meeting  of  the  North  American  Chapter  of  theInternational  Group  for  the 

Psychology of Mathematics Education, 1 (4), pp.969–978. 

Kaiser, H. F., 1974. An index of factorial simplicity, Psychometrika. 

Kam, M., Kumar, A., Jain, S., Mathur A. and Canny, J., 2009. Improving Literacy in 

Rural   India:   Cellphone   Games   in   an   After-School   Program,   Proceedings   of 

176 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IEEE/ACM   Conference   on   Information   and   Communication   Technology   and 

Development, Doha, Qatar, pp.139-149. 

Kirakowski, J. and Corbett, M., 1988. Measuring User Satisfaction, Jones, D. M. and 

Winder,  R.,  (Eds.),  People  and  Computers  IV,  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University 

Press. 

Kirriemuir,  J.,  2002.  Video  Gaming,  Education  and  Digital  Learning  Technologies: 

Relevance and Opportunities, D-Lib Magazine, 8. 

Klein,  G.,  1999.  Sources  of  power:  How  people  make  decisions?  The  MIT  Press 

Cambridge,  Massachusetts  The  MIT  Press,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts,  London, 

England, February1999. 

Klopfer, E., 2008. Augmented Learning: Research and Design of Mobile Educational 

Games: The MIT Press. 

Korhonen, H., Elina, M. I. and Koivisto, 2006. Playability  heuristics for mobile  games, 

Proceedings  of  the  8th  conference  on  Human-computer  interaction  with  mobile 

devices  and  services,  12-15  September  2006,  Helsinki,  Finland,  Available  at: 

<doi>10.1145/1152215.1152218>, (Accessed 20 November 2010). 

Kumaraguru,  P.  and  Cranor,  L.,  2005.  Privacy  in  India:  Attitudes  and  Awareness, 

Proceedings of the 2005 Workshop on Privacy Enhancing Technologies (PET2005), 

Dubrovnik, Croatia, 30 May - 1 June 2005. 

Kumaraguru,  P.,  Cranor,  L.,  2009.  Phishguru:  a  system  for  educating  users  about 

semantic attacks, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA. 

Kumaraguru,  P.,  Cranshaw,  J.,  Acquisti,  A.,  Cranor,  L.,  Hong,  J.,  Blair,  M.  A.  and 

Pham, T., 2009. School of phish: a real-world  evaluation of anti-phishing training, 

Proceedings  of  the  5th  Symposium  on  Usable  Privacy  and  Security,  15-17  July 

2009,  Mountain  View,  California  Available  at:  <doi>10.1145/1572532.1572536>, 

(Accessed 25 October 2011). 

177 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kumaraguru, P., Rhee, Y., Acquisti, A.,Cranor, L. F., Hong, J. and Nunge, E., 2007. 

Protecting people from phishing: the design and evaluation of an embedded training 

email  system,  Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI  conference  on  Human  Factors  in 

Computing Systems, San Jose, California, USA, April - May 2007. 

Kumaraguru, P., Rhee, Y., Acquisti, A.,Cranor, L. F., Hong, J. and Nunge, E., 2007. 

Protecting people from phishing: the design and evaluation of an embedded training 

email  system,  Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI  conference  on  Human  Factors  in 

Computing Systems, San Jose, California, USA, April - May 2007. 

Kumaraguru, P., Rhee, Y., Sheng, S., Hasan, S., Acquisti, A., Cranor, L. F. and Hong, 

J., 2007. Getting Users to Pay Attention to Anti-Phishing Education: Evaluation of 

Retention  and  Transfer, APWG  eCrime  Researchers  Summit,  4-5October  2007, 

Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 

Kumaraguru, P., Rhee, Y., Sheng, S., Hasan, S., Acquisti, A., Cranor, L. F. and Hong, 

J., 2007. Getting Users to Pay Attention to Anti-Phishing Education: Evaluation of 

Retention  and  Transfer,  APWG  eCrime  Researchers  Summit,  4-5  October  2007, 

Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 

Kumaraguru,  P.,  Sheng,  S.,  Acquisti,  A.,  Cranor,  L.  F.  and  Hong,  J.,  2008.  Lessons 

from a real world evaluation of anti-phishing training, eCrime Researchers Summit, 

15-16 October, pp.1–12. 

Kumaraguru, P., Sheng, S., Acquisti, A., Cranor, L. F., and Hong, J., 2007. Teaching 

Johnny  not  to  fall  for  phish.  Tech.  rep.,  Cranegie  Mellon  University,  Available 

at:<http://www.cylab.cmu.edu/files/cmucylab07003.pdf>, (Accessed 12 June 2011). 

Kurkovsky,  S.,  2009.  Engaging  students  through  mobile  game  development.  ACM 

SIGCSE Bull, 41, pp.44-48. 

Landay,  J.A.  and  Myers,  B.A.,  1996.  Sketching  Storyboards  to  Illustrate  Interface 

Behavior,  Conference  Companion  of  ACM  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in 

Computing Systems, CHI '96, Vancouver, Canada, 13-18 April 1996, pp.193-194. 

178 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lazarus,  R.,  and  Folkman,  S.,  1984.  Stress,  Coping,  and  Adaptation,New  York: 

Springer-Verlag. 

Lewis, J. R. and Sauro, J., 2009. The Factor Structure of the System Usability Scale, 

Proceedings  of  the  1st  International  Conference  on  Human  Centered  Design:  Held 

as  Part  of  HCI  International  2009, San Diego,  CA,  19-24  July 2009,  Available  at: 

<doi>10.1007/978-3-642-02806-9_12>, (Accessed 24 February 2012). 

Lewis,  J.,  1995.  IBM  Computer  Usability  Satisfaction  Questionnaires:  Psychometric 

Evaluation  and  Instructions  for  Use,  International  Journal  of  Human-Computer 

Interaction, 

7 

(1), 

57-78, 

Available 

at: 

<http://www.acm.org/~perlman/question.cgi?form=CSUQ>,(Accessed  20  February 

2012). 

Liang,  H. and  Xue,  Y.,  2009.  Avoidance  of  Information Technology  Threats: A 

Theoretical Perspective, MIS Quarterly, 33 (1), 71-90. 

Liang,  H.  and  Xue,  Y.,  2010.  Understanding  Security  Behaviours  in  Personal 

Computer  Usage:  A  Threat  Avoidance  Perspective, Association  for  Information 

Systems, 11 (7), pp.394-413. 

Likert,  R.  A.,  1932.  A  technique  for  the  measurement  of  attitudes,  Archives  of 

Psychology,  140,  55,  Quoted  in:  Coolican,  H.,  2004.  Research  Methods  and 

Statistics in Psychology, 4th ed., London, Hodder & Stoughton. 

Lim, Y. K., Pangam, A., Periyasami, S. and Aneja, S., 2006. Comparative analysis of 

high-  and  low-fidelity  prototypes  for  more  valid  usability  evaluations  of  mobile 

devices, Proceedings of the 4th Nordic conference on Human-computer interaction: 

changing   roles,   Oslo,   Norway,   14-18cOctober   2006,   291-300,   Available   at: 

<doi>10.1145/1182475.1182506>, (Accessed 10 May 2012). 

Lin, J.,  Newman, M.W.,  Hong,  J.I.  and  Landay,  J.A.,  2000.  DENIM:  Finding  a 

Tighter Fit Between Tools and Practice for Web Site Design, Proceedings of ACM 

179 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2000, The Hague, The 

Netherlands, 1-6 April 2000, pp.510-517. 

Liu, L.  and  Khooshabeh,  P.,  2003.  Paper  or  interactive? A  study  of  prototyping 

techniques  for  ubiquitous  computing  environments,  Proceedings  of  CHI  ’03 

extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, 05-10 April, Ft. 

Lauderdale,  Florida,  USA  ,  1030-1031,  <doi=10.1145/765891.766132>,  (Accessed  8 

June 2012). 

Maldonado, H., Lee, J. E. R., Brave, S., Nass, C., Nakajima, H., Yamada, R.,  Iwamura, 

K.,  and  Morishima,  Y.,  2005.  We  learn  better  together:  enhancing  elearning  with 

emotionalcharacters,  Proceedings  of  the  2005  conferenceon  Computer  support  for 

collaborative  learning,  International  Society  of  the  Learning  Sciences, CSCL ’05, 

pp.408–417, May 30-June 04, 2005, Taipei, Taiwan. 

Malone, T., 1981. Toward a Theory of Intrinsically Motivating Instruction, Cognitive 

Science, 5, 333-369. 

Mayer, R. E., 2001. Multimedia Learning. New York CambridgeUniversity Press. 

McFarlane, A., Sparrowhawk, A., &Heald, Y., 2002. Report on the educational use of 

games, 

Available 

at: 

<http://www.teem.org.uk/publications/teem_gamesined_full.pdf.>, 

(Accessed  22 

October 2011). 

Michael,  D.  and  Chen,  S.,  2005.  Serious  Games:  Games  That  Educate,  Train,  and 

Inform. Course Technology, 2005. 

Microsoft,  2012.  Use  your  Start  menu  to  check  for  updates.  [online]  Available  at: 

<Use your Start menu to check for updates >, (Accessed 20 October 2012 ). 

Miller,  M.  W.  R.  and  Garfinkel,  S.,  2005.  Do  Security  Toolbars  Actually  Prevent 

Phishing Attacks, Posters SOUPS. 

180 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Milne,  S.,  Orbell,  S.  and  Sheeran,  P.,  2002.  Combining  Motivational  and  Volitional 

Interventions  to  Promote  Exercise  Participation: Protection  Motivation  Theory  and 

Implementation Intentions, British Journal of Health Psychology, 7, pp.163-184. 

MIT  App 

Inventor,  2012.  Learn  About  App 

Inventor,  Available 

at: 

<http://beta.appinventor.mit.edu/learn/>, (Accessed 12 March 2012). 

Mitnick, K. and Simon, W. L., 2002. The art of  Deception – Controlling the Human 

Elements of Security. 

Molnar,  A.  and  Frias-Martinez,  M.,  2011.  Educamovil:  Mobile  educational  games 

made  easy,  In  Proceedings  of  the  World  Conference  on  Educational  Multimedia, 

Hypermedia and Telecommunications,pp. pp.3684–3689, Chesapeake, VA: AACE. 

Moreno, R., Mayer, R.  E., Spires,  H. A. and  Lester, J. C., 2001. The case for social 

agency  in  computer-basedteaching:  Do  students  learn  more  deeply  when  they 

interactwith  animated  pedagogical  agents?,  Cognition  and  Instruction,  19  (2), 

pp.177 – 213. 

Moreno-Ger,  P.,  Burgos,  D.,  Sierra,  J.  L.  and  Fernández-Manjón,  B.,  2008. 

Educational Game Design for Online Education, Computers in Human Behavior, 24 

(6), 2530-2540. 

Mumtaz, S., 2001. Children’s enjoyment and perception of computer use in the home 

and the school, Computers and Education, 36 (4), pp.347–362. 

Munoz-Organero,  M.,  Munoz-Merino,  P. J.,  & Kloos,  C.  D.,  2010. Student behavior 

and  interaction  patterns  with  an  LMS  as  motivation  predictors  in  E-learning 

settings. Education, IEEE Transactions on, 53(3), 463-470. 

Nacke, L., 2009. From playability to a hierarchical game usability model, Proceedings 

of  the  2009  Conference  on  Future  Play  on  @  GDC  Canada,  12-13  May  2009, 

Vancouver, 

British 

Columbia, 

Canada, 

Available 

at: 

<doi>10.1145/1639601.1639609>, (Accessed 28 September 2011). 

181 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Natvig,  L.,  Line,  S.  and  Djupdal,  A.,  2004.  Age  of  Computers:  An  Innovative 

Combination  of  History  and  Computer  Game  Elements  for  Teaching  Computer 

Fundamentals,  Proceedings  of  the  34th  ASEE/IEEE  Frontiers  in  Education 

Conference. (FIE),  vol. 3,  pp.S2F 1. 

Navarro, E.  O. and  Hoek,  A. V. D., 2004.  SimSE:  an  Educational  Simulation  Game 

for Teaching the Software Engineering Process, ITiCSE ’04, Proceedings of the 9th 

annual  SIGCSE  conference  on  Innovation  and  technology 

in  computer  science 

education, New York, USA,pp. 233 – 233. 

Neilsen, J., 1993. Usability Engineering. Academic Press, Boston, MA. 

Ng,  B.  Y.  and  Rahim,  M.  A.,  2005.  A  Socio-Behavioral  Study  of  Home  Computer 

Users  Intention  to  Practice  Security,  Proceedings  of  the  Ninth  Pacific  Asia 

Conference on Information Systems, Bangkok, 7–10 July, Bangkok, Thailand. 

Ng,  B.Y.,  Kankanhalli,  A.  and  Xu,  Y.  C.,  2009.  Studying  users'  computer  security 

behavior: A health belief perspective, Decision Support System, 46 (4), pp.815-825. 

Nielsen,   J.,   2000.   Why   you   only   need   to   test   with   5   users,   Available   at: 

<http://www.useit.com/alertbox/20000319.html>, (Accessed 08 May 2012). 

Nielsen, J., Clemmensen, T. and Yssing, C., 2002. Getting access to what goes on in 

people’s  heads?  –  Reflections  on  the  think-aloud  technique,  NordiCHI,  19-23 

October 2002, ACM. 

Nørgaard,  M.  and  Hornbaek,  K.,  2006. What  do  usability evaluators  do  in  practice? 

An   explorative   study   of   think-aloud   testing,   Proceedings   of   the   DIS   2006 

Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, ACM Press, New York, pp.209–218. 

Nørgaard,  M.  and  Hornbæk,  K.,  2006.  What  do usability  evaluators  do  in  practice?: 

an  explorative  study  of  think-aloud  testing,  Proceedings  of  the  6th  conference  on 

Designing  Interactive  systems,  University  Park,  PA,  USA,  26-28  June  2006, 

Available at: <doi>10.1145/1142405.1142439>, (Accessed 4 June 2012). 

182 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nunnally, J. O., 1978. Psychometric theory. New York: McGraw-Hill. 

Oates, B.J., 2006. Researching Information Systems and Computing. London: Sage. 

Oblinger,  D.,  2004.  The  next  generation  of  educational  engagement,   Interactive 

Media in Education, 8, pp.1–18. 

O'Brien,  J.,  Rodden,  T.,  Rouncefield  ,  M.  and  Hughes,  J.,  1999.  At  Home  with  the 

Technology: An Ethnographic Study of a Set-Top-Box Trial, ACM Transactions on 

Computer-Human Interaction, 6 (3), pp.282-308. 

Office  for  National  Statistics.  2011.  Internet  Access  –  House  Hold  and  Individuals, 

Available  at:  <http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171778_227158.pdf>,  (Accessed  17 

October 2011). 

Osgood, C. E., Suci, G. and Tannenbaum, P. H., 1957. The Measurement of Meaning. 

Urbana:  University  of  Illinois.  Quoted  in:  Coolican,  H.,  2004.  Research  Methods 

and Statistics in Psychology, 4th ed. London, Hodder and Stoughton. 

Pallant  J,  2007.  A  step  by  step  guide  to  data  analysis  using  SPSS  for  Windows 

(Version 15), SPSS survival manual, Open University Press, Buckingham. 

Papastergiou, M., 2009. Digital game-based learning in high-school computer science 

education:  Impact  on  educational  effectiveness  and  student  motivation.  Computers 

and Education, 52 (1), pp.1–12. 

Papert, S., 1998. Does Easy Do It? Children, Games, and Learning, Game Developer 

Magazine, 88. 

Parsons,  D., Ryu,  H. and  Cranshaw,  M.,  2006. A Study of Design  Requirements  for 

Mobile  Learning  Environments,  Proceedings  of  the  Sixth  IEEE  International 

Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies, pp.96-100. 

183 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phishing IQ tests measure fear, not ability, Usable Security (USEC’07), Available at: 

<http://usablesecurity.org/papers/anandpara.pdf>, (Accessed on 12 June 2011). 

PhishTank,  2011.  Avalable  at:  <http://www.phishtank.com/>, 

(Accessed  28 

November 2011). 

PhishTank, 

2013.  Available 

at:  <http://www.phishtank.com/stats/2013/01/>, 

(Accessed 27 April 2013). 

Pike, M., 2011. The Magazine for the IT Professional, British Computer Society, The 

Charted Institute for IT. 

Pinelle, D., Wong, N. and Stach, T., 2008. Heuristic Evaluation for Games: Usability 

Principles for Video Game Design,  Proceeding of the twenty sixth annual SIGCHI 

conference  on  Human  factors  in  computing  systems  CHI,  Florence,  Italy,  April, 

2008, pp.1453-1462, Available at: <doi>10.1145/1357054.1357282>,  (Accessed 12 

March 2012). 

Preece,  J.,  Rogers,  Y.  R.  and  Sharp,  H.,  2002.  Interaction  Design,  beyond  human- 

computer interaction, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York. 

Prensky,  M.,  2001.  Digital  Game-Based  Learning  Revolution,  Digital  Game-Based 

Learning, New York. 

Purkait, S., 2012. Phishing counter measures and their effectiveness – literature  review, 

Information Management & Computer Security, 20 (5), pp.382 – 420. 

Quinn,  C.  K.,  2005.  Engaging  Learning  Designing  e-Learning  Simulation  Games, 

Pfeiffer: John Wiley & Sons. 

Ramey,  J.,  Boren,  T.,  Cuddihy,  E.,  Dumas,  J.,  Guan,  Z.,  Van  den  Haak,  M.  and  De 

Jong, M., 2006. Does Think Aloud Work? How Do We Know?, CHI '06 extended 

abstracts  on  Human  factors  in  computing  systems,  April  22-27,  2006,  Montréal, 

Québec, Canada  <doi=10.1145/1125451.1125464> (Accessed 2 July 2012). 

184 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rates, S. J., 2004. Doing social science research, SAGE Publications, London. 

Raybourn,  E.  M.  and  Waern,  A.,  2004.  Social  Learning  Through  Gaming,  CHI  '04 

extended  abstracts  on  Human  factors  in  computing  systems,  April  24-29,  Vienna, 

Austria, 1733-1734, <doi=10.1145/985921.986206>, (Accessed 10 March 2012). 

Repenning, A. and Lewis, C., 2005. Playing a game: The ecologyof designing,  building 

and  testing  games  as  educational activities,  In ED-Media,  World  Conference  on 

Educational  Multimedia,  Hypermedia  &  Telecommunications,  Association for the 

Advancement of Computing in Education, June 27-July  2,  Montreal, Canada. 

Rhoa,  H.  and  Yub,  I.,  2011.  The impact  of  information  technology threat  avoidance 

factors on avoidance behavior of user. 

Richmond,  R.,  2006,  Hackers  set  up  attacks  on  home  PCs,  Financial  Firms:  study, 

September 

2006, 

Available 

at: 

<http://www.marketwatch.com/News/Story/Story.aspx?dist=newsfinder&siteid=go 

ogle&guid=%7B92615073-95B6-452EA3B9 

569BEACF91E8%7D&keyword=>, 

(Accessed 27 March 2011). 

Robila,  S.  A.  and  Ragucci,  J.  W.,  2006.  Don't  be  a  phish:  steps  in  user  education, 

Proceedings  of  the 11th  annual SIGCSE  conference on  Innovation  and  technology 

in  computer  science  education,  26  –  28  June  2006,  Bologna,  Italy,   Available  at: 

<doi>10.1145/1140124.1140187>, (Accessed 29 March 2011). 

Robson, C., 2002. Real World Research, (Oxford: Blackwell Publishing). 

Rogers, R. L., 2006. Home Computer Security, Carnegie Mellon  Software  Engineering

Institute, 

October 

2006, 

Available 

at: 

<http://www.cert.org/homeusers/HomeComputerSecurity/>, 

(Accessed  17  June 

2010). 

185 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rooden,  M.  J.,  1998.  Thinking  about  thinking  aloud.  In:  HANSON,  M.  A.,  (eds.), 

Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the Ergonomics Society, Cirencester, UK, 

Taylor & Francis, London (UK), pp.328--332. ISBN: 07484-0811-8. 

Root,  R.  W.  &  Draper,  S.,  1983.  Questionnaires  as  a  software  evaluation  tool, 

Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems, 

pp.83-87,   December   12-15,   Boston,   Massachusetts,   New   York,   United   States 

<doi=10.1145/800045.801586> (Accessed 23 June 2012). 

Rosas,  R.,  Nussbaum,  M.,  Cumsille,  P.,  Marianov,  V.,  Correa,  M.,  Flores,  P.,  Grau, 

V.,  Lagos, V.,  Lopez, X.,  Lopez, V., Rodriguez, P. and Salinas, M., 2003. Beyond 

Nintendo:  design  and  assessment  of  educational  video  games  for  first  and  second 

grade students, Computers & Education, 40(1), pp.71–94. 

Roschelle J. and Pea R. D., 2002. A walk on the WILD side: how wireless handhelds 

may  change  computer-supported  collaborative 

learning,  Proceedings  of 

the 

International  Conference  on  Computer  Support  for  Collaborative  Learning  2002 

(ed. Stahl, G.), Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ, pp.51–60. 

Rosenstock,  I.  M.,  1974.  The  health  belief  model  and  preventive  health  behavior, 

Health Education Monographs, 2, pp.354-386. 

Saleeby, J. R., 2000. Health beliefs about  mental  illness:  an instrument development 

study, American Journal of Health Behavior, (24) 2, pp.83-95. 

Sanchez,  F.  and  Duan,  Z.,  2012.  A  Sender-Centric  Approach  to  Detecting  Phishing 

Emails,  ASE/IEEE  International  Conference  on  Cyber  Security,  Washington  D.C., 

USA, 

December 

14-16, 

2012, 

Available 

at: 

< 

http://www.cs.fsu.edu/research/reports/TR-121106.pdf  >,  (Accessed  3  December 

2012). 

Schechter, S.E., 2007. The Emperor’s New Security Indicators, IEEE Symp. Security 

and Privacy, IEEE CS 2007, pp.51–65. 

186 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Schneier,  B., 2000. Semantic Attacks; The Third Wave of Network Attacks,  Crypto- 

Gram  Newsletter,  October  2000,  Available  at:  <http://www.schneier.com/crypto- 

gram-0010.html>, (Accessed 02 April 2011). 

Schultz,  E.,  2003.  Pandora's  box:  spyware,  adware,  autoexecution,  and  NGSCB, 

Computer & Security (22) 5, pp. 366-367. 

Sefelin,  R.,  Tscheligi,  M.  and  Giller,  V.,  2003.  Paper  prototyping  -  what  is  it  good 

for?: a comparison of paper- and  computer-based low-fidelity prototyping, CHI '03 

extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, Ft. Lauderdale, Florida, 

USA,  05-10  April  2003,  Available  at:  <doi>10.1145/765891.765986>,  (Accessed 

27 June 2012). 

Sharples, M., 2000. The design of personal mobile technologies for lifelong learning, 

Computer & Education, 34 (3-4), pp.177–193. 

Shaw,  G.,  2003.  "Spyware  &  Adware:  the  Risks  facing  Businesses,"  Network 

Security (2003) 9, pp.12-14. 

Sheng, S.,  Holbrook,  M.,  Kumaraguru, P.,  Cranor,  L.,  F.  and  Downs, J., 2010.  Who 

falls for phish?: a demographic analysis of phishing susceptibility and effectiveness 

of  interventions,  28th  international  conference  on  Human  factors  in  computing 

systems, 10-15 April, 2010, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. 

Sheng,  S.,  Magnien,  B.,  Kumaraguru,  P.,  Acquisti,  A.,  Cranor,  L.  F.,  Hong,  J.  and 

Nunge,  E.,  2007.  Anti-Phishing  Phil:  the  design  and  evaluation  of  a  game  that 

teaches  people  not  to  fall  for  phish,  Proceedings  of  the  3rd  symposium  on  Usable 

privacy and security, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, July 2007. 

Shih,  Y.  H.,  Hou,  H.  T.  and  Wu,  Y.  T.  T.,  2011.  A  Review  on  the  Concepts  and 

Instructional  Methods  of  Mini  Digital  Physics  Games  of  PHYSICSGAMES.NET, 

Edutainment'11,  Proceedings  of  the  6th  international  conference  on  E-learning  and 

games, edutainment technologies, LNCS, 6872,pp.517–521. 

187 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shneiderman,  B.,  1987.  Designing  the  user  interface:  supplemental  materials, 

University of Maryland at College Park, College Park, MD. 

Sipior, J. C., Ward, B. T. and Roselli,G. R., 2005. "The ethical and legal concerns of 

spyware,"Information Systems Management (22) 2, pp. 39-49. 

Smith,  H.,  Milberg,  S.  and  Burke,  S.,  1996.  Information  privacy:  measuring 

individuals' concerns about organizational practices, MIS Quarterly, 20 (2), pp.167- 

196. 

Sonderegger,  A.  and  Sauer,  J.,  2010.  The  influence  of  design  aesthetics  in  usability 

testing:  effects  on  user  performance  and  perceived  usability,  Applied  Ergonomics, 

41 (3), pp.403-410. 

Squire,  K.,  2003.  Video  games  in  education,  International  Journal  of  Intelligent 

Simulations and Gaming, 2, pp.49-62. 

Stafford,  T.  F.  and  Urbaczewski,  A.,  2004.  "Spyware:  the  ghost  in  the  machine," 

Communications ofthe AIS 14, pp. 291-306. 

Stajano,  F.  and  Wilson,  P.,  2011.Understanding  Scam  Victims:  Seven  Principles  for 

Systems Security, Comm. ACM, 54 (3), pp.70–75. 

Susan, H., Catherine, A. and Ritu, A., 2006. Practicing Safe Computing, Proceedings 

Message  Freaming,  Self-View  and  Home  Computer  User  Security  Behaviour 

Intentions,  ICIS  2006,  93,  Available  at:  <http://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2006/93>, 

(Accessed 15 March 2011). 

Taran,  C.,  2005.  Motivation  Techniques  in  eLearning,  Fifth  IEEE  International 

Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT'05), pp.617-619. 

Thurstone, L. L., 1931. The measurement of social attitude. Journal of Abnormal and 

Social  Psychology,  26,  pp.249-69.  Quoted  in:  Coolican,  H.,  2004.  Research 

Methods and Statistics in Psychology. 4th ed. London, Hodder& Stoughton. 

188 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tian,  F.,  Lv,  F.,  Wang,  J.,  Wang,  H.,  Luo,  W.,  Kam,  M.,  Setlur,  V.,  Dai,  G.,  and 

Canny,  J.  2010.  Let's  Play  Chinese  Characters:  Mobile  Learning  Approaches  via 

Culturally Inspired Group Games, Proceedings of 28th  International Conference on 

Human Factors in Computing Systems, Atlanta, 1 (4), 1603-1612. 

Timko,  D.,  2008.  The  social  engineering  threat,  Information  Systems  Security 

Association. 

Tolentino,  G.P.,  Battaglini,  C.,  Pereira,  A.C.V.,  de  Oliveria,  R.J.  and  de  Paula, 

M.G.M.,  2011.  Usability  of  Serious  Games  for  Health,  2011  Third  International 

Conference  on  Games  and  Virtual Worlds  for Serious  Applications  (VS-GAMES), 

pp.172-175,  4-6  May  2011,  Available  at:  <doi:  10.1109/VS-GAMES.2011.33>, 

(Accessed 26 March 2012). 

Torrente, J., Blanco, Á. D., Marchiori, E.J. , Moreno-Ger, P. and Fernández-Manjón, 

B., 2010. Introducing Educational Games in the Learning Process, EDUCON 2010, 

IEEE, Madrid, Spain, pp.1121-1126. 

Truong,  K.  N.,  Hayes,G.  R.  and  Abowd,G.  D.,  2006.  Storyboarding:  an  empirical 

determination  of  best  practices  and  effective  guidelines,  Proceedings  of  the  6th 

conference  on  Designing  Interactive  systems,  26-28  June  2006,  University  Park, 

PA,  USA,  Available  at:  <doi>10.1145/1142405.1142410>,  (Accessed  12  June 

2012). 

Tseng, S. S., Chen, K. Y., Lee, T. J., Weng, J. F., 2011. Automatic content generation 

for  anti-phishing  education  game,  2011  International  Conference  on  Electrical  and 

Control Engineering (ICECE), pp.6390-6394, 16-18 September 2011, Available at: 

<doi: 10.1109/ICECENG.2011.6056921>, (Accessed 15 May 2012). 

Tu,  Z.,  Yuan,  Y.,  2012.  Understanding  User's  Behaviors  in  Coping  with  Security 

Threat  of  Mobile  Devices  Loss  and  Theft,  2012  45th  Hawaii  International 

Conference  on  System  Science  (HICSS),  4-7  January  2012,  pp.1393-1402, 

Available at: <doi:10.1109/HICSS.2012.620>, (Accessed 25 July 2012). 

189 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tullis, T. S. and Stetson, J. N., 2004. A Comparison of Questionnaires for Assessing 

Website  Usability,  Usability  Professionals  Association  (UPA)  2004  Conference, 

Minneapolis, USA, 7-11 June 2004. 

Van  Eck,  R.,  2006.  Digital  Game-Based  Learning:  It's  Not  Just  the  Digital  Natives 

Who Are Restless, Educause Review, 41 (2), 16–30. 

Virzi, R. A., 1992. Refining the test phase of usability evaluation: how many subjects 

is enough?, Human factors, 34 (4), pp.457-468. 

Walliman,  N.,  2001.  Your  research  project:  a  step-by-step  guide  for  the  first-time 

researcher, Thousand Oaks, London, Sage Publications. 

Walls,  R.,  2012.  Using  Computer  Games  to  Teach  Social  Studies,  Digital  Media; 

Project  Assignment,  Uppsala  University,  Available 

at:  <http://uu.diva- 

portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2:561746>, (Accessed 3 December 2012). 

Wang,  A.I.,  Fsdahl,  T.,  Morch-Storstein,  O.  K.,  2008.  An  Evaluation  of  a  Mobile 

Game  Concept  for  Lectures,  IEEE  21st  Conference  on  Software  Engineering 

Education  and  Training,  CSEET  '08,  14-17  April  2008,  pp.197-204,  Available  at: 

<doi: 10.1109/CSEET.2008.15>, (Accessed 14 November 2011). 

Warkentin,  M.  and  A.  C.  Johnston  (2006)  IT  Security  Governance  and  Centralized 

Security Controls, in M. Warkentin and R. Vaughn (Eds.) Enterprise Information 

Assurance  and  System  Security:  Managerial  and  Technical  Issues,  Hershey,  PA: 

Idea Group Publishing, pp. 16-24. 

Wegerif,  R.,  2003.  Thinking  Skills,  Technology  and  Learning:  NESTA  Futurelab 

Literature        Review.        NESTA        Futurelab,        Bristol,        Available        at: 

<http://www.nestafuturelab.org/research>, (Accessed 3 February 2012). 

Wolber,  D.,  2011.  App  inventor  and  real-world  motivation,  Proceedings  of  the  42nd 

ACM  technical  symposium  on  Computer  science  education,  SIGCSE  '11,  March 

190 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
09-12,   2011,   Dallas,   TX,   USA,   601—606,   <doi=10.1145/1953163.1953329>, 

(Accessed 24 March 2012). 

Woon, I., Tan, G. W. and Low, R., 2005. A Protection Motivation Theory Approach 

to  Home  Wireless  Security,  International  Conference  on  Information  Systems,  Las 

Vegas, 11-14 December, pp.367-380. 

Workman,  M.,  Bommer,  W.  H.  and  Straub,  D.,  2008.  Security  Lapses  and  the 

Omission of Information Security Measures: A Threat Control Model and Empirical 

Test, Computers in Human Behavior, 24 (6), pp.2799-2816. 

Wu,  M.,  Miller,  R.  and  Garfinkel,  S.,  2005.  Do  Security  Toolbars  Actually Prevent 

Phishing  Attacks?,  Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in 

Computing Systems, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, 22 - 27April 2006. 

Ye,  Z.  and  Sean,  S.,  2002.  Trusted  Paths  for  Browsers,  Proceedings  of  the  11th 

USENIX Security Symposium, USENIX Association, Berkeley, CA, USA, p. 263 – 

279, August 05-09, 2002. 

Yordanova,  K.,  2007.  Mobile  learning  and  integration  of  advanced  technologies 

ineducation, Proceedings of the 2007 international conference on Computer systems 

and      technologies,      14-15      June      2007,      Bulgaria, 

Available      at: 

<doi>10.1145/1330598.1330695>, (Accessed 17 January 2012). 

Zaharias,  P. and Poylymenakou, A., 2009. Developing a usability evaluation method 

for  e-learning  applications:  beyond  functional  usability, International  Journal  of 

Human-Computer Interaction, 25 (1), pp.75-98. 

Zhang, Y., Egelman, S., Cranor, L. F. and Hong, J., 2007. Phinding phish - Evaluating 

anti-phishing tools, Proceedings of the 14th Annual Network & Distributed System 

Security     Symposium,     February     28     -     March     2,     2007,     Available     at: 

<http://lorrie.cranor.org/pubs/toolbars.html>, (Accessed 04 June 2011). 

191 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zhu, Q., Zhao, L., Cao, S., Shen, J. and Zhang, S. 2009. A BnB Mobile Game Online 

Based  on  J2ME  and  J2EE,  7th  ACIS  International  Conference  on  Software 

Engineering  Research,  Management  and  Applications,  SERA  '09,  pp.19-24,  2-4 

December  2009,  Available  at:  <doi:  10.1109/SERA.2009.10>,  (Accessed  21  June 

2012). 

Zyda, M., 2005. “From visual simulation to virtual reality to games,” Computer, vol. 

38, no. 9, pp. 25–32.

192 

 
 
 
 
 
