Parameters Differentiating the Characteristics and 
Security of Military Information Systems 

Muhammad Farooq-i-Azam 
COMSATS Institute of Information Technology 
 Lahore, Pakistan 

Dr. Muhammad Naeem Ayyaz 
University of Engineering and Technology 
Lahore, Pakistan 

farooq@chase.org.pk 

mna@uet.edu.pk 

ABSTRACT 
Revolution  in  the  area  of  information  technology  has  brought 
about  changes  in  many  spheres  of  life.  Today,  information 
systems are being used in very sensitive areas such as defence and 
missile  control  systems,  nuclear  plants,  etc.    Not  only  has  it 
changed  how  business  is  conducted,  it  has  also  brought  about 
entirely new paradigms like that of information and cyber warfare. 
Similarly, one of the many impacts that it has made, is how wars 
are fought. For all what it has contributed, the information stored 
on digital devices and computers has become a precious resource 
and  special  measures  are  taken  to  guard  it  against  attacks  from 
malicious  users.  These  special  measures  are  needed  by  any 
enterprise be it a business firm, a commercial entity, a government 
agency  or  a  military  organization.  However,  requirements  and 
specifications for information security and assurance for a military 
organization are essentially different from those of commercial or 
business applications. This paper highlights and discusses various 
aspects related to the security of information resources of military 
importance  and  outlines  certain  parameters  that  should  be  taken 
into  consideration  when  talking  about  the  security  of  military 
information  resources.  W  also  describe 
the  role  satellite 
reconnaissance can play in cyber war. Authors proclaim that this 
paper  is  first  such  attempt  to  correlate  cyber  war  with  satellite 
reconnaissance.  

Keywords 
Military 
information warfare. 

information  systems,  cyber  warfare,  cyber  arms, 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
Information  systems  in  current  age  use  digital  processing  and 
storage.  Like  other  spheres  of  life  military  is  also  increasingly 
dependent  upon  digital  information  systems.  Digital  systems  and 
networks  because  of  their  inherent  characteristics  are  susceptible 
to various kinds of remote attacks. Therefore, the military needs to 
adopt special measures to protect the confidentiality, integrity and 
availability of its own sensitive information resource related to its 
own  functioning  and  operations.  Furthermore,  when  attacks 
against the information resources of other important non-military 
institutions of a country are mounted in an organized manner by a 
hostile country, the role of military again comes into play which is 
to protect and defend the information resources of its country and 
to launch offensive attacks against the perpetrator as a tactical and 

strategic  measure.  Recently,  information  and  cyber  warfare  has 
been focus of much attention around the world. In particular, the 
CIA,  intelligence  outfit  of  USA,  carried  out  cyber  warfare 
exercises in 2005 [8]. It is also important to mention that in May 
2010  US  army  has  announced  the  creation  of  a  cyber  war 
command  and  appointed  a  four  star  general  to  lead  it  [4].  This 
significant  step  forecasts  the  role  of  information  technology  in 
future  wars  and  also  nature  of  these  wars.  Other  militaries  will 
sooner or later follow these same steps.  

For the information and cyber warfare, the cyber arms needed are 
peculiar information systems particularly designed and developed 
for  this  purpose.  At  the  heart  of  these  systems  are  software  and 
tools  both  for  attack  and  defence.  Traditionally,  there  are  a  lot 
many  such  tools  available  including  free  and  open  source 
developed  by  hackers  and  security  professionals  and  commercial 
software  and  tools  developed  by  companies.  However,  these 
traditional tools though suited to attack or defend commercial and 
business systems, are not suited to the needs of a military.  

One of the major reasons for this is the simple fact that software 
tools  developed  by  someone  else  cannot  be  relied  upon  for 
mission  critical  tasks.  There may be intentional or un-intentional 
trap  doors  left  in  such  tools  and  software  so  that  it  may  be 
rendered inoperable at a critical moment. 

Another  important  factor  is  the  fact  that  the  enemy  will  not  be 
using  traditional  tools  and  software  for the reasons stated above. 
Therefore, capability, capacity and characteristics of such systems 
are  not  known  in  advance.  As  a  result,  the  countermeasures 
required  against  such  attacks  cannot  be  based  upon  traditional 
techniques  and  rather  are  tailored  to  use  by  the  military.    For 
example,  to  communicate  some  information  related  to  trade  and 
commerce,  one  may  rely  on  openly  available  commercial 
solutions  and  encryption  algorithms.    However,  information 
which  is  related  to  defence  and  military  operations  needs  to  be 
taken  more  seriously.  Instead  of  deploying  tools  and  software 
using a third party encryption algorithm, the military would need 
to  develop  and  implement  its  own  encryption  algorithm  and 
software  for  this  purpose.  In  addition,  like  an  integrated  circuit 
has  different  military  specifications,  this  software  for  use  by  the 
military  would  also  have  different  specifications.  By  the  same 
token,  the  attack  mechanisms  and  countermeasures  used  by  the 
military  for  information  systems  are  different  from  traditional 
systems. 

 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore,  the  military  information  systems  may  not  simply 
comprise  of  merely  computer  systems,  computer  networks  and 
software  tools.  For  example,  information  and  cyber  war  will 
inevitably  also  use  military  reconnaissance  satellites.  Therefore, 
implications  and  effects  of  such  satellite  systems  in  a  cyber  war 
should also be taken into account and capacity to counter such a 
scenario should also be developed. 

It is to be further noted that military information systems is not an 
open  topic  of  research  due  to  obvious  reasons  and  not  much 
information is available in this area. The research presented in this 
paper  is  first-hand  research  and  is  derived  from  authors’ 
experience  and  consistent  observation  of  military  use  of  the 
Internet over the years. 

2.  MILITARY INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
REQUIREMENTS 
We  have  stated  previously  the  reasons  for  military  information 
systems 
security 
requirements.  In  this  section,  we  give  brief  details  of  such 
requirements  and  characteristics  regardless  how  easy  or  difficult 
these requirements are as far as their implementation is concerned. 

to  have  different 

characteristics 

and 

2.1  Anonymity 
In the case of commercial and business enterprises, the IP address 
blocks used by the organization may be known to the public and 
probably  cannot  be  hidden  from  being  discovered.  There  are 
various  means  through  which  an  attacker  can  enumerate  the  IP 
address blocks of such organizations. 

However,  in  the  case  of  military  organizations,  there  are  various 
levels of security and confidentiality that are ascribed to different 
institutions of the military. In this case, the IP address blocks used 
by  certain  unclassified  institutes  may  be  known  to  the  public. 
However, IP blocks used by certain other more classified projects 
should be hidden from public view. By stating that an IP address 
block is in public knowledge, we mean, for example, that:  

1-  Geographic  location  of  an  IP  address  i.e.  country,  city 

can be found out. 

2- 

 Organization to which the IP address is assigned can be 
found out. 

3-  How  do  Internet  registrars  respond  to  queries  against 

these IP address blocks. 

In the case of information warfare with military implications, it is 
very important that the source network used for the attack cannot 
be  traced  back  to.  Therefore  any  design  and  audit  of  such  a 
military network needs special considerations which are different 
from those of commercial and business networks. It is to be noted 
that  how  such  a  level  of  anonymity  may  be  achieved  is  entirely 
another area of research. In brief, the level of anonymity one can 
achieve is relative to the capability of the enemy. 

keep  a  tab  on  the  defence  networks  of  the  hostile  countries  and 
similarly expect the same from the other side and adopt means to 
hide  or  conceal  its  networks  activity  and  traffic.  If  the  enemy 
cannot penetrate a network, it would simply be interested to know 
what  kind  of  traffic  is  flowing  to  and  from  network  perimeter. 
What kinds of search queries are flowing to and from the network, 
the  email  messages,  who  are  the  people  or  networks at the other 
end,  etc.  The  exact  solution  for  this  problem  is  encryption. 
However,  not  all  destination  networks  with  which  a  source 
network  communicates  support  encryption.  Therefore,  a  means 
should be found out to conceal the traffic of a defence network. It 
is to be noted that requirement of concealment of traffic is another 
layer of security on top of anonymity. Appropriate levels of traffic 
concealment  may  be  applied  to  different  computer  systems  and 
networks having various levels of security. 

2.3  Specialized Encryption 
Conventional  encryption  algorithms  and 
those  available 
commercially  are  not  suitable  for  the  purposes  of  defence  and 
military purposes. On the other hand, a military would never trust 
or  share  the  encryption  algorithm  it  uses  itself  with  another 
country. Or if does, then the communication that uses it is secure 
as  long  as  the  provider  does  not  decide  to  just  intercept  and 
decipher the  cipher text. In other words, an encryption algorithm 
is not something that you can buy from somewhere. For a trusted 
information  and  communication  system,  the  military  needs  to 
build,  develop  and  deploy  its  own  encryption  algorithms.  It  is 
general  knowledge  that  the  countries  like  US  do  not  even  allow 
the  export  of  commercial  versions  of  certain  encryption 
algorithms beyond certain key lengths. 

2.4  Classification of Computer Systems 
The  computer  systems,  network  and  communication  hardware 
employed by the military is usually graded and assigned different 
security  levels.  Before  the  equipment  is  deployed,  it  undergoes 
various levels of security evaluations and checks. As a very crude 
example, the computer systems may be assigned different security 
levels  ranging,  say,  from  1  to  7  with  1  being  assigned  to  a  non-
classified  system  and  7  to  a  highly  classified  system.  Different 
evaluation  criteria  may  be  developed  for  these  systems  which 
again may range from checks on the design and various stages of 
development  of  the  equipment  and  then  final  testing  before  it  is 
deployed. It is to be noted that these checks are employed not only 
on  the  software  but  also  on  the  firmware  and  hardware  i.e. 
evaluation  starts  not  on  procurement  but  much  earlier  at  the 
design stage of the equipment. For militaries which do not design 
and  develop  their  equipment,  this  step  is  skipped  thereby 
compromising  the  security  of  these  systems.  If  a  military  cannot 
follow  the  steps  described,  it  is  always  better  to  know  where  it 
stands if the precautions described are not followed. 

It is pertinent to mention here that hardware  Trojan horses at the 
level of circuit board and even integrated circuits are possible and 
is  focus  of  current  research  [11].  Similarly,  BIOS  rootkits  have 
also been designed and hence any hardware piece of equipment is 
susceptible to almost same kinds of attacks as software systems. 

2.2  Traffic Concealment 
It  is  usual in military to keep a tab on the activity of the enemy. 
Translated to the cyber warfare, this means that a military should 

2.4.1  Hardware Trojan Horses 
Consider  the  case  of  a  stand-alone  digital  system  i.e.  a  digital 
system that is not part of any network. As the digital device does 

 
 
not interact with any external network, it may be thought that no 
attacks  can  be  mounted  against  the  device.  However,  it  is  still 
possible for a malicious design engineer to leave a malignant hole 
i.e. a Trojan horse in the system. For example, a design engineer 
could  program  a  peripheral  device  to  run  correctly  for  all 
operations  except,  say,  #2600th,  or  program  it  in  such  a  way  to 
behave  erratically  after  certain  number  of  operations  or  under  a 
certain critical condition.  

The designer could also leave a hardware Trojan horse that can be 
controlled  remotely,  possibly  using  a  radio  channel,  in  an 
otherwise  standalone  digital  system.  It  may  be  noted  that  the 
Trojan  horse  may  be  part  of  a  digital  system  in  the  shape  of 
discrete components or at the level of transistors in an integrated 
circuit.  In  the  first  case,  the  Trojan  horse  may  be  present  on  a 
circuit  board  of  the  system  and  in  the  second  case,  it  may  be 
present inside an integrated circuit in the shape of transistors. 

Above  descriptions  may  seem  unlikely  to  some,  and  therefore  it 
would  be  interesting  to  cite  just  two  instances  where  hardware 
Trojan  horses  were  detected  and  found  spying  on  unauthorized 
information.  In  the  first  instance,  Seagate  external  hard  drives 
were found to have a hardware Trojan horse that transmitted user 
information  to  a  remote  entity  [10].    In  the  second  instance, 
Prevelakis  et  al.  report  in  [11]  that,  in  2006,  Vodafone  routers 
installed  in  Greece  were  altered  in  such  a  manner so as to allow 
eavesdrop  phone  conversations  of  the  prime  minister  and  many 
other officials.  

The  hardware  Trojan  horse  may  be  implanted  in  the  hardware 
system at any of the various stages from design to implementation 
including  plantation.  This  includes  the  possibility  of  implant  by 
the designer at the level of behavioral description, by a third party 
synthesis tool or by the fabrication facility. 

2.5  Software Engineering 
Even in the world of hackers (we use the term in positive sense), it 
is considered bad practice to use someone else’s tools or software 
to test or penetrate a remote system and such folks are somewhat 
derogatorily  termed  as  script  kiddies.  Almost  always,  hackers 
leave a trapdoor or some sort of bug in the “tool” they distribute 
to  others.  For  example,  even  Linux  distributions  like  Slackware 
and  Debian  which  are  otherwise  considered  very  secure,  leave  a 
few  unnecessary  remote  services  running  which  may  allow  an 
attacker  to  intrude  into  the  system.  Other  times,  hackers  may 
purposely develop a tool such that it leaves a trace or some sort of 
signature so that its action could later be tracked. Therefore, it is 
imperative  for  the  military  to  develop  its  own  set  of  cyber  arms 
i.e. software and tools needed for military operations. As the only 
resource required for the development of such software is human 
resource, the cost factor is not important. Indeed, the cost of self-
built software may be quite lower than an equal quality software 
purchased  from  a  third  party  with  the  added  advantage  of 
technology transfer. 

2.6  Satellite Reconnaissance 
From the current commercial satellites, the GeoEye-1 launched in 
2008 and operated by the private firm GeoEye located in the US 
has a stated resolution of 41 cm or 16 inches which is the highest 
amongst  commercial  satellites  [7].  Furthermore,  just  after  two 
years  i.e.  in  2012,  the  same  company  GeoEye  would  launch 

than 

their  military  counterparts 

satellite  GeoEye-2  that  would  have  resolution  twice  higher 
resolution i.e. 20.5 cm or 8 inches. We can infer that commercial 
satellite resolution increases at the rate of 2 every four years. Rate 
of increase of resolution of military and  reconnaissance satellites 
must be higher than this as primary research in this area is carried 
out by military. However, let us stick with the conservative rate of 
increase  of  resolution  as  2  per  four  years.  Further,  resolution  of 
military  and  reconnaissance  satellites  can  be  estimated  by 
comparing  the  size  of  corresponding  commercial  and  military 
organization  that  run  this  business    When  this  comparison  is 
made,  the  private  firm  GeoEye  comes  out  to  be  much  smaller 
i.e.  National 
enterprise 
Reconnaissance  Office  (NRO), 
is 
responsible to build and operate US spy satellites. For example, if 
we consider the annual financial budget figures, NRO has annual 
budget  of  almost  US$  8  billion  whereas  GeoEye  has  total  assets 
worth almost US$ 790 million i.e. less than one billion. In terms 
of  number  of  employees,  GeoEye  has  only  410  employees  as 
compared  to  almost  3000  people  employed  by  NRO.  Therefore, 
we can safely assume that NRO satellites have a resolution that is 
at  least  10  times  better  than  that  of  commercial  satellites. 
Therefore,  corresponding  to  GeoEye-1,  a  NRO  military  satellite 
would have an estimated resolution of 4.1 cm or 1.6 inches i.e. it 
can take photograph of an individual. And just after two years i.e. 
by 2012, it would have an estimated resolution of 2.05 cm or 0.8 
inches i.e. it would be able to what is being typed on a keyboard. 

the  organization  which 

This estimate is corroborated from other sources as well. Dwayne 
A. Day in [6] states that US spy satellite KH-8 could be used to 
take  photographs  of  smallest  objects  and  even  portraits  of 
individuals. We quote Dwayne A. Day from his article [6] as: 

“The KH-8 could apparently see objects on the ground as small 
as a baseball” 

“There was the time that some Air Force officers used one to take 
a self-portrait”. 

It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  spy  satellite  KH-8  for  which  above 
remarks are made was operated in early 1970s. From this, we can 
once again infer the resolution of current spy satellites. If we trust 
above  remarks  and  also  consider  the  fact  that  it  was  almost  30 
years  ago that KH-8 was operated,  it is certain that resolution of 
the  current  spy  satellites  should  rather  be  better  than  our 
estimates. 

Please note further that satellites have a variety of remote sensing 
capabilities which may include seeing through building structures 
as well. This may well be derived from the fact that satellites have 
long been used to locate minerals and structures underground.  

It is to be noted that, resolution of reconnaissance satellites is not 
stated publicly due to obvious reasons and only estimates can be 
made.  Resolution  of  these  satellites  as  calculated  above  in  this 
paper is what the authors consider as the best estimate.  

Consider  above  stated  capabilities  of  spy  and  reconnaissance 
satellites being available for cyber and information warfare. Once 
the geographical location and name of the organization where the 

 
 
 
IP  address  of  an  enemy  is  located  is  found  out,  the  spy  satellite 
can  look  directly  at  the  person  and  the  systems  being  used  by 
them.  Obviously,  this  sort  of  capability  would  have  a  decisive 
effect on the outcome of the war. 

[2]  Ceruti, M. G. 2003. Data Management Challenges and 
Development for Military Information Systems. IEEE 
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 
September/October 2003. 

3.  FUTURE WORK 
Each  of  the  characteristics  of  a  military  information  system  that 
we described in this paper leads to a different and its own area of 
research.  The attributes and dimensions of a military information 
system that we have provided here just give an abstract and upper 
layer  description  which  are  by  no  means  complete  and  merely 
provide a starting point in this direction. Each of these areas needs 
further  investigation  so  as  to  provide  lower  level  details  of  a 
military information system. 

4.  CONCLUSION 
In  this  paper,  we  have  described  and  presented  parameters  that 
differentiate  a  military  information  system  from  commercial  and 
business  systems.  In  short,  military  information  systems  have 
requirements  which  are  essentially  different  from  those  of 
commercial  and  business  systems  simply  because  of  the  reason 
that  military  and  business  systems  are  used  for  entirely  different 
purposes.  Some  of  such  parameters  are  specialized  encryption, 
anonymity,  traffic  concealment,  assignment  of  security  levels  to 
computer  systems  according  to  their  roles,  etc.  We  have  also 
suggested  and  discussed  the  role  that  spy  satellites  can  play  in  a 
cyber war. 

5.  REFERENCES 
[1]  Banks, S.B., Stytz, M. R., 1996. Software Security 

Requirements for Military Computer Generated Forces 
System Architectures. Simulation Industry Association of 
Australia DOI=  http://www.siaa.asn.au/get/2396672378.pdf.  

[3]  Crawford, G. A. 1997. Information Warfare: New Roles for 
Information Systems in Military Operations. Technical 
Report Department of the Airforce, Washington DC. 1997. 

[4]  Beamount, P. 2010. US Appoints First Cyber Warfare 
General. News Report, The Observer, May 2010.  

[5]  Schell, R. R., Downey, P. J., Popek, G. J. 1973. Preliminary 
Notes on the Design of Secure Military Computer Systems. 
National Institute of Standards and Technology, US.  

[6]  Day, D. A. 2009. Ike’s gambit: The KH-8 reconnaissance 

satellite. The Space Review, January 2009.  

[7]  Science News. 2009. World’s Highest-Resolution 
Commercial Satellite.. Science Daily 2009 

[8]  Leyden, J. 2005. CIA Plays Cyber Wargame. News Report, 

The Register, May 2005.  

[9]  Bryant, J. H., Todd, M. A. 1965. The Design and 

Implementation of Automated Military Information Systems.  
IEEE Transactions on  Military Electronics. Volume 9, Issue 
2. 1965. 148-152.  

[10] Farrell, N., 2007. Seagate hard drives turn into spy 

machines”, The Inquirer, November 2007. 

[11] Prevelakis, V., Spinellis, D. 2007.  The Athens Affair. IEEE 

Spectrum, July 2007. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
