Curbing cyber-crime and Enhancing e-commerce security with 
Digital Forensics 

Israel  D. Fianyi 
 1 School of Computing and Mathematics, Charles Sturt University, Australia  

Abstract 

The  explosion  in  the  e-commerce  industry  which  has  been 
necessitated by the growth and advance expansion of Information 
technology and its related facilities in recent years have been met 
with  adverse  security  issues  thus  affecting  the  industry  and  the 
entire online activities. This paper exams the prevailing security 
threats  e-commerce  is  facing  which  is  predominantly  known  as 
cyber-crime  and  how  computer  related  technology  and  facilities 
such  as  digital  forensics  can  be  adopted  extensively  to  ensure 
security 
in  online  related  business  activities.  This  paper 
investigated the risk, damage   and the cost cyber-crime poses to 
individuals  and  organizations  when  they  become  victims,  since 
transacting business online as well as all related online activities 
has  become 
It  also 
comprehensively elucidate on some of the cyber-crime activities 
that  are  posing  serious  threat  to  the  security  of  E-commerce. 
Amazon and EBay were used as the case of study in relation  to 
respondents who patronizes these renowned e-commerce sites for 
various transactions. 
Keywords:  E-commerce  Security,  Cyber-Crime,  Digital 
Forensics,  Network 
forensics,  Network  Security,  Online 
Transactions, Identity theft, hacking. 

in  our  everyday 

inherent 

life. 

1. Introduction

The emergence and popularization of the world wide  web 
(WWW) has facilitated a drastic explosion in E-commerce 
an  essential  and 
consequently  has  become 
and 
indispensable  constituent  of  business 
strategy  and 
operations,  hence  the  recent  advancement  in  businesses, 
thus the main medium for trade and industry development 
in any given country and the world at large (Guan, Tan, & 
Hua,  2004).  Due  to  this  rapid  growth  in  the  e-commerce 
industry,  many  computer  programmers  and  Information 
Security  experts  have  directed  their  abilities  to  the 
development  of  applications 
that  enhances  computer 
internet.  Smith  (2009) 
the 
assisted 
indicated that the current revolution that has overtaken the 
world or business has become successful as a result of the 
incorporation  of  ICT  in  almost  every  facet  of  business 
transactions  and  its  operations.  It  has  also  facilitated  a 
strong  correlation  between  firms  and  their  corresponding 
clients.  Particularly,  the  use  of  ICT  in  business  has 

transactions  via 

enhanced  productivity,  promoted  customer  involvement, 
also  made  faster  and  possible  patronage    of    goods    and 
services    in    larger    quantities,    as    well    as    reducing 
charges  and  its associated benefits (Baek & Hong, 2003). 
In contrast to the normal brick and mortar business where 
there  is  physical  contact  between  the  business  owner  and 
the  buyer.  Online  business  is  solely  done  via  the  internet 
without any form of contact as the transaction is done via a 
technology mediated platform. 

Payment is done directly into the business owners account 
or through a third party payment system in this regard the 
customer  is  made  to  declare  his/her  confidential  bank 
details  to  enable  the  other  party  get  the  money  and  then 
send whatever has been bought through a delivery service. 
There  is  virtually  no  physical  encounter  between  the 
parties  (Gnanasekar,  2014).  Despite  the  successes  e-
commerce is experiencing in the e- world, there remain an 
issue of security which most often is to the detriment of the 
online  shopper  and  consequently  the  business  owners  as 
well.  The  upsurges  in  cyber-crime  by  unknown  assailant 
who  usually  take  the  advantage  the  internet  offers  and  in 
anonymity  perpetrate  heinous  crime  under  the  notion  that 
they cannot be seen, most crimes are perpetrated with this 
belief system. (Perez, 2005). There are various crimes that 
are committed via the internet and its related technologies 
from  denial  of  services,  identity  theft,  Privacy  violation 
and intrusion as well as industrial and financial espionage, 
this  study  expounds  on  these  crimes  further  in  the 
following sections and in appendix 1. Perpetrators of these 
crimes do it for various reasons with the underlining fact of 
illegally making money for themselves among other reason 
(Sidel, 2005). 
There  are  various  factors  that  has  propelled  the  security 
threat  being  experienced  in  recent  times.  However  one 
irrefutable  reason  is  the  advancement      in  hacking  tools 
(Andam, 2003). Hackers now capitalizes on the growth of 
technology 
to 
commit various crimes. 
While    most        normal    firms      have    established 
procedures    for    solving    the  common  problems    that  
comes      with      doing    business,    many    online 
merchants   and    their  customers  do  not   possess  the 

to  develop  sophisticated  applications 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 6, November 2015 ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 www.IJCSI.org782015 International Journal of Computer Science Issuesexperience  and    technical  know-how  and    usually  not 
sure  how  to  best      find      solutions  to  the  critical  and 
technical  issues    involved  in  cyber-crime  detection 
(Abels, Brehm, Hahn, & Gomez, 2006). For this reason, 
there  is  the  need  for  pragmatic  steps  to  establish  policies 
and  technical  know-how 
this  risk 
associated  with      online  business  and  e -  commerce  at 
large.  This  goes  a  long  way  to  save  the  business  from 
embarrassment,  loss  of  finances,  legal  challenges  among 
other (Alsaad, Mohamad, & Ismail, 2014). 

to  combat 

the 

investigated 

tools  with  regards 

This  paper 
  measures  that  are 
undertaken    to  detect  and    prevent  cyber-attack  with 
to  assisting   
digital  forensic 
customers      to    reduce        exposure    to      fraudulent   
transactions, 
fraud-related  
thereby  minimizing 
business    losses    (Aiken,  Garner,  Ghosh,  &  Vanjani, 
2014)  .  By  e m p l o y i n g   advanced  modern  ICT  tool 
such  as  digital  fo r e n s i c s   by  a  firm  which  have  the 
necessary mechanisms to investigate, curb cyber-crime and 
uncover perpetrators stand the chance of curbing e-crime. 
In the bid of most businesses ensuring security in their own 
prowess  have  set-up  these  systems  that  underpin  the 
immediate first hand security in a respective  organization: 
(a.) Setting up Clear Policies (b) Resolving disagreements 
(c) Systems that protect customers debit or credit card and 
/or  any  other  medium  used  in  making  payment  online  (d) 
How to use digital forensics and related tools to detect and 
prevent  cyber  fraud  (e)  Examine  the  pay  flow  fraud 
prevention services   

2. E-commerce and E-Risk 

Risk is an eminent constituent of any business operation in 
any  part  of  the  world,  e-commerce  in  this  respect  is  not 
immune to risk associated with the internet and its related 
platforms, which most researchers call e-risk  denoting  the 
uncertainty  of  transacting  business  online.  Especially  in  
recent  revolution  of  mobile  commerce  which  has  enabled 
businesses  to  rapidly  expand  (Kim,  Hong,  &  You, 
2015) .Some   of  the  risk  that  are    associated  with      e-
commerce  includes but not limited to, stolen  Credit  card  
number, personality theft, stolen  Social Security  Numbers,  
and  sometimes    goods    bought    and    paid    for    never  
arrives.  All  these    eminent  issues  and  more    are  rampant 
because  there    is    no    physical  encounter  between  the  
buyer    and    the    seller  basically;  electronic  mediums  as 
mentioned  earlier  are  employed  as  cited    in  Williams 
(2014).  The  research  further  reviews  a  statistics  by  cyber 
source  a  provider  of  electronic  imbursement  and  threat 
control solutions, estimates that $3 billion was missing as a 
result  of  the  above  mentioned  anomalies  in  e-commerce 
between  2006  and  2009  in  the  United  States  (Trautman, 
2014). 

Systems Security threats have progressively increased from 
both  outside  and  within  corporate  boundaries.    Internal 
security threat used to be  the  challenge  of  most  corporate 
firms,  these        threats      characteristically      included   
employees  within      a  company  getting  hold  of  company 
systems  through  loopholes  in  security  and  also  having 
access to   passwords they are not supposed to. There have 
been  marginal  changes  from  internal  security  threat  to 
external  threats  due  to  the  growth  of  the  Internet  and 
corporate  extranets.  Intruders  from  outside  corporate 
boundaries  now  represent  a  growing  concern  (O'Brien  & 
Marakas, 2011) 

that 

imposters 

in  cyberspace 

Since      online        activities        have    become      imperative   
and    indispensable    to    the  daily  lives  of  individuals  and 
businesses,    Security  tools    such  as  digital  and  computer 
forensic  that  are  meant  to  investigate  and  ensure  security 
on  the  web  and    its  interrelated    technology    needs  to  be 
enhanced in its capability to withstand the growing security 
threat  that  confront    E-commerce  (Achille  &  Roger, 
2014).The  authors  O'Brien  and  Marakas  (2011)  further 
established 
look  for 
opportunity to penetrate  and abuse  systems, these  they  do 
either  for  the  fun  or  selfish  gains  amidst  other  reasons. 
Once  system  is  infiltrated,  shams  can  possibly  cause 
devastating  problems  such  as  deleting  or  altering 
information, illegally take valuable data  as well  as  money 
in huge sums in that context . 
A research by Turban, King, Lee, Liang, and Turban (2015) 
categorized some of the    reasons  that  makes e-commerce 
susceptible to risk and they include the following; 
(a)  Old  methods  of  solving  e-business  problems  may  not 
work due to changing environment. 
(b)The more  an e-commerce company expands  the  higher 
the scope of risks. 
(c) System  hackers  will  always  devise  new  techniques  
and  tools  to  attack  system operations.  
(d)  When  a  system  is  digitized,  it  creates  exceptional 
challenges for digital information and online transactions. 

Internet 

(2007).  The 

E-commerce  risk  and  security  is  somehow  known  to  the 
prospective      customers,  as  mentioned  by  LaRose  and 
though  presents  many 
Rifon 
opportunities  to  companies  and  individuals,  the  benefits 
cannot  usually  be  compared  to  the  degree  of  damage  that 
results from security breaches. Hackers,  phishing,  identity 
theft,  credit  card  details  theft,  viruses,  malware,  among 
others  are  major  Security        issues  that  confronts  and 
frightens individual customers and   companies at any level 
of  online 
related  business  or  E-commerce.  These 
challenges  used  to  be  often  resolved  by  the  use  of 
Hardware's  and  software’s  techniques  to  guard  against 
hackers  and  infectious  viruses  from  their  intranet  systems 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 6, November 2015 ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 www.IJCSI.org792015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Moore,  2010).    Security  goes  beyond  Hardware  and 
software systems; they only represent one layer of security. 
Security as it stand will continually be  a  concern for both 
big and small firms and the lack of it can be devastating to 
the business due to the cost of resolving security problems, 
the  possibility  of  huge  financial  loses  and  eventually  lose 
of customers. 

In  contrast  to  traditional  crimes  where  there  are  well 
established  legal  jurisdiction  across  all  those  crimes  for 
prosecution,  it  is  not  the  case  with  online  crime  that  are 
perpetrated,  there  are  some  of  the  crimes  that  yet  to  be 
established  as  a  crime  in  the  legal  environment.  This 
differs  from  country  to  country  and  it  makes  it  more 
challenging to subject some of these crimes committed via 
the  World  Wide  Web  to  legal  interpretation  (CIOLAN, 
2014;  Vaseashta,  Susmann,  &  Braman,  2014).    For  cyber 
related  crime  investigation  to  be  successful  with  its 
corresponding  collaring  and  prosecution  an  addendum 
should be made to the existing perceptions, legal barriers , 
and the procedures employed by law enforcement agencies 
to combat cyber-crime.  
It is in this light that automated software’s such as  digital 
forensics  which  has  seen  revolution  in  recent  years  in 
crime  investigative  environment.    Though  it  is  been  used 
its  algorithms  structures  and  capabilities  have  been 
undermined  due  to  the  fact  that  most  law  enforcement 
officers  lack  the  expertise  to  digitally  analyzed  crimes 
committed in the this digitized world and as such present it 
in court as an evidence (Elyas, Ahmad, Maynard, & Lonie, 
2015). 

3. Digital Forensics  

The evolution of Digital forensics which primarily focuses 
on  extraction  of  data  and  analyzing  crimes  scenes  and 
equipment  after  they  have  been  committed  and  present 
them in court as an evidence, has in recent times become a 
necessary    tools  and  software's  applications  in  the  fight 
against  .  Thus  modern  techniques  of  digital  forensics  , 
which  can  easily  track  a  premeditated  crime  over  the 
network  by  employing  network  security  phenomenon  to 
impede  these  possible  crimes  from  occurring,  can  greatly 
be  explored  to  help  control  the  upsurge  of  e-commerce 
crime  in  recent  times  (Mylonas,  Meletiadis,  Mitrou,  & 
Gritzalis,  2013).  Subsequently  with  digital  forensics  tools 
crimes  could  be  detected  and  prevented  before  they  are 
eventually committed. 

When  forensics  is  mentioned  it  usually  brings  to  mind 
television and movie dramas, emphasizes on murder scenes 
surgeon.  
or 
Nevertheless,  a  growing  concern  of  technology  demands 
retrieving information from a computer system have given 

a  procedure 

involving 

specialist 

a 

another  phase  to  forensic  sciences  which  takes  into 
consideration all investigative analysis that has to do with 
technologies. contemporarily  digital  forensic analyst  may  
work  along with  law enforcement  institutions;  retrieving 
hidden  information  from  a  home  computer  system  and 
office computer, mobiles phones and other digital gadget is  
very  common  now  (Lochner  &  Zinn,  2014);  These 
information  may  range  from  deleted  files  to  existing 
documents  stored  on  a  hard  drive,  Network  activities  or 
other  storage  media      and  also  encrypting  files  that  may 
have  been  used  in  committing  online  related  crimes  
(Stephenson & Gilbert, 2013). 

3.1 Constitute Cybercrime 
There  are  various  crimes  that  are  perpetrated  via  the 
internet by reason of the following category (Avzu, 2014) 
•  Computer  assisted  crimes;  this  is  where  the  computer  is 
used  as  a  tool  to  enhance  a  criminal  activity  and  these 
activities are not exclusive to computers only, example will 
be child pornography, fraud, cyber bully etc. 
•  Computer  Specific  crimes; 
includes 
password attacking, server attacks, system hacking, denial 
of  services,  sniffers.  These  crimes  are  directed  to  the 
computers  and  available  digital  gadget,  the  network  and 
the various systems on which data is stored. 
•Computer 
becomes 
supplementary  to  crime  perpetration  such  client  list  on 
spreadsheets,  drug  traffickers    and  terrorist  interchanging 
information  on  various  apps  on  the  computer  such  as 
Skype, Facebook and the like. 

these  crimes 

incidental; 

computer 

The 

The aftermath of a cyber-crime has varying effects usually 
in a passage of time. A typical example is about computer 
viruses  which  use  to  be  seen  as  very  dangerous  and 
damaging to the any computer system that gets infected, in 
recent years it is not that dangerous as it used to be because 
stronger anti-viruses have come up to reduce the effects of 
damage  they  can  cause  to  a  system  (Sommer  &  Paxson, 
2010). In most of the cases carried out on cyber-crime, the 
person  responsible  is  a  hacker,  or  has  relatively  some 
computer expertise. Cyber-crime includes cyber-terrorism, 
electronic-theft,  espionage, denial of service  (DOS)  credit 
card  fraud,  and  phishing.  Damages  survived  were  closure 
of  websites  to  stolen  classified  information  (Broucek  & 
Turner,  2004).  Also  there  were  legislations  across  the 
globe  against  computer  virus  proponent,  it  was  seen  as  a 
criminal  offence  tantamount  to  prosecution,  and  this  also 
assisted  in  reducing  viral  infections  to  systems.  The 
sharing  of  information  between  local  agencies,  Federal 
states  exposed  possible  virus  attack  a  typical  example  is 
the collaboration that exist between the Federal Bureau of 
investigation  and  the  secret  service,  Law  enforcement 
agencies  in in most developed countries (Hallahan, 2010). 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 6, November 2015 ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 www.IJCSI.org802015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These  collaborations  when  encouraged  by  sharing 
developed digital forensics tools and other system security 
applications meant to curb cybercrime  will go a  long way 
to  enhance  a  degree  of  security  in  a  respective  system, 
eventually cyber terrorist will be brought to book. 

3.2 Supplementary Threats to Computer Security 

Though unlawful access incapacitating a system has severe 
complications,  they  don’t  constitute  the  main  threat  to 
computer  security.  There  are  basically  five  threats  that 
undermines  a  digitized  system  (Hartono,  Holsapple,  Kim, 
Na, & Simpson, 2014): (a) natural catastrophes, (b) corrupt 
workforces,  (c)  unhappy  workforces,  (d)  and  inadvertent 
blunders and oversights. 
Human  errors  constitute  the  major  cause  of  the  breaches 
that occur in computer security, inadvertent oversights and 
mistakes  are  very  common  in  the  implementation  and 
operation process of a system .However if a system is well 
developed these continues errors will be reduced hence the 
need 
internal  control  measures 
(Ghobakhloo, Arias-Aranda, & Benitez-Amado, 2011). 

for  an  effective 

According  to  surveys  carried  out,  showed  that  systems 
development  is  very  effective  when  users  are  part  of  the 
process, the system will not likely fail. The following steps 
by  organizations  are  essential  to  effective  computer 
security. Security policies and controls should be enforced 
and  communicated  constantly  (McLeod  &  MacDonell, 
2011). 
(a) Controls and security techniques should be put in place 
to ensure access to users and traceable information system 
should be implemented 
(b)  Users  should  be  restricted  to  their  area  of  jurisdiction 
only and not to other part of the system. 
(c) Intermittent security training should be conducted. 
(d) Some personnel should  be  made  to  be  responsible  for 
the security of the system in a liberated manner. 

3.3. Network Forensic 

to  ensure 

Defensive  measures  can  be  engaged 
the 
prevention  of  cyber-crime.  Nonetheless,  irrespective  of 
how  many  preventive  measures  are  in  place,  except 
accurate and constant arranged procedures are maintained, 
other  than  that  the  system  may    either  negligibly  report 
cyber-crimes or excessively as a result   giving false alarm, 
by a single interruption detection (Digital evidence, 2000). 
Interruption  discovery  methods 
include  detection  of 
anomaly 
the  system,  tripwires,  and  configuration 
checking tools. This is possible by the use of forensic tools 
that solely investigate real-time online activity. 

in 

the  network 

these  network 

that  underpins 

for  anomalies  on 

Network  forensic  is  the  branch  of  digital  forensics  that  is 
characterized  by  capture,  documenting  and  analyzing  of 
activities that take place on a network for the purposes of 
identifying imposition and subjecting them to investigation. 
The concept of forensic is classified into two sections, one 
that  enhances  the  security  of  the  network  and  the  other 
looks 
to  establish 
evidence(Pilli,  Joshi,  &  Niyogi,  2010).There  are  so  many 
tools 
from 
TCPDump,  Flow-tools,  IOS  NetFlow,  TCPXtract  ,    and 
Argus  among  others.    These  areas  of  digital  forensic  are 
some of the directions that security experts can employ to 
curb  e-commerce  crime.  Where  every  transaction  that  is 
taking place over the  network  is  being  monitored  and  red 
flag  raised  over  the  slightest  alarm  of  possible  crime 
perpetration. These Prevention techniques  may not  really 
be  without  some  form  of    imperfection,  as  such,  e-
commerce firms should establish measures for analysis and 
revitalization  the  system  after  cybercrime  attack  occurs 
(Kaushik, Pilli, & Joshi, 2010).This will enable the firm to 
be guarded against subsequent infiltrations. 

forensics 

Most  e-business  firms  usually  require  competent  and 
experienced computer security persons; thus, hiring outside 
experts,  for  example,  forensic  accountants,  computer 
forensic  professional.  If  negligence  of  a  company’s 
computer  security  personnel  caused  a  security  breach  or 
electronic  crime,  a  professional  from  outside  will  still  be 
needed  and  useful  to  examine  the  entire  security  of  a 
company’s system. Though  many  law  enforcement  bodies 
do  not  have  the  requisite  expertise  to  investigate  some 
issues of cybercrime, periodic training would enable them 
to  understand 
the  concept  of  digital  forensics,  this 
facilitates  smooth  corroboration  of  cyber-crime  evidence 
discovered by the forensic specialist (Park, 2011). 

Digital forensics s is concerned about an investigation into 
anything that has technology connotation, just like forensic 
science, it subject systems and technologies to observation 
and  investigate  the  technology  against  anything  that  may 
be  of  the  interest  of  the  investigator.  Technology  has 
advanced  and  computer  programmers  have  applications 
that  can  track  criminal  irrespective  of  their  location  by 
making  use  of  the  GPS.  If  digital  forensic  is  introduced 
into e-commerce at an advanced level, it will reduce if not 
totally  eradicate  cyber-crime.  This  implies  that  business 
owners  can  determine  the  location  of  a  shopper  or 
customer if  the  person  happens  to  be  a  hacker  he/she  can 
easily be identified (Vaseashta et al., 2014). 

Authentication,   authorization,      and       encryption   are      
some       basic         security methodologies; the policy and 
privacy  issues  that  governs  e-commerce  should  be  made 
available  to  prospective  customers  in  various  ways.  It  is 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 6, November 2015 ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 www.IJCSI.org812015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
imperative  that  e-commerce  firms  do  not  play  on  the 
ignorance on consumers in any given situation (Turban  et 
al., 2015).  

The law should be reconsidered to accept the scientific and 
procedural discoveries of digital forensics in its attempt to 
detect and expose perpetrators of cyber-crime. Observation 
of ethics in the practice to unravel criminal activities over 
the  internet  is  as  equally  important  as  catching  the 
criminals.  According  to  Moore  (2006)      the  court  will 
usually  accept  digital  forensic  evidence  in  a  typical  cyber 
fraud case if the investigation and analysis was done within 
a  generally  accepted  scientific  parameters  and  ethical 
considerations not compromised. 

4. Method 

The  respondents  in  this  study  were  customers  who  buy 
from  the  internet  particularly  the  most  common  ones 
Amazon  and  EBay  thus  they  were  the  organization 
considered for the study. A sample size of 60 respondents 
(N=60)  were  randomly  selected  to  participate  in  the 
research and there were 100% responses, no allurement to 
participants, it was purely voluntary responses. 

 5.  Results 

A descriptive analysis techniques was used to examine the 
data. The collected questionnaires were numbered to avoid 
duplicate  data  entry.  The  data  was  then  computed  into  a 
SPSS, a software for data analysis. Each written answers of 
the respondent were coded under various headings as seen 
in  the  discussion  below.  A  frequency  distribution  with  its 
corresponding percent of the results to the questions were 
displayed 

Table 1: Table 1. How respondents paid for items online 

Payment 
type 

Visa Debit 
card 
Visa Credit 
card 
Master 
Card 
American 
express 

Total 

Frequency 

Percent (%) 

21 

15 

13 

11 

60 

35 

25 

21.7 

18.3 

100 

Fig. 1 Responses on respondents encounter of any form of fraud, delays 
in online transaction 

 Fig. 2 Respondents visiting the wrong sites unknowingly 

4. Conclusions 

For the purpose of this paper three (3) of the  findings are 
displayed. Firstly it saw that majority respondents paid for 
their  items  they  purchased  online  with  a  visa  debit  card, 
thus these funds are sitting in their account, this confirms a 
research by Antonucci (2014) , that easy way of transacting 
or buying online is to use a debit card as most firms prefer 
this  option  to  others.  The  least  reported  medium  of 
payment online was the use of the American express which 
suggest, not many people use it. 

The  use  of  debit  and  credit  card  for  payment  in  recent 
times  is  a  global  phenomenon.  Over  decades  now  these 
cards have a magnetic hoop attached to it on these stripes 
are  the  relevant  accounts  details  of  the  bearer.  A  more 
advanced  type  which  was  also  recently  introduced  known 
as  the  integrated  circuit  thus  IC  which  has  chip  and 
memory  can  be  used  to  engage  in  a  transaction  with  a 
contactless  or  contact  systems,  usually  traders  have  point 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 6, November 2015 ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 www.IJCSI.org822015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
Appendix 

Types of digital related crimes 

Computer 
virus 

Computer  program 
that  causes 
damage to computer systems or files 

serious 

Phishing 

Vishing 

when the perpetrator set up deceitful websites 
that appears official and causing the victim to 
give out personal information to the criminals 
Personal details stolen via phone 

Spoofing   

Botnet 

this occurs when a hacker transmits 
instructions to other computers for the 
purpose of controlling them 
its use of email to swindle an individual into 
providing personal information that is later 
used for unlawful purposes 
E- theft      The perpetrator hacks into a financial 

Cyber 

terrorism                                                 
Espionage 

institution e.g. a bank and diverts funds to 
accounts accessible to the criminal. To 
prevent e-theft, most major banks severely 
limit what clients can do online 
Cyber terrorism occurs when terrorists cause 
virtual destruction in online computer systems 

occurs when perpetrators hack into online 
systems or individual PCs to obtain 
confidential information for the purpose of 
selling it to other parties (criminals) 
This is constituted by a category of viruses 
such as spyware, Trojan horse, worms with its 
original intent to break the host system 
Refers to unsolicited email; spam is illegal if 
it violates the Can-Spam Act of 
2003,   
such   as   by   not   giving recipients an opt-
out method. 

Malware 

Spam 

Source: (Andam, 2003; Carol Mendelsohn, 2015 May 13) 

of 

the 

and 

ownership 

processing 

transaction 

e-commerce 

of sale stations and card readers that allows the use of card 
for  payment  of  products.  When  a  card  is  used  at  a  sale 
terminal when the holder is physically present it is usually 
recorded  in  the  bank  transactions  as  card  present  as  such 
there  is  less  probability  of  fraud  in  situations  like  this 
because  the  holder  is  made  to  enter  a  password  to 
authenticate 
the 
transaction(Williams, 2014). 
On  the  other  hand,  card  not  present  is  used  on  the 
description of transactions made typically over the internet 
and  card  details  were  used  to  finalize  the  payment.  In  a 
normal 
cardholder 
communicate with the businesses’ website where payment 
is  made  for  chosen  products  and  finally  choses  payment 
option either by use of Visa® card American express® or 
MasterCard® and so on. Besides the use of the card other 
details  of  the  card  holder  are  collected  such  as  billing 
address and the three digit card verification value or code. 
This  risk  involved  in  this  card  not  present  transaction 
usually  made  over  the  internet  is  very  high  as  far  as  the 
card holder or the customer is concerned (Williams, 2014).  
It would really be appropriate that some form of chip and 
pin 
related 
transactions  in  that  regards  to  ensure  the  security  of  the 
card owner. Secondly the inquiry saw that a wide number 
of  e-commerce  users  have  encountered  internet  related 
fraud  one  way  or  the  other  whiles  the  least  have  not 
experienced any yet, this finding also confirms the findings 
of  Dwyer  and  Easteal  (2013)  that  cybercrime  is  really  on 
the  increase  and  advanced  counter  measure  is  imperative. 
A  survey  carried  out  by  Karake-Shalhoub  and  Al  Qasimi 
(2007)  indicated  that  there  are  about  63%  levels  of  un 
authorized penetration in Saudi Arabia as such most people 
have  been  victims  of  cyber-crime  and  it  is  really  on  the 
increase  since  the  use  of  the  internet  has  become  part  of 
their daily activities. 

transactions  are  available 

internet 

for 

The  cyber-crime  known  as  phishing  which  is  one  of  the 
most  common  cyber-crime  where  sham  e-commerce  web 
sites  are  created  to  look  like  the  original  by  imposters  so 
that  as  customers  enter  their  card  details  and  other 
important  information  they  illegally  take  them  or  where  a 
company’s  website  is  high  jacked  by  hackers  known  as 
denial  of  service  attacks  with  a  similar  purpose  among 
others, a typical example was when on 6th August , 2009, 
Facebook, twitter and Google blogger were bashed leaving 
these  social  networking  sites  struggling  to  recover.  Most 
users were not able to have access other did the cost of lost 
to both these firms and innocent customers were enormous 
(Broucek  &  Turner,  2001).  There  is  also  a  current  one 
known  as  vishing  due  to  the  explosion  of  smart  phones 
they  are  used  one  way  or  the  other  to  illegally  obtain 
information from unsuspecting individuals. 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 6, November 2015 ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 www.IJCSI.org832015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
[1]  Abels,  S.,  Brehm,  N.,  Hahn,  A.,  &  Gomez,  J.  M. 
(2006).  Change  management  issues  in  Federated  ERP 
systems:  an  approach  for  identifying  requirements  and 
possible  solutions.  International  Journal  of  Information 
Systems and Change Management, 1(3), 318-335.  
Achille, M. M., & Roger, A. E. (2014). Obtaining Digital 
Evidence  from  Intrusion  Detection  Systems.  International 
Journal of Computer Applications, 95(12).  
[2]  Aiken,  M.,  Garner,  B.,  Ghosh,  K.,  &  Vanjani,  M. 
(2014). Dot. com Boom and Bust Effects on MIS College 
Enrollments:  1995–2006.  Communications  of  the  IIMA, 
8(1), 4.  
[3] Alsaad, A. K., Mohamad, R., & Ismail,  N.  A.  (2014). 
The  Moderating  Role  of  Power  Exercise  in  B2B  E-
commerce  Adoption  Decision.  Procedia-Social  and 
Behavioral Sciences, 130, 515-523.  
[4] Andam, Z. R. (2003). E-Commerce and e-business. E-
ASEAN Task Force UNDP-APDIP. Retrieved October, 22, 
2010.  
[5]  Antonucci,  D.  A.  (2014).  System  and  method  for  a 
multiple merchant stored value card: Google Patents. 
[6] Avzu, K. (2014). Forensic Science and How Criminals 
Hide  their  Crimes.  Forensic  Science  and  How  Criminals 
Hide their Crimes: Standard YouTube License. 
[7]Baek,  J.-M.,  &  Hong,  I.-S.  (2003).  A  study  on  mobile 
payment system with united mileage using USIM Web and 
Communication  Technologies  and  Internet-Related  Social 
Issues—HSI 2003 (pp. 394-403): Springer. 
[8] Broucek, V., & Turner, P. (2001). Forensic computing: 
the  era  of 
Developing  a  conceptual  approach 
information  warfare.  Paper  presented  at  the  Journal  of 
Information Warfare. 
[9] Broucek, V., & Turner, P. (2004). Intrusion detection: 
issues and challenges in evidence acquisition. International 
Review of Law, Computers & Technology, 18(2), 149-164.  
[10] Carol Mendelsohn, A. E. Z. a. A. D. (Writer).  (2015 
May 13). CSI: Cyber. In M. Aiken's (Producer), CSI Cyber 
- The Poop Phone. USA: CBS. 
[11]  Ciolan,  I.  M.  (2014).  Defining  cyber  security  as  the 
security  issue  of  the  twenty  first  century.  A  constructivist 
approach.  Revista  de  Administratie  Publica  si  Politici 
Sociale, 12(1), 40. 
 [12]  Dwyer,  A.,  &  Easteal,  P.  (2013).  Cyber  bullying  in 
Australian  schools:  The  question  of  negligence  and  liability. 
Alternative LJ, 38, 92.  
[13] Elyas, M., Ahmad, A., Maynard, S. B., & Lonie, A. (2015). 
Digital  forensic  readiness:  Expert  perspectives  on  a  theoretical 
framework. Computers & Security, 52, 70-89.  
[14]  Ghobakhloo,  M.,  Arias-Aranda,  D.,  &  Benitez-Amado,  J. 
(2011).  Adoption  of  e-commerce  applications 
in  SMEs. 
Industrial Management & Data Systems, 111(8), 1238-1269.  
[15] Gnanasekar, J. (2014). Enhanced multi agents based model 
for convergent business services.  

in 

[16]  Guan,  S.-U.,  Tan,  S.  L.,  &  Hua,  F.  (2004).  A  modularized 
electronic payment system for agent-based e-commerce.  
[17]  Hallahan,  K.  (2010).  Crises  and  risk  in  cyberspace. 
Handbook of risk and crisis communication, 412-445.  
[18]  Hartono,  E.,  Holsapple,  C.  W.,  Kim,  K.-Y.,  Na,  K.-S.,  & 
Simpson,  J.  T.  (2014).  Measuring  perceived  security  in  B2C 
electronic  commerce  website  usage:  A  specification  and 
validation. Decision Support Systems, 62, 11-21.  
[19] Karake-Shalhoub, Z., & Al Qasimi, L. (2007). The diffusion 
of  e-commerce  in  developing  economies:  a  resource-based 
approach: Edward Elgar Publishing. 
[20]  Kaushik,  A.  K.,  Pilli,  E.  S.,  &  Joshi,  R.  (2010).  Network 
forensic  system  for  port  scanning  attack.  Paper  presented  at  the 
Advance  Computing  Conference  (IACC),  2010  IEEE  2nd 
International. 
[21]  Kim,  S.-S.,  Hong,  J.-W.,  &  You,  Y.-Y.  (2015).  an 
Exploratory  Study  on  E-Business  Risks  Due  to  the  Sector 
Classification  of  Small  and  Medium-Sized  Enterprises.  Indian 
Journal of Science and Technology, 8(S8), 387-396.  
[22]  LaRose,  R.,  &  Rifon,  N.  J.  (2007).  Promoting  i‐safety: 
effects of privacy warnings and privacy seals on risk assessment 
and online privacy behavior. Journal of Consumer Affairs, 41(1), 
127-149.  
[23]  Lochner,  H.,  &  Zinn,  R.  (2014).  Detecting  invisible  traces 
generated  by  a  cellphone  at  a  crime  scene.  Act  Criminological, 
27(1), 160-175.  
[24] McLeod, L., & MacDonell, S. G. (2011). Factors that affect 
software  systems  development  project  outcomes:  A  survey  of 
research. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 43(4), 24.  
[25]  Moore,  R. 
technology computer crime: Rutledge. 
Mylonas, A., Meletiadis, V., Mitrou, L., & Gritzalis, D. (2013). 
Smartphone  sensor  data  as  digital  evidence.  Computers  & 
Security, 38, 51-75.  
[26]  O'Brien,  J.  A.,  &  Marakas,  G.  (2011).  Developing 
Business/IT  Solutions.  Management  Information  Systems,  488-
489.  
[27]  Park,  Y.  J.  (2011).  Digital  literacy  and  privacy  behavior 
online. Communication Research, 0093650211418338.  
[28]  Perez,  J.  (2005).  Gartner:  Security  concerns  to  stunt  e-
commerce  growth.  Computer  World.  Retrieved  November  7, 
2005. 
[29] Pilli, E. S., Joshi, R. C., & Niyogi, R. (2010). A framework 
for network forensic analysis. Paper presented at the Information 
and Communication Technologies. 
[30] Smith, K. T. (2009). Worldwide growth of e-commerce. E-
Business (March), 29-34.  
[31]  Sommer,  R.,  &  Paxson,  V.  (2010).  Outside  the  closed 
world:  On  using  machine  learning  for  network  intrusion 
detection. Paper presented at the Security and Privacy (SP), 2010 
IEEE Symposium on. 
[32]  Stephenson,  P.,  &  Gilbert,  K.  (2013).  Investigating 
computer-related crime: CRC Press. 
[33]  Trautman,  L.  J.  (2014).  E-Commerce  and  Electronic 
Payment System Risks: Lessons from PayPal. SMU Science and 
Technology Law Review, 17(2).  
[34]Turban, E., King, D., Lee, J. K., Liang, T.-P., & Turban, D. 
C.  (2015).  E-Commerce  Security  and  Fraud  Issues  and 
Protections Electronic Commerce (pp. 459-520): Springer. 

(2010).  Cybercrime: 

Investigating  high-

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 6, November 2015 ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 www.IJCSI.org842015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues 
[35]  Vaseashta,  A.,  Susmann,  P.,  &  Braman,  E.  (2014).  Cyber 
Security and Resiliency Policy Framework (Vol. 38): IOS Press. 
[36]  Williams,  D.  E.  (2014).  An  Evolutionary  Approach  to  e-
Tailing:  Implications  for  Practitioners  Handbook  of  Strategic  e-
Business Management (pp. 433-466): Springer. 

Author:  A  full  time  PhD  candidate  at  Charles  Sturt  University 
Australia  in  the  school  of  Computing  and  mathematics,  Obtained 
Bachelor  of  Art  in  Information  studies  2007  from  University  of 
Information  Systems  2010, 
Ghana,  MBA 
in  Management 
University  of  Ghana  and  MBA  E-commerce 
from 
University  of  Gloucestershire  UK.  All  working  experience  have 
been  in  the  academia,  specifically  in  IT  related  fields.  Currently 
researching into Biometric security,  digital  forensics  and  Big  data 
analytics. 

in  2014 

IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues, Volume 12, Issue 6, November 2015 ISSN (Print): 1694-0814 | ISSN (Online): 1694-0784 www.IJCSI.org852015 International Journal of Computer Science Issues 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
