International Journal of Distributed and Parallel Systems (IJDPS) Vol.6, No.1, January 2015 

A SECURE SERVICE PROVISIONING FRAMEWORK 
FOR CYBER PHYSICAL CLOUD COMPUTING 
SYSTEMS 

Anees Ara, Mznah Al-Rodhaan,Yuan Tian, Abdullah Al-Dhelaan 

Department of Computer Science, College of Computers and Information Sciences, King 
Saud  University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 

ABSTRACT 

Cyber  physical  systems  (CPS)  are  mission  critical  systems  engineered  by  combination  of  cyber  and 
physical  systems  respectively.  These  systems  are  tightly  coupled,  resource  constrained  systems  and  have 
dynamic real time applications. Due to the limitation of resources, and in order to improve the efficiency of 
the CPS systems, they are  combined with cloud  computing architecture, and are called as Cyber Physical 
Cloud Computing Systems  (CPCCS).  These  CPCCS  have  critical  care  applications  where  security  of  the 
systems  is  a  major  concern.  Therefore,  we  propose  a  Secure  Service  provisioning  architecture  for  Cyber 
Physical  Cloud  Computing  Systems  (CPCCS),  which  includes  the  combination  of  technologies  such  as 
CPS,  Cloud  Computing  and  Wireless  Sensor  Networks.  In  addition  to  this,  we  also  highlight  various 
threats/attacks;  security  requirements  and  mechanisms  that  are  applicable  to  CPCCS  at  different  layers 
and propose two security models that can be adapted in a layered architectural format. 

KEYWORDS 

Cyber  physical  cloud  computing  systems,  Cloud  computing,  Wireless  sensor  networks,  Security 
Architecture. 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Cyber Physical Systems are large scaled,  closely integrated and resource  constrained,  collection 
of  distributed  cyber and physical systems respectively [2]. In CPS, the physical systems and its 
processes  are  monitored,  coordinated  and  controlled  by  the  computation  and  communication 
cores.  All  these  physical  devices  have  limited  resources  to  satisfy  complex  communication  & 
computational tasks needed by  critical applications. And hence these limitations were overcome 
by  the  introduction  of  the  concept  of  Service  oriented  architecture  (SOA),  of  cloud  computing 
systems [22], being applied to CPS.  Consequently,  this improves the interoperability,  flexibility 
and efficiency of the CPS [7, 14]. 

In 2013, The National Institute of standards and technology (NIST) have defined Cyber Physical 
Cloud  Computing  (CPCC)  architectural  framework  as  “a  system  environment  that  can  rapidly 
build,  modify  and  provision  auto-scale  cyber-physical  systems,  composed  of  a  set  of  cloud 
computing  based  sensor,  processing,  control,  and  data  services”  [6].  These  systems  provide 
mission  critical  services  such  as  1)  Smart  Health:  medical  devices  &  systems,  automated 
pervasive health; 2) Smart Transportation: Air CPS, Intelligent transport systems ITS, Unmanned 
Aerial  Vehicles  UAV;  3)  Smart  Power  grid:  electrical  power  grid;  Navigation  &  rescue 
applications; 4) Social networking and gaming [6, 11, 13, 29]. Since all these are mission critical 
applications,  and  hence  system  security  &  privacy  becomes  one  of  the  major  requirement  and 
research challenge needed by CPCCS [6, 13]. 

DOI:10.5121/ijdps.2015.6101                                                                                                                          1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Distributed and Parallel Systems (IJDPS) Vol.6, No.1, January 2015 

In literature, there are various approaches published in the direction of combining service oriented 
architecture  (cloud  computing)  and  CPS  [7,  8,  12,  15],  in  which  the  CPS  were  considered  as 
service  models;  platform  as  service  (PaaS)  and  Infrastructure  as  service  (IaaS).  In  addition  to 
these  there  are  application  specific  approaches,  where  more  prominence  was  given  to  the 
amalgamation  of  technologies  such  as  Cyber  Physical  System,  Cloud  Computing  and  Wireless 
sensor networks [9, 10, 11, 18], but none of them focussed on security and privacy related issues. 
Hence by taking the motivation, from the above approaches, combining these technologies (CPS, 
Cloud computing and WSN) and also by considering various security issues related to them, we 
propose a secure service provisioning framework for CPCCS.   

Our contributions in this paper include the following:  

1) We proposed A Secure Service Provisioning architecture for Cyber Physical Cloud Computing 
Systems, through which, the immense data from the connected physical sensing devices (such as 
WSN)  can  be  securely  provided  as  service  provisioning  sub  systems  (such  as  XaaS)  of  cloud 
computing architecture [7, 8, 9, 10].  
2)  We  surveyed  various  threats/attacks,  security  requirements  and  mechanisms  applicable  to 
CPCCS at different layers.  
3) We propose two security models namely horizontal security model and vertical security model 
that can be adapted in a layered architectural format in CPCCS. 
The rest of the paper is organized as  follows: Section 2 discusses the related  works in securing 
CPS. Section 3 proposes Secure Service Provisioning architecture for CPCCS, which includes the 
classification of sub systems been provided as services in a secure manner. Section 4 summarizes 
the  various  security  challenges  and  requirements  related  to  CPCCS  and  propose  two  security 
models related to it. Section 5 concludes the whole paper. 

2. RELATED WORKS 

The  CPS,  Internet  of  things  (IoT)  and  Sensor  Cloud  are  built  on  the  same  realms  of  cyber-
physical systems plethora supported by the underlying M2M communication paradigm. Security 
in these areas has been a prominent area of research in recent years. 

 Some of the proposed security architectures were application specific in CPS. Ahmed Lounis et 
al  [19]  proposed  a  secure  cloud  based  architecture  for  e-Health  wireless  sensor  networks. 
Through  the  combination  of  attribute-based  encryption  and  symmetric  cryptography  they  try  to 
eliminate the threats & risk of outsourcing the medical data to cloud computing systems. Yin-Jun 
Chen  et  al  [17]  has  developed  the  CPS  integrated  framework  for  monitoring  cultural  heritage. 
They  used  RSA  algorithm  and  fuzzy  theory  in  detecting  abnormalities  or  intrusions  in  the 
communication network. In addition to these HSCloud [16], a homeland security architecture was 
developed to monitor the transportation of dangerous goods (TGS) by using Cloud enabled virtual 
environment (CLEVER) and a Virtual pervasive element (VPE).  

Some other works include the solutions applied to a particular security issue such as  the CRBAC 
(Context-aware Role Based Access Control), a framework for Cyber physical cloud, proposed by 
Hiray et al [5], which  can be used for controlling, tracing and providing an authorized access to 
system resources. Also finite state model and hidden Markov chains were adopted to identify the 
multi-stage  attacks  and  to  prevent  real  damage  in  CPS[4].Besides,  the  adoption  of  FPGAs  in 
protecting  Cyber  Physical  Infrastructures  was  suggested  to  improve  security  and  robustness  of 
heterogeneous  networks  [3].  Chonka  et  al  developed  a  defence  system  called  Pre-Decision, 
Advance  Decision,  Learning  System  (ENDER)  for  detecting  and    mitigating    HX(HTTP  and 
XML)-DoS attacks against cloud web services in Cyber physical cloud systems[20, 30]. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Distributed and Parallel Systems (IJDPS) Vol.6, No.1, January 2015 

In addition, Chris et al [21] presented game theoretic formulations of attack and defence aspects 
of CPS under different cost - benefit functions and different budgets of the attacker and defender. 
Quanyan Zhu [25] developed a game-theoretic framework  for addressing security and resilience 
problems  at  multiple  layers  of  the  cyber-physical  systems  which  includes  robust  and  resilient 
control,  secure  network  routing and  management  of  information  security  and  smart  grid  energy 
systems. 

3. THE PROPOSED SECURE SERVICE PROVISIONING FRAMEWORK FOR CPCCS 

CPCCS are basically a CPS that combines sensor  networks  with  cloud  computing systems. The 
proposed  framework  is  one  such  combination  of  sensing  devices  and  cloud  computing  systems 
being  provided  in  a  secure  way.  In  the  proposed  framework  the  sensor  networks  are  being 
provided as service provisioning sub systems (XaaS) of cloud computing paradigm. 

 The  proposed  framework  is  a  combination  of  resource  oriented  architecture  [28]  and  service 
oriented  architectures  [27],  in  which  the  utilities  of  the  multiple  physical  sensing  networks  are 
provisioned as services through  cloud computing systems in a secure  way. That is the immense 
critical data which is continuously sensed by various wireless sensor networks are combined and 
securely  provisioned  as  service  modules  through  commercial  application  systems  in  the  cloud 
environment.  

3.1. Basic Components 

  Wireless  Sensor  Networks  (WSN):  It  is  a  network  that  comprises  of  the  low  power 
sensing  devices  called  as  nodes  and  a  base  station/sink  which  is  relatively  stronger  in 
power  and  storage.  These  nodes  with  base  station  are  deployed  in  a  physical  region  to 
sense a particular entity of environment such as temperature, pressure, humidity etc. 
  Gateway (proxy): It  is a proxy server  owned by the WSN owner who is responsible for 

data aggregation and dissemination to different applications. 

  Virtual  Sensor  Networks  (VSN):    It  is  a  seamless  grouping  of  WSN’s  in  a  virtual 

environment like an overlay. 

  Application  Management  Unit  (AMU):  It  comprises  of  Interface  agent,  service  API’s 
Service list. The general functionality of AMU is to manage the service request which is 
posed  by  the  client/user  through  an  interface  agent.  The  interface  agent  looks  for  the 
request in the service list and responses back to the client about its availability and if in 
case  of  its  absence  it  integrates  or  develops  new  Service  API’s  according  the  user 
requirement specification. 

  Management/Monitoring  Unit  (MU):  The  responsibilities  of  MU  are  to  manage  and 
monitor  the  different  virtual  components  of  the  system  through  resource  management, 
load  balancing,  network  resource  management,  real  time  scheduling  and  end  –  end 
performance evaluation metrics.  

  Supervisory Agent: The main responsibility of this agent is to supervise the pub/sub unit, 
where the  user requests are sent through interface  unit for the subscription  of a service. 
The  supervisory  agent  by  using  event  matching  &  processing  unit  tries  to  find  if  the 
request  can  be  matched  by  searching  for  the  service  in  service  registry.  If  the  match  is 
found the data in response to the request is send back. 

  Security  Unit  (SU):  The  basic  operations  of  the  SU  are  to  provide  security  at  various 
levels from the time a user puts in a request till the response is fed back. That is an end to 
end  security  which  is  provided  from  physical  layer  to  application  layer.  It  includes  the 
following components as:  

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Distributed and Parallel Systems (IJDPS) Vol.6, No.1, January 2015 

 

Identity Management Unit (IMU) who is responsible for authentication and authorization 
of the various assets in the system. 

  Access  Control  Unit  (ACU)  with  the  help  of  Access  Control  List  manages/grants  a 
user/client,  access  permission/rights  on  a  particular  object  (here  known  as  service)  and 
the operations performed by it.  

  Storage  security  is  responsible  for  applying  the  security  mechanisms  on  the  virtual 

database storage servers.   

  Service  level  Agreements  (SLA):  These  are  the  agreements  made  between  the  cloud 
service  provider  and  the  user/client  in  this  system,  which  includes  agreements  made by 
both the parties about the list of services, metrics, audit mechanisms, security, encryption, 
privacy,  data  retention,  regulatory  compliance  and  transparencies  to  be  provided  by 
Cloud service providers to the users. 

  Policy Management: A proper policy management has to be done between multiple WSN 
owners by the CPS cloud service provider for the information been provided by them. 
  Security  audit:    Since  the  system  comprises  of  cyber  and  physical  components,  the 
security  audit  should  be  processed  at  various  levels  i.e.,  information  security  audit, 
network security audit & physical security audit.  

3.2. Types of service provisioning sub-systems 

In  this  proposed  architecture  (Figure.1)  we  classify  the  type  of  sub  systems  that  can  be 
provisioned as (XaaS) services in the CPCCS with the help of following three cases: 

Case 1. Publish/Subscribe systems as SaaS 

SaaS  is the  software  that  is  deployed  over  the  internet. When  a  client/user  request  for  data,  the 
cloud  service  provider  (CSP)  using  SaaS  applications  subscribes  to  pub-sub  system  and  the 
service for which user requested is searched in the service registry, if the match is found the data 
as a service is published to the user. 

In our proposed  framework, the users are at the application layer of the architecture  where they 
interact with the system using the interface agent, and place a subscription request to the system. 
The supervisory agent then looks  for the  match in the service registry  using the  event  matching 
/processing unit. If the match is found the data is published. Depending on the type of request that 
is,  If  the  user/subscriber  request  for  raw  data  then  according  to  the  availability  of  data  at  DB 
storage server or from the WSN owner, the XML data is directly provided in a secure  encrypted 
form through service API’s. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Distributed and Parallel Systems (IJDPS) Vol.6, No.1, January 2015 

Figure1. Proposed Secure Service Provisioning Framework for CPCCS: Case (1). Pub/Sub systems as 
SaaS, Case (2). Sensing and Actuation Systems as PaaS and Case (3). Virtual Sensor Networks as IaaS. 

Figure 1. Proposed Secure Service Provisioning Framework for CPCCS: Case (1). Pub/Sub systems as 
SaaS, Case (2). Sensing and Actuation Systems as PaaS and Case (3). Virtual Sensor Networks as IaaS. 

Case 2. Sensing and Actuation Systems as PaaS  

These are the cyber physical systems where the sensor nodes form the physical sensing systems, 
the cloud storage and computation platform forms the cyber back bone. 

These  systems  are  used  for  controlling  and  monitoring  the  critical  environments  like  industrial 
monitoring systems, intelligent transport systems, health  monitoring  systems, SCADA  etc.  The 
case (2) in the architecture discusses about these type of the systems where physical entities in a 
particular  area  can  be  sensed  using  the  resource  constraint  sensor  nodes  and  the  data  is 
periodically  send  to  the  cloud  storage  using  the  secure  communication  protocols.  The 
computation on the sensed data is performed on the cloud servers. Based on the knowledge driven 
from the computation; the results are sent back so that the actuation can take place. 

Case 3. Virtual Sensor networks as IaaS 

The virtual sensor networks (VSN) are the overlays on the wireless sensor networks. Each VSN is 
actually a mapping of sensor nodes to the virtual machines or the virtual instances. According to 
the  application  requirement  posed  by  the  client/users,  the  corresponding  data  can  be  sent  from 
multiple sensors which are mapped onto the virtual machine or virtual instance. The Case (3) in 
our  architecture  discusses  about  this  kind  of  system.  As  we  know  that  the  deployment  of  each 
WSN  for  only  one  sensing  application  is  very  cost  effective.  It  is  also  found  that  there  are 
overlapping  sensor  nodes  from  two  different  sensor  networks  deployed  in  common  region. 
Therefore,  through  the  virtual  sensor  network  environment,  a  seamless  grouping  of  multiple 
sensor networks can be done on the virtual instance and correlations drawn data from them can be 
of great help to various applications. 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Distributed and Parallel Systems (IJDPS) Vol.6, No.1, January 2015 

Figure 2. Workflow diagram for the proposed secure service provisioning framework of CPCCS. 

The  general  workflow  scenario  for  CPCCS  from  the  application  layer  to  the  physical  layer  is 
described in Figure 2. It begins when a user/client wants to access the system, he first puts a login 
request to the cloud service provider (CSP) and the request is forwarded to the security agent. The 
Security  Agent  generates  a  UserID  and  the  user  is  authenticated.  An  authenticate  user  makes 
request  for  the  required  data,  which  gets  forwarded  from  CSP  to  the  supervisory  agent.  The 
supervisory  agent  by  using  event  matching  &  processing  unit  tries  to  find  if  the  request  can  be 
matched and found in the service registry. If the match is found, then according to the subscribers 
request the data will be published as a response from the underlying physical network (WSN). 

4. SECURING CYBER PHYSICAL CLOUD COMPUTING SYSTEMS 

The integration of  cyber (cloud computing and  other computing devices) and physical (physical 
sensing  devices)  components  with  the  heterogeneous  networks  in  a  cyber-physical  cloud 
computing    system  introduces  different  types  of  vulnerabilities  that  include  attacks  on  physical 
Space, attacks on cyber space and  interception, replacement or removal of information from the 
communication  channels[26].  The  major  challenges  for  securing  Cyber  Physical  systems 
constitute  in  understanding  the  threats  and  attacks,  identifying  the  features  of  CPS  and  their 
differences from traditional IT security and applicability of available security mechanisms in CPS 
[1].  

In  Table  1,  the  threats  and  attacks,  security  requirements  and  security  mechanisms  applicable 
according  to  the  components  at  each  layer  in  Cyber  Physical  Cloud  Computing  Systems  are 
summarized based on [23, 24].  

4.1. Proposed Security Models 

Using layered architecture  format  of the security  framework discussed in section 3, we propose 
two types of security models as follows: 

4.1.1. Horizontal Security Model 

The horizontal security model consists of horizontal decomposition of  components in CPCCS. It 
includes Cloud Computing infrastructure, Communication links and Wireless Sensor Network in 
a top-down hierarchy as shown in  Figure 3. The horizontal security  model  decomposes CPCCS 
system in a horizontal manner and it involves securing each level as follows: 

  Secure in-network data aggregation at WSN 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Distributed and Parallel Systems (IJDPS) Vol.6, No.1, January 2015 

Table 1. Security Attacks, Requirements and Mechanisms applicable to CPCCS 

Layers 

Components 

Threats/Attacks 

Application 
layer 

Personalized 
information 
service, 
intelligent 
transportation, 
environmental 
monitoring 

Support layer 

Cloud 
computing, 
intelligent 
computing 

Network 
layer 

Internet mobile 
communicatio
n network, 
Satellite nets, 
network 
infrastructure 
and 
communicatio
n protocols 

Perceptual 
layer 

RFID reader, 
Sensor, GPS 

DoS, DDoS, Cross 
site scripting (XSS), 
Injection attacks, 
buffer overflow, 
Session hijacking, 
Security 
misconfiguration, 
Failure to restrict 
URL access. 
Data Breaches, Data 
Loss , Account 
Hijacking , Insecure 
APIs, Denial of 
Service 
(DoS),Malicious 
Insiders, Abuse of 
Cloud Services, 
Insufficient Due 
Diligence and Shared 
Technology Issues 
Eavesdropping, Data 
Modification, 
Identity Spoofing (IP 
Address Spoofing), 
Password-Based 
Attacks, Denial-of-
Service Attack, Man-
in-the-Middle Attack, 
Compromised-Key 
Attack and Sniffer 
Attack 
DDoS due to 
jamming, Physical 
devices destruction, 
obstruction, 
manipulation, or 
malfunction of 
physical assets 

Security 
requirements 

Authentication 
and key 
agreement, 
privacy 
protection, 
security 
education and 
management 

Security 
management 
mechanisms 

Access control 
management, 
security 
management, 
privacy 
protection 
management 

Secure 
Multiparty 
computation, 
secure cloud 
computing, 
Anti-Virus 

Behavior entities 
certification, Data 
metric, Key 
generation and 
distribution, 
security & 
computation 

Identity 
Authentication, 
Anti DDOS, 
Encryption 
mechanism, 
Communication 
security 

User privacy, 
Data encryption, 
Data integrity, 
Multicast 
Security, Entity 
Authentication, 
Access security 

Light weight 
encryption 
technology, 
protecting 
sensor data, key 
agreement 

Intrusion 
detection, 
wireless 
encryption, key 
management, 
reputation 
evaluation, secure 
routing, 
Distributed 
authentication 

7 

 
 
 
 
International Journal of Distributed and Parallel Systems (IJDPS) Vol.6, No.1, January 2015 

Figure 3. Proposed Horizontal security model for CPCCS 

  Secure  data  aggregation  and  dissemination  from  multiple  WSN’s,  through  secure 

communication channel (internet) 

  Ensuring an overall security at cloud as storage security, computational security, virtual 

machines security and application management security. 

4.1.2. Vertical Security Model 

The  vertical  security  model  consists  of  vertical  decomposition  of  layers  in  CPCCS.  It  includes 
Application Layer, XaaS (SaaS/PaaS/IaaS), Communication links and Wireless Sensor Networks 
in a top-down hierarchy as explained in Figure 4. The vertical decomposition ensures that the data 
is collected in a vertical pattern as follows: 

  Secure in-network data aggregation at WSN 
  Secure  data  aggregation  and  dissemination  from  multiple  WSN’s,  through  secure 

communication channel to the cloud. 

Figure 4. Proposed Vertical security model for CPCCS 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Distributed and Parallel Systems (IJDPS) Vol.6, No.1, January 2015 

  Through  a  secure  service  provisioning  system 

in  cloud  a  service  model 

(SaaS/PaaS/IaaS) been to be selected according to the application/client requirement. 
  Using  the  best  web  security  mechanisms  and  following  the  application  security 

protocols, the data is send to the Client as requested.  

5. CONCLUSION 

includes 

In  this  paper  we  have  proposed  a  novel  security  architectural  framework  for  CPCCS  with 
different  service  provisioning  sub-systems,  which 
three  cases,  namely  1) 
Publish/Subscribe  systems  as  Software  as  service  (SaaS),  2) Sensing  and  Actuation  Systems  as 
Platform as service (PaaS) and 3) Virtual Sensor networks as Infrastructure as service (IaaS). We 
have  also  surveyed  various  components,  threats  and  attacks,  security  requirements  and  security 
mechanisms  applicable  at  different  layers  of  CPCCS.  We  also  proposed  two  security  models 
namely Horizontal security model and Vertical security model, based on the integration criteria of 
CPCCS.  As for the  future  work we focus on studying various cryptographic techniques  that can 
be applied to secure real time CPCCS. We intend to secure CPCCS using a bottom up approach, 
by developing algorithms that can be implemented to perform secure data aggregation in physical 
sensing networks in CPCCS.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This project was supported by NSTIP strategic technologies program number 13-INF2080-02 in 
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Cardenas,  A.,  Amin,  S.,  Sinopoli,  B.,  Giani,  A.,  Perrig,  A.,  &  Sastry,  S.  "Challenges  for  securing 

[2] 

[3] 

cyber physical systems”, In Workshop on future directions in cyber-physical systems security. 2009. 
 Shi,  J.,  Wan,  J.,  Yan,  H.,  &  Suo,  H.  "A  survey  of  Cyber-Physical  Systems". Wireless 
Communications and Signal Processing (WCSP), 2011 International Conference on , vol., no., pp.1,6, 
9-11 Nov. 2011 doi: 10.1109/WCSP.2011.6096958  
 Barbareschi, M., Battista, E., & Casola, V. "On the Adoption of FPGA for Protecting Cyber Physical 
Infrastructures".  In P2P,  Parallel,  Grid,  Cloud  and  Internet  Computing  (3PGCIC),  2013  Eighth 
International Conference on, pp. 430-435. IEEE, 2013.  

[4]  Chen, C. M., Hsiao, H. W., Yang, P. Y., & Ou, Y. H. "Defending malicious attacks in Cyber Physical 
Systems".  In Cyber-Physical  Systems,  Networks,  and  Applications  (CPSNA),  2013  IEEE  1st 
International Conference on, pp. 13-18. IEEE, 2013. 

[5]  Hiray, S.,  &  Ingle, R. "Context-Aware Middleware in Cyber Physical Cloud (CAMCPC)". In Cloud 
& Ubiquitous Computing & Emerging Technologies (CUBE), 2013 International Conference on, pp. 
42-47. IEEE, 2013. 

[6]  Simmon, E,.et al. "A vision of cyber-physical cloud computing for smart networked  systems". NIST 
Interagency/Internal  Report  (NISTIR)  7951  http://www2.  nict.  go.  jp/univ-com/isp/doc/NIST.  IR. 
7951. pdf, 2013.  

[7]  La, H. J., & Kim, S. D. "A service-based approach to designing cyber physical systems". In Computer 
and  Information  Science  (ICIS),  2010  IEEE/ACIS  9th  International  Conference  on,  pp.  895-900. 
IEEE, 2010.  

[8]  Karnouskos,  S.,  et  al.  "A  SOA-based  architecture  for  empowering  future  collaborative  cloud-based 
industrial  automation".  In IECON  2012-38th  Annual  Conference  on  IEEE  Industrial  Electronics 
Society, pp. 5766-5772. IEEE, 2012.  

[9]  Distefano,  S.,  Merlino,  G.,  &  Puliafito,  A.  "Sensing  and  actuation  as  a  service:  A  new  development 
for  clouds".  In Network  Computing  and  Applications  (NCA),  2012  11th  IEEE  International 
Symposium on, pp. 272-275. IEEE, 2012. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Distributed and Parallel Systems (IJDPS) Vol.6, No.1, January 2015 

[10]  You, P., Peng, Y., & Gao, H. "Providing Information Services for Wireless Sensor Networks through 
Cloud Computing".  In Services  Computing Conference (APSCC), 2012 IEEE Asia-Pacific, pp. 362-
364. IEEE, 2012.  

[11]  Wu,  F.  J.,  Kao,  Y.  F.,  &  Tseng,  Y.  C.  "From  wireless  sensor  networks  towards  cyber  physical 

systems". Pervasive and Mobile Computing 7, no. 4 (2011): 397-413.  

[12]  Wan,  J.,  Zhang,  D.,  Sun,  Y.,  Lin,  K.,  Zou,  C.,  &  Cai,  H.  "VCMIA:  A  Novel  Architecture  for 
Integrating Vehicular Cyber-Physical Systems and Mobile Cloud Computing". Mobile Networks and 
Applications 19, no. 2 (2014): 153-160.  

[13]  Gelenbe,  E.,  &  Wu,  F.  J.  "Future  research  on  cyber-physical  emergency  management 

systems". Future Internet 5, no. 3 (2013): 336-354.  

[14]  Misra, P. K., Mottola, L., Raza, S., Duquennoy, S., Tsiftes, N., Hoglund, J., & Voigt, T. "Supporting 
Cyber-Physical  Systems  with  Wireless  Sensor  Networks:  An  Outlook  of  Software  and 
Services". Journal of the Indian Institute of Science 93, no. 3 (2013): 463-486 

[15]  Gupta,  A.,  Kumar,  M.,  Hansel,  S.,  &  Saini,  A.  K.  "Future  of  all technologies-The  Cloud  and  Cyber 

Physical Systems". Future 2, no. 2 (2013).  

[16]  Fazio,  M.,  Villari,  M.,  &  Puliafito,  A.  "Sensing  technologies  for  homeland  security  in  cloud 
environments". In Sensing Technology (ICST), 2011 Fifth International Conference on, pp. 165-170. 
IEEE, 2011.  

[17]  Chen, Y. J., Shih, J. S., &  Cheng,  S. T. "A cyber-physical integrated security framework  with fuzzy 
logic  assessment  for  cultural  heritages".  In Systems,  Man,  and  Cybernetics  (SMC),  2011  IEEE 
International Conference on, pp. 1843-1847. IEEE, 2011.  

[18]  Corredor, I., Martínez, J. F., & Familiar, M. S. "Bringing pervasive embedded networks to the service 
cloud: A lightweight middleware approach". Journal of Systems Architecture 57, no. 10 (2011): 916-
933.  

[19]  Lounis,  A.,  Hadjidj,  A.,  Bouabdallah,  A.,  &  Challal,  Y.  "Secure  and  Scalable  Cloud-based 
Architecture  for  e-Health  Wireless  sensor  networks".  In Computer  Communications  and  Networks 
(ICCCN), 2012 21st International Conference on, pp. 1-7. IEEE, 2012. 

[20]  Chonka,  A.,  &  Abawajy,  J.  "Detecting  and  mitigating  HX-DoS  attacks  against  cloud  web  services". 
In Network-Based Information Systems (NBiS), 2012 15th International Conference on, pp. 429-434. 
IEEE, 2012.  

[21]  Ma, C. Y., Rao, N. S., & Yau, D. K. "A game theoretic study of attack and defense in cyber-physical 
systems". In Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2011 IEEE Conference 
on, pp. 708-713. IEEE, 2011.  

[22]  Mell,  P.,  &  Grance,  T.  "The  NIST  definition  of  cloud  computing  (draft)". NIST  special 

publication 800, no. 145 (2011): 7.  

[23]  Suo,  H.,  Wan,  J.,  Zou,  C.,  &  Liu,  J.  "Security  in  the  internet  of  things:  a  review".  In Computer 
Science  and  Electronics  Engineering  (ICCSEE),  2012  International  Conference  on,  vol.  3,  pp.  648-
651. IEEE, 2012.  

[24]  Chen, D., Chang, G., Jin, L., Ren, X., Li, J., & Li, F. "A Novel Secure Architecture for the Internet of 
Things".  In Genetic  and  Evolutionary  Computing  (ICGEC),  2011  Fifth  International  Conference  on, 
pp. 311-314. IEEE, 2011. 

[25]  Zhu,  Q.  "Game-theoretic  methods  for  security  and  resilience  in  cyber-physical  systems".  PhD  diss., 

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2013. 

[26]  Karim,  M.  E.,  &  Phoha,  V.  V.  "Cyber-physical  Systems  Security".  In Applied  Cyber-Physical 

Systems, pp. 75-83. Springer New York, 2014. 

[27]  X. Chu, and R. Buyya. "Service oriented sensor web." In Sensor Networks and Configuration, pp. 51-

74. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007. 

[28]  E.  J.  Kim,  and  S.  Youm.  "Machine-to-machine  platform  architecture  for  horizontal  service 
integration." EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking 2013, no. 1 (2013): 1-
9. 

[29]  Tinghuai  Ma,  Jinjuan  Zhou,  Meili  Tang,  Yuan  Tian,  Abdullah  Al-dhelaan,  Mznah  al-rodhaan,  and 
Sungyoung  Lee,  “Social  network  and  tag  sources  based  augmenting  collaborative  recommender 
system”, IEICE transaction on Information and Systems, Vol.E98-D,No.4,pp.-, Apr. 2015. 

[30]  Tinghuai  Ma,   Huan  Rong,  Changhong  Ying,  Yuan  Tian,   Abdullah  Al-Dhelaan,and  Mznah  Al-
Rodhaan.  “Detect  structural-connected  communities  based  on  BSCHEF  in  C-DBLP”,  Concurrency 
Computat.: Pract. Exper. (2014). DOI: 10.1002/cpe.3437.  

10 

 
 
 
 
International Journal of Distributed and Parallel Systems (IJDPS) Vol.6, No.1, January 2015 

Authors Biography 

Anees  Ara  received her BSc in  Computer Science and MSc in Mathematics with Computer Science from 
Osmania University, Hyderabad, India in 2005 and 2007 respectively. Currently, she is a Ph.D. candidate in 
the  Department  of  Computer  Science  at  College  of  Computers  and  Information  Science,  King  Saud 
University,  Riyadh.  Her  research  interest  include  IoT,  sensor  networks,  cloud  computing  and  security  in 
pervasive and ubiquitous computing. 

Mznah  Al-Rodhaan has  received  her  BS in  Computer  Applications  (Hon)  and  MS  in  Computer  Science 
both  from  King  Saud  University  on  1999  and  2003  respectively.  In  2009,  she  received  her  Ph.D.  in 
Computer Science from University of Glasgow in Scotland, UK. She is currently working as the Vice Chair 
of  the  Computer  Science  Department  in  College  of  Computer  &  Information  Sciences,  King  Saud 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Moreover, she has served in the editorial boards for some journals such 
as  the  Ad  Hoc  journal  (Elsevier)  and  has  participated  in  several  international  conferences.  Her  current 
research  interest  includes:  Mobile  Ad  Hoc  Networks,  Wireless  Sensor  Networks,  Multimedia  Sensor 
networks, Cognitive Networks, and Network Security. 

Yuan  Tian has  received  her  master  and  PhD  degree  from  Kyung  Hee  University  and  she  is  currently 
working  as  Assistant  Professor  at  College  of  Computer  and  Information  Sciences,  King  Saud  University, 
Kingdom  of Saudi Arabia. She is member of technical committees of several international conferences. In 
addition, she is an active reviewer of many international journals. Her research interests are broadly divided 
into privacy  and security, which are related  to cloud computing, bioinformatics, multimedia, cryptograph, 
smart environment, and big data. 

Abdullah Al-Dhelaan, has received BS in Statistics (Hon) from King Saud University, 
on 1982, and the MS and Ph.D. in Computer Science from Oregon State University on 
1986  and  1989  respectively.  He  is  currently  the  Vice  Dean  for  Academic  Affairs, 
Deanship  of  Graduate  Studies  and  a  Professor  of  Computer  Science,  King  Saud 
University,  Riyadh,  Saudi  Arabia.  He  has  guest  edited  several  special  issues  for  the 
Telecommunication Journal (Springer), and the International Journal for Computers and 
their  applications  (ISCA).  Moreover,  he  is  currently  on  the  editorial  boards  of  several 
journals  and  the  organizing  committees  for  several  reputable  international  conferences.    His  current 
research  interest  includes:  Mobile  Ad  Hoc  Networks,  Sensor  Networks,  Cognitive  Networks,  Network 
Security, Image Processing, and High Performance Computing. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
