Cyber-Physical Systems Security – A Survey

Abdulmalik Humayed, Jingqiang Lin, Fengjun Li, and Bo Luo

1

7
1
0
2

n
a
J

7
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
2
5
4
0
.
1
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—With the exponential growth of cyber-physical sys-
tems (CPS), new security challenges have emerged. Various vul-
nerabilities, threats, attacks, and controls have been introduced
for the new generation of CPS. However, there lack a systematic
study of CPS security issues. In particular, the heterogeneity of
CPS components and the diversity of CPS systems have made it
very difﬁcult to study the problem with one generalized model.
In this paper, we capture and systematize existing research on
CPS security under a uniﬁed framework. The framework consists
of three orthogonal coordinates: (1) from the security perspective,
we follow the well-known taxonomy of threats, vulnerabilities,
attacks and controls; (2)from the CPS components perspective,
we focus on cyber, physical, and cyber-physical components;
and (3) from the CPS systems perspective, we explore general
CPS features as well as representative systems (e.g., smart grids,
medical CPS and smart cars). The model can be both abstract
to show general interactions of a CPS application and speciﬁc
to capture any details when needed. By doing so, we aim to
build a model that is abstract enough to be applicable to various
heterogeneous CPS applications; and to gain a modular view of
the tightly coupled CPS components. Such abstract decoupling
makes it possible to gain a systematic understanding of CPS
security, and to highlight the potential sources of attacks and
ways of protection.

Index Terms—CPS, ICS, Smart Grids, Smart Cars, Medical

Devices, Security, Attacks, Vulnerabilities, Threats, Controls

I. INTRODUCTION

I N recent years, we have witnessed an exponential growth

in the development and deployment of various types of
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS). They have brought impacts to
almost all aspects of our daily life, for instance, in electrical
power grids, oil and natural gas distribution, transportation
systems, health-care devices, household appliances, and many
more. Many of such systems are deployed in the critical
infrastructure, life support devices, or are essential to our daily
lives. Therefore, they are expected to be free of vulnerabilities
and immune to all types of attacks, which, unfortunately, is
practically impossible for all real-world systems.

One fundamental issue in CPS security is the heterogeneity
of the building blocks. CPS are composed of various compo-
nents in many ways. There are different hardware components
such as sensors, actuators, and embedded systems. There are
also different collections of software products, proprietary and
commercial, for control and monitoring. As a result, every
component, as well as their integration, can be a contributing
factor to a CPS attack. Understanding the current CPS security
vulnerabilities, attacks and protection mechanisms will provide
us with a better understanding of the security posture of CPS.

A. Humayed, F. Li and B. Luo were with the Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, The University of Kansas, Lawrence,
KS, 66045 USA. e-mail: bluo@ku.edu.

Jingqiang Lin was with The State Key Laboratory of Information Security,

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

This manuscript is under submission for journal publication.

Consequently, we should be able point out the limitations of
CPS that make them subject to different attacks and devise
approaches to defend against them.

The complexity of cyber physical systems and the het-
erogeneity of CPS components have introduced signiﬁcant
difﬁculties to security and privacy protection of CPS. In par-
ticular, with the complex cyber-physical interactions, threats
and vulnerabilities becomes difﬁcult to asses, and new security
issues arise. It is also difﬁcult to identify, trace and examine
the attacks, which may originate from, move between, and
target at multiple CPS components. An in-depth understanding
of the vulnerabilities, threats and attacks is essential to the
development of defense mechanisms. A survey of existing CPS
security and privacy controls will also enable us to identify
missing pieces, weak links and new explorations.

In this survey, we ﬁrst brieﬂy introduce CPS, with a special
focus on how they are different from either legacy control
systems or traditional IT systems. Recognizing the difference
is key in understanding CPS security problems. We then survey
the literature on CPS privacy and security under a uniﬁed
framework, which consists of three orthogonal coordinates,
as shown in Figure 1. First, from security perspective, we
follow the well-known taxonomy of threats (Section III),
vulnerabilities (Section IV), attacks (Section V) and controls
(Section VI). Next, we discuss each main aspect following
the CPS components perspective: cyber, physical, and cyber-
physical. For instance, when we survey the attacks, we cat-
egorize them into cyber-attacks, physical-attacks, and cyber-
physical-attacks. Last, from the CPS systems perspective, we
explore general CPS features as well as representative systems,
in particular, industrial control systems, smart grids, medical
CPS, and smart cars. At the end of Section VI, we summarize
the key threats, vulnerabilities, attacks and controls in each
CPS aspect for each representative CPS system. In this survey,
we not only systematizes existing knowledge and provide
insightful perspectives on CPS security, but also identify open
areas that need more attention, and highlight the unanswered
challenges (Section VII).

In this work, our contributions are as follows: (1) We
propose a CPS security framework that aims to distinguish
between cyber, cyber-physical, and physical components in
a given system. (2) We survey potential threat sources and
their motivations. (3) We present the existing vulnerabilities
and highlight the root reasons with actual examples. (4) We
survey reported attacks on CPS and pinpoint the underlying
vulnerabilities and subtly inﬂuenced CPS components. (5)
We also summarize existing control mechanisms, and further
identify the unsolved issues and challenges in different CPS
applications.

 
 
 
 
 
 
device is connected to the physical world through sensors
and actuators. Usually, it is equipped with wireless and wired
communication capacity that is conﬁgured depending on the
surrounding environments. It can also be connected to PC
systems in a control center that monitors and controls the
operations.

Smart Grid Systems. The smart grid is envisioned as the
next generation of the power grid that has been used for
decades for electricity generation, transmission, and distribu-
tion. The smart grid provides several beneﬁts and advanced
functionalities. At the national level, it provides enhanced
emission control, global load balancing, smart generation, and
energy savings. Whereas at the local level, it allows home
consumers better control over their energy use that would be
beneﬁcial economically and environmentally [102]. The smart
grid is comprised of two major components: power application
and supporting infrastructure [145]. The power application is
where the core functions of the smart grid are provided, i.e.,
electricity generation, transmission, and distribution. Whereas
the supporting infrastructure is the intelligent component that
is mainly concerned with controlling and monitoring the core
operations of the smart grid using a set of software, hardware,
and communication networks.

Medical Devices. Medical devices have been improved by
integrating cyber and physical capabilities to deliver better
health care services. We are more interested in medical devices
with cyber capabilities that have physical impact on patients.
Such devices are either implanted inside the patient’s body,
called Implantable Medical Devices (IMDs), or worn by
patients, called wearable devices. They are usually equipped
with wireless capabilities to allow communication with other
devices such as the programmer, which is needed for updating
and reconﬁguring the devices. Wearable devices communicate
with each other or with other devices, such as a remote
physician or smartphone [134].

Smart Cars. Smart cars (intelligent cars) are cars that are
more environment-friendly, fuel-efﬁcient, safe, and have en-
hanced entertainment and convenience features. These ad-
vancements are made possible by the reliance on a range
of 50 to 70 computers networked together, called Electronic
Control Units (ECUs). ECUs are responsible for monitoring
and controlling various functions such as engine emission con-
trol, brake control, entertainment (radio, multimedia players)
and comfort features (cruise control and windows opening and
closing).

B. CPS Communications

Communication technologies vary in CPS applications. Dif-
ferent application use different protocols, open and proprietary,
and technologies, wired and wireless. Here we give a brief
overview of the most common communication technologies
and protocols in each of the four applications.

ICS. Two categories of communication protocols are deployed
in ICS, one is used for the automation and control such
as Modbus, Distributed Network Protocol (DNP3), and the
other is for interconnecting ICS control centers, such as Inter-

Fig. 1. CPS security framework with three orthogonal coordinates: security,
CPS components, and representative CPS systems.

II. BACKGROUND

A. Cyber-Physical Systems

While there doesn’t exist a unanimously accepted, author-
itative deﬁnition of Cyber Physical Systems (CPS), we can
simply say that CPS are systems used to monitor and control
the physical world. They are perceived as the new generation
of embedded control systems such that CPS are networked
embedded systems. In addition, systems, where sensor and
actuator networks are embedded, are also considered CPS [13].
Because of the reliance on IT systems, CPS could be deﬁned
as IT systems that are integrated into physical world applica-
tion [52]. This integration is a result of the advancements in the
information and communication technologies (ICT) to enhance
interactions with physical processes. All of these deﬁnitions
highlight the heavy presence of the interactions between the
cyber and the physical worlds.

An increasing dependence on CPS is growing in various
applications such as energy, transportation, military, health-
care, and manufacturing. CPS can be called different names,
depending on the application using them. For example, a very
important and representative CPS is the Supervisory Control
and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system, which is used in
Critical Infrastructure (CI) such as the Smart Grid and In-
dustrial Control Systems (ICS). Other examples have emerged
in medical devices such as wearable and implantable medical
devices. In addition, a network of small control systems are
embedded in modern cars to improve fuel efﬁciency, safety,
and convenience. Here we introduce brieﬂy four representative
applications of CPS that we will cover throughout the paper.

Industrial Control Systems (ICS). ICS refers to control sys-
tems used to enhance the control, monitoring, and production
in different industries such as the nuclear plants, water and
sewage systems, and irrigation systems. Sometimes ICS is
called Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)
or Distributed Control Systems (DCS). For consistency, we
will use the term ICS hereafter. In ICS, different controllers
with different capabilities collaborate to achieve numerous
expected goals. A popular controller is the Programmable
Logic Controller (PLC), which is a microprocessor designed
to operate continuously in hostile environments [86]. This ﬁeld

2

Control Center Protocol (ICCP) [1]. Those protocols are used
in addition to general-purpose protocols such as TCP/IP.
Smart Grid. The networks are of two types: ﬁeld device
communications within substations using Modbus and DNP3,
and recently the more advanced protocol, developed by the
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), IEC 61850.
The other type is control center communications, which also
rely on ICCP, similar to ICS. In addition, smart meters and
ﬁeld devices use wireless communications to send measure-
ments and receive commands from control centers. Smart
meters, for example, use short-range frequency signals, e.g.,
Zigbee, for diagnostics operations by technicians or readings
by digital smart readers.
Medical Devices. It is a necessary requirement that IMDs
be conﬁgured and updated wirelessly, so that no surgical
extraction for the device is needed. Therefore, wireless com-
munication is the most common method of communication in
medical devices. IMDs and wearable devices rely on differ-
ent communication protocols and technologies. For example,
IMDs use low frequency (LF) signals speciﬁed by The Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), called Medical Implant
Communication Service (MICS), that make it possible for
IMDs and their programmers to communicate. On the other
hand, wearable devices rely on another type of wireless com-
munications, i.e., Body Area Network (BAN). BAN utilizes
a number of wireless communication technologies such as
Bluetooth and ZigBee [21].
Smart Cars. Smart cars can have different types of communi-
cation capacities, including Vehicle to Vehicle (V2V), Vehicle
to Infrastructure (V2I), and in-vehicle communications. In
this paper we focus on the latter. As we mentioned, cars
have around 70 connected ECUs, all of which communicate
through a bus network. The network is usually divided into
multiple subnetworks, each of which also has a bus topology.
Subnetworks can exchange messages through a gateway that
separates their trafﬁcs. A common conception is that
this
separation is due to security concerns. However, [18] suggest
that this is also for bandwidth concerns. The most common
protocols are (1) the Local Interconnect Network (LIN), used
for relatively low speed applications such as opening/closing
windows; (2) Controller Area Network (CAN), used for soft
real-time applications such as the anti-lock braking system;
(3) Flexray, needed for hard real-time applications where the
speed of transmission is critical such as braking or responding
to an obstacle in front of the car; and (4) Media Oriented
Systems Transport (MOST), used for in-car entertainment
applications [162]. In addition, some cars are equipped with
wireless connections such as Bluetooth and cellular interfaces.

C. CPS Models and Aspects

Fig. 2 shows a high-level abstraction of any Cyber Physical
System, which mainly consists of three categories of com-
ponents: (1) communication, (2) computation and control, and
(3) monitoring and manipulation. The communication could be
wireless or wired, and it could connect CPS with higher-level
systems, such as control centers, or with lower-level compo-
nents in the physical world. The computation and control part

is where the intelligence is embedded, control commands are
sent, and sensed measures are received. The monitoring and
manipulation components connect CPS to the physical world
through sensors to monitor physical components, and actuators
to manipulate them.

Fig. 2. CPS abstract model

A CPS component might have the ability to communicate
with control centers or other CPS components. This same
component could also contain a sensor, an actuator, or both to
connect to the physical world. Each one of these capabilities
has different security implications that may result from the
interactions of the component’s parts and their capabilities.
For example, a CPS component’s communication and compu-
tational functions are not expected to affect the physical world,
and yet might be exploited to cause unexpected attacks with
physical consequences. Similarly, the physical properties of
this component, in addition to the physical properties of the
object of interest in the physical world that the CPS controls
and monitors, can also cause unexpected attacks that might
result in non-physical attacks, such as misleading information
sent to a CPS.

This heterogeneity of CPS, among components, or within
a component itself, results in a lack of understanding of new
types of security threats that would exploit such heterogeneity.
The need to clearly distinguish between such aspects for
security analysis and engineering arises. Thus, we propose
to view any CPS from three aspects: cyber, cyber-physical,
and physical. The cyber aspect considers data computations,
communications, and interactions that do not affect the phys-
ical world, whereas the cyber-physical aspect considers all
interactions with the physical world. The cyber-physical aspect
is where the cyber and physical world can connect. Finally,
the physical aspect includes any physical components that their
properties might have security-related exploitations.

In Figure 3, we incorporated the aforementioned CPS view
in the annotated ﬁgure shown in Fig 2. In Figure 3, (1)
indicates aspects that we consider cyber, whereas (2) denotes
cyber-physical aspects. Note the dashed line separating (1)
and (2) shows how the same component can be considered
cyber and cyber-physical at the same time depending on the
presence or absence of the interaction with the physical world.
(4) shows that the physical properties of any part of a CPS
system could play a role in security issues. Therefore, we need
to include them in the physical aspect.

In the following paragraphs, we present how our abstract
model can capture the CPS aspects in the representative
applications. For each application, we show a ﬁgure annotated
it with the CPS aspects: (1) cyber, (2) cyber-physical, and (3)
physical.

3

A meter is equipped with a diagnostics port that relies on short-
range wireless interface for convenient access by digital meter
readers and diagnostics tools [78]. The smart meter sends the
measurements to a collector that aggregates all meters’ data in
a designated neighborhood. The collector sends the aggregated
data to a distribution control center managed by the utility
company. In particular, to the AMI headend server that stores
the meters’ data and shares the stored data with the Meter Data
Management System (MDMS) that manages the data with
other systems such as demand response systems, historians,
and billing systems. The headend can connect/disconnect
services by remotely sending commands to the meters. This
feature is a double-edged sword such that it is very efﬁcient
way to control services, yet it could be exploited to launch
large-scale blackouts by remotely controlling a large number
of smart meters.

In Fig. 5, we highlight the CPS aspects in the involved
components that have some interactions with the smart meters.
Cyber aspects (1) appear in the control center where smart
meters’ data is stored, shared, and analyzed and based on
that some decisions can be made based on the analysis. The
control center can also have a cyber-physical aspect (2) when
connect/disconnect commands are sent by the AMI headend to
smart meters. In addition, the cyber-physical aspect (2) is also
apparent in the smart meter itself due to its ability to perform
cyber operations, such as sending measurements to utility, and
physical operations, such as connecting/disconnecting electric-
ity services. Other ﬁeld devices in the generation, transmission
automation, and distribution plants have a high presence of
the cyber-physical aspect due to their close interactions with
physical aspects of smart grids. Home appliances that are
connected with smart meters are considered cyber-physical
because of the their direct interaction with smart meters. A
utility company can use smart meters to control the amount
of energy consumed by particular home appliances when
needed [118], which is a cyber-physical (2) action.

Fig. 3. CPS Aspects

ICS. Figure 4 depicts the CPS aspects in a PLC scenario,
where it is used for controlling the temperature in a chemical
plant. The goal is to maintain the temperature within a certain
range. If the temperature exceeds a speciﬁed threshold, the
PLC is notiﬁed via a wireless sensor attached to the tank,
which in turn, notiﬁes the control center of the undesired
temperature change. Alternatively, in closed-loop settings, the
PLC could turn the cooling system on to reduce that tank’s
temperature within the desired range.

In this ﬁgure, the cyber aspects (1) are the cyber interactions
with the PLC such that there is no direct interaction with physi-
cal components, such as cooling fans or the tank. This involves
laptops that can directly connect PLCs, communications with
higher-level environments such as the control center and other
remote entities, and the PLC’s wireless interface that could
be based on long- or short-range frequencies. In addition,
cyber-physical aspects (2) are those that connect cyber and
physical aspects. The PLC, the actuator, and the sensor, are
all cyber-physical aspects due to their direct interactions with
the physical world. The wireless capabilities of the actuator
and the sensor are also considered cyber-physical. Finally, the
physical aspects are the physical objects that need monitoring
and control, i.e. the cooling fans and the tank’s temperature.

Fig. 4. CPS aspects in ICS

Smart Grid. Figure 5 shows a typical scenario in smart
grids. A smart meter is attached to every house to provide
utility companies with more accurate electricity consumption
data and customers with convenient way to track their usage
information. A smart meter interfaces a house’s appliances
and Home Energy Management Systems (HEMS) on the
one hand, and interfaces with data collectors on the other.
Wireless communications are the most common means to
communicate with collectors, although wired communications,
such as Power Line Communications (PLC), are also available.

Fig. 5. CPS aspects in the Smart Grid

Medical Devices. Fig. 6 is an overview of two of the most pop-
ular IMDs, the insulin pump and the implantable cardioverter
deﬁbrillator (ICD). The insulin pump is used to automatically
or manually inject insulin injections for diabetics when needed,
whereas the ICS is used to detect rapid heartbeat and response
by delivering an electric shock to maintain a normal heartbeat
rate [56]. The insulin pump usually needs another device,

4

called the continuous glucose monitor (CGM), to receive blood
sugar measurements. Both devices, the insulin pump and the
CGM, require small syringes to be injected into a patient’s
body. The insulin pump receives measurements of glucose
levels from the CGM. Based on the measurements, the pump
decides whether the patient needs an insulin dose or not. The
CGM sends the measurements through wireless signals to the
insulin pump or other devices, such as a remote control or
computer. In addition, some insulin pumps can be commanded
by a remote control held by a patient or physician.

Fig. 6. CPS aspects in medical devices

In this ﬁgure, the cyber aspects (1) are embodied in the
monitoring computers in the hospital and the communications
to the Internet. The cyber-physical aspects (2), on the other
hand, are present in those devices that directly interact with
patients’ implanted devices. A patient represents the physical
aspect (3) in the context of medical devices. An IMD connects
to the hospital by sending measurements through an in-home
router. In order to reconﬁgure an ICD, a physical proximity
is required to be able to do so using a device called the
programmer.

Smart Cars. Figure 7 shows the typical architecture of an
in-car network. Depending on the nature of the tasks expected
from each ECU, an ECU is attached to the appropriate subnet-
work. ECUs from different subnetworks can intercommunicate
through gateways. In this paper we mainly focus on CAN bus
for two reasons: 1) most security issues result from CAN-
based networks and 2) it has been required to be deployed in
all cars in the U.S. since 2008 [80], thus it is in almost every
car around us.

In Fig. 7, we annotated ECUs that do not have any in-
teractions with physical components of the cars as cyber (1).
Examples of which include the Telematics Control Unit (TCU)
and the media player. The TCU has more than a wireless
interface that allows advanced capabilities such as remote
software updates by car manufacturers, phone pairing, hands-
free usage of phones. The cyber-physical (2) annotations
are for ECUs that can legitimately interact with physical
components and manipulate them, such as the parking assist
and the Remote Keyless Entry (RKE) systems. The RKE, for
example, receives signals to make a physical impact on the
car by locking/unlocking doors. Finally, physical components
such as the engine or tires are physical (3).

5

Fig. 7. CPS aspects in smart cars

D. Security in CPS

In this section, we motivate the importance of security in
CPS with four speciﬁc illustrative examples. Security control
is usually associated with mechanisms such as cryptography,
access control, intrusion detection, and many other solutions
commonly used in IT systems. Those mechanisms are very
important in securing information and communication tech-
nology’s infrastructure. However, many reported attacks on
CPS applications show the inadequacy of the sole dependence
on these mechanisms as presented in Section V. Therefore,
solutions that take cyber-physical aspects into account are
needed and could be complemented with IT security solutions.

Security in ICS. Lack or weakness of security in CPS could
be catastrophic depending on the application. For example,
if the security of CPS used in a nuclear plant has been
compromised, a world-wide threat is the possible consequence.
Furthermore, security violations in smart grids could lead to
the loss of services to the consumer and ﬁnancial losses to
the utility company. Because of the CPS’s pervasiveness and
its wide use in the critical infrastructure in particular, CPS
security is of a critical importance. In fact, it is even suggested
that ICS is not yet ready to be connected to the Internet [47].
This is due to the inherent security vulnerabilities in the legacy
control systems and their communications.

Security in Smart Grids. Adequate security in smart grids
poses the threat of remote attacks that could result in large-
scale blackouts. Blackouts could result in safety implications
such as medical equipments malfunctions, loss of data in data
centers, and even an increase in crime rate [37]. Another
security inadequacy could result in compromised privacy such
as attackers’ ability to reveal customers’ personal information.

Security in Medical Devices. Security in wearable and IMDs
makes them immune to attacks that might compromise pa-
tients’ safety and privacy.Because of the different circum-
stances surrounding medical devices, the need for deﬁning
appropriate security goals arises. Halperin et al. [57] initiated

the discussion of the security goals in medical devices by
extending the standard security goals, conﬁdentiality, integrity,
and availability. Security goals include the authorized entities
should be able to access accurate data, identify and conﬁgure
devices, update software, and maintain the device’s availabil-
ity; whereas privacy goals include the protection of private
information about a device’s existence, type, unique ID, and
patient’s identiﬁcation.
Security in Cars. Car manufacturers strive to come up with
a variety of innovative technologies that would satisfy their
customers by providing more functionalities and comfort.
Typically cars are safe by design, but security, however, is
not usually of a great concern in the design phase. Safety
ensures the car’s ability to function during non-malicious
incidents. Security, on the other hand, has not been a design
issue, but rather an add-on feature. The new features in
cars require wireless communications and components with
physical impacts. These two features alone result in most
security vulnerabilities and attacks in smart cars.

III. CPS SECURITY THREATS

Securing CPS bears with it various challenges, one of
which is understanding the potential threats [12]. We aim to
tackle this challenge by identifying CPS potential threats and
shedding light on them from different angles. First we discuss
the general threats that almost any CPS application could be
vulnerable to. Then we dive into various threats that are more
speciﬁc to each CPS application. Traditionally, in order for a
system to be secure, it satisﬁes the three security requirements:
conﬁdentiality, integrity and availability. Due to the different
nature of CPS and their direct interaction with the physical
world, safety requirements are also crucial. Here we discuss
the threats to both security and safety of CPS.

A. General CPS Threat Model

The knowledge of who/what we protect a CPS from is
equally important to the knowledge of the existing vulnera-
bilities and attack mechanisms. We ﬁrst need to deﬁne what
we mean by a threat. A security threat
is deﬁned as “a
set of circumstances that has the potential to cause loss or
harm” [126]. The potentiality aspect is key in this context,
as we discuss potential threats that may not necessarily have
occurred, but might. The loss might be in safety measures,
conﬁdentiality, integrity, or availability of resources, whereas
the harm implies harming people, the environment, or systems.
Note that due to the pervasiveness of the CPS applications,
people are increasingly becoming a critical asset to protect,
in addition to the other informational and communicational
assets that are common in security literature.

We identify ﬁve factors about every threat: source, target,
motive, attack vector, and potential consequences. Then we
elaborate on each one by showing possible types applicable to
each factor.
(1) Source. The source of a threat
is the initiator of an
attack. Threat sources fall into three types: adversarial threats
which pose malicious intentions from individuals, groups
organizations or states/nations; accidental threats are threats

that have been caused accidentally or through legitimate
CPS components; environmental threats which include natural
disasters (ﬂoods, earthquakes), human-caused disasters (ﬁres,
explosions), and failures of supporting infrastructure (power
outage or telecommunications loss) [16], [74], [119], [132],
[146], [147], [155].
(2) Target. Targets are CPS applications and their components
or users. We will see speciﬁc examples for each application.
(3) Motive. CPS attackers usually have one or more reasons
to launch an attack: criminal, spying, terroristic, political, or
cyberwar [140], [155].
(4) Attack Vector. A threat might perform one type or
more of four mechanisms for a successful attack: interception,
interruption, modiﬁcation or fabrication [126]
(5) Consequence. Compromising the CPS’s conﬁdentiality,
integrity, availability, privacy, or safety.

B. CPS Security Threats

We explore the potential threats to the four CPS applications
using the proposed threat model. In particular, we highlight the
threats that are speciﬁc to each application with respect to the
ﬁve factors: source, target, motive, vector, and consequence.

Threats against ICS

• Criminal Attackers (motive). An attacker whose familiar
with the system (source) could exploit wireless capabili-
ties (vector) to remotely control an ICS application and
possibly disrupt its operations (consequence).

• Financially-motivated customers (motive). A capable cus-
tomer (source) aiming to reduce a utility bill might be
able to tamper with a physical equipment or inject false
data (vector) to misinform the utility (target) causing it
to lose ﬁnancially (consequence) [153].
• Politically-motivated espionage (motive).

Intelligence
agencies (source) might perform reconnaissance oper-
infrastructure (tar-
ations targeting a nation’s critical
get) possibly through spreading malware (vector) result-
ing in conﬁdentiality violations of critical data (conse-
quence) [106], [115].

• Politically-motivated cyberwar (motive). A hostile nation
(source) could initiate a cyberwar against another nation
(target) by remotely attacking its critical infrastructure,
e.g., nuclear plants and gas pipelines, by spreading mal-
ware or accessing ﬁeld devices (vector) resulting in a
plant’s shutdown, sabotaging components, or environ-
mental pollution (consequence)
[10], [74], [82], [135],
[152].
• Physical

threats. An attacker (source) could spoof a
sensor that measures the temperature of a particular en-
vironment (target) by applying heat or cold to it (vector)
resulting in sending misleading false measurements to the
control center (consequence).

Threats against Smart Grids

• Financially-motivated threats

(motive). A customer
(source) who wants to trick a utility company’s billing
system (target) might tamper with smart meters (vector)
to reduce the electricity bill (consequence) [4], [102],

6

[103], [113], [131]. Another example of this type of threat
is when utility companies (source) might be interested in
gathering customers’ private information (target) by ana-
lyzing their electricity usage to infer habits and types of
house appliances (vector) in order to sell such information
for advertisement purposes resulting in privacy violation
(consequence) [28], [102], [128], [145]. In addition, there
is a possible scenario where criminals (source) extort by
demanding a ransom (vector) in exchange for not taking
down a number of smart meters (target) that might cause
a blackout (consequence) [4].

• Criminally or ﬁnancially-motivated threat

(motive).
Thieves (source) who aim to rob a house (target) might
be able to infer private information, such as a house
inhabitant’s presence, from the communications between
the smart meter and the utility company (vector) in order
to perform a successful robbery (consequence) [145].
• Political threats (motive). A hostile nation (source) might
initiate a cyberwar against another country’s national
power system (target) by gaining remote access to the
smart grids’ infrastructure (vector) resulting in large
scale blackouts, disturbances, or ﬁnancial losses (conse-
quence) [102].

Threats against Medical Devices

• Criminal threats (motive). A criminal hacker (source)
might aim to harm a patient and affect his/her health
condition (target) by using wireless tools to inject or re-
transmit previously-captured legitimate commands (vec-
tor) in order to change the device’s state and expected
operations resulting in an undesired health condition
(consequence) [57]. In addition, an attacker (source)
might also be able to cause harm (target) by jamming
the wireless signals exchanged between medical devices
to maintain a stable health condition (vector) resulting in
the unavailability of the device and its failure to deliver
the expected therapies (consequence) [57], [58], [134].
• Spying threats (motive). A hacker (source) aiming to
reveal the existence of a disease, a medical device, or
any other information that a patient considers private
(target) by intercepting the communications of a pa-
tient’s medial device via wireless hacking tools (vector),
which results in a violation of privacy and conﬁdential-
ity(consequence) [57]. In addition, as the medical devices
communicate with other parties, such as hospitals, a large
amount of private data is stored in various locations. This
could tempt an attacker (source) with spying motivations
(motive) to gain an unauthorized access to such data
(target) through penetrating the networks that connect
among the involved legitimate parties (vector) resulting
in privacy invasion (consequence) [88].

• Politically-motivated threats (motive). Cyberwar has a
new attack surface by which a hostile nation (source)
could target political ﬁgures (target) by attacking their
medical devices exploiting the devices wireless commu-
nications (vector) resulting in a potential critical health
condition or eventual death (consequence) [156]. In fact,
former U.S. Vice President Dick Cheney had the wireless

capabilities disabled in his pacemaker because he was
aware of the possible realistic assassination threats [134].

Threats against Smart Cars

• Criminal threats (motive). A hacker (source) could attack
a car’s ECUs (target) by exploiting weakness in the
wireless interfaces (vector) to cause a collision or loss
of control (consequence) [18].

• Privacy threats (motive). A hacker (source) might be able
to intercept private conversations in a car (target) by
exploiting vulnerabilities in the TCU (vector) resulting
in privacy invasion (consequence) [18].

• Tracking threats (motive). A hacker, or a law enforcement
agent, (source) could track a car (target) by exploiting the
GPS navigation system (vector), which is mainly used
for guiding and directing drivers, resulting in privacy
violations [8], [18].

• Proﬁling threats (motive). Cars manufacturers (source)
can covertly gather cars’ logs stored in ECUs (vector)
to reveal some driving habits and trafﬁc violations (tar-
get) without drivers’ consent or knowledge which is a
violation of privacy (consequence) [8], [64]. Another
threat is that manufacturers (source) could gather driving
habits information (target) that could provide insurance
companies with a pool of personal information that might
be useful for insurance plans’ customization or accident
investigations [8].

• Politically-motivated threats (motive). A hostile nation
(source) might initiate a cyberwar against national trans-
portation roads and their commuters (target) by com-
promising smart cars that are vulnerable to full remote
control (vector) potentially causing large scale collisions
and critical injuries (consequence) [18].

IV. CPS SECURITY VULNERABILITIES

In this section, we ﬁrst highlight the causes of existing
vulnerabilities in general CPS. Then we identify application-
speciﬁc vulnerabilities. For example, not all vulnerabilities
found in smart grids are found in medical devices and vice
versa. Therefore, we need to distinguish between the generic
and application-speciﬁc vulnerabilities, so suitable solutions
can be designed accordingly.

In addition, using the abstract CPS model proposed in
Section II, we classify the vulnerabilities into three types,
according to the CPS aspect a vulnerability appears in: cyber,
cyber-physical, and physical vulnerabilities. One type of vul-
nerabilities may appear in different categories. For example,
the communication between CPS and the external world
(e.g., remote control centers) are considered cyber-, while the
communication among CPS components are considered cyber-
physical-. Cyber and cyber-physical-vulnerabilities in com-
munication systems usually demonstrate different appearances
and properties due to the differences in their origination.

A. Causes of Vulnerabilities

Isolation assumption. The trend of “security by obscurity”
has been dominant in most, if not all, CPS applications since

7

their initial design. The focus has been on designing reliable
and safe systems, whereas the security has not been of a great
importance. This is because the systems were supposed to
be isolated from the outside world, and therefore, considered
secure. For example, in ICS and power grids (before they
became “smart”), security relied on the assumption that sys-
tems are isolated from the outside world, and the monitoring
and control operations were performed locally [14], [38], [97].
Furthermore, medical devices, such as IMDs, were originally
designed to be isolated from networks and other external
interactions [57]. In addition, the same isolation assumption
is also present in smart cars where the security of the ECUs’
intercommunications relies on their isolation from adver-
saries [84]. Recent and ongoing advances in CPS applications
do not adhere to the isolation assumption, but rather more
connectivity has been introduced. More connectivity increases
the number of access points to cars, thus more attack surfaces
arise.

Increased connectivity. CPS are more connected than ever
before. Manufacturers have improved CPS by adding services
that rely on open networks and wireless technologies. For
example, ICS and smart grids are connected to control centers
which are connected to the Internet or some business-related
networks. In fact, most ICS attacks have been internal until
2001; after that most of the attacks originate from external
(Internet-based) sources [10]. This is clearly due to the in-
creased connectivity deployed in ICS. In addition, for fast
incident response and more convenience, some ﬁeld devices
are directly connected to the Internet [89], [143]. Medical
devices have wireless capabilities for easier reconﬁguration
and monitoring. Smart cars have more connectivity so they
are referred to as “connected cars”. This connectedness relies
on wireless communications such as Bluetooth, cellular, RFID,
and satellite radio communications.

Heterogeneity. CPS consist of components that are usually
heterogeneous such that COTS, third party, and proprietary
components are integrated to build a CPS application. CPS
are almost always multi-vendor systems, and each product
has its own security problems. For example, a component
might have been manufactured, speciﬁed, or implemented
by different entities, and eventually integrated by the system
deployers. Hence, the building components of CPS are more
integrated rather than designed [38]. This integration invites
the inherent vulnerabilities of each product [2]. For example,
one step of the Stuxnet attack was to exploit
the default
password in Siemens PLC to access a computer running a
Windows OS [106]. Last, the internal details of the integrated,
heterogenous components are unknown, and thus they may
produce unexpected behavior when they are deployed. In fact,
most of the bugs that led to successful attacks in smart cars,
for example, were found at the boundaries of interconnected
components manufactured by different vendors, where the
incorrect assumptions interact.

B. Cyber Vulnerabilities

ICS Vulnerabilities.

[ICS V1] Communication vulnerabilities
in cyber-
components. ICS’ reliance on open standards protocols, such
as TCP/IP and ICCP, is increasing. This makes ICS appli-
cations vulnerable as a result of using vulnerable protocols.
TCP/IP’s vulnerabilities have been studied and investigated
for many years, but the protocol still has security issues as
it was not intended to be secure by design [6], [59]. Another
protocol is Remote Procedure Call (RPC), which also has a
number of security vulnerabilities, one of which contributed to
the well-known Stuxnet attack [104]. In addition, ICCP, which
interconnects control centers, lacks basic security measures
such as encryption and authentication [119].

Wired communications in ICS includes ﬁber-optic and Eth-
ernet. Ethernet is usually used for local area networks in sub-
stations. Because the communication using Ethernet uses the
same medium, it is vulnerable to interception and man-in-the-
middle (MITM) attacks [67]. For example, an inside attacker
could exploit the privilege of accessing the local network and
impersonate legitimate components. It is also possible to inject
false data or disclose classiﬁed information [124], [158].

Short-range wireless communications are usually performed
within the ICS plant assuming an adversary is not able to get
close enough to capture wireless trafﬁc. However, the trafﬁc
is still vulnerable to be captured, analyzed or manipulated by
malicious insiders or even a capable-enough outsider [31].
In addition, when employees connect
their own, probably
unsafe, devices to the ICS wireless network, they expose the
network to potential threats, so that an attacker could use the
employees’ personal computers as an attack vector [68]. Long-
range wireless communications such as cellular, microwave,
and satellite are also used in ICS. In the literature, long-range
wireless communication vulnerabilities have not been studied
in the context of ICS. In conclusion, wireless networks are
more vulnerable to cyber attacks, including passive and active
eavesdropping, replay attack, unauthorized access and others
discussed thoroughly in the literature as in [75], [159].
[ICS V2] Software vulnerabilities. A popular web-related
vulnerability is SQL injection, where attackers can ac-
cess databases’ records without authorization [124], [170].
Databases that are connected directly or indirectly to ICS
servers contain important data such as historical data and
users’ information. Furthermore, emails can also contribute
to malware spreading to the network. In [116], a number of
email-based attacks are shown by experimentation. In addition,
gathering security credentials for ICS-connected computers is
a very enticing goal for attackers interested in gaining access
to a secured network. As a result, the network and the ICS as
a whole could be at risk. Finally, vulnerabilities in Internet-
exposed devices that are connected to the local network, such
as servers in the control center, employees’ portable devices
like laptops, and smartphones might be exploited to perform
malicious activities that affect the desired operations of the
control devices [15].

Smart grids vulnerabilities.

[SG V1] Communication vulnerabilities
in cyber-
components. The smart grid’s information infrastructure relies
on a number of standardized Internet protocols with known

8

vulnerabilities that could be used to launch attacks on the
grid. TCP/IP is used for general-purpose connection to the
Internet and is not supposed to connect to control centers.
However, Internet-faced networks are sometimes connected,
directly or indirectly, to the smart grids’ control centers due
to a network misconﬁguration [29]. This connectivity itself
is considered a vulnerability, let alone vulnerabilities in the
open protocols. In addition, ICCP, which is the standardized
protocol for data exchange between control centers, has a
critical buffer overﬂow vulnerability [170].
[SG V2] Software vulnerabilities. Almost the same software
vulnerabilities in ICS hold in smart grids with others that are
smart grids-speciﬁc. For example, widespread smart meters
that are remotely upgradeable, inviting a critical vulnerability.
An attacker can make use of such a feature to cause blackouts
by controlling the meters, either from the control center, or the
meters individually. This vulnerability can also be exploited by
a software bug [4]. The grids’ components now become more
accessible in every household, and hence provide a potential
access point for malicious attackers [113]. Some vendors leave
backdoors in smart meters. Santamarta [137] was able to
discover a backdoor in some smart meters that would result in
full control of the meter, including pricing modiﬁcations. In
addition, some smart meters can be connected to via Telenet
protocol. This vulnerability can also be exploited to affect
other smart meters in the grid to launch coordinated attacks.
[SG V3] Privacy vulnerabilities. A new type of vulner-
abilities has emerged as a result of the two-way commu-
nications between smart meters at customers’ houses and
utility companies. Attackers may be able to intercept the vast
amount of trafﬁc generated from smart meters and infer private
information about customers [26]. The kind of information
attackers could be interested in is, for example, daily habits
and residences’ presence/absence.

Medical devices vulnerabilities.

[MD V1] Security through obscurity. Because of the lack
of mandatory security standards for manufacturers of medical
devices, some resort to designing proprietary protocols and
rely on their secrecy as a security measure [88]. This paradigm,
a.k.a “security through obscurity” has always failed to thwart
attackers.
[MD V2] Communication vulnerabilities
in cyber-
components. As most medical devices rely on wireless com-
munications, this implies the devices’ vulnerability to a range
of wireless-based attacks such as jamming, noise, eavesdrop-
ping, replay, and injection attacks. Communications between
ICDs and their programmers are vulnerable to eavesdropping
due to the lack of encryption. Besides this conﬁdentiality
violation, the lack of encryption allows replay attacks [56].
In addition, patients with IMDs or wearable devices could
be vulnerable to a number of privacy invasion attacks ranging
from discovering the existence of the devices, the devices type,
to some physiological measures gathered by the device. In
addition, if a device’s unique information is inferred, a patient
could be vulnerable to tracing attacks [57].
[MD V3] Software vulnerabilities. The role of software has
been growing in medical devices, and so has the likelihood

of software vulnerabilities. As a result, recalls of medical
devices due to software-related defects has increased [49],
[58]. Failure of a device due to a software ﬂaw could result
in critical health conditions. Furthermore, Hanna et al.
[58]
presented the ﬁrst publicly known software security analysis
for medical devices. They found that one type of medical
devices, namely Automated External Deﬁbrillator (AED), to
have four vulnerabilities: arbitrary code execution due to a
buffer overﬂow vulnerability, weak authentication mechanism,
improper credentials’ storage, unauthorized ﬁrmware update
due to improper deployment of the Cyclic Redundancy Check
(CRC). In addition, certain assumptions by a device designers
could lead to undesired consequences. For example, Li et
al. [91] show how a CRC check in the code can lead to
dangerous attacks such as replaying outdated measures and
sending unauthorized commands.

Smart cars vulnerabilities.

in cyber-
[SC V1] Communication vulnerabilities
components. Cellular interfaces usually serve two purposes:
(1) enabling hands-free phone calls and (2) enabling manufac-
tures to perform services remotely such as remote diagnostics,
software updates, crash response, and stolen car recovery.
TCUs provide cars with such cellular communication chan-
nels, among others. However, privacy concerns have emerged
from using the cellular interface as a tracking tool where both
Global Positioning System (GPS) and the microphone are parts
of the TCU. This connection reveals a target’s whereabouts,
or can become a spying tool via eavesdropping on the in-car
conversations by exploiting the microphone [17], [18].

Bluetooth is one of the most vulnerable attack vectors in
smart cars [17]. When a passenger wants to pair a phone
with the car, the only authentication measure is a Personal
Identiﬁcation Number (PIN), prompted by the car’s Telematics
Control Unit (TCU). This measure is insufﬁcient, and attackers
can brute-force the PIN, intercept it, or even inject a false PIN
by spooﬁng the Bluetooth’s software. In addition, Bluetooth
connections could expose the car to traceability attacks if an
attacker successfully extracts the Bluetooth’s Media Access
Control (MAC) address, which is unique and traceable [18].

[SC V2] Software vulnerabilities. Software is at the heart
of every ECU, and smart cars’ reliance on it has signiﬁcantly
increased. This, in turn, increases the likelihood of software
bugs and security vulnerabilities [63]. For example, if a piece
of software is vulnerable to malicious code injection, it would
expose the car to various attacks depending on the injected
software. Jo et. al. [72] show how a TCU running on an
Android OS was exploited to unlock doors and trace GPS
due to vulnerabilities in the OS. On the other hand, the media
player has the ability to directly connect to the CAN bus.
This implies that any vulnerability in the player can affect
other ECUs because of this connection. Checkoway et al. [18]
identiﬁed two vulnerabilities: 1) a malicious specially-crafted
CD could affect the media player’s ECU and “reﬂash” it with
malicious data, and 2) the media player is vulnerable to an
arbitrary code execution, thanks to its ability to parse different
media ﬁles.

9

C. Cyber-Physical Vulnerabilities

ICS Vulnerabilities.
[ICS V3] Communication between ICS components. ICS
relies on protocols that used to be proprietary such as Modbus
and DNP3 to monitor and send control commands from
a control center to sensors and actuators. ModBus proto-
col, the de facto standard for communication in many ICS,
lacks basic security measures, so that it is vulnerable to a
plethora of attacks. Its lack of encryption exposes the trafﬁc
to eavesdropping attacks [1], [9]. It also lacks integrity checks
making data integrity questionable [9], [116]. In addition,
no authentication measures are implemented, suggesting the
feasibility of manipulating data traveling to actuators to make
them act undesirably, or with data coming from sensors so
the controllers can be spoofed by false data [152], [170].
Similarly, DNP3 protocol also does not implement any kind
of encryption or authentication mechanisms [36], [65]. It has,
however, a simple integrity measure using CRC. Although
CRC is relatively simple, it is better than no integrity check
altogether,
like in Modbus. East et al. [36] analyzed the
DNP3’s vulnerability to at least 23 attacks that exploit the
absence of encryption, authentication, and authorization.

Direct access to remote ﬁeld devices such as RTUs and
PLCs used in smart grids is also a vulnerability that might
be overlooked by smart grids’ operators. Some ﬁeld devices
might be left with default passwords [113]. Furthermore, a
large number of PLCs were found to be directly connected to
the Internet [89]. In fact, Leverett [90] identiﬁed 7,500 ﬁeld
devices that are directly connected to the Internet. Those de-
vices are also used in smart grids, thus the same vulnerability
is also applicable.

Sometimes, in case of failure of the primary communica-
tions, it is useful to have a secondary communication channel
(e.g., dial-up) to access ﬁeld devices such as PLCs and RTUs.
It provides a direct connection with ﬁeld devices, which in
turn are directly connected with the sensors and actuators [1].
This poses an opportunity for attackers to take control over the
ﬁeld devices without the need to exploit other more advanced
communication links, especially in the presence of default
logins and simple authentication mechanisms.
[ICS V4] OS vulnerabilities. The operating systems in ICS
devices, such as PLCs and RTUs, are Real-Time Operating
System (RTOS), and they do not implement access control
measures. Therefore, all users are given the highest privileges,
i.e., root access. This is fundamentally insecure, and clearly
makes the devices vulnerable to various kinds of attacks [170].
Applications that are used for controlling and monitoring
ﬁeld devices are running on general-purpose OS. If the OS or
running software have vulnerabilities, the hosting computers
or laptops posses a potential attack vector on the connected
ﬁeld devices and as a result, their physical components. An
example of such exploitable vulnerabilities are two Windows
OS vulnerabilities that were exploited in the Stuxnet attack.
The ﬁrst one is a vulnerability in the Print Spooler Service,
which is vulnerable to remote code execution over remote
procedure call (RPC) [105]. This particular vulnerability al-
lowed Stuxnet to copy itself onto the vulnerable computer [22].

The other exploited vulnerability was in Windows Server
Service that also was vulnerable to remote code execution
through sending a specially crafted RPC request [104]. Using
this vulnerability, Stuxnet connected to other computers [22].
In addition, some attacks are realized by exploiting buffer
overﬂow vulnerabilities in the OS running in the control
center [152], [170]. Buffer overﬂow vulnerabilities are the
most commonly reported vulnerabilities to ICS-CERT [66].
[ICS V5] Software vulnerabilities. We consider programs
running on general-purpose OS for controlling and monitoring
controllers as cyber-physical components. An example of such
programs is WinCC, which is a Siemens software used for
controlling PLCs. In the Stuxnet attack, the ﬁrst step was to
target vulnerable computers running WinCC software [22]. A
vulnerable computer is exploited so Stuxnet can copy itself
onto the computer, it then installs a rogue driver DLL ﬁle that
is used by both WinCC software and the PLC. Once the driver
DLL installed, a rogue code is sent to the PLC. The critical
vulnerability in the controller that allows such an action is the
lack of digital signature [83]. PLCs and other ﬁeld devices
have limited computational capabilities and cannot perform
computationally expensive solutions such as cryptographic
measures. Another class of cyber-physical software compo-
nents cover software running on ﬁeld devices such as PLCs
and other controllers. As we pointed out earlier, the presence
of COTS products in CPS is one of the contributing factors
for the increased number of vulnerabilities.
[89] revealed an
authentication vulnerability in a very common COTS product
deployed in 200 PLC models. This vulnerability allows an
attacker to bypass the authentication and consequently take
control of the PLC. The authors conducted multiple scans
and discovered a surprisingly large number of PLCs that
directly connect to the Internet. In addition, some vendors
leave backdoors in some ﬁeld devices. This makes it possible
for attackers to gain access and full control over the device
when valid credentials are gathered [137].

Smart Grids Vulnerabilities.

[SG V3] Grid communication vulnerabilities.

The power system infrastructure in smart grids relies on
almost the same protocols in ICS, such as Modbus and DNP3,
thus the same vulnerabilities still hold in smart grids. In
addition, IEC 61850 has also been introduced recently as an
advancement of these protocols in substations’ communica-
tions. The lack of security properties in these protocols has
a different impact in the context of smart grids. For example,
protocols that lack encryption, make the data in transit vulner-
able to eavesdropping, which results in a number of attacks
such as the inference of customers’ usage patterns [101],
[113], or even injection of false information due to the lack
of authentication [129], [158]. It is also possible to inject the
network with bogus packets that aim to ﬂood it, resulting in a
DoS attack; or to inject false information, resulting in decisions
based on false information [145], [164].

In addition, smart grids consist of heterogeneous compo-
nents run by different entities. For example, a generation
plant of a grid interacts with a transmission plant, where
the transmission plant, in turn, interacts with a distribution

10

plant, and ﬁnally the distribution delivers the electricity to end
users. Each type of interaction is usually run and administered
by different companies, which introduces vulnerabilities in
communication and collaboration [42], [62], [113].
[SG V4] Vulnerabilities with smart meters. Smart meters
rely on two-way communications, which contribute to a num-
ber of new security concerns about an attacker’s abilities to
exploit such interaction [76]. For example, a smart meter may
have a backdoor that an attacker could exploit to have full
control over the device. Santamarta [137] analyzed a smart
meter’s available documentation and found out that there is a
“Factory Login” account. Aside from the customers’ accounts
with limited capabilities used for basic conﬁgurations, this
factory login account gives full control to the user over the
smart meter. What’s more, the communication is transmitted
through telnet which is known for major security weaknesses,
e.g., sending data in clear text without encryption.

Once full control over the smart meter is gained, three
potential attacks arise: (1) power disruption, either directly,
by malicious interactions with other devices to change their
desired power consumption, or indirectly, by injecting false
data in a way that the control center receives false information
and consequently makes wrong decisions; (2) using the meter
as “bot” to launch attacks possibly against other smart meters
or systems within the smart grid network; and (3) the meter’s
collected data could be tampered with so that the bill reﬂects
false data to reduce the cost to the consumer [137].

Medical Devices Vulnerabilities.

[MD V4] Communication vulnerabilities in cyber-physical-
components]. The reliance on wireless communications in
wearable and IMDs invites vulnerabilities that could result
in physical impacts on patients when exploited. If medical
devices fail to transmit or receive expected packets, an unde-
sired health condition could result from incorrect operations
performed by the medical device.

As the devices rely on wireless communications, likelihood
of jamming attacks arises. For example, when an insulin pump
does not receive periodic updates from the associated CGM,
it assumes the patient’s condition is stable, and no need for
an injection of an insulin dosage. This leads to an undesirably
high glucose level [91], [130]. Some devices are vulnerable
to battery exhausting attacks, where an adversary exhausts
the devices computational or communication resources to
withdraw the battery’s reserves [56], [134].

By injecting a specially-crafted packet, it is possible to send
unauthorized commands or false data . Halperin et al. [56] and
Gollakota et al. [51] demonstrated the ICDs’ vulnerabilities
to injection attacks by exploiting wireless vulnerabilities. In
addition, Li et al. [91] demonstrated the insulin pump’s vulner-
ability to be remotely controlled by intercepting the device’s
communications with its remote control. Radcliffe [130] also
uncovered a vulnerability in the insulin pump device that
would allow injection attacks. The device requires its serial
number to be part of the command packet as an authentication
measure. An attacker equipped with the serial number can
inject unauthorized commands to the device.

Replay attacks do not require knowledge of the underlying

protocols; instead, an attacker only needs to capture legitimate
measurements or command packets, and retransmits them at
a later time. Li et al. [91] revealed a vulnerability in an
insulin pump that would allow replay attacks so that the pump
receives a dishonest reading of the glucose level. And therefore
the patient decides mistakenly to inject the wrong amount
of insulin such that the decision might threaten the health
condition. In addition, Radcliffe [130] revealed that a CGM
device was vulnerable to replay attacks. By retransmitting pre-
captured packets to the CGM, the author was able to spoof the
CGM with incorrect values. In addition, besides the violation
of conﬁdentiality, lack of encryption allows replay attacks [56].
[MD V5] Device authentication. An attacker can use a com-
mercial programmer without authorization as a result of the
implicit trust given to anyone uses the programmers [56]. This
makes medical devices vulnerable to safety-critical attacks
even without technical knowledge needed for attackers. In
addition, some attacks do not need programmers. Instead,
Universal Software Radio Peripheral (USRP) is sufﬁcient to
replace a programmer and send malicious packets as Halperin
et al.

[56] have shown.

Smart Cars Vulnerabilities.

[SC V3] Communication vulnerabilities in cyber-physical-
components. Smart cars are vulnerable to many attacks due
to the lack of security considerations in their design [84].
In-vehicle communication protocols, such as CAN and LIN,
lack encryption, authentication and authorization mechanisms.
Here we review the vulnerabilities in the most common proto-
col, CAN. The CAN protocol has a number of vulnerabilities
that contribute to most of the attacks on smart cars. For
example, CAN protocol lacks critical security properties such
as encryption, authentication, and has weak authorization and
network separation. Due to the lack of encryption, TPMS is
vulnerable to eavesdropping and spooﬁng [70]. Tracing a car
is possible by exploiting the unique ID in the TPMS com-
munications. In addition, the CAN protocol’s broadcast nature
increases the likelihood of DoS attacks [80]. CAN bus error
handling mechanism makes it vulnerable to DoS [24]. Another
security property, common in computer security literature, is
non-repudiation, where there is no way to identify the origin
of a particular message [64]. Clearly, these vulnerabilities,
especially the lack of encryption and authentication, result
from the isolation assumption discussed earlier.
[SC V4] Comfort ECUs. More advanced features are con-
tinuously added to ECUs to improve safety and comfort.
For example, ECUs like Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC),
Lane Keep Assist, Collision Prevention provide safety, where
Comfort Park Assist and RKE are examples of ECUs that
provide comfort. Although these components have a great
impact on improving the driving experience in terms of safety
and comfort, they pose a new type of attacks, i.e., cyber-
physical attacks. These components are part of the CAN
network, and there is a threat of attacking them and com-
promising their expected functions by directly exploiting their
vulnerabilities, or vulnerabilities in other ECUs residing in the
same network [17]. As an example, ACC is the next generation
of cruise control. It provides the ability to detect the speed

11

of the car ahead using laser or radar sensors, and adaptively
change the current speed to maintain a safe distance between
cars. A well-equipped attacker might be able to interrupt ACC
sensors’ operations by either introducing noise or spooﬁng.
As a result of the attack, ACC may reduce or increase speed
unexpectedly, or even cause collisions. The threat is the ability
to tamper with the sensors externally, or with the ACC’s
ECU itself internally, possibly through other ECUs that are
potentially vulnerable to remote attacks such as TPMS, RKE,
or TCU.
[SC V5] Vulnerabilities with X-by-wire. An emerging trend
in smart cars is the “X-by-wire”. It aims to gradually replace
the mechanically-controlled components in the car, such as the
steering wheel and the brake pedal, by electronic or electro-
mechanical components. Such electro-mechanical components
would make drivers control
the relevant functionality by
only pressing some buttons. Steer-, Drive-, Brake-, Shift-,
and Throttle-by-wire are all examples of this trend [149].
This implies new opportunities for attackers to launch cyber-
physical attacks exploiting such new functionalities. However,
this technology relies on FlexRay communication protocol,
which is more advanced than CAN protocol in terms of speed
and safety features. However, it is more costly and less likely
to widespread in the near future [149].

D. Physical Vulnerabilities

Finally, we review vulnerabilities in physical components
that would cause cyber impact. Physically tampering with
a physical component or its surrounding environment could
result in misleading data in the cyber-physical components.
Most of the vulnerability analysis in CPS literature focus on
cyber attacks with physical impact. Very few, on the other
hand, studies physical attacks with cyber impact such as
in [98].

ICS Vulnerabilities. The physical exposure of many ICS
components, such as RTUs and PLCs, that are scattered over a
large area is a vulnerability in itself. With insufﬁcient physical
security provided to these components, they become vulner-
able to physical tampering or even sabotage. For example, a
water canal’s sensors rely on solar panels as a source of energy
so they can communicate with the control center. These panels
were stolen, and therefore, the control center lost critical data
necessary for the desired operations [3].

Smart Grids Vulnerabilities. Similar to ICS, smart grids’
ﬁeld devices are placed in unprotected environments. A huge
amount of physical components are highly exposed without
physical security, and thus vulnerable to direct physical de-
struction. For example, power lines are vulnerable to mali-
cious, accidental, and natural attacks. For example, in Northern
Ohio, overgrown trees caused a large blackout affecting over
50 million people [152].

In addition, smart meters attached to buildings, houses, and
remote areas make them an easy target to various physical
attacks. Mo et al. [113] suggest that it is even infeasible to
achieve adequate physical protection of all assets in smart
is necessary to devise prevention and
it
grids. Therefore,
detection solutions.

Medical Devices Vulnerabilities. Medical devices, whether
implantable or wearable, sometimes could be vulnerable to
physical access. That is, the attacker’s ability to physically
deal with the medical device. For example, for maintenance
purposes, an attacker exploiting the absence of the device’s
owner, tampers with it, and potentially performs malicious
activities such as malware installation, or modiﬁcation of
the conﬁgurations such that
the device delivers unadvised
treatment that could threaten the patient’s health. In addition,
by physical access to a device, it is also possible to get the
device’s serial number, which is useful for some attacks [130].
In general, physical access to the device opens up many
possibilities to various attacks. Hanna et al. [58] recommend
protecting medical devices from physical access by any po-
tential attacker. Another subtle vulnerability to consider is the
mobility of medical devices’ users. It could be a vulnerability
by itself. As the device’s designers cannot control patients’
surroundings, the devices could be vulnerable to unpredicted
physical attacks when a patient is in an insecure location. This
is especially true for politically-motivated attacks [156].

Smart Cars Vulnerabilities. If not physically protected, cars
can be vulnerable to numerous attacks that do not necessarily
require cyber-capabilities. For example, TPMS parts could be
destroyed resulting in DoS attack such that TPMS cannot send
tires’ air pressure to the designated ECU. In addition, exposing
the car to any kind of physical access is another vulnerability
that could cause critical attacks. For example, a mechanic can
get physical access to a car’s internal parts directly through
OBD-II port [162]. Furthermore, some external parts can be
used to access critical components in the car’s CAN network.
Some attackers could get access to the internal network
through exterior exposed components such as the exterior
mirrors [64].

V. REAL-WORLD CPS ATTACKS

We review reported cyber, cyber-physical, and physical
attacks on the four CPS applications that exploited the afore-
mentioned vulnerabilities in Section IV. In general, publicly
is infeasible to ﬁnd
known attacks are rare [127], and it
attacks that represent exploitations of all vulnerabilities in
section
IV. Instead, we consider attacks that have been
realized by experimentation or in real life. At the end of
this section, we describe the discussed cyber-physical attacks
using a cyber-physical taxonomy proposed by Yampolskiy et
al. [166] in tables II, III, IV, and V for attacks on ICS, smart
grids, wearable and IMDs, and smart cars, respectively. Their
proposal dissects CPS attacks into six-dimensional description,
by which allows us to gather more insights about each attack.
The description includes the attacked object (Inﬂuenced Ele-
ment), the resulting changes on the attacked object from the
attack (Inﬂuence), indirectly affected components (Affected
Element), changes on the CPS application (Impact), how the
attack took place (Method), and preceding attacks needed to
make an attack successful (Precondition). We also integrate
our CPS framework into this taxonomy by highlighting CPS
aspects in the attack tables with C, CP, and P, for cyber,
cyber-physical, or physical aspects, respectively.

12

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF VULNERABILITIES. C: CYBER, CP: CYBER-PHYSICAL, P:
PHYSICAL; I: ISOLATION ASSUMPTION, C: CONNECTIVITY, O:
OPENNESS, H: HETEROGENEITY, S: MANY STAKEHOLDERS.

CPS
ICS

Vulnerability

Type

Cause

Open communication protocols
Wired communications
Wireless communications
Web-based attacks
Insecure protocols
Interconnected & exposed ﬁeld de-
vices
Insecure secondary access points
Insecure OS & RTOS
Software
Equipments’ physical sabotage

Blackouts
Communication protocols
Software
Customers’ privacy invasion
Interconnected ﬁeld devices
Insecure protocols
Insecure smart meters
Equipments’ physical sabotage

Jamming & noise
Replay & injection attacks
Patient’s privacy invasion
Software
DoS

TPMS easy interception
GPS traceability
Bluetooth authentication ﬂaw
Insecure CAN bus
Replay attacks
Communication software ﬂaws
Media player exploitations
Physically unprotected components

C
C
C
C
CP
CP

CP
CP
CP
P

CP
C
C
C
CP
CP
CP
P

P
C, CP
C
C, CP
CP

CP
C
C
CP
CP
C
C
P

I, O
I, H, S
I, Con
Con, H
I, Con
I, Con

I, Con
I, Con, H
Con, H
I

I, Con, H
I, Con
I, Con, O, S
I, Con, H
I, Con, H
I, Con
I, Con, H
I

Con
I, Con
I, Con
I, H
Con

H
H
Con
I, Con
I, Con
Con
H
I

Smart Grid

Wearable
& IMDs

Smart cars

In this section, we categorize the attacks based on the
damages’ location. Attacks that do not reach sensors/actuators
are considered purely cyber, while attacks that directly impact
physical components are physical. Whereas, attacks that indi-
rectly impact physical components, through cyber components,
are cyber-physical.

A. Cyber Attacks

ICS Attacks

Communication protocols. A number of attacks have ex-
ploited vulnerabilities in communication protocols. For exam-
ple, spooﬁng attacks on Address Resolution Protocol (ARP)
were demonstrated on SCADA system [68], [154].

Espionage. DuQu and Flame are two examples of ICS
attacks with spying purposes [23], [115]. Flame, for example,
targeted various ICS networks in the Middle East and was
discovered in 2012. This malware’s main goal was to collect
corporations’ private data such as emails, keyboard strokes,
and network trafﬁc [115]. Although the intention of the attack
was not clear, hostile nations or industrial competitors could
beneﬁt from such information leakages.

In addition, in 2013, a group of hackers, known as Drag-
targeted energy ﬁrms in the U.S. and Europe. The

onﬂy,

13

attackers main goal seems to have been gathering private
information. To do that, they needed to infect systems in
the targeted ﬁrms with malware that grants remote access.
They started by sending phishing emails to the personnel
of the targeted ﬁrms containing malicious PDF attachments.
Then the attack vector escalated to exploiting watering hole
vulnerabilities in victims’ browsers by directing victims to
visit malicious websites hosted by the attackers. Both delivery
mechanisms infected targeted systems with a malware that
allowed attackers to gather private information in the infected
systems [150].

Unintentional attack. Although software updates are critical
to ensuring systems are vulnerability-free, it can be a source
of service disruption. For example, in a nuclear plant, one
computer in the control center was updated and rebooted
thereafter. The reboot erased critical data on the control
system. As the data was erased, other components of the
system misinterpreted such loss, resulting in abnormality in
operations and the plant’s shutdown [14].

Web-based attacks. Night Dragon attack, in 2011, targeted
sensitive information from private networks of a number of
energy and oil companies [1]. The attack combined a number
of web-related vectors to succeed such as SQL injection
vulnerability and a malware injection [1], [106].

Smart Grids Attacks

DoS. The trafﬁc in smart grids is time-critical, so delays
may result in undesired consequences. Flooding the network
at different layers is the probable approach to achieve DoS
attacks. Lu et al. [95] evaluated the impact of DoS on smart
grids’ substations. The authors found that the network per-
formance only gets affected if the ﬂooding is overwhelming.
In addition, at the physical layer, the deployment of wireless
communications increases and therefore, jamming attacks’ are
possible as shown in [96].

False data injection. Introducing false data in smart grids’
trafﬁc leads to different consequences such as service disrup-
tion and ﬁnancial losses. Liu et al. [94] demonstrated a sim-
ulated false data injection to evaluate the impact on the state
estimation in smart grids. The authors assumed the attacker’s
pre-intrusion to the control center for a successful attack,
which aimed to ultimately inject false measurements to smart
meters to disrupt the state estimate process. Such disruption
leads to ﬁnancial losses for the operating utilities [158].

Customers’ information. Attackers can analyze network
trafﬁc in smart grids between smart meters and data centers
to infer private information about customers. For example,
an attacker can determine if a target is available at home
at particular times and dates. In addition, it is also possible
to deduce lifestyle in terms of sleeping times and quality,
preferred home appliances, and many more [114].

Untargeted malware. In 2003, the Slammer worm resulted
in disabling the trafﬁc between ﬁeld devices and substations.
Although that malware was not intended to affect the energy
sector, it still had an effect because of the interconnectedness
of the smart grid networks. The malware consumed a sig-
niﬁcant amount of the time-critical trafﬁc, but did not cause
service outages [10].

Medical Devices Attacks

Most, if not all, of the reported attacks on medical devices
have been performed in experimental environments. However,
the possibility of the attacks in this section, should raise an
alarm to stimulate the efforts in improving security in medical
devices. Although some attacks are speciﬁc to certain devices,
such as insulin pumps, the same attack techniques could be
applicable to other IMDs and wearable devices. This is the
case because of the similarities in the communication links
and hardware components.

Replay attacks. By exploiting a vulnerability in an insulin
pump, replaying eavesdropped packets is possible by incorpo-
rating a previously intercepted device’s PIN [91]. In addition,
replay attacks could result in misinformed decisions regarding
insulin injection [130].

For example, by replaying an old CGM packet to an insulin
pump, a patient will receive a dishonest reading of the glucose
level, and therefore will decide, mistakenly, to inject the wrong
amount of insulin. Such wrong decision could result in critical
health condition.

Privacy invasion. Attacks violating patients’ privacy have
different goals and consequences. For example, for the remote
control attack on the insulin pump in [91], an attacker needs to
learn the device type, PIN, and legitimate commands sent from
the remote control. The authors successfully performed this
attack and revealed three types of privacy-related information,
namely, the devices’ existence, its type, and ﬁnally the PIN.
In addition, Halperin [56] demonstrated similar attacks on an
ICD medical device such as revealing patient’s personal and
medical information and the device’s unique information.

Smart Cars Attacks

We reviewed about

two dozen papers that discuss the
security of smart cars. Most of the work done is abstract,
theoretical, or simulation-based. Only a few present results of
actual experiments on real cars [18], [64], [80], [107].

In order for a successful attack on a car, an attacker needs
to gain access to the internal network physically, through
the OBD-II port, media player, or USB ports, or wirelessly,
through the Bluetooth or cellular interfaces. Once an attacker
gets into the car’s internal network, a plethora of attacks
opportunities are open.

DoS. DoS attacks can take on different forms whose impacts
vary in safety-criticality. Koscher et al. [80] disabled CAN
communication from and to the Body Control Module (BCM)
which resulted in a sudden drop from 40 to 0 MPH on the
speedometer. In addition, this attack also resulted in freezing
the whole Instrument Panel Cluster (IPC). For example, if
the speedometer was at 60 MPH before the attack, and the
driver increased the speed, there will be no change in the
speedometer and the driver might reach a dangerous speed
level.

False Data Injection (FDI). An example of this attack is
displaying a false speed on the speedometer. An attacker
would ﬁrst intercept the actual speed update packet sent by
the BCM, and then transmit a modiﬁed packet that had the
false speed [80]. In addition, an attacker can forge the real
status of the airbag system to appear healthy, even if the airbag

had malfunctioned or was removed [64]. Another type FDI is
shown in [55] where the authors showed how a passenger
can manipulate the data collected by insurance dongles used
for rate customization in a way that would resulted in an
undeserved lower insurance price.

Privacy invasion. Checkoway et al. [18] were able to exploit
the cellular interface in the TCU and eavesdrop on in-car
conversations. In addition, a report published by Ed Markey,
a U.S. senator, reveals that car manufacturers store a large
amount of private information such as driving history and cars’
performance [100].

B. Cyber-Physical Attacks

ICS Attacks

Legacy communication channels. As we mentioned above,
dial-up connections provide direct access to ﬁeld devices
and sometimes their security are overlooked. In 2005, billing
information of a water utility was accessed by exploiting the
dial-up connection in a canal system [153]. Although this
attack did not have a physical impact, it could have, due to
the control capabilities provided by the dial-up connection.

Disgruntled insiders. A huge ﬁnancial loss for utility com-
impacts could result
panies with undesired environmental
from attacking a water and sewage system. In 2000, an ex-
employee intentionally disrupted the operations of a sewage
treatment system in Maroochy Water Services in Queens-
land, Australia. The attacker exploited his knowledge, as
a previously-legitimate insider, to change conﬁgurations in
pumping stations using a laptop and a radio transmitter. The
consequence of the attack caused a huge amount of raw sewage
to ﬂood into the streets and taint the environment [143].

Modbus worm. Fovino et al. [116] presented an alarming
work on targeted malware. The authors crafted malware that
exploits the lack of authentication and integrity vulnerabilities
in Modbus protocol. The worm aims to perform two attacks:
DoS, by identifying sensors or actuators and sending them
DoS-inducing messages, and command injection, by sending
unauthorized commands to the sensors or actuators.

Malware. Some malware targets speciﬁc systems to achieve
goals like trafﬁc interception and interruption of operations.
They exploit software vulnerabilities in applications that man-
age control ﬁeld devices. A well-known example is Stuxnet.
This attack is considered one of the most sophisticated attacks
on ICS that clearly embodies cyberwar. Stuxnet exploits soft-
ware vulnerabilities to achieve physical consequences [166].
Because the targeted networks were off the Internet, it is
believed that the delivery mechanism was a USB stick. The
attack can be generally summarized into two phases: 1) spread-
ing and determining targets and 2) PLCs hijacking [83]. The
ﬁrst step was realized by exploiting two zero-day Windows
vulnerabilities, i.e, one in the shared printing server and the
other was in Windows Server Service. Both vulnerabilities
would allow remote code execution using RPC. Stuxnet used
the ﬁrst vulnerability to install itself in the system and the other
to connect to other systems to also install itself in an iterative
fashion. This process led to infecting about 100,000 infected
systems worldwide, however, because the attack was targeted

14

on speciﬁc PLCs, the infection did not have an inﬂuence
on systems that were not connected to the targeted PLCs.
Once Stuxnet is installed, it looks for a speciﬁc software used
for monitoring and sending commands to the PLCs, that is
Seimens WinCC. It goes through a thorough analysis to ensure
that WinCC is connected to one of speciﬁc Siemens PLCs [83].
Once determined, the malware injects the malicious code that
aims to alter PLCs’ conﬁguration. Once that is achieved, the
ﬁnal objective of the attack is realized, which is, most likely,
damaging centrifuges used for uranium enrichment. For a
detailed Stuxnet analysis, we refer you to [120].

Web-based attacks. A group of hackers exploit a web-based
interface that is directly connected to ﬁeld devices like PLCs.
They opened multiple connections and left them open until
authorized users could not access them, resulting in a DoS
attack. In addition, they also sent a web page to the controller/
ﬁeld device that contains malicious Java script code designed
to exploit a bug in the TCP/IP stack causing resetting of the
controller [153].

Smart Grids Attacks

Cyber extortion. This type of attack is rare, at least pub-
licly, where attackers take control over the target smart grid
and make demands as a price of not causing a large-scale
blackout [117].

Blackouts. In the context of smart grids, a blackout
is
considered a DoS attack. The availability of smart grids is
probably the most important security goal to maintain, and
attacks aiming to compromise it could result in a large-scale
blackout that might have a nationwide impact. In 2007, Idaho
National Laboratory (INL) demonstrated an experiment on
how a generator could be damaged as a result of a cyber
attack [30]. The experiment proved the feasibility of such
attacks. For example, it is believed that two blackouts in Ohio
and Florida in 2003 were caused by a Chinese politically-
motived group, the People’s Liberation Army [60]. In addition,
about 800 blackouts in the U.S. occurred in 2014 for unknown
reasons [37]. Some speculations suggest that such mysteri-
ous outages may have resulted from cyber-physical attacks
launched by hostile nations [60].

Medical Devices Attacks

DoS attacks. This attack, when successful, could lead to
critical health condition to patients. Halperin et al. [56] were
able to disable an ICD therapies by replaying a previously
recorded “turn off” command sent by the programmer.

False data and unauthorized commands injection. Li et
al. [91] were able to remotely control an insulin pump’s remote
control and successfully stopped and resumed the insulin
injection from a 20 meter distance.

Replay attacks. By exploiting a software vulnerability in the
replay attacks countermeasure, any packet can be retransmitted
to the CGM and insulin pump [91], [130].

addition, jamming of wireless communications is also a form
of DoS such as jamming RKE signals [160].

Malware injection via Bluetooth. Checkoway et al. [18] con-
ducted an attack that exploits compromised devices connected
to the car through a Bluetooth connection. The authors assume
the attacker’s ability to ﬁrst compromise a connected device
to the car, usually a smartphone. Then they launch an attack
exploiting the connectivity between the Bluetooth’s ECU,
which is the TCU, with the other ECUs. This was realized by
installing a hidden malware, Trojan Horse, on the connected
smartphone. The malware captures Bluetooth connections and
then sends a malicious payload to the TCU. Then once the
TCU is compromised,
the attacker can communicate with
safety-critical ECUs, such as the Anti-Lock Braking System
(ABS). In addition, Woo et al. [163] showed a wireless attack
that exploits a malicious diagnostic mobile app connected to
the OBD-II port via Bluetooth. Since the app runs on a mobile
device, te attack can be launched through a cellular network.
Malware injection via cellular network. The cellular channel
in the TCU is exploitable and vulnerable to malware injection
attacks. The attack is realized by calling the target car and
injecting the payload by playing an MP3 ﬁle [18].

Malware injection via the OBD-II port. Malware injection
through the OBD-II port needs physical access to the car.
Hoppe et al. [64] show how an injected malware can launch
a number of DoS attach such as preventing passengers from
opening and closing windows and also preventing the car from
displaying that airbags are lost.

Packet injection. This attack requires previous access to
the CAN network. Once an attacker gets into the network,
physically or wirelessly, a large number of attacks are possible.
For example, through the OBD-II port, it is possible to increase
the engine’s Revolutions Per Minute (RPM), disturb the en-
gine’s timing, disable the engine’s cylinders, and disable the
engine itself. In addition, attacks on brakes are also possible
by injecting random packets to the Electronic Brake Control
Module (EBCM) such that it locks and releases the brakes
resulting in unsafe driving experiences [80]. In addition, Lee
et. al. [87] performed fuzzing attacks on multiple cars that
resulted in arbitrary behaviors that could affect passengers’
safety. The fuzzing attack is simple, they captured the CAN
IDs of the normal network trafﬁc and then ﬂood the network
with packets that have the same IDs but different data ﬁelds.
Replay attacks. This attack requires two steps: 1) inter-
cepting the CAN network trafﬁc when certain functions are
activated and 2) retransmitting the observed packet to reacti-
vate the same function. Koscher et al. [80] were successfully
able to disable the car’s interior and exterior lights by sending
previously-eavesdropped packets.

C. Physical Attacks

ICS Attacks

Smart Cars Attacks

DoS. One form of DoS attacks is where an attacker prevents
passengers from closing any opened windows. Another is to
disable the warning lights or the theft alarm system, so that the
car cannot produce warnings and alarms when needed [64]. In

Untargeted attacks. Zotob worm, although not targeted on
ICS, caused manufacturers to shut down their plants. For
example, US-based DaimlerChrysler had to shutdown thirteen
of their manufacturing plants for about an hour [152]. Such
an incident stimulated researchers to examine the impact of

15

unintended malware intended for tradition IT systems, on
ICS networks. For example, Fovino et al. [116] showed how
unintended malware could result in collateral damages ranging
from causing ICS servers to reboot, opening potential arbitrary
code execution vulnerabilities, infecting personal computers,
and stimulating DoS attacks.

Smart Grids Attacks

Natural and environmental incidents. We give a few ex-
amples of power blackouts in 2014 that resulted from natural
causes to show the impact of physical exposure and unreliabil-
ity of smart grids’ components. An ice storm in Philadelphia
affected 750,000 people for several days with no electricity,
whereas a tornado hit the New York area affecting 500,000
people [37]. Furthermore, the widespread power transmission
lines around various environments and conditions contributed
to unexpected attacks such as overgrown or falling trees.
For example, some overgrown trees caused a large blackout
affecting over 50 million people in Northern Ohio [152]. This
incident, however, is controversial and security analysts sug-
gest that it resulted from a cyber-physical attacks originating
from China [60]. In addition, in 2014, wild animals caused
150 blackout in the U.S. by eating and damaging cables [37].
Theft. Copper wires and metal equipments are proﬁtable
targets for ﬁnancially-motivated thieves. For examples, theft
caused a blackout with an impact on 3,000 people in West
Virginia [37].

Car accidents. In 2014, 356 outages in the U.S. were caused
by cars hitting transmission towers, transformers, or power
poles [37].

Vandalism. Attackers can physically damage parts of smart
grids such as cables, poles, generators, smart meters, and
transformers. An example of that is an incident in 2013 where
a sniper in California shot more than a hundred shots at a
transmission substation, leaving 17 transformed damaged [46].
Terrorist attacks. In 2014, the ﬁrst terrorist attack on a power
grid occurred in Yemen. The attackers launched rockets to
destroy transmission towers and caused a nationwide blackout
affecting 24 million people [69].

Medical Devices Attacks

Acquiring unique IDs. Obtaining devices’ serial numbers is
an example of attacks that require physical access to the target
devices [130].

Smart Cars Attacks

the car sends to detect

Relay attacks. This kind of attack targets the RKE, where
an attacker relays the communications between the car and
its key fob. The attack exploits the periodical LF beacon
if the key fob is in close
signal
range. The attacker captures and relays it, using an antenna,
to the relatively far key fob, which is most likely in the
car owner’s pocket. The key fob is activated by the relayed
signal and sends an “open” Ultra High Frequency (UHF)
signal to open the car. Once the car is opened, the same
attack is repeated from inside the car to start it. The attack
was implemented successfully on ten different cars from eight
manufacturers. In addition, it evades cryptographic measures
because it targets communications at the physical layer [48].

This kind of attack is also called Man-in-the-Middle (MITM)
or “two-thief” attacks [160]. In addition, Garcia et al. [50]
presented a attack on the RKE system used in many cars. The
attack relies on exploiting the simple cryptographic algorithms
and inadequate key management in order to clone a car’s key
resulting in an unauthorized access to the car. key

ABS Spooﬁng. Shoukry et al. [141] showed a physical attack
on the ABS wheel speed sensor. The sensor measures the
speed of a wheel using a magnetic ﬁeld the gets induced by the
iron tone wheel attached to every wheel. In the demonstrated
attack, the authors introduced a malicious actuator that pro-
duces another magnetic ﬁeld that disrupts the original ﬁeld
produced by the wheel speed sensor. This additional ﬁeld
results in inaccurate speed measurements received by the ABS
ECU. The authors also demonstrated a spooﬁng attack that
allows attackers to inject incorrect speed measures and spoof
the ABS ECU.

VI. SECURITY CONTROLS/SOLUTIONS
We brieﬂy describe the research trends in CPS controls in
two distinct paths. The ﬁrst one is the solution that targets
CPS in general, regardless of the application. The second is
application-speciﬁc solutions that are speciﬁcally designed for
some applications. In addition, we will highlight, whenever
applicable, some solutions that can be cross-domain. That is,
for example, some solutions designed for cars could be applied
to medical devices, or vice versa.

A. General CPS Controls

Here we review controls that consider securing CPS, regard-
less of the application. Addressing the vulnerability causes is
the ﬁrst step in the solution.

Controls against more connectivity. New security consider-
ations must be taken into account to secure the access point
from unauthorized access. Furthermore, the communication
protocols used for realizing such connectivity are either pro-
prietary protocols, such as Modbus and DNP3 in deployed
ICS and smart grids, or open protocols such as TCP/IP. The
proprietary protocols are burdened with a lot of vulnerabilities
due to the isolation assumption when the protocols were
designed [2].

Communication controls. Security solutions at the commu-
nication level in ICS should consider the differences with
traditional IT solutions. For example, Intrusion Detection
Systems (IDS) should be time-critical so that long delays are
intolerable [112]. In [108], [111], the authors focus on design-
ing IDS solutions for CPS. They also provide a comprehensive
survey on IDS solutions in CPS applications [112].

Device Attestation. CPS components running software need
to verify the software’s authenticity. This veriﬁcation helps
signiﬁcantly minimize malware. For example, hardware-based
solutions such as Trusted Platform Module (TPM) provides
code attestation. However, TPMs are assumed to be physical
secure, which is infeasible to guarantee in some CPS appli-
cations such as ICS and smart grids. Another problem with
TPM is the computational overhead on the limited resource
CPS applications. Therefore, a new generation of TPMs that
considers the limited CPS resources is needed.

16

TABLE II
ICS CYBER-PHYSICAL ATTACKS

Name
Maroochy

IE a
Pumps

I b
Pumps work
undesirably

AE c
Correct
in
stations
manipulated

settings
pumping

Modbus
worm

ICS network

Infected ICS
network

Connected ﬁeld
devices

Stuxnet

Centrifuges
PLCs

Exaggerated
rotation
centrifuges

Centrifuges’
rotors

of

Web-based
attacks

Field devices
(e.g. PLCs)

Field
web
feature

devices
interface

Web-based
attacks

Field devices
(e.g. PLCs)

Field
web
feature

devices
interface

The physical
environments
controlled
devices

The physical
environments
controlled
devices

by

by

Impact
sewage
Raw
in
ﬂood
streets,
tainted
environment, and
ﬁnancial losses
Servers’
rebooting, DoS,
& unauthorized
commands
injection
Lifetime
reduction
&
physical damage

Legitimate
personnel unable
to
to
connect
devices
ﬁeld
remotely
or
locally (DoS)
Devices lost con-
ﬁgurations

laptop
radio
to

Method
a
Used
and
a
transmitter
manipulate
pumps
Inject malware
code
ICS
into
network trafﬁc

Precondition
Insider knowledge

Ref
[143]

Access to ICS trafﬁc

[116]

sent

from
to

Illegitimate
commands
PLCs
centrifuges
Leave
with
connection state

devices
open

Infected
Stuxnet

PLC

by

[22],

[83],
[120], [166]

Devices are directly
exposed to the Inter-
net

[153]

Malware
injection

TCP/IP vulnerability
in a COTS implemen-
tation

[153]

aInﬂuenced Element
bInﬂuence
cAffected Element

Name
Cyber
tortion

ex-

IE
Power deliv-
ery

Aurora ex-
periment

Circuit
breakers (P)

I
Utilities
lose
control over their
grid system
Change relay be-
havior (CP)

TABLE III
SMART GRIDS CYBER-PHYSICAL ATTACKS

AE
Customers

Power generators
and
power-fed
substations (CP)

Impact
Lost of services
& ﬁnancial losses

Physical damage
generators
to
& inability
to
deliver electricity
(P)

Method
Exploit
Internet-
connected smart
grid components
Unexpected
opening
&
closing of circuit
breakers (CP)

Precondition
Inside knowledge

Ref
[117]

Access & inside
knowledge (CP)

[168]

B. System-speciﬁc Controls

ICS Controls.

New design. ICS needs security solutions that are speciﬁ-
cally designed for it. Such solutions should take into consider-
ation the cyber-physical interactions, and the heterogeneity of
components and protocols. Cardenas et al. [12] suggest that,
most of the solutions in ICS aim to provide reliability, i.e., they
make ICS reliable in the presence of non-malicious failures.
Although reliability is important, malicious cyber attacks are
now possible more than ever, and must be considered when
designing new solutions. Therefore, security is as important
as reliability.

Protocols with add-on security. Security solutions at the
ICS communication level should consider the fundamental
differences from traditional IT solutions. A number of pro-
posals that rely on modiﬁcations of currents protocols, such
as Modbus, DNP, and ICCP, to integrate security. Fovino et
al. [45] proposed the Secure Modbus framework. It provides
authentication, non-repudiation, and thwart replayed packets.

Majdalawieh et al. [99] proposed DNPSec framework, which
adds conﬁdentiality, integrity, and authenticity.

IDS. The complexity of designing IDS for securing ICS
is relatively less than it is in traditional IT security. This is
due to the predictability of the trafﬁc and the static topol-
ogy of the network [82]. Zhu et al. [171] deﬁned a set
of goals that IDS in ICS are expected to monitor such as
detection of 1)any access to controllers and sensors/actuators’
communication links, 2)modiﬁcations in sensor settings, and
3)actuators’ physical tampering. D‘Amico et al. [31] propose
WildCAT, a solution that targets the physical exposure of the
wireless communications within an ICS plant. It is a prototype
for securing ICS from cyber attacks that exploits wireless
networks. The idea is to install WildCAT in security guards’
cars and to collect wireless activities in the physical perimeter
of the plant. The collected data is sent to an analysis center,
which, in turn, detects any suspicious activities and direct
the guards to the location causing such activities. For further
analysis of the current ICS-speciﬁc IDS solutions, we refer
you to [5], [7], [19], [81], [82], [112], [171].

17

Name
DoS

IE
A medical
device

I
The
turned off

device

AE
Patients

is

False data in-
jection (FDI)

Insulin pump

Unauthorized
commands
injection

Insulin pump

False
measurements
sent
to
pump

insulin

Unauthorized
commands
to insulin pump

sent

Patient’s
therapeutic
decisions

TABLE IV
MEDICAL DEVICES CYBER-PHYSICAL ATTACKS

Impact
Patient does not
receive expected
therapy (DoS)
Wrong decisions

Patient’s safety

Dangerous health
condition

“turn

off”
by

Precondition
Capture
previously
sent
the programmer
Interception of CGM
pump
insulin
and
communications

Interception commu-
nications between in-
sulin pump and its
remote

Ref
[56]

[91]

[91]

Method
Retransmit “turn
off” command

by
similar
with

Impersonate
CGM and
sending
packets
false data
Impersonate
pump
insulin
remote control by
similar
sending
packets
with
unauthorized
commands

Remote access to ﬁeld devices. Fernandez et al. [41] sug-
gest that only authorized personnel can remotely access ﬁeld
devices. In addition, the access should be strictly secured by
using a designated laptop through a VPN. In addition, Turk et
al. [153] suggests a simple control for web-based DoS attacks
that ﬁeld devices with web access features are vulnerable to.
The author suggests to close idle connections. In addition, it
could be a good measure to disallow multiple connections si-
multaneously. Usually, no more than one legitimate employee
tries to access such a resource at the same time.

Encryption and key management. There is undoubtedly a
need for encryption in ICS networks. One of the associated
problems with encryption is the delay, which is not desirable in
time-sensitive environments. Choi et al. [27] proposed an ICS-
speciﬁc key management solution that does not cause delay.
In addition, Cao2013ALayeredet al. [11] proposed a layered
approach aiming to protect sensitive data in the widespread
ICS environments. Their technique relies on Hash Chains to
provide: 1) layered protection such that ICS is split into two
zones: high and low security levels, and 2) a lightweight key
management mechanism. Thanks to the layered approach, an
attacker with full control of a device in the low security level
cannot intercept data from higher security level zones.

Software controls. Regular patching of security vulnera-
bilities in operating systems and their applications is a vi-
tal security practice. Windows released Stuxnet-related secu-
rity patches, without which, Stuxnet would have still been
present [83]. However, vendors of ICS applications must also
keep up with the patching and release compatible versions
of their applications. This ensures that ICS operators do not
resort to older versions of vulnerable OS to be able to use the
compatible ICS application [73].

Standardization. The National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) is one of the leading bodies in the stan-
dardization realm. Following ICS security standards like theirs,
among others, should signiﬁcantly contribute to securing ICS.
For example, Stouffer et al. [147] provided a comprehensive
guidelines for ICS security. They provide guidelines for tech-
nical controls such as ﬁrewalls, IDS, and access control, and
operational controls such as personnel security, awareness,
and training. In fact, technical and operational controls must

always go hand in hand, and the negligence of one leads to
serious attacks. For example, lack of awareness could make
employees vulnerable to social engineering attacks such as
phishing. ICS-CERT reported that most of the attacks on
ICS originated from phishing emails with malware-infected
attachments [1]. In addition, security experts evaluated the
security of an ICS corporation, and were able, through so-
cial engineering and phishing, to gain employees’ creden-
tials [119]. Sommestad et al. [144] conducted a comparison,
based on keywords mining, and concluded that the standards
focus either on technical controls, or operational controls, but
not both. In addition, some standards somewhat neglect ICS-
speciﬁc properties and focus on IT security countermeasures
alone.

Smart Grids Controls.

DoS controls. Attacks on communication components
should be prevented or, at least, detected. On the one hand, at
the network layer, prevention of attacks like DoS is usually
achieved by rate-limiting, ﬁltering malicious packets, and
reconﬁguration of network architecture. The ﬁrst
two are
possible in smart grids, while the last might be difﬁcult due
to its relatively static nature. Furthermore, techniques at the
physical layer aim at preventing attacks of the nature of wire-
less jamming. On the other hand, DoS detection techniques
are categorized into four types: signal-based, packet-based,
proactive, and hybrid detection [158].

IDS. IDS for smart grids is still an ongoing problem that
is not that mature yet. Designing IDS for smart grids is a
complex task due to the enormous size of the grids and the
heterogeneity of their components [145]. In addition, IDS built
for traditional IT systems will not necessarily work for the
smart grids. They must be speciﬁcally designed for smart grids
to reduce the likelihood of false detection rates. Jin et al. [71]
proposed an anomaly-based IDS that detect malicious behavior
using invariant detection and artiﬁcial ants with Bayesian
reasoning approach. In addition, Mitchell and Chen [110]
proposed a behavior-rule-based IDS to detect attacks on cyber-
physical devices in smart grids such as headends, subscriber
energy meters (SEMs), and data aggregation points (DAPs).
Liu et al. [93] proposed an IDS for detecting bad data injection

18

TABLE V
SMART CARS CYBER-PHYSICAL ATTACKS

Name
DoS 1

IE
BCM

I
Sudden drop in
speedometer

AE
IPC

DoS 2

Windows

Window closing
failure

Windows control
buttons

Malware
injection 1

Bluetooth
ECU

Malware
injection 2

Malware
injection 3

Telematics
unit cellular
interface
An ECU

Ability
connect
other ECUs

to
to

Malware
injection

with

Safety-critical
ECU
cyber-phyiscal
capabilities
Loss of control
over other ECUs

ECU becomes an
attack vector
to
undesired
inject
packets

CAN bus trafﬁc
becomes vulnera-
ble to malicious
packets

Packets
injection

Replay
Attack

Varies

Varies,
depending
on
ECU

target

Lights ECUs

Lights turned off

Car’s spying

TCU

Relay attack

RKE system

Gain control of
car

and
Open,
start
car
a
without owner’s
knowledge

Other ECUs and
physical compo-
nents

Driver,
passengers,
and surrounding
cars
All other ECUs
can be remotely
controlled

Target car

Impact
Frozen IPC and
failure in turning
car on/off
Discomfort
frustration

and

Loss of control
and
potentially
collision

ECU

control
cyber-

Remote
and
physical attacks
Other
behaves
undesirably
affecting
cyber-physical
components
False
data
injection, loss of
control, DoS, and
safety-critical
consequences
Safety-critical
situation

Stealthily turn on
car’s microphone

Theft and unau-
thorized access

Precondition
Physical
CAN bus

access

Ref
[80]

to

Physical access

[64], [80]

Vulnerability in
Bluetooth
mechanism

pairing

[18]

Knowledge of car’s
speciﬁcs

[18]

access

Physical
or
vulnerable wireless
interfaces

[64], [80]

Malware injection

[64], [80]

Access to CAN bus
network

[80]

Buffer overﬂow vul-
nerability and ﬂaw in
authentication proto-
col
Attacker needs relay-
ing tools
an-
tennas and ampliﬁers
among other devices

e.g.,

[18]

[48]

Method
Disabling
communication
to/from BCM
Reverse
engineering
and fuzzing
Malware
injection
to
other ECUs via
Bluetooth’s ECU
Call car and in-
ject malware pay-
load
Transmit
malware
CAN packets

in

Compromised
ECUs
packets

inject

retransmit

Eavesdrop
and
legitimate
commands
Call the car

Capture
and
relay LF beacon
signals from car
to key fob, and
relay
resulting
UHF signal from
key fob to car

attacks targeting the smart grids. Their approach relies on
combining detecting techniques from the traditional IDS and
physical models.

Low-level authorization and authentication. A common
problem in a large system like smart grids is authentication
and authorization of users who need to gain access to low-
level layers such as ﬁeld devices. Commonly, all ﬁeld devices
share the same password that employees know. This results in
the impossibility of the non-repudiation security requirement.
A malicious employee could gain access to a ﬁeld device and
make undesired changes to the system, and there is no way
to trace who did it. Therefore, Vaidya et al. [157] proposed
an authentication and authorization mechanism that provides
legitimate employees the ability to access ﬁeld devices in the
substation automation systems in smart grids. Their proposal
relies on elliptic curve cryptography due to its low computation
and key size requirements compared with other public key
mechanisms.

New designs. New security issues require that various as-
pects of smart grids be approached differently. The cyber-
physical nature of the systems needs to be considered. Mo et
[113] proposed Cyber-Phyiscal Security, a new approach
al.
that combines systems-theoretic and cyber security controls.

They provide two examples showing the applicability of their
approach on two attacks on smart grids: replay attack, and
stealthy deception. They emphasize the need for consider-
ing those two types of components, cyber- and physical-
components, when designing controls for smart grids. Most
of the work done is extending existing protocols and systems
to capture security properties. This might work as a temporary
solution, but a bottom-up redesign is desired.

Security extensions. The trend of adding-on security to ex-
isting components of smart grids has been emerging. Protocols
like DNP3, IEC 61850 and IEC 62351 are extended to capture
security properties. For example, Secure DNP3 protocol is an
extended DNP3 that have basic authentication, integrity and
conﬁdentiality services. The security features are added by
inserting a security layer in the communication stacks of these
protocols [158].

Privacy-preserving controls. Lack of conﬁdentiality in data
in privacy invasion of
aggregation protocols might result
consumers’ private information such as billing information and
usage patterns [102], while the lack of integrity could result in
disruption in state estimation and consumption reports [145].
Therefore, a number of privacy-preserving techniques have
emerged to provide aggregated data with conﬁdentiality and

19

integrity when in transit between smart meters and control
centers [40], [158]. Another privacy concern that might affect
safety or ﬁnance is the ability to detect the (in)occupancy of
house in order to break in. Chen et al. [20] proposed combined
heat and privacy (CHPr) mechanism such that it makes the
poser usage data always looks like the house is occupied and,
therefore, tricks occupancy detection techniques.

Standardization. A number of bodies, such as the IEC and
NIST, have developed a set of standards for securing smart
grids’ communications. For example, IEC’s have developed
standards TC57 and 6235 [29], while NIST has developed
guidelines for smart grids in report 7628 [122].

Smart meters’ disabling prevention. To prevent remote
attackers who exploit the disabling feature in smart meters,
Anderson and Fuloria [4] suggest that smart meters should be
programmed to notify customers in enough time in advance,
before the command takes effect and disables meters. This
measure helps in the early detection of DoS attempts before
they take place.

Physical security. As smart meters are physically exposed,
they must be physically protected. NIST standards [122] state
that smart meters must have cryptographic modules in addition
to physical protection. The standards also emphasize on the
need for smart meters to be sealed in tamper-resistant units
such that unauthorized parties are not able to physically tamper
with them.

Medical Devices Controls.
Authentication.Halperin

[56]
and

proposed
a
al.
et
cryptographic-based
key-exchange
authentication
mechanism to prevent unauthorized parties from accessing
IMDs. Both mechanisms do not consume batteries as a source
of energy. Instead,
they rely on external radio frequency.
In addition, Out-of-Band (OBB) authentication is deployed
in some wearable and implantable devices. By which,
authentication is performed using additional channels, other
than the channels used for communication, such as audio
In addition, biometrics, such
and visual channels [134].
as electrocardiograms, physiological values
(PVs), heart
rate [138], glucose level and blood pressure, can all be used
for key generation for encrypted communication in the body
sensor network (BSN) [134]. In addition, patients’ movement
can be another property by which keys are derived [123].

Intrusion Detection Systems. Halperinet al. [56] proposed
a detection mechanism that alarms patients of unauthorized
communication attempts with their IMDs. In addition, Gol-
lakota et al. [51] proposed the Shield, which detects and
prevents malicious wireless-based attacks on IMDs. Although
the Shield is not designed speciﬁcally as an IDS, it certainly
serves as one. On the other hand, Mitchell and Chen [109] aim
to detect compromised sensors and actuators that pose threat
to patients’ safety through behavior rule-based IDS. Their
proposal is not intended for IMDs or wearable devices. Rather,
it is mainly for stand alone medical devices, such as vital sign
monitor and cardiac device. Thus, there is a need for IDS
solutions that consider implanted and wearable devices’ unique
properties, e.g., communication protocols, physical interaction
with human bodies, and limited resources.

20

Location-based controls. Some solutions utilize distance-
bounding protocols that rely on the physical distance between
communicating devices so that remote attackers cannot launch
attacks remotely. The distance is determined by various tech-
niques such as ultra sound signals, received signal strength
(RSS), electrocardiography (ECG) signals [169], and body-
coupled communication (BCC). This technique provides au-
thentication but not authorization. Hence, other techniques
must be incorporated [134].

Thwarting active and passive attacks. Li et al. [91] proposed
the use of BCC, were they experimentally investigate the
BCC’s ability to prevent passive and active attacks against
insulin delivery systems. This type of communication thwarts
most passive and active attacks because of its dependence
on the human body as its transmission medium, as opposed
to conventional wireless communication where the air is the
communication medium that is easily intercepted. When the
human body becomes the transmission medium, an attacker
needs a very close proximity to a patient or even direct body
contact. This signiﬁcantly mitigates the attacks and raises the
bar for the attackers.

Shifting security to wearable devices. Incorporating security
into the current IMDs and wearable devices has its own risks
and challenges. One of which is the health risk associated
with IMDs’ surgical extraction from a patient in order to
update or replace an IMD with more secure one. In fact,
even if we assume that there are no health risks for extracting
IMDs, the cryptographic operations required for any secure
system are still expensive in terms of computational, memory,
and battery resources. Therefore, the intuitive solution is to
add another device built speciﬁcally to add security. Several
proposals that deploy some cryptographic and anti-jamming-
attack mechanisms utilize external wearable devices to realize
such mechanisms. For example, Xu et al. [165] proposed
IMDGuard to defend against jamming and spooﬁng attacks. In
addition, Gollakota et al. [51] proposed an external wearable
device, the shield, to detect and prevent any unauthorized
commands sent to an IMD. They evaluated the shield on
two modern IMDs, i.e., ICD and cardiac resynchronization
therapy device (CRT). This device jams any signals initiated
by unauthorized party.

Cross-domain solutions. Li et al. [91] proposed the adoption
of the rolling code encryption mechanism used in RKE in cars.
Smart cars and medical devices both share similar features in
terms of computation limitations, power, and data bandwidth
constraints. Therefore, using rolling code encryption should
be an effective solution to prevent eavesdropping and replay
attacks.

Standardization and recommendations. The Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) is the leading body in medical devices’
standardization. It has issued a number of standards and guide-
lines for the manufacturers of medical devices. For example, in
2005, the FDA highlighted that potential vulnerabilities might
result from using COTS software equipped with remote access
capabilities [43]. Another recommendation was published in
2014 about cybersecurity in medical devices [44]. However,
the recommendations are not detailed enough nor mandatory,

rather ”non-binding recommendations”. Therefore, manufac-
turers have the liberty to choose not to follow them, which
certainly would contribute to the production of less secure
medical devices. In addition, IEEE 802.15.6 is the latest BAN
standard that provides security services such as authentication
and encryption [54]

Allowing vs. disallowing remote functionalities. In order
to prevent attackers from penetrating networks that make the
interaction between remote physicians with patients’ devices
possible, manufacturers should disable remote capabilities
from being sent through the network. They only allow remote
parties to receive measures and logs, but not send commands.
Although this is a good security practice to prevent attackers
from sending remote commands, it limits the full utilization
of such devices [88]. Therefore, there is a need to strike a
balance between security and usability without introducing
remote threats to patients. If remote commands are allowed,
Hayajneh et al. [61] proposed an approach to protect patients
from unauthenticated remote commands against their IMDs.
The approach relies on Rabin public-key cryptosystem.

Smart Cars Controls

Unimplemented promising controls. A number of security
controls have been proposed to secure the in-car network, most
of which have not been implemented. For example, Wolf et
at. [162] proposed three controls that would secure the bus
network: authentication gateway, encryption, and ﬁrewalls. In
addition, Larson et al. [84] call for redesigning security in
cars, and propose embracing of the defense-in-depth security
paradigm, i.e., prevention, detection, deﬂection, countermea-
sures, and recovery.

Cryptography. The use of cryptography provides a num-
ber of security properties such conﬁdentiality, integrity, and
authentication that cars lack. However,
these mechanisms
are computationally expensive for such systems with limited
capabilities in cars. Thus, the deployment of efﬁcient solutions
is vital. Wolf et al. [161] and Escherich et al. [39] propose
hardware-based solutions that are designed speciﬁcally for
cars’ security. Wolf et al. [161] designed and implemented the
Hardware Security Module (HSM). They show its applicability
to secure communications of ECUs within a car, or even
in Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) communications. Escherich et
al. [39] presented the Secure Hardware Extension (SHE), a
standard for adding security properties, such as secret key
protection and secure boot, to ECUs.

Redeﬁning trust. Koscher et al. [80] suggest two trust-related
controls that would have prevented most, if not all, of their
attacks. Firstly, revoking trust from arbitrary ECUs so they
cannot perform diagnostic and reﬂashing operations. Secondly,
ECUs with diagnostic and reﬂashing capabilities must be
authorized and authenticated before performing these tasks.
To do that, trusted platforms, in addition to remote attestation,
need to be deployed [77].

Restricted critical commands. Koscher et al. [80] empha-
sized that legitimate parties require physical access to cars be-
fore issuing any “dangerous” commands. Although this could
be an effective control, the term dangerous is relative, and its
interpretation varies from one manufacturer to another, so that

seemingly-benign commands could result in serious attacks.
If manufacturers decide to restrict the amount of commands
that require physical access, ﬂexibility and convenience will
be affected. Therefore, we need solutions that consider all
possible attacks resulting from critical or benign commands,
while maintaining the existing ﬂexibility.

Bluetooth. Bluetooth connections between devices and cars
can be exploited to launch different attacks such as com-
promising the TCU and consequently other ECUs [18]. Cars
need an additional security layer to defend against Bluetooth-
dependent attacks. Dardanelli et al. [32] show the applicability
of their proposed security layer to protect against smartphone-
initiated Bluetooth attacks, with little impact on performance.
Although their proposal was tested on a two-wheeled vehicle,
it should also be applicable to cars. Furthermore, Woo et
al. [163] proposed a security mechanism to efﬁciently authen-
ticate connecting devices to smart cars in order to prevent
wireless attacks exploiting vulnerabilities in smartphones.

IDS. Most of the proposed IDS are designed for CAN pro-
tocol, and only a few for other protocols such as FlexRay and
LIN. For example, Larson et al. [85] proposed a speciﬁcation-
based IDS that is implemented in each ECU, whereas [139]
proposed a behavior-based IDS that supports FlexRay net-
works, besides CAN. In addition, Miller and Valasek [17]
demonstrated a proof-of-concept
low-cost attack detection
system that detects anomalies in the CAN network, and the
great opportunities for implementing such a system at low
cost and no manufacturing overhead. Furthermore, Cho and
Shin [25] proposed an anomaly-based IDS that is clock-based
such that it measures and utilizes the intervals of periodic
messages in order to uniquely identify ECUs. The authors call
it “ﬁngerprinting”. Taylor et al. [151] proposed a frequency-
based IDS that detects anomalies between the frequency of
current and historical packets that have strict frequencies.

Physical Attacks Controls. Shoukry et al. [142] proposed a
challenge-response authentication scheme that works at the
physical
level. The scheme detects and prevents physical
attacks such as sensors spooﬁng. The scheme utilizes the
physical properties of signals in the physical/analog domain
by which they were able to implement their scheme. The
scheme detects and prevents the demonstrated attack on the
ABS [141].

C. Cyber-Physical Security Framework

Now after we have surveyed security in the four CPS
applications, we shed light on the relationship between the
CPS and security aspects. In Table VI, we summarize the four
security issues: (1) threats, (2) vulnerabilities, (3) attacks, and
(4) controls with respect to three CPS aspects: (1) cyber, (2)
cyber-physical, and (3) physical for ICS, smart grids, medical
devices, and smart cars. Please note that the table represents
a sample of the surveyed aspects under our framework, and is
by no means comprehensive.

VII. CPS SECURITY CHALLENGES

General CPS Security Challenges

21

TABLE VI
CYBER-PHYSICAL SECURITY FRAMEWORK. C: CYBER, CP: CYBER-PHYSICAL, AND P: PHYSICAL

CPS

ICS

Threats

Vulnerabilities

Criminal (C)

Criminal (C)

Internet-connected ﬁeld devices
(C)
COTS TCP/IP stack ﬂaw (C)

Espionage (C)

Personnel lack of awareness (C)

Attacks

DoS attacks (CP)

Malware injection that
ﬁeld devices to default (CP)
Dragonﬂy attack (C)

restores

Cyberwar (C)

Stuxnet: damaged about 1000 cen-
trifuges (CP) [120]

Insider (CP)

Customer (CP)

Reliance on security by obscurity
& Lack of access control and non-
repudiation (C)
Physical exposure of ICS compo-
nents (P)

Maroochy: a ex-insider exploits
knowledge of a systems’ weakness
[143]
Sensors tampering to cause false
reading (CP)

Smart Grid

Criminal (C)

Hostile nations &
criminals (C)
Espionage (C)

Internet-connected components of
the grid (C)
Aurora vulnerability: power gener-
ators’ breaker
Unencrypted
or
customers’ data (C)

inferable

Customer (CP)

Thieves & van-
dals (P)

Physical exposure of smart meters
(P)
Unprotected ﬁeld devices and other
equipments and cables (P)

Medical Devices

Criminal (C)

Criminal (C)

Espionage (C)

Politically-
motivated (C)

Insecure wireless transmission be-
tween programmers and ICDs (C)
Insecure wireless communications
between insulin pump, its remote
control, and CGM (C)
Weak or no encryption (C)

Wireless control capability (C)

Take control and cause blackouts
(CP) [117]
Disruption of circuit breakers to
damage generators
Infer data and reveal customers’
private information, habits, & ap-
pliances (C)
Physical tampering with smart me-
ters to reduce utility bills [79]
Stealing or damaging such compo-
nents affects the grid and its cus-
tomers (CP)

Turing off ICDs by retransmitting
”turn off” command (CP)
FDI (C), command injection (CP),
& replay attacks (CP)

Revealing patients’ private infor-
mation (C) [56], [92]

Target a political ﬁgure by tamper-
ing with ICD conﬁgurations (CP)
[134]

Smart Cars

Thieves (P)

Tampering (P) [64], [162]

FDI (C) [64], [80]

Criminal (C)

RKE system (P)

Espionage (C)

Criminal (C)

[17],

Wireless links (C) in TPMS [70],
cellular
[18], & Bluetooth
[18]
Vulnerability in media player’s
parser (C) [18]

Relay signals between car owner’s
key and car (P) [48]

Privacy invasion (C) [18]

DoS and lost of control (CP) [18]

Controls

Close timed out connections (C)
[153]
TCP/IP supplier ﬁxes the ﬂaw (C)
[153]
Raise personnel awareness of at-
tack entry points and use proper
antivirus and IDS mechanisms (C)
[150]
personnel
Raise
the
impact
devices/media
software
patching
encryption (C) [27]
Fine-grained access
(C
& CP) and security by design
(C) [147]
Tamper-resistant ﬁeld components
(P) [82]

of
infected
regular
and

using
(CP),

awareness

control

(C)

Avoid default and simple pass-
words (C) & Security-in-depth
Breakers’
[168]
Encryption (C) [92], [167]

protection measures

Tamper-resistant meters [26]

Physical protection and improved
resiliency (P) [29]

Zero-power detection & prevention
mechanism (C) [56]
Encrypted communication based
on rolling-code & body-coupled
communication [91]
Use lightweight encryption (C)
[56] or wearable security devices
(CP) [34], [51], [165]
Zero power encryption mechanism
(C) [56] or wearable devices (CP)
[34], [51], [165]

Hardware-based security measures
[39], [161]
Key shielding (P) and distance-
bounding countermeasures
(CP)
[48]
Secure Bluetooth (C) [32] & trust
redeﬁnition of COTS products (C)
[80]
Trust redeﬁnition of COTS prod-
ucts (C) [80]

Security by design. Security is not taken into consideration
in the design of most CPS as a result of their isolation in
physically-secured environments without connectivity to other
networks, the Internet for instance. Hence, physical security
has been almost the main security measure [147].

Cyber-physical security. The security mindset of CPS de-
they consider both cyber
signers needs to change so that
and physical aspects. This way potential cyber-attacks with
physical consequences will be better predicted and thus mit-
igated [52]. Neuman et al. [118] suggests that when the fun-
damental differences between cyber and physical aspects are
not considered, cyber-physical solutions are usually ignored,

and the focus becomes cyber-only solutions. This urges the
need for considering both cyber- and physical-aspects. Mo et
al. [113] described a new ﬁeld called “cyber-physical secu-
rity”. The authors’ aim to help by their proposal in developing
novel solutions for the CPS security issues, especially in the
context of smart grids. Furthermore, the survivability of the
systems under attack is very crucial in CPS. A set of CPS
security challenges, such as survivability, are discussed in [12].
The real-timeliness nature. The real-time requirement is a
requirement whose absence affects the security posture [13],
[118]. During a security attack, real-time decisions in CPS
are crucial for systems’ survivability. Therefore, consideration

22

of the interactions between physical- and cyber-aspects in any
CPS security design gives the full picture of the system, which
assists in designing better risk-assessment, attack-detection,
and attack-resilient solutions [13]. In addition, cryptographic
mechanisms could cause delays that could affect some real-
time deadlines. Therefore,
lightweight and hardware-based
mechanisms should be considered.

Uncoordinated Change. The number of CPS stakeholders
is relatively large. This includes manufacturers, implementors,
operators, administrators and consumers. Their activities and
privileges differ, and hence need to be properly managed [2].
The large number of stakeholders, as well as the heterogeneous
CPS components, require change management. This is another
challenge that we observe to be somewhat ignored. When
changes occur in a group of CPS components, some coordi-
nation is required at some level by the stakeholders. Examples
of such changes are replacing hardware, updating or changing
software, and adding new capabilities [97]. Any uncoordinated
the CPS
change might alter the initial assumptions about
security, and therefore could introduce new vulnerabilities.

In addition to the aforementioned general challenges to
CPS security, we highlight some application-speciﬁc security
challenges in the following paragraphs.

ICS Challenges

Change management. The ICS environment spans diverse
geographical locations that involve various systems that need
to be replaced, updated, or removed at some point. For
example, in ICS, a system update needs careful planning to
avoid unexpected failure as it has occurred in a nuclear plant
due to an update in a computer in the business network of the
plant [12]. In addition, there is a large number of stakeholders
who can affect the security posture unintentionally. Therefore,
some kind of coordinated change management should be
introduced to prevent and detect security-related changes in
the ICS application [97], [147].

Insider threat. This is probably one of the most difﬁcult
threats to defend against. Insiders could cause security prob-
lems either intentionally or unintentionally. For example, an
insider could leverage the trust given to her/him along with
acquired inside knowledge to launch an attack, such as the
Maroochy water and sewage system, or help remote attackers,
such as Stuxnet propagation via a USB stick. Unintentional
cases where insiders unknowingly use an infected laptop or
USB stick that could give remote attackers access points
to the ICS. The insider threat has been underestimated and
overlooked, and it certainly needs serious considerations [82].
Secure integration. As ICS relies heavily on legacy systems,
it is inherently vulnerable to their vulnerabilities. Therefore,
the integration of new components with legacy systems must
be done securely so that it does not result in new security
vulnerabilities. In addition, due to the large number of legacy
components in ICS, it is economically infeasible to replace
all of them with more secure ones [82]. Meanwhile, their
security should not be ignored and short-term solutions must
be implemented to minimize any potential risks [12].

Two-way communication. One of the distinguishing features
of smart grids is the two-way communication, thanks to the ad-
vanced metering infrastructure (AMI). Unlike the power grid,
AMI allows smart meters attached to consumers’ houses, that
are easily accessible by physical attackers, to communicate
with utility companies. This raises a new challenge to secure
these devices [76].

Access control mechanisms. Due to smart grids’ enor-
mous geographical coverage, in addition to the large number
of stakeholders, appropriate access control mechanisms are
needed [2]. Every possible access to smart grids’ network,
data, or devices must be controlled and managed. In addition,
during emergency, access control mechanisms need to have
enough ﬂexibility to give appropriate privileges for the appro-
priate parties.

Privacy concerns. As consumers’ data has become a sig-
niﬁcant part of the smart grids’ trafﬁc, privacy concerns have
become a great challenge. Not only should consumers’ data
be encrypted, but anonymization techniques are also desired
to prevent inference and other attacks from deducing patterns
from the encrypted data to reveal private information [79],
[114]. Some cryptographic-based solutions have been pro-
posed. Li et al. [92] proposed a homomorphic encryption
mechanism to protect consumers privacy while maintaining
low overhead on smart grids’ trafﬁc. However, such an ap-
proach does not prevent an attacker from participating in the
data aggregation as a smart meter by injecting false data
or impersonating a legitimate smart meter [158]. Therefore,
designing mechanisms that both encrypt and aggregate data
securely is a pressing challenge [158].

Explicit trust. Sensed data and sent commands should not
be explicitly trusted. Instead, new mechanisms are needed to
detect false data and unauthorized commands [33]. With the
large size of smart grids, it becomes difﬁcult to detect false
data injection attacks by relying on algorithms that have been
designed to only detect faults [94].

Comprehensive security. Security measures and tools
mainly exist at higher levels in smart grids and their effec-
tiveness decreases towards lower levels. In other words, the
sophistication of security measures decreases in lower levels
due to the limited capabilities in low-level devices. Hence,
security needs to be involved in every part of smart grids,
starting from the lowest levels, i.e., ﬁeld devices and their
protocols, to high levels, e.g., control centers. Implementing
security at lower levels might have some performance costs.
Therefore, lightweight solutions are desired [78]. The use of
encryption is necessary to provide conﬁdentiality and integrity
at all levels of smart grids. However, the challenge is not in
deploying it, rather, it is in doing it cost-effectively in low
level components.

Change management. Managing changes in smart grids
is in ICS. Smart grids are
is no less challenging than it
certainly more diverse and have more stakeholders than ICS
applications, and yet its change management capabilities are
limited [145]. This makes change management an immensely
desired requirement for a more secure smart grids.

Smart Grids Challenges

Medical Devices Challenges

23

Security vs. Usability. Too much security could be result
in counterintuitively result in the inability to reconﬁgure a
device when a patient is in a critical condition. For example, a
patient with an IMD might be in a situation that needs urgent
intervention by another health care provider. The provider
does not have the cryptographic credentials or the access
privileges that allow him/her to reconﬁgure the IMD, so the
unavailability of the IMD could be very dangerous [57], [133].
Therefore, designers should strike a balance between usability
and security in medical devices. The usability property should
allow access in emergency situations, for example, while
maintaining security as much as possible. Denning et al. [35]
proposed a promising solution which uses a fail-open/safety
wristband. A patient wears the band to prevent interactions
with unauthorized programmers and other illegitimate parties.
Whenever there is a need to access an IMD, this band is
removed, allowing communication with any programmer. The
authors also propose a number of secure design considerations
for maintaining usability and security in.

Add-on security ≈ increased code. Adding security directly
to the IMDs could increase the size of code and hence the rate
of medical device recalls. In addition, cryptographic operations
could also affect the limited-power at the cost of the original
purpose of a medical device [134]. Thus, it is more desirable
to limit functions of IMDs to pure medical operations and shift
security services to an external device [51].

Limited resources. Extensive computations that are usually
needed in cryptographic mechanisms consume power, which
is a critical resource in these small and limited-resource
devices [57], [133]. The devices must maintain power for a
number of years depending on the nature of the device. For
devices that require surgery to be placed into a patient’s body,
they must be able to function for at least a decade or two.
Halperin et al. [56] proposed one of the ﬁrst efforts to combine
cryptographic techniques with battery-free consumption. The
authors designed a cryptographic-based solution that relies
solely on RF as a source of energy.

In addition, some attacks might only aim to drain the battery
to disable a device, resulting in a DoS attack [134]. Although
a medical device might refuse to interact with an unauthorized
party sending signals, the very fact that the device receives and
processes the signals from illegitimate parties is problematic
and results in battery depleting. Therefore, new controls should
be developed to prevent such attacks by preventing medical
devices from responding to any illegitimate interaction.

Smart Cars Challenges

Secure integration. Incompatible security assumptions occur
at the boundaries of the integrations when manufacturers inte-
grate COTS and third party components into smart cars. The
lack of the products’ internal details results in this mismatch.
Therefore, manufacturers need to ensure a secure integration
of COTS and third party components. Sagstetter et al. [136]
suggest the adoption of formal methods such as a model-based
design that is combined with veriﬁcation methods to verify the
correctness of any assumptions about COTS and third party
components. In addition, access control measures need to be
implemented to prevent unauthorized operations, especially

that originate from COTS and third party components [121].
This ensures that the security posture assumed by a car’s
manufacturer is not compromised.

Effective separation. Although gateway ECUs are supposed
to separate CAN network trafﬁc into high and low bandwidths,
various attacks were able to bypass it and gain access to
restricted bandwidths [80]. However, some manufactures ac-
tually have deployed effective separation between critical and
non-critical ECUs by deploying them in completely separate
networks [17]. However, this practice is not that common
among manufacturers. Another promising solution is the use of
Ethernet/IP communications and the replacement of gateway
ECUs by Master-ECUs [136]. One the one hand, this should
provide more bandwidth, so cryptographic solutions can work
without causing communication overhead, and much higher
speeds. On the other hand, it requires manufacturers to replace
the legacy ECUs and network architecture which is a very
costly operation.

Heterogeneity of components. It is difﬁcult to suggest that
all components produced by different Original Equipment
Manufacturers (OEMs) should be replaced by components
produced only by car manufacturers. This might be an imprac-
tical solution given the complexity and highly skilled specialty
involved in designing different components that are integrated
with cars. Instead, both parties must be in accord in terms of
security requirements, assessment and testing. Manufacturers
must
incorporate security engineers from the early design
phase [77].

In-car communication. The CAN network is inherently vul-
nerable due to the isolation assumption, and thus new protocols
that assume existing potential malicious attackers are needed.
The OVERSEE project [53] aims to design such protocols that
would revolutionize the legacy CAN protocol and replace it
with a highly secure and dependable communication platform.
Other temporary solutions such as ﬁrewalls and IDS are also
essential, and could be incorporated into existing cars either as
a part of the gateway ECUs or as stand alone ECUs. A current
project on a stateful IDS that have a contextual awareness of
a current situation [148]. For example, it aims to detect the
legitimacy of messages sent while a car is in a speciﬁc status:
parked, driving, and many other contexts.

New vulnerabilities and attacks. In the forthcoming era of
autonomous cars, V2V, and V2I communications, new security
issues are certainly going to arise. Such potential attacks are
discussed in [125].

VIII. CONCLUSION

In the paper, we survey the literature on security and
privacy of cyber-physical systems, with a special focus on
four representative CPS applications: ICS, smart grids, medical
devices, and smart cars. We present a taxonomy of threats,
vulnerabilities, known attacks and existing controls. We also
present a cyber-physical security framework that incorporates
CPS aspects into the security aspects. The framework captures
how an attack of the physical domain of a CPS can result
in unexpected consequences in the cyber domain and vice
versa along with proposed solutions. Using our framework,

24

effective controls can be developed to eliminate cyber-physical
attacks. For example, we identiﬁed that the heterogeneity of
CPS components contributes signiﬁcantly to many attacks.
Therefore, an effective solution should pay special attention
when heterogeneous components interact.

The research in CPS security is active because of the
frequently reported cyber-attacks. Although some defense
mechanisms have been proposed/deployed, new and system-
speciﬁc solutions are still expected in response to the newly
identiﬁed threats and vulnerabilities. In this paper, we also
highlight challenges and some missing pieces in CPS security
research, and hope to stimulate more interests in the research
community.

REFERENCES

[1] Cristina Alcaraz and Sherali Zeadally. Critical control system protec-

tion in the 21st century: Threats and solutions. 2013.

[2] S. Amin, G.A. Schwartz, and A. Hussain. In quest of benchmarking
security risks to cyber-physical systems. Network, IEEE, 27(1):19–24,
2013.

Stealthy deception attacks on water scada systems.

[3] Saurabh Amin, Xavier Litrico, S Shankar Sastry, and Alexandre M
In
the 13th ACM international conference on Hybrid

Bayen.
Proceedings of
systems: computation and control, pages 161–170. ACM, 2010.
[4] Ross Anderson and Shailendra Fuloria. Who controls the off switch?
In Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), 2010 First IEEE
International Conference on, pages 96–101. IEEE, 2010.

[5] Rafael Ramos Regis Barbosa. Anomaly detection in scada systems: a

network based approach. 2014.

[6] Steven M Bellovin. Security problems in the tcp/ip protocol suite. ACM
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 19(2):32–48, 1989.
[7] Linda Briesemeister, Steven Cheung, Ulf Lindqvist, and Alfonso
Valdes. Detection, correlation, and visualization of attacks against
In Privacy Security and Trust (PST),
critical infrastructure systems.
2010 Eighth Annual International Conference on, pages 15–22. IEEE,
2010.

[8] R. R. Brooks, S. Sander, J. Deng, and J. Taiber. Automotive system
In Proceedings of the 4th
security: Challenges and state-of-the-art.
Annual Workshop on Cyber Security and Information Intelligence
Research: Developing Strategies to Meet
the Cyber Security and
Information Intelligence Challenges Ahead, CSIIRW ’08, pages 26:1–
26:3, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.

[9] Eric Byres, Matthew Franz, and Darrin Miller. The use of attack trees
In Proceedings of the

in assessing vulnerabilities in scada systems.
International Infrastructure Survivability Workshop, 2004.

[10] Eric Byres and Justin Lowe. The myths and facts behind cyber
In Proceedings of the

security risks for industrial control systems.
VDE Kongress, volume 116, 2004.

[11] Huayang Cao, Peidong Zhu, Xicheng Lu, and A. Gurtov. A layered
encryption mechanism for networked critical infrastructures. Network,
IEEE, 27(1):12–18, January 2013.

[12] Alvaro C´ardenas, Saurabh Amin, Bruno Sinopoli, Annarita Giani,
Adrian Perrig, and Shankar Sastry. Challenges for securing cyber
physical systems. In Workshop on future directions in cyber-physical
systems security, 2009.

[13] Alvaro A C´ardenas, Saurabh Amin, Zong-Syun Lin, Yu-Lun Huang,
Chi-Yen Huang, and Shankar Sastry. Attacks against process control
systems: risk assessment, detection, and response. In Proceedings of the
6th ACM Symposium on Information, Computer and Communications
Security, pages 355–366. ACM, 2011.

[14] Alvaro A C´ardenas, Saurabh Amin, and Shankar Sastry. Research
challenges for the security of control systems. In HotSec, 2008.
[15] Alvaro A Cardenas, Tanya Roosta, and Shankar Sastry. Rethinking
security properties,
threat models, and the design space in sensor
networks: A case study in scada systems. Ad Hoc Networks, 7(8):1434–
1447, 2009.

[16] James L Cebula and Lisa R Young. A taxonomy of operational cyber

security risks. Technical report, DTIC Document, 2010.

[17] Chris Valasek Charlie Miller. A survey of remote automotive attack

surfaces. Black Hat USA 2014, 2014.

25

[18] Stephen Checkoway, Damon McCoy, Brian Kantor, Danny Ander-
son, Hovav Shacham, Stefan Savage, Karl Koscher, Alexei Czeskis,
Franziska Roesner, and Tadayoshi Kohno. Comprehensive experimental
In USENIX Security Sympo-
analyses of automotive attack surfaces.
sium, 2011.

[19] M. Cheminod, L. Durante, and A. Valenzano. Review of security issues
in industrial networks. Industrial Informatics, IEEE Transactions on,
9(1):277–293, Feb 2013.

[20] Dong Chen, Sandeep Kalra, David Irwin, Prashant Shenoy, and Jeannie
IEEE
Albrecht. Preventing occupancy detection from smart meters.
Transactions on Smart Grid, 6(5):2426–2434, 2015.

[21] Min Chen, Sergio Gonzalez, Athanasios Vasilakos, Huasong Cao, and
Victor C Leung. Body area networks: A survey. Mobile Networks and
Applications, 16(2):171–193, 2011.

[22] Thomas M Chen and Saeed Abu-Nimeh.

Lessons from stuxnet.

Computer, 44(4):91–93, 2011.

[23] Eric Chien, Liam OMurchu, and Nicolas Falliere. W32.duqu: The
precursor to the next stuxnet. In Presented as part of the 5th USENIX
Workshop on Large-Scale Exploits and Emergent Threats, Berkeley,
CA, 2012. USENIX.

[24] Kyong-Tak Cho and Kang G Shin. Error handling of in-vehicle
In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM
networks makes them vulnerable.
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pages
1044–1055. ACM, 2016.

[25] Kyong-Tak Cho and Kang G Shin. Fingerprinting electronic control

units for vehicle intrusion detection, 2016.

[26] Shinyoung Cho. Privacy and authentication in smart grid networks.

2014.

[27] Donghyun Choi, Hakman Kim, Dongho Won, and Seungjoo Kim. Ad-
vanced key-management architecture for secure scada communications.
Power Delivery, IEEE Transactions on, 24(3):1154–1163, 2009.
[28] Richard Chow, Ersin Uzun, Alvaro A C´ardenas, Zhexuan Song, and
Sung Lee. Enhancing cyber-physical security through data patterns. In
Workshop on Foundations of Dependable and Secure Cyber-Physical
Systems (FDSCPS), page 25, 2011.

[29] Frances M Cleveland.

the
power system information infrastructure.
http : / / iectc57 . ucaiug .
org / wg15public / Public % 20Documents / White % 20Paper % 20on %
20Security%20Standards%20in%20IEC%20TC57.pdf, 2012.

Iec 62351 security standards

for

[30] CNN. Sources: Staged cyber attack reveals vulnerability in power grid.

http://www.cnn.com/2007/US/09/26/power.at.risk/, September 2007.

[31] A. D’Amico, C. Verderosa, C. Horn, and T. Imhof. Integrating physical
and cyber security resources to detect wireless threats to critical
In Technologies for Homeland Security (HST), 2011
infrastructure.
IEEE International Conference on, pages 494–500, Nov 2011.
[32] Andrea Dardanelli, Federico Maggi, Mara Tanelli, Stefano Zanero,
Sergio M Savaresi, R Kochanek, and T Holz. A security layer for
smartphone-to-vehicle communication over bluetooth. 2013.

[33] Sajal K Das, Krishna Kant, and Nan Zhang. Handbook on Securing

Cyber-Physical Critical Infrastructure. Elsevier, 2012.

[34] Tamara Denning, Kevin Fu, and Tadayoshi Kohno. Absence makes
the heart grow fonder: New directions for implantable medical device
security. In HotSec, 2008.

[35] Tamara Denning, Daniel B Kramer, Batya Friedman, Matthew R
Reynolds, Brian Gill, and Tadayoshi Kohno. Cps: beyond usability:
applying value sensitive design based methods to investigate domain
characteristics for security for implantable cardiac devices. In Proceed-
ings of the 30th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference,
pages 426–435. ACM, 2014.

[36] Samuel East, Jonathan Butts, Mauricio Papa, and Sujeet Shenoi. A
taxonomy of attacks on the dnp3 protocol.
In Charles Palmer and
Sujeet Shenoi, editors, Critical Infrastructure Protection III, volume
311 of IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology,
pages 67–81. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009.

[37] Powering Business Worldwide Eaton. Power outage annual report:

Blackout tracker, 2014.

[38] G.N. Ericsson. Cyber security and power system communication
2014;essential parts of a smart grid infrastructure. Power Delivery,
IEEE Transactions on, 25(3):1501–1507, July 2010.

[39] R Escherich, I Ledendecker, C Schmal, B Kuhls, C Grothe, and
F Scharberth. She: Secure hardware extensionfunctional speciﬁcation,
version 1.1. Hersteller Initiative Software (HIS) AK Security, April,
2009.

[40] Xi Fang, Satyajayant Misra, Guoliang Xue, and Dejun Yang. Smart
gridthe new and improved power grid: A survey. Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE, 14(4):944–980, 2012.

[41] John D Fernandez and Andres E Fernandez. Scada systems: vulnera-
bilities and remediation. Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges,
20(4):160–168, 2005.

[42] Terry Fleury, Himanshu Khurana, and Von Welch. Towards a taxonomy
of attacks against energy control systems. In Mauricio Papa and Sujeet
Shenoi, editors, Critical Infrastructure Protection II, volume 290 of
The International Federation for Information Processing, pages 71–
85. Springer US, 2008.

[43] Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Cybersecurity for networked
medical devices containing off- the-shelf (ots) software. http://www.
fda . gov / downloads / MedicalDevices / DeviceRegulationandGuidance /
GuidanceDocuments/ucm077823.pdf, 2005.

[44] Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Cybersecurity for networked
medical devices containing off- the-shelf (ots) software. http://www.
fda . gov / downloads / MedicalDevices / DeviceRegulationandGuidance /
GuidanceDocuments/UCM356190.pdf, 2014.

[45] Igor Nai Fovino, Andrea Carcano, Marcelo Masera, and Alberto
Trombetta. Design and implementation of a secure modbus protocol.
In Critical Infrastructure Protection III, pages 83–96. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2009.

[46] FOX News Network. Threat to the grid? details emerge of sniper
attack on power station. http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2014/02/06/
2013- sniper- attack- on- power- grid- still- concern- in- washington- and-
for-utilities/, 2014.

[47] Guillermo A Francia III, David Thornton, and Joshua Dawson. Security
best practices and risk assessment of scada and industrial control
systems. 2012.

[48] Aur´elien Francillon, Boris Danev, Srdjan Capkun, Srdjan Capkun, and
Srdjan Capkun. Relay attacks on passive keyless entry and start systems
in modern cars. In NDSS, 2011.

[49] Kevin Fu and James Blum. Controlling for cybersecurity risks of
medical device software. Commun. ACM, 56(10):35–37, October 2013.
[50] Flavio D Garcia, David Oswald, Timo Kasper, and Pierre Pavlid`es.
Lock it and still lose it–on the (in) security of automotive remote
keyless entry systems. In 25th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security 16), 2016.

[51] Shyamnath Gollakota, Haitham Hassanieh, Benjamin Ransford, Dina
Katabi, and Kevin Fu. They can hear your heartbeats: Non-invasive se-
curity for implantable medical devices. SIGCOMM Comput. Commun.
Rev., 41(4):2–13, August 2011.

[52] Dieter Gollmann. Security for cyber-physical systems. In Mathematical
and Engineering Methods in Computer Science, pages 12–14. Springer,
2013.

[53] Andr´e Groll, Jan Holle, Christoph Ruland, Marko Wolf, Thomas
Wollinger, and Frank Zweers. Oversee a secure and open commu-
nication and runtime platform for innovative automotive applications.
In 7th Embedded Security in Cars Conf.(ESCAR), 2009.

[54] IEEE 802.16 Working Group et al.

Ieee standard for local and
metropolitan area networks. part 16: Air interface for ﬁxed broadband
wireless access systems. IEEE Std, 802:16–2004, 2004.

[55] Le Guan, Jun Xu, Shuai Wang, Xinyu Xing, Lin Lin, Heqing Huang,
Peng Liu, and Wenke Lee.
to cyber: Escalating
protection for personalized auto insurance. In Proceedings of the 14th
ACM Conference on Embedded Network Sensor Systems CD-ROM,
SenSys ’16, pages 42–55, New York, NY, USA, 2016. ACM.

From physical

[56] D. Halperin, T.S. Heydt-Benjamin, B. Ransford, S.S. Clark, B. Defend,
W. Morgan, K. Fu, T. Kohno, and W.H. Maisel. Pacemakers and
implantable cardiac deﬁbrillators: Software radio attacks and zero-
In Security and Privacy, 2008. SP 2008. IEEE
power defenses.
Symposium on, pages 129–142, May 2008.

[57] Daniel Halperin, Thomas S. Heydt-Benjamin, Kevin Fu, Tadayoshi
Kohno, and William H. Maisel. Security and privacy for implantable
medical devices. IEEE Pervasive Computing, 7(1):30–39, 2008.
[58] Steven Hanna, Rolf Rolles, Andr´es Molina-Markham, Pongsin
Poosankam, Kevin Fu, and Dawn Song. Take two software updates
and see me in the morning: The case for software security evaluations
of medical devices. In Proceedings of the 2Nd USENIX Conference on
Health Security and Privacy, HealthSec’11, pages 6–6, Berkeley, CA,
USA, 2011. USENIX Association.

[59] B Harris and R Hunt. Tcp/ip security threats and attack methods.

Computer Communications, 22(10):885–897, 1999.

[60] Shane Harris. Chinas cyber militia. National Journal Magazine, 31,

2008.

[61] Thaier Hayajneh, Bassam J Mohd, Muhammad Imran, Ghada Al-
mashaqbeh, and Athanasios V Vasilakos. Secure authentication for
remote patient monitoring with wireless medical sensor networks.
Sensors, 16(4):424, 2016.

26

[62] Jeffrey Lloyd Hieb.

Security hardened remote terminal units for

SCADA networks. ProQuest, 2008.

[63] Greg Hoglund and Gary McGraw. Exploiting software: how to break

code. Pearson Education India, 2004.

[64] Tobias Hoppe, Stefan Kiltz, and Jana Dittmann. Security threats to
automotive can networks — practical examples and selected short-term
countermeasures. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference
on Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security, SAFECOMP ’08, pages
235–248, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011. Springer-Verlag.

[65] Peter Huitsing, Rodrigo Chandia, Mauricio Papa, and Sujeet Shenoi.
Attack taxonomies for the modbus protocols. International Journal of
Critical Infrastructure Protection, 1(0):37 – 44, 2008.

in indus-
[66] ICS-CERT.
trial
http : / / ics - cert . us - cert . gov / sites /
default / ﬁles / recommended practices / DHS Common Cybersecurity
Vulnerabilities ICS 2010.pdf, 2010.

Common cybersecurity vulnerabilities
systems.

control

[67] Guillermo Francia III, David Thornton, and Thomas Brookshire. Cy-

berattacks on scada systems. 2012.

[68] Guillermo Francia III, David Thornton, and Thomas Brookshire. Wire-
less vulnerability of scada systems. In Randy K. Smith and Susan V.
Vrbsky, editors, ACM Southeast Regional Conference, pages 331–332.
ACM, 2012.

[69] InvestmentWatch. First time in history, a terrorist attack on the electric
power grid has blacked-out an entire nation in this case yemen. http:
//investmentwatchblog.com/ﬁrst-time-in-history-a-terrorist-attack-on-
the- electric- power- grid- has- blacked- out- an- entire- nation- in- this-
case-yemen, 2014.

[70] Rob Millerb Ishtiaq Roufa, Hossen Mustafaa, Sangho Ohb Travis Tay-
lora, Wenyuan Xua, Marco Gruteserb, Wade Trappeb, and Ivan Seskarb.
Security and privacy vulnerabilities of in-car wireless networks: A
tire pressure monitoring system case study. In 19th USENIX Security
Symposium, Washington DC, pages 11–13, 2010.

[71] Xuan Jin, John Bigham, Julian Rodaway, David Gamez, and Chris
Phillips. Anomaly detection in electricity cyber infrastructures.
In
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Complex Networks and
Infrastructure Protection, CNIP, 2006.

[72] Hyo Jin Jo, Wonsuk Choi, Seoung Yeop Na, Samuel Woo, and
Dong Hoon Lee. Vulnerabilities of android os-based telematics system.
Wireless Personal Communications, pages 1–20, 2016.

[73] Robert E Johnson. Survey of scada security challenges and potential
In Internet Technology and Secured Transactions
attack vectors.
(ICITST), 2010 International Conference for, pages 1–5. IEEE, 2010.
[74] Dong-Joo Kang, Jong-Joo Lee, Seog-Joo Kim, and Jong-Hyuk Park.
Analysis on cyber threats to scada systems. In Transmission Distribu-
tion Conference Exposition: Asia and Paciﬁc, 2009, pages 1–4, 2009.
[75] Tom Karygiannis and Les Owens. Wireless network security. NIST

special publication, 800:48, 2002.

[76] Himanshu Khurana, Mark Hadley, Ning Lu, and Deborah A Frincke.
Smart-grid security issues. Security & Privacy, IEEE, 8(1):81–85,
2010.

[77] David Kleidermacher and Mike Kleidermacher. Embedded systems
security: practical methods for safe and secure software and systems
development. Elsevier, 2012.

[78] Eric D Knapp and Raj Samani. Applied Cyber Security and the
Smart Grid: Implementing Security Controls Into the Modern Power
Infrastructure. Newnes, 2013.

[79] Nikos Komninos, Eleni Philippou, and Andreas Pitsillides. Survey in
smart grid and smart home security: Issues, challenges and counter-
measures. 2014.

[80] K. Koscher, A. Czeskis, F. Roesner, S. Patel, T. Kohno, S. Checkoway,
D. McCoy, B. Kantor, D. Anderson, H. Shacham, and S. Savage.
In Security
Experimental security analysis of a modern automobile.
and Privacy (SP), 2010 IEEE Symposium on, pages 447–462, May
2010.

[81] Marina Krotoﬁl, Jason Larsen, and Dieter Gollmann. The process
In Pro-
matters: Ensuring data veracity in cyber-physical systems.
ceedings of the 10th ACM Symposium on Information, Computer and
Communications Security, ASIA CCS ’15, pages 133–144, New York,
NY, USA, 2015. ACM.

[82] Maryna Krotoﬁl and Dieter Gollmann.

Industrial control systems
security: What is happening? In Industrial Informatics (INDIN), 2013
11th IEEE International Conference on, pages 670–675. IEEE, 2013.
[83] Ralph Langner. Stuxnet: Dissecting a cyberwarfare weapon. Security

& Privacy, IEEE, 9(3):49–51, 2011.

[84] Ulf E. Larson and Dennis K. Nilsson. Securing vehicles against cyber
attacks. In Proceedings of the 4th Annual Workshop on Cyber Security
and Information Intelligence Research: Developing Strategies to Meet

the Cyber Security and Information Intelligence Challenges Ahead,
CSIIRW ’08, pages 30:1–30:3, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
[85] Ulf E Larson, Dennis K Nilsson, and Erland Jonsson. An approach
to speciﬁcation-based attack detection for in-vehicle networks.
In
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, 2008 IEEE, pages 220–225. IEEE,
2008.

[86] Edward Ashford Lee and Sanjit Arunkumar Seshia.

Introduction to
embedded systems: A cyber-physical systems approach. Lee & Seshia,
2011.

[87] Hyeryun Lee, Kyunghee Choi, Kihyun Chung, Jaein Kim, and Kangbin
In 2015 IEEE 29th
Yim. Fuzzing can packets into automobiles.
International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and
Applications, pages 817–821. IEEE, 2015.

[88] Insup Lee, Oleg Sokolsky, Sanjian Chen, John Hatcliff, Eunkyoung Jee,
BaekGyu Kim, Andrew King, Margaret Mullen-Fortino, Soojin Park,
Alex Roederer, et al. Challenges and research directions in medical
cyber–physical systems. Proceedings of the IEEE, 100(1):75–90, 2012.
´Eireann Leverett and Reid Wightman. Vulnerability inheritance in
programmable logic controllers. https://ics- cert.us- cert.gov/content/
cyber-threat-source-descriptions, 2013.

[89]

[90] Eireann P Leverett. Quantitatively assessing and visualising industrial
system attack surfaces. University of Cambridge, Darwin College,
2011.

[91] Chunxiao Li, A. Raghunathan, and N.K. Jha. Hijacking an insulin
pump: Security attacks and defenses for a diabetes therapy system.
In e-Health Networking Applications and Services (Healthcom), 2011
13th IEEE International Conference on, pages 150–156, June 2011.

[92] Fenjun Li, Bo Luo, and Peng Liu. Secure information aggregation for
smart grids using homomorphic encryption. In Smart Grid Communi-
cations (SmartGridComm), 2010 First IEEE International Conference
on, pages 327–332. IEEE, 2010.

[93] Ting Liu, Yanan Sun, Yang Liu, Yuhong Gui, Yucheng Zhao, Dai
Wang, and Chao Shen. Abnormal trafﬁc-indexed state estimation: A
cyber?physical fusion approach for smart grid attack detection. Future
Generation Computer Systems, 49:94 – 103, 2015.

[94] Yao Liu, Peng Ning, and Michael K Reiter. False data injection attacks
against state estimation in electric power grids. ACM Transactions on
Information and System Security (TISSEC), 14(1):13, 2011.

[95] Zhuo Lu, Xiang Lu, Wenye Wang, and Cliff Wang. Review and
evaluation of security threats on the communication networks in the
smart grid. In MILITARY COMMUNICATIONS CONFERENCE, 2010-
MILCOM 2010, pages 1830–1835. IEEE, 2010.

[96] Zhuo Lu, Wenye Wang, and Cliff Wang. From jammer to gambler:
Modeling and detection of jamming attacks against time-critical trafﬁc.
In INFOCOM, 2011 Proceedings IEEE, pages 1871–1879. IEEE, 2011.
[97] Matthew E. Luallen. Critical control system vulnerabilities demon-
strated - and what to do about them. A SANS Whitepaper, November
2011.

[98] Doug MacDonald, Samuel L Clements, Scott W Patrick, Casey Perkins,
George Muller, Mary J Lancaster, and Will Hutton. Cyber/physical
security vulnerability assessment integration. In Innovative Smart Grid
Technologies (ISGT), 2013 IEEE PES, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2013.
[99] Munir Majdalawieh, Francesco Parisi-Presicce, and Duminda Wijesek-
era. Dnpsec: Distributed network protocol version 3 (dnp3) security
In Advances in Computer, Information, and Systems
framework.
Sciences, and Engineering, pages 227–234. Springer, 2006.

[100] Ed Markey. Tracking and hacking : Security and privacy gaps put
american drivers at risk. http://www.markey.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/
2015-02-06 MarkeyReport-Tracking Hacking CarSecurity%202.pdf,
2015.

[101] Daisuke Mashima and Alvaro A. C´ardenas. Evaluating electricity theft
In Proceedings of the 15th inter-
detectors in smart grid networks.
national conference on Research in Attacks, Intrusions, and Defenses,
RAID’12, pages 210–229, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012. Springer-Verlag.
[102] Patrick McDaniel and Stephen McLaughlin. Security and privacy
challenges in the smart grid. Security & Privacy, IEEE, 7(3):75–77,
2009.

[103] Anthony R. Metke and Randy L. Ekl. Security technology for smart

grid networks. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, 1(1):99–107, 2010.

[104] Microsoft Security TechCenter. Microsoft security bulletin ms08-067 -
critical. https://technet.microsoft.com/library/security/ms08-067, 2008.
[105] Microsoft Security TechCenter. Microsoft security bulletin summary
for september 2010. https://technet.microsoft.com/library/security/
ms10-sep, 2010.

[106] Bill Miller and Dale Rowe. A survey scada of and critical infrastructure
incidents. In Proceedings of the 1st Annual conference on Research in
information technology, pages 51–56. ACM, 2012.

[107] Charlie Miller and Chris Valasek. Adventures in automotive networks

and control units. A SANS Whitepaper, August 2013.

[108] R. Mitchell and Ing-Ray Chen. Survivability analysis of mobile cyber
In Wireless
physical systems with voting-based intrusion detection.
Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), 2011
7th International-/, pages 2256–2261, 2011.

[109] Rob Mitchell and Ray Chen. Behavior rule based intrusion detection
In Computer
for supporting secure medical cyber physical systems.
Communications and Networks (ICCCN), 2012 21st International
Conference on, pages 1–7. IEEE, 2012.

[110] Robert Mitchell and I-R Chen. Behavior-rule based intrusion detection

systems for safety critical smart grid applications. 2013.

[111] Robert Mitchell and Ing-Ray Chen. Effect of intrusion detection and
response on reliability of cyber physical systems. IEEE Transactions
on Reliability, 62(1):199–210, 2013.

[112] ROBERT MITCHELL and INGRAY CHEN. A survey of intrusion

detection techniques for cyber physical systems. 2013.

[113] Yilin Mo, T.H.-H. Kim, K. Brancik, D. Dickinson, Heejo Lee, A. Per-
rig, and B. Sinopoli. Cyber-physical security of a smart grid infras-
tructure. Proceedings of the IEEE, 100(1):195–209, 2012.

[114] Andr´es Molina-Markham, Prashant Shenoy, Kevin Fu, Emmanuel
Cecchet, and David Irwin. Private memoirs of a smart meter.
In
Proceedings of the 2nd ACM workshop on embedded sensing systems
for energy-efﬁciency in building, pages 61–66. ACM, 2010.

[115] Kate Munro. Deconstructing ﬂame:

the limitations of traditional

defences. Computer Fraud & Security, 2012(10):8 – 11, 2012.
[116] Igor Nai Fovino, Andrea Carcano, Marcelo Masera, and Alberto
Trombetta. An experimental investigation of malware attacks on scada
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection,
systems.
2(4):139–145, 2009.

[117] Ellen Nakashima and Steven Mufson. Hackers have attacked foreign

utilities, cia analyst says. Washington Post, 19, 2008.

[118] Clifford Neuman. Challenges in security for cyber-physical systems.
In DHS Workshop on Future Directions in Cyber-Physical Systems
Security. Citeseer, 2009.

[119] Andrew Nicholson, S Webber, S Dyer, T Patel, and Helge Janicke.
Scada security in the light of cyber-warfare. Computers & Security,
31(4):418–436, 2012.

[120] Liam O. Nicolas Falliere. W32.stuxnet dossier, 2011.
[121] Dennis K Nilsson, Phu H Phung, and Ulf E Larson. Vehicle ecu
classiﬁcation based on safety-security characteristics. In Road Trans-
port Information and Control-RTIC 2008 and ITS United Kingdom
Members’ Conference, IET, pages 1–7. IET, 2008.

[122] NIST Nistir. 7628: Guidelines for smart grid cyber security. Technical

report, Technical report, 2010.

[123] Dhruv Oberoi, Wing Yan Sou, Yin Yi Lui, Roy Fisher, Lavinia Dinca,
and Gerhard P Hancke. Wearable security: Key derivation for body
area sensor networks based on host movement. In Industrial Electronics
(ISIE), 2016 IEEE 25th International Symposium on, pages 1116–1121.
IEEE, 2016.

[124] T. Paukatong. Scada security: A new concerning issue of an in-
In Transmission and Distribution Conference and

house egat-scada.
Exhibition: Asia and Paciﬁc, 2005 IEEE/PES, pages 1–5, 2005.
[125] Jonathan Petit and Steven E Shladover. Potential cyberattacks on
automated vehicles. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, 16(2):546–556, 2015.

[126] Charles P. Pﬂeeger and Shari Lawrence Pﬂeeger. Security in Computing
(4th Edition). Prentice Hall PTR, Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 2006.
[127] Ludovic Pi`etre-Cambac´ed`es, Marc Tritschler, and Goran N Ericsson.
Cybersecurity myths on power control systems: 21 misconceptions and
false beliefs. Power Delivery, IEEE Transactions on, 26(1):161–172,
2011.

[128] Elias Leake Quinn. Privacy and the new energy infrastructure. Avail-

able at SSRN 1370731, 2009.

[129] Amir Hamed Mohsenian Rad and Alberto Leon-Garcia. Distributed
internet-based load altering attacks against smart power grids. IEEE
Trans. Smart Grid, 2(4):667–674, 2011.

[130] Jerome Radcliffe. Hacking medical devices for fun and insulin: Break-
In Black Hat Conference presentation

ing the human scada system.
slides, volume 2011, 2011.

[131] M.A Rahman, P. Bera, and E. Al-Shaer. Smartanalyzer: A noninvasive
In INFOCOM, 2012

security threat analyzer for ami smart grid.
Proceedings IEEE, pages 2255–2263, March 2012.

[132] Ronald S. Ross. Nist, guide for conducting risk assessments. nist
special publication 800-30 revision 1. Technical report, US Dep. of
Commerce, 2012.

27

[154] V. Urias, B. Van Leeuwen, and B. Richardson. Supervisory command
and data acquisition (scada) system cyber security analysis using a live,
virtual, and constructive (lvc) testbed. In MILITARY COMMUNICA-
TIONS CONFERENCE, 2012 - MILCOM 2012, pages 1–8, 2012.

[155] US-CERT. Cyber threat source descriptions. https://ics-cert.us-cert.

gov/content/cyber-threat-source-descriptions, 2009.

[156] Lisa Vaas. Doctors disabled wireless in dick cheney’s pacemaker to
thwart hacking. http://nakedsecurity.sophos.com/2013/10/22/doctors-
10
disabled-wireless-in-dick-cheneys-pacemaker-to-thwart-hacking/,
2013.

[157] B. Vaidya, D. Makrakis, and H.T. Mouftah. Authentication and
authorization mechanisms for substation automation in smart grid
network. Network, IEEE, 27(1):5–11, January 2013.

[158] Wenye Wang and Zhuo Lu. Cyber security in the smart grid: Survey
and challenges. Computer Networks, 57(5):1344 – 1371, 2013.
[159] Donald Welch and Scott Lathrop. Wireless security threat taxonomy.
In Information Assurance Workshop, 2003. IEEE Systems, Man and
Cybernetics Society, pages 76–83. IEEE, 2003.

[160] Jos Wetzels. Broken keys to the kingdom: Security and privacy aspects
of rﬁd-based car keys. arXiv preprint arXiv:1405.7424, 2014.

[161] Marko Wolf and Timo Gendrullis. Design,

implementation, and
In Information
evaluation of a vehicular hardware security module.
Security and Cryptology-ICISC 2011, pages 302–318. Springer, 2012.
[162] Marko Wolf, Andr´e Weimerskirch, and Christof Paar. Security in

automotive bus systems. 2004.

[163] Samuel Woo, Hyo Jin Jo, and Dong Hoon Lee. A practical wireless
attack on the connected car and security protocol for in-vehicle can.
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 16(2):993–
1006, 2015.

[164] Le Xie, Yilin Mo, and Bruno Sinopoli. False data injection attacks in
electricity markets. In Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm),
2010 First IEEE International Conference on, pages 226–231. IEEE,
2010.

[165] Fengyuan Xu, Zhengrui Qin, C.C. Tan, Baosheng Wang, and Qun
Li. Imdguard: Securing implantable medical devices with the external
In INFOCOM, 2011 Proceedings IEEE, pages
wearable guardian.
1862–1870, April 2011.

[166] Mark Yampolskiy, Peter Horvath, Xenofon D Koutsoukos, Yuan Xue,
and Janos Sztipanovits. Taxonomy for description of cross-domain
attacks on cps. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM international conference
on High conﬁdence networked systems, pages 135–142. ACM, 2013.
[167] Ye Yan, Yi Qian, Hamid Sharif, and David Tipper. A survey on cyber
security for smart grid communications. Communications Surveys
Tutorials, IEEE, 14(4):998–1010, Fourth 2012.

[168] Mark Zeller. Myth or reality?does the aurora vulnerability pose a risk
to my generator? In Protective Relay Engineers, 2011 64th Annual
Conference for, pages 130–136. IEEE, 2011.

[169] Guanglou Zheng, Gengfa Fang, Rajan Shankaran, and Mehmet A
Orgun. Encryption for implantable medical devices using modiﬁed
one-time pads. IEEE Access, 3:825–836, 2015.

[170] Bonnie Zhu, Anthony Joseph, and Shankar Sastry. A taxonomy of cy-
ber attacks on scada systems. In Proceedings of the 2011 International
Conference on Internet of Things and 4th International Conference on
Cyber, Physical and Social Computing, ITHINGSCPSCOM ’11, pages
380–388, Washington, DC, USA, 2011. IEEE Computer Society.

[171] Bonnie Zhu and Shankar Sastry.

tion/prevention systems: a survey and taxonomy.
the 1st Workshop on Secure Control Systems (SCS), 2010.

Scada-speciﬁc intrusion detec-
In Proceedings of

[133] Masoud Rostami, Wayne Burleson, Farinaz Koushanfar, and Ari Juels.
Balancing security and utility in medical devices? In Proceedings of
the 50th Annual Design Automation Conference, page 13. ACM, 2013.
[134] Michael Rushanan, Aviel D Rubin, Denis Foo Kune, and Colleen M
Swanson. Sok: Security and privacy in implantable medical devices
and body area networks. 2014.

[135] Dae Hyun Ryu, HyungJun Kim, and Keehong Um. Reducing security
vulnerabilities for critical infrastructure. Journal of Loss Prevention
in the Process Industries, 22(6):1020 – 1024, 2009.
Papers Pre-
sented at the 2007 and 2008 International Symposium of the Mary
Kay O’Connor Process Safety Center and Papers Presented at the
{WCOGI} 2007.

[136] Florian Sagstetter, Martin Lukasiewycz, Sebastian Steinhorst, Marko
Wolf, Alexandre Bouard, William R Harris, Somesh Jha, Thomas
Peyrin, Axel Poschmann, and Samarjit Chakraborty. Security chal-
In Pro-
lenges in automotive hardware/software architecture design.
ceedings of the Conference on Design, Automation and Test in Europe,
pages 458–463. EDA Consortium, 2013.

[137] Ruben Santamarta. Here be backdoors: A journey into the secrets of
industrial ﬁrmware. https://media.blackhat.com/bh- us- 12/Brieﬁngs/
Santamarta/BH US 12 Santamarta Backdoors WP.pdf, 2012.
[138] Robert M Seepers, Jos H Weber, Zekeriya Erkin, Ioannis Sourdis, and
Christos Strydis. Secure key-exchange protocol for implants using
In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on
heartbeats.
Computing Frontiers, pages 119–126. ACM, 2016.

[139] Stefan Seifert and Roman Obermaisser. Secure automotive gateway–
In Industrial Informatics
secure communication for future cars.
(INDIN), 2014 12th IEEE International Conference on, pages 213–
220. IEEE, 2014.

[140] Roberto Setola. Cyber threats to scada systems, 2011.
[141] Yasser Shoukry, Paul Martin, Paulo Tabuada, and Mani Srivastava.
Non-invasive spooﬁng attacks for anti-lock braking systems.
In
Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems-CHES 2013, pages
55–72. Springer, 2013.

[142] Yasser Shoukry, Paul Martin, Yair Yona, Suhas Diggavi, and Mani
Srivastava. Pycra: Physical challenge-response authentication for active
In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
sensors under spooﬁng attacks.
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pages
1004–1015. ACM, 2015.

[143] Jill Slay and Michael Miller. Lessons learned from the maroochy water
breach. In Critical Infrastructure Protection, pages 73–82, 2007.
[144] Teodor Sommestad, G¨oran N Ericsson, and Jakob Nordlander. Scada
In Power and
system cyber security—a comparison of standards.
Energy Society General Meeting, 2010 IEEE, pages 1–8. IEEE, 2010.
[145] Siddharth Sridhar, Adam Hahn, and Manimaran Govindarasu. Cyber–
physical system security for the electric power grid. Proceedings of
the IEEE, 100(1):210–224, 2012.

[146] Gary Stoneburner, Alice Y. Goguen, and Alexis Feringa. Sp 800-30.
risk management guide for information technology systems. Technical
report, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 2002.

[147] Keith A. Stouffer, Joseph A. Falco, and Karen A. Scarfone. Sp 800-82.
guide to industrial control systems (ics) security: Supervisory control
and data acquisition (scada) systems, distributed control systems (dcs),
and other control system conﬁgurations such as programmable logic
controllers (plc). Technical report, Gaithersburg, MD, United States,
2011.

[148] Ivan Studnia, Vincent Nicomette, Eric Alata, Yves Deswarte, Mohamed
Kaaniche, and Youssef Laarouchi. Security of embedded automotive
In SAFECOMP
networks: state of the art and a research proposal.
2013-Workshop CARS (2nd Workshop on Critical Automotive applica-
tions: Robustness & Safety) of the 32nd International Conference on
Computer Safety, Reliability and Security, page NA, 2013.

[149] Ivan Studnia, Vincent Nicomette, Eric Alata, Yves Deswarte, Mohamed
Kaˆaniche, and Youssef Laarouchi. Survey on security threats and
protection mechanisms in embedded automotive networks. In Depend-
able Systems and Networks Workshop (DSN-W), 2013 43rd Annual
IEEE/IFIP Conference on, pages 1–12. IEEE, 2013.

[150] Symantec Security Response. Dragonﬂy: Western energy companies
http : / / www. symantec . com /connect / blogs /

under sabotage threat.
dragonﬂy-western-energy-companies-under-sabotage-threat, 2014.

[151] Adrian Taylor, Nathalie Japkowicz, and Sylvain Leblanc. Frequency-
based anomaly detection for the automotive can bus. In 2015 World
Congress on Industrial Control Systems Security (WCICSS), pages 45–
49. IEEE, 2015.

[152] Rose Tsang. Cyberthreats, vulnerabilities and attacks on scada net-

works. University of California, Berkeley, 2010.

[153] Robert J Turk. Cyber incidents involving control systems. 2005.

28

