CRSTIP - An Assessment Scheme for Security
Assessment Processes

Arthur-Jozsef Molnar
Info World
Bucharest, Romania
arthur.molnar@infoworld.ro

J¨urgen Großmann
Fraunhofer FOKUS
Berlin, Germany
juergen.grossmann@fokus.fraunhofer.de

7
1
0
2

b
e
F
6
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
0
0
8
0
.
2
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Complex networked systems are an integral part of
today’s support infrastructures. Due to their importance, these
systems become more and more the target for cyber-attacks,
suffering a notable number of security incidents. Also, they are
subject to regulation by national and international legislation.
An operator of such an infrastructure or system is responsible
for ensuring its security and correct functioning in order to
satisfy customers. In addition, the entire process of risk and
quality control needs to be efﬁcient and manageable. This short
paper introduces the Compliance, Risk Assessment and Security
Testing Improvement Proﬁling (CRSTIP) scheme. CRSTIP is an
evaluation scheme that enables assessing the maturity of security
assessment processes, taking into consideration systematic use
of formalisms,
integration and tool-support in the areas of
compliance assessment, security risk assessment and security
testing. The paper describes the elements of the scheme and their
application to one of the case studies of the RASEN research
project.

Index Terms—compliance assessment, risk assessment, security

testing

I. INTRODUCTION

Researchers within the RASEN 1 project develop methods
dedicated to supporting companies and organizations in under-
taking risk analysis for large scale, networked systems. These
methods cover security risk assessments on different levels
of abstraction and from different perspectives. Compliance
assessment especially addresses compliance of products and
processes for which regulations are in effect. Security risk
assessment deals with the concise assessment of security
threats, estimating the probabilities and consequences for a set
of technical or business related assets. Finally, security testing
can be used to examine the target under assessment, be it an
organization or system for actual weaknesses or vulnerabili-
ties. While the industry demands integrative approaches that
cope with security as a whole, currently no established process
exists that sufﬁciently emphasizes the systematic integration of
compliance assessment, security risk assessment and security
testing. Within the RASEN project we aim to close this gap
by developing an integrated security assessment framework
based on compliance assessment, security risk assessment and
security testing. The resulting framework will be evaluated
using three industrial case studies.

Currently, there exist a number of methods to evaluate the
maturity and quality of test and assessment processes. The
most known representative is the Test Process Improvement
(TPI) and its successor TPI NEXT [3]. Both schemes are
trademarks of SOGETI [5] and have been applied to assess
industrial processes across the world. Another approach is the
Test Maturity Model (TMM) and its successor Test Maturity
Model
integration (TMMi) [4]. However, both approaches
emphasize on testing and do not sufﬁciently cover the aspects
of compliance assessment and risk assessment as required to
assess the RASEN approach.

II. THE CRSTIP APPROACH FOR PROCESS EVALUATION

The CRSTIP (Compliance and Risk Security Testing Im-
provement Proﬁling) evaluation scheme can be used to assess
the readiness level of an organization, process or system with
regards to four key areas: legal and compliance assessment,
security risk assessment, security testing and tool support and
integration. CRSTIP was initially used to assess the baseline of
the RASEN use cases, that is their status quo before applying
the techniques and tools that are developed within the project.
It has been additionally used to express expectations regarding
the progress within the four key areas for each of the case
studies during the project’s life time. The scheme will be used
again in order to document the actual progress achived after
deploying RASEN methodology and tooling.

CRSTIP provides a simple, straightforward assessment with
regards to the target’s current positioning within the CRSTIP
key areas. The approach is based on the general ideas of
TMMi and TPI and previous work undertaken within the
ITEA2 DIAMONDS project 2, where it was limited to assess
progress in selected key areas of security testing [?]. For
each of the key areas we deﬁned a performance scale with
a four-level hierarchy that can be used to evaluate security
assessment processes with respect to performance. Within each
area, levels with a higher number represent an improvement
over lower levels. We plan to further reﬁne CRSTIP within
our project in order to serve as liaison between project efforts
and organizations seeking to improve their standing in the key
areas addressed by RASEN. This paper details the CRSTIP
key areas and levels, showing its initial application to the

1The FP7 RASEN project, http://www.rasenproject.eu

2The ITEA2 DIAMONDS project, http://www.itea2-diamonds.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
Medipedia system. The key areas and their levels are detailed
in the following subsections.

A. Key area - Legal and compliance assessment

This key areas refers to the overall process that is employed
with the objective of adhering to the requirements of laws, to
industry and organizational standards and codes, to principles
of good governance and accepted community as well as to
ethical standards. The overall process should support, to the
extent possible, the documentation of compliance with these
laws, rules and norms. The levels of this key area are:
Level 1: Ad-hoc. The compliance assessment is unstructured,
does not use a deﬁned compliance process, and compliance
decisions are made primarily on an event-driven basis.
Level 2: Check list based. The checklist-based compliance
to answer a set of standard
assessment uses a checklist
questions or to tick checkboxes.
Level 3: Systematic. A systematic compliance assessment
follows a structured and planned approach where there is a
deﬁned process and structured documentation of compliance.
Generally, the process involves the identiﬁcation of compli-
ance requirements, evaluation of the compliance issues and
taking measures to ensure compliance.
Level 4: Systematic and risk-driven. A systematic and
risk-driven compliance assessment involves a deﬁned process
for risk-driven compliance where requirements are prioritized
based on their risks. This approach is supported by a system-
atic documentation that enables the mapping of different risks
and controls to relevant compliance requirements.

B. Key area - Security risk assessment

Risk assessment is the overall process of risk identiﬁcation,
estimation and evaluation. Risk identiﬁcation is the process of
ﬁnding, recognizing and describing risks. This involves identi-
fying sources of risk, areas of impact and events, together with
their causes and potential consequences. Risk estimation is the
process of comprehending the nature of risk and determining
its level. Finally, risk evaluation is the process of comparing
the results of risk estimation with risk criteria to determine
whether the magnitute of risk is acceptable. Risk evaluation
assists in decisions about risk treatment. The levels of this key
area are:
Level 1: Checklist. Risk assessment mainly consists of an-
swering a sequence of questions or ﬁlling in a form.
Level 2: Qualitative. Risk assessment is based on qualitative
risk values. The value descriptions or distinctions are based
on some quality or characteristic rather than on some quantity
or measured value.
Level 3: Quantitative. Risk assessment is based on quantita-
tive values. The values are based on some quantity or number,
e.g. a measurement, rather than on some quality.
Level 4: Real time. Risk assessment is done in real-time based
on an underlying, computerized monitoring-infrastructure.

C. Key area - Security testing

Security testing is used to empirically check software im-
plementations with respect to their security properties and

resistance to attack. Functional security testing is used to
check the functionality, efﬁciency and availability of security
features of a dedicated test item. Security vulnerability testing
directly addresses the identiﬁcation and discovery of system
vulnerabilities. It targets the identiﬁcation of design ﬂaws and
implementation faults that can harm the availability, conﬁden-
tiality and integrity of the test item. The levels of this key area
are:
Level 1: Unstructured. Unstructured security testing is per-
formed either by the development team or the testing team
without planning or documentation. The tests are intended to
be run only once, unless a defect is discovered. The testing
is neither systematic nor planned. Defects found using this
method may be harder to reproduce.
Level 2: Planned. Planned security testing is performed either
by the development team or the testing team after a structured
test plan has been elaborated. A test plan documents the scope,
approach, and resources that will be used for testing.
Level 3: Risk based. Security tests are planned and executed,
either by the development team or by the testing team. The
planning of security testing is done on the basis of the security
risk assessment using impact estimations or likelihood values
to focus the testing process.
Level 4: Continuous risk based. Continuous risk based
security testing is a process of continuously monitoring and
testing a system with respect
to potential vulnerabilities.
Security risk analysis results are still used to focus the security
testing and optimize resource planning. Any evolution of the
system, of its environment or of the identiﬁed threats leads to
updated security tests so that vulnerabilities can be detected
throughout the whole life cycle of the test item.

D. Key area - Tool support and integration

This key area describes the degree of tool support and
integration available for the above mentioned areas. Typically,
tools work on their own data structures that are well suited to
the task which needs to be performed with or by the tool. Tool
integration is the ability of tools to cooperate by exchanging
data or sharing a common user interface. The levels of this
key area are:
Level 1: None. No tool support in any of the above mentioned
key areas is available.
Level 2: Stand-alone. Tools are available for some of the
previously mentioned key areas. However, the tools are not
integrated thus they do not exchange data nor do they share
the same user interface.
Level 3: Partially integrated. Tools are available for some of
the above mentioned key areas. Tool integration is based on
point-to-point coalitions between tools. Point-to-point coali-
tions are often used in small and ad-hoc environments but have
problems when it comes to more tools and larger environments
as they do not scale.
Level 4: Integrated. Tools are available for nearly all the key
areas. Tool integration is based on central integration platforms
and repositories that provide a common set of interfaces and
data deﬁnitions to be exchanged.

and to outline progress expectations for the end of the project.
We believe that in its current form, CRSTIP is a useful tool
which stakeholders can use to asses a target organization,
process or product. More so, as shown above, the scheme
can be used to gain understanding about which areas are
most suitable for further investment and how the levels in the
different key areas relate or require each other.

Furthermore, we envision using CRSTIP as a dissemination
tool for RASEN technologies, as it allows identifying maturity
levels with respect
to key security and compliance areas.
Ideally, a concise description for each of the key areas should
be available that denote the techniques and tools that can be
used to drive the improvement as well as the requirements to
other key areas that are the precondition to improve from one
level to the next. As future work, our desire is to provide a
web-based implementation where users are able to ﬁll in their
assessment and obtain information regarding the requirements
for moving to the next level in their areas of interest.

REFERENCES

[1] DIAMONDS, The
diamonds.org, 2013.

ITEA2 DIAMONDS project, http://www.itea2-

[2] RASEN, The FP7 RASEN project, http://www.rasenproject.eu, 2014.
[3] R. Marselis, R.

van der Ven, TPI NEXT CLUSTERS FOR CMMI,

http://www.tmap.net/sites/tmap.net/ﬁles/attachments/
TPI

NEXT clusters for CMMi 0.pdf, 2009.
Maturity
van

Veenendaal,

Test

[4] R.

Model

integration,

http://www.tmmi.org/pdf/TMMi.Framework.pdf, 2012.
[5] SOGETI, Website of SOGETI, http://www.sogeti.nl/, 2009
[6] Reform of data protection rules, http://ec.europa.eu/justice/newsroom/data-

protection/news/120125 en.htm, 2012

Fig. 1. CRSTIP Evaluation of Medipedia

III. THE MEDIPEDIA CASE STUDY
Medipedia3 is an eHealth web portal developed by Info
World that differentiates itself on the market by allowing
users to build and manage their personal electronic healthcare
record. As complex networked software system, Medipedia
has over 36000 active users and must fulﬁl legal requirements
with regards to processing highly-sensitive personal data such
as medical analyses results and diagnostic history. As a
case study system for RASEN, we have employed CRSTIP
to Medipedia in the following way: ﬁrst, we evaluated the
baseline, shown in Figure 1, as ”Before RASEN”. Then, based
on preliminary project results we estimate the beneﬁts of
implementing RASEN, shown on the same ﬁgure.

As the system processes sensitive customer data, key areas
already present maturity. However, it is clear that a structured
approach will beneﬁt Medipedia in virtually all of them. First
of all, while the system is legally compliant, a structured
approach enables Info World to better prepare for upcoming
regulations such as the General Data Protection Regulation[6]
and facilitates cornering new markets having different reg-
ulations. Furthermore, while the system undergoes planned
security testing and periodical risk assessment, there is no
interplay between these activities. A structured risk assessment
process that enables Info World to guide testing and which can
be updated using test results facilitates bringing new features
to market faster. The ﬁnal key area concerns software tooling,
where Info World recognizes the advantages supportive tooling
would bring to its risk assessment and testing processes.

IV. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK

CRSTIP was developed as an objective analysis and evalua-
tion scheme of the research and development within RASEN.
Currently we have used it to assess the case studies’ baseline

3http://www.medipedia.ro/

