7
1
0
2

r
a

M
6
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
5
8
8
0
.
3
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

The INSuRE Project:
CAE-Rs Collaborate to Engage Students in Cybersecurity Research

Alan Sherman (UMBC), M. Dark (Purdue), A. Chan (Northeastern),
R. Chong (Purdue), T. Morris (UAH), L. Oliva (UMBC), J. Springer (Purdue),
B. Thuraisingham (UTD), C. Vatcher (UMBC), R. Verma (Houston), S. Wetzel (Stevens)1

March 29, 2018

Abstract

Since fall 2012, several National Centers of Aca-
demic Excellence in Cyber Defense Research
(CAE-Rs) ﬁelded a collaborative course to en-
gage students in solving applied cybersecurity
research problems. We describe our experiences
with this Information Security Research and Ed-
ucation (INSuRE) research collaborative. We
explain how we conducted our project-based re-
search course, give examples of student projects,
and discuss the outcomes and lessons learned.

Index terms— INSuRE Project, cybersecu-
rity education, National Centers of Academic
Excellence in Cyber Defense Research (CAE-
Rs), project-based learning.

1 The INSuRE Project

The Information Security Research and Edu-
cation (INSuRE) research collaborative2 is a

1University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC),
University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH), University of
Texas at Dallas (UTD), University of Houston (Houston),
Stevens Institute of Technology (Stevens)
2http://insurehub.org/about-us

1

network of National Centers of Academic Ex-
cellence in Cyber Defense Research (CAE-Rs)
universities that cooperate to engage students
in solving applied cybersecurity research prob-
lems. Since fall 2012, INSuRE has ﬁelded a
multi-institutional cybersecurity research course
in which BS, MS, and PhD students work in
small groups to solve unclassiﬁed problems pro-
posed by the National Security Agency (NSA)
and by other government and private organiza-
tions and laboratories.

In this paper we describe our experiences with
the INSuRE Project. We explain how we con-
ducted our project-based research course, give
examples of student projects, and discuss the
outcomes, beneﬁts, and lessons learned.

The approximately eighty CAE-R universi-
ties3 include a signiﬁcant collection of cyber-
security students, educators, and researchers.
While the individual universities were “nodes of
excellence,” these nodes were not purposefully
constellated into a research network. The IN-
SuRE Project created an educational and re-
search network of CAE-Rs. As such, INSuRE
is a self-organizing, multi-disciplinary, multi-

3https://www.iad.gov/NIETP/reports/cae_designated_institutions.cfm

 
 
 
 
 
 
institutional, and multi-level collaborative orga-
nization.

The central activity of the INSuRE Project is
its cybersecurity research course, in which stu-
dents form small groups that work on research
problems of interest to the nation. The NSA
and other organizations support the project by
contributing suggested problems and by provid-
ing technical directors to mentor student groups.
The geographically-diverse participants connect
and collaborate using a variety of conferencing
and data-sharing technologies.

Students beneﬁt from an exciting opportunity
to work collaboratively on real-world problems
and to interact with experienced technical di-
rectors. They learn how to carry out research,
including producing fast, incremental, and ac-
tionable results in team projects. Beneﬁts to
participating government organizations include
collaborative work on important problems and
access to university faculty and to highly moti-
vated and capable students for possible employ-
ment. In addition, faculty beneﬁt from building
connections with other researchers, schools, and
government organizations.

Melissa Dark (Purdue), and Mark Loep-
ker, NSA Security Education Academic Liaison
(SEAL) for Purdue, started the INSuRE Project
in 2012. Dark provided the students and Loep-
ker provided the NSA research problems, along
with NSA Technical Directors under Trent Pit-
senbarger’s leadership. For more information
about INSuRE, see Dark, et al. [5, 7, 8].

2 The INSuRE Course

The ﬁrst INSuRE course took place in fall 2012
at Purdue, involving ﬁve students who formed
two groups supported by three technical direc-

Table 1: Growth of the INSuRE cybersecurity
research course from fall 2012 through spring
2017: number of universities, students, technical
directors (TDs: NSA + other government orga-
nizations), and student groups. For example, in
fall 2016, there were eleven TDs, including ﬁve
from NSA and six others.

Term

Univs.

2012 fall
2013 summer
2014 spring
2014 summer
2014 fall
2015 spring
2015 fall
2016 spring
2016 fall
2017 spring

1
1
3
1
4
8
7
6
8
7

Stud-
ents
5
1
33
1
22
52
42
72
64
54

TDs Groups

3+0
0
7+0
0
7+1
7+3
8+8
6+9
5+6
6+15

1
1
13
1
8
21
14
27
25
22

tors (TDs). With funding from the National Sci-
ence Foundation, the project added three more
schools: University of California, Davis; Missis-
sippi State; and University of Maryland, Bal-
timore County (UMBC). Many of the INSuRE
students are CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Ser-
vice (SFS)4 scholars.

In the following years, the course expanded
to include a total of twelve universities, six na-
tional labs, and two state organizations.5
In

4https://www.sfs.opm.gov/
5The additional universities included Carnegie Mellon
University, Dakota State University, Iowa State Univer-
sity, Northeastern University, Stevens Institute of Tech-
nology, University of Alabama in Huntsville, University
of Houston, University of Texas at Dallas, and University
of Texas at San Antonio. The additional organizations

2

some years, a small number of private compa-
nies participated. For example, the spring 2014
edition included a private defense contractor, As-
sured Information Security, located in UMBC’s
research park. Each partner organization sug-
gested research problems. Table 1 summarizes
the growth of the INSuRE course.

Every semester, a rotating subset of the collab-
orating universities oﬀers a section of the course
at their schools. Doing so enables each univer-
sity to participate at a frequency that suits its
needs, while fostering a diverse set of relation-
ships among the schools.

To facilitate collaboration, the project used
PURR, an instantiation at Purdue of the open
source software platform HUBzero®.6 Users
can share ﬁles, publish datasets and compu-
tational tools with Digital Object Identiﬁers,
and participate asynchronously in discussion
groups across multiple institutions. Individuals
and groups participated synchronously in peri-
odic community meetings using the WebEx con-
ferencing software, supplemented by an audio
bridge. INSuRE instructors shared experiences
and developed common syllabi, handouts, and
grading rubrics.

All class activities revolved around student
projects. TDs presented their suggested prob-
lems.
Students submitted bids and formed
groups (typically three to ﬁve students each).
In some schools, instructors assigned groups; in
other schools, students self-selected the groups.

included Argonne National Laboratories, Indiana Oﬃce
of Technology, Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics
Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technol-
ogy, Naval Surface Warfare Center Crane Division, New
Jersey Oﬃce of Homeland Security and Preparedness,
Oak Ridge National Laboratories, Paciﬁc Northwest Na-
tional Laboratories, and Sandia National Laboratories.

6https://hubzero.org/

Each group prepared a proposal, including a lit-
erature review, speciﬁc aims, and research plan.
Formal group presentations to the INSuRE com-
munity included progress reports and ﬁnal re-
ports.

Throughout the course, students interacted
with their TD. TDs could check on the status
of their groups, including reading a “dashboard”
slide summarizing the group’s progress.

Most groups worked on problems suggested
by the TDs; some proposed their own “custom”
projects or variations of suggested problems. Or-
ganizations sometimes proposed the same or a
similar project in multiple semesters. Student
groups were allowed to continue projects com-
pleted in previous terms, or in some cases, revisit
a problem addressed by others before.

Once a semester, key faculty and student
members from each of the participating schools
met in person, together with some of the TDs, to
review outcomes, discuss possible improvements,
nurture relationships, and plan ahead.
the project

initiated
INSuRE-Con,7 an annual student-organized re-
search conference featuring ﬁve competitively-
selected project presentations from the INSuRE
class.

In summer 2016,

3 Project Examples

To illustrate the type of research carried out in
the INSuRE course, we comment brieﬂy on the
suggested problem lists and describe several rep-
resentative projects, including three in some de-
tail.

Partner organizations pro-
Problem Lists.
vided lists of suggested problems covering a wide

7https://sites.google.com/a/uah.edu/insurecon16/proceedings

3

range of topics, including, for example, policy-
based stored information management, protec-
tion, and access control; software assurance, in-
cluding machine-assisted semantic understand-
ing of code; cloud computing, including cleaning
up data spillage in Hadoop clouds; forensics, in-
cluding cloud forensics and mobility forensics in
the Internet of Things; deriving intelligence from
an encrypted VPN stream; protocol analysis and
veriﬁcation; attacking botnets; machine learning
for malware classiﬁcation; vehicular data bus se-
curity; and incident response capabilities assess-
ment.

TD Pitsenbarger explained, “The tasks we
place on our INSuRE task list represent areas
where the organization needs greater insight and
past tasks have helped us.” These areas include
understanding new technologies (e.g., FIDO au-
thentication), tool development (e.g., control
ﬂow integrity), and validation of guidance (e.g.,
guidance on cleaning up spillages of sensitive
data in clouds).

Example 1: Moving Target Defense.

A three-student team from UT Dallas, work-
ing together with Argonne National Laborato-
ries, developed a Moving Target Defense (MTD)
to protect against probing attacks on web
servers [14]. At random bounded intervals be-
tween 15 and 60 seconds, the system switched
the web server between Apache and Nginx. Dy-
namically updated IP tables redirected web traf-
ﬁc to the active server. This deception aimed to
hinder attacks by constantly changing the tar-
get.

To test the eﬀectiveness of their system, the
team launched simulated attacks against the
web service, with and without MTD protection.
With MTD protection, a Word Press application
ran normally 76% of the time, experienced lag

14% of the time, and was down 10% of the time.
By contrast, without MTD the application ran
normally 13% of the time, experienced lag 7% of
the time, and was down 80% of the time.

This work suggests that MTD can be a prac-
tical and eﬀective defense against web service
probing attacks.

Example 2: Analysis of FIDO.

In three separate terms, teams from UMBC,
Purdue, and Stevens Institute of Technology
analyzed the Fast Identity Online (FIDO) au-
thentication protocol under development by the
FIDO Alliance.
In spring 2014, a team from
UMBC studied the new FIDO protocol, assess-
ing its goals, strengths, and weaknesses. This
team complemented the work of another concur-
rent UMBC team that studied the PICO authen-
tication system. FIDO and PICO oﬀer diﬀerent
approaches toward the eventual replacement of
passwords.

Building on the initial UMBC work, in fall
2014, a team from Purdue evaluated the vulnera-
bility of the FIDO Ready (TM) Samsung Galaxy
S5 ﬁngerprint reader to a particular spooﬁng at-
tack [4]. Discovered by a German security re-
search lab, this attack lifted a latent ﬁngerprint.
The Purdue team was unable to replicate this at-
tack successfully, though they were able to pro-
duce a ﬁngerprint by lifting a latent ﬁngerprint.
Building on the Purdue work, in spring 2015,
a team from Stevens studied two attacks on each
of four diﬀerent ﬁngerprint scanners: two FIDO
compliant devices (Samsung Galaxy S5, iPhone
S5) and two non-FIDO compliant devices (Ham-
ster Area Scanner, Validity Swipe Sensor). For
each of these two device categories, one device
had a swipe sensor and one device had an area
sensor. One attack created a “fake ﬁnger;” the
other produced a latent ﬁngerprint. The team

4

was able to carry out each attack successfully on
the S5 and on both non-FIDO compliant devices.
Diﬀerences between FIDO and non-FIDO com-
pliant devices were not due to the FIDO protocol
but rather to diﬀerences in the strengths of the
component authenticators.

Subsequently, NSA removed the problem from
the INSuRE problem set because the three stu-
dent teams had answered all of the questions.

Example 3: Detecting Intrusions on SCADA
Systems.

A two-student team from Mississippi State
University studied machine learning techniques
for detecting cyber attacks against industrial
control systems [15]. The team worked from a
dataset by Pan [11] of cyber attacks and normal
behavior from an electricity transmission system.
The dataset included alteration and injection at-
tacks against protection relays and Energy Man-
agement System (EMS) software. The injection
attacks sent illicit network packets to protection
relays to cause the relays to operate and open
a circuit breaker. The alteration attacks used
a Man-in-the-Middle to alter voltage and cur-
rent sensor data sent from phasor measurement
units to the EMS software. The dataset also in-
cluded instances of single line-to-ground faults at
random locations in the simulated transmission
system, and changes in system load at random
times.

First, the team extracted features from the
dataset and applied clustering techniques to
learn classes of events. Second, the team built a
classiﬁer using the Mamdani fuzzy inference sys-
tem. Inputs to the classiﬁer comprised a hetero-
geneous collection of voltage, current, frequency,
Snort log, and protection relay log information
from one time stamp.

ing results to similar classiﬁers developed from
K-means and Fuzzy C-Means clustering algo-
rithms. Their approach outperformed K-means-
and Fuzzy C-means-based intrusion detection
systems.

Additional Examples.
In spring 2014, the IN-
SuRE Project negotiated access to Google Glass
by some INSuRE students who analyzed its secu-
rity. A UMBC student team discovered a vulner-
ability and developed a proof-of-concept demon-
stration exploit, enabling an adversary to acti-
vate the eyewear and capture images without the
subject’s knowledge.

Also in spring 2014, a UMBC PhD student led
a group working on a custom project to perform
a security audit of software developed for the
Random-Sample Election Project.8

A Purdue team investigated information leak-
age from encrypted output from a Cisco ASA
5506 Virtual Private Network (VPN) appli-
ance. The team discovered a vulnerability in
the VPN’s use of Quick UDP Internet Connec-
tions (QUIC), an experimental transport layer
protocol designed in 2012 at Google. QUIC
exposed the length of short communications,
such as passwords, even when encrypted, as a
result of aligning cryptographic block bound-
aries to contain packet loss. When Purdue re-
ported the vulnerability, Google responded that
the vulnerability is broader than QUIC and
also impacts Transport Layer Security (TLS). If
Googles claim is true, the vulnerability could be
used to undermine authentication in TLS (for
short passwords) and impacts over 96% of all
websites. Google and Apple are working with
Purdue to create a patch to protect QUIC, TLS,
and other transport security protocols vulnera-
ble to leaking encrypted password lengths.

The team validated their work by compar-

8http://rsvoting.org/

5

Working on the problem of commercial so-
lutions for classiﬁed, another Purdue team ex-
plored the impact of known vulnerabilities on
layered solutions. The project analyzed past
known vulnerabilities across multiple mecha-
nisms in a layered solution. Given known vul-
nerabilities, as well as patch times generated by
statistical models, the project simulated the per-
formance of a layered security solution. The
study also explored if any of the vulnerabilities
in the individual mechanisms permitted a breach
in the security to persist beyond the application
of a patch, thus allowing an attacker to bypass
the layered solution even when the vulnerability
windows for the layers do not align. The team
produced software that, given one or more layers
composing a layered solution, identiﬁes windows
of opportunity where an attacker could breach
any layer as well as the complete layered solu-
tion. The sponsoring government organization
is currently using this tool.

4 Outcomes
Learned

and

Lessons

From fall 2012 through fall 2016, the INSuRE
class produced 140 project reports on 110 sep-
arate problems, and taught 356 students (many
of whom have been hired by government organi-
zations).

In addition to the works presented at INSuRE-
Con, INSuRE projects resulted in refereed con-
ference publications (e.g., [1,2,4,9,10,14]), refer-
eed posters (e.g., [12,13]), and published datasets
(e.g., [6]).

In this section we discuss some of the take-
aways (outcomes, beneﬁts, lessons learned, and
open challenges) from the INSuRE experience,
organized from the separate perspectives of ed-

6

ucators and government policy makers.

4.1 Takeaways for Educators

We summarize some of the outcomes,
lessons
learned, and challenges from the perspective of
educators.

Outcomes. To improve the course, faculty fre-
quently discussed process and outcomes. In May
2014, students were asked to submit course feed-
back via an online survey administered through
SurveyMonkey. Items included rank-order, Lik-
ert scale, and open-ended questions. Students
rated the course high on a variety of indicators.
The most highly rated elements included devel-
oping expertise in a speciﬁc topic in cybersecu-
rity, developing qualiﬁcations for a job in cyber-
security, and working with a mentor from gov-
ernment or industry. Students identiﬁed devel-
opment of research skills in cybersecurity as an
important course outcome. Results of the sur-
vey also showed that students found limitations
with the electronic communication methods used
to interact with other institutions.

In fall 2016, Purdue University conducted a pi-
lot study investigating the eﬀect of the INSuRE
course on student research self-eﬃcacy. Research
self-eﬃcacy [3] is a self judgement of one’s ability
to perform particular research tasks. The study
included 17 students (5 undergraduate, 12 grad-
uate) from eight universities that responded to
pre- and post-surveys. Each student measured
research self-eﬃcacy using a 100-point Likert
scale (0 denotes complete uncertainty; 100 de-
notes complete certainty).

size

small

sample

Given the

and rel-
team
the
ative nature of Likert
analyzed the data using a nonparametric
Wilcoxon Test.
stu-
Results
dent research self-eﬃcacy improved: pre-test

show that

scores,

mean 73.56, median 76.33,
interquartile range
[65.38–83.54]; post-test mean 83.27, median
86.83, interquartile range [74.54–89.42]. These
gains were statistically signiﬁcant (z = −2.58,
p < 0.01). Cronbach Alpha for each survey was
0.96.

to make sure they are motivated and ready to
engage in research. It was helpful for each team
to have a student leader with strong organiza-
tional skills. TDs also contributed signiﬁcantly
through their enthusiasm, availability, and prob-
ing questions.

Students gained valuable experiences carrying
out research, presenting their work, writing pro-
posals and reports, using tools (including for
software analysis), working in groups, building
relationships, and communicating succinctly and
eﬀectively with their TD. Because the problems
touched a broad range of issues, students and
faculty gained knowledge outside of their focused
In addition, the course in-
areas of expertise.
spired students to tackle challenging problems.
For some, it was their ﬁrst exposure to research.
The project-based course helped students learn
the need to take the initiative and lead.

the PhD level,

INSuRE students continued their
Several
studies at
citing their IN-
SuRE course as an important motivating factor.
One university reports that its INSuRE course
prompted a faculty member to include one of the
INSuRE problems to his research area. This uni-
versity also reports that the INSuRE course in-
creased the number of students completing cap-
stone engineering projects in cybersecurity and
motivated more local companies to engage in cy-
bersecurity projects with the university.

The INSuRE course has beneﬁted from a sig-

niﬁcant number of female students.

Although the INSuRE research experience in-
spired most students, a few learned that cy-
bersecurity research is not a path they wish to
pursue—a useful discovery for the students.

Lessons Learned. Many factors contributed to
the success of groups. To begin, it was helpful to
screen students (especially the undergraduates)

Course alumni and alumnae also contributed
to project success. Some of them enthusiastically
functioned as course assistants, facilitators, and
mentors.

In some terms, instructors required each group
to provide periodic peer evaluations of a paired
group. Doing so provides additional feedback to
the evaluated group, and it helps the evaluating
group learn the research process. While there
can be signiﬁcant value, such peer evaluations
come at a cost of time and eﬀort for students
and faculty, and it can be diﬃcult to coordinate
across diverse university schedules.

Some schools restricted enrollment to gradu-
ate students; others permitted some undergrad-
In mixed classes, more
uates to participate.
advanced (e.g., PhD) students were usually ex-
pected to carry out greater leadership roles than
were undergraduates. Many of the instructors
found, however, that student performance typi-
cally had more to do with student capability and
motivation than with degree level.

While most schools oﬀered the INSuRE expe-
rience as a dedicated course, others enrolled stu-
dents as independent study projects or as part
of an existing capstone course.

The faculty found the biannual

in-person
meetings very useful, helping participating uni-
versities to improve the course by applying
lessons learned. They also fostered stronger per-
sonal relationships necessary for eﬀective collab-
oration.

Challenges. Challenges included dealing with

7

diﬀerent time zones and university schedules
(e.g., semester vs. quarter systems). Also, while
useful, the conferencing software yielded video
displays that were limited in comparison to the
rich interaction possible through in-person meet-
ings. It requires a signiﬁcant involvement by the
instructor to stay on top of all projects.

One semester is a short period of time to com-
plete a research project, yet one year might be
longer than many students are willing to invest.
At many of the universities, grant support was
essential to enable a faculty member to be al-
lowed to teach a small specialized research course
counting toward his or her oﬃcial teaching du-
ties. Teaching the INSuRE class often meant not
teaching some other course, which might have
been a larger required class.

Some centralized support was essential, to or-
ganize the network, to maintain a repository of
project work, and to manage the collaborative
technologies. Financial resources are needed for
this centralized support, for hardware and soft-
ware, for the in-person meetings, for support by
a teaching assistant if the class is large, and for
instructor time.

The INSuRE course enabled government orga-
nizations to stimulate research on projects that
they lacked time to pursue.

Aspects of the INSuRE model can be applied
to other settings.
Inspired in part by the IN-
SuRE Project, UMBC is pioneering a new initia-
tive in which UMBC extends SFS awards to stu-
dents at nearby Montgomery College and Prince
George’s Community College, who will complete
their degrees at UMBC. While in community
college, the scholars will work collaboratively to
help solve IT security problems for their county
government.

Securing a sustainable funding model is a chal-
lenge. One option is a subscription model in
which companies and organizations contribute
in return for access to students and their work
on problems. Another model is a charity model
in which sponsors (e.g., government) fund the
program for the national good.
INSuRE wel-
comes the opportunity to explore future relation-
industry, foundations,
ships with government,
and other groups to continue the outstanding
student work nurtured by INSuRE.

4.2 Takeaways for Government Policy

5 The Future

Makers

At modest investments, the INSuRE Project
produced a sizable return, especially in terms
of recruiting highly-qualiﬁed cybersecurity stu-
dents into the government workforce.
Be-
yond resumes, student experiences with INSuRE
demonstrate the ability of students to under-
stand technology, communicate, and work eﬀec-
In addition, by funding a re-
tively in teams.
search network, government can support cyber-
security research without favoritism to particular
universities.

The INSuRE Project has inspired and educated
students in cybersecurity, empowered them to
think freely, and engaged them in research prob-
lems related to national security.
It has also
strengthened the CAE-R network and helped
government organizations, including by motivat-
ing students to pursue government service. The
course is being oﬀered again in spring 2017. IN-
SuRE’s continued success will depend on strong
external support from government, industry and
foundations, and internal support from universi-
ties.

8

Acknowledgments

We thank Mark Loepker (NSA) for overall gov-
ernment program management and the many
technical directors who contributed greatly to
the success of the INSuRE Project, especially
Trent Pitsenbarger (NSA). We also thank the
INSuRE instructors and student leaders.

This work was supported in part by the
National Science Foundation under a variety
of grants including an Eager grant (1344369),
supplements to several SFS and other grants
(1241576, 1433753, 1433690, 1241668, 1433795,
1241576,
NSA supported IN-
SuRE 2.0 via collaborative CAE-R grants to
DSU (H98230-15-1-0298), Stevens (H98230-15-
1-0299), and Purdue (H98230-15-1-0300). A
small Intel grant to Purdue paid for equipment
for some student projects.

1241668).

Additional technical directors include: Paul
Black (NIST), Joel Coﬀman (APL), Nate Evans
(ANL), Aaron Ferber (ORNL), Jennifer Fowler
(ANL), Andrew Gearhart (APL), Dickie George
(APL), Mahantesh Halappanavar (PNL), Al
Holt
(NSA), Chris Jenkins (Sandia), Mark
Krisanda (NSA), Matt Kuczynski (NJOHSP),
Bill LaCholter (APL), Bill Layton (NSA), Mark
Loepker
(NSA) Joshua Lyle (ANL), Brian
Lyles (ORNL), Patrick Mackey (PNL), Mike
Moore (ORNL), Nick Multari (PNL), Alex New-
man (NJOHSP), Rob Nichols (APL), Nate
Paul (ORNL), James Pendergass (APL), Austin
Roach (Crane), Andy Sampson (NSA), My-
ron Schlueter (AIS), Michael Thompson (ANL),
Roland Varriale (ANL), Andy White (NSA),
Jian Yin (PNL), Ed Zieglar (NSA), and Neal
Ziring (NSA).

In addition to the faculty coauthors,

IN-
SuRE faculty include: Matt Bishop (UC Davis),
Glenn Dietrich (San Antonio), Tom Halverson

(DSU), Michael Ham (DSU), Doug Jacobson
(ISU), Brandeis Marshall (Purdue), Wayne Pauli
(DSU), Joshua Strolchen (DSU), and Patrick
Tague (CMU).

In addition to the student coauthors, INSuRE
student leaders include: Courtney Falk (Pur-
due), Filipo Sharevski (DePaul), and Lauren
Stuart (Purdue).

References

[1] Alabi, T. and J. Beckman and M. Dark and J.
Springer. Toward a Data Spillage Prevention
Process in Hadoop Using Data Provenance. In
Proceedings of the 2015 Workshop on Changing
Landscape in HPC Security (CLHS ’15), 2015.

[2] Alves, T. and R. Das and T. Morris. Virtual-
ization of Industrial Control System Testbeds
In Second Annual Indus-
for Cybersecurity.
trial Control System Security (ICSS) Workshop
at the 2016 Annual Computer Security Appli-
cations Conference (ACSAC-2016), December
2016.

[3] K. J. Bieschke, R. M. Bishop, and V. L. Garcia.
The Utility of the Research Self-Eﬃcacy Scale.
Journal of Career Assessment, 4(1):59–75, 1996.

[4] Chong, R. C. and M. Dark and R. Linger, R. and
M. Bishop. The FIDO INSuRE (Information
Security Research Education) Project: An Ag-
ile Research Experience. In Colloquium for In-
formation Systems Security Education (CISSE),
pages 1–7, 2015.

[5] Dark, M. Innovation in Graduate Cyber Educa-
tion Project INSuRE. In 2014 National Initia-
tive for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) Con-
ference, 2014.

[6] Dark, M. and B. Curnett. Longitudinal Pass-
Pur-
2015.

word Data Set Varying with Policy.
due University Research Repository,
doi:10.4231/R72V2D12.

9

A shorter version of this paper will be submitted to
IEEE Security & Privacy.

[7] Dark, M. and L. Stuart.

Innovation in Cy-
bersecurity Research Traineeship in the IN-
SuRE Project.
In Proceedings of the 7th An-
nual Southeastern Cyber Security Conference
(SCSS), 2015. Huntsville, AL.

[8] Dark, M. and M. Bishop and R. Linger and L.
Goldrich. Realism in Teaching Cybersecurity
Research: The Agile Research Process. In In-
formation Security Education Across the Cur-
riculum, pages 3–14. Springer, 2015.

[9] Falk, C. A Model and Tool for Public Cloud
Provider Risk Assessment. In Proceedings of the
7th Annual Southeastern Cyber Security Summit
(SCSS), 2015. Huntsville, AL.

[10] Nair, Sandeep and Sudip Mittal and Anupam
Joshi. OBD SecureAlert: An Anomaly Detec-
tion System for Vehicles. In IEEE Workshop on
Smart Service Systems (SmartSys 2016), May
2016.

[11] S. Pan, T. Morris, and U. Adhikari. Developing
a Hybrid Intrusion Detection System Using Data
Mining for Power Systems. IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid, 6(6):3104–3113, Nov 2015.

[12] Raut, Amit and Pravav Sharma. Machine
Learning and Malware Classiﬁcation. Research,
Innovation and Scholarship Expo (RISE), 2014.
Poster, Boston.

[13] Shehab, Omar.

Locality of Diﬀerent Clock
Hamiltonians for Unitary Evolution of Deutschs
Algorithm. QuICS Workshop on Quantum In-
formation and Computer Science, March 2014.
Poster, University of Maryland, College Park.

[14] Michael Thompson, Marilyne Mendolla, Michael
Muggler, and Moses Ike. Dynamic Application
Rotation Environment for Moving Target De-
fense. Resilience Week (RWS), September 2016.

[15] Tomlin, L. and M. Farnam and S. Pan. A
Clustering Approach to Industrial Network
Intrusion Detection. In Proceedings of the 2016
Information Security Research and Education
(INSuRE) Conference (INSuRECon-16), 2016.
https://sites.google.com/a/uah.edu/insurecon16/document-archive/INSuRECon16_paper_2.pdf.

10

