ARL-TR-7967 ● MAR 2017 

US Army Research Laboratory 

Recommendations for Model-Driven 
Paradigms for Integrated Approaches to Cyber 
Defense 

by Mona Lange, Alexander Kott, Noam Ben-Asher, Wim Mees, 
Nazife Baykal, Cristian-Mihai Vidu, Matteo Merialdo, Marek 
Malowidzki, and Bhopinder K Madahar 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTICES 

Disclaimers 

The findings in this report are not to be construed as an official Department of the 
Army position unless so designated by other authorized documents. 

Citation  of  manufacturer’s  or  trade  names  does  not  constitute  an  official 
endorsement or approval of the use thereof. 

Destroy this report when it is no longer needed. Do not return it to the originator.

 
 
 
 
ARL-TR-7967 ● MAR 2017 

US Army Research Laboratory 

Recommendations for Model-Driven 
Paradigms for Integrated Approaches to Cyber 
Defense 

by Mona Lange 
University of Lübeck, Germany 

Alexander Kott and Noam Ben-Asher 
Computational and Information Sciences Directorate, ARL 

Wim Mees 
Royal Military Academy, Belgium  

Nazife Baykal 
Middle Eastern Technical University, Turkey 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cristian-Mihai Vidu 
National University for Political Sciences and Public Administration, 
Romania 

Matteo Merialdo 
Roma Tre University, Italy 

Marek Malowidzki 
Military Communication Institute, Poland 

Bhopinder K Madahar 
Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, United Kingdom 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK. 

 
 
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 

Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the 
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing the 
burden, to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (0704-0188), 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302. 
Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid 
OMB control number. 
PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS. 

1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY) 
March 2017 
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 
Recommendations for Model-Driven Paradigms for Integrated Approaches to 
Cyber Defense 

2. REPORT TYPE 
Technical Report 

6. AUTHOR(S) 
Mona Lange, Alexander Kott, Noam Ben-Asher, Wim Mees, Nazife Baykal, 
Cristian-Mihai Vidu, Matteo Merialdo, Marek Malowidzki, Bhopinder K 
Madahar 

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 
US Army Research Laboratory 
ATTN: RDRL-CIN 
2800 Powder Mill Road 
Adelphi, MD 20783-1138 
9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 

12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 
Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

3. DATES COVERED (From - To) 
1 January 2016–January 2017 
5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 

5b. GRANT NUMBER 

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

5d. PROJECT NUMBER 

5e. TASK NUMBER 

5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER 

ARL-TR-7967 

10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S) 

11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT NUMBER(S) 

14. ABSTRACT 
This report describes the findings of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Exploratory Team investigating cyber defense. 
Many defensive activities in cyber warfare and information assurance rely on ad hoc techniques. The cyber community 
recognizes that comprehensive, systematic, principle-based modeling and simulation are more likely to produce long-term, 
reusable approaches. A model-driven paradigm is predicated on mechanisms of modeling the organization whose mission is 
under cyber attack, the mission itself, and the systems that support it. The level of detail of this class of problems ranges from 
the level of host and network events to systems assets and up to business functions. Solving this class of problems is of 
significant difficulty. Such modeling could be used to explore multiple alternative mitigation strategies and select optimal 
mitigating actions. The paradigm applied to cyber operations is likely to benefit traditional disciplines of cyber defense. The 
team identified challenges for model-driven paradigms for cyber defense and reviews 2 in detail: 1) modeling adversarial 
aspects, including wargaming, of the cyber warfare, and 2) modeling of human cognitive processes in relation to cyber 
activities. Based on its discussions, the team makes recommendations on modeling and simulation for a broad range of cyber 
defense disciplines. 
15. SUBJECT TERMS 
cyber modeling, cyber defense, wargaming, modeling and simulation, risk, likelihood and impact models, adversary models, 
human cognition, resilience engineering, graph theory 

16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 

a. REPORT 
Unclassified 

b. ABSTRACT 
Unclassified 

c. THIS PAGE 
Unclassified 

17. LIMITATION 
       OF  
       ABSTRACT 

18. NUMBER 
       OF  
       PAGES 

UU 

58 

19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON 
Alexander Kott 
19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (Include area code) 
301-394-1507 

ii 

Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8/98) 
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39.18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 

List of Figures 

Executive Summary 

1. 

Introduction 

2. 

Contributors 

3.  Modeling Adversarial Aspects of Cyber Attacks 

3.1  Taxonomy and Literature Review of Common Types of Models in 

Cyber Defense 

3.2  Emulation 

3.3  Training-Focused Simulations 

3.4  M&S of Human Cognitive Processing 

3.5  M&S Based on Attack Graph Concept 

3.6  M&S Based on Epidemiology Analogy 

3.7  Abstract Wargaming 

3.8  Business Process-Based Models 

3.9  Statistical Models 

3.10  Maturity Models 

4.  Human Cognitive Modeling in Cyber Security 

4.1  Models of Human in the Cyber Detection Loop 

4.2  Perception and Representation of the Cyber Environment 

4.3  Learning 

4.4  Modeling Team Interactions and Decision Making 

5. 

Conclusion and Recommendations 

6.  References 

Appendix A: Proposal for Workshop IST-156 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

iii 

v 

vii 

1 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

11 

11 

13 

14 

15 

18 

19 

20 

22 

27 

 
Appendix B: Special Issue of the Journal of Defense Modelling and 

Simulation (JDMS) 

Appendix C: Proposal for Exploratory Team ET-094 

Appendix D: Skybox Security Software 

List of Symbols, Abbreviations, and Acronyms 

Distribution List 

33 

37 

43 

45 

46

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

iv 

 
List of Figures 

Fig. 1 

Two major subspaces of cyber modeling and simulation problems ......2 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

v 

 
 
 
INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK. 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

vi 

 
Executive Summary 

The  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organization  (NATO)  Exploratory  Team  meeting, 
“Model-Driven  Paradigms  for  Integrated  Approaches  to  Cyber  Defense”,  was 
organized  by  the  NATO  Science  and  Technology  Organizations’  (STOs’) 
Information Systems and Technology (IST) panel and conducted its meetings and 
electronic  exchanges  during  2016.  This  report  describes  the  proceedings  and 
outcomes of the team’s efforts.  

Many  of  the  defensive  activities  in  the  fields  of  cyber  warfare  and  information 
assurance rely on essentially ad hoc techniques. The cyber community recognizes 
that comprehensive, systematic, principle-based modeling and simulation are more 
likely  to  produce  long-term,  lasting,  reusable  approaches  to  defensive  cyber 
operations.  

A model-driven paradigm is predicated on creation and validation of mechanisms 
of modeling the organization whose mission is subject to assessment, the mission 
(or missions) itself, and the cyber-vulnerable systems that support the mission. This 
by any definition is a complex socio-technical system (of systems), and the level of 
detail of this class of problems ranges from the level of host and network events to 
the systems’ functions up to the function of the enterprise/business. Solving this 
class of problems is of medium to high difficulty and can draw in part on advances 
in Systems Engineering (SE). Such model-based approaches and analysis could be 
used to explore multiple alternative mitigation and work-around strategies and to 
select  the  optimal  course  of  mitigating  actions.  Furthermore,  the  model-driven 
paradigm applied to cyber operations is likely to benefit traditional disciplines of 
cyber  defense  such  as  security,  vulnerability  analysis,  intrusion  prevention, 
intrusion detection, analysis, forensics, attribution, and recovery.  

The team identified a number of challenges for model-driven paradigms for cyber 
defense and  elected to review 2 of them in detail: the problems of modeling the 
adversarial aspects, including wargaming, of cyber warfare and modeling human 
cognitive processes in relation to cyber activities. 

Recommendations include the following:  

•  Stress  the  need  for  modeling  and  simulation  for  full  range  of  cyber 

specialties, not only for training and rehearsal.  

•  Encourage participation of commercial companies, in NATO STO activities 

and meetings, with an option to demonstrate their relevant products. 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

vii 

 
•  Simulation  models  that  we  call  here  “Business  Impact  Simulation”  are 
particularly  important  for  NATO,  but  simulation  models  we  call  here 
“Attack Details Simulation” are crucial for NATO. 

•  Produce  a  set  of  clear  and  concrete  requirements  for  modeling  and 
simulation  (M&S)  tools  specifically  targeted  at  cyber  defense  and 
leveraging advances in SE. 

•  Simulation of attack-defense scenarios at a level of observable, component-

network-and-system-level events. 

•  Minimize government investments in the line of approaches based on attack 
graphs and related methods to invest in other directions of cyber (M&S). 

•  Encourage academic research targeted at effective and validated M&S of 
human cognitive processes and behaviors as they execute cyber defense and 
attack.  

The team initiated publication of a special issue of the Journal of Defense Modeling 
and Simulation dedicated specifically to model-driven paradigms for cyber defense. 
It also formulated a Technical Activity Proposal and obtained NATO IST approval 
for a workshop titled “Modelling and Simulation S&T: Critical Enabler for Cyber 
Defence”, details of which appear in Appendix A.

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

viii 

 
1. 

Introduction 

This report describes the proceedings and outcomes of the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) Exploratory Team meeting, “Model-Driven Paradigms for 
Integrated Approaches to Cyber Defense” (IST-ET-094), organized by the NATO 
Science  and  Technology  Organizations’  (STOs’)  Information  Systems  and 
Technology  (IST)  panel.  Two meetings  for  IST-ET-094 were held: an  inaugural 
workshop at the University of Lübeck in  Lübeck, Germany, 14–18 March 2016, 
and the final meeting at the Royal Military Academy in Brussels, Belgium, 12–14 
September 2016. 

The STO’s mission is to help position the NATO nations’ and NATO’s science and 
technology  (S&T)  investments  as  a  strategic  enabler  of  the  knowledge  and 
technology advantage for the defense and security posture of NATO nations and 
partner nations. This is accomplished by conducting and promoting S&T activities 
that  augment  and  leverage  the  capabilities  and  programs  of  the  alliance,  of  the 
NATO  nations,  and  the  partner  nations,  in  support  of  NATO’s  objectives.  It  is 
further  accomplished  by  contributing to  NATO’s ability to enable  and influence 
security and defense-related capability development and threat mitigation in NATO 
nations and partner nations, in accordance with NATO policies, and by supporting 
decision making in the NATO nations and NATO.  

IST, the immediate sponsor of this workshop, is one of the 5 NATO S&T panels 
whose  role  it  is,  with  the  NATO  modeling  and  simulation  (M&S)  Group,  to 
implement,  on  behalf  of  the  S&T  Board,  the  STO  mission  with  respect  to 
information systems technology. The focus of this panel is the advancement and 
exchange of techniques and technologies to provide timely, affordable, dependable, 
secure, and relevant information to warfighters, planners, and strategists, as well as 
enabling information systems technologies for modeling, simulation, and training. 
The IST covers the fields of information warfare and assurance, architecture and 
intelligent information systems, and communications and networks.  

The motivation for the workshop had to do with the fact that while many of these 
defensive  activities  currently  rely  on  essentially  ad  hoc  techniques,  there  is  a 
growing realization within the cyber community that comprehensive, systematic, 
principle-based  M&S  are  more  likely  to  produce  long-term,  lasting,  reusable 
approaches to defensive cyber operations. In particular, a recent NATO workshop 
(IST-128-RWS-019,  “Cyber  Attack  Detection,  Forensics  and  Attribution  for 
Assessment  of  Mission  Impact”)  voiced  a  strong  consensus  that  substantive 
solutions for at least some classes of cyber challenges, for example mission impact 
assessment, require adopting and developing a new model-driven paradigm. Such 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

1 

 
a paradigm is predicated on creation and validation of mechanisms of modeling the 
organization  whose  mission  is  subject  to  assessment,  the  mission  (or  missions) 
itself, and the cyber-vulnerable systems that support the mission. 

The models are then used to simulate or otherwise portray the cyber attacks and 
associate  defensive  phenomena  and  system  operations,  including  assessment  of 
mission  impact.  This  by  any  definition  is  a  complex  socio-technical  system  (of 
systems) and the level of detail of this class of problems ranges from the level of 
host  and  network  events  to  the  systems  functions  up  to  the  function  of  the 
enterprise/business. Solving this class of problems is of medium to high difficulty 
and can draw in part on advances in Systems Engineering (SE). Such model-based 
approach and analysis could be used to explore multiple alternative mitigation and 
work-around  strategies  and  then  select  the  optimal  course  of  mitigating  actions. 
Furthermore, the model-driven paradigm  applied  to cyber operations  is  likely  to 
benefit  traditional  disciplines  of  cyber  defense,  such  as  security,  vulnerability 
analysis, intrusion prevention, intrusion detection, analysis, forensics, attribution, 
and  recovery.  For  example,  intrusion  detection,  especially  for  zero-day  or 
polymorphic attacks, would greatly benefit from the ability to model the observable 
effects of a hypothetical attack. 

The  team  identified  2  major  subspaces  of  model-driven  paradigms  for  attack 
analysis cyber modeling and simulation problems in attack analysis, as shown in 
Fig. 1. 

Fig. 1 

Two major subspaces of cyber modeling and simulation problems 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

2 

 
 
 
The team identified a number of challenges for model-driven paradigms for cyber 
defense and elected to review 2 of them in detail. A section of this report reviews 
the problem of  modeling the adversarial  aspects,  including wargaming,  of cyber 
warfare.  Another  section  reviews  the  modeling  of  human  cognitive  processes  in 
relation to cyber activities. 

Other results and outcomes of the Exploratory Team included the following: 

•  The  team  formulated  a  number  of  conclusions  and  recommendations, 

summarized in Section 5 of this report. 

•  The team initiated publication of a special issue of the Journal of Defense 
Modeling and Simulation dedicated specifically to model-driven paradigms 
for cyber defense (Appendix B). 

•  The  team  formulated  a  Technical  Activity  Proposal  and  obtained  NATO 
IST  approval  for  a  workshop  titled  “Modelling  and  Simulation  S&T: 
Critical Enabler for Cyber Defence” (Appendix C). 

•  The  team  explored  a  number  of  commercial  and  open-source  tools  that 
appeared  to  be  relevant  to  modeling  and  simulation  of  cyber  security 
activities (Appendix D). 

•  The team started to explore model-based approaches in SE in terms of utility 
for  cyber  defense,  the  rationale  being  that  such  approaches  are  gaining 
commercial use for the design and development of information technology 
systems and components and therefore are relevant to cyber M&S. As the 
broader developments and thinking in this area remained immature, it was 
identified as a topic of specific interest in the workshop (see Appendix C). 

2.  Contributors 

Participating nations included  Belgium, Bulgaria, Germany, the United Kingdom 
(UK),  Poland, Romania, Turkey, and the United States. The participants included 
the following: 

•  Alexander Kott (USA) 

•  Wim Mees (Belgium) 

•  Felix Kuhr (Germany) 

•  Nazife Baykal (Turkey) 

•  Cristian-Mihai Vidu (Romania) 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

3 

 
•  Matteo Merialdo (Italy) 

•  Mona Lange (Germany) 

•  Marek Malowidzki (Poland) 

•  Bhopinder K Madahar (UK) 

Remote (teleconference) attendees included the following: 

•  Margaret Varga (UK) 

•  Nikolai Stoianov (Bulgaria) 

3.  Modeling Adversarial Aspects of Cyber Attacks 

Primary Author: Alexander Kott (USA) 

The  ability  to  reason  about  or  model  actions  of  the  adversary  in  relation  to 
defender’s actions appears to be a significant aspect of modeling in cyber defense. 
Terms like “wargaming” or “adversarial reasoning” apply to such forms of M&S. 
In this section, we review the literature and provide related observations regarding 
these aspects of modeling in cyber defense. 

An Illustrative Description of a Class of Modeling with Wargaming 

Exploring  wargaming  aspects  of  cyber  modeling,  ET-094  elected  to  focus  on  a 
specific class of problems. In the following, we describe the class that has to do 
with in-depth analysis of cyberattack progression inspired by adversarial reasoning 
and automated wargaming approaches in conventional, kinetic warfare (e.g., Kott 
et al. 2002; Rasch et al. 2003). 

Given data about friendly infrastructure, applications, and defensive mechanisms, 
and some assumptions about enemy intent and capability, the objective was to find 
the following: 

•  A set of most-probable detailed steps of enemy courses of action (COAs), 

as modulated by friendly defensive actions 

•  Detailed  steps  should  be  at  observable  level  of  details  such  as  could  be 

found in host system logs and network traffic packet capture files. 

•  For  each  COA  estimate,  find  the  probability  of  enemy  actions  failing  or 

detected by friendly systems/people.  

• 

Include considerations of cognitive processes and limits of defenders (and 
perhaps of attackers)  

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

4 

 
•  Target  this  type  of  model  for  several  types  of  integrated  utilization: 
developing  prevention  and  detection  agents,  forensics,  risk  assessment, 
friendly COA development, and cyber battle command. 

3.1  Taxonomy and Literature Review of Common Types of 

Models in Cyber Defense 

The following comprise an overview of the taxonomy and definitions used for the 
review: 

•  Emulation (often with simulation) of networks: actual hardware, software, 

and humans (e.g., cyber ranges) 

•  Training-focused simulations: presenting to human trainees the effects of a 

cyber attack without modeling underlying processes 

•  M&S  of  human  cognitive  processing  of  cyber  events  and  situations: 
perception, recognition, situational awareness (SA), and decision making 

•  M&S of attack progress and malware propagation 

o  Attack-graph-based approaches 

o  Epidemiology analogy (e.g., Susceptible, Infected, Recovered [SIR]) 

•  Abstract  wargaming:  game-theoretic  model  of  cyber  conflict  without 

modeling the underlying processes of cyber attack and defense 

•  Business processes models: defense, offense, and business processes, along 
with business information technology architecture, simulated for observing 
resulting effects 

•  Statistical  models  of  cyber  events:  cyber  processes  represented  as,  for 
example,  equations  of  Poisson  processes,  and  coefficients  learned  from 
training dataset 

•  Two classes of models used to support cyber modeling but do not model 

cyber aspects: 

•  Physical systems models to support modeling of cyber-physical effects 

•  Network simulation models 

The following section summarizes each element of the taxonomy with brief review 
of related literature. 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

5 

 
 
3.2  Emulation 

This  often  includes  elements  of  both  emulation  and  simulation  of  networks, 
simulation of an attack on the  network and its progress, and might include human 
defenders  and  attackers.  Many  cyber  ranges  (CRs)  are  based  on  this  paradigm, 
which is often used to evaluate a system or technology concept, as evidenced in the 
following literature: 

•  CyberVAN  [accessed  23  Jan  2016].  http://www.appcomsci.com/research 

/tools/cybervan.   

•  Serban  C  et  al.  Testing  android  devices  for  tactical  networks:  a  hybrid 
emulation testbed approach. Proceedings of the Military Communications 
Conference.  New  York  (NY):  Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics 
Engineers; 2015. 

Davis  J,  Magrath  S.  A  survey  of  cyber  ranges  and  testbeds.  Edinburgh 
(Australia): Cyber and Electronic Warfare Division, Defence Science and 
Technology Organization; 2013. Report No.: DSTO-GD-0771. 

The authors explored the approaches used to build existing CRs, the merits 
of each approach and their functionality. The review first categorizes CRs 
by their type and second by their supporting sector: academic, military, or 
commercial.  The  types  of  CR  are  identified  as  simulation,  overlay,  or 
emulation. CRs are considered simulations if they use software models of 
real world objects to explore behavior. They are labelled as overlays if they 
operate  on  live  production  hardware  with  experiments  sharing  their 
production resources rather than using a dedicated CR laboratory. CRs are 
labelled  emulations  if  they  run  real  software  applications  on  dedicated 
hardware.  Emulation  refers  to  the  software  layer  that  allows  fixed  CR 
hardware  to  be  reconfigured  to  different  topologies  for  each  experiment. 
The review found CRs are predominantly used for training. 

In ET-094 foci, humans are also simulated for purposes of reducing bias, improving 
controllability, repeatability of runs, and the ability to perform large number of runs 
to  discover  novel  patters  and  phenomena.  Thus,  we  focus  on  full  constructive 
simulations. 

Such models are well suited for wargames between human attackers and defenders. 
Unfortunately, repeatability of such wargames is poor,  and it is difficult to make 
generalized conclusions from  such wargames. 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

6 

 
3.3  Training-Focused Simulations 

These are usually limited to presenting to the trainee with the effects of a cyber attack 
without  modeling  underlying  processes.  Examples  in  literature  include  the 
following: 

•  Marshall  H et al.  Cyber  operations  battlefield  web services  (COBWebS): 
concept for a tactical cyber warfare effect training prototype. Proceedings of 
the  2015  Fall  Simulation 
Interoperability  Workshop;  Simulation 
Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO): 2015. 

•  Littlejohn AM, Makhlouf E. Test and evaluation of the malicious activity 
simulation tool (MAST) in a local area network (LAN) running the common 
PC  operating  system  environment  (COMPOSE).  Monterey  (CA):  Naval 
Postgraduate School; 2013. 

The paper notes that training network administrators is a rather expensive 
and  time-consuming  process.  MAST  aims  to  provide  realistic,  tailored 
simulation  of  malicious  activity  for  the  purpose  of  training  network 
administrators  to  recognize  and  respond  to  threats  on  the  network  they 
manage. 

•  Chapman  IM  et  al.  Taxonomy  of  cyber  attacks  and  simulation  of  their 
effects.  Proceedings  of  the  2011  Military  Modeling  &  Simulation 
Symposium.  San  Diego  (CA):  Society  for  Computer  Simulation 
International; 2011. 

The authors propose methods to simulate the effects of several cyber attack 
types for use in simulation in support of training and experimentation. 

Such models are not generally suitable for wargaming. 

3.4  M&S of H uman Cognitive Processing 

These  focus  on  modeling  how  humans  process  cyber  events  and  situations: 
perception,  recognition,  SA, and decision making,  examples  of  which  are  in  the 
following literature: 

•  Cho J-H, Cam H, Oltramari A. Effect of personality traits on trust and risk 
to  phishing  vulnerability:  modeling  and  analysis.  Cognitive  Methods  in 
Situation Awareness and Decision Support (CogSIMA), IEEE International 
Multi-Disciplinary Conference; 2016 Nov 2–4; Beirut, Lebanon. 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

7 

 
•  Ben-Asher  N,  Oltramari  A,  Erbacher  RF,  Gonzalez  C.  Ontology-based 
adaptive  systems  of  cyber  defense.  Proceedings  of  the  10th  International 
Conference  on  Semantic  Technology  for  Intelligence,  Defense,  and 
Security (STIDS); 2015. 

Jones  RM,  et  al.  Modeling  and  integrating  cognitive  agents  within  the 
emerging cyber domain. Proceedings of the Interservice/Industry Training, 
Simulation, and Education Conference (I/ITSEC); 2015. 

The application of cognitive agents to the roles of cyber offense and defense 
would  provide  a  more  complete  cyber  ecology  for  training  purposes  and 
thus a more realistic training experience  for the  student. There  are 2 key 
challenges  to  creating  such  cyber  agents:  1)  modeling  the  complex  and 
continually  evolving  processes  of  cyber  operations  within  a  cognitive 
architecture and 2) defining the tools and data standards to enable cognitive 
agents to interoperate with networks in a portable way. This paper discusses 
novel  models  of  cyber  offensive  and  defensive  behavior  based  on 
observation and elaboration of human expertise. It also offers an approach 
to the creation of software adapters that translate from task-level actions to 
network-level events to support agent-network interoperability. 

•  Robinson D, Cybenko G. A cyber-based behavioral model. The Journal of 
and  Simulation:  Applications,  Methodology, 

Defense  Modeling 
Technology. 2012;9(3):195–203.  

This research examines aspects of the cognitive level by defining a cyber-
based behavioral model contingent on the activities a user performs while 
on the Internet. The authors believe this is foundational to completely define 
a cyber SA model, thus providing commanders and decision makers a more 
comprehensive  and  real-time  view  of  the  environment  in  which  they  are 
operating. 

Such  models  are  not  directly  suitable  for  wargaming  but  can  be  valuable 
components of a complete wargaming system. 

3.5  M&S Based on Attack Graph Concept 

Examples in literature include the following: 

•  Skybox  Security. Using risk modeling and attack simulation for proactive 
cyber security [accessed 23 Jan 2016]. https://www.skyboxsecurity.com/. 

Explains what they mean by cyber M&S and its purposes. Their approach 
is  clearly  not  able  to  reproduce  observables,  and  therefore  they  do  not 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

8 

 
mention detection and forensics as its purposes, but they do stress predictive 
aspect. 

•  Kotenko I, Chechulin A. A cyber attack modeling and impact assessment 
framework.  Proceedings  of  the  5th  International  Conference  on  Cyber 
Conflict. New York (NY): Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers; 
2013. 

The  paper  suggests  a  framework  for  cyber  attack  modeling  and  impact 
assessment.  It is supposed that the common approach to attack modeling 
and  impact  assessment  is  based  on  representing  malefactors’  behavior, 
generating  attack  graphs,  calculating  security  metrics,  and  providing  risk 
analysis  procedures.  The  architecture  of  the  Cyber  Attack  Modeling  and 
Impact  Assessment  Component  (CAMIAC)  is  proposed.  The  authors 
present the prototype of the component, the results of experiments carried 
out, and comparative analysis of the techniques used. 

•  Sommestad  T  et  al.  The  cyber  security  modeling  language:  a  tool  for 
assessing the vulnerability of enterprise system architectures. IEEE Systems 
Journal. 2013;7(3):363–373. 

The  Cyber  Security  Modeling  Language  (CySeMoL)  is  a  modeling 
language for enterprise-level system architectures coupled to a probabilistic 
inference engine. If the computer systems of an enterprise are modeled with 
CySeMoL, this inference engine can assess the probability that attacks on 
the  systems  will  succeed.  The  theory  used  for  the  attack-probability 
calculations in CySeMoL is a compilation of research results on a number 
of security domains and covers a range of attacks and countermeasures.  

Such  models  are  not  normally  used  for  wargaming  purposes.  In  principle,  a 
wargaming element could be added if the defender could execute actions directed 
at closing some attack paths. 

3.6  M&S Based on Epidemiology Analogy 

These  use  the  popular  SIR-type  models.  Examples  in  the  literature  include  the 
following:  

•  Marvel LM et al. A framework to evaluate cyber agility. Proceedings of the 
2015 Military Communications Conference. New York (NY): Institute of 
Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE); 2015.  

•  Thompson B, Morris-King J, Cam H. Controlling risk of data exfiltration in 

cyber networks due to stealthy propagating malware; 2017 in press. 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

9 

 
Using a SIR-type approach, the authors present a compartmental stochastic 
model  to  represent  changes  in  the  state  of  the  network  and  analytically 
derive an upper bound on the rate at which an attacker can exfiltrate data 
without arousing suspicion.  

Such  models  are  not  normally  used  for  wargaming.  However,  they  could  be  if 
defender could execute actions that limit the spread of malware. 

3.7  Abstract Wargaming 

Here, a game-theoretic process is modeled with moves and effects inspired by cyber 
conflict but without modeling the underlying processes of cyber attack and defense. 
Examples in literature include the following: 

•  Cho  J-H,  Gao  J.  Cyber  war  game  in  temporal  networks.  PloS  One. 

2016;11(2);e0148674. 

•  Manshaei MH et al. Game theory meets network security and privacy. ACM 

Computing Surveys (CSUR). 2013;45(3):25. 

This survey provides a structured and comprehensive overview of research 
on security and privacy in computer and communication networks that uses 
game-theoretic approaches. The authors organize the presented works in 6 
main categories: 1) security of the physical and media access control layers, 
2)  security  of  self-organizing  networks,  3)  intrusion  detection  systems,  
4)  anonymity  and  privacy,  5)  economics  of  network  security,  and  
6) cryptography. In each category, they identify security problems, players, 
and game models. 

•  Backhaus S et al. Cyber-physical security: a game theory model of humans 
interacting  over  control  systems.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Smart  Grid. 
2013;4(4):2320–2327. 

Accurate  predictions  require  good  models  of  not  just  the  physical  and 
control  systems,  but  also  of  human  decision  making.  In  this  article,  the 
authors present an approach to develop such tools, specifically models of 
the  decisions of the  cyber-physical intruder who  is  attacking  the  systems 
and the system operator who is defending it, and demonstrate its usefulness 
for design. 

Such models are explicitly designed for game-solving purposes. It is not exactly 
wargaming but very close. 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

10 

 
 
3.8  Business Process- Based Models 

Defense,  offense,  and  business  processes  are  modeled  as  process  diagrams  and 
simulated for the sake of observing resulting effects. An example in the literature 
is the following: 

•  Noel S et al. Analyzing mission impacts of cyber actions (AMICA). NATO; 

2015. Report No.: IST-128. 

Such models are essentially used for automated wargaming. 

3.9  Statistical Models 

Here, cyber processes are represented as, for example, equations of Poisson process 
and coefficients are learned from training dataset, as in the following example: 

•  Gil S, Kott A, Barabási A-L. A genetic epidemiology approach to cyber-
security. Scientific Reports 4. 2014 July 16. doi:10:1038/srep05659. 

By themselves, such models are not suitable for wargaming. However, they could 
be a useful component of a wargaming system. 

3.10  Maturity Models 

There is growing research interest in developing models that can better represent 
the ability and maturity of organizations to manage risks and threats in cyber space. 
These  are  conceptual  models,  building  on  software  engineering  and  information 
technology  (IT)  risk  management  approaches  and  others,  to  outline  and  assess 
characteristics associated with various levels of maturity. Consequently they serve 
as weakness indicators and mitigation/improvement maps to help improve cyber 
defenses and resilience. Examples in the literature include the following: 

Poeppelbuss  J  et  al.  Maturity  models  in  information  systems  research: 
literature  search  and  analysis.  Communications  of  the  Association  for 
Information Systems. 2011;29(1). 

Reviewed  research  related  to  models  such  as  Capability  Maturity  Model 
(e.g., CMM and CMMi), which are well known. Findings are that research 
was generally critical to the applicability and reliability of existing models, 
which need greater rigor in their measurement and conceptualization.   

•  Becker  J  et  al.  Developing  maturity  models  for  IT  management  –  a 
procedure  model  and  its  application.  Business  &  Information  Systems 
Engineering. 2009;3. 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

11 

 
Though  the  focus  is  on  the  development  of  the  IT  Performance 
Measurement Maturity Model, the research identifies the gaps that need to 
be addressed. It uses the guidelines for Design Science proposed by Hevner 
(2004) and postulates 8 requirements for the design process of models. This 
opens  up  potential  for  improvements  (e.g.,  detailed  specifications  and 
epistemological  substantiation  of  requirements)  and  inform  higher-level 
cyber maturity models.  

•  White GB. The community cyber security maturity model. Proceedings of 

the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences; 2007. 

This  paper  considers  the  development  of  maturity  models  for  improving 
cyber  defense  within  communities;  that  is,  assessment  of  preparedness 
against  cyber  attacks.  A  Community  Cyber  Security  Maturity  Model  is 
proposed to identify weaknesses and develop programs to enhance security 
posture.  

•  Healey J, van Bochoven L. NATO’s cyber capabilities: yesterday, today, and 
tomorrow. Atlantic Council, Smarter Alliance Initiative Issue Brief; 2012. 

This is a think piece on NATO cyber capabilities and recommendations as 
to  the  key  enablers  for  the  future.  One  of  these  is  adoption  of  relevant 
information security and IT standards and adoption of models related to risk 
and maturity such as the Resilience Management Model.  

These works suggest linking developments across security, IT risk management, and 
business  resilience  areas  for  assessing  and  enhancing  cyber  capability  of 
organizations.  A  software-based  framework,  the  Cyber  Defense  Capability 
Assessment Tool (see https://apmg-cyber.com/products/cdcat), has been developed 
to model cyber capabilities of an enterprise. Though such frameworks and maturity 
models are not currently part of cyber M&S, they do provide an important contextual 
view  within  which  the  more  detailed  M&S  can  be  undertaken;  for  example,  by 
identifying  where  the  cyber  weaknesses  are  within  an  enterprise  (e.g.,  people, 
processes, and technology) and applying M&S to specific parts to exercise higher-
level decisions and actions.  

Maturity models are not suitable for wargaming but can be used to provide context 
to exercises such as exploring maturity of processes. 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

12 

 
 
4.  Human Cognitive Modeling in Cyber Security 

Primary Author: Noam Ben-Asher (USA) 

Many  technological  advances  in  cyber  security  have  facilitated  advanced 
monitoring  and  threat  detection.  However,  the  ever-growing  sophistication  of 
attackers deters the ongoing attempt to automate critical tasks that cyber defenders 
perform. Human analytical capabilities, the ability to discern suspicious activity, 
and authority to make decisions on threats place the human defender as a key player 
in cyber defense. As such, there is a substantial interest in understanding human 
cognitive activities and behaviors that drive detection of cyber threats and response 
selection.  Modeling  and  simulating  these  processes  can  allow  us  to  discern  the 
underlying mechanisms, revealing their strengths and deficiencies. Modeling and 
simulating also provide the necessary conditions for proactive defense.  

However,  progression  in  modeling  and  simulating  human  cognition  in  cyber 
defense confronts significant hurdles. The first relates to the limited availability of 
reliable data that capture defenders’ decision making processes as well as the cyber 
environment  in  which  they  operate.  Besides  it  being  extremely  hard  to  collect 
highly complex data, in many cases such data are confidential and cannot be shared 
with the research community. A second hurdle relates to the lack of unified theory 
of cyber detection in general and specifically defining the role defenders’ cognition 
plays, what mental models defenders use, and how human cognition interfaces with 
detection tools. As a result, research on cyber defenders’ cognitive activities and 
behaviors is highly fragmented. Furthermore, due to the complexity of the domain 
and  the  limited  ability  to  collect  data  from  professional  security  experts,  the 
tendency  to use  simplified tasks and experimentation  often involves participants 
with limited or no understanding in cyber security. 

Gonzalez et al. (2014) identified the following 4 critical aspects of cyber defender 
cognitive modeling: 

•  High levels models of defender-in-the-loop 

•  Perception  and  representation  of  the  highly  dynamic  cyber  environment, 

including vulnerabilities, assets, and threats among others 

•  Cyber  SA,  how  it  relates  to  SA  in  the  physical  world,  and  what  are  the 

cognitive demands to achieve cyber SA 

•  Decision-making  processes  including  learning,  adaptation,  and  decision 

biases 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

13 

 
•  Scaling  up  from  the  individual  defender  to  interactions  within  a  team  of 

defenders or between a defender and an attacker 

In the following we review literature related to each of these domains. 

4.1  Models of Human in the Cyber Detection Loop  

High-level modeling of defender-in-the-loop often attempts to map and define the 
human analyst role in detection processes. These high-level models often focus on 
information flows, task analysis, and interactions with decision support tools. Such 
preliminary  models  can  provide  systematic  mapping  of  the  roles,  tasks,  and 
responsibilities of human defenders, plus what tools are used in different scenarios, 
and lay the foundations for automating some of these tasks. Examples in literature 
include the following: 

•  D’Amico  A,  Whitley  K.  The  real  work  of  computer  network  defense 
analysts. Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Visualization 
for Cyber Security. Berlin (Germany): Springer; 2008. p. 19–37.  

•  D’Amico A et al. Achieving cyber defense SA: a cognitive task analysis of 
information  assurance  analysts.  Proceedings  of  the  Human  Factors  and 
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting. 2005;49(3). 

One of the most human labor-intensive aspects of cyber defense is triage 
analysis,  where  the  human  defenders  review  and  sort  a  large  volume  of 
network activities data that already happened and corresponding intrusion 
detection  alerts.  These  studies  are  based  on  cognitive  task  analysis 
conducted  to  baseline  the  state  of  the  practice  in  the  US  Department  of 
Defense  Computer  Network  Defense  community.  Based  upon  these 
observations, the authors propose an analyst-in-the-loop workflow model 
that encapsulates analytic goals, tasks, types of decisions made, data sources 
used to make those decisions, cognitive demands, and tools used. 

•  Oltramari A et al. General requirements of a hybrid-modeling framework 
for cyber security. Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE Military Communications 
Conference; 2014. 

• 

Jones  RM  et  al.  Modeling  and  integrating  cognitive  agents  within  the 
emerging cyber domain. Proceedings of the Interservice/Industry Training, 
Simulation, and Education Conference (I/ITSEC); 2015. 

The  authors  propose  to  harness  cognitive  architectures  such  as  Soar  and 
ACT-R to build executable cognitive agents that can interact with real cyber 
networks in real time. This all-embracing development of a cognitive model 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

14 

 
of  a  cyber  defender  is  driven  by  cognitive  task  analysis  and  knowledge 
elicitation from subject matter experts. This knowledge is assimilated into 
the procedural, semantic, and episodic long-term memories of the cognitive 
agent. Based on goals and inputs from perception, an agent can query long-
term memories and choose the appropriate actions. Observing the outcomes 
of an action and changes in the environment closes the learning loop of the 
agent.  While  there  are  constant  advancements  in  the  understanding  of 
cognitive processes and the maturity of cognitive architecture also increase, 
the prospect of developing a generic cyber defender using this approach in 
the  near  future  is  fairly  limited.  This  is  mainly  due  to  difficulty  in 
successfully  capturing  and  assimilating  all  of  the  required  knowledge 
regarding the complex dynamics of the cyber environment. It is more likely 
to benefit from small-scale specialized cognitive agents.  

•  Zhong  C  et  al.  Automate  cybersecurity  data  triage  by  leveraging  human 
analysts’  cognitive  process.  Presented  at  the  2nd  Big  Data  Security  on 
Cloud; 2016 Apr 8–10; Columbia University, NY. 

The authors demonstrate how by capturing and analyzing traces of human 
defender’s behavior, it is possible to construct a model of the defender’s 
decision making process. A cognitive agent based on this model is then used 
to  automate  triage  analysis  yielding  faster  performance  than  human 
defenders but with similar accuracy. 

•  Greitzer FL, Hohimer RE. Modeling human behavior to anticipate insider 

attacks. Journal of Strategic Security. 2011;4(2):25. 

This study combines traditional cyber security audit data with psychosocial 
data  to  develop  a  predictive  model  that  supports  the  detection  of  insider 
threats. It reports on progress in defining a usable set of predictive indicators 
and developing a framework for integrating the analysis of organizational 
and cyber security data to yield predictions about possible insider exploits 
and  developing  the  knowledge  base  and  reasoning  capability  of  such  a 
system. The  authors also outline the types of errors that one expects in a 
predictive system versus a detection system and discuss how those errors 
can affect the usefulness of their model.  

4.2  Perception and R epresentation of the Cyber Environment 

Cyber  environments  in  which  defenders  operate  are  highly  dynamic  and  differ 
considerably between organizations.  As such, most cyber environments challenge 
human analytical capabilities by including high volume  of data that come from a 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

15 

 
variety  of  sensors.  These  real-time,  high-velocity  data  streams  with  inherent 
veracity serve as the basis for the defender’s SA and decision-making processes. 
Therefore,  multiple  studies  investigate  and  model  how  defenders  perceive  and 
internally represent cyber environments, including the following: 

•  Ben-Asher  N,  Oltramari  A,  Erbacher  RF,  Gonzalez  C.  Ontology-based 
adaptive  systems  of  cyber  defense.  Proceedings  of  the  10th  International 
Conference on Semantic Technology for Intelligence, Defense, and Security 
(STIDS); 2015. 

Among  other  things,  successful  modeling  of  human  cognition  in  cyber 
defense  must  carefully  attend  human  knowledge  representation  and  the 
interplay  between  knowledge  representation  and  decision  making.  The 
authors  use  computational  ontology  to  provide  a  knowledge  base  for  an 
adaptive cognitive agent and evaluate the ability of this hybrid architecture 
to  detect  malicious  network  activity.  The  detailed  representation  of  the 
cyber  environment  allowed  a  relatively  simple  cognitive  model  of  a 
defender  to  learn  from  experience  and  accurately  detect  malicious  port-
scanning.  Beyond  emphasizing  the  key  role  of  in-depth  knowledge 
representation in modeling human cognition, the paper demonstrates how 
knowledge is used in decision making, learning, and detection. 

•  Robinson D, Cybenko G. A cyber-based behavioral model. The Journal of 
and  Simulation:  Applications,  Methodology, 

Defense  Modeling 
Technology. 2012;9(3):195–203.  

At  its  core,  cyber  SA  requires  perceiving,  encoding  (representing),  and 
understanding  the  environment  in  terms  of  how  information,  events,  and 
actions will impact goals and objectives, both now and in the near future. 
This  study  models  the  cognitive  layer  of  SA  by  defining  a  statistical 
behavioral model that is contingent on user activities. This model provides 
a  representation  of  normal  user  behavior  based  on  activities.  Hence, 
deviations from the model prediction can be flagged as suspicious network 
activities. 

•  Chen  P-C  et  al.  Experience-based  cyber  situation  recognition  using 
relaxable logic patterns. Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE International Multi-
Disciplinary Conference on Cognitive Methods in Situation Awareness and 
Decision Support; 2012. 

The  authors  developed  a  systematic  approach  to  leverage  experiences  of 
defenders  to  enhance  cyber  situation  recognition.  Using  a  logic-based 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

16 

 
approach,  they  efficiently  capture  and  use  defenders’  experiences,  which 
are the categorized as kind of knowledge-based intrusion detection. 

•  Yen  J  et  al.  RPD-based  hypothesis  reasoning  for  cyber  SA.  In:  Cyber 
situational awareness. New York (NY): Springer US; 2010. p. 39–49. 

The  paper  describes  a  high-level,  cognitively  inspired  framework  that  is 
built  upon  a  Recognition-Primed  Decision  model,  and  integrates  the  3 
components of the traditional SA model. The framework connects the logic 
world  of  tools  for  cyber  SA  with  the  mental  world  of  human  analysts, 
enabling the perception, comprehension, and prediction of cyber situations 
for better prevention, survival, and response to cyber attacks by adapting 
missions  at  the  operational,  tactical,  and  strategic  levels.  Further 
development  is  needed  to  formalize  an  executable  computational  model 
build based on this framework. 

•  Domínguez  IX  et  al.  Human  subtlety  proofs:  using  computer  games  to 
model  cognitive  processes  for  cybersecurity.  International  Journal  of 
Human-Computer  Interaction;  2016  Oct  3.  doi.org/10.1080/10447318 
.2016.1232229. 

The paper provides a brief overview of work in different areas of cyber-SA 
where  cognitive  modeling  research  plays  a  role  with  regard  to  direct 
interaction between end users and computer systems and with regard to the 
needs of security analysts working behind the scenes. The authors address 
the fundamental challenge of confirming whether the entity who triggered 
an  activity  in  the  cyber  space  is  human  or  not  (i.e.,  a  software  bot).  The 
authors demonstrate that by calibrating cognitive models to human behavior 
it  is  possible  to  characterize  human  behavior  and  use  it  for  generating 
human interactive proof for bot detection. 

•  Greitzer FL, Hohimer RE. Modeling human behavior to anticipate insider 

attacks. Journal of Strategic Security. 2011;4(2):25. 

The authors propose a comprehensive threat assessment approach that will 
provide  automated  support  for  the  detection  of  high-risk  behavioral 
“triggers” to help focus the analyst’s attention and inform the analysis when 
detecting insider threat.  This predictive modeling  framework integrates  a 
diverse  set  of  data  sources  from  the  cyber  domain  as  well  as  inferred 
psychological/motivational  factors  that  may  underlie  malicious  insider 
exploits.  The  main  components  of  the  framework  are  1)  ontologies, 
representing  specialized  domain  knowledge,  2)  reifiers,  used  for  the 
ingesting  of  the  primitive  data  types  that  are  specified  in  the  domain 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

17 

 
ontologies,  3) memory  storing facts asserted  from  the  primitive  data  and 
the facts inferred by the reasoning system, and 4) reasoning  components, 
used to interpret the data assertions and infer new assertions. 

•  Siraj A, Vaughn RB. A cognitive model for alert correlation in a distributed 
environment. Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligence 
and Security Informatics. Berlin: (Germany): Springer; 2005. 

In this paper the authors demonstrate the use of cognitive modeling of cause 
and effect relationships to correlate alerts in a distributed environment. By 
combining  a  casual  knowledge-based  inference  technique  together  with 
fuzzy  cognitive  modeling,  the  authors  were  able  to  discover  casual 
relationships in alert data in multiple datasets of cyber exercises. 

4.3  Learning 

Training  defenders  and  their  learning  to  detect  new  threats  based  on  past 
experiences are 2 areas that can significantly benefit from modeling and simulating 
human  cognition.  Understanding  the  cognitive  mechanisms  that  govern  human 
adaptation to changes in the highly dynamic cyber environment is a key factor to 
threat  and  anomaly  detection.  The  following  papers  study  these  issues  using 
laboratory experimentation with a simplified Intrusion Detection System: 

•  Dutt V et al. Modeling the effects of base-rates on cyber threat detection 
performance.  Proceedings  of  the  11th  International  Conference  on 
Cognitive Modeling. Berlin (Germany): Universitaetsverlag der TU; 2012. 

This paper used a cognitive model of  a cyber defender to study memory 
retrieval, decision making, and learning from experience. More specifically, 
the  model  allowed  examination  of  how  defenders  perceive  and  attend 
situational  attributes.  The  cognitive  model  accounted  for  changes  in 
defender’s performance when encountering different adversarial behavior. 

•  Dutt  V  et  al.  Cyber  situational  awareness  modeling  detection  of  cyber 
attacks with instance-based learning theory. Human Factors: The Journal of 
the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. 2013:55(3):605–618. 

This paper examined through cognitive modeling how training, risk taking, 
and  past  experiences  influence  the  defender’s  judgment  and  decision 
making.  Based  upon  model  predictions,  a  defender’s  prior  threat 
experiences and tolerance to threats are likely to predict detection accuracy. 
In parallel, considering the nature of adversarial behavior, especially attacks 
base rate, is equally important. 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

18 

 
4.4  Modeling Team Interactions and D ecision Making 

Cyber  defenders  often  work  in  heterogeneous  and  interdependent  teams  of 
individuals. Such teams plan, decide,  perceive, design, solve problems, and act as 
an  integrated  system.  Achieving  and  maintaining  effective  teamwork  heavily 
depends  on  communication,  information  sharing,  and  collaboration.  Typically, 
team members  differ in their areas of expertise and their familiarity with different 
aspects  of  the  network.  Team  interactive  cognition  is  a  key  component  to 
understanding  team performance  and  synergistic behavior. Network security  live 
exercises  like  Capture  the  Flag  provide  rich  data  for  this  line  of  research.  The 
following papers focus on  modeling and simulating cyber interactions at the team 
level:  

•  Rajivan P et al. Agent-based model of a cyber security defense analyst team. 
Proceedings  of  the  Human  Factors  and  Ergonomics  Society  Annual 
Meeting. 2013;57(1). 

This study explored the effects of different collaboration strategies and team 
sizes on performance measures such as number of intrusion alerts accurately 
processed  by  the  defenders  and  rewards  they  accrue  from  accurately 
processing the alerts. This study also explored the feasibility of using agent-
based  modeling  methodologies  for  studying  team  processes  in  the  cyber 
defense context. The model revealed that specific collaboration strategies 
lead  to  better  performance  and  that  large  teams  are  detrimental  to 
performance. 

•  Kotenko I. Agent-based modeling and simulation of cyber warfare between 
malefactors and security agents in Internet. Presented at the 19th European 
Simulation Multiconference; 2005. 

The author used teams of defender agents and attacker agents to simulate 
the dynamics in a Distributed Denial of Service attack. The paper presents 
the structure of the teams of agents, specifications of hierarchies of agent 
plans,  agent  interaction  and  coordination  mechanisms,  and  agent  role-
assignment mechanisms. 

•  Ben-Asher N, Gonzalez C. CyberWar game: a paradigm for understanding 
new  challenges  of  cyber  war.  In:  Cyber  warfare.  Berlin  (Germany): 
Springer; 2015. p. 207–220. 

This study examines the decision-making processes that drive the dynamics 
of cyber war  using a multi-agent model comprising cognitive agents that 
learn to make decisions from experience. In this paradigm—the CyberWar 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

19 

 
game—assets and power are 2 key attributes that influence the decisions of 
agents. Assets represent the key resource that an agent is protecting from 
attacks,  while  power  represents  technical  prowess  of  an  agent’s  cyber 
security. All of the agents share the same goal of maximizing their assets, 
and  they  learn  to  attack  other  agents  and  defend  themselves  to  meet  this 
goal.  These  agents  do  not  learn  by  using  predefined  strategies,  as  many 
multi-agent models do, but instead learn from experience according to the 
situation  and  actions  of  others,  as  suggested  by  many  cognitive 
architectures. 

5.  Conclusion and Recommendations 

Multiple disciplines within cyber systems engineering and operations cannot take 
a  mature,  rigorous,  and  suitably  advanced  form—comparable  to  those  in  more 
mature technical findings—without availability of M&S tools that are specifically 
targeted for phenomena of cyber defense and produce results at several  levels of 
detail. 

•  Recommendation:  Stress  the  need  for  M&S  for  a  full  range  of  cyber 
specialties—not only for training and rehearsal. We observe very limited 
availability of commercial products and probably a corresponding lack of 
commercial research and development. 

•  Recommendation:  Encourage  participation  of  commercial  companies, 
especially  developers  of  products  for  military  command,  control, 
communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance 
requirements,  in  NATO  STO  activities  and  meetings,  with  an  option  to 
demonstrate  their  relevant  products.  Several  types  of  simulations  are 
especially relevant to NATO military operations, especially the ability to 
perform  realistic  wargaming  of  a  cyber  battle—attack  and  defense—and 
dynamic  replanning  for  enhanced  resilience  of  NATO  systems  and 
networks. 

•  Recommendation:  The  types  of  simulation  models  that  we  call  here 
Business Impact Simulation are particularly important for NATO mission 
planning,  mission  risk  assessment,  mission  risk  mitigation  plans,  enemy 
COA assessment, and mission damage assessment. On the other hand, types 
of simulation models that we call here Attack Details Simulation are crucial 
for  NATO  system  engineering,  model  validation,  forensic  analysis,  and 
generation of indicators. 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

20 

 
•  Recommendation:  Produce  a  set  of  clear  and  concrete  requirements  for 
simulation tools specifically targeted at cyber defense mission planning and 
wargaming for a military unit in active operations against a cyber-capable 
adversary. This will encourage and guide the development of relevant tools 
in NATO nations’ government and industry. 

•  Recommendation:  Produce  a  set  of  clear  and  concrete  requirements  for 
simulation  tools  capable  of  simulating  attack-defense  scenarios  at  an 
observable level of network-and-system-level events. Approaches based on 
attack graphs and related methods appear to be most mature and suitable for 
certain types of simulation tools. They are likely to be actively pursued by 
commercial developers. 

•  Recommendation:  Minimize  government  investments  in  the  line  of 
approaches based on attack graphs and related methods to invest in other 
directions of cyber M&S. Human (both defenders and attackers) cognitive 
processes and resulting behaviors are crucial components of simulating  a 
cyber battle. Approaches to such simulations are at the infancy stage. 

•  Recommendation:  NATO  nations  should  encourage  academic  research 
targeted at effective and validated simulation of human cognitive processes 
and behaviors as they execute cyber defense and attack. Two recent large 
efforts—AMICA  and  the  European  Union’s  Panoptesec—are  highly 
valuable  for  understanding  the  state  of  the  art,  the  gaps,  and  technical 
challenges. Lessons of such efforts should be actively studied and used as 
technical references in developing NATO cyber capabilities. Similarly, the 
utility of model-based approaches in SE (Estefan 2008) for cyber needs to 
be considered in view of their greater use in cyber space sectors.

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

21 

 
6.  References 

Backhaus S, Bent R, Bono J, Lee R, Tracey B, Wolpert D, Xie D, Yildiz Y. Cyber-
physical  security:  a  game  theory  model  of  humans  interacting  over  control 
systems. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid. 2013;4(4):2320–2327. 

Becker  J  Knackstedt  R,  Pöppelbuß  J.  Developing  maturity  models  for  IT 
management – a procedure model and its application. Business & Information 
Systems Engineering. 2009;1(3):213–222. 

Ben-Asher  N,  Gonzalez  C.  CyberWar  game:  a  paradigm  for  understanding  new 
challenges of cyber war. In: Cyber warfare. Berlin (Germany): Springer; 2015. 
p. 207–220.  

Ben-Asher  N,  Oltramari  A,  Erbacher  RF,  Gonzalez  C.  Ontology-based  adaptive 
systems of cyber defense. Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on 
Semantic  Technology  for  Intelligence,  Defense, and Security (STIDS); 2015 
Nov; Fairfax, VA. 

Chapman IM, Leblanc SP, Partington A. Taxonomy of cyber attacks and simulation 
of  their  effects.  Proceedings  of  the  2011  Military  Modeling  &  Simulation 
Symposium. San Diego (CA): Society for Computer Simulation International; 
2011. 

Chen  PC,  Liu  P, Yen J,  Mullen T. Experience-based cyber situation recognition 
using relaxable logic patterns. Presented at the 2012 IEEE International Multi-
Disciplinary  Conference  on  Cognitive  Methods  in  Situation  Awareness  and 
Decision Support; 2012 Mar 5–8; New Orleans, LA. 

Cho  J-H,  Gao  J.  Cyber  war  game 

in 

temporal  networks.  PloS  One. 

2016;11(2);e0148674.  

Cho  J-H,  Cam  H,  Oltramari  A.  Effect  of  personality  traits  on  trust  and  risk  to 
phishing  vulnerability:  modeling  and  analysis.  Presented  at  IEEE  Cognitive 
in  Situation  Awareness  and  Decision  Support  (CogSIMA) 
Methods 
International Multi-Disciplinary Conference; 2016 Nov 2–4; Beirut, Lebanon. 

CyberVAN  [accessed  23  Jan  2016].  http://www.appcomsci.com/research/tools 

/cybervan. 

D’Amico  A,  Whitley  K.  The  real  work  of  computer  network  defense  analysts. 
Proceedings  of  the  4th  International  Workshop  on  Visualization  for  Cyber 
Security. Berlin (Germany): Springer; 2008. p. 19–37. 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

22 

 
D’Amico  A,  Whitley  K,  Tesone  D,  O’Brien  B,  and  Roth  E.  Achieving  cyber 
defense  SA:  a  cognitive  task  analysis  of  information  assurance  analysts. 
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting. 
2005;49(3). 

Davis J, Magrath S. A survey of cyber ranges and testbeds. Edinburgh (Australia): 
Cyber  and  Electronic  Warfare  Division,  Defence  Science  and  Technology 
Organization; 2013. Report No.: DSTO-GD-0771. 

Domínguez IX, Goodwin PR, Roberts DL, St. Amant R. Human subtlety proofs: 
using  computer  games  to  model  cognitive  processes  for  cybersecurity. 
International  Journal  of  Human–Computer  Interaction;  2016  Oct  3; 
doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2016.1232229. 

Dutt V, Ahn Y-S, Gonzalez C. Cyber situational awareness modeling detection of 
cyber attacks with instance-based learning theory. Human Factors: The Journal 
of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. 2013:55(3):605–618. 

Dutt V, Ahn YS, Ben-Asher N, Gonzalez C. Modeling the effects of base-rates on 
cyber  threat  detection  performance.  Proceedings  of  the  11th  International 
Conference  on  Cognitive  Modeling.  Berlin  (Germany):  Universitaetsverlag 
der TU, Berlin; 2012. 

Estefan J. Survey of candidate model-based engineering (MBSE) methodologies. 
In: INCOSE MBSE Initiative, Rev. B. San Diego (CA): International Council 
on Systems Engineering (INCOSE); 2008 May 23. 

Gil S, Kott A, Barabási A-L. A genetic epidemiology approach to cyber-security. 

Scientific Reports 4. 2014 July 16. doi:10:1038/srep05659. 

Gonzalez C, Ben-Asher N, Oltramari A, Lebiere C. Cognition and technology. In: 

Cyber defense and SA. Berlin (Germany): Springer; 2014. p. 93–117. 

Greitzer FL, Hohimer RE. Modeling human behavior to anticipate insider attacks. 

Journal of Strategic Security. 2011;4(2):25. 

Healey  J,  van  Bochoven  L.  NATO’s  cyber  capabilities:  yesterday,  today,  and 
tomorrow. Atlantic Council, Smarter Alliance Initiative Issue Brief; 2012. 

Hevner  AR,  March  ST,  Park  J,  Ram  S.  Design  science  in  information  systems 

research. MIS Quarterly. 2004;28(1):75–105. 

Jones RM, O’Grady R, Nicholson D, Hoffman RR, Bunch L, Bradshaw JM, Bolton 
A.  Modeling  and  integrating  cognitive  agents  within  the  emerging  cyber 
domain.  Proceedings  of  the  Interservice/Industry  Training,  Simulation,  and 
Education Conference (I/ITSEC); 2015. 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

23 

 
Kotenko  I.  Agent-based  modeling  and  simulation  of  cyber-warfare  between 
malefactors and security agents in the internet. Presented at the 19th European 
Simulation Multiconference; 2005. 

Kotenko  I,  Chechulin  Andrey.  A  cyber  attack  modeling  and  impact  assessment 
framework. Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Cyber Conflict 
(CyCon); 2013. 

Kott A, Rebbapragada L, Langston J. Toward practical knowledge-based tools for 
battle planning and scheduling. Proceedings of the 2002 AAAI Conference on 
Artificial  Intelligence.  Palo Alto  (CA): Association for the Advancement of 
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI); 2002. 

Littlejohn  AM,  Makhlouf  E.  Test  and  evaluation  of  the  malicious  activity 
simulation tool (MAST) in a local area network (LAN) running the common 
PC  operating  system  environment  (COMPOSE).  Monterey  (CA):  Naval 
Postgraduate School; 2013. 

Manshaei  MH,  Zhu  Q,  Alpcan  T,  Bacşar  T,  Hubaux  JP.  Game  theory  meets 
(CSUR). 

network  security  and  privacy.  ACM  Computing  Surveys 
2013;45(3):25. 

Marshall H, Mize JR, Hooper M, Wells R, Truong J. Cyber operations battlefield web 
services  (COBWebS):  concept  for  a  tactical  cyber  warfare  effect  training 
prototype. Proceedings of the 2015 Fall Simulation Interoperability Workshop; 
Simulation Interoperability Standards Organization (SISO); 2015. 

Marvel LM, Brown S, Neamtiu I, Harang R, Harman D, Henz B. A framework to 
IEEE  Military 

the  2015 

evaluate  cyber  agility.  Proceedings  of 
Communications Conference; 2015.  

Noel S, Ludwig J, Jain P, Johnson D, Thomas RK, McFarland J, King B, Webster 
S,  Tello  B.  Analyzing  mission  impacts  of  cyber  actions  (AMICA);  2015. 
NATO Report No.: IST-128.2015.  

Oltramari A, Ben-Asher N, Cranor L, Bauer L, Christin N. General requirements 
of a hybrid-modeling framework for cyber security. Proceedings of the 2014 
IEEE Military Communications Conference; 2014. 

Poeppelbuss J Niehaves B,  Simons A, Becker J. Maturity models in information 
systems  research:  literature  search  and  analysis.  Communications  of  the 
Association for Information Systems. 2011;29(1). 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

24 

 
Rajivan P, Janssen MA, Cooke NJ. Agent-based model of a cyber security defense 
analyst  team.  Proceedings  of  the  Human  Factors  and  Ergonomics  Society 
Annual Meeting. 2013;57(1). 

Rasch R, Kott A, Forbus KD. Incorporating AI into military decision making: an 

experiment. IEEE Intelligent Systems. 2003;18(4):18–26. 

Robinson D, Cybenko G. A cyber-based behavioral model. The Journal of Defense 
Modeling  and  Simulation:  Applications,  Methodology,  Technology. 
2012;9(3):195–203. 

Serban  C,  Poylisher  A,  Sapello  A,  Gottlieb  Y,  Chiang  CJ,  Chadha  R.  Testing 
Android devices for tactical networks: a hybrid emulation testbed approach. 
Proceedings of the IEEE Military Communications Conference; 2015. 

Siraj  A,  Vaughn  RB.  A  cognitive  model  for  alert  correlation  in  a  distributed 
environment. Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligence and 
Security Informatics. Berlin (Germany): Springer; 2005. 

Skybox  Security.  Using  risk  modeling  and  attack  simulation  for  proactive  cyber 
security  [accessed  23  Jan  2016].  https://lp.Skyboxsecurity.com/RiskModeling 
/WP_DownloadNow.html. 

Sommestad T, Ekstedt M, Holm H. The cyber security modeling language: a tool 
for  assessing  the  vulnerability  of  enterprise  system  architectures.  IEEE 
Systems Journal. 2013;7(3):363–373. 

Thompson B, Morris-King J, Cam H. Controlling risk of data exfiltration in cyber 

networks due to stealthy propagating malware; 2017 in press. 

White GB. The community cyber security maturity model. Proceedings of the 40th 

Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences; 2007. 

Yen  J,  McNeese  M,  Mullen  T,  Hall  D,  Fan  X,  Liu  P.  RPD-based  hypothesis 
reasoning  for  cyber  situational  awareness.  In:  Cyber  situational  awareness. 
New York (NY): Springer; 2010. pp. 39–49. 

Zhong  C,  Yen  J,  Liu  P,  Erbacher  RF.  Automate  cybersecurity  data  triage  by 
leveraging human analysts’ cognitive process. Presented at the 2nd Big Data 
Security on Cloud; 2016 Apr 8–10; Columbia University, NY.

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

25 

 
INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK. 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix A: Proposal for Workshop IST-156 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TECHNICAL ACTIVITY PROPOSAL (TAP) 

ACTIVITY REFERENCE 
NUMBER  

TYPE AND SERIAL 
NUMBER 

IST-156 

RWS-022 

LOCATION(S) AND DATES 

ACTIVITY TITLE 

Modelling and Simulation S&T: Critical Enabler for Cyber 
Defense 

APPROVAL 
2016 

START 
January 2016 

END 
January 2017 

COORDINATION WITH OTHER BODIES 

HFM, MSG, NCIA, NIAG, ACT 

NATO CLASSIFICATION OF ACTIVITY 

Public Release 

Non-NATO Invited 
Yes 

PUBLICATION DATA  

TR 

PR 

KEYWORDS 

Cyber Defense, Modelling and Simulation, Risk, likelihood and Impact Models, Adversary 
Models, Human Cognition, Resilience Engineering, Graph Theory, Communications and 
Information Systems, Model Based Systems Engineering,  Synthetic environments, Cyber 
Education and Training 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

28 

 
 
 
 
A-1  Background and Justification (Relevance to the North 

Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO]) 

team, 

technology 

This technical activity proposal for a workshop addresses the recommendation from 
the  research  of  the  NATO  Information  Systems  and  Technology  (IST)  panel 
IST-ET-094:  “Model-Driven  Paradigms  for  Integrated 
exploratory 
Approaches for Cyber Defense”. Key findings of this research are that the science 
and 
the  developments  of  models, 
simulators/emulators, methods, and tools in support of an integrated cyber defense 
approach  remain  immature.  Though  some  progress  has  been  made  in  a  few 
individual cyber-related topic areas (e.g., emulation for cyber ranges and training 
environments as well as attack graphs analysis), there is less evidence of integration 
and an interdisciplinary approach to address challenges in cyber defense, a priority 
strategic risk area for NATO and most, if not all, of its coalition nations. 

(S&T)  underpinning 

It  is  therefore  argued  that  a  new  model-driven  paradigm,  interdisciplinary  and 
coherent by design to link the technical areas, is needed for cyber defense to assist 
the integration of business or military operations with cyber defense, particularly 
in  bridging  the  cognitive  gap  between  operational  decision  makers  and  cyber 
defenders.  This  paradigm  should  support  the  ability,  at  the  required  level  of 
abstraction, to translate operational priorities into cyber defense priorities and to 
translate  impacts  on  the  supporting  cyber  infrastructure  into  consequences 
expressed in operational terms. 

A-2  Objectives 

The objectives of the workshop are to provide such a forum and consider the S&T 
developments  (what?,  where?,  and  how?)  that  could  be  leveraged  and  form  an 
integral part of a model-driven approach to arrive at a better representation, with 
varying levels of fidelity, of the socio-technical system (of systems) that comprise 
cyber security  and  defense against  cyber threats.  This  includes  the  underpinning 
analytics  to  determine,  with  certain  levels  of  validation  or  assurance,  the 
effects/impacts  of  threats,  options,  and  consequences  of  mitigations  and  actions. 
This needs outputs and evidence from a broad range of analysis activities: detecting 
attacks in a mission-supporting manner, assessing damages relevant to the mission, 
investigating  impacts  on  mission  elements,  recovering  from  attacks  in  order  to 
continue missions to the maximum extent possible, and deciding on how to respond 
to  cyber  attacks  in  a  manner  that  maximizes  mission  success.  Additionally, 
forensics  methods  and  tools  are  necessary  to  determine  key  facts  relevant  to 
assessing mission impact. Such tools are used for evidence collection, analysis of 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

29 

 
the  attack,  identification  of  the  attacker,  understanding  the  attack,  damage 
assessment, and attribution of attackers. Depending on the mission and the type of 
an  attack,  there  may  be  different  degrees  of  relative  importance  and  resources 
attached  to  attack  detection,  continuity  of  the  mission,  damage  assessment, 
evidence  collection,  attribution,  and  other  activities.  Use  of  related  methods, 
procedures, tools, or technology should depend largely on the mission. 

The following 4 themes emerge to provide focus for the workshop for modeling 
and simulation within this overall cyber defense context: 

•  Model-Based  Systems  Engineering  (MBSE)  approaches:  From  MBSE 
developments in other sectors (e.g., land, air, and space), which methods, 
tools,  and  techniques  can  be  best  applied  to  socio-technical  systems  (of 
systems) that define cyber, their utility, and measures of effectiveness? In 
particular,  how  well  can  a  MBSE  approach  address  all  layers  from  the 
cognitive and virtual to the physical as well as over the system life cycles? 

•  Models for and simulation of attack (and defend) processes: What can be 
identified and inferred at a detailed level of observable events (e.g., system 
logs at lower levels) suitable for the validation of the model and verification 
of  defensive  measures?  Important  aspects  include  comparison  with  real 
events  (threats  and  countermeasures  where  available),  forensics,  and 
warnings and indicators. 

•  Better  representation  of  modeling  and  sim(em)ulation  of  adversarial 
interactions between attackers  and defenders  and adversaries themselves: 
What  are  the  effective  high-level  techniques  and  detailed  game  theoretic 
techniques for “war gaming” of a range of simple-to-complex scenarios in 
order to provide means by which solutions can  be explored in an overall 
end-to-end chain of actions-counteraction in an attack or goal-compromise 
episode? 

•  Modeling and sim(em)ulation of human cognition and behaviors: How can 
we model and “encode”’ human decision making and action/reaction of a 
human defender, including working with machines with increasing levels 
of  autonomy,  as  a  function  of  the  environments,  the  situation  at  hand, 
different stimuli, knowledge, experience, and training? 

The expected outcome of the workshop is deeper insight into the S&T art of the 
possible, now and in the future, of a model-based systems approach applied to cyber 
defense—the  utility,  benefits,  and  challenges.  Specific  technical  challenges  that 
need  to  be  addressed  to  extract  value  for  enhanced  cyber  defense  capability  of 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

30 

 
NATO and coalition nations. In addition, also expect some foresight on how the 2 
areas may evolve in the future and the opportunities and threats posed. 

A-3  Topics to Be Covered 

•  Mature MBSE approaches for cyber defense 

•  Enhanced models for and simulation of attack (and defend) processes 

•  Better  representation  of  modeling  and  sim(em)ulation  of  adversarial 
interactions between attackers and defenders, plus adversaries themselves 

•  Effectiveness in the modeling and sim(em)ulation of human cognition and 

behaviors 

A-4  Deliverable (e.g., S/W Engage Model, Database,...) and/or 

End Product (e.g., Final Report) 

Technical Report; other deliverable(s): none 

Technical Team Leader: Co-Chair: Mr Jack Branhill, United Kingdom 

Lead Nation: United States 

A-5  Nations Willing/Invited to Participate 

NATO  nations  and  bodies:  Belgium,  Bulgaria,  France,  Germany,  Portugal, 
Romania, the United Kingdom, and the United States 

Partnership for Peace nations: Finland, Montenegro, and Sweden 

Mediterranean Dialogue nations: none 

Istanbul Cooperation Initiative nations: none 

Global Partners: Australia 

Contact/other nations: none 

A-6  National and/or NATO Resources Needed (Physical and 

Nonphysical Assets) 

Nations are asked to provide, from their cyber community, leading subject matter 
experts  and  suitable  representatives  from  their  stakeholders,  policy  makers,  and 
practitioners,  including  new  STEM  (Science,  Technology,  Engineering  and 
Mathematics) staff. A background and experience, current or latent, in the 4 topics 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

31 

 
detailed in Section C-3 and operational experience in implementing cyber defense 
solutions is very desirable. 

A-7  STO/CSO Resources Needed 

Provision of funding for and support for the arrangements of a technical evaluator 
for the workshop and 2 keynote speakers.

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

32 

 
Appendix B: Special Issue of the Journal of Defense Modelling 

and Simulation (JDMS)

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Call for Papers 

Journal of Defense Modeling and Simulation:  
Applications, Methodology, Technology (JDMS)  

Special Issue: Model-Driven Paradigms for Integrated Approaches to 
Cyber Defense 

Guest Editors  

Dr Alexander Kott, US Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, Maryland  

Introduction  

information 

The growing military importance of cyber security is unquestionable. Increased use 
technology  and  dependency  on 
of  commercial  off-the-shelf 
computerized information systems for weapons, intelligence, communication, and 
logistics continues to increase vulnerability of military missions to cyber attacks. 
Successful  mission  execution  requires  highly  capable  technologies  that  result  in 
forces performing a broad range of defensive cyber operations for each step of an 
attacker’s life cycle.  

While  many  of  these  defensive  cyber  operations  rely  on  essentially  ad  hoc 
techniques,  there  is  a  growing  realization  within  the  cyber  community  that  a 
comprehensive, systematic, principle-based modeling and simulation approach is 
more likely to produce long-term, lasting, and reusable approaches for defensive 
cyber operations. Such a paradigm is predicated on the creation and validation of 
mechanisms of modeling the organization whose mission is subject to assessment, 
the mission (or missions) itself, and the cyber-vulnerable systems that support the 
mission.  The  models  are  then  used  to  simulate  or  otherwise  portray  the  cyber 
attacks and associate defensive phenomena  and system operations, including the 
assessment of mission impact.  

The main objective of this special issue is to offer the readers a broad, yet integrated 
exploration of the field while providing a publishing venue for researchers working 
toward a multipurpose, integrated system of cyber models that guide a broad range 
of  cyber  security  operations,  examples  of  which  include  vulnerability  analysis, 
intrusion  prevention,  intrusion  detection,  analysis,  forensics,  attribution,  mission 
impact assessment, and recovery.  

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
Candidate  model-driven  paradigms  questions  for  cyber  defense  include  the 
following. Are there applications of the model-driven paradigm that are more likely 
to prove  fruitful in  the near term than others? What can be learned  and adopted 
from the ongoing efforts, such as experiences in the European Union Panoptesec 
program  that  explores  a  model-based  approach?  What  are  ways  to  populate  and 
validate models in an affordable fashion? Is the model-driven paradigm defeated 
by ever-growing diversity and diffusion of information technology infrastructures, 
such as Internet of Things? What commercial tools are emerging that can support 
the  model-driven  paradigm?  Could  these  approaches  be  adapted  for  military-
specific requirements?  

Possible topics for authors to consider include the following:  

•  Theoretical foundations and formulations of the model-driven paradigm  

•  Relevance of game-theoretic and control-theoretic approaches  

•  Formal languages for model specification 

•  Assessment of barriers to successful use of the model-driven paradigm  

•  Potential techniques for using model-driven paradigms for cyber defense 

problem solving at different phases of cyber operations (e.g., prior, during, 
and after discovery of a cyber compromise)  

•  Analysis of known related approaches and methods  

•  Complexity and completeness of the models  

•  Feasibility of automated or semi-automated generation of models  

•  Modeling of the adversary  

•  Human factors in the models  

•  Calibration of the models  

•  Validation of the models  

•  Maintenance of the models  

•  Utility functions to be used in conjunction with models  

Papers submitted should not be concurrently under review at another conference, 
journal, or similar venue.  

Instructions for Manuscript Preparation  

For  manuscript  formatting  and  other  guidelines,  visit  the  Author  Guidelines  for 
JDMS. Manuscripts must not have been previously published or be submitted for 
publication  elsewhere.  Each  submitted  manuscript  must  include  title,  names, 
authors'  affiliations,  postal  and  e-mail  addresses,  and  a  list  of  keywords.  For 
multiple author submission, please identify the corresponding author.  

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

35 

 
Due Dates  

Submission of papers: September 30, 2016 

Expected date of publication: Summer 2017 

Guest Editors:  

•  Alexander Kott, PhD  

Chief  of  Network  Science  Division,  US  Army  Research  Laboratory, 
Adelphi, Maryland, USA  

•  Nazife Baykal, PhD  

Professor,  Director  of  Informatics  Institute  and  Chair,  Cyber  Security 
Department, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey  

•  Yilmaz Cankaya  

Chief Researcher, TÜBITAK BILGEM Cyber Security Institute, Kocaeli, 
Turkey  

•  Bob Madahar, PhD  

Professor, Senior Fellow, DSTL, Porton, United Kingdom  

•  Col. Nikolai Stoianov, PhD  

Associate  Professor,  Defence  Institute  “Prof.  Tsvetan  Lazarova”,  Sofia, 
Bulgaria  

•  Margaret Varga, PhD  

Director at Seetru Ltd, visiting fellow at the University of Oxford. Bristol, 
United Kingdom  

For questions contact:  

Vicki Pate, Managing Editor \Journal of Defense Modeling & Simulation:  

vmpate@scs.org  

Dr Alexander Kott, Guest Editor: alexander.kott1.civ@mail.mil

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

36 

 
Appendix C: Proposal for Exploratory Team ET-094 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TECHNICAL ACTIVITY PROPOSAL (TAP) 

ACTIVITY REFERENCE 
NUMBER  

TYPE AND SERIAL 
NUMBER 

IST-___ 

ET-___ 

ACTIVITY TITLE 

Model-Driven Paradigms for Integrated Approaches to 
Cyber Defence 

LOCATION(S) AND DATES 

TBD 

COORDINATION WITH OTHER BODIES 

NATO ACT, NCIA, CCDCOE 

NATO CLASSIFICATION OF ACTIVITY  NATO UNCLASSIFIED, RELEASABLE TO PUBLIC 

APPROVAL 
2015 

START 
December 2015 

END 
July 2016 

Non-NATO Invited 
Yes 

PUBLICATION DATA  

R 

NU 

KEYWORDS 

Cyber Defense Operations, Computer Information Systems (CIS), Information & 
Communications Technology (ICT), Modeling and Simulation 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

38 

 
 
 
C-1  Background and Justification (Relevance to North Atlantic 

Treaty Organization [NATO]): 

The  growing  military  importance  of  cyber  space  and  cyber  security  is 
unquestionable.  The  increased  use  of  commercial  off-the-shelf  information 
technology  and  dependency  on  computer  information  systems  for  weapons, 
intelligence,  communication,  and  logistics  continues  to  increase  vulnerability  of 
military  missions  to  cyber  attacks.  Successful  execution  of  NATO  missions 
requires highly capable technologies that allow the forces to perform a broad range 
of  defensive  cyber  operations, 
identification,  risk 
characterization, continuous monitoring, evidence collection, analysis of the attack, 
identification of the attacker, understanding the attack, forensic analysis, damage 
assessment,  mission  impact  assessment,  attribution  of  attackers,  threat  analysis, 
remedial  stabilization  of  the  system,  active  response  to  attach  and  preventive 
actions. 

including  vulnerability 

While  much  of  these  defensive  activities  currently  rely  on  essentially  ad  hoc 
techniques,  there  is  a  growing  realization  within  the  cyber  community  that 
comprehensive,  systematic,  principle-based  modeling  and  simulation  are  more 
likely  to  produce  long-term,  lasting,  reusable  approaches  to  defensive  cyber 
operations.  In  particular,  a  recent  NATO  workshop  (IST-128)  voiced  a  strong 
consensus that substantive solutions for at least some classes of cyber challenges, 
for  example  mission  impact  assessment,  was  in  adopting  and  developing  a  new 
model-driven paradigm.  

Such  a  paradigm  is  predicated  on  creation  and  validation  of  mechanisms  of 
modeling the organization whose mission is subject to assessment, the mission (or 
missions)  itself,  and  the  cyber-vulnerable  systems  that  support  the  mission.  The 
models  are  then  used  to  simulate  or  otherwise  portray  the  cyber  attacks  and 
associate defensive phenomena and system operations, including the assessment of 
mission impact. In addition, such model-based analysis could be used to explore 
multiple alternative mitigation and work-around strategies and select the optimal 
course of mitigating actions.  

Furthermore, the model-driven paradigm  applied  to cyber operations  is  likely  to 
benefit  traditional  disciplines  of  cyber  defense,  such  as  vulnerability  analysis, 
intrusion  prevention,  intrusion  detection,  analysis,  forensics,  attribution,  and 
recovery. For example, intrusion detection, especially for zero-day or polymorphic 
attacks, would greatly benefit from the ability to model the observable effects of a 
hypothetic attack.

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

39 

 
C-2  Objective(s): 

The  main  objective  of  the  activity  is  to  perform  a  broad  and  unconstrained 
exploration of the possibility of using a multipurpose, integrated system of models 
for  guiding  a  broad  range  of  cyber  security  operations:  vulnerability  analysis, 
intrusion  prevention,  intrusion  detection,  analysis,  forensics,  attribution,  mission 
impact  assessment,  and  recovery.  The  team  will  investigate  whether  such  a 
paradigm  can  be  expected  to  provide  meaningful,  actionable  information  about 
cyber activities and the resulting impacts that have not been seen before or do not 
match prior experiences and patterns. 

To be sure, a model-driven paradigm presents a number of serious challenges both 
practical and theoretical. For example, a major challenge is to create and maintain 
an appropriate model. Manual generation of such a complex model appears possible 
in some cases but prohibitively expensive and impossible to maintain in the long 
term. Therefore, it will be ET-094’s charter to explore such challenges and answer 
a  number  of  questions,  such  as  the  following:  How  likely  these  challenges  be 
overcome in the near- and mid-term? Are there applications of the model-driven 
paradigm that are more likely to prove fruitful in near-term than others? What can 
be  learned  and  adopted  from  the  ongoing  efforts,  such  as  experiences  in  the 
European Union Panoptesec program that explore a model-based approach? What 
are ways to populate and validate models in an affordable fashion? Is the model-
driven paradigm defeated by ever-growing diversity and diffusion of information 
technology infrastructures, such as the Internet of Things? What commercial tools 
are emerging that can support the model-driven paradigm? Could these be adapted 
for military-specific requirements? 

C-3  Topics to Be Covered 

•  Theoretical foundations and formulations of the model-driven paradigm 

•  Relevance of game-theoretic and control-theoretic approaches 

•  Formal languages for model specification 

•  Assessment of barriers to successful use of the model-driven paradigm     

•  Potential techniques for using model-driven paradigm for cyber defense 
problem  solving  at  different  phases  of  cyber  operations  (e.g.,  prior, 
during, and after discovery of a cyber compromise) 

•  Analysis of known related approaches and methods 

•  Complexity and completeness of the models 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

40 

 
•  Feasibility of automated or semi-automated generation of models 

•  Modeling of the adversary 

•  Human factors in the models 

•  Calibration of the models 

•  Validation of the models 

•  Maintenance of the models 

•  Utility functions to be used in conjunction with models 

C-4  Deliverables and/or End Product  

•  Final Report 

•  Collection of materials (briefs, papers, etc.) assembled in support of the 

Final Report 

•  Recommendations  regarding  the  model-driven  paradigms  for  cyber 

defense, including topics for future activities if appropriate 

C-5  Technical Team Leader and Lead Nation: 

Chair:  

TBD 

Lead Nation:   TBD 

C-6  Nations Willing/Invited to Participate: 

Poland, Rumania, Turkey, Germany, United States  

Partnership for Peace (PfP) nations: all PfP invited 

Mediterranean Dialogue nations: none 

Istanbul Cooperation Initiative nations: none 

Global Partners: none 

Contact/Other nations: none 

C-7  National and/or NATO Resources Needed (Physical and 

Nonphysical Assets) 

•  Support from national host for meeting  

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

41 

 
 
C-8  RTA Resources Needed (e.g., Consultant Funding) 

•  None 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

42 

 
Appendix D: Skybox Security Software

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
After reviewing commercial off-the-shelf solutions, we identified Skybox Security 
as  a  commercially  available  cyber  security  management  software.  Skybox  was 
contacted and agreed to organize a presentation in April 2016. The following is a 
summary of findings resulting from this presentation. 

Their solution seems quite advanced in terms of network discovery, reachability 
map reconstruction, and capability to manipulate this reconstruction via a graphical 
user  interface  (GUI).  The  tool  is  able  to  use  different  vulnerability  scanners  to 
extract  vulnerability  data.  Skybox  uses  a  Panoptesec-similar  algorithm  for  the 
computation  of  the  attack  paths,  based  on  the  Common  Vulnerabilities  and 
Exposures system (https://cve.mitre.org/), and proactively analyses the network to 
propose  mitigation  actions  for  risk  reduction.  While  Skybox’s  cyber  security 
management software is similar to the Panoptesec approach, it does not take into 
account business-related analysis. It is possible to define some particular devices as 
critical, to avoid or optimize the instantiation of the mitigation actions on them, but 
no  more  than  that.  Skybox  completely  avoids  the  reactive  perspective,  and  the 
company is actually seeking and developing its reactive approach. Skybox seems 
to be quite strong on the configuration/GUI and seems able to manage thousands 
of  devices,  which  means  their  attack  path  algorithms  are  quite  optimized.  The 
interesting  discovery  is  the  lack  of  an  evolved  business  mission  engine.  The 
engineer who made the demo for me seemed to understand my questions about such 
an engine, but I am not sure it is in the development plan of the company to  go 
much deeper in this direction (compared with the kind of evolution we envisioned 
for our exploratory team). Skybox, in conclusion, is not particularly advanced in 
terms of the concepts we analyzed and apparently not extremely interested in them. 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

44 

 
 
List of Symbols, Abbreviations, and Acronyms 

AMICA 

analyzing mission impacts of cyber actions 

CAMIAC 

Cyber Attack Modeling and Impact Assessment Component 

COA 

CR 

course of action 

cyber range 

CySeMoL 

Cyber Security Modeling Language 

GUI 

IST 

IT 

JDMS 

M&S 

graphical user interface 

Information Systems and Technology 

information technology 

Journal of Defense Modelling and Simulation 

modeling and simulation 

MAST 

Malicious Activity Simulation Tool 

MBSE 

Model-Based Systems Engineering 

NATO 

North Atlantic Treaty Organization 

PfP 

S&T 

SA 

SE 

SIR 

STO 

UK 

Partnership for Peace 

science and technology 

situational awareness 

Systems Engineering 

Susceptible, Infected, Recovered 

Science and Technology Organization 

United Kingdom 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

45 

 
1  DEFENSE TECH INFO CTR 

  (PDF)  DTIC OCA 

2  US ARMY RSRCH LAB 

  (PDF)  IMAL HRA MAIL & RECORDS MGMT 

RDRL CIO L TECHL LIB 

1  GOVT PRNTG OFC 

  (PDF)  A  MALHOTRA 

1  US ARMY RSRCH LAB 

  (PDF)  RDRL CIN  
  A  KOTT 

Approved for public release; distribution unlimited. 

46 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
