Audit Analysis Models, Security Frameworks and Their Relevance 
for VoIP 

Oscar Gavilanez1, 2, Glen Rodriguez2 and Franklin Gavilanez3 
1Systems Engineering, Escuela Superior Politécnica de Chimborazo ESPOCH, Ecuador 
2Systems Engineering, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos UNMSM, Peru 
3Mathematics, Montgomery College, USA 
oscar.gavilanez@unmsm.edu.pe 
glen.rodriguez@gmail.com 
franklin.gavilanez@montgomerycollege.edu 

Abstract: Voice over IP (VoIP) is the transmission of voice and multimedia content over Internet Protocol (IP) networks, this 
paper reviews models, frameworks and auditing standards proposed to this date to manage VoIP security through a literature 
review,  with  descriptions  of  both  the  historical  and  philosophical  evolution  reflecting  an  adequate  knowledge  of  related 
research.  Three research questions are raised here: RQ1. What are the requirements to be met by a model of security audit 
in VoIP systems to achieve their goals? RQ2. Today, are there additional attacks that previous works have not considered? 
RQ3. Which security requirements in the VoIP systems are covered (and which are not covered) by security frameworks? 
After  some  discussion  about  VoIP  Protocols,  Attacks  on  VoIP,  Information  Technology  (IT)  audit,  IT  security  audits, 
Frameworks and auditing standards, we present a unified view of VoIP Security Requirements; as well as considering the 
contributions  and  disadvantages  of  frameworks  and  auditing  standards  toward  achieving  those  requirements  through  a 
comparative evaluation. It was determined that there is no security framework which considers social engineering attacks in 
spite of being an important aspect to consider in security management VoIP; also there is no specific framework that covers 
all categories of security requirements for VoIP system, therefore, a more extensive model is needed. 

Keywords: VoIP security, attacks on VoIP, IT security audit, IT security frameworks, social engineering attacks 

1.

Introduction 

This article aims to analyse models, frameworks and auditing standards for relevance in VoIP systems; and to 
establish if previous jobs meet all safety requirements in VoIP systems. Three research questions are raised here: 
RQ1. What are the requirements to be met by a model of security audit in VoIP systems to achieve their goals? 
RQ2.  Today,  are  there  additional  attacks  that  previous  works  have  not  considered?  RQ3.  Which  security 
requirements in the VoIP systems are covered (and which are not covered) by security frameworks? 

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 shows the literature review regarding attacks on VoIP Security, IT 
security  audits,  framework  and  auditing  standards,  and  VoIP  Security  Requirements.  Section  3  deals  with 
approaches and benchmarking of frameworks and standards, requirements and needs of the VoIP management 
systems. Finally, section 4 concludes with answers to the research questions. 

2. Literature review 

2.1 Introduction to VoIP 

VoIP refers to communication protocols, technologies, methodologies and data transportation involved in the 
delivery of voice communications and multimedia sessions over the internet, rather than the public switched 
telephone network (PSTN). The communication voice uses the internet protocol (IP) which is low cost and is a 
major factor behind VoIP implementations, thus organizations can save thousands of dollars a year by opting for 
this technology, however, safety related problems should then be considered.  

Ibrahim, Abdullah and Dehghantanha (2012) state that VoIP applications combine video and audio data along 
with the usual data packets traveling within a network system. Users make phone calls using softphones or IP 
phones  (like  Skype)  and  send  instant  messages  through  their  computer.  Geneiatakis,  Lambrinoudakis  and 
Kambourakis (2008) state that VoIP infrastructure inherits and uses various protocols of the stack architecture 
of the Internet,  specifically in the network and transport use of Internet Protocol IP, and TCP,  UDP or SCTP, 
respectively. 

143

 
 
 
 
Oscar Gavilanez, Glen Rodriguez and Franklin Gavilanez 

2.2 Attacks on VoIP security 

An attempt to overcome the safety rules of a computer network is considered as an attack, based on a threat 
by exploiting vulnerabilities. Their effectiveness depends on the combination of three factors: countermeasures 
and  security  mechanisms  used,  existence  of  specific  vulnerabilities  on  the  infrastructure,  and  abilities  of  the 
attacker and tools used to perform the attack. 

Shukla and Sahni (2013) addressed the detection and mitigation of SPIT using the signalling protocol analysis. 
Kshetri (2006) states that the constant reporting of vulnerabilities in information systems, and the exploit of 
human, procedural or technological failures on computing infrastructures in the world, are offering a perfect 
scenario for computer intrusions to grow.  

Rosenberg et al (2002) argue that Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) has several security vulnerabilities, some are 
documented in RFC 3261 IETF, therefore there are several SIP security attacks. 

2.2.1 Username enumeration  

Dwivedi (2009) states that the attacker employs usernames consisting of valid account information registered 
in a VoIP network. This can be achieved by sniffing, when authentication is required between a user agent and 
a SIP server, the Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) standard SIP traversing the network in plain text, it can be 
sniffed backwards on the network, and as a switching network offers little protection, an attack can be made by 
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) poisoning, and man in the middle to capture all URI within the local subnet.  

2.2.2 Man in the middle  

According to  Xin  (2007)  when the attacker intercepts traffic SIP call  signalling  messages and traffic from the 
calling party to the called party, once the attacker has won the position calls can be hijacked. Man in the middle 
on the enemy gains the ability to read, insert and modify at will messages between two parties without either 
of  them  knowing  that  the  link  between  them  has  been  compromised,  the  attacker  is  able  to  observe  and 
intercept messages between two victims. 

2.2.3 Eavesdropping 

Dwivedi  (2009)  considers  eavesdropping  the  data  transmitted  between  two  or  more  points  without  being 
directly  involved  in  it, thus  signalling  messages  and  audio  streams  intersect;  usually  it  happens  when 
implantation of VoIP is not planned properly and share the same physical medium to transmit voice and data. 

2.2.4 SIP password cracking  

According to Dwivedi (2009) SIP password cracking for a given user is usually done through brute force technique 
and the use of a dictionary, especially effective with weak passwords; there are methods and tools to break and 
crack the hashes in order to obtain a username and password to use the identity of the victim maliciously.  

2.2.5 Denial of service (DoS) 

Chen, E. (2006) considers DoS as one of the most alarming threats on  the Internet. A DoS attack attempts to 
make  a  network  node  not  available  by  flooding  it  with  illegitimate  packets,  usurping  their  bandwidth  and  / 
or overloading node resources.  

2.2.6 VoIP spam and phishing  

Dwivedi (2009) considers that this type of attack involves a caller pretending to be a trustworthy organization 
and asks for confidential and critical information. This is an attack on the privacy of the data.  The victim gives 
his/her personal data.  

2.2.7 Toll fraud  

Dwivedi (2009) refers to it as the ability to have unauthorized access to the VoIP service. It can be performed by 
manipulating  the  messages  and configuration  of  VoIP  signalling  access  components,  allowing  the  hackers  to 
sequester the system, entering directly on phones and copying the credentials and placing them on their own 
computer. 

144

 
 
 
Oscar Gavilanez, Glen Rodriguez and Franklin Gavilanez 

2.2.8 Spam over internet telephony (SPIT) 

Rebahi  and  Sisalem  (2005)  state  that  the  term  spam  is  mostly  used  in  the  context  of  email,  but  it  can  also 
generally refer to any unsolicited communication. According to MacIntosh and Vinokurov (2005), in the context 
of VoIP networks, SPIT generally refers to massive amounts of unsolicited calls, and involves sending emails to 
users against their will. Each VoIP account has an IP address associated with it. Messages to thousands of IP 
addresses are sent which can carry viruses and spyware. 

2.2.9 Social engineering  

Snyder  (2015)  argues  that  social  engineering  stands  in  a  unique  place  among  hacking  techniques  due  to  its 
reliance upon deception rather than technology. These types of attacks are dangerous due to their high success 
rate  and  simplicity. According  to  Allsopp  (2009),  who  is  a  professional  penetration  tester,  social  engineering 
refers  to  “obtaining  of confidential  or  privileged  information  by  manipulating  legitimate  sources”  and  that  it 
“always  requires  some  degree  of deception”.  Nwogu  and  Odoh  (2015)  argue  that  vishing  is  a  tool  used  by 
attackers to harvest customers’ credentials. An attacker phones the victims and uses social engineering to trick 
them into divulging secret information such as credit card information.  

Chiappetta  et  al  (2013)  report  that  VoIP  threats  have  long  been  studied,  their  taxonomy  divides  threats  in 
several macro-categories,  which include the  following: social threats, eavesdropping,  intentional  interruption 
and service abuse.  

2.3 IT audit/ IT security audits 

According to Weber (1998), an audit is the process of collecting and evaluating evidence to see whether the 
performance of the system to protect assets, maintains data integrity and operates effectively and efficiently in 
accordance with the objectives of the organization. Meanwhile, according to Arens, Elder and Beasley (2012) 
the audit is the accumulation and evaluation of evidence about  information to determine and report on the 
degree  of  correspondence  between  the  information  and  established criteria.  Xia  (2014)  states  that  the 
information system audit records information system user activity in the behaviour of a mechanism; it is not 
only able to identify who has access to the system, but also how to use the recording system, so as to provide 
the basis for the post-process of security incidents. 

Ariffin  et  al  (2014)  consider  that  Information  audit  is  crucial  in  understanding  the  current  state  of  an 
organization. By implementing an information audit, the needs, the available resources and the gaps are defined 
and reported to the top management of an organization, thus helping them to identify steps to be taken in order 
to  improve  the  way  they  manage  information  to  stay  competitive  in their  business.  Maciejewska  (2014) 
considers that the dynamic development of the data communications industry in recent years increases the risk 
of auditing of financial statements, to some extent. 

Kooper, Maes and Lindgreen (2011) argue that information technology has become a vital and integral part of 
many  business  activities  and  of  the  support, sustainability,  and  growth  of  enterprises.  Business  and  IT 
departments must understand each other and make together the strategic/tactical plans needed for achieving 
goals of the organization.  

IT  security  audits  determine  whether  an  information  system  and  its  management  meet  both  the  legal 
expectations of customer data protection and the company’s financial standards against various security threats. 
Ryoo et al (2014) state that the organizations have used traditional IT audits to evaluate issues such as availability 
to authorized users and integrity and confidentiality in data storage and transmission. 

A company needs to make explicit how specific security measures are linked to the relevant security objectives, 
and how they are meant to address possible risks concerning business processes and assets to be protected. 
Security  engineering  methodologies  aim  to  enable  the  systematic  design  and  implementation  of  security 
measures. 

Burgemeestre,  Hulstijn  and  Tan  (2013)  argue  that  security  engineering  requires  a  broader  perspective.  It 
integrates security requirements with functional requirements and constraints derived from other sources. 

145

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Oscar Gavilanez, Glen Rodriguez and Franklin Gavilanez 

2.4 Frameworks and auditing standards  

There are many IT-related management frameworks, standards and methodologies in use today. None of them, 
on  their  own,  are  standalone  IT  governance  frameworks,  but  they  all  have  a  useful  role  in  the  efficient 
management of IT operations. 

2.4.1 The CALDER-MOIR IT Governance framework  

According to Calder (2016), CALDER-MOIR IT is designed to help to use all these overlapping and competing 
frameworks and standards, and also to deploy the best practice guidance contained in the international standard 
for  IT  governance,  ISO/IEC  38500.  The  framework  harmonizes  the  different  frameworks  and  standards  as  a 
graphic classification linking the main topics such as business strategy, risk, IT strategy, operations and change 
management capabilities.  

2.4.2 SAS 70 Type II  

Statement on Auditing Standards No. 70 (SAS 70) is  an internationally recognized  standard audit focused on 
internal and external controls for a company that provides services. The report consists of a review by a certified 
independent auditing firm.  

2.4.3 GLBA 

Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) which is also known as the Law for the Modernization of the Financial Services 
1999 provides limited protection against the sale of their private financial information privacy. 

2.4.4 ISO 27000 

Defines  a  framework  for  managing  information  security  for  organizations  of  any  size.  The  ability  to  define  a 
standard for information security guarantees proper implementation and mobility in different organizations, 
adapted  to  the  specific  needs  of  each,  but  all  governed  and  controlled  similarly.  The  ISO  27000  family  of 
standards  creates,  manages  and  measures  the  Information  Security  Management  System  (ISMS)  which  is 
defined as a set of rules and policies for secure information management in an organization. 

2.4.5 PCI DSS 

Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard is developed by a committee formed by debit and credit card 
companies called Payment Card Industry Security Standards Council (PCI SSC) as a guideline to help organizations 
that  process,  store  and  /  or  transmit  cardholder  data,  to  ensure  data,  in  order  to  prevent  fraud  involving 
payments.  

2.4.6 EU privacy (or Directive 95/46 / EC) 

This is a directive of the European Union adopted in 1995, which regulates the processing of personal data in 
the European Union. It is an important component of EU privacy and human rights standards. On January 25, 
2012, the European Commission presented a draft (Regulation European Data Protection General) to replace 
the Data Protection Directive. 

2.4.7 COBIT 

Ridley, Young and Carroll (2004) state that Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology (COBIT) 
is an open standard that is being used increasingly by a wide range of organizations around the world. COBIT is 
the  most  suitable  control  framework  to  help  an  organization  to  ensure  alignment  between  the  use  of 
Information Technology (IT) and business goals, and emphasizing the need of business so that managers are 
satisfied by each objective of control. While there is a wide range of frameworks, standards and related IT control 
documents, the main focus of COBIT is in alignment with the use of IT in achieving organizational goals. 

Relatively  little  academic  literature  published  investigates  the  use  of  COBIT.  This  may  be  due  to  extensive 
electronic resources available on COBIT being primarily designed for IT and audit professionals. These sources 
are produced by the Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA) and the IT Governance Institute 
and are not known by many academic authors. There are few published studies concerning the adoption or use 

146

 
 
Oscar Gavilanez, Glen Rodriguez and Franklin Gavilanez 

of  COBIT.  Apart  from  the  study  cases  produced  by  the  IT  Governance  Institute,  there  is  little  literature  that 
considers the scope and characteristics of organizations that have used COBIT and the results of the application.  

2.4.8 The Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL) framework 

ITIL is a set of practices for IT service management that focuses on aligning IT services with the needs of business; 
despite stating the risk should be identified, measured and mitigated, ITIL does not clarify what concrete method 
is to be used in dealing with the risk. The risk management component is implicit in the process but in a very 
abstract, unobvious way and it is not specified as desired in the actual business scenario. 

Vilarinho and da Silva (2011) consider that the risk management is not clearly shown because there is not an 
obvious way to implement risk management in ITIL, despite risk management being referenced in some of the 
ITIL books, mainly in Operation and Continual Service improvement. 

Goldstein and Frank (2016) state that there is a need for a method to guide the design of IT security systems, 
balancing the goals and limitations of various perspectives. Burgemeestre, Hulstijn and Tan (2010) manifest that 
in business administration, high-level control models such as Committee of Sponsoring  Organizations (COSO), 
Simons’s levers of control, and IT governance models such as COBIT, serve as inspiration for designing internal 
control systems. With regards to the design of computerized workplaces Draxler and Stevens (2011) found such 
permeation in the common standards for IT management like ITIL and COBIT, the ITIL standard does not address 
the single user as the customer of an IT service, but the organization as a whole.  

2.5 VoIP security requirements   

Bellavista, Corradi, and Stefanelli (1999) state that without security, systems cannot deal with global untrusted 
environments, such as the internet; without interoperability, they cannot interact with existing tools and legacy 
systems. The increasing complexity of global distributed systems, from a set of resources connected by network 
infrastructures  to  a  set  of  network-centric  coordinated  services,  has  motivated  the  evolution  of  traditional 
management models. Dabbebi, Badonnel and Festor (2015) consider that telephony over IP has been widely 
deployed, supported by the standardization of VoIP signalling and media transfer protocols. This deployment 
has also led to the emergence of several security threats, including attacks inherited from the IP layer and attacks 
specific to the application layer. A large variety of security mechanisms has been proposed for addressing them, 
but these mechanisms may seriously degrade such a critical service. Telephony over IP defines a new paradigm, 
which enables the establishment and the transmission of voice communications directly over IP networks. This 
integration  of  data  and  voice  on  the  same  network  enables  higher  flexibility  and  cost  sharing.  It  also  poses 
security challenges, as the VoIP service is much less confined than traditional PSTN. The risk is the combination 
of the probability that a given threat will exercise a vulnerability on a given system and the resulting impact of 
that adverse event on this system.  

Zhang and Fischer-Hübner (2013) state that the transmissions of VoIP flows are sensitive to the quality of service 
(QoS). Three issues are often taken as evaluation criteria: end-to-end delay, delay jitter and packet loss. Several 
basic security requirements for VoIP systems are consolidated in Table 1. 

Table 1: Basic security requirements for VoIP systems 

Requirements 
Authentication, 
integrity, 
confidentiality, 
privacy, 
efficiency, 
performance, 
security against 
various attacks, 
security features 
Quality of Service QoS 

Description 
Security measures are usually inversely proportional to the performance. 
The original SIP authentication scheme does not provide mutual authentication and cannot 
support the integrity and confidentiality protection. 
Special safety requirements for privacy protection, which have not been considered in most 
previous works include strong authentication, protection of privacy and efficiency. 
The authentication scheme for VoIP must meet several requirements of safety and efficiency, 
in order to meet several objectives, including: providing security against various attacks, 
providing security elements and generate privacy protection. 

The transmission of VoIP flows is sensitive to the quality of service (QoS), three issues are 
often taken as evaluation criteria: end-to-end delay, delay jitter and packet loss 

Gonzalez  et  al  (2012)  carry  out  a  classification  of  several  potential  security  issues  determining  the  following 
categories: network security, interfaces, data security, virtualization, governance, compliance and legal issues. 

147

 
 
 
 
Oscar Gavilanez, Glen Rodriguez and Franklin Gavilanez 

3. Approaches and benchmarking 

There are disadvantages to be taken into account with respect to approaches found on existing frameworks 
according to the literature; they justify the need for a model of Security Audit for VoIP; this are shown in Table 
2. 

Table 2: Disadvantages of frameworks and standards 

Author 
Cots, Casadesús and 
Marimon (2016) 

Disadvantages of frameworks and standards 
The establishment of audit is a specific benefit of management in accordance with rules and 
cannot be extended to other frameworks like ITIL 

Vilarinho and da Silva 
(2011) 
Goldstein and Frank 
(2016) 

Burgemeestre et al 
(2010) 

Draxler and Stevens 
(2011) 

Burgemeestre, Hulstijn 
and Tan (2013) 

Ridley, Young and 
Carroll (2004) 

ITIL has some gaps in the specification Risk Management 

Management frameworks, such as ITIL and COBIT are not sufficient for the design and 
management of comprehensive IT security systems because they do not address the 
challenges in terms of protection of IT resources 
The methods of risk management support decisions on the implementation of control 
measures, however, they are not designed as a means to explain and encourage compliance 
with decisions to external auditors. 
The ITIL standard does not address the needs of a single user of an IT service but that of the 
organization as a whole, therefore, the issue of adaptation is not addressed in the ITIL 
standard (by the end users themselves or in cooperation with the service provider) 
The safety standards of information as COBIT or NIST 800-53 are organized around a set of 
objectives of generic control; open standards must be translated into specific rules to be 
applied. 

COBIT is an open standard that ensures alignment between the use of IT and business 
objectives; it stresses the need of business by each control objective; the IT control 
frameworks are designed to promote effective IT governance. 

Table 3: Contains requirements and needs of management systems VoIP versus some frameworks 

Framework 
COBIT sets best practices for IT controls, but companies should 
determine who controls make for your specific organization. 
That makes a very general framework COBIT 
The user must implement COBIT: 
Ensure that the application meets its regulatory requirements. 
Selecting the right controls for your organization. 
Monitoring and reporting on the program. 
The United States Government Configuration Baseline (USGCB) 
(formerly FDCC) and Security Content Automation Protocol 
(SCAP). 
Standard designed to provide a unique setting, consistent 
throughout the company, both for desktop and notebook PCs, 
and therefore reduce the costs associated with support, 
application compatibility and at the same time to improve 
safety. 
SCAP is based on a set of open standards that list the security 
issues configuration, software failures and product names. It is 
used for measuring systems to determine the presence of 
known vulnerabilities and provide a mechanism for sorting the 
results in order to evaluate the potential impact. 
Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) / NIST 
800-53. 
Streamlining business processes to ensure business continuity, 
improve operational efficiency and maximize the security of IT 
infrastructures of organizations. 
They must implement strategies and processes to: 
assure service levels, policy compliance and appropriate risk 
management, 
reduce the cost and complexity of managing heterogeneous IT 
infrastructures. 

Management systems VoIP 
Integrated security management is required. 
Should identify, implement and automate the 
critical controls. 
Define, manage and report on a coherent set of 
internal controls over data and corporate systems. 

Automated systems evaluation is required on VoIP. 
Build the capacity to safely manage the 
configuration of Group Policy objects for VoIP. 
Integrated security management for compliance 
and policies to ensure IT assets and manage risk. 
Effective configuration management of all VoIP 
devices and identifying those where the system 
differs from its expected configurations. 

Monitor heterogeneous security controls across the 
organization, enabling rapid identification of 
potential and existing threats and provide a 
detailed and accurate safety personal knowledge to 
allow quick recovery and reduce exposure times. 
Policies of real-time monitoring and change 
auditing (reports). 
Generate accurate and timely assessments of 
security risks. 
Management of user identity access and rights. 

148

 
 
 
 
 
Oscar Gavilanez, Glen Rodriguez and Franklin Gavilanez 

Framework 
Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act (GLBA). 
Financial services providers must protect customer information 
against threats to security, confidentiality and integrity; 
however, GLBA is not a technical safety standard. 

ISO 27002 is an international safety standard or code of good 
practices for managing information security. 
The key to success lies in identifying a common framework for 
implementation and mapping regulatory requirements that 
framework, because the objective of ISO 27002 is to provide a 
comprehensive security framework, their requirements are very 
broad in its impact usually affecting all aspects of an IT 
organization. 

In order to ensure the reliability of power generation and power 
transmission, North American Electric Reliability Corporation 
(NERC) Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP) requires a wide 
range of both technical and procedural controls to be 
implemented and documented. 
NERC CIP involves specific technical security controls and 
process controls around training, policy enforcement, and 
access. 

4. Conclusions 

Management systems VoIP 
Establishment of a program of information security 
to safeguard user information. 
The evaluation of the ability of security policies to 
identify and control internal and external threats. 
The management and control of risks that threaten 
customer information 
Establish Security Policy. Policies needed to address 
access controls, the use of encryption, exchange 
controls, monitoring and incident response. 
Risk Assessment Information Security and 
Configuration Management. 
Access controls systems. Real-time monitoring and 
auditing 
Reports of security breaches, audit for security 
applications and devices, as well as network 
devices. 
Develop a set of policies, standards and other 
internal security guidelines. 
Access control. 
Management of rights of user identity and access, 
streamline password management, access control 
to sensitive information inside or outside the 
firewall. 
Management service levels. 
Protection against intrusions, security event 
management. 
Reporting on safety deficiencies. 
Secure record management, event correlation and 
threat detection and Safety Information. 
Evaluate default security. 
User Management. 
Integration of security and compliance tools. 

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Responding to the research question 1, we can say that the requirements to be met by a model of VoIP 
audit to achieve its objectives should be based on the following categories: network security, interfaces, 
data security, virtualization, governance, compliance and legal matters, adaptability to consolidated VoIP 
systems and social engineering. 

Regarding the research question 2, we consider that unlike common technical attacks, social engineering 
attacks cannot be prevented by current security tools and software. Despite the devastating nature of social 
engineering  attacks,  there  seems  to  be  a  lack  of  concern  about  social  engineering  in  VoIP  professional 
literature, with writers and researchers devoting their time solely to technical security issues. Despite this 
lack of concern, social engineering remains perhaps the most dangerous threat to information security for 
any company; accordingly, social engineering continues to be an issue that must be addressed. 

Responding to the research question 3, according to the literature review there is no specific framework 
that covers all categories of security requirements for VoIP systems; a more extensive model is needed. 

Social  engineering  refers  to  taking  advantage  of  human  element  of  security  to  compromise  vital 
information,  when  the  ease  of  use  and  cost  of  execution  of  social  engineering  are  compared  to  more 
technical attacks on companies, it becomes apparent why social engineering is such a common tool, it must 
pay  careful  attention  to  both  technical  security  breaches  and  non-technical  forms  of  hacking  like  social 
engineering. 

Security is a people and management problem; therefore, physical and technical controls are not enough 
to protect the security of the information. 

149

 
Oscar Gavilanez, Glen Rodriguez and Franklin Gavilanez 

References 

Allsopp, W., 2009. Unauthorised access: physical penetration testing for IT security teams. United Kingdom:  John Wiley & 

Sons. 

Arens, A.A., Elder, R.J., and Beasley, M.S. 2012. Auditing and assurance services: an integrated approach. Singapore: 

Prentice Hall. 

Ariffin, I., Latif, A.A., Faudzi, M.A., Shariff, S.S., and Nadzir, M.M. 2014. Information audit in electricity utilities: Roles, 

methodologies, issues and challenges. In: IEEE, International conference on computer and information 
sciences. Available at: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6868421&isnumber=6868339. 3-
5 June 2014, Malaysia.  

Bellavista, P., Corradi, A., and Stefanelli, C. 1999. An open secure mobile agent framework for systems 

management. Journal of Network and Systems Management, 7(3), pp323-339. 

Burgemeestre, B., Hulstijn, J., and Tan, Y.H. 2010. Value-based argumentation for justifying compliance. In: International 

conference on deontic logic in computer science.  Delft University of Technology. Berlin: Springer. 

Burgemeestre, B., Hulstijn, J., and Tan, Y.H. 2013. Value-based argumentation for designing and auditing security 

measures. Ethics and information technology, 15(3), pp153-171. 

Calder, A. (2016). The Calder-Moir IT Governance Framework. [online] Available at: 

http://www.itgovernance.co.uk/calder_moir.aspx. Obtained on 11 January 2016. 

Chen, E. Y. 2006. Detecting DoS attacks on SIP systems. In:IEEE 1st Workshop on VoIP management and security. 
Chiappetta, S., Mazzariello, C., Presta, R., and Romano, S.P. 2013. An anomaly-based approach to the analysis of the social 

behavior of VoIP users.Computer Networks, 57(6), pp1545-1559. 

Cots, S., Casadesús, M., and Marimon, F. 2016. Benefits of ISO 20000 IT service management certification. Information 

Systems and e-Business Management, 14(1), pp1-18. 

Dabbebi, O., Badonnel, R., and Festor, O. 2015. An online risk management strategy for VoIP enterprise 

infrastructures. Journal of Network and Systems Management, 23(1), pp137-162. 

Draxler, S., and Stevens, G. 2011. Supporting the collaborative appropriation of an open software ecosystem. Computer 

Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), 20(4-5), pp403-448. 

Dwivedi, H. 2009. Hacking VoIP: protocols, attacks, and countermeasures. San Francisco: No Starch Press. 
Geneiatakis, D., Lambrinoudakis, C., and Kambourakis, G. 2008. An ontology-based policy for deploying secure SIP-based 

VoIP services. Computers & Security, 27(7), pp285-297. 

Goldstein, A., and Frank, U. 2016. Components of a multi-perspective modeling method for designing and managing IT 

security systems. Information Systems and e-Business Management, 14(1), pp101-140. 

Gonzalez, N., Miers, C., Redigolo, F., Simplicio, M., Carvalho, T., Näslund, M., and Pourzandi, M. 2012. A quantitative 

analysis of current security concerns and solutions for cloud computing. Journal of Cloud Computing: Advances, 
Systems and Applications, 1(1), pp1. 

Ibrahim, M., Abdullah, M. T., and Dehghantanha, A. 2012. Modelling Based Approach for Reconstructing Evidence of VoIP 

Malicious Attacks. International Journal of Cyber-Security and Digital Forensics (IJCSDF), 1(4), pp324-340. 
Kooper, M. N., Maes, R., and Lindgreen, E. R. 2011. On the governance of information: Introducing a new concept of 

governance to support the management of information. International Journal of Information Management,31(3), 
pp195-200. 

Kshetri, N. 2006. The simple economics of cybercrimes. IEEE Security & Privacy, 4(1), pp33-39. 
Maciejewska, I. 2014. Risk factors for an audit process in the developed IT environment: The concept of research based on 
experiences from small audit practices in Poland. In: IEEE  9th Iberian conference on information systems and 
technologies (CISTI). Spain. 

MacIntosh, R., and Vinokurov, D. 2005. Detection and mitigation of spam in IP telephony networks using signaling protocol 

analysis. In: IEEE/Sarnoff, Symposium on advances in wired and wireless communication, 2005. USA. 

Nwogu, E., and Odoh, M. 2015. Security Issues Analysis on Online Banking Implementations in Nigeria. International 

Journal of Computer Science and Telecommunications, 6(1), pp20-27. 

Rebahi, Y., and Sisalem, D. 2005. Sip service providers and the spam problem. In: Proceedings of the 2nd VoIP security 

workshop. USA. 

Ridley, G., Young, J., and Carroll, P. 2004. COBIT and its Utilization: A framework from the literature. In: Proceedings of the 

37th Annual Hawaii international conference on system sciences. 

Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A. et al. 2002. SIP: session initiation protocol (No. RFC 3261). 
Ryoo, J., Rizvi, S., Aiken, W., and Kissell, J. 2014. Cloud security auditing: challenges and emerging approaches. IEEE Security 

& Privacy, 12(6), pp68-74. 

Shukla, J., and Sahni, B. 2013. A survey on VoIP security attacks and their proposed solutions. International Journal of 

Application or Innovation in Engineering & Management (IJAIEM). 

Snyder, C. 2015. Handling human hacking: creating a comprehensive defensive strategy against modern social engineering.  

Liberty University. 

Vilarinho, S., and da Silva, M.M. 2011. Risk management model in ITIL. In: International conference on ENTERprise 

information systems. Berlin: Springer. Technical University of Lisbon. 

Weber, R. A. (1998). Information systems control and audit. Pearson Education. [Online]. Available at: 

http://books.google.co.kr/books?id=rLvehDVJG EC.  Obtained on 18 April 2016. 

150

 
Oscar Gavilanez, Glen Rodriguez and Franklin Gavilanez 

Xia, S. 2014. The design of teaching management information system based on oracle security audit technology. In: IEEE, 

Workshop on advanced research and technology in industry applications (WARTIA). Canada. 

Xin, J. 2007. Security issues and countermeasure for VoIP. white paper, SANS Institute. Available at: 

https://www.sans.org/reading-room/whitepapers/voip/security-issues-countermeasure-voip-1701 
Zhang, G., and Fischer-Hübner, S. 2013. A survey on anonymous voice over IP communication: attacks and 

defenses. Electronic Commerce Research, pp1-33. 

151

 
