Intelligent Infrastructure for Smart Agriculture: 
An Integrated Food, Energy and Water System 

Shashi Shekhar 
University of Minnesota 

Joe Colletti 
Iowa State University 

Francisco Muñoz-Arriola 
University of Nebraska-Lincoln 

Lakshmish Ramaswamy 
The University of Georgia 

Chandra Krintz 
University of California, Santa 
Barbara 

Lav Varshney 
University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign 

Debra Richardson 
University of California, Irvine 

Abstract: Agriculture provides economic opportunity through innovation; helps rural America to thrive; promotes 
agricultural  production  that  better  nourishes  Americans;  and  aims  to  preserve  natural  resources  through  healthy 
private  working  lands,  conservation,  improved  watersheds,  and  restored  forests.  From  agricultural  production  to 
food supply, agriculture supports rural and urban economies across the U.S.  It accounts for 10% of U.S. jobs and is 
currently  creating  new  jobs  in  the  growing  field  of  data-driven  farming.  However,  U.S.  global  competitiveness 
associated with food and nutrition security is at risk because of accelerated investments by many other countries in 
agriculture,  food,  energy,  and  resource  management.  To  ensure  U.S.  global  competitiveness  and  long-term  food 
security,  it  is  imperative  that  we  build  sustainable  physical  and  cyber  infrastructures to  enable  self-managing  and 
sustainable farming. Such infrastructures should enable next generation precision-farms by harnessing modern and 
emerging technologies such as small satellites, broadband Internet, tele-operation, augmented reality, advanced data 
analytics, sensors, and robotics. 

Agriculture: A Vital Economic Engine and National Resource 

1.  
Agriculture provides economic opportunity through innovation, helps rural America to thrive, promotes agricultural 
production  that  better  nourishes  Americans,  as  well  as  provides  new  jobs  and  aims  to  preserve  natural  resources 
through  healthy  private  working  lands,  conservation,  improved  watersheds,  and  restored  forests.  This  vital  sector 
affects each American and is an economic engine that provides approximately 1 in 10 U.S. jobs. U.S. agricultural 
productivity and profitability are the envy of the world. Notably, many new jobs are appearing in the fast-growing 
area of data-driven farming1. However, U.S. global competitiveness associated with food and nutrition security is at 
risk because of accelerated investments in agriculture, food, energy, and resource management by countries such as 
China, Brazil, and India.   

Technological  innovation  in  agriculture,  food  manufacturing,  energy  production,  and  water  conservation  by  the 
private  and  public  sectors  have  been  key  drivers  of  our  international  competitiveness.  A  renewed  private-public 
effort is needed to develop and deploy advanced technologies that will ensure food and nutrition security; address 
workforce,  malnutrition  and  obesity;  foster  energy  independence;  manage  critical  natural  resources,  especially 
water; and improve our ability to adapt to environmental and market shocks that jeopardize food, energy, and water 
security. 

The Potential for Intelligent Agriculture Infrastructure 

2.  
An intelligent agriculture infrastructure that leverages private development and public R&D is the key to addressing 
these grand challenges and increasing our competitive position globally. 2 Interconnecting existing and new models 

1 The Seeds of Innovation – Big Data Reshaping U.S. Agriculture, US Chamber of Commerce, March 2014, 
https://www.uschamberfoundation.org/blog/post/seeds-innovation-big-data-reshaping-us-agriculture/34140 

2 Mynatt et al. (2017) “A National Research Agenda for Intelligent Infrastructure” CCC Led Whitepapers 
http://cra.org/ccc/resources/ccc-led-whitepapers/, last accessed April 12, 2017. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
(e.g.,  crop,  soil,  water  and  weather),  creating  public-private  spaces  for  data  sharing,  and  developing  technologies 
distributed  across  all  scales  of  food,  energy,  and  water  systems  will  create  data-based  assets  that  can  be  used  to 
optimize agricultural productivity and the food pipeline all the way to consumer behavior and waste management, 
while increasing jobs, wages, and wealth creation opportunities in both rural and urban America. Data-based assets 
detailed  in  Box  1  include  raw  data,  processed  data,  tools  for  real-time  decision-making,  and  tools  for  models  that 
stand alone and hopefully in the future will be interconnected. Further, these data-based assets need to be generated 
and shared across the private and public sectors. 

Box 1. Data-based Assets 

•  Raw and processed data from farm equipment, field sensors, UAS, weather stations, and satellite 

resources.  Some data originate with the farmers and agribusiness and other data originate in the public 
sector.  Data typically captured include production inputs, fertility and moisture content of soil, 
topographic attributes, temperature, relative humidity, wind, precipitation, solar input, images of crops at 
various growth stages, crop yield, and crop health/quality traits (e.g., chlorophyll, moisture content). 
•  Decision support tools that use raw and/or processed data to assist the farmers or agribusiness in real 
time with respect to input and crop management needs (seed, fertilizers, pesticides, soil amendments 
[e.g., lime], cultivation, and harvest). 

•  Decision support tools that use raw and/or processed data in prediction models to assist the farmers with 
spatially-connected yield estimates and forecasting cost of production, profitability, and return on 
investment. 

Over  last  few  decades,  computing  research  has  unleashed  game-changing  capabilities  in  precision  agriculture, 
including  enabling  farmers  to  optimize  farm  returns,  reduce  unnecessary  applications  of  fertilizers  and  pesticides, 
preserve  natural  resources,  and  contend  with  impending  weather  events.  Precision  agriculture  represents  a  holistic 
view  of  agriculture  as  an  integrated  food,  energy  and  water  system.  Farmers  monitor  crop  or  animal  growth  and 
productivity,  while  sensing  the  efficient  use  of  water  and  energy  resources.  Precision  agriculture  uses  a  blend  of 
computing  components  such  as  global  positioning  systems,  sensors  to  monitor  soil  and  crop  health,  computerized 
map visualization to understand inter- and intra-field variability, spatial and temporal databases to collect and query 
farm  data,  spatial  statistical  analysis  to  delineate  management  zones,  and  spatial  decision  support  systems  to 
optimize yield while preserving natural and farm resources. These components and capabilities enable service-based 
operations and decision making at multiple levels, namely, descriptive, prescriptive, predictive and proactive levels: 

•  Descriptive: For precision agriculture and high throughput phenotyping applications, data collection aims 
to characterize spatial and temporal variability in soil, crop and weather characteristics and identify 
stressors and traits that need better management.  

•  Prescriptive: Using collected data and associated maps of individual characteristics or traits, a prescriptive 

analysis is conducted to determine necessary farm management interventions.  

•  Predictive: Similarly, a predictive analysis that uses historic data as well as integrated soil, crop and 

weather models may forecast crop yield at the end of the season. 

•  Proactive: Proactive involves observations of crop development and stress on multiple farms over large 
regions and time scales.  Data from these observations are pooled and mined to obtain relationships 
between site characteristics, weather and crop performance under a range of management conditions. These 
relationships can be used to customize management practices and seed selection to local conditions.   

Ultimately,  farmers  want  to  maximize  production/revenues  while  minimizing  costs  and  use  of  resources.  Data 
scientists  and  software  engineers  can  collaborate  with  farmers,  educators  and  researchers  to  create  tools  that 
optimize  the  use  of  resources.  The  creation  of  such  tools  evidences  the  need  for  continuous,  solid  and  reliable 
production of data; the design of analytics that translate such data into information; and the ability to synthesize and 
deliver the right information in time and space.  

Smart Agriculture Challenges  

3.  
3.1. Smart Agriculture as an Integrated Food-Energy-Water System 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  1  shows  five  major  activities  –  namely,  food  production,  processing,  distribution,  consumption  and 
waste management – for food system outcomes such as food security. Food production can be characterized by 
three broad categories of food: fish, meat, and crops (e.g., grains, vegetables, fruits). 

Figure 1. Food systems and their drivers3 

It is not sufficient to consider the food system in isolation since many economic, social, and environmental drivers 
affect food security. In addition, the interactions among these drivers, activities and outcomes are complex.  These 
drivers include weather/climate, land use change, urbanization, and population growth. As elements of such drivers, 
water and energy availability regulate sustainable development and infrastructure’s resilience. Further, in a dynamic, 
yet  complex  system,  effects  of  changing  weather  and  climate,  reflected  in  water  scarcity  and  increasing  energy 
demands,  can  influence  food  availability  from  its  production  to  its  delivery,  and  likely  observe  cumulative  or 
magnified effects on communities with restricted economic power and access to food, water and energy resources4. 

In summary, agriculture is an integrated Food-Energy-Water system with many components and processes that 
regulate flows of mass, energy, and water across its components. Such flows are seen in water relocation to fulfill 
intra-seasonal and inter-annual deficits in agricultural working lands. At the same time, water relocation requires 
energy use and the adequate and timely availability of energy may represent the success of production or transport 
of food. Adverse economic factors such as an excessive food stock may deplete the price of produce or a climate 
spell may increase it in places with average climate conditions. Thus assessments of socioeconomic and physical 
vulnerability are essential to build resilient and sustainable integrated Food-Energy-Water systems.  

Current Agriculture Infrastructure 

3.2  
Existing  agriculture  infrastructure  may  be  classified  by  activities  –  namely,  production,  processing, 
distribution, consumption and waste management – with the exception of cross-cutting cyberinfrastructure and 
workforce development. For instance, food production infrastructure includes farm equipment such as tractors, 
combine-harvesters,  irrigation  infrastructure  and  duster  airplanes.  Support  services  for  food  production 
including  germplasm5  (e.g.,  seed  banks),  fertilizer  production,  and  farm  equipment  manufacturing.  In  food 
processing,  infrastructure  includes  food  factories  and  processing  plants.  Food  distribution  infrastructure 
includes transportation systems (e.g., railroads, trucks, barges, ships, etc), supply chain and retail stores.  

3 Conceptualizing food sys. for global env. change research, P. Ericksen, Gl. Env. Change, 18:234-245, Elsevier, ‘08.  
4 Climate Change and Food Systems, S. Vermerulen, et al., Annual review of Env. & Resources, 37:195-222, ‘12.  
5 GRIN NPGS - Germplasm Resources Information Network, http://www.ars-grin.gov  

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
In addition, agriculture also needs water and energy infrastructure. Water infrastructure includes pumping systems, 
built  and  natural  water  storage;  monitoring  networks,  water  governance  and  management.  Energy  infrastructure 
includes the electric grid, biofuel production, and fossil and carbon energy production. 

Cyberinfrastructure is an important and cross-cutting component of existing agricultural infrastructure. It facilitates 
all phases of the data lifecycle, namely: (a) Data collection and citizen engagement via manual scouting, proximal 
and remote sensors and public and private investment in field monitoring networks, in-air sensor on UAVs, and in-
space  sensors  on  satellites;  (b)  Collection,  curation,  management,  and  long-term  preservation  of  data  for  future 
discovery;  (c)  Model  calibration/validation,  data  analytics,  and  synthesis  involving  interdisciplinary  research 
between  agronomists,  hydrologists,  physicists  and  computer  and  social  scientists  to  generate  and  deliver  better 
information;  (d)  Visualization  and  communication  of  information  including  the  design  of  architectures  as  well  as 
forms to better communicate information (e.g. social media). Examples of such cyberinfrastructure systems include 
the USDA VegScape6, and the international Group on Earth Observations Global Agricultural Monitoring Initiative 
(GEOGLAM)7 which use remotely sensed satellite imagery for monitoring major crops biweekly for end-of-season 
yield forecasts to enable timely interventions and reduce disruptions in global food supply. In addition, agriculture 
infrastructure also includes supply-chain management with all the organizations, people, activities, information, and 
resources involved in moving the products from the suppliers to the consumers. 

Limitations of Current Agriculture Infrastructure 

3.3.  
Current  infrastructure  has  several  limitations  and  challenges  that  need  to  be  addressed  to  realize  the  vision  of 
intelligent  agriculture  infrastructure.  Social  challenges  include  the  aging  workforce,  labor  shortage,  and  lack  of 
engagement of urban communities. Currently, production of many crops is highly labor-intensive and the average 
age of the US farmer is about 60 years. The farming sector is projected to face severe shortages of skilled labor in 
the next decade. Environmental challenges include declining pollinator population (e.g., bees) in many areas. 

There  are  also  many  technical  challenges  that  need  to  be  addressed.  For  example,  current  cyberinfrastructure  is 
inadequate since the Internet bandwidth is severely limited in many farming areas and is easily overwhelmed by the 
data  deluge  from  precision  agriculture.  The  Global  Positioning  System  (GPS)  infrastructure  used  for  positioning 
precision  farming  equipment  are  aging  and  increasingly  vulnerable  to  jamming  and  spoofing.  In  addition,  data 
sharing  infrastructure  is  inadequate  due  to  a  lack  of  mechanisms  to  share  agricultural  data  in  a  privacy-protected 
manner.  The  best-of-the-breed  privacy  protection  technology,  namely,  differential  privacy,  is  inadequate  for 
agricultural data due to its spatiotemporal nature. Consequently, many farmers are reluctant to share data to allow 
for  computing  research  due  to  legal,  insurance,  and  privacy  or  other  concerns.  Furthermore,  existing  sensing 
infrastructure  only  allows  infrequent  (e.g.,  bi-weekly)  and  coarse  resolution  (e.g.,  30  meter-pixels)  monitoring  via 
remote  sensing  satellites  which  introduces  major  delays  in  detection  of  adverse  conditions  and  corrective  actions. 
Furthermore, the level of automation in the farming sector varies significantly. For example, corn, wheat and pecan 
farms have higher levels of automation than fruit and vegetable farming and manual interventions are needed since 
these crops do not ripen at the same time and require periodical pickup. In addition, land management and fertilizer 
application decisions are made by farmers using manual procedures. Finally, there are also organizational challenges 
such as the lack of end-to-end visibility and transparency in the current supply-chain. 

The Case for Federal Action for Smart Agriculture 

4.  
Addressing these critical societal needs requires investment in intelligent infrastructure and computing research that 
concurrently  increases  economic  competitiveness,  intensifies  food  production,  reduces  resource  use  (e.g.,  land, 
water, and manual labor), and ensures long-term environmental viability and food safety.  Table 1 (next page) lists 
many examples of infrastructure investment needs and opportunities. For example, tele-operation8 may address the 
structural  mismatch  between  farming  areas  facing  labor  shortage  and  other  areas  (e.g.,  old  mining  and 
manufacturing  towns)  with  worker  surplus.  The  tele-operation  will  also  require  investments  in  broadband  Internet 
infrastructure for rural areas to support quick interaction between remote workers and farm equipment. Furthermore, 
investment  in  augmented  (or  virtual)  reality  infrastructure  (e.g.,  farm-based  video  games  similar  to  SimCity  and 
flight  simulator)  may  help  engage  the  next  generation  even  from  urban  areas  in  farm  careers.  Another  major 

6 VegScape: U.S. Crop Condition Monitoring Service, R.Mueller et al, AGU, Fall 2013. 
7 GEOGLAM Crop monitor: a geoglam initiative. www.geoglam-crop-monitor.org, Accessed 1 Mar 2017 
8 N. Murakami et al., Development of a teleoperation system for agricultural vehicles. Comput. Electron. Agric. 63(1):81-
88,August 2008. ( http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2008.01.015 ) 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
opportunity  is  to  invest  in  research  and  development  to  leverage  small  satellites  (e.g.,  Planet  Labs9),  which  will 
provide  high-resolution  (e.g.,  daily  global  scans  at  1meter  resolution)  to  monitor  crops  for  timely  detection  and 
management  of  adverse  conditions.  It  is  also  important  to  invest  in  the modernization10  of  the  Global  Positioning 
System to protect against outage, jamming and spoofing as it is a crucial infrastructure for the precision agriculture 
during narrow time-windows for harvesting or planting large farms. 

Broadly, the complex, interdisciplinary, and changing nature of agricultural processes and these urgent, potentially 
conflicting  goals,  demand  technological  breakthroughs  that  leverage  recent  advances  in  precision  agriculture  and 
scalable data management, while integrating new approaches for remote sensing and advanced analytics to provide 
effective, low cost, data-driven decision support and automation for the next-generation in farming operations.  To 
enable such breakthroughs, an intelligent cyberinfrastructure must leverage recent technological advances that have 
proven  successful  for  other  sectors  of  the  economy  in  spurring  economic  growth,  profits,  and  high-paying  job 
creation.    One  key  example  of  this  is  e-commerce  for  the  retail  sector  —  in  which  companies  such  as  Amazon, 
Netflix,  and  Walmart  combine  large-scale  data  analytics,  complex  modeling,  and  easy-to-use  and  scalable  cloud 
systems to disrupt how consumers purchase goods and services.  A similar disruption and impact is possible for the 
US agriculture industry through the use of these same underlying technologies tailored to food production processes 
in addition to the enhancement of citizen engagement and developing a private incentives regulatory framework to 
secure free access to data and quality of products delivered to users. Let us examine a few opportunities in detail in 
the following subsections. 

Table 1. Intelligent infrastructure and Research Needs 

Areas 
Workforce 
Development 
Cyber Physical Systems  
& Robotics  

Spatiotemporal 
Machine Learning, Data 
Analytics 

Intelligent Infrastructure and Research Needs 
Augmented reality: precision agriculture video-games to engage urban youth 
Teleoperation: create jobs in labor-surplus areas & address farm labor shortage 
Robust high-precision positioning to counter GPS11 outage, jamming, & spoofing 
Integrated sensors across satellites, UAVs, farming-equipment, and under-soil  
Automation for labor intensive tasks, e.g., picking berries, pruning grape vines 
Robotic bees for pollination in areas of declining bee population 
Leverage new high-resolution (e.g., daily, 1 meter) satellite data to monitor crops 
Spatiotemporal hotspot detection of agricultural pests, diseases and stresses 
Model resource availabilities, forecast food, water & energy demands 
Active management of sensors and actuators to optimize resource allocation 

Security, Privacy, 
Safety 

Networking, Internet of 
Farm Things 
Decision Support 

Citizen Engagement 

Secure, privacy-protected farm-data transmission and sharing spaces 
Application-specific notions of privacy for data for spatiotemporal farm data 
Economic models to promote data sharing among stakeholders  
Improving Broadband Network Access in Rural Farming Areas 
Edge Cloud Computing to reduce need for transferring large amounts of data 
 -   Advanced spatiotemporal image, and video analysis techniques  
Automate tasks e.g., identify crop stress, fruits/vegetables ready to be harvested 
Social Media, Apps, Easy to use Decision Support for growers and ranchers 
Downstream behavioral change through apps (e.g., reduce food waste) 
Cognitive and behavioral science applied to enhance feedback for technology 
improvement, scientific advancement and innovation 

Intelligent Workforce Infrastructure  

4.1  
Precision  Agriculture  Simulation  and  Tele-operation:  To  maintain  and  increase  competitiveness  of  the  U.S. 
agriculture  industry  in  the  global  market,  it  is  necessary  to:  (a)  continuously  retrain  farmers  and  farm  service 
providers so that they are well-positioned to embrace newer technologies; (b) engage next generation in the farming 
sector;  (c)  attract  and  train  workers  from  other  economic  sectors  (e.g.,  computer  science,  mechanical  engineering, 
mining,  manufacturing)  for  agriculture  careers;  and  (d)  go  beyond  workforce  training  to  engage  citizens  and 

9 The Planet Labs, https://www.planet.com 
10 GPS.gov: GPS Modernization, http://www.gps.gov/systems/gps/modernization/ 
11 GPS: The Global Positioning Systems, http://www.gps.gov 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
children.  We  need  a  multi-pronged  approach.  First,  it  is  important  to  make  agriculture  “cool”  in  the  minds  of  the 
next generation. This goal will need to be accomplished by highlighting modern technological tools such as drones, 
sensors,  and  robots  and  their  applications  in  the  agricultural  sector  as  well  as  the  gamification  of  agricultural 
processes. Nurturing virtual communities on popular social media platforms such as Facebook and Instagram will be 
vital in this regard. Second, small workshops and tutorials should be conducted to introduce current farmers as well 
as workers from other sectors to intelligent farming infrastructures and provide hands-on experience. Third, virtual 
and augmented reality platforms should be built to make the training more accessible, cost-effective and scalable. 
Associated video games may help engage young minds to aspire to be next generation farmers. Lastly, we should 
investigate  tele-operation  technologies  to  engage  people  in  labor-surplus  areas  for  jobs  available  on  farms  and 
farming  areas.  This  approach  may  address  the  structural  mismatch  in  the  economy  by  employing  people  in  labor 
surplus areas for unfilled and hard to fill jobs on farms. 

(Privacy-Protected) Shared Data Spaces 

4.2  
Although  farmers  are  stewards  of  the  land,  they  also  must  have  sufficient  revenue  to  stay  in  business;  they  must 
compete with their neighbors in commodity markets.  As such, they may be reticent to share data about crops, soil, 
and  equipment,  since  it  provides  a  competitive  advantage.  Yet  pooling  data  allows  more  powerful  predictive 
analytics  and  optimization  to  accelerate  adoption  of  best  practices  across  farms  to  improve  yield  and  farm  profits 
while  protecting  water.  Farmers  are  reluctant  to  share  data,  however,  due  to  privacy  concerns.  There  is  a  need  to 
have new data analytic algorithms that maintain privacy. To maintain privacy when pooling data among neighboring 
farms  to  improve  analytics,  we  have  to  recognize  that  data  will  be  correlated.  The  soil  in  adjacent  plots  will  be 
similar; the weather will also be common. The mathematical notion of differential privacy has emerged as a standard 
definition for preserving privacy through random perturbations when sharing information to optimize systems in a 
variety  of  industries  ranging  from  health  care  (HIPAA)  to  education  (FERPA).  Unfortunately,  enforcing  such  a 
universal  definition  significantly  reduces  utility  of  agricultural  data  due  to  spatiotemporal  dependencies. 
Application-specific notions of privacy for data sharing are needed. 

It is also necessary to build economic models that will promote sharing of data among multiple stakeholders, such as 
farmers,  farm  equipment  manufacturers,  co-operative  societies  and  state  and  federal  governments.  Also  note  that 
agriculture is carried out to support human nutrition and so it is interlinked to the remainder of the food pipeline.  
Thinking in larger systems-level terms suggests possibly new computing approaches and optimizations not just in 
agriculture but in food manufacturing, retail, restaurants, and food waste management.   

Intelligent Cyber-Infrastructure to support smart food systems  

4.3  
The intelligent agriculture cyberinfrastructure must integrate sensing (e.g., GPS, remote sensing, field sensors, etc.), 
data  aggregation,  scalable  data  analytics  and  visualization.    Sensing  will  consist  of  stationary  and  mobile  devices 
(e.g., smart phones, air/ground robots) that measure local environmental conditions (e.g., weather, soil moisture and 
composition), collect multi-spectral imagery (e.g., plant health, animal location, crop maturity), and track implement 
and input use (e.g., irrigation, pesticide, tractors) among others. Data systems will consist of public cloud services 
and on-farm or community-based edge cloud systems that implement a wide range of tools (e.g., open source and 
proprietary) for extracting actionable insights from farm data.  Edge clouds are small computing “appliances” that 
operate  similarly  to  public  clouds  yet  preclude  the  need  for  Internet  connectivity  (and  costly  data  transfer)  while 
giving farmers real time, localized decision support and control over the privacy and sharing of their data.  Public 
clouds  will  facilitate  large-scale  batch  data  analytics  and  sharing  of  anonymized  information  across  farms.  
Networks  link  sensor  and  cloud  systems  to  complete  this  end-to-end,  multi-tier  cyberinfrastructure  that  is  key  to 
enabling  research  and  technology-transfer  to  the  agriculture  industry  for  open  source  and  co-designed  algorithms, 
programming environments, protocols, systems software, and analysis engines.  Such systems are necessary to make 
it easy and economical to collect, mine, and analyze information (e.g., extracting inferences and predictions) and to 
form  concrete  solutions  that  can  be  directly  tested,  evaluated,  and  employed  by  U.S.  growers  to  increase  yields 
sustainably. 

Finally, the data surrounding the crop life cycle and farming practices that such cyberinfrastructure must support is 
vast in size and disparate in type (e.g., imagery, time series, statistical), structure (e.g., hand-written, digitized), and 
scale (e.g., spatial and temporal, plant-to- global levels).  Moreover, these data sets are incomplete, interdependent, 
volatile,  imprecise,  and  generated  by  a  vast  diversity  of  devices  (e.g.,  drones,  farm  workers,  sensors,  and  Internet 
services) not designed to address future (and unknown) challenges. New techniques for data fusion are needed that 
integrate multi-dimensional data from multiple sources to form standardized and useful representation of a physical 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
object or system that are amenable to analysis. Extracting actionable insights from this data requires new analyses 
that accurately describe, simulate, and model the complex systems that these data represent, such as the climate, soil, 
plant and animal genotypes and phenotypes, entomology, hydrological processes, human behavior, community food 
habits, and economic market forces, among others.  Coupling models requires integrative techniques that preserve 
key  system  features  and  reduce  uncertainty  while  eliding  detail  that  results  in  additional  computational  workload 
without adding additional descriptive power. For agricultural productivity, these coupling techniques must be able to 
integrate analysis across scales (time and space) while reducing the number of dimensions of the problem at hand to 
enable computational tractability. Given the urgency of the problems that we face in this domain (e.g., the need for 
job creation, food safety, and significantly increased food production), such research and infrastructure must enable 
interdisciplinary  collaboration  and  make  available  real-world  test  beds  and  data  sets,  from  which  validated  results 
can be extracted and applied to the immediate problems facing both large and small holder farming concerns in the 
U.S. 

Engaging the Computing Research Community in Smart Agriculture 

5.  
The computing research community may be engaged in this effort via community workshops to survey the current 
infrastructure for Food, Energy and Water as well as disruptive technology trends to identify research challenges and 
opportunities.  The  workshop  may  also  help  seed  interdisciplinary  partnership  between  computing  researchers  and 
Food,  Energy  and  Water  researchers.  This  may  be  followed  by  a  research  initiative  with  research  funding  and 
request for proposals for interdisciplinary research to envision and test feasibility of next generation infrastructure 
for Food, Energy and Water security. 

6. Acknowledgements 
We thankfully acknowledge the contributions of Jennifer Clarke, Roxanne Clements, Melissa Cragin, Travis Desell, 
Khari  Douglas,  Ann  Drobnis,  Wes  Herche,  Volkan  Isler,  Kyle  Johnsen,  Elizabeth  Kramer,  Vipin  Kumar,  Erin 
Mellinix, David Mulla, Luis Rodriguez, and Helen Wright. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1136993. Any 
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do 
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. 

8 

 
