Digital Grid: Transforming the Electric Power Grid into an  
Innovation Engine for the United States 

     Aranya Chakrabortty and Alex Huang 

North Carolina State University 

The  electric  power  grid  is  one  of  the  largest  and  most  complex  infrastructures  ever  built  by  mankind.  Modern 
civilization  depends  on  it  for  industry  production,  human  mobility,  and  comfortable  living.  However,  many  critical 
technologies such as the 60 Hz transformers were developed at the beginning of the 20th century and have changed 
very  little  since  then. 1 The  traditional  unidirectional  power  from  the  generation  to  the  customer  through  the 
transmission-distribution grid has also changed nominally, but it no longer meets the need of the 21st century market 
energy  customers.  On  one  hand,  128m  US  residential  customers  pay  $15B/per  month  for  their  utility  bill,  yet  they 
have  no  option  to  select  their  energy  supplier.  In  a  world  of  where  many  traditional  industries  are  transformed  by 
digital  Internet  technology  (Amazon,  Ebay,  Uber,  Airbnb),  the  traditional  electric  energy  market  is  lagging 
significantly behind. A move towards a true digital grid is needed. Such a digital grid requires a tight integration of the 
physical layer (energy and power) with digital and cyber information to allow an open and real time market akin to the 
world  of  e-commerce.  Another  major  factor  that  is  pushing  for  this  radical  transformation  are  the  rapidly  changing 
patterns  in  energy  resources  ownership  and  load  flow.  Driven  by  the  decreasing  cost  in  distributed  solar,  energy 
storage,  electric  vehicle,  on  site  generation  and  microgrids,  the  high  penetration  of  Distributed  Energy  Resource 
(DER) is shifting challenges substantially towards the edge of grid from the control point of view.  The envisioned 
Digital  Grid  must  facilitate  the  open  competition  and  open  innovation  needed  to  accelerate  of  the  adoption  of  new 
DER technologies while satisfying challenges in grid stability, data explosion and cyber security.  

The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 was an unprecedented action to stimulate the economy and to 
modernize our nation’s energy and communication infrastructure and enhance energy independence. Under this act, 
the US Department of Energy and the electricity industry have jointly invested in 99 cost-shared projects involving 
more  than  200  participating  electric  utilities  and  other  organizations  to  modernize  the  electric  grid,  improve  inter-
operability, and collect an unprecedented level of data on smart grid operations and benefits. A new and substantial 
investment is needed to develop the new Digital Grid. Radical reductions in the cost of sensors, communication, 
information processing, cyber-security, and new regulatory policies in electricity markets are needed. Federal 
leadership is essential to break the logjam and encourage new approaches. The key is designing programs that drive 
change but leave plenty of room for ideas from unexpected sources.  

Challenges and Potential Solution 
There are many challenges to transform the power grid into a Digital Grid. The primary ones are listed as follows: 

Electricity Market and Regulatory Policy  

1.  
Low marginal costs coupled with high initial capital costs are characteristic  of traditional power generation.  Today 
the ratio between running cost and capital cost is falling rapidly with the introduction of renewable generation, along 
with  flexibility  of  resources  such  as  storage  and  demand  response.  Standard  economic  theory  predicts  that  price  of 
power will collapse in this setting, which is indeed the case today. Wholesale prices for electric power in the U.S. and 
other  parts  of  the  world  are  frequently  far  below  operating  cost,  and  even  negative  prices  are  commonly  observed. 
This  trend  and  price  volatility  will  discourage  capital  investment,  which  is  why  FERC  and  local  authorities  are 
searching  for  market  designs  that  will  encourage  long-term  investment.  A  holistic  approach  to  market  design  that 
accommodates  both  surplus  and  shortage  in  renewables,  combines  them  with  other  generation  assets  as  well  as 
storage, and includes design guidelines and incentives that enable short-term benefits of improved grid performance 
and long-term benefits of sustainability and economic stability is highly warranted. Innovations in wholesale markets 
need to be accompanied by those in retail markets to accommodate multiple DG owners and aggregators. 

On  the  demand  side,  changes  are  needed  due  to  the  same  reason  as  above,  to  accommodate  intermittency  and 

1 Mynatt et al. (2017) “A National Research Agenda for Intelligent Infrastructure” CCC Led Whitepapers 
http://cra.org/ccc/resources/ccc-led-whitepapers/, last accessed April 12, 2017. 

1 

	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
																																																								
uncertainty in renewable generation. The standard practice of generation following load has to be shed, and loads need 
to be more dispatchable as well. This approach leads to the generalized concept of Demand Response, which needs to 
be  integrated  into  the  functioning  of  electricity  markets.  Direct  Load  Control  and  Transactive  Control,  the  two 
methods that make up Demand Response are both highly promising methods that can help in shaping demand so as to 
coordinate  fluctuations  in  renewables.  Research  is  needed  to  ensure  that  consumer  engagement  will  enhance  rather 
than disrupt reliability of the grid. Further, automation of demand response is required to ensure grid reliability and 
also  to  ensure  that  each  participant  receives  the  benefits  that  are  promised. For  example,  strict  bounds  on  indoor 
temperature  and  humidity  must  be  maintained.  Market  rules  are  required  to  ensure  that  players  receive  transparent 
incentives for services provided to the grid, even in the case of residential consumers who have little understanding of 
power  systems  or  even  their  own  fuse  box.  Given  that  all  of  the  aforementioned  innovations  require  real-time  and 
reliable communication, a cyber-physical approach is essential to realize an efficient electricity market. 

Grid Stability and Resiliency under High DER Penetration  

2.  
The envisioned Digital Grid must be realized with no comprise to grid reliability and resilience. Since the Digital Grid 
is fundamentally supporting high DER penetration with very dynamic bidirectional power flows affected by the real-
time  market  participation,  the  grand  challenges  in  control  is  to  achieve  voltage  and  frequency  stability,  as  well  as 
intelligent protection. To address these issues as well as to the severe intermittence issue in the DER and the lack of 
traditional  system  inertia,  the  Digital  Grid  will  need  the  development  and  installation  of  a  new  generation  of  Smart 
Transformers as an universal cyber-physical system interface, that can provide the needed system inertia and provide 
autonomous voltage, frequency and protection. It must also have the secured communication and software such as the 
Block-chain to participate in the real time energy market for resource sharing (a key attribute to the Digital Grid) by 
aggregating  the  DER,  load  and  storage  devices.  New  transmission  technologies  such  as  the  High  Voltage  Direct 
Current  (HVDC)  must  be  further  developed  and  installed  to  connect  highly  dynamic  distribution  grids  with  strong 
regional interconnection to balance of the system demand and supply.  

Data Analytics  

3.  
Availability of smart grid data is expected to increase precipitously. Compared to the traditional Supervisory Control 
and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems available for operations, these future data sources could provide vastly richer 
information about the state of the grid. Transforming this raw data into contextual information to support operations 
requires new data platforms and analytics capable of extracting useful information. This new information will enable 
utilities to: 1) create new control paradigms that operate the grid closer to system limits, lowering the cost of operation 
without  sacrificing  reliability;  2)  improve  asset  utilization  and  management  across  transmission  and  distribution 
systems;  and  3)  integrate  high  levels  of  renewable  generation.  The  unique  characteristics  of  the  new  information 
available to operations create a number of challenges, including: extensive geo-spatial distribution, temporal diversity, 
internal  organizational  boundaries,  disparate  underlying  physical  sources  and  a  wide  range  of  data  quality.  Despite 
extensive investments in various IT technologies, utilities still lack sufficient infrastructure and understanding of the 
best  approaches  to  manage  this  data.  Major  challenges  for  utilities  today  include  data  quality,  data  volume,  data 
velocity, and especially data variety, although they clearly have issues to address in all these dimensions. 

New Communication Technologies for Smart Grid  

4.  
Currently one of the biggest roadblocks for grid modernization is that the Information Technology (IT) infrastructure 
for  today's  grid  is  rigid  and  low  capacity.  The  push  to  adopt  the  existing  open  Internet  and  high-performance 
computing technologies would not be enough to meet the requirement of collecting and processing very large volumes 
of real-time data. Secondly, the impact of unreliable and insecure communication and computation infrastructures on 
grid  operations  is  not  well  understood.  Typically,  the  Internet  cannot  provide  the  required  latency  and  packet  loss 
performance  for  grid  operation  under  high  data-rates.  Moreover,  the  network  performance  is  highly  random,  and 
therefore, difficult to model accurately. Few studies have been conducted to leverage emerging IT technologies such 
as cloud computing, software defined networking (SDN), and network function virtualization (NFV), to accelerate this 
development. With the recent revolution in networking technology, these new communication mechanisms can open 
up more degrees of freedom in programmability and virtualization for tomorrow's grid.  

Cyber-Physical Security  

5.  
Cyber  vulnerabilities  of  the  power  grid  exist  in  numerous  facilities,  including  Supervisory  Control  and  Data 
Acquisition  (SCADA)  systems  that  power  grids  rely  upon  for  monitoring  and  control  of  the  physical  grid.  The 
increasing  penetration  of  wind  turbines,  solar  arrays,  and  energy  storage  devices  creates  potential  new  targets  for 
cyber  intrusions.  About  65  million  smart  meters  and  other  sensing  devices,  with  capabilities  for  data  collection  for 
billing, outage reporting, and customers’ choice, have been installed at the customer locations. These low-cost devices 

2 

	
 
 
 
 
are targets for attackers, who may compromise large numbers of meters and use those meters to mount attacks. Such 
attacks resemble the October 2016 attack on the eastern U.S., in which smart devices such as wireless cameras were 
compromised and used to disrupt Internet access to millions of users. Ensuring resilience of the power grid to cyber 
threats  will  require  a  sustained  and  coordinated  research  effort  towards  understanding  the  vulnerabilities  of  cyber-
attacks  on  the  grid,  providing  defense  mechanisms  that  can  ameliorate  the  impact  of  attacks  and  ensure  continued 
operation  and  efficient  recovery  from  attacks  when  and  where  they  occur.  The  cyber  vulnerabilities  of  grid 
components must be characterized and mitigated. Privacy of sensitive power system data must also be preserved by 
efficient data protection and encryption techniques. 

Actions and Recommendations 
Based on the preceding discussion, we offer the following recommended actions: 
1.  

Create a multi-university based national consortium on digital grid to jointly study the critical cyber-physical 
challenges based on a competitive solicitation. 

2.  

3.  

4.  

5.  

6.  

Create a DOE led investment program to US industry and electric power companies to manufacture and 
upgrade the edge of the grid into a Digital Grid, such as the Smart Transformer manufacturing and 
deployment. 

Enhance funding for programs such as the NSF’s Cyber Physical System (CPS) program to focus on research 
needs associated with the Digital Grid. 

Develop realistic and comprehensive testbeds for evaluations of control and cyber- security that would be 
impractical to conduct on the power grid itself. 

Promote education and workforce development initiatives to train existing power engineers and grid 
operators about cyber-physical systems, data analytics, Internet-of-Things, cyber-security as well as educate 
the next generation of researchers and practitioners in the design and operation of secure and resilient power 
systems. 

Form a task force by federal regulatory agencies to study the policy changes needed for creating a transactive 
energy market supported by the Digital Grid infrastructure. 

Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to acknowledge the following individuals for their contribution to this paper.  

•  Sean Meyn, University of Florida 
•  Anuradha Annaswamy, MIT 
•  Kevin Tomsovic, University of Tennessee 
• 
Joe H. Chow, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute  
•  Chen-Ching Liu, Washington State University 
•  Radha Poovendran, University of Washington, Seattle 

This  material  is  based  upon  work  supported  by  the  National  Science  Foundation  under  Grant  No.  (1136993).  Any 
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. 

3 

	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
