University of South Florida, Sarasota- Manatee 

College of Hospitality and Tourism leadership 

A STUDY OF CYBER SECURITY IN HOSPITALITY INDUSTRY 
⎯ THREATS AND COUNTERMEASURES: CASE STUDY IN 
RENO, NEVADA 

Master of Science in Hospitality Management 

                                                             By Neda Shabani 

Project Supervisor: Dr. Cihan Cobanoglu 

April 2016 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT.  The  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  analyze  cyber  security  and  security  practices  of 

electronic information and network system, network threats, and techniques to prevent the cyber 

attacks  in  hotels.  Helping  the  information  technology  directors  and  chief  information  officers 

(CIO) is the aim of this study to advance policy for security of electronic information in hotels 

and  suggesting  some  techniques  and  tools  to  secure  the  computer  networks.  This  research  is 

completely  qualitative  while  the  case  study  and  interviews  have  done  in  5  random  hotels  in 

Reno, Nevada, United States of America. The interview has done with 50 hotel guests, 10 front 

desk employees, 3 IT manager and 2 assistant of General manager. The results show that hotels’ 

cyber  security  is  very  low  and  hotels  are  very  vulnerable  in  this  regard  and  at  the  end,  the 

implications and contribution of the study is mentioned.  

INTRODUCTION 

 “Modern  societies  have  become  increasingly  dependent  on  Information  and  Communication 

Technologies  that  offer  both  opportunities  and  challenges  with  respect  to  improvements  in  the 

quality of life of people and the communities in which they live” (Muata, Bryson, Vogel, 2014, 

p.93).  Technology  in  hospitality  industry  is  driven  by  the  increasing  transaction  volumes, 

complex  reporting  requirement,  and  international  communication  needs  (Cobanoglu,  & 

Demicco,  2007).  Information  technology  (IT)  can  improve  almost  all  areas  of  hospitality 

industry, such as guest services, reservations, food and beverage management, sales, food service 

catering, maintenance, security, and hospitality accounting (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007).  

Having  high  technology  causes  a  lot  of  data  breach  and  information  loss.  To  prevent  against 

 
losses,  organizations  observe  their  computer  network  for  security  threats  from  a  wide  range  of 

sources,  such  as  computer-assisted  fraud,  espionage,  sabotage,  vandalism,  hacking,  system 

failures,  fire,  and  flood  (Cobanoglu,  &  Demicco,  2007).    To  protect  the  public  trust  and  to 

prevent  copycat  hackers  to  hack  into  an  organization’s  computer  system,  most  of  the 

organizations try not to reveal the data breaches and cyber attacks against their computer systems 

(Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007).   

Problem Statement  

Every level of hotel management (e.g., property level, user level) involves computer networks. 

At  the  property  level,  there  are  local  area  networks  where  reservation,  front  office,  payroll, 

accounting, restaurant management, human resources, and other systems are located (Cobanoglu 

& Cougias, 2003). At the user level, the user browse the hotel website to make reservations and 

to  access  the  information  about  the  hotel  (Cobanoglu,  &  Demicco,  2007).  This  level  of 

interaction  in  a  network  environment  increases  the  vulnerability  of  computer  systems  to 

information  and  network  security  threats  as  any  unencrypted  information  transmitted  on 

Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) can be sniffed by unauthorized people 

(Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). The IT security problem exacerbates as most of the people in 

hotels who deal with computer systems (e.g., front office managers and accountants) are not IT 

experts and have only some familiarity with computer systems (Cobanoglu, 2005). Cyber risk is 

becoming  an  increasing  issue  for  many  organizations  and  businesses,  including  hospitality 

industry, as new advances in computing systems emerge, such as cloud computing, social media, 

and big data.  

 
Questions of this research and the purpose of study  

The  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  analyze  cyber  security  and  security  practices  of  electronic 

information and network system, network threats, and techniques to prevent the cyber attacks in 

hotels. Helping the information technology directors and chief information officers (CIO) is the 

aim of this study to advance policy for security of electronic information in hotels and suggesting 

some techniques and tools to secure the computer networks.  

The following research questions were created:  

 1.What methods, tools and techniques are currently used in hotels regarding computer network 

and system protection?  

 2. What are the current threats to computer network security in hotels?  

3. What are the ways of handling security attacks in the hotel’s computer networks? 

4. What is the importance of network security in hotels? 

5.  Which  methods  hotels  leverage  to  secure  their  websites  for  any  data  and  financial 

transactions? 

6. What criteria hotels have to consider in making a strong password for their computer networks 

and logins (computers and websites)? 

                                                     LITERATURE REVIEW 

Information technology (IT) is the science and technology of using computers and other 

electronics to save and transmit information (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). This information 

can include variety of data, such as sales, customers, market, stocks and shares, accounts, 

 
airplane tickets, and booking (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007).  

Organizations that use IT need to tackle and administer electronic information safely and 

securely (Daler et al., 1989). The organization’s administrative managers are responsible for the 

protection of the organization’s assets and information (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). 

Like other organizations, IT systems in hotels comprise of both software and hardware.  The 

basic software in a hotel includes the property management system (PMS), point of sale system 

(POS), call accounting system (CAS), and accounting system. The basic hardware in a hotel 

include front desk computers, POS terminals, back office computers, printers, routers, switches, 

firewalls, and network cables (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). The front and back office 

computers, POS terminals, and printers are connected to routers and switches with network 

cables that enable communication between these devices (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). 

Routers also connect the hotel network with other networks and the Internet (Cobanoglu, & 

Demicco, 2007). The firewalls protect the hotel network from outside attacks (Cobanoglu, & 

Demicco, 2007). The hotel’s local area network (LAN) typically consists of devices within the 

hotel’s premises (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007).  

Hospitality Industry and its Computer System 

Most of the computing systems are connecty computer networks to enable variety of 

applications, such as database sharing and shared storage (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). The 

hospitality industry uses the computer networks to manage reservations while avoiding duplex 

reservations for the same date and time (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). The hospitality industry 

uses two main types of computer networks: local area network (LAN) and wide area network 

(WAN) (Collins et al., 2003).  

Computer Network and Information Security  

Information security aims at maximizing the revenue of organizations and investments by 

minimizing the damage that could be caused by security attacks (Computer Fraud & Security, 

2002). Most of the information security systems provide three main services: confidentiality, 

integrity and availability (ISO, 2000).  

Organizations using IT are vulnerable to various security threats and attacks. The most common 

threats include viruses, inside attackers for network access, laptop theft, spoofing, unauthorized 

insider access, unauthorized outside attack, and denial of service attacks (Cobanoglu, & 

Demicco, 2007).  

Computer crimes have always been there since the introduction of computers, however, the 

nature of attacks varies as the technology evolves (Beaulier Law Office, 2003). For instance, 

hacking or cracking is the crime of connecting to a computer system without permission 

(Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). Most of the hacking attacks are aimed at obtaining confidential 

information (e.g., financial information of banking accounts, user accounts information) without 

authorization (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). Theft of technology occurs when an attacker 

consciously connects to a computer with intentions to steal technological information or secrets 

(Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). Fraud happens when an attacker consciously connects to a 

computer with intentions of fraud or masquerades a legitimate user of the computer system 

(Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). Hacking, theft of technology, and frauds are the most common 

security attacks whereas other security attacks are also possible (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). 

Information Security Tools and Techniques 

Information security aims at protecting valuable assets from disclosure or damage (Cobanoglu, 

& Demicco, 2007). This protection can be attained through both technological and non-

technological methods, such as physical security of assets, user identification and authentication, 

biometrics, and firewalls (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). We define some of the network and 

information security tools and techniques in the following:  

1. Digital IDs are the electronic counterparts of driver’s licenses, passports, and membership 

cards (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). Digital IDs often include a username and a password.  

2. Intrusion Detection System is a system that analyzes the events happening in a computer 

system or a network for detecting intrusions or attacks (Judge, 2003). An intrusion can be 

defined as an effort to circumvent security services employed by the system, such as 

confidentiality and integrity (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). Many times intrusions are aimed at 

making the computer system unavailable (denial of service attack). Intrusions can be caused by 

various means: (1) attackers connecting to the systems from the Internet or outside networks; (2) 

authorized users of the systems who try to obtain additional privileges for which they are not 

authorized; and (3) authorized users who misuse and abuse the privileges given to them 

(Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007).  

3. Physical Security refers to keeping the networking and computing equipment in a secure 

physical environment (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). 

4. Firewall can be a hardware, a software or combination of hardware and software equipment to 

monitor the traffic between two or more computer networks (CERT, 2005). The firewall can also 

block particular malicious packets trying to enter a computer network.  

5. Encryption is the process of hiding the information by making the information transformed in 

a way that is impossible or very hard to understand (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007).  

6. Biometrics is technology of authenticating a user based on physical or behavioral 

characteristics, such as finger prints, voice recognition, and retina or iris identification. Biometric 

technology is one of the most effective methods of identity verification (Bilgihan, Karadag, 

Cobanoglu, Okumus, n.d.). The biometric systems measure the physical characteristics of an 

individual, and compare them with the recorded characteristics to verify the user’s identity 

(Flink, 2002).  

7. Access Control are techniques of restricting usage of system resources to authorized 

users/processes (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007).  

8. “Vulnerability Assessment Scan is a software that scans/examines the system for possible 

vulnerabilities” (i.e., weaknesses) and inform the system administrator of these vulnerabilities so 

that system can be safeguarded against these weaknesses (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). 

Attackers can be from both inside and outside an organization (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). 

Especially in hospitality and tourism industry where turnover rate is very high, the possibility of 

inside attackers is higher in comparison to other industries (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007). 

Consequently, some organizations, such as Burger King Corporation, take measurements to 

prevent inside attackers, and provide infrastructure to ensure only a single sign-on by an 

employee (Liddle, 2003). In this case, only one record needs to be expunged from the system in 

case of an employee’s termination or resignation from an employee so that the former employee 

will not have any access to the system (Cobanoglu, & Demicco, 2007).  

 
Cyber Risks and Challenges in Hospitality Industry 

There are five major risks and challenges that hotels have faced during 2015 and they still 

continue, according to Hiller (January 23, 2015). These five challenges are: “ 1. Identity theft 

leading to credit card fraud which has caused a lot of data breaches and information stealing 

from hotel’s network systems, 2. Silent invasions and Cyber-crime attacks that are powerful 

tactics from next generation criminals, During 2015, there are lots of cyber criminals who have 

targeted and attacked the hotels’ Wi-Fi and get the guests’ personal information as well as their 

passwords. 3. Unfortunately there are no security audit cycles in majority of the hotels and this 

issue will put the situation of the investors and the guests in a highly risk. 4. Physical crimes like 

terrorism that put the hotels in challenge and it can be more seen in South Asia and Middle East. 

5. Loss of competitive advantage and image as well as lots of negative words of mouth is other 

challenges that hotels have faced due to the cybersecurity attacks” (Hiller, 2015). 

One of the unique features of hospitality industry is being a place for their customers’ comfort 

and confidence; thus it is basically rely on this reputation and abusing the customers’ information 

doesn’t make any sense in this regard.  

Unfortunately the reality shows that this confidence and reputation can’t be achieved easily due 

to the estimation of annual cost of cyber crime that can affect the global economy as much as 

$375 billion to $575 billion and these numbers are still growing according to Butler ((January 15, 

2016), due to greater technology available in the market for cyber attackers that makes the 

hotels’ system more and more vulnerable.  

In this regard, hotels are also not completely innocent and without fault; because they can do a 

lot to prevent these cyber attacks; for example in the case of data breach which happened to 

Wyndham hotels, after the investigation, many mistakes were revealed which was made by the 

IT managers of whoever was in charge of taking care of information technology system and 

computers. Some of those mistakes according to Butler ((January 15, 2016), are mentioned 

below:  

•  “failed to use readily available security measures, such as firewalls 

•  stored credit card information in clear text 

•  failed to implement reasonable information security procedures prior to connecting local 

computer networks to corporate-level networks 

•  failed to address known security vulnerabilities on servers 

•  used default user names and passwords for access to servers 

•  failed to require employees to use complex user IDs and passwords to access company servers  

•  failed to inventory computers to appropriately manage the network 

•  failed to maintain reasonable security measures to monitor unauthorized computer access 

•  failed to conduct security investigations 

•  failed to reasonably limit third-party access to company networks and computers” 

With what was mentioned above, we will understand that some of these cyber attacks can be 

prevented by hoteliers; however these cyber crimes will not come to the end here since cyber 

attackers will find new ways to penetrate customers’ information and take advantage of them. 

One of the most famous ways to get into customers’ account information is opening a new 

website and pretend to be the hotel that the customer looks for by using the same brand name, 

logo, map, picture and all other information that belong to the real hotel (Mest, October 6,2015). 

According to Mest (October 6,2015) this process is called fake booking which The American 

Hotel & Lodging Association reported that, each minute there are about 480 fake online hotel 

booking website are creating and it is an amazing place for cyber criminals to take advantage. 

Data breaches in the world of business continuously increase and they remind us of how having a 

secure system, taking action on cyber risks and implementing different security tools are critical 

and necessary for any business (MASTER, October 8, 2015). According to MASTER (October 

8, 2015), not having enough knowledge and in most cases (%80) not having any knowledge at all 

is the biggest mistake, which is made by business owners. Therefor, as long as businesses 

doesn’t have any idea about how to secure their business, hackers and cyber attackers will have 

more opportunity to take advantage of this issue which is like an easy treasure for them to gain.  

In addition, hackers and attackers are not only able to abuse the computer system of the hotels by 

using different type of phishing email, viruses and etc., but also they are able to attack and take 

advantage of Wi-Fi in the hotels (Clark, April 13, 2015). Most of the hotels now a days offer free 

Wi-Fi to their guests and the guests will access to the same network all over the hotel such as 

lobby, convention center, dinning room and all other places within the hotel (Clark, April 13, 

2015). This is one of the advantages of the hotels however it can seriously cost a lot for the 

hotels (Clark, April 13, 2015). According to Clark (April 13, 2015), in some of the cases which 

are reported, the router that was infected by hackers plus the ANTLabs InnGate (“Specially 

designed for the hospitality sector, the ANTlabs InnGate meets the High Speed Internet Access 

(HSIA) needs of hotels and service apartments, while allowing hoteliers to roll out free HSIA 

WiFi that pays for itself.”(InnGate3, n.d.)), were associated with the hotel’s property 

management system so that hackers and cyber attackers could easily access to whatever they 

want to know about the hotels such as customers information, database, property payroll system 

and a lot more (InnGate3, n.d.)). Furthermore, by taking advantage of hotels’ Wi-Fi, hackers 

offer “updates” for software that are famous such as Adobe Reader or Flash Player so that the 

 
users won’t hesitate to update their software and then those updates contain malware that 

criminals use to get all the usernames, passwords or any other important information from users’ 

computer or smartphone (Noone, August 5, 2015). Based on this fact, Noone (August 5, 2015) 

suggested a couple of tips and advices for hotel customers while being in travel and especially in 

the hotel such as not using online banking on public computers and public Wi-Fi, not access or in 

the case of emergency, access your email inbox by creating a throwaway email address, prevent 

your computer or smartphone from automatically connection to any unknown Wi-Fi, instead of 

saving sensitive information on the laptop or smartphone, use remote desktops.  

Interestingly, in most of the cases, the software that is used by hackers and cyber criminals, is not 

a new software and it can be even up to 10-year old software and unfortunately due to ignorance 

of the hotels and not updating their system, even sometimes this software can be taken advantage 

of by previous contractors that hotels hired for their information technology support (Greenberg, 

February 2, 2010).  

Another issue, which is related to hotels cyber security and customers’ information safety, is the 

matter of loyalty programs. According to Friedland (September 10, 2015), in several of studies 

that have done so far, most of the loyal customers were not ready to consider to be a loyal 

customer of the same hotel again after the hotel experienced breach. For any brand, loyal 

customers are gifts and very valuable assets that the company should always try to keep 

(Friedland, September 10, 2015).  In addition, it is very cheaper to keep a loyal customer than to 

make new customers for the brand. Thus, all hotels must do their best to keep them satisfied by 

securing their information and protect them from cyber attackers (Friedland, September 10, 

2015). The possibility of taking advantage from loyal customers’ information is much more than 

any other customers since due to lots of loyalty programs, loyal customers’ profile have more 

details and information in itself which makes it more interesting for cyber attackers to be curious 

about and try to take advantage of (Friedland, September 10, 2015); In this case the 

responsibility of hoteliers is more about loyal customers while protecting their information and 

secure their experience (Friedland, September 10, 2015). Regarding that, according to Friedland 

(September 10, 2015), IT manager or GM of the hotels can do a couple of things to strengthen 

then security regarding protecting loyal customers’ information and data:   

1.  “Giving them information about the possibility of being hacked by cyber attackers and 

alarm them to regularly change their password and avoid having the same password for 

several websites. Also inform them to check their account activity more often and reward 

them for being securely active as well as practicing secure ways to use their account.  

2.  Sending them an automatic email and notify them in case of changing the password or 

login to their account, so in this case if they haven’t logged in to their account and 

received an email regarding that, they can immediately be aware of abuse and report it.  

3.  Empowering the system to have a two-factor authentication so that for logging into 

accounts, people require to submit the security code that they will receive on the same 

email address or phone number that they provided before while they were singing up to 

the website. Therefore, in case of abusing, cyber attackers will not be able to access to the 

account as long as they don’t know the email address or phone number that the account 

was registered. Even if they know the phone number or the email address, they will not 

have the actual phone or the password of the email address to enter and get the pass 

code.” 

 
 
DSS PCI Compliance level  

In addition to all that, any organization and industry that works with credit card must accept the 

risks and cost of fraud in doing business (How credit-card transactions just got dicier for hotels, 

October 29, 2015). Payment Card Industry Data Security Standards (PCI DSS) helps a lot to 

secure the credit card, debit card and cash transactions and protect them from fraud and misuse 

by determining some policies and procedure (How credit-card transactions just got dicier for 

hotels, October 29, 2015). The PCI DSS was created on 2004 jointly by the four major credit 

card companies, which are Visa, MasterCard, Discover and American Express (Rouse, n.d.).  

According to Amazon Web Services (n.d.), all organizations that process the credit card 

information are require to be certified regardless of their deployment model. Having a PCL DSS 

certification requires the organizations to develop and maintain a secure network. It also requires 

protecting the cardholder data and information as well as maintaining a vulnerability 

management program. Furthermore, organizations require to implement the strong security 

measures and frequently test, control and monitor networks and finally maintain an information 

security policy (Amazon Web Services, n.d.)  

There are different levels of PCI compliance that all merchants will fall into, according to Visa 

transaction volume over a 12-month period. This transaction is determined based on the 

aggregate number of Visa transactions (inclusive of credit, debit and prepaid) from a merchant 

Doing Business As (ComplianceGuide, n.d.). There are four different merchant levels that any 

merchants based on the categories that are described below and regardless of their acceptance 

channel, should have (ComplianceGuide, n.d.).  

“Level 1: Any merchant that process more than 6M Visa transactions per year.  

Level 2: Any merchant that process 1M to 6M Visa transactions per year. 

Level 3: Any merchant that process 20,000 to 1M Visa e-commerce transactions per year. 

Level 4: Any merchant that process fewer than 20,000 Visa e-commerce transactions per year, 

and all other merchants that process up to 1M Visa transactions per year.” 

Cyber Risks and Cyber Attack Prevention Methods 

We should know that none of the security software, antiviruses, and other tools can % 100 

guarantees to prevent hotels and any other business from cyber attacks (Accenture operations, 

n.d.). On the other hand, securing and limiting the system too much may cause other problems 

such as preventing the customers to access the information they might need; thus, hotels and 

other organizations should manage the risk in cyber defense which according to (Accenture 

operations, n.d.) requires a meaningful and understandable operational model which causes 

balance in security implementation and operation as well as using the newest technology 

available plus testing of security posture and very strong feedback structure (Accenture 

operations, n.d.). In Accenture operations website (n.d.), for cyber defense excellence, there are 

three steps available, which are: 1. Prepare and protect 2. Defend and detect and 3. Respond and 

recover.  

Now we will go to the details of each step to see what each step suppose to do to secure the 

business as much as it is able to (Accenture operations, n.d.). 

1.  PREPARE AND PROTECT: this step will give us a big view of the security performance 

in support of businesses. It makes us aware of the threat intelligence existence and will 

make us ready to manage our business vulnerability. In this between, experts will need to 

have forward thinking capabilities to help scale activities and on the other hand IT 

 
strategies will be designed based on great understanding of assets, data sets, technical and 

business functions. 

2.  DEFEND AND DETECT: in this step which is very critical, the forward thinking 

capabilities should effectively help the scale activities so that operational monitoring and 

controlling capabilities be able to analyze the security in an advance level which focuses 

on visualization to understand and identify the anomalies and suspicious activities. 

3.  RESPOND AND RECOVER: in the last step which focuses on intelligent incident 

response, some active defense strategies will be take into action which requires the 

security incidence management. This step is the art of the platforms to catch the hackers 

and attackers or any other threat to the business. 

In general, Cyber attacks can occur in any four forms below (Bamrara, 2015):  

1.  “The intruder may unofficially access to the network 

2.  The intruder may destroy, otherwise or corrupt the alter data 

3.  The intruder may fake the permission from user system and enter to the system 

4.  The intruder may implement some malicious procedure to fail, hang or reboot the system 

while can not access the system” 

The modern system of security really makes it difficult for hackers and cyber criminals to attack 

and access the network system however if the system is not configured in a good and proper way 

or the update patches are not installed then cyber criminals may crack to the system while using 

security loophole (Bamrara, 2015).  

 
 
 
According to Lavelle (Jan 4, 2016), most of the cyber attacks occur by sending phishing emails, 

hacking weak passwords or some other attacks, which target the vulnerabilities of the web 

applications. Thus, a lot of endpoint security vendors offer the anti-phishing solutions (Lavelle, 

2016).  

One of the tools to prevent data breach attacks is Web Application Firewall (WAF) that hotels 

can take advantage of. WAF solutions can be accessed through market and they are able to 

utilize as a cloud-based service and an on-premise appliance (Lavelle, 2016). WAF solutions are 

also useful to detect and prevent the data to be revealed, therefore the attackers that target the 

credit card database will not able to get those information since the WAF solutions will detect 

and block the database (Lavelle, 2016).  

One of the best ways that hotels can use in order to secure themselves as well as customers’ 

information and protect their data and also cover their loss in the case of data breach is having 

cyber security insurance. According to Butler (January 15, 2016), cyber security insurance must 

be a concentration for any hotel owners. Hotel owners have to know that data breaches and cyber 

claims are not included in general liabilities policy; therefore this fact makes it even more 

important for hotel owners to think about and getting insurance for any cyber claims in case of 

cyber attack. Cyber security insurers will cover both first and third party in the case of cyber 

attack and data loses. The third party can be both customers and government or any regulatory 

agencies.  

Learning about Digital Certificates 

Digital certificates are used to bind a message to the owner/generator of the message (Chapter 6 - 

Digital Certificates, n.d.). This binding is established by the use of private keys, that is, the 

 
owner of the message signs a message with his private key (only the owner has its private key) 

(Chapter 6 - Digital Certificates, n.d.). The verification is done with the public key of the 

message owner/generator. Digital certifications are important in cybersecurity as they provide 

non-repudiation service (Chapter 6 - Digital Certificates, n.d.). In hospitality industry, digital 

certifcates are also crucial to prevent fraud from customers or hotel/restaurant owners as false 

claims from either can be legally challenged and the truth be established by using digital 

certificates (Chapter 6 - Digital Certificates, n.d.). Digital certificates are integrated in all modern 

web browsers so that the identity of the people and organizations can be verified, and the 

integrity of the content be preserved (Chapter 6 - Digital Certificates, n.d.). The following 

information (at least) is contained in each digital certificate (Chapter 6 - Digital Certificates, 

n.d.): 

• 

“Owner's public key  

•  Owner's name or alias  

•  Certificate’s expiration date  

•  Certificate’s serial number  

•  Name of the organization that issued the certificate  

•  Digital signature of the organization that issued the certificate “ 

Certificates are authenticated, issued, and managed by a trusted third party called a certification 

authority (CA). The CA must provide following services: (Chapter 6 - Digital Certificates, n.d.) 

• 

• 

“Security related technology, such as security protocols and standards  

Infrastructure, including secure facilities, backup systems, and customer support  

•  A legally binding framework for managing subscriber activities and resolving disputes” 

 
 
Digital certificates can be used for the following: (Chapter 6 - Digital Certificates, n.d.) 

• 

“To verify the identity of clients and servers on the web  

•  To enable secure communication between clients and servers by encryption (e.g., secure 

Internet email communication)  

•  To associate a digital signature with an executable code that users can download from the 

web to verify the source and integrity of the executable code “ 

Clients and servers exchange digital certificates using a secure transmission protocol, such as 

secure sockets layer (SSL) or transport layer security (TLS). (Chapter 6 - Digital Certificates, 

n.d.) 

How to know if a Website is Secure 

Before providing any confidential information to a website, one should ensure that the website is 

secure. The following tips help in identifying the security of a website: (Woodfield, November 

26,2014). 

1. Check the SSL Certificate 

The website address, also known as the website’s Uniform Resource Locator (URL), provides 

information about the security of a website. If the URL begins with “https” instead of “http”, it 

implies that the website uses SSL and is secure (Woodfield, November 26,2014). The website 

hosting company has to go through a validation process to obtain an SSL Certificate (Woodfield, 

November 26,2014). There are a few different validation levels and some of them are more 

difficult to obtain than the others (Woodfield, November 26,2014). The two most commonly 

used validation levels are: (a) Domain Validation (DV); and (b) Extended Validation (EV). The 

DV is the lowest level of validation that simply verifies the ownership of the domain and not the 

 
legitimacy of the organization requesting the certificate (Woodfield, November 26,2014). For 

example, if someone purchases a domain “amaz0n.com” and requests a certificate for this 

domain, he/she would get the certificate because of the domain’s ownership (Woodfield, 

November 26,2014). The EV is the highest validation level (also the most safest and expensive 

validation level) that requires not only the company requesting the certificate to prove its identity 

but also verifies the company’s legitimacy as a business (Woodfield, November 26,2014). A 

website having an EV certificate can be recognized by looking at the address bar (Woodfield, 

November 26,2014). Browsers depict a green address bar with a padlock icon for websites with 

EV certificates, as shown in the picture below (Woodfield, November 26,2014). 

Fig. Websites with Extended Validation (EV) Certificate 

2. Look at the Website Domain 

Cyber attackers sometimes make websites that mimic existing websites in order to trick people to 

enter their confidential information (e.g., credit card numbers, login information) on the phishing 

website. For example, assume a cyber attacker purchases the domain “amaz0n.com” and sets up 

 
 
 
 
a website at “amaz0n.com” that resembles the amazon.com website (Woodfield, November 

26,2014). The attacker purchases a DV certificate for the website and attempts to trick users (by 

using phishing emails or other methods) to buy items or log into their accounts on the mimic 

phishing site (Woodfield, November 26,2014). These phishing attacks can be avoided by always 

looking at the website domain to ensure that one is connected to the authenticated website and 

not a phishing website (Woodfield, November 26,2014). 

3. Look for Signs that the Company is Real 

One should always look for signs to identify if the company represented on the website is real or 

not (Woodfield, November 26,2014). The following signs can help in the identification of a 

legitimate company: (Woodfield, November 26,2014). 

Physical address and phone number – Listing of a physical address and a phone number on the 

website increases the chances that the business is legitimate because reputable companies often 

list their information so that a customer can contact them if there is a problem (Woodfield, 

November 26,2014). 

Return policy – Reputable e-commerce sites should list their return and shipping policies. If one 

cannot find the return and/or shipping policy of a company, one should refrain from purchasing 

on such websites (Woodfield, November 26,2014). 

Prices are too low to believe – If a website offers a product at a price that is incredibly lower 

than the actual product price, this could be an indication that the website is selling a counterfeit 

product or one may not get anything at all after purchasing from such a website (Woodfield, 

November 26,2014). 

 
Privacy statement – Reputable sites should list their privacy statement, that is, how the website 

protects customer information and whether the website shares the customer information with 

third parties (Woodfield, November 26,2014). One should make sure a site has a privacy 

statement and should read the privacy statement before making a purchase (Woodfield, 

November 26,2014). 

Examples of Cyber Attacks in Hotels 

In 2014 and 2015, we will see a large number of hotels that were affected by cyber attackers, 

which has never seen before in the history of hotel industry. Below are some stories about these 

hotels that were exposed and had caused a lot of guests’ personal information and their bank 

accounts to be revealed to attackers:  

1.  According to Hertzfeld (September 3rd, 2015), There was a data breach that was reported 

at a Brunswick Maine and Hotel, which possibly could affect 2,600 guest information 

who had stayed in the hotel between November 29th to July 21st Based on company 

estimation. The Brunswick Hotel and Tavern management said, malware was placed on 

their front desk computer and the CFO (Dan Flaherty) believed that through a scam 

phishing email, which pretended to be a message from a guest, the malware was installed.  

Malware was designed in a way to avoid demodulation from antivirus software. 

According to a letter from one of their customer, which was posted online by Vermont 

Office of the Attorney General, the malware’s aim was to capture and permit remote 

access to payment card information. Finally the hotel got some help from the cyber 

 
 
security and investigation company to search more about the case as well as make the 

whole system of the hotel more secure and increase the online safety for their customers.  

2.  On March 2015, the Mandarin Oriental Hotels experienced the data breach (Lavelle, 

2016). The breach was designed to get the credit card and debit card information of those 

customers who used spa, beverages, guest rooms, dining room and other product and 

services. It is also infected the sales system of a couple of properties (Petri, Dec 08, 

2015). 

3.  From November 18 to December 5, 2014 and from April 21 to July 27, 2015 Hilton 

Worldwide hotels faced the data breach, credit and data theft as well as some of its point-

of-sale computer system. Fortunately, the hackers were not able to get the name of the 

customers as well as their addresses and personal identification numbers, however they 

had accessed to the credit card numbers plus security codes and expiration dates. Hilton 

got help from a third-party experts, law enforcement and payment card companies to 

investigate the breach and also told its customers to see if there is any irregular activity in 

their accounts (AFP, Nov 25, 2015). 

4.  On November 2015, Four days before attack to Hilton Hotels, Starwood Hotel Group got 

attack and that caused data breach. Hackers targeted the payment system and potentially 

leaking customer credit card data. Starwood also got help from forensic experts so that 

could recover the system in a couple of the restaurants as well as gift shops and point of 

sale system of the hotel (AFP, Nov 25, 2015). The company was also gave the list of the 

affected hotels which included the Sheraton New York Times Square, the Westin New 

York Grand Central New York and the St.Regis Bal Harbour Resort in Florida (Starwood 

says malware, November 24, 2015).  

5.  Hyatt Hotels also faced data breach on December 2015 (Lavelle, 2016).  It did not talk 

about the type of the malware that was used to attack the data however the hotel asked 

the customers to check their account activity and also told them that they can feel free to 

using payment cards at Hyatt hotels since they are making their security system very 

strong to protect their customers (Rukmangadhan & Finkle, December 24, 2015). This 

data breach is a big warning to Hyatt hotels because it makes all their 627 properties in 

52 countries vulnerable to the cyber criminals (Champagne, January 6, 2016).  

6.  And finally, on October 2015, Trump Hotel Collection confirmed the data breach and it 

alarmed the customers who used their credit card in the hotels between May 19, 2014 and 

June 2, 2015. This data breach happened in several Trump locations such as SoHo New 

York, Trump International Hotel and Tower Las Vegas, Trump International Waikiki and 

Trump International Chicago (Petri, Dec 08, 2015). 

METHODOLOGY 

This study is completely qualitative and the case study is targeting the hotels in Reno, Nevada. 

Based on that, five hotels are chosen without any specific consideration or hotels’ features. The 

researcher decided to have an interview with a targeted sample for the following reasons: 1) 

interview is one of the most effective tools and techniques to collect data; 2) the simplicity, 

practicality, flexibility and interactive nature of the interview provides an opportunity to hear the 

interviewee’s perspective regarding the subject and research. 

 
 
 
The interviews for this study were conducted either face-to-face or via phone for data collection. 

The interviewees included hotels’ front desk employees, hotels’ guests, and hotels’ assistant of 

general managers (GMs) or IT managers depending whether the hotel employed an IT manager 

or not. The participants were selected based on their knowledge about the issue or their ability to 

give productive, useful and effective information about the topic that can be contributed to the 

public knowledge, such as public knowledge about cyber security. 

 In each hotel, ten guests were interviewed without giving any consideration of whether the 

interviewee was a loyal customer or not. Also two Front Desk employees were interviewed in 

each hotel. In three hotels out of the five that had an IT manager, the interviews were done with 

them; however, the other three hotels, which didn’t have IT managers, the interviews were done 

with assistant of GMs.  

Since this study is not a human subject study, the researcher didn’t get IRB for the study; 

however, all interviewees were informed about the confidentiality of the information they had 

given. Each interview with guests took about 7-10 minutes and with employees it took about 5 

minutes. Interviews with IT managers and Assistant of general managers took about 15 minutes 

each; however unfortunately the researcher couldn’t get enough information that the study seeks 

due to the confidentiality of the hotels’ security information. IT managers and Assistant of GMs 

informed the researcher that they were not allowed to reveal anything about their network 

security system and their implications regarding that because it was against their policy and the 

policy of the third party company that they work with to reveal hotel’s security-related 

information. Therefore, some of the interview questions couldn’t be answered.  

 
 
The interview questions were made based on some of the previous articles and works that have 

done so far regarding network security issues in hotels and hospitality industry. The interview 

questions did not ask of personal information about the interviewees and the participation in this 

interview was absolutely volunteer. Also, the interviewees were free not to answer any of the 

questions they did not want to. The answers to the interview questions were recorded on the 

piece of paper and later on were typed and added to the research project.  

The interviews questions from all three groups (guests, front desk employees and assistant of 

GMs or IT managers) in each hotel can be seen in Table 1, and the answers are available in the 

“Findings and Results” section.  

The data analysis of this study is based on the qualitative nature of the study. Since it is a case 

study research, the data analysis will be done with pattern matching and explanation building in 

conclusion section. These two methods of data analysis are introduced and defined by Yin 

(1994).  

Table 1: Interview Questions 

Question’s  
Number 

Interview questions for 
Assistant of GM/ IT managers 

Interview questions 
for Front Desk 
employees 

Interview questions 
for hotel’s customer 

 
 
 
 
1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

What are the main property (hotel) 
features, such as star rating, number 
of rooms, services they offer (e.g., 
spa, swimming, Wi-Fi, parking, 
restaurants, etc.)? 

Does the hotel employee a dedicated 
IT manager or this position is 
handled by the hotel’s GM? 

Does the hotel have any 
training program for 
employees to inform 
them the importance of 
computer security and 
to use the network 
securely? 

If the previous 
question’s answer is 
yes, Then to what 
extend and how they 
trained you? 

What are the current practices used 
by hotels to protect their computer 
networks? 

How often is there is 
any, do you receive 
phishing emails? 

What kind of computer security 
threats (if any) the hotel has 
experienced in past five years? 

How do you recognize 
if an email is phishing 
or not?  

Has the hotel reported publicly any 
computer security threat (if any) 
experienced in the past? 

Which methods the hotel leverages 
to secure their websites for any data 
and financial transactions? 

Have you ever noticed 
if the hotel has 
experienced any data 
breach? 

Have you ever received 
any complain from 
guests about fake 
website reservation? 

What criteria the hotel considers in 
making a strong password for their 
computer networks and logins 
(computers and websites)? 

Have you ever 
experienced any fake 
website for booking a 
hotel? 

Have you ever been 
informed the hotel you 
used to stay in, 
experienced a data breach 
that caused you to see 
some unusual activities 
on your credit/debit card 
account? 

As a customer of the 
hotel, if you heard the 
hotel computer system is 
attacked, will you still 
choose this hotel to stay 
in?  
If you are a loyal 
customer of this hotel, 
how often do you change 
your password of your 
loyalty account and check 
its activities? 

What are your criteria to 
choose a password for 
your accounts? 

Do you pay attention to 
the website security of the 
hotel you are going to 
book and pay online? If 
yes, then what do you pay 
attention to?  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

Does the hotel have some 
contract/arrangement with an IT 
firm to maintain as well as to handle 
the security of their cyber 
infrastructure? 

What measures hotel takes to secure 
the confidential data from potential 
internal threats (e.g., rogue 
employees)? 

Does the hotel have any plan to 
incorporate more security measures 
in their cyber infrastructure?  

What is the level of your 
compliance for PCI DSS? Do you 
believe 100% compliance is 
possible? Why? Why not? 
What are your biggest security 
challenges? 

FINDINGS AND RESULTS 

The results and findings of the research is shown below: 

Hotel 1  

This hotel hasn’t had an IT manager, so the interview was done with the assistant of GM. This 

hotel is a 2-star hotel with 59 smoke-free guestrooms, Free airport shuttle, Fitness center, 

Business center, 24-hour front desk Coffee/tea in the lobby, Air conditioning, Computer station, 

Self-serve laundry, Meeting rooms, Multilingual staff and Free newspapers in the lobby. At the 

moment the hotel uses Anti-virus software to protect its system; however the hotel’s computer 

security is very low and it doesn’t require any password for guests to log into the hotel’s Wi-Fi, 

which makes the computer system very vulnerable. The Assistant of GM claimed that they have 

not experienced any attack in last five years. Based on that the hotel has not reported anything to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
public about any cyber attack. The website of the hotel is certified and secure for any financial 

transactions. The hotel currently has decided to make a contract with an IT company, however 

they do not have any specific IT company at the moment to work with. For now in case of facing 

any problem, they acquire services of IT professionals from various companies. The hotel tries to 

have a strong password to access the computer system by using small and capital letters as well 

as symbols and numbers in creating passwords. Unfortunately the hotel doesn’t have any specific 

method to protect the confidential data from potential internal attackers, however the front desk 

employees are not able to see some information that managers can see. The assistant of GM 

believes that there is no %100 in security.  

The result after interview with front desk employees shows that the hotel does not have any 

specific training program regarding cyber security, however both employees claimed that they 

have an idea about phishing emails, so they do not open all emails that they receive. They 

mentioned they get phishing emails very often and lots of other emails that go to spam section of 

the email and based on the content of email and the format they can recognize if this is a 

phishing email or not. They also mentioned they never heard about data breach in this hotel and 

they barely received complains about the fake websites and money transactions.  

Among 10 guests in this hotel, only one of them said that he has experienced a fake website 

while he was booking a hotel for his business purposes 2 years ago and he didn’t recognize the 

issue until the time he went for check-in and front desk employee told him that his name is not 

there. He also mentioned that the front desk employee already knew about the fake website since 

they had another customer who had claimed the same thing. All of the guests responded no to the 

second question regarding being informed about any data breach in the hotel they have stayed; 

however one of them mentioned that after coming back from his travel, he observed some 

unusual credit card activities, so he called the bank and informed them and get his refund. All 

guests responded no regarding staying in a hotel that has experienced any data breach. Among 

ten guests, three of them were loyal customers however they said they never change their 

passwords and their criteria for choosing password is adding numbers, symbols and small and 

capital letters to the password and make it as strong as possible. Among all guests, only three of 

them said they pay attention to the website security while paying online.  

Hotel 2 
This hotel has an IT manager and it comes under 4-star hotels. The amenities of the hotel 

include: 1990 guestrooms, Casino, 10 restaurants, Full-service spa, Nightclub, Breakfast, Free 

airport shuttle, Seasonal outdoor pool, Ski storage, Health club, 24-hour business center and 

Limo/town car service. The interview was done with the IT manager. Due to the security of the 

hotel, the IT manager was not able to provide ant information regarding their current security 

practices, their experiences in last 5 years, their PCI DSS compliance level, their challenges and 

the methods they use to prevent internal attacks. The IT manager mentioned that the hotel has 

not reported any cyber attack to public in last five years. The website of the hotel is completely 

secure for any personal and credit card information as well as financial transaction. The hotel 

also has annual contract with an IT company to maintain and handle the security of the cyber 

infrastructure. The hotel has a plan to get cyber insurance as well in the near future. The IT 

manager believed that there is no %100 security in anything and IT managers are always one 

step behind the hackers and cyber attackers.  

The result after interview with front desk employees shows that the hotel does not have any 

specific training program regarding cyber security, however the IT manager frequently check the 

system to see if everything goes well. They mentioned they get phishing emails almost everyday 

 
and most of the emails in spam section are phishing. Based on the content of email and the 

format they can recognize if this is a phishing email or not. They also mentioned they never 

heard about data breach in this hotel and they received complains a couple of times about the 

fake websites and money transactions.  

Among 10 guests in this hotel, none of them said that he has experienced a fake website for 

booking a hotel. All of the guests responded no to the second question regarding being informed 

about any data breach in the hotel they have stayed. All guests responded no regarding staying in 

a hotel that has experienced any data breach. Among ten guests, six of them were loyal 

customers however only two of them mentioned that they change their passwords every six 

months. These two guests were a couple who had studied and worked in IT area. Seven out of 

ten guests mentioned that their criteria for choosing password is adding numbers, symbols and 

small and capital letters to the password and make it as strong as possible and the rest of the 

guests mentioned that they use the same password for all their online accounts. Among all 

guests, seven of them said they pay attention to the website security while paying online.  

Hotel 3 

This is a 4-star hotel that has an IT manager plus1623 guestrooms, Casino, 10 restaurants and 14 

bars/lounges, Full-service spa, 2 outdoor pools, Nightclub, Breakfast, Internet in the lobby, Free 

airport shuttle, Ski storage, Fitness center and 24-hour business center. The interview was done 

with the IT manager. Due to the security of the hotel, the IT manager was not able to provide ant 

information regarding their current security practices, their experiences in last 5 years, their PCI 

DSS compliance level, their challenges and the methods they use to prevent internal attacks. The 

IT manager mentioned that the hotel has not reported any cyber attack to public in last five years. 

 
The website of the hotel is completely secure for any personal and credit card information as 

well as financial transaction. The hotel also has annual contract with an IT company to maintain 

and handle the security of the cyber infrastructure. The hotel does not have cyber insurance yet. 

The IT manager believed that there is no %100 security. 

The result after interview with front desk employees shows that the hotel does not have any 

specific training program regarding cyber security, however the IT manager frequently check the 

system to see if everything goes well. They mentioned they are not responsible to check the 

emails and response and they have another department for that. In addition, they also mentioned 

they never heard about data breach in this hotel and they received complains a couple of times 

about the fake websites and money transactions.  

Among 10 guests in this hotel, two of them said that they have experienced a fake website for 

booking a hotel an one of them said that after paying and booking the hotel room, her son had 

recognized the website was fake due to the logo image. All of the guests responded no to the 

second question regarding being informed about any data breach in the hotel they have stayed. 

Nine guests responded no regarding staying in a hotel that has experienced any data breach and 

only one said if they informed the guests about it and they guarantee the security now, she will 

still stay at that hotel. Among ten guests, five of them were loyal customers however none of 

them change their password regularly and two of them said in the case of observing suspicious 

activities, they would change the password. Five out of ten guests mentioned that their criteria 

for choosing password is adding numbers, symbols and small and capital letters to the password 

and make it as strong as possible and the rest of the guests mentioned that they use the same 

password for all their online accounts. Among all guests, six of them said they pay attention to 

the website security while paying online.  

Hotel 4 

This hotel is a 4-star hotel that has an IT manager and the interview was done with him. The 

amenities of the hotel include: 824 guestrooms, Casino, 8 restaurants, Full-service spa, Indoor 

pool, Free airport shuttle, Ski storage, Health club, Conference center, Limo/town car service, 

24-hour front desk and Air conditioning. Due to the security of the hotel, the IT manager was not 

able to provide ant information regarding their current security practices, their experiences in last 

5 years, their PCI DSS compliance level, their challenges and the methods they use to prevent 

internal attacks. The IT manager mentioned that the hotel has not reported any cyber attack to 

public in last five years. The website of the hotel is completely secure for any personal and credit 

card information as well as financial transaction. The hotel also has annual contract with an IT 

company to maintain and handle the security of the cyber infrastructure. The hotel does not have 

cyber insurance yet. The IT manager believed that there is no %100 security. 

The result after interview with front desk employees shows that the hotel has a training program 

but not specifically for regarding cyber security, however the IT manager frequently check the 

system to see if everything goes well and also inform them not to answer security questions and 

not to provide private information of the hotel to anyone either on phone or email. They 

mentioned they get phishing emails a lot and most of the emails in spam section are phishing. 

They mentioned sometimes they are not able to recognized if the email is phishing or not 

because they look very normal. They also mentioned they never heard about data breach in this 

hotel and they received complains a three times in last year about the fake websites and money 

transactions.  

 
Among 10 guests in this hotel, none of them said that they have experienced a fake website for 

booking a hotel. All of the guests responded no to the second question regarding being informed 

about any data breach in the hotel they have stayed. All of the guests responded no regarding 

staying in a hotel that has experienced any data breach. Among ten guests, two of them were 

loyal customers; however only three of them change their password regularly and six of them 

said in the case of observing suspicious activities, they would change the password. Eight out of 

ten guests mentioned that their criteria for choosing password is adding numbers, symbols and 

small and capital letters to the password and make it as strong as possible and the rest of the 

guests mentioned that they use the same password for all their online accounts. Among all 

guests, eight of them said they pay attention to the website security while paying online.  

Hotel 5 

This 3-star hotel doesn’t have an IT manager and the interview was done with the assistant of 

GM. The amenities of the hotel include: 260 guestrooms, Casino, 2 restaurants, Breakfast, Free 

airport shuttle, Seasonal outdoor pool, 24-hour business center, 24-hour front desk, Air 

conditioning, Front desk safe, ATM/banking services and Laundry service. At the moment the 

hotel uses Anti-virus software, physical security and software firewall to protect its computer 

system. The password for log into the Wi-Fi for guests is changes daily; however on the same 

day the password is the same for all guests. The Assistant of GM was not willing to provide 

information about the hotel cyber attack, however she mentioned that they experienced once and 

it was not a major one so the hotel has not reported anything to public regarding that. The 

website of the hotel is certified and secure for any financial transactions. The hotel currently has 

contract with an IT company and they come to check the system and update the security software 

 
on a regular bases. The hotel tries to have a strong password to access the computer system by 

using small and capital letters as well as symbols and numbers in creating passwords. 

Unfortunately the assistant of GM was not able to provide any information regarding the 

methods to protect the confidential data from potential internal attackers. The assistant of GM 

does not believe in %100 securities and instead believes in luck and fortune. 

The result after interview with front desk employees shows that the hotel does not have any 

specific training program regarding cyber security. They mentioned they get phishing emails 

sometimes and mostly spam emails from unknown people. They also mentioned they never 

heard about data breach in this hotel and they have never received complains about the fake 

websites and money transactions.  

Among 10 guests in this hotel, none of them said that they have experienced a fake website for 

booking a hotel. All of the guests responded no to the second question regarding being informed 

about any data breach in the hotel they have stayed. All of the guests responded no regarding 

staying in a hotel that has experienced any data breach. Among ten guests, one of them was loyal 

customer; however only two of them change their password regularly and eight of them said in 

the case of observing suspicious activities, they would change the password. Seven out of ten 

guests mentioned that their criteria for choosing password is adding numbers, symbols and small 

and capital letters to the password and make it as strong as possible and the rest of the guests 

mentioned that they use the same password for all their online accounts. Among all guests, eight 

of them said they pay attention to the website security while paying online.  

 
 
 
CONCLUSION  

This study tries to explain the importance of the cyber security in hospitality industry. It also 

discusses about the tools and techniques to prevent cyber attacks. The findings and results of this 

study after interview with the front desk employees, guests and IT manager/ Assistant of GM in 

five different hotels that were chosen randomly, shows that not all the hotels in Reno, Nevada 

has IT manager or someone who dedicates to computer system and networks. Even some of the 

hotels do not have contracted with any specific IT company to refer when the face any challenge 

or problem and they call random IT professionals from different companies to fix their 

computers’ problem. Also the current cyber security practices in some hotels are not enough at 

all to prevent the cyber attacks at all. In addition, due to the security and privacy of the hotel, the 

researcher was not able to understand whether the hotels have experienced any data breach in 

last five years or not and the cyber challenges that they are facing as well as their PCI 

compliance level and their criteria for creating the passwords; however the results show that all 

five hotels have not reported any data breach to public in last five years. Interestingly one of the 

hotels has a plan to sign a contact with an IT company very soon. Moreover, all five hotels’ IT 

managers/ Assistant of GM do not believe in %100 security and they think this is not possible.  

On the other hand, the results of interview with front desk employees show that they barely 

receive any complain from guests about fake websites and there is no specific training program 

from the hotel for them regarding cyber security of the computer networks, while they recognize 

the phishing and suspicious emails based on their own knowledge about the content and outlook 

of the emails. They all also mentioned that they have never heard anything regarding data breach 

about the same hotel they work for.  

And finally the results of the interview with hotels’ guests show that nobody has ever heard 

about data breach in the hotel they stays while nobody wants to stay in a hotel that has 

experienced any type of data breach. Also more than half of the guests who were interviewed (32 

out of 50), mentioned that they pay attention to the security of the website while booking the 

hotel online. In addition, more than half of the guests 27 out of 50) add symbols, numbers, 

capital and small letters to their passwords to make sure the password is strong enough and less 

than half of them change their password regularly, while most of them either use the same 

password for all their online account or change their passwords if they observe any suspicious 

and unusual activity.  

So based on the findings and results and data analysis, we understand that hotels are very 

vulnerable and they definitely require a lot more security for their computer networks and 

system. While the hotels are very careless in paying attention to their network security, a lot of 

hackers and cyber attackers out there are waiting for the chance to get into the hotels’ network 

system and access to the personal information of the guests without legal and official permission 

and authorization. One of the biggest reasons that cause cyber attacks is not having an IT 

manager or a company to monitor the computer network and system. Also the lack of knowledge 

in hotel employees and lack of training in cyber security makes the hotels more vulnerable. In 

addition, lack of public knowledge about cyber security causes a lot of data breaches, personal 

information loses and a lot more.  

RECOMMENDATIONS, IMPLICATIONS AND CONTRIBUTIONS 

According to the study’s findings and results, the researcher comes up with some 

recommendations, suggestions and implications that hoteliers can implement to make their 

 
computer system and networks more secure and to prevent any type of data breach and cyber 

attacks as much as possible: 

There are variety of tools and techniques available to scan the vulnerability of the computer 

networks, measure and protect data from cyber attacks (as some of them are mentioned in this 

research), that any hotel based on its affordability, size and other features of the hotel, can 

implement and use in order to take a better care of the data and personal information of the 

guests. Also each hotel should have a contract with an IT company or a dedicated IT manager 

whom the hotel trusts so that on a regular bases all the computer networks can be checked for 

any possible problem that makes the computer networks vulnerable.  

In addition to that, hotels should determine some internal regulations and policies for the hotel’s 

employees regarding cyber security and computer network usage as well as having cyber 

security training program for those employees whose job is working with computers, handling 

the emails and social media. Moreover, instead of having the same password for all the guests in 

the hotel or not having any password to join the hotel Wi-Fi, hotels can set up a wired internet 

system, so that those guests who has concern about their security be able to use the wired system 

while they are in their room or having an individual password for each guest or each room in 

order to protect the computer networks from any cyber attack that might be caused by reusable 

passwords. Furthermore, hotels must have a very secure and certified website that leverage 

extended validation or at least domain validation, so that the guests be able to book the rooms or 

anything else online without having any concern of being hacked or abused. And finally it is 

better for any hotel to have cyber insurance so that if the hotel experienced any data breach or 

cyber attack, the insurance covers its loss and liabilities.  

Although this study has many more contribution, the main contributions of this study are 

increasing the public knowledge and awareness regarding the importance of cyber security in 

hotels and hospitality industry as well as the importance of having a strong password for the 

online accounts and changing them more often. It also teaches people to be careful about the 

security of the website they want to pay online while booking a hotel room. In addition, this 

study provides a thorough discussion of important terminologies and concepts of cyber security 

in general and hospitality industry in particular. And finally this study helps to increases the 

knowledge of the readers about the different tools and techniques of cyber security as well as 

their usage.  

LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE STUDIES 

Considering that no research can be done without limitations, this study also has several 

limitations. According to Phillips (1981), the best participants for interviews in research are 

those who have enough information and knowledge about the topic and issue that the researcher 

is seeking for. Based on that, unfortunately the researcher of this study was not able to find 

exactly those participants, who are expert in this area since three out of five hotels, which were 

targeting for this study, didn’t have IT manager in their hotel and the interview was done with 

the assistant of general managers in those three hotels. In addition, assistant of general managers 

did not have much information and knowledge about the issue.  

On the other hand, the biggest limitation that this study faced was that in all of the five hotels 

that the interviews were done, due to hotels’ policy and the other involved companies’ policies 

(e.g., the policies of the security companies involved), the participants were not allowed to reveal 

information about the hotel’s security. The hotel employee interviewees’  mentioned that it was 

 
against their hotel’s policy to talk about the hotel’s network security as well as their experiences 

regarding the security threats and challenges faced by the hotel. Therefore, the researcher was 

not able to get the answer of all the interview questions.  

Another limitation of this study is that the sample of the study was very general and did not 

target any specific features in choosing the considered five hotels, such as property features, 

number of stars, services included, etc.  

Furthermore, this study has only focused on network security and customers’ data and 

information security and not specifically on PCI DSS, payment security methods or anything 

regarding credit cards and debit cards fraud. However, the project did briefly define the 

terminologies regarding other security aspects. In particular, the project described some details of 

PCI DSS and its purpose in businesses, organizations and specifically hotels. Furthermore, the 

project discussed the determination of the compliance level of PCI DSS in a business or an 

organization. Thus, the future studies can focus more on how the PCI DSS works in hotels and 

base on the size of the hotels and the other features of them, which level of compliance they need 

to have.  

Also, in this study, the researcher shortly introduced tokenization, which can be an interesting 

topic for future studies to see if hotels really know about this issue and take advantage of it to 

secure their network system or not and how it can be a help for them to prevent data breach and 

cyber attacks.  

Since network security and cyber crimes are kind of new topics and hotels are facing more and 

more challenges as well as getting to know the importance of this issue gradually, a lot of 

research can be done in this area. For example one of the targets of the research can be the 

insurance companies that cover liabilities regarding cyber crimes in hotels and other 

organizations. In addition, similar research can be carried out in other industries, such as banking 

and airlines.  

REFERENCES 

A, B. (2015). Evaluating Database Security and Cyber Attacks: A Relational Approach. The 

Journal of Internet Banking and Commerce, 20(2). 

 Beaulier Law Office (n.d.). White Collar Crime. Retrieved on February 26, 2016 from Beaulier 

Law Office Website: http://www.nvo.com/beaulier/whitecollarcrime/# Overview 

Bilgihan, Anil Dr.; Karadag, Ersem; Cobanoglu, Cihan; and Okumus, Fevzi (2013) "Research 

Note: Biometric Technology Applications and Trends in Hotels," Hospitality Review: 

Vol. 31: Iss. 2, Article 2.  

Available at: http://digitalcommons.fiu.edu/hospitalityreview/vol31/iss2/2 

Butler, J. (2016, January 15). Hospitality Net - Not Just Heads In Beds – Cybersecurity for Hotel 

Owners | By Jim Butler. Retrieved February 26, 2016, from 

http://www.hospitalitynet.org/news/4073687.html 

CERT (2005). 2005 E-Crime Watch Survey. Retrieved on February 26, 2016 from CERT 

Website: http://www.cert.org/archive/pdf/ecrimesummary05.pdf 

Chapter 6 - Digital Certificates. (n.d.). Retrieved February 29, 2016, from 

https://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/dd361898.aspx 

Cobanoglu, C. & Cougias, D (2003). Security: What to watch for and how to prevent attacks. 

The Annual International Foodservice Technology Conference and Exhibition, Long 

Beach, CA. 

 
 
Cobanoglu, C. (2005). Securing Hotel Networks: Potentially a Hacker’s Paradise. Hospitality 

and Foodservice Technology Tradeshow and Conference (HOSTEC-ASIA), Hong Kong, 

China. 

Cobanoglu, C. (2007) A Critical Look at Restaurant Network Security, Journal of Foodservice 

Business Research, 10:1, 31-50, DOI: 10.1300/J369v10n01_03 

Cobanoglu, C. & Demicco,  F. J. (2007) To Be Secure or Not to Be, International Journal of 

Hospitality & Tourism Administration, 8:1, 43-59, DOI: 10.1300/J149v08n01_03 

Clark, C. (2015, April 16). The Serious Cyber Security Threat That Could Hurt Hotels. Retrieved 

February 26, 2016, from http://www.pcma.org/news/news-landing/2015/04/13/the-

serious-cyber-security-threat-that-could-hurt-hotels#.VqhHLGCZaJV 

Collins, G. R., Cobanoglu, C., & Malik, T. (2003). Hospitality Information Technology: 

Learning How to Use It. (5th Ed.). Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt Publishing Co. 

Computer Fraud & Security (2002). What Company Managers Should Know About Information 

Security. Computer Fraud & Security, 2, 18-19. 

Continuous Cyber Attacks – Cyber Defense Excellence - Accenture. (n.d.). Retrieved February 

26, 2016, from https://www.accenture.com/us-en/insight-ciso-cyber-defense. 

Daler, T., Gulbrandsen, R., Melgard, B., & Sjolstand, T. (1989). Security of Information and 

Data. pp. 13-14, 82-83. 

Flink, Y. (2002). Who Holds the Key to IT Security? Information Security Technical Report, 7 

(4), 10-22. 

Greenberg, A. (2010, February 02). Cybercrime Checks Into Hotels. Retrieved February 26, 

2016, from http://www.forbes.com/2010/02/01/cybersecurity-breaches-trustwave-

technology-security-hotels.html 

Hertzfeld, E. (2015, September 3). Data breach reported at the Brunswick Hotel in Maine. 

Retrieved February 26, 2016, from http://www.hotelmanagement.net/technology/data-

breach-reported-at-the-brunswick-hotel-in-maine-32566 

Hiller, S. (2015, January 23). Top 5 risks and security challenges for hotels in 2015. Retrieved 

from http://ehotelier.com/insights/2015/01/23/top-5-risks-and-security-challenges-for-

hotels-in-2015/ 

Hilton Hotels Hit by Cyber Attack | SecurityWeek.Com. (2015, November 25). Retrieved 

February 26, 2016, from http://www.securityweek.com/hilton-hotels-hit-cyber-attack 

Hospitality Cyber Risk and Solutions. (n.d.). Retrieved from 

http://www.aon.com/attachments/risk-services/cyber/Aon-Cyber-Risk-Solutions-

Hospitality.pdf 

How Can I Identify a Phishing Website or Email? (n.d.). Retrieved February 29, 2016, from 

https://safety.yahoo.com/Security/PHISHING-SITE.html 

How credit-card transactions just got dicier for hotels. (2015, October 29). Retrieved February 

28, 2016, from http://www.hotelmanagement.net/technology/how-credit-card-

transactions-just-got-dicier-for-hotels-33238 

InnGate High Speed Internet Access (HSIA) Gateway. (n.d.). Retrieved February 26, 2016, from 

http://www.antlabs.com/products/inngate/ 

Indiana University Indiana University Indiana University. (n.d.). Retrieved February 29, 2016, 

from https://kb.iu.edu/d/arsf 

Jennifer Champagne. (2016, January 06). What the Hyatt Hotel Hack Means for You: 3 Hotel 

Security Tips for Small Hotels in 2016. Retrieved February 28, 2016, from 

http://blog.capterra.com/hyatt-hotel-hack-hotel-security-tips-for-small-hotels/ 

Kasavana, M.L. & Cahill J.J. (2003). Managing Technology in the Hospitality Industry. 4th Ed. 

East Lansing, MI: Educational Institute of the American Hotel and Motel Association. 

Kruger, H., & Kearney, W. (2006). A prototype for assessing information security awareness. 

Computers & Security, 25(4), 289-296. 

Levalle, R. (2016, January 04). Is the Hotel industry serious about cyber security? Retrieved 

February 26, 2016, from https://www.zenedge.com/blog/is-the-hotel-industry-serious-

about-cyber-security 

Liddle, A. J. (October 6, 2003). BK Seeks Simplification of Complex Network, Online Identity 

Management Process. Nation’s Restaurant News, 37 (40), 36. 

Mest, E. (2015, October 06). Fake booking websites and the tangled web they weave. Retrieved 

February 28, 2016, from http://www.hotelmanagement.net/technology/fake-booking-

websites-and-the-tangled-web-they-weave-32968 

National Cyber Security Leadership Act. (2003). 

Noone, F. (2015, August 05). Defending Against Cyber-Security Threats in Your Hotel Room - 

ECC IT Solutions. Retrieved February 26, 2016, from 

http://www.eccitsolutions.com/defending-against-cyber-security-threats-in-your-hotel-

room/ 

Osei-Bryson, K., & Vogel, D. (2014). Special Issue on Cyber-Security for Development. 

Information Technology for Development, 20(2), 93-95. 

PCI Compliance Guide Frequently Asked Questions | PCI Compliance Guide. (2014). Retrieved 

February 28, 2016, from https://www.pcicomplianceguide.org/pci-faqs-2/#5 

PCI DSS Level 1 - Amazon Web Services (AWS). (n.d.). Retrieved February 28, 2016, from 

https://aws.amazon.com/compliance/pci-dss-level-1-faqs/ 

Petri, A. E. (2015, December 08). Five Hotel Cyber Security Breaches in 2015. Retrieved 

February 26, 2016, from http://skift.com/2015/12/08/five-hotel-cyber-security-breaches-

in-2015/ 

Phillips, Lynn W. (1981, November). Assessing measurement error in key informant reports: A 

methodological note on organizational analysis in marketing. Journal of Marketing 

Research, 18 (4), 395-415. 

Report Phishing Sites. (n.d.). Retrieved February 29, 2016, from https://www.us-cert.gov/report-

phishing 

Rouse, M. (n.d.). What is PCI DSS (Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard)? - 

Definition from WhatIs.com. Retrieved February 28, 2016, from 

http://searchfinancialsecurity.techtarget.com/definition/PCI-DSS-Payment-Card-

Industry-Data-Security-Standard 

Rukmangadhan, R., & Finkle, J. (2015, December 24). Hyatt Hotels' Payment System Hacked 

By Credit-Card Stealing Malware. Retrieved from 

http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/hyatt-hotels-

hacked_us_567ba3d6e4b0b958f6594a28 

Starwood says malware found on some hotel POS systems. (2015, November 24). Retrieved 

February 28, 2016, from http://www.hotelmanagement.net/technology/starwood-says-

malware-found-on-some-hotel-pos-systems-33539 

What is HTTPS? (n.d.). Retrieved February 29, 2016, from https://www.instantssl.com/ssl-

certificate-products/https.html 

What Is SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) and What Are SSL Certificates? (n.d.). Retrieved February 

29, 2016, from https://www.digicert.com/ssl.htm 

Woodfield, M. (2014, November 26). How to Know if a Website is Secure | DigiCert Blog. 

Retrieved February 29, 2016, from https://blog.digicert.com/buy-site-know-website-

secure/ 

Yin, Robert (1994). Case study research: Design and methods (2

nd 

ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: 

Sage Publications, Inc. 

Zhao, X., Xue, L., & Whinston, A. B. (2013). Managing Interdependent Information Security 

Risks: Cyberinsurance, Managed Security Services, and Risk Pooling Arrangements. 

Journal of Management Information Systems, 30(1), 123-152. 

	  
 
	  
 
 
 
 
