Optimized Certiﬁcate Revocation List Distribution
for Secure V2X Communications

Giovanni Rigazzi∗, Andrea Tassi∗, Robert J. Piechocki∗, Theo Tryfonas‡, Andrew Nix∗
∗Department of Electric and Electronic Engineering, University of Bristol, UK
‡Department of Civil Engineering, University of Bristol, UK
E-mail: {g.rigazzi, a.tassi, r.j.piechocki, theo.tryfonas, andy.nix}@bristol.ac.uk

7
1
0
2

y
a
M
9
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
0
9
6
0
.
5
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The successful deployment of safe and trustworthy
Connected and Autonomous Vehicles (CAVs) will highly depend
on the ability to devise robust and effective security solutions
to resist sophisticated cyber attacks and patch up critical vul-
nerabilities. Pseudonym Public Key Infrastructure (PPKI) is a
promising approach to secure vehicular networks as well as
ensure data and location privacy, concealing the vehicles’ real
identities. Nevertheless, pseudonym distribution and management
affect PPKI scalability due to the signiﬁcant number of digital
certiﬁcates required by a single vehicle. In this paper, we focus
on the certiﬁcate revocation process and propose a versatile and
low-complexity framework to facilitate the distribution of the
Certiﬁcate Revocation Lists (CRL) issued by the Certiﬁcation
Authority (CA). CRL compression is achieved through optimized
Bloom ﬁlters, which guarantee a considerable overhead reduction
with a conﬁgurable rate of false positives. Our results show that
the distribution of compressed CRLs can signiﬁcantly enhance
the system scalability without increasing the complexity of the
revocation process.

Index Terms—ITS, PPKI, vehicular networks, certiﬁcate revo-

cation, Bloom ﬁlter, autonomous vehicles.

I. INTRODUCTION

Connected and Autonomous Vehicles (CAVs) rely heavily
upon a wide spectrum of heterogeneous technologies com-
bining autonomous driving and vehicle-to-everything (V2X)
communications, with the goal of achieving social and eco-
nomic beneﬁts, such as enhanced road safety, reduced trafﬁc
congestion and air pollution [1]. Besides innovative emergency
services and infotainment applications leveraging Global Posi-
tioning Systems (GPS) and cellular systems, Dedicated Short
Range Communications (DSRC) connectivity allows vehicles
to exchange real-time information provided by on-board sen-
sor devices, and make decisions based on multiple factors,
including road conditions and trafﬁc status [2].

One of the most critical issues concerning the deployment
of such vehicular networks is how to efﬁciently integrate
cyber security mechanisms, and ensure trustworthiness and
anonymity of exchanged data. Due to the their intrinsic char-
acteristics, V2X communications can be targeted by numerous
cyber attacks and security threats, ranging from injection
of bogus information or node impersonation, to malicious
location tracking and privacy leakage [3]. As a result, security
for CAVs has been subject of intensive joint research activities
among automotive industry, standardization and regulatory
bodies, public authorities and academia, resulting in a plethora
of research projects and initiatives across the world [4].

As part of the IEEE 1609 Wireless Access in Vehicular
Environments (WAVE) suite, IEEE 1609.2 represents the ref-
erence standard for security and privacy adopting a Public Key
Infrastructure (PKI), where vehicle authentication is achieved
through a Certiﬁcation Authority (CA) or Trusted Third Party
(TPP), in charge of issuing legitimate digital certiﬁcates and
binding vehicle identity to its public key [5]. An authenti-
cated vehicle can then use its corresponding private key to
digitally sign each outgoing packet, whereas sender identity
veriﬁcation is performed by using the public key included
in the certiﬁcate assigned by the CA. Moreover, the CA is
responsible for revoking certiﬁcates associated with corrupted
or misbehaving entities. To this end, IEEE 1609.2 deﬁnes
Certiﬁcate Revocation Lists (CRL) containing the identities
of the revoked certiﬁcates, which are periodically updated and
disseminated by the CA in the vehicular network [6]. Upon the
reception of a new message, a vehicle can identify a legitimate
sender by verifying whether the corresponding certiﬁcate is not
published in the CRL.

To further preserve data privacy and limit vehicle traceabil-
ity, vehicle identities (VIDs) can be replaced with multiple
abstract short-lived identiﬁers, i.e., pseudonyms, thus realizing
a Pseudonym PKI (PPKI) [7]. The pseudonym credentials are
issued by the CA, which is also responsible for verifying
the eligibility of a vehicle to exchange data by storing its
VID. Therefore, location privacy is preserved, as two con-
secutive messages are signed under two distinct and unlikable
pseudonyms. However, this comes at the price of a signiﬁcant
increase in the CRL size, which in turn undermines the
scalability and efﬁciency of the revocation process [8].

In this paper, we propose a low-complexity framework for
ensuring trustworthy communications, aiming to reduce the
overhead of the CRL distribution via optimized Bloom ﬁlter
compression. Authors in [6] ﬁrst adopt Bloom ﬁlters to com-
press the CRLs and reduce the amount of data disseminated.
The resulting Compressed Certiﬁcate Revocation Lists (C2RL)
are then broadcast, while certiﬁcate validation is quickly
performed by checking the Bloom ﬁlter associated with the
latest C2RL update. Similarly, [9] proposes the Revocation
using C2RL (RC2RL) protocol, where the dissemination of
compressed lists is achieved through Road Side Units (RSU)
and mobile units. In addition, a quantitative analysis of the
protocol performance is presented, showing the existing trade-
off between computational complexity and probability of false

 
 
 
 
 
 
positives. Bloom ﬁlter compression is also employed in [10],
where vehicles locally compress and store the list of revoked
certiﬁcates by generating the revocation keys with the help of
optimized CRLs, which are disseminated in a V2V epidemic
fashion. However, these solutions do not specify optimal val-
ues of the parameters associated with Bloom ﬁlters and do not
consider the case of multiple certiﬁcates assigned to a single
vehicle. Differently from the proposed approaches, we aim to
evaluate the efﬁciency of C2RLs in PPKI vehicular networks,
and introduce an optimization framework to jointly minimize
the ﬁlter size and the number of hash functions employed,
according to a predeﬁned probability of false positives. Our
results show that the CRL distribution process can beneﬁt from
the signiﬁcant overhead reduction, which can be characterized
through the compression gain, without causing an increase in
complexity. We also demonstrate the C2RLs effectiveness in
comparison with a standard CRL approach in an urban setting
through large-scale network simulations.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the network model adopted as well as the certiﬁcate
compression and the CRL distribution. The proposed optimiza-
tion framework is illustrated in Section III. In Section IV,
we analyze the numerical results obtained, whereas the ﬁnal
conclusions are drawn in Section V.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

In this section, we describe the vehicular network and the
main entities involved in our system model. We also discuss
the fundamental aspects of the C2RL issuance and distribution
as well as the procedure to compress the certiﬁcates and
perform the veriﬁcation.

A. Network Model

In a typical hierarchical PPKI setup, a Root CA (RCA)
coordinates the CAV authentication within a predeﬁned juris-
dictional area, such as a city, region, county, etc., by registering
vehicles and assigning long-term certiﬁcates. Fig. 1 shows
the reference scenario considered in this paper. A certain
number of Pseudonym CAs (PCA) are also connected to the
RCA through wired links, and are responsible for issuing
pseudonyms and CRLs. We assume that RCA and PCAs
are equipped with sufﬁcient resources in terms of storage
and computation, and cannot be compromised by potential
attackers. Moreover, the RCA maintains the mapping of short-
term credentials to the long-term identity of the vehicles. A
number of Road-Side Units (RSU) are deployed along the
roads, each connected to a single PCA via a wired backhaul
network, while V2I wireless connectivity is achieved by em-
ploying DSRC interfaces, such as IEEE 802.11p or ETSI ITS-
G5. To mitigate the potential lack of DSRC due to the RSU
sparse deployment, we also assume that CAVs are supplied
with a cellular radio interface, e.g., 3GPP LTE-A. Although
cellular systems introduce additional delay and present limited
applicability for safety critical applications, we expect that
the integration of these two technologies will represent a key
feature of next-generation V2X communications [11]. CAVs

Fig. 1.
a single RCA.

Illustration of the system model, where two PCAs are connected to

sign and broadcast safety-related messages, i.e., Cooperative
Awareness Messages (CAM) and Decentralized Environmental
Notiﬁcation Messages (DENM), attaching the sender cer-
tiﬁcate, and are provided with a tamper-resistant Hardware
Security Module (HSM) storing the cryptographic material.

B. Attacker Model

We assume that an internal adversary is able to inject bogus
information in terms of fake messages through a legitimate
private/public key pair and a related pseudonym certiﬁcate. An
attacker may also perform a Denial-of-Service (DoS) attack
by broadcasting messages with the goal of reducing network
resources necessary to reliably exchange safety messages.
We assume that anomaly detection algorithms are capable of
identifying these threats and triggering the eviction process.

C. Certiﬁcate Compression

Following the PPKI approach [12], we assume that each
vehicle is assigned a certain number of short-term certiﬁcates
containing different pseudonyms and pairs of public/private
keys. In passive revocation schemes [13],
the pseudonym
certiﬁcate lifetime is minimized, thus vehicles and PCAs need
to frequently communicate to initiate the certiﬁcate renewal
or pseudonym reﬁll procedure. This requirement is usually
dictated by the need for minimizing the vulnerability window,
i.e., the time between a vehicle is declared illegitimate and
subsequent pseudonym reﬁll requests are denied, and all the
associated pseudonyms are expired. By contrast, our approach
seeks to limit the frequency of pseudonym reﬁlls according to
the pseudonym change strategy adopted and the storage capa-
bility1. Efﬁcient compression of CRLs can be accomplished
with the help of Bloom ﬁlters. A Bloom ﬁlter is a probabilistic
data structure typically adopted to verify whether a certain
element belongs to a set [14]. Such a ﬁlter is characterized
by a probability of false positives, i.e., probability that an

1The problem of how to efﬁciently change the pseudonyms and determine

the change rate is out of the scope of this paper.

RootCAPCAAPCABDSRC RSUFig. 2. Example of Bloom ﬁlter of size m bits and k hash functions.

element not included in the set is detected due to multiple
hash collisions, while false negatives cannot occur. As shown
in Fig. 2, a Bloom ﬁlter corresponds to a sequence of m
bits set to 0. To add an element x, a set of k independent
hash functions H1, . . . , Hk are employed. The output of each
hash function matches one of the ﬁlter elements and sets
to 1 the corresponding bit, while an element previously set
to 1 cannot be altered. The veriﬁcation procedure is then
performed by checking the bits corresponding to the output
of the hash functions. If all the corresponding bits are set to
1, an element is assumed to be contained in the ﬁlter with a
certain probability, whereas negative outcomes are always true
if at least one of the ﬁlter bits is 0. For a target number of
ﬁlter elements m, the probability of false positives δ is given
by [14]:

δ(m, k)

.
=

(cid:34)

(cid:18)

1 −

1 −

(cid:19)kn(cid:35)k

,

1
m

(1)

being n the number of elements to add into the ﬁlter. Hence,
the ﬁlter accuracy is inﬂuenced by the size, the number of em-
ployed hash functions and n, as the larger the set of elements,
the higher the probability of obtaining a false positive. More-
over, Bloom ﬁlters involve a small amount of computational
overhead for insertion and search operations [10].

D. CRL Issuance and Distribution

Every time a misbehaving vehicle is identiﬁed, a new CRL
needs to be issued and sent to the registered CAVs. As a
result, all non-expired certiﬁcates associated with the evicted
vehicle must be revoked, otherwise any pseudonym still valid
may be used to sign the outgoing trafﬁc2. We also assume
that a revocation authority, e.g., a government agency, is in
charge of recognizing malicious vehicles and informing the
RCA. As shown in Fig. 3, a WAVE CRL consists of (i)
a header, including a version ﬁeld set to 1, a signer ﬁeld
containing information on the CA issuing and signing the
CRL, and a signature ﬁeld carrying the signature of the signer,
and (ii) the unsigned CRL ﬁeld. A detailed description of
each sub-ﬁeld is reported in [5]. To discuss the differences
between a standard CRL (see Fig. 3(A)) and a Bloom ﬁlter
compressed CRL (see Fig. 3(B)), we focus on the entries sub-
ﬁeld, containing the identiﬁers of each revoked certiﬁcate.
Speciﬁcally, in a standard WAVE CRL, each certiﬁcate is

Fig. 3. Structure of a WAVE CRL [5]: standard CRL (A) and C2RL (B).

identiﬁed with an ID ﬁeld and an optional expiry date ﬁeld,
used to enhance the efﬁciency of the certiﬁcate storage. By
contrast, in our approach, a single Bloom ﬁlter of ﬁxed size
m bits is carried by the entries ﬁeld. As a consequence, the
size of this ﬁeld remains constant as the number of revoked
certiﬁcates increases, thus resulting in a signiﬁcant reduction
of the size of the CRLs distributed to the CAVs, as illustrated
in Sec. IV. We assume that a C2RL is issued by the RCA
and delivered to its connected PCAs. Next, the RSUs receive
the C2RL forwarded by the PCAs and validate the attached
signature. The C2RL is then signed by the RSU and broadcast
to the CAVs through DSRC connectivity, which verify the
authenticity and store it in the HSM. Hence, untrustworthy
vehicles can be quickly identiﬁed by verifying whether the
certiﬁcates attached in the messages are contained in the
ﬁlter transmitted in the latest C2RL. We also point out that
only the parameter k needs to be notiﬁed to the CAVs in
order to fulﬁll this process, as long as each CAV adopts the
same implementation for the k uniformly distributed hashing
functions employed. To this end, we consider a single hashing
function and provide it with different seed values3.

Being the generation of false positives inevitable, how
to handle vehicle identities wrongly revoked represents an
open research question. To overcome this issue, we adopt the
approach proposed in [10] and provide the vehicles with a set
of backup pseudonyms to replace those pseudonyms generating
false positives. Each vehicle periodically establishes whether
the pseudonym in use triggers a false positive. In other words,
the
each vehicle validates the pseudonym in use against
latest CRL update. Should a legitimate vehicle trigger a false
positive, the pseudonym in use is replaced with one of the
backup pseudonyms. This entails the provision of additional
certiﬁcates to compensate for the number of pseudonyms
discarded because of false positives. It is worth noting that the
resulting false positive probability decreases exponentially as
the number of backup pseudonyms per-vehicle increases [10].

III. PROPOSED OPTIMIZATION FRAMEWORK

Let S = {k1, ..., kn} be the set of certiﬁcates to be added
into the Bloom ﬁlter, being |S| = n the cardinality of S. We
formulate our ﬁlter optimization (FO) model as follows4:

2This assumption entails linkability among pseudonyms, which limits data
privacy. The analysis of the tradeoff between overhead and privacy is left for
future work.

3In our implementation, the i-th hashing function is simply obtained by

setting the corresponding seed value to i.

4By N we denote the set of natural numbers.

0000011. . .01H1(x)H2(x)Hk(x)012m-1m-2m-3Element x. . .345versionsignerunsigned CRLsignaturetypeCRL seriesCA IDCRL serialstart periodissue datenext CRLentries1 byte136 bytes1 byte4 bytes8 bytes4 bytes4 bytes4 bytes4 bytesIDexpiry date10 bytes4 bytes64 bytesIDexpiry date10 bytes4 bytesBloom ﬁlter⎡m/8⎤ bytes(A)(B)Procedure 1 Solution of FO
1: ˜k∗ ← the real root of (11)
2: ˜m∗ ← ˜m(˜k∗)
3: i ← 1
4: for k ← (cid:98)˜k∗(cid:99), (cid:100)˜k∗(cid:101) do
k(i) ← k
5:
m(i) ← (cid:98) ˜m∗(cid:99)
while δ(m(i), k(i)) > ˆδ do
m(i) ← m(i) + 1

6:

8:

7:

9:

i ← i + 1

10: for i ← 1, 2 do
11:

if δ(m(i), k(i)) > ˆδ then
m(i) ← N aN
k(i) ← N aN

12:

13:

14: if m(1) (cid:54)= m(2) then
15:
16: else
17:

j ← index of the smallest element in m

j ← index of the smallest element in k

18: return (m(j), k(j))

while ˜m∗ is simply equal to ˜m(˜k∗).

From (7), we derive the ﬁrst order derivative of ˜m(˜k), which

is [15]:

where

∂ ˜m
∂˜k

=

1
˜kn

T

(1 − T

1

˜kn )2

(cid:34) ˆδ

1

˜k log(ˆδ)
˜k3nT

−

log(T )
˜k2n

(cid:35)

,

.
= 1 − ˆδ

1
˜k .

T

(9)

(10)

We observe that the equation ∂ ˜m
∂˜k
iff the equation

= 0 has at least a real root

ˆδ

1

˜k log(ˆδ) − ˜kT log(T ) = 0

(11)

has at least a real root, as well. By resorting to the bisection
strategy [16], it is numerically simple to observe that this
circumstance occurs for practical values of ˜m, ˜k and ˆδ5.
Finally, we observe that the real root of (11), if it exists, is
equal to ˜k∗.

From the optimum solution ( ˜m∗, ˜k∗) of rFO, we derive
the optimum solution (m∗, k∗) of FO, as per Procedure 1.
In particular, for each value in vector k = [(cid:98)˜k∗(cid:99), (cid:100)˜k∗(cid:101)], the
for-loop at lines 4-9 and 10-13 (of Procedure 1) derives the
minimum ﬁlter length that meets constraint (3). These values
are then stored in vector m. Lines 14-17 allow the procedure
to select the solution associated with the smallest ﬁlter size or,
if both the solutions refer to the same ﬁlter size, the procedure
returns the one with the smallest number of hash functions.

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

In this section, we discuss the performance in terms of
overhead reduction obtained by employing our optimized
framework. To this end, we denote by G the compression gain,

Fig. 4. Contour plot of δ(m, k), for n = 102. We only reported the
level curves corresponding to the pairs (m, k) where δ(m, k) is equal to
0.05, 0.1, 0.15 and 0.2.

(FO) min
m,k

m

subject to δ(m, k) ≤ ˆδ

k ≥ 1, m ≥ 1
k ∈ N.
m ∈ N,

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

We observe that the FO model carries out a joint optimization
of m and k, having as objective the minimization of m, as
per (2). Constraint (3) ensures that the probability of false
positives is smaller than or equal to a target value ˆδ. Obviously,
in order for a Bloom ﬁlter to exist, it should be at least one
bit long and be associated with at least one hash function.
These existing constraints are summarized in (4). Finally,
constraint (5) imposes m and k to be integer values.

(5).

In the attempt of

solving the FO model, we re-
lax constraint
In addition, we regard the function
˜δ( ˜m, ˜k) : R+ × R+ → [0, 1] as the real expansion of δ(m, k)
over the set of positive real values R+. As such, the relaxed
FO (rFO) model can be expressed as follows:
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

˜δ( ˜m, ˜k) ≤ ˆδ ∧ k ≥ 1 ∧ m ≥ 1

(rFO) arg min

(cid:111)
.

(6)

˜m

(cid:110)

˜m,˜k

Remark 3.1: From (1), it follows that δ(m, k) goes to 0 as
m tends to inﬁnity, which is not surprising (see Section II-C).
Furthermore, from (1), we observe that as m increases,
δ(m, k) cannot increase. Hence, considering constraint (3), the
more δ(m, k) approaches ˆδ, the more m is likely to decrease,
as also shown in Fig. 4. Obviously, the same observation also
applies to ˜δ( ˜m, ˜k).

For a given value of ˆδ, we deﬁne the function ˜m(˜k)
providing the value of ˜m such that relation ˜δ( ˜m(˜k), ˜k) = ˆδ
holds. From (1), ˜m(˜k) can be deﬁned as follows:

˜m(˜k)

.
=

(cid:20)

1 −

(cid:16)
1 − ˆδ− 1

˜k

(cid:21)−1

(cid:17) 1
˜kn

.

(7)

We denote by ( ˜m∗, ˜k∗) the optimum solution of rFO. From
Remark 3.1, we observe that the optimum solution of rFO
shall satisfy condition ˜δ( ˜m∗, ˜k∗) = ˆδ. As such, the value of
˜k∗ can be deﬁned as follows:

˜k∗ = arg min

˜k

(cid:110)

˜m(˜k)

(cid:111)
,

(8)

5Speciﬁcally, we refer

ˆδ ∈ [10−4, 2 · 10−1].

to

˜m ∈ [1, 232], ˜k ∈ [1, 103] and

k15101520253035404550m2004006008001000120014000.050.10.150.2TABLE I
SYSTEM PARAMETERS CONSIDERED IN THE HOLLOWAY SCENARIO.

Parameter

Area size

trafﬁc

through

Sim. duration
SUMO
trafﬁc factor [17]
SUMO
count [17]
No.
per-vehicle
CRL TX interval
Optimized Bloom
ﬁlter

pseudonyms

Value

Parameter

3 km × 2 km

3600 s

7

15

Max. UDP packet
size
Carrier freq.
TX power

Value

1024 bits

5.89 GHz
20 mW

Phy. layer bitrate

11 Mbps

1000

Sensitivity

−89 dBm

300 s
ˆδ = 10−3, n = 300

Thermal noise

−110 dB

Fig. 6. Optimal ﬁlter size m∗ for different values of n and ˆδ.

Fig. 5. Optimal number of hash functions k∗ for different values of n and
ˆδ.

Fig. 7. Compression gain as ˆδ increases and for different values of n.

corresponding to the ratio between the size of a standard CRL
and the size of a C2RL adopting the Bloom ﬁlter compression.
As described in Sec. II-D, a standard CRL consists of a
ﬁxed section of 230 bytes and an additional 14 bytes per
each revoked certiﬁcate, whereas the size of a CCRL is equal
to 230 + (cid:100)m/8(cid:101) bytes. Finally, we consider a large-scale
urban scenario and evaluate the C 2RL gains through network
simulations.

A. Optimal Values of k and m

Fig. 5 shows the optimal number of hash functions k∗ for
different values of ˆδ and varying input load n. As expected,
a less strict requirement in terms of false positives leads to
a lower and constant k∗ as the number of certiﬁcates to be
compressed becomes higher. On the other hand, by decreasing
ˆδ we observe an increment of the optimal number of hash
functions, which is necessary to reduce the probability of false
positive reports. In addition, Fig. 6 shows the optimal ﬁlter size
m∗ (in bits) to meet different values of ˆδ as a function of n.
We note that m∗ linearly increases as the input load becomes
higher, thus allowing to keep the false positive rate less than
or equal to ˆδ. Furthermore, the ﬁlter size increase becomes
more relevant for ˆδ = 10−2, as shown by the gap between
the blue and green line. This in turn indicates the amount of
space required in the ﬁlter to prevent multiple hash collisions.

B. C 2RL v.s. Standard CRL

Fig. 7 shows the compression gain G as ˆδ increases and
for different numbers of certiﬁcates revoked n. We can note
the key beneﬁt provided by the CRL compression, consisting
in a signiﬁcant reduction of the overhead generated by the
revocation process. It is also worth pointing out that for low
values of n the gain is constant, as the probability of false
positives does not signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the choice of the
optimal m. By contrast, for higher loads, e.g., n = 103, we
observe that G increases from 7 to 9, which shows the efﬁ-
ciency of Bloom ﬁlters for storing high amounts of certiﬁcates
as compared with standard CRLs. To analyze the performance
of the optimized CRL distribution, we also consider an urban
vehicular scenario, where vehicles are distributed on an area of
5 km2 with different spatial densities, i.e., number of vehicles
per km2, managed by a single PCA. Furthermore, we assume
that each vehicle owns a set of 43800 certiﬁcates, which
corresponds to the ﬁxed amount of certiﬁcates requested by a
vehicle driving for two hours and every day of the year [18].
Moreover, we deﬁne the revocation rate ρ, representing the
percentage of vehicles per hour whose certiﬁcates must be
revoked. Fig. 8 shows the average compression gain over
an hour, for different values of ρ as the vehicle density
increases, and ﬁxed ˆδ = 10−3. We note that for ρ = 0.1%,
G considerably increases in the range of densities between
20 and 40, whereas a saturation effect occurs for values of
density higher than 60 vehicles per km2. This is more evident

10203040506070809010034567810203040506070809010002040608010012011.522.533.544.5510-3123456789Fig. 8. Compression gain as the vehicle density increases and for different
values of ρ (ˆδ = 10−3).

Fig. 10. Gains in terms of CRL delivery ratio, percentage of vehicles
successfully receiving a CRL and CRL download time.

Fig. 10 shows the gains achieved employing the C 2RL
scheme over a standard CRL approach in terms of total number
of CRLs received by all the vehicles, fraction of vehicles
receiving at least one CRL, and average CRL download time as
a function of the number of RSUs. The derived performance
values have been averaged over multiple instances of RSU
deployments. We simulated the cases where 50 or 100 vehicles
identities per-hours are revoked and each vehicle holds 1000
in the case of the C 2RL
pseudonyms. We observe that,
the Bloom ﬁlter parameters m and k have been
scheme,
optimized as in Sec. III, by referring to ˆδ = 10−3 and a value
of n equal to the average number of vehicles present in the
simulated area per-second. We note that a higher number of
RSUs per-area ensure higher gains for 100 revoked vehicle
identities both in terms of the total number of CRLs received
by all the vehicles and the fraction of vehicles receiving at
least one CRL - thus ensuring, in the case of 139 RSUs, gains
greater than 1.55 and 1.6, respectively. These effects are also
detectable for 50 revoked identities per-hours, yet limited due
to the lower trafﬁc load. From Fig. 10, we also observe that
C 2RL guarantees a shorter CRL download time resulting in
an average CRL download time gain greater than 2.5, for 139
RSUs and 100 identities revoked per-hour.

V. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we proposed an optimized framework to
streamline the certiﬁcate revocation distribution in a PPKI-
based vehicular network. We illustrated the scalability issue
resulting from the adoption of a large set of pseudonym
certiﬁcates per each CAV and discussed the beneﬁts of CRL
compression through Bloom ﬁlters. Signiﬁcant compression
gains can be achieved by adding revoked certiﬁcates into a
Bloom ﬁlter and then disseminating the C2RL in the network.
We also investigated the impact of different input loads and
false positive rates on the optimal choice of k and m, and
compared our approach with a standard CRL distribution
scheme in a realistic large-scale scenario.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work is part of the FLOURISH Project, which is
supported by Innovate UK under Grant 102582. The authors

Fig. 9. Map of the simulated area in Holloway (London, UK). The ﬁgure
shows the footprint of the main buildings present in the area and a possible
RSU deployment.

for ρ equal to 0.5% and 1%, where the compression gain
immediately reaches a saturation level around 7.78. In other
words, for higher values of ρ the ﬁlter size needs to increase
to meet the ˆδ constraint, while m∗ remains low for lower
revocation rates.

C. Large-Scale Urban Scenario

To further evaluate the performance gain of the C 2RL
scheme over the standard CRL performance, we implemented
the aforementioned revocation schemes in a OMNet++ net-
work simulator based on the Veins framework [19]. We
considered the urban area of Holloway (London, UK) where
a realistic trafﬁc of vehicles has been simulated by means
of SUMO [17]. Each vehicle is equipped with a DSRC
communication device capable of communicating with RSUs
deployed at
the side of the road. In order to investigate
the impact of different RSU deployments, we placed RSUs
uniformly at random in the simulated area preventing the RSUs
from being placed within the footprint of a building, as shown
in Fig. 9. In particular, we considered scenarios ranging from
28 to 139 RSUs. Periodically, the CA generates a CRL, which
is fragmented by the RSUs, encapsulated in UDP packets and
transmitted over the DSRC interface. A list of the relevant
simulation parameters is reported in Tab. I.

20304050607080901007.57.557.67.657.77.757.8 = 0.1% = 0.5% = 1%28406080100120139Number of RSUs11.21.41.61.822.22.42.6Gain50 revoked identities - #CRLs received100 revoked identities - #CRLs received50 revoked identities - fraction of vehicles receiving at least a CRL100 revoked identities - fraction of vehicles receiving at least a CRL50 revoked identities - CRL download time100 revoked identities - CRL download timewould like to thank the project collaborators, in particular,
Melina Christina, John McCarthy and Ben Miller.

REFERENCES

[1] Atkins, “Connected & Autonomous Vehicles - Introducing the Future

of Mobility,” Tech. Report, 2016.

[2] K. Zheng, Q. Zheng, H. Yang, L. Zhao, L. Hou, and P. Chatzimisios,
“Reliable and efﬁcient autonomous driving: the need for heterogeneous
vehicular networks,” IEEE Comms Magazine, vol. 53, no. 12, Dec 2015.
[3] J. Petit and S. E. Shladover, “Potential cyberattacks on automated
vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 546–556, 2015.

[4] M. Zhao, J. Walker, and C.-C. Wang, “Challenges and opportunities for
securing intelligent transportation system,” IEEE Journal on Emerging
and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 96–105,
2013.

[5] “IEEE P1609.2 – Trial-Use Standard for Wireless Access in Vehicular
Environments (WAVE) – Security Services for Applications and Man-
agement Messages,” IEEE, 2006.

[6] M. Raya, D. Jungels, P. Papadimitratos, I. Aad, and J.-P. Hubaux,
“Certiﬁcate revocation in vehicular networks,” Laboratory for computer
Communications and Applications (LCA) School of Computer and
Communication Sciences, EPFL, Switzerland, 2006.

[7] J. Petit, F. Schaub, M. Feiri, and F. Kargl, “Pseudonym schemes
in vehicular networks: A survey,” IEEE communications surveys &
tutorials, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 228–255, 2015.

[8] M. M. E. A. Mahmoud, J. Mii, K. Akkaya, and X. Shen, “Investigating
Public-Key Certiﬁcate Revocation in Smart Grid,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 490–503, Dec 2015.

[9] M. Raya, P. Papadimitratos, I. Aad, D. Jungels, and J.-P. Hubaux,
“Eviction of misbehaving and faulty nodes in vehicular networks,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 25, no. 8, pp. 1557–
1568, 2007.

[10] J. J. Haas, Y.-C. Hu, and K. P. Laberteaux, “Efﬁcient certiﬁcate revoca-
tion list organization and distribution,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas
in Communications, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 595–604, 2011.

[11] K. Abboud, H. Omar, and W. Zhuang, “Interworking of DSRC and
Cellular Network Technologies for V2X Communications: A Survey,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–1,
2016.

[12] M. Khodaei and P. Papadimitratos, “The Key to Intelligent Transporta-
tion: Identity and Credential Management in Vehicular Communication
Systems,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 63–
69, 2015.

[13] Z. Ma, F. Kargl, and M. Weber, “Pseudonym-on-demand: a new
pseudonym reﬁll strategy for vehicular communications,” in Vehicular
Technology Conference, 2008. VTC 2008-Fall. IEEE 68th.
IEEE, 2008,
pp. 1–5.

[14] S. Tarkoma, C. E. Rothenberg, and E. Lagerspetz, “Theory and practice
of bloom ﬁlters for distributed systems,” IEEE Communications Surveys
& Tutorials, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 131–155, 2012.

[15] A. Jeffrey and D. Zwillinger, Table of Integrals, Series, and Products.

Elsevier, 2007.

[16] R. Moore, Methods and Applications of Interval Analysis, ser. Studies

in Applied and Numerical Mathematics. SIAM), 1979.

[17] M. Behrisch, L. Bieker, J. Erdmann, and D. Krajzewicz, “SUMO–
Simulation of Urban Mobility: An Overview,” in Proceedings of SIMUL
2011, The Third International Conference on Advances in System
Simulation. ThinkMind, 2011.

[18] M. E. Nowatkowski, J. E. Wolfgang, C. McManus, and H. L. Owen,
“The effects of limited lifetime pseudonyms on certiﬁcate revocation
list size in VANETS,” in Proceedings of the IEEE SoutheastCon 2010
(SoutheastCon).

IEEE, 2010, pp. 380–383.

[19] “Veins - Vehicle Network Simulation (http://veins.car2x.org/).”

