Integrating “self-efﬁcacy” into a gamiﬁed approach
to thwart phishing attacks

Nalin Asanka Gamagedara Arachchilage and Mumtaz Abdul Hameed
Australian Centre for Cyber Security
The School of Engineering and Information Technology
University of New South Wales
Australian Defence Force Academy
PO Box 7916 Canberra BC ACT 2610
Email: nalin.asanka@adfa.edu.au

7
1
0
2

n
u
J

3
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
4
7
7
0
.
6
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Security exploits can include cyber threats such
as computer programs that can disturb the normal behav-
ior of computer systems (viruses), unsolicited e-mail (spam),
malicious software (malware), monitoring software (spyware),
attempting to make computer resources unavailable to their
intended users (Distributed Denial-of-Service or DDoS attack),
the social engineering, and online identity theft (phishing). One
such cyber threat, which is particularly dangerous to computer
users is phishing. Phishing is well known as online identity
theft, which targets to steal victims sensitive information such
as username, password and online banking details. Automated
anti-phishing web browser plugin tools have been developed
and used to alert users of potential fake emails and websites.
However, these tools are not completely reliable in detecting
and protecting people from phishing attacks. This is because
the “humans are the weakest link” in information security. It is
not possible to completely circumvent the end-user, for example,
in personal computer use, one mitigating approach for computer
and information security is to educate the end-user in security
prevention. Educational researchers and industry experts talk
about well-designed user security education can be effective.
However, we know to our cost no-one talks about how to better
design security education (i.e. user-centered security education)
for end-users. Therefore, this paper focuses on designing an
innovative and gamiﬁed approach to educate individuals about
phishing attacks. The study asks how one can integrate “self-
efﬁcacy”, which has a co-relation with the user’s knowledge, into
an anti-phishing educational game to thwart phishing attacks?
One of the main reasons would appear to be a lack of user
knowledge to prevent from phishing attacks. Therefore, this
research investigates the elements that inﬂuence (in this case,
either conceptual or procedural knowledge or their interaction
effect) and then integrate them into an anti-phishing educational
game to enhance people’s phishing prevention behaviour through
their motivation.

I. INTRODUCTION
In March 2016, John Podesta, the chairman of the Hillary
Clinton presidential campaign, received a phishing email with
a subject line “*Someone has your password*” (shown in Fig.
1). The email greeted Podesta, “Hi John” and then reads,
“Someone just used your password to try to sign into your
Google Account john.podesta@gmail.com”. Then it provided
a time stamp (i.e. Saturday, 19 March, 8:34:30 UTC) and an IP
address (i.e. 134.249.139.239) in the Location (i.e. Ukraine),
where someone used his password. The email also stated
“Google stopped this sign-in attempt”. It then offered a link

Fig. 1. The John Podesta emails released by WikiLeaks [2]

luring him to change his password immediately. Bit.ly [1]
provides web address shortening service (i.e. this is heavily
used by Twitter users), which can make users easier to share.
So, hackers created a Bit.ly account called Fancy Bear, belongs
to a group of Russian hackers, to by-pass the web browser
phishing email ﬁltering system in order to make the attack
successful. Unfortunately, Podesta clicked on the link and
disclosed his credentials to the hackers. This incident shows
us “humans are the weakest link” in information security. The
hacking group, who created the Bit.ly account linked to a
domain under the control of Fancy Bear, failed to make the
account private. Therefore, this has shown “hackers are human
too and they make mistakes (i.e. weakest link)”.

Phishing (identity theft) is particularly dangerous to com-
puter users [3] [4]. It synthesizes social engineering techniques
(i.e.
the art of human hacking) along with the technical
subterfuge to make the attack successful [5]. Phishing aims
to steal sensitive information such as username, password and
online banking details from its victims [3]. Mass-marketing
perpetrators commit identity theft to contact, solicit and obtain
money, funds, or other items of value from victims [6]. Online
Mass-Marketing Fraud (MMF) is a serious, complex and often
very organised crime, which exploits mass communication
techniques (e.g. email, Instance messaging service, spams,
social networking website) to steal people’s money.

Automated tools (e.g. anti-phishing, anti-virus and anti-

 
 
 
 
 
 
spyware) have been developed and used to alert users of
potential fraudulent emails and websites. However, these tools
are not entirely reliable in detecting and preventing people
from online phishing attacks. For example, even the best anti-
phishing tools missed over 20 percent of phishing websites
[7] [8]. Because the “humans” are the weakest link in cyber
security [3]. It is impossible to completely avoid the end-user
[9], for example, in personal computer use, one mitigating ap-
proach for cyber security is to educate the end-user in security
prevention. Educational researchers and industry experts talk
about well-designed user security education can be effective
[3] [4] [10] [7] [11] [12]. However, we know to our cost no-
one talks about how to better design security education for
end-users. Therefore, the aim of this research proposal focuses
on designing an innovative and gamiﬁed approach to educate
individuals about phishing attacks. The study asks how one
can integrate “self-efﬁcacy”, which has a co-relation with the
users knowledge, into an anti-phishing educational game to
thwart phishing attacks?

We initially focus on identifying how people’s “self-
efﬁcacy” enhances their phishing threat avoidance behaviour.
One of the main reasons would appear to be a lack of
user knowledge to prevent from phishing attacks. Based on
the literature, we then attempt to identify the elements that
inﬂuence (in this case, either conceptual or procedural knowl-
edge or their interaction effect) to enhance people’s phishing
prevention behaviour through their motivation. Based on the
literature, we will also attempt to identify whether conceptual
knowledge or procedural knowledge has a positive effect on
computer users’ self-efﬁcacy in relation to thwarting phishing
attacks. Furthermore,
the current research work integrates
either procedural or conceptual (or the interaction effect of
both procedural and conceptual) knowledge into an anti-
phishing educational game to better educate people how to
protect themselves against phishing attacks. We believe this
will certainly improve users’ ability to thwart phishing attacks.

II. RELATED WORK

Educational games and simulations have become increas-
ingly acknowledged as an enormous and powerful teaching
tool that may result in an “instructional revolution” [13] [14]
[15] [16]. The main reason is that game based education
allows users to learn through experience and the use of virtual
environment while leading them to approach problem solving
thinking [3]. Zyda [17] describes Serious
through critical
Games as “a mental contest, played with a computer in
accordance with speciﬁc rules”. Michael and Chen [18] pro-
posed the following thematic classiﬁcation based upon Zyda’s
deﬁnition of Serious Games; Military Games, Government
Games, Educational Games, Corporate Games, Healthcare
Games, Political and Religious Games. Nevertheless, serious
games are quite useful as an effective teaching medium [19],
because it enables users to learn in an interactive and attractive
manner [20]. There is a considerable amount of published
studies in the literature describing the role of games in the
educational context. Bellotti, et al. [21] designed a Massive

Multiplayer Online Game (MMOG) for high-school called
‘SeaGame’ to promote best practices in sea-related behaviours,
such as sailing or beach surveillance. The main focus of the
‘SeaGame’ was to embed the educational content into the
gaming context in a meaningful, homogeneous and compelling
whole, where the player can enjoy learning while having fun.
Authors have concluded that this type of games helps people
to improve their best practices in behaviour.

In addition, game based education is further useful
in
motivating players to change their behaviour. Gustafsson and
Bang [22] designed a pervasive mobile-based game called
‘Power Agent’ to educate teenagers and their families to
reduce energy consumption in their homes. They attempted
to transform the home environment and its devices into a
learning arena for hands-on experiences with electricity usage.
The results suggested that the game concept was more efﬁcient
in engaging teenagers and their families to reduce their energy
consumption during the game sessions. Furthermore, serious
games can be effective not only for changing people’s be-
haviour, but also for developing their logical thinking to solve
mathematical problems. Eagle and Barnes [23] designed ‘Wu’s
Castle’ through an empirical investigation, which is a 2D
(2-Dimensional) role-playing game where students developed
their C++ coding skills such as loops, arrays, algorithms and
logical thinking and problem solving. The results showed that
‘Wu’s Castle’ is more effective than a traditional programming
assignment for learning how to solve problems on arrays and
loops. One of the most well-established facts within the serious
games research is the ability to enhance players’ motivation
towards learning as they are able to retain their attention
and keep them engaged and immersed with games [3] [24]
[25] [26] [27]. Other interesting facts of educational games
are: (a). The provision of immersive gaming environments
that can be freely explored by players and promote self-
directed learning [28] [29]. (b). The immediate feedback
process with perception of progress [30] [26] [25]. (c). Their
relation to constructivist theories and support of learning in
the augmented environment [25] [31].

The design of serious games is a double-edged sword.
When its power is properly harnessed to serve good purposes,
it has tremendous potential to improve human performance.
However, when it is exploited for violation purposes, it can
pose huge threats to individuals and society. Therefore, the
designing of educational games is not an easy task and there
are no all-purpose solutions [32]. The notion that game based
education offers the opportunity to embed learning in a natural
environment, has repeatedly emerged in the research literature
[33] [3] [4] [10] [7] [13] [24] [34].

A number of educational games have been designed and
developed to protect computer users and to assert security
issues in the cyberspace [14]. For example, some educational
games teach information assurance concepts, whereas others
teach pure entertainment with no basis in information assur-
ance principles or reality. However, there is little research on
engagement in the virtual world that also combines the human
aspect of security [7]. Therefore, it is worth investigating

further on game based learning in order to protect computer
users from malicious IT threats such as MMFs.

Even though there are usability experts who claim that user
education and training does not work [7], other researchers
have revealed that well-designed end-user education could be
a recommended approach to combating against cyber-attacks
such as MMFs [35] [11] [12] [36] [37]. In line with Herley
[38], also Kirlappos and Sasse [11] and other researchers argue
that current security education on malicious IT threats offers,
little protection to end users, who access potentially malicious
websites [12] [7] [10].

Another reason for ineffectiveness of current security edu-
cation for phishing prevention is because security education
providers assume that users are keen to avoid risks and thus
likely to adopt behaviours that might protect them. Kirlappos
and Sasse [11] claimed that security education should consider
the drivers of end user behaviour rather than warning users of
dangers. Therefore, well-designed security education (i.e. user-
centred security education) should develop threat perception
where users are aware that such a threat is present in the cy-
berspace. It should also encourage users to enhance avoidance
behaviour through motivation to protect them from malicious
IT threats.

The literature revealed that well-designed games focusing
on education could be helpful for learning even when used
without assistance. The ‘Anti-phishing Phil’ game developed
by Sheng, et al. [7] reported results conﬁrm that games educate
people about phishing and other security attacks in a more
effective way than other educational approaches such as read-
ing anti-phishing tutorial or reading existing online training
materials. Arachchilage et al. [3] developed a mobile game
prototype to teach people how to thwart phishing attacks. Their
mobile game design aimed to enhance the user’s avoidance
behaviour through motivation to protect themselves against
phishing threats. The designed mobile game was somewhat
effective in teaching people how to thwart phishing attacks
improvement of
as the study results showed a signiﬁcant
participants’ phishing threat avoidance behaviour in their post-
test assessment. Furthermore, the study ﬁndings suggested that
participants’ threat perception, safeguard effectiveness, self-
efﬁcacy, perceived severity and perceived susceptibility ele-
ments positively impact threat avoidance behaviour, whereas
safeguard cost had a negative impact on it.

Baslyman and Chiasson [39] have developed a board game
that contributes to enhance users’ awareness of online phishing
scams. Their ﬁndings revealed that after playing the game,
participants had a better understanding of phishing scams
and learnt how to better protect
themselves. Kumaraguru,
et al. [40] designed and evaluated an embedded training
email system that teaches people to protect themselves from
phishing attacks during their normal use of email. The authors
conducted lab experiments contrasting the effectiveness of
standard security notices about phishing with two embedded
training designs they developed. They found that embedded
training works better than the current practice of sending
security notices.

Robila and Ragucci [41] evaluated the impact of end user
education in differentiating phishing emails from legitimate
ones. They provided an overview of phishing education, tar-
geting on context aware attacks and introduced a new strategy
for end user education by combining phishing IQ tests and
classroom discussions. The technique involved in displaying
both legitimate and fraudulent emails to users and ask them to
identify the phishing attempts from the authentic emails. The
study concluded that users identiﬁed phishing emails correctly
after having the phishing IQ test and classroom discussions.
Users also acknowledged the usefulness of the IQ test and
classroom discussion. Researchers at Indiana University also
conducted a similar study of 1700 students in which they
collected websites frequently visited by students and either
sent them phishing messages or spoofed their email addresses
[42].

Tseng, et al. [43] also developed a game to teach users
about phishing based on the content of the website. The
authors proposed the phishing attack frame hierarchy to de-
scribe stereotype features of phishing attack techniques. The
inheritance and instantiation properties of the frame model
allowed them to extend the original phishing pages to increase
game contents. Finally, the authors developed an anti-phishing
educational game to evaluate the effectiveness of proposed
frame hierarchy. The evaluation results showed that most of the
lecturers and experts were satisﬁed with this proposed system.

Previous research has revealed that technology alone is in-
sufﬁcient to ensure critical IT security issues. So far, there has
been little work on end user behaviour of performing security
and preventing users from attacks which are imperative to
cope up with MMFs such as phishing attacks [3] [10] [4]
[44] [45] [46] [47]. Many discussions have terminated with
the conclusion of “if we could only remove the user from the
system, we would be able to make it secure” [48]. Where it is
not possible to completely eliminate the user, for example in
home use, the best possible approach for computer security
is to educate the user in security prevention [3] [10] [4]
[11] [49]. Previous research has revealed well designed user
security education can be effective [7] [12] [40] [50]. This
could be web-based training materials, contextual training, and
embedded training to improve users’ ability to avoid phishing
attacks. One objective of our research is to ﬁnd effective ways
to educate people to identify and prevent from MMFs such as
phishing websites.

Therefore, this research focuses on investigating how one
can better educate the people in order to protect themselves
from phishing attacks. To address the problem, this research
attempts to understand how people’s “self-efﬁcacy” enhances
their phishing threat avoidance behaviour. The research work
reported in this paper then discusses how one can inte-
grate people’s “self-efﬁcacy”, into an anti-phishing educational
game design in order to better educate themselves against
phishing attacks.

Fig. 3.
indicates phishing

The game player is prompted to identify which part of the URL

1) Story: The game story was created based on a scenario
of a character of a small and big ﬁsh that both live in a big
pond. The game player roll-plays the character of the small
ﬁsh, who wants to eat worms in order to become a big ﬁsh.
Worms were randomly generated in the game design. However,
the small ﬁsh should be very careful of phishers, those who
may try to trick him with fake worms. This represents phishing
attacks by developing threat perception. The other character
is the big ﬁsh, who is an experienced and grown up ﬁsh
in the pond. The proposed mobile game design prototype
contains two sections: teaching the concept of phishing URLs
and phishing emails. The proposed game design teaches how
one can differentiate legitimate URLs (Uniform Resource
Locators) from fraudulent ones.

2) Game Design: Each worm is associated with a URL,
which appears as a dialog box. The small ﬁsh’s job is to
eat all the real worms, which are associated with legitimate
URLs while prevent eating fake worms which are associ-
ated with fraudulent URLs before the time is up. If the
phishing URL is correctly identiﬁed, then the game player
is prompted to identify which part of the URL indicates
phishing (shown in Fig. 3). This determines whether or not
the game player has understood the conceptual knowledge
of the phishing URL. At this point in time, the score of the
game player will be increased to encourage him/her in order
to proceed with the game. Nevertheless, if the phishing URL
is incorrectly identiﬁed, then the game player will get real
time feedback saying why their decision was wrong with an
appropriate example, such as “Legitimate websites usually do
not have numbers at the beginning of their URLs”. For ex-
ample, http://187.52.91.111/.www.hsbc.co.uk. Therefore, this
attempts to teach the player about conceptual knowledge of
phishing URLs within the game design context.

Furthermore, one can argue that presenting the player with
different types of URLs to identify if it is phishing or legiti-
mate (i.e. procedural knowledge) then asking them to identify
which part of the URL is phishing (i.e. conceptual knowledge),
would positively impact on his/her self-efﬁcacy to enhance the
phishing threat avoidance.

The proposed game design is presented at different levels
such as beginner, intermediate and advance. When the player
comes across from the beginner to advanced level, complexity
of the combination of URLs (i.e. procedural knowledge)
is dramatically increased while considerably decreasing the
time period to complete the game. Procedural knowledge of
phishing prevention will be then addressed in the game design

Fig. 2. Elements address in the game design [10]

III. GAME DESIGN ISSUES

The aim of the proposed game design is to integrate
people’s “self-efﬁcacy” into an anti-phishing educational game
design in order to better educate themselves to thwart phish-
ing attacks. Self-efﬁcacy has a co-relation with individuals’
knowledge [51]. For example, uses are more conﬁdent to
take relevant actions to thwart phishing attacks, when they
are knowledgeable of phishing threats. McCormick [52] has
revealed that one’s knowledge can be inﬂuenced by learning
procedural and conceptual knowledge associated with. Plant
[53] has argued that conceptual knowledge is close to the idea
of “know that” and procedural knowledge “know how”, in
which, both the ideas are imperative to educate one to thwart
phishing attacks. Furthermore, his research work described
that such conceptual knowledge permits one to explain why,
hence the difference of know how and know why. Addition-
ally, McCormick [52] stated that the two ideas of conceptual
and procedural knowledge are frequently treated individually,
with their relationship being disregarded.

Therefore, in this research, the elements derived from a the-
oretical model [10] will be used to incorporate into the game
design to thwart phishing attacks. The theoretical model [10]
(shown in Fig. 2) examined whether conceptual knowledge or
procedural knowledge effects on computer users’ self-efﬁcacy
to thwart phishing attacks. Their ﬁndings revealed that the in-
teraction effect of both procedural and conceptual knowledge,
will positively inﬂuence on self-efﬁcacy, which contributes to
enhance computer users’ phishing threat avoidance behaviour
(through their motivation).

IV. INTEGRATING “SELF-EFFICACY” INTO A GAME
DESIGN

To explore the viability of using a game to thwart phishing
attacks based on “self-efﬁcacy”, a prototype designed was
proposed. We developed a story addressing “self-efﬁcacy” (in
this case, both procedural and conceptual knowledge as well as
its interaction effect) of phishing URLs within a game design
context.

Procedural	KnowledgeConceptual	KnowledgeSelf-EfficacyAvoidance	MotivationAvoidance	BehaviorNote:InteractionElements	address	in	the	game	designPlease identify which part of the URL indicates phishing?http://187.52.91.111 /.www.hsbc.co.uk”. as the complexity of the URLs presented to the player through
the design. The overall game design focuses on designing an
innovative and gamiﬁed approach to integrate both conceptual
and procedural knowledge effects on the game plyer’s (i.e.
computer users) self-efﬁcacy to thwart phishing attacks.

If the worm associated with the URL is suspicious or if it
is difﬁcult to identify/guess, the small ﬁsh (in this case the
game player) can go to the big ﬁsh and request some help.
The big ﬁsh will then provide some tips on how to recognize
bad worms associated with fraudulent URLs. For example, “a
company name followed by a hyphen in a URL is generally
a scam” or “website addresses associated with numbers in
the front are generally scams”. This will again aid to develop
the player’s “self-efﬁcacy” to combat against phishing attacks.
Whenever the small ﬁsh asks some help from the big ﬁsh,
the time left will be reduced by a certain amount (e.g. 100
seconds) as a payback for safeguarding measure.

V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

This research focused on designing an innovative and gam-
iﬁed approach to integrate both conceptual and procedural
knowledge effects on the game player’s (i.e. computer users)
self-efﬁcacy to combat against phishing attacks. The study
asks how one can integrate “self-efﬁcacy” into an anti-phishing
educational gaming tool that teach people to thwart phishing
attacks? The game design teaches how one can differentiate
legitimate URLs (Uniform Resource Locators) from fraudulent
ones. The elements derived from a theoretical model [10]
incorporated into the proposed game design to thwart phishing
attacks. The theoretical model [10] revealed the interaction
effects of both conceptual knowledge or procedural knowledge
will positively effect on self-efﬁcacy, which contributes to
enhance computer users’ phishing threat avoidance behaviour
(through their motivation). Furthermore, as future research, we
attempt to implement this game design and empirically investi-
gate through users in order to understand how their knowledge
(the interaction effect of both conceptual and procedural) will
positively effect on self-efﬁcacy, which eventually contributes
to enhance their phishing threat avoidance behaviour.

The transformative nature of this proposal is in presenting
the game based awareness design for individuals to protect
themselves against phishing crimes. The proposed game de-
signed that integrated the user’s “self-efﬁcacy” will enhance
individual’s phishing threat avoidance behaviour. This concept
is based on the notion that not only can a computer game
provides anti-phishing education, but also games potentially
provide a better learning environment, because they motivate
the user and keep attention by providing immediate feedback.
This can also be considered as an appropriate way to reach
individuals in society with the message of phishing threat
awareness is vital, which makes a considerable contribution
to enable the cyberspace a safe environment for everyone.

Eventually, the implemented game will enable the Aus-
tralian government to protect their citizen being victims of
phishing crimes. For example, the Australian government (for
example, the ofﬁce of the children’s e-safety commissioner)

can also make this game toolkit freely available to the Aus-
tralian citizens in order to protect them from phishing crimes.
Additionally, this proposed game design can be an enormous
beneﬁt
to Australian schools to educate their children to
protect themselves from phishing crimes. The proposed re-
search work is also focused on integrating new knowledge and
technology to provide law enforcement and security agencies
with automatic devices and capabilities to improve prevention,
detection and solution of crimes, and acts of terrorism.

REFERENCES

[1] Bitly, “Bitly url shortener and link management platform,” https:
//bitly.com, October 2017, [Online: Accessed 15-June-2017]. [Online].
Available: https://bitly.com

[2] K. Krawchenko, “The phishing email that hacked the account of john

podesta,” CBS NEWS, October 2016.

[3] N. A. G. Arachchilage, S. Love, and K. Beznosov, “Phishing threat
avoidance behaviour: An empirical investigation,” Computers in Human
Behavior, vol. 60, pp. 185–197, 2016.

[4] N. A. G. Arachchilage and S. Love, “A game design framework for
avoiding phishing attacks,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 29,
no. 3, pp. 706–714, 2013.

[5] B. Gupta, N. A. Arachchilage, and K. E. Psannis, “Defending against
phishing attacks: taxonomy of methods, current issues and future direc-
tions,” Telecommunication Systems, pp. 1–21.

[6] M. T. Whitty, “Mass-marketing fraud: a growing concern,” IEEE Secu-

rity & Privacy, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 84–87, 2015.

[7] S. Sheng, B. Magnien, P. Kumaraguru, A. Acquisti, L. F. Cranor,
J. Hong, and E. Nunge, “Anti-phishing phil: the design and evaluation
of a game that teaches people not to fall for phish,” in Proceedings of
the 3rd symposium on Usable privacy and security. ACM, 2007, pp.
88–99.

[8] R. Dhamija, J. D. Tygar, and M. Hearst, “Why phishing works,” in
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing
systems. ACM, 2006, pp. 581–590.

[9] N. A. G. Arachchilage, C. Namiluko, and A. Martin, “A taxonomy for
securely sharing information among others in a trust domain,” in Internet
technology and secured transactions (ICITST), 2013 8th international
conference for.

IEEE, 2013, pp. 296–304.

[10] N. A. G. Arachchilage and S. Love, “Security awareness of computer
users: A phishing threat avoidance perspective,” Computers in Human
Behavior, vol. 38, pp. 304–312, 2014.

[11] I. Kirlappos and M. A. Sasse, “Security education against phishing: A
modest proposal for a major rethink,” IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 10,
no. 2, pp. 24–32, 2012.

[12] P. Kumaraguru, S. Sheng, A. Acquisti, L. F. Cranor, and J. Hong,
“Lessons from a real world evaluation of anti-phishing training,” in
eCrime Researchers Summit, 2008.

IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–12.

[13] R. Walls, “Using computer games to teach social studies,” Ph.D.
dissertation, Uppsala University, Disciplinary Domain of Humanities
and Social Sciences, Faculty of Educational Sciences, Department of
Education., http://www.diva-portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva22012.
[14] B. D. Cone, C. E. Irvine, M. F. Thompson, and T. D. Nguyen, “A video
game for cyber security training and awareness,” computers & security,
vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 63–72, 2007.

[15] J. Foreman, “Video game studies and the emerging instructional revo-
lution,” Innovate: Journal of Online Education, vol. 1, no. 1, 2004.
[16] G. Arachchilage and N. Asanka, “Security awareness of computer users:
A game based learning approach,” Ph.D. dissertation, Brunel University,
School of Information Systems, Computing and Mathematics, 2012.

[17] M. Zyda, “From visual simulation to virtual reality to games,” Computer,

vol. 38, no. 9, pp. 25–32, 2005.

[18] D. R. Michael and S. L. Chen, Serious games: Games that educate,

train, and inform. Muska & Lipman/Premier-Trade, 2005.

[19] J. Froschauer, I. Seidel, M. G¨artner, H. Berger, and D. Merkl, “Design
and evaluation of a serious game for immersive cultural
training,”
in Virtual Systems and Multimedia (VSMM), 2010 16th International
Conference on.

IEEE, 2010, pp. 253–260.

[44] H. Liang and Y. Xue, “Avoidance of information technology threats: a

theoretical perspective,” MIS quarterly, pp. 71–90, 2009.

[45] ——, “Understanding security behaviors in personal computer usage: A
threat avoidance perspective,” Journal of the Association for Information
Systems, vol. 11, no. 7, p. 394, 2010.

[46] M. Workman, W. H. Bommer, and D. Straub, “Security lapses and the
omission of information security measures: A threat control model and
empirical test,” Computers in human behavior, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 2799–
2816, 2008.

[47] K. Aytes and T. Connolly, “Computer security and risky computing
practices: A rational choice perspective,” Journal of Organizational and
End User Computing (JOEUC), vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 22–40, 2004.

[48] S. Gorling, “The myth of user education,” 2006.
[49] B. Schneier, “Semantic attacks: The third wave of network attacks,”

Crypto-Gram Newsletter, vol. 14, 2000.

[50] A. Le Compte, D. Elizondo, and T. Watson, “A renewed approach to
serious games for cyber security,” in Cyber conﬂict: Architectures in
cyberspace (CyCon), 2015 7th international conference on. IEEE, 2015,
pp. 203–216.

[51] W. Hu, “Self-efﬁcacy and individual knowledge sharing,” in Informa-
tion Management, Innovation Management and Industrial Engineering
(ICIII), 2010 International Conference on, vol. 2.
IEEE, 2010, pp.
401–404.

[52] R. McCormick, “Conceptual and procedural knowledge,” in Shaping

Concepts of Technology. Springer, 1997, pp. 141–159.

[53] M. Plant, “How is science useful to technology,” Design and Technology
in the Secondary Curriculum: A Book of Readings, The Open University,
Milton Keynes, pp. 96–108, 1994.

[20] N. A. G. Arachchilage and M. Cole, “Design a mobile game for home
computer users to prevent from “phishing attacks”,” in Information
Society (i-Society), 2011 International Conference on.
IEEE, 2011,
pp. 485–489.

[21] F. Bellotti, R. Berta, A. D. Gloria, and L. Primavera, “Enhancing the
educational value of video games,” Computers in Entertainment (CIE),
vol. 7, no. 2, p. 23, 2009.

[22] A. Gustafsson, C. Katzeff, and M. Bang, “Evaluation of a pervasive
game for domestic energy engagement among teenagers,” Computers in
Entertainment (CIE), vol. 7, no. 4, p. 54, 2009.

[23] M. Eagle and T. Barnes, “Wu’s castle: teaching arrays and loops in a
game,” in ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, vol. 40, no. 3. ACM, 2008, pp.
245–249.

[24] J. P. Gee, “What video games have to teach us about learning and
literacy,” Computers in Entertainment (CIE), vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 20–20,
2003.

[25] F. Fotouhi-Ghazvini, R. Earnshaw, D. Robison, and P. Excell, “The
mobo city: A mobile game package for technical language learning.”
International Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies, vol. 3, no. 2,
2009.

[26] G. A. Gunter, R. F. Kenny, and E. H. Vick, “Taking educational games
seriously: using the retain model to design endogenous fantasy into
standalone educational games,” Educational Technology Research and
Development, vol. 56, no. 5-6, pp. 511–537, 2008.

[27] T. W. Malone, “Toward a theory of intrinsically motivating instruction,”

Cognitive science, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 333–369, 1981.

[28] D. Oblinger, “The next generation of educational engagement,” Journal

of interactive media in education, vol. 2004, no. 1, 2004.

[29] K. Squire, “Video games in education,” in International journal of

intelligent simulations and gaming. Citeseer, 2003.

[30] S. De Freitas and M. Oliver, “How can exploratory learning with games
and simulations within the curriculum be most effectively evaluated?”
Computers & education, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 249–264, 2006.

[31] M. Prensky, “Digital game-based learning,” 2001.
[32] P. Moreno-Ger, D. Burgos,

I. Mart´ınez-Ortiz, J. L. Sierra, and
B. Fern´andez-Manj´on, “Educational game design for online education,”
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 2530–2540, 2008.

[33] G. Andrews, E. Woodruff, K. A. MacKinnon, and S. Yoon, “Concept
development for kindergarten children through a health simulation,”
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 209–219,
2003.

[34] J. Roschelle and R. Pea, “A walk on the wild side: How wireless
handhelds may change computer-supported collaborative learning,” In-
ternational Journal of Cognition and Technology, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 145–
168, 2002.

[35] M. Allen, “Social engineering: A means to violate a computer system,”

SANS Institute, InfoSec Reading Room, 2006.

[36] S. E. Schechter, R. Dhamija, A. Ozment, and I. Fischer, “The emperor’s
new security indicators,” in Security and Privacy, 2007. SP’07. IEEE
Symposium on.

IEEE, 2007, pp. 51–65.

[37] D. Timko, “The social engineering threat,” Information Systems Security

Association Journal, 2008.

[38] C. Herley, “So long, and no thanks for the externalities: the rational
the 2009
rejection of security advice by users,” in Proceedings of
workshop on New security paradigms workshop. ACM, 2009, pp. 133–
144.

[39] M. Baslyman and S. Chiasson, “” smells phishy?”: An educational game
about online phishing scams,” in Electronic Crime Research (eCrime),
2016 APWG Symposium on.

IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–11.

[40] P. Kumaraguru, Y. Rhee, A. Acquisti, L. F. Cranor, J. Hong, and
E. Nunge, “Protecting people from phishing: the design and evaluation
of an embedded training email system,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems. ACM, 2007, pp.
905–914.

[41] S. A. Robila and J. W. Ragucci, “Don’t be a phish: steps in user
education,” in ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, vol. 38, no. 3. ACM, 2006,
pp. 237–241.

[42] T. N. Jagatic, N. A. Johnson, M. Jakobsson, and F. Menczer, “Social
phishing,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 94–100,
2007.

[43] S.-S. Tseng, K.-Y. Chen, T.-J. Lee, and J.-F. Weng, “Automatic content
generation for anti-phishing education game,” in Electrical and Control
Engineering (ICECE), 2011 International Conference on.
IEEE, 2011,
pp. 6390–6394.

