7
1
0
2

g
u
A
8
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
3
7
5
0
.
8
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Security, Privacy and Safety Evaluation of Dynamic and Static Fleets of Drones

Raja Naeem Akram∗, Konstantinos Markantonakis∗, Keith Mayes∗,
Oussama Habachi†, Damien Sauveron†, Andreas Steyven‡ and Serge Chaumette§
∗Information Security Group Smart Card Centre, Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham, United Kingdom
†XLIM (UMR CNRS 7252 / Universit´e de Limoges), Limoges, France
‡School of Computing, Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
§LaBRI (UMR CNRS 5800 / Universit´e de Bordeaux), Talence, France
Email: {r.n.akram,k.markantonakis,keith.mayes}@rhul.ac.uk
{oussama.habachi,damien.sauveron}@unilim.fr
a.steyven@napier.ac.uk, serge.chaumette@labri.fr

Abstract—Interconnected everyday objects, either via public or
private networks, are gradually becoming reality in modern
life – often referred to as the Internet of Things (IoT) or
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS). One stand-out example are
those systems based on Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs).
Fleets of such vehicles (drones) are prophesied to assume
multiple roles from mundane to high-sensitive applications,
such as prompt pizza or shopping deliveries to the home, or to
deployment on battleﬁelds for battleﬁeld and combat missions.
Drones, which we refer to as UAVs in this paper, can operate
either individually (solo missions) or as part of a ﬂeet (group
missions), with and without constant connection with a base
station. The base station acts as the command centre to manage
the drones’ activities; however, an independent, localised and
effective ﬂeet control is necessary, potentially based on swarm
intelligence, for several reasons: 1) an increase in the number
of drone ﬂeets; 2) ﬂeet size might reach tens of UAVs; 3)
making time-critical decisions by such ﬂeets in the wild; 4)
potential communication congestion and latency; and 5) in
some cases, working in challenging terrains that hinders or
mandates limited communication with a control centre, e.g.
operations spanning long period of times or military usage
of ﬂeets in enemy territory. This self-aware, mission-focused
and independent ﬂeet of drones may utilise swarm intelligence
for a), air-trafﬁc or ﬂight control management, b) obstacle
avoidance, c) self-preservation (while maintaining the mission
criteria), d) autonomous collaboration with other ﬂeets in the
wild, and e) assuring the security, privacy and safety of physical
(drones itself) and virtual (data, software) assets. In this paper,
we investigate the challenges faced by ﬂeet of drones and
propose a potential course of action on how to overcome them.

1. Introduction

Drone technology is developing at a breath-taking pace.
From toys for hobbyists, it has now reached a state where
both the private and public sectors can rely on them as
tools to provide value-added services to users [1]. The low

cost and mobilisation time of drones are two major drivers
behind their adoption. Checking the structural integrity of
a building, for example, is much cheaper with drones than
with other aerial platforms, such as helicopters, or with high-
rise cranes. Similarly, drones may be deployed faster than
police helicopters – a potentially attractive feature required
by law-enforcement agencies.

Most likely, however, drones would not operate indi-
vidually or in isolation; individual drones may form part
of a ﬂeet managed by the same organisation, where mission
objectives are achievable only if ﬂeet participants cooperate.
Moreover, airspaces may contain drones from other organi-
sations, where individual drones and ﬂeets must negotiate to
operate safely. Another complexity is that the airspace might
be governed by a local government authority, which may use
an automated management system to handle a dynamic and
congested airspace containing large numbers of UAVs.

1.1. Context

There are multiple ways in which UAV ﬂeets can be
managed; for example, all decisions might be taken by
the ﬂeet management authority (also referred to as control
centre). This requires drones to communicate information
to the ground ﬂeet management system, potentially in real-
time, and to quickly react
to any received instructions.
For certain situations, as discussed previously, drone ﬂeets
are likely to act autonomously and should make in-ﬂight
decisions without requiring explicit permission from a ﬂeet
management control system on the ground.

Individual drones, with limited computation power, may
not be suited for autonomous behaviour if it is based on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) techniques – limited computa-
tional and storage resources along with real-time decision
requirements imposes just challenges. To overcome this
limitation, drone ﬂeets may be behave like swarms, where
AI algorithms designed for the Swarm Intelligence paradigm
can be applied. For Fleets of Drones (FoD) that use swarm
intelligence, we refer to them as ‘Swarm of Drones (SoD)’;
the rest are referred to as ‘FoD’. An important consideration

 
 
 
 
 
 
in swarm intelligence is the nature of the swarm and rela-
tionship between swarm-objects, particularly the concept of
individual objects entering and leaving the swarm. This is
crucial for a SoD that might either be static, dynamic or
hybrid ﬂeets. In a static ﬂeet, all drones remain together
for the whole duration of the mission. In dynamic ﬂeets,
individual drones may enter and leave the ﬂeet as necessary
or required by their mission. Lastly, hybrid ﬂeets have a
partial ﬂeet behaving statically with the rest as a dynamic
ﬂeet.

1.2. Challenges and Problem Statement

For a SoD, there are core operations that are necessary
for successful mission completion. These include ﬂight con-
trol, ﬂight routing, obstacle avoidance, regulation confor-
mation (regarding the airspace usage), and self-protection
(including safety-critical operations) with respect to phys-
integrity and cybersecurity. All of these operations
ical
are highly time-sensitive. Collectively, we refer to these
time-sensitive operations as ‘Mission-Critical Operations’
(MCO). The listed operations are loosely related to three
main challenges discussed below.

1.2.1. Swarm Intelligence. Swarm intelligence takes in-
spiration from the collective behaviour of natural systems,
such as swarms of insects; these systems are inherently
decentralised and often have the ability to self-organise.
The ability of a swarm of insects to perform certain tasks
emerges out of the interaction of simple and quasi-identical
agents, which act asynchronously due to the lack of a central
control [2]. Algorithms based on swarm intelligence princi-
ples, like ant colony optimisation, bee-inspired algorithms
and particle-swarm optimisation, are used in optimisation
problems that are static or change over time.

In distributed robotics systems, a swarm or ﬂeet of
autonomous agents may operate in remote locations with
little or no control by a human operator. Swarm robotics
uses large numbers of autonomous and situated robots with
local sensing and communication capabilities [3].

A swarm of robots offers certain advantages over the
use of a single one. Due to the large number of robots, the
workload can be distributed across the swarm, and multiple
tasks can be worked on simultaneously [4]. It further offers
distributed sensing capabilities and an increased robustness
to failure, by eliminating the single point of failure, as
demonstrated in the Swarmanoid project [5].

The swarm’s behaviour is often optimised using evo-
lutionary algorithms; for instance, researchers have suc-
cessfully evolved a swarm’s ability to adapt to unknown
environments [6, 7], its resilience to failure [8], and the
planning and following of formation patterns [5, 9].

1.2.2. Security, Safety and Privacy. Any ﬂying asset –
drones in this case – can be a potential target to harm
its current state or to access the data it contains, whether
it is part of a group or individual. These two elements
raises the challenges of how to implement the security of

the asset so its current state cannot be compromised [10,
11], and how the data can be protected in a manner so
it does not violate any privacy requirements [12]. Similar
issues regarding intentional hacking and signal jamming,
accountability of security issues, management/enforcement
of airspace restrictions, and concerns over privacy and intru-
siveness were detailed in a report to the US Congress [13].
Furthermore, not just national governments are concerned
with the security, safety and privacy of drones ﬂying in
cities – the US Congress passed legislation covering UAVs
development and integration in civilian airspace (PUBLIC
LAW 11295FEB. 14, 2012) – but also general public [14]–
[16]. This is alongside a number of companies trialling the
deployment of drones as part of their on-demand services,
e.g. Amazon for Prime Delivery [17].
Individual drones and FoD,

therefore, require strong
assurances in terms of security, safety and privacy. There
are multiple options in which the assurances and counter-
measures can be built for FoD. One option is to opt for a
set of static policies deﬁned before the FoD commences its
mission. This is useful if the FoD operates in an static envi-
ronment that has ﬁxed and predictable behaviour; creating
ﬁxed policies for MCOs is an obvious choice here. In reality,
however, drones operating in the wild1 has the potential
to present scenarios that were not considered previously
by drone owners and operators. For this reason, in this
paper, we forward the proposal of designing SoDs based
on swarm intelligence. All of the MCOs would have a deep
foundation in swarm intelligence and have the potential to
collaboratively learn, evolve and decide the best course of
action when operating in the wild, without depending on a
ground ﬂeet management systems.

1.2.3. Performance and Energy Consumption. Drones are
resource-constrained pieces of equipment; individual aircraft
are heavily impaired by limited processing capabilities and
severe battery or fuel constraints. It is widely acknowledged
that drone power consumption, whether it uses a thermal
or electrical engine, is a major issue [18]. These energy
constraints inﬂuences all the parameters of the drone system,
as well as the mission itself. The impact of MCOs on
energy management is important: on one hand, the MCOs
impact the energy consumption – for instance, because of
encryption algorithms [19] – but the power management
must also take MCOs into account, e.g. reserving enough
energy to ensure prompt responses to critical external stimuli
that require quick (and energy demanding) route changes.
Using a swarm is beneﬁcial to ensure that the overall energy
burden is shared, e.g. sharing processing loads (see below),
to maintain continuous ﬂight and mission succession.

Regarding performance in terms of computing power,
even though the technology is evolving very quickly, the
processors embedded on small drones (which usually con-
stitute swarms) are not the most efﬁcient. It should be noted
that this lack of computational power also comes from the

1. Wild: Environment that is not under the control of the drone opera-

tors/owners.

power management issue (see above): the more efﬁcient a
processor, the more power it requires. Therefore, to achieve
a signiﬁcant level of performance, load sharing (in addition
to highly tuned algorithms) is required. Load can be shared
between the drones of the swarm themselves or between the
drones and some external system (a bigger drone or even a
ground system). For instance in terms of image processing,
mosaicking is often used [20]. It consists of taking several
photos of a given area and then assembling them to build a
global picture that can thereafter be processed depending on
the situation at hand. Such a process can be shared among
the individual drones of the swarm, dispatching the load all
over them [21, 22].

The two challenges described in this section crucially
depend on swarm intelligence, which, in turn, impacts power
consumption and computational capabilities. All challenges
should thus be considered in a holistic approach.

1.3. Contributions

In [29], authors introduced and validated a decentralised
architecture for search and rescue missions in ground based
robot groups of different sizes. Considered limited com-
munication ability with a command centre and employs
distributed communication.

In [30], distributed unsupervised learning in a swarm
of robots using a particle-swarm optimisation algorithm.
Accounting for limited communication capabilities amongst
members of the swarm. Requires a priori knowledge of the
terrain.

In [9], the authors achieved area coverage for surveil-
lance in a FoD using visual relative localisation for keeping
formation autonomously.

In [31], authors explored the use of swarm intelli-
gence paradigm to control formation ﬂight and stabilisation
through the use of GPS and locally shared information.

In [25], authors have investigated the use of a commu-
nication middleware and a rule based system to command
and control an otherwise autonomous FoD.

The paper contributes in three main aspects to further
the discussion on the management of autonomous and in-
dependent FoDs that are:

1) A rationale supporting application of drone ﬂeets and

potential impact of building a SoD.

2) A conceptual architecture for the SoD, its different
variants based on the swarm (enrolment) structures and
collaboration models.

3) Finally, charting the open issues that impact SoD in
general but speciﬁcally the security, safety and privacy
of SoD.

2.2. Security, Safety and Privacy of Fleet of Drones

Since the emergence of drones, different papers have
proposed solutions to secure them and their communica-
tions: either a), an alone drone communicating with a GCS
(Ground Control Station) or with other devices, or b), com-
munication inside a FoD. As stated in [32], the attack vectors
to consider are either the capture of drone to make physical
or logical attacks, or attacks through its communication
capabilities – all of which might be conducted by a highly
sophisticated adversary.

2. Related Work

In this section, we discuss the related literature from

three aspects.

2.1. Swarm Robotics - Experiencing, Learning and
Adaptation

Swarm intelligence is not a new concept for FoD. Exist-
ing literature [23]–[26] has already explored different uses
of swarm intelligence in the context of FoD, especially in the
case of internal swarm communication and route planning.
However, in related literature, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd a case
where swarm intelligence is proposed for all operations
ranging from ﬂight control to cybersecurity – as is the case
of this paper.

The swarm intelligence paradigm has been used to
optimise and control single UAVs: In [27], single vehicle
autonomous path planning by learning from small number
of examples.

In [28], three-dimensional path planning for a single
drone using a bat inspired algorithm to determine suitable
points in space and applying B-spline curves to improve
smoothness of the path.

the authors of [33] proposed a protocol

2.2.1. Individual Drones. For individual drones controlled
by a GCS,
to
secure communication along with ensuring that illegitimate
accesses to sensing data is not easily available to an attacker.
While this proposal provides the deniability property to help
to deal with privacy issues (i.e. a GCS is not able to prove to
other parties from which drone the message was received),
it is expensive to implement in terms of computation and
thus energy consumption.

In a similar context, a more efﬁcient proposal relying
only on lightweight primitives was done by the authors
of [34] to establish a secure channel protocol when GCS is
in the communication range of drone. Their proposal ensures
conﬁdentiality and privacy-protection of collected data; if a
drone is captured, data cannot be accessible by an adversary.
In [35], the authors proposed a secure communication
protocol between drones and smart objects based on efﬁcient
Certiﬁcateless Signcryption Tag Key Encapsulation Mecha-
nism using ECC, which addresses issue of drone capture.

In [36], the authors used drones to perform efﬁcient in-
ventory and search operations over some RFID tagged assets
using lightweight secure and privacy-preserving serverless
protocols deﬁned in [37], while guaranteeing the privacy
of the tags and the secret when the drone is captured (i.e.
compromised).

Figure 1. Single drone versus a one-level drones ﬂeet

In [38], the authors proposed a secure and trusted chan-
nel protocol to enable communication of a drone and sensors
of Aircraft Wireless Networks (AWNs) to retrieve collected
data and ensuring their conﬁdentiality.

2.2.2. Drones in Fleet. In the HAMSTER (HeAlthy, Mobil-
ity and Security based data communication archiTEctuRe)
solution for unmanned vehicles [39], the authors presented a
security framework and cryptographic schemes without dis-
cussing speciﬁcally of secure channel protocols and issues
of captured drones.

In [40], the authors proposed a secure reactive routing
protocol, called SUAP, for a ﬂeet of drones. The proposal
is efﬁcient to detect and prevent routing, e.g. wormhole and
blackhole attacks, but it does not consider an adversary with
a high attack potential nor the issue of captured drones.

In [32], the authors proposed to address an adversary
with a high attack potential by adding a secure element to
each drone of the ﬂeets. Based on the built architecture,
in [41], they proposed a secure and trusted channel protocol
to establish a secure channel between the communicating
drones and to provide security assurance that each drone is
in the secure and trusted state.

2.3. Performance and Energy Consumption

Energy management is addressed at two different levels:
in terms of refuelling (fuel or batteries) capabilities and in
terms of in-ﬂight/mission power consumption optimization.
Regarding refuelling, research and experiments are being
done to provide mechanisms to reload/refuel during the
ﬂight. Standard avionic procedures are being used/adapted
but more original approaches are also explored, like the
usage of solar panels, laser power beaming or ad hoc hosts
[42] for instance. Regarding in-ﬂight power consumption
the drone (internal) supervision algorithms
optimization,
(the algorithms that control the sensors, the IMU, the au-
topilot, etc.) are studied, as well as the algorithms used to
achieve/implement the missions. For instance, ﬂight path

management, sense & avoid, etc. can highly impact power
consumption.

Computational load sharing is addressed mainly by the
computing community, rather than the electronics commu-
nity. Still, it should be noted that strong relationships are
required with the situation management people so as to
determine the important information that are really required
for the decision process [43]. This is to avoid the burden and
thus the processing load of processing potentially useless
data.

It should also be noted that managing and organizing
a swarm induces an overhead in terms of computational
power and energy consumption. Indeed, this requires ad-
ditional communication and management of swarm-related
data (location of drone, proximity, RSSI, etc.). Even though
power consumption has been addressed in some work (see
for instance [44]) it is still an issue to consider. Moreover,
security and safety related features also impact power con-
sumption and computational load, and it is necessary to take
these into account.

3. Fleet of Drones - Why?

Why should FoD can be preferred to single, powerful
drones? As illustrated Fig 1, one of the ﬁrst interest of
the ﬂeet is to be composed of several smaller drones that
can be equipped with different sensors or other equipments
providing redundancy that can help to tolerate a certain
degree of failure. In addition, a multitude of drones can
cover a larger geographic area than a single one. This can
be performed in a smarter way, since only required drones
with useful capabilities to support the mission can be sent
to speciﬁc areas while other drones perform other tasks.
Nevertheless, a single drone would have to attend each
location. FoD can also take advantage of the network they
form altogether to continue to communicate with the GCS
when there are obstacles on the path between some drones
and GCS by simply relying messages to neighbour drones
which are able to establish communication with GCS. Small
drones are also interesting because they are more stealthy,

Ground control stationOwner of droneSingle droneCommunication between drone and ground control stationData storageHumidity sensorTemperature sensorInfrared sensor & cameraBaseMission areaGround control stationOwner of drones fleetOne-level drones fleetCommunication paths in drones fleetCommunication with ground control stationData storageHumidity sensorTemperature sensorInfrared sensor & cameraBaseMission areaFigure 2. A multi-level drones ﬂeets

less noisy than a big drone that might be of interest for both
military and civilian applications. Last, but not least, small
drones can be less expensive than large drone due to their
mass-production, and they might be safer for use in civilian
applications since their weight is smaller, which is safer in
the event of a crash.

However, large drones and smaller versions should not
be opposed since they can be used in a complementary way;
for example, in a multi-level ﬂeet in which they can serve as
relay (they can also be seen as cluster heads) for the smaller
drones to enable communication with a GCS or with other
FoDs. In Figure 2, only a 1-level ﬂeet is depicted.

It is worth noting that FoDs presented before always
received command from the GCS. Of course, they can have a
certain degree of autonomy but standalone swarm of drones,
illustrated in Figure 3 acting like swarm of animals/insects
can be regarded as highly desirable for researchers and
operators. Indeed, once the mission is given, a SoD no
longer requires to be driven by a GCS, hence making it
autonomous and more stealthy.

3.1. Fleet of Drones - Commercial, Civilian and
Military Need

Depending on the end-users, different architectures of

FoDs can be envisioned.

In a commercial context, FoDs can be shared by several
stakeholders to decrease the cost of each having its own
ﬂeets. For instance, it can be imagined FoDs spread over
countries to achieve the entitled missions on-demand of
stakeholders that would have to pay according their uses.
The missions can be of different types, delivery (assets buy
in on-line shops, pizza, drugs, etc.), monitoring of ﬁelds or
herds for agriculture sector, surveillance of buildings. The

Figure 3. A standalone swarm of drones

main requirement is a good cost effectiveness for FoDs,
i.e. the ﬂeets can be able to be shared between several
stakeholders in a fair usage and in a dynamic way to enable
drones of a ﬂeet to join drones of other ﬂeets to achieve
objective of the missions. For such an applicative context,
a certain degree of autonomy can be useful but essentially
a WAN infrastructure of communication will be used. e.g.
LTE network, to control the FoDs.

In a civilian context, authorities would require safe
and reliable FoDs for rescue operations (ﬁre detection in
forest, searching missing people in sliding snow or after
an earthquake, etc.), for smart city scenarios (detection of
trafﬁc offences, hunt of criminals, etc.), to monitor major in-
frastructures (nuclear plants, pipelines of oil and gas, power
lines, water reserves, airports, railways, etc.) and borders. In
this context, most applications can use WAN communication

Ground control stationOwner of drones fleets A and BMulti-level drones fleetsDrones fleet AHead A2Head A1Drones fleet BHead B2Head B1Communication paths in drones fleetCommunication with head A1Communication between heads and ground control stationData storageHumidity sensorTemperature sensorInfrared sensor & cameraBaseMission areaMission areaOwner of drones swarmStandalone drones swarmCommunication paths in drones swarmBaseMission areaData storageHumidity sensorTemperature sensorInfrared sensor & camerainfrastructure to control the FoD, in addition to the drone-
to-drone communication inside the FoD, to exchange data
and potentially control commands to achieve the mission.
One of the scenarios where communication infrastructures
might no longer exist is after a disaster (earthquake, tsunami,
hurricane, huge terrorist attacks) that destroyed them. Au-
thorities can also use FoDs to ﬁght against malevolent drone
ﬂying in forbidden areas by capturing it.

In a military context, requirements are stealth, protection
of data regarding the missions (ﬂight plans) and the data
collected (positions of interests), adaptability to the adverse
condition when deployed in the ﬁeld. For stealth, SoDs are
the best since they do not use the wide range communication
which minimises potential detection by the adversaries. The
SoD is adaptive to adverse conditions, to failure or destruc-
tion of some drones, to fulﬁl the missions. In any case, FoD
or SoD of drones are more resilient than single drone for
most of applications in this context.

It is worth noting that the security and privacy protection

are requirements shared by all contexts.

3.2. Use Cases

This section present three use cases for FoDs and SoDs.

3.2.1. Rescue Operation in Remote Areas. FoDs and
SoDs can be used in several rescue operations in remote
areas where an event – earthquakes, for instance – has made
access difﬁcult or dangerous for emergency services. They
can also be used to set up a network of communication
dedicated to emergency staff for data exchange or to recover
public networks (like 3G/4G) to enable victims and other
people to communicate with their families or urgency staff.
FoD can also be used in case of sliding snow to cover a wide
area than human persons to search victims. In addition, such
small drones can ﬂy closer to the ground than big drone.
This can more efﬁcient to detect signs of life; for instance,
to look for people at sea after a plane crash. FoDs can cover
a larger area than conventional means (helicopters, planes
and ships). For such scenario, autonomy in energy is an
issue to deal with.

3.2.2. Facility Surveillance and Fault Detection. As men-
tioned previously, FoDs can be used for surveillance of
wide area to detect abnormal event. For instance, they can
detect ﬁre in natural parks or forests by covering wide area
equipped with multiple sensors (e.g. thermal) and they can
also ﬁght it with embedded dedicated payload to extinguish
the ﬂames before they grow. For buildings and any large
infrastructure requiring a high security, FoDs can provide an
additional security level by providing a third dimension in
defence against intrusion or degradation. Indeed the drones
help to detect intruders based on embedded sensors and
camera. However they can also provide a fourth dimension
by being able to ﬁght promptly against intruders, potentially
at the price of their own destruction. For instance, recently
at the time of the writing, a few hundred dollars drone land
on the deck of HMS Queen Elizabeth – without anyone

raising the alarm. It can be imagined that one or several
drones of a FoD protecting this ship would have tried to
capture and/or to destroy the intruder’s drone by sacriﬁcing
them if required. For border surveillance, FoDs can help
cost efﬁciency by avoiding continuous human patrols or wall
construction.

3.2.3. Data Collection. FoDs can also help to collect data
from wireless sensors nodes (WSN) which are not always
connected to a sink having a permanent internet connection
(for instance, it can be a WSN requiring stealthy since it op-
erates on an adversary ﬁeld or individual sensors positioned
on the ground but that do not form a network to save their
energy). In such applications, the drones of the ﬂeets are
somehow mobile sinks to retrieve collected data. This kind
of uses of FoDs can exist in smart city scenarios where to
avoid crowding of radio frequency spectrum, sensors nodes
disseminated in the city may only emit with a very low
power that requires the recipient is very close to collect the
data; which such small drones can do.

For data collection tasks, drones of a ﬂeet can be used
for inventories of RFID tagged assets if they are equipped
with RFID readers, but also of livestock in wide areas using
cameras.

Finally, a basic and common scenario of data collection
with drones that can be extended to FoDs is ground imaging
capture for different purposes, such as for military (to ﬁnd
point of interests: position of enemies for instance) and agri-
culture (to view area requiring watering, or those requiring
treatment against a disease).

4. Swarm of Drones - Technology Perspective

In this section, we discuss a conceptual architecture that

can deployed for SoD.

4.1. Generic Architecture for SoD

The conceptual architecture shows the set of operations
in two different contexts: 1), how they are stacked in a
single drone, for example, operations are that speciﬁc (or
individual) to a drone and how it is related to other oper-
ations on the drone, and 2), how different operations are
actually a collaborative options in which the swarm decides
rather than individual drones. Figure 4 shows the conceptual
architecture. The architecture is divided into three layers
with some duplication and each layer; the rationale of these
is discussed in subsequent sections.

4.1.1. Drone Abstraction. This abstraction layer is focused
on a single drone operations, which preserves the drone as
an individual entity and includes:
D1 Flight Management: This operation ensures that the
drone remains in the air as required by the mission.
The ﬂight management features can be semi-static or
partly dependent on F1 and can only be modiﬁed in
unique circumstance if required by S8.

D8, S3 and S5.

D7 Security, Safety and Privacy Measures: This operation
monitors the individual drone level security, safety and
privacy features. The baseline rule set can be pre-
deﬁned either solely based on SoD owners design or
an autonomously evolved formulation (from a baseline)
based on the collaborate knowledge of all SoD ﬂights
(carried out by the respective SoD or other SoDs in the
past). If a situation appears that an individual drone has
not encountered before, then it can raise that to the SoD
to take a collaborative decision (S8).

D8 Self-Preservation: Depending upon the criticality of the
mission, role of a drone and analysis from S5, a drone
might opt for selﬁsh attitude to preserve its operational
integrity over the requirements of SoD or opt the altru-
ism approach. In the later approach, individual drone
might came to the decision to sacriﬁce its operational
integrity for the success of the mission or in corner
condition to upload the ethical principles (S4).

4.1.2. Fleet Abstraction. This abstraction layer bridges
between the decisions taken by individual drones on their
own and the course of action that is stipulated as part of the
mission brief from the SoD owner, with feed in from the
swarm abstraction layer in case an unexpected situation is
encountered in the wild.

F1 Flight Management: The operation that is conﬁgured
to manage the ﬂight operations of the SoD as per pre-
deﬁned mission brief. The ﬂight management operation
is mission focused and pragmatic as depending on the
situation it would either opt for pre-deﬁned plan or S8.
F2 Airspace Policy Management: This function of the SoD
remains in constant communication with airspace con-
troller and other drones operating in the same space to
comply with the regulations stipulated in the respective
region. When making decisions, whether by individual
drone or by the SoD as a whole, it consults this function
and abide by the airspace regulations.

F3 Navigation: This functions manages the airborne move-
ments of the ﬂeet as a whole based on the F2 and
follows the feeds of F4.

F4 Flight Route Management: The route planner for the
whole of the ﬂeet is triggered by either F2 and F7 –
but remains inside the airspace regulation (F2).

F5 Object Detection and Avoidance: Logically, at the ﬂeet
abstraction layer this is part of the F4 but discussed
separately. It depends upon individual drones detection,
notiﬁcation to the population in the SoD and potential
avoidance strategy formulation (ﬂeet level) – based on
the analysis results of S8.

F6 Mission Objectives: Manages the ﬂeet wide mission
objectives that are conﬁgured at the point of swarm
construction (discussed later). This function assists
multiple functions during the normal ﬂight, however, in
unique situation the swarm abstraction layer takes over
to make adequate modiﬁcation for successful comple-
tion or abortion of the mission.

Figure 4. Conceptual architecture of SoD

D2 Navigation: This involves airborne movements within
the respective SoD, in relation to the external envi-
ronment, ﬂight route, airspace authority’s injunction
and D5. Each drone has a static set of rules for its
navigation activity; however, these can be superseded
by the collaborative decision making process of the
SoD.

D3 Power and Performance Efﬁciency: This operation con-
tinually monitors in the drones power and performance
matrix – and at set intervals notiﬁes the swarm. In
case the power and performance efﬁciency has severely
degraded, the conﬂicting self-preservation D8 and SoD
preferences (S3 and S8) kicks in and based on the
severity and mission requirements the drone can either
take the route of disengaging from the mission or
altruism.

D4 Service Level Maintenance: Similar to the D3, this
operation looks into the entirety of the services a drone
is offering as part of the SoD. Any delays or difﬁculty
to fulﬁl its obligations, required by the SoD, it will raise
the notiﬁcation for the SoD (S5 and S6), so adequate
mitigation can be applied via F11, S7 and S8.

D5 Object Detection and Avoidance: This operation has
two aspects, ﬁrst to detect a obstacle approaching the
ﬂight path and second the avoid collision. These two
actions are dual nature, due to time criticality of this
operation, ﬁrst option is that the decision might be
taken by a drone individually, but even in this case it
would notify the remaining swarm. The second option
is that obstacle is not detected by the drone itself but
by other swarm member and it takes adequate measure
to avoid it pre-emptively.

D6 Individual Mission Objectives: At the time of swarm
construction (section 4.2), the SoD owner would upload
the objectives of the mission. These objectives would
be speciﬁc to two levels, individual drones and the
ﬂeet (F6). This information would detail the criticality
of mission, responsibility of individual drones and the
ﬂeet as a whole. This information would be used by

Communication paths in drones fleetData storageHumidity sensorTemperature sensorInfrared sensor & cameraFleet AbstractionDrone AbstractionSwarm AbstractionFlight Management| Navigation| Power and Performance Efficiency| Service Level Maintenance| Object Detection and Avoidance| Individual Mission Objectives| Security, Safety and Privacy Measures| Self-PreservationFlight Management| Navigation| Flight Route Management| Object Detection and Avoidance| Airspace Policy Management| Mission Objectives| Congestion Detection & Avoidance| Policy Consolidation and Harmonisation| Secure Communication| Trust Establishment and Verification| Power and Performance Management Swarm Community Management| Security and Privacy| Safety and Self-Preservation| Ethical Principles| Mission Assessment| Collaborative Learning| Collaborative Evaluation| Collaborative Decision Formulation| Collaborative Knowledge ManagementF7 Congestion Detection and Avoidance: Based on the
drone sensors and/or external feed like airspace traf-
ﬁc broadcasts, this function would identify potential
congestion on the selected route of the mission. Based
on this detection, it can notify the ﬂight management
(F1) to take adequate actions.

F8 Secure Communication: Manages the set-up and main-
tenance of secure communication channels between
drones in the SoD and with external entities.

F9 Trust Establishment and Veriﬁcation: Depending upon
the type of SoD (section 4.3) this functionality would
establishes the trust relationship between drones in the
SoD and with external entities.

F10 Policy Consolidation and Harmonisation: Depending
upon the type of the SoD (section 4.3) either all drones
would abide by a single policy (covering airspace
regulations, ethical principles and swarm participation
guidelines) or they have different, sometime conﬂicting
policies. When a drone enrols into a SoD this operation
veriﬁes whether the enrolled drone is compatible with
the baseline policy of the SoD or not.

F11 Power and Performance Management: Computation
and power are two scarce resources for the SoD. This
operation continuously monitors individual drones state
and performs load-balancing to achieve maximum con-
tributions from individual member of the SoD.

4.1.3. Swarm Abstraction. This abstraction layer is the
foundation of the SoD proposal. The services in this layer,
similar to the other abstractions layers, are continuously
running on individual drones. This layer has a baseline
knowledge: a collection of knowledge that is accumulation
of all the SoD ﬂights managed the SoD owner/operator.
Therefore,
learning, evaluation and decision formulation
performed during a single mission then becomes part of the
collaborative knowledge to improve all future missions.
S1 Swarm Community Management: This service man-
ages the drones participating in the SoD, their con-
tributions and also detects any potential free-riders.
S2 Security and Privacy: Deals with the unique situations
encountered by the SoD that are speciﬁc to the security
and privacy-preservation.

S3 Safety and Self-Preservation: Similarly to the S2, this
service deals with safety and self-preservation of indi-
vidual drones and SoD as a whole.

S4 Ethical Principles: Set of ethical principles that are set
by the drones owner. The S8 will take these principles
into account when making decision.

S5 Mission Assessment: Swarm health feeds collected by
the S1 will be used by the mission assessment service
to perform the prediction of failure and success of the
whole mission. This prediction would be useful to make
challenging decision whether to continue the mission or
abort it. Furthermore, this analysis would be part of the
decision to take the mission abortion or an altruistic2

2. Altruistic Decision: Sacriﬁcing few of the members of the SoD to

achieve overall mission objectives

decision.

S6 Collaborative Learning: The core module that contin-
uously learns from different feeds that is being shared
in the SoD. One point needs to be emphasised that the
learning process is also collaborative – as each of the
drones might not have the resources to perform this
entirely by itself.

S7 Collaborative Evaluation: Based on the learning, the
SoD would evaluate a situation collaborative to see
whether a precedent exists in the collaborative knowl-
edge,
the collective make a decision au-
tonomously (S8).

if not

S8 Collaborative Decision Formulation: The decision for-
mulation service that requires collaboration from the
SoD participants to reach a decision either based on
the existing knowledge or take a trail-error strategy. The
decision taken and its success would be recorded along
with the situation parameters – post-mission evaluation
and inclusion to the collaborative knowledge manage-
ment (further discussed in section 4.2).

S9 Collaborative Knowledge Management: One of the ob-
jective of the SoD is to accumulate the knowledge from
every mission to a single collaborate knowledge based
that can then be part of every subsequent missions –
exploring as many as possible permutations of scenar-
ios that SoD can encounter in the ﬁeld.

4.2. Fleet Construction

Based on the conceptual model, the ﬁrst step is the for-
mation of the SoD at the pre-mission stage and deformation
at the post-mission stage. Therefore the process of ﬂeet
construction consists of two parts: pre-mission and post-
mission, which are discussed in this section.

At the pre-mission stage, the ﬂeet construction process
begins with the formulation of a mission – with a set of
objectives. The mission control unit generates a mission
brief that includes mission objectives, airspace regulations,
ethical principles, security and privacy policies, organisation
commitments, baseline conﬁguration (for ﬁrst mission), and
collaborative knowledge. The mission brief is then commu-
nicated to the ground ﬂight management system (GFMS).
This system would select the drones from the inventory that
would participate in the mission. This selection process is
based on the mission requirements, drone availability and
organisation preferences. Once the set of drones are selected,
the GFMS would then upload the mission brief to the se-
lected drones. Once the brief is uploaded, the drones would
establish secure communication channel among themselves
in the SoD. Once all drones are connected and GFMS has
given the permission to commence the mission, the SoD
would initiate.

After the completion of the mission, upon return of
the SoD participants to the base, the GFMS will connect
with each drone to download the mission logs, learning/e-
valuation matrix and potential material that can contribute
to the collaborative knowledge. The GFMS communicates
this information to the mission control centre that would

Figure 5. Swarm of drones construction process – pre- and post-mission activities.

analyses the mission debrieﬁng information and improves
the collaborative knowledge. Figure 5 shows the ﬂeet con-
struction process with both pre- and post-mission activities.

4.3. Types of Swarm of Drones

In this section, we discuss three types of SoDs that can
be potentially deployed depending upon the target environ-
ment and situation.

4.3.1. Static SoD. The most basic type of the SoD is the
static SoD. In this formation, the members of the swarm are
pre-selected at the pre-mission stage. During the ﬂight, no
new members can enrol into the swarm as the collective is
locked at the point of mission commencement. The secure
communication, mutual-trust and collaboration is setup by
the GFMS of the SoD owner. Any drone that is whether
belong to the respective SoD owner or not would be treated
as an external entity to the SoD during the ﬂight. Figure 6
shows the static SoD in comparison with the dynamic SoD
discussed in the next section.

4.3.2. Dynamic SoD. In contrast to a static SoD, a dynamic
SoD is open to the inclusion of new members along with
existing members leaving the swarm at any point of time:
pre-mission and/or during the mission. Such a SoD can
either be a closed dynamic SoD that only allows enrolment
of new drones from the same organisation, or an open
dynamic SoD that allows enrolment of drones from any
third-party organisations. Whichever the case, the challenges
of secure communication, mutual trust and collaboration are
unique in comparison to static SoD.

priority when making any collaborative learning, evaluation
and decisions. The extended swarm can be viewed as drones
that join the static SoD and would provide a service to the
core swarm in return for some fair exchange. Members of
the extended swarm can leave the collective at any stage.
Figure 7 shows the hybrid SoD construction.

4.4. SoD Collaboration Models

In this section we discuss three variants of collaboration

models for the SoD.

1) Centralised: In this collaboration model,

there is a
powerful, master drone in the SoD that collets all the
feeds from individual drones and assists the swarm in
computing and agreeing on decisions.

2) Decentralised: In this collaboration model, there is no
single master drone, but
instead a small subset of
powerful drones that collect the feeds from their neigh-
bouring drones and then these powerful drones perform
the collaborative learning, evaluation and decision.
3) Distributed (Peer-Oriented): In this model, each and
every participant of the SoD have more or less equal
role in all collaborative learning, evaluation and deci-
sion making process. It can be noted that the activity
load is distributed among the population based on their
individual capabilities, current performance and power
resources and the criticality of their unique features to
overall mission.

5. Open Challenges of Swarm of Drones

4.3.3. Hybrid SoD. This variant of SoD combines both the
static and dynamic SoDs together into a single collaborative
unit. At the core of this SoD is a static SoD that behaves
like one in all of its operations. This static SoD, however,
is open to allowing other drones to join the swarm, thus
creating an extended swarm that behaves like a dynamic
SoD. One thing to note is that the core swarm takes high

In this section, we selected a very short list of open
problems of the SoD. They are categorised into two cate-
gories: 1), Security, Privacy and Trust related, and 2), Per-
formance and Energy Consumption related. The implication
and importance of these open issues are listed in Table 1,
represented by number of ∎; the higher the number, the
more crucial this open issue is to the success of the SoD.

Drones SwarmMissionMission Control CenterGround Flight Management SystemObjectives of the missionSwarm enrolment+Mission detailsMission BriefDronesMission logs and  Learning matrixPre-Flight PhasePost-Flight PhaseFlight PhaseFigure 6. Static swarm-of-drones versus dynamic swarm-of-drones

not participates in the SoD. Fair exchange becomes way
more relevant in the case of dynamic and hybrid SoD as
during the ﬂight swarms would potentially be changing
and to identify the beneﬁts of joining a swarm has to be
clear and veriﬁable – use fair-exchange mechanisms.

SP3 Collaborated Cybersecurity Deterrence Mechanism:
This open issue concerns with how swarm intelligence
can be deployed to provide a wide range of counter-
measures – protecting individual drone and the whole
of SoD. This is still an open issue and potentially the
most crucial element of the SoD proposal.

SP4 Detecting the Mole and Free-Riders in the Swarm: This
open issues relates to the SP2, however, it focuses on
detecting free-riders in the SoD. A free-rider is a drone
in the SoD that does not contribute its fair share and
becomes a burden on the rest of the drones in the SoD.

5.2. Performance and Energy Consumption

PE1 Balancing the Cybersecurity with Performance and En-
ergy Consumption: we have seen in section 1.2.3 that
the computational power and the energy consumption
of a drone is highly impacted by several factors. Among
these, it is clear that MCOs (including critical event
response capabilities), algorithms, data management
(ciphering for instance) are of utmost importance. All
these aspects must thus be mitigated with the cyberse-
curity issues in a holistic approach.

PE2 Graceful Degradation – Altruism versus Selﬁsh-
Survival: Graceful Degradation is of course part of the
intrinsic management system of each drone. Still, when
combined as a swarm, this should not longer be con-
sidered only at the level of one single drone but at the
level of the swarm as a whole. Indeed, depending on the
mission, it must be decided if it is more important for
each drone to save its own energy/computational power
(selﬁsh approach) or if cooperating (and thus sharing

Figure 7. A hybrid swarm of drones

5.1. Security, Privacy and Trust Related

SP1 Swarm Authentication, Attestation and Secure Commu-
nication: SoDs have to negotiate with external entities
that include the airspace controllers, and other UAVs
(includes SoDs). Beside this, for dynamic and hybrid
types of SoDs, the inclusion of new drones and de-
listing of ones that leave the swarm is another chal-
lenge. This open issue does not impact the static SoD
as much it does the other two types.

SP2 Fair Exchange Services Architecture for Swarm of
Drones: When drones participate in a group supporting
swarm intelligence-based mechanisms to create a SoD,
individual drones should have this synergy worthwhile.
This should not tax them to the extend that solo mission
is comparatively less costly and have negative impact
on performance and energy of the drone than if it does

Static drones swarmCommunication paths in drones swarmDynamic drones swarmCommunication paths in drones swarmNotify leaving swarmRequest joining swarmHybrid drones swarmCommunication paths in core swarmNotify leaving swarmRequest joining swarmExtended swarmExtended swarmCore swarmCore swarmCommunication paths in extended swarmTable 1. IMPORTANCE OF OPEN CHALLENGE/PROBLEM TO
COMBINATION OF SOD TYPES AND COLLABORATION MODELS.

SP1

SP2

SP3

SP4

PE1

PE2

Static SoD

Centralised
Decentralised
Distributed

Centralised
Decentralised
Distributed

Centralised
Decentralised
Distributed

∎ ∎ ◻ ◻ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ◻ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ◻ ◻

∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ◻

∎ ◻ ◻ ◻ ◻
∎ ◻ ◻ ◻ ◻
∎ ◻ ◻ ◻ ◻

∎ ∎ ◻ ◻ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ◻ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ◻ ◻

∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎
Dynamic SoD
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎

∎ ◻ ◻ ◻ ◻
∎ ◻ ◻ ◻ ◻
∎ ◻ ◻ ◻ ◻

∎ ∎ ∎ ◻ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ◻

∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎

[6]

∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎

∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎

∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎

Hybrid SoD

∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ◻

∎ ∎ ◻ ◻ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ◻ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ◻ ◻

∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎

∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎

∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎

∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ◻
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎
∎ ∎ ∎ ∎ ∎

energy consumption/computational load) is more ap-
propriate to ensure the success of the mission (altruist
approach).

6. Conclusion

The potential for having an independent and autonomous
set of drones, whether we call them FoD or SoD, is gradually
becoming necessary, especially with the increased complex-
ities of making real-time decisions by individual or ﬂeets
of drones in an overcrowded and regulated airspace. For
such an eventuality, the application of swarm intelligence in
the UAVs domain is only a natural progression of the ﬁeld.
In this paper, we forwarded the rationale for drone ﬂeets,
the need for them to be independent and autonomous in
the wild, and the application of swarm intelligence. We also
explained a conceptual architecture to integrate swarm intel-
ligence as a core function, not a merely restricted to a single
function like trafﬁc management, it manages and controls a
wide range of functions and decisions at the individual drone
and ﬂeet level. To support this conceptual architecture, we
have also listed different types and collaboration models of
SoD along with open issues whose solutions are crucial to
the success of the application of swarm intelligence as a
core function of the FoDs.

References

[1] B. Canis, Unmanned aircraft systems (UAS): Commercial outlook for
a new industry. Congressional Research Service Washington, 2015.

[2] G. Beni, “From Swarm Intelligence to Swarm Robotics,” in
Springer,
[Online]. Available: http:

International Workshop on Swarm Robotics, SR 2004.
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 1–9.
//link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-540-30552-1 1

[3] M. Brambilla, E. Ferrante, M. Birattari, and M. Dorigo, “Swarm
robotics: a review from the swarm engineering perspective,” Swarm
Intelligence, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–41, jan 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s11721-012-0075-2

[4]

J. C. Barca and Y. A. Sekercioglu, “Swarm robotics reviewed,” Robot-
ica, vol. 31, no. 03, pp. 345–359, may 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://www.journals.cambridge.org/abstract S026357471200032X

T. Stirling, A. Stranieri, T. Stutzle, V. Trianni, E. Tuci, A. E. Turgut,
and F. Vaussard, “Swarmanoid: A Novel Concept for the Study
of Heterogeneous Robotic Swarms,” IEEE Robotics & Automation
Magazine, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 60–71, dec 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6603259/
J. Urzelai and D. Floreano, “Evolution of adaptive synapses:
new environments.”
robots with
Evolutionary Computation, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 495–524,
jan
2001. [Online]. Available: http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/
10.1162/10636560152642887#.VUnQjeS7zUJ

behavior

adaptive

fast

in

[7] N. Bredeche, E. Haasdijk, and A. E. Eiben, “On-line, on-
the
Strasbourg:
[Online]. Available:

board evolution of
9th international conference on Artiﬁcial evolution.
Springer-Verlag, oct 2009, pp. 110–121.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1883723.1883738

robot controllers,” in Proceedings of

simulated and real

[8] A. G. Millard, J. Timmis, and A. F. T. Winﬁeld, “Run-time
detection of faults in autonomous mobile robots based on the
robot behaviour,” in 2014
comparison of
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems. Chicago, IL, USA: IEEE, sep 2014, pp. 3720–3725.
[Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6943084/
[9] M. Saska, J. Chudoba, L. Precil, J. Thomas, G. Loianno, A. Tresnak,
V. Vonasek, and V. Kumar, “Autonomous deployment of swarms
in cooperative surveillance,” in 2014
of micro-aerial vehicles
International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS).
Orlando, FL, USA:
[Online].
Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6842301/

IEEE, may 2014, pp. 584–595.

[10] A. Y. Javaid, W. Sun, V. K. Devabhaktuni, and M. Alam, “Cyber
security threat analysis and modeling of an unmanned aerial vehicle
system,” in Homeland Security (HST), 2012 IEEE Conference on
Technologies for.

IEEE, 2012, pp. 585–590.
[11] L. Gupta, R. Jain, and G. Vaszkun, “Survey of important issues
in uav communication networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1123–1152, 2016.

[12] W. G. Voss, “Privacy law implications of the use of drones for
security and justice purposes,” International Journal of Liability
and Scientiﬁc Enquiry, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 171–192, 2013, pMID:
60848. [Online]. Available: http://www.inderscienceonline.com/doi/
abs/10.1504/IJLSE.2013.060848

[13] B. Elias, “Pilotless drones: Background and considerations for
congress regarding unmanned aircraft operations in the national
airspace system,” Congressional Research Service, CRS Report for
Congress, September 2012. [Online]. Available: http://biotech.law.
lsu.edu/crs/R42718.pdf

[14] V. Chang, P. Chundury, and M. Chetty, “Spiders in the sky: User
perceptions of drones, privacy, and security,” in Proceedings of the
2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
ser. CHI ’17. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2017, pp. 6765–6776.
[Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3025453.3025632
[15] C. Lidynia, R. Philipsen, and M. Zieﬂe, Droning on About
Drones—Acceptance of and Perceived Barriers
in
Civil Usage Contexts. Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2017, pp. 317–329.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-41959-6 26

to Drones

[16] A. Cavoukian, “Privacy and drones: Unmanned aerial vehicles,”
Information and Privacy Commissioner of Ontario, Ontario,
Canada, Tech. Rep., August 2012.
[Online]. Available: https:
//www.publicsafety.gc.ca/lbrr/archives/cnmcs-plcng/cn29822-eng.pdf
suc-
[Online].
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/

[17] (2016,
cessful
Available:
amazon-claims-ﬁrst-successful-prime-air-drone-delivery

December)
prime

delivery.

Amazon

claims

drone

ﬁrst

air

[5] M. Dorigo, D. Floreano, L. M. Gambardella, F. Mondada, S. Nolﬁ,
T. Baaboura, M. Birattari, M. Bonani, M. Brambilla, A. Brutschy,
D. Burnier, A. Campo, A. L. Christensen, A. Decugniere, G. Di
Caro, F. Ducatelle, E. Ferrante, A. Forster, J. M. Gonzales, J. Guzzi,
V. Longchamp, S. Magnenat, N. Mathews, M. Montes de Oca,
R. O’Grady, C. Pinciroli, G. Pini, P. Retornaz, J. Roberts, V. Sperati,

[18] A. Abdilla, A. Richards, and S. Burrow, “Power and endurance
in 2015 IEEE/RSJ
modelling of battery-powered rotorcraft,”
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
IROS 2015, Hamburg, Germany, September 28 - October 2,
2015.
[Online]. Available: https:
IEEE, 2015, pp. 675–680.
//doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2015.7353445

[20] J. Z. W. C. H. D. H. J. A. T. Huaibo Song, Chenghai Yang,
“Comparison of mosaicking techniques for airborne images from
consumer-grade cameras,” Journal of Applied Remote Sensing,
vol. 10, pp. 10 – 10 – 14, 2016.
[Online]. Available: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1117/1.JRS.10.016030

[21] G. Chmaj and H. Selvaraj, “Distributed processing applications for

uav/drones: A survey,” 08 2014.

[22] S. Chaumette, “Chapter 8: Cooperating UAVs and Swarming,” in
UAV Networks and Communications, S. C. Kamesh Namuduri, Jae
H. Kim and J. P. Sterbenz, Eds. Cambridge University Press, 2016.
[Online]. Available: https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01391871

[23] Y. Wei, G. R. Madey, and M. B. Blake, “Agent-based simulation
for uav swarm mission planning and execution,” in Proceedings of
the Agent-Directed Simulation Symposium.
Society for Computer
Simulation International, 2013, p. 2.

[24] R. Purta, S. Nagrecha, and G. Madey, “Multi-hop communications in
a swarm of uavs,” in Proceedings of the Agent-Directed Simulation
Symposium.
Society for Computer Simulation International, 2013,
p. 5.

[25] G. Madey, “Dynamic predictive simulations of agent swarms
(dddas),” University of Notre Dame, IN, USA, Defense Technical
[Online].
Information Center Report ADA601979,
Available: http://www.dtic.mil/get-tr-doc/pdf?AD=ADA601979

Jan 2014.

[26] L. Apvrille, Y. Roudier, and T. J. Tanzi, “Autonomous drones for
disasters management: Safety and security veriﬁcations,” in 2015
1st URSI Atlantic Radio Science Conference (URSI AT-RASC), May
2015, pp. 1–2.

[27] S. Ross, N. Melik-Barkhudarov, K. S. Shankar, A. Wendel,
D. Dey, J. A. Bagnell, and M. Hebert, “Learning monocular
reactive UAV control in cluttered natural environments,” in 2013
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
[Online]. Available: http:
IEEE, may 2013, pp. 1765–1772.
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6630809/

[28] G.-G. Wang, H. E. Chu, and S. Mirjalili, “Three-dimensional
path planning for UCAV using an improved bat algorithm,”
Aerospace Science and Technology, vol. 49, pp. 231–238,
feb
2016. [Online]. Available: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S1270963815003843

[29] M. S. Couceiro, D. Portugal, and R. P. Rocha, “A collective robotic
architecture in search and rescue scenarios,” in Proceedings of the
28th Annual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing - SAC ’13.
New York, New York, USA: ACM Press, 2013, p. 64. [Online].
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2480362.2480377

[30] J. Pugh and A. Martinoli, “Multi-robot

learning with particle
swarm optimization,” in Proceedings of the ﬁfth international joint
conference on Autonomous agents and multiagent systems - AAMAS
’06. New York, New York, USA: ACM Press, 2006, p. 441. [Online].
Available: http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=1160633.1160715

[31] G. Vasarhelyi, C. Viragh, G. Somorjai, N. Tarcai, T. Szorenyi,
T. Nepusz, and T. Vicsek, “Outdoor ﬂocking and formation ﬂight
with autonomous aerial robots,” in 2014 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems.
IEEE, sep 2014, pp.
3866–3873. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/
6943105/

[32] R. N. Akram, P. F. Bonnefoi, S. Chaumette, K. Markantonakis,
and D. Sauveron, “Secure autonomous uavs ﬂeets by using new
speciﬁc embedded secure elements,” in 2016 IEEE Trustcom/Big-
DataSE/ISPA, Aug 2016, pp. 606–614.

[33] J. A. Steinmann, R. F. Babiceanu, and R. Seker, “Uas security:
Encryption key negotiation for partitioned data,” in 2016 Integrated
Communications Navigation and Surveillance (ICNS), April 2016,
pp. 1E4–1–1E4–7.

[19] J. A. Montenegro, M. Pinto, and L. Fuentes, “An empirical study of
the power consumption of cryptographic primitives in android,” 05
2017.

[34] O. Blazy, P.-F. Bonnefoi, E. Conchon, D. Sauveron, R. N. Akram,
K. Markantonakis, K. Mayes, and S. Chaumette, “An efﬁcient proto-
col for uas security,” in 2017 Integrated Communications Navigation
and Surveillance (ICNS), 2017.

[35] J. Won, S.-H. Seo, and E. Bertino, “A secure communication protocol
for drones and smart objects,” in Proceedings of the 10th ACM
Symposium on Information, Computer and Communications Security,
ser. ASIA CCS ’15. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2015, pp. 249–260.
[Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2714576.2714616

[36] C. Mtita, M. Laurent, D. Sauveron, R. N. Akram, K. Markantonakis,
and S. Chaumette, “Serverless protocols for inventory and tracking
with a uav,” in 2017 IEEE/AIAA 36th Digital Avionics Systems
Conference (DASC).

IEEE, 2017.

[37] C. Mtita, M. Laurent, and J. Delort, “Efﬁcient serverless radio-
frequency identiﬁcation mutual authentication and secure tag search
protocols with untrusted readers,” IET Information Security, vol. 10,
no. 5, pp. 262–271, 2016.

[38] R. N. Akram, K. Markantonakis, K. Mayes, P. Bonnefoi, D. Sauveron,
and S. Chaumette, “A secure and trusted protocol for enhancing safety
of on-ground airplanes using uavs,” in Integrated Communications
Navigation and Surveillance.

IEEE, 2017.

[39] D. F. Pigatto, L. Gonc¸alves, G. F. Roberto, J. F. Rodrigues Filho,
N. B. Floro da Silva, A. R. Pinto, and K. R. Lucas Jaquie
Castelo Branco, “The hamster data communication architecture for
unmanned aerial, ground and aquatic systems,” Journal of Intelligent
& Robotic Systems, vol. 84, no. 1, pp. 705–723, 2016. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10846-016-0356-x

[40] J. A. Maxa, M. S. B. Mahmoud, and N. Larrieu, “Extended veriﬁ-
cation of secure uaanet routing protocol,” in 2016 IEEE/AIAA 35th
Digital Avionics Systems Conference (DASC), Sept 2016, pp. 1–16.

[41] R. N. Akram, K. Markantonakis, K. Mayes, P. F. Bonnefoi, A. Cherif,
D. Sauveron, and S. Chaumette, “A secure and trusted channel pro-
tocol for uavs ﬂeets,” in WISTP2017, The 11th WISTP International
Conference on Information Security Theory and Practice, Sep 2017.

[42] E. Abebe, A. Beloglazov, D. Karunamoorthy, J. Richter, and
K. Steer, “Drone range extension via host vehicles,” May 23 2017,
uS Patent 9,659,502. [Online]. Available: https://www.google.com/
patents/US9659502

[43] M. L. Cummings, A. S. Brzezinski, and J. D. Lee, “Operator perfor-
mance and intelligent aiding in unmanned aerial vehicle scheduling,”
IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 22, no. 2, 2007.

[44] M. R. Brust, M. I. Akbas, and D. Turgut, “VBCA: A virtual
forces clustering algorithm for autonomous aerial drone systems,”
in Annual IEEE Systems Conference, SysCon 2016, Orlando, FL,
USA, April 18-21, 2016, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[Online]. Available:

https://doi.org/10.1109/SYSCON.2016.7490517

