Cyber-Physical War Gaming 

EJM Colbert, DT Sullivan, A Kott 

Computational and Information Sciences Directorate 
U.S. Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, USA 
E-mail: edward.j.colbert2.civ@mail.mil; daniel.t.sullivan12.ctr@mail.mil; 
alexander.kott1.civ@mail.mil 

Abstract:  This  paper  presents  general  strategies  for  cyber  war  gaming  of  Cyber-Physical 
Systems  (CPSs)  that  are  used  for  cyber  security  research  at  the  U.S.  Army  Research 
Laboratory  (ARL).  Since  Supervisory  Control  and  Data  Acquisition  (SCADA)  and  other 
CPSs are operational systems, it is difficult or impossible to perform security experiments on 
actual systems. The authors describe how table-top strategy sessions and realistic, live CPS 
war  games  are  conducted  at  ARL.  They  also  discuss  how  the  recorded  actions  of  the  war 
game activity can be used to test and validate cyber-defence models, such as game-theoretic 
security models. 

Keywords: SCADA, ICS, CPS, War gaming, Red Team, Blue Team, Cyber Defence, Cyber-
Physical 

Introduction 
It is commonly known that many Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs)—which include Industrial 
Control  Systems  (ICSs),  Supervisory  Control  and  Data  Acquisition  (SCADA)  systems,  and 
“things” in the so-called Internet of Things (IOT)—are often vulnerable to cyber threats. For 
example, the very well known STUXNET attack targeted nuclear power plant centrifuges in 
Iran.  Similar  cyber  (and  physical)  attacks  on  CPS  equipment  could  very  well  target  the 
United States’ power grid, the control systems of large water dams, and even people, since 
wearable CPSs are becoming more and more popular. Even though the hardware controlling 
CPSs are vulnerable to cyber-attacks, they remain relatively unprotected from many potential 
adversaries. In an attempt to educate operators, owners and users of CPSs, the ARL recruits 
players  for  red  (attack)  and  blue  (defence)  teams  and  conducts  CPS  war  games  in  an 
environment as close to realistic as possible. The decisions (moves) of the war game players 
are  recorded  so  that  a  better  understanding  of  how  security  models  may  allow  useful 
assessments and/or predictions of attacks against currently operating SCADA and other CPS 
systems.  This  paper  discusses  current  results  and  future  plans  for  CPS  war  gaming  in  the 
following subsections. 

SCADA and Industrial Control Systems 
An Industrial Control System (ICS) is a generic term for a combined system of electrical and 
mechanical devices and processes that automatically control the operation or one or more 
physical machines. Machines can be as simple as a self-service gasoline filling pump system, 
or as complex as a complete robotic assembly line in a vehicle production plant.  

A Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system is a specific type of ICS that 
usually  controls  many  machines  separated  by  relatively  large  distances  (Sullivan,  Luiff  & 
Colbert  2016).  The  key  discriminator  which  separates  an  ICS  from  an  Information 
Technology (IT) system is that an ICS monitors or interacts with something physical in the 

	
	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
real world. Previously, ICSs were isolated; however, due to demand for greater productivity 
and  efficiency,  ICSs  and  IT  enterprise  networks  are  now  being  inter-connected.  This  new 
trend  exposes  ICS  devices  to  many  new  threats  they  would  have  never  encountered  when 
previously isolated. 

Error! Reference source not found., below, depicts a typical manufacturing plant with its 
ICS connected to a corporate IT network. The ICS consists of the Supervisory Control and 
Basic  Control  layers  and  field  bus  networks  connected  to  plant  sensors  and  other  physical 
devices. In this example, a corporate Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) on the edge of the corporate 
network  offers  some  protection  against  cyber-attacks  from  external  networks.  However, 
many network attack vectors remain, putting the physical machines (sensors and equipment 
in  the  figure)  at  risk.  In  many  cases,  physical  machines  in  ICS  and  SCADA  systems  are 
critically important for human sustenance, such as power switches and transformers in the US 
electric  grid.  Automated  processes  in  the  ICS  are  programmed  into  and  controlled  by  ICS 
hardware  devices  such  as  Programmable  Logic  Controllers  (PLCs)  and  are  consequently 
monitored by a human operator, who manages Human Machine Interfaces (HMIs). A recent 
summary  of  cyber  security  issues  and  method  of  SCADA  and  ICS  systems  was  written  by 
Colbert and Kott (2016).  

Figure 1: Notional ICS and corporate IT network architecture 

War Gaming 
War gaming has been used to refine aspects of warfare since the 5th century B.C. when the 
ancient Chinese general and philosopher Sun Tzu documented military strategies in The art 
of war (Sawyer & Sawyer 2007). War gaming methods are now used in business and military 
training  as  essential  elements  of  developing  strategic  leaders  (Horn  2011;  Curry  &  Perla 
2011;  McCown  2005).  Without  risking  a  company’s  reputation,  stock  value,  or  customers’ 
confidence,  corporate  cyber  defenders  can  test  their  cyber  play  books  and  identify  needed 

	
	
	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
skills or new processes in a safe and controlled environment. A realistic war game can be an 
immersive learning tool where players can practice making decisions in real time and can see 
the effects immediately. Modern cyber war games are played between cyber attacker in a ‘red 
team’ and cyber defenders in a ‘blue team’ and are organised around a business scenario in 
which teams and players receive awards for their actions. They are necessarily structured to 
simulate  a  real  attack  so  that  the  defenders  can  exercise  and  refine  their  defence  strategy 
methods for potential future engagements (for example, Bailey, Kaplan & Weinberg 2012). 
War games are also very useful for uncovering ‘black swans’ or unforeseen gaps in current 
cyber  defences  (Perla  &  McGrady  2011).  Knowledge  learned  in  war  games  is  dependent 
upon the ability of the game moderators to simulate real-world network and processes. 

Table-Top War Gaming at ARL 
In order to develop strategies for defending SCADA systems, a full-day Table-Top exercise 
was performed at ARL in 2014. A SCADA system named AQUA was analysed during the 
exercise.  AQUA  is  a  notional  Army  SCADA  system  representative  of  an  Army  production 
system.  The  process  diagram  for  AQUA  is  shown  in  Error!  Reference  source  not  found., 
below.  AQUA  produces  high-quality  meals  for  soldiers  and  consists  of  six  manufacturing 
processes indicated in the figure. 

Figure 2: Process map of the AQUA ICS 

The  plant  network  diagram  for  AQUA  is  shown  in  Error!  Reference  source  not  found., 
below.  It  consists  of  6  PLCs,  several  Windows  workstations,  a  Closed-Circuit  Television 
(CCTV)  system,  and  a  wireless  network  for  tablet  computers.  Technicians  use  the  tablet 
computers to access the Human Machine Interface (HMI) displays using Hypertext Transfer 
Protocol  Secure  (HTTPS)  and  to  read  machinery  documentation  in  Portable  Document 
Format (PDF). The plant network is not connected to the corporate network or the Internet. 
The HMIs and PLCs transmit and receive the commonly used ModBus-transmission control 

	
	
	
 
 
 
 
 
 
protocol (TCP) communication protocol. The AQUA system is air-gapped from the corporate 
network and the Internet, as indicated in the figure. 

Figure 3: Network diagram of the AQUA plant network 

The Table-Top activity was conducted in a war gaming scenario in which a red team would 
formulate attacks, and a blue team would attempt to mitigate those attacks. The teams were 
composed  of  government  and  contract  workers  from  ARL.  In  general,  the  network-based 
attacks  proposed  by  the  red  team  were  defendable,  often  by  simple  security  measures  that 
were unfortunately not already installed in the AQUA system. Some specific areas of follow-
up research and development were proposed for SCADA intrusion detection, such as a Layer-
2 Intrusion Detection System (IDS) and anomaly-based network detectors. 

An information packet (Colbert et al. 2015a) was given to all red and blue team participants 
before  the  exercise  began.  It  provided  background  material  for  those  not  familiar  with 
SCADA  systems,  a  discussion  of  the  differences  between  IT  enterprise  networks  and 
SCADA networks. Technical information about the AQUA system was also provided in the 
packet. 

The general goal of the Table-Top exercise was to generate enough discussion so that general 
gaps in security measures could be identified. The ARL Sustaining Base Network Assurance 
Branch  (SBNAB)  and  Network  Security  Branch  (NSB)  support  research  and  development 
activities of IT enterprise IDS systems and most of the game participants from these branches 
were  familiar  with  those  IDS  efforts.  As  such,  improvements  to  SCADA  security  were 
typically  framed  in  terms  of  IDS  plug-in  modules.  Complete  details  of  the  exercise  are 
documented in Colbert et al. (2015b). Some general conclusions from the exercise follow.  

•  The  SCADA  network  should  be  regarded  in  the  same  manner  that  a  government 
classified  network  is  regarded.  While  the  system  may  not  be  classified,  the  same 

	
	
	
 
 
 
 
 
 
measures should be applied: tight physical security; zero or highly restricted wireless 
access;  US  Department  of  Defense  (DoD)  Security  Technical  Implementation 
Guidance (STIG) regulations should be applied when possible; firewalls should be in 
place  to  highly  restrict  traffic  to  and  from  critical  network  assets;  and,  appropriate 
policies and training should be created and enforced. 

•  Two  particular  technology  improvements  were  noted  for  follow-up  research  and 

development for IDS plug-in modules: 

o  Anomaly-based  network  monitoring  should  be  developed  for  HMI/PLC 

traffic. 

o  Layer-2  traffic  should  be  monitored  for  defending  against  attacks  coming  in 
below the Internet Protocol (IP) layer (Layer-3). This includes wireless traffic, 
which  seems  to  be  coming  to  more  and  more  ‘protected’  networks,  even 
classified government networks. 

•  A  considerable  amount  of  development  effort  would  be  needed  to  develop  new 
security  capabilities  for  SCADA,  and  a  considerable  amount  of  maintenance  effort 
would  be  needed  by  both  network  security  analysts  and  plant  operators  to  keep  the 
new security tools calibrated, especially after changes are made in the plant network. 
A benefit of having a SCADA anomaly detector in place, however, is that all changes 
to the plant network would be immediately alarmed. 

•  Since  much  SCADA  hardware  is  not  designed  for  cyber  security,  physical  security 
often  currently  provides  the  main  defence.  Defence-in-depth  is  vitally  important  for 
an effective defence. Strong policies and employee training must be used, especially 
for alleviating insider threat. 

The  2014  Table-Top  exercise  provided  an  exceptional  view  of  the  technical  and 
programmatic security issues in SCADA systems that could be followed up by hardware test 
bed experiments. ARL plans to continue to perform similar exercises in the future to better 
understand  how  ARL  SCADA  research  should  proceed  and  to  better  educate  its  personnel 
about ongoing problems and issues specific to different ICSs.  

It  is  important  to  note  that  while  important  general  conclusions  for  improved  security  were 
found  in  the  exercise,  since  each  SCADA  system  is  unique  a  dedicated  Table-Top  or  other 
brainstorming  activity  would  be  needed  if  threats  are  to  be  identified  and  mitigated  for 
specific systems. For the AQUA production line, poor network security proved to be a severe 
problem.  Poor  network  security  exists  on  many  modern  SCADA  systems  since  they  were 
originally  designed  for  physical  security  protection  in  an  isolated  network  environment. 
Consequently, most or all of the red team attacks from the Table-Top experiment would have 
been  successful.  However,  a  few  simple  network  security  improvements  would  have  made 
the  AQUA  system  significantly  safer,  such  as  removing  the  wireless  access  point  and  not 
using the default configuration for routers and switches.  

In general, pure network attacks against AQUA are defendable if the IT network section of 
the  system  is  upgraded  with  appropriate  security  measures.  However,  there  are  non-IT 
network  elements of the AQUA system that are more complicated to  defend; PLCs are not 
built  for  network  security  and  the  Modbus  TCP  protocol  does  not  use  any  authentication 
measures. 

Since SCADA systems are, overall, distinctly different from standard IT enterprise systems, 
network  security  analysts  need  to  educate  themselves  and  understand  the  intricacies  of 

	
	
	
 
 
 
 
SCADA  in  order  to  guard  them  properly.  Furthermore,  for  each  SCADA  installation,  the 
analysts  would  need  to  understand  the  particular  intricacies  of  the  SCADA  system  being 
defended,  since  each  SCADA  system  usually  has  very  different  types  of  hardware.  This 
differs from IT enterprise systems, which typically run a limited number of operating systems 
and applications. Unlike SCADA systems, the underlying hardware in IT enterprise systems 
is  much  less  relevant,  since  many  or  most  of  the  vulnerabilities  are  software-oriented  and 
already known. 

Live war gaming at ARL 
The objective of the war gaming activity on a real live SCADA system is to capture activities 
of  cyber  defenders  as  they  protect  a  corporate  and  an  ICS  network  as  well  as  capture  the 
actions of hackers as they try to halt automated processes. Afterwards, the captured activities 
are  compared  to  a  security  model  of  the  system  to  determine  if  the  model  algorithm  can 
accurately predict actions of the cyber actors. 

In  the  planned  live  war  game,  a  simulated  corporate  network  and  a  SCADA  system  are 
monitored  by  a  security  operations  centre  while  being  attacked  by  hackers.  Three  teams  of 
actors participate in the war game: 

•  Red  Team:  threat  actors  who  represent  a  mid-level  of  knowledge  in  penetrating 
networks. Red team members are not ‘script-kiddies’ nor do they have the resources 
of a nation-state; 

•  Blue Team: security operations analysts who will monitor and defend the corporate 

network and the SCADA system operations; and, 

•  White  Team:  neutral  group  that  facilitates  the  war  game.  The  white  team  provides 
the  initial  configuration  of  the  corporate  network  and  SCADA  system,  training  (as 
needed),  and  monitors  all  activity  of  the  game.  The  white  team  also  adjudicates 
scoring of the red and blue teams. 

The  mission  of  the  red  team  is  to  compromise  the  availability  of  the  SCADA  system 
operation  by  stopping  the  automated  process.  The  mission  of  the  blue  team  is  to  monitor 
system  status,  maintain  critical  IT  services  in  the  corporate  network,  and  maintain  normal 
operations  of  the  plant.  At  the  conclusion  of  each  war  game  event,  the  white  team  will 
capture all artefacts and archive the data for analysis. A post-war game meeting will be held 
to review the actions of each team and share lessons learned. 

Sample live war game scenario 
A  specific  sample  live  war  game  is  described  next,  in  which  two  companies  manufacture 
competing  smartphone  products.  Company  ALPHA  has  a  SCADA  production  line  that  is 
connecting to its corporate network and to the Internet. The ALPHA corporate network and 
smartphone production line system are protected by the blue team in the war game scenario. 
Company BETA has recently suffered a drop in smartphone sales and wishes to increase its 
revenue and dominate the market. Company BETA hires a team of hackers (the red team) to 
compromise  the  availability  of  the  company  ALPHA  smartphone  production  line.  Sample 
game play (schedule, rules, and point scoring system) for this war game are described next. 

War game schedule 
The blue team must design its network defences prior to the start of the war game. The white 
team will provide a read-ahead package to the blue team members one-to-two weeks before 

	
	
	
 
 
 
 
 
 
the  war  game  begins.  The  read-ahead  package  will  contain  technical  information  about  the 
system, such as: 

• 

Initial  network  topology  of  the  simulated  corporate  and  ICS  network  for  the  war 
game; 

•  Lists  of  each  physical  and  Virtual  Machine  (VM)  used  in  the  war  game  along  with 

their respective Operating System (OS) and software;  

•  Make and model of the PLC(s) which operate the simulated automated process; and, 
•  Additional  hardware  such  as  firewalls,  switches,  or  routers  that  are  available  to  the 

blue team for enhancing the system security. 

The blue team members may bring additional tools or software they would like to install. Red 
team  members  may  also  bring  their  own  tools  and  software.  Red  team  members  will  not 
receive  the  read-ahead  package.  They  will  only  receive  general  information  about  the  war 
game play provided by the white team in the kickoff meeting. 

The  war  game  will  be  executed  in  two  events  (Event  1  and  Event  2),  which  are  identical 
except  for  the  fact  that  the  blue  team  has  additional  SCADA  security  training  in  Event  2. 
There  will  be  two  distinct  blue  teams  (Blue  Team  #1  and  Blue  Team  #2)  as  well  as  two 
distinct red teams (Red Team #1 and Red Team #2). Each event will be conducted over a 3-
day period. The white team will meet with the blue and red teams in advance of the war game 
to answer questions and coordinate building access. 

The timeline for Event 1 is illustrated in Figure 4, below. On Day 1, both teams will meet for 
a  short  introductory  kickoff  meeting.  Blue  Team  #1  will  then  have  two  hours  to  install 
software  or  hardware  to  protect  the  simulated  corporate  and  ICS  networks.  An  additional 
hour  will  be  spent  with  the  white  team  discussing  and  verifying  the  mitigations.  The  white 
team will then commence the war game and the blue team will monitor and attempt to defend 
the ALPHA SCADA system for the next 21 hours while the red team attempts to compromise 
its  availability.  During  game  play,  activities  of  each  player  as  well  as  network  packet  data 

	
	
	
 
 
 
 
will be captured by the white team. Each red and blue team member will keep notes on the 
actions taken to validate point scoring. 

Figure 4: Event 1 timeline 
After  24  hours  of  game  play  (Day  2),  the  white  team  will  stop  the  game  play  for  Event  1. 
Each  player  will  provide  notes  describing  his  or  her  actions  to  the  white  team.  The  white 
team will then archive game play data such as network packet captures, logs, and capture of 
screen video. The white team will have 24 hours to complete the data capture and archiving 
of the event. 

On Day 3, all red and blue team members will be invited to a two-hour technical exchange 
meeting during which each team will share insights and information about their strategies and 
provide  feedback  to  the  white  team.  Point  totals  will  be  share  and  game  prizes  will  be 
awarded.  The  white  team  will  brief  their  analysis  of  the  collected  game  play  data  and  will 
discuss conclusions of the war game. Lessons learned will be recorded by the white team. 

Event 2 
Event  2  is  conducted  in  a  similar  manner  to  Event  1  with  one  change.  Before  starting  the 
event (on Day 4), the white team will provide an in-depth security brief on general methods 
of  SCADA  security  and  specific  applications  for  the  ALPHA  production-line  system.  This 
change  is  performed  in  order  to  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  blue  team  SCADA  security 
training. Many cyber defence security workers are well trained in IT enterprise security, but 
not necessarily in SCADA security. The three-day structure of Event 1 shown in Figure 4 is 
then  repeated  for  Event  2  during  days  4,  5,  and  6,  respectively.  A  new  set  of  red  and  blue 
teams are chosen using the same team selection criteria used for Event 1. 

Sample war game play  
The red and blue teams are provided with game rules and objectives used for scoring in the 
initial  kickoff  meeting.  Violations  of  game  rules  create  point  penalties  for  the  respective 
teams. A preliminary set of rules and a sample point scoring system are given below. 

General game structure 
In this example exercise, the white team randomly selects members of the red and blue teams 
from a larger pool of volunteers. Players in event 1 are not allowed to participate in event 2. 
Members  from  the  red  and  blue  teams  will  nominate  their  own  team  captain.  In  order  to 
accomplish their strategy, red and blue team members are allowed to use their own hardware 
and  software  during  the  game  activity.  The  red  team  may  use  cyber-attacks  or  physical 
attacks as they see fit, since both are viable in a realistic setting. Game play is dictated to the 
teams  using  specific  rules  of  conduct  and  point  scoring,  such  as  those  listed  in  Table  1, 
below. 

	
	
	
 
 
 
 
 
Game Rule 

Description 

A competitor can participate in only one war 
game event 

Violation Penalty Points 

5 points deducted from the 
team for each person who 
attempts to compete in both 
war game events 

Before competition begins, the red team may 
not eavesdrop or surreptitiously observe the 
blue team configure the war game network 

20 points deducted from the 
red team 

During competition, red and blue team 
members may not visit their opponents’ area 
unless approved by the white team 

20 points deducted from the 
offending team 

Table 1: Red and blue team game rules of conduct 

1 

2 

3 

Sample Point Scoring 
The  white  team  will  track  game  scores.  Negative  points  are  levied  for  violations  of  game 
rules and positive points are awarded for achievements. In this sample game, each team has 
knowledge  of  its  current  score,  but  it  does  not  have  knowledge  of  the  other  team’s  score. 
Table 2, below, lists sample point values for each achievement scored by the blue team, as 
well as the criterion for award and the award validation method.  

Achievement 

Point Value 

Award Criterion 

Validation Method 

1 

5 points for 
each critical 
service per 
hour  

Critical service is 
normally running 

White team will connect to each 
service to verify it is operational 

2 

10 points 

Stopping red team 
intrusion 

Blue team shows the white team that 
an intruder was present and the blue 
team’s action prevented new 
connections from the intruder. The 
blue team must show that the intruder 
is being prevented from reconnecting 
by showing log entries to the white 
team. 

Table 2: Blue team point scoring system 

The  red  team  gains  points  for  having  presence  on  the  corporate  network  or  the  ALPHA 
SCADA  system,  disabling  vital  ALPHA  corporate  network  services  (for  example,  email, 
web,  Voice  Over  Internet  Protocol  [VOiP]  telephony),  or  compromising  a  critical  plant 
process  (see  Table  3,  below).  The  red  team  automatically  wins  the  competition  if  they 
completely halt the smartphone production line. 

	
	
	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Achievement 

Point Value 

Award Criterion 

Validation Method 

1 

5 points for 
each critical 
service stopped 

Red team stops a 
Company Blue 
corporate critical 
service (for 
example, web, 
email, etc.) 

White team will try to access the 
service. Points are awarded if the 
service is down for 10 minutes. 

2 

10 points 

Red team gains a 
remote shell on a 
Company Blue 
host 

Red team shows the white team a 
screen capture video of a remote shell 
session and displays the IP address of 
the remote host. 

3 

10 points 

4 

1 point for 
each IP address 

Red team has 
administrative 
privileges on a 
Company Blue 
host or network 
element 

Red team learns IP 
address of a host 
on the ICS 
network 

Red team executes a command on the 
host that requires administrative 
rights. Red team shows the white 
team a screen capture of the admin 
command executing. 

Red team sends IP address to white 
team to validate. 

5 

Infinite 

Company Blue’s 
ICS process stops 

White team witnesses the ICS process 
has stopped. 

Table 3: Red team point scoring system 

Recording war game activity 
In this example, the mission of the white team is to record game play activity so that human 
actions can later be compared with predictions of computer security models, and the utility of 
the  security  models  can  be  evaluated  and  hopefully  improved.  To  accomplish  a  uniform 
sampling  of  actors,  members  of  the  red  and  blue  teams  will  be  chosen  from  academia, 
government institutions, or companies and team selection methods will be the same for both 
Event  1  and  Event  2.  As  in  a  real  scenario,  blue  team  members  can  provide  additional 
security measures during game play as needed. Red team members have a minimum amount 
of a priori technical information about the ALPHA system. Acquiring useful information for 
their attacks is part of the red team strategy. 

Network traffic on the war game network will be recorded by the white team. The white team 
will  also  record  strategic  actions  by  red  and  blue  team  members,  hopefully  with  assistance 

	
	
	
 
 
 
 
from the actual performers. After completing Events 1 and 2, the white team will present the 
game results at an open meeting and all teams will discuss lessons learned. Each team will 
have an opportunity to present its strategy and observations as well as recommendations for 
improving the war game. Point summaries will be discussed and awards will be given to the 
winning  team.  As  mentioned,  the  purpose  of  having  two  events  is  to  measure  the  effect  of 
providing more in-depth training to the blue team for the second event. 

Post-game activities: comparison with models 
After the white team records game play activity, a computer security model will be used to 
analyse  game  play  based  on  the  initial  system  configuration  and  sample  blue  and  red  team 
strategies. This post-game activity is intended to test the validity of security models so that 
they can be improved for practical use as a security tool. 

Next,  a  sample  game-theoretic  security  model  is  described  in  which  three  games  occur 
simultaneously at the physical layer, the cyber layer, and the management layer. This model 
assumes that all game players act rationally to optimize gain and an equilibrium strategy can 
be computed. For example, in the cyber game, the encounter between attacker and defender is 
described by a zero-sum game and rational moves of the two players are defined by saddle-
points (Nash equilibria points) once the costs and awards of the two teams are known for all 
game strategies. 

A  sample  cyber  game  (one  of  the  three)  is  described  next  in  which  an  attacker  enters  the 
attack surface and penetrates a series of layers guarded by the defender before arriving at the 
target (disabling the plant). The attacker devises a set 
 is the 
attack  strategy  space,  where  the  attack  strategies  are  identified  by  index .  Likewise,  the 
defender has developed a set of 
 is the defence strategy space 
and 
  is  the  defence  strategy  index.  The  sample  model  assumes  that  both  attacker  and 
defender  have  complete  knowledge  of  the  system  and  can  consequently  determine  each 
other’s  strategies.  The  defender  strategies  are  accomplished  by  selecting  specific  subsets  of 
cyber-defence  mitigations  {
  is  the 
mitigation  index.  There  are 
  layers  that  the  attacker  needs  to  penetrate.  These  layers  are 
identified by the index . 

  is  the  set  of  all  mitigations,  and 

 strategies {

 strategies {

  where 

 where 

 where 

There  are  costs  for  both  the  attacker  and  the  defender  for  each  specific  strategy  tuple
That is, given an attack strategy   and a defence strategy  , the attacker suffers a cost 
accomplish his goal and the defender spends a cost 

. 
 to 
 to deploy his or her defence strategy.  

Finally,  given  a  strategy  choice
probability 
or she reaches the target 

 , or 

 and obtains a benefit

. 

,  the  attacker  is  assumed  to  penetrate  layer 

 in shorthand notation. If the attacker penetrates all 

  with 
 layers, he 

It is assumed that when the attacker gains benefit 𝑏, the defender loses an equivalent value of 
his or her assets, so that the defender strives to keep the relevant portion (𝑏) of his or her 
assets. 

The attacker and defender expecting utility 𝑢! depends on the benefit 𝑏, the probability of 
penetrating all layers 𝑃!,!" =  

, and expended costs 𝐶!,!". For the attacker:  

𝑝!,!"

!!
!!!

	
	
	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1a)  𝑢! 𝑠!,!, 𝑠!,! = 𝑏

!!
!!!

𝑝! 𝑠!,!, 𝑠!,!

  − 𝐶! 𝑠!,!, 𝑠!,! , or, in shorthand notation 

(1b)  𝑢!,!" =  𝑏 𝑃!,!" −   𝐶!,!" 

Likewise, for the defender: 

(1c)  𝑢! 𝑠!,!, 𝑠!,! = 𝑏[1 −  

!!
!!!

𝑝! 𝑠!,!, 𝑠!,! ]

  − 𝐶! 𝑠!,!, 𝑠!,! , or, in shorthand 

notation 

(1d)  𝑢!,!" =  𝑏 (1 −  𝑃!,!") −   𝐶!,!" 

One game equilibrium can be calculated using a Stackelberg model in which the defender is 
the leader and the attacker is the follower. To choose his or her initial strategy 𝑠!
defender will seek to minimize the damages to his or her assets and the costs of defending his 
or her assets using an affordable defender strategy, which is equivalent to maximizing his or 
her utility 𝑢!,!". That is:  

∗ , the 

(2a) 

∗ = argmax
𝑠!

!  
 !!,! ∊!!  !!,! ∊!!

 𝑢!(𝑠!,!, 𝑠!,!), 

where 𝑆!

! ⊂   𝑆! is the subset of affordable defender strategies. 

After the defender chooses strategy 𝑠!
maximizes his utility 𝑢!,!": 

∗ , the attacker selects his attack strategy 𝑠!

∗, that 

(2b) 

∗ = argmax
𝑠!

!!,! 

 𝑢!(𝑠!,!, 𝑠!

∗ ) 

The defender can then assess the probability 𝑃!
by calculating 

∗(𝑠!,!, 𝑠!,!) that the attack reaches the target T 

(2c) 

 𝑃!

∗ =

!!
!!!

𝑝! 𝑠!

∗, 𝑠!

∗  

. 

A second Stackelberg equilibrium can also be calculated by allowing the attacker to move 
first, followed by the defender. 

While  these  equilibrium  points  are  interesting  mathematical  entities,  the  simple  game-
theoretical model here makes many assumptions that were not necessarily true in a real war 
game  of  human  teams  of  defenders  and  attackers  in  our  December  2016  “Terra”  cyber-
physical  war  game  held  at  ARL  (Colbert  et  al.  2017).  Some  important  differences  between 
our simple model and a more realistic attack scenario are: 

•  The attacker entity may be a group of people that work 8-hour shifts around the clock, 

not a single person with a single utility function;  

	
	
	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  The  attacker  entity  may  be  a  group  of  people  that  has  a  leader  that  manages  people 
that execute the attacks. The group will likely have members that do not take direction 
well from the manager;  

•  The  attacker  (and/or  defender)  may  not  know  how  to  navigate  his  or  her  strategy 

space because of unknown information (rules) at the beginning of the game;  
•  As information is learnt by both teams, the game rules and utilities may change; 
•  Similarly, system vulnerabilities and, consequently, game rules may be dynamic; 
•  The actors on the defence and attacking side may not make decisions according to a 
known  utility  function;  for  example,  a  nation  state  may  take  actions  independent  of 
the costs, and in a war game a red-team member may be more interested in displaying 
his or her prowess rather than helping his or her team; 

•  Zero-sum is an interesting concept for finding solutions, but is not realistic; 
•  Government  politics  or  polices  may  change  during  a  nation-state  attack,  which 

effectively modifies the rules of the game;  

•  Attackers and defenders do not always act rationally. In a group setting, the attacker 
entity’s  decisions,  effectively  made  by  a  number  of  people,  may  be  chaotic  or  very 
difficult  to  model  easily  with  a  probabilistic  model  such  as  instance-based  learning 
(Gonzalez, Lerch & Lebiere 2003); and, 
 As  a  real-life  security  situation  unfolds,  a  series  of  (illogical)  moves  are  made  on 
each side as the (dynamic) game evolves. If the uncertainty of each move is too large, 
the  solution  (for  example,  a  saddle  point  in  strategy  space)  might  not  be  useful  to  a 
system owner. 

• 

These issues should be considered and accommodated at some reasonable level before game-
theoretical models can be developed into good attacker-defender security models for war 
game or real actors. 

Conclusion 
This  sample  cyber  framework  describes  a  simple  game-theoretic  approach  in  which  both 
attacker and defender have complete knowledge of the system, can infer all strategies of their 
opponents,  and  act  in  a  rational  manner  toward  maximizing  their  utility  (minimizing  their 
costs). Variations on this cyber model will be needed to accommodate deviations from ideal 
(rational) actors. 

As  mentioned  earlier,  SCADA  and  ICS  systems  are  not  merely  a  cyber  network.  They  are 
affected by the state of the physical system attached to the network. Attacks focused on the 
physical  system  can  penetrate  the  cyber  network.  As  physical  system  changes  occur  on  a 
much  faster  timescale  than  the  cyber  game,  it  can  be  modelled  as  a  differential  game  and 
solved  simultaneously  with  the  cyber  game  to  create  a  two-game  security  model,  (Zhu  & 
Basar  2015).  In  addition,  the  plant  operator  and  the  supervisor  exist  in  an  important  and 
distinct  management  layer  and  their  actions  strongly  influence  both  the  cyber  and  physical 
layers. The policies and procedures for plant operations also play a part in the management 
layer game. The plant operator monitors critical elements of the plant processes and makes 
optimal choices—within given policy constraints—to maintain system operability. 

To best accommodate influences from these three layers, a three-game model is proposed in 
which  defender  and  attacker  play  in  the  cyber  regime,  physical  control  devices  and 
perturbations  (intentional  or  accidental)  play  in  the  physical  regime,  and  operator  and  plant 

	
	
	
 
 
 
 
management play in an abstracted management layer. All three regimes and all players can 
affect each other in this complex, three-game model. 

The amount of information revealed to the players is an important determinant in the outcome 
of the game. Assuming costs and behaviour can be modelled well, the attacker will often not 
have complete knowledge of the three regimes when they begin their attacks, as the security 
model  may  assume.  In  fact,  in  ARL’s  two  war  game  events,  the  red  team  does  not  have 
complete  knowledge  of  the  system  when  it  begins  game  play.  It  may  have  done  some 
reconnaissance  work,  but  will  be  missing  important  pieces  of  information  when  it  initiates 
attack  strategies.  This  lack  of  information  will  affect  the  team’s  path  taken  through  attack 
space. 

Clearly,  the  purpose  of  the  post-game  activities,  and  arguably,  the  war  game  itself,  is  to 
identify significant deficiencies in the security model so that it can be improved for practical 
use. By adding more complexity to the model and recalculating results, an improved SCADA 
security model can be developed and validated using recorded actions such as those from this 
sample SCADA cyber war game. 

References 

Bailey, T, Kaplan, J, & Weinberg, A 2012, Playing war games to prepare for a cyberattack,  
McKinsey  &  Company,  viewed  15  May  2017,  <http://www.mckinsey.com/business-
functions/business-technology/our-insights/playing-war-games-to-prepare-for-a-
cyberattack>. 

Colbert,  E,  Sullivan,  D,  Patrick,  J,  Schaum,  J,  Ritchey,  R,  Reinsfelder,  M,  Leslie,  N,  & 
Lewis,  R  2017,  Terra  defender  cyber-physical  wargame,  Technical  Report  ARL-TR-7999, 
U.S. Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, U.S.A.  

—— & Kott A 2016, Cyber-security of SCADA and Other Industrial Control Systems, 1st 
edn, Springer Publishing, New York, NY, U.S.A.  

——,  Sullivan,  D,  Wong,  K,  &  Smith,  S  2015a,  Table-Top  exercise:  intrusion  detection 
capabilities  for  US  Army  SCADA  systems:  information  packet,  US  Army  Research 
Laboratory technical report ARL-TR-7498, U.S. Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, 
U.S.A. 

——, Sullivan, D, Wong, K, Smith, S, Stephenson, S, Sfakianoudis, V, Ritchey, R, Parker, 
T, Knachel, L, Hutchinson, S, Hudlow, J, Comroe, K, Collmann, S, Braun, T, Bergin, R, & 
Andes, R 2015b, RED and BLUE teaming of a US Army SCADA system: Table-Top exercise 
final  report,  U.S.  Army  Research  Laboratory  technical  report  ARL-TR-7497,  US  Army 
Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, U.S.A.  
Curry, J & Perla, P 2011, Peter Perla’s the art of wargaming, Lulu Press Inc., Raleigh, NC, 
U.S.A. 

Horn, J 2011,  ‘Playing war games to win’, McKinsey Quarterly, no. 2, pp. 122-7. 

Gonzalez,  C,  Lerch,  JF  &  Lebiere,  C  2003,  ‘Instance-based  learning  in  dynamic  decision 
making’, Cognitive Science, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 591-635. 

	
	
	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
McCown,  MM  2005,  Strategic  gaming  for  the  national  security  community,  National 
Defense University, Washington, D.C. U.S.A. 

Perla,  P  &  McGrady,  E  2011,  ‘Why  wargaming  works’,  Naval  War  College  Review, 
Summer, vol. 64, no. 3, pp 111-130. 

Sawyer,  RD  &  Sawyer,  MC  2007,  The  seven  military  classics  of  ancient  China,  Basic 
Books, New York, NY, U.S.A. 

Sullivan,  D,  Luiijf,  E,  &  Colbert,  E  2016,  ‘Components  of  Industrial  Control  Systems’, 
Cyber-security  of  SCADA  and  other  Industrial  Control  Systems,  1st  edn,  Springer 
Publishing, New York, NY, U.S.A., pp. 15-28 

Zhu, Q & Basar, T 2015, ‘Game-theoretic methods for robustness, security, and resilience of 
cyber-physical  control  systems:  games-in-games  principle  for  optimal  cross-layer  resilient 
control systems’, IEEE Control Systems, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 46-65. 

	
	
	
 
 
 
 
