Taxonomy of Digital Forensics: Investigation Tools and Challenges 

Nikita Rana1, Gunjan Sansanwal1, Kiran Khatter1,2 and Sukhdev Singh1,2 
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Manav Rachna International University, Faridabad-121004, India 
2Accendere Knowledge Management Services Pvt. Ltd., India 

Abstract 

In  today’s  world  of  computers,  any  kind  of  information  can  be  made  available  within  few 
clicks for different endeavours. The information may be tampered by changing the statistical 
properties  and  can  be  further  used  for  criminal  activities.  These  days,  Cybercrimes  are 
happening at a very large scale, and possess big threats to the security of an individual, firm, 
industry and even to developed countries. To combat such crimes, law enforcement agencies 
and investment institutions are incorporating supportive examination policies, procedures and 
protocols to address the complete investigation process. The paper entails a detailed review of 
several  cybercrimes  followed  by  various  digital  forensics  processes  involved  in  the 
cybercrime  investigation.  Further  various  digital  forensics  tools  with  detail  explanation  are 
discussed  with  their  advantages,  disadvantages,  challenges,  and  drawbacks.  A  comparison 
among  all  the  selected  tools  is  also  presented.  Finally  the  paper  recommends  the  need  of 
training  programs  for  the  first  responder  and  judgement  of  signature  based  image 
authentication.   

1.  INTRODUCTION 

Computer  is  a  masterpiece  made  by  the  human  race  that  has  made  our  lives  smooth  and 
effortless. Computers have become the very bedrock of today’s technological environment 
and we use them in  almost  every aspect  of our  customary life. They are everywhere from 
shopping,  banking  to  school  and  hospitals,  even  our  own  homes.  Businesses  depend  on 
these devices and the Internet to do their daily transactions, marketing and communications 
across  the  globe  and  given  to  our  desideratum  to  have  the  best  of  everything  it  has  seen 
noteworthy  diversifications.  Generous  volume  of  information  that  includes  financial  and 
personal information is stacked on the servers daily. People have become so reliant over the 
usage  of  computers  that  they  have  started  to  call  this  structured  form  of  environment  as 
Cyberspace. The word ‘Cyberspace’ itself defines the space of cyber or in technical terms, a 
notional environment of computer networks over which communication takes place [1]. The 
term was first featured in a book called “Neuromancer” by William Gibson in 1984 (Page 4, 
Phantasia Press Edition, Bloomfield, MI, 1986) [2]. It is a virtual computer world which is 
used  to  establish  worldwide  online  communication  [3].  It  engages  TCP/IP  protocol  to 
facilitate data exchange exercises. Although it seems like an abstract point, cyberspace has 
become the destination of millions of people who visit it every day to share their ideas and 
thoughts,  play  games, socialise, initiate and boost business,  and, many other activities, for 
this it looks like it must be a real place [4]. Just like the way, every real place is valued in 
the  market;  cyberspace  has  also  gained  its  own  value,  which  can  be  seen  in  the  form  of 
various applications and services people use in their everyday lives. If we speak in terms of 
limitations, it  has  no physical  barriers and hence, is  not  restricted by  any territorial  limits. 
Today, a Service provider in one part of the world can freely offer his services to a person 
sitting across the globe. It is a levelling medium where each person connected to the Internet 

 
 
 
  
 
can  avail  everything  that  the  Internet  has  to  offer  and  reap  its  benefits.  The  everyday 
scenarios  can  be  that  of  people  no  longer  having  to  opt  for  hitchhiking  and  can  get  the 
benefits from the application driven cab services such as Ola and Uber. These start-ups have 
made the drivers to become entrepreneurs without having to become a part of taxi services. 
Additionally,  people  can  get  free  knowledge  and  information  from  the  materials  available 
over  the  cyberspace.  The  advent  of  online  education  platforms  such  as  Quora,  Udemy, 
Coursera  etc.  have  enabled  people  to  access  knowledge  which  was  earlier  localized  in 
universities and schools. Even the government, has attained various benefits from the advent 
of cyberspace as all the form submissions such as voter id  cars, driving license, telephone 
bill and other payments can be done over cyberspace without the people having to wait in 
long queues. Cyberspace has issued a sense of transparency and the removal of middlemen 
between  the  citizens  and  the  government.    However,  even  if  the  cyberspace  has  so  many 
benefits  it  cannot  be  considered  fully  trustworthy.  Just  like  we  say  a  coin  has  two  faces, 
cyberspace also has two faces, one where there are thousands of people getting befitted from 
it and the other where lots of people who are getting harmed because of it. With the increase 
in  the scope of computer networks, the world  has seen a rise in  computer oriented  crimes 
alternatively referred as cyber crimes [5]. 56% of the participants in a survey conducted by 
PWC observed an increase in the level of cyber crime [6]. This leads one to conclude that 
cybercrime never came days or years after the invention of cyberspace rather it came with it. 
The real challenge with cybercrime is that the accused or the criminal can stay hidden in the 
virtual domain [7]. 
       Cyber  crimes  also  known  as  e-crimes,  hi-tech  crimes  or  electronic  crimes  is  an 
operation  performed  by  an  individual  which  have  some  or  intensive  knowledge  of  the 
computer  and  its  whole  system  with  the  aim  of  corrupting,  illegally  extracting  the  data, 
deleting the stored data. If the word ‘cybercrime’ is searched upon the Internet we will come 
across various definitions of it. The Cyber.laws website defines cyber crimes as “a crimes or 
any  illegal  activity  that  involves  a  network  and  a  coordinating  computer”  [8]  whereas 
Norton by Symantec defines it as “a crime that has some kind of computer or cyber aspect to 
it” [9]. Whatever be the types of definitions provided by various sources one factor remains 
the same that cybercrime unlike traditional crimes, provides a major hindrance in unveiling 
the criminals as the user’s identity may be hidden or fraud over the virtual domain [10]. 
These crimes happening over the cyberspace have impacted huge masses to such an extent 
that  billions  of  dollars  have  been  nagged  by  the  criminals  from  the  organizations  without 
them knowing until an extreme damage has been done to their part. Therefore, as the extent 
of  damage  increases  the  need  to  solve  such  an  extent  also  rises,  which  is  where  we  come 
across  something  which  can  be  related  to  the  long  heard  tales  of  Sherlock  Holmes  by  Sir 
Arthur Conan Doyle [11]. The series’ character has been imprinted in the minds of millions 
along with the fact that forensic sciences along with logical reasoning can be considered as 
the  primary  foundation  for  solving  many  cases,  has  made  many  dream  about  becoming 
detectives  someday.  Just  like  the  way  forensic  science  is  used  in  a  number  of  traditional 
cases it can also be used in the crimes which happen over computers or cyberspace. Such an 
investigative method is known as computer or digital forensics. 
      Prior  moving  ahead  in  explaining  the  details  of  digital  forensics  and  its  role  in 
combating cybercrimes, it’s imperative to understand the types of cybercrimes and the huge 
gap between the occurrence of cybercrimes and the ability of the legislation to solve them.   

 
 
 
 
 
TYPES OF CYBERCRIME 

AUTHOR 

TYPE OF CYBERCRIME. 

EXAMPLES 

Prosise,  Chris, 
Kevin  Mandia, 
and  Matt  Pepe 
[27] 

Unauthorized access: 
Accessing or intercepting any piece of data 
or  information  that  one  is  not  supposed  to 
see or is unauthorized to review [27,28].  

Margaret 
Rouse[30] 

Identity theft: 
When an individual acquire or impersonates 
someone  else’s  identity.  In  other  words, 
pretending to be someone else [29,30,33]. 

Vangie  Beal 
[31] 

Mindi 
McDowell 
[35] 

or 

group 

individuals 

Phishing: 
Targeting 
of 
individuals  and  luring  them  into  giving  up 
their  personal  and/or  financial  information 
and using the acquired information for own 
benefit.  Phishing  can  be  of  different  types 
namely  clone  phishing,  spear  phishing  etc 
[31]. 

Denial of service: 
Overburdening  a  system  by  sending  too 
many  requests  at  once  which  result  in 
failure  to  complete  normal  requests.  When 
too many requests come at once the system 
is unable to recognise the priority of the task 
to  do  the  normal 
and 
functioning  and 
the  extra 
focus  on 
information coming in [34, 35]. 

is  unable 

thus 

A  man  named  kumar  gained  unauthorized 
access  to  Joint  Academic  Network(JANET) 
and  altered  the  contents  of  the  files,  changed 
passwords, deleted and added few files so that 
access can be denied to the authorized user. In 
order  to  do  he  was  illegally  accessing  the 
BSNL  broadband  connection  and  modifying 
the computer database [12]. 

.  In  September  of  2010  a  complaint  was 
registered  by  the  President  household  and 
Secretariat  against  an  imposter  who  created  a 
fake profile in the name of the Indian president 
Pratibha Patil on facebook [15,16]. 

.  In  2011,  a  fake  twitter  account  of  Sarah 
Palin,  the  former  governor  of  Alaska  was 
created, which tweeted out open invites to the 
governor’s  house  for  a  barbecue.  This  tweet 
led to a situation which was difficult to handle 
by the governor’s security [20]. 
.  The  customers  of  ICICI  bank  were  sent 
emails  in  which  they  were  asked  to  change 
their  username  and  passwords.  The  emails 
resembled the original mails from the bank so 
the customers clicked on the  url  mentioned in 
the  mail  thus  giving  up  their  bank  details  for 
the attackers to exploit [12, 21]. 

. LinkedIn website was cloned in order to steal 
the  credentials  of  the  users.  This  was  the 
“Ham-Fisted” phishing attack [23]. 

.  In  December,  2013  a  man  was  accused  and 
arrested  for  initiating  a  phishing  attack  which 
targeted college students in UK . The students 
were  asked  to  update  their  loan  details  on  a 
fake website that resulted in the loss of money 
from the student’s accounts [22]. 
. A foreign citizen residing in Shimla for past 
thirty  years  wanted  to  buy  land  in  shimla 
which  was  offered  by  the  shimla  housing 
board at very low rates ,but his application was 
rejected because he  was  not an Indian citizen. 
To take revenge he sent thousands of email to 
the  shimla  housing  board’s  address  and  this 
ultimately  lead  to  the  crash  of  their  servers 
[12]. 

. Boston children’s hospital was targeted by a 
hacker  group  in  2014.  It  became  the  first 
to  encounter  such 
healthcare  organization 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ricardo 
Morales 

A. 

Sarita 
Coletrane 

Hill 

Cyber bullying or cyber stalking: 
Tormenting  or  stalking  someone  online.  It 
means that a person may harass someone for 
personal vengeance or for a mere purpose of 
poking fun [28]. 

Harold 
Shreves 

Jeffrey 
Butterworth 

Aaron 
Stutz [38] 

M. 

Cristina  
Chipurici [41] 

Subhojyoti 
Acharya  [36] 

CRISTINA  
CHIPURICI 
[41] 

Fraud  
Manipulating  or  moulding  financial  data  in 
order  to  benefit  a  particular  individual  or 
organisation.  By  acquiring  the  financial 
records  the  attacker  may  use  the  money  or 
the statement details [39, 40, 41]. 

the  government 

Cyber terrorism  
selected 
Blackmailing  or  attacking  a 
organisation  say 
into 
following  some  demand  and  brainwashing 
the younger generation to follow the path of 
terrorism  via  any  online  medium.  The 
terrorist groups use social media websites as 
a  platform  to  spread  terrorism  and  anti-
government ideology [36]. 

are 

Scam  
Deceiving  people  to  believe  in  the  things 
fake 
that 
advertisements  or  similar  kind  of  slogans 
are  sent  to  people  so  as  to  make  them 
believe in what is being advertised [41]. 

true.  Certain 

not 

attack.  The  attackers  targeted  the  hospital 
using  the  distributed  denial  of  service  attack. 
The  hospital  shared  the  same  internet  service 
provider  (ISP)  with  seven  other  healthcare 
organizations.  This  attack  was  intended  to 
bring  down  multiple  healthcare  organizations 
in Boston [24]. 
.  A  student  studying  law  in  Delhi  University 
was  accused  and  punished  for  stalking  and 
bullying  a  woman  online  after  she  refused  to 
his  proposal.  He  created  fake  profile  of  the 
lady on social site to defame her [17]. 

jumping  from 

.  In 2010, an 18 year old boy Tyler Clementi 
who  was  a  student  at  Rutgers  University 
committed  suicide  by 
the 
George  Washington  bridge 
after  being 
electronically  stalked  and  bullied  by  his 
roommate  Dharun  Ravi.  Ravi  spied  on  Tyler 
using  a  webcam  and  recorded  an  intimate 
encounter  with  the  same-sex  and  posted  the 
video online. Tyler was bullied because of the 
video and took his own life [25,26]. 
.  Five  people  who  were  working  in  MsourcE  
in pune were arrested in April 2005 for alleged 
fraud  of  425,000  dollars  from  the  account  of 
four New York  based holders which had their 
account in Citibank [12, 18]. 

.  In  May  of  2002  two  anti-Indian  groups 
namely  Unix  Security  Guards  and  World 
Fantabulous Defacers digitally attacked Indian 
educational  and  business  sites  by  carrying  out 
111  attacks  in  total  when  the  tension  between 
India  and  Pakistan  increased  over  Kashmir 
[13] 

.  Two  Nigerians  were  arrested  for  duping  a 
woman  by  promising  her  a  job  in  America 
after  seeing  the  profile  of  the  woman  which 
she  had uploaded on a  well-known job portal. 
In  a  mail  which  she  received  on  December  1, 
confirming  her  job  in  Herald  square  hotel  in 
New York told her that she would be contacted 
by  the  “American  embassy”,  after  which  she 
received a mail from the “embassy” asking her 
to  pay  the  fees  and  submit  her  documents  in 
order to go to the states [12]. 

.  In  the  year  2012,  a  scam  surfaced  which 
involved  Facebook  as  platform 
to  steal 
financial  information  from  the  users.  The 
attackers  impersonated  the  facebook  security 
account  and  generated  fake  messages  alerting 
their  accounts  would  be 
the  users 

that 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deactivated if they were unable to verify there 
account. To do so they were directed to a fake 
page  where  they  were  asked  to  provide  their 
account  and  credit  card details  and  as  a  result 
were defrauded [20]. 
. An Gujarat ambuja executive pretended to be 
a  girl  and  blackmailed  an  Abu  Dhabi  based 
NRI for crores [12].  

.  A  malware  that  was  hosted  on  Sugarsync 
cloud  services  was  being  distributed  by  the 
drive-by-download method. The malicious file 
was later removed. 

. The CBI registered its first spamming case in 
2002  when  a  complaint  was  filed  by  a  UK 
based  company  regarding  thousands  of  mail 
that  it  was  receiving  from  India.  The  accused 
was  found  to  be  a  16  year  old  school  dropout 
from Pondichery.  
. In 2008 a case was files against the NSA for 
wiretapping 
the 
American  citizens.  Evidence  provided  by  a 
former  telecommunication  technician  named 
Mark Klein who  worked for AT&T suggested 
that AT&T sent the copies of internet traffic to 
unsaid  location  in  San  Francisco  which  was 
controlled and monitored by the NSA [19]. 

internet  activities  of 

the 

.  Yahoo  filed  a  case  in  Delhi  high  court 
against  Akash 
using 
  Arora 
‘yahooindia.com’  as  a  domain  name  for  his 
website  which  is  very  similar  to  the  original 
website ‘yahoo.com’ [12]. 

for 

Neil  DuPaul 
[42] 

Hon Lau [43] 

Spoofing  
Tricking a system to make it trust you when 
you  are  actually  forging  someone  else’s 
identity.  A  person  takes  up  other  person’s 
identity  in  order  to  penetrate  in  the  system 
or to shift the blame onto that person [42]. 

Creating malwares  
Creating,  writing  or  distributing  malicious 
software  for  e.g.  viruses,  worms,  Trojans 
and spywares.  These  malwares can identify 
and  capture  critical 
like 
passwords,  username,  computer’s  cache, 
keystrokes and more [43, 44]. 

information 

Ravi Kant [45]  Spamming  

Distributing  unwanted  e-mails  to  various 
email  addresses.  The  content  of  the  mail 
may be formulated according to the targeted 
audience and email addresses [45]. 

Tony 
Wu 
Justin  Chung 
James  Yamat 
Jessica 
Richman 

Nigel  Stanley 
[47] 

is 

of 

the 

secret 
internet 

Wiretapping  
electronic 
Wiretapping 
monitoring 
based 
communications  or  telephones,  fax  etc.  It 
can  be  accomplished  by  placing  a 
monitoring  device  more  commonly  known 
as  a  bug  on  the  wire  which  we  want  to 
monitor  or  by  using  built-in  mechanisms. 
For  example-  packet  sniffers  are  used  for 
acquiring  the  data  that  is  being  transported 
on any network [32]. 
Intellectual property theft  
It  can  be  defined  as  the  stealing  of  any 
property or material that is copyrighted. The 
theft of intellectual property- creative ideas, 
innovation, parts of song or movie, software 
piracy,  trademark  violations  etc.  comes 
under  this  category  [46,  47].  Around  8% 
people  in  India  and  7%  around  the  world 
encountered  this  attack  in  the  year  2014-
2016 [48].  

2.  DIGITAL FORENSICS 

Digital  Forensics  is  the  branch  which  deals  with  the  crimes  which  happen  over  the 
computers, where a single computer system constitutes an entire crime scene or in the least 
it  may  contain  some  evidence  or  information  that  can  be  useful  in  the  investigation. 
However,  in  technical  terms  it  can  be  defined  as  the  process  of  identification,  acquisition, 
preservation,  analysis  and  documentation  of  any  digital  evidence  [49].  Digital  forensics  is 
the process of collecting evidence from any computing device and investigating, analysing 
and preserving the same to present it as legally admissible evidence in the court of law. The 

 
 
 
    
 
objective  of  digital  forensics  is  to  follow  the  standardised  investigation  process  while 
documenting  any  evidence  that  is  stored  digitally  which  may  indicate  to  the  person 
responsible for the crime. The investigators use various techniques and forensic applications 
to search hidden folders, retrieve deleted data, decrypt the data or restore damaged files etc. 
A thorough examination can tell us when any document was created, edited, printed, saved 
or deleted [50]. There are several problems that can be faced by digital forensics examiners 
like the files that are encrypted take more time, the rapidly changing computer technology, 
and  anti  forensics  tools  can  add  up  to  more  time  and  money  for  the  investigating 
organisation  [51].  However,  as  the  crime’s  frequency  rises  so  does  its  need  to  get 
investigated. Therefore, the process which needs to be followed must be thorough and up to 
its full optimization level in order to solve the case.  

2.1 PROCESSES INVOLVED IN DIGITAL FORENSICS 

The  digital  forensics  process  involves  the  following  five  levels  of  investigation  [Harbawi 
and Varol, 2016]: 

2.1.1  IDENTIFICATION OF THE DIGITAL EVIDENCE 

This  step  involves  the  identification  of  any  digital  evidence  which  might  be  present  at  the 
crime  scene.  This  can  involve  computers,  pen  drives,  hard  disks  or  any  other  electronic 
device  that  can  store  digital  data.  Also,  it  needs  to  be  taken  care  of  that  the  processes 
followed when the computer is found in on or off state are different [54]. 

2.1.2  ACQUISITION OF THE IDENTIFIED EVIDENCE 

This step comes after the identification step as after the evidence has been identified it need 
to be acquired in the most appropriate manner such that the integrity of the data stored in the 
evidence remains intact. The sub-steps followed during this part of the investigation can be 
seizing the crime scene, forensically acquiring the data stored in the found devices for further 
investigation.  The  two  sources  of  evidence:  volatile  and  non-volatile  data  have  different 
methods of acquisition. In case of volatile data, the order in which the data is collected is of 
utmost  importance.  One  suggested  order  can  be  network  connections,  ARP  cache,  login 
session, running processes, open files and the contents of RAM. Meanwhile, in case of non-
volatile  data  i.e.  from  hard-disk  the  bit  stream  image  can  be  done  using  three  strategies: 
using a hardware device such as write blocker where the system is taken offline and the hard 
drive is removed, using a forensic tool Helix which is used to boot the system or using a live 
system acquisition which can be done either locally or remotely in case of encrypted systems 
that cannot be taken offline or are only accessible remotely [55]. 

2.1.3  PRESERVATION OF THE ACQUIRED EVIDENCE  

The evidence acquired should be kept in such a way that it remains the same even after the 
investigation  process  has  been  completed  as  it  was  first  acquired.  This  is  done  via  a  well 
defines  process  known  as  the  chain  of  custody  which  ensures  that  the  evidence  remains 
protected from the unintended alterations. In order to achieve this, read only copies are made 
by  the  practitioners  or  experts  to  work  upon  whereas,  the  original  evidence  is  kept  in  a 
secured location [].     

 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
2.1.4  EXAMINATION AND ANALYSIS STAGE  

This is the most crucial step of any investigative procedure as it is the strongest as well as the 
most vulnerable part where any minor mistake can lead up to the evidence’s ineffectiveness 
to be presented in the court of law. Examining the evidence involves the step of categorizing 
the  digital  evidence  and  the  tools  which  would  be  used  to  analyze  that  evidence.  For 
instance,  a  received  email  can  include  multiple  information  regarding  the  source’s  email 
address, metadata as well as the data which can be used to find the ip address of the sender’s 
workstation. One important advice which needs to be taken care of at this stage of analysis 
involves  the  difference  in  the  data  generated  from  different  devices.  For  instance,  the  data 
and  the  metadata  generated  from  an  image  and  an  email  would  be  different.  Evidence’s 
correctness  and  authenticity  to  be  presented  in  the  court  of  law  totally  depends  upon  the 
expert’s experience and skill [].  

2.1.5  PRESENTATION OR DOCUMENTATION OF EVIDENCE 

This is the last stage of the investigative procedure which includes the process of presenting 
a report or documentation on what type of evidence was obtained, the description about the 
experts who worked upon the evidence, the methods followed and the tools used in a specific 
format.  The  report  can  also  include  the  protocols  and  legal  policies  followed.  It  should  be 
presented in the most understandable way stating its findings to be very accurate. 

2.2  GENERAL  PROCESSES  INCLUDED  IN  THE  ANALYSIS  OF  DIGITAL 
EVIDENCE  

Evidence acquired from a crime scene undergoes multiple processes of analysis mentioned 
as follows [54, 57]: 

2.2.1  VERIFICATION OF OCCURRENCE  

The  occurrence  of  the  incident  which  has  taken  place  is  verified  and  the  specifics  are 
gathered to  figure out  the best  approach for its investigation. Normally the investigation is 
done  as  part  of  an  incident  response  scenario.  The  breadth  and  scope  of  the  incident  is 
determined to assess the case. This preliminary step is important as it helps the investigator 
in determining the characteristics of the incident and to define the best approach to identify, 
preserve and collect evidence.  [Rocha et al and Quoinine ,2014,2016].  

2.2.2  DESCRIPTION OF SYSTEM   

The data about the specific incident is done by taking notes and describing the system which 
is  to  be  analysed,  where  the  system  is  acquired,  what  is  the  role  of  the  system  in  the 
organization  and  network.  The  outlining  of  the  operating  system  and  its  general 
configuration  such  as  disk  format,  amount  of  RAM  and  the  location  of  the  evidence  is 
performed. 

2.2.3  TIME-FRAME ANALYSIS  

  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
The information  such as when were the files created, modified, changed  and accessed in  a 
human readable form is done under the timeline analysis. the timeframe information is also 
known  as  MAC  time  evidence  and  can  be  extracted  from  a  variety  of  tools  such  as  SIFT 
Workstation. The gathering of data is done using a variety of tools and is extracted from the 
metadata layer of the  file system.  it is  then parsed and sorted in  order to be analysed. The 
final goal is to generate a snapshot of the activity done in the system including its date, the 
artefact/media involved, action performed and source.  

2.2.4  DATA CATEGORIZATION IN MEDIA    

The amount of information obtained might be overwhelming at this stage for the investigator 
and can be reduced by categorizing the files as good or bad. This can be performed by the 
tools  such  as  hfind  from  the  Sleuth  Kit  for  hash  comparisons.  The  information  gives  the 
details  about,  which  files  were  opened,  where  did  the  user  browse  to,  which  files  were 
downloaded,  which  directories  were  accessed  and  what  programs  were  executed. 
Additionally, other things that has to  be taken care of is  the evidence of  account,  browser, 
file  downloads,  file  opening/creation,  program  execution  and  usb  key  usage.  The  memory 
analysis  is  an  important  analysis  step  in  order  to  examine  rogue  processes,  network 
connections, loaded DLLs, evidence of code injection, process paths and many others.  

2.2.5  INFORMATION FILTERING USING KEYWORD SEARCH 

This step is beneficial when one knows what he is looking for. It involves the usage of tools 
look for the byte signatures of the known files which are also called as magic cookies It is 
also in this step that one performs string searches using regular expressions. The strings or 
byte signatures that are searched are the ones that are relevant to the case. 

2.2.6  RECOVERY OF DATA 

This  step  is  done  to  recover  data  from  the  file  system.  Some  of  the  tools  available  in  the 
Sleuth Kit can be used to analyse the file system, data layer and metadata layer.  The process 
of analysing the slack space, unallocated space  and in-depth file system analysis is  part of 
this step. Carving files based on file headers from the raw images is done to gather evidence. 
This can be performed using the Foremost tool. The recovered data from the file systems can 
be analysed using tools such as Sleuth Kit. 

2.2.7  CAPTURING OF LIVE RAM DUMP    

This essential first step is often omitted. Yet, one must begin with acquiring a memory dump 
before  triggering  the  power  switch.  Memory  dumps  contain  routinely  information  such  as 
binary decryption keys for encrypted volumes (TrueCrypt, BitLocker, PGP WDE), recently 
viewed  pictures,  loaded  registry  keys,  recent  Facebook  communications,  emails  sent  and 
received  via  Web  services  such  as  Yahoo  or  Gmail,  active  malware,  open  remote  sessions 
etc. 

2.2.8  CREATING DISK IMAGE  

Creating a forensic image of the suspect’s hard drive is mandatory step in any investigation. 
A  combination  of  hardware  and  software  is  used  to  acquire  forensic  disk  images  while 
overcoming all possible issues. The hardware is designed to acquire hard drives damaged to 

  
                                    
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
the  point  where  the  competing  imaging  products  stall.  The  hardware  supports  cloning  and 
imaging of a file, enabling one to make up to 3 copies of the source device with a SATA, IDE 
and  USB  interface  and  the  receiving  device  to  be  a  SATA,  SSD  or  USB  drive  or  a  file  on 
your computer. You can upload the image onto a remote PC via an Ethernet connection. 

2.2.9  DISCOVERING AND ANALYZING EVIDENCE 

This step might involve the creation of multiple images, out of which most are retrieved. The 
retrieval  of  existing  and  deleted  evidence  is  in  auto  mode.  With  hundreds  of  formats 
supported,  the  tools  such  as  Belkasoft  Live  RAM  capturer  can  quickly  extract  the  most 
forensically important information. The following types of data can be located or recovered if 
deleted: 

1.     Office documents 
2.     Emails 
3.     Pictures 
4.     Videos 
5.     Mobile application data 
6.     Web browser histories, cookies, passwords, cache, etc. 
7.     Chats and instant messenger histories 
8.     Social network communications 
9.     System files including jump lists, thumbnails and event logs 
10.  Encrypted files 
11.  Registry files 
12.  SQLite databases 
13.  PCAP files        

3.  CHAIN OF CUSTODY 

Chain of custody is defined as a sequence of events which involves the movement of digital 
evidence among the authorized experts working upon the evidence in succession. The chain 
of  custody  documents  the  terms  related  to  when,  where,  who,  why,  how  in  the  use  of 
evidence at any stage of the investigative process. Its scope involves all the individuals who 
were  part  of  the  process  of  acquisition,  analysis,  time  records  as  well  as  the  contextual 
information i.e. case labelling and the laboratory that processes the evidence [52]. Figure 1 
shows  the  relationship  between  the  crime  scene,  suspect,  victim  and  the  chain  of  custody 
during any digital forensics investigation.  
      The evidence obtained at the crime scene can be of two types: electronic evidence and 
digital  evidence.  Electronic  evidence  refers  to  any  electronic  device  that  can  be  visually 
identified and is capable of storing data such as Computer, mobile phone etc whereas Digital 
evidence refers to the evidence that can be extracted or recovered from electronic evidence 
(can be any doc file, email attachment, image etc). As depicted in Figure 1 the examination 
and analysis of the evidence is done by the digital forensic investigator, attorney or lawyer 
and the judge. And they all after thorough inspection of the evidence present a report which 
is used for the final verdict of the trial [53]. 

 
 
 
 
        Figure 1. The relation between the crime scene and the chain of custody 

4.  COMMONLY  USED  TOOLS  USED  DURING  DIGITAL  FORENSICS 

ANALYSIS 

Digital  forensics  is  one  of  the  many  fields  that  have  provided  the  investigators  with 
multipurpose  tools  to  solve  the  criminal  cases.  However,  the  capability  of  a  single  tool  to 
have  universal  functionality  is  still  rare.  The  analysis  of  huge  amount  of  data  like  that  in 
terms of petabytes in real time and the usage of mobile phones are some of the unforeseen 
situations that are yet to be adapted by the digital forensics. It would seem most convenient if 
one tool could be applied to any situation however, it could not be applied to these types of 
unforeseen  advancements.  Also,  the  tools  which  are  multipurpose  may  provide  some  tools 
which are not even required by the investigator and may burden them. The categorization of 
the  forensic  tools  is  done  on  the  basis  of  the  user  adopting  them.  On  one  hand,  law 
enforcement  agencies  might  require  tools  which  can  produce  consistent  results  without 
compromising  the  integrity  of  the  evidence  whereas,  on  the  other  hand  Network 
administrators  may  require  tools  that  would  assist  them  in  the  detection  of  any  kind  of 
compromise on their networks.  This leads one to conclude two possible truths about digital 
forensic tools.  First  that  no single tool can  act  as a universal  functionary  tool and, second, 
that  all  professionals  be  it  investigators,  attorneys  etc  require  solutions  that  provide 
actionable  data  consistently.  On  the  basis  of  these  two  conclusions,  until  the  offering 
surfaces forensic toolkits would be providing a vast variety of tools which the investigators 
can use according to their respective fields [53]. The following gives a brief overview about 
the commonly used tools used by the digital forensic investigators [88,89]: 

4.1 ENCASE 

Encase is a forensic software that is developed by the Guidance Software. It is a 1-mega byte 
program written in C++ [58].  It has a number of products in its suite that includes: Encase 
cybersecurity, Encase portable, encase forensics and encase eDiscovery. More than 2000 law 
enforcement  agencies  use  the  tool  around  the  world  [58].  It  can  be  used  for  variety  of 
purposes  including  analysis,  reporting  and  acquisition  of  evidence.  The  software  also  has 
EnScript  which  is  a  scripting  facility  that  is  used  for  interacting  with  the  evidence.  Encase 
allows the examiners to identify, search and examine the evidence in order to decide whether 
further investigation is needed or not, this saves a lot of time and decrease backlog. The tool 

 
 
 
 
collect  evidences  from  the  file  systems,  mobile  devices  and  operating  systems  as  well,  this 
ensures that there is no lack of evidence in any case [59]. 

The investigators place the hard drive of the person in question on the forensic computer; it 
can be from any operating system like windows, Linux or DOS machine.  EnCase makes bit 
stream mirror image of the drive, which is mounted as read only so that it cannot be altered 
by  anyone.  To  verify  that  it  is  same  as  original,  encase  calculates  MD5  hash  values  and 
redundancy checksums. The tool reconstructs the file structure of the drive and then examines 
the drive through a Windows GUI. Encase goes deep into the operating system while doing 
so, in unallocated space or in windows swap files, where deleted files can be stored [58].  

4.2 BELKASOFT EVIDENCE CENTER 

Belkasoft evidence center is a forensic solution that is used for locating, searching, acquiring, 
examining,  sharing  and  storing  the  evidence  which  are  stored  inside  mobile  and  computer 
devices.  The  toolkit  extracts  the  digital  evidence  from  hard  drives,  memory  dumps, 
blackberry and android backups, IOS, chip-off dumps and more. The tool looks out at hidden 
locations and for encrypted information for detailed investigation, and carves out damaged or 
deleted  files.  It  works  with  different  Operating  systems  like  Windows,  Linux,  Mac, 
Blackberry  and  more.  It  covers  more  than  700  types  of  artifacts  which  include  100  mobile 
applications,  browsers,  major  documents,  pictures  and  video  formats,  email  clients,  social 
networks, registry files and more [60]. It is useful in live RAM analysis and also dig through 
the cloud data and everything that has been downloaded on that device [61]. 

4.3 CAINE 

Caine stands for Computer Aided Investigative environment is a GNU/Linux live distribution 
that  is  developed  in  Italy  and  is  created  to  act  as  a  Digital  forensic  project.  It  provides  an 
environment which is suitable for using the existing forensic tools as well as providing new 
software modules. It is an open source and available for everyone to install  [62]. The latest 
version is Caine 6.0 dark matter which is majorly based on Ubuntu and supports Bios, secure 
boot etc [63]. The main objective of Caine is to provide user friendly graphical interface and 
tools in an environment that supports digital forensics. 

4.4 THE SLEUTH KIT AND AUTOPSY 

The  sleuth  kit  is  a  library  and  collection  of  UNIX  based  command  line  tools  that  allow  an 
investigator to examine the disk images. The main objective of the sleuth kit to analyze file 
system data and volume. There are plug-in frameworks that allow a forensic examiner to add 
on modules to the existing tool and customize the system. The library can be embedded into 
other  forensic  tools  that  can  be  used  directly  to  find  any  evidence.  The  investigators  can 
examine the computer in a non-intrusive manner with the help of the file system tools [64]. 
The toolkit does not depend on the operating system of the device so any data that has been 
hidden  or  deleted  can  be  easily  viewed  [65].  Autopsy  is  the  graphical  interface  that  is 
available  with  the  tools.  It  has  extended  features  like  hash  filtering,  file  system  analysis, 
timeline  analysis  and  keyword  searching,  adding  other  modules  for  increased  functionality 
[66]. 

4.5 FOREMOST 

Foremost is an open source digital forensic tool which is designed for Linux based platforms. 
It is free and was originally developed by Special agents Jesse Kornblum and Kris Kendall of 
the United States Air Force Office of Special Investigations [67]. It is a console program that 

allows  forensic  examiners  to  recover  partial  or  full  files  from  a  bit  image  based  on  their 
internal  data  structure  and  their  headers  and  footers.  This  process  is  also  known  as  data 
carving. The headers and footers are specified in a user defined configuration file or one can 
specify  the  built-in  file  types  by  using  command  line  switching  [68].  Additionally,  the 
configuration files in Foremost allows the investigator to customize the file type that has to 
be recovered, they can also perform a cursory examination wherein the tool will only search 
and not  extract  any file  which helps  in  filtering if there is  a lot of media files or drives are 
involved to determine whether it has to searched thoroughly [67].  

Foremost can recover files and images that are created by EnCase, Safeback, the images that 
are made by dd (Unix utility) or those present directly on the drive [69]. The memory portion 
of media file or image that has to be examined is read by the Foremost tool and is searched 
for the file header that is specified in the Foremost configuration file. If the header matches 
then, the tool writes the header and all the data following it to a file until the footer or the size 
limit of the file specified in the configuration file is reached [67]. Foremost can recover files 
with  different  extensions  namely  jpeg,  png,  gif,  exe,  bmp,  avi,  riff,  wav,  mpg,  mov,  pdf, 
wmv, doc, zip, ole, cpp, rar, htm [70]. 

4.6 FORENSIC TOOLKIT 

Forensic  ToolKit  commonly  known  as  FTK  is  a  digital  forensic  software  made  by 
AccessData. It scans and searches the hard drive for any information that the examiner need 
for example, deleted emails, or scan the disk for text string to use them as possible passwords 
to crack any encryption. The toolkit has a simple but concise disk imaging program known as 
the FTP  Imager. The  FTP  Imager saves  the image of the hard disk  in  a file or in  segments 
which can be reconstructed whenever needed  [71]. The  FTK is  easy to  use and is  database 
driven that is, all the data is stacked in one case database which increases the reusability and 
reduces the cost and complexity.  Any failure that is associated with memory based tools is 
not  encountered  in  FTK.  It  is  a  high  speed  tool  that  is  designed  to  give  accurate,  fast  and 
consistent processing with multithreaded support and distributed processing [72]. 

The Forensic ToolKit calculates the hash value which is given by the MD5 hash algorithm to 
confirm the integrity of the achieved data before discarding any file. It gives the result in the 
form of an image file(s) which can be saved in many formats [73].  

4.7 MEMGATOR 

MemGator is an open source tool, it is easy to use and is portable, cross-platform, concurrent 
and server tool and self-documented Memento aggregator CLI written in Go. It includes all 
the  features  of  Memento  aggregator  and  also  provides  an  option  to  customize  different 
options  including  which  archives  are  aggregated  [74].  MemGator  is  used  for  memory 
analysis by extracting the data from memory files automatically and generates a report for the 
examiner.  MemGator  combines  different  memory  analysis  tools  like  Volatility  Framework, 
AESKeyFinder, PTFinder and Scalpel file carver into a single program. By using Volatility 
the user have the options of adding on command line parameters and can override the current 
program  and  provide  the  input  of  the  operating  system  profile  if  necessary.  Furthermore 
Scalpel  carve  and  search  for  usernames  and  passwords  for  various  social  networking 
platforms  like  Gmail,  Facebook  and  Yahoo,  also  will  automatically  fill  the  form  entry  for 
chrome browser. Additionally it can also take out TrueCrypt encryption keys from the given 
memory  file.  The  data  that  can  be  extracted  can  be  anything  related  to  memory  details, 
passwords,  processes,  malware  detection,  network  connections  and  encryption  keys.  The 
examination machine should have Python installed in it beforehand [75]. 

4.8 GALLETA 

Galleta a word which means “cookie” in Spanish is an open source and free forensic tool that 
examine and analyse the contents of the cookie files of Internet Explorer that are linked to the 
browser history and give us the idea of the recently visited websites [76]. It was developed as 
there are many  cases where the investigators require the recovery and reconstruction of the 
Internet Explorer cookie files of the subject. Galleta is a command line tool that is designed 
to work on various platforms and different operating systems [77]. It supports windows, Mac 
OS, Linux. It analyses the content of the cookie files by converting the data in those files into 
a format that can be imported to any spreadsheet program for further examination [78]. 

4.9 WIRESHARK 

Wireshark  is  an  open  source,  free  and  the  most  widely  used  packet  or  network  protocol 
analyser and is a de-facto standard across many educational institutions, government agencies 
and commercial organisations [79]. It was originally known as Ethereal but was renamed in 
the  year  2006.  Its  development  was  started  in  the  year  1998  by  Gerald  Combs  [80]. 
Wireshark  can  run  on  almost  every  operating  system  which  includes  Microsoft  Windows, 
Linux,  Mac  OS,  Solaris,  and  BSD.  It  has  another  version  called  TShark  which  is  terminal 
based  [79].  Wireshark  is  used  for  communication  and  software  protocol  development, 
analysis, network troubleshooting by letting the user see the network at a microscopic level. 
The data acquired from the network scan can be examined in real time or can also be saved 
for a later review [81]. Wireshark allows the user to have network interface controllers that 
gives  support  to  promiscuous  mode  so  that  all  the  traffic  that  is  being  generated  on  the 
network is visible to the user. The packets that are captured are dissected by wireshark that is 
running on the remote machine at the very same time that they are captured [80]. 

4.10 

RIFIUITI 

Rifiuti  is  an  open  source  forensic  tool  released  under  the  liberal  FreeBSD  license  that  is 
designed to extract information from the recycle bin repository (info2) files of the recycle bin 
in Microsoft Windows [76]. It is written by The word rifiuti literally means “trash” in Italian. 
It  runs  on  different  operating  systems  like  windows,  Linux,  Mac  etc.  The  recycle  bin  may 
have very useful information for the forensic examiner which is why this tool is very useful 
[82]. The tool can recover any recently deleted files from the recycle bin, also it can extract 
the time when a particular file was deleted, the size of the deleted file, and the original drive 
number [83]. Rifiuti analyses the information in the info2 files and generates the result in a 
manner  that  is  field  delimited  so  it  is  easier  for  the  user  to  export  it  to  any  spreadsheet 
program [82]. 

4.11 

NMAP 

NMAP which is short for Network Mapper is a free and open source forensic tool which was 
written  by  Gordon  Lyon.  It  is  used  for  security  auditing  and  for  discovering  services  and 
hosts on a network thus giving us a “map” of the network; also many network administrators 
and  systems  use  it  for  routine  tasks  like  monitoring  service  or  host  uptime  and  managing 
service upgrades as well. Although it was initially designed for large networks, it works well 
against  a  single  host  as  well.  NMAP  runs  on  almost  all  operating  systems  like  Linux, 
Windows,  Solaris,  AmigaOS  and  Mac  and  have  official  binary  packages  for  them,  but  it 
started as Linux-only utility [84]. NMAP can adapt to any network condition like congestion 
and  latency  while  doing  the  scan  and  is  flexible,  portable,  powerful  and  well  documented. 
The tool uses specially crafted  IP packets  and sends it to the targeted host(s) to know what 

host and services are available on the network, reverse DNS names, what type of firewall is 
in use, operating system detection, MAC address and much more. Additionally NMAP offers 
a debugging tool(Ncat), a GUI version(Zenmap) and more [85]. 

The  NMAP  generated  a  result  which  include  “interesting  port  table”  which  include 
information  like  the  service  name,  port  number  and  protocol  etc.  The  state  can  be  open, 
closed, filtered or unfiltered. Open means  that the target  machine has an  application that is 
listening  for  packets  on  that  port.  Closed,  means  that  no  application  is  listening  on  them. 
Filtered means that NMAP cannot tell is a port is open or closed because it is being blocked 
by any network obstacle or firewall. Unfiltered is a state when the NMAP is undetermenistic   
about  the state. The table may also  include software version details  [86]. Nmap hides itself 
from the source workstation so that the system is not alerted by thinking that  it is a malware 
attack [76]. 

4.12 

X-WAYS 

X-Ways  forensic  is  an  advanced  platform  that  is  used  by  forensic  examiners.  It  is  portable 
and is  very flexible to  use. The main features  of x-ways forensics include disk  cloning and 
imaging, accessing logical memory of running processes, different data recovery techniques, 
carving of files within other files, identification of lost or deleted partitions, view and edit the 
binary data structure using templates, ensuring data authenticity by  writing protection, hard 
disk cleansing, analyse the partition table without altering the original content, detection and 
much more [87]. 

5.  CHALLENGES OF DIGITAL FORENSICS 

There is no simple answer to the question about the challenges faced by the digital forensics 
today. As a field digital forensic is encountering immense array of challenges out of which 
not even a single one is candidly answerable. Researchers and experts from around the globe 
coincide together to foresee the elucidation of the major challenging facet of the field [90]. 
In a survey conducted by the Forensic Focus in September 2015, around five hundred people 
were  asked  to  voice  their  opinion  on  the  biggest  challenges  faced  today  by  the  digital 
forensic  investigators.  This  question  stimulated  overabundance  of  answers.  The  research 
done  by  the  experts  from  University  College  Dublin’s  School  of  Computer  science  have 
questioned  the  same  [91].The  result  of  this  survey  revealed  that  the  two  most  concerning 
factors  were  encryption(21%)  and  cloud  forensics(23%)  followed  by  triage(11%),  lack  of 
resources and training, the increased volume of data, the elevation in the number of digital 
crimes etc [90]. 

5.1 Device proliferation         

Mobile  and  IoT  equipments  use  array  of  operating  systems,  communication  specifications 
and file arrangements, which in turn increases the complexity of investigations. In few cases 
there  may  be  an  absence  of  constant  storage  wholly,  postulating  pricey  RAM  forensics. 
Furthermore  inspecting  many  devices  also  adds  up  to  the  correlation  and  consistency 
problem [91]. 

5.2 Lack of training and resources 

Lack of training and resources has also been listed as a major challenge. The already strained 
investigators  check  all  the  evidence  from  multiple  devices  manually,  which  becomes  a 

 
 
                                          
 
 
matter is concern. Only a basic training is given to the investigators about using a particular 
forensic tool without giving them any deeper knowledge of its working and techniques [90]. 
Around  44%  people  in  India  thought  that  the  local  law  enforcement  agencies  lack  the 
required  knowledge  and  skills  in  handling  the  cases  related  to  cyber  crimes,  malware 
hacking incidents etc [6]. 

5.3 Cloud forensics 

Unlike the traditional forensic scheme where the data is stored on a single machine, the data 
on the cloud is stored on different nodes. This leads to data being in different jurisdiction and 
the investigators facing local laws and codifications for the collection of any evidence. This 
may  possibly  increase  the  amount  of  time,  expenses  and  predicament  correlated  with  the 
forensic investigation. The matter that  an individual file can be broken down into multiple 
blocks  of  data  that  are  stored  in  isolated  nodes  summates  the  complexity.  The  research 
conducted by the UCD also agrees on the challenges regarding the cloud-based data storage. 
A  law  student,Janice  Rafraf  studying  at  Teesside  University,  conveyed  through  a 
presentation at TDFCON in 2015, not only the most evident obstacles like accessing the data 
stored in unfamiliar surroundings but also the legal struggle related to it. The data may not be 
legally accessible for it is stored in many distinct physical locations globally. 
The diverse nature of data storage makes the covering of tracks for criminals effortless with 
all the tools available for keeping the person anonymous. The adoption of IP obscurity tools 
along with the user friendly aspect of the cloud systems can make it impossible in tracking 
down a criminal [92, 93].  

5.4 Encryption 

When asked about the impact of encrypted devices on investigations Yuri Gubanov, CEO of 
Belkasoft said that the challenges differ between devices. For example in windows a full disk 
encryption can be invaded by seizing a memory dump in order to get the binary decryption 
key .For androids it hinges on the version of android and the creator of the device, they can 
be  decrypted  or  dumped  even  if  it  is  pass  code  protected.  The  enforcement  of  security  is 
laudable in the Apple tablets and phones; it is using Secure Enclave in 64-bit hardware for 
the purpose. Other aisle like cloud is used in case of data acquisition in such device. The real 
challenge  is  to  actually  locate  the  encrypted  data;  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  between  the 
compressed  files  and  the  data  which  is  encrypted.  The  experts  are  applying  different 
procedures  (workarounds)  to  triumph  encryption.  For  example,  if  one  knows  the  precise 
password of the Microsoft account,  they  can unlock a BitLocker volume or by obtaining a 
binary  decryption  key  from  a  memory  dump.  One  can  easily  identify  the  weakness  of  any 
android Smart phone in order to surpass its protection or can get more than enough data from 
the  Google  account  of  the  user.  The  information  can  easily  be  extracted  from  the  cloud  in 
case  of  Apple  smart  phones  where  it  is  backed  up  by  default  instead  of  breaking  into  the 
device. Once all the paramount data is acquired it necessary to analyze what is useful for the 
investigation and discard the rest. The estimated increase in  the case volume would add to 
the already elevating backlog problem especially if the amount of evidence originating from 
cloud  and  Internet  of  Things  keeps  on  escalating.  Forensic  professionals  frequently  find 
themselves  despondently  mangling  to  keep  up  to  the  ever  growing  development  of  new 
technologies. With the surge of the society stockpiling heap of data online, it can serve as an 
opening  for  the  field  of  digital  forensic  to  use  this  enthusiasm  as  a  leverage  and  help  to 
devise compelling solutions. Collusion between scholastic establishments, law enforcement 
agencies and business organizations are unarguably the best way to do so [90]. 

 
 
 
 
 
5.5 Legal Issues 

There  is  a  stress  on  the  privacy  and  protection  of  data  of  all  citizens,  which  has  been 
evolving recently. Everyone is  the owner of their data and devices. This  factor adds to  the 
complexities  faced  by  the  forensic  examiners  for  gathering  the  required  information.  For 
example any information that may be of use is contained within the suspect’s device cannot 
be achieved because of the laws that change with the change in the geographical areas and 
searching  for  information  from  that  device   may  be  considered  violating  the  rights  of  the 
person  and  violation  of  rules.  The  fact  that  now  day  the  organizations  are  allowing  their 
employees to  do the official work from  their personal devices also  adds  up to  the stack of 
problems. If there is any malicious activity performed by that device will be difficult to trace 
back  like  if  someone  downloads  an  attachment  from  any  email  that  can  result  in  theft  of 
confidential information [94]. 

6.  PROPOSED SOLUTIONS AND FUTURE SCOPE 

The  increase  in  the  number  of  cybercrimes  has  engendered  us  to  focus  upon  the 
improvement of the current legislation and effectiveness of the current forensic tools in the 
investigation of cybercrimes. Even today, the first responders tend to ignore the importance 
of  the  digital  evidences  found  on  the  crime  scene.  In  most  of  the  cases,  the  judgement  is 
merely made on the basis of circumstantial evidences which may be proved wrong after the 
inclusion of the digital evidence as part of the investigation. For this, we suggest that the law 
enforcement  agencies  organise  certain  basic  training  programs  for  their  first  responders  so 
that they do not neglect the digital evidence and acquire it in a forensically correct manner 
that  is  by  not  unplugging  the  system  directly  and  create  a  necessary  forensic  image  of  the 
volatile memory also known as RAM forensics.   In addition to the training programs and the 
suggested acquisition measures, the process of image forgery detection needs to be improved 
in investigation of cybercrimes in India. So that instead of judging the image’s authenticity 
on  the  basis  of  the  person’s  skin  tone  it  can  be  validated  on  the  basis  of  its  embedded 
signature or other pixelating factors.  

7.  CONCLUSION 

In  this  paper,  we  briefed  about  the  status  and  the  various  types  of  cybercrimes  happening 
worldwide. We then, discussed about the importance of digital evidence and digital forensics 
processes involved in the cybercrime investigation. Thereafter, we mentioned about the chain 
of custody process adopted in the digital forensic investigation and about the various actors 
who  play  key  roles  in  it.  The  process  was  then  followed  by  a  detailed  explanation  about 
various digital forensics tools used in the investigations. The detailed study of these tools also 
highlighted the challenges associated with the field of digital forensics. Towards the end of 
the  paper,  possible  solutions  were  suggested  as  countermeasures  for  the  problem  under 
consideration. 

REFERENCES 

1.  https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/cyberspace 
2.  http://www.williamgibsonbooks.com/books/neuromancer.asp 
3.  https://techterms.com/definition/cyberspace 

 
 
 
 
 
4.  https://www.techopedia.com/definition/2493/cyberspace 
5.  Nirkhi,  Smita,  R.  V.  Dharaskar,  and  V.  M.  Thakare.  "An  Experimental  Study  on 

Authorship Identification for Cyber Forensics." 

6.  http://www.pwc.com/gx/en/services/advisory/forensics/economic-crime-

survey/cybercrime.html 

7.  Harbawi,  Malek,  and  Asaf  Varol.  "The  role  of  digital  forensics  in  combating 
cybercrimes."  Digital  Forensic  and  Security  (ISDFS),  2016  4th  International 
Symposium on. IEEE, 2016. 

8.  http://cyber.laws.com/computer-crimes 
9.  https://in.norton.com/cybercrime-definition 
10. Harbawi,  Malek,  and  Asaf  Varol.  "The  role  of  digital  forensics  in  combating 
cybercrimes."  Digital  Forensic  and  Security  (ISDFS),  2016  4th  International 
Symposium on. IEEE, 2016. 

11. http://sherlockholmes.com/ 
12. http://satheeshgnair.blogspot.in/2009/06/selected-case-studies-on-cyber-      

crime.html#Email_bombing_DoS_171188047155 
13.  http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/2052320.stm 
14. http://www.cyberralegalservices.com/detail-casestudies.php 
15. http://www.neerajaarora.com/cyber-imposter-created-fake-profile-of-president-of-

india/ 

16. http://cyberlawdelhi.blogspot.in/2010/09/fake-profile-of-president-posted-by.html 
17. http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/DU-law-student-charged-with-cyber-

stalking/articleshow/8917937.cms 

18. http://www.cyberralegalservices.com/detail-casestudies.php 
19. https://www.eff.org/cases/jewel 
20. http://socialnomics.net/2016/01/13/4-case-studies-in-fraud-social-media-and-identity-

theft/ 

21. http://cybercellmumbai.gov.in/html/case-studies/case-of-fishing.html 
22. https://blog.returnpath.com/top-7-phishing-scams-of-2013/ 
23. https://info.wombatsecurity.com/blog/the-latest-in-phishing-attacks-january-26-2015-

edition 

24. https://security.radware.com/ddos-experts-insider/ert-case-studies/boston-childrens-

hospital-ddos-mitigation-case-study/ 

25. https://cyberbullying.ua.edu/index.php/casestudies/ 
26. http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/02/06/the-story-of-a-suicide 
27. http://itsecurity.telelink.com/unauthorized-access-2/ 
28. Prosise,  Chris,  Kevin  Mandia,  and  Matt  Pepe.  "Incident  response  &  computer 

forensics." (2003). 

29. https://www.justice.gov/criminal-fraud/identity-theft/identity-theft-and-identity-fraud 
30. http://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/definition/identity-theft 
31. http://www.webopedia.com/TERM/P/phishing.html 
32. https://cs.stanford.edu/people/eroberts/cs181/projects/ethics-of-

surveillance/tech_wiretapping.html 

33. https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/safety/online-privacy/phishing-symptoms.aspx 
34. https://www.incapsula.com/ddos/ddos-attacks/denial-of-service.html 
35. https://www.us-cert.gov/ncas/tips/ST04-015 
36. http://www.legalserviceindia.com/article/l169-Cyber-Terrorism.html 
37. https://www.stopbullying.gov/cyberbullying/what-is-it/ 
38. http://www.ncpc.org/topics/cyberbullying 
39. https://www.fbi.gov/scams-and-safety/common-fraud-schemes/internet-fraud 

40. https://www.usa.gov/online-safety 
41. https://heimdalsecurity.com/blog/top-online-scams/ 
42. https://www.veracode.com/security/spoofing-attack 
43. https://www.symantec.com/connect/blogs/introducing-trojanbadlib-malware-

distribution-network 

44. https://heimdalsecurity.com/glossary/email-malware-distribution 
45. http://www.cyberblogindia.in/spamming/ 
46. https://www.fbi.gov/investigate/white-collar-crime/piracy-ip-theft 
47. http://www.bloorresearch.com/analysis/intellectual-property-theft-protecting-data-

cyber/ 

48. http://www.pwc.in/publications/2016/pwc-global-economic-crime-survey-2016-india-

edition.html 

49. Kent, Karen, et al. "Guide to integrating forensic techniques into incident response." 

NIST Special Publication 10 (2006): 800-86. 

50. https://www.techopedia.com/definition/27805/digital-forensics 
51. Irons, Alastair, and Harjinder Singh Lallie. "Digital forensics to intelligent forensics." 

Future Internet 6.3 (2014): 584-596. 

52. Prayudi,  Yudi,  and  Azhari  Sn.  "Digital  chain  of  custody:  State  of  the  art." 

International Journal of Computer Applications 114.5 (2015). 

53. Prayudi, Yudi, Ahmad Ashari, and Tri K. Priyambodo. "Digital evidence cabinets: A 
proposed  framework  for  handling  digital  chain  of  custody."  International  Journal  of 
Computer Applications 107.9 (2014).  

54.  Rocha,Dias  and  and  Parizzas  -  https://countuponsecurity.com/2014/08/06/computer-

forensics-and-investigation-methodology-8-steps/,2014 

55.   https://www.quoininc.com/news/2016/04/21/digital-forensics/     
56. https://www.google.co.in/search?sa=X&biw=1536&bih=710&q=forensic+examinatio
n+of+digital+evidence:+a+guide+for+law+enforcement+originally+published&stick
=H4sIAAAAAAAAAOPgELRT9c3zEguNE6Kr0jWks9OttJPys_P1i8vyiwpSc2LL88
vyrYqKE3KySzOSE0BALYY2FQxAAAA&ved=0ahUKEwjmrcCk17DSAhXFwLw
KHatLD8cQ6BMIgAEoADAO   
57. https://belkasoft.com/baas/en/steps 
58. Garber,  Lee.  "Encase:  A  case  study  in  computer-forensic  technology."  IEEE 

Computer Magazine January (2001). 

59. https://www.guidancesoftware.com/encase-forensic 
60. https://belkasoft.com/ec 
61. http://forensicswiki.org/wiki/Belkasoft_Evidence_Center 
62. http://www.caine-live.net/ 
63. http://www.linuxinsider.com/story/81353.html 
64. https://www.sleuthkit.org/sleuthkit/desc.php  
65. http://sectools.org/tool/sleuthkit/ 
66. Panchal,  Esan  P.,  and  B.  K.  Sharma.  "A  SURVEY  ON  DIGITAL  FORENSIC 

TOOLS AND ITS APPLICATIONS." 

67. http://www.drdobbs.com/the-foremost-open-source-forensic-tool/199101633 
68. http://foremost.sourceforge.net/ 
69. http://tools.kali.org/forensics/foremost 
70. https://www.howtoforge.com/recover-deleted-files-with-foremost 
71. Panchal,  Esan  P.,  and  B.  K.  Sharma.  "A  SURVEY  ON  DIGITAL  FORENSIC 

TOOLS AND ITS APPLICATIONS." 

72. https://www.digitalintelligence.com/software/accessdata/forensictoolkit/ 

73. Digital  Forensics  and  Cyber  Crime:  4th  International  Conference,  ICDF2C  2012  ...   

edited by Marcus K. Rogers, Kathryn C. Seigfried-Spellar 

74. Alam,  Sawood,  and  Michael  L.  Nelson.  "MemGator—A  portable  concurrent 
memento aggregator: Cross-platform CLI and server binaries in Go." Digital Libraries 
(JCDL), 2016 IEEE/ACM Joint Conference on. IEEE, 2016. 

75. http://orionforensics.com/w_en_page/MemGator.php 
76. Harbawi,  Malek,  and  Asaf  Varol.  "The  role  of  digital  forensics  in  combating 
cybercrimes."  Digital  Forensic  and  Security  (ISDFS),  2016  4th  International 
Symposium on. IEEE, 2016. 

77. https://www.mcafee.com/au/downloads/free-tools/galleta.aspx 
78. http://tools.kali.org/forensics/galleta 
79. http://tools.kali.org/information-gathering/wireshark 
80. https://www.wireshark.org/ 
81. https://github.com/wireshark/wireshark 
82. https://www.mcafee.com/au/downloads/free-tools/rifiuti.aspx 
83. manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/zesty/man1/rifiuti.1.html 
84. http://tools.kali.org/information-gathering/nmap 
85. https://nmap.org/ 
86. https://nmap.org/book/man.html 
87. http://www.x-ways.net/forensics/ 
88. https://www.scmagazine.com/digital-forensic-tools/grouptest/520/ 
89. http://resources.infosecinstitute.com/computer-forensics-tools/#gref 
90. https://articles.forensicfocus.com/2016/05/11/current-challenges-in-digital-forensics/ 
91. Lillis,  David,  et  al.  "Current  Challenges  and  Future  Research  Areas  for  Digital 

Forensic Investigation." arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.03850 (2016). 

92. Lin, Angela, and Nan-Chou Chen. "Cloud computing as an innovation: Percepetion, 
attitude,  and  adoption."  International  Journal  of  Information  Management  32.6 
(2012): 533-540. 

93. Yang,  Chuan,  et  al.  "Saliency  detection  via  graph-based  manifold  ranking." 
Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  conference  on  computer  vision  and  pattern  recognition. 
2013. 

94. http://www.forensicmag.com/article/2015/12/emerging-challenges-digital-forensics 

