9
1
0
2

v
o
N
5

]

Y
S
.
s
c
[

2
v
8
6
7
9
0
.
9
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Colonel Blotto Game for Secure State

Estimation in Interdependent Critical

Infrastructure

Aidin Ferdowsi∗, Walid Saad∗, and Narayan B. Mandayam†

∗ Wireless@VT, Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,

Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA, Emails: {aidin,walids}@vt.edu

† WINLAB, Dept. of ECE, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA,

Email: narayan@winlab.rutgers.edu

Abstract

Securing the physical components of a city’s interdependent critical infrastructure (ICI) such as

power, natural gas, and water systems is a challenging task due to their interdependence and a large

number of involved sensors. In this paper, using a novel integrated state-space model that captures the

interdependence, a two-stage cyber attack on an ICI is studied in which the attacker ﬁrst compromises the

ICI’s sensors by decoding their messages, and, subsequently, it alters the compromised sensors’ data to

cause state estimation errors. To thwart such attacks, the administrator of each critical infrastructure (CI)

must assign protection levels to the sensors based on their importance in the state estimation process. To

capture the interdependence between the attacker and the ICI administrator’s actions and analyze their

interactions, a Colonel Blotto game framework is proposed. The mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium of

this game is derived analytically. At this equilibrium, it is shown that the administrator can strategically

randomize between the protection levels of the sensors to deceive the attacker. Simulation results coupled

with theoretical analysis show that, using the proposed game, the administrator can reduce the state

estimation error by at least 50% compared to a non-strategic approach that assigns protection levels

proportional to sensor values.

I. INTRODUCTION

The services delivered by a smart city’s critical infrastructure (CI) such as power, natural

gas, and water will be highly interdependent [1]–[4]. CIs are cyber-physical systems (CPSs) that

This research was supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation under Grants OAC-1541105, OAC-1541069, and

EAGER-1745829.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

encompass physical infrastructure whose performance is monitored and controlled by a cyber sys-

tem, typically consisting of a massive number of sensors. These CPSs exhibit close interactions

between their cyber and physical components [4]–[6]. The different types of interdependencies

inside and between CPSs include: 1) Physical, in which a CPS’s state depends on the output of

another CPS, 2) Cyber, a CPS’s state depends on the received information from another CPS, 3)

Policy-related, where the administrative decisions impact the CPSs, 4) Shared, in which CPSs

share some components, and 5) Exclusive, in which only one CPS can work at a time while

other CPSs must wait for the CPS to ﬁnish operating. Thus, the various interdependencies within

CPSs require having precise state estimation for monitoring purposes [6]–[8].

A. Previous Works

The state estimation of the CIs, which uses cyber elements to monitor the physical elements, is

a crucial stage for controlling their functionality. However, the interdependency between CIs and

the high synergy between their physical and cyber components make them vulnerable to attacks

and failures [9]–[11]. Numerous solutions have been presented for securing state estimation of

CPSs as well as for CI failure detection and identiﬁcation [12]–[15]. In [12], the authors presented

a control-theoretic approach for attack detection and identiﬁcation in noiseless environments

using centralized and distributed attack detection ﬁlters. The works in [13]–[15] considered the

estimation of a CPS under stealthy deception and replay cyber-attacks using a Kalman ﬁlter

(KF). Moreover, the security of interdependent critical infrastructure (ICI) has been studied in

recent works such as [16]–[18]. In [16], the authors assessed the security of interdependent

power and natural gas CIs under multiple hazards, considering the ICI’s performance as a

measurement for security. In [17], the authors proposed an agent-based model to capture the

effects of interdependencies and quantify the coupling strength within ICIs. Also, the impact of

natural and human-included disasters has been studied in [18]. Furthermore, the security and

protection of sensor networks, which collect data from CIs has been studied in [19]–[21]. In [19],

the authors proposed a novel method for physical attack protection with human virtualization in

the context of data centers using sensors that detect an impending physical/human attack and,

then, alarm to mitigate the attack. The work in [20] proposed a distributed observer for state

estimation of CIs in lossy sensor networks with cyber attacks. The authors in [21] proposed a

deep learning algorithm to authenticate vulnerable sensors in an Internet of Things network.

The works in [22]–[26] used a Colonel Blotto game (CBG) to study the interactions between

a CPS’s defender and an attacker that seeks to compromise the CPS components. The CBG

3

captures the competitive interactions between two players that seek to allocate resources across

a set of battleﬁelds. The player who allocates more resources to a certain battleﬁeld wins it and

receives a corresponding valuation. In [22], a three stage CBG has been proposed to analyze the

interaction of an attacker with two defenders. The work in [23] studied the resilience of smart

cities against cyber attacks using a CBG framework. In addition, many variants of the CBG have

been studied including those with symmetric resources [26], heterogeneous resources [24], and

approximate winning-losing setting [25].

However, the works in [12]–[21] do not consider the limitations of the available security

resources for the protection, detection, and identiﬁcation of CI attacks. For instance, in practical

smart cities, resource limitations may substantially affect the security of the CIs. Indeed, because

of massive data transmission from sensors to the central processing unit, security solutions such

as in [12], [13], and [21] will require a large number of computations, a high communication

bandwidth, a large amount of power, and a considerable level of ﬁnancial resources, all of which

constitute limited resources for the ICI’s administrator. Therefore, unlike the idealized security

solutions in [12]–[21], due to resource limitations, the administrator of an ICI has to prioritize

between the protection of the cyber components of ICI based on their importance in the state

estimation process [27]. Another key limitation in the current literature is that the majority of

the existing works, such as [12]–[15] and [22]–[26] do not take into account the interdependence

between the CPSs. Meanwhile, those that account for interdependencies such as in [16]–[18] are

mostly based on graph-theoretic constructs that abstract much of the functionalities of the CIs.

In practice, the CIs are interdependent and cannot be simply captured by a graph.

B. Contributions

The main contribution of this paper is a novel game-theoretic framework for analyzing and

optimizing the security of a large-scale ICI’s state estimation. To build this uniﬁed security

framework, this paper makes several contributions:

• We ﬁrst introduce a novel integrated state-space model that captures the dynamics of an

ICI consisting of power, natural gas, and water distribution systems. To the best of our

knowledge, this is the ﬁrst model that mathematically captures the interdependence of these

three CIs. For enabling state estimation of the proposed ICI dynamics model, we implement

a centralized KF that uses the sensor data to estimate the ICI’s state.

• We derive the maximum state estimation error deviation on the ICI caused by a two-stage

cyber attack that targets the sensors of the ICI so as to manipulate the state estimation. In

4

essence, in the ﬁrst stage, the attacker aims to compromise the ICI sensors by breaking their

protection algorithm (e.g., watermarking or sensor attack detection ﬁlter). We address this

attack stage by assigning protection levels on the sensors which are derived from a game-

theoretic analysis. In the second stage, the attacker manipulates the ICI’s state estimation by

altering the compromised sensors’ data to induce state estimation errors. To defend against

the second stage of the attack and protect the sensors, we implement an attack detection

ﬁlter based on a Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. Using the KL divergence we can derive

a maximum cumulative state estimation error deviation caused by manipulating any sensor

in the ICI. This is a notable result since it enables the defender to distinguish most valuable

sensors and protect the ICI accordingly.

• Since the actions of the attacker and the defender are interdependent, we propose a Colonel

Blotto game framework [28] to analyze the interactions between the attacker and the

administrator. In this game, the attacker chooses the set of sensors to compromise while

the administrator assigns protection levels to the sensors. In contrast to existing works

on Colonel Blotto for CPS security [22]–[26], our game considers the interdependence

between multiple CPSs. For this game, we derive the mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium for

the administrator and the attacker as a function of their available resources and the maximum

state estimation error due to the attack.

Extensive simulations are used to corroborate the theoretical ﬁndings. Simulation results show

that the administrator’s mixed strategy increases the security of large-scale ICIs and reduces the

state estimation error of the ICI by at least a factor of 50% compared to a baseline.

II. INTERDEPENDENT CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND ATTACK MODEL

Consider an ICI as a CPS whose physical system consists of three interdependent power,

natural gas, and water distribution CIs and whose cyber system is a network of sensors that

collect data from the physical components of the CIs and transmit it to a central processing

unit. We ﬁrst derive a state-space model for the physical system of each CI separately and then

present the general ICI model. The detailed derivations can be found in Appendix A. Finally,

we discuss the associated cyber system and its vulnerability to attacks.

A. Physical System

The power system can be modeled as a linear dynamic system whose inputs are the electrical

power demands from the load buses [29]. We focus only on generators that are supplied by

5

Fig. 1: An illustrative example of an ICI.

natural gas [30] and we consider water as a requirement for the vapor condensation and cooling

down in some of the generators [31]. The natural gas and water CIs are designed to supply

natural gas and water to consumers in a city. Due to the pressure loss at the junctions of these

two CIs, gas compressors [32] and water pumps [33] are used to compensate the pressure loss.

Fig. 1 shows a block diagram of such an ICI model. Therefore, we can write a state-space model

for the interdependent critical gas-power-water infrastructure:

˙x(t) = ¯Ax + ¯Bu(t),

(1)

where x(t) ∈ Rn is an n × 1 vector and u(t) ∈ R˜n is an ˜n × 1 vector. x(t) is the vector that

contains the all state variables such as the power ﬂows in the power CI and pipe pressure in

water and natural gas CI and u(t) contains the power, gas, and water demands from the end-
users. Moreover, ¯A ∈ Rn×n is an n × n matrix and ¯B ∈ Rn×˜n is an n × ˜n. ¯A and they are the

representation of the interdependencies between the ICI’s state variables. In addition, n is the

total number of states in the ICI and ˜n is the total number of power demands from the ICI. For

ease of exposition, an extensive explanation of the interdependence and our derivation of all the

state space model matrices for the interdependence of CIs are summarized in Appendix A.

B. Cyber System

To monitor the state variables in (1), a cyber system is needed. For the considered ICI , the

cyber system will consist of a number of sensors spread around the ICI and collecting different

measurements from the ICI’s components. Sensors and meters in the power infrastructure measure

the instantaneous frequency of the generator, the mechanical input power to the generator, and

the line powers between the generators. In the natural gas and water CI, sensors collect the outlet

Power supply for pumps and junctionsPower supply for pumps and junctionsWater for cool down and power generationGas as fuel for power generationWater CINatural gas CIPower CISensor ClusterAdminAttacker6

pressure, and inlet ﬂow rate of each pipeline. As shown in Fig. 1, we consider a sensor network

that is used to collect data from the ICI and send it to a central server. The sensor data collected

from each CI can be expressed as a linear equation of the states of the ICI, as follows:

y(t) = ¯Cx(t),

(2)

where x(t) is given in (1), and y(t) ∈ Rp×1 is a p × 1 vector of all the sensor data at each time
instant, ¯C ∈ Rp×n is a p × n matrix for converting the states to the sensor data and p is the total

number of sensors in ICI. However, due to the inaccuracy in measurements and the process noise
in the infrastructure as well as possibility of ¯C not being full rank, the owner of each CI must

estimate the system state at each time instant. Due to the interdependence between the CIs, their

owners have to share the collected data from the components with a single administrator who has

access to the ICI model [34]. Note that a lack of cooperation between the owners of the CIs can

yield estimation error since the administrator will not be able to capture the interdependencies.

While (1) and (2) capture the physical and cyber behavior of the ICI, however, they do not

consider the process and measurement noise, and also the discrete sensor data. Thus, here, we

transform the continuous state-space model equations and the sensor outputs to a discrete model

using a bilinear transformation [35]:

x(k + 1) = Ax(k) + Bu(k) + w(k),

y(k) = Cx(k) + l(k),

(3)

where A ∈ Rn×n, B ∈ Rn×˜n, and C ∈ Rp×n are n × n, n × ˜n, and p × n matrices and are

discretized versions of the matrices deﬁned in (1) and (2), x(k) ∈ Rn is the n × 1 vector of state

variables of the ICI at time step k, u(k) ∈ Rp is the ˜n × 1 vector of external inputs of the ICI at

time step k, w(k) ∈ Rn is the n × 1 vector of process noise at time k, and l(k) ∈ Rp is the p × 1

vector of measurement noise at time k. Due to the discrete sensor data, hereinafter, we use (3)
in our analysis which is the discrete model for the ICI. Note that, we transform the ( ¯A, ¯B, ¯C)

matrices into the discrete form (A, B, C) using a bilinear transformation [35]. In addition,

x(0) is the initial state of the ICI, and w(k), l(k) and x(0) are independent Gaussian random

variables with x(0) ∼ N (0, Ψ), w(k) ∼ N (0, Φ), and l(k) ∼ N (0, Ω) where Ψ ∈ Rn×n,

Φ ∈ Rn×n, and Ω ∈ Rp×p are n × n, n × n, and p × p matrices, respectively.

The ICI administrator seeks to estimate the state of the ICI using (3). However, due to sensor

error and operation noise, a noise-resilient method is needed to estimate the state variables. To

this end, it can be shown that by using a KF, one can compute the state estimation ˆx(k) from

7

observations y(k) [36]. Since the initial time of the ICI is considered −∞, the KF converges to

a ﬁxed gain linear estimator. To ﬁnd the state estimate of the system, we ﬁrst compute the n × n
Kalman state probability matrix P ∈ Rn×n as P = AP AT+Φ−AP C T(cid:0)CP C T + Ω(cid:1)−1
CP AT .
Then, we compute the n × p Kalman ﬁxed gain matrix as follows K = P C T (cid:0)CP C T + Ω(cid:1)−1

.

Next, we ﬁnd the state estimation vector at time k dependent to knowing the state estimation at

time k − 1, ˆx(k|k − 1) as ˆx(k|k − 1) = Aˆx(k − 1|k − 1) + Bu(k − 1). Finally, we compute

the state estimate ˆx(k|k) using a KF:

ˆx(k|k) = (I − KC)ˆx(k|k − 1) + Ky(k),

(4)

where the initial state is deﬁned as ˆx(0|0) = x(0). The initial state of the KF for a linear system

only affects the convergence rate but the ﬁnal estimation will not change. Therefore, irrespective

of how the initial state is selected, the KF can converge to the optimal estimation [35]. In our

case, we initialize the ICI state based on our knowledge about the steady state operation. Another

commonly used initialization method for a KF is assigning zero values to all of the states. We

deﬁne the estimation error as the difference between the state x(k) and its estimate ˆx(k):

e(k) (cid:44) x(k) − ˆx(k),

(5)

where e(k) ∈ Rn is an n × 1 vector. Using (4) and (5), we have:

e(k + 1) = (A − KCA)e(k) + (I − KC)w(k) − Kl(k)

(6)
We also deﬁne the residue of the KF: z(k) (cid:44) y(k) − CAˆx(k), where z(k) ∈ Rp×1 is a p × 1

+ KCB (u(k) − (A − KCA)u(k − 1)) ,

vector. Because of process and measurement noise, we need to validate the estimation of the

states and detect the failure of the estimation ﬁlter. We use X 2 failure detector allowing the

detector computes the following value at each time step [37]:

g(k) = zT (k)Z −1z(k),

(7)

where Z∈ Rp×p is a p × p semi-positive deﬁnite matrix and is the relative cost of residue vector

z(k). If g(k) exceeds the threshold level, then the detector will trigger an alarm.

C. Attack Model

Consider the cyber system of the ICI in Fig. 1, where sensors collect measurements from

the physical components of the ICI and transmit the measurement data to a central node in

their proximity. Then different central nodes will transmit the data to a central server that will

calculate the estimation of ICI state variables using the presented KF in (4). We refer to the

group of sensors which connect to a single central node, as a sensor cluster (SC). We consider

8

a two-stage attack model to the cyber system of our ICI. In the ﬁrst stage, the attacker aims to

compromise the ICI’s sensors by breaking the security solution that is implemented by the ICI

administrator (referred to as the defender, hereinafter). After compromising some of the SCs, in

the second stage, the attacker manipulates the SC data to increase the ICI state estimation error.

Our model can be used to capture any ICI security solution that can include a watermarking of

the sensor data [21], an implementation of attack detection ﬁlter [12], or a physical protection of

the sensors [19]. Therefore, to compromise any SC within the ICI, the attacker has to collect the

broadcast data from the sensors to the central nodes and compromise the implemented security

solution. However, this requires processing of the collected data from the sensors across the

ICI, physical presence of the attacker in the proximity of the central nodes to collect data, or

communication resources for transmission of the collected data to the attacker’s central processing

unit. Since processing, communication and human resources are limited, the attacker needs to

prioritize between the sensors based on their importance in the state estimation of the ICI.

From the defender’s point of view, implementing the aforementioned security solutions, requires

computational resources, communication bandwidth, or ﬁnancial resources which are restricted

in availability for the defender. Therefore, the defender must also prioritize between the ICI

sensors that it seeks to protect. Thus, to initiate this two-stage attack, the attacker must have

information about the implemented security protocols at SCs, the defender’s available security

resources, and the ICI cyber-physical model. This attack model has been widely used in the

literature [12]–[14] and is appropriate to consider because using this assumption we secure the

ICI against the most capable attacker and, thus, for any other attackers with less capabilities,

the ICI will still be secure. The defender’s required information is the available resources of

the attacker, i.e., how strong is the attacker. The defender can always assume a worst-case or

average value for the attacker’s available resources based on typical attackers capabilities, past

attacks, or known data on similar attacks [12]–[14].

In summary, the attacker aims to maximize the state estimation error through the compromised

sensors and the defender seeks to protect the SCs of the ICI from this cyber attack, under strict

resource limitations at both sides. To analyze this interactions between the attacker and the

defender, ﬁrst, we study the second stage of attack to ﬁnd the maximum estimation error caused

by the cyber attack and quantify the importance of each SC in the ICI, then using these values

we can formally analyze the attacker-defender interaction and derive optimal defense strategies.

9

III. MAXIMUM STATE ESTIMATION ERROR IN THE COMPROMISED SENSORS

In this section, we analyze the impact of the second stage of the cyber attack in order to

quantify the ability of an attacker to increase the estimation error by altering the sensor data. We

assume a worst-case scenario for security analysis in which the attacker has complete knowledge

about the system as done in [12] and was able to compromise some of the SCs in the ﬁrst stage.

We assume that the attacker can change the data of the compromised sensors to a desired value

in order to disturb the ICI’s state estimation. Given the set of all compromised SCs, A, we deﬁne
attack vector at time step k, ya(k) (cid:44) [ya
1

T (k)]T where N is the number of SCs,

T (k), . . . , ya
N

and ya

i is the 1 × Ni attack vector on SC i where Ni is the number of sensors in SC i. Also,
yi(k) = 0 if i /∈ A. Therefore, the linear relationship between the state variables of the ICI and
the sensor data under attack will be ¯y(k) = Cx(k) + l(k) + ya(k), where ¯y(k) is the vector of

sensor measurements under attack, and ya(k) is independent from w(k), v(k), and x(0). Here,

we assume that the attack on the sensors starts from k = 1. When the ICI’s cyber system is

under attack, the Kalman state estimation ﬁlter of the ICI in (4) changes as follows:

¯x(k|k − 1) = A¯x(k − 1|k − 1) + Bu(k − 1), ¯x(k|k) = (I − KC)¯x(k|k − 1) + K ¯y(k), (8)

where ¯x(k|k) is the estimate of the states under attack. The new residue and estimation error
are deﬁned as ¯z(k) (cid:44) ¯y(k) − CA¯x(k − 1) and ¯e(k) (cid:44) x(k) − ¯x(k). We deﬁne the error

difference at the ICI state estimation between the under attack and in absence of attack as
∆e(k) (cid:44) ¯e(k) − e(k), ∆z(k) (cid:44) ¯z(k) − z(k). Using (4) and (8), we can ﬁnd the following

model for the difference in error and residue:

∆e(k + 1) = (A − KCA)∆e(k) − Kya(k + 1),

∆z(k + 1) = CA∆e(k) + ya(k + 1).

We deﬁne the cumulative error difference (CED) at time step k:

q(k) (cid:44) ∆eT (k)E∆e(k),

(9)

(10)

(11)

where E ∈ Rn×n is the n × n relative cost matrix of state error. E is a positive semi-deﬁnite
matrix such that QT EQ (cid:22) E, i.e., for any vector v, we have vT QT EQv ≤ vT Ev , where
Q (cid:44) A − KCA which is a Hurwitz stable matrix since the ICI model is a stable system

[36]. Next, we derive the maximum CED caused by an impulse attack (an attack vector that

has nonzero values in the initial time step and zero values afterwards) to an SC. The reason

for analyzing the impulse attack is that, any attack vector can be designed by combination of

shifted impulse attack vectors. This is because of the superposition characteristics of linear time

10

invariant systems, the effect of any attack sequence on the ICI is equal to the summation of

shifted impulse attack vectors [35].

Proposition 1. The maximum CED caused by an impulse attack to a set of sensors A is:

qm(ya) (cid:44) yaT (1)K T EKya(1).

(12)

Proof. Since ya(1) is a vector with ya(1)[i] = 0 for i /∈ A and the attack is an impulse input,

then, we have ya(k) = 0 for k > 1. Therefore, using (9), we have ∆e(k) = Q∆e(k − 1) =
Q(k−1)Kya(1). Therefore, for k > 2, we will have:
q(k) = ∆eT (k)E∆e(k) = ∆eT (k − 1)QT EQe(k − 1) (cid:22) ∆eT (k − 1)Ee(k − 1) = q(k − 1),

which means that the maximum value of q(k) occurs in q(1) = yaT (1)K T EKya(1).

(cid:4)

Proposition 1 shows that the maximum CED caused by an impulse attack occurs during ﬁrst

time instant, q(1), after the initiation of the impulse attack to the sensors. In the presence of

the attack, the failure detector in (7) computes the following value in each time step ¯g(k) =
¯zT (k)Z −1¯z(k). Now, we deﬁne two new parameters for the analysis of probability of failure
in the system as follows: β(k) (cid:44) Pr(g(k) > gt) and ¯β(k) (cid:44) Pr(¯g(k) > gt), where β(k) and
¯β(k) capture probabilities of failure in absence and existence of attack, respectively, and gt is

the failure trigger threshold. Also, for the subsequent analysis, we consider that Z is chosen
such that AT C T Z −1CA (cid:23) QT AT C T Z −1CAQ.

Deﬁnition 1. An impulse attack to set A is α-feasible if:

D(z(k)||¯z(k)) = ||∆z(k)||S = (cid:112)∆zT (k)S∆z(k) ≤ α.
for all k = 1, . . . , ∞, where S ∈ Rp×p is a p × p matrix deﬁned as S (cid:44) Z −1/2 and

(13)

D(z(k)||¯z(k)) is the KL distance between z(k) and ¯z(k).

Using [15, Theorem 1], we can directly prove the convergence of ¯β(k) to β(k) as D(z(k)||¯z(k))

goes to 0, as follows.

Lemma 1. For any (cid:15) > 0, there exists α > 0, such that if D(z(k)||¯z(k)) ≤ α, for k = 1, . . . , ∞,
then ¯β(k) ≤ β(k) + (cid:15) for all k = 1, . . . , ∞.

Lemma 1 shows that, if the probability of alarm triggering at time k, β(k), increases by a
value of (cid:15) in presence of attack, ¯β(k) = β(k) + (cid:15), then, there exists a value for α such that an

impulse attack can be designed with a KL distance lower than α. In other words, if the defender

wants to increase the probability of triggering an alarm by, e.g., increasing the alarm threshold,

11

then the KL divergence will still be bounded by α. We use the same concept to deﬁne the

α-feasible attack. Essentially, we assume that, if the defender wants to keep the KL divergence

under α, then the probability of triggering the attack will have a very small variation. Now, if

the attacker wants to design an α-feasible impulse attack then it should change the sensor data

such that the KL distance never exceeds α. Next, we ﬁnd the maximum KL distance caused by

an impulse attack to a set of sensors.

Lemma 2. The maximum KL divergence caused by an impulse attack to a set of sensors A is:

Dm(ya) (cid:44) max

(CAKya(1))T SCAKya(1),

yaT (1)Sya(1)

(14)

(cid:113)

(cid:41)
.

(cid:40)(cid:113)

Proof. From (9) and (10) we have ∆z(1) = ya(1) and ∆z(k) = −CAQ(k−2)Kya(1),

k > 2,

therefore, the KL divergence for k > 2 will be:
D(z(k)||¯z(k)) = (cid:112)∆zT (k)S∆z(k) =
(cid:113)

(cid:113)

∆zT (k)Z −1/2∆z(k)

=

yaT (1)K T Q(k−2)T

AT C T Z −1/2CAQ(k−2)Kya(1)

(cid:113)

yaT (1)K T Q(k−3)T

QT AT C T Z −1/2CAQQ(k−3)Kya(1)

(cid:113)

yaT (1)K T Q(k−3)T

AT C T Z −1/2CAQ(k−3)Kya(1)

=

≤

= D(z(k − 1)||¯z(k − 1)).

(15)

(15) implies that the KL distance is decreasing for k > 2, and hence, the maximum KL distance

will occur in k = 1 or 2 and this proves (14).

(cid:4)

Lemma 2 ﬁnds the maximum KL divergence caused by an impulse attack to a set of sensors.

We use the maximum error caused by an impulse attack and maximum KL distance to ﬁnd the

maximum CED caused by an α-feasible attack in the following theorem. This theorem quantiﬁes

the maximum CED that the attacker can cause without triggering the alarm to a set of sensors.

Theorem 1. For any value of α chosen by the defender, the maximum CED caused by an impulse

α-feasible attack to a set of sensors A is the solution of the following quadratic program with

quadratic constraints:

α (A, A, B, C)(cid:44) max
qm
ya

yaT R1ya,

s.t. max

yaT P 1ya, yaT P 2ya(cid:111)
(cid:110)

≤ α2,

ya[i] = 0,

i /∈ A,

(16)

(17)

(18)

where R1 = K T EK, P 1 = S, P 2 = K T AT C T SCAK.

12

Proof. From Proposition 1, we know that the maximum CED caused by an impulse attack which

we deﬁne it as vector ya in time step k = 1 to a sensor set A is:

qm(ya) = yaT K T EKya,

(19)

where ya[i] = 0 for i /∈ A and ya[i] is the i-th entity of vector ya. From Lemmas 1 and 2, we

know that the maximum KL distance caused by an α-feasible attack to the sensor set A cannot

exceed α and therefore we have:

(cid:40)

(cid:41)

(Dm(S a))2 < α2, ⇒ max

yaT Sya, (CAKya)T SCAKya

< α2,

(20)

then, ya should maximize (19) with constraints in (20), and considering ya[i] = 0 for i /∈ A.

Also, since E and S are positive-deﬁnite matrices then R1, P 1, and P 2 are all semi-positive

deﬁnite matrices. Due to the positive semi-deﬁnitiveness, (16) is a convex function and (17) is

a convex bounded constraint, thus, the solution of (20) will lie at the boundaries [38].

(cid:4)

Theorem 1 provides a method for the attacker to ﬁnd the maximum CED caused by altering

a set of sensors without triggering failure alarm. To solve the optimization problem in Theorem

1, known techniques such as quadratic programming can be used [38]. Using Theorem 1, we

can assign a value to quantify the maximum CED for each of the ICI’s SCs. To do so, for each

of the ICI’s SCs we calculate the following value:
ϕi(A, B, C) (cid:44) qm

α (Ni, A, B, C),

(21)

where ϕi is the value of SC i in the state estimation and Ni is the set of sensors inside SC i.

This value captures the importance of each SC for the attacker and the defender in the ﬁrst stage

of attack, because the attacker can increase the estimation error by ϕi in the second stage of

attack after compromising the SC i in the ﬁrst stage. Based on this value both the attacker and

the defender can prioritize between their actions in the ﬁrst stage. Since we can now quantify

the importance of different SCs under attack, next, we study how the ICI can defend against the

ﬁrst stage of attack during which the attacker and the defender should allocate their available

resources on all the SCs based on their values.

IV. ICI SECURITY RESOURCE ALLOCATION AS A COLONEL BLOTTO GAME

In this section, we analyze the resource allocation of the attacker and the defender in the ﬁrst

stage of the cyber attack. In our model, the available resources for the defender and attacker

are denoted by Rd, and Ra, respectively. Consequently, the defender and the attacker must

simultaneously allocate their resources across a ﬁnite number of SCs, N . Moreover, each SC i has

a value, ϕi(A, B, C), given by (21) which quantiﬁes the maximum CED caused by compromising

SC i. This value captures both the cyber and physical nature of the ICI as per (21). Hereinafter,

we use subscripts a and d to denote the attacker and the defender, respectively.

13

1, . . . , rj

Also, rj = [rj

the defender assigns a protection level which requires rd

N ]T denotes player j’s allocation vector across N SCs. In each SC i,
i resources. In contrast, the attacker
i resources in
SC i. For instance, in signal watermarking techniques the defender must consider a number

spends some effort to break the sensor’s security mechanism, which requires ra

of computations in the decoding of each SC’s messages in the central server [39]. To break

such watermarking techniques, the attacker must collect the messages of each SC and break the

watermarking key using a large number of computation, which requires the attacker to assign a

portion of its available computational resources for each SC. Such a resource limitation is not

restricted to cases of signal watermarking as it can also be applied to other protection methods

such as attack detection ﬁlters [12].

Therefore, for any protection method, in each SC, if the defender allocates more resources

than the attacker then the defender prevents that SC from being compromised. In this case, we

assign the normalized value of SC i to the defender and zero to attacker if the defender wins SC

i. In contrast, if the attacker allocates a higher number of resources in each SC, then the attacker

can compromise that SC. In this case, we assign the normalized value of SC i to the attacker

and zero to the defender if the attacker wins SC i (i.e., in this case, the CED is zero, and the

defender perfectly protects its SC). Also, in case of equal allocation of resources, which has the

probability of zero due to the continuous action space of the attacker and the defender, we share

the normalized value of each SC equally between the attacker and the defender. Therefore, in

each SC i, the normalized payoff for the attacker and defender is given by:

i (rj
vj

i , r−j

i ) =

where −j is the opponent of j and






φi(A, B, C),

φi(A,B,C)
2

,

0,

if rj

if rj

if rj

i

i > r−j
i = r−j
i < r−j

i

i

,

,

,

(22)

(cid:80)N
The total payoff of the defender and the attacker resulting from allocations across all N SCs is

φi(A, B, C) =

(23)

ϕi(A, B, C)
m=1 ϕm(A, B, C)

.

the sum of the individual payoffs in (22) received from each individual SC:

uj(rj, r−j)=

i (rj
vj

i , r−j

i ).

(24)

N
(cid:88)

i=1

14

Here, we deﬁne the total maximum CED caused by the allocation vectors ra and rd as follows:

π(ra, rd) (cid:44) ua(ra, rd)

N
(cid:88)

ϕm(A, B, C),

(25)

since ua(ra, rd) captures summation of the estimation errors from all the SCs. The attacker aims

m=1

to increase its utility function in (24) by maximizing the sum of the compromised SC valuations

which results in maximizing the total state estimation error. Also, the defender seeks to increase

its utility function in (24) by maximizing the sum of the valuations of the protected SC from

the cyber attack to minimize the state estimation error. Moreover, the payoff for each player

depends on the actions of both players and, thus, we can use a game-theoretic approach to solve

this problem [40]. In particular, next, we ﬁrst model the problem as a two-player Colonel Blotto

game [28] between the attacker and the defender, and then present the solution for the game. The

Colonel Blotto game framework is particularly suitable for the considered ICI security problem

since, in this game, two colonels simultaneously allocate their available military resources on N

battleﬁelds, where the winner of each battleﬁeld is the colonel with a more allocated resources

and both the colonels aim to maximize the sum of the valuations of the won battleﬁelds. This

is similar to the problem in (24), in which SCs are the battleﬁelds and the defender (attacker)

maximizes the sum of the valuations of the protected (compromised) SCs.

A. Game Formulation and Pure Strategy Nash Equilibrium

To model the interdependent decision making processes of the attacker and defender, we

introduce a noncooperative Colonel Blotto game [25], [28]

(cid:110)

P, {Qj}j∈P, {Rj}j∈P, N, {φa
i ,

i=1, {uj}j∈P

i }N
φd
deﬁned by six components: a) the players which are the attacker a and the
defender d in the set P (cid:44) {a, d}, b) the strategy spaces Qj for j ∈ P, c) available resource Rj
for j ∈ P, d) number of the SCs N , e) normalized value of each SC i for j ∈ P, φj

i (A, B, C),
and f) the utility function, uj, for each player. For both players, the set of pure strategies Qj

(cid:111)

corresponds to the different possible resource allocations across the SCs:
(cid:40)

(cid:41)

Qj =

rj

i ≤ Rj, rj
rj

i ≥ 0

.

(26)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

N
(cid:88)

i=1

Also, the utility function of each player, uj, can be deﬁned as in (24). The utility function in

(24) is a symmetric case for the Colonel Blotto game where φd

i (A, B, C) =
φi(A, B, C), which indicates that the values of SCs are equal for the defender and the attacker.

i (A, B, C) = φa

In the following, ﬁrst we present the solution of the Colonel Blotto game for a general case

i (A, B, C) (cid:54)= φa

of φd
i (A, B, C), then we derive the solution of symmetric case. For notational
simplicity, hereinafter, we drop the arguments (A, B, C) in the notation of variables ϕi and φj
i .

15

One of the most important solution concepts for noncooperative games is that of the Nash

equilibrium (NE). The NE characterizes a state at which no player j can improve its utility by

changing its own strategy, given the strategy of the other player is ﬁxed. For a noncooperative

game, the NE in pure (deterministic) strategies can be deﬁned as follows:

Deﬁnition 2. A pure-strategy Nash equilibrium of a noncooperative game is a vector of strategies
[ra∗, rd∗] ∈ Qa × Qd such that ∀j ∈ P, the following holds true:

uj(rj ∗, r−j ∗) ≥ uj(rj, r−j ∗), ∀rj ∈ Qj.

(27)

The NE characterize a stable game state at which the defender cannot improve the protection

of the ICI’s SCs by unilaterally changing its action rd given that the action of the attacker is

ﬁxed at ra∗. At the NE, the attacker cannot increase the state estimation error of the ICI by

changing its action, ra, when the defender keeps its action ﬁxed at rd∗. However, the NE is not

guaranteed to exist in pure strategies. In particular, for a Colonel Blotto game, without loss of

generality, if Rd > Ra, then it can be proven that, for N Ra > Rd there exist no pure-strategy

NE [28]. However, it is proven that there exists at least one NE in mixed strategies [40] for

noncooperative games. When using mixed strategies, each player will assign a probability for

playing each one of its pure strategies. For an ICI security problem, the use of mixed strategies

is motivated by two facts: a) both players must randomize over their strategies in order to make

it nontrivial for the opponent to guess their potential action, and b) the allocation of resources

can be repeated over an inﬁnite time duration and mixed strategies can capture the frequency

of choosing certain strategies for both players. A mixed strategy, which can be termed as a

distribution of resources, for player j is an N -variate distribution function Gj : RN

+ → [0, 1]
with support contained in player j’s set of feasible allocations, Qj. We also deﬁne univariate
marginal distribution functions (MDFs) {F j

i=1 : R+ → [0, 1] for each SC i and can be called

i }N

as distribution of resources on each SC i.

B. Mixed-Strategy Nash Equilibrium Solution

In a game-theoretic setting, each player chooses its own mixed-strategy distribution to maxi-

mize its expected utility. We ﬁrst derive the solution for a special case of our problem in which

the attacker and the defender consider the expected allocation of their resources on each SC

instead of exact allocation. This is a special case of the Colonel Blotto game known as the

General Lotto game [26]. In a Colonel Blotto game, the sum of allocated resources cannot

exceed the limited resources for the players as in (26). In contrast, in a in General Lotto game,

16

the sum of expected allocated resource on SCs cannot exceed the restricted resource of players:

(cid:41)

i (r) ≤ Rj, rj
Ej

i ≥ 0

.

(28)

(cid:40)

Qj =

rj

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

N
(cid:88)

i=1

where Ej

i (r) is the expected value of resources allocated by player j on SC i. In this case, the

utility of each player j ∈ P is deﬁned as the expected value over its mixed strategies:
i=1, {F −j

U j(Gj, G−j) = U j({F j

i F −j
φj

i )dF j

i=1) =

i }N

(cid:20)(cid:90) ∞

i }N

N
(cid:88)

(rj

(cid:21)

.

i

i

(29)

i=1

0

Thus, player j’s optimization problem considering its constraint on the available resource is:

N
(cid:88)

(cid:20)(cid:90) ∞

(cid:2)φj

i F −j

i

(rj

i ) − ζ jrj

i

(cid:21)

(cid:3) dF j

i

+ ζ jrj,

(30)

max
{F j
i }N
i=1

i=1

0

where ζ j is a multiplier for player j’s expected resource allocation constraint. For each i =

1, . . . , N , the corresponding ﬁrst-order condition for maximizing (30) is given by:

d
drj
i

(cid:2)φj

i F −j

i

(rj

i ) − ζ j(cid:3) = 0, ⇒

F −j
i

(rj

i ) = 1,

(31)

φj
i
ζ j

d
drj
i

where (31) is equivalent to the necessary condition for a single all-pay auction game where
player j’s value for the prize in auction is φj

ζj [41]. In such an all-pay auction, if φj

ζj ≥ φ−j

i
ζ−j

the

i

i

solution of (31) is described as follows:

ζj − φ−j

i
ζ−j



φj
i

F −j
i

(r) =



 +

, F j

i (r) =

φj
i
ζj

r
φj
i
ζj

(cid:34)

, r ∈

0,

(cid:35)

.

φ−j
i
ζ −j

r
φ−j
i
ζ−j

(32)

ζd and assume that Ωa(µ) is the set of SCs in

Now, to ﬁnd the multipliers (ζ a, ζ d), let µ (cid:44) ζa
which φa
i
φd
i

> µ. Then using (30), (32), we have:

(cid:88)

i∈Ωa(µ)

φd
i
2ζ d +

(cid:88)

i /∈Ωa(µ)

(cid:17)2
(cid:17) = Ra,

(cid:16) φa
i
ζa
(cid:16) φd
i
ζd

2

(cid:17)2

(cid:16) φd
i
ζd
(cid:16) φa
i
ζa

2

(cid:88)

(cid:17) +

i /∈Ωa(µ)

(cid:88)

i∈Ωa(µ)

φa
i
2ζ a = Rd.

(33)

(34)

From [26, Propostion 1] we know that there exists at least one solution to (33) and (34).

Now that we characterized the functions that maximize the expected utility of players in (29),

we ﬁrst deﬁne the solution concept of mixed strategy Nash equilibrium (MSNE) and then, ﬁnalize

the solution of Lotto game by deriving its MSNE. The MSNE is deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 3. A mixed strategy proﬁle G∗ constitutes a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium if for

player j we have:

U j(Gj ∗, G−j ∗) ≥ U j(Gj, G−j ∗) ∀Gj ∈ Gj

(35)

where Gj is the set of all probability distributions for player j over its action space Qj.

17

The MSNE for this game characterizes a state of the system at which the defender has chosen

its optimal randomization over the allocation of resources on SCs and, thus, cannot improve the

protection of ICI’s SCs by changing this choice. Also, the MSNE for the attacker is a probability

distribution that captures the allocation of its resources over the SCs in a way to maximize the

state estimation error when the defender chooses its MSNE strategies. Using the deﬁnition of

the MSNE, we deﬁne the expected CED at MSNE as follows:

Π(Ga∗, Gd∗

) = Π({F a∗

i }N

i=1, {F d∗

i }N

i=1) (cid:44) U a(Ga∗, Gd∗

N
(cid:88)

)

ϕi.

(36)

It is proven in [26, Theorem 1] that for each solution (ζ d, ζ a) for system of equations in (33)

m=1

and (34), each player in a General Lotto game has a unique MSNE with univariate marginal

distributions in (32). In the following remark, we characterize the solution for our problem

when the values of the ICI’s SCs for both attacker and defender are equal and, then, we ﬁnd

the expected state estimation error.

Remark 1. For the problem of resource allocation over SCs having equal values for the attacker

and defender φa

i = φd
i

(cid:44) ϕi(v)
(cid:80)N

i=1 ϕi(v)

, at the MSNE, the MDFs for the attacker and defender, when

the defender’s resources are greater than the attacker’s resources, Rd ≥ Ra, will be given by:
Ra
Rd , F d
(cid:80)N

r
2φiRd
and the expected CED at MSNE will be Ra
2Rd

2φiRd , r ∈ [0, 2φiRd],
i = φd

i=1 ϕi. Considering φa

∗(r) =

Ra
Rd

(r) =

F a
i

1 −

+

(cid:19)

(cid:18)

r

∗

i

(37)

i and Rd ≥ Ra the
2(Rd)2 . Then, by substituting ζ a and ζ d into (32) we

solution of (34) and (33) is ζ a = 1

2Rd , ζ d = Ra

can directly prove (37) and ﬁnd the expected CED at the MSNE.

The value Ra
2Rd

i=1 ϕi captures the ICI’s expected estimation error for the case in which, the
available resource for the attacker and defender are Ra and Rd, respectively. From Proposition 1,

(cid:80)N

we can conclude two important points: a) the probability of allocation of resources greater than
i > 2φiRd(cid:1) = 0, b) as the ratio of the attacker’s available resource
2φiRd to SC i is zero, Pr (cid:0)rj
to the defender’s available resource, Ra
Rd , increases, the expected state estimation error increases.
Next, we prove that, if the defender concentrates only on one of the CIs without considering

their interdependence, then the expected estimation error increases.
Theorem 2. Suppose the sets N e, N g, N w contain the SCs inside the power, natural gas, and

water CIs. Then, the ICI’s expected estimation error increases if the defender does not consider

the interdependence between the CIs.

Proof. Without loss of generality, suppose that the defender only protects the water CI while

the attacker considers all of the ICI’s SCs. In this case, we assume that the value of the SCs in

the natural gas and power CI for the defender is ε → 0. The water CI’s SCs, however, will have

new values as φd

i =

(cid:80)

ϕi
m∈N w ϕm

, ∀i ∈ N w, while the values of SCs for the attacker are similar

18

to (23). Then, the ratio of the values for the attacker and defender is as follows:
κ (cid:44) (cid:80)

if i ∈ N w,

< 1,




m∈N w ϕm
(cid:80)N
m=1 ϕm

φa
i
φd
i

=



ϕi
ε → ∞,

if i /∈ N w.

(38)

To ﬁnd the values of ζ a and ζ d we consider two cases for µ:
If µ < κ, then Ωa(µ) = N , and, thus, from (33) and (34) we have ζ d = 1
results in µ = κRd
Ra where it violates the condition µ < κ.
If µ ≥ κ, then Ωa(µ) = N g (cid:83) N e, and from (33) and (34) we ﬁnd ζ a = κ
results in µ = κRd

Ra ≥ κ. Therefore, the MDFs for the attacker and the defender are:

2Ra , ζ a = κRd

2(Ra)2 which

2Rd , ζ d = Ra

2(Rd)2 which

¯F a

i (r) =

¯F d

i (r) =



1,
(cid:0)1 − Ra

Rd



1,



rκ
2Rdφi

,

r = 0, i /∈ N w
(cid:105)
,i ∈ N w

0, 2φiRd
κ

(cid:104)

, r∈

(cid:1) + rRaκ
2(Rd)2φi

r = 0, i /∈ N w
(cid:105)

(cid:104)

0, 2φiRd
κ

r ∈

, i ∈ N w,

(39)

(40)

Using above distribution functions and (36), we can ﬁnd the expected CED at the MSNE as
Π({ ¯F d

i=1 ϕi. To reduce the expected CED in Proposition 1,

i=1) = (cid:0) Raκ

2Rd + 1−κ

(cid:1) (cid:80)N

i }N

2

i=1, { ¯F a
i }N
we must have:

(cid:18) Raκ

(cid:19) N
(cid:88)

1 − κ
2

2Rd +
and since κ < 1 then we need to have Ra
that Ra

ϕi <

i=1

Rd > 1 which results in a contradiction because we know
Rd ≤ 1. Therefore, the defender is never better off if it does not allocate resources to the
water infrastructure. Hence, when the defender allocates its resources only on a subset of CIs,

Ra
2Rd

N
(cid:88)

i=1

ϕi, ⇒ (κ − 1)

(cid:19)
(cid:18) Ra
Rd − 1

< 0,

(41)

although the expected allocated resources on these CIs increases, the estimation error of their

states will also increase due to the interdependence of the state variables of the ICI.

(cid:4)

Theorem 2 illustrates the role of the interdependence between power, natural gas, and water

CIs in the state estimation. The defender must consider all the CIs and their interdependence in

the security analysis. Otherwise, if the defender only protects one of the CIs, then the attacker

can cause higher estimation error on all the state variables of the ICI.

The solutions presented in Proposition 1 and Theorem 2 are for the General Lotto game in

which the constraints on resources hold true in expectation as in (28). Next, we analyze a special

case for the values of the SCs in which the solution of the General Lotto game in Proposition

1 can be applied to our original CBG. We deﬁne nδ as the total number of distinct SCs with

distinct valuations and show the following result:
Theorem 3. For nδ → ∞, the derived solution of General Lotto game in Remark 1 can be

19

i , φd

valuations (φa

i ζd
i ) we have φa
i ζa ≤ 1, and 2
φd

applied to the original CBG for ICI.
Proof. From [26, Proposition 2], given a solution (ζ a, ζ d) to (33) and (34), if for each pair of
i ζd
≤ φa
i ζa , then there exists a Nash equilibrium
φd
nδ
of the CBG with the same set of univariate marginal distributions and expected payoffs in the
General Lotto game. In our deﬁned game φd
i = φa
i ζd
2(Rd)2 . Hence, we will have φa
i ζa =
φd
→ 0 ≤ Ra

i ∀i = N , we have derived in Remark 1 that
Rd ≤ 1. Therefore, for a large-scale
(cid:4)

= Ra
i ζd
Rd = φa
i ζa , which proves Theorem 3.
φd

ICI where nδ → ∞, then we will have 2
nδ

2Rd , ζ d = Ra

Ra
2(Rd)2
1
2Rd

ζ a = 1

In this section, we derived two key theorems. Theorem 2 highlights the importance of in-

terdependence in the security analysis and proves that the defender cannot minimize the state

estimation error by allocating resources to a single CI. Moreover, we characterized the solution of

our Colonel Blotto game for the ICI model in Theorem 3 and we derived the expected estimation

error at the MSNE as a function of the attacker’s and the defender’s available resources.

V. SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

For our simulations, we study the ICI example in Fig. 2a which captures a real-world ICI

scenario such as in [17], [29], [32], and [33]. In Fig. 2a, we consider 10 generators out of which

6 are supplied by natural gas and 4 require water ﬂow to operate. Here, 11 natural gas pipelines,

and 11 water pipelines distribute natural gas and water to the demand junctions. Based on this

example we ﬁnd the matrices A and B in (1) using Appendix A and simulate the ICI. To

illustrate how the changes in one CI can affect the state variables of other CIs, we increase the

power demand in generator 5, ue

5, at time t = 20.5. Fig. 2b shows the change of state variables of
the natural gas pipeline between junctions 2 and 3 and state variables of water pipeline between

the junctions 2 and 3. The reason is that any increase in power demand results in an increase

of electric power generation, and due to the interdependence between electric power generation

and the consumption of the natural gas and water, the state variables of the natural gas and water

CIs change. In this ICI, each power generator and each junction in the natural gas and water

systems has a demand proﬁle, which speciﬁes power, gas, and, water demand, at each time.

We design A and B such the dynamic ICI model constitutes an asymptotically stable system.

Also, we consider 32 SCs which collect sensor data from different physical components. Based

20

(a) An illustrative example of an ICI.

(b) Interdependence between the CIs.

Fig. 2: The interdependence of power, natural gas, and water CIs and their state variables.

(a) Sum of the compromised SC valuations.

(b) Average sum of the compromised SC

valuations.

Fig. 3: The outcome of the CBG with the strategies at the MSNE.

on the sensor network architecture in Fig. 2a, we generate the matrix C. In our simulations,

we consider 0.5-feasible attacks that we use to compute the values of the SCs, φi(A, B, C).

Moreover, in our example all of the SCs are distinct, thus, for Ra/Rd > 1/32 the solution of

Blotto game in Theorem 3 will hold.

In Fig. 3a, we simulate the presented ICI in Fig. 2a for the case in which the ratio of the

available resources is Ra

Rd = 0.2. Over 50 simulation runs, both players, empirically, play their
MSNE based on the MDFs in Proposition 1. The average percentage of compromised SCs in this

case is 11% which is very close to the theoretical expected percentage of the compromised SCs
which is Ra

2Rd = 10%. Fig. 3a shows that since the attacker and the defender randomize between
their strategies in each simulation, the percentage of compromised SCs of each simulation might

Water sourceGassourceWater junctionGas junctionWater pipeGas pipeGenerator indep. from gas and waterGenerator dep. on waterGenerator dep. on gaswgGas dem.Power dem.Water dem.AttackerSensorCentral Node81235476910W2W11234586971011G2G11235467891110ggggggwwww1234567891011121314151617181920212223242526272829303132InternetAttacker’s CPUDefender’s CPUSensorCluster2020.220.420.620.821-5005010015020051015202530354045500510152025300.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91010203040506070809010021

(a) The average percentage of compromised

(b) The average CED caused by the cyber

SCs in ICI when the defender allocates

attack to ICI when the defender allocates

resources to only one SC.

resources to only one SC.

Fig. 4: The effect of interdependency on the security solution.

differ from the theoretical expected percentage of compromised SCs. However, the average

percentage of compromised SCs for 50 simulations conforms to the theoretical prediction.

To analyze the efﬁciency of the MSNE , we consider three baseline approaches: a) both players

play their MSNE (which is the solution of the game), b) the attacker allocates a portion φi of its

resource on SC i while the defender plays best response, and c) the defender allocates a portion

φi of its resource on SC i while the attacker plays a best response. The best response of player j

is the pure strategy which maximizes its utility function. Fig. 3b shows that, when the defender

allocates a portion φi of its resource on SC i without mixing the allocation of resources, the

attacker can predict the defender’s strategy and can get higher payoff. In contrast, if the attacker

allocates a portion φi of its resources on SC i without playing a mixed strategy, then the defender

can protect almost all the SCs since it knows the exact amount of attacker’s allocated resource

on each SC. Thus, the attacker is clearly better off randomizing using an MSNE. Therefore,

Fig. 3b shows that if the defender plays MSNE, it can protect the SCs at least 50% better than

the case in which it allocates a portion φi of its resource to every SC i. The 50% improvement

actually can be derived by comparing the slopes of lines passing through the simulation points

in Fig. 3b. Moreover, Fig. 3b shows that, as much the portion of the attacker’s resources to the

defender’s resources increases, the average sum of the compromised SC valuations increases.

To analyze the interdependence between the three CIs, we simulate our model for cases

in which the defender protects only one of the CIs. Fig. 4a shows the average percentage of

compromised SCs. From Fig. 4a, we can see that the defender loses more SCs to the attacker by

concentrating on the security of only one CI. Moreover, Fig. 4b shows the average CED caused

00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91010203040506070800.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.910.020.040.060.080.10.120.140.160.180.20.2222

(a) The average estimation error caused by the
attack to the ICI at MSNE for two cases: Ra
20 , 10
1
20 .

Rd =

(b) The average estimation error of a gas state

caused by the attack on the ICI when the defender

protects the entire ICI VS. only the natural gas CI.

Fig. 5: The average estimation error when the ICI is attacked.

by the cyber attack on the ICI. Fig. 4b indicates that the state estimation of each CI depends

on the data of the SCs in other CIs. Therefore, when the defender focuses only on one CI to

protect, the attacker can disturb this CI’s state estimation by attacking the SCs in other CIs. The

simulation results in Figs. 4a and 4b corroborate the theoretical results in Theorem 2, where we

proved that the defender cannot protect the estimation error by allocating its resources only on

one CI without considering the interdependence between the CIs.

In Fig. 5a, we simulate the use of a KF for the estimation of one of the ICI’s state variables,

ω6, in presence of the attack and in absence of the attack, for two values of Ra
that the estimation of the state variable ω6 causes 10 times higher error in the case of (cid:0) Ra
compared to the case of (cid:0) Ra
Rd
from Proposition 1, we know that the expected estimation error of the attack is Πa = Ra
2Rd

Rd . Fig. 5a shows
1 = 10
20
20 when both players play their MSNE. To explain this result,
i=1 ϕi.

2 = 1

(cid:80)N

Rd

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

Hence, the error caused by the attacker increases by a factor of

= 10.

( Ra
Rd )1
( Ra
Rd )2

In Fig. 5b, we analyze the estimation error of one of the state variables of the pipeline between

junction 2 and 3 of natural gas CI. In this simulation, we examine two games where in ﬁrst case,

we consider that the defender can allocate resources to all the SCs of ICI, while in the second

case, we consider that the defender can only protect the SCs of the natural gas CI. Note that the
ratio between the players’ resources is Ra

Rd = 0.25 in two cases. Fig. 5b shows that, at MSNE
although the defender protects only the SCs of the natural gas CI, the average estimation error

of a natural gas CI state variable in this case is larger than the estimation error in the case of

protecting all the SCs of ICI. Moreover, although the allocated resources on natural gas CI is

increased but from Fig. 5b we see that the average estimation error in natural gas state variable is

23

increased with the factor of 0.47

0.18 = 2.6. This difference between the error estimation of two cases
is very close to the theoretical expected utility of the attacker in Theorem 2. From Theorem 2,

( Raκ

Rd +1−κ)
Ra
Rd

. Here,

we know that the ratio of the expected utility of the attacker in two cases is

κ =

(cid:80)

i∈N g ϕi
i=1 ϕi

(cid:80)N

= 0.38. Therefore, the ratio of the expected utility of the attacker in two cases is

2.86. Fig. 5b illustrates the interdependence of three CIs. To protect the states of only one of

the CIs, the defender has to consider the interdependence of CIs, and allocate its resources on

all the SCs of ICI not only the CI which it desires to protect.

VI. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have analyzed the problem of allocating limited protection resources on

sensor areas (SCs) of an ICI using a game-theoretic approach. We have modeled the dynamic

system of interdependent power, natural gas, and water infrastructure. We have analyzed the

state estimation of the states of an ICI and the maximum reachability of estimation errors of

different SCs of the ICI. We have considered a general model of protection of SCs of an ICI

when the available resources of the defender and the attacker are limited. In particular, we have

formulated the problem of allocating the limited resources of the defender and the attacker as

a Colonel Blotto game. We have then derived the MSNE of the defender and the attacker in

closed-form as a function of the values of SCs and the available resources for the attacker and

the defender. The derived MSNE gives insights on the allocation of the resources on each SC

and also underlines the interdependence of the three infrastructure. Simulation results verify that

the derived MSNE is the defender’s best strategy and due to the interdependence of three CIs,

the defender must consider ICI as a uniﬁed system in the security analysis.

APPENDIX A

CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE DYNAMIC MODEL
In this appendix, we derive a dynamic system model for the power, natural gas, and water

CI. Moreover, we analyze the dynamic model of interdependence between these three CIs.

A. Power Infrastructure

To analyze the power system, we consider a synchronous generator connected to a trans-
mission line as the study system. For a large-scale power system, consisting of ne generators
interconnected through a transmission network, the model derived in [29] is used. In this model,
each generator is considered as a subsystem, with the input to each subsystem i being the power
demand from the connected bus, Pei. Any changes in the power demand, Pei, will result in a

24

(b) Natural gas pipeline.

(a) Two connected generators.

(c) Water pipeline.

Fig. 6: Block diagram of CIs.

change in the frequency of the generator and the mechanical input to the generator. The block

diagram of two connected generators is shown in Fig. 6a. In this model, the dynamics of each
subsystem i can be written as follows:

˙ωi(t) = −

Di
Ji

ωi(t) +

1
Ji

Pmi (t) − Pei(t) −





ne(cid:88)

˙Pmi (t) = −

Pmi(t) −

1
Tti
˙Pij = P o

ij(ωi − ωj),

j=1,j(cid:54)=i

1
P o
i Tti

ωi,

Pij

.

(42)

(43)

(44)

where (42), (43), and (44) represent the mechanical, feedback, and line dynamics of each

subsystem [29] and P o
i − δo

ij = EiEj
xlij

cos(δo

as P o

ij is the linearized power ﬂow in the constant voltage that can be derived
j ). All the power infrastructure parameters are deﬁned in Table I. Using

(42), (43), and (44) we can summarize each power subsystem’s state-space model as:

i (t) = Ae
˙xe

i xe

i (t) + Be

i ue

i (t) + H e








 , ue

(cid:105)

(cid:105)

(cid:104)

(cid:104)





=

ωi

ue
i1

i =

i =

Pmi

 =

xe
i1
xe
i2

where xe

− Di
Ji
−1
i Tti
is a vector with size nl consisting all the line powers Pij. Also, H e




i [m] =

, Ae

H e

−1
Ji

Pei

1
Ji

P o

otherwise,

0,

, xl[m] = Plji for j = 1, . . . , ne, j (cid:54)= i

, xl[m] = Plij for j = 1, . . . , ne, j (cid:54)= i



i xl, i = 1, . . . , ne
1
Ji
−1
Tti

i =




 , Be

i =





−1
Ji
0

(45)


 ,and xl

i is a row vector with entities:

(46)

where xl[m] is the m-th entity of vector xl. In (45), the input to a subsystem, ue

i , is the demand
power from each generator, Pei. Any change in power demand results in the deviation of state

variables. Since one of the state variables in (45) is the mechanical power input to the generator,

Pmi, then any change in the demand power will result in the deviation of mechanical power

𝑃𝑒𝑖1𝑠𝐽𝑖1𝑃𝑗𝑜1+𝑇𝑡𝑗𝑠1𝑠𝐽𝑗1𝑃𝑖𝑜1+𝑇𝑡𝑖𝑠𝑃𝑒𝑗𝜔𝑖𝜔𝑗𝑃𝑖𝑗𝑃𝑖𝑗+−−+−+𝑃𝑚𝑖𝑃𝑚𝑗−+𝑃𝑖𝑗𝑜𝑠𝑃𝑖𝑗𝑜𝑠++1𝜂𝑗𝑔1𝜂𝑗𝑤1𝜂𝑖𝑔1𝜂𝑖𝑤𝜗𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑡𝜗𝑗𝑜𝑢𝑡𝜉𝑖𝑜𝑢𝑡𝜉𝑗𝑜𝑢𝑡𝜌11+𝜏1𝑠11+ො𝜌1𝑠−𝜏2𝑠1+ො𝜌1𝑠−ො𝜌11+𝜏2𝑠11+𝜏3𝑠𝑠++𝑔𝑖𝑛𝜗𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑥1𝑥2𝑐1ሶ𝑥2𝑥3𝑥4𝑔𝑜𝑢𝑡𝜗𝑖𝑛1𝜈−1λ11+𝑠𝜉𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑤𝑜𝑢𝑡++𝜆−+𝑟25

Parameter Description

Parameter Description

δo
i

the i-th generator’s constant operational power

angle in rad

Ji, Di

rotor inertia and damping factor of generator i

Pei

xlij

P o
ij
eg, ew

neg
ηg
i

gin
ij

gcomp
i

ϑd
i
ϑout
ij

nout
i
ηw
i

win
i

ri

active power demand in the subsystem i

equivalent reactance of the bus between gener-

ators i and j.

linearized power ﬂow in the constant voltage

vector of all of the generator indexes supplied

by natural gas and water

number of generators supplied by gas

the efﬁciency of transformation of gas fuel to

mechanical power in the generator i

the inlet gas pressure at connection of junction

i to j

the pressure produced by the compressor in the

junction i

the gas ﬂow demand in junction i

the outlet gas ﬂow rate at the connection of

junction i to j

Number of pipelines suppling junction i

a constant value based on a turbine’s inner

characteristics

the inlet pressure of water at the pipeline i

friction of the water at pipeline i

Tti

Pmi

ωi

Pij

Ei

θ

new

nl

gout
ij

gdef
i

wout
i

γij

npipe
g
ϑin
ij

ξi

ν

direct-axis transient time constant of mechani-

cal power of i-th generator

mechanical input power of the i-th generator

angular frequency of the i-th generator, in rad/s

Power ﬂow in the line between generators i and

j

constant voltage of generator i

friction coefﬁcient of water

number of generators require water

number of lines connected between the subsys-

tems

the outlet gas pressure at

the connection of

junction i to j

the predeﬁned pressure in the junction i

the outlet pressure of water at the pipeline i

The sector area of a pipeline between the junc-

tion i and j

Total number of the pipelines in the gas system

the inlet gas ﬂow rate at connection of junction

i to j

the ﬂow rate of the water in pipeline i

the kinematic viscosity of water

Table I: ICI parameter description.

input to the generator. However mechanical input to the generator is excited by an external input

such as nuclear energy, coal, natural gas, wind, or water ﬂow. Here, we focus on dynamics of

the generators excited by the natural gas and for the other types of generators we assume a

known mechanical input without any dynamics. We also assume that the mechanical input to the

generators supplied by natural gas is proportional to the ﬂow rate of arriving gas to the generator
from the gas CI. Therefore, we have Pmi = ηg

i ϑout
i
Power generation also depends on some form of water input. For instance, thermal power

are deﬁned in Table I.

, where ηg

i and ϑout
i

generation requires large volumes of water for cooling purposes. Hydroelectric power requires

ﬂowing water to drive generating turbines [30]. We model the dependence of the power generation

on water using the boiler turbine dynamics in [31]. Since the generator’s temperature control

requires water ﬂow to the generator, the relationship between the input water and the generator’s

26

mechanical power can be written as: Pmi = ηw

i ξout
i
(45) considers each generator separately. However, to analyze the power infrastructure as a

are deﬁned in Table I.

, where ηW
i

and ξout

i

uniﬁed system we need to deﬁne a centralized model for the power system. In this regard, we

present the state space model as follows:

˙xe(t) = Aexe(t) + Beue(t),

yeg(t) = Cegxe(t), yew(t) = Cewxe(t),

xe =











xe
1
...
xe
ne
xl











, ue =








u1
...
une








, Ae

(2ne+nl)×(2ne+nl) =

Ae
1

0

0











(47)











,

0
. . .
0 Ae
ne

0 H e
1
...
H e
ng

0

Ael

0

Ael

nl×2ne

[i, j] =






Be

(2ne+nl)×(ne) =











Be
1

0

0

0

0

0
. . .
0 Be
ne

0

. . .

0

P o

j
2 m
−P o

, if j

2 = 1, . . . , ne, & xl[i] = P j

2 m,
2 = 1, . . . , ne, & xl[i] = Pm j

, if j

,

2

j
2 m

otherwise,

, Ceq

neq×(2ne+nl)[i, j] =




1
ηq
j/2



0,

if j/2 = eq[i],

otherwise,

∀q ∈ {g, w}

0,










and yeg and yew are the vectors of natural gas and water demand from the power CI, respectively.

eg and ew are the vectors which contain the indices of generators require natural gas and water.

B. Natural Gas Infrastructure

To analyze the performance of a natural gas CI, we need to model the transient ﬂow of the

gas pipelines, as in [32]. In this model, the inlet pressure and outlet ﬂow rate at each pipeline

are the inputs to the pipeline system. Also, the outlet gas pressure and the inlet ﬂow rate are the

outputs of the pipeline. The reason that outlet ﬂow rate is the input of the pipeline system is that

it determines the gas ﬂow demand in the output of the system. Also, the pressure in the inlet of

the pipelines is controlled by the components such as the compressor. Therefore, we consider

the inlet pressure of the pipeline as another input to the pipeline system. The block diagram of a

pipeline is shown in Fig. 6b and the state space equations for a pipeline are derived as follows:
˙xg
3 =

˙xg
4 =

xg
3 −

xg
4 +

xg
2 +

ϑout,

ϑout,

(48)

gin,

gin,

xg
1 +

˙xg
2 =

˙xg
1 =

−1
ρ1

τ1
ρ1
and the outputs of the pipeline are:
ˆτ1
ˆρ1

gout = xg

−1
ˆρ1

1 +

1 −

(cid:18)

1
ˆρ1

(cid:19)

xg
3 −

ˆτ1τ2
ˆρ1

−1
ˆρ1

τ2
ˆρ1

−ˆτ2
ˆρ1

ϑout, ϑin =

2 + xg
xg

4 −

gin.

(49)

−1
τ3

ˆτ2
ˆρ1

1
τ3

The parameters τ1, τ2, τ3, ˆτ1, ρ1, and ˆρ1 are computed from the linearization of the pressure and
gas ﬂow rate inside the pipeline. For detailed analysis, the reader can refer to [32, Annex A].

Other variables in the natural gas network are described in Table I. In the natural gas CI, we

need to account for the connection between the pipelines. To do so, ﬁrst we consider that the

27

(cid:80)

(cid:16)(cid:80)

mi =

ij + ϑd

{j|i→j} ϑin

i , where ϑout

summation of inlet gas ﬂow in the junctions has to be equal to the summation of the outlet
gas ﬂow. Therefore, the inlet-outlet gas rate relationship in each junction i is (cid:80)
mi =
(cid:80)
γmi1
, and the notation j|j → i
{q|q→i} γqi1
means all the junctions supplying junction i and j|i → j means all the junctions supplied
by junction i. Also, the inlet-outlet pressure relationship in each junction can be written as
gout
, ∀j|i → j. A compressor at each
i
junction compensates the pressure loss [42]. The required power at each compressor i is a
function of the pressure produced by the compressor asPei = ηc
is
deﬁned by the designer of the system based on the characteristics of the junction. Therefore, the

i ), where gdef

{m|m→i} ϑout

i + gcomp

ji , ⇒ gout

{j|i→j} ϑin

i − gout

ij = gdef

j|j→i gout

(cid:44) 1
nout
i

ij + ϑd
i

= gdef
i

, ⇒ gin

i (gdef

(cid:80)

(cid:17)

i

i

i

gas pressure in the inlet of the pipelines is ﬁxed. Now, we can write the state space model of a
natural gas pipeline between junction i and j as:



ug

ij +

n
(cid:88)

yg

jm

 , i = 1, . . . , ng

ij = Ag
˙xg

ijxg

ij + Bg

ij

ij = Cg
yg

ijxg

ij + Dg

ij


ug

ij +

m|j→m

n
(cid:88)

yg

jm

m|j→m


 , yge

i = Cge

i


uge

i − Dge

i



yg
ji

 ,

n
(cid:88)

j|j→i

(50)

where

























xg

ij =

Cg

ij =

Ag

ij =











xg
ij1
xg
ij2
xg
ij3
xg
ij4

, ug

ij =





 =







ug
ij1
ug
ij2

gdef
i
ϑd
j


 , yg

ij =









 =



gout
ij

ϑijin

yg
ij1
yg
ij2


 , yge

i =

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

,

Pei

0

1
0 −ˆτij2
ˆρij1

−1
ρij1
0

0

1

−1
ˆρij1
0

0

0

(cid:17)

(cid:16)

1 − ˆτij1
ˆρij1
0

0

0

−1
ˆρij1
0

0

0

0

−1
τij1

0

1












 , Cge

i =

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

ηc
i

, Dge

i =

(cid:104)

1
nout
i

(cid:105)

0

, uge

i =

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

,

gdef
i











, Bg

ij =

τi1
ρi1
1
ˆρi1
0

ˆρij1

0

0



ji1

0
−τ 2
{j|j→i} τji1
τji1
{j|j→i} τji1

(cid:80)

(cid:80)



ij=






, Dg







.

ˆτij1 τij2
ˆρij1
0

0

ˆτij1
ˆρij1

τij3
and yge
is deﬁned the power demand in the compressor of each junction i. The relationship
i
in (50) considers the dynamics of a single pipeline system. To analyze the natural gas CI as a

uniﬁed system, we propose the centralized model consisting all of the state variables as:

˙xg(t) = Agxg(t) + Bgug(t), yge(t) = Cgexg(t) + Dgug(t),

where

(cid:104)
xg=

1 , · · · , xgT
xgT
npipe
g

(cid:105)T

(cid:104)
, ug=

1 , · · · , ugT
ugT
npipe
g

(cid:105)T

(cid:104)
, yge=

ygeT
1

, · · · , ygeT
ng

(cid:105)T

,

(51)

(52)

28

and Ag, Bg, C g, and Dg are 4npip

g × 2npip
g × 4npip
g , 4npip
g × 4npip
g
matrices, respectively. In (52), each vector xg
m corresponds to one of the pipeline state vectors,
xg
m in (52) corresponds to one of the pipeline input vectors, ug
ij.
To ﬁnd matrices Ag, Bg, C g, Dg, we need to start from the last pipelines in the natural gas

ij. Moreover, each vector ug

g , and 2npip

g × 2npip

g , 2npip

CI and ﬁnd the outputs of these pipelines and use them as the inputs of previous pipelines. By

proceeding this method until reaching the source junction we can derive the mentioned matrices.

C. Water Infrastructure

To analyze the water CI we use the model presented in [33], in which the ﬂow rate is considered

and outlet pressure of the pipeline can be expressed as ˙r = −r + 1

constant in the outlet and inlet of each pipeline. Moreover, the relationship between the ﬂow, inlet
θ win, wout = −θr + win,
where all the parameters are described in Table I. Fig. 6c shows the block diagram model of the

ν ξ − 1

pipeline in water system. Also at each junction of water system the summation of inlet ﬂow has

to be equal to the summation of the outlet ﬂow of water. Therefore, at each junction i we have:





(cid:88)

(cid:88)

ξmi =

ξij + ξd

i , ⇒ ξmi =

{m|m→i}

{j|i→j}

γmi
{q|q→i} γqi

(cid:80)

(cid:88)



{j|i→j}

ξij + ξd
i

 .

(53)

Moreover, due to the pressure loss in the pipelines, there exist a water pump in each junction

(cid:80)

which controls the pressure of water in the junctions. Then, the water pressure relationship in
each junction is wout
∀j|i → j. Each
junction i’s required power for the pump is a function of pressure provided by the pump as
Pei = ηp
is a predeﬁned value by the designer of the water system
which indicates the ﬁxed inlet water pressure in each pipe. Similar to the natural gas CI, the

i ), where wdef

i + wpump

ji , ⇒ wout

i − wout

j|j→i wout

ij = wdef

(cid:44) 1
nout
i

, ⇒ win

i (wdef

= wdef

,

i

i

i

i

i

state space model for each water pipeline is as follows:

ij = Aw
˙xw

ijxw

ij + Bw
ij

yw
jm

 , i = 1, . . . , nw




uw

ij +

n
(cid:88)

m|j→m

ij = Cw
yw

ijxw

ij + Dw
ij


uw

ij +

n
(cid:88)

yw
jm

m|j→m


 , ywe

i = Cwe

i


uwe

i − Dwe

i



yw
ji

 ,

n
(cid:88)

j|j→i

(54)

where

(cid:104)

xw

ij =

rij

(cid:105)

, uw

ij =





wdef
i
ξd
j


 , yw

ij =

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

, Aw

ij =

(cid:104)

(cid:105)

, Bg

ij =

(cid:104)

−1

rij

1
νij

−1
θij

(cid:105)

,



Cw

ij=



−θij

0




 , Dw

ij=




 , ywe

(cid:104)
i =

1

0

0

0

(cid:105)

, Cwe

(cid:104)
i =

ηp
i

(cid:105)

, Dwe

(cid:104)
i =

Pei

1
nout
i

(cid:105)

, uwe

(cid:104)
i =

0

(cid:105)

.

wdef
i

Vector ywe

i

identiﬁes the power demand from the pumps in each junction. The system presented

in (54) is a decentralized model which considers only one pipeline. Using (53) and (54), for

each pipeline in the water system we can ﬁnd the centralized water CI model as follows:

˙xw(t) = Awxw(t) + Bwuw(t), ywe(t) = C wexw(t) + Dwuw(t),

(55)

29

(cid:104)

(cid:105)T

(cid:104)

(cid:105)T

(cid:104)

xw

uw

, uw =

1 , · · · , xw

1 , · · · , uw

where xw =

npipe
w
corresponds to one of the pipeline state vectors, xw

, and each xw
1 , · · · , ywe
ywe
m
npipe
w
ij, and each uw
m corresponds to one of the
w ×npipe
w , npipe
w ×npipe
w ,
w matrices, respectively, and to ﬁnd these matrices the same procedure in the
natural gas CI model can be proceeded. We start from the junctions that only have the demand

ij. Also, Aw, Bw, C w, and Dw are npipe

pipeline input vectors, uw

w × 2npipe

w ×2npip

w , 2npipe

and 2npipe

, ywe =

npipe
w

(cid:105)T

outlet ﬂow without any pipelines connected to their outlet. Then, we use each pipeline’s output

as inputs to the pipelines of previous step. We continue this procedure until we reach the source.

D. ICI Model

Considering the power-gas-water CI interdependence, a uniﬁed model for each CI is:

˙xe(t) = Aexe(t) + Be (ue(t) + T geyge(t) + T weywe(t)) ,

˙xg(t) = Agxg(t) + Bg (ug(t) + T egyeg(t)) ,

˙xw(t) = Awxw(t) + Bw (uw(t) + T ewyew(t)) ,

(56)

where

yeg(t) = Cegxe(t), yew(t) = Cewxe(t),

yge(t) = Cgexg(t) + Dg (ug(t) + T egyeg(t)) , ywe(t) = Cwexw(t) + Dw (uw(t) + T ewyew(t)) .

(57)

Here, T ge, T we, T ew, and T eg are 4npipe

w , and
g matrices connecting the inputs and outputs of the three CIs whose elements
are equal to one if the output of one CI is connected to the input of another CI or is equal to

w × (2ne + nl), (2ne + nl) × npipe

g × (2ne + nl), npipe

(2ne + nl) × 4npipe

zero otherwise. By substituting (57) into (56), we will have the following state-space model for

the interdependent critical gas-power-water infrastructure as in (1), where

(cid:104)

x(t) =

xeT (t), xgT (t), xwT (t)

(cid:105)T

(cid:104)

, u(t) =

ueT (t), ugT (t), uwT (t)

(cid:105)T

,

(58)

and ¯A and ¯B are n × n and n × ˜n matrices deﬁned in (59) where n (cid:44) 2ne + nl + 4npipe
and ˜n (cid:44) ne +2npipe

g + npipe
w ,
w . (1) captures the dynamics of an ICI. In this model, the state variables
of three CIs are mutually interdependent, and changes in one CI can affect the other two CIs.

g +2npipe



¯A(cid:44)









Ae+Be(T geDgT egCeg+T weDwT ewCew) BeT geCge BeT weCwe

BgT egCeg

BwT ewCew

Ag

0

0

Aw











, ¯B(cid:44)











Be BeT geDg BeT weDw

0

0

Bg

0

0

Bw






.





(59)

In summary, we proposed the state space modeling for each of the CIs and analyzed their

interdependence. Moreover, we derived the matrices of dynamic model of each CI.

REFERENCES
[1] S. Chattopadhyay, H. Dai, D. Y. Eun, and S. Hosseinalipour, “Designing optimal interlink patterns to maximize robustness
of interdependent networks against cascading failures,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 65, no. 9, pp. 3847–
3862, Sep. 2017.

[2] H. Farhangi, “The path of the smart grid,” IEEE power and energy magazine, vol. 8, no. 1, 2010.
[3] S. M. Rinaldi, J. P. Peerenboom, and T. K. Kelly, “Identifying, understanding, and analyzing critical infrastructure

interdependencies,” IEEE Control Systems, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 11–25, 2001.

[4] T. Nam and T. A. Pardo, “Smart city as urban innovation: Focusing on management, policy, and context,” in Proceedings
of the 5th International Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance, ser. ICEGOV ’11. New York,
NY, USA: ACM, Sept 2011, pp. 185–194.

30

[5] A. Ferdowsi, U. Challita, and W. Saad, “Deep learning for reliable mobile edge analytics in intelligent transportation

systems: An overview,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, 2019.

[6] M. Ouyang, “Review on modeling and simulation of interdependent critical infrastructure systems,” Reliability engineering

& System safety, vol. 121, pp. 43–60, 2014.

[7] M. Rana, L. Li, and S. W. Su, “Distributed state estimation over unreliable communication networks with an application
to smart grids,” IEEE Transactions on Green Communications and Networking, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 89–96, March 2017.
[8] R. E. Kamel and Y. Bar-Ness, “Reduced-complexity sequence estimation using state partitioning,” IEEE Transactions on

Communications, vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 1057–1063, Sep. 1996.

[9] L. Xie, Y. Mo, and B. Sinopoli, “Integrity data attacks in power market operations,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid,

vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 659–666, Dec 2011.

[10] O. Yagan, D. Qian, J. Zhang, and D. Cochran, “Optimal allocation of interconnecting links in cyber-physical systems:
Interdependence, cascading failures, and robustness,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 23,
no. 9, pp. 1708–1720, Sept 2012.

[11] A. Ferdowsi, A. Sanjab, W. Saad, and N. B. Mandayam, “Game theory for secure critical interdependent gas-power-water

infrastructure,” in Proceedings of 10th Resilience Week. Wilmington, DE, USA: IEEE, Sept 2017.

[12] F. Pasqualetti, F. D¨orﬂer, and F. Bullo, “Attack detection and identiﬁcation in cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Transactions

on Automatic Control, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 2715–2729, 2013.

[13] H. Fawzi, P. Tabuada, and S. Diggavi, “Secure estimation and control for cyber-physical systems under adversarial attacks,”

IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 1454–1467, 2014.

[14] C. Kwon, W. Liu, and I. Hwang, “Security analysis for cyber-physical systems against stealthy deception attacks,” in 2013

American Control Conference, Washington, DC, USA, June 2013, pp. 3344–3349.

[15] Y. Mo, E. Garone, A. Casavola, and B. Sinopoli, “False data injection attacks against state estimation in wireless sensor
networks,” in Proceedings of 49th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), Atlanta, GA, USA, Dec 2010, pp.
5967–5972.

[16] M. Ouyang and Z. Wang, “Resilience assessment of interdependent infrastructure systems: With a focus on joint restoration

modeling and analysis,” Reliability Engineering & System Safety, vol. 141, pp. 74–82, 2015.

[17] C. Nan and G. Sansavini, “A quantitative method for assessing resilience of interdependent infrastructures,” Reliability

Engineering & System Safety, vol. 157, pp. 35–53, 2017.

[18] S. E. Chang, T. McDaniels, J. Fox, R. Dhariwal, and H. Longstaff, “Toward disaster-resilient cities: characterizing resilience

of infrastructure systems with expert judgments,” Risk Analysis, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 416–434, 2014.

[19] J. Szefer, P. Jamkhedkar, Y.-Y. Chen, and R. B. Lee, “Physical attack protection with human-secure virtualization in data
centers,” in IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks Workshops (DSN 2012), Boston,
MA, USA, June 2012, pp. 1–6.

[20] A. Ashok, A. Hahn, and M. Govindarasu, “Cyber-physical security of wide-area monitoring, protection and control in a

smart grid environment,” Journal of advanced research, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 481–489, 2014.

[21] A. Ferdowsi and W. Saad, “Deep learning for signal authentication and security in massive Internet of Things Systems,”

IEEE Transactions on Communications, 2018.

[22] A. Gupta, G. Schwartz, C. Langbort, S. S. Sastry, and T. Bas¸ar, “A three-stage Colonel Blotto game with applications to

cyberphysical security,” in Proc. American Control Conference, Portland, OR, USA, June 2014, pp. 3820–3825.

[23] A. Ferdowsi, W. Saad, B. Maham, and N. B. Mandayam, “A Colonel Blotto game for interdependence-aware cyber-physical
systems security in smart cities,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Science of Smart City Operations
and Platforms Engineering. Pittsburgh, PA, USA: ACM, 2017, pp. 7–12.

[24] G. Schwartz, P. Loiseau, and S. S. Sastry, “The heterogeneous Colonel Blotto game,” in 2014 7th International Conference

on NETwork Games, COntrol and OPtimization (NetGCoop). Trento, Italy: IEEE, 2014, pp. 232–238.

[25] A. Ferdowsi, A. Sanjab, W. Saad, and T. Bas¸ar, “Generalized Colonel Blotto game,” in Proc. IEEE American Control

Conference, Milwaukee, WI, USA, June 2018.

[26] D. Kovenock and B. Roberson, “Generalizations of the General Lotto and Colonel Blotto games,” 2015.
[27] A. Rullo, D. Midi, E. Serra, and E. Bertino, “A game of things: Strategic allocation of security resources for IoT,” in
Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Internet-of-Things Design and Implementation, ser. IoTDI ’17.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2017, pp. 185–190.

[28] B. Roberson, “The Colonel Blotto game,” Economic Theory, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 1–24, Sep 2006.
[29] G. Andersson, “Dynamics and control of electric power systems,” Lecture notes, pp. 227–0528, 2012.
[30] W. N. Lubega and A. M. Farid, “Quantitative engineering systems modeling and analysis of the energy–water nexus,”

Applied Energy, vol. 135, pp. 142–157, 2014.

[31] C. Maffezzoni, “Boiler-turbine dynamics in power-plant control,” Control Engineering Practice, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 301–312,

1997.

[32] R. Alamian, M. Behbahani-Nejad, and A. Ghanbarzadeh, “A state space model for transient ﬂow simulation in natural gas

pipelines,” Journal of Natural Gas Science and Engineering, vol. 9, pp. 51–59, 2012.

[33] J. Burgschweiger, B. Gn¨adig, and M. C. Steinbach, “Optimization models for operative planning in drinking water

networks,” Optimization and Engineering, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 43–73, Mar 2009.

[34] A. Zanella, N. Bui, A. Castellani, L. Vangelista, and M. Zorzi, “Internet of things for smart cities,” IEEE Internet of Things

Journal, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 22–32, 2014.

[35] R. L. Williams, D. A. Lawrence et al., Linear state-space control systems.
[36] P. R. Kumar and P. Varaiya, Stochastic systems: Estimation, identiﬁcation, and adaptive control. SIAM, 2015.
[37] J. Chen and R. J. Patton, Robust model-based fault diagnosis for dynamic systems. Springer Science & Business Media,

John Wiley & Sons, 2007.

[38] D. P. Baron, “Quadratic programming with quadratic constraints,” Naval Research Logistics Quarterly, vol. 19, no. 2, pp.

2012, vol. 3.

253–260, 6 1972.

[39] A. Ferdowsi and W. Saad, “Deep learning-based dynamic watermarking for secure signal authentication in the Internet of
Things,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), Kansas City, MO, USA, May 2018.

[40] T. Bas¸ar and G. J. Olsder, Dynamic noncooperative game theory. SIAM, 1998.
[41] M. R. Baye, D. Kovenock, and C. G. De Vries, “The all-pay auction with complete information,” Economic Theory, vol. 8,

no. 2, pp. 291–305, 1996.

[42] K. A. Pambour, R. Bolado-Lavin, and G. P. Dijkema, “An integrated transient model for simulating the operation of natural

gas transport systems,” Journal of Natural Gas Science and Engineering, vol. 28, pp. 672–690, 2016.

