Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2017, Hobart, Australia 

Micallef & Arachchilage 
Enhancing Human Behaviour with Security Questions 

A Model for Enhancing Human Behaviour with Security 
Questions: A Theoretical Perspective 
Nicholas Micallef 
Australian Centre for Cyber Security 
School of Engineering and Information Technology 
University of New South Wales 
Canberra, Australia 
Email: n.micallef@adfa.edu.au  

Nalin Asanka Gamagedara Arachchilage 
Australian Centre for Cyber Security 
School of Engineering and Information Technology 
University of New South Wales 
Canberra, Australia 
Email: nalin.asanka@adfa.edu.au 

Abstract 

Security  questions  are  one of the  mechanisms used to  recover  passwords.  Strong  answers  to  security 
questions (i.e. high entropy) are hard for attackers to guess or obtain using social engineering techniques 
(e.g. monitoring of social networking profiles), but at the same time are difficult to remember. Instead, 
weak answers to security questions (i.e. low entropy) are easy to remember, which makes them more 
vulnerable to cyber-attacks. Convenience leads users to use the same answers to security questions on 
multiple  accounts, which  exposes  these  accounts to numerous  cyber-threats.  Hence,  current  security 
questions implementations rarely achieve the required security and memorability requirements.  This 
research study is the first step in the development of a model which investigates the determinants that 
influence users’ behavioural intentions through motivation to select strong and memorable answers to 
security  questions.  This  research  also  provides  design  recommendations  for  novel  security  questions 
mechanisms.   

Keywords  Cyber  Security,  Usable  Security,  Security  Questions,  Human-computer  interaction  and 
design. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2017, Hobart, Australia 

Micallef & Arachchilage 
Enhancing Human Behaviour with Security Questions 

Introduction 

1 
Internet  users  are  increasingly  dealing  with  more  online  accounts  (statistics  show  that  92%  of 
Australians use the internet (Poushter 2016)), for personal emails, social networks, e-commerce, banks 
etc.  Hence,  internet  users  are  finding  it  more  challenging  to  remember  the  passwords  of  all  of  their 
online accounts (Florencio and Herley 2007; Stavova et al. 2016). Recent research found that password 
managers  have  not  been  widely  adopted  (Alkaldi  and  Renaud  2016).  Thus,  resetting  passwords  is 
increasingly becoming a much more frequent task (Florencio and Herley 2007; Stavova et al. 2016). 

Various types of fall-back authentication mechanisms have been studied to address this problem with 
password  recovery  mechanisms  (Stavova  et  al.  2016). The  most  popular  being  email-based  password 
recovery, text-based password recovery and security questions (Schechter and Reeder 2009). Although 
both  email-based  and  text-based  password  recovery have  recently  been  adopted  by  major  companies 
(e.g.  Google  and  Facebook),  they  still have  major  limitations  (e.g.  security  vulnerabilities  and  lack  of 
mobility) (Stavova et al. 2016). For instance, with email-based password recovery users might require 
to pay a higher cost for data roaming if they need to recover their passwords, when they are abroad. Also, 
for text-based password recovery, users might not carry their device with them when on vacation. In this 
situation, it would be impossible for users to recover their forgotten password.   

From a security questions perspective, weak answers to security questions (i.e. low entropy) are easy to 
remember (Zviran and Haga 1990), which makes them more vulnerable to the art of human hacking (i.e. 
guessing attacks, dictionary attacks, observational attacks and shoulder surfing attacks) (Bonneau et al. 
2010;  Denning  et  al.  2011).  Instead,  strong  answers  to  security  questions  (i.e.  high  entropy)  are  less 
vulnerable to cyber-attacks (Shay et al. 2012), but at the same time are difficult to remember (Micallef 
and Just 2011).  Therefore, convenience leads users to use the same answers to security questions on 
multiple accounts (Honan 2012), which exposes these accounts to numerous cyber-threats.  

One could argue, that the main problem with security questions is that they are poorly designed, since 
more effort has been invested in improving the security and usability of passwords (Bonneau et al. 2012) 
(e.g.  password  meters  (Komanduri  et  al.  2011),  password  rules).  While  in  comparison,  research  on 
improving  the  security  and  memorability of  security  questions  is  still  quite  limited  (e.g. there  are  no 
websites that provide security questions answer meters) (Senarath et al. 2016). Research on designing 
secure and usable security questions might still be limited due to the fact that passwords are considered 
to be more important, since passwords are used as the main mechanism to login into an online account 
(Bonneau and Preibusch 2010). Alternatively, security questions are mostly used for password recovery 
(Just  and  Aspinall  2010).  However, if  an online  account could  be  breached  through  weak  answers  to 
security questions than it does not matter how strong and usable a password login mechanism is because 
the attacker could still get control of the account and consequently reset the password to use the account 
for malicious purposes. For instance, in Sarah Palin's 2008 email account hack, the attacker merely used 
social engineering techniques to reset her password using her birth-date, ZIP code and where she met 
her spouse (Bridis 2008). In 2014, Apple released a statement which stated that certain iCloud accounts 
were compromised by a targeted attack on user names, passwords, and security questions (Albanesius 
2014). Therefore, equal importance (as for designing usable and secure passwords) should be given to 
designing  secure  and  usable  security  questions.  Therefore,  since  other  fall-back  authentication 
mechanisms (e.g. text-based password recovery) have their own limitations (e.g. security vulnerabilities 
and lack of mobility) (Stavova et al. 2016), designing both secure and usable security questions needs to 
be investigated in a more pragmatic way.  

To  design  both  secure  and  usable  security  questions  mechanisms  we  need  to  better  understand  the 
human behaviour. Therefore, in this research, we focus on investigating which are the determinants that 
influence users’ behavioural intentions through motivation to select strong and memorable answers to 
security  questions.  Hence,  in  our  work,  we  use  previous  research  on  Protection  Motivation  Theory 
(PMT)  (Rogers  1975;  Maddux  and  Rogers  1983)  and  Technology  Threat  Avoidance  Theory  (TTAT) 
(Liang  and  Xue  2010;  Arachchilage  and  Love  2013,  2014)  to  define  a  model  that  aims  to  investigate 
users’ behavioural intentions when selecting answers to security questions to protect themselves from 
cyber-attacks. We also use previous research on human memory (Atkinson and Shiffrin 1968; Anderson 
and Bower 1972) to enhance the proposed model, so that it takes into consideration memorability traits 
that affect users’ behaviour intentions when selecting answers to security questions. Finally, we discuss 
how the proposed research model could affect the design of a novel security questions mechanism.   

The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. The ‘Theoretical Background’ section illustrates the 
basics of PMT (Rogers 1975) and TTAT (Liang and Xue 2010). The ‘Research Model’ section, presents 
the proposed research model and motivations behind the design of the model and related hypotheses. 
In Section 4, we identify the implications that the proposed model would have on the design of a novel 

2 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2017, Hobart, Australia 

Micallef & Arachchilage 
Enhancing Human Behaviour with Security Questions 

security questions mechanisms that aims to enhance human behavioural intentions through motivation 
when  selecting  answers  to  security  questions.  Finally,  conclusion  and  future  research  regarding  the 
proposed research model are presented in Section 5. 

2  Theoretical Background 

The aim of this research is to design a model that investigates the determinants that influence human 
behavioural  intentions  through  motivation  to  select  strong  and  memorable  answers  to  security 
questions. In this research we construct the research model by exploring the two main aspects that could 
motivate users to select strong and memorable answers to security questions: (1) behavioural traits that 
influence security and (2) behavioural traits that influence usability. 

With respect to the behavioural traits that influence security, previous research defined the Protection 
Motivation Theory (PMT) (Rogers 1975; Maddux and Rogers 1983). PMT interprets why and how people 
decide to take protective behaviours. Current research in security behaviour adopted the PMT model by 
creating the Technology Threat Avoidance Theory (TTAT), through the use of health behavioural models 
and risk analysis research (Liang and Xue 2010). According to Liang and Xue (2010) (and other research 
in the field (Arachchilage and Love 2013; Arachchilage et al. 2016; Tsai et al. 2016)), TTAT implements 
PMT's framework by detecting the main factors that lead to technology threat avoidance behaviour. This 
is  achieved  by  exploring  the  relationship  between  threat  (in  this  case,  the  threat  of  hacking  online 
accounts due to weak answers to security questions) and coping (in this case, measures taken to avoid 
hacking of online accounts which use security questions) appraisals and their role in motivating the use 
of protective behaviours, as instigated by risk tolerance and social influences. Previous research (Liang 
and Xue 2010; Arachchilage and Love 2013; Arachchilage et al. 2016; Tsai et al. 2016) found that threat 
appraisals  (perceived  susceptibility  and  severity)  and  coping  appraisals  (safeguard  effectiveness, 
safeguard cost, and self-efficacy) were significant predictors of computer threat avoidance behaviours. 
Since the aim of our research is to design a model that investigates the determinants that could influence 
users’  motivation  to  improve  their  behavioural  intentions  when  selecting  strong  answers  to  security 
questions,  in  order  to  protect  their  accounts  from  cyber-attacks,  we  also  use  TTAT  as  a  means  of 
extending PMT.  

Previous research found that internet users are more inclined to get discouraged in taking measures to 
cope with a threat, which could arise from using weak answers to security questions because they find 
the cost of remembering strong answers to security questions to be prohibitive (Schechter and Reeder 
2009; Schechter et al. 2009). Hence, in our research we also investigate behavioural traits that influence 
usability (by focusing specifically on memorability, since for security questions memorability is the main 
determinant of usability (Just and Aspinall 2009; Bonneau et al. 2015)), as a separate entity. The aim is 
to  further  understand  how  memorability  affects  the  avoidance  motivation  and  consequently  the 
improved behavioural intentions of using strong and memorable answers to security questions.  Since 
previous work found that entertaining ads tend to be more memorable (Kellaris and Cline 2007) than 
non-entertaining ads, our research also investigates whether entertainment would have the same effect 
on  remembering  answers  to  security  questions.  Entertainment  is  important  because  recent  research 
(Micallef  and  Arachchilage  2017a,  2017b)  has  started  evaluating  the  use  of  games  with  the  aim  of 
enhancing the memorability of answers to security questions. In the proposed research model, we also 
add social influences because Johnston and Warkentin (2010) found that social influences are important 
to understand how others behave. No other research has investigated in detail the behavioural traits that 
influence  both  security  and usability  to  motivate users  to  select  stronger  and  memorable  answers  to 
security questions. 

3  Research Model 

The proposed research model (see Figure 1) aims to enhance human behaviour with security questions 
by  exploring  the  two  aspects  (i.e.  security  and  usability)  that  could  influence  users’  motivation  to 
improve their behavioural intentions to select strong and memorable answers to security questions. The 
part of the model which refers to the behavioural traits which influence security was derived from Liang 
and Xue (2009) and also adopted and evaluated by plenty of other research in the security behaviour 
field (Liang and Xue 2010; Arachchilage and Love 2013, 2014; Tsai et al. 2016). In line with TTAT, we 
propose that internet users' cyber-threat avoidance behaviour is determined by avoidance motivation. 
Avoidance motivation is affected by perceived threat, safeguard effectiveness, safeguard cost and self-
efficacy. However, since for security questions memorability is the main determinant of usability (Just 
and Aspinall 2009; Bonneau et al. 2015), we propose that avoidance motivation is also affected by the 
memorability of answers to security questions (see behavioural traits which influence usability in Figure 

3 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2017, Hobart, Australia 

Micallef & Arachchilage 
Enhancing Human Behaviour with Security Questions 

1). The following sections explain in more detail the reasoning behind the choices that were taken when 
designing the proposed research model (see Figure 1) and corresponding hypotheses.  

Figure 1: Proposed research model (enhanced from TTAT (Liang and Xue 2010)) 

3.1  Behavioural Traits Influencing Security 

A perceived threat is defined as the extent to which a person perceives a situation to be dangerous or 
harmful (Liang and Xue 2010). Perception of threat is developed by examining the personal computing 
environments to detect potential dangers (Liang and Xue 2010). According to previous research (Liang 
and Xue 2010; Arachchilage and Love 2013), perceived susceptibility and perceived severity influence 
the  threat  perception.  Perceived  severity  is  the  magnitude  to  which  an  internet  user  perceives  that 
negative consequences caused by malicious behaviour will be severe (Liang and Xue 2010). Perceived 
susceptibility is the internet users' personal opinion on whether malicious behaviour will affect him or 
not (Liang and Xue 2009). Most security behaviour research (Liang and  Xue 2010; Arachchilage and 
Love 2013; Tsai et al. 2016; Boss et al. 2015) agree that susceptibility and severity seem to determine the 
security threats that internet users face continuously. Therefore, in our research model we propose that 
even for threats that arise from cyber-attacks on accounts that use security questions, both perceived 
susceptibility and severity contribute to threat perception (H1a, H1b). 

Previous research (Liang and Xue 2010; Arachchilage and Love 2013; Arachchilage et al. 2016) found 
that perceived susceptibility and severity have an interaction effect on threat perception. An interaction 
effect is a multiplication of two variables (i.e. perceived susceptibility and severity). Hence, perceived 
severity moderates the relationship between perceived susceptibility and perceived threat, and the other 
way round. When the perceived susceptibility of a malicious behaviour is high, internet users are more 
sensitive  to  changes  in  its  severity  level.  Therefore,  in  our  research  model  we  propose  that  even  for 
threats  that  could  arise  from  cyber-attacks  on  online  accounts  that use  security  questions,  perceived 
susceptibility moderates the perceived severity of the threat perception, and the other way round (H1c). 

When internet users perceive a threat, they are motivated to avoid it (Liang and Xue 2010). Avoidance 
motivation is defined as the extent to which internet users are motivated to avoid cyber-threats by taking 
safeguarding  measures  (e.g.  using  stronger  answers  to  security  questions).  As  the  threat  perception 
increases,  internet  users  get  more  motivated  to  avoid  the  danger.  The  vulnerabilities  of  security 
questions (Just and Aspinall 2010) towards numerous cyber-threats have increased. This is leading to 
severe consequences, such as embarrassment, reputation and monetary loss (Micallef and Just 2011). 
Hence,  based  on  empirical  evidence  from  other  research  conducted  on  security  avoidance  behaviour 
(Liang and Xue 2010; Arachchilage and Love 2013; Arachchilage et al. 2016; Tsai et al. 2016), in our 
research  model  we  propose  that  the  perceived  threat  of  cyber-attacks  on  online  accounts  which  use 
security questions affects avoidance motivation (H2).  

4 

 
 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2017, Hobart, Australia 

Micallef & Arachchilage 
Enhancing Human Behaviour with Security Questions 

Prior experience (in this case, with cyber-attacks on online accounts) was not included in the original 
PMT model (Rogers 1975) or the adopted TTAT model (Liang and Xue 2010). Although, eventually it 
was suggested to add prior experience into the PMT model (Maddux and Rogers 1983), few studies have 
actually added this variable (Mwagwabi et al. 2014; Tsai et al. 2016). Since Mwagwabi et al. (2014) found 
that  prior  experience  (in  their  case,  hacking  exposure)  does  affect  the  perceived  vulnerability  when 
complying with password guidelines, we incorporate prior experience as part of the threat appraisals of 
our research model (H3). Also, since previous research (Zhao et al. 2005) found that prior experience 
(i.e. previous entrepreneurial experience  affected students' intentions to become entrepreneurs) does 
affect self-efficacy, in our research model we propose that prior experience does affect self-efficacy, to 
enhance threat avoidance behaviour when selecting answers to security questions (H3a). 

Conceptual knowledge is the "know what" of knowledge, while procedural knowledge is the "know how" 
of  knowledge  (Plant  1994).  McCormick  (1997)  argued  that  learning  procedural  and  conceptual 
knowledge  of  technological  activities  can  influence  knowledge.  Previous  research  (McCormick  1994; 
Arachchilage  and  Love  2014)  argue  that  conceptual  and procedural  knowledge  should  be  considered 
separately, however, there is a relationship between them. Other research (Hsu et al. 2007; Hu 2010) 
found that knowledge affects self-efficacy. For example,  when users are  knowledgeable of  the threats 
that could arise from using weak answers to security questions, they are more confident to take relevant 
actions to avoid potential cyber-attacks. Thus, in our research model we propose that both procedural 
and  conceptual  knowledge  as  well  as  their  interaction  effect  positively  affects  self-efficacy,  which 
contributes to enhance threat avoidance behaviour when selecting answers to security questions (H4a, 
H4b, H4c). According to Bonner and Walker (1994) experience is one of the factors that determines 
the acquisition of knowledge. For example, prior experience of having an online account hacked, leads 
a  user  to  gather  knowledge  about  what  lead  to  the  hacking  incident  and  how  to  prevent  another 
occurrence. Hence, in our research model we propose that both procedural and conceptual knowledge 
have  a  positive  interaction  effect  with  prior  experience  towards  self-efficacy,  which  contributes  to 
enhance threat avoidance behaviour when selecting answers to security questions (H4d, H4e). 

When internet users perceive a threat, they start considering coping measures to potentially safeguard 
themselves from that threat. Based on previous research (Liang and Xue 2010; Arachchilage and Love 
2013; Boss et al. 2015; Arachchilage et al. 2016; Tsai et al. 2016), internet users' avoidance motivation 
of a perceived threat is determined by three variables: safeguard effectiveness, safeguard cost and self-
efficacy.  Safeguard  effectiveness  is  defined  as  the  individual’s  assessment  of  a  safeguarding  measure 
regarding  how  effectively  it  can  be  applied  to  avoid  malicious  cyber-threats  (Liang  and  Xue  2010; 
Arachchilage and Love 2013). For example, the individual assessment regarding how effectively strong 
answers to security questions could be used to prevent cyber-attacks on online accounts. Safeguard cost 
is a payback for safeguard effectiveness. This refers to the physical and cognitive efforts such as time, 
money,  inconvenience  and  comprehension  required  using  safeguarding  measures  (Liang  and  Xue 
2009). Self-efficacy is defined as individuals' confidence in taking the safeguarding measure. This is an 
important  determinant  of  avoidance  motivation.  Previous  research  has  found that internet users  are 
more  motivated  to  perform  IT  security  related  behaviours  as  the  level  of  their  self-efficacy  increases 
(Woon et al. 2005; Ng et al. 2009; Liang and Xue 2010; Arachchilage and Love 2013; Arachchilage et al. 
2016; Tsai et al. 2016). Therefore, in our research model we propose that even for threats arising from 
attacks  on  online  accounts  which  use  security  questions,  coping  mechanisms  consist  of:  safeguard 
effectiveness, safeguard cost and self-efficacy (H5, H6, H7). 

Liang  and  Xue  (2010)  found  that  perceived  threat  can  negatively  moderate  the  relationship  between 
safeguard  effectiveness  and  avoidance  motivation.  Knowing  that  the  safeguarding  measure  can 
effectively reduce the threat, an internet user will not be so eager to cope with it, although the user is 
fully  aware  of  the  threat.  Therefore,  in  our  research  model  we  propose  that  as  the  level  of  safeguard 
effectiveness increases, users tend to feel less motivated to avoid the threat (H5a). 

3.2  Behavioural Traits Influencing Memorability 

To define the hypotheses related to memorability factors for our proposed research model, we examine 
previous work that studied in detail how the human memory functions. Atkinson and Shiffrin (1968) 
proposed a cognitive memory model, in which, new information is transferred to short-term memory 
through sensory organs. The short-term memory holds this new information as mental representations 
of selected parts of the information. This information is only passed from short-term memory to long-
term memory when it can be encoded through cue-association (Atkinson and Shiffrin 1968) (e.g. seeing 
a cat crossing the street reminds us of our first cat). This encoding through cue-association helps people 
to remember and retrieve the stored information over an extended period of time. These encodings are 
strengthened  through  constant  rehearsals.  Therefore,  in  our  research  model  we  propose  that  both 

5 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2017, Hobart, Australia 

Micallef & Arachchilage 
Enhancing Human Behaviour with Security Questions 

encoding  (memorization)  and  rehearsals  improve  the  memorability  of  answers  to  security  questions, 
even for recall and recognition tasks (H10a, H910b, H11a, H11b, H13, H14).  

Recall and recognition are the processes that are used to retrieve information from memory (Stobert 
and Biddle 2013). Recognition is the process of remembering contextual information when a focus is 
provided,  while  recall  is  the  process  of  remembering  a  specific  focus  when  context  is  provided 
(Hollingworth  1913).  Recall  can  either  happen  through  cued-recall  (e.g.  a  picture  of  a  school  would 
remind us of our first school), where a cue aids the retrieval of information, or free recall (e.g. recalling 
the password of an email account), where no aid is provided (Stobert and Biddle 2013). Therefore, in 
our  research  model  we  propose  that  cued  recall  has  a  positive  effect  on  recalling  answers  to  security 
questions while free-form recall has a negative effect (H9a, H9b). 

Researchers  argue  that  recognition is  easier  to  perform  when  compared  to  recall  (Haist  et  al.  1992). 
According to the generate-recognize theory (Anderson and Bower 1972), recall is a two phase process: 
Phase  1  (generate)  -  A  list  of  possible  words  is  formed  by  looking  into  long-term  memory;  Phase  2 
(recognize) - The list of possible words is evaluated to determine if the word that is being looked for is 
within the list. According to this theory, recognition does not use the first phase which makes it easier 
and faster to perform. The theory also explains the benefits of cueing on memory retrieval. A cue helps 
both when generating a relevant candidate list, but also in recognizing the appropriate word from that 
list (Stobert and Biddle 2013). Therefore, in our research model we propose that recall has a negative 
effect on memorability, while recognition has a positive effect on memorability (H12, H15).  

Based on previous memorability research one could argue that our proposed research model should only 
contain recognition and omit recall. However, using only recognition would decrease the level of security 
of  answers  to  security  questions  because  it would  provide  a  limited  answer  space  when  compared  to 
recall (Micallef and Arachchilage 2017a, 2017b). Therefore, since the aim of this research is not only to 
strengthen security, but also to strengthen memorability, we argue that the proposed research model 
should also study the interaction effect between recall and recognition to enhance memorability, but at 
the same time don’t undermine security (H12a).  

Previous research (Crawford et al. 2013) found that users are ready to trade-off security for convenience 
(i.e. usability) during smartphone authentication (Micallef et al. 2015).  This trade-off between security 
and  usability  is  also  common  in  various  other  scenarios,  such  as  using  same  answers  to  security 
questions for multiple accounts (Honan 2012). Hence, even for answers to security questions, usability 
(in terms of memorability) negatively affects the users’ motivation to create strong answers to security 
questions.  Therefore,  in  our  research  model  we  propose  that  memorability  negatively  affects  the 
avoidance motivation of selecting strong answers to security questions (H16).   

3.3  Entertainment 

Previous work in the advertising field found that entertaining ads tend to be more memorable (Kellaris 
and Cline 2007) than ads which are not entertaining. This is further backed up by other research (Ho et 
al. 2009), which evaluated the use of tangible user interfaces (e.g. WII remote control), when playing a 
health education-based game. They found that an increase in fun and enjoyment leads to an increased 
memorability  and  consequently  an  improved  learning  experience.  One  could  argue  that  an  improved 
learning  experience  provides  a high user  satisfaction,  which  was  empirically  investigated  by  previous 
work on security behaviour (Arachchilage et al. 2016), that it could motivate users to change peoples’ 
phishing threat avoidance behaviour. Therefore, in our research model we propose that entertainment 
positively  affects  remembering  answers  to  security  questions  and  that  there  is  a  positive  interaction 
between entertainment and memorability with respect to avoidance motivation (H16, H16a). 

3.4  Social Influences 

Internet users are usually part of an organization, a group or a society. Thus, their behaviours could be 
influenced  by  other  people.  Liang  and  Xue  (2009)  found  that  computer  users'  threat  avoidance 
behaviour could be influenced by their social environment (i.e. family, friends). This happens because 
when internet users do not know how to avoid a cyber-threat, they turn to their social connections to 
help them come up with safeguarding measures (Tu et al. 2014). Lee and Larsen (2009) examined in 
detail how social influences affects internet users' behaviour and found that IT executives are more likely 
to  adopt  anti-malware  software  in  their  organisations  if  their  social  connections  (including  business 
connections, customers, business partners) used the software. Therefore, in our research model social 
influences have a positive effect on avoidance motivation (H8).  

6 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2017, Hobart, Australia 

Micallef & Arachchilage 
Enhancing Human Behaviour with Security Questions 

3.5  Improved Behaviour 

Consistent with previous TTAT research on security behaviour (Liang and Xue 2010; Arachchilage and 
Love 2013), in our research model we do not differentiate between avoidance motivation and improved 
behavioural  intention.  This  is  justified  by  the  fact  that  behavioural  intention  is  a  strong  predictor  of 
actual behaviour (Ajzen 1991). This relationship has also been confirmed by technology adoption studies 
(Venkatesh et al. 2003; Pavlou and Fygenson 2006). Therefore, to be consistent with previous research, 
we argue that internet users which have a strong avoidance motivation are very likely to engage in an 
improved avoidance behaviour to protect their online accounts from  cyber-attacks  arising from weak 
answers to security questions (H18). 

4  Designing  a  Novel  Security  Questions  Mechanism:  An  Avatar 

Profile Case Study  

A possible way to reduce the vulnerabilities of security questions towards the art of human hacking is to 
encourage  users  to  use  system-generated  answers  to  security  questions  (Micallef  and  Just  2011). 
Previous research  (Micallef and Just 2011) proposed a novel security questions mechanism, that uses 
an  Avatar  to  represent  system-generated  data  of  a  fictitious  person,  and  then  the  Avatar's  system-
generated data is used to answer security questions (Micallef and Just 2011). Although this mechanism 
has  not  been  extensively  investigated,  Micallef  and  Arachchilage  (2017a,  2017b)  argue  that  it has  the 
potential to improve the trade-off between security and usability (in terms of memorability) due to the 
following  reasons:  (1)  it  could  be  tailored  for  a  wide  range  of  people;  (2)  guessing  attacks  could  be 
minimized because the entropy and variety of answers could be defined/controlled by the system that 
generates them; (3) risks of having observational attacks would be minimal since the system-generated 
avatar information would not be publicly available; and (4) memorability could be improved by using a 
gamified approach to create and nurture a bond between users and their avatar profiles (in the form of 
system-generated  data).  In  this  research,  we  argue  that  the  design  of  a  novel  security  questions 
mechanism which uses avatar profiles (Micallef and Just 2011) could be further improved by using the 
following design recommendations that were extracted from the proposed research model (Figure 1).  

Based  on  the  behavioural  traits  which  influence  security  (see  left  part  of  Figure  1), we  suggest  that  a 
novel  security  questions  mechanism  which  uses  avatar  profiles  should  have  features  that  enable 
reminders  of  previous  experiences  (involving  cyber-attacks  of  online  accounts,  which  might  have 
affected users themselves or close friends/acquaintances). This is due to the fact that according to our 
proposed research model prior experiences seem to affect the perceived susceptibility towards a threat 
(Mwagwabi  et  al.  2014),  but  also  self-efficacy  together  with  interaction  effects  with  conceptual  and 
procedural  knowledge  (Bonner  and  Walker  1994). This  feature  could  be  implemented  either  through 
asking questions about prior experiences (Briggs et al. 2016), during the avatar profile generation phase 
or through nudging users with periodic notifications (Almuhimedi et al. 2015; Felt et al. 2015), when 
logging  into  an  account  which  uses  the  details  of  the  selected  avatar  profile  to  recover  passwords. 
Previous work conducted on fall-back authentication mechanisms (Micallef and Just 2011; Shay et al. 
2012; Hang et al. 2015) have not leveraged the use of previous experiences to improve self-efficacy or 
increase the susceptibility of threats that could arise from using weak answers to security questions.  

According  to  the  behavioural  traits  that  influence  security  (see  left  part  of  Figure  1),  users'  threat 
perception  could  also  be  increased  by  affecting  their  perceived  susceptibility  and  severity  (Liang  and 
Xue  2010;  Arachchilage  and  Love  2013;  Tsai  et  al.  2016;  Boss  et  al.  2015).  Besides  notifications  or 
questions related to the users’ prior experiences, an avatar security questions mechanism should also 
nudge users’  perception  towards  cyber-threats  launched on online  accounts  of  victims  that use  weak 
answers to security questions (Briggs et al. 2016). Thus, it is suggested that notifications (i.e. messages) 
(Felt  et  al.  2015)  should  appear  when  logging  into  accounts,  which  use  avatar  profiles  to  recover 
passwords. These accounts should also show scenarios in which other accounts were hacked using weak 
answers to security questions. Furthermore, the interface should describe the severe consequences that 
victims suffered due to these attacks.  

Research (Bonneau at al. 2015) suggests that sometimes users do not seem to realize that the answers 
to their security questions are not effective in safeguarding themselves from cyber-attacks (Bonneau at 
al. 2015). Therefore, the proposed research model implies that a novel security questions mechanism 
that  uses  avatar  profiles  should  show  security  questions  answers  meters  (as  password  meters 
(Komanduri et al. 2011)). This feature would help users understand the strength of the answers of the 
security questions that they selected (Senarath et al. 2016). 

7 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2017, Hobart, Australia 

Micallef & Arachchilage 
Enhancing Human Behaviour with Security Questions 

Our research model (see Figure 1) proposes that social influences affect one’s behaviour (Tu et al. 2014). 
Thus, a novel security questions mechanism that uses avatar profiles should implement features that 
encourage social interactions. For instance, this mechanism could have features which allow users to 
use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter or LinkedIn) to notify their social acquaintances that they are 
using mechanisms that help them strengthen and memorize their answers to security questions, with 
the  purpose  of  being  less  vulnerable  to  cyber-attacks.  In  the  Mobile  HCI  field,  previous  work  on 
improving  the  adherence  to  rehabilitation  conditions  has  highlighted  the  importance  of  social 
connections on motivation (Micallef et al. 2016). However, despite other areas of research highlighted 
the importance of social connections to enhance motivation, previous work on fall-back authentication 
mechanisms (Denning et al. 2011; Juang et al. 2012; Bonneau and Schechter 2014) have not evaluated 
features which involve social interactions to influence threat avoidance motivation for security purposes. 
Thus, we suggest that the use of social interactions should be investigated in more detail in interfaces 
and systems (e.g. security questions) that try to educate people to change their security behaviour.  

The behavioural traits that influence usability (see right part of Figure 1) of the proposed research model 
suggest  that  a  novel  security  questions  mechanism  which  uses  avatar  profiles  should  implement 
features, through the use of memorization techniques, with the aim of helping users store information 
in long-term memory (Atkinson and Shiffrin 1968). For example, after selecting the attributes from the 
avatar profile that users would use to answer security questions, memorization exercises could also be 
provided to help users memorize the information (Juang et al. 2012). Our research model also proposes 
the use  of  rehearsal  techniques.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  rehearsals  help  strengthen  the  storage  of 
information in long-term memory and the stronger the association with the information the more likely 
it is that users will remember the answers to their security questions (Micallef and Arachchilage 2017a, 
2017b). This feature could be implemented by sending reminders (i.e. messages) to the users to have a 
look at their avatar profile, in order to refresh their memory of the attributes that they selected to answer 
their security questions. Based on previous memorability research (Atkinson and Shiffrin 1968; Haist et 
al. 1992), the proposed research model suggests that a novel security questions mechanism which uses 
avatar  profiles  should  implement  cued  recall  to  minimize  the  instances  in  which  free-form  recall  is 
required. For example, an image of the selected avatar could be shown at each login to facilitate cued-
recall (Denning et al. 2011; Stobert and Biddle 2012; Castelluccia et al. 2017).  

The design recommendations that were discussed in this section were particularly tailored for a novel 
security questions mechanism which uses avatar profiles (Micallef and Just 2011). However, we suggest 
that these recommendations should also be implemented in fall-back authentication mechanisms (i.e. 
security questions) and cyber security education (game-based learning approach for security) systems, 
which  also  aim  to  reduce  the  trade-off  between  security  and  usability.  Based  on  the  theoretical 
perspective that we used to define the proposed research model, we strongly believe that these design 
recommendations could potentially enhance users’ behavioural intentions through motivation to select 
strong and memorable answers to security questions. 

5  Conclusion and Future Research 

The main contribution of this research is the definition of a model that investigates the determinants 
that  could  influence  the  behavioural  intentions  that  motivate  users  to  select  strong  and  memorable 
answers to security questions. The proposed research model was constructed using previous research 
on PMT (Rogers 1975) and TTAT (Liang and Xue 2010) to investigate the behavioural traits that users 
use  when  selecting  answers  to  security  questions,  to  protect  themselves  from  cyber-attacks.  The 
proposed research model also uses previous research on human memory (Atkinson and Shiffrin 1968) 
to investigate the behavioural traits which affect memorability (the strongest determinant for usability 
(Just  and  Aspinall  2009))  when  selecting  answers  to  security  questions.  Finally,  we  discuss  how  the 
proposed research model could improve the design of novel security questions mechanisms that aim to 
enhance human behavioural intentions by motivating users to select strong and memorable answers to 
security questions. In future work we will empirically verify the validity of this research model. 

6  References 

Ajzen,  I.  1991.  “The  theory  of  planned  behaviour”. Organizational  behavior  and  human  decision 

processes, 50(2), pp.179-211. 

Albanesius,  C.  2014.  “Apple:  No 

iCloud,  Find  My 

iPhone  Breach 

in  Celeb  Photo  Hack” 

http://au.pcmag.com/software/23957/news/apple-no-icloud-find-my-iphone-breach-in-celeb-
photo-hack.  Retrieved 17 July, 2017. 

8 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2017, Hobart, Australia 

Micallef & Arachchilage 
Enhancing Human Behaviour with Security Questions 

Almuhimedi, H., Schaub, F., Sadeh, N., Adjerid, I., Acquisti, A., Gluck, J., Cranor, L.F. and Agarwal, Y. 
2015. “Your location has been shared 5,398 times!: A field study on mobile app privacy nudging.”  
Proceedings of CHI 2015 (pp. 787-796). ACM. 

Alkaldi, N. and Renaud, K. 2016. “Why Do People Adopt, or Reject, Smartphone Password Managers?,” 
Proceedings of 1st European Workshop on Usable Security, Darmstadt (Vol. 18, pp. 1-14). 

Anderson, J.R. and Bower, G.H. 1972. “Recognition and retrieval processes in free recall,” Psychological 

review, 79(2), p.97. 

Arachchilage,  N.  A.  G.  and  Love,  S.  2013.  “A  game  design  framework  for  avoiding  phishing  attacks.” 

Computers in Human Behavior, 29(3), 706-714. 

Arachchilage,  N.  A.  G.  and  Love,  S.  2014.  "Security  awareness  of  computer  users:  A  phishing  threat 

avoidance perspective." Computers in Human Behavior, 38, 304-312. 

Arachchilage,  N.  A.  G.,  Love,  S.  and  Beznosov,  K.  2016.  “Phishing  threat  avoidance  behaviour:  An 

empirical investigation.” Computers in Human Behavior, 60, 185-197. 

Atkinson,  R.  C.  and  Shiffrin,  R.  M.  1968.  “Human  memory:  A  proposed  system  and  its  control 

processes.” Psychology of learning and motivation, 2, 89-195. 

Bonneau, J., Bursztein, E., Caron, I., Jackson, R. and Williamson, M. 2015. “Secrets, lies, and account 
recovery: Lessons from the use of personal knowledge questions at google.” Proceedings of WWW 
2015 (pp. 141-150). ACM. 

Bonneau, J., Herley, C., Van  Oorschot, P.C. and Stajano, F. 2012. “The quest to replace passwords: A 
framework for comparative evaluation of web authentication schemes.” IEEE Security & Privacy 
(pp. 553-567). IEEE. 

Bonneau,  J.,  Just,  M.  and  Matthews,  G.  2010.  “What’s  in  a  name?  evaluating  statistical  attacks  on 
personal  knowledge  questions.”  Proceedings  of  International  Conference  on  Financial 
Cryptography and Data Security (pp. 98-113). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 

Bonneau, J. and Preibusch, S. 2010. “The Password Thicket: Technical and Market Failures in Human 

Authentication on the Web”. Proceedings of WEIS 2010. 

Bonneau, J. and Schechter, S.E. 2014. "Towards Reliable Storage of 56-bit Secrets in Human Memory." 

In USENIX Security Symposium (pp. 607-623). 

Bonner,  S.E.  and  Walker,  P.L.  1994.  “The  effects  of  instruction  and  experience  on  the  acquisition  of 

auditing knowledge.” Accounting Review, pp.157-178. 

Boss, S.R., Galletta, D.F., Lowry, P.B., Moody, G.D. and Polak, P. 2015. “What do users have to fear? 
Using fear appeals to engender threats and fear that motivate protective security behaviors.” MIS 
quarterly, pp. 837-864. 

Bridis,  T.  2008.  “Hacker:  impersonated  palin,  stole  e-mail  password.”  http://6abc.com/archive/ 

6398817/ Retrieved 10 July, 2017. 

Briggs,  P.,  Jeske,  D.  and  Coventry,  L.  2016.  “Behavior  Change  Interventions  for  Cybersecurity.” 
Behavior Change Research and Theory: Psychological and Technological Perspectives, pp.115-
135. 

Castelluccia, C., Dürmuth, M., Golla, M. and Deniz, F. 2017. "Towards Implicit Visual Memory-Based 

Authentication." Proceedings of NDSS 2017. 

Crawford, H., Renaud, K. and Storer, T. 2013. “A framework for continuous, transparent mobile device 

authentication.” Computers & Security, 39, pp.127-136. 

Denning,  T.,  Bowers,  K.,  Van  Dijk,  M.  and  Juels,  A.  2011.  "Exploring  implicit  memory  for  painless 

password recovery." Proceedings of CHI 2011 (pp. 2615-2618). ACM. 

Felt, A.P., Ainslie, A., Reeder, R.W., Consolvo, S., Thyagaraja, S., Bettes, A., Harris, H. and Grimes, J. 
2015. “Improving SSL warnings: Comprehension and adherence.” Proceedings of CHI 2015 (pp. 
2893-2902). ACM. 

Florencio, D. and Herley, C. 2007. “A large-scale study of web password habits”. Proceedings of WWW 

2007 (pp. 657-666). ACM. 

9 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2017, Hobart, Australia 

Micallef & Arachchilage 
Enhancing Human Behaviour with Security Questions 

Haist, F., Shimamura, A.P. and Squire, L.R. 1992. “On the relationship between recall and recognition 
memory.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 18(4), p.691. 

Hang,  A.,  De  Luca,  A.  and  Hussmann,  H.  2015.  “I  know  what  you  did  last  week!  do  you?:  dynamic 
security  questions  for  fallback  authentication  on  smartphones.”  Proceedings  of  CHI  2015  (pp. 
1383-1392). ACM. 

Ho, J.H., Zhou, S.Z., Wei, D. and Low, A. 2009. “Investigating the effects of educational Game with Wii 
Remote on outcomes of learning.” In Transactions on Edutainment III (pp. 240-252). Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg. 

Hollingworth,  H.L.  1913.  “Characteristic  differences  between  recall  and  recognition.” The  American 

Journal of Psychology, 24(4), pp.532-544. 

Honan,  Matt.  2012.  “How  Apple  and  Amazon  Security  Flaws  Led  to  My  Epic  Hacking”  https:// 
www.wired.com/2012/08/apple-amazon-mat-honan-hacking/all Retrieved 19 July, 2017. 

Hsu,  M.H.,  Ju,  T.L.,  Yen,  C.H.  and  Chang,  C.M.  2007.  “Knowledge  sharing  behavior  in  virtual 
communities:  The  relationship  between  trust,  self-efficacy,  and  outcome  expectations.” 
International journal of human-computer studies, 65(2), pp.153-169. 

Hu, W.W. 2010. “Self-efficacy and individual knowledge sharing.” Proceedings of ICIII 2010 (Vol. 2, pp. 

401-404). IEEE. 

Johnston, A.C. and Warkentin, M. 2010. “Fear appeals and information security behaviors: an empirical 

study.” MIS quarterly, pp.549-566. 

Juang,  K.A.,  Ranganayakulu,  S.  and  Greenstein,  J.S.  2012.  "Using  system-generated  mnemonics  to 
improve  the  usability  and  security  of  password  authentication."  Proceedings  of  the  Human 
Factors  and  Ergonomics  Society  Annual  Meeting  (Vol.  56,  No.  1,  pp.  506-510).  Sage  CA:  Los 
Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications. 

Just,  M.  and  Aspinall,  D.  2009.  “Personal  choice  and  challenge  questions:  a  security  and  usability 

assessment.” Proceedings of SOUPS 2009 (p. 8). ACM. 

Just,  M.  and  Aspinall,  D.  2010.  “Challenging  challenge  questions:  an  experimental  analysis  of 

authentication technologies and user behaviour.” Policy & Internet, 2(1), 99-115. 

Kellaris,  J.J.  and  Cline,  T.W.  2007.  “Humor  and  ad  memorability:  On  the  contributions  of  humor 
expectancy, relevancy, and need for humor.” Psychology & Marketing, 24(6), pp.497-509. 

Komanduri, S., Shay, R., Kelley, P.G., Mazurek, M.L., Bauer, L., Christin, N., Cranor, L.F. and Egelman, 
S.  2011.  “Of  passwords  and  people:  measuring  the  effect  of  password-composition  policies.” 
Proceedings of CHI 2011 (pp. 2595-2604). ACM. 

Lee, Y. and Larsen, K.R. 2009. “Threat or coping appraisal: determinants of SMB executives’ decision 
to adopt anti-malware software.” European Journal of Information Systems, 18(2), pp.177-187. 

Liang,  H.  and  Xue,  Y.  2009.  “Avoidance  of  information  technology  threats:  a  theoretical 

perspective.” MIS quarterly, pp.71-90. 

Liang, H. and Xue, Y. 2010. “Understanding security behaviors in personal computer usage: A threat 
avoidance perspective.” Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 11(7), p.394. 

Maddux, J.E. and Rogers, R.W. 1983. “Protection motivation and self-efficacy: A revised theory of fear 

appeals and attitude change.” Journal of experimental social psychology, 19(5), pp.469-479. 

McCormick, R. 1997. “Conceptual and procedural knowledge.” International journal of technology and 

design education, 7(1-2), pp.141-159. 

Micallef, N. and Arachchilage, N. A. G. 2017. “A Gamified Approach to Improve Users’ Memorability of 

Fall-back Authentication.” Proceedings of SOUPS 2017. USENIX Association. 

Micallef,  N.  and  Arachchilage,  N.  A.  G.  2017.  “Changing  users’  security  behaviour  towards  security 

questions: A game based learning approach.” Proceedings of MilCIS 2017. IEEE. 

Micallef, N., Baillie, L. and Uzor, S. 2016. “Time to exercise!: an aide-memoire stroke app for post-stroke 

arm rehabilitation.” Proceedings of Mobile HCI 2016 (pp. 112-123). ACM. 

Micallef, N. and Just, M. 2011. “Using Avatars for Improved Authentication with Challenge Questions”. 

Proceedings of SECURWARE 2011. 

10 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2017, Hobart, Australia 

Micallef & Arachchilage 
Enhancing Human Behaviour with Security Questions 

Micallef, N., Just, M., Baillie, L., Halvey, M. and Kayacik, H. G. 2015. “Why aren't users using protection? 
investigating  the  usability  of  smartphone  locking.”  Proceedings  of  Mobile  HCI  2015  (pp.  284-
294). ACM. 

Mwagwabi, F., McGill, T. and Dixon, M. 2014. “Improving compliance with password guidelines: How 
user  perceptions  of  passwords  and  security  threats  affect  compliance  with  guidelines.” 
Proceedings of 2014 47th Hawaii International Conference (pp. 3188-3197). IEEE. 

Ng, B.Y., Kankanhalli, A. and Xu, Y.C. 2009. “Studying users' computer security behavior: A health belief 

perspective.” Decision Support Systems, 46(4), pp.815-825. 

Pavlou, P.A. and Fygenson, M. 2006. “Understanding and predicting electronic commerce adoption: An 

extension of the theory of planned behavior.” MIS quarterly, pp.115-143. 

Plant,  M.  1994.  “How  is  science  useful  to  technology.”  Design  and  Technology  in  the  Secondary 

Curriculum: A Book of Readings, The Open University, Milton Keynes, pp.96-108. 

Poushter,  J.  2016.  “Internet  access  growing  worldwide  but  remains  higher  in  advanced  economies.” 
http://www.pewglobal.org/2016/02/22/internet-access-growing-worldwide-but-remains-
higher-in-advanced-economies/ Retrieved 10 July, 2017. 

Rogers, R.W. 1975. “A protection motivation theory of fear appeals and attitude change.” The journal of 

psychology, 91(1), pp.93-114. 

Senarath,  A.,  Arachchilage,  N.A.G.  and  Gupta,  B.B.  2016.  “Security  Strength  Indicator  in  Fallback 
Authentication: Nudging Users for Better Answers in Secret Questions”. International Journal 
for Infonomics (IJI), 9 (4), 5. 

Schechter, S. and Reeder, R. W. 2009. “1+ 1= you: measuring the comprehensibility of metaphors for 

configuring backup authentication.” Proceedings of SOUPS 2009 (p. 9). ACM. 

Schechter, S., Brush, A.B. and Egelman, S. 2009. “It's no secret. measuring the security and reliability 

of authentication via “secret” questions.” IEEE Security & Privacy (pp. 375-390). IEEE. 

Shay, R., Kelley, P.G., Komanduri, S., Mazurek, M.L., Ur, B., Vidas, T., Bauer, L., Christin, N. and Cranor, 
L.F. 2012. "Correct horse battery staple: Exploring the usability of system-assigned passphrases."  
Proceedings of SOUPS 2012 (p. 7). ACM. 

Stavova,  V.,  Matyas,  V.  and  Just,  M.  2016.  “Codes  v.  People:  A  Comparative  Usability  Study  of  Two 
Password  Recovery  Mechanisms.”  In  IFIP  International  Conference  on  Information  Security 
Theory and Practice (pp. 35-50). Springer International Publishing. 

Stobert, E. and Biddle, R. 2013. “Memory retrieval and graphical passwords.” Proceedings of SOUPS  

2013 (p. 15). ACM. 

Tsai,  H.Y.S.,  Jiang,  M.,  Alhabash,  S.,  LaRose,  R.,  Rifon,  N.J.  and  Cotten,  S.R.  2016.  “Understanding 
online safety behaviors: A protection motivation theory perspective.” Computers & Security, 59, 
pp.138-150. 

Tu, Z., Yuan, Y. and Archer, N. 2014. “Understanding user behaviour in coping with security threats of 
mobile device loss and theft.” International Journal of Mobile Communications, 12(6), pp.603-
623. 

Venkatesh,  V.,  Morris,  M.G.,  Davis,  G.B.  and  Davis,  F.D.  2003.  “User  acceptance  of  information 

technology: Toward a unified view.” MIS quarterly, pp.425-478. 

Woon,  I.,  Tan,  G.W.  and  Low,  R.  2005.  “A  protection  motivation  theory  approach  to  home  wireless 

security.” Proceedings of ICIS 2005, p.31. 

Zhao, H., Seibert, S.E. and Hills, G.E. 2005. “The mediating role of self-efficacy in the development of 

entrepreneurial intentions.” Journal of applied psychology, 90(6), p.1265. 

Zviran,  M.  and  Haga,  W.J.  1990.  "User  authentication  by  cognitive  passwords:  an  empirical 
assessment."  Proceedings  of  the  5th  Jerusalem  Conference  on  Information  Technology, 
1990.'Next Decade in Information Technology'(Cat. No. 90TH0326-9) (pp. 137-144). IEEE. 

Copyright: © 2017 authors. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons  Attribution-NonCommercial  3.0  Australia  License,  which  permits  non-commercial  use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and ACIS are credited. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
