International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 176 – No.3, October 2017 

Barrier Free Internet Access: Evaluating the Cyber 
Security Risk Posed by the Adoption of Bring Your Own 
Devices to e-Learning Network Infrastructure  

E. T. Tchao 
Dept. of Computer Engineering 
KNUST 

Richard Y. Ansah 
University I.T. Services 
KNUST 

Seth D. Kotey 
Dept. of Computer Engineering 
KNUST 

ABSTRACT 
The  adoption  of  Bring  Your  Own  Device  (BYOD)  –  also 
known as Bring Your Own Technology (BYOT), Bring Your 
Own Phone (BYOP), or Bring Your Own Personal Computer 
(BYOPC)  –  is  a  policy  which  allows  people  access  to 
privileged resources, information and services available on the 
private computer network of an organization using their own 
personal  computer  devices.  BYOD,  since  its  emergence  in 
2009,  courtesy  of  Intel,  is  now  a  common  practice  in  many 
organizations.  Academic 
to 
implement BYOD, can derive many benefits as well as many 
risks to its network infrastructure, largely security-based. 

that  attempt 

institutions 

This paper presents an assessment of a WLAN network which 
has been deployed for a campus-wide data  centric e-learning 
platform  at  Kwame  Nkrumah  University  of  Science  and 
Technology  (KNUST)  towards  the  overall  objective  of 
achieving a barrier free internet access to enhance the teaching 
and learning process at the university. The paper subsequently 
evaluates the WLAN infrastructure, its accompanying BYOD 
set-up,  and  associated  likely  security  risks  and  threats,  and 
recommends appropriate solutions. 

Keywords 
Bring  Your  Own  Device;  e-learning;  organizational 
perceptions;  Network  infrastructure;  Campus  Area  Network; 
BYOD policies. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
Computer  networks  have  grown  exponentially  in  popularity, 
demand,  and  convenience  since  the  advent  of  the  US  DoD’s 
ARPANET  in  1969[1].  Today,  computer  networks  afford  us 
the  ability  to  conduct  business,  share  information,  stay  in 
touch with professional and personal connections, and access 
news and entertainment all over the world from the comfort of 
one’s  home,  classroom,  office,  or  anywhere  with  an  Internet 
connection  [2].  With  the  arrival  of  next  generation  computer 
systems and networking technology, real time interaction with 
anyone  can  be  experienced  as  well  as  obtaining  any 
information. 

The  explosion  of  computer  networks,  along  with  many  users 
desiring to stay connected to each other and the world, meant 
the  growth  of  digital  information,  which  is  much  more 
difficult  to  protect  than  hard  copy  files  and  folders.  This 
makes  cyber  security  inconvenient  because  there  always  has 
to  be  a  compromise  between  robustness  and  simplicity.  That 
is,  the  more  robust  and  secure  the  security  mechanisms,  the 
more  inconvenient  the  process  becomes  [3].  Moreover,  the 
current trend is to share information, not protect it. Every now 
and then, news of compromised individuals, schools, research 
organizations, even governments, from social media to secure 
website  portals  is  encountered.  Still,  people  will  share  their 
data  and  information  on  social  media,  visit  questionable 

websites,  and  download  files  from  the  Internet  that  probably 
contain malware. 

Over  the  years  since  computer  networks  have  no  longer 
became restricted to governments and educational institutions, 
there have appeared many forms of security issues, and many 
more ways of ensuring security. There are now various types, 
forms,  versions  and  mutations  of  malware,  and  just  as  many 
antimalware,  firewalls,  authentication  protocols,  encryption 
techniques, and so on [4]. 

the 

last  decade,  particularly 

The number of public Ethernet and Wi-Fi LANs has increased 
in 
in  schools,  university 
campuses,  and  offices  that  want  to  streamline  educational  or 
work activities that require networking by providing their own 
private  networks.  Wireless  LAN  is  the  choice  network  in 
many organizations, public venues, and homes; they are even 
allowed on aircrafts these days; and they offer a wide range of 
use  cases,  deployment  scenarios,  and  security  budgets 
according to the requirements of the network [5]. Usually, the 
schools  and  organizations  owned  all  the  computers  and 
resources  on  the  network.  This made  managing  and  securing 
the private network more streamlined and effective. 

However,  in  recent  years,  mobile  devices  have  become  so 
ubiquitous  that  people  no  longer  bat  an  eye  when  an 
individual  operates  two  or  more  mobile  devices  [6].  Modern 
mobile devices are now equipped with faster microprocessors, 
better and more memory, and better integration and support in 
connecting to enterprise services, making them  more capable 
to students and workers to perform their regular functions [7]. 
There  has  been  an  exponential  growth  of  smartphones  sales, 
which according to Gartner’s report has led to the reduction of 
laptop sales. Gartner even goes further to predict that the use 
of  smartphones  and 
in  educational 
institutions will replace that of laptops in the very near future 
[8]. 

tablet  computers 

This  development  has  led  many  educational  institutions  and 
organizations  to  adopt  the  Bring  Your  Own  Device  (BYOD) 
initiative.  Pioneered  by  Intel  in  2009  [9],  BYOD  means 
exactly as the name suggests: People can now access private 
networks  of  their  respective  organizations  with  their  own 
personal devices. This strategy has many benefits to both the 
organization and the individuals: 

1.  Education  –  The  larger  number  of  mobile  device 
users  exist  in  schools  and  universities.  It  is  not 
uncommon to find Wi-Fi in universities these days, 
accessed  by  the  thousands  by  students  to  access 
course  materials,  share  files,  and  browse 
the 
Internet. [10][11][12][13] 

2.  Enterprise  –  In  a  business-oriented  environment, 
to 

connectivity 

information 

crucial 

to 

is 

53 

productivity.  The  ability  to  access  and  update  data 
from 
efficiency, 
higher 
ensures 
convenience, and worker satisfaction. 

anywhere 

3.  Healthcare  –  In  hospitals  where  many  rules  and 
regulations  exist,  it  is  the  last  place  one  would 
expect  a  BYOD  network.  But  many  doctors  can 
appreciate  this  initiative  as  a  convenient  way  to 
access  hospital  data,  monitor  patients,  etc.  all  from 
the comfort of their offices and homes. 

Also,  BYOD  offers  added  benefits  of  saving  an  organization 
equipment  costs,  offers  stronger  protection  of  personal, 
sensitive information, and mobility [14]. 

However, BYOD is not without security risks. This is mainly 
because the clients choose their own devices. In view of this, 
network  architects  and  administrators  often  have  to  make 
tough choices throughout the process of designing, installing, 
managing  and  securing  their  networks.  Among  the  many 
factors they have to consider about the network infrastructure 
are  the  hardware  choices  that  can  adequately  accommodate 
bandwidth requirements, the number of potential clients, types 
of mobile devices, and the purpose and intentions of the users. 

Some benefits and challenges of incorporating a BYOD set-up 
into an organization’s private network have been stated. This 
case  study  seeks  to  assess  the  cybersecurity  risks  posed  by 
BYOD  initiative  currently  started  by  KNUST  to  afford  the 
students  barrier  free  access  to  network  resources.  The  study 
evaluates  the  implemented  network  architecture  at  KNUST 
the  vulnerability  assessment 
and  subsequently  presents 
results. 

2.  KNUST NETWORK 
2.1  KNUST Network Infrastructure 

Design 

Before  the  security  details  of  KNUST’s  BYOD  set-up  are 
investigated,  the  existing  WAN  needs  to  be  looked  at,  or  in 
this  case,  the  Campus  Area  Network  (CAN)  as  shown  in 
Figure  1.  The  entire  KNUST  wired  network  backbone  rides 
on a single link to the outside world with a bandwidth of 144 
Mbps  as  of  June,  2015.  This  connectivity  is  supplied  by  an 
ISP,  Vodafone  Ghana.  The  link  enters  the  KNUST  Network 
Operations  and  Infrastructure  Department  (NOID)  via  fiber 
optic  cables.  The  link  passes  through  a  cascade  of  firewalls, 
caching devices, and core Ethernet switches. Next, the link is 
split  up  by  distribution  switches  with  more  fiber  optic  and 
Ethernet cables to the various faculties in KNUST. 

Figure 1: Simplified Network Diagram of KNUST WAN 

The  well-structured  Ethernet  backbone  also  support  a  VoIP 
system, and are linked to web, DNS, database, directory, and 

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 176 – No.3, October 2017 

application  servers  that  host  KNUST  websites,  web  apps, 
school management data, and other essential information     

2.2  KNUST Wireless LAN Infrastructure 

Design 

The robustness of a WLAN depends on a well-designed wired 
network  backbone,  which  has  been  covered.  The  next  step 
was to investigate the requirements of the WLAN used for the 
BYOD  set-up.  These  drive  the  basic  principles  such  as 
coverage, capacity and security. 

2.3  WLAN Architecture 
WLAN  architectures  are  based  on  the  levels  (tiers)  of  the 
access node. The tiers indicate how many devices sit between 
the WAN and an access point as shown in Figure 2. 

i.e. 

The  main  types  of  access  points  available  are  Autonomous 
Access  Points  (AAP)  and  Lightweight  Access  Points  (LAP). 
Autonomous, as the name implies, consists of routers that are 
they  care  completely  self-sufficient, 
autonomous, 
standalone  devices  that  can  connect  multiple  clients  to  a 
central wired LAN network [15]. An LAP, on the other hand, 
has  to  be  controlled  by  an  AAP  or  premise-based  WLAN 
controller  for  scalability,  added  maintenance,  and  Quality  of 
Service. 

Looking at AP installations around KNUST, it is noticed that 
both  AAPs  (which  can  be  seen  mounted  on  the  side  of  the 
buildings)  and  LAPs  (which  reside  in  the  classrooms  and 
lecture halls) are logically connected in a 2-tier configuration, 
shown  in  Figure  2.  The  2-tier  configuration  allows  for 
maximum  coverage  and  allows  for  simpler  allocation  of  the 
same SSID for many APs. 

Figure 2: Logical 2-Tier Access Node Configuration 

2.4  WLAN Access Point Device Types 
APs  come  in  single  channel  (rated  at  2.4  GHz)  and  dual 
channel  (rated  at  2.4  GHz  and  5  GHz).  The  AP  type  often 
depends  on  which  types  of  IEEE  802.11  technologies  it  can 
support.  The  APs  around  KNUST  are  dual  channel,  each 
promising  a  theoretical  bandwidth  of  300Mbps1  per  channel, 
and  capable  of  supporting  legacy  technologies  802.11b  and 
802.11g as well as the newer 802.11a and 802.11n [16]. 

Of  course,  factors  like  signal  power,  channel  allocation  and 
interference,  channel  bonding,  distance  constraints  and 
obstacles  contribute  to  increases  or  decreases  in  bandwidth 

54 

 
 
                                                           
 
and  throughput  [7].  Typical  throughputs  are  much  less. 
Considering a dual channel AP with theoretical throughput of 
300Mbps  per  channel  would  yield  600Mps.  Yet,  in  practice, 
several factors drastically reduce this figure. 

 

 

Protocol  and  packet  overhead  can  reduce 
throughput by 40 to 50% 

Slow  or  “far  away”  clients  sending  a 
packet  at  1Mps  would  take  100  times 
more time than a client sending the same 
packet at 100Mps 

  Uneven  distribution  of 

all 
contending  for  access,  even  with  dual 
throughput  by 
reduce 
channels,  can 
another 50%. 

clients, 

  Other 

such 

factors 

packet 
retransmission,  channel  interference  from 
to  a 
rouge  networks,  etc.  contribute 
further 25% reduction in throughput. 

as 

Eventually, the actual throughput per client is just about 2 to 3 
Mbps on a good day [17]. 

Table 1.  Basic Wi-Fi Requirements 

REQUIREMENT 
CATEGORY 

Users 

Device support 

Wi-Fi Technologies 

Coverage 

User Density 

Availability Time 

Applications 

CASES AND CONDITIONS 

IEEE 802.11b/g (2.5 GHz2) 
IEEE 802.11a/n (5.0 GHz) 

1. 
Students 
2. 
Staff 
1.  Desktops 
2.  Laptops 
3.  Tablets 
4.  Mobile phones 
1. 
2. 
1.  Classrooms 
2.  Lecture halls 
3. 
Public venues 
1.  Classrooms: 10 – 500 
2.  Lecture halls: 20 – 1000 
3. 
Public venues: 100 – 2000  
1. 
24 hours 
2. 
7 days 
1. 
Internet 
2. 
File sharing 
3.  Media streaming 
4.  Application 

protocols 

(HTTP, FTP, P2P, etc.) 
5.  Transport  protocols  (TCP, 

UDP) 

2.5 KNUST WLAN attributes 
The  attribute  of  the  deployed  WLAN  as  seen  on  a  laptop 
computer running Windows 10 Pro is as summarized: 

a.  Wireless Properties 

Name/SSID 
Network Type  
Point 
Network Availability  
Network Security 
Authentication 

– 
– 

– 
– 

WIFI  
Access 

All  Users 
No 

(Open) 

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 176 – No.3, October 2017 

Encryption Type 
IPv4 Connectivity   
IPv6 Connectivity   
Access 
Speed 

b.  Wireless Details 

DHCP Enabled 
DNS Suffix 
Default Gateway 

– 
– 
– 

– 

– 
– 
– 

None 
Internet 
No Network 

65 Mbps3 

Yes 
knust.edu.gh 

10.9.0.5 

2.6   KNUST WLAN and BYOD Test Runs 
2.6.1 First Version 
In  early  2015,  the  initiative  to  introduce  a  new  WLAN  into 
KNUST  was  kept  under  wraps,  but  known  only  by  rumor  to 
Electrical,  Telecommunication,  and  Computer  engineering 
students.  Soon  enough,  workers  began  digging  trenches  and 
laying  network  and  power  cables  around  campus.  The  only 
reliable Wi-Fi available in KNUST were Cloud Ghana, whose 
APs were only available in halls and hostels but not faculties 
and Vodafone, whose WLAN signal range was limited to the 
vicinity  of  their  Internet  café.  The  KNUST  WLAN,  with 
SSID  WIFI-KNUST,  did  not  become  operational  and 
accessible to students until sometime in November, 2015. The 
new  network  had  no  security  features  that  were  visible  to 
clients,  no  restrictions  to  the  web  domains,  and  no  caps  on 
bandwidth  had  been  imposed.  Moreover,  users  experienced 
throughputs  from  512  kbps  to  over  5.2  Mbps  depending  on 
the  time  of  day,  number  of  connected  clients,  user’s  Wi-Fi 
technology  type,  and  AP  signal  strength.  At  the  time,  the 
greater  population  of  students  were  unaware  of  the  new 
network,  and  only  a  few  faculties  had  APs  installed  on  their 
premises. 

2.6.2 Second Version 
After  a  month,  the  network  administrator  introduced  some 
restrictions  on  domains  and  protocols.  Students  could  not 
access  some  websites  such  as  YouTube,  and  domains  that 
hosted  websites  with  pornographic  content;  any  attempt  to 
access  such  domains  would  only  redirect  the  browser  to  the 
KNUST website. Also, clients could download files from the 
Internet  using  HTTP  and  HTTPS  only;  no  FTP  or  P2P 
connections were allowed. 

On the bright side, users were experiencing throughputs up to 
256  kbps  to  over  5.2  Mbps  depending  on  the  time  of  day, 
number of connected users, the users’ Wi-Fi technology type, 
and AP signal strength. Still many  students were unaware of 
WIFI-KNUST. 

2.6.3 Third Version 
After  a  while,  clients  were  no  longer  restricted  to  access  to 
any  website domain they preferred, nor were they limited by 
protocols. 

However, a second logical network, with SSID KNUST WIFI 
SEC  was  created.  This  network  was  indeed  an  isolation  of 
WIFI-KNUST,  a  test  network.  This  network  was  closed  off 
behind  an  undisclosed  proxy  firewall  with  no  access  list, 
making  it  possible  for  the  network  administrator  to  test  all 
manner  of  security  policies  that  could  be  deployed  on  the 
main network. 

55 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
 
2.6.4 Fourth Version 
The  network  administrators  decided  to  implement  a  security 
system  –  the  gateway  proxy  (with  IP  10.5.0.7  on  port  3905) 
running  an  open  source  captive  portal,  CoovaChilli  [18],  to 
deny unauthorized Internet access, and to redirect browsers to 
a login portal, similar to the login website of KNUST Student 
Portal (KNUST, 2016). Internet access was disallowed until a 
student verified their identity with their school issued student 
ID and password. 

The  portal  was  inefficient  because  the  gateway  was  not 
always reliable to: 

  Redirect  all  URLs  to  the  CoovaChilli 

captive portal 
  Authenticate 

user 

(host 
unavailability and timeouts were frequent) 
  Access  time  ended  every  10  minutes  or 
so, and the student had to log in again 

credentials 

The addition of the captive portal, in addition to the reduced 
throughput  even  at  night  when  there  were  fewer  users 
(perhaps by a bandwidth cap imposed on the network by the 
administrators)  caused  much  frustration  and  disappointment 
among students with the Wi-Fi service. 

2.6.5 Current Version 
The  captive  portal  was  discontinued.  WIFI-KNUST  is  now 
open,  without  any  authentication.  However,  KNUST  WIFI 
SEC,  while  also  without  any  WEP,  WPA2,  or  802.1X 
encryption  or  authentication,  is  fully  monitored,  and  has  a 
better, but not fully functional, captive portal.  

2.7 KNUST BYOD Security Risks 
1.  No Wi-Fi Encryption or Authentication 
Generic  WLAN  networks  implement  security  authentication 
types such as: 

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

only 

WEP  –  Encryption  for  IEEE  802.11 
Wi-Fi  networks  to  provide  similar 
privacy of an Ethernet LAN. WEP is 
very  insecure  and  contains  serious 
security flaws; it is not intended to be 
the 
security  measure; 
superseded by WPA [19][20][21] 
WPA  –  Authentication  type  for  Wi-
Fi. Superseded by WPA2 [22]. 
WPA2  –  Improved  version  of  WPA 
(known as WPA2 Personal or WPA2 
Enterprise). It is based on a modified 
form  of  AES  encryption,  but  still 
very vulnerable [22][23] 

None of these IEEE 802.11 security protocols should be relied 
on  exclusively  to  secure  a  WLAN.  Still,  WIFI-KNUST  does 
not implement any of the above. 

An  open  Wi-Fi  with  no  encryption  or  authentication  allows 
outsiders to use resources such as an Internet connection. It is 
susceptible to network privacy intrusions like eavesdropping. 

2.  Automatic Host Configuration (DHCP) 
Public  networks  with  DHCP  disabled  are  tedious  to  use  and 
manage  since  users  have  to  manually  choose  their  own  IP 
addresses,  and  know  extra  information  like  IP  addresses  of 
DNS servers and gateway routers. Users may choose incorrect 
network  and  DNS  Server  addresses  or  conflicting  host 
identifiers.  Nevertheless,  making  such  information  private 

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 176 – No.3, October 2017 

provides a sort of security by “IP anonymity.” One cannot use 
a network without correct configuration settings. 

Of course, this is not practical for a network for thousands of 
users  in  KNUST.  So,  KNUST’s  WLANs  have  DHCP 
enabled.  Therefore,  any  host  may  connect  to  WIFI-KNUST 
and,  with  no  further  settings,  obtain  direct  access  to  the 
Internet. 

3.  Captive Portal 
Although it was an imperfect application, the reasons that led 
to the recent discontinuation of the captive portal are not fully 
known, but at least it offered some degree of air gap between                                               
WIFI-KNUST users and the Internet. Without the portal, there 
is not much standing between a client and a malicious attacker 
on the same WLAN or from the Internet. 

4.  Device Discovery  
By  default,  most  computers  trust  Ethernet  (mark  as  private) 
and  distrust  Wi-Fi  (mark  as  public).  Nevertheless,  it  is  quite 
easy to change this setting, especially on a Windows operating 
system.  The  ability  for  PCs  to  discover  other  PCs  on  a 
network is a vital precondition for many network attacks and 
spreading of malware. Limiting interactions between hosts on 
a  network  can  help  protect  them  especially  keep  malware 
from running rampant [24]. 

3. METHODOLOGY 
There are many highly reputable organizations that design and 
build  ultramodern  computer  networks  for  individuals  and 
other  organizations.  Their  solutions  make 
them  highly 
acclaimed the world over, and most do not reveal their “trade 
secrets.”  They,  however,  do  publish  books,  whitepapers  and 
reports  on  many  tested  and  verified  practices  in  computer 
networks. 

In this section, a few of these publications concerning WLAN 
and BYOD from illustrious conglomerates like Cisco, Aruba, 
Fortinet, Global Sign, and Intel, are briefly examined and how 
to use their advice to solve KNUST BYOD challenges. 

1.  Trust Your Users – Intel 

As  a  company 
that  manufactures  several  billions  of 
microprocessors yearly, Intel does not just allow people to use 
their  own  devices.  It  welcomes  and  encourages  it.  So,  while 
many  network  architects  and  IT  managers  worry  about  user 
intent, Intel does something radical – it trusts its employees to 
patronize and adhere to its BYOD program. 

This  trust  is  not  absolute,  of  course.  This  is  not  a  passive 
dismissal of reality of threats posed by malicious users, but an 
awareness of it. This translates to: 

1.  Encouraging  BYOD!  Intel  asserts  that  clients 
demeaning  a  BYOD  program,  and  refusing  to 
use,  a  Wi-Fi  network  is  just  as  unfortunate  as 
having security issues. So, as much as possible, 
KNUST  BYOD  program  should  be  attractive 
and exciting. 

2.  Making  the  BYOD  program  as  convenient  as 
possible  while  implementing  robust  security 
and  privacy  measures.  An  example  is  making 
users  control  the  implementation  process  by 
being  able  to  choose  the  access  and  security 
level they require to use the corporate network. 
3.  Regulating  what  users  can  and  cannot  have 
access  to.  Users  often  feel  that  IT  managers 
highly  overestimate  the  access  they  have. 
Besides,  the  larger  percentage  of  users  always 

56 

use company Wi-Fi for work, and never out of 
desire to steal information or wreak havoc. 
4.  Creating  separate  spaces  for  personal  and 
company  data.  This  obviously 
to 
separating  storage  spaces,  databases,  and 
perhaps  using  different  servers  to  host  them 
[25]. 

refers 

Intel  believes  that  its  entire  BYOD  policy  would  collapse 
without user’s interest  and trust; the belief that security must 
start with the employee [26]. 

2.  Enterprise Mobility – Cisco 

true  device  freedom  without  compromising 

Cisco  Systems  Inc.  is  a  world  leader  in  enterprise  network 
Solutions  Corporation.  The  flourishing  of  BYOD  campaigns 
was  not  lost  on  them.  Their  Enterprise  Mobility  solution 
the 
offers 
corporate  network  [7].  Their  solutions  offer  an  organization 
control  of  the  network  when  it  does  not  control  the  devices 
that  use  it  [27].  Cisco  achieves  this  for  the  networks  its 
experts design by the following guidelines: 

1.  Secure  Wireless  Network  Infrastructure  –  The 
foundation  of  a  successful  BYOD  solution  is 
providing  an  excellent  user  experience  while 
minimising  risk.  As  iterated  over  again,  this 
involves  building  atop  a  robust  Ethernet 
backbone  and  using  high  quality  WLCs  and 
APs. 

2.  Automated  Enforcement  of  Access  Policies  – 
This  involves  automation  of  authorisation  and 
authentication processes of the devices used on 
the network, the clients who own them, and the 
services they wish to access. 

3.  Web  Security  –  Most  computer  threats  spread 
when  users  visit  websites.  A  BYOD  solution 
such as KNUST’s should consider utilities that 
deal  with  URL  filtering,  malicious  code 
detection and filtering, and application controls 
for web-based applications. 

4.  Low  Management  Overhead  –  Managing  a 
campus  Wi-Fi  and  BYOD  solution  can  be 
made  more 
less 
demanding 
centralised 
management station. 

secure,  efficient,  and 
is 

there 

if 

a 

5.  Mobile  Device  and  Mobile  Application 
Management – Many enterprises have adopted 
MDM/MAM – an all-inclusive management of 
various  device  types,  platforms,  applications, 
user  roles  and  locations,  etc.  MDM/MAM 
seeks to make do on the promise of diversity of 
devices  and  mobility  of  users  in  a  BYOD 
implementation. [27] 

To  this  end,  Cisco  developed  various  solutions  such  as  the 
Cisco Identity Services Engine (ISE – a powerful but flexible 
and  fully  customizable  platform  that  addresses  all  these 
requirements); Cisco AnyConnect® Secure Mobility Client (a 
VPN  access  solution);  Cisco  ASA  CX  Context-Aware 
Firewall and S-Series Web Security Appliance. 

3.  Focus on Productivity – Aruba Networks 

Many  organizations  prefer  the  perspective  the  BYOD  is  a 
means of increasing productivity to the convenience it offers 
users  and 
IT  managers  when  managing  a  WLAN 
infrastructure.  In  spite  of  the  obvious  benefits  of  BYOD, 
Aruba 
thorough  assessment  of  your 
organizational  needs,  resources  to  determine  if  a  BYOD 
solution  will  benefit  the  organization.  If  the  assessment 

recommends  a 

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 176 – No.3, October 2017 

predicts impediment to productivity, it is advisable to abandon 
the initiative [28]. 

4.  Security is Critical – EYGM 

This  is  a  point  worth  overemphasis  yet.  The  whole  idea  of 
clients bringing their own devices originates from a desire to 
protect  themselves  from  external  scrutiny.  People  are  more 
likely to check emails, share files, create documents, and work 
harder using their own devices than using devices supplied  – 
and  no  doubt  controlled  –  by  a  company.  Hence,  while 
ensuring convenience, it is also important to consider various 
factors  such  as  device  profile,  organizational  risks,  security 
solutions, deployment scenarios, future state scenarios, mobile 
device  management,  etc.  As  much  as  possible,  create  an 
airtight BYOD system [29]. 

4. KNUST BYOD RECOMMENDATIONS 
1 – Ethernet LAN Performance and Reliability 
First,  ensure  a  robust  Ethernet  backbone,  complete  with 
modern,  quality  network  hardware  (high  bandwidth  routers 
and  switches,  Category  5e  or  better  Ethernet  and  fiber  optic 
cables, UTMs, next generation, context-aware firewalls, etc.). 
An  excellent  wired  LAN  with  better  traffic  and  security 
management will ensure a decent WLAN implementation [7]. 
The relationship attributes are summarized in Figure 3. 

Figure 3: Relationship between Wired and Wireless 
Networks 

2 – WLAN Performance and Reliability 
Secondly,  perform  requirement  assessments  and  surveys  to 
determine  WLAN  constraints,  as  have  been  discussed  in 
section 3. 

Leverage the stability of the underlying wired LAN to build a 
reliable WLAN  [7] using a suitable hierarchical topology  for 
better management and scalability [26]. 

Use  high  load  dual  channel  routers  and  APs  that  can  use 
channel bonding and multiple data rates, and use PoE so they 
can  be  easily  placed  at  vantage  points  on  premises  [15].  A 
fewer  number  of  AAPs  is  recommended  whiles  providing 
LAPs  for  more  access  locations  as  are  needed,  and  choose 
strategic  locations  for  the  APs  to  ensure  maximum  coverage 
and signal power [30], and reduce interferences and obstacles 
[17][31].  Use  the  same  SSID  for  multiple  APs  in  a  zone  to 
make roaming easy [15]. 

3 – Consider Better Network Protocols 
IPv4  has  been  around  for  a  while  –  has  been  the  default 
network addressing protocol for many years. 

But that is changing, with IPv4 addresses exhausted and more 
organizations are switching to IPv6 [1][32]. The performance 
of  a  WLAN  can  be  greatly  increased  by  configuring  IPv6 
network access (alongside IPv4 for devices incapable of using 
IPv6). IPv4 and IPv6 can be deployed in a number of ways for 

57 

both  independence  and  interoperability,  the  easiest  and  most 
common being the IPv4v6 Dual Stack Model.  

In the End-To-End Dual Stack model, shown in Figure 4, both 
IPv4  and  IPv6  can  work  fully  without  interfering  with  each 
other if both the access block (end users) and datacenter block 
(administration end) are both fully capable of deploying IPv6; 
otherwise,  the  Hybrid  Model  with  ISATAP  and  manual 
tunneling  can  be  used  if  either  the  end  users  or  the  wired 
backbone cannot leverage IPv6 [33]. 

Figure 4: IPv4v6 End-to-End Dual Stack Model 

IPv6 has  many  performance  and  security  enhancements  over 
IPv4. 

1. 

2. 

this  makes 

IPv6  was  designed  for  faster  and  more  secure 
host  configuration  with  DHCPv6,  or  Auto-
configuration  using  a  device’s  MAC  address. 
Experts  say 
IPv6  addresses 
impossible to spoof [32]. 
IPv6  was  also  designed  for  better  routing. 
Improved IP headers prevent IP fragmentation 
attacks  [1];  improved  packet  size  makes  it 
unnecessary for routers to fragment or combine 
IP packets in order to make it compatible to the 
underlying  LLC 
sublayers 
[1][4[32]].  

and  MAC 

IPv6  is  also  better  for  addressing  subnetworks  and  creating 
DMZs without the NAT overhead in IPv4 as shown in Figure 
5. 

Figure 5: IPv4 vs IPv6 Global and Subnet Routing 

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 176 – No.3, October 2017 

4 – Consider Network Segregation 
Network  segregation  is  a  good  practice,  if  done  correctly,  to 
ensure  that  various  sections  of  the  school’s  network  are 
isolated and protected from one another and from the Internet 
[24][4].  Key  resources  (web,  application,  and  database 
servers) can be properly isolated and firewalled, and faculties, 
departments and buildings can be logically separated from one 
another and from the Internet [34]. 

this 

regard,  as  already  mentioned 

In 
the  3rd 
recommendation, IPv6 is better at dividing corporate networks 
into  subnets,  isolations,  and  DMZs  according  to  the  logical 
structure  and  needs  of  KNUST  without  the  extra  overhead 
incurred employing NAT and VLANs in IPv4 [1][32]. 

in 

5 – Take Advantage of Basic Wi-Fi Security Options 
The IEEE 802.11 standard Wi-Fi security options discussed in 
5 are certainly not ideal, but they can be used in some isolated 
subnets  as  additional  security  layer.  WEP  and  WPA2  are 
vulnerable, but regular Wi-Fi users hardly ever attempt it [12]. 

6 – Monitor and Control the WLAN 
Network  administrators  should be  able  to  efficiently  monitor 
and  manage  their  networks  [35].  Right  from  the  very 
beginning  of  the  project,  integrate  a  network  monitoring 
system  into  WLAN  management  structure. Start  with  SNMP 
and  work  up  to  sampling  various  free  and  retailed  reputable 
network  monitoring  utilities  such  as  Wireshark,  the  Dude, 
Logic  Monitor,  etc.  and  sticking  with  one  or  more  that 
accomplishes  the  task.  The  administrator  can  also  step  up  to 
infrastructure monitoring of DHCP and DNS services, etc. 

Data  collected  from  these  monitoring  activities  can  be 
analyzed  to  determine  usage  of  the  network  infrastructure, 
bandwidth  demand,  throughput  performance,  behavior  and 
activity of users, suspicious  behavior, etc. Traffic  monitoring 
can  inform  many  decisions  of  bandwidth  allocation,  IP 
address Management (IPAM), URL restrictions, and so on. 

7  –  Implement  User  Authentication  and  Mobile  Device 
Management 
Security is critical in a private WLAN, especially one running 
a  BYOD  program.  It  is  highly  recommended  to  take  a 
pervasive  security  measures  to  ensure  that  only  authorized 
users  can  access  the  right  resources:  Internet,  VoIP,  web 
applications,  or  storage.  Use  as  many  security  technologies, 
protocols,  and  solutions  as  reasonably  possible.  Employing 
several  systems  to  handle  various  security  scenarios,  or  a 
complete security solution such as a UMT. 

that 

Design  for  devices 
implement  minimum  security 
capabilities, and accept that not all devices will be supported, 
because considering some legacy devices may very well lead 
to  choices  that  will  compromise  the  infrastructure.  In  the 
meantime,  beware  of,  and 
take  advantage  of  security 
capabilities  of  modern  devices  (e.g.  certificates,  dynamic 
MAC addresses, IPv6 Auto configuration) [36]. 

Implement  MDM  system  capable  of  registering,  classifying, 
and  managing  devices  of  users  through  MAC  addresses, 
operating systems, Wi-Fi technology, IP version support, etc. 

Lastly,  implement  captive  portals  customized  for  credential-
based  user  authentication,  service  selection  and  access  level; 
deploy NAC if there is the need to assess and enforce device 
security requirements [6]. 

58 

 
 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 176 – No.3, October 2017 

servers located there. All management actions must 
go through the firewall, ensuring that no backdoors 
are accidentally built into them. 

4.1  Proposed  Design  for  KNUST  WLAN 
BYOD 
Adopted  from  Cisco  Validated Designs  and  Cisco  Reference 
Network  Architecture  [31],  a  KNUST  BYOD  solution  based 
on the existing WAN, shown in Figure 6, was designed. The 
design  includes  ACMs,  Threat  Managers,  and  other  network 
modifications that shall be elaborated now. 

Solution Components 

1.  Routers,  switches  and  Access  Points  that  use 
recent Ethernet and 802.11 technology, e.g.: 
(i) 

Cisco  Catalyst  2000-X,  3000,  and 
4000-E Series switches 
Cisco 
Controller 

vWLC  Wireless 

LAN 

(ii) 

2.  Access  Control  Managers  (MDM  and  NAC 

solutions), e.g.: 
(i) 
(ii) 

(iii) 

Cisco Identity Services Engine (ISE) 
Cisco  Secure  Access  Control  Server 
(ACS) 
Cisco  Authorization,  Authentication 
Accounting (AAA) Server 

3.  Threat Managers, e.g.: 

(i) 

Cisco  Wireless  Intrusion  Prevention 
System (wIPS) 

4.  BYOD Managers, e.g.: 

(i) 

(ii) 

Cisco  Mobility  Services  Engine 
(MSE) 
Cisco 
Experiences (CMX) 

Connected 

Mobile 

Figure 6: Design for NUST WAN and BYOD 

Technology Use Cases 

1.  Subnetting and isolation (DMZs) 

An  educational  institution  such  as  KNUST  has 
resources  that  are  intended  for  authorized  users 
everywhere  (Web,  DNS,  etc.)  and  resources  that 
should  be  accessed  from  the  inside  the  private 
network  only  (Email,  Databases,  VoIP,  Captive 
portals, DHCP, etc.) Such resources can be isolated 
behind  firewalls  in  DMZs  with  stringent  access 
control settings. The firewall’s ACL allows only IPs 
belonging  to  the  private  network  access  to  certain 
resources  inside  the  private  DMZ,  and  blocking  all 
others.  The  public  DMZ  contains  data  that  when 
compromised, will not adversely affect the security 
of  KNUST,  and  be  accessed  by  all  as  shown  in 
Figure 7.  
The  one  important  property  of  the  DMZs  is  there 
are  no  hosts,  dynamic  or  static,  other  than  the 

Figure 7: Firewalled DMZs in a Private Network 

2.  Network Access Control (NAC) 

NAC is an industrial term to describe the integration 
and management of several network security control 
solutions.  NAC,  as  shown  in  Figure  8,  deals  with 
several facets of security such as mobile device and 
mobile  application  management  (MDM/MAM), 
antimalware,  firewalls  and 
intrusion  detection, 
certificates, credentials and IP address management 
(IPAM).  Often,  these  systems  involve  servers  that 
run special applications that communicate with one 
another and to the NAC server, usually via RPC and 
ICMP. 

3.  Mobile Device Management (MDM) 

MDM  is  the  administration  of  networked  devices. 
The  NAC  system  usually  controls  the  MDM’s 
activities.  The  MDM  is  responsible  for  identifying 
every  single  computer  device  connected  to  the 
network by collecting data such as:  

(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 

(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 

(viii) 

Device name 
Device type 
Device  serial  number  and/or 
IMEI 
MAC address 
Device manufacturer 
Date manufactured 
OS  or  firmware  version  and 
date 
IP  version  (and  IP  addresses 
used before and dates) 

Also  relevant  to  the  NAC  is  the  device’s  security 
state.  The  NAC,  via  the  MDM  collects  additional 
data such as: 
(i) 
(ii) 

Antivirus product and version 
Drivers vendors and versions 

59 

 
 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 176 – No.3, October 2017 

solution works hand in hand with other Cisco ACMs such as 
the Cisco ISE. This is how it is implemented in KNUST: 

2. 

1.  The  student,  having  connected  to  the 
WLAN,  if  the  device  is  not  already 
registered,  is  redirected  to  a  Guest  Portal 
website  for  registration  with  their  student 
ID, password and reference number. 
If  the  credentials  check  out,  the  user  is 
prompted to download a tiny app directly 
from the school’s servers. (There are apps 
iOS,  Android, 
for 
Windows  Phone.  Desktop  OS 
like 
Windows, OSX, and Linux may need just 
applets.) 

every  platform: 

3.  The  student  runs  the  app  which  acquires 
the  device’s  name,  model,  IMEI  and 
MAC  address  (the  MAC  address 
is 
becomes the device ID). 

4.  The  app  uses  the  data  to  generate  and 
device. 
install 
Certificates  are  unique  to  device  and 
cannot be used on other devices. 

certificates 

the 

on 

5.  Each  time  the  student  wishes  to  use  a 
resource on the network, the certificate is 
required. 

5.  Captive Portal 

After device authorization comes student authentication. This 
is usually the last phase of the authentication process for users 
attempting  to  browse  the  Internet.  Because  it  usually  is  a 
website,  the  captive  portal  must  be  accessed  with  a  web 
browser,  an  application  capable  of  processing  web  pages. 
Otherwise, users will be frustrated in attempting to connect to 
the Internet yet unable to do so. 

Many  KNUST  students  are  familiar  with  the  Vodafone 
captive  portal  used  in Vodafone Internet  cafés  on  campus  as 
well  as  across  the  country,  and  that  of  the  rogue  network 
Cloud Ghana, which is very popular among KNUST students. 

The captive portal must be presented to the user the first time 
the  browser  attempts  to  access  a  website.  Since  the  gateway 
must  present  the  captive  portal  to  the  user,  the  website  is 
either stored in the gateway itself, or the IP and domain name 
of  the  server  hosting  the  captive  portal  is  whitelisted  in  the 
gateway’s  Access  Control  list.  Redirection  is  achieved  using 
three main techniques: 

1. 

ICMP redirection, which is less common and can easily be 
bypassed with common IP address spoofing tricks. 

2.  DNS  redirection,  whereby  the  server  intercepts  a  host’s 
DNS lookup and returns the Internet address of the captive 
portal website; this is called DNS hijacking [38]. 

captive  portals 

security  process  of 

is  quite 
The 
straightforward.  After 
the  student’s  browser  has  been 
redirected  to  the  Captive  portal,  they  must  log  in  with  their 
school  issued  student  ID,  password,  (and  perhaps  their 
reference  number  as  well).  The  portal  contacts  a  directory 
server, or a database containing student data. If the credentials 
check  out,  the  portal  contacts  the  NAC  or  gateway  with  the 
user’s  device  IP 
to  allow  said  user  Internet  access. 
Disconnecting from the Wi-Fi should automatically log a user 
out as shown in Figure 10. 

60 

Figure 8: NAC Mobile Device Management 

On connecting to the WLAN, a mobile device is assigned an 
IPv4  (or  IPv6)  address.  The  device  can  do nothing  else  until 
the NAC assesses and clears it for further authentication based 
on  the  data  it  collects.  A  device  lacking  in  any  way  (e.g. 
outdated  virus  definitions,  discontinued  OS  versions, 
compromised  device  drivers,  etc.) 
is  either  blocked 
indefinitely until deficiencies have been met. 

Some  sophisticated  MDMs  allow  users  to  register  two  or 
more devices to their account, and remove them as necessary. 

4.  Certificates 
After  the  MDM  phase,  devices  can  be  issued  certificates, 
special  customised  XML  files  that  are  saved  in  a  special 
directory  on  the  device.  Certificates  can  be  generic,  or 
generated using unique device data such as the MAC address 
or IMEI. This ensures that they cannot be duplicated or copied 
onto another device which has been blocked or unauthorised. 
Certificates  can  also  expire  and  have  to  be  re-issued  after  a 
time. 

Figure 9: NAC and Network Certificates 

Figure  9  shows  the  authentication  by  certificates,  first  by  an 
on-boarding device (first joining the network) which is issued 
a  certificate  for  the  first  time;  and  another  device  whose 
certificate  is  being  verified  before  its  assigned  IP  is  allowed 
access through the gateway. 

An  example  of  authorizing  devices  using  certificates  is 
implemented by the Cisco Network Setup Assistant [37]. This 

 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 176 – No.3, October 2017 

point) 

When? 

When  are  they  accessing  the  network,  for  how 
long, and how many times 

1.  History logs of device connecting and 

disconnecting 

What can they do? 

2.  Logs of user logins and logouts 
1.  Access Levels 
2.  Usage 

traffic, 

(Packet 
behaviour, etc.) 

suspicious 

Figure 10: Captive Portal Authentication Process 

There  are  so  many  open  source  captive  portals  in  existence, 
such as ChilliSpot, Wifidog, PacketFence and HotSpotPA. All 
these  applications  must  be installed  on  a  server  and properly 
configured  according  to  the  needs  and  requirements  of  the 
target Wi-Fi network. 

5. SUMMARY 
So  far  it  has  been  proposed  that  a  robust,  high-performance 
WAN-Wi-Fi  infrastructure  is  the  foundation  of  a  successful 
BYOD  program.  Without  a  reliable  physical  network,  it  is 
difficult  to  ensure  clients  the  speed,  mobility,  security,  and 
QoS  they  expect  to  enjoy  from  a  university  network;  if 
students  reject  a  poor  WLAN  will  render  a  BYOD  program 
pointless. 

its 

to  use 

resources,  as 

Secondly,  it  is  important  to  ensure  control,  security,  and 
convenience in good in a BYOD program in good measures. 
For  control,  establish  good  network  monitoring  and 
management  solutions.  For  security,  implement  a  multi-
faceted  authentication  process,  which  intends  to  leverage 
every source of information about the client connecting to the 
network 
in  Multi-faceted 
authentication  helps  the  security  system  made  up  of  the 
ACMs  (NAC,  MDM,  and  Certificate  servers)  to  recognize 
contexts  and  patterns  of  use  and  misuse,  suspicious  behavior 
and  common  threats.  This  eases,  at  the  same  time  improves, 
the  network  administration  process.  For  convenience,  the 
processes  of  control  and  security  should  be  abstracted  from 
users, and simplified for them, as much as possible to satisfy 
usability  as  summarized 
in  Table  2.  Tedious  security 
processes  will  defeat  one  of  the  prime  purposes  of  BYOD: 
convenience. 

Table 2. Facets of Authentication 

Security Facet 

Relevant Data 

is  on 

Who 
network? 

the 

User credentials 

are 

they 

What 
using? 

Where are they? 

1.  Username and password 
2. 
User devices 

Security questions, etc. 

1.  Device name 
2.  MAC and IP addresses 
3. 
4.  OS, Antivirus, etc. 
Where user accesses the network 

IMEI 

1.  Wired 

(using  a  switch  or  port 

interface) 

2.  Wireless  (connected 

to  an  access 

6. CONCLUSION 
For  many  Institutions  and  Organizations  that  benefit  from 
computer  networking,  Wi-Fi  is  an  inevitable  choice,  and 
BYOD  is  the  next  obvious  initiative.  While  students  and 
employees  demand  mobility,  stakeholders  are  concerned 
about security of corporate data. Nevertheless, BYOD is here 
to  stay,  and  cybersecurity  risks  have  always  been  a  nuisance 
the 
to  network  administrators  and  users 
introduction  of  Wi-Fi  –  risks  that  can  be  curtailed  or 
eliminated with tested and proven solutions. 

long  before 

So,  regardless  of  the  costs  and  risks  involved,  a  university’ 
network  with  a  BYOD  program  is  full  of  benefits  that  are 
worth  taking  the  time  and  resources  to  thoroughly  assess  the 
KNUST’s  needs,  and  to  properly  design,  build,  manage,  and 
secure  a  robust  physical  network  and  a  reliable  BYOD 
program. 

7. REFERENCES 
[1]  Forouzan,  B.  A.,  2013.  Data  Communications  and 

Networking. 5th ed. s.l.:McGraw-Hill. 

[2]  Bosworth,  S.,  Kabay,  M.  E.  &  Whyne,  E.,  2014. 
Computer Security Handbook. 6th ed. s.l.:John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc.. 

[3]  Vacca,  J.  R.  & Mallery,  J.,  2013.  Chapter  1:  Building  a 
Secure  Organisation.  In:  Computer  and  Information 
Security  Handbook.  2nd  ed.  s.l.:Morgan  Kaufmann 
Publications (MK), pp. 3-24. 

[4]  Wu,  C.-H.  (.  &  Irwin,  J.  D.,  2013.  Introduction  to 
Computer Networks and Cybersecurity. s.l.:CRC Press - 
Taylor & Francis Group. 

[5]  Fortinet  Solutions  Guide,  2015.  Secure  Wireless  LAN 
Solution  Guide  -  Complete  WiFi  Security  for  Any 
Network Topology, s.l.: Fortinet Inc.. 

[6]  Brown,  J.,  Jackson,  S.  &  Scarfone,  K.,  2013.  Securing 
BYOD  -  Guidance  on  the  Strategies  and  Tools  Needed 
for  a  Secure  and  Productive  Bring-Your-Own-Device 
Program, s.l.: CDW-G. 

[7]  Cisco  Systems,  Inc.,  2014.  Cisco  Enterprise  Mobility 
Solution  -  Device  Freedom  Without  Compromising  the 
IT Network, s.l.: Cisco Systems Inc.. 

[8]  Gartner  Press,  2013.  Worldwide  PC,  Tablet  and  Mobile 
Phone Combined Shipments to Reach 2.4 Billion units in 
2013.  [Online]  Available  at:  http://www.gartner.com/ 
newsroom/id/2408515 [Accessed 2016]. 

[9]  Harkins,  M.,  2016.  Mobile:  Learn  from  Intel's  Cisco  on 
Securing  Employee-Owned  Devices.  [Online]  Available 
http://www.govinfosecurity.com/webinars/mobile-
at: 
learn-from-intels-ciso-on-securing-employee-owned-
devices-w-264 [Accessed 19 April 2016]. 

61 

 
 
Own 

[10] Bradley, T., 2011. PC World - Pros and Cons of Bringing 
[Online]  

Your 
Availableat:http://www.pcworld.com/article/246760/pros
_and_cons_of_byod_bring_your_own_device_.html[Acc
essed 19 April 2016]. 

to  Work. 

Device 

[11] Intel, 2012. Insights on the Current State of BYOD in the 

Enterprise, s.l.: Intel. 

[12] Aruba  Networks,  Inc.,  2016.  The  Definitive  Guide  to 

BYOD. s.l.:Aruba Networks Inc.. 

[13] Wikipedia,  2016.  Bring  Your  Own  Device.  [Online]  

Availableat:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bring_your_ow
n_device[Accessed 19 April 2016]. 

[14] Johnson,  K.  &  Filkins,  B.  L.,  2012.  SANS 
Mobility/BYOD Security Survey, s.l.: SANS Institute. 

[15] MCNC,  2012.  Designing  and  Building  a  Campus 
Wireless Network, s.l.: MCNC for the K-12 Community 
of North Carolina. 

[16] Cisco  Systems,  Inc.,  2014.  Campus  Wireless  LAN 
Technology Design Guide. s.l.:Cisco Systems, Inc.. 

[17] Chin,  D.,  2013.  Whitepaper  -  Best  Practices  for  High 
and 

Desnsity  Network  Design 
Small/Medium Businesses, s.l.: NETGEAR Inc.. 

in  Education 

[18] Coova, 

2016. 
Available 
at: 
[Accessed 2016]. 

Coova.org 
[Online]  
Projects. 
http://coova.github.io/CoovaChilli/ 

[19] Beaver,  K.  &  Davis,  P.  T.,  2005.  Hacking  Wireless 

Networks for Dummies. s.l.:Wiley & Sons, Inc.. 

[20] TechTarget,  2006.  Wired  Equivalent  Privacy  (WEP). 
[Online]Availableat:http://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/
definition/Wired-Equivalent-Privacy 
[Accessed 2016]. 

[21] Wikipedia,  2016.  Wired  Equivalent  Privacy.  [Online]  

Availableat:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wired_Equival
ent_Privacy 
[Accessed 2016]. 

[22] Beaver,  K.,  2016.  Enterprise  Wireless  Security:  Secure 
[Online]  
and 

Wi-Fi 
Availableat:http://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/tip/Enter
prise-wireless-security-Secure-Wi-Fi-today-and-
beyond[Accessed 2016]. 

Beyond. 

Today 

[23] Wikipedia, 

at: 

Available 
Fi_Protected_Access 
[Accessed 2016]. 

2016. 

[Online]  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wi-

WPA. 

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 176 – No.3, October 2017 

malware/isolated-security-zones-yield-stronger-network-
protection.html[Accessed 2016]. 

[25] Buchholz, D., Dunlop, J. & Ross, A., 2012. Whitepaper: 
Improving  Security  and  Mobility  for  Personally  Owned 
Devices. s.l.:Intel Corporation. 

[26] Short,  T.,  2013.  3  Ways  Intel  Gets  Employees  to  Trust 
(and Adhere to) Their BYOD Security Program. [Online] 
Available  at:  http://hello-operator.softwareadvice.com/3-
ways-intel-gets-employees-to-trust-their-byod-program-
1113/ 
[Accessed 2016]. 

[27] Cisco Systems, Inc., 2012. Whitepaper - BYOD Security 
Challenges 
the  Network, 
in  Education:  Protect 
Information, and Students, s.l.: Cisco Systems Inc.. 
[28] Aruba  Networks,  Inc.,  2012.  Aruba  Whitepaper  - 
Conquering  Today's  Bring  Your  Own  Device 
Challenges:  A  Framework 
for  Successful  BYOD 
Initiatives, s.l.: Aruba Networks Inc.. 

[29] EYGM  Limited,  2013.  Bring  Your  Own  Device: 
Security  and  Risk  Considerations  for  Your  Mobile 
Device Program, s.l.: EYGM Limited. 

[30] Aruba  Networks,  Inc.,  2012.  Aruba  Whitepaper  -  The 
Whys and Hows of Deploying Large-Scale Campus-wide 
WiFi Networks, s.l.: Aruba Networks Inc.. 

[31] Cisco  Systems,  Inc.,  2015.  Cisco  Reference  Design  - 
Campus  LAN  and  Wireless  LAN  Design  Guide. 
s.l.:Cisco Systems, Inc.. 

[32] Hagen,  S.,  2014.  IPv6  Essentials.  3rd  ed.  s.l.:O'Reilly 

Media, Inc.. 

[33] McFarland,  S.,  2011.  Deploying  IPv6 

in  Campus 

Networks. s.l.:Cisco Systems, Inc.. 

[34] Reichenberg,  N.,  2014.  Imporving  Security  via  Proper 
[Online]  

Network 
Availableat:http://www.securityweek.com/improving-
security-proper-network-segmentation 
[Accessed 2016]. 

Segmentation. 

[35] Cisco  Systems,  Inc.,  2016.  Wireless  Education Vertical. 

s.l.:Cisco Systems, Inc.. 

[36] GlobalSign, 2016. Whitepaper - Taking BYOD Too Far: 
How to Avoid the Pitfalls of Striving for BYOD Utopia, 
s.l.: GlobalSign. 

[37] Cisco  Systems,  Inc.,  2014.  Cisco  Unified  Access  (UA) 
and  Bring  Your  Own  Device  (BYOD)  CVD.  s.l.:Cisco 
Systems, Inc.. 

[24] Grimes,  R.  A.,  2010.  Isolated  Security  Zones  Yield 
[Online]  

Stronger 
Availableat:http://www.infoworld.com/article/2628540/

Protection. 

Network 

[38] Wikipedia, 

2016. 

DNS 
Availableat:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DNS_hijacking
.

Hijacking. 

[Online]  

IJCATM : www.ijcaonline.org 

62 

 
