©  2017  IEEE.  Personal  use  of  this  material  is  permitted.  Permission  from  IEEE  must  be  obtained  for  all  other  uses,  in  any 
current  or  future  media,  including  reprinting/republishing  this  material  for  advertising  or  promotional  purposes,  creating  new 
collective  works,  for  resale  or  redistribution  to  servers  or  lists,  or  reuse  of  any  copyrighted  component  of  this  work  in  other 
works. 

The final, published version of this paper is available under: 
S. Marksteiner and H. Vallant, "Towards a secure smart grid storage communications gateway," 2017 Smart City Symposium 
Prague (SCSP), Prague, 2017, pp. 1-6. doi: 10.1109/SCSP.2017.7973855. 
URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=7973855&isnumber=7973339 

 
 
 
Smart Cities Symposium Prague 2017 

1 

Towards a Secure Smart Grid Storage 
Communications Gateway 

Stefan Marksteiner and Heribert Vallant 

 

Abstract—  This  research  in  progress  paper  describes  the  role 
of  cyber  security  measures  undertaken  in  an  ICT  system  for 
integrating electric storage technologies into the grid. To do so, it 
defines security requirements for a communications gateway and 
gives detailed information and hands-on configuration advice on 
node and communication line security, data storage, coping with 
backend  M2M  communications  protocols  and  examines  privacy 
issues.  The  presented  research  paves  the  road  for  developing 
that  allow 
secure  smart  energy  communications  devices 
enhancing  energy  efficiency.  The  described  measures  are 
implemented  in  an  actual  gateway  device  within  the  HORIZON 
2020 project STORY, which aims at developing new ways to use 
storage  and  demonstrating  these  on  six  different  demonstration 
sites. 

Index  Terms—Cyber-physical 

storage, 
Information security, Power system management, Privacy, Smart 
grids  

systems,  Energy 

I.  INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION 

I 

N this paper we propose security requirements and privacy 
recommendations  for  a  smart  grid  storage  communications 
gateway  (SCG).  The  intended  purpose  of  this  gateway  is  to 
provide  a  means  of  communication  to  distribute  information 
about flows between energy production and storage devices of 
various sizes. The gateway is developed within the HORIZON 
2020 project added value of STORage in distribution sYstems 
(STORY), in the context of ICT supporting services to enhance 
the  efficiency  of  storage  systems.  Going  to  be  dedicated  to 
transmitting  data  and  control  signals  within  demonstration 
sites,  this  gateway  is  regarded  critical  infrastructure,  which 
obviously  has  severe  security  implications.  The  objective  of 
this  paper  is  to  clarify  these  implications  for  network  nodes, 
communication  lines,  machine-to-machine  (M2M)  protocols, 
data  storage  and  privacy  aspects.  The  presented  results  are 
more  developed,  yet  work  in  progress,  research  based  on  a 
first publication in 2016 [1]. 

Being designed for the communications gateway developed 
in the  STORY project, they can, in principle, also be applied 

Manuscript received March 20, 2017; revised April 27, 2017  
This work has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research  and  innovation  programme  under  grant  agreement  No.  646426 
Project STORY–H2020–LCE-2014-3.  

The  authors  are  with  the  Connected  Computing  Research  Group, 
DIGITAL  –  Institute  for  Information  and  Communication  Technologies, 
JOANNEUM 
(e-mail: 
stefan.marksteiner@joanneum.at, heribert.vallant@joanneum.at). 

RESEARCH, 

Austria. 

Graz, 

to  any  device  with  a  similar  profile  (for  instance  other  smart 
grid  devices  or  smart  appliances).  For  devices  partially 
matching  this  profile  (for  instance  ICT-enabled  devices  with 
well-known  peers,  see  Section 
requirements 
the 
concerning the matching parts may be applied. 

IV), 

II.  RELATED WORK 

in 

[4,5], 

configuration 

hands-on 
such 

this  area  available 

there 
guidance 
energy  devices.  Therefore, 

While  there  is  some  theoretical  work  [2,3]  on  security 
aspects  in  smart  energy  systems  and  solutions  for  distinct 
is  no 
problems 
for 
comprehensive 
developers  of 
the 
recommendations  and  requirements  in  this  paper  will  serve 
also as a practical reference for connecting and interoperating 
M2M  networks  to  ICT  networks  in  the  context  of  energy 
production,  distribution,  consumption  and  storage  devices. 
This applicability set this paper in contrast to known security 
standards in the energy context operating at this level of detail, 
which are mostly limited to smart metering, like the protection 
profile  of  the  German  Office  for  Information  Security  [6]. 
Standards  that  follow  a  more  general  approach,  on  the  other 
hand,  are 
for  practical 
implementation  and  are  mostly  designed  for  overall  systems 
architectures rather than providing device-level guidance [7]. 

too  unspecific 

to  be  used 

Other  known  approaches  have  a  different  focus  regarding 
device  purpose  and  security  focus.  The  OGEMA  project,  for 
instance,  aims  on  an  architecture  more  resembling  the 
emerging  STORY  Smart  Energy  Platform  (see  Section  VII) 
and focuses its security effort to application security and user 
rights management [8].  

III.  STORY PROJECT OVERVIEW 

STORY  presents  six  different  demonstration  cases,  each 
with  different 
storage  concepts  and 
technologies, covering industrial and residential environments.  
These  cases  are  situated  in  the  mid  to  western  parts  of 

local/small-scale 

Europe: 

1)  Demonstration at residential building scale, Oud-
Heverlee, Belgium 
2)  Demonstration at residential neighborhood scale, 
Oud-Heverlee, Belgium 
3)  Demonstration of storage in a factory, Navarra, 
Spain 
4)  Demonstration of storage in residential district, 
Lecale, Northern Ireland 

 
 
 
 
Smart Cities Symposium Prague 2017 

2 

5)  Demonstration of large scale storage unit in 
industrial and residential area, Hagen, Germany and 
Suha, Slovenia 
6)  Demonstration of private multi energy grid in 
industrial area, Olen, Belgium 

The  management  of  these  different  STORY  systems  in  a 
smart  multi-energy  grid  is  a  crucial  element  to  facilitate 
communication, 
increase 
algorithms, 
interoperability and provide measurement services. 

integrate 

control 

A.  STORY ICT Architecture 

Figure  1  displays  the  communication  networks  of  STORY 
demonstration  sites  on  a  general  level.  The  following  three 
network  types,  based  on  their  application  location,  are 
identified  and  for  each  type  fixed,  wireless,  and  mobile 
technologies can be applied: 

  Home Area Network (HAN), also called a Premises 
Area Network or a Subscriber Access Network; 

Fig. 1 Overview of communication networks in demonstration sites. [9]  

  Field Area Network (FAN), also called a neighborhood 

Area Network (NAN); 
  Wide Area Network (WAN). 
Depending  on  the  size  of  the  demonstration  site  different 
combinations of these network layers have been deployed. The 
common  entities  for  all  demonstrations  are  the  gateway 
device, energy storage device and a WAN network. This view 
of  the  STORY  architecture  is  idealized  and  generic.  During 
the  course  of  the  project,  it  became  evident  that  the 
communication  levels  are  different  at  each  demo  site.  If  and 
to  further 
how 
investigations (see Section VII). 

this  could  be  harmonized 

is  subject 

STORY  demonstration  sites  will  be  connected  to  the 
Internet  via  the  gateway  device  which  is  being  developed 
within  the  project.  All  data  (measurements,  faults,  warnings, 
acknowledgements and control signals) transferred within  the 
system  have  to  pass  this  SCG.  The  gateway  therefore 
resembles  a  smart  energy  gateway,  connecting  prosumer 
systems to a power grid. 

Also,  to  broker  applications  between  application  providers 
and end users (prosumers), a  separate Smart Energy Platform 
(SEP) will be developed (see Section VII). 

IV.  SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE STORAGE 
COMMUNICATIONS GATEWAY 

One  major  challenge  for  the  management  of  the  proposed 
architecture  is  that  energy  requests  and  sensed  measurement 
data  have to be reliably transferred both internally  within the 
demo  sites  and  externally  via  a  network  outside  of  the  demo 
site  operators’  sphere  of  influence.  This  reliable  transfer 
includes,  besides  availability  and  robustness,  also  additional 
security and privacy issues that arise  when data is transferred 
through  external  networks.  This  section  therefore  defines  the 
security  requirements  and  covers  the  privacy  aspects  for  the 
different facets of the gateway. 

A.  Node Security Requirements 

For  monitoring  and  configuration  purposes,  user  interfaces 
will be required. This can be ranging from simple status views 
(for  instance  an  energy  level  overview  for  prosumers)  to 
interfaces 
for  energy 
for  sophisticated  data  analytics 
distribution  prediction.  In  order  to  secure  these  interfaces, 
authentication  and  access  control  is  one  of  the  most  crucial 
elements 
infrastructure. 
Therefore,  depending  on  the  size  of  the  storage  production 
capacity and their integration into the grid, two categories are 
introduced: 

the  proposed  system 

to  secure 

  For demo sites with storage capacity dimensioned 
mainly for their own consumption, individual user 
login/ password combinations or eIDs are proposed; 
  For demo sites that are mainly under control by a DSO, 
a more sophisticated authentication process including a 
combination of a certificate (see [4] and role/ID-based 
authentication and access control process is planned.  
The  latter  (two-factor)  authentication  method  needs  more 
administrative  effort  (especially  establishing  a  public  key 
infrastructure),  but  at  DSOs,  the  presence  of  the  needed 
the 
expertise  and 
maintenance of certificates is assumed pre-existing. 

is  assumed.  Therefore, 

resources 

four 

(each 

levels  of  alert  classes 

The  roles  defined  in  the  authentication  (and  authorization) 
may also be used  for alerting; the  system  must be capable  of 
reporting  certain  safety  and  security  relevant  events  to 
distinctive  people  or  groups  thereof.  Reporting  methods  may 
include email and SMS. Furthermore, the system may contain 
a  security  dashboard,  displaying 
recent  events  on  a 
management  interface.  We  also  propose  up  to  eight  and  at 
respectively 
least 
corresponding  to  one  or  consolidating  two  Syslog  logging 
levels [10]) to categorize these events and assign them to roles 
or  groups  to  be  alerted.  Access  control  also  includes 
measurements to prevent unauthorized access. To achieve this, 
the  device  must  be  hardened,  which  means  that  all  unneeded 
services, users and file permissions (especially for executables 
with  shell-like  capabilities)  must  be  deactivated.  Further,  a 
custom-compiled, reduced kernel  (for instance not containing 
unneeded but reportedly error-prone network protocols or user 
interfaces) is also recommended to provide a smaller target to 
adversaries.  Moreover,  strict  patch  management  and  a  host-
based firewall must be in place. 

 
 
Smart Cities Symposium Prague 2017 

3 

B.  Communication Line Security Requirements 

Also, communication channels have to be secured. Due the 
limited  resources  normally  available  at  embedded  systems,  a 
hybrid  cryptosystem  approach  is  used  which  combines  the 
security  benefit  of  a  public-key  cryptosystem  with  the 
efficiency  of  a  symmetric-key  cryptosystem.  During  the 
communication  establishment,  the  asymmetric  key  is  used  to 
exchange  the  symmetric  key,  which  used  afterwards  for  an 
efficient  data  throughput.  Such  a  hybrid  approach  is  part  of 
various cipher suites and should be enabled. 

In order to provide authentication and encryption, Transport 
Layer Security (TLS) must be used to provide communication 
security  while  traversing  over  foreign  networks.  The  reasons 
for this implementation to choose TLS over alternatives (e.g. 
IPsec) are the following [11]: 

to 

  TLS is easier to integrate between different vendors; 
  TLS needs less overhead; 
  TLS allows quicker handshakes; 
  TLS is easier to configure. 
These  arguments  apply  particularly 

the  proposed 
gateway, as it will also be installed in prosumers’ households 
where  knowledge  needed 
to  configure  more  complex 
protocols  will  not  be  present  and  the  gateway  hardware  will 
only have limited resources. In constrained environments such 
as  STORY  demo  sites  that  largely  consume  their  own 
production  themselves,  Datagram  Transport  Layer  Security 
(DTLS)  might  be  used  as  a  lightweight  alternative.  For  the 
remainder  of  this  document,  all  requirements  regarding  TLS 
apply  to  DTLS  in  the  same  manner.  TLS  is  sometimes 
confounded with the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) protocol, but 
in contrast to the former it is not an Internet Engineering Task 
Force  (IETF)  standard,  although  there  is  a  specification  for 
historic purposes [12]. This confusion  occurs because  TLS is 
the  standardized  version  of  SSL  [13,  p.  60]  and  has  been 
further  enhanced  since  then  [14,15].  The  various  versions  of 
SSL,  however,  have  proven  to  be  insecure  and  must  not  be 
used, not even as fallback methods [16]. We further propose to 
use the most recent version of TLS.  

To  fully  utilize  the  security  features  of  TLS,  this  protocol 
stack  has  to  be  configured  carefully.  That  means  that 
encryption  and  authentication  measures  allowed 
the 
standard,  but  regarded  unsafe  by  now  must  not  be  used.  The 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) published a guideline 
for the secure use of TLS [17]. The gateway must support and 
implementers must comply to these recommendations with the 
following additional security-enhancing constrictions: 

in 

  Symmetric cipher with at least 128 bits (see below); 
  Must not support static key assignments (RSA and 

PSK); 

  Must negotiate the most recent version of TLS 
(currently 1.2; exclusion of TLS 1.0 and 1.1); 

  Must implement strict TLS; 
  Must disable TLS-level compression; 
  DH keys of at least 2048 bits or ECDH keys of at least 

192 bits must be used; 

  No anonymous suite must be used [15]; 
  Authentication must be mutual (see below). 

is 

is 

that 

Unless stated otherwise, these constraints consist of setting 
recommendations  from  the  IETF  guideline  cited  above  to 
requirements.  For  simplicity,  the  allowed  TLS  cipher  suites 
are restricted to the ones recommended in the document [17]: 
  TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256 
  TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256 
  TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384 
  TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384 
One  reason  for  changing  the  IETF  recommendations  to 
mandatory 
regarded  critical 
the  gateway 
infrastructure  and  has  therefore  a  higher  demand  of  security 
than  standard  desktop  machines  or  web-enabled  devices. 
Another reason is that generally industrial and energy systems 
have  longer  product  life  cycles  and  therefore  the  time  period 
the security measures have to prevail are also longer. Because 
of this, the key size is restricted to 128 bits or greater, for they 
are  recommended  beyond  2031  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) [18]. Another related issue 
is  the  block  size  of  symmetric  encryption  algorithms.  Block 
sizes  of  64  bits  are  generally  not  recommended  [19]  and 
therefore  prohibited  for  the  gateway.  Of  the  encryption 
algorithms  currently  standardized  in  TLS  [20],  only  AES, 
SEED,  CAMELLIA  and  ARIA  fulfill  this  requirement.  Of 
these  four,  SEED  does  not  occur  in  a  cipher  suite  in 
CCM/GCM  mode  and  does  therefore  practically  not  fulfill 
these requirements. AES is strongly recommended, as it is the 
most  proliferated  of  these  algorithms.  CCM  and  GCM  are 
generally  recommended,  because  both  of  them  offer  a 
combined  authentication  and  encryption  algorithm.  Also,  the 
gateway  specification  mentioned  above  is  defined  within  the 
project, allowing the requirements to be more strict compared 
to  the  general  TLS  specifications,  which  is  designed  for 
systems  that  have  to  cope  with  a  broader  range  of  peers  that 
have  to  interoperate.  It  is  further  assumed  that  peering 
gateway devices are known to each other a priori and therefore 
are able to authenticate mutually, which might not be possible 
for  webservers,  which  are  usually  interacting  with  thousands 
of  clients.  All  of  these  reasons  above  both  allow  and  require 
restricting  the  cryptographic  configurations  to  a  narrower  set 
than  in  an  ordinary  or  more  generic  ICT  infrastructure 
environment. 

C.  Data Storage Requirements 

requirement 

In  the  same  manner  as  in  communication  channels,  data 
stored  locally  on  the  device  has  to  be  secured  from 
unauthorized  access.  Apart  from  system  access  controls,  this 
data  has  to  be  encrypted  and  integrity  checked  by  the  same 
algorithmic  methods  as  communication 
is 
relevant  data 
distinctively  a 
(explicitly  logs  that  contain  security  events),  which  must  be 
encrypted  and  integrity  checked.  Additionally,  for  privacy 
reasons,  some  sort  of  anonymization  method  (see  Section  V) 
has to be implemented, if personal data is to be processed. As 
it is a  sensitive part,  special  focus on  the  key  management is 
needed. A key derivation function that is deemed state of the 
art by current research must be used. A smart card-based key 
derivation  function  is  recommended.  To  protect  systems  (i.e. 

for  security 

lines.  This 

Smart Cities Symposium Prague 2017 

4 

ICS)  in contact  with the  gateway, some  sort of  filtering (ICS 
intrusion  protection  or  anomaly  detection  system)  is  also 
recommended. The model for this secure data storage is yet to 
be  elaborated.  Apart  from  that,  a  model  that  stores  only 
minimum  data  directly  on  the  device  could  be  used.  Instead, 
all  data  could  be  sent  to  a  secure,  trusted  server  within  the 
service  operator’s  trusted  zone  could  be  used.  This  however, 
does  not  nullify  the  need  for  storage  security,  for  there  will 
always  be  stored  data  for  authentication  (credentials  or 
certificates  for  communications  authentication)  and  device 
caching  purposes.  The  latter  is  strongly  advised  to  prevent 
data  loss  in  case  of  unforeseen  device  resets  or  outage,  in 
which case data might not be transferred correctly and timely. 
To achieve appropriate storage security, we recommend using 
disk encryption (for instance, using  dm-crypt on  Linux-based 
systems). 

D.  Intra-site (M2M) Communication Requirements 

Although, due to the heterogeneous nature of the connected 
energy production, energy consumption and storage devices, it 
is  currently  difficult 
to  give  advice  on  secure  M2M 
communications.  The  minimum  requirement  should  be  a 
protocol  that  provides  at  least  a  similar  security  level  as  the 
IEC  62351  standard  [21],  although  this  standard  does  not 
necessarily  assure  end-to-end  security  [22].  Due  to  the  latter, 
still  cryptographic  end-to-end  node  protection,  as  described 
above  should  be  in  place.  As  the  devices,  ordinarily  only 
operate  with  limited  system  resources,  using  only  the  shorter 
of the recommended key lengths and relying on elliptic curve 
cryptography is advisable [23]. 

as  means  of 

As other M2M protocols (like MTConnect) lay even less (if 
any  at  all)  focus  on  security,  we  strongly  recommend  using 
OPC  UA  (standardized  as  IEC/TR  62541  [24])  with  WS 
Secure  Conversation 
intra-site  M2M 
communications.  Further  research  enhancing  security  in  this 
area is expected as the importance of M2M communications is 
on  the  rise.  Generally,  we  recommend,  as  it  is  common 
practice,  to  segregate  Industrial  Control  System  (ICS)  and 
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) networks 
as much as possible, both among  each other (if there is more 
than  one)  and  from  ICT  networks,  especially  the  Internet. 
Means  of  segregation  include  (but  are  not  limited  to), 
depending  on  possibility  and  needed  security  level,  physical 
isolation (through lack of connection or data diodes), VLANs, 
network layer segregation, whitelisting and network firewalls. 
Following  the  defense  in  depth  principle  (also  called  layered 
security)  [25],  we  suggest  not  relying  on  a  single  line  of 
protection,  but  securing  every  part  of  the  network  graph 
(Figure  1)  separately,  for  experience  has  shown  that  there  is 
always a certain probability that network segregation is not a 
hundred percent effective (for instance because of a posteriori 
design changes). Apart from that, established techniques from 
traditional  network  security,  like  rate  limiting  and  filtering 
should be used [5]. Further considerations are out of scope, as 
this paper defines only the gateway’s security requirements. 

V.  PRIVACY CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE STORAGE 
COMMUNICATIONS GATEWAY 

Privacy aspects in STORY are not limited to confidentiality 
and  access  control.  The  sensors  in  use  will  generate  a  large 
amount of data and partly highly sensitive personal data about 
activities within the demonstration site. At residential building 
demonstrations, the connection to smart household appliances 
or  smart  home  functionality  has  to  be  considered,  because  it 
might  have  a  huge  impact  on  the  privacy  of  a  person.  The 
amount of personal data  that might be collected this  way can 
potentially  deliver  a  lot  of  information  about  a  person’s 
behavior,  location  and  actions,  as  well  as  health  and  finance 
status. In the area of industrial demo sites, the interconnection 
with  other  deployed  systems  may  have  serious  impact 
regarding  accessibility  of  confidential  internal  information 
(data  protection)  and  processes.  Therefore,  measurements 
have  to  be  undertaken  to  protect  this  information  from 
unauthorized access.  

A.  Standards and Initiatives with Privacy context 

Our  privacy  recommendations  draw  from  a  series  of 
European and international efforts to safeguard personal (end 
consumers’)  sensitive  data.  Primarily,  the  European  General 
Data  Protection  Regulation,  being  ius  congens  in  the  EU’s 
legal  sphere,  serves  as  pivotal  point  for  our  privacy 
considerations.  

1)  European General Data Protection Regulation 

The  European  Union  unified  data  protection  within  its 
jurisdiction  with  a  single  law,  the  General  Data  Protection 
Regulation  (GDPR)  [26].  This  new  legislation  covers  the  so-
called  right  to  be  forgotten  and  related  rights  for  customers 
(restriction, rectification and erasure of personal data), as well 
as  the  data  processing  companies’  obligation  to  classify, 
control  and  monitor  data,  including  means  to  protect  them 
from  unauthorized  access,  further  increasing  the  need  for  the 
measures  proposed  in  Section  IV.  Non-compliance  to  this 
regulation is punishable with penalties of up to four percent of 
the  corporation’s  global  profit  or  20  million  Euros.  This 
outspokenly customer-friendly legislation, in conjunction with 
the complexity of the potentially harvested and processed data 
creates the necessity for a data privacy model (see below).  

2)  Other Initiatives 

in 

In  order  to  achieve  a  comprehensive  view  on  privacy  and 
give  appropriate  recommendation  for  data  collection  and 
processing 
the  storage  communications  gateway,  a 
collection of initiatives related to data privacy was sighted and 
aggregated, yielding the recommendations in the next section. 
In particular, the considered initiatives and documents include 
the following: 

  The OECD Privacy Framework [27]; 
  The Safe Harbor Privacy Principles [28] and them 
being rendered to supply only insufficient privacy 
guarantees [29]; 

  The EU-U.S. Privacy Shield [30], including an 

opposing view by European Digital Rights (EDRi) for 

 
 
Smart Cities Symposium Prague 2017 

5 

not going far enough to protect the EU citizens’ rights 
[31]; 

  The IPEN initiative [32]; 
  The Online Trust Alliance’ IoT Trust Framework [33]; 
  The OWASP Top 10 Privacy Risk Project [34].  

B.  Privacy Recommendations for the Storage Communication 
Gateway 

After  sighting  the  sources  mentioned  above,  the  following 
the  Storage 

requirements  were  derived 

for 

privacy 
Communication Gateway: 

  All personally identifiable and sensible data must be 
encrypted using state of the art encryption standards; 
  Establish state of the art access control mechanism to 

all data; 

 

  Specify the nature and purpose of processed personally 
identifiable and sensitive data types and attributes; 
If sensitive data is transferred outside the premises, 
only the part of the data that is reasonably useful for the 
functionality must be allowed to be transferred; 
If data is transferred outside the premise, personalized 
data has to be pseudonymized; 
If data is transferred outside operations, personalized 
data has to be anonymized; 

 

 

  During the transfer, all data has to be encrypted by 

using current generally accepted state of the art security 
standards; 
In general, data must only be stored within storage de-
vices located inside the EU; 

 

  Collected data should not be shared with third party 

organizations; 

  Specify the data storage duration; 
  Provide information about policies, terms and 

conditions to the user; 

  Provide information and control mechanisms for users 

to decline collection and initiate removal of 
personalized data. 

These 

requirements  must  be  underpinned  by  an 
anonymization  model  which  sets  on  t-closeness  [35].  The 
model  description  is  too  extensive  to  be  covered  in  this 
requirements specification. If personal data is to be transferred 
to  third  parties  for  processing  and  providing  analytical  (big 
data)  services,  it  has  occur  via  a  trusted  secure  broker, 
allowing no linkage between processed data and personalities 
of the originator. 

C.  Availability 
Availability  requirements  to  the  gateway  were  elaborated 
through a survey, consisting of questionnaires, sent out to each 
of  demo  sites.  This  survey,  constituting  an  aggregated 
operator-side  assessment,  yielded  that  the  gateway  has  to  be 
available  24  hours  a  day  (24/7),  more  precisely  it  has  to 
exhibit  an  uptime  of  99.9%  (three  nines)  for  STORY 
operations.  To  achieve  this  objective,  a  backup  solution  for 
data and configuration information is required. In general, the 
gateway  itself  has  to  be  linked  to  the  power  supply  directly. 
Depending  on  the  local  operation  mode  at  the  STORY  demo 
site, an islanded  mode  without power from  the  grid  might be 

required.  Considering  this,  a  battery  or  uninterruptible  power 
source (UPS) to enable such a mode is required to ensure both 
operational  availability  at  such  high  level  and  data  loss 
prevention. 

VI.  CONCLUSION 

This  research  in  progress  paper  outlined  the  requirements 
for a Secure Smart Grid Storage Communications Gateway as 
defined  by  the  needs  of  the  demonstration  cases  of  the 
STORY project. The key findings are as follows:  

  Node security requires an access control (ideally 

cryptographically supported) and monitoring concept, 
as well as device hardening; 

  Communication channels should be secured with a 

recent TLS implementation using an AES cipher with 
128 bit keys or more, an ephemeral key exchange 
algorithm, SHA2 hashing with 256 bits or more and the 
use of the GCM cipher mode; 

  Data storage needs a secure access and anonymization 
concept, combined with storage-level encryption; 
Intra-site communications should use the OPC UA 
protocol (and make use of its security features) and 
layered defenses; 

 

  The availability of the gateway should at least reach 

99.9% (three-nines) using appropriate power 
redundancy and UPS concepts; 

  A privacy concept based on t-closeness has, in 

conjunction with data storage, to be developed, coping 
with access protection and anonymization including 
their legal issues; 

These  findings  allow  building  a  secure  smart  grid  storage 
communications  gateway,  as  well  as  other  building  blocks  to 
enhance energy efficiency in a way that is secure from an ICT 
perspective.  As  this  is  research  in  progress,  the  next  section 
outlines identified potential for further research. 

VII.  FURTHER RESEARCH 

As  this  paper  outlines  the  requirements  for  a  secure  smart 
grid storage communications gateway, the next logical step is 
its  implementation.  Therefore,  further  research  is  needed  in 
technology  and  procedures  (some  of  which  have  yet  to  be 
developed) that meet those requirements. In order to meet the 
privacy  recommendations  outlined  in  this  document,  also  a 
statutorily  regulation  and  technological  model  (including  the 
secure storage of data both on the device and at different sites) 
has  to  be  developed.  Further,  as  the  communication  levels 
have proven to be different at each demo site, the implications 
of  this  circumstance  on  the  security  requirements  have  to  be 
investigated.  

To enhance the overall value of the project, the project team 
is  also  dedicated  to  develop  a  standalone  Smart  Energy 
Platform  (SEP).  This  platform  basically  allows  brokering  the 
services  of  application  providers  to  end  users,  as  well  as  the 
use  of  data  to  generate  billing  and  energy  data  statistics. 
Figure 2 shows the Smart Energy Platform within the STORY 
context.  The  security  requirements  are  yet  to  be  elaborated, 
although it is by now advised to lead all communication lines 

Smart Cities Symposium Prague 2017 

6 

[14]  T.  Dierks  and  E.  Rescorla,  “The  Transport  Layer  Security  (TLS) 
Protocol  Version  1.1,”  Internet  Requests  for  Comments,  Internet 
Engineering Task Force, Tech. Rep., 2006.  

[15]  ——,  “The  Transport  Layer  Security  (TLS)  Protocol  Version  1.2,” 
Internet Requests for Comments, Internet Engineering Task Force, Tech. 
Rep., 2008.  

[16]  R. Barnes, M. Thomson, A. Pironti, and A. Langley, “The Secure Shell 
(SSH)  Transport  Layer  Protocol,”  Internet  Requests  for  Comments, 
Internet Engineering Task Force, Tech. Rep., 2006.  

Fig. 2 Overview of the Smart Energy Platform architecture and context  

through  the  SEP  and  the  gateway  to  both  minimize  attack 
vectors and reduce interoperability issues. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The  authors  wish  to  express  their  gratitude  to  the  STORY 
demonstration  sites  and  the  WP4  team,  especially  to  Arnout 
Aertgeerts,  Timo  Kyntäjä,  Paul  Valckenaers,  Topi  Mikkola 
and Franci Katrašnik for their valuable inputs on the security 
considerations outlined in this paper. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

J.  Pucker,  H.  Vallant,  S.  Marksteiner,  and  A.  Türk,  “Story  - 
Demonstrating the Added Value of Storage in Distribution Systems,” in 
Proceedings  of  the  14.Symposium  Energieinnovation,  ser.  EnInnov 
2016. Graz: Verlag der TU Graz, 2 2016, pp. 83–84.  

[2]  Y. Mo, T. H.-J. Kim, K. Brancik, D. Dickinson, H. Lee, A. Perrig, and 
B.  Sinopoli,  “Cyber–physical  security  of  a  smart  grid  infrastructure,” 
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 100, no. 1, pp. 195–209, 2012.  

[3]  Y. Yan, Y. Qian, H. Sharif, and D. Tipper, “A Survey on Cyber Security 
for  Smart  Grid  Communications,”  IEEE  Communications  Surveys  and 
tutorials, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 998–1010, 2012.  

[4]  A.  R.  Metke  and  R.  L.  Ekl,  “Security  technology  for  smart  grid 
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 99–107, 
2010.  

[5]  W.  Wang  and  Z.  Lu,  “Cyber  security  in  the  Smart  Grid:  Survey  and 

challenges,” Computer Networks, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1344–1371, 2013.  

[7] 

[6]  H. Kreutzmann and S. Vollmer, “Protection Profile for the Gateway of a 
Smart  Metering  System  (Smart  Meter  Gateway  PP),”  Bundesamt  für 
Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik, Tech. Rep., 2014.  
International  Organization  for  Standardization,  “ISO/IEC  TR  27019  - 
Information  security  management  guidelines  based  on  ISO/IEC  27002 
for  process  control  systems  specific  to  the  energy  utility  industry,” 
International  Standard,  International  Organization  for  Standardization, 
ISO/IEC ”27019:2013”, 2013.  

[8]  M.  Zillgith,  D.  Nestle,  and  M.  Wagner,  “Security  Architecture  of  the 
OGEMA  2.0  Home  Energy  Management  System  -  Security  in  Critical 
Infrastructures  Today,”  in  Proceedings  of  International  ETG-Congress 
2013, ser. Symposium 1, 2013, pp. 1–6.  

[9]  P. T. Savolainen, T. Kyntäjä, H. Vallant, S. Marksteiner, A. Aertgeerts, 
L.  Van  HaleWeyck,  and  P.  Valckenaers,  “Structured  Over-view  of 
Communication  Standards 
for  Smart  Grids,”  STORY  Project 
Deliverable, H2020 STORY Project, Tech. Rep., 2016.  

[10]  R.  Gerhards,  “The  Syslog  Protocol,”  Internet  Requests  for  Comments, 

Internet Engineering Task Force, RFC 5464, 2009.  

[11]  A. Alshamsi and T. Saito, “A technical comparison of IPSec and SSL,” 
in 19th International Conference on Advanced Information Networking 
and  Applications  (AINA’05)  Volume  1  (AINA  papers),  vol.  2,  March 
2005, pp. 395–398 vol.2.  

[12]  A.  Freier,  P.  Karlton,  and  P.  van  Kocher,  “The  Secure  Sockets  Layer 
(SSL)  Protocol Version 3.0,”  Internet Requests for Comments,  Internet 
Engineering Task Force, Tech. Rep., 2011.  

[13]  T. Dierks and C. Allen, “The  Transport  Layer Security (TLS) Protocol 
Version  1.0,”  Internet  Requests  for  Comments,  Internet  Engineering 
Task Force, Tech. Rep., 1999.  

[17]  Y. Sheffer, R. Holz, and P. Saint-Andre, “Recommendations for Secure 
Use  of  Transport  Layer  Security  (TLS)  and  Datagram  Transport  Layer 
Security 
Internet 
Internet  Requests 
Engineering Task Force, Tech. Rep., 2015.  

for  Comments, 

(DTLS),” 

[18]  E.  Barker,  “Recommendation  for  Key  Management  Part  1:  General 
(Revision 4),” NIST Special Publication, National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, SP 800-57, 2016.  

[19]  D.  A.  McGrew, 

and 
probableplaintext collision attacks of 64-bit block cipher modes,” IACR 
Cryptology ePrint Archive, vol. 2012, p. 623, 2012.  

cryptanalysis 

“Impossible 

plaintext 

[20]  Internet  Assigned  Numbers  Authority,  “TLS  Cipher  Suite  Registry,” 
[Online].  Available: 

2016, 

Online, 
retrieved: 
http://www.iana.org/assignments/tls-parameters/tls-
parameters.xhtml#tls-parameters-4  

2017-03-20. 

[21]  International  Electrotechnical  Commission,  “Communication  network 
and  system  security  -  Introduction  to  security  issues,”  Technical 
Specification,  International  Electrotechnical  Commission,  TS  ”62351-
1”, 2007.  

[22]  S. Fries, H. J. Hof, and M. Seewald, “Enhancing IEC 62351 to Improve 
Security  for  Energy  Automation  in  Smart  Grid  Environments,”  in 
Internet  and  Web  Applications  and  Services  (ICIW),  2010  Fifth 
International Conference on, may 2010, pp. 135–142.  

[23]  H.  P.  Begam  and  M.  Mohamed,  “Performance  Analysis  of  Elliptic 
Curve  Cryptography  Using  Onion  Routing  to Enhance the  Privacy  and 
Anonymity  in  Grid  Computing,”  International  Journal  of  Future 
Computer and Communication, vol. 1, no. 2, p. 97, 2012.  

[24]  IEC  TR,  “OPC  Unified  Architecture  -  Part  2:  Security  Model,” 

International Electrotechnical Commission, Tech. Rep., 2010.  

[25]  NSA  Information  Assurance  Solutions  Group,  “Defense  in  Depth  -  A 
practical strategy for achieving Information Assurance in today’s highly 
networked environments,” National Security Agency, Tech. Rep., 2010, 
retrieved:  2017-03-20.  [Online].  Available:  https:  //www.iad.gov/iad/ 
library/reports/defense-in-depth.cfm  

[26]  Parliament  and  Council  of  the  European  Union,  “Regulation  (EU) 
2016/679,” Official Journal of the European Union, vol. 59, 2016.  
[27]  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, “The OECD 
Privacy  Framework,” 2013, retrieved: 2017-03-20. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/oecd privacy framework.pdf  

[28]  Commission  of the  European  Union,  “Decision 2000/520/EC,”  Official 

Journal of the European Communities, vol. 215, 2000.  

[29]  Court of Justice of the European Union, “The Court of Justice declares 
that  the  Commissions  US  Safe  Harbour  Decision  is  invalid,”  Press 
Release, 2015.  

[30]  Commission  of  the  European  Union,  “Restoring  trust  in  transatlantic 
data  flows  through  strong  safeguards:  European  Commission  presents 
EU-U.S. Privacy Shield,” Press Release, 2016.  

[31]  J.  McNamee,  “Transatlantic  coalition  of  civil  society  groups:  Privacy 
Shield is not enough renegotiation is needed,” 2016. [Online]. Available: 
https://edri.org/transatlantic-coalition-of-civil-society-groups-privacy-
shield-is-not-enough-renogitation-is-needed/  

[32]  European  Data  Protection  Supervisor,  “Engineering  privacy:  the  IPEN 

Initiative,” Press Release, 2014.  

[33]  Online  Trust  Alliance,  “OTA  IoT  Trust  Framework,”  2016,  retrieved: 
2017-03-20.    [Online].  Available:  https://otalliance.org/system/files/ 
files/initiative/documents/iot_trust_framework_released_3-2-2016.pdf  

[34]  OWASP,  “Top  10  Privacy  Risks  Projects  -  Countermeasures  v1.0,” 
2016,  retrieved:  2017-03-20.  [Online].  Available:  https://www.owasp 
.org/images/0/0a/OWASP_Top_10_Privacy_Countermeasures_v1.0.pdf  
[35]  N. Li, T. Li, and S. Venkatasubramanian, “t-Closeness: Privacy Beyond 
k-Anonymity  and  l-Diversity,”  in  2007  IEEE  23rd  International 
Conference on Data Engineering, ser. ICDE 2007, April 2007, pp. 106–
115. 

 
