An Integrated Research Infrastructure for
Validating Cyber-Physical Energy Systems

T. I. Strasser1, C. Moyo1, R. Br¨undlinger1, S. Lehnhoﬀ2, M. Blank2,
P. Palensky3, A. A. van der Meer3, K. Heussen4, O. Gehrke4 J. E. Rodriguez5,
J. Merino5, C. Sandroni6, M. Verga6, M. Calin7, A. Khavari7, M. Sosnina7,
E. de Jong8, S. Rohjans9, A. Kulmala10, K. M¨aki10, R. Brandl11, F. Coﬀele12,
G. M. Burt12, P. Kotsampopoulos13, and N. Hatziargyriou13

1 AIT Austrian Institute of Technology, Vienna, Austria
2 OFFIS e.V., Oldenburg, Germany
3 Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
4 Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark
5 TECNALIA Research & Innovation, Derio, Spain
6 Ricerca sul Sistema Energetico, Milano, Italy
7 European Distributed Energy Resources Lab. (DERlab) e.V., Kassel, Germany
8 DNV GL, Arnhem, The Netherlands
9 HAW Hamburg University of Applied Sciences, Hamburg, Germany
10 VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Espoo, Finland
11 Fraunhofer Inst. of Wind Energy and Energy System Technology, Kassel, Germany
12 University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, United Kingdom
13 National Technical University of Athens, Athens, Greece

thomas.strasser@ait.ac.at

Abstract. Renewables are key enablers in the plight to reduce green-
house gas emissions and cope with anthropogenic global warming. The
intermittent nature and limited storage capabilities of renewables culmi-
nate in new challenges that power system operators have to deal with
in order to regulate power quality and ensure security of supply. At the
same time, the increased availability of advanced automation and com-
munication technologies provides new opportunities for the derivation of
intelligent solutions to tackle the challenges. Previous work has shown
various new methods of operating highly interconnected power grids,
and their corresponding components, in a more eﬀective way. As a con-
sequence of these developments, the traditional power system is being
transformed into a cyber-physical energy system, a smart grid. Previous
and ongoing research have tended to mainly focus on how speciﬁc aspects
of smart grids can be validated, but until there exists no integrated ap-
proach for the analysis and evaluation of complex cyber-physical systems
conﬁgurations. This paper introduces integrated research infrastructure
that provides methods and tools for validating smart grid systems in
a holistic, cyber-physical manner. The corresponding concepts are cur-
rently being developed further in the European project ERIGrid.

Keywords: Cyber-Physical Energy Systems, Research Infrastructure,
Smart Grids, Testing, Validation.

7
1
0
2

t
c
O
6

]

Y
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
1
3
2
0
.
0
1
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

1

T. I. Strasser et al.

Introduction

Future power systems have to integrate a higher amount of distributed, renew-
able energy resources in order to cope with a growing electricity demand, while
at the same time trying to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases [8]. In ad-
dition, power system operators are nowadays confronted with further challenges
due to the highly dynamic and stochastic behaviour of renewable generators (so-
lar, wind, small hydro, etc.) and the need to integrate controllable loads (elec-
tric vehicles, smart buildings, energy storage systems, etc.). Furthermore, due
to ongoing changes to framework conditions and regulatory rules, technology
developments (development of new grid components and services) and the lib-
eralization of energy markets, the resulting design and operation of the future
electric energy system has to be altered.

Sophisticated (systems and component) design approaches, intelligent infor-
mation and communication architectures, and distributed automation concepts
provide ways to cope with the above mentioned challenges and to turn the ex-
isting power system into an intelligent entity, that is, a “Cyber-Physical Energy
System (CPES)” (also known as “Smart Grid”) [5,13,24].

While reaping the beneﬁts that come along with intelligent solutions, it is,
however, expected that due to the considerably higher complexity of such so-
lutions, validation and testing will play a signiﬁcantly larger role in the devel-
opment of future technology. As it stands, the ﬁrst demonstration projects for
smart grid technologies have been successfully completed, it follows that there is
a high probability of key ﬁndings and achieved results being integrated in new
and existing products, solutions and services of manufacturers and system inte-
grators. Up until now, the proper validation and testing methods and suitably
corresponding integrated Research Infrastructure (RI) for smart grids is neither
fully available nor easily accessible [25].

The aim of this paper is to introduce an approach for integrated RI with
corresponding CPES-based system-level validation methods that are being cur-
rently implemented in the framework of the European project ERIGrid [1].

The remaining parts of the paper are organized as follows: Section 2 provides
a brief overview of CPES challenges whereas in Section 3 the corresponding
research needs are outlined. The concept of the ERIGrid integrated RI is intro-
duced in the following Section 4. The paper concludes with a discussion about
and an outlook on future developments.

2 Higher Complexity in Cyber-Physical Energy Systems

Smart grid systems usually lead to an increased level of complexity within sys-
tem operation and management as brieﬂy outlined in the introduction. There is
an urgent need for the system ﬂexibility to also be increased, in order to avoid
dramatic consequences. It also follows that advanced Information and Com-
munication Technology (ICT), distributed automation approaches and power
electronic-based grid components are necessary in order to allow a number of

An Integrated RI for Validating CPES

3

important system functionalities (e.g., power/energy management, demand side
management, ancillary services) [5,13]. As a consequence of these developments
(distributed) intelligence is needed on four diﬀerent levels in smart grid systems
as outlined in Table 1 [23,25].

Level

System

Sub-System

Component

Table 1. CPES – intelligence on diﬀerent levels

Implemented Intelligence

System-wide approaches like power utility automation, coordinated
voltage control, demand-side management, energy management,
etc. are usually executed in a coordinated way on this level, but
also factoring in services of the underlying sub-systems and compo-
nents. Central or distributed control approaches can be are applied.

On this layer the control of the underlying sub-systems or compo-
nents is carried out. Usually the corresponding functions, services,
and algorithms have to deal with a limited amount of components
(renewable sources, energy storage system, electric vehicle supply
equipment, etc.). Micro-grid control or building energy management
are representative examples for this layer. Distributed automation
architectures are commonly used.

Nowadays, new components like Distributed Energy Resources
(DER), energy storages, electric vehicle supply equipment, or tap-
changing transformers providing ancillary services are installed on
this layer. Intelligence on this level is either used for local opti-
mization purposes (component behaviour) or for the optimisation
of systems/sub-systems on higher levels in a coordinated manner.

Sub-Component On this level intelligence is mainly used to improve local compo-
nent behaviour (harmonics, ﬂicker, etc.). Power electronics and the
necessary corresponding advanced control algorithms are the main
drivers for local intelligence. Component controllers can be consid-
ered as examples for sub-components.

The top requirements for the realisation of advanced ICT/automation sys-
tems and component controllers include ﬂexibility, adaptability, scalability, and
autonomy. Open interfaces that support interoperability are also necessary in en-
abling the above described behaviour [23,24,25]. As a consequence, the electric
power system is moving towards a complex cyber-physical system of systems.
Not only the design and implementation, but also the validation and deployment
of these systems is associated with increasing both the engineering complexity
and total life-cycle costs.

In order to address challenges in CPES, such as network limitations, CPES
modeling and computational prediction of system uncertainty [18], multidisci-
plinary teams that understand the diﬀerent aspects of CPES and from all layers
are needed. CPES research requires control system engineers, engineers familiar
with the physical process being controlled (electric generation, electric distri-

4

T. I. Strasser et al.

bution), communication engineers, and security engineers [19]. The team needs
to be assembled based on the particular use case (e.g., modeling/simulation
[9,15,20], security [16,21], smart houses/buildings [17,27]).

3 Open Issues and Future Research Needs

To facilitate in the understanding of future CPES validation needs, an illustra-
tive example will be introduced. Figure 1 shows a coordinated voltage control
application in an active power distribution grid. Reactive and active power con-
trol provided by DER and electric storage units, together with an On-Load Tap
Changing (OLTC) transformer, are used to keep the voltage in the grid in deﬁned
boundaries [22]. The control application has to calculate the optimal position
of the OLTC and to derive set-points for reactive and active power which is
communicated over a communication network to the DER and storage devices.

Fig. 1. CPES example – voltage control in an active power distribution grid

DERDERTapChangerCommunication NetworkPower Distriubtion GridOptimization ControlAn Integrated RI for Validating CPES

5

In order to guarantee the safe and secure operation of this CPES application
various tests need to be carried out before installing it in the ﬁeld. This includes
the validation of the diﬀerent components (including local control approaches
and communication interfaces for the DER, storage, and OLTC devices) on
the sub-component and component levels. Nevertheless, the integration of all
components and sub-systems is also still one of the most important issues. The
proper functionality of all components is not a guarantee that the whole system
will behave as expected. A system-level validation of the actual behaviour is
necessary in order to prove that the whole CPES application, together with the
ICT devices, works properly.

Up to now, there is no integrated approach for analysing and evaluating
smart grid conﬁgurations addressing power system, as well as information, com-
munication and automation/control topics that is available [25]. The integration
of cyber-security and privacy issues is also not suﬃciently addressed by existing
solutions. In order to guarantee a sustainable and secure supply of electricity
in a smart grid system, with considerably higher complexity and also support
the expected forthcoming large-scale roll out of new technologies, a proper in-
tegrated RI for smart grid systems is necessary [25]. Such an infrastructure has
to support system analysis, evaluation and testing issues. Furthermore, it would
foster future innovations and technical developments in the ﬁeld.

In summary, the following open issues have been identiﬁed and need to be

addressed in future research and development [3,6,7,12,25]:

– A cyber-physical, multi-domain approach for analysing and validating CPES
on the system level is missing today; existing methods are mainly focusing
on the component level - system integration topics including analysis and
evaluation are not yet addressed in a holistic manner.

– A holistic validation framework (incl. analysis and evaluation/benchmark
criteria) and the corresponding RI with proper methods and tools needs to
be developed.

– Harmonized and standardized evaluation procedures need to be developed.
– Well-educated professionals, engineers and researchers that understand smart
grid systems in a cyber-physical manner need to be trained on a broad scale.

4 ERIGrid Smart Grid Research Infrastructure

In order to tackle the above aforementioned research needs, a Pan-European RI
is currently being realized in the European ERIGrid project that will support
the technology development as well as the roll-out of smart grid solutions. It pro-
vides a holistic, CPES-based approach by integrating European research centres
and institutions with outstanding lab infrastructure to jointly develop common
methods, concepts, and procedures. In the following sections, the main idea be-
hind everything and the corresponding research and development activities of
the ERIGrid approach are explained.

6

T. I. Strasser et al.

4.1 Overview and Approach

Figure 2 provides an overview of the ERIGrid concept supporting the technology
development, validation and roll out of smart grid solutions. The target of this
integrating activity is to realise the systematic validation and testing of smart
grid conﬁgurations from a holistic, cyber-physical systems point of view. It fol-
lows a multi-domain approach and covers power system, ICT and cyber-security
topics in a cyber-physical manner. It is expected that the provision of support to
the upcoming large-scale roll out of new concepts, technologies and approaches
will also be possible fostering innovation.

Fig. 2. Overview of the ERIGrid approach

The main research activities are related to the development of a formalized,
holistic validation procedure, simulation and laboratory-based testing methods,
and the provision of an integrated RI. Additionally, training and education con-
cepts are also being developed.

4.2 Research and Development Directions

a) Holistic Validation Procedure

Validating smart grid technologies and developments is a task that requires a
holistic treatment of the overall process since the entire domain spectrum of
CPES solutions has to be considered. This consideration has to be carried out
alongside the technical components such as the grid infrastructure, storage, gen-
eration, consumption, etc. it also comprises customers, markets, ICT, regulation,
governance, and metrology to name a few of them. It is clear that the full de-
velopment process has to be covered. This includes design, analysis, testing,

Validated Smart Grid System Configurations· Validated concept / architecture· Substantiated comparision· Test report· Improvement and innovation potential· CertificateSmart Grid Configurations(Power + ICT system)System Validation and TestingApproaches(cyber-physical systems based)· Virtual-based methods· Real-world-based methods· Combination of virtual & real-world-based methods (HIL)Holistic Validation Procedure(iterative process)Distributed and Integrated Research InfrastructureInstallations for· Component characterication and small-scale system evaluation (Micro-Grids)· System integration and large-scale system testingImproved Methods and Tools· Co-simulation / simulator coupling· Integrated power system and ICT models· Controller & Power HIL· Laboratory experiments· Cyber-security analysis and ICT-based assement methodsTraining and Eductation· PhD seminars and summer schools· Webinars· Online learning platforms· Technical workshops· Staff exchangeDERDERTapChangerCommunication NetworkPower Distriubtion GridOptimization ControlAn Integrated RI for Validating CPES

7

veriﬁcation (even certiﬁcation), as well as deployment. Furthermore, the whole
range of aspects that are of interest and relevant to a stable, safe and eﬃcient
smart grid solutions have to be regarded. Thus, small-signal stability together
with large-scale scenarios, short-term impacts and long-term sustainability, eco-
nomic feasibility/proﬁtability, and cyber-security have to be analysed. In fact,
since all these topics are dependent upon each other, they have to be analysed in
an integrated way. Finally, a holistic approach demands integrating all prospec-
tive R&D sites and stakeholders, e.g. hardware/software simulation labs as well
as academic and industrial research. [25]

Comparable processes have been successfully implemented in other applica-
tion domains like automotive, consumer electronics, mechanical/chemical engi-
neering (albeit on an arguably less complex level) [11,14]. In order to realize a
sustainable and cost eﬀective holistic procedure in smart Grid system valida-
tion, two major challenges have to be addressed: (i) formalized scenario design
and (ii) model exchange. These will ensure guaranteed comparability between
experiments of diﬀerent setups and designs. They will also facilitate subsequent
re-utilization of experimental results from diﬀerent stakeholders, as the basis
for continuative experiments. Utilising the two aforementioned capabilities, use
cases can then be deﬁned with respect to the actual system requirements and
with the best setup available. The huge amount of possible scenarios and ex-
periments has to be narrowed down to a valid set of experiments in such a way
that yields statistical aspects and reproducible results. Quantifying both the er-
rors and signiﬁcance of these experiments is of high importance. A consistent
methodology for model exchange facilitates coordinated smart grid experiments
(of representative scope and scale) within ERIGrid and beyond. It also aids the
comparability between experiments, and furthermore to conduct consecutive,
continuative, and parallel experiments for the re-utilization and subsequent use
of results. In Figure 3, the holistic validation process is outlined. [25]

Fig. 3. Diﬀerent steps for carrying out a holistic validation of CPES

In detail, the process is divided into the following seven steps [10]:

Scenario DescriptionRICapabilities ProfilingMappingSpecification(Experiments)ExperimentsMappingExperimentsAnalysisResults12345678

T. I. Strasser et al.

1. Scenario Description: It is important to decide on the system boundaries
for each smart grid scenario. It imperative to deﬁne which parts of the over-
all system are being considered and to what level of detail. Thus, the use
cases will be derived accordingly. The speciﬁc systems conﬁguration will be
described within each testcase .

2. Research Infrastructure Capabilities Proﬁling: In order to take advantage of
the best suitable infrastructure setup for each use case, all ERIGrid installa-
tion (hardware and simulation-based labs) will be proﬁled. The capabilities
of each lab installation will be analysed, documented and published. This
will facilitates optimal use of capabilities provided by the existing hardware
and software.

3. Mapping: optimal mapping will be carried out based on both the scenario
descriptions and partner proﬁles. The partner proﬁles will be analysed, with
the goal of identifying which ERIGrid partner(s) is(are) best suitable for
realizing each part of the deﬁned use cases and especially the validation of
the appropriate test cases. Particular attention will be paid to the interfaces
between the various hardware and software components, while still ensuring
that the mapping follows a cyber-physical systems approach.

4. Speciﬁcation of Experiments: After the determination of the best partner(s)
setup (who), for the test cases (what), the concrete experiments will then
be speciﬁed (how). In order to realize a use case the interfaces between
the necessary hardware/software will be implemented based on the require-
ments imposed on the corresponding test cases. In addition, the available
tool support will be analysed and taken into account. During this step miss-
ing models are expected to come to light, triggering the initialisation of their
development.

5. Conducting Experiments: After the experiments are speciﬁed they will be
conducted following a consortium-wide speciﬁcation. Here, it is highly im-
portant to identify the right amount and variations of experiments. This step
is closely related to the next step addressing analysis tasks.

6. Analysis: The step is interrelated to the previous step. Each experiment will
be analysed and afterwards iteratively reﬁned in order to meet the test case
requirements. This cyclic process allows for the development of high quality
experiments. Experimental results may be used to generate surrogate models
of certain phenomena/aspects, that can be eﬃciently computated, and may
(if necessary in a virtual manner) be “plugged into” other partners setups.
7. Test Results: In the last step the ﬁnal reports will be compiled as summaries
and analysis of the experiments. Certiﬁcates will be given to components
such as controllers that have been tested successfully against requirements
that were deﬁned in reference scenarios and systems. Based on experimental
ﬁnding, improvement potentials as well as further innovation-related activi-
ties will be identiﬁed.

b) Improved Methods and Tools

The current development in the smart grid ﬁeld shows that future systems will
contain a heterogeneous agglomeration of active power electronics and passive

An Integrated RI for Validating CPES

9

network components coupled via physical processes and dedicated communica-
tion connections to automation systems (SCADA, DMS) [25]. In order to analyse
and evaluate such a multi-domain conﬁgurations, a set of corresponding methods
and tools is necessary. In the context of smart grids the following possibilities
exist [25]:

– Pure virtual-based methods and tools (mainly simulation-based),
– Real-world-based methods (laboratory and demonstration-based), or
– A combination of both (hardware-in-the-loop based).

Figure 4 provides an overview of the methods and tools which will be applied
in ERIGrid. The goal is to use all three above mentioned possibilities in order
to cover the whole range of opportunities in a cyber-physical manner that is es-
sential for addressing system integration and validation questions. Usually, pure
virtual-based methods are not always suﬃcient for validating CPES since the
availability of proper and accurate simulation models cannot always be guaran-
teed (e.g., inverter-based components are sometimes very complex to model or it
takes too long to get a proper model). Also laboratory-based testing approaches
and a combination of both (hardware-in-the-loop based) have to be applied.

Fig. 4. Improved methods and tools for smart grid validation – possibility to combine
virtual (simulated) and real components [25]

ERIGrid follows an approach where the following methods, models and cor-
responding tools are being improved for component characterization, system
integration and validation:

CommunicationSCADA / DMS / HMIComponentsPower System AnalysisControl SystemPower Quality, etc.Control CenterGenerators, Storages, Loads, etc.+    -MeasurementsParametersElectrical SignalsPower, VoltagesControlSignalsPower GridIEDLocal ControlIEDLocal ControlCentral ControlREAL SYSTEM / COMPONENTSREAL SYSTEM / COMPONENTSSIMULATED SYSTEM / COMPONENTSREAL SYSTEM / COMPONENTSSIMULATED SYSTEM / COMPONENTSSIMULATED SYSTEM / COMPONENTSREAL SYSTEM / COMPONENTSSIMULATED SYSTEM / COMPONENTSREAL SYSTEM / COMPONENTSSIMULATED SYSTEM / COMPONENTS10

T. I. Strasser et al.

– Co-simulation (simulator couplings covering the power system, components,

communication, control system and SCADA),

– Integrated power system and ICT models,
– Controller & Power Hardware-in-the-Loop (HIL),
– Laboratory experiments, and
– Cyber-security analysis and ICT-based assessment methods.

It is usually not possible to test the whole power system infrastructure in
a lab environment and also pure simulation-based methods are sometimes not
precise enough. A very important issue in ERIGrid approach is that parts of
the smart grid system can be available as a physical component (in a laboratory
environment), as a simulation model or even as a combination of both.

Further research is necessary in order to combine all three validation ap-
proaches in a ﬂexible manner (based on the testing needs of a speciﬁc CPES
application). In the ERIGrid context this includes the coupling of software tools
and simulators, the model exchange between them as well as the provision of
necessary component models. The coupling of simulation systems with labora-
tory equipment is also in focus so as to facilitate the above outlined ﬂexible
interaction between hardware and software components (see Figure 4).

c) Distributed and Integrated Research Infrastructure

Historically, power systems have been nationally organized, however, the main
vision of the ERIGrid approach is to bring those institutions together on Euro-
pean level.

Key eﬀorts will be applied in the realization of a distributed and integrated
RI which is capable to support the validation and testing of diverse CPES conﬁg-
urations. The power and energy systems domain is characterized by diverse lab
environments operated by universities, research centres, and industry in various
European countries. As these RIs deal with many levels of system operation,
their components and ICT systems are very heterogeneous. There is no central
European RI for smart grid research, and harmonization eﬀorts have till now fo-
cussed on networking activities. The ERIGrid vision extends beyond networking
to allow further integration and eﬀective use of testing resources through human
interoperation and mutual access to a shared experimental platform.

Stronger interoperability is achieved by means of three main eﬀorts: (a) a
harmonized and detailed description of the available RI aimed at supporting
the collaborative design of experiment conﬁgurations, (b) the development of a
harmonized validation procedure that accommodates the integration of testing
procedures and resources across RIs, facilitating the test design and evaluation
process, and (c) a coherent and technology-agnostic description of RI control
interfaces, supporting the coordination of control software deployment across
RIs. The harmonized RI description (a) will soon be available as a publicly ac-
cessible database whereas the harmonized validation procedure (b) is still under
development, but has been outlined in [10].

The coherent RI control interface description (c) resulted in a taxonomy as
illustrated in Figure 5. The ﬁve control levels are marked C1 . . . C5. Local con-

An Integrated RI for Validating CPES

11

trollers have been assigned the levels D1 . . . D5, corresponding to their associated
control levels, while external controllers are denoted X1 . . . X5. Communication
between the local controllers, i.e. communication links which are considered to
be part of the laboratory infrastructure, are enumerated L1 . . . L4, while those
communication links which enable the interaction between the laboratory and
external controllers, have been assigned the identiﬁers E1 . . . E12. This taxon-
omy establishes a combination of structural and functional criteria that can be
applied across smart grid laboratories to map the local architecture into a com-
mon framework, much like the Smart Grid Architecture Model (SGAM) plane
serves that purpose for smart grid standardisation [26].

Fig. 5. Harmonized control interfaces

This model outlines a number of possible interactions for external control
software deployment, six of which are of particular interest for CPES scenarios:

1. Communication interfaces provided by a lab-internal DER controller, al-
lowing an external Intelligent Electronic Device (IED) to control the DER
(E11).

2. Communication interfaces provided by a lab-internal IED, allowing an ex-

ternal IED to inﬂuence the behaviour of the internal IED (E7).

3. Communication interfaces provided by a lab-internal IED, allowing the IED

to be remotely operated through an external SCADA system (E6).

12

T. I. Strasser et al.

4. Communication interfaces provided by a lab-internal SCADA system, allow-
ing an external SCADA system to receive and/or send data to laboratory
devices through the internal SCADA system (E4).

5. Communication interfaces provided by a lab-internal SCADA system to an

external controller (E3).

6. Communication interfaces provided by a lab-internal supervisory controller
to an external controller (E1), for example to allow the external controller
to inﬂuence the control behaviour of the supervisory controller.

Other interactions are possible, however they are considered to be of less

interest for the ERIGrid case.

d) Education and Training

Drivers for the transition to a CPES are largely due to the rise in renewable en-
ergy sources, e-mobility, distributed energy storages, more resilient network in-
frastructure, new market models and the goal of an emission free and sustainable
energy system [2,4,5]. The need to understand the interconnections between the
power system components increases steadily due to the rising complexity caused
by the myriad of players and actors. This includes not only the physical system
but also the communication and the control of connected power components
and assets. These needs are addressed by recent developments and research in
cyber-physical systems [23]. As a result of this trend a further focus in ERIGrid
needs to be put on educational aspects covering the transition in power systems
towards a smart grid.

Training and education can be based on the concepts of modelling and sim-
ulating components as well as on conducting laboratory experiments to un-
derstand how they work as a system. When designing intelligent automation
and control concepts like energy management systems, voltage control algo-
rithms, dynamic protection, topology re-conﬁguration as well as demand re-
sponse mechanisms, researchers and engineers need to understand diﬀerent con-
trol paradigms, like centralized, hierarchical and distributed approaches. More-
over, they also have to learn how to use and be aware of diﬀerent tools; their
strengths and weaknesses, and how to interconnect them.

The goal is to design proper training material as well as the necessary proce-
dures for educating power system and ICT professionals, (young) researchers as
well as students in the domain of smart grid system integration and validation.

5 Conclusions and Outlook

A large-scale roll out of smart grid solutions and corresponding technologies
and products is expected in the upcoming years. The validation of such com-
plex CPES needs attention since available testing approaches and methods are
mainly focusing on power system and ICT components. An integrated, cyber-
physical systems based, multi-domain approach for a holistic testing of smart
grid solutions is currently still missing.

An Integrated RI for Validating CPES

13

Four main research priorities have been identiﬁed and prioritized in context
of the European project ERIGrid in order to overcome the shortcomings in the
validation of today’s smart grid systems. The focus of the future research lies in
the development of a holistic validation procedures and corresponding formalized
test case descriptions as well as the improvement of simulation-based methods,
hardware-in-the-loop approaches, and lab-based testing (incl. a ﬂexible combi-
nation of them). In addition, the integration and harmonization of nationally
organized labs into a distributed and integrated RI is a further priority. Last
but not least, the education and training of researchers and power system pro-
fessionals on these extended and harmonized testing possibilities is another ﬁeld
of action.

Acknowledgments. This work is supported by the European Communitys
Horizon 2020 Program (H2020/2014-2020) under project “ERIGrid” (Grant
Agreement No. 654113).

References

1. European Research Infrastructure supporting Smart Grid Systems Technology
Development, Validation and Roll Out (ERIGrid). https://www.erigrid.eu, ac-
cessed: 2017-04-07

2. Strategic research agenda for Europes electricity networks of the future. European

Commission (EC) – Directorate-General for Research (2007)

3. 10 Steps to smart grids - EURELECTRIC DSOs Ten-Year Roadmap for Smart

Grid Deployment in the EU. Eurelectric (2011)

4. Smart Grid Mandate - Standardization Mandate to European Standardisation Or-
ganisations (ESOs) to support European Smart Grid deployment. European Com-
mission (EC) (2011)

5. Technology roadmap: Smart Grids. International Energy Agency (IEA) (2011)
6. International Smart Grid Action Network (ISGAN) Annex 5: Smart Grid Inter-
national Research Facility Network (SIRFN). International Energy Agency (IEA)
(2013)

7. SmartGrids SRA 2035 Strategic Research Agenda, Update of the Smart Grids
SRA 2007 for the needs by the year 2035. European Technology Platform Smart
Grids (2013)

8. Climate change 2014: Mitigation of climate change. IPCC Working Group III Con-

tribution to AR5 (2014)

9. Al Faruque, M.A., Ahourai, F.: A Model-Based Design of Cyber-Physical Energy
Systems. In: 19th Asia and South Paciﬁc Design Automation Conference (ASP-
DAC). pp. 97–104 (2014)

10. Blank, M., Lehnhoﬀ, S., Heussen, K., Bondy, D.M., Moyo, C., Strasser, T.: To-
wards a foundation for holistic power system validation and testing. In: 2016 IEEE
21st International Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation
(ETFA). pp. 1–4 (2016)

11. Bringmann, E., Krmer, A.: Model-based testing of automotive systems. In: 2008
1st International Conference on Software Testing, Veriﬁcation, and Validation. pp.
485–493 (2008)

14

T. I. Strasser et al.

12. Brunner, H., Br¨undlinger, R., Calin, M., Heckmann, W., Bindner, H., Verga, M.:
Proposal for a coordinated investment planning of the future European smart grid
research infrastructure. ELECTRA IRP, Deliverable D2.2 (2016)

13. Farhangi, H.: The path of the smart grid. IEEE Power and Energy Magazine 8(1),

18–28 (2010)

14. Fouchal, H., Wilhelm, G., Bourdy, E., Wilhelm, G., Ayaida, M.: A testing frame-
work for intelligent transport systems. In: 2016 IEEE Symposium on Computers
and Communication (ISCC). pp. 180–184 (2016)

15. Ilic, M.D., Xie, L., Khan, U.A.: Modeling Future Cyber-Physical Energy Systems.
In: Power and Energy Society General Meeting-Conversion and Delivery of Elec-
trical Energy in the 21st Century (2008)

16. Khan, U.A., Stakovic, A.M.: Security in Cyber-Physical Energy Systems. In: Work-
shop on Modeling and Simulation of Cyber-Physical Energy Systems (MSCPES)
(2013)

17. Kleissl, J., Agarwal, Y.: Cyber-Physical Energy Systems: Focus on Smart Build-

ings. In: 47th Design Automation Conference. pp. 749–754 (2010)

18. Macana, C.A., Quijano, N., Mojica-Nava, E.: A Survey on Cyber Physical Energy
Systems and their Applications on Smart Grids. In: IEEE PES Conference on
Innovative Smart Grid Technologies (ISGT Latin America) (2011)

19. Morris, T.H., Srivastava, A.K., Reaves, B., Pavurapu, K., Abdelwahed, S., Vaughn,
R., McGrew, W., Dandass, Y.: Engineering Future Cyber-Physical Energy Sys-
tems: Challenges, Research Needs, and Roadmap. In: North American Power Sym-
posium (NAPS) (2009)

20. Palensky, P., Widl, E., Elsheikh, A.: Simulating cyber-physical energy systems:
Challenges, tools and methods. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cyber-
netics: Systems 44(3), 318–326 (2014)

21. Sridhar, S., Hahn, A., Govindarasu, M.: Cyber-physical system security for the

electric power grid. Proceedings of the IEEE 100(1), 210–224 (2012)

22. Stifter, M., Bletterie, B., Brunner, H., Burnier, D., Sawsan, H., Andr´en, F.,
Schwalbe, R., Abart, A., Nenning, R., Herb, F., Pointner, R.: DG DemoNet val-
idation: Voltage control from simulation to ﬁeld test. In: 2011 2nd IEEE PES
International Conference and Exhibition on Innovative Smart Grid Technologies
(ISGT Europe). pp. 1–8 (Dec 2011)

23. Strasser, T., Andr´en, F., Kathan, J., Cecati, C., Buccella, C., Siano, P., Leitao,
P., Zhabelova, G., Vyatkin, V., Vrba, P., Marik, V.: A review of architectures and
concepts for intelligence in future electric energy systems. IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics 62(4), 2424–2438 (2015)

24. Strasser, T., Andr´en, F., Merdan, M., Prostejovsky, A.: Review of Trends and
Challenges in Smart Grids: An Automation Point of View, pp. 1–12. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg (2013)

25. Strasser, T., Pr¨ostl Andr´en, F., Lauss, G., et al.: Towards holistic power distribu-
tion system validation and testing—an overview and discussion of diﬀerent possi-
bilities. e & i Elektrotechnik und Informationstechnik 134(1), 71–77 (2017)

26. Uslar, M., Specht, M., D¨anekas, C., Trefke, J., Rohjans, S., Gonz´alez, J.M.,
Rosinger, C., Bleiker, R.: Standardization in smart grids: Introduction to it-related
methodologies, architectures and standards. Springer Science & Business Media
(2012)

27. Wu, W., Aziz, M.K., Huang, H., Yu, H., Gooi, H.B.: A Real-Time Cyber-Physical
Energy Management System for Smart Houses. In: IEEE PES Innovative Smart
Grid Technologies Asia (ISGT) (2011)

