Vulnerabilities of Electric Vehicle Battery Packs to Cyber-
attacks

Shashank Sripad1, Sekar Kulandaivel2, Vikram Pande1, Vyas Sekar2 & Venkatasubramanian Viswanathan1

9
1
0
2

p
e
S
9

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

3
v
2
2
8
4
0
.
1
1
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1Department of Mechanical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania

15213.

2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,

Pennsylvania 15213.

Electric Vehicles (EVs), like all modern vehicles, are entirely controlled by electronic devices

embedded within networks that are exposed to the threat of cyberattacks. Cyber vulnerabil-

ities are magniﬁed with EVs due to unique risks associated with EV battery packs. Current

batteries have well-known issues with speciﬁc energy, cost and ﬁre-related safety risks. In

this study, we develop a systematic framework to assess the impact of cyberattacks on EVs.

While the current focus of automotive cyberattacks is on short-term physical safety, it is cru-

cial to consider long-term cyberattacks that aim to cause ﬁnancial losses through accrued

impact, especially in the context of EVs. Faulty components of battery management systems

such as a compromised voltage regulator could lead to cyberattacks that can overdischarge

or overcharge the battery. Overdischarge could lead to failures such as internal shorts in the

timescale of minutes through cyberattacks that compromise energy-intensive EV subsystems

like auxiliary components. Attacks that overcharge the pack could shorten the lifetime of a

new battery pack to less than a year. Further, such attacks also pose physical safety risks via

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
the triggering of thermal (ﬁre) events. Attacks on auxiliary components lead to battery drain,

which could be up to 20% of the state-of-charge per hour. Lastly, we develop a heuristic for

the stealthiness of a cyberattack to augment traditional threat models. The methodology pre-

sented here will help in building the foundational principles of electric vehicle cybersecurity:

a nascent but critical topic in the coming years.

2

Modern vehicles consist of a myriad of devices and systems ranging from safety-critical

systems that control a vehicle’s brakes to auxiliary components that adjust cabin temperature and

wiper speed. While such components enhance the users’ safety and comfort, they also render the

vehicle’s internal networks vulnerable to cyberattacks. When these vulnerabilities are exploited,

attackers can gain access to safety-critical systems like the brakes and transmission of the vehicle,

as demonstrated by recent work.1, 2

Alongside, another notable development in the automotive sector is the transition to electric ve-

hicles (EVs) motivated by efforts to downscale tailpipe emissions.3, 4 Widespread EV adoption is

bottlenecked by limited driving range, battery pack cost, battery lifetime and safety issues associ-

ated with Li-ion batteries.3, 5–7 The battery pack also forms a signiﬁcant fraction of the total cost of

the electric vehicle (

20% of the cost).8, 9 From the standpoint of automotive cybersecurity, while

∼

the primary focus is on immediate safety concerns, EV battery packs present several new vulner-

abilities related to the bottlenecks mentioned previously. It is crucial to explore the cybersecurity

aspects of battery packs to inform and improve future work in EV cybersecurity.10

One of the challenges in assessing systems involving batteries is to accurately analyze the complex

molecular-scale processes occurring inside a closed system.11–13 A practical battery system stores a

ﬁxed amount of energy via reversible electrochemical reactions. During normal operation, several

unwanted side reactions also occur, which eventually degrade the battery’s ability to store energy

and thus, reduce the lifetime.14–20 Further, from a safety standpoint, batteries have a speciﬁed set

of conditions for safe operation, outside which the risk of thermal events increases. Cyberattacks

3

Figure 1: A pictorial illustration of various potential attack scenarios. The illustration enumerates

all the variables that need to be considered for analyzing the impact of cyberattacks, which could

cause (i) Physical and/or (ii) Financial impact. The attacker could utilize auxiliary components

within the EV or EV charging systems using the attacker’s control dimensions. Cyberattacks can

cause either temporary effects or permanent damage. The only environmental state variable of

relevance in this scenario is the ambient temperature. The different variables that deﬁne the state

of the battery pack inﬂuence the magnitude of impact due to the cyberattack. (The automobile

outline illustration is published with permission from Chris Philpot.)

4

may compromise driving range by draining energy via higher loads, reduce lifetime by enhancing

side reactions, and compromise safety by pushing the operating conditions to unsafe limits, as

illustrated in 1.

Attack Scenarios: The attack scenarios for an EV are centered around an attacker who aims to

cause either physical or ﬁnancial losses through cyberattacks. Modern vehicles, including EVs,

contain several devices called Electronic Control Units (ECUs) that are responsible for a majority

of vehicle’s functions. ECUs gather sensor inputs and actuate mechanical and electromechanincal

components within the vehicle.1 Recent efforts that have demonstrated vulnerabilities in automo-

tive networks, have primarily examined vehicles that employ the Controller Area Network (CAN)

communication protocol. CAN is the prevailing standard for intra-vehicle communication due to

low cost and robustness; however, there are many CAN exploits.1 An attacker can gain access to

the vehicle’s CAN networks via direct physical access 1, 21 or the remote exploitation of an ECU

with existing direct access.2 If an attacker aims to cause ﬁnancial impact, one attack trajectory

could be reducing the lifetime of the battery pack by enhancing the rate of degradation. In terms of

physical damage, cyberattacks could increase the risk of thermal runaway where the attacker can

overcharge or overdischarge the battery pack which are achieved through attacks on the battery

management systems (BMS) when used in conjunction with other parasitic loads like auxiliary

component loads.

In this work, we develop a physics-driven approach which uses an experimentally validated battery

model22 within a vehicle dynamics model to simulate the operation of an EV.23, 24 We also explore

5

new concepts like ‘stealthiness of attacks’ and the trade-offs between stealthiness of attack and

extent of damage from the attack. Using this framework, we quantify the impact of cyberattacks

in different scenarios. We analyze either ﬁnancial and physical losses incurred through either: (i)

permanent damage, deﬁned as a change in the state of system that is irreversible, for example,

irreversible capacity loss in a battery pack and (ii) temporary damage, deﬁned as a change in

the state of system that is (mostly) reversible, for e.g., reduction in state-of-charge which can be

recovered by re-charging.

Permanent Damage: As we stated previously, cyberattacks can accelerate cell degradation

and shorten the lifetime of the battery pack. Experimental demonstration of degradation is typi-

cally indirect as batteries are closed systems and measuring the internal states of the batteries is

extremely difﬁcult.25, 26 Thus, a validated physics-based model that can track the internal states of a

battery packs provides a convincing means to demonstrate permanent damage due to cyberattacks.

Among the different mechanisms that cause cell degradation, two main processes of interest are:

(i) growth of the solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer at the graphite anode and (ii) lithium

plating.14, 16–18, 20, 27 The SEI layer grows as a result of solvent reduction at the anode-electrolyte

interface and consumes Li+ ions, thereby causing a decrease in the amount of active Li+ ions

available and a reduction in capacity. Plating of Lithium at the anode similarly leads to a loss in

capacity along with an increase in the risk of internal shorts which could lead to catastrophic safety

issues.28–30

The permanent damage due to a cyberattack can be quantiﬁed using the rise in the internal resis-

6

tance of the cell. The rise in the internal resistance is estimated using the increase in the thickness

of the SEI layer.27, 31 The extent of Li-plating is controlled by the electrochemical potential for

lithium deposition or the ‘Li-plating potential’.16 The EV battery pack end-of-life is characterized

by degradation in capacity to 80% of the initial capacity.32, 33 We deﬁne the usable 20% of the

capacity as the ‘vital capacity’ of the battery pack. A parametric study of the effect of different

variables on degradation is compiled in the Supplementary Information.

Compromised Battery Management Systems, Overdischarge: When a BMS is compromised,

an override of the lower cut-off voltage is possible.34 An attack on an EV with a depleted battery

pack and compromised BMS can lead to overdischarge through energy-intensive auxiliary compo-

nents. In terms of such cyberattacks occurring on an EV with the depleted battery pack, the idea

of using wake-up functions as attacks has been demonstrated recently.35 Such attacks could be fol-

lowed by auxiliary component attacks discussed in this work, to overdischarge the cells. During

overdischarge, the initial stages involve the decomposition of the SEI layer which is composed

of Lithium containing compounds and subsequently Copper dissolution from the current collector

begins.36 The dissolved Copper ions eventually lead to deposition of metallic Copper and potential

internal shorts. The time for potential failure can be estimated using the time required for the de-

composition of the SEI layer during the cyberattack, as shown in (Fig. 2). The cells shown in (Fig.

2) correspond to that of a 100 kWh battery pack based on NCA

(Ni0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2) cathode and Graphite anode. The thickness of the SEI layer is a func-

tion of the age of the battery pack where 50nm is assumed to be equivalent to a battery pack aged

7

Figure 2: A compromised battery management system, is vulnerable to attacks that override the

lower voltage cutoff which can overdischarge the pack. During overdischarge, one of the initial

steps is the decomposition of the Li-ion containing SEI layer which is followed by the dissolution

of copper ions from the current collectors, with the possibility of internal shorts and other safety

events. The estimated time to the onset of copper dissolution occurs during overdischarge is shown

above for the cells based on NCA (Ni0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2) cathode and Graphite anode. For compo-

nents with the power consumption equivalent to lights (

200 W), the time to onset of copper dis-

∼

solution is under 2 hours while components with a high power consumption like air-conditioning

have a timescale of less than an hour.

over 2 years, however, the thickness would change with the vehicle operating conditions. We ob-

serve that attacks that involve components with an energy consumption rate of over 200W, the

timescale for the complete decomposition of the SEI layer and potential failure is under 2 hours.

While the consequences of overdischarge in Li-ion batteries depend on the kind of materials used

in the cells, the impact could range from the loss of energy through the internal short to thermal

8

, [0-3 kW]and safety events as well.34, 36

Compromised Battery Management Systems, Overcharge: A compromised BMS can modify

the upper cut-off voltage.37 The pack can then be charged at a voltage higher than the normal

charging voltage (manufacturer speciﬁc upper voltage cutoff) leading to overcharging. Within a

constant current-constant voltage protocol,38 an increase in the charging current would lead to

an increased rate of degradation which is an extension of the previously mentioned parametric

analysis on the discharge rate of the battery pack. However, overcharging the battery pack leads to

various other issues shown in (Fig. 3).

In (Fig. 3a), we observe a super-linear rise in the growth rate of ∆R∗ as the overvoltage per cell

increases in a fresh cell. The charging system cyberattack simulated spans a duration of one hour

after charging similar to the auxiliary component cyberattacks. However, the consequent damage

caused to the battery pack in terms of capacity fade, as shown in (Fig. 3b), is enormous. At a

cell overvoltage of 0.4V, we observe that the pack reaches its end-of-life or 100% damage to vital

capacity in about 200 days. This could result in signiﬁcant ﬁnancial impact as shown in (Fig. 3b)

where we estimate the monetary value of the loss of capacity for a 100kWh battery pack assuming

the cost of battery packs of about $200/kWh.40 (Fig. 3a) also shows the decrease in the Li-plating

potential which implies that lithium would plate more readily at higher overvoltage. Over time,

such attacks could lead to an increased amount of Li-plating which could have safety implications

resulting in physical impact including thermal events and ﬁre.28, 41

Compromised Auxiliary Components: Compromised auxiliary components effectively act as

9

Figure 3: The impact of cyberattacks on charging systems speciﬁcally aimed at overcharging the

battery pack is summarized here.(a) The attacks studied here lasts for one hour after charging.

We can study the increase in the SEI growth rate and ∆R∗.(b) This increase along with Li-plating

translates to capacity fade and could shorten the lifetime to about 200 days at an overcharge voltage

of about 0.4V. The reduction in the Li-plating potential due to overcharge in (Fig. 3a), provides a

metric to quantify the risk of developing internal shorts due to lithium plating.39 When the same

attacks are performed on older packs, we observe that the ∆R∗ growth rate increases while the

Li-plating potential decreases, both of which are detrimental to the state-of-health of the battery

pack.

parasitic loads. Quantifying the impact of such attacks requires a close examination of different

operating and environmental variables. The variations in each of the state variables like tempera-

ture, state-of-charge (SOC), pack size, age of the pack, etc. and the set of variables that deﬁnes a

given auxiliary component attack workload42–44 affects the degradation in vital capacity in a dif-

ferent manner. A parametric analysis of all the variables, exploring the effect of each variable,

similar to other studies17, 18 reveals that the damage to vital capacity increases with the tempera-

10

ture by following the Arrehenius relationship which implies that cyberattacks conducted at higher

ambient temperature would cause greater impact. Damage to vital capacity also increases with

the State-of-Charge of the battery pack which suggests that attacks on fully charged battery packs

would cause more damage. As the age of the pack increases, the damage caused by a ﬁxed load

in the same conditions decreases. The damage to vital capacity is seen to be a sub-linear function

of the total time of attack, characteristic of a diffusion-limited process. Further, damage to vital

capacity increases linearly with an increase in the cumulative energy consumption of the load, a

phenomenon which has been covered previous studies on capacity fade.17, 18

Following the insights from the parametric analysis, we infer that attacks which comprise of energy

intensive auxiliary components when engaged after a new battery pack is fully charged cause

the most damage. We design the attack scenarios accordingly. We consider two types of EV

users based on charging behavior, either charging at ‘Home’ or charging at ‘Home’ and at ‘Work’.

The sample attack workload spans a duration of one hour and is based on the combination of

A/C at high power along with Lights, Power-Steering and Wipers. We analyze the cases where

these users are located in Oslo, San Francisco, Beijing, Delhi and Phoenix which serve as proxies

for the environment state variable of temperature and are chosen to represent a wide range of

temperature conditions. In order to analyze the impact of auxiliary component cyberattacks, we

use ∆R, a quantity which represents the increase in internal resistance of the cell compared to a

cell which has not been subjected to the attack workloads. ∆R essentially provides information

on the effectiveness of the cyberattack. We calculate ∆R after 400 days for each case using the

11

Figure 4: We can study the impact of auxiliary component cyberattacks here, based on the results

for simulations equivalent to

400 days. ∆R∗ represents the increase in the resistance of the cell

∼

due to the cyberattack when compared to the baseline scenario. The triangular markers indicate

situations where the vehicle is attacked twice in a day. In such cases, the average ∆R∗ of the two

attacks is shown, while the circular markers represent the cases with one attack over the day.

following relationship,

∆R =

RB

SEI

RA

SEI −
RB
SEI

,

(1)

where RSEI is the resistance due to the SEI layer, and ‘A’ and ‘B’ represent the attack and baseline

scenario. For the quantities reported in (Fig. 4), ∆R∗ values are obtained by normalizing all the

∆R values with the minimum value in a given set which facilitates the comparison of values within

the set.

In (Fig. 4), the rise in ∆R∗ is the most for Oslo, which has the lowest average ambient temper-

ature. While an increase in ambient temperature causes an increase in the thickness of the SEI

layer, the resistance due to the formation of SEI layer impedes further growth.45 This phenomenon

12

Charging at WorkCharging at HomeOsloSan FranciscoBeijingDelhiPhoenix11.522.533.5R* in 400 days05101520253035Mean Temperature, [°C]leads to the fact that places like Phoenix, where the ambient temperature is high, already feature a

substantial SEI layer thickness, thereby minimizing any additional damage to vital capacity due to

the attack workload. However, it is worth highlighting that the average resistance due to the SEI

ﬁlm formed is higher in warmer regions compared to colder regions. The two cases of charging, at

Home and at Work, do not show any substantial difference, although, if the EV is charged in both

locations, then we have two separate time windows for attack.

Temporary Damage: With compromised auxiliary components, attack workloads can cause

a depletion of energy contained in the battery pack, thereby a reduction in available driving range.

This damage can be reversed by charging the battery pack. However, such attacks can play into

the well-known issue of ‘range anxiety’.3 For some vehicles, with battery packs <40kWh battery

packs, up to 20% of the available range could be depleted in under one hour with energy intensive

attack workloads which include combinations of auxiliary components as discussed previously.

Such attacks which engage several components at the same time will be more energy intensive

compared to single components, however, such attacks might be easier to detect for the user which

is discussed in the subsequent sections.

Stealthiness of Attack: An important constraint on a cyberattack is the likelihood of it getting

detected. In the case of auxiliary components, the detection is by the user and hence it is difﬁcult

to develop a quantitative metric for the same. However, in order to provide a basic overview of the

issue, we develop a qualitative understanding using three scenarios, namely, ‘parked’, ‘stationary’

(at rest within driving operation) and ‘driving’. A summary of the stealth of an attack involving a

13

Table 1: Stealthiness of attack, a qualitative metric used by attackers to reduce the chance of

detection.

Auxiliary Component

Stealthiness of Attack

Parked

Stationary Driving

A/C-High

A/C-Low

Power Steering

Lights

Fan

Wipers

High

High

N/A

High

High

Low

High

High

Low

Low

Medium

High

High

Medium

Medium

Medium

Very Low

Very Low

Combinations

High

Low

Low

given auxiliary component is given in (Tab. 1). Such a metric is heuristic but it provides a calibra-

tion for the components that are more likely to be targeted based on the attacker’s perspective. An

auxiliary component that involves a high stealthiness of attack and is also energy intensive would

naturally be targeted often.

Rowhammer Attack: Rowhammer style attacks46 have been demonstrated previously where

targeted workloads on memory systems were generated to cause corruptions which can be used

to launch further attacks. We observe an analogous case here with battery systems since battery

pack is made up of several cells arranged in a matrix involving a series-parallel conﬁguration. This

architecture is vulnerable to ‘rowhammer’ attacks since individual strings or cells within battery

packs could be targeted through a compromised battery management system and the damage to

individual strings or cells is magniﬁed. Each of the cyberattack scenarios we have considered, like

attacks on auxiliary components, overcharge, and overdischarge could be orchestrated as rowham-

mer attacks. We previously discussed the various factors due to which the damage to the battery

14

pack increases with a reduction in pack size for the same workload which is especially relevant

to rowhammer attacks. Such attacks could not only shorten the lifetime of the targeted subset of

the battery pack but could also lead to issues related to instabilities due to the isolation of strings

within the battery pack.

We have discussed the potential physical and ﬁnancial impact due to cyberattacks on EVs and EV

subsystems. We identify simple but effective cyberattacks on auxiliary components that can tem-

porarily drain the battery pack up to 20% per hour. Furthermore, we analyze attacks could lead to a

deterioration in the power capability due to an increase in the cell resistance. We use a metric which

is equivalent to the ‘normalized resistance increase’, which can be used to quantify the extent of

performance reduction. We ﬁnd that normalized resistance increase is generally higher for colder

regions. We ﬁnd that cyberattacks on auxiliary components launched after the pack is completely

charged (i.e. high state-of-charge) leads to more damage. The cell resistance increase, largely

due to the formation of a solid-electrolyte-interphase (SEI) layer, follows a sublinear relationship

with time. This results in a new pack being more vulnerable than an aged pack to cyberattacks on

auxiliary components. Compromised battery management systems expose the pack to two kinds

of attacks, (i) Overdischarge and (ii) Overcharge. Overdischarge attacks which override the lower

cutoff voltage of the pack could lead to the complete decomposition of the SEI layer in under two

hour thorough auxiliary components with a power rating of over 200W. The decomposition of the

SEI is followed by the dissolution of Copper ions which could eventually lead to internal shorts

and potential safety events. Cyberattacks launched during charging through the compromise of the

voltage regulator could lead to an overcharge of the cells, which in some cases could even lead to

15

physical safety issues (e.g. ﬁre). Further, this could lead to a new pack being depleted to 80% of

its initial capacity (end-of-life for an EV battery) in less than a year. Finally, a compromise of the

battery management system could lead to novel “rowhammer"-style attacks (attacking a string of

cells), which could damage a subset of cells in a short time span. We believe that the results pre-

sented here will inform the development of robust detection and prevention systems and provide a

much-needed rational design approach for electric vehicle automotive security.47

Acknowledgements S. S., S. K., V.S. and V. V. gratefully acknowledge support from Technologies for

Safe and Efﬁcient Transportation University Transportation Center. V.S. and V. V. gratefully acknowl-

edges support from the Pennsylvania Infrastructure Technology Alliance, a partnership of Carnegie Mellon,

Lehigh University and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania’s Department of Community and Economic

Development (DCED).

Competing Interests The authors declare that they have no competing ﬁnancial interests.

Correspondence Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to V.V.

(email: venkvis@cmu.edu).

Methods

Battery Pack Simulations. The description of the system of equations for the multiphysics bat-

tery model16, 22 can be found elsewhere. Cells constructed based on this modelling framework are

assembled into a battery pack model. The baseline load proﬁle for the vehicle is based on Urban

Dynamometer Driving Schedule for 50 miles per day, along with a constant current-constant volt-

16

age (CC-CV) charging protocol with a peak power of a level-1 charger. The attack workloads are

implemented within this daily load proﬁle. The daily load proﬁles are repeated to simulate the

operation over a long period. The battery model is a thermally coupled model,22 and the ambient

temperature conditions are implemented within the same simulation framework, described in detail

in the Supporting Information.

Supporting Information (SI): Supporting Information contains details of the parametric study for

battery degradation and other information on the battery modeling undertaken for the study.

References

1. Koscher, K. et al. Experimental security analysis of a modern automobile.

In 2010 IEEE

Symposium on Security and Privacy, 447–462 (IEEE, 2010).

2. Miller, C. & Valasek, C. Remote exploitation of an unaltered passenger vehicle (2015).

3. Needell, Z. A., McNerney, J., Chang, M. T. & Trancik, J. E. Potential for widespread electri-

ﬁcation of personal vehicle travel in the united states. Nat. Energy 1, 16112 (2016).

4. Kempton, W. Electric vehicles: Driving range. Nat. Energy 1, 16131 (2016).

5. Yang, F., Xie, Y., Deng, Y. & Yuan, C. Predictive modeling of battery degradation and green-

house gas emissions from us state-level electric vehicle operation. Nature communications 9,

2429 (2018).

17

6. Cano, Z. P. et al. Batteries and fuel cells for emerging electric vehicle markets. Nat. Energy

3, 279 (2018).

7. Gröger, O., Gasteiger, H. A. & Suchsland, J.-P. Electromobility: Batteries or fuel cells? J.

Electrochem. Society 162, A2605–A2622 (2015).

8. Safari, M. Battery electric vehicles: Looking behind to move forward. Energy Policy 115,

54–65 (2018).

9. Schmuch, R., Wagner, R., Hörpel, G., Placke, T. & Winter, M. Performance and cost of

materials for lithium-based rechargeable automotive batteries. Nat. Energy 3, 267 (2018).

10. Pratt, R. M. & Carroll, T. E. Vehicle charging infrastructure security. In 2019 IEEE Interna-

tional Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE), 1–5 (2019).

11. Wang, C. & Srinivasan, V. Computational battery dynamics (cbd)-electrochemical/thermal

coupled modeling and multi-scale modeling. J. Power Sources 110, 364–376 (2002).

12. Ramadesigan, V. et al. Modeling and simulation of lithium-ion batteries from a systems engi-

neering perspective. J. Electrochem. Soc. 159, R31–R45 (2012).

13. Dubarry, M., Vuillaume, N. & Liaw, B. Y. From single cell model to battery pack simulation

for li-ion batteries. J. Power Sources 186, 500 – 507 (2009).

14. Christensen, J. & Newman, J. Cyclable lithium and capacity loss in li-ion cells. J. Electrochem.

Soc. 152, A818–A829 (2005).

18

15. Santhanagopalan, S., Guo, Q., Ramadass, P. & White, R. E. Review of models for predicting

the cycling performance of lithium ion batteries. J. Power Sources 156, 620–628 (2006).

16. Yang, X.-G., Leng, Y., Zhang, G., Ge, S. & Wang, C.-Y. Modeling of lithium plating induced

aging of lithium-ion batteries: Transition from linear to nonlinear aging. J. Power Sources

360, 28–40 (2017).

17. Safari, M., Morcrette, M., Teyssot, A. & Delacourt, C. Life-prediction methods for lithium-

ion batteries derived from a fatigue approach i. introduction: Capacity-loss prediction based

on damage accumulation. J. Electrochem. Soc. 157, A713–A720 (2010).

18. Safari, M., Morcrette, M., Teyssot, A. & Delacourt, C. Life prediction methods for lithium-ion

batteries derived from a fatigue approach ii. capacity-loss prediction of batteries subjected to

complex current proﬁles. J. Electrochem. Soc. 157, A892–A898 (2010).

19. Ramadesigan, V. et al. Parameter estimation and capacity fade analysis of lithium-ion batteries

using reformulated models. J. Electrochem. Soc. 158, A1048–A1054 (2011).

20. Peled, E. & Menkin, S. Sei: past, present and future. J. Electrochem. Soc. 164, A1703–A1719

(2017).

21. Checkoway, S. et al. Comprehensive experimental analyses of automotive attack surfaces. In

USENIX Security Symposium (San Francisco, 2011).

22. Kalupson, J., Luo, G. & Shaffer, C. E. AutolionTM: A thermally coupled simulation tool for

automotive li-ion batteries. Tech. Rep., SAE Technical Paper (2013).

19

23. Sripad, S. & Viswanathan, V. Evaluation of current, future, and beyond li-ion batteries for

the electriﬁcation of light commercial vehicles: Challenges and opportunities. J. Electrochem.

Soc. 164, E3635–E3646 (2017).

24. Sripad, S. & Viswanathan, V. Performance metrics required of next-generation batteries to

make a practical electric semi truck. ACS Energy Lett. 2, 1669–1673 (2017).

25. Fathi, R. et al. Ultra high-precision studies of degradation mechanisms in aged licoo2/graphite

li-ion cells. J. Electrochem. Soc. 161, A1572–A1579 (2014).

26. Smith, A., Burns, J. C., Zhao, X., Xiong, D. & Dahn, J. A high precision coulometry study of

the sei growth in li/graphite cells. J. Electrochem. Soc. 158, A447–A452 (2011).

27. Safari, M., Morcrette, M., Teyssot, A. & Delacourt, C. Multimodal physics-based aging model

for life prediction of li-ion batteries. J. Electrochem. Soc. 156, A145–A153 (2009).

28. Abada, S. et al. Safety focused modeling of lithium-ion batteries: A review. J. Power Sources

306, 178–192 (2016).

29. Deng, J., Bae, C., Marcicki, J., Masias, A. & Miller, T. Safety modelling and testing of

lithium-ion batteries in electriﬁed vehicles. Nat. Energy 3, 261 (2018).

30. Deng, J., Bae, C., Miller, T., L’Eplattenier, P. & Bateau-Meyer, S. Accelerate battery safety

simulations using composite tshell elements. J. Electrochem. Soc. 165, A3067–A3076 (2018).

20

31. Lawder, M. T., Northrop, P. W. C. & Subramanian, V. R. Model-based sei layer growth and

capacity fade analysis for ev and phev batteries and drive cycles. J. Electrochem. Soc. 161,

A2099–A2108 (2014).

32. Wood, E., Alexander, M. & Bradley, T. H. Investigation of battery end-of-life conditions for

plug-in hybrid electric vehicles. J. Power Sources 196, 5147–5154 (2011).

33. Saxena, S., Le Floch, C., MacDonald, J. & Moura, S. Quantifying ev battery end-of-life

through analysis of travel needs with vehicle powertrain models. J. Power Sources 282, 265–

276 (2015).

34. Lee, Y.-S. & Cheng, M.-W.

Intelligent control battery equalization for series connected

lithium-ion battery strings.

IEEE Transactions on Industrial electronics 52, 1297–1307

(2005).

35. Cho, K.-T., Kim, Y. & Shin, K. G. Who killed my parked car?

arXiv preprint

arXiv:1801.07741 (2018).

36. Guo, R., Lu, L., Ouyang, M. & Feng, X. Mechanism of the entire overdischarge process and

overdischarge-induced internal short circuit in lithium-ion batteries. Sci. Rep. 6, 30248 (2016).

37. Lelie, M. et al. Battery management system hardware concepts: An overview. Applied Sci-

ences 8, 534 (2018).

38. Zhang, S. S. The effect of the charging protocol on the cycle life of a li-ion battery. J. Power

Sources 161, 1385–1391 (2006).

21

39. Bugga, R. V. & Smart, M. C. Lithium plating behavior in lithium-ion cells. ECS Transactions

25, 241–252 (2010).

40. Kittner, N., Lill, F. & Kammen, D. M. Energy storage deployment and innovation for the clean

energy transition. Nat. Energy 2, 17125 (2017).

41. Wang, Q. et al. Thermal runaway caused ﬁre and explosion of lithium ion battery. J. Power

Sources 208, 210–224 (2012).

42. Hendricks, T. J. Vehicle Transient Air Conditioning Analysis: Model Development & System

Optimization Investigations. Tech. Rep., National Renewable Energy Lab., Golden, CO.(US)

(2001).

43. Johnson, V. H. Fuel used for vehicle air conditioning: a state-by-state thermal comfort-based

approach. Tech. Rep., SAE Technical Paper (2002).

44. Perrucci, G. P., Fitzek, F. H. & Widmer, J. Survey on energy consumption entities on the

smartphone platform. In Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), 2011 IEEE 73rd,

1–6 (IEEE, 2011).

45. Christensen, J. & Newman, J. Effect of anode ﬁlm resistance on the charge/discharge capacity

of a lithium-ion battery. J. Electrochem. Soc. 150, A1416–A1420 (2003).

46. Kim, Y. et al. Flipping bits in memory without accessing them: An experimental study of

dram disturbance errors. In ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News, vol. 42, 361–372

(IEEE Press, 2014).

22

47. Khalid, A., Sundararajan, A., Hernandez, A. & Sarwat, A. I. Facts approach to address cy-

bersecurity issues in electric vehicle battery systems. In 2019 IEEE Technology Engineering

Management Conference (TEMSCON), 1–6 (2019).

23

SupplementaryInformation:VulnerabilitiesofElectricVehicleBatteryPackstoCyberattacksShashankSripad,aSekarKulandaivel,bVikramPande,aVyasSekarbandVenkatasubramanianViswanathana∗aDepartmentofMechanicalEngineering,CarnegieMellonUniversity,Pittsburgh,Pennsylvania,15213,USA.bDepartmentofElectricalandComputerEngineering,CarnegieMellonUniversity,Pittsburgh,Pennsylvania,15213,USA.∗Correspondingauthor,Email:venkvis@cmu.eduBatteryModelingTheseequationsusedforthebatterymodelingaresummarizedbyFangetal.,1andKalupsonetal.,2usingEqns.(1-5)whichdescribethe1-Dtransportmodelforthespeciesandthechargecoupledwithalumpedthermalmodel.Thesolidphasechargeconservationisgivenby∇.(σeﬀ∇Φs)=jLi,(1)whereσeﬀistheeﬀectiveelectronicconductivityandΦsisthepotentialofthesolidphase.Theelectrolytephasechargeconservationisgivenby∇.(keﬀ∇Φe)+∇.(keﬀD∇log(ce))=−jLi,(2)wherekeﬀistheeﬀectiveionicconductivity,Φeisthepotentialoftheelectrolytephase,keﬀDistheconductivityandceisvolumeaveragedLiconcentrationintheelectrolytephase.Theconservationofspeciesintheelectrolytephaseisgivenby∂(εece)∂t=∇.(Deﬀe∇ce)+(1−t0+)FjLi,(3)whereεeisthevolumefraction,Deﬀistheeﬀectivediﬀusioncoeﬃcient,t0+isthetransferencenumber,andFistheFaradayconstant.Thespeciesconservationinsolidphaseisgivenby∂cs∂t=Dsr2∂∂r(r2∂cs∂r),(4)wherecsistheconcentrationofLiinthesolidphase,Dsisthediﬀusioncoeﬃcientinthesolidphase,and‘r’representstheradiusoftheparticlesofactivematerial.Theenergy1balanceisrepresentedasalumpedthermalmodelgivenby∂(ρCpT)∂t=(qr+qj+qc+qe)Acell+hconvAs(k∇T),(5)whichaccountsforqrreactionheat,qjthejouleheating,qctheheatingduetocontactre-sistancebetweenthecurrentcollectorandelectrodematerials,andqetheentropicheating.Thelasttermrepresentstheheatdissipation,wherehconvisthecoeﬃcientofheatdissipationandAsisthecellexternalsurfacearea.SEIlayerandDegradationProcessesTheparasiticreactionswithinthecellbasedonmodelsthatcanbefoundelsewhere3,4are:jSEI=−kSEI.cssol.exp(cid:2)−αc,SEI.FRT.(cid:0)φs−φe−I.RSEI−USEI(cid:1)(cid:3),(6)jPL=−io,PL.exp(cid:2)−αc,PL.FRT.(cid:0)φs−φe−I.RSEI(cid:1)(cid:3),(7)wherethesidecurrentsforeachofthedegradationprocessesforSolid-ElectrolyteInterphase(SEI),(jSEI),fortheLithiumplating,(jPL),andthelastrateequationcapturestheActiveMaterialIsolationalongwiththetotalcurrent,(I).Theotherconstantsfromthedegra-dationsub-modelaretherateconstants(ko,SEI=1×10−12m/s)4,(kAMI=2×10−14m/s)andtheexchangecurrentdensity,(io,PL=0.001A/m2)4.The(α’s)arethecathodictransfercoeﬃcients.(cssol),istheconcentrationofthesolvent.The(φ’s)arethepotentialsoftheelectrodeandliquidphases.(Rﬁlm)istheresistanceoftheSEIlayer.TheincreaseinthethicknessoftheSEIlayerincreasestheinternalresistanceorimpedanceofthecell,therebyleadingtoalossinthepowercapabilities.dδSEIdt=−jSEI2FMSEIρSEI,(8)whereMSEIandρSEIarethemolecularweightandthedensityoftheSEI.TheresistanceduetotheSEIiscalculatedusingtheeﬀectiveconductivityoftheelectrolyte(solvent)throughtheSEIusing:RSEI=δSEIκeﬀSEI,(9)ParametricAnalysisThroughoutthisstudy,weexaminecapacityfadeconsideringaquantitydeﬁnedas‘vitalcapacity’whichisequivalentto20%oftheinitialcapacityofthebatterypack.ForEVsadegradationof20%oftheinitialcapacityor100%ofthevitalcapacitymarkstheend-of-lifeofthebatterypack5.Inordertoexaminetheeﬀectofeachvariable,weselectasamplecyberattackdeﬁnedbyaspeciﬁcworkloadonthepackconductedforaﬁxeddurationoftime.In2otherwords,weﬁxalltheattacker’scontroldimensionsandconstraints.Wealsoﬁxallotherbatterypackandenvironmentstatevariablesapartfromthevariableinconsideration,andtherebyexaminepermanentdamageasafunctionofthegivenvariablealone.Forexaminingpermanentdamage,theﬁrstvariableconsideredforanalysisistheambienttemperature.ThedamagetovitalcapacityisobservedtobeanexponentiallyincreasingfunctionofambienttemperatureandfollowstheArrheniusrelationship.Theparametricanalysissummarizedin(Fig.S1-S4)aretheresultsofbatterypacksimulationsforattackworkloadsofonehourcomprisingofA/C,Lights,Power-SteeringandWipers,for400attack-chargecycles.TheConstantCurrentConstantVoltage(CC-CV)chargingprotocolisfollowedineachofthesimulations.Theeﬀectofambienttemperatureonthedamagetovitalcapacityisillustratedin(Fig.S1).ThedamagetovitalcapacityfollowstheArrheniusequationandwithinthesameanalysis,oncomparingdiﬀerentworkload,wecanobservethedamagetovitalcapacityincreaseslinearlyasafunctionoftheaveragepoweroftheworkload.TheSOCalongwithtemperaturearestudiedtoseetheirinﬂuenceonthecapacityfadeforbatterypacksofdiﬀerentage,namely0,1,and2-year-oldpacksasvisualizedin(Fig.S2).WeobservethatthedamagetovitalcapacityincreaseswithincreaseinSOC,inotherwords,ifacyberattackisconductedonafully-chargedbatterypackorabatterypackwhichisplacedinahigherambienttemperature,thentheresultantimpactwouldbemuchgreater.OncomparingtheSOC-Temperatureresultsforpacksofdiﬀerentage,weobserveaninterestingtrendthatolderpacksshowamuchlowerdamagetovitalcapacitywiththesamespeciﬁedcyberattack.ThiscanbeexplainedfromthefactthattheSEIlayermodeledshowsagrowthratewhichisasub-linearfunctionoftime,andhencethecapacityfadeordamagetovitalcapacitydecreasesforabatterywhichhasalreadyagedforacertainduration.Theeﬀectoftotaltime-of-attackondamagetovitalcapacitycanbeseenin(Fig.S3),whereweseethatthedamageisasub-linearrelationshipoftime.Thedamagetovitalcapacityalsoincreaseslinearlywithareductioninthebatterypacksize.Thiscouldbeexplainedascapacityfadebeingalinearfunctionofthedepth-of-discharge,asseenin(Fig.S4)sinceasmallerbatterypackwouldhavealargerdepthofdischargeforthesameauxiliarycomponentorworkloadconsidered,andthiscorroboratestheﬁndingsofotherstudies6.DisablingBatteryCoolingFanTodemonstratethefeasibilityofcausingathermalrunawayevent,wehavediscoveredaparticularCANmessagethatdisablesthebatterycoolingfanfora2009ToyotaPrius.Todiscoverthismessage,wesystematicallyinjectedaCANmessagewitheachpossibleIDvaluerangingfrom0x0to0x6FF,orthesaferangeformessageinjection7.Foreachinjection,weﬂoodthenetworkwithaparticularIDandrandomlymodifythedatavaluesuntilwenoticeaphysicalresponseinthevehicle.WedoacknowledgethatthePriusisaHybridvehicleandthatitisanoldermodelcar;however,modernEVsalsohavetheirBatteryECUconnectedtotheCANbusandanewermodelcarismuchmorelikelytohaveminorsystems,suchasthecoolingfan,controlledbyCANmessages.Ifweassumethattheattackerisastrongattacker(asdiscussedinourthreatmodel)whocanre-ﬂashtheBatteryECU,thentheattackercansimplywritecodethatignoresthebatterytemperature.Withthecombination3ofdisablingthebatteryfanandforcingtheECUtoignorebatterytemperature,itisclearhowanattackercancauseasafetyevent.FractionofRangeReductionandtheEﬀectofTemperatureTheenergyconsumptionperunitdistanceforeachEViscollectedfromthedataoftheU.S.EnvironmentalProtectionAgency.Theambienttemperaturehasasigniﬁcantimpactontheratedrangeandtheuseofauxiliarycomponentslikeheatersandair-conditionersatloworhighambienttemperaturescausesanadditionallossinrange.TheSOCiscouldhaveaneﬀectonthedischargeeﬃciencyofthebatterypackandhencewouldaﬀecttheenergyconsumption.Anagedbatterypackwouldhavealowerpackenergy,andhencealoweroverallratedrange.Formoredetailsontheimpactofeachofthesevariablesonshort-termimpact.Thelossinrangeisdeterminedbytheenergyconsumedbytheauxiliarycomponentsandtheenergyconsumptionofthevehicleatthetimeinstantoftheattack.Ineﬀect,thefractionofrangelostortheratioofrangelostduetoacyberattackandtheratedrangeofthevehiclewouldbeindependentofthetemperature.010203040Ambient Temperature [oC]024681012% Damage to Vital Capacity39.839.94010.51111.5FigureS1:DamagetoVitalCapacityasafunctionofambienttemperatureforvariousauxiliarycomponents,whereweobservetheArrheniustyperelationship.EachattackworkloadisrunforatimedurationofonehourandthensubjectedtochargingwiththepackSOCofabout0.7.4FigureS2:Bi-variateanalysisoftheDamageasafunctionoftheSOCandambienttemperatureconductedforbatterypacksofdiﬀerentage(0,1,2years).Theattackworkloadsareﬁxedforatimedurationofonehourandthensubjectedtocharging.T = 40oC0510152025Total Time of Attack [days]051015% Damage to Vital Capacity1818.5191010.511FigureS3:Damagetovitalcapacitystudiedasafunctionofthetotaltimeofattackforvariousauxiliarycomponentswhichshowsthesub-linearrelationship.Eachattackworkloadhasadurationofonehour,andthepackisthensubjecttocharging.TheinitialSOCofthepackismaintainedat0.7.Theinsetshowsthediﬀerentworkloadsthathavebeensimulated.5T = 40oC0123456Power [kW]10.81111.211.411.6%Damage to Vital CapacityAC-High+Lights+Power-Steering+WipersAC-Low+Power-Steering+WipersAC-HighAC-LowWipersPower SteeringLightsFanFigureS4:Damagetovitalcapacitystudiedasafunctionoftheenergyconsumptionoftheauxiliarycomponentsatanambienttemperatureof40oC.Thedamageiscalculatedafter20daysofattackwherethebatterypackissubjectedtotheattackworkloadsofoneoverandchargedafter.TheinitialSOCofthepackismaintainedat0.7.6Baseline LoadAttack LoadHomeWorkHomeAttack(a)-200204060Power [kW]AttackAttack(b)Baseline LoadAttack Load0:004:009:0014:0019:0023:59Time-of-day [24-hour clock]-200204060Power [kW]FigureS5:ThedailypowerloadontheModelSP100Dwhichshowsmultiplescenarios.Thepowerloadshownin‘blue’representsthebaselinescenariowherewehavenocyberattacks,andthe‘red’representstheattackscenario.Theattackisassumedtotakeplaceonlyduringthetime-windowafterchargingbasedontheconclusionsdrawnfromtheouranalysesabove.Thecasewheretheuserchargesonlyathomeisillustratedin(a)while(b)isacasewheretheuserchargesbothathomeandatwork.Theattackscenariointhework-chargingcasecouldhavetwodistinctsub-caseswheretheattackisconductedeitheratoneorboththetime-windowsaftercharging.7Leafi3e6Model S00.20.40.60.81Total Time of Attack [hr]AC-High+Lights+Power-Steering+WipersAC-Low+Power-Steering+WipersAC-HighAC-LowWipersPower SteeringLightsFan061218Fraction of Total Range Lost [%]06121803690246FigureS6:Thefractionofratedrangelostduetothecyberattackisdeterminedusingtheenergyconsumptionperunitdistanceoftheelectricvehicle.Theenergyconsumptionchangeswithtemperature,whereextreme(lowofhigh)temperaturesleadtoanincreasedenergyconsumption.Thequantityofrangereducediscalculatedusingthesameenergyconsumptionastheoneusedtocalculatetheratedrange,andhencethefractionofratedrangelostisindependentoftheambienttemperature.JanFebMarAprMayJunJulAugSepOctNovDecMonths-10010203040Average Temperature [oC]PhoenixSan FranciscoOsloBeijingDelhiFigureS7:Thetemperaturevariationsindiﬀerentlocationsovertheyearusedforthelong-termdamagestudies.Theambienttemperaturedataforeachlocationisincorporatedasanaverageovereveryweek,andtheeﬀectofthesechangesintemperaturecanbeseenintheSEIgrowthwhichisquantiﬁedinthemodel.8References(1)Fang,W.;Kwon,O.J.;Wang,C.-Y.Int.J.EnergyRes.2010,34,107–115.(2)Kalupson,J.;Luo,G.;Shaﬀer,C.E.AutoLionTM:AthermallycoupledsimulationtoolforautomotiveLi-ionbatteries;2013.(3)Safari,M.;Morcrette,M.;Teyssot,A.;Delacourt,C.J.Electrochem.Soc.2009,156,A145–A153.(4)Yang,X.-G.;Leng,Y.;Zhang,G.;Ge,S.;Wang,C.-Y.J.PowerSources2017,360,28–40.(5)Wood,E.;Alexander,M.;Bradley,T.H.J.PowerSources2011,196,5147–5154.(6)Lawder,M.T.;Northrop,P.W.;Subramanian,V.R.J.Electrochem.Soc.2014,161,A2099–A2108.(7)Smith,C.TheCarHacker’sHandbook:AGuideforthePenetrationTester;NoStarchPress,2016.9