United Nations Digital Blue Helmets as a Starting Point for Cyber Peacekeeping
Nikolay Akatyev1, Joshua I. James2
1Horangi, Singapore
2Legal Informatics and Forensic Science Institute,
Hallym University, Chuncheon, South Korea
nikolay.akatyev@gmail.com
joshua.i.james@hallym.ac.kr

Abstract: Prior works, such as the Tallinn manual on the international law applicable to
cyber   warfare,   focus   on   the   circumstances   of   cyber   warfare.   Many   organizations   are
considering how to conduct cyber warfare, but few have discussed methods to reduce, or
even   prevent,   cyber   confict.   A   recent   series   of   publications   started   developing   the
framework   of   Cyber   Peacekeeping   (CPK)   and   its   legal   requirements.   These   works
assessed   the   current   state   of   organizations   such   as   ITU   IMPACT,   NATO   CCDCOE   and
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, and found that they did not satisfy requirements to
efectively host CPK activities. An assessment of organizations currently working in the
areas related to CPK found that the United Nations (UN) has mandates and organizational
structures that appear to somewhat overlap the needs of CPK. However, the UN's current
approach to Peacekeeping cannot be directly mapped to cyberspace. In this research we
analyze the development of traditional Peacekeeping in the United Nations, and current
initiatives in cyberspace. Specifcally, we will compare the proposed CPK framework with
the recent initiative of the United Nations named the ‘Digital Blue Helmets’ as well as
with other projects in the UN which helps to predict and mitigate conficts. Our goal is to
fnd   practical   recommendations   for   the   implementation   of   the   CPK   framework   in   the
United   Nations,   and   to   examine   how   responsibilities   defned   in   the   CPK   framework
overlap with those of the ‘Digital Blue Helmets’ and the Global Pulse program.

Keywords:  Cyber   Peacekeeping,   Digital   Blue   Helmets,   Global   Pulse,   United   Nations,
international security, cyber confict, international relations

1. Introduction
War is both destructive and constructive. Destruction is a threat that is responded to by
passive and active protection; sometimes referred to as ofensive and defensive security.
Response to perceived threats tends to cause isolationism, or an us-vs-them mentality
(Gladstein and Reilly, 1985). Much of the current discussion related to cyber warfare is
focused on when and how to conduct aggressive activities, usually with the assumption
of a national perspective.

The constructive aspect of war is based on threat avoidance. When groups wish to avoid
the - usually costly - destructive side of war, they are more inclined to attempt peaceful
cooperation. The challenge, however, is internal and external support for such peaceful
cooperation.   During   physical   confict,   one   group   may   call   a   ceasefre   and   withdraw
troops. This becomes an indicator of good faith in the peacemaking process. Acts such as
these become a foundation upon which further peaceful cooperation can take place.

Cyberwarfare, however, attempts to utilize anonymity online as much as possible. With
attribution   nearly   impossible,   it   is   less   obvious   when   good   faith   measures   are   taking
place. In such a situation countries need more support for building peaceful cooperation
in   cyberspace.   Support   should   come   from   impartial   organizations   with   the   goal   of
cyberwarfare  prevention,  cessation and response.  This  work examines proposed  cyber
peacekeeping models and their state of implementation.

To   date,   no   organization   has   thoroughly   addressed   the   roles   and   functions   of   cyber
peacekeeping   as   defned   by   Akatyev   and   James   (2015).   Organizations   such   as   ITU
IMPACT,   NATO   CCDCOE   and   the   Shanghai   Cooperation   Organization,   among   others,
represent   specifc   interests   or   address   narrow   problems.   The   United   Nations
Peacekeeping operations do not address challenges in cyberspace, and their functions
cannot   be   directly   mapped   to   cyberspace   operations.   Other   branches   of   the   United
Nations (UN) are starting to consider the problem of peacekeeping in cyberspace, and it

appears   as   though   the   UN   may   be   one   of   the   best   options   for   hosting   Cyber
Peacekeeping eforts in the future. A recent peacekeeping development called the United
Nations ‘Digital Blue Helmets’ program (“Digital Blue Helmets”, n.d.) appears to focus on
Dark   Web   and   critical   infrastructure   issues.   However,   digital   and   physical   confict
cessation and prevention demand much greater scope. Another UN program, the Global
Pulse,   focuses   on   data   analysis   and   has   experience   with   digital   technologies.   This
program’s structure and experience is useful for cyber peacekeeping support, but, again,
lacks scope and focus on such issues.

1.1 Contribution
While past work defned organizational structure, functions, and legislative requirements
of   Cyber   Peacekeeping   (CPK),   little   consideration   was   given   to   the   concrete
implementation as a separate organization or within a structure of an international body.
This work will analyze cyber peacekeeping frameworks and related organizations, with a
specifc   focus   on   the   United   Nations   Peacekeeping   activities   and   cyber   security
initiatives.   We   then   update   prior   framework   recommendations   based   on   current   work
from the international community, and propose implementation plans that use existing
organizational eforts.

2. Cyber Peacekeeping
The   main   goal   of   Cyber   Peacekeeping   is   to   promote   online   safety   and   security   that
assists in both physical  and  cyber  confict cessation,  and helps protect cyber civilians
from   becoming   either   victims   or   participants   in   cyber   conficts   (Akatyev   and   James,
2015). Protection and prevention is provided through pre and post confict monitoring,
cleanup   and   capacity   building,   as   well   as   response   and   coordination   activities   during
conficts.

Cyber Peacekeeping seeks to prevent and mitigate cyber and physical conficts before
the   confict  escalates.   Further,   CPK   works  towards  confict  cessation  during  periods  of
confict.   These   goals  are   achieved   through   cyber   confict   prevention,   mitigation,   post-
confict   containment   and   rehabilitation   services.   Two   specifc   implementations   of
mitigation services previously proposed include the concept of a Cyberspace Safe Layer
(CSL), and an Information Clearinghouse (ICH). The CSL addresses the need to defne and
protect   critical   cyber   infrastructure   and   help   delineate   unethical   targets   in   conficts
(Schmitt, 2013). The ICH helps in the tempering of rumor and bias on social networks
that is likely to lead to the escalation of digital and/or physical conficts, and potential
recruitment of unafliated actors (Nissen, 2016; “Digital Blue Helmets”, n.d.).

Cyber Peacekeeping difers from UN Peacekeeping in scope. Field (1993) claims that UN
Peacekeeping is diferent from peacemaking and peacebuilding in both utilized means
and targeting goals. The goal of UNPK strives to prevent the recurrence of violence. UNPK
may   actively   apply   force   when   it   overlaps   with   peacemaking.   They   may   also   start
building on the safety and stability of a state assuming some peacebuilding roles, but
these are not the main activities of UNPK. In cyberspace violence can spread fast, and
peacekeeping eforts should also try to prevent confict escalation before confict occurs. 

2.1 The Cyber Peacekeeping framework
To carry out its mission, we defne goals, roles and functions for Cyber Peacekeeping as
shown  in  Figure  1.  Each  role   of  Cyber  Peacekeeping  can   contribute   to  the   safety  and
security of cyberspace at all three stages of a confictt no confict, during confict, after
confict. For example CPK as a guardian will monitor potential threats when there is no
confict.   During   confict   CPK   will   stop   the   spread   of   cyber   attacks   and   involved   cyber
weapons responding with defensive counterattacks as a last resort for “self-defense or
defense of the mandate” (“Principles of UN peacekeeping”, n.d.). After confict CPK as a
guardian   will   lead   cleanup   activities   related   to   distribution   and   alteration   of   cyber
weapons. Figure 1 shows relations among roles and their functions for diferent stages of
a   confict   depicted   by   diferent   types   of   linest   solid   (guardian),   dot   (mediator),   dash
(coordinator), dash-dot (builder).

Figure 1: Overview of the framework of CPK reflecting layers of goals, roles and functions when there is no conflict,
during conflict and after conflict. Solid line, guardian role and related functions; dotted line, mediator and related functions;
dashed line, coordinator and related functions; dash-dotted line, builder and related functions

The goals of Cyber Peacekeeping are defned ast

 Protect civilians

 The main goal of CPK is the protection of civilians.  CPK must be impartial

to any State independent of contributions.

 Increase trust and security in cyberspace

 Through   confict   prevention,   mitigation   and   rehabilitation   tasks,   trust   in

cyberspace can be maintained and security increased.

 Prevention

 Focuses on preparation for potential attacks, and preventing cyber confict

escalation when conficts begin

 Mitigation

 Focuses on containing conficts and minimizing damage to infrastructure

and civilians

 Aftermath Containment

 Focuses on containment of tools and information that may be re-purposed
or   reused   in   other   conficts,   as   well   as   using   collected   information   for
prevention 

 Rehabilitation

 Focuses on rebuilding infrastructure, security and trust post-confict

2.2 Cyber Peacekeeping Requirements
Prior   works   (Akatyev   and   James,   2016)   looked   at   the   legislative   requirements   for
organizations   to   begin   cyber   peacekeeping   eforts.   The   formal   requirements   for
establishing Cyber Peacekeeping are minimal but require considerable political actiont

 CPK does not have operational authority within member states, and does not need

additional legal frameworks for any of its main functions

 Future development of a legally-binding collaboration will be necessary for CPK to

be efective as threats of cyber conficts grow

 To support Cyber Peacekeeping functions, member states need to formally accept
terms, defnitions and concepts that CPK works in, including diferentiating terms
such as ‘freedom of speech’, ‘propaganda’ and ‘infammatory information’

 It   also   includes   a   formal   agreement   on   the   protection   of   civilians   through   the

protection of critical infrastructure

 States need to determine how the UN Charter exactly maps to diferent activities

in cyberspace

 A formal agreement would require specifying the CPK governance structure, and
especially   the   terms   by   which   CPK   could   operate   in   confict   and   non-confict
situations in cyberspace

While   formal   requirements   mostly   relate   to   organization   and   oversight,   informal
requirements   deal   more   with   the   practice   of   Cyber   Peacekeeping.   Specifcally,   the
establishment,   promotion   (and   potentially   enforcement)   of   cyber   norms.   These   cyber
norms will be the basis for CPK operations.

An essential part of the establishment of cyber norms is confdence building. CPK would
work   with   States   and   global   and   regional   organizations   in   order   to   establish
understanding   among   diferent   groups   with   their   own   values,   and   to   promote   best
practices of appropriate behaviour in cyberspace. The culture of training and information
sharing   already   exists   to   some   extent.   Some   groups   also   run   anti-cyber   terrorists
operations and share technologies (Goldman, 2016; O’Connell, 2016). CPK will endorse
these activities and facilitate their globalization to meet the goal of digital and traditional
confict prevention, mitigation and cessation.

After cyber norms (and formal agreement of terms), informal agreements will need to be
established   between   CPK   and   individual   member   countries   regarding   services   and
access. For example, one function of CPK is to help secure, support and maintain critical
infrastructure. First the scope of critical infrastructure would need to be formally defned,
and informal agreements would need to be made with each member country regarding
how CPK would help protect their infrastructure. Some members may allow full access to
ensure   CPK   can   properly  maintain   and   monitor   security,   where   other  members   would
prefer CPK to be only an outside monitoring organization.

Informal requirements mostly deal with CPK member country agreements and permission
to   interact   internally   and   externally   to   the   member   country.   The   conditions   for   that
support, and the requirements member countries must meet to continue to receive such
support from the CPK.

2.3 Current status of CPK-related organizations
Muller (2016) explains the failure of the multi-stakeholder approach with examples from
the   Internet   Governance   Forum   (IGF)   and   the   World   Group   on   Internet   Governance
(WGIG). The core problem of the multi-stakeholder approach’s implementation includes
separation of public collaboration from private collaboration. Specifcally, governmental
multi-stakeholders organize their own group as well as private organizations and NGOs
develop their own, separate initiatives. Instead of supporting the functions of each other,
public and private sectors collaborate through a rigid interface which is difcult to use
and   develop.     For   example,   the   failed   “Alert   System   for   Digital   Infrastructure”   (VDI)
sensor program in Norway.

Another   example   of   the   public-private   cooperation   was   ITU   IMPACT   (“IMPACT”,   2015)
which   formally   become   the   cybersecurity   executing   arm   of   the   United   Nations’
specialised   agency;   the   International   Telecommunication   Union   (ITU).   ITU   IMPACT
diferentiated itself by bringing together multiple countries as well as prominent private
organizations. However, multiple factors such as no involvement of major national cyber
powers,   and   a   focus   of   the   organization   on   training   and   monitoring   for   businesses,
limited the scope of ITU IMPACT’s responsibilities.

Regional   organizations   such   as   NATO   and   the   Shanghai   Cooperation   Organization
recognized   the   signifcance   of   threats   in   cyberspace.   After   cyber-attacks   on   Estonia,
NATO included cyber threats into Article 5 (NATO, 2014). The SCO discussed cooperative
protection in cyberspace among participating members, and proposed a supervision role
for the UN. However, activities of regional organizations were limited to their member-
states, and focused mostly on military components. Without global confdence-building
and understanding, these regional initiatives may only escalate confict.

3. The United Nations Peacekeeping eforts
Peacekeeping was frst envisioned by the drafters of the UN Charter in 1945, and the frst
operation was conducted in 1948 (Field, 1993; Bellamy, et al., 2010). Despite their plan
for the creation of a large standing military force, such a force was not possible during
the   Cold   War.   Later,   with   the   support   of   the   Canadian   initiatives,   UN-sanctioned
peacekeeping missions were made a reality. 

For more than sixty years UN peacekeeping (UNPK) operations played diferent roles, and
though there has been much criticism for a series of failures, there are claims that the
benefts   of   peacekeeping   outweigh   the   challenges   (Fortina,   2008).   UNPK   evolved
signifcantly   from   narrowly-purposed   missions   into   multi-functional   campaigns   partially
covering   peacemaking   and   peacebuilding   tasks   in   some   situations   (Bellamy,   et   al.,
2010).

In the current information era, diferent divisions in the UN have started paying attention
to cyberspace. The Global Pulse program (“United Nations Global Pulse”, 2016) attempts
to   apply   large-scale   data   analysis   to   humanitarian   challenges,   helping   to   predict
humanitarian catastrophes such as diseases, environmental problems or civil aggressions
in unstable countries. Karlsrud (2014) analyzes this program and how it can be applied to
the needs of peacekeeping. He elaborates on specifc cases of the use of the data for the
facilitation of the current types of UNPK operations.

The   most   recent   UN   initiative   by   the   UN   Ofce   of   Information   and   Communication
Technologies (OICT) proposes the Digital Blue Helmets (DBH). The DBH is a frst step in
shifting   focus   to   problems   in   cyberspace,   like   Dark   Web   issues.   However,   the   main
function of DBH is the protection of UN cyber infrastructure itself (“Digital Blue Helmets”,
n.d.).

3.1 United Nations Mandates
Through the execution of UNPK operations, the Security Council (SC) satisfes its primary
responsibility   from   the   UN   Charter   for   the   maintenance   of   international   peace   and
security (“Mandates”, n.d.). UNPK operations are deployed on the basis of mandates from
the   UN   SC.   International   human   rights   law   described   in   The   Universal   Declaration   of
Human Rights is a signifcant part of the normative framework for UNPK operations.

Responsibilities of UNPK vary from mission to mission, but common peacekeeping tasks
include prevention of the outbreak and spill-over of confict, stabilization after the confict
and peacebuilding tasks. Peacebuilding covers the protection and promotion of human
rights as well as disarmament and demobilization.

In  Principles of UN  peacekeeping  (n.d.) the  organization  tracked how  UNPK  developed
beyond   monitoring   ceasefres   to   multidimensional   peacekeeping   operations.   This
changed followed due to the reality of new intra-state conficts that mostly substituted
inter-state confict. However, inter-state conficts are currently moving into cyberspace. It
appears as though the goals and functions of Cyber Peacekeeping, as previously defned,
fall under United Nations Peacekeeping and Human Rights mandates.

3.2 UN Peacekeeping Operations
Current   UNPK   operations   are   beginning   to   use   more   technology,   such   as   cell   phone
movement data to determine challenging areas, and drones to quickly assess dangerous
areas   (Karlsrud,   2016).   However,   UNPK   is   limited   in   data,   tools   analysis   and   human
resources to process such information. UNPK is focused on physical confict areas, and so
far has not shown an interest in incorporating cyberspace - such as activities in social
media - into their peacekeeping eforts. Cyberspace can greatly afect physical confict
(Loukas, 2015). Until now UNPK has shown an interest in data related tools to assist in
physical   peacekeeping   without   considering   that   physical   confict   can   potentially   be
avoided altogether through peacekeeping in cyberspace.

3.3 Digital Blue Helmets

Digital Blue Helmets is a recent initiative, and comprehensive strategy does not yet exist
for the organization. Information on the ofcial website (“Digital Blue Helmets”, n.d.) and
an   interview   with   Atefeg   Riazi,   UN   CITO   from   the   Ofce   of   Information   and
Communication Technologies, (Tucci, 2016) shows similar values and vision between the
DBH and CPK. The  DBH  is a program under  the OICT in the  United  Nations,  and  acts
under United Nations mandates.

In the long term, the DBH will focus on cybercrime, and specifcally cyber-underground
marketplaces. Sources discuss the risk of the escalation of conficts as the result of “the
power   of   social   media   to   attract   new   recruits”   (“Cyber   Risk”,   n.d.),   as   well   as   cyber
terrorism and cyber threats to the critical infrastructure. The DBH already considers these
issues   as   a   challenge   of   national   boundaries   and   international   law.   This   challenge   is
innate in such an organization, and is one of the limitations of the United Nations as a
host for CPK activities. 

As   the   result   of   the     challenges   of   the   boundaries   and   international   law   in   the
cyberspace,   the   DBH   aims   to   involve   “all   stakeholders,   including   the   United   Nations
Secretariat, Agencies, Funds and Member States, as well as external partners, including
academia,   the   public   and   private   sectors   and   the   [general]   public”   (“Digital   Blue
Helmets”,  n.d.).   Building  the  DBH  as  a  group  of experts  means  a permanent but  less
consistent contingent, but clarifcation is still needed as to how they would be recruited,
either as professionals or contributed by member states, as well as what skills they would
possess.   Conducting   only   research   and   sharing   information   would   bring   them   to   the
territory of ITU IMPACT, so the DBH needs ofensive and defensive cybersecurity skills to
diferentiate themselves.

However, the UN CITO declared the mission of the DBH to “operate in the cyber world
protecting the UN from cyber intrusion” (Tucci, 2016). This seems to indicate a focus on
UN infrastructure, but not necessarily defending the interests of world peace.

3.4 Global Pulse
The   United   Nations   formed   Global   Pulse   (GP)   to   promote   Big   Data   applied   to
development and humanitarian action.

[Global   Pulse’s]   vision   is   a   future   in   which   big   data   is   harnessed   safely   and
responsibly as a public good. Its mission is to accelerate discovery, development
and   scaled   adoption   of   big   data   innovation   for   sustainable   development   and
humanitarian   action…   Global   Pulse   is   working   to   promote   awareness   of   the
opportunities Big  Data  presents   for  sustainable   development  and  humanitarian
action,   forge   public-private   data   sharing   partnerships,   generate   high-impact
analytical   tools   and   approaches   through   its   network   of   Pulse   Labs,   and   drive
broad adoption of useful innovations across the UN System (“Global Pulse”, n.d.).

Global Pulse is applying data analysis to a number of public data sources including social
media.   The   DBH   and   GP   have   the   potential   to   converge   in   their   data   collection   and
analysis   tasks,   and   include   cyber   threat   detection,     prevention   and   mitigation.   This
partnership does not currently appear to be developed between the two organizations.

Karlsrud   (2014)   analyzed   the   GP   and   its   application   to   peacekeeping   operations.   He
noted how new technology is used by groups spreading disinformation with the purpose
to incite hatred. It is overlapping areas like these where GP and DBH could work together.

The GP is a useful initiative for the incorporation of information technologies in the UN,
and can be extended for peacekeeping activities. However, the GP is currently focusing
on solutions to humanitarian problems, and it is unclear if an expansion of scope into
cybercrime and cyber warfare would be covered by the mandate of GP, which is currently
focused on innovation and data sharing. Karlsrud (2014) examined how the GP could be
applied   for   the   UNPK,   which   is   limited   to   the   application   of   the   GP   as   a   tool   for   the
physical operations. The GP may in time help prevent violent physical conficts, but the

application   of   big   data   can   also   be   useful   for   the   prediction   and   prevention   of   both
physical and cyber conficts. The GP can be a tool for both the UNPK and CPK as it can
assist but does not by itself solve problems of violence, confict escalation and threats to
peace in cyberspace. 

4. Comparison of CPK, GP and DBH
The DBH and CPK share a similar vision and have similar approaches to recognized cyber
threats. However, the DBH has yet to establish a concrete plan for the implementation of
its vision. CPK already has a proposed organizational and activity framework developed
that has been analyzed in terms of its practical implementation. CPK’s initial scope of
activities has been defned to support confict avoidance, cessation and recovery. For all
the   framework   development   and   research   on   CPK,   it   still   lacks   the   backing   of   an
organization   that   can   work   at   the   scale   needed   for   global   cyber   peacekeeping.   We
propose the DBH start working to implement the CPK framework, and specifcally on ‘low
hanging   fruit’   such   as   the   CPK-proposed   Cyberspace   Safe   Layer   and   Information
Clearinghouse (Akatyev and James, 2015). After reviewing UN mandates, it appears that
the objectives of the Information Clearinghouse and Cyberspace Safe Layer defne similar
goals to the UN CITO’s vision for the “light web” (Tucci, 2016), a web space designed to
counter the negative efects of the dark web.

The   experience   of   the   GP   could   also   greatly   contribute   to   the   development   of   the
combined   DBH   and   CPK   organization   by   applying   its   developed   expertise   in   data
collection and analysis from social media and other sources. Specifcally, this expertise
would  greatly  enhance   capabilities  of  the   Information  Clearinghouse   to  combat   issues
such   as   “fake   news”   and   government   or   other   organization-sponsored   misinformation
campaigns.

4.1 Digital Blue Helmets as a Starting Point for Cyber Peacekeeping
As the Canadian push for peacekeeing played a pivotal moment in the implementation of
the UNPK operations (Field, 1993), the UN CITO’s DBH initiative can be a starting point for
the development and implementation of CPK. In section 3, we identifed that the plan for
peacekeeping, as initially drafted, included a permanent, global peace force. Both politics
and resources made a permanent peace force impossible. Location, resources, security
and   training   make   peacekeeping   eforts   difcult   for   peacekeepers,   and   any   type   of
participation - except donations -  at an individual level is nearly impossible.

Similar to physical confict, confict in cyberspace has a potential to escalate extremely
quickly in more scenarios. This could result in retaliation in cyberspace, or spill over to
exacerbate   physical   confict.   Peacekeeping,   however,   is   not   only   about   responding   to
confict, but helping to prevent confict before it begins. For this reason, peacekeeping
activities need to be taking place constantly. Many organizations and individuals need to
take ownership of the peacekeeping process, similar to organizations such as Security
Without   Borders   (“Security   Without   Borders”,   n.d.),   where   individuals   with   diferent
skillsets volunteer to secure NGOs and other non-profts from spying and exploitation.
The nature of cyberspace allows this kind of global collaboration to happen in near-real-
time.

As discussed, we recommend that the DBH, with the support of GP and the UNPK, begin
to implement the CPK framework as an expansion of their current work. Being under the
UN  umbrella,  the DBH can beneft from  the  UN’s international  cooperation experience
and especially from lessons learned from the UNPK. At the same time, the DBH should
seek to use the benefts of globally connected experts with similar goals. Rather than
keeping complete, centralized control, DBH should become a type of CPK coordination
center.   Where   the   goals   and   scope   of   CPK   are   concretely   defned   and   developed   to
provide guidance to semi-independent cyber peacekeeping groups around the world. This
distributed   network   would   allow   a   24-7   peacekeeping   force   for   fast   response   and
intelligence   gathering.   In   the   reality   of   the   multi-stakeholder   globally   connected
cyberspace,   the   UN   needs   to   create   a   permanent   cyber   peacekeeping   force   that   can
rapidly, globally address cyber threats.

Karlsrud   (2014)   separated   confict   prevention   and   humanitarian   actions   from
peacekeeping and noted that the GP only focused on the frst two activities. However,
the scope of CPK includes all activities that can impact the peace in the cyberspace. We
can   not   ignore   confict   prevention   or   humanitarian   actions   because   cyberspace   is
interconnected and global, and military cyber attacks targeting state assets can easily
afect civilians. Moreover, conficts in cyberspace spread so fast and broad that confict
prevention is  potentially more  difcult but more  important  than  in  the physical  world.
Hence,   the   experience   of   the   GP   in   confict   prevention   and   humanitarian   actions   are
indispensable for the CPK.

Prior   CPK   research   showed   that   the   development   of   such   a   politically   sensitive
organization should be started with small, specifc steps (Akatyev and James, 2015). It is
important   to   have   a   clear   vision,   goals   and   outlined   full-fedged   framework   that   is
supported by major stakeholders.

4.2 Multi-stakeholder foundation 
As   discussed,   the   CPK   is  potentially  implemented   on   the   foundation   of   UN   initiatives;
DPH, GP, UNPK and others. This efort would also require guidance from other cybercrime
and  cyber-confict  related  organizations  which  are   included  in  this  research.  INTERPOL
has   an   established   structure   and   constitution;   ITU   IMPACT   provides   an   example   and
lessons learned for global cooperation in the cyberspace; NATO CCDCOE has experience
in the defence in cyber-conficts; and  Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) proposes
concrete roles for the leadership of the UN in the cyberspace security activities.

Ramjoue (2011) claims that “UN member states  have been wary of  UN peacekeeping
operations   gaining   intelligence-gathering   and   analysis   capabilities”.   Karlsrud   (2014)
believes that this attitude is shifting as the UN realizes that intelligence gathering can
have   a   profound   impact   on   the   success   of   peacekeeping   activities.   This   is   somewhat
confrmed with the GP, and the analysis of big data, which has the potential to extract a
considerable   amount   of   actionable   intelligence   for   humanitarian   and   peacekeeping
purposes. The same is true for cyberspace. Intelligence gathering and analysis is critical
to   make   strategy   decisions   towards   confict   avoidance   in   cyberspace.   This   data
gathering,   however,   cannot   be   done   alone.   No   single   organization   has   access   to   all
relevant   data   sources   and   the   ability   to   extract   and   digest   relevant   intelligence.   The
DBH/CPK then needs to utilize many stakeholders. Partners should include the UN’s own
branches, private business, security research companies, the fnancial sector, academia,
hackers, security experts and cyber underground experts. Such collaboration, however, is
not a usual structure for the United Nations.

5. Conclusions
Cyberwarfare   is   happening.   Attribution   makes   the   diferentiation   of   cybercrime   and
cyberwarfare difcult, but there are cases around the world with attacks that appear to
be government sponsored. Beyond a growing threat to cyberspace, cyber confict can -
and has - spilled over to afect physical confict. UNPK seeks to prevent the reoccurrence
of  confict.   Cyber  Peacekeeping   needs  to   do   even  more;   focusing  not  only  on   confict
cessation,   but   also   pre-confict   prevention   and   post-confict   management.   This   work
described   the   framework   and   requirements   for   Cyber   Peacekeeping,   and   analyzed
potential organizations that could support the vision and scope of CPK. We believe one of
the best organizations to support CPK is the recently created UN Digital Blue Helmets
program.   Currently  Digital   Blue   Helmets  is  limited  in  scope   and   defnition,   specifcally
focusing   on   dark   web   issues   and   protection   of   UN   infrastructure.   Despite   the   limited
scope, the DBH appears to be a strong base for the implementation of CPK. DBH with the
support   of   GP   and   UNPK   would   have   the   information,   analysis   and   experience   to
implement the frst stages of CPK. By focusing on community building and inclusion of a
distributed network of experts around the world, DBH/CPK could infuence peacebuilding
in both physical and digital spaces.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by Hallym University Research Fund, 2016 (HRF201603007).

References
Akatyev, N. and James, J. I. (2016) ‘Legislative Requirements for Cyber Peacekeeping’, in
Proceedings of the 2016 International Symposium ‘Security of Individual, State and
Societyt Challenges and Perspectives’. Perm, Russian Federation.

Akatyev, N. and James, J. I. (2015) ‘Cyber Peacekeeping’, in Lecture Notes of the Institute
for   Computer   Sciences,   Social-Informatics   and   Telecommunications   Engineering,
LNICST, pp. 126–139. doit 10.1007/978-3-319-25512-5_10.

Bellamy,   A.   J.,   Williams,   P.   D.   and   Grifn,   S.   (2010)   Understanding   Peacekeeping.   2
  Available   att

  Cambridge,

  Malden,

  Polity.

  UK  

  MAt

;

edition.
httpst//www.amazon.com/Understanding-Peacekeeping-Alex-J-
Bellamy/dp/0745641865.

Field,   R.  (1993)  ‘Keeping  the   Peacet   The   U.N.,   Canada  and  the   Quest  for  International
att

Available

Origins,

1(2).

Security’,
httpt//origins.osu.edu/sites/origins.osu.edu/fles/origins-
archive/Volume1Issue2Article7.pdf.

Fortna, V. P. (2008) Does Peacekeeping Work?t Shaping Belligerents’ Choices after Civil
att

War.
Princeton
httpst//www.amazon.com/Does-Peacekeeping-Work-Shaping-
Belligerents/dp/0691136718/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1485682979&sr=8-
1&keywords=Does+Peacekeeping+Work%3F.

  University

  Available

Princetont

Press.

Gladstein, D. L. and Reilly, N. P. (1985) ‘Group Decision Making Under Threatt The Tycoon
Game’,   Academy   of   Management   Journal,   28(3),   pp.   613–627.   doit
10.2307/256117.Goldman, D. (2016) Twitter goes to war against ISIS. Available att
httpt//money.cnn.com/2016/02/05/technology/twitter-terrorists-isis/index.html
(Accessedt 16 September 2016).

IMPACT   (2015)   IMPACT-   International   Multilateral   Partnership   Against   Cyber   Threats.
Available  att  httpt//www.impact-alliance.org/home/index.html   (Accessedt   29  January
2017).

Karlsrud, J. (2016) ‘New Tools for Blue Helmets’, in Della-Giacoma, J. (ed.). Global Peace
  Available   att

Operations   Review   (Global
httpt//peaceoperationsreview.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/gpor_2015_fnal.pdf.

  Peace   Operations   Review).

Karlsrud, J. (2014) ‘Peacekeeping 4.0t Harnessing the Potential of Big Data, Social Media,
and   Cyber   Technologies’,   in   Kremer,   J.-F.   and   Müller,   B.   (eds).   Springer   Berlin
Heidelberg, pp. 141–160. Available att httpt//link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-
3-642-37481-4_9 (Accessedt 29 January 2017).

Loukas,   G.   (2015)   Cyber-Physical   Attackst   A   Growing   Invisible   Threat,   Cyber-Physical

Attacks. Oxfordt Elsevier.

Muller,  L. P.  (2016)  ‘How  to govern cyber security? The  limits of the  multi-stakeholder
approach and the need to rethink public-private cooperation’, in Lacy, M., Prince, D.,
Walby,   S.,   and   May-Chahal,   C.   (eds).   Routledge   (Routledge   studies   in   confict,
technology
att
httpst//www.routledge.com/Confict-in-Cyber-Space-Theoretical-Strategic-and-Legal-
Pespectives/Friis-Ringsmose/p/book/9781138947788.

security),

130–150.

Available

and

pp.

NATO (2014) Press conference by NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg following the
North Atlantic Council meeting at the level of NATO Defence Ministers. Available att
httpt//www.nato.int/cps/en/natohq/opinions_132349.htm   (Accessedt   29   January
2017).

Nissen,   T.   E.   (2016)   ‘Cyber   warfare   by   social   network   media’,   in   Lacy,   M.,   Prince,   D.,
Walby,   S.,   and   May-Chahal,   C.   (eds).   Routledge   (Routledge   studies   in   confict,
technology
att
httpst//www.routledge.com/Confict-in-Cyber-Space-Theoretical-Strategic-and-Legal-
Pespectives/Friis-Ringsmose/p/book/9781138947788.

security),

130–150.

Available

and

pp.

O’Connell,   J.   (2016)   ‘Google   Joins   The   Fight   Against   ISIS’.   Available   att

Principles

httpst//hacked.com/google-joins-fght-isis/ (Accessedt 16 September 2016).
Available
peacekeeping
(Accessedt

httpt//www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/operations/principles.shtml
September 2016).

(2008).

UN

of

att
  15

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ramjoué,   M.   (2011)   ‘Improving   UN   Intelligence   through   Civil–Military   Collaborationt
Lessons from the Joint Mission Analysis Centres’, International Peacekeeping, 18(4),
pp. 468–484. doit 10.1080/13533312.2011.588392.

Schmitt, M. N. (2013) Tallinn manual on the international law applicable to cyber warfare.
Cambridge   University   Press.   Available   att   httpst//books.google.co.kr/books?
hl=en&lr=&id=FujYDXdOMQgC&oi=fnd&pg=PR1&dq=Tallinn+Manual+on+the+Inter
national+Law+Applicable+to+Cyber+Warfare&ots=M1uSBsT3Nu&sig=jwHYrfUIWFhl
Cl3iZd-q09QzAwM (Accessedt 15 September 2016).

Security   Without   Borders   (no   date).   Available   att   httpst//securitywithoutborders.org/

(Accessedt 30 January 2017).

Tucci, L. (2016) UN CITO dreams of foiling dark web with ‘Digital Blue Helmets’. Available
  httpt//searchcio.techtarget.com/news/4500277224/UN-CITO-dreams-of-foiling-

att
dark-web-with-Digital-Blue-Helmets (Accessedt 29 January 2017).

United Nations (2016) United Nations Global Pulse; Harnessing big data for development
and humanitarian  action.  Available  att  httpt//www.unglobalpulse.org/  (Accessedt  29
January 2017).

United Nations ofce of Information and Communications Technology (no date) UN Digital
Blue   Helmets.   Available   att   httpst//unite.un.org/digitalbluehelmets/   (Accessedt   29
January 2017).

United   Nations   ofce   of   Information   and   Communications   Technology   (no   date)   Cyber
Risk.   Available   att   httpst//unite.un.org/digitalbluehelmets/cyberrisk   (Accessedt   30
January 2017).

United Nations Peacekeeping (no date) Mandates and the legal basis for peacekeeping.
  httpt//www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/operations/pkmandates.shtml

Available   att
(Accessedt 29 January 2017).

