A Case Study of the 2016 Korean Cyber Command Compromise
Kyoung Jae Park, Sung Mi Park, Joshua I. James
Legal Informatics and Forensic Science Institute
Hallym University, Chuncheon, South Korea
kyoungjae.park@hallym.ac.kr
2ricecake@gmail.com
joshua.i.james@hallym.ac.kr

Abstract:  On  October  2016  the  South Korean cyber military unit  was the victim of a
successful  cyber attack  that  allowed access  to internal  networks.  Per usual  with  large
scale   attacks   against   South   Korean   entities,   the   hack   was   immediately   attributed   to
North   Korea.   Also,   per   other   large-scale   cyber   security   incidents,   the   same   types   of
‘evidence’ were used for attribution purposes. Disclosed methods of attribution provide
weak   evidence,   and   the   procedure   Korean   organizations   tend   to   use   for   information
disclosure lead many to question any conclusions. We will analyze and discuss a number
of   issues   with   the   current   way   that   South   Korean   organizations   disclose   cyber   attack
information to the public. A time line of events and disclosures will be constructed and
analyzed   in   the   context   of   appropriate   measures   for   cyber   warfare.   Finally,   we   will
examine   the   South   Korean   cyber   military   attack   in   terms   previously   proposed   cyber
warfare response guidelines. Specifcally, whether any of the guidelines can be applied to
this real-world case, and if so, is South Korea justifed in declaring war based on the most
recent cyber attack.

Keywords:  Cyber military, cyber warfare, South Korea, Tallinn Manual, cyber response,
national security

1. Introduction
On   a   theoretical   level   cybercrime   and   cyberwarfare   are   quite   diferent.   Each   have
diferent motivations and potential consequences. However, the methods used by both
cyber   criminals   and   government-sponsored   attackers   are   -   in   most   cases   -   nearly
indistinguishable. Although there is currently much discussion about cyber warfare and
appropriate   or   justifed   response,   it   is   unclear   how   to   apply   even   the   most   practical
recommendations. This work gives a case example of a recent cyber attack against the
South   Korean   military   cyber   unit,   and   analyzes   Korea’s   response   options   in   terms   of
cyber-conflict guides vs. reality.

South Korea has a 92.1% Internet penetration rate (“Asia Internet Usage Stats”, 2016).
Most   banking   and   government   services   are   ofered   online,   and   online   shopping   is
extremely   common.   Likewise,   credit   cards   and   other   virtual   currencies   are   common
throughout the country.

Korea’s   cyber   security   policy   is   largely   based   on   isolationism   and   obscurity.   Influence
from   such   policies   is   seen   in   the   well-meaning   Digital   Signature   Act   (1999).   This   Act
mandated centralized cybersecurity practices for online banking and ecommerce on the
provider  and client sides, implemented  in mandatory,  government-controlled software.
The   policy  continues  to   force   the   use   of   (no   longer   supported)   browsers   and   browser
plugins   for   conducting   basic   transactions   online.   Until   a   2014   revision   of   the   Act,
alternative   software   using   current   cyber   security   best   practices   was   prohibited.   As   of
2017, much online commerce and government online services in South Korea continue to
require end-of-support software on the client side.

Although South Korea is seen as a highly-connected, technologically advanced country,
policies   such   as   these   have   stunted   Korea’s   development   in   practical   information
security. The government is slow to change, especially after providing complete backing
for an already implemented system. Further, the current system is extremely useful for
law enforcement and intelligence services during investigations. Allowing a free market
on information security practices would reduce direct access from the government.

These issues are not meant to be a criticism per se, but to give background context on
the state of thinking behind cyber security decisions. Because of a national security focus
on internal threats rather than external threats (“National Security Act”, 2011), there is
little motivation for security-focused change based on external pressures.

This situation is made worse because of alleged cyber conflicts between North and South
Korea. There have been many cyber attacks against South Korean infrastructure in the
past, which will be discussed later. Out of these attacks the South Korean government
claimed  that  North Korea is behind  all  major  incidents.  However,  evidence  implicating
North   Korea   is   often   circumstantial.   Key   evidence   that   allegedly   proves   North   Korea’s
involvement is consistently classifed as secret, and is never released to the public. This
is similar to the FBI discussing evidence the Sony Pictures hacking case of 2014, also
allegedly involving North Korea.

In   this   work,   we   examine   major   cyber   attacks   against   South   Korean   organizations,
specifcally focusing on the 2016 attack on South Korea’s cyber military unit; the ‘Cyber
Command’. The Korean Cyber Command revealed that their anti-virus relay servers were
compromised  on  October   5th  2016,   allegedly  by  North  Korea.   Confdential   documents
were exfltrated during the attack (Kim, 2016).

2. Background
The Cyber Command was created under the Korean Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) on
January 1, 2010 in response to the 7.7DDOS (July 1, 2009) attack allegedly committed by
North  Korea.   In  September 2011,   the   Cyber  Command   came   under  the   control   of  the
Korean Ministry of National Defense which is in charge of the command and control of the
Korean Armed Forces. Currently, there are an estimated 1,000 soldiers under the Cyber
Command. The cyber command is divided into 4 primary units (publicly). There are:

 Research and Development (Corps 31)
 Cyber warfare (Corps 510)
 Psychological warfare (Corps 530)
 Education and Training (Corps 590)

The organization structure of the cyber command is shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1: South Korean Cyber Command organizational structure. Stevenh. 
(2016) South Korean cyberwarfare unit for cyberwar. [사이버전(戰)을 위한 남북한
‘사이버전 전담부대’] . Available at: http://ko.stevenh.wikidok.net/wp-
d/585b33ef6926962302f059a  [Accessed January 27, 2017].

2.1 Major attacks against South Korea
South Korean government agencies, businesses and critical infrastructure have been the
victims of many large scale cyber attacks. On July 4, 2009, DDOS attacks were launched
against  major  sites  in   the   United   States  (Lee,   2009).   On   July   7,   the   attacks   began  to
target   major   sites   in   South   Korea.   The   attack   took   websites,   including   government
websites, ofine for up to 4 hours. The White House and major sites in the US, and South
Korean websites of Media companies, political parties, the National Intelligence Service
(NIS) and other major portal sites were targeted (Internet News Team, 2009). The NIS
announced that it was most likely North Korean sponsored hacker groups. However, there
was not enough direct evidence to conclusively link to North Korea. On October 30, 2009,
during an audit with the National Assembly’s National Defense Committee the NIS chief
stated   that   the   IP   coordinating   the   attack   was   allocated   to   China.   North   Korea’s
telecommunication ministry was known to lease this IP from Chinese providers. Based on
the evidence, North Korea was identifed as the primary suspect in the 7.7 DDOS attack,
a claim that North Korea denies (Kim, 2009).

“DarkSeoul” was a large-scale cyber terror attack that disabled the computer equipment
of broadcasters and fnancial institutions in South Korea on March 20, 2013. Malicious
code   spread   through   the   public   to   target   critical   systems   through   the   compromise   of
popular Web servers. Popular sites were infected with drive-by malware (Kim, 2013). The
malicious code took control of the PC or server inside the institution for up to 8 months.
During   this   time   the   malware   exfltrated   data,   identifed   more   vulnerabilities,   and
distributed malicious code. On March 20th, the malware deleted data in infected PCs and
servers, all at the same time. At the time, more  than 48,000 PCs  were  disabled. This
resulted   in   media   coverage   and   banking   outages   for   ten   days.   As   well   as   fnancial
damage   of   an   estimated   900   billion   Korean   Won   (approx.   900   million   USD)   (Special
Coverage   Team,   2013).   The   South   Korean   government   was   also   quick   to   name   North
Korea as the prime suspect. There are four main pieces of evidence that attributes the
attack to North Korea. Sung and Lee (2013) describe them as:

1. Traces of manipulating an infected PCs through the same Chinese IP address used

in previous attacks

2. Traces   of   a   Korean-language   PC   accessing   the   fnancial   companies   1590   times,

distributing malicious code and leaking data since June 28, 2012

3. Malicious code similar to the previous hacking in South Korea where North Korea

was suspected

4.  An attack route that was the same as previous hacking that was allegedly by North

Korea 

Finally,   on   December   15,   2014,   personal   information   of   Korea   Hydroelectric   Nuclear
Power Corporation (KHNP) staf members and confdential documents related to nuclear
power plants and nuclear power plants (including drawings of nuclear power plants) were
revealed on the hacker's' blog. The document contained the phrase "Who Am I?", and
stated that they were an anti-nuclear group (Lee, 2014). They also announced a second
attack during Christmas. The media claimed that the malicious code was similar to prior
cyber terror attack, and that the attackers used expressions mainly used in North Korea,
notifying the attack through Twitter (Jin, 2014). The hacker disclosed internal documents
related to the nuclear power plant on December 15, 18, 19, 21, and 24, and requested to
shut   down   Korea   nuclear   power   plants   Kori   1   and   3   and   Wolsong   2   starting   from
Christmas. The attackers threatened to reveal 10 million pages of unpublished data and
carry out the second attack if their demands were not met. On October 24, the South
Korean government announced that the KHNP' attack originated in Shenyang, China. On
March   17,   2015,   Hanshin   announced  that   the   KHNP  hacking   attack   was  from  a   North
Korean hacker organization (Koo, 2015). The evidence stated was:

1. The malicious code is similar to the "kimsuky" malicious code allegedly used by a

2.

North Korean hacker organization in a prior attack (not conclusively proven)
 The same Chinese IP address used previously that is believed to also be used by
North Korea 

2.2 Cyber Attack Against South Korean Cyber Military
After establishing the Defense Integrated Data Center (DIDC) in 2014, a private company
that built the computer network connected the internal computer system to the external
computer   system   in   the   process   of   building   the   computer   network.   They   fnished   the
work without disconnecting. Through this route, malicious code penetrated the military
network   for   the   frst   time   on   August   4,   2016.   On   September   23,   Cyber  Command's
vaccine   routing   server   detected   signs   of   malicious   code   infection,   and   the   army
separated the network of vaccine routing servers on September 25, midnight, and set up
a joint investigation team on October 2 to investigate the infltration route, the damage
situation, and the identity of the hacker (Lee, 2016). 

On   December   5,   a   two-month   investigation   found   that   there   was   an   intrusion   in   the
intranet   (defense   network),   and   the   possibility   confdential   documents   were   leaked.   It
was   initially   claimed   that   the   frst   signs   of   infltration   were   found   on   the   Cyber
Command’s vaccine routing server, however it was revealed that on December 7, that
traces of intrusion were also found on the vaccine routing server in Gye-Ryong-Dae DIDC
(Defense Integrated Data Center). DIDC is the center for the information systems of the
Army, Navy and Air Force.

The center has an important role, and the total number of infected computers was 3,200.
2,500   systems   were   external   networks   (Internet   use),   700   were   internal   networks

(defense networks), and the defense minister's business computer was also infected with
malware. The military revealed that the hacker’s IP address was allocated to Shenyang,
China; again suspected of being used by the North Korean military. Malware code similar
to   prior   cases   were   also   found   (North   Korea   suspected).   Also,   a   Hangul   (the   Korean
alphabet) keyboard was used for compiling the malicious code. With this evidence, the
military announced that North Korea was the likely suspect (Lee, 2016). On December 9,
North Korea denied the claim and argued, "자신들이 해킹한 것이라면 왜 계속 같은 주소대역대
의 IP 주소를 사용하겠냐” which translates as: If we hacked them, why would we continue
to use the IP address range? According to North Korea, blaming them was an attempt to
manipulate public opinion to divert from political issues in South Korea (Kim, 2016). On
December 12, the Ministry of National Defense announced that the Defense Commission
had leaked confdential data but could not disclose what kind of data it contained, and
could only reveal that it was not a serious document (Lee and Ryu, 2016). However, a
day   later,   on   December   13,   the   military   prosecutors   and   Defense   Security   Command
proceeded   to   carry   out   search   and   seizure.   It   was   recently   revealed   that   confdential
information was leaked. The investigation is still ongoing (Hong, 2016).

3. Appropriate Response from South Korea
The attack against the South Korea Cyber Command is an excellent case study to test
out theoretical recommendations for cyber warfare response. The attack  was targeted
against   a   nation’s   military,   successfully   leaked   confdential   military   documents   and
evidence   leads   back   to   only   a   few   main   suspects   (though   none   proven   beyond
reasonable doubt). There is likely no cyber attack that has greater standing as a cyber
conflict, beyond two nations openly admitting their actions. We will analyze this case in
the context of the Tallinn Manual.

After North Korea was identifed to be the suspect behind several cyber attacks targeting
critical infrastructure, the people of South Korea started to consider cyber attacks as an
“act of war” and asked for “retribution” in both cyber and traditional forms (Yoo, 2013).
However,   the   issue   is  not   as   simple   as   people   believe   it   to   be.   Not  only   is  there   the
politics   between   countries   to   consider,   but   also   the   legal   perspective.   Retribution   or
declaring war is a complex, often prohibited, procedure. Meanwhile, it is also reasonable
that a national crisis such as a severe cyber attack cannot continue to happen without
any   deterrence.   That   is   why   the   Tallinn   Manual   garnered   attention   with   the   hopes   of
having a strict guideline in the new domain of cyber warfare 

In   this   section,   we   will   attempt   to   establish   which   rules   of   the   Tallinn   Manual   could
potentially   apply   to   cyber   attacks   similar   to   South   Korea’s   case.   This   section   will   be
divided into the terms in which cyber attacks could be categorized, and what the victim
State would be entitled to do accordingly. 

3.1 Cyber operation as armed attack
The frst Rule we need to consider is when the cyber operation is an armed attack within
the meaning of the UN charter. Rule 13 of the Tallinn Manual (Schmitt, 2013) attempts to
identify situations of legitimate self-defense. The right to exercise self-defense is not only
limited to kinetic attacks, but also can be justifed in case of cyber attacks (Rule 13, cmt.
3). Because of the term “armed” attack, however, the experts had varying opinions; it
was disputed if weapons were necessary for an “armed” attack (Rule 13, cmt. 4). The
majority of experts denied the necessity and were more inclined to set an analogy as to
determine the severity of the cyber attack (Rule 13, cmt. 4). For them, a cyber operation
could be considered as an armed attack if the consequences were equal to those of an
attack with a kinetic weapon (Rule 13, cmt. 4). The idea that cyber operations could be

sufficiently grave to qualify as armed attacks came to an accord unanimously (Rule 13,
cmt. 3). The Rule itself defnes armed attack as cyber operation depending on scale and
efects. Based on the Nicaragua judgment (Nicaragua v. United States of America 1986,
para. 191), the scales and efect are criteria to determine the “most grave forms” of use
of force (Rule 13, cmt. 6). To be more detailed, according to the International Group of
Experts, any use of force that “injures or kills persons or damages or destroys property”
(Rule   13,   cmt.   6)   would   be   enough   to   constitute   as   armed   attack.   A   more   precise
defnition of what exactly would be “grave” is not given. 

In the recent case of South Korea, this Rule cannot apply as comment 6 states “acts of
cyber   intelligence   gathering   and   cyber   theft,   cyber   operations   that   involve   brief   or
periodic   interruption   of   non-essential   cyber   services”   are   not   considered   to   be   armed
attacks (Rule 13, cmt. 6). 

3.2 Cyber operation as use of force
While use of force takes up an entire chapter of the Tallinn Manual, it is important to
diferentiate the terms “use of force” and “armed attack”. These two standards are to be
distinguished   as   they   serve   diferent   purposes   (Rule   11,   cmt.   11).   “Use   of   force”   is
defned with the simple goal to decide whether a State has violated the prohibition of the
use of force according to Article 2(4) of the UN Charter (United Nations 1945) and related
customary international laws (Rule 11, cmt. 11). “Armed attack”, on the other hand, gives
a State the right to defend itself with use of force (Rule 11, cmt. 11). Thus, any cyber
operation that does not constitute as an armed attack, the victim State must resort to
other methods, such as countermeasures in Rule 9 (Rule 11, cmt. 11). Responding in use
of force without receiving an armed attack would violate the prohibition.

Rule   11   again   uses   the   phrase   “scale   and   efects”,   without   further   explanation.   The
comments make it clear the physical efects serve as a major criteria; States have denied
inclusion   of   economic   or   political   coercion   as   a   use   of   force,   so   mere   funding   of   a
hacktivist group would not qualify (Rule 11, cmt. 3). Giving an organized group malware
and training to use it to conduct cyber attacks against other States would be considered
use   of   force   (Rule   11,   cmt.   4).   Despite   this,   dealing   with   cyber   operations   without   a
kinetic equivalent is still unsettled. The experts provided a probable assessment with 8
factors   to   consider.   This,   however,   is   also   not   defnitive;   a   holistic   assessment   of   the
operation   depending   on   the   various   circumstances   seems   to   be   unavoidable   (p.20,
Schmitt, 2012). 

3.3 State responsibility
This   is   a   Rule   that   determines   the   scope   of   responsibility   a   State   has   for   its   cyber
operation. Based on the customary international law of State responsibility, the State has
international legal responsibility if the act is attributable to it and the act constitutes as a
breach of an international obligation (Rule 6, cmt.2). Any cyber operations conducted by
organs of a State, which is understood as a broad term, including every person of entity
under the State’s internal legislation, can be attributed to the State (Rule 6, cmt.6). If the
organ  appears   to   operate   in  official   capacity   and  breach   international   obligations,   the
State becomes responsible (Rule 6, cmt.7). Whether the organ acted “in compliance with,
beyond, or without any instructions” has little consequence (Rule 6, cmt.7). This is the
same for other entities empowered by domestic law to be equivalent to governmental
authority   (Rule   6,   cmt.8).   However,   standards   to   determine   how   much   evidence
“attributable”   needs   is   unsettled.   It   stands   to   question   if   suspecting   a   State   can   be
enough or if it is even possible to attribute the questionable act to a State with absolute
certainty.   In   comment   14,   acts   can   be   retroactively   attributed   to   the   State   if   it

acknowledges or adopt the conduct. It is unlikely in case of the recent attack of South
Korea, that the North Korean government would admit to any involvement. 

Internationally   a   wrongful   act   can   refer   to   cyber   operations   that   are   violating
international   law   (Rule   6,   cmt.4).   In   case   of   cyber   espionage,   however,   this   becomes
controversial as there is no international law prohibiting the act per se (Rule 6, cmt.4).
One   possible   interpretation   could   be   based   on   Rule   1   comment   6;   cyber   operation
directed   to   another   State’s   cyber   infrastructure   may   violate   the   latter’s   sovereignty.
However, whether malware is used for monitoring purposes only without causing physical
damage   could   be   regarded   as   breach   of   sovereignty   was  disputed   without   consensus
(Rule 1, cmt. 6). It would depend on the severity and efects of the act to determine if
cyber espionage is an international wrongful act at all.

Even   if   it   is   considered   as   an   international   wrongful   act   thereby   justifying
countermeasures   in   context   of   Rule   9,   the   appropriate   responses   are   not   at   full
consensus. It is the widespread agreement that cyber countermeasures cannot include
the threat or use of force (Rule 11), however there are some who accept limited degree
of military force. In comment 7, the Experts foresee a “proportionate” countermeasure to
be appropriate, which is determined by the gravity of the initial unlawful act. If the origin
of the cyber breach is unclear, the State may invoke a plea of necessity (Rule 9 cmt. 12).
The State may be entitled to counter hacking, if the action is the “only way” to prevent
further attacks and does not violate interests of other States too severely (Rule 9 cmt.
12). The precise limits and scope of this plea is still debated.

3.4 Conclusion
The Tallinn Manual, despite giving a guideline, does not give sufficient material in certain
situations as stated in the scope section of the Introduction. However, even in dealing
with cyber operations addressed in the manual, it does not seem to give enough criteria
to   determine   the   appropriate   response   if   the   cyber   operation   does   not   accompany
physical consequences. Overall it can be concluded that terms used as standards are too
ambiguous to avoid subjective assessments.

One   thing   that   needs   to   be   mentioned   specifc   to   South   Korea’s   situation   with   North
Korea, is that applying international law itself could be problematic. North Korea is a state
with  limited recognition;  South  Korea  considers  North  Korea to  be  a  part  of  the  same
nation and vice versa (Scofeld, 2005). Therefore, in theory, should an ofensive cyber
operation be proven to be North Korea’s doing, they would fall under Korean Criminal
Law.   However,   in   reality   attempts   to   push   South   Korea’s   criminal   law   to   North   Korea
would   more   likely   be   detrimental.   Potential   solutions   and   responses   should   be   found
within international law; even in cases without physical damages. 

4. South Korea Response
As shown in prior cases, the evidence found in major cyber attacks are weakly linked to
North Korea. While North Korea is certainly a prime suspect, many alternative hypotheses
are   just   as   likely.   These   alternatives,   however,   are   not   politically   benefcial   for   South
Korea. A major concern about the South Korean situation is how predictable the initial
response   is,   combined   with   no   follow-through   to   any   real   conclusion.   For   example,   in
most attacks North Korea was confirmed by the government to be the attacker within a
week of the attack. Police and other investigations into the attack concluded weeks later,
fnding   similar   evidence   to   prior   attacks.   Related   attack   ‘traces’   are   now   publicly
available, and somewhat easily forged.

This situation presents a number of response  challenges.  First,  other entities,  such as
governments or organized crime could attack South Korea and attempt to make traces
similar to those presumed to be North Korean. Second, successful cyber attacks against
South Korea critical infrastructure is quite common. The government’s stance is that the
perpetrator is known, but the attacks continue to be successful. This demonstrates a lack
of ability or willingness to secure critical infrastructure and control a known adversary.
Finally,   a   major   point   of   the   South   Korean   response   regarding   almost   all   major   cyber
attacks is little transparency. North Korea is blamed, the same weak evidence is given
and there is no further elaboration on methods, motives or prevention. The response, at
least publicly, appears to be nothing.

An   analysis   in  the   context   of  the   Tallinn   Manual   appears   to  show   why   South   Korea  is
restricted in its response options. There are very few legal options for a country in South
Korea’s position. Ultimately, the issue is proper attribution, which is rarely possible but is
a   reality   in   cyber   warfare.   Without   this   attribution   being   unrealistically   certain,   most
recommendations about cyber warfare response cannot be applied.

5. Conclusions
This work gave an overview of major cyber attacks against South Korea. These attacks
work   normally   blamed   on   North   Korea   using   similar   evidential   traces   that   are
circumstantial. One attack that is presumed to be attributed to North Korea is used as a
basis for claiming another attack must defnitely be North Korea. The most recent attack
that   appears   to   be   an   act   of   cyber   warfare   was   against   the   South   Korean   Cyber
Command. We analyzed South Korea’s response options to this real attack in the context
of the Tallinn Manual, and found that South Korea has no military recourse, even from a
targeted attack that leaked confdential information, if that attack is no longer ongoing.
This   partially   explains   South   Korea’s   lack   of   a   substantive   reaction   during   any   of   the
major attacks that took place.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by Hallym University Research Fund, 2016 (HRF201603007).

References
Anon,   1999.   Digital   Signature   Act.   Available   at:   http://www.law.go.kr/eng/engLsSc.do?
menuId=1&query=digital+signature+act&x=0&y=0 [Accessed January 27, 2017].
Anon,   2011.   National   Security   Act.   Available   at:   http://www.law.go.kr/eng/engLsSc.do?
menuId=1&query=national+security+act&x=0&y=0#AJAX   [Accessed   January   27,
2017].

Anon, 2016. Asia Internet Usage Stats Facebook and Population Statistics. Internet World
Stats. Available at: http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats3.htm [Accessed January
27, 2017].

Hong Jiye, (2016) Joongboo Daily <[속보] 기무사, '국방망' 해킹관련 사이버사령부 압수수색>
[Defense   Security   Command,   confscates   cyber   command   for   intranet   hacking]
Available
http://www.joongboo.com/?
mod=news&act=articleView&idxno=1127986 (Accessed: 26 January 2017)

at:

International Court of Justice., (1986) Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against

Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America). Available at: 

         http://www.icj-cij.org/docket/?p1=3&p2=3&case=70&code=nus&p3=4
Internet News Team, (2009) Dong-A Ilbo < 청와대, 국방부, 백악관 등 해킹 공격 당해> [The
Blue House, Department of Defense, the White House attacked by hackers] Available
at: http://news.donga.com/3/all/20090707/8752882/1 (Accessed: 16 January 2017)

 
 
Jin Dalrae, (2014) MoneyToday <’ 한 수 원   해 킹 ’   북 한 해 킹   패 턴   유 사 한   ‘ 사 이 버 테 러 ’ >
[Hacking on Korea Hydro and Nuclear Power Co (KHNP) shows similar pattern to 3.20
cyber   terror   by   North   Korea]   Available   at:   http://www.mt.co.kr/view/mtview.php?
type=1&no=2014122119503745925&outlink=1 (Accessed: 24 January 2017)

Kim Gyeonghui, (2016) Korea JoongAng Daily <北, 군 내부망 해킹 부인 "박 정부 통치위기 모면
용">[North, denies hacking attack “Park using cyber attack as crisis aversion of her
government”]   Available   at:   http://news.joins.com/article/20981832   (Accessed:   26
January 2017)

Kim HyunA, (2013) Edaily <[일문일답] 정부가 밝힌 북한발 해킹 증거는 뭔가?> [What evidence
does the government have to claim it was North Korea behind the attack?] Available
at:
http://www.edaily.co.kr/news/NewsRead.edy?
SCD=JE41&newsid=02505926602774808&DCD=A00504&OutLnkChk=Y   (Accessed:
21 January 2017)

Kim Jungwan, (2009) BoanNews <이홍섭 회장, “7.7DDoS 공격자, ‘북한’이 확실해!!”> [Lee,
the chairman of Korea Association of Chief Information Security Officers says, “It was
certainly   North   Korea   who   was   behind   the   7.7   DDos   Attack!”]   Available   at:
http://www.boannews.com/media/view.asp?idx=18185&kind=1  
  13
January 2017)

(Accessed:

Kim SooYoung, (2016) SBS <軍 "내부 전용망 해킹당해 군사기밀 유출…北 소행 추정"> [Intranet
hacking   leaked   confdential   data...Military   suspects   the   North]   Available   at:
http://news.sbs.co.kr/news/endPage.do?
news_id=N1003922916&plink=ORI&cooper=NAVER(Accessed: 10 January 2017)
Koo Gyoun, (2015) News1 <한수원 자료 유출…”북한 해커조직 사이버테러”> [KHNP leakage
confrmed…”Cyber   terror   by   North   Korean   Hackers”]   Available   at:
http://news1.kr/articles/?2140829 (Accessed: 23 January 2017)

Lee Daeyeong, (2016) ITWorld <대한민국 군 내부망 해킹 사건 개요와 분석> [Summary and
  Available   at:

Analysis   of   the   ROK   Military   Defense   Network   Hacking]  
http://www.itworld.co.kr/news/102451 (Accessed: 25 January 2017)

Lee Hanseung, (2009) YonhapNews <국정원 “16 개국 86 개 IP 통해 사이버테러(종합)> [NIS
“Cyberterror was conducted through 86 IP addresses from 16 countries”] Available
http://news.naver.com/main/read.nhn?
at:
mode=LSD&mid=sec&sid1=100&oid=001&aid=0002757598   (Accessed:   18   January
2017)

Lee Seungu and Ryu Mina, (2016)  YonhapNews <한민구 "유출 군사자료 심각한 영향 초래하는
자 료   아 냐 "( 종 합 )>[Minister   Han   “the   leaked   information   will   not   lead   to   severe
consequences”]
at:
http://www.yonhapnews.co.kr/bulletin/2016/12/12/0200000000AKR20161212132451
001.HTML?input=1195m (Accessed: 13 January 2017)

Available

Lee Ung, (2014) Yonhap News <”한수원, 해킹 수사의뢰...원전 설계도 유출 가능성 (종합 2 보)>
[KHNP   requests   for   investigation...leakage   of   nuclear   plant   blueprints   possible]
Available
at:
http://www.yonhapnews.co.kr/bulletin/2014/12/18/0200000000AKR20141218183952
003.HTML?input=1195m (Accessed: 23 January 2017)

No Hyodong, (2014) Yonhap News <사이버 보복 ‘교전규칙’ 성문화…탈린 매뉴얼 시선집중>
[Cyber Retribution 'Engagement Rules' becomes codifed ... Tallinn Manual receives
high attention]. Available at:

http://www.yonhapnews.co.kr/northkorea/2014/12/22/1801000000AKR201412220038000

71.HTML (Accessed: 23 January 2017)

Special Coverage Team, (2013) BoanNews <[단독] 3.20 사이버테러 일으킨 북한의 침투경로는?

  >   [North   Korea’s   penetration   path   of   3.20   Cyber   terror]  
http://www.boannews.com/media/view.asp?idx=35599&kind=1  
January 2017)

  Available   at:
  13

(Accessed:

 
 
  
 
 
Schmitt   M.   N.,   (2012)   International   Law   in   Cyberspace:   The   Koh   Speech   and   Tallinn
Manual   Juxtaposed,   Harvard   International   Law   Journal   Online     Vol.   54,   Harvard
International
at:
http://www.harvardilj.org/2012/12/online-articles-online_54_schmitt/   (Accessed:   24
January 2017).

Available

Online.

Journal

Law

Schmitt, M. N. (2013) Tallinn manual on the international law applicable to cyber warfare.

Cambridge University Press.

Scofeld,   David   (4   January   2005).   "Seoul's   double-talk   on   reunifcation".   Asia   Times.
Available   at:   http://www.atimes.com/atimes/Korea/GA04Dg01.html   (Accessed   25
January 2017)

Sung Youngkwang and Lee HaNeul, (2013) MoneyToday  <”3.20 사이버테러는 北 사전기획형
공 격 ” ( 종 합 )> [The 3.20 Cyberattack was a premeditated attack by North Korea”]
Available
http://www.mt.co.kr/view/mtview.php?
type=1&no=2013041017132766833&outlink=1 (Accessed:  4  January 2017)

at:

United Nations., (1945). Charter of the United Nations. Available at: 
          http://www.un.org/en/charter-united-nations/ (Accessed: 24 January 2017)
Yoo Jeongin, (2013) KyungHyang News <새누리 이철우, ‘사이버테러, 보복해야’> [Saenuri
Congressman   states,   “Cybeterror   needs   to   be   retaliated”].   Available   at:
http://news.khan.co.kr/kh_news/khan_art_view.html?
artid=201304101641261&code=910402 (Accessed: 1 January 2017).

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
