Autonomic Vehicular Networks: Safety, Privacy, 
Cybersecurity and Societal Issues  

Gerard Le Lann 
INRIA 
Paris-Rocquencourt, France 
gerard.le_lann@inria.fr

Abstract—Safety,  efficiency,  privacy,  and  cybersecurity  can 
be achieved jointly in self-organizing networks of communicating 
vehicles  of  various  automated  driving  levels.  The  underlying 
approach,  solutions  and  novel  results  are  briefly  exposed.  We 
explain  why  we  are  faced  with  a  crucial  choice  regarding 
motorized society and cyber surveillance. 

Keywords—vehicular  networks,  safety,  privacy,  cybersecurity, 
authentication, pseudonymity, anonymity, automated driving levels 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

Vehicular  networks  are  bound  to  be  autonomic,  i.e.  self-
organizing  and  self-healing.  An  autonomic  vehicular  network 
(AVN)  is  comprised  of  partially  or  fully  automated  vehicles, 
assigned SAE automated driving levels ranging from 0 to 5 [1]. 
The  focus  of  this  paper  is  on  AVN  constructs  and  vehicular 
capabilities  meant  to  achieve  the  following  four  fundamental 
properties:  safety  (a  significant  reduction  of  severe  injuries, 
fatalities,  and  damages),  efficiency  (high  vehicular  densities, 
good  asphalt  utilization  ratios),  privacy  (no  cyberespionage), 
and cybersecurity (immunity to cyberthreats). With current and 
upcoming  standards  such  as,  e.g.,  IEEE  802.11p,  ETSI  ITS-
G5,  IEEE  1609-2  (MAC  and  channel  management),  SAE 
J2945/1-2.2, ETSI TS 102 637 (periodic beaconing), and ETSI 
TS  102 940  (security  schemes  based  on  PKIs  (Public  Key 
Infrastructures)),  none  of  the  aforementioned  goals  can  be 
reached  fully.  Authors  who  have  arrived  at  such  conclusions 
have published proposals aimed at improving current solutions. 
However, intractable limitations  remain.  For  example,  current 
thinking  is  that  one  cannot  have  safety  and  privacy  together. 
That is incorrect. Our intent here is to share a vision of how to 
meet the challenge of achieving safety, efficiency, privacy and 
cybersecurity jointly, by design. This vision may be considered 
unreasonably  radical  by  a  fraction  of  the  ITS  community. 
However, there is no choice: under current approaches, risks of 
cyber-surveillance  and  collisions  due  to  cyberattacks  are  not 
eliminated  fully.  Along  with  other  scientists  and  lawyers,  we 
advocate  for  the  adoption  of  novel  approaches  and  solutions 
that  would  serve  as  foundations  for  the  next  “wave”  of 
standards,  denoted  WAVE  2.0  for  convenience,  WAVE  1.0 
referring to current and upcoming standards.  

We  have  been  here  before.  Remember  the  MAP  initiative 
by  General  Motors,  the  IBM  Token  Ring  saga,  and  other 
similar failures? Despite huge investments and financial losses, 
products  based  on  the  IEEE  802.4,  802.5,  802.6  (DQDB) 
standards,  or  FDDI  networks,  have  disappeared  soon  after 

deployment.  Whether  this  could  be  the  fate  of  802.11p  is  not 
our  concern  here.  Rather,  we  anticipate  the  continuous 
emergence of novel communication technologies as well as the 
adoption of more rigorous approaches regarding the design of 
onboard systems and solutions for next-gen AVNs.   

Some  recent  results  are  presented  in  this  paper.  Due  to 
space restrictions, they cannot be exposed thoroughly. Detailed 
presentations  are  to  appear  in  forthcoming  publications  and 
research  reports.  We  introduce  partitioned  architectures  for 
onboard systems (Section II), vehicular cells (Section III), the 
the  spontaneous 
trusted  vehicular  subnetwork  construct, 
formation  of  homogeneous  subnetworks  of  identical  SAE 
automation levels (Section IV), PKI-free pseudonym schemes, 
privacy  and  safety  in  the  presence  of  cyberthreats,  physical 
exclusion  of  a  malicious  vehicle,  and  the  cyber-stealth  mode 
(Section V). Adopting or not adopting the WAVE 2.0 approach 
implies  a  fundamental  societal  choice  of  deep  consequences 
regarding cyber-surveillance. 

II.  PARTITIONED ONBOARD SYSTEM ARCHITECTURES 

AVNs are life-critical systems-of-systems. Conformance to 
design principles in force in every safety-critical (SC) domain 
(e.g.,  aerospace,  chemical/nuclear  plants)  is  thus  mandatory, 
notably  a  strict  separation  of  SC  and  non-SC  functionalities. 
Fig. 1 shows a simple example of a partitioned onboard system 
architecture.  A  SC  subsystem  comprises  a  SCR  subsystem 
(robotics  and  other  capabilities,  e.g.,  AI  and  algorithmic 
learning),  and  a  SCC  subsystem  (short-range  neighbor-to-
neighbor  (N2N)  and  SC  V2V  radio  communications,  optical 
communications,  time-bounded  coordination  algorithms).  SC 
subsystems are equipped with specific processors and real-time 
operating  systems,  and  they  shall  be  ASIL-D  compliant  (ISO 
26262  standard).  Besides  its  own  inputs  (radars,  lidars, 
cameras),  a  SCR  subsystem  processes  data  written  by  a  SCC 
subsystem in their shared memory. They share a UTC-aligned 
clock (GNSS inputs) and back-up clocks (to cope with GNSS 
outages) as well as a tamper-proof device (TPD) which records 
significant  events,  and  may  fire  a  Stop  maneuver,  to  be 
performed by the SCR subsystem. A non-SC (NSC) subsystem 
hosts  non  safety-critical  V2X  (V2V/V2I)  telecommunication 
capabilities (WAVE 1.0 standards, 4G LTE, 5G, 6G), most of 
them resting on terrestrial nodes for, e.g., infotainment, access 
to  Internet,  cloud  services  and  to  PKIs.  A  NSC  subsystem 
cannot  write  in  the  SC  subsystem  data  space.  The  NSC  TPD 
can be updated via V2X telecommunications.  

 
 
safety-critical and local functionalities

non safety-critical and global functionalities

SCR subsystem
(robotics, AI,…)

SCC subsystem
(N2N and SC V2V 
communications)

V2X 
telecommunications

NSC tamper-
proof device

close cyberthreats blocked here

distant cyberthreats blocked here

read/write shared memory

memory written by the NSC 
subsystem, read by the SC subsystem

SC tamper-proof device

secured bridge

X

maximal
Cell(X)

signed request
(certified pseudonym)  

cohort Γ

LtJoin

LgJoin

cohort Γ

Fig. 1.  A partitioned onboard system 

Fig. 2.  Vehicular Cell and authenticated Join maneuvers 

Terrestrial  topology  provided  in  emaps  shows  lanes  and 
their  numbering,  starting  from  1  for  the  rightmost  lane 
(leftmost  in certain countries).  Numbers  are assigned to roads 
at  intersections  and  roundabouts.  Knowledge  of  correct  lane-
level  positioning  is  achieved  by  SCR  and  SCC  subsystems, 
e.g., via hybrid measurements [2] or visual SLAM. 

III.  SAFETY AND EFFICIENCY 

A.  Vehicular Cells and Safety-Critical Communications 

WAVE 1.0 radio ranges in the order of 300 m and reliance 
on  V2I  communications  are  inappropriate  for  safety.  The 
vehicular  cell  concept  derives  from  observing  that  vehicles 
may  collide  only  if  close  to  each  other.  Let  Cell(X)  stand  for 
X’s vehicular cell. Assuming a multilane setting, highest traffic 
density  and  smallest  vehicles  size,  maximal  Cell(X)  would 
comprise 14 members in addition to X (2 closest predecessors 
and successors and 5 neighbors in each lateral lane), as shown 
in Fig. 2. Neighbors that may hit X belong to Cell(X). In a Cell, 
collision prevention implies ultra-fast coordination. That is the 
purpose of N2N very short-range communications (up to 30 m 
approximately),  activated  only  when  needed  (no  beaconing), 
longitudinally  (e.g.,  steep  deceleration)  or  laterally  (e.g.,  lane 
change,  subject  to  distributed  agreement).  Anonymity  is  a 
fundamental feature of N2N messages: source and destination 
fields  carry  non-reversible  names  (no  MAC  or  IP  address)—
see Section IV. Vehicles that belong to different Cells shall be 
able to coordinate their behaviors. That is the purpose of short-
range  SC  V2V  communications  (up  to  60  m  approximately). 
For  example,  safe  entrance  to  un-signaled  intersections  or 
roundabouts can be achieved by exchanging SC V2V messages 
among  members  of  competing  Cells.  (Safe  crossings  would 
mostly  rest  on  optical  communications.)  N2N  and  SC  V2V 
messaging is performed via power-controlled omnidirectional, 
directional, or MIMO radio antennas that operate on channels 
distinct  from  those  used  for  V2X  telecommunications.  With 
power control, radio ranges can be tuned as desired (up to ≈ 30 
m  or  ≈  60  m).  N2N  and  SC  V2V  communications  serve  to 
cope with failures of onboard sensors and to achieve proactive 
safety—the  ability  to  influence  the  behaviors  of  nearby 
vehicles.  Communications  are  not  just  yet  another  “sensing” 
technology. They supplement robotics and AI, able to  achieve 
reactive  safety  only,  since  behavioral  decisions  are  kept 
untold—others have to guess. Optics-based N2N messaging is 
an invaluable technology regarding privacy. 

V2X messages that are authenticated  can be imported in a 
SCC  subsystem  for  further  processing  (otherwise,  a  V2X 
message  is  kept  inside  a  NSC  subsystem).  Privacy  and 
cybersecurity issues related to V2X telecommunications differ 
from those arising with N2N and SC V2V communications. 

B.  Restricted Spanning of N2N Communications 

leaving  open 

Technologies  change  at  a  higher  pace  than  requirements 
(our  four  properties).  It  is  thus  wiser  to  specify  desired 
the  choice  of 
communication  primitives, 
appropriate underlying technologies. This is consistent with the 
emergence  of  software-defined  architectures  and  with  our 
recommendation for top-down approaches. Four primitives are 
defined  for  N2N  messaging.  A  LgSend  primitive  serves  to 
trigger  range  2  longitudinal  communications:  a  N2N  message 
sent by X shall reach X’s 2 closest predecessors and successors, 
if  any.  A  LtSend  primitive  serves  to  trigger  range  1  lateral 
communications: X shall be able to send N2N messages to its 
closest adjacent (left, right) neighbors, if any. Communications 
are transitive across Cells: N2N messages can be disseminated 
longitudinally  and  laterally.  Symmetrically,  we  have  defined 
the  LgReceive  and  LtReceive  primitives  (see  Section  IV). 
Enforcing  restricted  spanning  for  N2N  communications  has 
decisive merits regarding cybersecurity.  

C.  MAC Protocols 

 A  MAC  protocol  shall  match  higher-level  requirements. 
As  for  safety  and  efficiency,  a  MAC  protocol  shall  guarantee 
small bounded channel access delays (λ) under highest channel 
contention  conditions  and  small  bounded  delays  for  message 
dissemination under highest message loss conditions. A MAC 
protocol  is  acceptable  only  if  distances  travelled  in  λ  are  an 
order  of  magnitude  smaller  than  inter-vehicular  gaps.  As  for 
privacy  and  cybersecurity,  a  MAC  protocol  shall  help  in 
thwarting  eavesdropping,  masquerading,  message  forging, 
Sybil attacks,  and  the  like. WAVE  1.0  MAC  protocols  fail  to 
meet these requirements, by huge margins concerning λ [3-6]. 
Different MAC  protocols  are defined  for N2N  radio  channels 
and  for  SC  V2V  radio  channels.  Suitable  protocols  can  be 
found in the literature—e.g., [7-8].  

D.  Periodic Beaconing Considered Useless for Safety 

Given  that  radio  communications  are  unreliable,  some 
vehicle(s)  may  not  receive  beacons  delivered  to  others. 
Consequently,  Local  Dynamic  Maps  (LDMs)  built  out  of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
periodic  beaconing  (Cooperative  Awareness  Messages)  may 
differ  significantly,  which  is  a  serious  weakness  regarding 
safety. Consider X, A and B moving at 90 km/h.  X broadcasts 
beacons  at  1  Hz.  Consider  the  case  where  a  given  beacon 
received by A is not received by B. X’s geolocations recorded 
in  LDM(A)  and  LDM(B)  differ  by  25  m,  enough  for  creating 
collisions. Despite periodic updates, discrepancies may persist. 
Algorithms such as terminating atomic broadcast or consensus 
keep  LDMs  mutually  consistent  (identical  in  our  case),  under 
assumptions … that are not met in AVNs. In an asynchronous 
model (delays have unknown bounds—the case with WAVE), 
consensus is impossible in the presence of a single loss [9]. In a 
synchronous model (delays have known upper bounds), neither 
unanimity nor strong majority can be achieved when loss ratios 
exceed modest thresholds [10-11]. Since channel access delays 
differ  for  any  2  broadcasters,  geolocations  read  in  different 
beacons  cannot  mirror  a  correct  instantaneous  “picture”  of 
some real global state. (This is a problem studied over the last 
30  years  in  the  Distributed  Algorithms  community.)  Being 
possibly  inaccurate  and  mutually  inconsistent,  LDMs  are 
useless  for  making  safety-preserving  decisions.  Moreover, 
LDMs  cannot  help  in  avoiding  accidents,  since  vehicle 
trajectories  cannot  be  predicted  with  certainty  from  past 
trajectories.  A  LDM  updated  at  UTC  time  t  cannot  reflect 
moves  made  by  vehicles  right  after  t,  which  moves  may  be 
dictated  by  unexpected  hazards—besides  depending  on  each 
other. Finally, why should a vehicle waste communication and 
computational  resources  to  maintain  knowledge  relative  to 
distant  vehicles  that  it  will  never  see?  Periodic  beaconing  is 
just another passive solution that may help to achieve reactive 
safety  probabilistically,  when  proactive  safety  is  needed  for 
collision  prevention.  In  addition 
to  being  useless  (and 
unreliable), periodic beaconing may be harmful. Beacons carry 
unencrypted  GNSS  data  (in  particular)  that  can  be  heard  by 
distant unknown vehicles and terrestrial nodes, thus facilitating 
eavesdropping and tracking.  

IV.  COHORTS 

Efficiency (very small inter-vehicular gaps) is antagonistic 
with safety. Both properties can nevertheless be reconciled. An 
AVN  being  an  instance  of  a  cyber-physical  system,  correct 
solutions  for  safety  and  efficiency  must  be  based  on  some 
appropriate  cyber-physical  construct.  A  linear  formation  of 
vehicles  in  a  given lane  is  commonly  referred  to as  a  platoon 
(long-lived  formation)  or  as  a  string  (short-lived  ad  hoc 
formation).  In  [12-13],  we  have  presented  and  discussed  the 
cohort  construct,  which  is  a  linear  formation  endowed  with  a 
specification.  In  addition  to  small  inter-vehicular  gaps  (iv-
gaps),  safe  inter-cohort  gaps  (IC-gaps)  have  been  proposed, 
large enough  for  guaranteeing  that  the  head of  a  cohort  never 
hits the tail of a preceding cohort. The rationale is to keep the 
number of rear-end collisions below an acceptable threshold in 
case a “brick wall” condition would develop within a cohort. A 
spontaneous  ranking  of  members  is  a  crucial  property  of  the 
cohort construct. An example of a similar idea can be found in 
[14]—concepts of convoy, authenticated members and vehicle 
sequence  numbers.  In  a  cohort,  members  assign  themselves 
consecutive ranks, 1 for the head and n (an inverse function of 
velocity) for the tail. Highest velocities and cohort sizes depend 
on  the  setting  (city  streets,  country  roads,  highways).  Any  2 

contiguous  members  exchange  N2N  messages  that  carry  SC 
data  or  data  needed  for  internal  cohort  management  (e.g., 
common knowledge of current n and velocity). Time-bounded 
broadcasts  can  be  instantiated  via  cohort-wide  N2N  message 
dissemination  [15]—unfeasible  with  WAVE  1.0  solutions. 
Details relative  to reliability  (losses  of  N2N  messages,  cohort 
splits  performed  when  a  N2N  link  is  detected  failed)  can  be 
found  in  referenced  publications.  Names  that  appear  in  N2N 
messages  exchanged  within  a  cohort  circulating  in  lane 
numbered  j  are  pairs  of  integers  {r,j},  where  r  stands  for 
sender’s  rank.  Longitudinal  N2N  messages  processed  by  a 
member ranked rth are those received from neighbors of ranks 
r+1 and r+2, or/and r-1 and r-2 (the LgReceive primitive). As 
for  lateral  N2N  messaging  and  LtReceive,  designation  of 
specific  lateral  neighbors  without  knowing  their  names  is  an 
issue. This problem has original solutions, based on optics [16-
17].  Human-less  seeing-is-believing  [17]  fits  ideally  with  the 
cohort  construct  (to  appear).  A  vehicle  that  wants  to  become 
member of a cohort activates a LgJoin primitive (if catching up 
with the tail of a cohort) or a LtJoin primitive (in case of a lane 
change), based on LgSend and LtSend primitives (see Fig. 2).  

A  novel  result  relates  to  the  spontaneous  formation  of 
homogeneous  cohorts.  Let  aul(V)  stand  for  V’s  automated 
driving  level.  Assume  that  vehicles  reactivity  and  agility  are 
higher with higher automation levels. With smaller iv-gaps and 
IC-gaps, efficiency is higher as well. A cohort (Γ) specification 
stipulates  the  smallest  and  highest  automation  levels accepted 
in Γ, denoted SL(Γ) and HL(Γ), respectively. (These levels may 
change  dynamically,  subject 
to  cohort-wide  agreement.) 
LgJoin  and  LtJoin  primitives  have  aul(.)  as  a  parameter.  If 
SL(Γ) ≤ aul(V) ≤ HL(Γ) holds, then V is accepted in cohort Γ. 
A  strictly  homogeneous  cohort  Γ  is  spontaneously  created  by 
setting  SL(Γ)  =  HL(Γ).  There  is  no  need  for  restricting  the 
circulation  of  highly  automated  vehicles  to  specific  lanes.  In 
addition  to  being  antagonistic  with  the  efficiency  property, 
such  a  constraint  might  be  a  source  of  frustration.  In  a 
multilane  highway,  other  vehicles  may  enjoy  fluid  traffic 
conditions  while  congestion  would  develop  in  specific  lanes. 
Vehicles  assigned  low  automation  levels  may  or  may  not  be 
equipped with communication capabilities. In the former case, 
they  would 
iv-gaps). 
Inefficiency  is  highest  in  the  latter  case  (human-driven 
vehicles),  since  we  would  have  iv-gaps  =  IC-gaps.  Another 
property of cohorts has been uncovered recently: a cohort is a 
trusted vehicular sub-network.  

inefficient  cohorts 

(large 

form 

V.  PRIVACY AND CYBERSECURITY  
Originally  devised  for  safety  and  efficiency,  a  cohort  is 
essential also for privacy and cybersecurity. Note that issues of 
cyber-surveillance  carried  out  by  sensors  installed  inside 
vehicles (e.g., cameras) are out of the scope of this paper. 

A.  Pseudonymity 

Solutions  based  on  asymmetric  cryptography,  PKIs  and 
pseudonymity  [18]  are  being  worked  out  by  standard-making 
bodies.  When  registered  and  authenticated  by  a  certification 
authority  (CA),  a  vehicle  is  assigned  a  unique  reversible 
certificate for accountability purposes (auditability, liability) as 
well  as  credentials, 
i.e.  pairs  {pseudonym,  pseudonym 
certificate},  referred  to  as  a  (certified)  pseudo  here.  Current 

 
 
solutions are not satisfactory [19-21]. For example, tracking is 
feasible despite frequent changes of pseudos. Major roadblocks 
can  be  eliminated  as  follows:  no  binding  with  beaconing,  no 
dependence  on  PKIs  (no  importation  of  new  pseudos).  Why 
should  a  vehicle  “prove”  that  it  has  been  authenticated  each 
time it sends a message? That is unnecessary if, as commonly 
assumed,  most  vehicles  are  not  malicious.  With  vehicular 
networks that lack structuring constructs and that rely on V2X 
telecommunications, there might be no alternative. Pseudos are 
spent  at  high  frequencies,  and  vehicles  must  replenish  their 
TPDs  with  new  credentials.  As  a  result,  an  AVN  is  prone  to 
man-in-the-middle  (MitM)  cyberattacks  (e.g.,  suppression  or 
falsification  of  pseudos)  launched  via  intrusions  of  terrestrial 
nodes. Moreover, communication and computational resources 
are  wasted.  Consider  ECDSA-256  signatures,  a  verification 
time of 2 ms, 7 Hz beaconing frequency, and a vehicle within 
WAVE  1.0  radio  range  (≈  300  m)  of  x  vehicles.  Thrashing 
develops as x tends to 70, the case in numerous settings. There 
are better ways of using onboard resources.  Finally, assuming 
that  vehicles  are  always  within  reach of  terrestrial  nodes,  that 
they  enter  mix-zones  whenever  necessary,  and  so  on  severely 
restricts the applicability of current solutions.  

B.  Anonymity in Trusted Vehicular Subnetworks 

A  cohort  is  a  vehicular  subnetwork  where  members  can 
trust  each  other,  provided  that  admission  into  a  cohort  is 
subject to verified authentication, as shown in Fig. 2. A pseudo 
must  be  used  to  sign  a  LgJoin  or  a  LtJoin  request.  Owing  to 
controlled  admission,  no  pseudo  need  be  used  afterwards  for 
N2N  messaging.  As  a  result,  pseudos  available  in  a  SC-TPD 
are consumed at reasonable  a  rate. This removes the  need for 
on-the-move  TPD  replenishment  of  new  pseudos  via  PKIs.  If 
required  by  administrative  or  contractual  regulations,  TPD 
replenishment  would  be  performed  at  secured  places  (no  V2I 
communications).  Vehicle  thefts  (an  issue  with  long-lived 
pseudos) can be prevented or combated very easily. Self-issued 
names  {r,j}  that  appear  in  N2N  messages  are  non-reversible. 
Full anonymity is thus guaranteed, and these names entail very 
negligible  processing  overhead.  WAVE  2.0  solutions  provide 
vehicles with a double obfuscation scheme (pseudos and names 
{r,j}),  while  meeting  the  accountability  requirement.  Another 
condition  for  intra-cohort  trust  is  immediate  detection  of  any 
malicious behavior (see Subsection E). 

C.  Close Cyberthreats in Trusted Vehicular Subnetworks 

Owing to the LgReceive and LtReceive primitives (Section 
IV), close cyberthreats that target X may only be launched by 
members  of  Cell(X).  That  is  a  drastic  change  compared  to 
traditional approaches where cyberthreats may be instigated by 
unknown  distant  vehicles  and 
terrestrial  nodes.  Close 
eavesdropping  is  not  an  issue.  N2N  messages  do  not  carry 
GNSS coordinates, thus geo-privacy is ensured. N2N messages 
carry unencrypted SC data such as “lane merging”, “clear lane” 
(emergency  vehicle),  “new  v”  (bad  road  conditions,  lane 
blocking).  Secrecy  is  not  an  issue.  Vehicles  nearby  Cell(X) 
may  overhear  N2N  messages  exchanged  by  members  of 
Cell(X) which start a SC maneuver. That can only be beneficial 
(think  of  concurrent  conflicting  maneuvers).  As  regards 
metadata,  close  tracking  of  a  given  name  {r,j}  is  pointless, 
since  the  same  name  may  be  used  by  different  vehicles  at 
unpredictable  different  times.  Assuming  in  the  order  of  5,000 

pseudos  in  a  SC-TPD,  none would  be  used  more than once  a 
day.  Reuse  is  thus  possible  without  being  tracked.  Close 
physical tracking/spying (a vehicle is followed by the same car 
for too long) is out of the scope of this paper.  

We  have  analyzed  close  cyberattacks  such  as,  e.g.,  N2N 
message falsification, suppression, masquerading, Sybil attack, 
injection of false messages, and demonstrated that they cannot 
endanger  safety  in  a  Cell  or  defeat  controlled  admission  in  a 
cohort (to appear). Consequently, they can only originate from 
irrational  neighbors.  A  honest  vehicle  may  behave  as  an 
irrational  adversary  when  its  SCC  subsystem  has  been 
contaminated by  a  malware, leading  to  those  mitm  (malware-
in-the-middle) cyberattacks mentioned above. A contaminated 
vehicle is quickly excluded (see Subsection E). It is customary 
to  assume  that  an  AVN  comprises  a  minority  of  malicious 
vehicles.  Assuming  cohorts  of  size  3  at  least  (other  cases  not 
detailed  here,  for  conciseness),  this  assumption  can  be  stated 
more accurately: at most 1 malicious member in any group of 3 
longitudinal  neighbors.  Owing  to  the  LgReceive  primitive, 
forging or  suppression  of a  longitudinal  N2N  message  m  sent 
by  a  range  2  neighbor  and  relayed  by  a  range  1  neighbor  is 
trivially  detected:  m  is  accepted  only  if  seen  twice.  A  lateral 
N2N message is accepted only if identical or consistent copies 
are received from at least 2 out of 3 neighbors. Masquerading 
and Sybil attacks are detected on the spot, owing to a  generic 
property of suitable MAC protocols: X of rank x can only send 
a  longitudinal (resp.,  lateral) N2N  message at a  specific UTC 
time Lgx (resp., Ltx). A receiver can thus trivially tell whether X 
tries to impersonate another member (radio channel accessed at 
times  other  than  Lgx  or  Ltx,  or  rank  other  than  x).  The  same 
goes for injections of false messages. 

D.  Distant Cyberthreats and Cyber-Stealth Mode 

They can be launched via V2X communications. Given that 
a NSC subsystem has no access to a SCR subsystem and that 
motions of a vehicle are under the exclusive control of a SCR 
subsystem,  distant  cyberattacks  cannot  compromise  safety. 
Recall  that  SC-TPDs  are  immune  to  distant  cyberattacks  (no 
new  pseudos  need  be  imported).  Conversely,  cybersecurity  is 
not  guaranteed  for  NSC  subsystems.  Distant  cyberattacks  on 
input ports may disrupt convenient services (e.g., infotainment, 
traffic  data),  a  tolerable  nuisance.  Distant  eavesdroppers  may 
exploit outgoing V2X messages. Personal data secrecy/privacy 
(message contents) can be achieved through encryption. Other 
privacy  threats  are  linked  with  metadata.  Tracking  is  feasible 
despite  frequent  pseudo  changes,  and  facilitated  with  probes 
issued  by  commodity-grade  wifi  handlers.  We  introduce  the 
cyber-stealth  mode  option  for  NSC  subsystems  of  privately 
owned vehicles: muteness is enforced (no V2X outputs, to the 
exception  of  e-Call  and  pseudonymized  crowdsourcing—see 
further). This option which guarantees passengers privacy is in 
line with the EU General Data Protection Regulation entered in 
force in Europe in May 2018 [22]. SC V2V messages serve to 
avoid  accidents.  Thus,  medium-range  V2V/X2V  emergency 
messages broadcast for announcing an accident (recognition of 
a  defeat)  are  not  SC  messages.  Such  messages  may  not  be 
necessary  since  recent  radars  and  cameras  have  ranges 
comparable  to  WAVE  ranges.  The  broadcasting  of  V2X 
messages  is  useful  for  updating  global  traffic  data.  Estimates 
suffice  for  planning  and  traffic  management  purposes.  A 

 
 
variation of periodic beaconing akin to crowdsourcing may be 
of interest. Every member of a cohort (Γ) runs an algorithm A 
serving  to  tell  whether  it  must  broadcast  a  V2X  message 
carrying  Γ’s  length  (common  knowledge  within  Γ)  and  its 
GNSS coordinates. A pseudo found in its NSC-TPD is used to 
sign such a message. Receivers learn about the existence of a 
cohort,  its  spanning  and  approximate  geolocations  of  non-
identifiable members. Besides preserving privacy, this scheme 
induces  light  channel  loads:  1  (deterministic  A)  or  much  less 
than n (probabilistic A) broadcasts at every algorithmic round. 

E.  Malicious Behavior, Physical Exclusion, Accountability 

That  a  CA  or  a  PKI  has  delivered  pseudos  to  a  vehicle  X 
does not prohibit X from behaving maliciously, in the physical 
space, and in cyber space by injecting bogus data, thus causing 
accidents.  Revocation  of  credentials  (PKI-based  solutions) 
achieves  eviction  in  cyber  space,  which  does  not  suffice.  A 
malicious  vehicle  must  be physically  excluded  from  an  AVN. 
To this end, SC-TPDs contain predicates, such as: 

- Any 2 consecutive activations of LgSend or LtSend shall 
be separated at least by (latency derived from a MAC protocol) 
- Member ranked rth may activate LgSend (resp., LtSend) at 

UTC times Lgx (resp., Ltx) only 

-  SCR  subsystem  sensors  detect  a  new  neighbor  in  a  Cell 

and N2N communications are active. 

Violation of a predicate, UTC timestamped, is recorded in 
SC-TPD,  and  leads  to  a  Stop.  The  SCR  subsystem,  informed 
by  the  SCC  subsystem,  takes  control:  red  flashing  warning 
lights  are  turned  on,  velocity  is  reduced,  until  a  safe  halt  is 
possible  (parking  spot  or  emergency  lane).  A  pseudonymized 
and encrypted V2X message is broadcast, aimed at appropriate 
public/private  organizations  (e.g.,  police,  highway  authorities, 
insurance companies). That message carries the GNSS location 
of where to find the vehicle, its reversible certificate, and other 
data recorded in SC-TPD. Accountability is guaranteed. 

F.  Societal Issues 

With WAVE 1.0 solutions, safety can be compromised by 
cyberattacks, and cyber-surveillance remains an issue. Fees are 
charged for telecommunications and PKI services. WAVE 2.0 
solutions—those  briefly  exposed  here  or  found  in  recent 
publications,  and  under  study—achieve  highest  safety  and 
immunity  to  cyberattacks.  Full  privacy  is  enabled  with  the 
cyber-stealth  mode  option.  Modest  fees  are  due  for  V2X 
telecommunications,  and  there  is  no  billing  for  N2N  or  SC 
V2V communications or PKI services. The crucial question is: 

In  which  type  of  motorized  society  do  we  want  to  live, 

subject to or free from cyber-surveillance? 

REFERENCES 

[1]  SAE J3016 standard, www.sae.org/news/3544. 
[2]  R.  Toledo-Moreo,  D.  Bétaille,  and  F.  Peyret,  “Lane-level  integrity 
provision for navigation and map matching with GNSS, dead reckoning, 

and  enhanced  maps”,  IEEE  Trans.  Intelligent  Transport.  Systems,  vol. 
11, 1, March 2010, 100-112. 

[3]  P. Kyasanur and N. Vaidya, “Selfish MAC layer misbehavior in wireless 
networks”,  IEEE,  Int’l  Conf.  on  Dependable  Systems  and  Networks 
(DSN’03), 2003, 173-182. 
J. Tang, Y. Cheng, and W. Zhuang, “Real-time misbehavior detection in 
IEEE  802.11-based  wireless  networks:  An  analytical  approach”,  IEEE 
Trans. Mobile Computing, vol. 13, 1, Jan. 2014, 146-158. 

[4] 

[5]  K.  Karlsson,  C.  Bergenhem,  and  E.  Hedin,  “Field  measurements  of 
IEEE  802.11p communication  in  NLOS  environments  for  a  platooning 
application”, IEEE VTC Fall-2012, 1-5. 

[6]  Y. Yao et al., “Delay analysis and study of IEEE 802.11p based DSRC 
safety communication in a highway environment”, IEEE Infocom 2013, 
1591-1599. 

[7]  G.  Le  Lann,  “A  collision-free  MAC  protocol  for  fast  message 
dissemination  in  vehicular  strings”,  IEEE  Conference  on  Standards  for 
Communications and Networking (CSCN’16), Oct.-Nov. 2016, 7 p. 
[8]  M.  Hadded  et  al.,  “TDMA-Based  MAC  protocols  for  vehicular ad hoc 
networks:  a  survey,  qualitative  analysis,  and  open  research  issues”, 
IEEE Com. Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17(4), 2015, 2461-2492. 

[9]  M.J.  Fischer,  N.A.  Lynch,  and  M.S.  Paterson,    “Impossibility  of 
distributed consensus with one faulty process”, Journal of the ACM, vol. 
32, n°2, April 1985, 374-382. 

[10]  N.  Santoro  and  P.  Widmayer,  “Agreement  in  synchronous  networks 
with  ubiquitous  faults”,  Theoretical  Computer  Science  384,  Elsevier 
Science Direct, 2007, 232-249. 

[11]  U.  Schmid,  B.  Weiss,  and  I.  Keidar,  “Impossibility  results  and  lower 
bounds for consensus under link failures”, SIAM Journal of Computing, 
vol. 38, 5, Jan. 2009, 1912-1951. 

[12]  G.  Le  Lann,  “Cohorts  and  groups  for  safe  and  efficient  autonomous 
driving on highways”, 3rd IEEE VNC Conference, Nov. 2011, 1-8. 
[13]  G.  Le  Lann,  “Safety  in  vehicular  networks—On  the  inevitability  of 
short-range  directional  communications”,    Proc.  14th  Intl.  Conference 
on  Ad  Hoc,  Mobile,  and  Wireless  Networks  (AdHoc-Now),  June-July 
2015, Springer LNCS 9143, 347-360. 

[14]  A.  Studer,  M.  Luk,  and  A.  Perrig,  “Efficient  mechanisms  to  provide 
convoy member and vehicle sequence authentication in VANETs”, 3rd 
Intl. Conference on Security and Privacy in Communications Networks 
(SecureComm), Sept. 2007, 422-432. 

[15]  G. Le Lann, “Fast distributed agreements and safety-critical scenarios in 
VANETs”,  Proc.  IEEE  Intl.  Conf.  on  Computing,  Networking  and 
Communications (ICNC 2017), Jan. 2017, 200-206. 

[16]  IEEE  Spectrum,  “LEDs  bring  new  light  to  car-to-car  communication”, 
Aug.  2014,  http://spectrum.ieee.org/transportation/advanced-cars/leds-
bring-new-light-to-car-to-car-communication 

[17]  J.M. McCune and A. Perrig, “Seeing-is-believing: using camera phones 
for  human-verifiable  authentication”,  Intl.  Journal  Security  and 
Networks, vol. 4 (1/2), 2009, 43-56. 

[18]  J.  Petit  et  al.,  «  Pseudonym  schemes  in  vehicular  networks:  a  survey”, 

IEEE Comm. Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 17 (1), 2015, 228-255. 

[19]  B. Wiedersheim et al., “Privacy in inter-vehicular networks: why simple 
pseudonym  change  is  not  enough”,  7th  IEEE/IFIP  Intl.  Conf.  on 
Wireless  On-demand  Network  Systems  and  Services,  (WONS),  2010, 
176-183. 

[20]  D. Eckhoff and C. Sommer, “Driving for big data? Privacy concerns in 
vehicular  networking”,  IEEE  Security  &  Privacy  Conference,  Vol.  12, 
Issue 1, 2014, 77 – 79.                       

[21]  J. Petit et al., “Connected vehicles: Surveillance threat and mitigation », 

Black Hat Europe, Nov. 2015, 12 p. 
[22]  EU GDPR, https://www.eugdpr.org/ 

 
 
 
