Machine Learning for Wireless Connectivity and
Security of Cellular-Connected UAVs

Ursula Challita∗, Aidin Ferdowsi†, Mingzhe Chen‡, and Walid Saad†
∗ Ericsson Research, Stockholm, Sweden, Email: ursula.challita@ericsson.com
† Wireless@VT, Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA, Emails: {aidin,walids}@vt.edu
‡ Beijing Laboratory of Advanced Information Network, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Beijing, China 100876, Email: chenmingzhe@bupt.edu.cn

8
1
0
2

v
o
N
9
2

]
T
I
.
s
c
[

3
v
8
4
3
5
0
.
4
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Cellular-connected unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs)
will
inevitably be integrated into future cellular networks as
new aerial mobile users. Providing cellular connectivity to UAVs
will enable a myriad of applications ranging from online video
streaming to medical delivery. However, to enable a reliable
wireless connectivity for the UAVs as well as a secure operation,
various challenges need to be addressed such as interference
management, mobility management and handover, cyber-physical
attacks, and authentication. In this paper, the goal is to expose
the wireless and security challenges that arise in the context
of UAV-based delivery systems, UAV-based real-time multimedia
streaming, and UAV-enabled intelligent transportation systems.
To address such challenges, artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) based
solution schemes are introduced. The introduced approaches en-
able the UAVs to adaptively exploit the wireless system resources
while guaranteeing a secure operation, in real-time. Preliminary
simulation results show the beneﬁts of the introduced solutions for
each of the aforementioned cellular-connected UAV application
use case.

I. INTRODUCTION

Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) will be ubiquitous and
will play a vital role in various sectors ranging from medical
and agricultural
to surveillance and public safety. Provid-
ing connectivity to UAVs is crucial for data collection and
dissemination in such applications. Unlike current wireless
UAV connectivity that relies on short-range communication
technologies (e.g., WiFi, Bluetooth), cellular connectivity
allows beyond line-of-sight control, low latency, real time
communication, robust security, and ubiquitous coverage. In
lead to many new
essence, cellular-connected UAVs will
application use cases which we classify into three primary
categories: UAV-based delivery systems (UAV-DSs), UAV-
based real-time multimedia streaming (UAV-RMS) networks,
transportation systems (UAV-
and UAV-enabled intelligent
ITSs), as shown in Figure 1.

However, to reap the beneﬁts of cellular-connected UAVs
for UAV-DSs, UAV-RMS, and UAV-ITSs use cases, various
unique communication and security challenges for each of
∗This work was done when this author was at The University of Edinburgh.
This work was supported by the Army Research Ofﬁce (ARO) under Grant
W911NF-17-1-0593 and, in part, by the U.S. National Science Foundation
under Grants OAC-1541105 and IIS-1633363. The views and conclusions
contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be
interpreted as representing the ofﬁcial policies, either expressed or implied,
of ARO or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to
reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding
any copyright notation herein.

such applications need to be addressed. For instance, efﬁcient
handover and online path planning are more crucial for UAV-
DSs applications while cooperative multi-UAV data transmis-
sion and secured consensus of UAV swarms are unique for
UAV-ITSs. In this scope, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) based so-
lution schemes are regarded as a powerful tool for addressing
the aforementioned challenges1. It is worthwhile noting that
such challenges can also be addressed at different levels such
as the PHY layer and 3D coverage enhancement2. In this
regard, AI-based solution schemes assist in addressing the
aforementioned challenges while yielding new improvements
in the design of the network. Although many approaches exist
for addressing the aforementioned challenges, we focus on
machine learning solutions3 due to their inherent ability for
predicting future network states thus allowing the UAVs to
adapt to the dynamics of the network in an online manner.
In particular, machine learning techniques allow the UAVs
to generalize their observations to unseen network states and
can scale to large-sized networks which therefore makes them
suitable for UAV applications. Moreover, for such UAV-based
applications, energy efﬁciency and computation capability is
a key design constraint. Consequently, the main scope of this
work is to highlight the advantages that AI brings for cellular-
connected UAVs, under various constraints.

In this regard, current existing literature study the changes
in the radio environment of cellular-connected UAVs with
altitude and analyze the corresponding implications on mo-
bility performance [2]. Moreover, in [3], the authors provide
an overview on the opportunities and challenges for the use
of UAVs for wireless communication applications; however,
the primary focus is on their application as base stations
(BSs). The authors in [4] propose a trajectory optimization
scheme for cellular-connected UAVs while guaranteeing cel-
lular connectivity. Although the works in [3] and [4] discuss
cellular-connected UAVs, they do not focus on the speciﬁcs of
UAV-DS, UAV-RMS, and UAV-ITS applications, nor do they
1For more information, technical details related to the proposed AI tech-

niques can be found at [1]

2Some existing surveys already discuss some of these issues [2], [3].
3The proposed machine learning techniques are mainly divided into two
phases, the training phase followed by the testing phase. Therefore, although
the training phase requires some heavy computation, it does not have any
impact on the behavior of the UAVs during the testing phase, which refers to
the actual execution time.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1: Cellular-connected UAVs applications in UAV-based
delivery systems, UAV-based real-time multimedia streaming
networks, and UAV-enabled intelligent transportation
systems.

address AI or security challenges. Therefore, despite being in-
teresting, none of the existing works propose and evaluate AI-
based solutions for addressing both wireless and security chal-
lenges that arise in the context of cellular-connected UAVs. In
essence, the state-of-the-art does not study the potential of
AI as a means for addressing the challenges of integrating
cellular-connected UAVs across various applications.

The main contribution of this paper is to expose the major
wireless and security challenges that arise in different UAV-
based applications and suggest artiﬁcial neural network (ANN)
based solution approaches for addressing such challenges. In
particular, we focus on three major use cases for cellular-
connected UAVs: UAV-based delivery systems, UAV-based
real-time multimedia streaming networks, and UAV-enabled
intelligent transportation systems. For each one of these use
cases, we introduce the main technical challenges, in terms of
wireless connectivity and security (as illustrated in Figure 2),
while outlining new AI-inspired solutions to address those
challenges. The introduced AI solutions enable the UAVs to
predict future network changes thus adaptively optimizing
their actions in order to efﬁciently manage their resources
while securing a safe operation. We also provide preliminary
simulation results to showcase the beneﬁts of the introduced
solutions for each cellular-connected UAV application use
case. Here, we restrict our attention to the security at higher
communication layers since physical layer security issues and
solutions have been discussed in [5].

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the communication and wireless challenges in UAV-

Fig. 2: Examples of wireless and security challenges of
cellular-connected UAVs in UAV-based delivery systems,
UAV-based real-time multimedia streaming networks, and
UAV-enabled intelligent transportation systems.

DS and proposes AI-based solution schemes for such chal-
lenges. Section III highlights the main communication and
security challenges in UAV-RMS applications and the corre-
sponding proposed ANN-based solutions. Section IV provides
ANN-based solution schemes for the main communication
and security challenges in UAV-ITSs. Finally, conclusions are
given in Section V.

II. UAV-BASED DELIVERY SYSTEMS

A. Motivation

UAV-based delivery systems have received much attention
recently for various applications such as postal and package
delivery (e.g., Amazon prime), food delivery,
transport of
medicines and vaccinations, and drone taxis for delivery of
people [6]. Compared to conventional delivery methods, UAV-
DSs allow a faster delivery process at a reduced cost. They
can also provide mission critical services reaching remote and

TaxiTraffic monitoring Accident reportFood deliveryMedical deliveryVR applicationsInspectionPublic safetyTaxi dronesUAV-RMS ApplicationsUAV-DS ApplicationsUAV-ITS Applications𝑡1𝑡2𝑡4𝑡5𝑡6𝑡3Autonomous Path Planning with Connectivity ConstraintIntelligent HandoverCyber and Physical AttacksUAV-enabled Edge CachingAerial v/s Ground User IdentificationAuthenticationInsider AttackUAV SwarmVelocitySpacingSensor FusionCooperative Multi-UAV Data TransmissionUAV-based Delivery Systems UAV-based Real-time Multimedia StreamingUAV-based Intelligent Transportation SystemsInterference ManagementInterference Signalsinaccessible areas. To reap the beneﬁts of UAV-DSs, it is im-
portant to provide cellular connectivity to the UAVs for control
and signaling data transmission. In essence, providing cellular
connectivity to delivery UAVs allows network operators to
track their location and guarantee a secure delivery of the
transported goods. Therefore, to realize such beneﬁts, it is
important to address several wireless and security challenges
related to cellular-connected UAV-DSs, ranging from efﬁcient
handover and path planning to cyber-physical attacks.

B. Wireless Challenges and AI Solutions

and

1) Ultra-Reliable

Low-Latency Communications
(URLLC): In UAV-DS, the UAVs must send critical control
information while delivering goods to their destinations. This,
in essence, requires latency of 1 ms or less and exceedingly
stringent reliability with a target block error rate as low
as 10−5 [7], especially in mission-critical scenarios such
as medical delivery. Wireless latency encompasses both
signaling overhead and data transmission. To achieve low
signaling latency, channel estimation can be predicted in
advance using AI thus allowing a proactive allocation of
radio resources. This can be realized by incorporating a
long-short term memory (LSTM) cell at the UAV level for
learning a sequence of future channel states [8]. LSTMs are
effective in dealing with long term dependencies which makes
them suitable for learning a sequence of a time-dependent
vector. Moreover, in a large network of UAVs, constantly
communicating with a remote cloud can introduce substantial
communication and signaling delays. To reduce such delays,
one can rely on on-device machine learning or edge AI. As
opposed to centralized, cloud-based AI schemes, on-device
machine learning is based on a distributed machine learning
approach, such as federated learning (FL),
in which the
training data describing a particular AI task (e.g., resource
management or computing) is stored in a distributed fashion
across the UAVs and the optimization problem is solved
collectively [9]. This in turn enables a large number of
UAVs to collaboratively allocate their radio resources in
a distributed way thus reducing wireless congestion and
device-to-cloud latency. Finally, it is important to note that
transmission latency can be further reduced by improving
wireless connectivity, as discussed in Section III-B.

2) Efﬁcient Handover: In UAV-DSs, the UAVs face fre-
quent handovers and handover to distant cells thus resulting
in a ping-pong effect. As opposed to ground UEs, cellular-
connected UAVs exhibit LoS links with multiple neighboring
BSs simultaneously which, along with dynamic channel varia-
tions, can result in a ﬂuctuation in the quality of their wireless
transmission. In this context, it is necessary to have complete
and sequential information about the channel signal quality
at different locations before and after the current location
of a particular UAV. As such, bidirectional LSTM cells (bi-
LSTMs) are suited for addressing this challenge as they exploit
both the previous and the future context, by processing the
input data (i.e., channel quality) from two directions with
two separate hidden layers. In particular, one LSTM layer

processes the input sequence in the forward direction, while
the other LSTM layer processes the input
in the reverse
direction [10]. Therefore, instead of accounting for the next
time step only, this scheme enables each UAV to consider the
channel quality at its previous and future sequence locations.
This framework can hence be trained to allow the UAVs
to update their corresponding cell association vector while
avoiding frequent handovers based on previous and future
channel signal quality.

3) Autonomous Path Planning with Connectivity Con-
straints: A critical factor for UAV-DSs is to maintain reliable
cellular connectivity for the UAVs at each time instant along
their corresponding paths while also minimizing the total time
required to accomplish their delivery mission. In essence,
a delivery UAV must maintain a minimum signal-to-noise-
and-interference (SINR) ratio along its path to guarantee a
reliable communication link for its control information. This
naturally depends on the UAV’s location, cell association
vector, transmit power level, and the location of the serving
ground BS. As such, a key challenge for UAV-DSs is to
optimize the UAVs’ paths so as to reduce their total delivery
time while guaranteeing reliable wireless connectivity and thus
an instantaneous SINR threshold value. Although a centralized
approach can update the path plan of each UAV, this would
require real-time tracking of the UAVs and control signals to
be transmitted to the UAVs at all time. Moreover, a centralized
approach incurs high round-trip latencies and requires a central
entity to acquire full knowledge of the current network state.
To overcome these challenges, online edge algorithms must be
implemented individually by each UAV to plan its future path.
In this regard, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) can be
combined with a deep reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm
based on a recurrent neural network (RNN) (e.g., echo state
network (ESN) or LSTM) at the UAV level resulting in a
CNN-RNN scheme. ESN exhibits dynamic temporal behavior
and is characterized by its adaptive memory that enables it
to store necessary previous state information to predict the
future steps of each UAV. Meanwhile, CNN are mainly used
for image recognition and thus can be used for identifying the
UAV’s environment by extracting features from input images.
For instance, CNNs aid the UAVs in identifying the location of
the ground BSs, ground UEs, and other UAVs in the network.
These extracted features are then fed to a deep RNN which can
be trained to learn an optimized sequence of the UAV’s future
steps, that would minimize its delivery time and guarantee a
reliable cellular connectivity at each time instant, based on the
input features.

In this regard, in [11], we proposed a deep RL frame-
work based on ESN (D-ESN) for optimizing the trajectories
of multiple cellular-connected UAVs in an online manner
while minimizing latency and interference. For simplicity,
we consider an input vector describing the locations of the
neighboring ground BSs and other UAVs instead of extracting
such features from a CNN. To highlight the gain of D-ESN
for path planning, we compare the average values of the (a)
wireless latency per UAV and (b) rate per ground UE resulting

III. UAV-BASED REAL-TIME MULTIMEDIA STREAMING
APPLICATIONS

A. Motivation

One key use case for cellular-connected UAVs is to provide
various real-time multimedia streaming applications such as
online video streaming and broadcasting, UAV-enabled virtual
reality (VR), online tracking and localization of mobile targets,
and surveillance. In essence, providing cellular connectivity to
the UAVs enables online transmission of data and low-latency
wireless communication which are essential factors for mul-
timedia streaming applications. To enable effective delivery
of such real-time multimedia using cellular-connected UAVs,
several wireless and security challenges need to be addressed
ranging from interference management to authentication.

B. Wireless Challenges and AI Solutions

1) Interference Management: For UAV-RMS applications,
UAVs will mainly transmit data in the uplink. Nevertheless,
the ability of cellular-connected UAVs to establish LoS con-
nectivity with multiple ground BSs can lead to substantial
mutual interference among them as well as to the ground
users. To address this challenge, new improvements in the
design of future cellular networks such as advanced receivers,
cell coordination, 3D frequency reuse, and 3D beamforming,
are needed. For instance, due to their ability of recognizing
and classifying images, CNNs can be implemented on each
UAV in order to identify several features of the environment
such as the location of UAVs, BSs, and ground UEs. Such an
approach will enable each UAV to adjust its beamwidth tilt
angle so as to minimize the interference on the ground UEs.
Moreover, in streaming scenarios, UAV trajectory optimization
is also essential. In particular, physical layer solutions such as
3D beamforming, can be combined with an interference-aware
path planning scheme to guarantee more efﬁcient communi-
cation links for both ground and aerial users. Such a path
planning scheme (e.g., such as the one we proposed in [11])
allows the UAVs to adapt their movement based on the rate
requirements of both aerial UAV-UEs and ground UEs, thus
improving the overall network performance.

2) UAV-enabled Edge Caching: For various real-time mul-
timedia streaming applications, cellular-connected UAVs must
generate videos from data ﬁles collected using sensors and
cameras. For instance, in UAV-enabled VR applications, the
UAVs will generate 360◦ videos for each user. However, each
UAV can only collect a limited number of data ﬁles which
might not be sufﬁcient for generating all the requested videos.
Meanwhile, cache-enabled UAVs can store common data ﬁles
related to popular content or for generating videos that users
may request in the future thus reducing the number of data
ﬁles that UAVs need to collect when a request is made [13].
For instance, for UAV-enabled VR applications, cache-enabled
UAVs can directly store a 360◦ video and send a rotated
version of this stored video according to each user’s viewing
perspective. Moreover, for game broadcast applications, cache-
enabled UAVs can store the environment of the game and

Fig. 3: Performance assessment of the proposed deep
ESN-based path planning algorithm in terms of average (a)
wireless latency per UAV and (b) rate per ground UE as
compared to the shortest path approach, for different number
of UAVs [11].

from the proposed path planning scheme and the shortest path
scheme, as shown in Fig. 3. Clearly, from Fig. 3, we can see
that exploiting a deep ESN-based path planning scheme under
connectivity constraints for cellular-connected UAVs results in
a more reliable wireless connectivity and in lower latency, as
compared to wireless-unaware shortest path scheme.

C. Security Challenges and AI Solutions

Due to the UAVs’ altitude limitations and the LoS commu-
nication link with the ground BS, UAV-based delivery systems
are vulnerable to cyber-physical (CP) attacks in which an
adversary aims at compromising a delivery UAV, taking over
its control, and ultimately destroying, delaying, or stealing
the transported goods. To thwart such CP attacks, the UAV
can create a CP threat map in which the adversaries locations
can be categorized based on the environmental objects where
the UAVs can be physically attacked as well as communi-
cation network where the cyber attacks can be imposed to
the communication link. Even though prior works assume
that a threat map is predetermined [12], it is important to
create such map in an online manner in order to account
for real-time changes in the environment and to overcome
the memory limitation of the UAVs for storing a large-scale
map. To realize this, a CNN can be trained for classifying
the high-risk locations by taking as input the images of the
UAV’s surrounding environment along each position of its
path. From the operator’s perspective, it is also important to
detect any potential attack by identifying any abnormal or
undesirable behavior in the UAVs’ motion. Therefore, given
their capability of dealing with time-series data, RNNs can
be adopted for capturing the UAV’s motion characteristics by
feeding them with the UAV’s dynamics such as its position,
speed, acceleration, and destination location. In this case, the
RNN’s output will be the predicted UAV’s normal motion
and, thus, using this output the operator can distinguish UAV’s
abnormal motion which is resulted from a CP attack.

12345Number of UAVs0102030405060Average wireless latency per UAV (ms)(a)Shortest PathProposed Approach12345Number of UAVs0.150.20.250.30.350.40.45Average rate per ground UE (Mbps)(b)Shortest PathProposed Approachdata from Youku, Fig. 4(a) shows that the ESN-based algorithm
can accurately predict the content request distribution of a
given user. Fig. 4 (b) shows the average transmit power per
UAV of cache-enabled UAVs as a function of the number of
users. In Fig. 4, we can see that the proposed ESN algorithm
for cache-enabled UAVs yields a considerable reduction in
transmit power compared to a baseline without caching.

3) Identiﬁcation of Aerial and Ground Users: As shown
in [2],
the radio propagation environment experienced by
cellular-connected UAVs differs from that experienced by
ground users. Consequently, to maximize the total network
performance, a network operator must allocate its radio re-
sources differently between airborne and ground users, es-
pecially for UAV-RMS applications. To realize this, network
operators should be capable of differentiating an airborne
user from a ground one which cannot be achieved by solely
relying on self-reporting due to the possibility of a faulty
report. Instead, network operators can utilize wireless cellular
radio measurements such as reference signal received power
(RSRP), received signal strength indicator (RSSI), and refer-
ence signal received quality (RSRQ) for user classiﬁcation.
These features can essentially act as an input
to a deep
belief network (DBN) which can be trained for classifying an
airborne user from a ground one. In essence, DBNs are deep
architectures that consist of a stack of restricted Boltzmann
machines (RBMs), thus having the beneﬁt that each layer
can learn more complex features than the layers before it. In
essence, a pre-training step is done in DBNs thus overcoming
the vanishing gradient problem. This is then followed by ﬁne-
tuning the network weights using conventional error back
propagation algorithm.

C. Security Challenges and AI Solutions

In UAV-RMS applications, an attacker can disrupt
the
UAV’s data transmissions by forging the identities of the
transmitting UAVs’ and sending disrupted data using their
identity. This type of insider attacks becomes particularly
acute in a large-scale UAV system. In particular,
the BS
must process the received multimedia ﬁles from all the UAVs
and allocate computational resources for authenticating the
UAVs. However, in large-scale networks, authenticating all the
UAVs at once exceeds the BS’s computational resources, thus,
incurring delay for processing the received ﬁles. To avoid this
delay, the BS can authenticate only a fraction of the UAVs at
each time step. To realize this, the BS could implement a deep
RL algorithm based on LSTM in order to learn what signals
to authenticate at each time step of its authentication process.
In particular, this framework takes as an input a sequence
of previous security states of each UAV indicating whether
a UAV was previously vulnerable to attacks, and learns a
sequence of future authentication decisions for each UAV.
LSTMs are suitable for this application since they can learn
the interdependence of UAVs’ vulnerability at the past time
steps, memorize the importance of UAVs to the BS, and map
the past sequence of UAV states to a future decision sequence.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4:
(a) Comparison of the content request probability
predictions for the proposed conceptor ESN algorithm with
the real data and (b) the average UAV transmit power as a
function of the number of users in the network for the
proposed conceptor ESN algorithm with and without
caching [13].
thus would only need to track the motions of the players
for updating the cached data. Here, CNNs can once again
be adopted for allowing cache-enabled UAVs to store popular
videos or common data ﬁles. In particular, CNNs can extract
and store the common features of the data ﬁles that are
requested by different users or by each user, at different time
slots. Furthermore, CNNs can be used to record the features
of each UAV’s surrounding environment. Consequently, when
the UAVs need to collect data in a new environment, they
would only need to collect new features that are not already
recorded by the CNNs. In this context, RNNs can also be
employed for predicting the users’ video requests. In fact, the
context requests of users can be correlated over time, and thus,
RNNs can enable the UAVs to cache in advance the predicted
future requests or other popular multimedia ﬁles.

Based on our work in [13], we introduce an ESN-based al-
gorithm for predicting the user’s content request distributions.
The input to the proposed framework is the users’ context
information such as age, gender, and job, and the output of
the ESN-based algorithm is the distribution of the users’ con-
tent requests. Therefore, based on the users’ content request
distributions, the UAVs can determine the contents to store at
the UAV cache and, thus, transmit the cached contents to the
users without the need for backhaul connections. Using real

101214161820Time (hour)00.10.20.30.40.50.6Probability of user requested contentReal content 1Predicted content 1Real content 2Predicted content 2405060708090Number of users02468101214Average transmit power (cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)UAV (W)16(cid:3)(cid:38)onceptor ESN algorithm with cache(cid:38)onceptor ESN algorithm without cache3D-map representation of the environment) to either other
UAVs, vehicles, or the infrastructure, simultaneously. In such
scenarios, it would be essential for different UAVs in a given
geographical area to coordinate their data transmission. In
other words,
instead of each UAV transmitting the whole
data ﬁle, e.g., area map, to its corresponding vehicle, each
UAV will transmit a different part of the data ﬁle to all of
the vehicles in a given geographical area thus resulting in a
faster data transmission and a lower power consumption per
UAV. In this regard, deep spectral clustering (DSC) learning
can be adopted for grouping the UAVs into several clusters
for data transmission based on their location, type of sensors
they encompass, data ﬁles they need to transmit, and the
location and number of vehicles in the network. In essence,
DSC learns a map that embeds this input data into the
eigenspace of their associated graph Laplacian matrix and
thus clusters them accordingly. Consequently, DSC endows
the UAVs with the capability of transmitting correlated data
in a cooperative and distributed manner to the vehicles. This
would essentially result in a faster data transmission to the
vehicles thus allowing them to make real-time decisions for
a safe navigation among the surrounding trafﬁc. DSC can be
combined with cooperative game theory, for further analysis
of cooperative swarms of UAVs. Moreover, the presence of
high mobility in ITSs along with cooperative UAV swarms,
requires revisiting the interference and resource management
schemes of Sections II and III to handle the more dynamic
and cooperative ITS environment.
2) Multimodal Sensor Fusion:

In UAV-ITS, UAVs must
transmit each one of their sensor readings to other network
nodes, thus, resulting in cellular network congestion in case
of dense UAV deployment. However, energy consumption and
bandwidth allocation are important factors that determine the
maximum operation time of the UAVs. As such, to reduce
the power and bandwidth allocated for transmitting the sensor
readings, a UAV can integrate its heterogeneous sensor read-
ings into one vector thus resulting in less data transmissions
over the UAV-vehicle links while also providing a more com-
prehensive assessment of the environment. Nevertheless, there
exists differences between sensors ranging from sampling
rates to the data generation model thus making UAV-based
ITS sensor integration challenging. In this regard, multimodal
RBMs (m-RBMs) are a suitable tool for combining different
perspectives captured in signals of multimodal data for a
system with multiple sensors [15]. A m-RBM can be imple-
mented at the UAV level thus identifying nonintuitive features
largely from cross-sensor correlations which can yield accurate
estimation. From the UAV’s perspective, this approach enables
each UAV to have a better assessment of its environment.
For instance, a system trained simultaneously to detect an
accident, high speed vehicle, and an anomalous vehicle does
better than three separate systems trained in isolation since the
single network can share information among the separate tasks.
From the wireless network perspective, multimodal sensor
fusion improves the UAV’s energy efﬁciency and results in less
data transmissions over the UAV-vehicle links thus reducing

Fig. 5: The proportion of compromised cellular-connected
UAVs as a function of the proportion of vulnerable UAVs in
a large-scale UAV system authentication [14].

To analyze the performance of LSTM-based deep RL
method for authentication, based on [14], we consider a net-
work of 1000 UAVs that transmit multimedia streams to a BS.
We analyze different scenarios in which different proportions
of available UAVs are vulnerable to cyber attacks. Fig. 5
assesses the performance of the LSTM-based deep RL frame-
work compared to two baseline authentication scenarios. From
Fig. 5, we can see that the proposed algorithm performs the
same as the two other baselines in the low range of proportion
of vulnerable UAVs. However, as the number of vulnerable
UAVs increases the LSTM-based deep RL outperforms the two
other baselines and reduces the proportion of compromised
UAVs in the network.

IV. UAV-ENABLED INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION
SYSTEMS

A. Motivation

Integrating UAVs in an intelligent

transportation system
(ITS) would control road trafﬁc, monitor incidents, and enforce
road safety. For instance, UAVs can provide a quick report in
case of an accident and can act as ﬂying roadside units, speed
cameras, and dynamic trafﬁc signals. Moreover, for vehicular
platoons, to reduce wireless network congestion, a cellular-
connected UAV can send control and network related informa-
tion to one of the vehicles only and this vehicle can share the
information with other vehicles in the platoon via dedicated
short range communication links. UAVs can also track the
behavior of a platoon thus detecting any compromised vehicle.
Therefore, to reap the beneﬁts of UAV-ITS, several wireless
and security challenges need to be addressed ranging from
cooperative multi-UAV data transmission and multimodal data
integration to secured consensus of UAV swarms.

B. Wireless Challenges and AI Solutions

1) Cooperative Multi-UAV Data Transmission:

In UAV-
ITSs, each UAV is generally equipped with multiple sensors
such as LiDAR and GPS and would therefore need to send
types of multimedia ﬁles and/or big data (e.g.,
different

0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Proportion of vulnerable UAVs00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Proportion of compromised UAVsEqual probability allocationAllocation proportional to UAV signal valuesLSTM-based deep RL algorithmTable I: Cellular-connected UAV use cases, challenges, and ANN-based solution schemes.

Wireless and Security Challenges

UAV-based Applications

ANN-based Solutions

UAV-DS UAV-RMS UAV-ITS FL bi-LSTM CNN-RNN D-ESN CNN ESN DBN LSTM DSC m-RBM

(cid:88)

(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

URLLC
Efﬁcient Handover
Autonomous Path Planning
Interference Management
UAV-enabled Edge Caching
Identiﬁcation of Aerial and Ground Users
Cooperative Multi-UAV Data Transmission
Multimodal Sensor Fusion
Cyber-Physical Attacks
Authentication of UAVs
Secured Consensus of UAV Swarms

(cid:88)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)
(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)
(cid:88) (cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

[2] S. Euler, H. Maattanen, X. Lin, Z. Zou, M. Bergstr¨om, and J. Sedin,
“Mobility support for cellular connected unmanned aerial vehicles:
Performance and analysis,” arXiv:1804.04523, Apr. 2018.

[3] M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, Y. H. Nam, and M. Debbah, “A
tutorial on UAVs for wireless networks: Applications, challenges, and
open problems,” arXiv:1803.00680, Mar. 2018.

[4] E. Bulut and I. G¨uvenc¸, “Trajectory optimization for cellular-connected
UAVs with disconnectivity constraint,” in Proc. of International Confer-
ence on Communications (ICC)- Integrating UAVs into 5G (UAV-5G).
Kansas City, MO, USA, May 2018.

[5] G. Zhang, Q. Wu, M. Cui, and R. Zhang, “Securing UAV communi-
cations via joint trajectory and power control,” arXiv:1801.06682, Jan.
2018.

[6] P. Grippa, D. Behrens, C. Bettstetter, and F. Wall, “Job selection in
a network of autonomous UAVs for delivery of goods,” in Proc. of
Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS). Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA,
July 2014.

[7] J. Nielsen, R. Liu, and P. Popovski, “Ultra-reliable low latency communi-
cation using interface diversity,” IEEE Transactions on Communications,
vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 1322–1334, Nov. 2017.

[8] U. Challita, and L. Dong, and W. Saad, “Proactive resource management
in LTE-U systems: A deep learning perspective,” arXiv:1702.07031, Feb.
2017.

[9] J. Konecn´y, H. B. McMahan, D. Ramage, and P. Richt´arik, “Federated
optimization: Distributed machine learning for on-device intelligence,”
arXiv:1610.02527, Oct. 2016.

[10] A. Zeyer, P. Doetsch, P. Voigtlaender, R. Schl¨uter, and H. Ney, “A
comprehensive study of deep bidirectional LSTM RNNs for acoustic
modeling in speech recognition,” arXiv:1606.06871, Mar. 2017.
[11] U. Challita, and W. Saad, and C. Bettstetter, “Cellular-connected UAVs
over 5G: Deep reinforcement learning for interference management,”
arXiv:1801.05500, Jan. 2018.

[12] A. Sanjab, W. Saad, and T. Bas¸ar, “Prospect theory for enhanced cyber-
physical security of drone delivery systems: A network interdiction
game,” in Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Communications
(ICC), Paris, France, 2017.

[13] M. Chen, M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, C. Yin, M. Debbah, and C. S. Hong,
“Caching in the sky: Proactive deployment of cache-enabled unmanned
aerial vehicles for optimized quality-of-experience,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 1046–1061, May
2017.

[14] A. Ferdowsi and W. Saad, “Deep learning for signal authentication
and security in massive Internet of Things systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.00916, 2018.

[15] N. Srivastava and R. Salakhutdinov, “Multimodal learning with deep
boltzmann machines,” in Proc. of Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NIPS). Lake Tahoe, CA, USA, Dec. 2012.

wireless congestion and enabling a larger number of UAVs to
be served simultaneously.

C. Security Challenges and AI Solutions

For UAV-ITS, a swarm of coordinated UAVs has the ca-
pability of performing missions compared to single UAVs.
Swarming UAVs communicate with each other while in ﬂight
to reach a consensus over their deﬁned task, and can respond
to changing conditions autonomously. A good analogy would
be a dense ﬂock of starlings reacting to a sudden threat like a
hawk. Nevertheless, this data sharing scheme among a swarm
of UAVs is generally prone to adversarial machine learning
attacks in which an attacker can join the swarm and alter
their shared data, which results in non-harmonious movements
as well as collisions. To overcome this challenge, federated
learning can be adopted for a swarm of UAVs. In federated
learning, each UAV receives the common task that needs to be
accomplished by the UAV swarm from the BS and improves its
learning model for completing the required tasks based on its
collected data only. Then, each UAV summarizes the changes
in its learning model and shares this summary with other UAVs
in the swarm. This, indeed, will solve the vulnerability of raw
data transmission between the UAVs and thus mitigating the
risk of the adversarial machine learning.

Table I provides a summary of the wireless and security
challenges of cellular-connected UAVs in UAV-DS, UAV-
RMS, and UAV-ITS while suggesting ANN-based solution
schemes.

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have summarized the main use cases of
cellular-connected UAVs in UAV-DS, UAV-RMS, and UAV-
ITS applications. We have highlighted the main wireless
and security challenges that arise in such scenarios while
introducing various AI-based solutions for addressing such
challenges. Preliminary simulation results have shown the
beneﬁts of the introduced solutions for each cellular-connected
UAV application use case.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Chen, U. Challita, W. Saad, C. Yin, and M. Debbah, “Machine
learning for wireless networks with artiﬁcial intelligence: A tutorial on
neural networks,” arXiv:1710.02913, Oct. 2017.

