ARL-SR-0396 ● APR 2018 

US Army Research Laboratory 

Approaches to Enhancing Cyber Resilience: 
Report of the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) Workshop IST-153 

by Alexander Kott, Benjamin Blakely, Diane Henshel, Gregory 
Wehner, James Rowell, Nathaniel Evans, Luis Muñoz-
González, Nandi Leslie, Donald W French, Donald Woodard, 
Kerry Krutilla, Amanda Joyce, Igor Linkov, Carmen Mas-
Machuca, Janos Sztipanovits, Hugh Harney, Dennis Kergl, Perri 
Nejib, Edward Yakabovicz, Steven Noel, Tim Dudman, Pierre 
Trepagnier, Sowdagar Badesha, and Alfred Møller 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTICES 

Disclaimers 

The findings in this report are not to be construed as an official Department of the 
Army position unless so designated by other authorized documents. 

The  views  expressed  in  this  report  are  those  of  the  authors  and  not  of  their 
employers. 

Citation  of  manufacturer’s  or  trade  names  does  not  constitute  an  official 
endorsement or approval of the use thereof. 

Destroy this report when it is no longer needed. Do not return it to the originator. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARL-SR-0396 ● APR 2018 

US Army Research Laboratory 

Approaches to Enhancing Cyber Resilience: Report 
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) 
Workshop IST-153 

by Alexander Kott, Office of the Director, ARL 

Nandi Leslie, Raytheon, Waltham, MA  

Benjamin Blakely, Nathaniel Evans, and Amanda Joyce, Argonne National Laboratory, 
Lemont, IL 

Diane Henshel and Kerry Krutilla, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IL 

Gregory Wehner and James Rowell, US Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 

Luis Muñoz-González, Imperial College, London, UK 

Donald W French and Donald Woodard, Attivo Networks, Fremont, CA 

Igor Linkov, US Army Engineer Research and Development Center, Vicksburg, MS 

Carmen Mas-Machuca, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany 

Janos Sztipanovits, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 

Hugh Harney, Axiom, Inc., Columbia, MD 

Dennis Kergl, Universität der Bundeswehr, Neubiberg, Germany 

Perri Nejib and Edward Yakabovicz, Northrop Grumman, Falls Church, VA 

Steven Noel, The MITRE Corporation, McLean, VA 

Pierre Trepagnier, MIT Lincoln Laboratory, Lexington, MA  

Sowdagar Badesha and Tim Dudman, Riskaware, Bristol, UK 

Alfred Møller, Danish Defence Acquisition and Logistics Organization, Ballerup, Denmark 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 

Form Approved 
OMB No. 0704-0188 

Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the 
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing the 
burden, to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports (0704-0188), 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302. 
Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently 
valid OMB control number. 
PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS. 

1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY) 
April 2018 

2. REPORT TYPE 
Special Report 

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 
Approaches to Enhancing Cyber Resilience: Report of the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) Workshop IST-153 

6. AUTHOR(S) 
Alexander  Kott,  Benjamin  Blakely,  Diane  Henshel,  Gregory  Wehner,  James 
Rowell,  Nathaniel  Evans,  Luis  Muñoz-González,  Nandi  Leslie,  Donald  W 
French, Donald Woodard, Kerry Krutilla, Amanda Joyce, Igor Linkov, Carmen 
Mas-Machuca,  Janos  Sztipanovits,  Hugh  Harney,  Dennis  Kergl,  Perri  Nejib, 
Edward Yakabovicz, Steven Noel, Tim Dudman,  Pierre Trepagnier, Sowdagar 
Badesha, and Alfred Møller 
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 
US Army Research Laboratory 
Army Research Laboratory (ATTN: RDRL-D) 
2800 Powder Mill Road, Adelphi, MD 20783‐1138 

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES) 
NATO Science and Technology Organisation 
Collaboration Support Office (CSO) 
BP 25, 92201 Neuilly sur Seine, France 

12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT 
Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 

3. DATES COVERED (From - To) 
23 October 2017–12 March 2018 
5a. CONTRACT NUMBER 
5b. GRANT NUMBER 
5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER 

5d. PROJECT NUMBER 

5e. TASK NUMBER 

5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER 

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER 

ARL-SR-0396 

10. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S ACRONYM(S) 
NATO 
11. SPONSOR/MONITOR’S REPORT NUMBER(S) 

14. ABSTRACT 
This report summarizes the discussions and findings of the 2017 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Workshop, IST-
153,  on  Cyber  Resilience,  held  in  Munich,  Germany,  on  23–25  October  2017,  at  the  University  of  Bundeswehr.  Despite 
continual progress in managing risks in the cyber domain, anticipation and prevention of all possible attacks and malfunctions 
are not feasible for the current or future systems comprising the cyber infrastructure. Therefore, interest in cyber resilience (as 
opposed  to  merely  risk-based  approaches)  is  increasing  rapidly,  in  literature  and  in  practice.  Unlike  concepts  of  risk  or 
robustness—which are often and incorrectly conflated with resilience—resiliency refers to the system’s ability to recover or 
regenerate its performance to a sufficient level after an unexpected impact produces a degradation of its performance. The exact 
relation among resilience, risk, and robustness has not been well articulated technically. The presentations and discussions at 
the workshop yielded this report. It focuses on the following topics that the participants of the workshop saw as particularly 
important: 1) fundamental properties of cyber resilience, 2) approaches to measuring and modeling cyber resilience, 3) mission 
modeling  for  cyber  resilience,  4)  systems  engineering  for  cyber  resilience,  and  5)  dynamic  defense  as  a  path  toward  cyber 
resilience. 

15. SUBJECT TERMS 
cybersecurity, cyber resilience, risk management, cyber metrics, mission modeling, systems engineering, dynamic defense 

16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF: 

a. REPORT 
Unclassified 

b. ABSTRACT 
Unclassified 

c. THIS PAGE 

Unclassified 

17. LIMITATION 
       OF  
       ABSTRACT 
UU 

18. NUMBER 
       OF  
       PAGES 
44 

19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON 
Alexander Kott 
19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER (Include area code) 
301-394-1507 

Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8/98) 
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39.18 

ii 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 

List of Figures 

List of Tables 

Acknowledgments 

1. 

Introduction 

2. 

Toward a Taxonomy of Fundamental System Properties of Cyber 
Resilience 

3. 

Cyber Resilience-by-Design 

3.1  Goal: Plan/Prepare 

3.2  Goal: Absorb 

3.3  Goal: Recover 

3.4  Goal: Adapt 

4.  Measuring and Modeling Cyber Resilience 

4.1  Challenges of Security in Cyber Domain and Need for Resilience 

4.2  Methods and Tools for Measuring Resilience 

4.3  Example of Measuring Risk and Resilience 

4.4  Conclusions 

5.  Mission Models for Cyber-Resilient Military Operations 

5.1  Mission Models and Resilience 

5.2  Resilience as a Time-Based Problem 

5.3  Time-Based Dependencies 

5.4  Hierarchical Decomposition 

5.5  Capability Gap 

5.6  Appropriate Modeling Abstractions 

5.7  A Common Mission Modeling Language 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

iii 

v 

v 

vi 

1 

2 

6 

8 

8 

9 

9 

11 

11 

12 

14 

17 

17 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

21 

22 

 
5.8  Summary and Conclusions 

6.  Dynamic Defense in a Cyber-Resilient System 

7. 

Conclusion 

8.  References 

List of Symbols, Abbreviations, and Acronyms 

Distribution List 

24 

25 

28 

30 

35 

36 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

iv 

 
List of Figures 

Fig. 1 

Fig. 2 

Fig. 3 

Fig. 4 

Fig. 5 

Fig. 6 

NATO cyber-resilience capabilities across the system lifecycle 
concept—based on Start Secure, Stay Secure, and Return Secure 
concept .................................................................................................. 7 

Cyber Resiliency Engineering Framework goals and objectives 
alignment with NATO cyber-resilience goals and objectives (Bodeau 
and Graubart 2011) ............................................................................... 8 

Cyber resilience is composed of sensing, hardware, and software 
networks, which collectively contribute to mission goals and military 
operations ............................................................................................ 11 

Two primary approaches for resilience quantification that are currently 
described in the literature, including metric- and model-based 
approaches. Within each of these approaches, multiple tools have been 
developed to address resilience in systems. ........................................ 13 

Possible resilience profiles: Dashed profiles have worse resilience than 
the continuous counterparts since it takes longer to restore 
performance. Comparing performance levels using colors, the green 
profile offers better performance than the original one, whereas the red 
profile does not reach the initial performance. ................................... 15 

Metrics associated to the resilience profile: tip is the time to restore the 
initial performance, tfp is the time to reach the final performance, ∆p is 
the difference between the final and the initial performance (negative 
if the system is underperforming), and imp is the impact of the threat 
measured by the decrease of performance .......................................... 15 

Fig. 7 

“Get to the airport from University of the Bundeswehr”  
sub-mission ......................................................................................... 20 

Fig. 8 

Adaptive cyber-resilience mechanisms............................................... 27 

List of Tables 

Table 1  Resilience property domains ................................................................. 3 

Table 2 

Properties of resilient systems .............................................................. 4 

Table 3  Mapping of NATO cyber-resilience capabilities to the Cyber 

Resilience Engineering Framework .................................................... 10 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

v 

 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgments 

The co-chairpersons express their gratitude to Mr Julius Zahn for his outstanding 
help  in  organizing  and  executing  the  workshop,  to  Mr  John  B  MacLeod  for  his 
critical role in organizing the workshop, and to Carol Johnson for organizing and 
editing this report. 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

vi 

 
1.  Introduction 

This  report  summarizes  the  discussions  and  findings  of  the  2017  North  Atlantic 
Treaty  Organization  (NATO)  Workshop,  IST-153,  on  Cyber  Resilience.  The 
workshop was held in Munich, Germany, on 23–25 October 2017, at the University 
of  Bundeswehr.  This  workshop  was  unclassified  and  open  to  NATO  nations, 
Partner for Peace nations, Mediterranean Dialogue, Istanbul Cooperation Initiative 
nations, and Global Partners.  The workshop  co-chairpersons  were Dr Alexander 
Kott, US Army Research Laboratory, United States, and Prof Dr Gabrijela Dreo 
Rodosek, University of Bundeswehr, Germany. 

Committee  members  were  Bob  Madahar,  Defence  Science  and  Technology 
Laboratory,  Cyber  and  Information  Systems  Division,  United  Kingdom;  Emin 
Emrah  Özsavaş,  Turkish  Army  Cyber  Defence,  Turkey;  Alfred  Møller,  Danish 
Defence  Acquisition  and  Logistics  Organization,  Denmark;  Harald  Schmidt, 
Fraunhofer-Fkie, Germany; Dennis Mccallam, Northrop Grumman, United States; 
Peeter Lorents, Estonian IT College, Estonia; and Mark Raugas, Pacific Northwest 
National Laboratory, United States. 

In organizing this workshop, the committee stressed that NATO nations—citizens, 
businesses, and governments—increasingly rely on cyber infrastructure. This puts 
national security at considerable risk to unforeseen and unknown cyber threats. The 
high level of interconnectivity found in modern society has opened many avenues 
for cyberattacks, including internal and external threats, and vulnerabilities within 
supply-chain networks. Despite continual progress in managing risks in the cyber 
domain,  it  is  clear  that  anticipation  and  prevention  of  all  possible  attacks  and 
malfunctions are not feasible for the current or future systems comprising the cyber 
infrastructure. Therefore, interest in  cyber resilience  (as  opposed  to  merely risk-
based  approaches)  is  increasing  rapidly,  in  literature  and  in  practice,  with  many 
nations expressing it in their cyber strategies.   

Resilience is defined in dictionaries as the ability to recover from or easily adjust 
to misfortune or change. It is characterized by 4 abilities: to plan/prepare, absorb, 
recover from, and adapt to known and unknown threats. Unlike concepts of risk or 
robustness—which are often and incorrectly conflated with resilience—resiliency 
refers to the system’s ability to recover or regenerate its performance to a sufficient 
level after an unexpected impact produces a degradation of its performance.  

However,  the  exact  relation  among  resilience,  risk,  and  robustness  has  not  been 
well articulated technically. This includes the appropriateness and use of metrics, 
the  correspondence  to  engineering  and  architectural  approaches,  and  the  role  of 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

1 

 
resilience-by-design in assuring effective recovery and continuity of operations. All 
these issues remain poorly researched and understood. 

For all these reasons, the workshop aimed to explore how the directions of current 
and future science and technology may impact and define potential breakthroughs 
in this field. The presentations and discussions at the workshop yielded this report. 
It  focuses  on  the  following  topics  that  the  participants  of  the  workshop  saw  as 
particularly important: 

• 

• 

fundamental properties of cyber resilience 

approaches to measuring and modeling cyber resilience 

•  mission modeling for cyber resilience 

• 

• 

systems engineering for cyber resilience 

dynamic defense as a path toward cyber resilience 

In  addition,  the  papers  presented  at  the  workshop  were  published  as  a  separate 
volume  “Proceedings  of  the  NATO  IST-153/RWS-21  Workshop  on  Cyber 
Resilience,”  edited  by  Alexander  Kott  and  Gabi  Dreo  Rodosek,  found  online  at 
http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2040/.  

2.  Toward a Taxonomy of Fundamental System Properties of 

Cyber Resilience 

Authors: Benjamin Blakely, Diane Henshel, Gregory Wehner, and James Rowell 

Cyber  resilience  is  an  increasingly  discussed  but  as  yet  not  well-understood 
concept. Though progress has been made to distinguish it from cyber risk, an exact 
description  of  what  makes  a  system  resilient  and  how  that  resilience  can  be 
improved has yet to come. In this section, we build upon the work of Alexeev et al. 
(2017)  to  propose  specific  connections  between  well-known  concepts  of 
information assurance and the resilience of an information system to attack.  

We consider risk to be the probable consequence of threat actions (under the model 
of risk being the product of threat, vulnerability, and consequence), while resilience 
results in the minimization of the impact of threat actions and the enablement of 
recovery.  The  US  Department  of  Homeland  Security  (DHS  2008)  risk  lexicon 
defines these terms similarly, risk as “potential for an unwanted outcome resulting 
from  an  incident,  event,  or  occurrence,  as  determined  by  its  likelihood  and  the 
associated  consequences”  and  resilience  as  the  “ability  to  resist,  absorb,  recover 
from,  or  successfully  adapt  to  adversity  or  a  change  in  conditions”.  In  a  cyber 
context,  we  work  from  the  assumption  of  compromise,  famously  put  by  John 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

2 

 
Chambers, CEO of Cisco, as “there are 2 types of companies: those that have been 
hacked and those who don’t know they have been hacked.” 

Resilience has been extensively studied in other contexts, and some of those lessons 
have started to be applied to critical infrastructure. For example, in an ecological 
context (e.g., Holling [1973]), resilience is a property of a population that can be 
examined in terms of the properties of equilibria and oscillation given perturbations 
to the system. Similar thinking has been applied in economics (e.g., Briguglio et al. 
[2009]). The construction of buildings incorporates resilience properties to resist 
disasters (Cimellaro et al. 2016). Perhaps most relevant, this type of thinking has 
been applied to critical infrastructure protection (e.g., Watson [2015]) in an attempt 
to develop metrics for assessing the resilience of a system. 

To understand why a particular system is more resilient than another, we need to 
understand what properties of a system make it better able to resist, absorb, and 
recover  in  the  face  of  an  attack.  Here  we  concern  ourselves  with  intentional, 
malicious  threat  actors  in  the  context  of  information  technology  systems.  That 
system  could  come  in  many  forms,  however—from  a  single  web  server,  to  an 
interconnected  system  of  microservices,  to  an  embedded  system  as  found  in 
autonomous vehicles.  

Alexeev et al. (2017) analyzed resilience at several scales: micro, meso, and macro. 
We  use  these  scales  to  categorize  system  properties  that  affect  its  resilience  
(Table  1).  At  the  microscale,  resilience  is  affected  by  individual  component 
properties—whether they be software or hardware—and their interfaces with other 
components. At the mesoscale, architectural properties of the information system, 
organizational  constraints,  and  operational  requirements  are  used  to  define  the 
critical  resilience  properties.  At  the  macroscale,  resilience  is  inherent  in  the 
properties of  the mission to be carried out by the system(s)  and  assurance  of its 
successful completion. 

Table 1  Resilience property domains 

Scale 

Microscale 

Mesoscale 

Macroscale 

Domain 
Hardware and software (individual components) 
Interfaces 
Organizational constraints 
Operational requirements 
Assurance of mission 

As  we  wish  to  focus  on  the  ways  systems  can  be  better  engineered  versus  the 
organization  processes  surrounding  them,  we  primarily  discuss  structural 
resilience.  Alexeev  et  al.  (2017)  distinguish  between  structural  and  active 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

3 

 
 
resilience: structural resilience is the ability of a system to resist, absorb, or recover 
from an attack due to inherent properties in the way it is constructed. However, it 
is also worth touching on the topic of active resilience—the ability of a system to 
respond, adapt, and recover (Alexeev et al. 2017). We expect human intervention 
to  provide  most  of  the  active  resilience  actions,  but  techniques  such  as  moving 
target  defense  (MTD)  could,  in  theory,  restructure  the  system  in  a  way  that 
increases its resistance to existing, and perhaps future, attacks. 

We separate metrics—the measurement of the behavior of a system, typically in 
terms  of  how  well  it  accomplishes  its  primary  functionality—from  fundamental 
properties. Metrics for resilience have been  previously studied (e.g.,  Trimintzios 
[2011]), and  there must be a tight coupling  between  fundamental  properties  and 
metrics. A physical system has properties that allow for prediction of its behavior 
under certain stresses.  However, one would not confuse the spring constant of a 
particular spring with the metric of how fast the vehicle in which it is installed can 
go. While this may be an oversimplification, separating these 2 concepts allows us 
to focus on the resilience properties of a system irrespective of its specific purpose. 
Returning to Alexeev et al. (2017), we concur with the requirement that properties 
must be time-independent, quantifiable, and calculated rather than measured. 

Therefore, we propose the following mapping of categories of system properties to 
resilience objectives. For each, we give several examples of traditional information 
assurance  concepts,  or  modifications  of  them,  that  might  achieve  the  desired 
objective and may be an expression of a fundamental property of the system. From 
here, we conduct further research into how these, or other, concepts relate to the 
underlying properties of the system, how to quantify those properties, and how to 
use them to predict the response of a system to a given attack. Table 2 details the 
properties of such systems. 

Table 2  Properties of resilient systems 

Hardening 

Resist 

Structural 

Diversity and modularity 

Structural, active 

Plasticity 

Graceful degradation 

Instrumentation 

Agility 

. . . 

. . . 

. . . 

. . . 

Absorb 

Recover 

Respond 

. . . 

. . . 

Structural 

Structural, active 

. . . 

. . . 

. . . 

. . . 

Structural 

Structural 

Structural 

Structural, active 

Active 

Active 

Active 

. . . 

Active 

Active 

A  large  part  of  information  security,  in  the  cyber  domain,  focuses  on  hardening 
systems to attack at the intersection of risk and resilience. If a system is properly 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

4 

 
 
 
hardened, the vulnerability component of the risk equation is reduced, and thus the 
probability of a loss event is equivalently reduced, from a probabilistic standpoint. 
Likewise,  if  an  outlier  event  occurs,  a  properly  hardened  system  will  be  more 
resistant  to  an  attacker  who  has  penetrated  or  compromised  it.  Typically,  this  is 
referred to as “defense in depth” and has been the standard model of information 
security  management  for  at  least  a  decade.  Concepts  such  as  mandatory  access 
control  (whereby  restrictions  on  even  administrative  users  can  be  enforced  at  a 
granular  level,  e.g.,  Loscocco  and  Smalley  [2001])  or  Kerckhoff’s  principle 
(whereby we assume an attacker has full knowledge of our system and we must 
maintain security regardless) start with the assumption that an attacker has already 
penetrated the system and look to mitigate damage. A related concept in light of 
the widespread impact of ransomware might be persistent access—the ability of an 
administrator  to  maintain  control  of  a  system  despite  the  actions  of  a  malicious 
actor. 

Similarly, we can resist the actions of a malicious actor by complicating the task of 
targeting the system. Diversity in system components and their construction (e.g., 
operating system, programming language, access channel) requires an attacker to 
formulate multiple attack strategies or be lucky enough to match their strategy to 
the component presented to them. MTD strategies are designed to increase system 
diversity. Modularity in a system allows for the reconfiguration and replacement of 
components without requiring changes to the interface between them, thus enabling 
greater diversity. Diversity typically creates a level of overhead for administrators 
and may not be appropriate for all situations. However, in complex modern systems 
built  upon  microservice  models,  interfaces  are  largely  confined  to  Hypertext 
Transfer  Protocol  (HTTP)  calls  and  the  underlying  details  are  easily  abstracted, 
allowing diversity between components, if not within them. 

Plasticity  and  graceful  degradation  allow  the  system  to  bend  without  breaking. 
Concepts  such  as  redundant  components,  excess  processing  or  communication 
capacity,  and  avoidance  of single  points of  failure are  common  ways to  allow a 
system to absorb unexpected events while continuing to deliver at least a minimum 
acceptable level of service. This ability clearly benefits availability, but its effect 
on confidentiality and integrity is less certain. Graceful degradation is the concept 
that a system may be preconfigured with a set of progressively less functional states 
that  represent  acceptable  tradeoffs  between  continued  functionality  and  the 
assurance of security parameters. For example, it may be acceptable to proceed with 
an encrypted connection despite an invalid certification in certain circumstances, 
or  even  to  fall  through  to  entirely  unencrypted  communication,  but  only  if 
predefined criteria are met. Building these considerations into a system represents 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

5 

 
worst-case  thinking,  but  may  be  appropriate  for  highly  sensitive  or  critical 
functions. 

Finally, structural properties of the system, such as instrumentation, can improve 
the ability of the system’s active properties—its ability to recover fully or resiliently 
continue operations in a degraded but acceptable  state. Previous categories were 
primarily structural; recovery is largely active but depends upon information, that 
is,  adequate  instrumentation  and  monitoring.  From  a  structural  perspective, 
building  appropriate  instrumentation  into  the  system  and  monitoring  this 
instrumentation with appropriate reports and alerts (e.g., security information event 
management tools or intrusion detection/prevention tools) provide information that 
enables quicker detection of an attack and easier investigation. Whether by manual 
or automated means, it is much easier to respond to an attack if the right information 
is available rather than being in the context of uncertainty. The speed with which a 
system  can  be  repaired  or  reconstituted  may  also  be  affected  by  structural 
parameters. Systems built in an “infrastructure as code” paradigm (i.e., with a high 
level of automation and configuration management) will be much easier to return 
to normal operation than systems requiring a great deal of manual effort and trial 
and error. Having frequent backups of critical configuration and data likewise will 
allow for recovery to a recent known-good state. 

3.  Cyber Resilience-by-Design 

Authors: Perri Nejib, Edward Yakabovicz, and Alfred Moller 

During  the  workshop,  a  cyber  system  security  engineering  concept  for  cyber 
resilience  was  introduced  to  the  working  group  (Fig.  1).  The  Start  Secure,  Stay 
Secure,  and  Return  Secure  concept  was  mapped  to  the  NATO  Plan,  Prepare, 
Absorb,  Recover,  and  Adapt  concept  for  cyber  resiliency.  This  addresses  the 
engineering-driven  actions  necessary  to  develop  more  resilient  systems  by 
integrating cybersecurity/systems security  engineering (SSE) to that of the  well-
known systems engineering (SE) process. This concept, shown in Fig. 1, infuses 
SSE  techniques,  methods,  and  practices  into  typical  systems  and  software 
engineering system development lifecycle activities, thus becoming part of the core 
solution/process rather than an isolated and expensive add-on, bolt-on, and separate 
task/process.  

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

6 

 
Fig. 1  NATO  cyber-resilience  capabilities  across  the  system  lifecycle  concept—based  on 
Start Secure, Stay Secure, and Return Secure concept 

During  the  workshop,  the  group  was  also  introduced  to  the  Cyber  Resiliency 
Engineering Framework developed by MITRE (Bodeau and Graubart 2011), which 
provides  an  overview  of  how  to  structure  cyber-resiliency  capabilities  by 
addressing  the  goals,  objectives,  and  practices  in  alignment  with  the  “adversary 
activities” that occur within each capability to reflect the intent and potential actions 
that the capabilities are intended to protect.  

Figure 2 shows the cyber-resilience goals (top) and associated objectives (bottom) 
from the framework, which align closely with the NATO cyber-resiliency goals. It 
was apparent throughout the workshop that many of the cyber-resilience concepts 
presented  and  introduced  were  applicable  in  the  NATO  domain  as  well.  The 
following section contains some additional insights that were gained in each of the 
goal  areas  during  the  workshop.  It  focuses  on  the  architecture  perspective  as  a 
starting point. Future workshops and papers can expand these data to include other 
views from engineering, process, and mission assurance perspectives. 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

7 

 
 
Fig. 2  Cyber  Resiliency  Engineering  Framework  goals  and  objectives  alignment  with 
NATO cyber-resilience goals and objectives (Bodeau and Graubart 2011) 

3.1  Goal: Plan/Prepare 

For this goal, the architectural approach is reasonably understood and widely used 
for the design of systems. We have to prepare for cyber resilience by using well-
known  architecture  components,  relations,  and  structures  with  redundancy, 
segmentation, diversity, monitoring, coordination, deception, and so on. We also 
have  to  be  aware  of  the  resilience  of  the  information  and  communication 
technology (ICT) platform, because operations are highly dependent on the military 
platforms. 

However,  the  understanding  of  relations  to  operational  procedures  should  be 
improved. This is prerequisite for having operational people adapt to changes of 
operations in order to complete a mission even with degraded system capabilities.  

3.2  Goal: Absorb 

The goal of absorbing may seem more difficult from an architectural point of view. 
Continuation  of  operations  or  mission  assurance  may  require  unforeseen 
changeability  of  the  basic  system  architecture  dependent  on  what  is  down  or 
degraded by a cyberattack. However, not only the technical systems may require 
change, but also the operational procedures  and  way of exchanging information. 
The  consequence  may  be  that  alternative  communication  and  processing  are 
necessary  together  with  a  change  of  operational  procedures,  thus  resulting  in 
different  mission  enterprise  architectures,  which  may  not  be  foreseen  in  the 
preparation phase. The result may be that new ways of handling architecture are 
needed in this dynamic environment.   

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

8 

 
 
Constraining the attack is often foreseen during the planning/preparation; however, 
unexpected ways of attacks may not be foreseen (i.e., some adaptations are needed 
to isolate faults). How can one use an architectural approach to support this goal of 
absorbing with limitations of damage, ensuring execution of essential parts of the 
mission, and understanding of the issues? This may  require further investigation 
and research. 

3.3  Goal: Recover 

The end-state of recovering is normally supported by the architecture. However, 
transformation from an unexpected state to a recovered state while still maintaining 
operational continuity is not well understood either and may also require further 
investigations and research. 

3.4  Goal: Adapt 

The re-architecting phase is often the best understood part of the cyber-resilience 
architecture process, because it is “easy” to make modifications or reconfigurations 
based on earlier events or inject emerging technologies for improving the resilience. 

As  shown  in  Table  3,  we  took  the  framework  and  again  mapped  NATO  cyber-
resilience capabilities to it. We looked closely at the Cyber Resilience Engineering 
Framework concept and determined that it could be used to describe many of the 
NATO  resiliency  attributes,  especially  taking  into  account  the  interdependency 
among  engineering,  architecture,  and  operation/mission.  Beyond  capabilities, 
Table 3 also  reflects  the associated  “adversary  activities” that occur within each 
capability that reflect the intent and potential actions from which the capabilities 
are intended to protect.  

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

9 

 
 
Table 3  Mapping of NATO cyber-resilience capabilities to the Cyber Resilience 
Engineering Framework 

System Security Engineering

Architecture

Operations/Mission

Adversary Activities

Cyber Resilience 
Capabilities and Goals

Plan/Prepare (goal: 
anticipate)
Understand-Prepare-
Prevent

Absorb (goal: withstand)
Understand-Continue-
Constrain

Recover (goal: recover)
Understand-Continue-
Reconstitute

Enable dynamic reconfiguration and 
resource re-allocation, using Dynamic 
Representation and Substantiated 
Integrity mechanisms that accurately 
describe the system state
Enable dynamic reconstitution, using 
discovery and Substantiated Integrity 
mechanisms

Incorporate notification / coordination 
mechanisms to deconflict actions (e.g., 
reconfiguration, refresh, resource re-
allocation, isolation, failover, 
reconstitution) by cyber defenders and 
managers / administrators
Design for modularity, so that 
functional segments can be easily 
defined 
Design to separate critical from non-
critical data and processing Incorporate 
thin clients, secure browsers, and 
diskless nodes to minimize data 
Design for agility and interoperability, 
enabling cyber resources to be 
repurposed
Design for spare capacity and secure 
failover

Adapt (goal: evolve)
Understand-Transform-
Re-architect

Design for modularity and agility, so 
that cyber resources can be relocated, 
refreshed, and/or replaced

Define interfaces with Analytic 
Monitoring to enable situational 
awareness of cyber resources and (as 
feasible) of the surrounding 
environment and of alternative 
processing / communications 
capabilities 
Define external interfaces to enable 
situational awareness of the 
surrounding environment and of 
alternative processing / 
communications capabilities.

Define mappings between the 
architecture and governance structures, 
so that those (functional roles and/or 
architectural components) whose 
decisions will affect sets of cyber 
resources are clearly identified
Define standards for modularity Provide 
guidance for defining segments to 
enable isolation 
Define standards for trusted, isolated 
enclaves (criteria or trade-off analyses 
for when physical separation is needed 
vs. when virtual enclaves suffice)
Define criteria and trade-offs for 
realigning resources and functionality
Perform trade-off analyses for 
redundancy, diversity, and costs Provide 
alternate communications paths for 
reporting the results of Analytic 
Monitoring (including indications, 
warnings, and damage assessments)

Define standards (criteria and/or trade-
offs) for technologies to be replicated, 
distributed, diversified and/or 
modularized to facilitate unpredictable 
location or usage patterns 
Define standards (criteria and trade-
offs) for mission user and cyber 
defender interfaces that conceal 
unpredictable behavior that is not 
relevant to doing their jobs

Involves developing alternative cyber courses of 
action (CCoAs), and being prepared to respond. 
Define CCoAs that use externally provided I&W 
(e.g., DIB tips) Define CCoAs that include I&W 
thresholds and triggers, as well as damage 
assessments, using data provided by Analytic 
Monitoring Define CCoAs that take into 
consideration mission priorities and constraints 
on timing of changes

The adversary is preparing the 
cyber battlefield, seeking to 
establish a foothold or 
consolidate a presence in the 
information infrastructure. The 
adversary performs 
reconnaissance, 
weaponization, and delivery, 
and attempts 
exploitation/installation.

The primary focus is thus on maintaining minimal 
essential capabilities.
Define CCoAs that include coordination between 
cyber defenders and managers or administrators 
at different tiers or with different spans of 
control
Define CCoAs that isolate mission-essential from 
non-essential cyber resources

The adversary has established a 
foothold or consolidated a 
presence in the information 
infrastructure, and is using this 
to subvert the mission (disrupt, 
deceive, usurp) or compromise 
future missions (acquire 
information). The adversary 
performs command and control 
and actions to achieve 
objectives.

When adversary activities are sufficiently 
contained or defeated, the process of recovering 
from the attack can begin.
Restoration can take the form of backward 
recovery, rolling back to a known acceptable 
state.
Update CCoAs based on lessons learned from 
incidents, changes to mission priorities and 
constraints
Define alternate or out-of-band communications 
/ processing paths identified and incorporated 
Environmental changes include changes to the 
threat environment, the system environment, 
and the technology environment.
Perform realistic exercises that include 
unpredictable behavior, to evaluate impacts on 
mission user and cyber defender effectiveness
Re-archtecting may include redesigning, re-
implementing, or replacing existing cyber 
resources – particularly with new technologies 
(innovation), and reconfiguring existing 
resources to provide new or different 
capabilities.

The adversary has 
demonstrated a presence in or 
had significant impacts on the 
information infrastructure, but 
adversary activities have 
receded or been curtailed to a 
tolerable level. The adversary 
performs maintenance, seeking 
to ensure future access.

The adversary is preparing the 
cyber battlefield anew, and 
new adversaries are arising, 
seeking to establish a foothold 
or consolidate a presence in the 
information infrastructure. The 
adversary seeks intelligence 
about planned investments in 
and changes to the information 
infrastructure (reconnaissance), 
and may attack the supply chain 
(weaponization and delivery).

This section has summarized some of the key findings and discussion points that 
were a result of the collaboration and exchange during the NATO IST-153 Cyber 
Resilience Workshop. The table and mapping to the Cyber Resiliency Engineering 
Framework and the Start Secure, Stay Secure, and Return Secure concept are an 
excellent starting point toward further development of a NATO cyber resilience-
by-design capability. 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  Measuring and Modeling Cyber Resilience 

Authors: Igor Linkov, Carmen Mas-Machuca, Janos Sztipanovits, Hugh Harney, 
Dennis Kergl, and Alexander Kott 

4.1  Challenges of Security in Cyber Domain and Need for 

Resilience 

Analysis, measuring, and modeling of complex systems should include physical, 
information,  cognitive,  and  social  domains  (Kott  and  Abdelzaher  2014).  Cyber 
systems operate within the information domain, as they provide support to mission 
execution at one end and link to specific operational alternatives at the other end. 
Generally,  cyber  systems  include  sensing,  software,  and  hardware  components 
within systems and networks. These components provide the ability to understand 
and perform the critical mission functions necessary to sustain operations. Figure 3 
outlines the cyber-resilience problem. 

Fig. 3  Cyber resilience is composed of sensing, hardware, and software networks, which 
collectively contribute to mission goals and military operations 

The challenges of assessing cybersecurity are related to the interconnected nature 
of  each  of  the  cyber  domains  and  asymmetric  threat  space.  With  regard  to 
traditional  systems,  military  personnel  can  provide  protection  through  the 
identification  of  system  threats  and  vulnerabilities  as  well  as  system  hardening 
against  attacks.  This  approach  is  limited  for  more  complex  systems  in  which 
systems  domains  are  interdependent  and  interconnected.  The  hardening  of  one 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

11 

 
 
system component is insufficient to protect against the connected domains, which 
may  result  in  cascading  failures.  Given  that  cyber  systems  are  highly  complex, 
improved methods must account for the interconnected nature of system domains, 
operations, and goals.  

The  second  challenge  of  cyber  resilience  pertains  to  the  adaptive  nature  of  the 
adversaries themselves. The hardening of system components is highly visible to 
adversaries  who  can  identify  hardened  components  and  subsequently  conduct 
alternative interventions. Thus, while hardening of conventional systems typically 
results in increased costs of conducting attacks against the network, adversaries of 
even complex cybersecurity networks can identify barriers and plan counterattacks 
against other vulnerable components. In the case of the virtual world, adversaries 
can  quickly  adapt  to  overcome  system  entry  barriers  at  a  low  cost.  Third,  the 
temporal dimension of cyberattacks is short as attacks can be developed in seconds 
through  automated  processes  and  require  responses  that  no  longer  rely  only  on 
human judgment. 

To overcome potential network adversaries, resilience ensures that system recovery 
occurs  across  each  of  the  physical,  information,  cognitive,  and  social  domains. 
Cyber resilience is required to minimize the asymmetric advantage of cyberattacks. 
To shift from focusing on hardening system components to comprehensive system 
recovery allows for efficient allocation of resources. It ensures that protection is 
implemented  across  all  system  domains  and  spatial  components  to  deceive 
adversaries and ensure high levels of systems protection.  

4.2  Methods and Tools for Measuring Resilience 

Resilience  is  a  new  concept  in  the  risk  management  field.  Resilience  tools  and 
measures are continually revised to adequately address potential threats to varieties 
of  systems.  Figure  4  shows  2  primary  resilience  approaches  that  are  currently 
described in the literature: metric based and model based. The core of metric-based 
approaches entails measures of individual properties of system components using 
quantitative metrics (e.g., number of antivirus measures, number of system users). 
While the metrics may or may not be directly related to resilience, metrics should 
relate to the basic features of resilience, such as the ability of the system to adapt to 
adversary  attacks  and  systematically  recover  from  disruption.  The  metrics  are 
traditionally  combined  either  through  indices  or  visualized  through  dashboards; 
however, these tools do not necessarily allow for integration of mission goals or 
tradeoffs  within  contradictory  mission  objectives.  Thus,  a  Resilience  Matrix 
(Linkov  et  al.  2013)  provides  a  more  comprehensive  approach  through  the 
classification  of  individual  metrics  based  on  system  domains  and  temporal 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

12 

 
evolution  of  response  to  threat  (absorption,  recovery,  and  adaptation).  The 
Resilience  Matrix  is  capable  of  integrating  multiple  metrics  by  allowing  for 
individual metrics to be weighted through the systematic elicitation of judgment by 
commanders or analysts.  

The  second  resilience  method  entails  a  model-based  approach  that  focuses  on 
representing the real world and defining resilience using models. Modeling requires 
an  understanding  of  the  critical  functions  of  a  mission,  the  critical  function 
thresholds, the temporal patterns of a system, and system memory and adaptation. 
Process modeling requires a thorough understanding of the physical mechanisms 
within a system to simulate event impacts and system recovery; process modeling 
can  be  difficult  to  construct  and  may  be  information-intensive.  Alternatively, 
statistical approaches require a lot of data on system performance. Bayesian models 
combine  features  of  process  and  statistical  models.  Network  models  require  a 
presentation of the system as interconnected networks whose structure is dependent 
on the function of the system. The game-theoretical/agent-based approach focuses 
on the model performance of the system based on a limited set of rules defined by 
the  modelers.  Using  these  approaches,  resilience  can  be  defined.  However,  the 
utility of many advanced models is limited due to the data-intensive requirements. 
Network  science is the  most promising  of the  approaches  described  because  the 
structure of the network can be assessed within the social, cognitive, information, 
and physical domains of a system.  

Fig. 4 
Two primary approaches for resilience quantification that are currently described 
in  the  literature,  including  metric-  and  model-based  approaches.  Within  each  of  these 
approaches, multiple tools have been developed to address resilience in systems. 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

13 

 
 
4.3  Example of Measuring Risk and Resilience 

Both  risk  and  resilience  are  important  within  cybersecurity  applications.  Risk  is 
useful when the attack vector is known and the vulnerabilities within the system 
are well defined. Further, risk is useful in scenarios when the consequences of an 
attack  have  previously  been  experienced  and  are  predictable  for  future  threat 
scenarios. Risk assessment is useful for the identification of specific vulnerabilities 
affected  by  system  threats.  Risk  management  is  useful  for  the  minimization  of 
threat vectors under well-defined threat scenarios. However, risk assessment and 
management are no longer useful in scenarios in which threats and vulnerabilities 
are  not  well  defined.  Adaptive  adversaries  will  always  find  a  way  to  find  new 
strategies  of  attack  not  currently  recognized  among  the  wide  range  of  defense 
mechanisms.  Probability  calculations  consistent  with  risk  assessment  and 
management may not work in situations of low risk and high uncertainty.  

The close relation of risk and resilience has encouraged the research community to 
take the former as a first step toward the evaluation of resilience. In fact, a system 
that  is  able  to  diminish  the  risks,  reduce  the  impact  of  attacks,  and  improve  the 
response  and  recovery  phase  is  likely  to  be  more  resilient  to  attacks—though  it 
cannot be guaranteed. The uncertainty justifies why the differences between risk 
and resilience should be considered, despite their close relation.  

Generally, risk models are based on known threats. That is, risk models consider a 
defined set of failures, attacks, and vulnerabilities that are known for a particular 
system. Hence, the complete set of adversaries is expected to be well defined (e.g., 
likelihood to occur, point of impact, impact radius). The resilience models, on the 
other hand, are designed to be effective given both known and unknown potential 
threats.  Resilience  models  assess  the  functions  of  a  particular  system  to  then 
identify the critical ones. Further, resilience models determine how to restore the 
performance of the system given an attack in a faster and more efficient way. The 
restoration of the performance, as shown in Fig. 5, can achieve a level that is lower 
than, equal to, or even higher than the system performance before the attack. The 
performance restoration does not have to be done at once, but stepwise. Hence, new 
parameters measuring the resilience should be defined based on the compromise 
between the level of performance and the time from the attack. These parameters 
are depicted in Fig. 6: 

• 

• 

tip is the time to restore the initial performance,  

tfp is the time to reach the final performance,  

•  ∆p is the difference between the final and the initial performance (negative 

if the system is underperforming), and 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

14 

 
• 

imp is the impact of the attack measured by the decrease of performance. 

Possible  resilience  profiles:  Dashed  profiles  have  worse  resilience  than  the 
Fig. 5 
longer  to  restore  performance.  Comparing 
continuous  counterparts  since 
performance levels using colors, the green profile offers better performance than the original 
one, whereas the red profile does not reach the initial performance.  

it  takes 

Fig. 6  Metrics  associated  to  the  resilience  profile:  tip  is  the  time  to  restore  the  initial 
performance, tfp is the time to reach the final performance, ∆p is the difference between the 
final and the initial performance (negative if the system is underperforming), and imp is the 
impact of the threat measured by the decrease of performance 

To  develop  an  efficient  resilience  model,  a  detailed  knowledge  of  the  system  is 
required, as well as an understanding of the relationships and dependencies with 
other systems.  

Let us consider a particular example of a communication network in a local area. 
Assume that, in this case, the communication is provided by different technologies: 
wireless  and  wired.  The  performance  could  be  measured  by  the  number  of 
connections  that  could  survive  a  particular  threat  (e.g.,  loss  of  power  of  several 
communication nodes). Once the attack occurs, several protection and restoration 
mechanisms  are  activated  so  that  the  maximum  and/or  the  most  prioritized 
connections  can  be  restored.  The  different  mechanisms  against  an  attack  with  a 
particular imp could be compared in terms of the presented metrics: tip, tfp, and ∆p. 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

15 

 
 
 
The  concept  described  previously  can  also  be  applied  to  cyber-physical  systems 
(CPS),  where  the  overall  goal  is  to  make  the  integrated  system  resilient  against 
cyberattacks,  physical  attacks,  and  their  combination.  To  date,  resilience  of 
physical  systems  and  cyber  systems  (including  dominantly  computation  and 
communication  platforms)  have  been  considered  as  largely  disjoint  goals  in 
systems engineering that are achieved by different means. In CPSs, where salient 
functionalities  and  performance  measures  emerge  from  the  tight  interaction  of 
physical and computation process, this distinction is counterproductive. Resilience 
needs to be measured in terms of the impact of threats on performance as defined 
by the context of utilities and risks as they are linked to system vulnerabilities and 
resources of attackers.  

In transportation networks, for example, vehicle throughput can be measured as a 
performance  indicator  of  the  network.  Besides  the  physical  topology  and 
characteristics  of  the  road  network,  the  throughput  is  directly  influenced  by  the 
traffic control network implemented using cyber means: sensors (inductive loops 
or imaging), actuators (traffic lights and message boards), and control algorithms 
(computing nodes and communication networks). The traffic signal schedules are 
typically designed to maximize throughput and minimize congestion. The risk is 
manifested  in  whether  attackers  exploit  cyber  vulnerabilities,  such  as  tampering 
with the schedule of traffic lights in multiple intersections so as to minimize the 
traffic network utility by maximizing congestion. To avoid detection, attackers may 
select only valid schedules. In this scenario, the metrics proposed in Fig. 6 can be 
applied in the following manner. 

Assume  the  initial  performance  of  the  traffic  network,  T,  that  is  obtained  by 
optimizing  the  traffic  light  schedules.  A  worst-case  attacker  that  has  a  certain 
amount of resources can mount A attacks (including modification of traffic light 
schedules  at  most  k  intersections)  simultaneously.  The  goal  of  the  attacker  is  to 
select A such that the throughput T is minimized: minA [T(A)]. The impact of the 
attack can be expressed by the metrics: imp = (T(A)-T)/T, where A is the worst-case 
attack given the resources of the attacker. 

In this example, we can make the following observations: 

1)  The  dynamics  of  the  attack  characterizing  the  overall  resilience  are 
influenced by not only the cyber components (attacker strategy and control 
network design) but also by the full integrated system dynamics including 
that of the traffic network. 

2)  The model of the scenario requires not only physical models of the traffic 
network but also detailed implementation models of the cyber components 
and detailed models of the attacks. 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

16 

 
3)  In  dynamic  attack  scenarios,  the  full  trajectory  characterizing  attack, 
impact, and recovery require also modeling the strategies of the attackers 
and defenders in the framework of the attacker-defender games. 

4.4  Conclusions 

While both risk and resilience methods aim to strengthen a system against potential 
threats,  they  have  different  foundations;  therefore,  quantification  of  risk  and 
resilience should be approached differently. Risk assessment is focused on finding 
a specific asset or system component vulnerable to a known or assumed threat.  As 
the threats and vulnerabilities are known, it is possible to harden the system against 
these threats. Conversely, resilience models better account for the uncertain threats, 
vulnerabilities, and consequences. Critical functions of the system are identified, as 
well as how these functionalities are impacted by unknown or unpredictable threats. 
That is, resilience models aim to determine whether and how quickly a system’s 
critical functionalities can be restored given an unspecified event in order for the 
system to recover to a normal, functioning state.  

Cybersecurity networks are complex and interconnected networks in which known 
and  unknown  threats  may  impair  the  integrity  of  the  system  as  a  whole.  If  the 
structure  of  a  network’s  interconnections  and  critical  functionalities  is  well 
understood, resilience models help simulate how each state of the network will be 
impacted by an attack and how cascading effects will influence the resilience of the 
whole  system.  While  existing  risk  and  resilience  modeling  approaches  are 
implemented, advanced quantification tools should be further explored to develop 
a comprehensive understanding of how resilience modeling can help enhance cyber 
resilience.  

5.  Mission Models for Cyber-Resilient Military 

Operations 

Authors: Steven Noel, Tim Dudman, Pierre Trepagnier, and Sowdagar Badesha 

5.1  Mission Models and Resilience 

In general, cyber resilience is a property of individual systems, system-of-systems, 
networks, or organizations (Bodeau and Graubart 2017). Understanding cyber risks 
is  a  key  enabler  for  achieving  appropriate  levels  of  resilience.  Because  of  rich 
interdependencies among all levels of military activities (operational, tactical, and 
strategic), cyber risk is not solely determined by individual hosts, vulnerabilities, 
events, mission functions, and so on. Rather, it is an emergent property that depends 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

17 

 
on dependencies among entities at all levels of military command and operations. 
Another dimension of resilience is flexible system components that manage cyber 
risk  by  changing  configuration  and  organizational  stance,  such  as  modifying 
boundaries  as  a  reaction  to  attack,  changing  roles  to  meet  dependency  needs  of 
downstream assets, or forming new communication channels. 

Because of the challenges and costs of assessing and improving resilience across a 
military  organization,  such  activities  should  be  aligned  to  specific  mission 
requirements.  There  is  a  need  to  identify  or  discover  the  various  elements  that 
contribute  to  mission  success,  and  how  those  elements  depend  upon  each  other. 
This includes  1) high-level mission objectives, 2)  the operational tasks  that  help 
meet each objective, 3) the system functions that support each task, and 4) the cyber 
assets that enable each system function. Given the various operational threats and 
associated  risks,  such  mission  dependency  models  (e.g.,  graph-based)  can  guide 
remediation  actions,  determine  appropriate  system  redundancies  and  service 
diversity,  and  so  on  (Noel  and  Jajodia  2014).  Then,  as  situations  involving  a 
cyberattack  unfold,  mission  models  can  help  prioritize  alerts,  assess  elevated 
mission  risk,  and  understand  options  for  responding  to  attacks  (Musman  and 
Agbolosu-Amison  2014;  Noel  et  al.  2015,  2016).  In  terms  of  military  doctrine, 
mission  modeling  should  be  considered  part  of  Intelligence  Preparation  of  the 
Battlefield (HDA 2014). 

However, in the current state of practice, developing and continually maintaining 
mission models remains an expensive process. It might be appropriate to capture 
some higher-level elements of doctrine through manual efforts (Heinbockel et al. 
2016).  But  because  of  continual  churn  at  more  operational  levels,  this  becomes 
untenable for lower-level mission elements, especially in tactical environments. As 
an  example,  manual  methods  for  producing  dependency  models  from  mission 
threads  are  expensive  and  unrepeatable.  While  there  has  been  some  progress  in 
automated methods for mission modeling (Musman 2017; Schulz et al. 2017), there 
has been relatively little work in this area for tactical environments. Thus, military 
personnel are continually challenged with understanding how cyberattacks can put 
missions at risk and impact performance. 

5.2  Resilience as a  Time-Based Problem 

Resilience is inherently a time-based problem (Musman et al. 2013; Trepagnier and 
Schulz 2015). For example, maintaining operational tempo in cyberspace requires 
synchronizing  ongoing  analysis  with  incoming  data  (e.g.,  alert  streams).  At  the 
other end of temporal relevance is the need for aging out data that are no longer 
relevant to the mission components being protected. Another requirement for cyber 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

18 

 
resilience  is  to  bring  attention  to  situational  changes  of  relevance  to  mission 
assurance, such as deviation from planned versus actual events. For example, such 
requirements can be addressed through dynamically changing mission-dependency 
graphs,  with  re-planning  during  live  missions  and  activating  alternate  graph 
sections in response to events. A system like this could suggest changes that result 
in  more  resilient  mission  graphs  (e.g.,  algorithms  that  run  high  impact/low 
probability analysis). 

5.3  Time-Based Dependencies 

Cyber  resilience  is  quantified  by  the  length  of  time  necessary  to  recover  from  a 
perturbation.  In  this  section,  we  explore  another  aspect  of  time  dependence,  in 
which the assets on which a mission depend themselves change over time. Let’s 
explore  a  toy  example  taken  from  the  Munich  public  transportation  authority: 
returning to the Munich airport after the IST-153 Cyber Resilience Workshop. For 
a specific taxonomy here, we stipulate “Get to the airport from University of the 
Bundeswehr” to be a sub-mission of the tactical mission “Attending the IST-153 
Cyber Resilience Workshop”, and that tactical mission to be part of the operational 
mission  “My  publications  in  2017”,  which  in  turn  is  part  of  the  overarching 
strategic mission “My successful career in cybersecurity”. 

As shown in Fig. 7, the tactical sub-mission “Get to the airport from University of 
the  Bundeswehr”  contains  a  baseline  course  of  action:  Take  Bus  199  from  the 
University gate to the subway station, then take subway U-5 to the Ostbahnhof, and 
then take S-Bahn 8 from Ostbahnhof to the airport. At the baseline level, mission 
success depends on the successive availability of the Bus 199, U-5, and S-8 assets. 
Each of these could be considered as sub-sub-missions of “Get to the airport from 
University  of  the  Bundeswehr”,  which  in  turn  is  a  sub-mission  of  our  tactical 
mission “Attending the IST-153 Cyber Resilience Workshop”. 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

19 

 
Fig. 7 

“Get to the airport from University of the Bundeswehr” sub-mission 

Note that Alternative 1, “Taxi from the university”, provides resilience in case the 
bus or U-5 are unavailable, while Alternative 2, “Taxi in central Munich”, would 
apply in case one has made it to Ostbahnhof, but the S-8 is not available. 

The  point  to  emphasize  here  is  the  time  dependence  of  the  supporting  assets 
regarding their contribution to mission resilience and mission success. Once one 
makes  it  to  the  subway  station,  the  mission  dependency  on  Bus  199  drops  out. 
Similarly, once at Ostbahnhof, U-5 dependency ceases, as does the contribution of 
Alternative 1 to mission resilience. 

5.4  Hierarchical Decomposition 

The  previous  discussion suggests a general principle: that, analytically, it makes 
sense  to  continue  to  decompose  missions  hierarchically  until  one  gets  to  atomic 
units where asset dependence is constant over time. (In the sense that the Airport 
mission dependence on Bus 199 is constant from the moment one steps onto it until 
one alights at the subway station, and then vanishes.) 

We  suggest  that  it  also  has  implications  for  information  filtering.  The  exact 
schedules, fares, and phone numbers that the Munich transportation authority has 
so helpfully provided in Fig. 7 become irrelevant once one has successfully made 
it to the airport, and need not be passed on up to the next higher level of abstraction. 
Similarly, the entire process of getting home would be unlikely to be included in a 
trip report discussing the tactical mission “Attending the IST-153 Cyber Resilience 
Workshop”  and  that  tactical  mission  might  get  only  a  summary  mention  in  the 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

20 

 
 
operational mission “My publications in 2017”, which in turn is subsumed in one’s 
strategic mission “My successful career in cybersecurity”. Thus, one can avoid the 
drowning  in  data  issue  that  would  result  in  retaining  the  fact  at  all  levels  of 
abstraction that a 4-zone train ticket in Munich costs 11.20 Euros. 

5.5  Capability Gap 

Current methods for assessing mission dependency lack both the granularity and 
fidelity to apply the hierarchical decomposition approach discussed previously, and 
more particularly, the discovery of the level of granularity necessary to answer a 
specific question. Rather than being data-driven, they tend to rely on documentation 
and the memories and opinions of subject-matter experts. Given constant fixes and 
patches  that  occur  in  cyber,  they  tend  to  reflect  some  combination  of  the  as-
designed and as-understood structure, rather than the structure that actually exists 
at any given time. Developing an accurate method of actually assessing the asset 
dependencies  of  a  mission,  particularly  with  respect  to  timescale,  is  currently  a 
significant unmet need. 

5.6  Appropriate Modeling Abstractions 

When constructing mission models, the model modalities and levels of abstraction 
need  to  be  matched  to  the  operational  use  cases.  Models  need  to  be  sufficiently 
expressive for answering the required analytic questions and communicating results 
within  an  organization.  Indeed,  as  a  key  part  of  system  resilience,  the  human 
element can be included for modeling decisions in response to cyber events. The 
level  of  detail  needs  to  be  appropriate  for  the  echelon  of  command,  along  a 
spectrum from operational, tactical, and strategic decision making. An important 
research  direction  is  to  develop  visual  analytics  and  dashboards  appropriate  for 
different command levels. 

Mission  models  based  on  directed  acyclic  graphs  are  built  with  the  Cyber 
Command  System tool (MITRE  2017) and  analyzed/visualized via the  CyGraph 
tool (Heinbockel et al. 2016). This captures a hierarchy of dependencies (directed 
acyclic  graph)  among  mission  functions,  the  information  needed  for  these 
functions,  the  services  that  provide  the  information,  and  the  hosts  on  which  the 
services reside. In this way, incorporating mission dependencies supports resilience 
by prioritizing exploitable paths that lead to mission-critical cyber assets (Musman 
and Agbolosu-Amison 2014). Cyber resiliency techniques via CyGraph (Noel et al. 
2017) are augmented through information on cyber threats, vulnerabilities, policies, 
and traffic patterns. 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

21 

 
An  alternative  approach  is  to  create  mission  models  that  link  cyber  assets  to 
organizational  business  processes  (Musman  et  al.  2013;  Noel  et  al.  2015) 
employing Business Process Modeling Notation (Object Management Group 2011) 
integrated with network-attack and mission-dependency  graphs. Mission process 
models have also been integrated with information infrastructure, with validation 
and reasoning provided via ontology language (Barreto et al. 2012). 

5.7  A Common Mission Modeling Language 

A  key  research  direction  is  to  develop  standard  taxonomy  for  inferring  mission 
dependencies,  risks,  and  impacts  (including  resilience  parameters)  based  on 
empirical studies. For example, this might include inferring recovery time of assets 
through  system  complexity 
indicators  (subcomponent  count,  number  of 
frameworks,  users  assigned  to  that  component  or  process),  asset  value  (cost) 
impact, data requirements for assets, or the presence of redundancy. This research 
direction dovetails with other forms of cybersecurity standardization (Martin 2009). 
Furthermore,  the  results  of  mission  resilience  analysis  need  to  be  effectively 
communicated  to  commanders,  integrated  through  standard  tactical  dashboards, 
and mapped to geographic location as appropriate.  

For assessing mission resilience to cyberattack and communicating analytic results 
to military commanders, a common mission modeling taxonomy and language are 
needed, which represent both mission vignettes and cyber entities. Standards such 
as  Coalition  Battle  Management  Language  (C-BML)  (NATO  2012)  define 
information (orders, plans, reports, requests, etc.) that can be readily processed by 
command  and  control  systems,  simulation  systems,  or  interfaces  to  automated 
forces.  Serving  as  an  interoperability  standard  based  on  Extensible  Markup 
Language (SISO 2013), the focus of C-BML is to convey a commander’s intent. 
Other efforts (in both the US and UK) have focused more on developing a Cyber 
Mission Impact Assessment (CMIA) modeling standard for representing mission 
dependencies, risks, and impacts. 

There  are  currently  2  CMIA  standards  that  both  allow  the  mission  impact  of 
potential  cyberattacks  on  large  military  sociotechnical  systems  of  systems  to  be 
modeled: 

1)  The US approach (Musman et al. 2013), developed by MITRE and based 
temporal  resilience 
on  BPMN,  allows  for  explicit  modeling  of 
characteristics  and 
information  resources  within  a  general-purpose 
approach that can compute measures of effectiveness at a mission level for 
specific  categories  of  cyber  impacts.  This  approach  requires  manual 
intervention  to  alter  the  mission  model  to  reflect  the  cyber  effect  of  the 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

22 

 
incident and repeated runs of the simulation to reflect the normal variations 
in mission instances. 

2)  The  UK  approach  (Lang  and  Madahar  2017),  developed  by  Dstl  in 
collaboration  with  RJD  Technology  and  based  on  the  Unified  Modeling 
Language (Object Mangement Group 2015), focuses on capturing networks 
of  computer  information  system  elements  and  defining  mission  device 
associations  with  critical  mission  components, 
termed  operational 
technology  (OT).  Analysis  scripts  allow  for  the  identification  of  highly 
connected (and therefore potentially critical) systems, potential attack paths 
between  attack  surfaces  and  critical  systems,  and  the  impact  on  business 
processes  of  a  successful  cyberattack.  This  approach  was  developed  to 
support  the  analysis  of  individual  military  platforms  and  critical  national 
infrastructure  as  part  of  cyber  vulnerability  investigations,  and  therefore 
requires  an  integration  architecture  to  support  analysis  across  multiple 
CMIA models to represent whole military deployments and cyber terrains. 
However, it does lend itself to the reuse of individual models to reduce the 
overall modeling burden. 

The question of how to  present the  analysis  results  to  mission  operators  has not 
been  addressed  in  either  the  UK  or  US  CMIA  programs,  and  in  both  cases,  the 
outputs  of  the  analysis  are  highly  dependent  on  the  skills  and  knowledge  of  the 
CMIA analyst and the availability and accuracy of the technical information used 
to construct the models. 

In the UK, the Joint User Cyber Mission Planning program (Waldock  et al. 2017) 
is developing a concept demonstrator to combine some of the previously mentioned 
modeling  concepts  with  advanced  cyberattack  and  mission  impact  assessment 
(MIA) analysis algorithms, to allow tactical military personnel to plan and conduct 
missions  involving  cyber  operations.  In  addition,  the  latest  user  interaction  and 
visualization technologies are being trialed to effectively capture a commander’s 
intent  through  a  tactical  map-based  dashboard  and  communicate  the  results  of 
analysis to military personnel at different levels. 

Mission vignettes and computer networks (including software and vulnerabilities) 
are  being  modeled  as  a  unified,  scalable  connected  property-graph,  allowing 
mission dependencies and resilience parameters to be explicitly modeled at varying 
levels  of  detail  (LODs),  as  well  as  the  application  of  MIA  methods  designed  to 
assess cyber resilience (Dudman et al. 2017). UK CMIA model interoperability is 
being  integrated  to  support  the  automatic  generation  of  mission  vignettes 
composing  OT  (critical  mission  components)  for  previously  modeled  military 
systems. The vignette is augmented with mission objectives and effects as military 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

23 

 
personnel  interact  with  the  variety  of  interfaces  available  to  create  and  assess 
courses of action. Entire computer networks are imported separately from network 
information  systems,  so  device  associations  are  required  to  enable  detailed 
automated  cyber-resilience  analysis.  Joint  military  symbology  (DOD  2014)  has 
been  extended  to  show  the  location  of  cyber  entities  (e.g.,  unknown  entities, 
friendly defensive cyber sections, and hostile offensive cyber squads) in familiar 
NATO format. 

Further research is needed for the reuse of existing system models and extensions 
to existing symbology. Questions about improved modeling of the human element 
of a cyberattack and deriving detailed temporal resilience parameters in a tactical 
situation also need to be addressed. Any common mission modeling language must 
include  the  required  elements  to  capture  the  commander’s  intent,  OT,  mission 
dependencies,  computer  networks,  resilience  parameters,  and  the  necessary 
analysis support, while minimizing information requirements in a tactical setting. 
The development of a unified CMIA modeling language could provide systems that 
utilize property-graph analysis techniques with detailed mission modeling system 
and effects templates at varying LODs, and also support advanced human-centric 
cyberattack  and  mission  impact  assessment  techniques.  Further  research  is  also 
required  into  the  LODs  that  would  be  required  of  such  models  to  support  the 
different levels of command. 

5.8  Summary and Conclusions 

In this section, we examined the role of mission models (e.g., mission-dependency 
graphs)  for  cyber  resilience  in  military  environments.  Such  models  provide  a 
framework  that  focuses  resilience  efforts  on  assuring  missions  and  a  mission-
centric context for situational understanding in the face of cyberattacks. In terms of 
strategic directions for future research and development, it is important to consider 
automated  methods  for  building  such  dependency  models,  to  help  reduce  costs. 
Because resilience in cyberspace is inherently a time-dependent problem, mission 
models  need  to  incorporate  the  dynamic  nature  of  mission  dependencies  and 
network environments. Furthermore, the modeling abstractions and LODs need to 
be driven by mission requirements. Standardization efforts in the area of mission 
models for cyber resilience can also help in reducing costs and improving modeling 
accuracy and consistency. 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

24 

 
 
 
6.  Dynamic Defense in a Cyber-Resilient System 

Authors: Nathaniel Evans, Luis Muñoz-González, Nandi Leslie, Donald W French, 
Donald Woodard, Kerry Krutilla, and Amanda Joyce 

To  understand  the  cyber  resilience  of  a  CPS,  we  must  consider  the  system’s 
operational responsibility, whether the engineered system can adapt to adversarial, 
heterogeneous environments and continue to perform as designed, how quickly the 
system  can  repair  itself  following  a  cyberattack,  and  what  network  security 
mechanisms  exist  that  are  adaptive  and  can  serve  as  dynamic  defenses  for  CPS 
entities. Uniform and static approaches are not useful for cyber resilience and risk 
assessments. Although the applications that run on a computer host or networked 
device operate as  a series of straightforward steps, the interaction between these 
applications and hardware components can lead to complex performance dynamics 
(Mytkowicz et al. 2009). For example, even though identical code is run on Intel 
Pentium  4-based  and  Intel  Core2-based  computers,  the  Intel  Pentium  4-based 
computer  can  exhibit  periodic  cache-miss  behavior;  while  aperiodic,  and 
potentially chaotic, behavior is observed for the Intel Core 2-based computer (Berry 
et  al.  2006).  Both  of  these  processors  have  the  same  ISA  specifications  and 
manufacturer.   

Cyber  systems  (e.g.,  intrusion  prevention  systems,  intrusion  detection  systems 
[IDSs]) often  are not scalable to cope  with the  size  of  networked devices, when 
considering all the components simultaneously in the system—this especially holds 
for lightweight, wearable devices in an Internet of Things (IoT) and large modern 
infrastructures of CPSs or industrial IoT. On the other hand, frequent changes in 
the  system  require  the  re-computation  of  the  analyses  from  scratch,  which  is 
impractical  and  computationally expensive (or intractable) in  many  cases. There 
are a number of computational modeling techniques that can be useful to address 
the  CPS  security  dynamics  at  multiple  scales:  compositional  analysis  tools  and 
machine-learning  algorithms  can  help 
the  aforementioned 
challenges—in  addition,  developing  and  assessing  measures  of  system-level 
reliability are essential for our understanding of the intensity of the cyberattack and 
how quickly (or whether) the damage can be remediated such that the CPS entity 
returns  to  some  level  of  functioning—this  process  refers  to  cyber-resilience 
assessments. For example, Rodrigues et al. (2015) propose a compositional model 
capable  of  measuring  reliability  and  modeling  failure  scenarios  by  composing 
models of its subcomponents. This allows efficient updates to the model, when new 
components are added or existing components are reconfigured or removed.   

to  cope  with 

Furthermore,  network performance  for CPS entities can be analyzed  at different 
levels  of  granularity,  where  only  parts  of  the  system  are  considered.  This  helps 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

25 

 
clarify the cyber risks of the system, specifically under the presence of a failure or 
cyberattack. Analyses at different scales can also be combined to produce aggregate 
measures of cyber risk and resilience, thus reducing the computational complexity 
of the analysis, enabling the parallelization of the computation of such measures 
and a more efficient updating of the analysis, when changes are observed in specific 
parts  of  the  system.  This  kind  of  compositional  analysis  introduces  a  tradeoff 
among accuracy, level of granularity, and computational complexity. Since a gross 
modeling  of  the  components  of  the  system  will  reduce  the  computational 
complexity, the accuracy of the measurement of risk and resilience can be affected.  

For CPSs, it is also important for our cyber-resilience assessments to measure and 
forecast key cyber-risk characteristics, such as the timing and type of exploit and 
the  number  of  successful  cyberattacks.  In  this  context,  there  exists  visualization 
tools capable of providing representations of the attack paths an attacker can follow 
to compromise valuable assets in the system at different levels of granularity (Noel 
and Jajodia 2004; Noel et al. 2005). This granularity allows the user to manage the 
complexity of graph representations, in turn helping humans to better understand 
the levels of cyber risk. Muñoz-González et al. (2017) showed that approximate 
measures  of  risk  in  Bayesian  attack  graphs  can  be  as  accurate  as  exact  analysis 
techniques,  while  imposing  a  lower  computational  burden.  However,  the 
compositional generation and analysis of attack graphs remains an open problem.  

Using attack graphs, the timing of lateral moves in a cyberattack can be projecting 
or  forecasted—this  type  of  predictive  modeling  is  critical  for  cyber-resilience 
assessments  (Yang  et  al.  2014).  Attack  graphs  have  also  been  valuable  for 
computing  the  optimal  cyber  policy  (Oldehoeft  1992)  and  control  laws  for 
implementation  in  cyber  systems  (e.g.,  IDSs,  firewalls)  for  industrial  control 
systems  (ICSs)—security  policies  define 
the  goals  and  elements  of  an 
organization’s  cyber  systems  (Strapp  and  Yang  2014;  Yang  et  al.  2014). 
Furthermore,  using  Poisson  and  negative  binomial  generalized  linear  models, 
Leslie et al. (2017) show that network security policy violations greatly influence 
cyber vulnerabilities for an organization or company’s network—specifically, the 
number  of  such  violations  is  a  strong  predictor  of  the  number  of  successful 
cyberattacks. In ICSs (e.g., power systems), resilient and robust controllers can be 
defined  using  discrete-time  hybrid  models  that  are  based  on  value  iteration  and 
linear matrix inequalities, and these models have been used to study the effect of 
the IDSs’ cybersecurity policies on the ICS under a denial-of-service attack (Yuan 
et al. 2013). 

Another,  more  traditional  way  to  test  cyber  resilience  would  be  to  engage  a  red 
team to measure mean time to recovery (MTTR) on a baseline of an infected system 
with  no  post-breach  tools  in  use,  then  test  again  after  introducing  dynamic 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

26 

 
solutions.  A  cross  reference  MTTR  with  a  cost-benefit  analysis  of  adding  these 
tools would be a valuable maturity measure. 

Figure 8 outlines adaptive cyber-resilience mechanisms. 

Adaptive cyber-resilience mechanisms. 

Fig. 8  Adaptive cyber-resilience mechanisms 

Key cyber-resilience mechanisms are cyber deception, MTD or cyber agility, and 
clone  defense—these  processes  provide  dynamic  CPS  defense.  Cyber  deception 
works in networks, datacenters, cloud, supervisory control and data acquisition ICS 
systems, and the IoT. It is also capable of gathering forensics and reporting on the 
behavior  of  the  attacker  to  understand  its  intent.  It  can  easily  scale  as  the 
dimensionality  of  the  system  grows.  MTD  is  based  on  a  simple  premise  that  a 
moving target is harder to attack than a stationary target (Mellinger 2016). As a 
CPS  gets  more  complex,  the  ability  to  implement  a  moving  target  solution  gets 
more complicated to measure effectiveness. Clone defense is reverting to a point of 
a last known good state of the system. This can be accomplished from snapshots 
taken  on  a  virtual  machine  or  via  a  known  good  backup  system.  As  a  dynamic 
system (e.g., CPS, IoT) surges in size, the ability to revert to a known good state is 
demanding. 

Cyberattacks are frequent and are often stealthy, requiring CPSs and the IoT to be 
resilient to their intended affects.  Cyber-resilience approaches that are rules-based 
and  static  are  insufficient  for  connected  devices  in  dynamic,  contested 
environments,  where  the  cyber  threats  are  difficult  to  predict.  Instead,  we  need 
cyber-resilience  assessments  for  CPSs  and  the  IoT  based  on  computational 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

27 

 
 
 
 
algorithms  and  models  that  predict  and  forecast  cyber-risk  factors,  such  as 
identifying the targeted device (or host computer system) of a cyberattack, timing 
of  the  attack,  and  frequency  of  intrusions  by  type.  In  addition,  examining  the 
impacts of dynamic, strategic mechanisms for CPS defense—these include cyber 
deception, MTD, and clone defenses—can improve cyber resilience by adapting to 
dynamic exploit-vulnerability pairings in adversarial environments.  

7.  Conclusion 

Much  work  remains  in  understanding  the  fundamental  properties  of  cyber 
resilience.  Cyber  resilience  is  an  increasingly  discussed  but  as  yet  not  well-
understood concept. One  approach to enhancing  and clarifying  the concept is  to 
identify connections between well-known concepts of information assurance and 
the resilience of an information system to attack. Well-formed properties must be 
time-independent, quantifiable, and calculated rather than measured. It is possible 
and useful to develop a mapping of categories of system properties to resilience 
objectives. 

Approaches to measuring  and modeling  cyber resilience  should  not  be  confused 
with  those  developed  for  risk.  While  both  risk  and  resilience  methods  aim  to 
strengthen  a  system  against  potential  threats,  they  have  different  foundations; 
therefore,  quantification  of  risk  and  resilience  should  be  approached  differently. 
Unlike risk models, resilience models aim to determine whether and how quickly a 
system’s critical functionalities can be restored given an unspecified event in order 
for the system to recover to a normal, functioning state. Cybersecurity networks are 
complex and interconnected networks in which known and unknown threats may 
impair  the  integrity  of  the  system  as  a  whole.  If  the  structure  of  a  network’s 
interconnections and critical functionalities is well understood, resilience models 
help simulate how each state of the network will be impacted by an attack and how 
cascading effects will influence the resilience of the whole system. While existing 
risk and resilience modeling approaches are implemented, advanced quantification 
tools should be further explored to develop a comprehensive understanding of how 
resilience modeling can help enhance cyber resilience. 

Modeling  of  a  mission  is  critical  to  modeling  and  enhancing  cyber  resilience. 
Because of the challenges and costs of assessing and improving resilience across a 
military  organization,  such  activities  should  be  aligned  to  specific  mission 
requirements. However, in the current state of practice, developing and continually 
maintaining  mission  models  remains  an  expensive  process.  Such  models  should 
provide  a  framework  that  focuses  resilience  efforts  on  assuring  missions  and  a 
mission-centric context for situational understanding in the face of cyberattacks. In 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

28 

 
terms of strategic directions for future research and development, it is important to 
consider automated methods for building such dependency models, to help reduce 
costs.  Because  resilience  in  cyberspace  is  inherently  a  time-dependent  problem, 
mission models need to incorporate the dynamic nature of mission dependencies 
and network environments. Furthermore, the modeling abstractions and levels of 
detail need to be driven by mission requirements. Standardization efforts in the area 
of  mission  models  for  cyber  resilience  can  also  help  in  reducing  costs  and 
improving modeling accuracy and consistency. 

Engineering-driven  actions  are  necessary  to  develop  more  resilient  systems  by 
integrating  cybersecurity/SSE  to  that  of  the  well-known  SE  process.  The  Cyber 
Resiliency Engineering Framework developed by MITRE provides an overview of 
how to structure cyber-resiliency capabilities by addressing the goals, objectives, 
and practices in alignment with the “adversary activities” that occur within each 
capability to reflect the intent and potential actions that the capabilities are intended 
to protect. The mapping to the Cyber Resiliency Engineering Framework and the 
Start Secure, Stay  Secure, and Return Secure  concept are  a useful starting point 
toward further development of a NATO cyber resilience-by-design capability. 

A particularly important path toward cyber resilience is implementation of dynamic 
defense. Uniform and static approaches are not useful for cyber resilience and risk 
assessments. Key cyber-resilience mechanisms are cyber deception, MTD or cyber 
agility, and clone defense—these processes provide dynamic defense. 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

29 

 
8.  References 

Alexeev A, Henshel DS, Levitt K, McDaniel P, Rivera B, Templeton S, Weisman 
M. Constructing a science of cyber-resilience for military systems. NATO IST-
153 Workshop on Cyber Resilience; 2017 Oct 23–25; Munich, Germany. 

Barreto A, Costa P, Yano E. A semantic approach to evaluate the impact of cyber 
actions to the physical domain. In 7th International Conference on Semantic 
Technologies for Intelligence, Defense, and Security; 2012 Oct 24‒25; Fairfax, 
VA.  

Berry H, Gracia Pérez D, Temam O. Chaos in computer performance. Chaos: An 

Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science. 2006;16(1):013110. 

Bodeau D, Graubart R. Cyber Resiliency Engineering Framework. McClean (VA): 

The MITRE Corporation; 2011 Sep. Report No.: MTR110237. 

Bodeau  DJ,  Graubart  RD.  Cyber  resiliency  design  principles:  selective  use 
throughout the lifecycle and in conjunction with related disciplines. McClean 
(VA):  The  MITRE  Corporation; 
2018]. 
https://www.mitre.org/sites/default/files/publications/PR%2017-
0103%20Cyber%20Resiliency%20Design%20Principles%20MTR17001.pdf. 

[accessed 

2017 

Jan 

Briguglio L, Cordina G, Farrugia N, Vella S. Economic vulnerability and resilience: 
concepts  and  measurements.  Oxford  Devel  Studies.  2009;37(3):229–247. 
doi:10.1080/13600810903089893. 

Cimellaro GP,  Dueñas-Osorio  L, Reinhorn AM.  Introduction to special issue  on 
resilience-based analysis and design of structures and infrastructure systems. J 
Structural Engineering. 2016;142(8). 

Cyber Command System (CyCS). McLean (VA): The MITRE Corporation; 2017 
http://www.mitre.org/research/technology-

May. 
transfer/technology-licensing/cyber-command-system-cycs.  

[accessed 

2018]. 

Department  of  Homeland  Security  (US).  DHS  risk  lexicon.  Washington  (DC): 
Department of Homeland Security (US), Risk Steering Committee; 2008 Sep 
[accessed 2018]. https://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/dhs_risk_lexicon.pdf. 

[DOD]  MIL-STD-2525D. 

Interface  standard: 

joint  military  symbology. 

Washington (DC): Department of Defense; 2014. 

Dudman T, Waldock A, Barrington S. JUMP: modelling and simulation of cyber 
resilience for mission impact assessment. NATO IST-153 Workshop on Cyber 
Resilience; 2017 Oct 23–25; Munich, Germany.  

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

30 

 
[HDA]. Intelligence preparation of the battlefield/battlespace. Washington (DC): 
Headquarters. Department of the Army; Quantico (VA): Marine Corps (US); 
2014 Nov. Report No.: ATP 2-01.3/MCRP 2-3A. 

Heinbockel  W,  Noel  S,  Curbo  J.  Mission  dependency  modeling  for  cyber 
situational  awareness.  In  NATO  IST-148  Workshop  on  Cyber  Defence 
Situation Awareness; 2016 Oct 3–4; Sofia, Bulgaria.  

Holling CS. Resilience and stability of  ecological systems. Annual Rev Ecology 

and Systematics. 1973;4:1–23. 

Kott A, Abdelzaher T. Resiliency and robustness of complex systems and networks. 

Adapt Dyn Resilient Syst. 2014;67:67–86. 

Lang C, Madahar B. Understanding the mission impact of a cyber attack in a system 
of  systems  environment.  In  NATO  IST-156  Workshop  on  Modelling  and 
Simulation  S&T:  Critical  Enabler  for  Cyber  Defence;  2017  Jul  18–21; 
Portsmouth, UK.  

Leslie NO, Harang RE, Knachel LP, Kott A. Statistical models for the number of 
successful cyber intrusions. J Defense Modeling and Sim. 2017;15(1):49–63. 
doi: 10.1177/1548512917715342. 

Linkov I, Eisenberg DA, Plourde K, Seager TP, Allen J, Kott A. Resilience metrics 
for cyber systems. Environment Systems and Decisions. 2013;33(4):471–476. 

Loscocco P, Smalley S. Integrating flexible support for security policies into the 
Linux operating system. Fort Meade (MD): National Security Agency; 2001. 
[accessed  2017  Oct  31].  https://www.nsa.gov/resources/everyone/digital-
media-center/publications/research-papers/assets/files/flexible-support-for-
security-policies-into-linux-feb2001-report.pdf. 

Martin R. Making security measurable and manageable. CrossTalk: The Journal of 

Defense Software Engineering. 2009 Sep/Oct.  

Mellinger A. SEI insights. Pittsburgh (PA): Carnegie Mellon University; 2016 Apr 
https://insights.sei.cmu.edu/sei_blog/2016/04/a-

[accessed 
 platform-for-dynamic-defense-technologies.html.  

2018]. 

Muñoz-González  L,  Sgandurra  D,  Paudice  A,  Lupu  EC.  Efficient  attack  graph 
analysis  through  approximate  inference.  ACM  Transactions  on  Privacy  and 
Security (TOPS). 2017;20(3). 

Musman  S,  Agbolosu-Amison  S.  A  measurable  definition  of  resiliency  using 
“mission  risk”  as  a  metric.  McClean  (VA):  The  MITRE  Corporation;  2014. 
Report No.: MTR140047. 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

31 

 
Musman S, Temin A, Tanner M, Fox R, Pridemore B. Evaluating the impact of 

cyber attacks on missions. M&S Journal. 2013 Summer;8(2):25–35.  

Musman  S.  Automagical  dependency  mapping.  McClean  (VA):  The  MITRE 

Corporation; 2017.  

Mytkowicz  T,  Diwan  A,  Bradley  E.  Computer  systems  are  dynamical  systems. 
Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science. 2009;19(3):033124. 

Nejib P, Yakabovicz E. NATO resilience by design: enhancing resilience through 
cyber systems engineering. NATO IST-153 Workshop and Report; 2017 Oct 
23‒25; Munich, Germany. 

Noel  S,  Bodeau  D,  McQuaid  R.  Big-data  graph  knowledge  bases  for  cyber 
resilience. NATO IST-153 Workshop on Cyber Resilience; 2017 Oct 23‒25; 
Munich, Germany.  

Noel S, Harley E, Tam KH, Gyor G. Big-data architecture for cyber attack graphs: 
representing  security  relationships  in  NoSQL  graph  databases.  In  IEEE 
Symposium  on  Technologies  for  Homeland  Security  (HST);  2015;  Boston, 
MA.  

Noel S, Harley E, Tam KH, Limiero M, Share M. CyGraph: graph-based analytics 
and  visualization  for  cybersecurity.  In  Cognitive  computing:  theory  and 
applications,  handbook  of  statistics  35.  Amsterdam  (The  Netherlands): 
Elsevier; 2016.  

Noel S,  Jacobs M,  Kalapa P, Jajodia  S.  Multiple  coordinated views  for  network 
attack  graphs.  In  Visualization  for  Computer  Security.  (VizSEC  05).  IEEE 
Workshop; 2005 Oct 26; Minneapolis, MN. p. 99–106. 

Noel S, Jajodia S. Managing attack graph complexity through visual hierarchical 
aggregation. In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Workshop on Visualization and 
data mining for computer security; 2004 Oct. p. 109–118.  

Noel S, Jajodia S. Metrics suite for network attack graph analytics. In 9th Annual 
Cyber  and  Information  Security  Research  Conference  (CISRC);  2014;  Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN.  

Noel S, Ludwig J, Jain P, Johnson D, Thomas RK, McFarland J, King B, Webster 
S, Tello B. Analyzing mission impacts of cyber actions (AMICA). In NATO 
IST-128 Workshop on Cyber Attack Detection, Forensics and Attribution for 
Assessment of Mission Impact; 2015; Istanbul, Turkey. 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

32 

 
North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organisation  (NATO)  Research  and  Technology 
Organisation  (RTO).  Coalition  Battle  Management  Language  (C-BML). 
Brussels (Belgium): NATO; 2012. Report No.: TR-MSG-048.  

Object  Management  Group.  Business  Process  Model  and  Notation  (BPMN). 

Needham (MA): Object Management Group; 2011. 

Object  Mangement  Group.  OMG  Unified  Modeling  Language  (OMG  UML). 

Needham (MA): Object Management Group; 2015 Mar. 

Oldehoeft A. Foundations of a security policy for use of the national research and 
educational network. Gaithersburg (MD): Computer Security Resource Center, 
National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology;  1992  Feb.  [accessed 2018]. 
https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/4734/final.  

Rodrigues P, Lupu E, Kramer J. Compositional reliability analysis for probabilistic 
component  automata.  In  Proceedings  of  the  7th  International  Workshop  on 
Modeling in Software Engineering. IEEE Press; 2015 May. p. 19–24.  

Schulz A, O’Gwynn D, Kepner J, Trepagnier P. Dynamically correlating network 
terrain  to  organizational  missions.  NATO  IST-153  Workshop  on  Cyber 
Resilience; 2017 Oct 23–25; Munich, Germany.  

Simulation Interoperability Standards Organisation (SISO). Standard for Coalition 
Battle Management Language (C-BML) phase 1. Atlanta (GA): SISO; 2013. 

Strapp S, Yang SJ. Segmenting large-scale cyber attacks for online behavior model 
generation.  In  Proceedings  of  2014  International  Conference  on  Social 
Computing, Behavioral-Cultural Modeling & Prediction (SBP14); 2014 Apr 1–
4; Washington, DC. p. 169–177. 

Trepagnier P, Schulz A. Mission assurance as a function of scale. NATO IST-128 
Workshop  on  Cyber  Attack  Detection,  Forensics  and  Attribution  for 
Assessment of Mission Impact; 2015 June 15–17; Istanbul, Turkey.  

Trimintzios  P.  Measurement  frameworks  and  metrics  for  resilient  networks  and 
services.  Heraklion  (Greece):  European  Network  and  Information  Security 
Agency;  2011  Feb  1 
[accessed  2018].  https://www.enisa.europa.eu/ 
publications/metrics-tech-report/at_download/fullReport. Discussion draft. 

Waldock A, Dudman T, Harold SJ, Barrington S. JUMP: concept demonstrator for 
cyber  mission  planning.  NATO  IST-156  Workshop  on  Modelling  and 
Simulation  S&T:  Critical  Enabler  for  Cyber  Defence;  2017  Jul  18–21; 
Portmouth, UK.  

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

33 

 
Watson J-P, Guttromson R, Silva-Monroy C, Jeffers R, Jones K, Ellison J, Rath C, 
Gearhart J, Jones D, Corbet T, Hanley C, Walker LT. Conceptual framework 
for developing resilience metrics for the electricity, oil, and gas sectors in the 
United  States.  Albuquerque  (NM):  Sandia  National  Laboratories;  2015  Sep 
[accessed  2018].  Report  No.:  SAND2014-18019.  https://cfwebprod.sandia. 
gov/cfdocs/CompResearch/docs/EnergyResilienceReportSAND2014-
18019o.pdf. 

Yang  SJ,  Du  H,  Holsopple  J,  Sudit  M.  Attack  projection.  In Cyber  defense  and 
situational  awareness.  Berlin  (Germany):  Springer  International  Publishing; 
2014. p. 239–261.  

Yuan  Y,  Zhu  Q,  Sun  F,  Wang  Q,  Başar  T.  Resilient  control  of  cyber-physical 
systems  against  denial-of-service  attacks.  In  Resilient  Control  Systems 
(ISRCS). 2013 6th International Symposium on IEEE; 2013 Aug 13–15; San 
Francisco, CA. p. 54–59. 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
List of Symbols, Abbreviations, and Acronyms 

C-BML 

CMIA  

CPS 

HTTP 

ICS 

ICT 

IDS 

imp  

IoT 

LODs 

MIA 

MTD 

MTTR 

NATO 

OT 

SE  

SSE 

tfp  

tip  

∆p  

Coalition Battle Management Language 

Cyber Mission Impact Assessment  

cyber-physical systems  

Hypertext Transfer Protocol  

industrial control system  

information and communication technology  

intrusion detection system  

impact of the attack measured by the decrease of performance 

Internet of Things  

levels of detail 

mission impact assessment  

moving target defense  

mean time to recovery  

North Atlantic Treaty Organization  

operational technology  

systems engineering  

systems security engineering 

time to reach the final performance 

time to restore the initial performance 

difference between the final and the initial performance  

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

35 

 
 
 
 
1 
  (PDF) 

DEFENSE TECHNICAL 
INFORMATION CTR 
DTIC OCA 

2 
  (PDF) 

DIR ARL 
IMAL HRA  
  RECORDS MGMT 
RDRL DCL 
  TECH LIB 

1 
  (PDF) 

GOVT PRINTG OFC 
  A MALHOTRA 

1 

ARL 

  (PDF)  RDRL D 

  A KOTT 

Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
