Kelarestaghi et al. 

1 

VEHICLE SECURITY:  
RISK ASSESSMENT IN TRANSPORTATION 

Kaveh Bakhsh Kelarestaghi, Mahsa Foruhandeh, Kevin Heaslip, Ryan Gerdes 

Abstract  -  Intelligent  Transportation  Systems  (ITS)  are  critical 
infrastructure  that  are  not  immune  to  both  physical  and  cyber 
threats.  Vehicles  are  cyber/physical  systems  which  are  a  core 
component of ITS, can be either a target or a launching point for 
an  attack  on  the  ITS  network.  Unknown  vehicle  security 
vulnerabilities  trigger  a  race  among  adversaries  to  exploit  the 
weaknesses and security experts to mitigate the vulnerability. In 
this  study,  we  identified  opportunities  for  adversaries  to  take 
control  of  the  in-vehicle  network,  which  can  compromise  the 
safety,  privacy,  reliability,  efficiency,  and  security  of  the 
transportation  system.  This  study  contributes  in  three  ways  to 
the  literature  of  ITS  security  and  resiliency.  First,  we  aggregate 
individual  risks  that  are  associated  with  hacking  the  in-vehicle 
network  to  determine  system-level  risk.  Second,  we  employ  a 
risk-based  model  to  conduct  a  qualitative  vulnerability-oriented 
risk  assessment.  Third,  we  identify  the  consequences  of  hacking 
the  in-vehicle  network  through  a  risk-based  approach,  using  an 
impact-likelihood  matrix. 
assessment 
communicates risk outcomes for policy analysis. The outcome of 
this  study  would  be  of  interest  and  usefulness  to  policymakers 
and engineers concerned with the potential vulnerabilities of the 
critical infrastructures. 

qualitative 

The 

Index  Terms  — 

Cybersecurity, 
Assessment, National Institute of Standard and Technology 

Intelligent  Transportation  Systems, 
In-vehicle  Network,  Vulnerability,  Risk 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

I 

N  the  Wired  article  that  broke  the  hacking  of  a  Jeep 
Cherokee,  researcher  Charlie  Miller  was  quoted  as  saying, 
“When you lose faith that a car will do what you tell it to do, it 
really changes your whole view of how the thing works.” [1] 
The  high  demand  for  cutting-edge  technologies  and  the  need 
to keep vehicles affordable are reasons why rigorous security 
measures  and  policies  have  not  been  prioritized  in  the  past. 
Vehicles  are  becoming  more  intelligent  with  the  constant 
demand  for  improvement  of  driver’s  safety,  comfort,  and 
vehicle performance. Technologies are being deployed such as 
infotainment  and  safety  monitoring  applications 
the 
vehicles  to  meet  the  demand  for  increased  technology. 
According 
the  major  automobile  original  equipment 
manufacturers  (OEMs),  nearly  100%  of  new  vehicles  are 

in 

to 

KB.  Kelarestaghi  and  K.  Heaslip  are  with  the  Department  of  Civil  & 
Environmental  Engineering,  Virginia  Tech,  Arlington,  VA,  22203.  Email: 
{kavehbk, kheaslip} @vt.edu. 

M.  Foruhandeh  and  R.  Gerdes  are  with  the  Department  of  Electrical  & 
Computer  Engineering,  Virginia  Tech,  900  N  Glebe  Rd,  Arlington,  VA, 
22203. Email: {mfhd, rgerdes} @vt.edu. 

technologies  [2].  The  security 
equipped  with  wireless 
challenges become even more complex by the knowledge that 
60%  of  the  2016  vehicles  come  with  internet  connection 
capabilities [3]. 
remote 
The  vehicle’s  systems  were  designed  without 
connectivity  in  mind  and  focused  on  vehicle  safety  and  not 
security.  Car manufacturers achieved the former but not in the 
presence of an attacker in an adversarial environment. Current 
vehicles are computers on wheels equipped with Wi-Fi access 
points,  Bluetooth  modules,  and  dozens  of  Electrical  Control 
Units  (ECUs).  Even  further,  cars  are  envisioned  as  platforms 
to  offer  on-demand  technologies  and  services  to  the  road 
users.  Advancements  that  could  transform  cars  to  have  the 
functions  of  personal  computers  and  smartphones,  but  with 
numerous security vulnerabilities [4].  
The system should provide prevention strategies in addition to 
detection  and  recovery  strategies  to  stop  adversaries  from 
causing  any  harm 
infrastructure.  Such 
to  ITS  critical 
prevention  strategies  need  to  be  built  into  the  design  from 
inception.  Reasons  to  secure  the  in-vehicle  network  prior  to 
implementation are [5]: (i) design phase is the most effective 
stage  to  prevent  exposure,  (ii)  initial  security  consideration 
will prune research initiatives that are expensive to be secured 
once  implemented,  (iii)  blind  eye  to  attackers  will  endanger 
the  system  robustness,  and  (iv)  security 
to 
government and customers. The real challenge emerges when 
an intelligent vehicle is placed into the vulnerable vehicular ad 
hoc  network.  An  adversary  can  gain  access  to  the  in-vehicle 
network and be rewarded by ample access to the vehicle ECU. 
The adversary can take control of the vehicle braking system, 
engine,  air  conditioning  system,  and  steering  wheel  are  just 
steps needed to remotely-drive a vehicle.  
There  is  a  gap  in  the  current  literature  to  assess  and  evaluate 
the impact of cyber/physical attacks on the road users and the 
system operators. This study attempts to survey the impacts of 
in-vehicle  network  security  vulnerabilities  and  adds  to  the 
literature of ITS security and resiliency, by exploring possible 
consequences  of  an  adversary  compromising  the  in-vehicle 
system. To this extent, we aim to contribute to the nascent but 
growing 
impact-oriented  risk 
assessment.  First,  most  of  the  previous  studies  have  been 
limited to combine risks of a compromised in-vehicle network 
systematically. The bulk of this work is devoted to identifying 
security  attacks  against 
to 
proposing  defense  and  protection  security  mechanisms.  The 
knowledge about the conceivable attacks and the performance 

literature  of  ITS  security 

in-vehicle  network  and 

is  crucial 

the 

 
 
 
 
Kelarestaghi et al. 

2 

in-vehicle  security 

impact  assessment 

the  security  mechanisms 

of 
is  still  rudimentary.  This 
deficiency  urges  the  need  for  an  impact-oriented  analytic 
approach  to  identify  system-level  risk  –that  is  an  area  of 
emerging  research.  A  rigorous  quantitative  assessment  could 
be conducted, but this is a difficult task because statistical data 
(collected through either revealed or stated method) is mainly 
in 
unknown.  As 
transportation is active research with lacking numerical data of 
the  executed  security  attacks,  a  comprehensive  quantitative 
risk assessment methodology cannot be conducted. That is, in 
our  second  contribution  we  propose  employing  a  qualitative 
risk-based  approach  for  measuring  risks  and  communicating 
the results for policy analysis. We employ National Institute of 
Standard  and  Technology  (NIST)  [6]  risk-based  model  to 
conduct  a  qualitative  vulnerability-oriented  risk  assessment. 
The risk-based approach of this study aims to identify adverse 
impacts that are caused by malicious adversaries exploiting in-
vehicle  network  security  vulnerabilities. 
third 
contribution,  we  provide  a  rating  of  the  risks’  likelihood  and 
impact  through  a  qualitative  risk-based  approach.  Herein,  we 
synthesize  evidence  from  current  literature  and  real-world 
hacking incidents to determine potential impacts of exploiting 
in-vehicle  network  vulnerabilities.  We  then  map  safety, 
operation, reliability, and security issues ensued by in-vehicle 
hacking  incidents  into  a  visual,  matrix  for  risk  prioritization 
purposes.  
The remainder of this study is structured as follows. First, we 
explain  the  risk  assessment  methodology  of  this  study. 
Second, we investigate the threat events and threat sources to 
the  in-vehicle  network.  Third,  we  evaluate  the  in-vehicle 
network  vulnerabilities  and  determine  the  risks  of  such 
vulnerabilities  to  the  transportation  system.  We  conclude  our 
study by suggesting countermeasures to prevent the failure of 
ITS critical infrastructure. 

In  our 

II.   RISK ASSESSMENT METHODOLOGY 

The  risk  assessment  methodology  of  this  study  incorporates 
the  risk  model  proposed  by  NIST  Special  Publication  800-30 
(SP  800-30)  [6].  The  NIST  risk  assessment  objective  is  to 
detect, evaluate and to prioritize risks to the system operations 
and  assets  [6].  In  which  the  aim  is  to  pinpoint  insights  to 
policymakers  to  support  risk  responses.  To  this  extent,  risk 
determination  is  conducted  through  identifying  threats  to  the 
system,  system  vulnerabilities,  consequences  in  case  an 
adversary exploits those vulnerabilities, and the likelihood that 
impacts  emerge.  The  deliverables  of  the  risk  assessment 
methodology  will  be  the  critical  components  for  the  risk 
management  process  [7].  The  risk  assessment  is  the  second 
that 
component  of 
incorporates  knowledge  into  the  risk  respond,  the  third 
component  of  the  risk  management  (Figure  1).  The  four  core 
elements  (i.e.,  frame,  assess,  respond,  and  monitor)  of  the 
hierarchy  constitute  a  comprehensive  risk  management 
process  that  ensures  successful  risk-based  decisions  that 
manage system’s risks from strategic to tactical level. 

risk  methodology  hierarchy 

the 

Fig. 1. Risk Management Process (adapted from [7]) 

For this study, we employ the risk model proposed in NIST SP 
800-30  to  conduct  qualitative  vulnerability-oriented  threat 
analysis.  The  analytic  approach  of  the  risk  assessment 
comprises  of  both  qualitative  assessment  and  impact-oriented 
analysis  approach.  Together,  the  qualitative  assessment  and 
impact-oriented  analysis  provide 
to 
characterize  adverse 
likelihoods  are 
identified.  The  risk-based  approach  of  this  study  (Figure  2) 
threat  sources  and  events,  (ii) 
includes  (i) 
identifying system vulnerabilities and predisposing conditions, 
and  (iii)  determining  adverse  impacts  and  magnitude  of 
impact. 

impacts  for  which 

level  of  detail 

identifying 

the 

Fig. 2. Risk Model (adapted from [6]) 

III.  THREAT SOURCE AND EVENTS 

“No matter what happens, don't panic,” said Charlie Miller to 
Andy  Greenberg  before  he  hacked  2014  Jeep  Cherokee 
through the car entertainment system [1]. The most analogous 
scenarios  with  real-world  settings  are  Miller  and  Valsak 
experiments  [1],  [8]–[11],  wherein  a  driver  was  behind  the 
wheel during the attack. In 2013, they hacked Ford Escape and 
Toyota  Prius  through  a  physical  attack.  They  demonstrated 
their work in a real-world situation when a driver was behind 
the wheel. Several attacks were successfully executed such as 
killing  the  engine,  disabling  the  brake,  and  altering  the 
speedometer.  Later  in  2015,  Miller  and  Valsak  remotely 
hacked  the  Jeep  Cherokee  with  a  driver  driving  the  car  [1]. 
This hack occurred by rewriting the firmware to gain access to 
the  car  Controller  Area  Network  (CAN)  bus.  Examples  of 
their attacks are (i) control of the engine, (ii) control of brake, 
(iii)  control  of  steering  wheel,  and  (iv)  control  of  air 
conditioning  system.  The  most  important  outcome  of  this 
attack is the reaction of the driver to the experience; the driver 
expressed  his  feeling  as  a  “traumatic  experience.”  The 
experience was traumatic because the driver did not have any 
control  over  the  vehicle  while  driving  on  the  highway 
surrounded  by  other  vehicles.  The  driver  was  helpless  when 
hackers turned radio volume to the maximum volume and left 
him with no choice but to ask them to make it stop [1].  

Before  the  Miller  and  Valsak  studies  [9]–[11],  other 
researchers  have  exploited  vulnerabilities  of  the  vehicle 

 
 
 
Kelarestaghi et al. 

3 

systems that are based on the CAN bus technology. Hoppe et 
al.  [12],  indicated  that  by  exploiting  CAN  bus  security 
vulnerabilities,  an  adversary  is  capable  of  (i)  compromising 
the  availability  of  window  lifts  through  DoS  attack,  (ii) 
compromising the availability of the warning light by keeping 
it  dark,  and  (iii)  removing  airbag  control  modules  from  the 
system. They argued that an adversary could cause passengers 
discomfort  and  compromise  their  safety.  Koscher  et  al.  [13] 
examined the security of two 2009 model year passenger cars 
(researchers did not disclose the make and model of the cars) 
through reverse engineering, in both lab and test road settings. 
The  researchers  demonstrated  that  by  taking  control  of  even 
one  of  the  car’s  ECU  an  adversary  can  entirely  compromise 
the  car  and  that  ECU  can  be  reprogrammed  even  while 
driving.  They  were  able  to  take  control  of  several  car 
components by hacking the vehicle (i) physically through the 
On-Board  Diagnostic  II  (OBD-II)  port,  and  (ii)  remotely 
(with prior  physical  access)  through  car  wireless  interfaces 
(digital  radio).  These  components  include  (i)  radio,  (ii) 
instrument panel cluster, (iii) body controller (e.g., door lock, 
trunk  lock,  and  window  relays),  (iv)  engine,  (v)  brakes,  and 
(vi) heating and air conditioning. Later in 2011, Checkoway et 
al.  [14]  supplemented  the  Koscher  et  al.  [13]  experiment  by 
attacking  a  modern  vehicle  remotely,  without  prior  physical 
access.  They  were  able  to  compromise  the  vehicle  through 
several  components  entirely.  These  components  include  (i) 
diagnostic  tool,  (ii)  media  player,  (iii)  Bluetooth,  and  (iv) 
cellular communication. The dreadful reward of an adversary 
breaching through the wireless components is that he does not 
need to execute an attack immediately and can wait for a time 
to gain maximum benefit. 

Other  researchers  have  also  attempted  to  scrutinize 
the  security  of  vehicles.  Oka  et  al.  [15]  suggest  that 
adversaries can breach into the in-vehicle network through the 
Bluetooth  communication.  They  reviewed  publicly  available 
information  and  concluded  that  although  it  is  difficult  to  pair 
with  the  built-in  infotainment  system,  it  is  possible  to 
compromise  driver  safety  through  the  external  infotainment 
systems via Bluetooth. It is even more likely for an attacker to 
inject  false  messages  through  the  OBD-II  port  dongle  by 
merely pairing his device or with a brute-force attack. Another 
study  conducted  by  Foster  et  al.  [16]  assessed  the  security 
vulnerabilities  of  the  aftermarket  Telematics  Control  Units 
(TCU)  that  interconnect  ECUs  with  external  systems.  They 
examined two threat models: (i) local (i.e., physical access to 
the  TCU)  and  (ii)  remote 
the  attacker  can 
compromise  the  vehicle  without  physical  access.  The  results 
indicate 
in  both  cases  adversaries  with  adequate 
knowledge can compromise the vehicle through the TCU. The 
adversary  can  inject  false  CAN  packets  and  fully  control 
safety  components  of  a  vehicle  such  as  a  brake  system.  The 
researchers tested this attack in a real-world situation and were 
able to tamper with windshield wipers and the brake system. 

in  which 

that 

The  Yan  et  al.  [17]  study  indicates  that  it  is 
conceivable  to  hack  Tesla  Model  S  sensors  through  the 
spoofing  and  jamming  attacks.  The  study  suggests  that  these 
attacks can trigger a crash and compromise the function of the 
self-driving  vehicles.  The  study  has  some  limitations  such  as 
the limited range of the attacks and the uncertainties that come 
with the possibility of on-road attack. Nevertheless, the impact 

of such attacks on road users’ safety is considerable and needs 
to  be  further  assessed.  These  vulnerabilities  are  not  the 
concern only of passenger cars but involve heavy commercial 
vehicles as well. Burakova et al. [18] assessed the security of a 
2006 Class-8 semi-tractor and a 2001 school bus that are both 
equipped  with  SAE  J1939  standard;  the  J1939  bus  is 
commonly used among the heavy-duty vehicles in the US, for 
in-vehicle  communication  and  diagnostics.  The  study  results 
indicate that an attacker with network access can compromise 
the ECUs and manipulate (i) gauges on the instrument cluster 
(e.g.,  oil  pressure  and  battery  voltage  gauge),  (ii)  engine 
Revolutions  Per  Minute  (RPM),  and  (iii)  engine  brake.  In 
conclusion, the attacker with physical access to the in-vehicle 
network  may  override  the  driver  and  remotely  control  the 
heavy-duty vehicle.   

Jafarnejad  et  al.  [19]  were  able  to  hack  the  Renault  Twizy 
80  through  exploiting  vulnerabilities  of  the  Open  Vehicle 
Monitoring  System  (OVMS);  the  OVMS  enables  a  driver  to 
have remote access to electric car information such as battery 
level  and  location.  They  concluded  that  an  adversary  might 
override  the  driver  and  launch  several  attacks.  These  attacks 
are:  (i)  move  the  vehicle  forward,  and  backward,  (ii)  change 
the speed of vehicle while in operation, (iii) cause damage to 
the  engine,  (iv)  change  motor  direction  at  will,  (v)  distort  a 
dashboard, and (vi) control the throttle. In 2015, white hackers 
physically  breached  into  the  Virginia  State  Police  (VSP) 
Chevrolet  Impala.  A  police  officer  who  intended  to  start  his 
duty  was  not  able  to  shift  the  gear.  The  hacker  was  able  to 
manipulate  the  speedometer  and  eventually  shut  down  the 
engine.  Tampering  was  initiated  with  the  installation  of  a 
device  in  the  car,  capable  of  Bluetooth  communication  [20]. 
The  experiment  indicates  that  even  a  vehicle  without  design-
built  advanced  communication  is  a  lucrative  target  for 
adversaries.  In  a  real-world  situation,  consequences  of  a 
malicious  behavior  targeting  state  trooper  vehicles  can  cause 
delay  and  disruption  of  a  police  operation.  This  event 
provoked  VSP  to  support  security-based  research  and  to 
simulate  such  an  event  on  its  students  to  prepare  them  for 
unexpected  attacks.  Also,  a  private  company  designed  a  real-
time intrusion detection device to be plugged into the OBD-II 
[20].  Table  1  represents  a  summary  of  the  experiments  that 
attempted to hack on-the-market vehicles.  
The review of the existing literature suggests that a malicious 
adversary should have high-level of expertise, well resourced, 
and  be  capable  of  executing  effective,  continuous,  and 
synchronized 
security 
vulnerabilities are not only of today or past concern; these can 
accrue  with  vehicular  ad  hoc  network  security  issues  and 
could  trigger  dire  consequences.  The  breach  might  prolong 
and  contaminate  other  vehicles  that  are  on  the  same  network 
as  the  hacked  vehicle.  Breach  propagation  can  disseminate 
over  the  ITS  wide-range  network  like  a  virus  goes  from  one 
computer to another. 

attacks.  Vehicle 

cyber/physical 

 
 
 
 
Kelarestaghi et al. 

4 

1st author 

Year 

Burakova 
[18] 

2016 

Vehicle 
2006 Class-8 
semi-tractor 
and 2001 
school bus 

TABLE 1 
SUMMARY OF THE IN-VEHICLE NETWORK EVENTS 
Attack Impact 

Threat Model 

Foothold 

OBD-II 

Physical 

Taking  control  of  gauges  on  the  instrument  cluster, 
engine rpm, and engine brake 

Yan [17] 

2016 

Tesla Model S 

Sensors 

Physical 

Trigger a crash, Compromise self-driving functions 

Higgins [20] 

2015 

Chevrolet 
Impala 

Greenberg 
[8], and 
Miller [10] 

2013 

Ford Escape, 
Toyota Prius 

OBD-II 

Physical 

OBD-II 

Physical 

Koscher 
[13] 

2010 

2009 model 
year passenger 
car 

OBD-II 

Physical & 
Remote 
(with prior 
physical access) 

Greenberg 
[1], and 
Miller [11] 

2015 

2014 Jeep, 
Cherokee 

Entertainment 
system –Cellular 
(Wi-Fi hotspot) 

Remote 

Jafarnejad 
[19] 

2015 

Renault Twizy 
80 

OVMS 

Remote 

The driver was not able to shift the gear, tampering the 
speedometer, and kill the engine 

Disable brake, changed seatbelt setting, take control of 
steering wheel, spoofed GPS, distort a dashboard, and 
manipulate vehicle lights 

Take  control  of  radio;  instrument  panel  cluster;  body 
controller; engine; brakes; heating and air conditioning 

Take control of the engine, take control of brake. Take 
control  of  the  steering  wheel,  control  air  conditioning 
system,  traumatic  driving  experience,  compromised 
driver privacy by tracing the location of the car through 
the GPS coordinates. 

Move  the  vehicle  forward  and  backward,  change  the 
speed  of  the  vehicle,  cause  damage  to  the  engine, 
changing  motor  direction,  distort  a  dashboard,  control 
the throttle 

Checkoway 
[14] 

2011 

2011 model 
moderately 
priced sedan 

OBD-II, Media 
player, Bluetooth, 
and Cellular 

Remote 

Complete  control  over  the  car  systems,  car  theft,  and 
surveillance 

IV.  SYSTEM VULNERABILITY   

V.  ADVERSE IMPACTS 

to 
Vehicles  or  “computers  on  wheels”  are  prone 
cyber/physical  attacks  as  a  result  of  vehicle  security 
vulnerabilities.  A  premium  vehicle  may  consist  of  more  than 
70 ECUs that are interconnected through the network data bus.  
This  network  consists  of  a  core  bus,  the  CAN,  and  sub-
networks which are: (i) Local Interconnect Network (LIN), (ii) 
FlexRay, and (iii) the Media Oriented System Transport [21]. 
CAN  has  been  the  de  facto  standard  [22],  [23],  yet  CAN 
vulnerabilities  such  as  weak  access  control,  no  integrity  and 
no authenticity, make it a potential foothold for adversaries to 
launch  eavesdropping  and  replying  attacks  aiming  for  ECUs 
[24].  

One  may  claim  that  ECUs  are  hackable  with  significant 
effort  through  reverse  engineering  and  carjacking,  similar  to 
the  Koscher  et  al.  study  [13].  In  fact,  researchers  have  been 
demonstrating  that  attacks  are  possible  with  more  ease 
remotely via Bluetooth, Cellular radio [14], [24], or through a 
malicious  smartphone  application  [24].  In  these  attacks, 
although  the  physical  access  does  not  need  to  be  granted,  an 
attacker  needs  high-level  knowledge  of  vehicle’s  network 
architecture to hack the vehicle.  

A valid concern is that a sophisticated adversary can breach 
into  the  vehicular  ad-hoc  communication  network  and  inject 
false  information  to  an  in-vehicle  network  and  be  rewarded 
with  access  to  the  ECUs  [25].  The  consequences  might  be  to 
disable  a  braking  system,  shut  down  an  engine,  distort  a 
dashboard, and manipulate the air conditioning system, lights, 
radio, driver seat, to name a few [13], [14], [24]. Beyond all, 
the  worst-case  scenario  might  be  that  an  adversary  fully 
controls a vehicle or in other words, remote-drives the vehicle. 

Researchers  have  paid  a  great  deal  of  attention  to  the 
security  aspect  of  vehicular  network  protocol  and  structure, 
but  unfortunately,  very  little  attention  has  been  dedicated  to 
assessing  the  impact  of  vehicle  security  breach  on  the 
transportation  network.  Although  many  studies  suggest  the 
presence  of  various  security  vulnerabilities  within  the  in-
vehicle  network,  surprisingly,  cyber/physical  attacks  impact 
assessment  has  not  been  extensively  explored.  Thus,  we 
cannot  say  for  sure  what  consequences  such  an  attack  can 
impose. This section represents possible adverse impacts of in-
vehicle  network  security  breach.  The  implications  are  based 
on  real-world  studies  that  have  focused  on  or  alluded  to  the 
vehicle cyber/physical attack impacts on transportation.  

Characteristics  of  the  intelligent  vehicles  are  a  “double-
edged  sword.”  Intelligent  advancements  offer  substantial 
applications,  but  on  the  other  hand,  it  stimulates  security 
threats and malpractices. With the developments in the age of 
the  ubiquitous  Internet  and  cellular  communication  soon  the 
conventional  vehicles  will  be  part  of  the  Internet  of  Things 
(IoT), a new era that is called the Internet of Vehicle (IoV). It 
has been projected that approximately between 19 billion to 40 
billion of “things” will be connected through the Internet, and 
vehicles  will  constitute  a  substantial  portion  of  the  IoT  [26]. 
With  the  emergence  of  the  IoV  and  the  progression  of 
technology, adversaries will not limit themselves to the known 
attacks, but they will devise innovative attacks to exploit IoV 
vulnerabilities.  The  adaptiveness  of  the  adversary  promotes 
the need for more comprehensive strategies and out of the box 
perspective. 

While  manufacturers, 

legal  authorities,  and 

service 

 
 
an 

system, 

adversary 

information.  That 

is,  by  compromising 
could 

providers are the core pieces of the transportation network, the 
ones who are disturbed the most by the security breaches are 
the road users. Examples of this scenario are the recent Yahoo 
[27] and Equifax [28] breaches, where privacy and security of 
millions  of  people  were  undermined,  due  to  the  system 
footholds.  Attacks  such  as  location  tracking  can  jeopardize 
users’  privacy  and  impose  problems  for  the  road  users.  Also, 
the attack on vehicle security can lead to a sophisticated leak 
the 
of  private 
infotainment 
eavesdrop 
passengers’ communications through the in-cabin microphone, 
and  extract  that  data  via  the  connected  Internet  Relay  Chat 
(IRC) channel [14]. Even minor information on specifications 
of the sensors, used in the physical infrastructure of a vehicle, 
impart  reliable  information  on  the  make  and  model  of  the 
vehicle  [29].  In  the  Vehicular  Ad  hoc  Network  (VANET), 
vehicles  are  configured  to  send  timestamps,  identifiers  and 
to  communicate  with  other 
hello  beacons  periodically 
vehicles.  Eavesdropping 
trigger 
sophisticated privacy concerns than location tracking [29]. For 
example, through reading the hello beacons associated with a 
specific 
to 
information  related  to  individuals’  arrival  and  departure. 
this 
Unauthorized 
information that can impose severe consequences.  

identifier,  an  adversary  could  gain  access 

investigation  parties  can  also  use 

information  could 

this 

Imperative  to  note  that  there  is  no  clear  way  of  defining 
privacy  and  setting  its  boundaries.  The  degree  of  privacy  is 
dependent  on  many  factors  such  as  user  preferences, 
environmental  settings,  and  application.  Sometimes  privacy 
can  even  be  entangled  with  regulations  of  a  country.  This 
ambiguity  is  the  main  reason  for  the  lack  of  considerable 
efforts to accommodate privacy in transportation systems, on a 
global  scale.  For  instance,  to  fulfill  certain  levels  of  privacy, 
any necessary connections to some fixed physical or software 
infrastructure  has  to  be  avoided,  which  happens  to  be  a  hard 
task to be undertaken by the manufacturers at a technical level. 
Other than that, a substantial problem emerges when security 
and  privacy  happen  to  contradict  each  other  in  specific 
scenarios.  The  information  breach  on  specific  sensors  can  be 
an  excellent  example  of  this  scenario.  That  is,  sensor 
information  might  be  used  for  designing  intrusion  detection 
mechanisms, while at the same time sensors can be a foothold 
for  adversaries  to  compromise  the  system’s  privacy.  Some 
frame the discussion of privacy between two extreme edges of 
full  anonymity  or  no  privacy  at  all.  How  to  find  the  proper 
trade-off  is  still  an  open  problem  to  be  solved.  A  universal 
business  model  needs  to  be  developed  via  an  international 
effort of technical parties as well as legal authorities.  

sophisticated  adversary  can  cause 

Disruption of the ITS network usually comes with monetary 
loss.  These  losses  can  affect  both  operators  and  users  of  the 
system.  A 
traffic 
congestion,  driver  confusion,  driver  distraction,  and  may  be 
the  system  availability,  which  dictates 
able 
unexpected  operation  cost  [30]  (e.g.,  time  and  labor  cost). 
Schoettle and Sivak [31] surveyed 1,533 individuals and found 
that  almost  70%  of  US  participants  are  moderately  or  highly 

to  disrupt 

5 

concerned  about  security  and  data  privacy  breaches  when  it 
comes  to  the  automated  vehicle  technology.  In  fact,  the 
presence  of  any  vulnerabilities  may  lead  to  the  point  that 
public loses trust in the system. 

As  far  as  the  consequences  of  in-vehicle  network  security 
vulnerabilities  are  concerned,  several  impacts  can  be  singled 
out.  These  consequences  are  mainly  concerned  with 
transportation’s  safety,  operation,  efficiency,  security,  and 
reliability,  and  drivers’  behavior.  The  hacking  in-vehicle 
network may impose ruinous damages by compromising road 
users’  safety.  Safety  concerns  have  been  identified  in  several 
studies  (e.g.  [12]).  Taking  control  of  the  engine,  brake, 
steering  wheel  and  throttle  [10],  [11],  [19]  to  supersede  the 
driver,  compromises  the  safety  of  the  targeted  driver  and  his 
tampering  with  air  conditioning 
adjacent  drivers.  Also, 
system, radio volume and distorting the dashboard [10], [11], 
[18],  [20]  not  only  compromise  the  traffic  safety  but  leave  a 
driver  in  a  traumatic  state,  a  state  that  can  contribute  to 
impulsive behavior. 

Beyond 

installation.  Compromising 

the  concerns  mentioned  above,  a  malicious 
adversary  may  compromise  the  road  users’  privacy  through 
tracking attack. Such an attack can deteriorate if coupled with 
malware 
in-vehicle  network, 
impose  monetary  losses  for  road  users  and  transportation 
operators  –  also,  recuperating  from  an  attack  takes  time.  In-
vehicle  network  vulnerabilities  can  cause  users  and 
government  distrust.  Moreover,  individuals  and  companies 
might  file  a  lawsuit  against  car  manufacturer  and  authorities. 
Also,  attacks  can  negatively  affect 
transportation 
efficiency  by  increasing  the  influenced  vehicles’  energy 
consumption  [32].  Since  there  are  not  many  studies  to 
scrutinize attacks’ consequences on road users and authorities, 
security  attack  impacts  on  transportation  network  shall  be 
investigated  more  in-depth  through  stated  and  revealed 
methods (e.g., [33]–[38]). 

the 

The  likelihood-impact  matrix  (Figure  3)  represents  the  in-
vehicle  network  security  vulnerability  impacts  into  a  3×3 
matrix  for  risk  prioritization  purposes.  The  matrix  links  each 
of  the  adverse  impacts  to  the  three  impact  and  likelihood 
clusters  (low-,  medium-  and  high-risk)  to  help  decision-
makers  prioritize  risks  that  are  associated  with  hacked 
vehicles.  Risk  assessment  result  indicates  that  (i)  safety  (e.g., 
injury  and  fatality  crash),  operational  (i.e.,  monetary  loss), 
security (compromising driver’s privacy based on the context), 
and  behavioral 
impacts  are 
associated  with  the  high-risk  cluster,  and  (ii)  security  (i.e., 
vehicles become a foothold in ITS), legal exposure, reliability 
(i.e., road users distrust the system), efficiency (i.e., passenger 
discomfort)  and  operational  (i.e.,  congestion)  impacts  are 
associated  with  the  medium-risk  cluster.  More  research  can 
supplement  the  risk  analysis  studies  and  help  policymakers 
provide flexible solutions to mitigate the risk of cyber/physical 
attack regarding an in-vehicle network. 

(i.e.,  driver’s  distraction) 

 
 
 
 
 
Low

h Security Impact: vehicles becomes a 
g
i
malicious node in the ITS network
H

T
C
A
P
M

I

u
i
d
e
M

m Legal Exposure: due to losses, individuals and 

companies might file a lawsuit against 
manufacturer and authorities

LIKELIHOOD

Medium

Safety Impact: crashes with severity level of 
Injuries and fatalities

Behavioral Impact: traumatic experience that can 
contribute to an impulsive driver’s behavior; 
Drivers' distraction

Operational Impact: taking control of vehicle and 
compromise vehicle’s critical components (e.g. 
engine, brake, steering wheel); Disabled and 
crippled services

w
o
L

Efficiency Impact: increase in energy 
consumption

6 

High

Safety Impact: property damage crashes

Security Impact: to compromise vehicles’ 
availability; To compromise driver’s privacy; to 
track road users’ trajectories; Eavesdrop 
passengers’ communications

Operational Impact: monetary loss of road users 
and system operators

Efficiency Impact: cause discomfort to passengers

Reliability Impact: attacks on in-vehicle network 
can cause road users to distrust the intelligent 
vehicles, as well as the VANET future 
implementation 

Fig. 3. The Impact-Likelihood Matrix maps the adverse impact of in-vehicle network hacking into high- (colored in 
red), medium- (colored in yellow), and low-risk clusters (colored in green)  

VI.  COUNTERMEASURES 

study  objective 

raise  awareness  among 
to 
This 
transportation  operators  and  traffic  engineers  to  employ 
cybersecurity best practices to ensure:  

is 

(i) 
(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

Security by design from inception,  
the 
Out-of-the-box  solutions  by  examining 
system  as  a  whole  not  a  collection  of  isolated 
components,  
Redundancy solutions for critical cyber-physical 
systems,  
Road  users  and  operators  familiarity  with 
possible  attacks  and  adequate  training  for  them 
to react promptly to the attack, and  
A  partnership  among  diverse  resources  (e.g., 
exercising  white  hackers),  to  bring  innovative 
ideas  and  to  portray  the  vulnerability  of  the 
system before the large-scale implementation.  

to 

identify 

scanning 

inviting  white  hackers 

vulnerabilities.  Vulnerability 

The presence of any vulnerabilities triggers a race against the 
clock  among  adversaries  and  security  experts.  Thus,  the  in-
vehicle  network  needs  to  be  continuously  assessed  for 
potential 
and 
penetration  testing  are  among  the  primary  solutions  to  assess 
the security and resiliency of the system against cyber threats 
[39]. Penetration testing is possible through sandboxing event 
and  by 
system 
in  a  controlled  scenario.  Besides,  cyber 
vulnerabilities 
hygiene;  deployment  of 
isolation 
fault  detection  and 
techniques  (e.g.,  application  of  intrusion  detection  systems); 
and full confidentiality, integrity, availability, and authenticity 
threat  analysis  [39]  are  possible  countermeasures  that  ensure 
security and resiliency of the in-vehicle network.  
As stated earlier, CAN is the de facto communication protocol 
that  connects  ECUs  within  the  in-vehicle  network.  ECUs  are 
minicomputers,  which  have  a  specific  task  of  automotive 
related  duty.  ECUs’  tasks  associated  with,  but  not  limited  to, 
engine  control,  brake  control,  timing  module.  All  the  critical 
safety  tasks  are  performed  by  ECUs  that  is,  plausible  to 
conclude  that  passenger’s  safety  is  dependent  on  the  security 
and proper functionality of ECUs as stated in [14] “an attacker 
connected  to  a  car’s  internal  network  can  circumvent  all 
computer control systems.”  

for 

tries 

instance, 

to  overcome 

reliable  measures 

The  deficiencies  in  automobile  cyber-security  stem  from  the 
fact  that  CAN  protocol  has  a  broadcast  nature  and  does  not 
support message confidentiality, authenticity or integrity. This 
provides  the  incentive  for  researchers  to  investigate  the 
shortcomings  of  CAN  protocol  regarding  security,  and 
introduce 
automobiles.  These 
contributions fall into three main categories, (i) protocols, (ii) 
intrusion  detection  systems  (IDSs)  and  (iii)  preventive 
methods, explained in detail below.  
Different protocols have been proposed as an alternative to the 
conventional  CAN  protocol.  Cryptographic  solutions  have 
been immensely investigated to secure CAN protocol as far as 
the  authenticity  and 
integrity  measures  are  concerned. 
Message  authentication  codes  (MACs)  and  digital  signatures 
are some of the few approaches [40] to be named here. CAN+ 
the  problems  of 
[41]  for 
cryptographic  methods  by  using  out  of  band  channels  for 
transmitting 
the  main 
the  cryptographic  bits.  However, 
drawback of this scheme and similar solutions is the backward 
compatibility issue. Nilsson et al. [42] attempted to overcome 
the  backward  compatibility  problem  by  authenticating 
multiple messages, which is less than optimal due to the use of 
multiple  messages,  which  gives  space  to  hackers  for  the 
intrusion.  While  Cryptographic  methods  provide  secure 
solutions  for  CAN  protocol,  they  may  not  be  sufficient  for 
providing  a  robust  security  mechanism.  The  reason  is  mainly 
that  standard  CAN  frame  only  accommodates  up  to  eight 
bytes.  That  is,  CAN  Cryptographic  solutions  might  be 
vulnerable to the brute force attacks. 
The  second  line  of  defense  that  offers  solutions  to  the  CAN 
security vulnerability problem includes IDSs. Unlike protocol 
security measures, IDSs can be mounted into the current CAN 
bus  as  a  software  patch  that  is  completely  aligned  with  the 
backward  compatibility  requirement.  The  state-of-the-art  IDS 
mechanisms  rely  on  a 
technique  named  fingerprinting. 
Fingerprinting  generates  templates  for  the  network  legitimate 
devices and uses the templates for identification purposes [43] 
– these  feature  templates  are  called  fingerprints.  In  brief,  any 
message  that  is  to  be  transmitted  into  the  CAN  bus  needs  to 
match  to  the  fingerprint  of  its  source  device  or  ECU. 
Otherwise,  it  will  fail  the  identification  step  and  will  not  be 
transmitted.  Since  fingerprints  are  usually  extracted  from  the 

 
 
 
analog  physical  layer  signal,  this  type  of  identification  is 
called,  physical  layer  identification  (PLI)  systems  [43]. 
Examples of PLI based IDSs can be found in the literature that 
uses  different  features  such  as  the  line  voltage  [44]–[46]  or 
clock skews [47] for extracting fingerprint templates.  
Last, not least, it is evident that the automobile’s security can 
be  compromised  through  physical  access  [13]  or  a  wireless 
connection [14]. The former is easily avoidable and brings in 
minor  technical  concerns,  whereas  the  wireless  connections 
established from the uncertified users are a matter of concern. 
Securing the wireless links is a problem that has been under-
evaluated. So far, the telematics port or Bluetooth connection 
have been the primary source of security vulnerabilities. That 
is, footholds for adversaries to gain access to an automobile to 
inject  malicious  messages.  Spaur  et  al.  proposed  a  new 
telematics  unit  with  certain  access  restrictions  at  [48]  aiming 
to  control  the  flow  of  messages  into  the  vehicle  through  the 
cellular  network.  Based  on  their  approach,  this  telematics 
ports  is  equipped  with  a  security  controller,  which  is  built 
based  on  digital  certificates.  The  controller  grants  access  to 
certified  users  only.  The  security  of  telematics  ports,  even 
though  essential,  has  been  neglected  in  the  current  literature. 
The telematics ports have always been the most common and 
accessible  footholds  for  malicious  adversaries.  To  preclude 
intrusions right at the starting point, in-built security solutions 
–rather than reactive response– should be implemented. 
The contributions to the field of automobile cybersecurity are 
well  summarized  in  the  three  categories  above.  However,  a 
robust  framework  offering  a  secure  end-to-end  physical 
platform  is  noticeably  missing  in  state-of-the-art  research. 
Providing awareness in public, as well as among professionals 
is of major importance, to bring the necessary attention to the 
transportation  cybersecurity  problem.  The  more  significant 
problem,  however,  appears  when  security  and  privacy  are 
taken into account at the same time. These two critical aspects 
of transportation systems are most of the time aligned in same 
directions  and  occasionally  in  opposite  directions  where 
is  very 
findings  an  optimal  solution  for 
complicated. 

tradeoff 

this 

VII.  CONCLUSION 

ITS  projected  to  augment  safety,  comfort,  transportation 
efficiency,  and  to  overcome  the  environmental  impacts  of 
transportation, but in the presence of security footholds all can 
dim. In the presence of any weaknesses, attackers can exploit 
ITS availability, authentication, integrity, and privacy security 
goals.  Moreover,  many  questions  need  to  be  resolved  before 
the vehicular ad hoc network large-scale implementation. For 
instance:  (i)  what  would  be  the  impact  of  known/unknown 
cyber/physical attacks on transportation? (ii) How should road 
users  respond  to  the  vehicle  hacking  incidents?  (iii)  Do  road 
users need to be trained for cyber intrusion events? Moreover, 
(iv)  Whom  should  road  users  reach  for  fixing  their  cars  to 
recover from a security attack?   

Security is a core technical challenge of the ITS that if not 
appropriately maintained, will drastically affect road users and 
system  operators.  Lessons  learned  from  this  study  depict  that 
road  users’  safety,  privacy  and  security  can  be  compromised 

7 

due  to  the  vehicle  security  vulnerabilities.  Adversaries  not 
only  can  take  control  of  vehicles  but  can  compromise  the 
traffic  safety  and  leave  a  driver  in  a  traumatic  state. 
Eventually,  adversaries  will  supersede  drivers  to  remotely-
drive vehicles shortly.  

for 

risk  determination.  The 

This study offers an early assessment of the risks to the in-
vehicle  network.  We  employed  the  NIST  risk  assessment 
approach 
risk  assessment 
methodology  conducted  in  identifying  threats  to  the  system, 
system  vulnerabilities,  adverse  impacts  in  case  an  adversary 
exploits  those  vulnerabilities,  and  the  likelihood  that  impacts 
will occur. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this study is 
the  first  attempt  to  systematically  assess  the  risks  of  a 
compromised in-vehicle network in the transportation domain. 
The  current  literature  is  mainly  devoted  to  detecting  security 
threats  and  to  suggesting  protection  measures  against  the 
identified and future security attacks. While the knowledge is 
lagging  behind  the  state-of-the-art,  the  need  for  an  impact-
oriented  analytic  assessment  to  identify  system-level  risks  is 
of vital importance. That is, this study aims to contribute to the 
body  of  knowledge  of  ITS  security  and  resiliency  by 
employing  a  qualitative  risk-based  approach  for  measuring 
risks  and  communicating  the  results  for  policy  analysis.  We 
summarize the main findings of the study as follows: 

•  An  adversary  can  compromise  the  in-vehicle  network 
due  to  the  CAN  vulnerabilities  such  as  weak  access 
control,  no  integrity  and  no  authenticity.  That  is,  a 
malicious  adversary  with  high-level  of  expertise,  well 
resourced,  and  capable  of  executing  effective, 
continuous,  and  synchronized  cyber/physical  attacks, 
can exploit vehicle security vulnerabilities. As far as the 
connected/automated  vehicle  technology  is  concerned, 
these  security  vulnerabilities  can  accrue  with  VANET 
security  issues.  The  security  attack  might  extend  and 
contaminate other vehicles that are on the same network 
as  the  compromised  vehicle.  Breach  propagation  can 
disseminate  over  the  ITS  wide-range  network  like  a 
virus goes from one computer to another. 

•  The  risk  determination  of  an  adversary  compromising 
the  in-vehicle  network  can  be  categorized  into  high-, 
medium-, and low-level risk clusters:  

o High-risk  cluster:  safety  (e.g.,  injury  and 
fatality  crash),  operational  (i.e.,  monetary 
loss), security (compromising driver’s privacy 
based  on  the  context),  and  behavioral  (i.e., 
driver’s distraction) impacts.  

o Medium-risk  cluster:  security  (i.e.,  vehicles 
become  a  foothold  in  ITS),  legal  exposure, 
reliability (i.e., road users distrust the system), 
efficiency  (i.e.,  passenger  discomfort)  and 
operational (i.e., congestion) impacts. 
•  A  rigorous  solution  offering  a  secure  end-to-end 
physical  platform  is  noticeably  missing  in  state-of-the-
art  research.  Providing  awareness  in  public,  as  well  as 
among professionals is of vital importance, to bring the 
necessary  attention  to  the  transportation  cybersecurity 
problem.  The  more  significant  problem,  however, 

 
appears when security and privacy are considered at the 
same 
the 
time.  Security  and  privacy  aspects  of 
transportation  systems  are  most  of  the  time  aligned  in 
same  directions  and  occasionally  in  the  opposite 
directions  where  offering  an  optimal  solution  to  this 
tradeoff is a complex task. 

This  study  indicates  a  high  level  of  uncertainty  in  the 
impact  of  a  security  breach  on  the  in-vehicle  network, 
especially on road users and the transportation network. There 
is  a  gap  in  literature  to  assess  and  evaluate  the  impact  of 
cyber/physical  attacks  on  the  road  users  and  the  system 
operators.  The  result  of  this  study  endorses  the  necessity  of 
impact  assessment  on  the  in-vehicle  network  security  breach. 
Impact  assessment  results  will  be  of  great  benefit  to  the  risk 
management  studies  for  the  provision  of  realistic  solutions 
against  security  attacks.  Incorporating  the  outcomes  of  the 
impact  assessment  and  the  risk  management  provides  a 
realistic  analysis  of  the  risk  evaluation.  Also,  the  impact 
assessment  will  help  policymakers  and  system  operators  to 
prioritise strategies to mitigate security risk. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Greenberg,  A.,  Hackers  Remotely  Kill  a  Jeep  on  the 
Highway—With  Me  in  It.  WIRED.  Available  from: 
https://www.wired.com/2015/07/hackers-remotely-kill-
jeep-highway/. 

[2]  Markey  EJ.  Tracking  &  Hacking:  Security  &  privacy 
gaps put american drivers at risk. Congressional Report. 
2015. 

[3]  Ogle A. Automotive Controller Area Network Systems: 
Driver  Convenience  or  Cyber  Security  Threats?.  Utica 
from: 
College; 
http://search.proquest.com/openview/a2091e54000c7fcf
e15cc6da701cdfaf/1?pq-
origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y. 

Available 

2017. 

[4]  Dowson,  C.,  The  Dangers  of  the  Hackable  Car  -  WSJ. 
https://www-wsj-
Available 
from: 
com.cdn.ampproject.org/c/s/www.wsj.com/amp/articles/
the-dangers-of-the-hackable-car-1505700481. 

[5]  Blum  J,  Eskandarian  A.  The  threat  of  intelligent 

collisions. IT professional. 2004;6(1):24–29. 

[6]  Ross RS., Guide for conducting risk assessments. NIST 

Special Publication. 2011;800–30. 

[7]  Ross,  RS.,  Managing  Information  Security  Risk: 
Organization,  Mission,  and  Information  System  View. 
NIST Special Publication. 2011;800–39. 

[8]  Greenberg A., Hackers Reveal Nasty New Car Attacks--
With Me Behind The Wheel (Video) [Internet]. Forbes. 
2013. 
from: 
Available 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/andygreenberg/2013/07/2
4/hackers-reveal-nasty-new-car-attacks-with-me-
behind-the-wheel-video/. 

[9]  Miller  C,  Valasek  C.  A  survey  of  remote  automotive 
attack  surfaces.  Black  Hat  USA  [Internet].  2014; 
Available 
http://blog.hackthecar.com/wp-
content/uploads/2014/08/236073361-Survey-of-
Remote-Attack-Surfaces.pdf. 

from: 

8 

[10]  Miller  C,  Valasek  C.  Adventures 

in  automotive 
networks  and  control  units.  DEF  CON.  2013;21:260–
264. 

[11]  Miller  C,  Valasek  C.  Remote  exploitation  of  an 
unaltered  passenger  vehicle.  Black  Hat  USA.  2015; 
2015. 
from: 
Available 
https://securityzap.com/files/Remote%20Car%20Hacki
ng.pdf. 

[12]  Hoppe  T,  Kiltz  S,  Dittmann  J.  Security  threats  to 
automotive  CAN  networks–practical  examples  and 
selected  short-term  countermeasures.  Computer  Safety, 
Reliability, and Security. 2008;235–248. 

[13]  Koscher  K,  Czeskis  A,  Roesner  F,  Patel  S,  Kohno  T, 
Checkoway S, et al. Experimental security analysis of a 
modern automobile. In: Security and Privacy (SP), 2010 
IEEE  Symposium  on.  IEEE;  2010.  p.  447–462. 
Available 
from: 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/abs_all.jsp?arnumber=55
04804. 

[14]  Checkoway  S,  McCoy  D,  Kantor  B,  Anderson  D, 
Shacham  H,  Savage  S,  et  al.  Comprehensive 
Experimental Analyses of Automotive Attack Surfaces. 
In: USENIX Security Symposium. San Francisco; 2011. 
Available 
from: 
http://static.usenix.org/events/sec11/tech/full_papers/Ch
eckoway.pdf. 

[15]  Oka DK, T. Furue, L. Langenhop, T. Nishimura, Survey 
of  vehicle  IoT  bluetooth  devices.  In:  Service-Oriented 
Computing  and  Applications  (SOCA),  2014  IEEE  7th 
International  Conference.  IEEE;  2014.  p.  260–264. 
Available 
from: 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/6978619/. 

[16]  Foster ID, A. Prudhomme, K. Koscher, S. Savage, Fast 
and  Vulnerable:  A  Story  of  Telematic  Failures.  In: 
WOOT. 
from: 
https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/woot15/
woot15-paper-foster.pdf. 

Available 

2015. 

[17]  Yan  C,  W.  Xu,  J.  Liu,  Can  you  trust  autonomous 
vehicles:  Contactless  attacks  against  sensors  of  self-
driving  vehicle.  DEF  CON.  2016.  24.  Available  from: 
https://www.co.tt/files/defcon24/Speaker%20Materials/
DEFCON-24-Liu-Yan-Xu-Can-You-Trust-
Autonomous-Vehicles-WP.pdf. 

[18]  Burakova  Y,  B.  Hass,  L.  Millar,  A.  Weimerskirch, 
Truck  Hacking:  An  Experimental  Analysis  of  the  SAE 
J1939 Standard. In: WOOT. 2016. 

[19]  Jafarnejad S, L. Codeca, W. Bronzi, R. Frank, T. Engel, 
A  car  hacking  experiment:  When  connectivity  meets 
vulnerability.  In:  Globecom  Workshops  (GC  Wkshps), 
2015  IEEE.  IEEE;  2015.  p.  1–6.  Available  from: 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/7413993/. 

[20]  Higgins,  KJ.,  State  Trooper  Vehicles  Hacked.  Dark 
from: 

Reading. 
http://www.darkreading.com/attacks-breaches/state-
trooper-vehicles-hacked-/d/d-id/1322415. 

Available 

[21]  Amirtahmasebi  K,  SR.  Jalalinia,  Vehicular  Networks–
Security,  Vulnerabilities  and  Countermeasures.  2010; 
Available 
from: 
http://publications.lib.chalmers.se/records/fulltext/1237
78.pdf. 

 
[22]  Wolf M, A Weimerskirch, T. Wollinger, State of the art: 
Embedding  security  in  vehicles.  EURASIP  Journal  on 
Embedded Systems. 2007;2007(1):074706. 

[23]  Johansson  KH,  M.  Törngren,  L.  Nielsen,  Vehicle 
applications of controller area network. In: Handbook of 
networked  and  embedded  control  systems.  Springer; 
from: 
2005. 
http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/0-8176-4404-
0_32. 

Available 

741–765. 

p. 

[24]  Woo S, HJ. Jo, DH. Lee, A practical wireless attack on 
the  connected  car  and  security  protocol  for  in-vehicle 
CAN.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Intelligent  Transportation 
Systems. 2015;16(2):993–1006. 

[25]  Othmane  L,  R.  Fernando,  R.  Ranchal,  B.  Bhargava, 
to  Connected  Vehicles; 
Likelihoods  of  Threats 
https://www.informatik.tu-
Available 
darmstadt.de/fileadmin/user_upload/Group_CASED/Li
klihoodConnectVehicles.pdf 

from: 

[26]  Castillo  A,  AD.  Thierer,  Projecting  the  growth  and 
economic impact of the internet of things. 2015. 
[27]  Selyukh  A.,  Yahoo  Hack  Likely  Breached  3  Billion 
Accounts,  All  That  Existed  In  Mid-2013 :  The  Two-
Way : NPR.  

[28]  Newman,  LH.,  Equifax  Officially  Has  No  Excuse 
from: 

[Internet]. 
https://www.wired.com/story/equifax-breach-no-
excuse/. 

Available 

WIRED. 

[29]  Dötzer F., Privacy issues in vehicular ad hoc networks. 
In:  International  Workshop  on  Privacy  Enhancing 
Technologies. Springer; 2005. p. 197–209. 

[30]  Kelarestaghi  KB.,  K.  Heaslip,  V.  Fessmann,  M. 
Khalilikhah,  A.  Fuentes.  Intelligent  Transportation 
System  Security:  Hacked  Message  Signs.  SAE  Int  J 
Transp  Cyber  &  Privacy.  2018,  doi:10.4271/11-01-02-
0004. 

[31]  Schoettle B, M. Sivak, A survey of public opinion about 
autonomous  and  self-driving  vehicles  in  the  US,  the 
from: 
UK, 
https://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/handle/2027.42/108384. 

2014;  Available 

and  Australia. 

[32]  Gerdes  RM,  C.  Winstead,  K.  Heaslip,  CPS:  an 
efficiency-motivated 
autonomous 
attack 
vehicular  transportation.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  29th 
Annual  Computer  Security  Applications  Conference. 
ACM; 2013. p. 99–108. 

against 

[33]  Jeihani,  M.,  S.,  NarooieNezhad,  and  KB.  Kelarestaghi, 
“Integration  of  a  Driving  Simulator  and  a  Traffic 
Simulator  Case  Study:  Exploring  Drivers’  Behavior  in 
Response  to  Variable  Message  Signs,”  IATSS  Res. 
41(4):164-171, 2017. 

[34]  Dabiri,  S.  and  Heaslip,  K.,  “Inferring  Transportation 
Modes  from  GPS  Trajectories  Using  a  Convolutional 
Neural Network,” Transp. Res. Part C Emerg. Technol. 
86:360-371, 2018. 

9 

Behavioral  Impacts  of  Connected  Automated  Vehicles 
at the National Level,” No. 17-06283, 2017. 

[37]  Kelarestaghi, K.B., W., Zhang, Y., Wang, L., Xiao, K., 
Hancock, and KP., Heaslip. “Impacts to Crash Severity 
Outcome due to Adverse Weather and Other Causation 
Dactors,” Advances in Transportation Studies 43:31-42, 
2017. 

[38]  Zhang,  W.,  L.  Xiao,  Y.  Wang,  and  KB.  Kelarestaghi, 
Prediction,” 
97th  Annual 
(No.  18-

“Big  Data  Approach 
Transportation  Research  Board 
MeetingTransportation  Research  Board. 
04956), 2018. 

of  Crash 

[39]  Dellios  K,  D.  Papanikas,  D.  Polemi,  Information 
Security  Compliance  over 
Intelligent  Transport 
Systems:  Is  IT  Possible?  IEEE  Security  &  Privacy. 
2015;13(3):9–15. 

[40]  Szilagyi CJ., Low cost multicast network authentication 
for  embedded  control  systems  [PhD  Thesis].  Carnegie 
Mellon University Pittsburgh; 2012. 

[41]  Ziermann  T,  S.  Wildermann,  J.  Teich,  CAN+:  A  new 
backward-compatible  Controller  Area  Network  (CAN) 
protocol  with  up 
to  16x  higher  data  rates.  In: 
Proceedings  of  the  Conference  on  Design,  Automation 
and  Test  in  Europe.  European  Design  and  Automation 
Association; 2009. p. 1088–1093. 

[42]  Nilsson  DK,  UE.  Larson,  E.  Jonsson,  Efficient  in-
vehicle delayed data authentication based on compound 
message authentication codes. In: Vehicular Technology 
Conference,  2008  VTC  2008-Fall  IEEE  68th.  IEEE; 
2008. p. 1–5. 

[43]  Wang  C,  RM.  Gerdes,  Y.  Guan,  SK.  Kasera,  Digital 

fingerprinting. Springer; 2016. 

[44]  Cho  K-T,  Shin  KG.  Viden:  Attacker  identification  on 
in-vehicle  networks.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  2017  ACM 
SIGSAC 
and 
Communications Security. ACM; 2017. p. 1109–1123. 

Conference 

Computer 

on 

[45]  Choi  W,  K.  Joo,  HJ.  Jo,  MC.  Park,  DH.  Lee, 
VoltageIDS: Low-Level Communication Characteristics 
for  Automotive  Intrusion  Detection  System.  IEEE 
Transactions  on  Information  Forensics  and  Security. 
2018;13(8):2114–2129. 

[46]  Choi  W,  HJ.  Jo,  S.  Woo,  JY.  Chun,  J.  Park,  DH.  Lee, 
Identifying  ecus  using  inimitable  characteristics  of 
signals in controller area networks. Jun; 2016. 

[47]  Cho  K-T,  KG.  Shin,  Fingerprinting  Electronic  Control 
Units  for  Vehicle  Intrusion  Detection.  In:  USENIX 
Security Symposium. 2016. p. 911–927. 

[48]  Spaur  CW,  PJ.  Kennedy,  MF.  Braitberg,  A.  Fuchs,  N. 

Klingenstein, L. Lee, Secure telematics. 2008. 

[35]  Dabiri,  S.  and  Heaslip,  K.,  “Transport-Domain 
Applications of Widely Used Data Sources in the Smart 
Transportation: 
Prepr. 
ArXiv180310902, 2018. 

Survey,” 

ArXiv 

A 

[36]  Shabanpour,  R.,  Auld,  J.,  Mohammadian,  A.K.,  and 
Stephens,  T.S.,  “Developing  a  Platform  to  Analyze 

 
 
