Introduction of A Hybrid Monitor for Cyber-Physical Systems 

J. Ceasar Aguma 
Department of Computer Science 
 University of California 
 Irvine, CA USA 
 jaguma@uci.edu 

Bruce McMillin 
 Department Of Computer Science 
 Missouri University Of Science 
and Technology 
 Rolla, MO USA 
 ff@mst.edu 

Amelia Regan 
Department of Computer Science  
 University of California 
 Irvine, CA USA 
 aregan@ics.uci.edu

ABSTRACT 

Computing  systems  and  mobile  technologies  have  changed 
dramatically since the introduction of firewall technology in 1988. 
The  internet  has  grown  from  a  simple  network  of  networks  to  a 
cyber and physical entity that encompasses the entire planet. Cyber-
physical  systems(CPS)  now  control  most  of  the  day  to  day 
operations of human civilization from autonomous cars to nuclear 
energy  plants.  While  phenomenal,  this  growth  has  created  new 
security  threats.  These  are  threats  that  cannot  be  blocked  by  a 
firewall for they are not only cyber but cyber-physical. In light of 
these cyber-physical threats, this paper proposes a security measure 
that  promises  to  enhance  the  security  of  cyber-physical  systems. 
Using  theoretical  cyber,  physical,  and  cyber-physical  attack 
scenarios, this paper highlights the need for additional monitoring 
of  cyber-physical  systems  as  an  extra  security  measure. 
Additionally, we illustrate the efficiency of the proposed monitor 
using  a  Shannon  entropy  proof,  and  a  multiple  security  domain 
nondeducibility (MSDND) proof. 

KEYWORDS 
Cyber-physical 
domains, cyber-physical attack 

systems,  CPS  monitor, 

security 

ACM Reference format: 

Julius C. Aguma, Bruce McMillin and Amelia Regan. 2019. Introduction of 
a  Hybrid  Monitor  to  Cyber-Physical  Systems.  In  Proceedings  of  ACM 
Workshop  on  Cyber-Physical  Systems  Security  &  Privacy  (CPS-SPC  ‘19). 
ACM, London, UK, 8 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/1234567890 

1  Introduction 

In  May  of  2017,  a  ransomware  attack  held  most  of  the 
developed  world  hostage, 
systems, 
manufacturing systems, and multiple critical infrastructures across 

crippling  healthcare 

∗Article Title Footnote needs to be captured as Title Note 

†Author Footnote to be captured as Author Note 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or 
classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not  made  or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and 
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this 
work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). 

WOODSTOCK’18, June, 2018, El Paso, Texas USA 
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). 978-1-4503-0000-0/18/06...$15.00 

https://doi.org/10.1145/1234567890 

the globe. The British National Health Services was forced to limit 
health  care  to  only  emergency  cases  [7].  If  not  for  a  timely  kill 
switch, the attack could have brought forth catastrophic damage to 
nuclear  plants,  air  transportation  systems,  and  many  other 
infrastructures.  The  Wannacry  [7]  ransomware  attack  is  a  recent 
example of a now critical threat. A great many cyber and physical 
attacks keep cropping up all over the world, most notably; the Iran 
stuxnet attack [4] , which, according to Iran’s civil defense agency, 
was  still  a  threat  in  October  of  2018  [18],  the  byzantine  replay 
attack [19], and the Ukraine power grid attack that left more than 
230,000 people without electricity [20]. [23] provides an extensive 
list  of  typical  security  threats  that  are  facing  smart-city  CPS  and 
detailed  countermeasures  available  to  defend  against  these.  
Because cyber-physical systems (CPS), are physical entities with 
cyber functionality, traditional cybersecurity  measures are simply 
not  sufficient  to  mitigate  the  threat  posed  by  this  new  wave  of 
cyber-physical  attacks  [1].  While  traditional  cyber  attacks  were 
easily  deducible  and  susceptible  to  prevention  by  means  of  a 
firewall or antivirus software, it has been shown that recent attacks 
like the Iran Stuxnet attack could go undetected for long periods of 
time [5]. A search for a solution to these threats should, therefore, 
focus on making the occurrence of such attacks almost impossible, 
and  if  the  attacks  remain  possible,  then  they  should  at  least  be 
swiftly deducible. 

The protection of cyber-physical systems cannot depend 
on the effectiveness of a single detection mechanism [5]. However, 
the  majority  of  the  proposed  Cyber-physical  security  measures 
have centered around the  notion of a single  monitoring  unit.  The 
Shadow Security Unit(SSU) [16] proposed by Cruz et al is a viable 
idea, but considering that the SSU is a single unit that employs only 
cybersecurity  measures,  a  cyber  attack  that  targets  the  central 
monitoring unit itself, if not detected early, could be fatal to the rest 
of  the  CPS.  Scaglione,  Peisert,  and  McParland  acknowledge  the 
need for both a centralized and distributed monitor but the proposed 
monitor is only an algorithm [14]. While it’s a great algorithm, it’s 
still a cyber measure which will inevitably be vulnerable to some 
cyber attack. The same could be said about the Intrusion Detection 
Systems(IDSs) [15], that is, IDSs are also a single cyber measure. 
For  an  extensive  look  at  the  many  cyber  attacks,  industry  CPS 
models, and common cyber measure, we direct the reader to [19].  

Other  than  purely  cyber  measures,  some  scholars  have 
proposed the use of physics based measures to detect attacks, but 

 
CPS-SPC’19, Nov, 2019, London, UK 

J. Ceasar Aguma et al. 

these  very  rarely  provide  ways  to  mitigate  the  attacks  or  prevent 
them in the first place [21]. The primary idea of those methods is 
that physical properties of the system models can be used to detect 
attacks. Their paper presents a detailed survey of recent physics-
based  attack  detection  schemes  in  CPS  models.  Our  research 
proposes the addition of a hybrid monitor spread over virtual nodes 
with randomized features. This addition to a CPS would provide a 
much-needed  auxiliary  layer  of  security  and  also  enhance  attack 
deductibility. 

This  paper  is  arranged  as  follows;  Section  2  introduces 
the tools used in testing the viability of the proposed hybrid monitor 
as  a  security  measure  for  CPS.  Section  3  gives  a  comprehensive 
look  at  the  hybrid  monitor,  listing  its  features  and  the  reasoning 
behind  each  feature.  Section  4  explains  the  methodology  used  to 
demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of the hybrid monitor. 
Section 5 presents the test scenarios and proofs. Section 6 wraps up 
with a short conclusion. 

2  Background 

This  research  employs  the  Future  Renewable  Electric 
Energy  Delivery  and  Management  (FREEDM)  [2]  System  as  a 
model  CPS.  Shannon  entropy  [8]  is  used  as  a  tool  to  test  the 
effectiveness  of  the  monitor  as  a  security  measure.  The  multiple 
security domain nondeducibility(MSDND) [1] is used as a tool to 
test the effectiveness of the monitor in detecting attacks. 

 The  FREEDM  system  center  is  a  engineering  research 
center  funded  by  the  National  Science  Foundation  and  spanning 
number of universities including but not limited to North Carolina 
State University, Missouri  University of Science and  Technology 
and  Florida  State  University.  The  research  center  developed  an 
energy management and distribution smart grid system  located at 
the  North  Carolina  State  University  that  is  also  referred  to  as 
FREEDM  [2].  The  heart  of  this  energy  system  is  the  Distributed 
Grid  Intelligence  (DGI)  [2],  an 
that 
implements  energy  management  and  distribution  using  modular 
adapters  to  interact  with  devices  in  a  smart  grid  over  different 
interfaces. In this paper, the FREEDM system is employed as a test 
subject for the implementation of the hybrid monitor proposed by 
this research. 

intelligent  algorithm 

The  MSDND  model  is  a  security  model  that  tests  the 
integrity and confidentiality of a cyber-physical architecture.  The 
MSDND model uses logic proofs to test information flow security; 
that  is,  how  information  moves  among  user  groups  within  the 
security domains (SDs) that make up the system [1]. Howser and 
Mcmillin show that maintaining information flow security in CPS 
is  challenging  because  the  flow  is  irrevocably  linked  among  the 
CPS’ cyber and physical units [1]. Therefore, the MSDND model 
is  employed  to  account  for  both  cyber  and  physical  information 
flow  paths.  The  model  defines  two  system  properties  namely: 
MSDND  secure  and  notMSDND  secure  [1].  An  MSDND  secure 

system implies that for information flowing from entity A to entity 
B,  entity  B  cannot  deduce  whether  the  information  is  valid  or 
erroneous.  This  also  means  while  an  MSDND  secure  system  is 
desirable  if  the  goal  is  to  maintain  confidentiality,  it  can  be  an 
indicator  of  the  possibility  of  an  attack  going  undetected.  A 
notMSDND secure system implies the alternative, that is, entity B 
can evaluate the correctness of information obtained from entity A. 
Therefore, in the event of an attack, Howser, and McMillin shows 
that a notMSDND secure system could easily detect the occurrence 
of  an  attack  [1].  Thudimila  and  McMillin  demonstrate  the 
superiority  of  MSDND  over 
traditional  electronic  and 
cryptographic solutions [3] when applied to detection of attacks in 
Automatic  Dependent  Surveillance-Broadcast(ADS-B)  air  traffic 
surveillance  system  [3].  For  this  research,  MSDND  is  used  to 
analyze  whether  a  CPS  with  a  hybrid  monitor  in  place  would 
deduce the occurrence of an attack. 

Phan et al introduce the idea of using information flow-
metrics  like  Shannon  entropy  to  measure  information  leakage  in 
CPS  programs  [9].  Li  uses  Shannon  Entropy  to  break  down  the 
physical  dynamics  of  CPS  and  goes  on  to  show  the  negative 
entropy that communication adds to the general entropy of a CPS 
[10]. In this text, Shannon Entropy is used to illustrate the decrease 
in the possibility of an attack in a CPS after the introduction of a 
hybrid  monitor.  This  demonstrates  the  value  of  adding  a  hybrid 
monitor to CPS architectures as an extra security measure. 

Shannon  entropy  is  an  information  theory  concept 
derived  from  the  general  idea  of  information  entropy  that  was 
developed  and  introduced  by  Claude  Shannon  [8].  Entropy  is 
basically  a  measure  of  uncertainty  in  a  communication  system 
where a low entropy value implies minimal uncertainty and a high 
entropy implies the contrary. Shannon entropy defines entropy (H) 
as: 

Where I is the information content of the discrete random 
variable X. Therefore we can further define E[I(X)] in terms of the 
probability mass function of X: i.e, 

The generally definition of entropy H then comes to: 

3  The Hybrid Monitor 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction of a Hybrid Monitor to Cyber-Physical 
Systems 

CPS-SPC’19, Nov, 2019, London, UK 

To  better  protect  cyber-physical  systems,  this  research 
proposes  the  addition  of  a  monitor.  Many  other  researchers  have 
explored  the  use  of  hybrid  monitoring  to  ensure  safety  or/and 
security  in  CPSs.  Li  et  al.    propose  extended  hybrid  automata 
modeling for vehicular CPSs as a safety and control measure [11]. 
Mao  and  Chen  also  introduce  a  runtime  hybrid  automaton 
monitoring  framework  for  the  Cooperative  Adaptive  Cruise 
Control  Systems(CACC)  [12].  This  research  borrows  the  idea  of 
hybrid monitoring but with randomization as an additional feature. 
The  addition  of  randomization  in  information  flow  paths’ 
generation increases the system’s entropy and in turn, reduces the 
chances of a successful attack in a generic CPS. That is because a 
higher number of information flow paths increases the number of 
points the attacker has to corrupt to remain undetected. Below is a 
detailed break down of this hybrid monitor’s features; 

▪ 

▪ 

▪ 

The monitor is hybrid, that is, both virtual and physical, 
central and decentralized. The monitor would have both 
a virtual component and physical component. The virtual 
implemented  as  a  hidden 
components  would  be 
algorithm 
in  every  Supervisory  control  and  data 
acquisition  unit  (SCADA)  in  the  CPS.  The  physical 
component  of  the  monitor  would  be  a  physical  unit 
independent of the entire CPS and running a monitoring 
algorithm whose function is to oversee the operations of 
the  monitor’s  virtual  components.  The  physical 
component  is,  therefore,  a  central  unit  and  the  virtual 
components are the decentralized units. 

The  monitor  should  be  intelligent  enough  to  generate 
physical invariants for every information flow path in the 
CPS.  An  invariant  is  simply  a  logical  assertion  that 
should  always  be  true  throughout  an  execution  cycle. 
Therefore  physical invariants are logical properties of a 
CPS  that  cannot  be  transformed  by  cyber  entities  and 
should  always  be  held  true.  Having  physical  invariants 
makes  the  CPS  vastly  more  secure  because  they  are 
secure from being corrupted by cyber attacks. With that 
in  mind,  the  hybrid  monitor  uses  generated  physical 
invariants as a validator of the information received from 
other  system  modules.  The  automated  generation  of 
physical invariant using machine learning, deep learning 
or  linear  regression  is  also  a  viable  research  area.  The 
automation of invariant generation is explored further by 
Cruz et al [16]. 

The  virtual  components  of 
the  monitors  would 
continuously generate a randomly increasing number of 
paths for the flow of information between any two CPS 
entities.  The  physical  monitor  should  also  generate  a 
randomly  increasing  number  of  virtual  paths  as  a 
compliment to a physical path for the flow of information 
between any two virtual components of the monitor. 

▪  All paths generated by the monitor should be independent 
of  each  other.  This  ensures  that  all  the  randomly 
generated  paths  cannot  be  collectively  corrupted  by  an 
attacker. 

▪ 

▪ 

To  reduce  the  information  flow  overhead,  information 
sent  through  the  monitors  should  be  sent  through  a 
randomly  chosen  path  among  the  generated  paths  and 
then white noise should be transmitted on the rest of the 
paths. 

The monitor should have a routing algorithm that can be 
employed if the monitor detects a failure or corruption at 
any of the CPS’ entities. 

▪  Communication  between 

the  virtual  and  physical 
monitor should be done on an entirely different network 
than that used by the rest of the cyber-physical system. 

Note that this hybrid monitor is only a theoretical idea but the exact 
physical realization should at the very least aim to implement the 
above mentioned features. 

4  Methodology 

This  research  uses  two  methods  to  highlight  the 

significance of introducing a hybrid monitor to a CPS.  

4.1  Method 1 

The  research  employs  attack  scenarios  to  examine  the 
security of a CPS with and without the hybrid monitor. There are 
three  attack  scenarios,  that  is;  A  purely  cyber  attack  like  a 
ransomware  on  a  CPS,  a  completely  physical  attack  like  the 
attacker  inflicting  physical  damage  to  the  CPS  by,  for  example, 
cutting  wires  and  a  cyber-physical  attack  like  the  Iran  Stuxnet 
attack expounded upon in Kushner’s [4] and Karnouskos’ [5] work. 

4.2  Method 2 

In the second method, the research uses two proof models 
i.e  Shannon  entropy  and  MSDND  to  show  that  the  addition  of  a 
hybrid  monitor  makes  a  CPS  less  susceptible  to  an  undetected 
attack and much more effective at deducing attacks when they do 
occur. 

5  Research Results 

This  section  details  the  three  attack  scenarios,  their 
respective results, the Shannon entropy proof, and MSDND proof. 

5.1  Cyber Attack scenario 

As mentioned in the background, the FREEDM system is 
controlled  by a distributed algorithm called the DGI.  The DGI  is 
set  up  to  run  on  multiple  nodes  spread  out  over  a  network.  It 

 
 
CPS-SPC’19, Nov, 2019, London, UK 

J. Ceasar Aguma et al. 

provides  an  interface  for  energy  management  applications  to 
communicate with physical power devices. 

go even further to keep critical functions running while the damage 
gets fixed. 

5.3  Cyber-physical Attack scenario 

The third and last scenario assumes that a microcontroller 
in  FREEDM  system  is  infected  by  Stuxnet  (figure  2).  Erroneous 
Information  from  this  microcontroller  could  cause  catastrophic 
damage to the smart grid. In this case, deducing the presence of the 
Stuxnet  and  reducing  the  damage  to  the  smart  grid  are  both 
necessary. 

Figure 1: The DGI under a WannaCry attack 

Let us assume that a DGI node is being held hostage by 
the wannaCry ransomware (figure 1). This kind of attack is rather 
easy to detect because ransomware attacks normally make the user 
aware  that  the  attack  is  in  progress.  Therefore,  for  this  scenario, 
attack  deductibility  is  not  important.  But  because  the  attacker  is 
holding a node hostage, all information flowing through this node 
could  be  infected  by  the  attacker.  This  could  give  the  attacker 
further access to other nodes since all nodes of the DGI share state 
information.  At this point,  it’s clear that the entire DGI could  be 
held  hostage.  Since  the  DGI  manages  the  entire  FREEDM  smart 
grid  system,  the  entire  CPS  would  be  either  rendered  useless  or 
could be left vulnerable to more damaging attacks. 

Now  let’s  consider  a  scenario  where  a  hybrid  monitor 
was in place with virtual units running alongside every DGI node 
and a physical unit to oversee the virtual units. Because all traffic 
that goes through a node is verified by the monitor and subjected to 
physical invariants generated by the monitor, it would be easy for 
the  monitor  to  flag  the  presence  of  the  ransomware.  Since  the 
monitor  has  information  flow  routing  capabilities,  all  state 
information  from  other  nodes  would  be  safely  rerouted  through 
other nodes. While the infected node would not be saved, the rest 
of the DGI would continue to function without threat. 

5.2  Physical Attack scenario 

For this scenario, we assume that an attacker has inflicted 
physical  damage  to  the  CPS  without  using  cyber  means.  The 
damage could be as simple as cutting an Ethernet cord or breaking 
a  sensor.  The  detection  and  solution  for  such  an  attack  are  also 
rather simple. However, if the CPS is a critical infrastructure like a 
nuclear  reactor  that  needs  to  continuously  keep  some  functions 
fully  operational  then  even  this  simple  attack  could  prove  fatal. 
With a monitor in place, any failure in the CPS would quickly be 
detected. The monitor, through information flow rerouting, would 

 Figure 2: The DGI under a Stuxnet attack 

From the Iran attack, it’s clear that the Stuxnet could go 
unnoticed  for  a  long  time  if  no  extra  security  measure  is  put  in 
place. Although, if the FREEDM system had a hybrid monitor, the 
Stuxnet  would  be  detected  because  all  information  from  the 
microcontroller would have to be verified by the monitor. Since the 
monitor  has  physical  invariants  to  prove  the  correctness  of 
information  from  this  microcontroller,  any  discrepancies  in  the 
information  generated  by  the  Stuxnet  would  be  caught.  On 
detection,  information  flow  would  then  be  routed  through  other 
nodes and further infection would be avoided. The Stuxnet would 
have to infect all random paths used by the hybrid monitor to avoid 
detection. The Shannon Entropy proof below shows that there is a 
very small possibility of the Stuxnet or attacker infecting all of the 
hybrid monitor’s random paths. 

5.4  MSDND proof 

For  this  proof,  let’s  look  at  the  cyber-physical  Stuxnet 
attack  shown  above.  More  specifically,  the  information  path 
between  the  infected  microcontroller  and  the  DGI  node  process 
running on the computer without the monitor. 

 
 
 
 
Introduction of a Hybrid Monitor to Cyber-Physical 
Systems 

CPS-SPC’19, Nov, 2019, London, UK 

is false. Therefore the Stuxnet would go undetected. Knowin this, 
let us take a look at a scenario with the monitor in place. 

The  difference  in  this  scenario  is  the  presence  of  a 
monitor that is equipped with physical invariants. Using a physical 
invariant, the monitor can evaluate the validity of φ. With this, the 
monitor  can  also  determine  the  state  of  the  microcontroller  with 
respect  to  the  validity  of  φ;  i.e,..  There  exist  a  valuation  Vφmon 
leaving  the  state  SDφmic  deducible  [1].  Hence  the  notMSDND 
secure evaluation shown in figure 4. 

The  proof  shows  that  in  the  event  of  a  cyber-physical 
attack  like  the  Stuxnet  attack,  the  presence  of  a  monitor  would 
render the attack deducible. For the attack to go undetected with a 
monitor  in  place,  the  attacker  would  have  to  infect  every  single 
monitor node, both virtual and physical. The next Shannon entropy 
proof will show that the possibility of compromising all the monitor 
nodes without being detected is rather minimal. 

5.5  Shannon Entropy proof 

The proof considers two scenarios where the attacker is 
attempting  to  infect  the  information  flow  between  the  DGI  node 
process and the microcontroller.  

First, let us take a look at the entropy of the setup without 
the monitor.  There are two possible  information flow events x_1 
and x_2 that the attack could target. With a sample space = 2, the 
probability of the attacker successfully infecting information flow 
between  the  DGI  node  process  and  microcontroller  is  ½.  The 
entropy evaluation for this scenario is shown below. 

Figure 5: Shannon Entropy evaluation for the DGI without a 
monitor 

Figure 3: MSDND evaluation for the DGI without a monitor 

Let  us  define  the  two  domains  as  SDnode  for  the  DGI 
node and SDmic for the  microcontroller with  valuation functions 
Vnode  and  Vmic  respectively.  Then  consider  a  scenario  where 
arbitrary information (φ) is sent from the infected microcontroller 
to  the  DGI  node  process.  If  the  DGI  node  process  and 
microcontroller are at the same level of security, then the DGI node 
process will trust that information from the infected microcontroller 
to  be  valid.  Since  the  information  can  be  either  true  or  false,  the 
first condition; i.e,.. (SDφmic, SD¬φmic ) for MSDND is met [1]. 
This is derived from the fact that if φ is true then SDφmic is true or 
if φ is false then SD¬φmic is true hence the xor statement is always 
true. 

The  second  condition 

is  also  satisfied  from 

the 
assumption that the two domains are at the same security level [1]. 
Therefore,  the  DGI  node  process  believes  and  trusts  the  infected 
microcontroller. This means the DGI node process has no valuation 
function to prove the validity of φ [1]. The absence of this valuation 
function (Vφnode) leaves the system in an MSDND secure system 
[1]. This is the MSDND secure evaluation shown in figure 4.  

Figure 4: MSDND evaluation for the DGI with a monitor 

The implication of this MSDND evaluation is that if the 
infected  microcontroller  sent  false  information  to  the  DGI  node 
process, there would be no way of evaluating that the information 

 
 
 
CPS-SPC’19, Nov, 2019, London, UK 

J. Ceasar Aguma et al. 

With a monitor in place, the sample space grows to (2n + 
2), making the probability of successfully corrupting one path come 
to 1/[2(n + 1)]. Here is the entropy evaluation;  

Computer Science),Joshua Hermann (Graduate Student, Missouri 
S&T’s Department of Computer Science). 

REFERENCES 
[1]  Gerry Howser and Bruce McMillin. 2017. Using Information-Flow Methods to 
Analyze the Security of Cyber-Physical Systems. Computer 50, 4 (April 2017), 
17-26. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2017.112 

 [2]  M.  L.  Crow,  B.  McMillin,  Wenye  Wang  and  S.  Bhattacharyya,  "Intelligent 
Energy  Management  of  the  FREEDM  System,"  IEEE  PES  General  Meeting, 
Providence, RI, 2010, pp. 1-4. doi: 10.1109/PES.2010.5589992  

[3]  A. Thudimilla and B. McMillin, "Multiple Security Domain Nondeducibility Air 
Traffic  Surveillance  Systems,"  2017  IEEE  18th  International  Symposium  on 
High  Assurance  Systems  Engineering  (HASE),  Singapore,  2017,  pp.  136-139. 
doi: 10.1109/HASE.2017.29  

[4]  D. Kushner, "The real story of stuxnet," in IEEE Spectrum, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 48-

53, March 2013. doi: 10.1109/MSPEC.2013.6471059 

Figure  6:  Shannon  Entropy  evaluation  for  the  DGI  with  a 
monitor 

The  proof  shows  us  that  the  entropy  increases  with  the 
increase in the size of n paths. From the attacker’s point of view, 
the uncertainty increases with increasing size of n paths. Therefore 
as the size of n increases, it becomes much harder for the attacker 
to  launch  a  successful  attack  on  the  CPS.  By  adding  the  hybrid 
monitor,  the  system  is  not  fully  secure  from  an  attack  but  the 
possibility of a successful attack is vastly smaller. 

6  Conclusion 

After 2017’s Ransomware attack [17], the world can not 
ignore the threat posed by the possibility of using attacks on cyber-
physical  systems  as  a  tool  for  terrorism  and  cyber  warfare.  The 
increased occurrence of cyber-physical systems attacks is surely an 
indicator that traditional cybersecurity measures are insufficient at 
prevention and detection of these attacks. The world needs to start 
considering  alternative  or  improved  security  measures.  The 
combination  of  an  intelligent,  randomized  physical  monitor  with 
existing virtual cyber measures to create a hybrid monitor is a good 
place to start. While, the hybrid monitor is not a foolproof solution 
to  cyber-physical  attacks,  it  could  well  be  the  best  solution  yet. 
focus  on  physical 
this  area  should 
Future 
implementation  of  the  hybrid  monitor  and  prevention  of  attacks 
targeting  the  hybrid  monitor  itself.  This  hybrid  monitor  could  be 
the  great 
important  and 
towards  fully  securing  an 
nonexpendable entity of smart living that is cyber-physical systems. 

research 

leap 

in 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This research was sponsored by the United States National Science 
Foundation  (NFS).  The  following  colleagues  made  notable 
contribution to the research over the span of the project; Dr. Patrick 
Taylor  (Associate  Professor,  Missouri  S&T’s  Department  of 
Computer  Science),  Manish  Jaisinghani  (Graduate  Student, 
Missouri  S&T’s  Department  of  Computer  Science),  Anusha 
Thudmilla  (Graduate  Student,  Missouri  S&T’s  Department  of 

[5]  S.  Karnouskos, 

"Stuxnet  worm 

industrial  cyber-physical 
system security," IECON 2011 - 37th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial 
Electronics  Society,  Melbourne,  VIC,  2011,  pp.  4490-4494.  doi: 
10.1109/IECON.2011.6120048  

impact  on 

[6]  J. Weimer, R. Ivanov, S. Chen, A. Roederer, O. Sokolsky and I. Lee, "Parameter-
Invariant  Monitor  Design  for  Cyber–Physical  Systems,"  in  Proceedings  of  the 
IEEE, vol. 106, no. 1, pp. 71-92, Jan. 2018. doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2017.2723847 
 [7]  Ehrenfeld,  Jesse  M.  "WannaCry,  Cybersecurity  and  Health  Information 
Technology: A Time to Act," Springer Science+Business Media New York 2017, 
24 May 2017.  

[8]  Shannon, C. E. (1948), A Mathematical Theory of Communication. Bell System 
Technical Journal, 27: 379-423. doi:10.1002/j.1538-7305.1948.tb01338.x  
[9]  Quoc-Sang  Phan,  Pasquale  Malacaria,  Corina  S.  Păsăreanu,  and  Marcelo 
D'Amorim.  2014.  Quantifying  information  leaks  using  reliability  analysis.  In 
Proceedings of the 2014 International SPIN Symposium on Model Checking of 
Software 
(SPIN  2014).  ACM,  New  York,  NY,  USA,  105-108. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2632362.2632367  

[10]  H. Li, "Information efficiency of communications for networked control in cyber 
physical systems: When carnot meets shannon," 2016 IEEE 55th Conference on 
Decision  and  Control  (CDC),  Las  Vegas,  NV,  2016,  pp.  1865-1870.  doi: 
10.1109/CDC.2016.7798536  

[11]  Li Yejing, Chen Ming-cai, Zhang Guang-quan, Shao Yu-zhen, Feng Fei and Hou 
Xing-hua,  "A  model  for  vehicular  Cyber-Physical  System  based  on  extended 
hybrid automaton," 2013 8th International Conference on Computer Science & 
Education, Colombo, 2013, pp. 1305-1308. doi: 10.1109/ICCSE.2013.6554123. 
[12]  Jianhui  Mao  and  Liqian  Chen.  2012.  Runtime  Monitoring  for  Cyber-physical 
Systems: A Case Study of Cooperative Adaptive Cruise Control. In Proceedings 
of the 2012 Second International Conference on  Intelligent System Design and 
Engineering  Application  (ISDEA  '12).  IEEE  Computer  Society,  Washington, 
DC, USA, 509-515. DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISdea.2012.592  

[13]  F. Pasqualetti, F. Dörfler and F. Bullo,  "Attack Detection  and  Identification in 
Cyber-Physical Systems," in IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 58, 
no. 11, pp. 2715-2729, Nov. 2013. doi: 10.1109/TAC.2013.2266831.  

[14]  C. McParland, S. Peisert and A. Scaglione, "Monitoring Security of Networked 
Control Systems:  It's the Physics," in  IEEE Security & Privacy,  vol. 12, no. 6, 
pp. 32-39, Nov.-Dec. 2014. doi: 10.1109/MSP.2014.122  

[15]  K.  Pal,  S.  Adepu  and  J.  Goh,  "Effectiveness  of  Association  Rules  Mining  for 
Invariants Generation in Cyber-Physical Systems," 2017 IEEE 18th International 
Symposium on High Assurance Systems Engineering (HASE), Singapore, 2017, 
pp. 124-127. doi: 10.1109/HASE.2017.21 

[16]  T.  Cruz  et  al.,  "Improving  network  security  monitoring  for  industrial  control 
systems,"  2015  IFIP/IEEE  International  Symposium  on  Integrated  Network 
doi: 
Management 
10.1109/INM.2015.7140399  

(IM),  Ottawa,  ON, 

878-881. 

2015, 

pp. 

[17]  Tobias  A.  Mattei,  Privacy,  Confidentiality,  and  Security  of  Health  Care 
the  Recent  WannaCry  Cyberattack,  World 
ISSN  1878-8750, 

Information:  Lessons  from 
Neurosurgery,  Volume  104,  2017,  Pages  972-974, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2017.06.104. 
and 

international 

[18]  Center 

strategic 

studies. 

for 

“https://www.csis.org/programs/technology-policy-program/significant-cyber-
incidents,” May 2019. 

[19]  Ding,Derui. Han,Qing-Long. Xiang, Yang. Xiaohua Ge, Xiaohua. Zhang, Xian-
Ming.”A  survey  on  security  control  and  attack  detection  for  industrial  cyber-
physical systems,” Neurocomputing, 2018.  

[20]  Lee, Robert M. Assante, Michael J. Conway, Tim. “Analysis of the Cyber Attack 
on the Ukrainian Power Grid,” Defense Use Case, E-ISAC, 18 March 2016. 

 
 
 
Introduction of a Hybrid Monitor to Cyber-Physical 
Systems 

CPS-SPC’19, Nov, 2019, London, UK 

[21]  Jairo  Giraldo,  David  Urbina,  Alvaro  Cardenas,  Junia  Valente,  Mustafa  Faisal, 
Justin  Ruths,  Nils  Ole  Tippenhauer,  Henrik  Sandberg,  and  Richard  Candell. 
2018. A Survey of Physics-Based Attack Detection in Cyber-Physical Systems. 
ACM  Comput.  Surv.  51,  4,  Article  76  (July  2018),  36  pages.  DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3203245  

[22]  Fardin Abdi, Chien-Ying Chen, Monowar Hasan, Songran Liu, Sibin Mohan, and 
Marco Caccamo. 2018.  Guaranteed physical security  with  restart-based design 
for cyber-physical systems.  In Proceedings of the 9th ACM/IEEE  International 
Conference  on  Cyber-Physical  Systems  (ICCPS  '18).  IEEE  Press,  Piscataway, 
NJ, USA, 10-21. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCPS.2018.00010 

[23]  A. Gharaibeh et al., "Smart Cities: A Survey on Data Management, Security, and 
Enabling Technologies," in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 19, 
no. 4, pp. 2456-2501, Fourthquarter 2017. doi: 10.1109/COMST.2017.2736886 

 
 
