The Sounds of Cyber Threats

Akbar Siami Namin 

Rattikorn Hewett 

Computer Science Department 

Computer Science Department 

Texas Tech University 

Texas Tech University 

Lubbock, TX 79409, USA 

Lubbock, TX 79409, USA 

akbar.namin@ttu.edu 

rattikorn.hewett@ttu.edu 

Keith S. Jones 

Psychology Department 

Texas Tech University 

Lubbock, TX 79409, USA 

keith.s.jones@ttu.edu 

Rona Pogrund 

College of Education  

Texas Tech University 

Texas School for the Blind and 

Visually Impaired (TSBVI) 

Austin, TX, 78756, USA 
rona.pogrund@ttu.edu 

Copyright is held by the author/owner. Permission to make digital or hard 
copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee. Poster presented at the 12th Symposium on Usable Privacy 
and Security (SOUPS 2016), June 22-24, 2016, Denver CO. 

Abstract 
The Internet enables users to access vast resources, 
but it can also expose users to harmful cyber-attacks.  
This paper investigates human factors issues 
concerning the use of sounds in a cyber-security 
domain. It describes a methodology, referred to as 
sonification, to effectively design and develop auditory 
cyber-security threat indicators to warn users about 
cyber-attacks.  A case study is presented, along with 
the results, of various types of usability testing with a 
number of Internet users who are visually impaired. 
The paper concludes with a discussion of future steps to 
enhance this work. 

Author Keywords 
Sonification; Internet security threats; usability testing; 
visually impaired  

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.2. [User Interfaces]: User-centered design, user 
interface management systems 

Introduction 
The Internet increasingly plays important roles in our 
day-to-day activities. While it improves the quality of 
life, it also makes users vulnerable to various cyber-
threats such as phishing attacks that lure users to 
malicious Websites. Given the prevalence of and risks 
pertinent to cyber-attacks, it is imperative that users 
be informed when they are being attacked. Many 
technologies and visual cues have been developed to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Casting a fishing rod - 
The sonification for phishing 
attack.  

Figure 2. Dropping bombs - The 
sonification for malvertising.  

Figure 3. Typing on a keyboard - 
The sonification for form-filling.  

help detect and determine the risks associated with 
cyber threats. While these cues are useful, the main 
drawback of using only visual cues for cyber attack 
alert is that they not always available to all users, in 
particular, those with visual impairments. The use of 
sounds could be a good complement to visual cues. 

without visual impairments use to detect cyber-attacks 
can be lost when screen readers translate the system’s 
interface into a verbal description. It is difficult for 
visually impaired users to know that those around them 
can see their information being typed into an insecure 
field. 

The goals of this research were to investigate (1) how 
practical it is to convey security alerts to the targeted 
victims through sonification, and (2) whether Internet 
users find these sounds to be accessible and easy to 
use. This paper presents a methodology for sonifying 
cyber-security threats using non-speech sounds, 
earcons, in order not to further complicate the already 
sound-intensive screen reader users [6, 7, 8]. The 
focus was on sonifying three security threats and cues:  
phishing, malvertising, and form-filling (or typing 
sensitive information) into a form. Basic steps and 
results are briefly described below. A detailed and 
context-dependent report is published in [10].  

Sound-Featured Design: Issues & Approach 
Designing effective computer-human interfaces to warn 
users, particularly those with visual impairments, in the 
context of cyber-attacks, faces several challenges.  
First, while sonifying warnings is well studied, almost all 
do not apply to cyber-attacks, which can take many 
forms, many of which are difficult to understand and 
articulate and are even unknown to novice users. The 
design must be able to convey the warning at different 
levels of danger to users with diverse backgrounds.  
Second, users with visual impairments use screen 
readers, which auditorily present information that 
normally would be graphically displayed on a computer 
screen (e.g., conveying text via speech). Microsoft 
Internet Explorer with a screen reader such as Job 
Access with Speech (JAWS) speaks the elements of the 
computer’s interface aloud. The user hears synthesized 
speech as she navigates a document or the Internet on 
the computer screen. Human linear-like perception of 
sounds is limited compared to the nature of visual 
perceptions. Finally, the visual cues that individuals 

This research proposes an earcon-based sonification 
design. Three approaches to designing non-speech 
sounds or earcons include: the representational, 
abstract, and semi-abstract approaches [1, 4].  The 
representational approach uses natural sounds. For 
example, the threat of a security breach could play the 
sound of an old creaky door. The abstract approach 
uses sounds that are synthesized from basic sound 
components.  Combining pitches with simple rhythm 
and pitch design can be used to represent complex 
information. The semi-abstract approach is a mixture of 
the two.    

The design principle focused on user-centric 
information that uses sonification as a means to convey 
i) the “concept” or “meaning” of associated cyber-
security threats. ii) the “consequences” of the threats 
for users. and iii) the “actions” that users should take in 
response to the current threat. There are many types of 
cyber-security threats [9].  The CIA (Confidentiality, 
Integrity, and Availability) organizes attacks based on 
whether they threaten the Confidentiality of information 
and users, tamper with the Integrity of information, or 
hinder the Availability of services. The selection of 
sonification approaches largely depends on the 
underlying context. Selecting appropriate sonification 
approaches also rely on the ease to remember, the 
types of audiences, the familiarity of sonifications, and 
the relevance to the events sonified. Similarly, the 
selection of sounds mainly depends on the type and 
severity of events being sonified [4].  For instance, an 
event with catastrophic consequences should have loud 
and high frequency sounds.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Set of Sonifications and 
the Rationales 

Phishing:  
1. Casting a Fishing Reel. 
Users should recognize it as a 
fishing reel and then connect 
that with a phishing attack. 
2. Breaking Glass, and 3. 
Opening a Rust Door. 
Phishing attacks often involve 
attempts to steal information, 
which is analogous to 
burglary.  

Malvertising:   
1. Dropping a Bomb, 2. 
Sounding a Siren. Can wreak 
havoc on one’s computer. 
3. Pouring Water into a 
Container. An analogous to 
the process of downloading a 
file. 

Form-Filling:  
1. Typing on a Keyboard. A 
component of filling out an 
online form. 
2. Bubbling Water. An 
analogous to an ongoing 
process such as filling out a 
form. 
3. Playing a Slot Machine. 
The threat during form-filling 
is exposing sensitive and 
expensive information. 

Threat 

Phishing 

Malvertising 

Form-Filling 

Sonification 

- Casting a fishing reel 
- Breaking Glass 
- Opening a Rusty Door 
- Dropping a bomb 
- Pouring Water  
- Sounding a Siren 
- Typing on a keyboard 
- Bubbling Water 
- Playing a Slot Machine 

Correctly 
Identified 

Average 
Pleasantness 

Average 
Urgency 

Average 
Conspicuity 

Rated 
Best 

Correctly 
Remembered 

80% 
0% 
0% 
40% 
20% 
60% 
40% 
20% 
20% 

2.4 
2.8 
2.4 
3 
3.2 
2.6 
3.4 
3.4 
3.2 

3.6 
4 
2.8 
4.2 
2.8 
4.6 
3 
3 
4.4 

4.4 
4.2 
3 
5 
4.4 
4.8 
2.8 
4 
5 

60% 
40% 
0% 
20% 
0% 
80% 
100% 
0% 
0% 

40% 
60% 
60% 
80% 
40% 
60% 
80% 
80% 
80% 

 Table 1. Quantitative results from usability testing1. 

Case Study  
The study involved five participants who were visually 
impaired, in the age range of 20-49. This sample size is 
considered sufficient in identifying most system’s 
usability problems [3] including usability studies with 
users who were visually impaired [2]. Three of the 
participants were males and four were employed.  In 
terms of education, one had a Master’s degree, three 
had Bachelor’s degrees, and one had a high school 
diploma. They rated their uses of screen readers from 
Good (2) to Very Good (3). These participants were 
randomly recruited from a pool of 20 users who are 
workers and students at a special purpose school for 
students who are blind or visually impaired and from a 
state rehabilitation agency for individuals who are blind. 
All participants reported being blind using screen 
readers such as: JAWS, Window-Eyes, VoiceOver, 
NVDA, System Access, and Talkback for Android. See 
additional demographic information in [5].  

Sonifications were created that convey a) the concept 
or meaning of associated cyber-security threats, and b) 
the consequences of cyber-threats for users. We 
focused on threats familiar to most users to ensure the 
exact intention of usability testing and its effectiveness, 

1For sonification and sounds, please visit the following webpage:  

http://www.myweb.ttu.edu/asiamina/SonificationSounds.html 

namely phishing and malvertising. The former refers to 
an attacker’s attempt to trick users into giving the 
attacker private information (e.g., users’ passwords).  
The latter, malvertising (malware + advertising) refers 
to attacks in which an attacker attempts to entice users 
to download files that contain harmful codes. To include 
a cyber-security threat that would be familiar to users 
but operated differently, form-filling of an online form 
was selected as the potential to expose private 
information.   

Usability Testing and Participant Tasks  
The usability testing was accomplished in four phases:  
Phase I) During the first phase of testing, participants 
listened to the sonifications, which were superimposed 
on a background of the screen reader JAWS’ output. 
After listening to a given sonification, participants 
reported which cyber-security threat they thought that 
the sonification was meant to convey followed by a 
rationale for their judgment. Participants then rated the 
sonification’s pleasantness, urgency, and conspicuity 
via 5-point Likert scales (e.g., 1 = extremely 
unpleasant, 5 = extremely pleasant). 
Phase II) Similar to Phase I, during the second phase 
of testing, participants listened to the set of 3 
sonifications associated with each cyber-security threat.  
For each set, participants were asked to choose the 
sonification that best represented the intended cyber-
security threat and to provide a rationale for the choice. 
Phase III) During the third phase of testing, 
participants listened to each possible pairing of their 

 
 
 
                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
choices for the best sonifications of each cyber-security 
threat.  For each pair, participants rated the 
discriminability of the sonifications on the 5-point Likert 
scale. During this phase of testing, sonifications were 
not superimposed onto a JAWS output background. 
During this phase of testing, participants judged how 
similar or dissimilar were the sonifications.  
Phase IV) During the fourth stage of testing, 
participants again listened to each of the sonifications, 
which were superimposed on a background of JAWS 
output.  After each sonification, participants were asked 
whether they remembered what cyber-security threat 
that sonification was meant to convey.  If they 
answered “yes,” participants were asked to report what 
they thought was the intended cyber-security threat. 

Chosen Earcon-Based Sonification Approach  
The representational sonification was chosen mainly for 
two reasons.  First, we wanted to create sounds that 
could convey their intended meanings with little-to-no 
user training. Second, we hypothesized that, to reduce 
their cognitive loads, individuals with visual 
impairments heavily utilize natural sounds. 
Each project team member independently searched 
online sound repositories (e.g., www.sounddogs.com) 
for natural sounds representing phishing, malvertising, 
and form-filling. Approximately sixty percent more 
candidate sounds than needed were chosen. Each team 
member selected and ranked three sounds considered 
to be the best potential sonification for each cyber-
security threat. The highly ranked sonifications for each 
threat were usability tested in order to investigate 
whether users would i) hear the indicator when 
triggered, ii) identify what cyber-security threat a given 
indicator was meant to convey, and iii) react 
appropriately to the indicator. Figures 1 – 3 illustrate 
the sonifications for some of the security threats. 

Results and Discussion  
Table  1  provides  a  summary  of  the  major  quantitative 
results  from  the  usability  testing.    Review  of  the  table 
suggests the following. 

!  Users correctly identified the cyber-security threat 
associated with certain sonifications.  For example, 
80% of users correctly identified that the “casting a 
fishing reel” sonification warned of a phishing attack.  
This finding suggests that it is possible to develop 
sonified cyber-security threat indicators that users 
intuitively understand.   

!  Users failed to correctly identify the cyber-security 
threat associated with certain other sonifications.  
However, once told the intended sonification-threat 
mapping, users were able to remember that pairing 
when tested later.  This finding suggests that users’ 
abilities to recognize that a given sonification warns 
of a given attack could increase as they use such a 
system or with training.  

!  There did not seem to be a relation (positive or 

negative) between pleasantness and the likelihood 
that 1) the sonification would be correctly identified 
without training, 2) the sonification’s intended 
meaning would be correctly remembered at the end 
of the testing session or 3) the sonification would be 
picked as the best sonification for that cyber-security 
threat type.   

Conclusions and Next Steps 
The results of initial usability testing were promising in 
that it is possible to develop sonified cyber-security 
threat indicators that users intuitively understand. 
Future research should explore ways to optimize 
various facets of the sonification development process. 
For example, the process of finding and selecting 
candidate sonifications was cumbersome; it would be 
advantageous to develop ways to fully or partially 
automate that process.  

Acknowledgment  
This work is supported by National Science Foundation 
under award number CNS-1347521. Thanks to Yuanlin 
Zhang, Fethi Inan, Thomas Hughes, John Rose, Miriam 
Armstrong, and Tim Salau for the discussion and 
conducting the usability testing sessions.  

 
 
 
References 
1.  Meera M. Blattner, Denise A. Sumikawa, Robert M. 

Greenberg. 1989. Earcons and icons: Their 
structure and common design principles. Human–
Computer Interaction, 4(1): 11–44. 

2.  Elaine Gerber. 2002. Surfing by ear: Usability 

concerns of computer users who are blind or 
visually impaired. Access World, pages 38–43. 

3.  Robert A. Virzi. 1992. Refining the test phase of 

usability evaluation: How many subjects is enough? 
Human Factors, 34:457–468.   

4.  Thomas Hermann, Andy Hunt, John G. Neuhoff. 

2011. The Sonification Handbook. Logos Verlag.  

5.  Fethi Inan, Akbar Siami Namin, Keith S. Jones, 

Rona Pogrund, 2016, Perception of Cybersecurity 
Risks for Internet Users Who Are Visually Impaired, 
Journal of Educational Technology and Society. 
(ISSN 1436-4522). 

6.  Petrie, Fisher, ONeill, Fisher, Di Segni Y. 2001. 

Deliverable 2.1: Report on user requirements of 
mainstream readers and print disabled readers. 

7.  Romisa R. Ghahari, Mexhid Ferati, Tao Yang, 

Davide Bolchini. 2012. Back navigation shortcuts 
for screen reader users. In Proceedings of the 14th 
international ACM SIGACCESS conference on 
Computers and accessibility, pages 1–8. 

8.  Jonathan Lazar, Allen Aaron, Jason Kleinman, Chris 
Malarkey. 2007. What frustrates screen reader 
users on the web: A study of 100 blind users. 
International Journal of human-computer 
interaction, 22(3): 247–269. 

9. 

Internet Security Threat Report (ISTR 20). 2015 
Volume 20, Symantec Annual Report. 

10.  A. Siami Namin, R. Hewett, K.S. Jones, and R. 
Pogrund. 2016. Sonifying Internet Security 
Threats, ACM International Conference on 
Computer-Human Interactions, Late-Breaking Work 
(ACM CHI’16), San Jose, California, USA. 

 
 
