Security for Cyber-Physical Systems: Leveraging 
Cellular Networks and Fog Computing 

Filipo Sharevski  
School of Computing 
College of Computing and Digital Media 
DePaul University 
Chicago, IL, USA 
fsharevs@cdm.depaul.edu 

Sharief Oteafy 
School of Computing 
College of Computing and Digital Media 
DePaul University 
Chicago, IL, USA 
soteafy@depaul.edu 

The  reach  and  scale  of  Cyber  Physical  Systems  (CPS)  are 
expanding to many aspects of our everyday lives. Health, safety, 
transportation  and  education  are  a  few  areas  where  CPS  are 
increasingly  prevalent.  There  is  a  pressing  need  to  secure  CPS, 
both  at  the  edge  and  at  the  network  core.  We  present  a  hybrid 
framework  for  securing  CPS  that  leverages  the  computational 
resources and coordination of Fog networks, and builds on cellular 
connectivity for low-power and resource constrained CPS devices. 
The  routine  support  for cellular  authentication, encryption,  and 
integrity  protection  is  enhanced  with  the  addition  of  a  cellular 
cloud controller to take over the management of the radio and core 
security  contexts  dedicated  to  CPS  devices.  Specialized  cellular 
cloudlets  liaison  with  core  network  components  to  implement 
localized  and  network-wide  defense  for  denial-or-service,  smart 
jamming,  or  unauthorized  CPS  tracking  attacks.  A  comparison 
between  our  framework    and  recent  cellular/fog  solutions  is 
provided,  together  with  a  feasibility  analysis  for  operational 
framework  deployment.  We  conclude  with  future  research 
directions that we believe are pivotal to the proliferation of secure 
and scalable CPS.   

Keywords—  Cyber-Physical  Systems  Security;  Cellular  IoT; 

LTE-V2V; Fog Computing; Cloudlets; Hybrid architecture  

I. 

INTRODUCTION  

Cyber-Physical  Systems  (CPS)  are  smart  systems  that 
include  engineered  networks  of  interacting  physical  and 
computational  components  [1].  Each  CPS  manifestation  has 
unique operational requirements depending on the application 
it  supports.  For  example,  smart  grids  require  a  nationwide 
network of meters for fast delivery of the metered information. 
Systems  for  control  of  industrial  processes  require  myriad 
sensors for pressure, temperature, and motion to prevent system 
outages  and  environmental  hazard.  Smart  healthcare 
applications  require  patient-worn  monitors  for  vital  signs and 
changes in patient conditions for diagnosis in real-time. Smart 
cars must retrieve sensor information including speed, weather 
conditions, sense nearby pedestrians and communicate in real-
time to prevent collisions and improve traffic flow.  

CPS has evolved to encompass sensors, actuators, varying 
modalities of network infrastructures, as well as an increasing 
spectrum of interactions with humans. These technologies are 
different from those in a traditional computational setting; the 
clients  in  CPS  are  sensors  or  actuators  with  restricted 
computational  resources  and  are  often  battery-powered.  The 
servers not only support web traffic in non-real-time, but handle 

XXX-X-XXXX-XXXX-X/XX/$XX.00 ©2018 IEEE 

real-time  and  mission-critical  applications  like  monitoring  of 
power distribution over large regions. Even CPS traffic cannot 
be  simply  met  with  wired/wireless  TCP/IP  access.  CPS 
applications  communicate  over  various  wireless  technologies 
and  use different  protocols  to  share  the  sensory  and actuation 
data.   

preclude 

resources 
intensive 

CPS technologies demand practical security approaches to 
ensure  consistent  protection  of  the  entire  cyber-physical 
ecosystem.    Sensors  and  actuators  are  often  battery  powered, 
implementing 
that 
with  modest 
computationally 
algorithms.  While 
security 
traditional  protection  modes  may  work  for  securing  the 
computing  components  and  communication  technologies, 
many  problems  arise  with  scalability  and  the  cyber-physical 
dynamics.  Smart  grids  or  environmental  monitoring  systems 
contain large  amounts  of  physical  components that  scale  fast, 
routinely  distributed  authentication  or  automatic  patching 
difficult  to  implement.  A  static  CPS  topology  cannot  be 
assumed for smart cars or smart healthcare applications as they 
require  support  for  mobility  and  varying  number  of  devices 
with unique communication patterns.  

To meet these demands, we propose a security framework 
that  builds  on  advancements  in  cellular  networks  and  fog 
computing, tailored to support secure CPS operation. Cellular 
networks provide nationwide coverage, mobility management, 
and built-in encryption, authentication, and integrity protection 
of  user  communication.  Recently,  the  LTE  infrastructure  has 
been  upgraded  to  support  CPS  access  for  computationally 
restricted  devices  and  smart  vehicles  [2].  In  parallel,  fog 
computing  gains  traction  as  an  efficient  platform  supporting 
customized and near-edge computation that could support real-
time  security  computations.  Fog  nodes  coordinate  among 
themselves  to  offload  processing  from  less  capable  or 
overburdened  elements,  eliminate  application  bottlenecks, 
attest  the  trustworthiness  of  devices,  and  facilitate  self-
reconfiguration 
[3]. 
Leveraging  cellular  access  with  fog  computing  allows  for 
feasible  security  implementations  in  most  cyber-physical 
applications. 

for  continuous  security  protection 

In the remainder of this paper, we elaborate on the design 
requirements  and  challenges  of  CPS,  leading  to  security 
vulnerabilities.  We  present  a  detailed  discussion  on  these 
security challenges in Section III, and elaborate on the cellular 

 
 
networks  security  in  Section  IV,  emphasizing  the  new 
advancements  in  the  LTE  infrastructure.  The  potential  of 
leveraging  Fog  computing  to  improve  near-edge  security  is 
elaborated  upon in  Section  V. We  present  our  framework  for 
CPS security over a hybrid Cellular-Fog architecture in Section 
VI, and discuss the premise and feasibility of this framework in 
section VII. We conclude in Section VIII with future insights 
on how CPS security could be addressed more thoroughly and 
holistically via this framework, and building on advancements 
in tangent Edge technologies.    

II.  CYBER PHYSICAL SYSTEMS  

The CPS conceptual model is shown in Fig 1. The sensors 
provide  information  about  the  physical  state  in  the  cyber 
domain,  which  is  computationally  processed  to  render  an 
actionable output. The actuators translate this output to alter or 
modify the physical state. There are six main CPS domains: (1) 
Smart  Grids,  (2)  Industrial  Control  Systems  (ICS),  (3) 
Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS), (4) Smart Healthcare, (5) 
Smart Environments, and (6) Smart homes [4].  

Smart  grids  are  the  early  CPS  where  the  computing 
components support remote power metering, maintenance, and 
power  distribution  control.  Smart  grids  require  massive, 
nationwide  deployment  of  sensors  and  actuators  that  must 
communicate  with  minimum  delay  and  latency.  Domain 
specific  protocols  are  used  together  with  wireless  access 
technologies like IEEE 802.11 b/g/n/ac, ZigBee or Cellular IoT 
(CIoT) for reliable and scalable communication [5].  

ICS  use  the  sensed  information  about  light  intensity, 
humidity,  pressure,  or  temperature  to  implement  production 
logic  through  actuators  known  as  Programmable  Logic 
Controllers  (PLCs).  The  computing  components  in  ICS 
supervise  and  control  manufacturing  processes  or  render 
emergency/safety decisions to halt operations. The operation in 
ICS  does  not  necessarily  require  many  sensors/actuators  or 
large throughput  but  requires  minimum  delay  and latency  for 
communication.  Like  smart  grids,  ICS  use  similar  domain 
specific  protocols  and  increasingly  rely  on  wireless  access  to 
optimize installation and maintenance costs [5], [6].    

ITS  are another  popular cyber  physical  domain  where  on-
board  computers  or  traffic  management  systems  sense  road 
conditions  to  avoid  collisions,  optimize  routes,  or  congestion 
control.  ITS  require  wireless  transmission  for  both  the 
Vehicular-to-Vehicular  (V2V)  or  Vehicular-to-Infrastructure 
(V2I)  communications  and  have  strict  requirements  for 
minimum delay and latency. To meet these requirements, IEEE 
provides a complete V2V/V2I suite for communication with the 
IEEE  1609  Dedicated  Short  Range  Communication  (DSRC) 
protocol  group.  LTE  also  offers  V2V/V2I  communication 
alternative from Release 14 onwards, supporting national scale 
deployments and massive capacity on a nationwide level [7].   

Smart  healthcare  is  enhancement  in  diagnosis,  treatment 
and monitoring of patients based on real-time information from 
patients’ vital signs. This information helps doctors and nurses 
to determine the optimal drug dosage or adjust other treatments 
to patients, even remotely. Most smart healthcare applications 
use short range wireless technologies like 6LoWPAN, BLE, or 
ZigBee to  communicate  with  a telemedicine cloud.  However, 

Fig. 1.  CPS Conceptual Model 

the CIoT enable long range coverage with mobility support, so 
sensors  like  wearables  for  active  people are  also included  for 
real-time mobile patient monitoring [8].  

Smart  environments  use  cyber-physical  interactions  to 
better understand the operating conditions in spaces, buildings, 
or  cities  and  assist  the  occupants  in  executing  their  tasks. 
Because  the  sensing  is  static  in  nature,  sensors  in  smart 
environments  require  extended  battery  life  and  relaxed 
delay/latency budget. Wireless access is preferred for simplicity 
and scalability, therefore applications like ambient intelligence 
have the option to implement LoRaWAN or CIoT technologies 
that  support  wide  area  operation  [9],  [10].  The  advantage  of 
CIoT  is  that  the  low  power  communication  is  supported  for 
longer ranges and regional access. The similar idea for cyber-
physical  assistance  drives  the  development  of  smart  homes, 
although  on  a  much  smaller  scale.  Smart  home  sensors  and 
actuators like ambient lights, smart switches, smart thermostats 
and smoke/water/gas leak detectors communicate on the local 
network  or  over  BLE/ZigBee  and  are controlled  by the  home 
occupants [11].  

SECURITY DEMANDS OF CYBER PHYSICAL SYSTEMS  

III. 
CPS  operate  in  more  vulnerable  conditions  compared  to 
traditional  computing  systems.  An  adversary  can  alter  the 
physical  state,  induce  inaccurate  sensory  observations,  or 
modify  the  actuation  to  disturb  normal  CPS  operation.  For 
example,  it  is  possible  for  an  adversary  to  interfere  with  an 
artificial  glucose  monitoring  system  to  ignore  a  patient’s 
glucose-level  readings  and  alter  insulin  injection  levels  [12]. 
Adversaries can target mission-critical CPS to cause maximum 
damage. In the only confirmed case of hacker-caused blackouts 
in history, adversaries were able to take control of a Windows 
XP machine running the control server in the Ukrainian electric 
utility company Ukrenergo, and turn off the power distribution 
without causing any alarms [13].  

  Achieving secure CPS operation also helps satisfy the safety 
and  business  continuity  requirements  of  these  systems. 
Therefore, a thorough CPS security implementation demands: 
(1)  lightweight  security  processing,  (2)  frequent  changes  in 
system  capacity,  (3)  non-patched  devices,  (4)  system-level 
security visibility, and (5) minimum-impact incident response.  

Supporting lightweight  processing  means  that  the  security 
baseline (authentication, encryption, integrity protection) must 

 
 
 
be met with minimum processing power, minimum energy, and 
possibly in non-real time [14]. Most sensors and actuators are 
computationally  restricted  to  perform  complex  calculation  or 
maintain  encrypted  connections  in  real-time.  However,  this 
should  not  let  CPS  systems  default  to  no  encryption  or  only 
simple one-way authentication.    

Frequent  changes  in  system  capacity  require  the  security 
management  to  scale  with  the  dynamic  CPS  topology  and 
sporadic  traffic.  Smart  cars  randomly  come  and  go  at  a 
monitored  intersection,  for  example,  and  advanced  meters 
communicate  measurement  reports  by  sending  only  one  IP 
packet  on  30-minute  intervals.  The  detection  of  suspicious 
system  behavior  will  differ  between  enterprise  networks  and 
CPS  networks,  so  reusing  existing  intrusion  detection  and 
protection setups seems impractical.  

it 

is  not  straightforward  as 

Intrusion detection and protection goes hand in hand with a 
regular  patch  management  program.  However,  patching  CPS 
devices 
is  for  computing 
components. Sensors and actuators are designed to work over 
very  long  lifespans  with  minimal  interruption  and  on-site 
human  intervention.  A  firmware  upgrade  of glucose  monitors 
distributed to many patients or on-board car systems in already 
sold cars is hard to complete. Even if it is, by the time the all 
affected CPS devices are patched, new firmware upgrade may 
be needed due to newly discovered vulnerabilities.  

The  presence  of  knowingly  vulnerable  CPS  devices  in  a 
dynamic network topology requires a security visibility beyond 
simple  collection  of  status  reports  or 
log  data  [15]. 
Knowledgeable  adversaries  will  interfere  to  preclude  the 
delivery of insulin or send falsified data to nearby cars to create 
congestion  or  traffic  disasters.  Also,  adversaries  might  try  to 
interfere  with  sensors’  observations  and  simply  increase  the 
temperature  near  a  thermometer  or  induce  vibrations  near  a 
vibration  sensors.  Therefore,  a  CPS  security  implementation 
needs  not  only  to look  after the  confidentiality, integrity, and 
availability;  it  must  also  ensure  the  veracity  of  sensors’ 
observations and maintain a plausible system state at any time 
(one that does not deviate to far from values estimated by some 
model) [16].  

Mission-critical  CPS  have  strict  requirements  for  high 
availability. This restricts the patching frequency of the control 
systems and limits the timeframe for incident response. When 
an incident is detected in purely cyber system, the compromised 
parts are either isolated  or taken  offline to  reinstall,  reboot or 
update  the  running  software  and/or  hardware.  These  actions 
almost always take more than few minutes. In parallel, a copy 
of the running services from the affected parts is brought up to 
serve  during  the  overall  system  restore.  These  strategies 
adopted for enterprise incident response will not work for most 
CPS;  they  can  neither  tolerate  taking  system  parts  offline  for 
more  than  several  minutes,  nor  easily  bring  replicas  of  the 
affected  system  elements  (e.g.  PLCs or  smart  meters)  to  take 
over the operation while the incident response is in progress.       

IV.  CELLULAR NETWORKS SUPPORT FOR CPS SECURITY 
CPS  security  demands  are  hard  to  meet  with  a  single 
protection system or traditional enterprise protection practices. 

Fig. 2. Cellular CPS Access and Infrastructure. 

Significant customization  of existing  security  solutions  might 
be an option, but its costly and there are not guaranteed to work 
in  all  CPS  domains.  Recent  advancements  in  3GPP  Rel.  13 
enable  CPS  wireless access,  with  the  inherently  authenticated 
and regulated communication infrastructure of cellular network 
systems  [17].  That  is,  CPS  devices  connected  to  a  cellular 
network will benefit from LTE-grade security while having the 
advantages  of  wide  area  coverage,  high  density,  support  for 
mobility, minimum delay and latency, and high throughput. In 
this section we highlight the advantages of cellular connectivity 
that afford feasible security for CPS.  

A.  Cellular CPS Access   

Cellular  networks  support  CPS  specific  access  under  the 
Cellular  IoT  (CIoT)  umbrella.  CIoT  offers  three  different 
options for system level connectivity: Extended Coverage GSM 
IoT (EC-GSM-IoT), enhanced Machine Type Communication 
(eMTC),  and  Narrowband  IoT  (NB-IoT)  [2].  In  addition, 
cellular  networks 
support  LTE-V2V  access  designed 
specifically for ITS applications [18]. 

EC-GSM-IoT  extends  the  network  capacity,  adds  LTE-
grade  security,  and  improves  the  power  efficiency  both  for 
legacy  GSM-based  CPS  applications  and  new  low-cost  CPS 
applications  in  areas  with  no  LTE  coverage.  GSM  has  the 
largest global coverage footprint and very small time-to-market, 
which is a significant advantage for CPS applications like smart 
environments, 
these 
improvements, EC-GSM-IoT provides a combined capacity of 
up to 50,000 CPS devices per cell sector [2].   

healthcare.  Under 

homes, 

or 

eMTC  is  an  adaptation  of  the  current  LTE  access  to 
accommodate  a  wide  range  of  CPS.  It  enables  a  15  dB 
enhancement over the standard LTE coverage,  supports relaxed 
latency, bigger delay budget and device mobility. eMTC is fully 
compatible with the standard LTE, making it relatively easier to 
support  in  deployed  LTE  networks.  3GPP  introduces  a    self-
contained NB-IoT radio access for CPS requiring modest data 
rates,  longer  battery  life,  extended  coverage  and  massive 
capacity. The narrower bandwidth of only 200 kHz allows for 
significant reduction in device complexity, supporting sporadic 
(maximum latency of 10 seconds) and low-rate CPS traffic (50 

 
kbps) for a long battery life (five to ten years). As for capacity, 
NB-IoT supports up to 52,547 CPS devices per cell sector [19]. 

3GPP also enables LTE-V2V access supporting high speed 
(up  to  250  km/h),  high  density  (thousands  of  connected 
vehicles),  and less than 100  milliseconds latency  CPS traffic, 
suitable  for  ITS  applications.  LTE-V2V  currently  enables 
transmission 
deployment  of 
scheduling between the vehicles, and eNB assisted scheduling. 
In both deployments, vehicles utilize the standard LTE features 
for mobility, security, and session management.  

two  configurations:  ad-hoc 

B.  Cellular CPS Infrastructure 
  To support CPS operation, 3GPP dedicates a separate core 
element,  the  Cellular  IoT  Serving  Gateway  Node  (C-SGN) 
shown in Fig. 2 [20]. C-GSN manages the IP traffic delivery to 
and  from  the  Application  server  and  together  with  the  HSS 
ensures scalable authentication, key management and network 
level  encryption  for  resource  constrained  CPS  devices.  This 
adaptation  enables  easier  scaling  using  existing,  nationwide 
LTE infrastructures, seamless support for LTE-V2V, and CPS-
specific traffic models including non-IP traffic (e.g. SMS).   

C.  Cellular CPS Security  

From a security perspective, the built-in LTE security is of 
great advantage for CPS. The LTE security architecture shown 
in Fig 3 is based on a pre-shared cryptographic key K stored in 
a tamper-resistant SIM card on the device side and in the HSS 
on the network side [21]. This key is used in a Authentication 
and Key Agreement (AKA) security protocol that distinguishes 
Access Stratum (AS) security in the radio part and Non-Access 
Stratum  (NAS)  in  the core  part  of  the  network.  For the  radio 
part,  the  CPS  device  and  the  eNB  maintain  an  AS  security 
context that includes the cryptographic keys at AS level, next 
hop parameters, cryptographic algorithms used for enciphering 
and  integrity  protection,  and  counters  used  for  replay  attacks 
protection.  CPS  devices  and  the  C-SGN  maintain  a  NAS 
security context too, with the similar parameters including the 
NAS level keys as depicted in Fig 3.  

Every time a CPS device registers with the network, sends 
or receives data, or moves under coverage of another eNB the 
AKA is invoked and both the AS and NAS security context are 
established  with  the  network.  The  security  signalization  for 
CPS  with  infrequent  and  small  data  transmissions  leads  to 
inefficient  use  of  the  radio  resources  and  battery  power.  For 
example, periodic metering reports in smart grids take 20-200 
kB and are sent on 30 minutes or longer intervals. To optimize 
the security signalization, the C-SGN and the CPS devices can 
store  the  AS  security  context  and reuse it  when they perform 
service request to send metering or command data [17].  

Another optimization is a data transfer (single IP packet in 
one direction) over NAS signaling with a pre-established NAS 
security context. In this case, CPS devices are not required to 
establish an AS security context. Instead, the NAS-encrypted IP 
packet is send as a message in the signalization transaction for 
radio  resource  connection  setup  together  with  an  updated 
counter and decrypted by the C-SGN using the other elements 
in the pre-established NAS security context. 

Cellular networks implement performance management for 
routine network operation and maintenance that can also be of 
advantage  for  CPS  security  monitoring.  Assuming  operation 
with  non-patched  or  malicious  devices, 
the  network 
performance  management  is  useful  for  system-level  security 
visibility  and  detection  of  malicious  CPS  behavior  [22]. 
Examples  like  the  Mirai  IoT  botnet  confirm  that  smart  home 
CPS devices can be orchestrated to launch distributed Denial-
of-Service (DoS) attacks even outside of the these domains and 
harm  regular  Internet  hosts  [23].  Analyzing  the  performance 
indicators  for  traffic and  signalization  utilization  per cell,  per 
CPS device, or a CPS domain can alter for potential DoS and 
minimize the time for incident response.   

V.  FOG COMPUTING SUPPORT FOR CPS SECURITY 

There  is  a  significant  push  to  leverage  Edge  resources  in 
advancing  network and  computing  functionalities.  One  of  the 
prime areas of growth lies in Fog Computing. This domain has 
been  introduced  as  a  mediation  layer  between  remote  Cloud 
services,  and  local  computing/networked  devices  [24].  The 
notion  of  cyber  foraging  for  improving  local  operation  via 
remote  resources has evolved  over  multiple  manifestations of 
Cloud/Fog/Mist  architectures  [25].  Overall,  each  instance  of 
Cloud  resources,  at  every  level,  needs  to  be  matched  with 
functional requests given pre-determined latency and capacity 
constraints.  The  resulting  offloading  problem  is  application 
specific and raises significant challenges in both scalability and 
response times. A more detailed analysis of the tiers/classes of 
Cloud/Fog/Mist architectures is presented in [26]. 

To  secure  CPS  interactions  at  the  Edge,  we  propose 
leveraging  the  Fog  infrastructure in  multiple  fronts,  including 
offloading  processing/authentication, 
trustworthy  security 
attestation, and minimum-downtime protection  [3]. That is, we 
argue  that  CPS  systems  can  optimize  their  computational 
resources  to  support  complex  security  monitoring  and  policy 
enforcement  [27]  by  leveraging  fog  resources.  In  this  section 
we  highlight  the  advantages  of  fog  computing  that  afford 
feasible security for CPS. 

A.  Computational offloading for CPS devices 

Fog resources could significantly aid the operation of CPS 
devices. This includes the management of AS and NAS security 
contexts on the network-core side for CPS devices. Fog services 
can  maintain  validity  timers  (how  long  before  a  new  context 
needs to be generated), reuse counters (how many times a CPS 
device  has  reused  a  context), 
the  average  number  of 
authenticated  users  per  CPS  domain  to  offload  C-GSN  and 
eNBs,  in  addition  to  optimizing  the  security  signalization. 
Another  function  suitable  for  fog  nodes  is  local  security  data 
sharing  for  preliminary  defense.  Fog  nodes  interact  with  a 
subset  of  eNBs  and  can  correlate  the  plausibility  state  with 
traffic  load  information  from  the  C-SGN  to  raise  alarms  for 
potential DDoS attacks.  

B.  Trustworthy Security Attestation 

Fog nodes can act as attesters of security trustworthiness for 
CPS devices. In deployments with a large number of devices, 
this is useful because it enables granular detection of abnormal 
behavior, which cannot be detected with only a general network 
monitoring.    For  example,  changes  in  V2V  traffic  load  in  a 

subset of eNBs covering a segment of a highway intersection 
that  is  not  a  result  of  a  congestion  might  alarm  for  a 
compromised  smart  car.  Attestation  can  also  happen  for  a 
subset of CPS devices to look for falsified measurement reports 
or unauthorized commands from a remote CPS application.   

C.  Minimum Downtime Protection 

To  improve  on  CPS  self-defense  capabilities,  we  propose 
leveraging  Fog-based  attestation  functions.  In  many  CPS 
deployments,  a  compromised  device  may  still  be  allowed  to 
operate, because taking it down will disturb the physical state 
of  the  system.  For  example,  a  compromised  PLC  in  a  water 
plant  –  controlling chlorine levels  –  will  prompt  isolation  for 
other PLCs controlling water distribution, when detected by the 
fog attestation. Fog nodes will also attest CPS control servers 
to check for potential compromises on an application level, and 
provide a system-level report so ICS operators can take actions 
for  manual  chlorine  control  and  removal  of  potential 
application malware.  

VI.  A HYBRID FOG-CELLULAR NETWORK FOR CPS SECURITY 

To meet the security demands discussed in Section III, we 
propose  a  hybrid  CPS  security  architecture,  shown  in  Fig  4.  
The  objective  is  to  enhance  CPS  security  by  leveraging  fog 
computing  and  cellular  access.  The  cellular  infrastructure  is 
well  poised  to  support  connectivity  for  a  wide  range  of  CPS 
devices, and the fog architecture can significantly aid response 
time  and  more  complex  security  tasks,  especially  for  CPS 
devices that are spatially correlated.  

The  proposed  hybrid  architecture  supports  lightweight 
security processing with recent adaptations for optimized use of 
AS  and  NAS  security  contexts  for  CPS  access.  The 
authentication, encryption, and integrity protection are handled 
by  cellular  nodes,  but  a  cellular  cloud  controller  node  is 
introduced to offload the management of the AS/NAS security 
contexts. Thus, the CPS AS can dedicate its resources to only 
execute  application  logic,  and  periodically  check  with  the 
cellular cloud controller on the CPS devices’ security status.  

and 

both 

computational 

Fog  resources  will  be  delegated  to  specialized  Cloudlets, 
which  are  the  anchoring  Fog  access  points  in  this  edge 
technology  [24]  [26].  These  devices  are  either  designed  and 
deployed near each group of CPS devices, or could be virtually 
realized  by  delegating  its  tasks  to  a  more  capable  (high-end) 
CPS device. Each Cloudlet will be tasked with broadcasting its 
service  set  to  neighboring  CPS  devices  for  task-offloading, 
spanning 
security-related 
functionalities.  Cloudlets  will  liaison  with  cellular  network-
core  components,  to  support  region-wide  and  network  wide 
defense  functionalities,  including  protection  from  DDoS  and 
tracking  malicious  users/devices  that  operate  across  CPS 
deployments.  Their  overall  task  would  be  to  carry  out 
local/Edge  processing  and  security  functionalities,  as  well  as 
delivering  a  rapidly-accessible  infrastructure  for  coordinating 
between  CPS  deployments and  core  security  functions  on  the 
cellular backbone. Each cloudlet will be directly connected via 
high-speed and authenticate access to a cellular BS, and will be 
designed to adapt to different cellular-based Internet backbones 
(i.e. communication modalities and standards).  

Fig. 4. Proposed hybrid CPS security architecture. 

 
 
 
On  the  network  core,  the  cellular  cloud  controller  also 
offloads the processing burden from the C-SGN, those resulting 
from the frequent changes in CPS system capacity. A cellular 
network  can  support  many  CPS  applications  from  different 
domains  requiring  either  AS  context  storage,  pre-established 
NAS  security  context,  or  both.  Instead  of  having  the  C-SGN 
maintain  the  security  requirements  for  each  CPS  application, 
that cellular cloud controller could perform this in coordination 
with  the  CPS  application  server.  C-GSN  and  eNBs  will  be 
probed to generate the contexts, and revoke and/or regenerate 
them, but the IDS/IPS monitoring logic will be a responsibility 
of the cellular cloud controller. 

This  segregation  of  security  duties  enables  system-level 
security  visibility  and  helps  operate  with  non-patched  or 
compromised CPS devices. Managing the security contexts and 
the  CPS  device/application  security  attestation  enables  the 
cellular cloud controller to maintain a plausible system state at 
any  time, in  coordination  with  spatially-aware  Cloudlets.  The 
plausible  state 
for  mission-critical  CPS  assumes  high 
availability so any threat of downtime can be detected as early 
as  possible,  helping  operators  to  respond  to  incidents  with 
minimum impact on the CPS operation.  

VII. 

FEASIBILITY DISCUSSION 

The goal for blending fog computing and cellular access for 
CPS  is  to  meet  the  specific  security  demands  with  minimal 
adaptations  on  CPS  side.  Shifting  the  security  burden  on  the 
infrastructure side is practical and cost effective. The CIoT and 
LTE-V2V access are readily available as software upgrades in 
already existing LTE networks. Given that C-SGN incorporates 
most of the standard LTE functionalities for session, mobility 
and  security  management,  it  can  be  implemented  as  network 
upgrade in the Evolved Packet Core (EPC). The cellular cloud 
controller assumes most of the costs, but the overall architecture 
is less expensive compared with, for example, the costs needed 
to  build  a  nation-wide  DSRC  infrastructure  for  ITS  support 
(which can serve only one CPS domain). 

Fog computing as a concept is explored as an enhancement 
for  the  cellular  radio  access  to  support  local  caching  and 
optimized  radio  resource  management  [28].  Our  architecture 
can be well integrated in a Fog Radio Access Network (F-RAN) 
where  the  management  of the  AS and  NAS  security contexts 
can be a part of the local caching. We designated a standalone 
fog computing node to allow separate implementation and full 
security support in cases where a F-RAN is not viable option. 
The  cellular  cloud  controller  can  be  also  integrated  into  a 
Mobile  Edge  Computing  (MEC)  infrastructure.  MEC  as  a 
technology has already been proposed in integration with LTE-
V2V  for  ITS applications and  standard  LTE  access  for  smart 
healthcare  and  smart  home  applications  [29].  With  a  MEC 
integration  in  5G  deployments,  our  hybrid  architecture  can 
support  security  not  just  for  CPS,  but  also  for  use  cases  like 
augmented reality.  

Blending 

technologies 

requires  an 

interdisciplinary 
approach,  but  also  requires  a  feasibility  analysis  from  an 
infrastructural  security  point  of  view,  even  in  case  where  the 
purpose of blending is to provide security support. Authors in 
[30] agree with this proposition and provide a comprehensive 
analysis  of  the  security  threats  and  issues  for  fog-related 

core 

center, 

edge  data 

technologies  including  F-RAN  and  MEC.  The  threats  are 
classified per assets included in each fog technology: network 
infrastructure, 
infrastructure, 
virtualization  infrastructure,  and  user  devices.  Our  proposed 
solution incorporates all of these assets, so the fog threat model 
equally applies to it. The threats of DoS is relevant in our case 
given the possibility for rogue cars in an ITS scenario or sensors 
in  smart  entrainments/homes  to  target  the  availability  of  the 
eNBs  or  the  cellular  cloud  controller,  respectively.  For 
example,  CPS  devices  can  misuse  the  small  data  transfer  to 
initiate  signaling  storm  targeting  the  C-SGN  and  the  cellular 
cloud  controller.  The  proposed  architecture  assumes  trusted 
network operations, however, misuse of network functions have 
occurred in the pass from rogue insiders, making the threat for 
insider service manipulation also relevant in our case [31]. 

technologies 

two  foundational 

VIII.  CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The exponential growth of CPS and IoT systems are mandating 
the design and integration of novel architectures. Securing their 
operation,  interactions,  data  sustenance  and  access  policies  is 
the  area  of  immanent  research  interest.  In  this  work  we 
elaborated  on 
that  have 
witnessed significant leaps in agility and functional expansion, 
and are now poised to significantly aid our ongoing pursuit to 
securing  CPS.  Rapid  developments  in  edge  computing, 
facilitated  via  Cloudlets  and  Fog  Access  Points,  have 
significantly  empowered  deployed  CPS  devices  in  taking  on 
more  complex  and  time-sensitive  functionalities,  that  were 
previously  infeasible  given  their  constrained  resources.  We 
surveyed  recent  developments  in  Fog  networking,  and  how  a 
number of functionalities could be supported by Cloudlets/ Fog 
APs 
improve  CPS  operation  and  security.  Recent 
developments  in  Cellular  IoT  are  promising  significant 
authentication and provisioning capabilities to low-power CPS, 
and  have  recently  gained  momentum  in  providing  near-edge 
services with considerably less overhead on these devices.  

to 

We  presented  a  hybrid  architecture  that  aids  security  and 
provisioning in CPS systems, leveraging recent advances in Fog 
networking  and  cellular  IoT.  The  hybrid  architecture  is 
articulated  on  Cloudlet  access  at  every  edge  network,  and 
details a set of primary functionalities that could be delivered to 
CPS  systems  without  impacting  design  and  deployment 
schemes.  This  hybrid  architecture  has  been  designed  with 
integration  and  cross-validation  at  its  heart,  whereby  CPS 
system  are  monitored  and  managed  via  implicit  back-end 
collaboration,  sustained  via  Cloud  and  Fog  services  that 
interconnect  and  analyze  traffic  and  access  policies  via  the 
cellular backbone. 

In future work, we plan to implement this hybrid architecture in 
health-focused CPS. Specifically, we are currently developing 
a  secure  framework  for  developing  an  Internet  of  Medical 
Things, targeting secure interactions between medical devices, 
physicians,  patients,  and  other  stakeholders  in  the  medical 
domain.  

It is important to note that the growing abundance of connected 
devices in the CPS ecosystem, is quickly drowning our security 
and  provisioning  mechanisms.  This 
is  magnified  by 
developments  in isolated  silos, and a  recent trend  to delegate 
AP specific security mechanisms that do not take into account 

coordinated  attacks  and  malicious interventions  with  network 
operations.  We  identified  physical  plant  management  and 
medical  CPS  as  two  vulnerable  sectors,  and  they  require  the 
aggregated  development  of  security,  access  provisioning  and 
proactive 
to  ensure  safe 
traffic  monitoring  protocols, 
interactions with humans and environments.  

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[12] 

[13] 

[14] 

REFERENCES 

National Institute of Standards and Technologies, “Framework for 
Cyber-Physical Systems,” Gaithersburg, MD, 2016. 

Ericsson AB, “Cellular networks for Massive IoT,” Ericsson, vol. 1, 
no. January, pp. 1–13, 2016. 

Z. Tao, Z. Yi, Z. Raymond, and A. Helder, “Securing the Internet of 
Things: Need for a New Paradigm and Fog Computing,” in Fog for 
5G and IoT, M. Chiang, B. Baslasubramanian, and F. Bonomi, Eds. 
Hoboken, New Jersey: Wiley, 2017, pp. 261–281. 

J. Giraldo, E. Sarkar, A. Cardenas, M. Maniatakos, and M. 
Kantarcioglu, “Security and Privacy in Cyber-Physical Systems: A 
Survey of Surveys,” IEEE Des. Test, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 7–17, 2017. 

European Union Agency for Network and Information Security 
(ENISA), “Communication network dependencies for ICS/SCADA 
Systems,” Heraklion, Greece, 2017. 

K. Stouffer, V. Pillitteri, S. Lightman, M. Abrams, and A. Hahn, 
“NIST Special Publication 800-82: Guide to Industrial Control 
Systems (ICS) Security [Rev. 2],” Gaithersburg, MD, 2015. 

N. Lu, N. Cheng, N. Zhang, X. Shen, and J. W. Mark, “Connected 
vehicles: Solutions and challenges,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 1, 
no. 4, pp. 289–299, 2014. 

M. Hassanalieragh et al., “Health Monitoring and Management 
Using Internet-of-Things (IoT) Sensing with Cloud-Based 
Processing: Opportunities and Challenges,” Proc. - 2015 IEEE Int. 
Conf. Serv. Comput. SCC 2015, pp. 285–292, 2015. 

U. Raza, P. Kulkarni, and M. Sooriyabandara, “I am,” IEEE 
Commun. Surv. Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 855–873, 2017. 

Z. Dawy, W. Saad, A. Ghosh, J. G. Andrews, and E. Yaacoub, 
“Toward Massive Machine Type Cellular Communications,” IEEE 
Wirel. Commun., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 120–128, 2017. 

J. Rafferty, C. D. Nugent, J. Liu, and L. Chen, “From Activity 
Recognition to Intention Recognition for Assisted Living Within 
Smart Homes,” IEEE Trans. Human-Machine Syst., vol. 47, no. 3, 
pp. 368–379, 2017. 

J. Radcliffe, “Hacking medical devices for fun and insulin: Breaking 
the human SCADA system,” in Black Hat Conference, 2011, p. 13. 

A. Greenberg, “Crash Override: The Malware That Took Down a 
Power Grid,” Wired, 2017. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.wired.com/story/crash-override-malware/. [Accessed: 
02-Jan-2017]. 

S. Sicari, A. Rizzardi, L. A. Grieco, and A. Coen-Porisini, 
“Security, privacy and trust in Internet of Things: The road ahead,” 
Comput. Networks, vol. 76, pp. 146–164, 2015. 

[15] 

R. Roman, J. Lopez, and M. Mambo, “Mobile Edge Computing, 

[16] 

[17] 

[18] 

[19] 

[20] 

[21] 

[22] 

[23] 

[24] 

[25] 

[26] 

[27] 

[28] 

[29] 

[30] 

[31] 

Fog et al.: A Survey and Analysis of Security Threats and 
Challenges,” Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst., p. 28, 2016. 

A. Teixeira, D. Pérez, H. Sandberg, and K. H. Johansson, “Attack 
models and scenarios for networked control systems,” in 
Proceedings of the 1st international conference on High Confidence 
Networked Systems - HiCoNS ’12, 2012, p. 55. 

3rd Generation Partnership Project, “3GPP TR 23.720 V13.0.0 - 3rd 
Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group 
Services and System Aspects; Study on architecture enhancements 
for Cellular Internet of Things (Release 13).” 3GPP, p. 94, 2016. 

3rd Generation Partnership Project, “3GPP TR 36.785 V14.0.0 - 
Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network; Vehicle to 
Vehicle (V2V) services based on LTE sidelink; User Equipment 
(UE) radio transmission and reception (Release 14).” 3GPP, Sophia 
Antipolis, France, p. 57, 2016. 

A. Rico-Alvariño et al., “An overview of 3GPP enhancements on 
machine to machine communications,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 
54, no. 6, pp. 14–21, 2016. 

F. Sharevski and S. M. A. Oteafy, “Cyberforensics in the Cellular 
Internet of Things era,” Commun. Mag., vol. 38, no. 2 quarter, 2018. 

F. Sharevski, Mobile Network Forensics: Emerging Challenges and 
Opportunities, 1st ed. Hershey, PA: IGI Global, 2018. 

Y. Z. Lun, A. D’Innocenzo, I. Malavolta, and M. D. Di Benedetto, 
“Cyber-Physical Systems Security: a Systematic Mapping Study,” 
arXiv Prepr. arXiv1605.09641., pp. 1–32, 2016. 

B. Herzberg, D. Bekerman, and I. Zifman, “Breaking Down Mirai: 
An IoT DDoS Botnet Analysis,” Blogs, Bots & DDOS Security, 
2016. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.incapsula.com/blog/malware-analysis-mirai-ddos-
botnet.html. [Accessed: 01-Jan-2017]. 

M. Satyanarayanan, “The emergence of edge computing,” Computer 
(Long. Beach. Calif)., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 30–39, 2017. 

M. Satyanarayanan, “A Brief History of Cloud Offload,” GetMobile 
Mob. Comput. Commun., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 19–23, 2014. 

S. Oteafy and H. Hassanein, “IoT in the Fog: A roadmap for data-
centric IoT development,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. March, 2018. 

S. M. A. Oteafy and H. S. Hassanein, “IoT in the Fog: A roadmap 
for data-centric IoT development,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 
Quarter I, 2018. 

R. Tandon and O. Simeone, “Cloud-aided wireless networks with 
edge caching: Fundamental latency trade-offs in fog Radio Access 
Networks,” IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory - Proc., vol. 2016–Augus, 
pp. 2029–2033, 2016. 

Y. C. Hu, M. Patel, D. Sabella, N. Sprecher, and V. Young, “Mobile 
Edge Computing A key technology towards 5G,” ETSI White Pap. 
No. 11 Mob., no. 11, pp. 1–16, 2015. 

R. Roman, J. Lopez, and M. Mambo, “Mobile edge computing , Fog 
et al .: A survey and analysis of security threats and challenges,” 
Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst., no. November, pp. 1–19, 2016. 

B. V. Prevelakis and D. Spinellis, “The Athens Affair,” IEEE 
Spectr., vol. 44, no. 7, pp. 26–33, 2005. 

 
