The Second Amendment and Cyber Weapons   
The Constitutional Relevance of Digital Gun Rights  

Jan Kallberg 
Army Cyber Institute at West Point (ACI)  
and the Department of Social Sciences  
United States Military Academy  
West Point, NY 10996 
jan.kallberg@usma.edu 

Abstract— In the future, the United States government can seek to limit 
the ownership and usage of cyber weapons. The question is whether 
the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution gives a right 
to bear and own military-grade cyber weapons, and if so, under which 
conditions. The framers of the Bill of Rights, ratified in 1791, did not 
limit the right to bear arms to defined weapons such as long rifles and 
pistols, but instead chose the broader word  arms. The United States 
Supreme Court, in the case District of Columbia v. Heller, upheld a 
demarcation between “dangerous and unusual” weapons that are not 
permissible to own and weapons protected by the Second Amendment. 
Cyber weapons take the form of dual-use software, often shared and 
globally distributed, that in most cases can be weaponized for harmful 
purposes. In recent years, major corporations  have sought to “hack 
back,”and  if  the  hack  back  is  authorized,  the  question  becomes 
whether corporations have digital gun rights. Even if corporations are 
considered US persons, they do not automatically obtain digital gun 
rights based on the Second Amendment. This article discusses the core 
constitutional  challenges  for  the  United  States  government  in 
prohibiting individual ownership of cyber weapons and the rationale 
for why corporations are in a weaker position regarding ownership of 
cyber  arms.  The  argument  brought  forward  is  that  individuals  can 
claim  Second  Amendment  protection  of  their  right  to  own  military-
grade software tools, but corporations must meet additional criteria to 
do so.   

Keywords  –  penetration  testing,  malware,  port  scanners,  cyber 

weapons, Second Amendment, cyber arms, network scanning 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

If  the  US  government  pursued  the  regulation  of  cyber 
weapons and the prohibition of private ownership of these arms, 
the question becomes if and how the right to bear arms would 
protect  ownership  of  cyber  weapons  from  governmental 
intervention.  Another  question 
the  Second 
Amendment  to  the  US  Constitution  provides  individuals  and 
corporations  with  equal protection regarding the right to own 
advanced cyber weapons. In most cases, public debate over the 
Second  Amendment  is  ideological,  but  there  also  is  legal 
doctrine  given  by  the  US  Supreme  Court  in  the  verdict  of 
District of Columbia v. Heller that culminates the aggregation 
of precedent covering more than two centuries.   

is  whether 

The  Second  Amendment  to  the  US  Constitution,  ratified 
1791, was not only a product of the American Revolution and 
recognition of the state militias’ contribution to the war effort, 
but  also  was  an  idea  nurtured  by  early  influencers  of  the 
Founding Fathers [1],[2]. A hundred years before the American 

Revolution, Hobbes declared that the right to bear arms was a 
response to the lingering chaos of human conflict and without 
access to  weapons,  society  would fall into  a  state of  entropy. 
Montesquieu  considered  armed  citizens  a  counter-balance  to 
tyranny  and  the  abuse  of  power.  During  the  Virginia 
Convention in June 1776, when Jefferson and Mason worked to 
word the new constitution for the State of Virginia, they wrote 
that  “no  freeman  should  be  debarred  the  use  of  arms.”  This 
phrase did not appear in the final bill [3].   

The  Second  Amendment  to  the  US  Constitution  reads  as 
follows:  “A  well-regulated  militia,  being  necessary  to  the 
security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear 
arms, shall not be infringed.” The authors of the Bill of Rights 
and Second Amendment could have listed the weapons of their 
era, but instead used the general term, arms. Restrictions on the 
weapons  that  citizens  have  the  right  to  bear  have  been 
implemented over time through litigation and guidance from the 
US Supreme Court and precedents put forth through the legal 
system.  

II. 

DANGEROUS AND UNUSUAL WEAPONS 

In  the  most  recent  legal  challenge  to  Second  Amendment 
doctrine, addressed by  the US Supreme Court,  a central  legal 
question  was  what  types  of  weapons  are  protected  by  the 
Second Amendment. If a weapon is “dangerous and unusual” 
under the US Supreme Court’s interpretation and verdict, then 
ownership  of  such  a  weapon  is  not  protected  by  the  Second 
Amendment  to  the  US  Constitution.  If  a  weapon  is  deemed 
“dangerous and unusual,” then the government is not hindered 
by the Second Amendment to forbid ownership and usage.  

In  their  District  of  Columbia  v.  Heller  verdict,  the  US 

Supreme Court majority wrote [4]: 

“We also recognize another important limitation on the right 
to keep and carry arms. Miller said, as we have explained, that 
the sorts of weapons protected were those  ‘in common use at 
the time.’ 307 U. S., at 179. We think that limitation  is fairly 
supported by the historical tradition of prohibiting the carrying 
of “dangerous and unusual weapons.”  See 4 Blackstone 148–
149  (1769);  3  B.  Wilson,  Works  of  the  Honourable  James 
Wilson 79 (1804); J. Dunlap, The New-York Justice 8 (1815); 
C. Humphreys, A Compendium of the Common Law in Force 
in Kentucky 482 (1822); 1 W. Russell,  A Treatise on Crimes 

 
 
 
 
 
and  Indictable  Misdemeanors  271–272  (1831);  H.  Stephen, 
Summary  of  the  Criminal  Law  48  (1840);  E.  Lewis,  An 
Abridgment of the Criminal Law of the United States 64 (1847); 
F.  Wharton,  A  Treatise  on  the  Criminal  Law  of  the  United 
States  726  (1852).  See  also  State  v.  Langford,  10  N.  C.  381, 
383–384 (1824); O’Neill v. State, 16Ala. 65, 67 (1849); English 
v. State, 35Tex. 473, 476 (1871); State v. Lanier, 71 N. C. 288, 
289 (1874).” 

The  US  Supreme  Court  majority  refer  to  cases  that  define 
unusual  and  dangerous  weapons,  and  also  to  behaviors  that 
could endanger others. In State v. Lanier (1874), a drunk man 
rides  at  a  canter  pace  at  midnight  through  a  courthouse  yard, 
which is considered an endangerment. The verdict of the North 
Carolina  Supreme  Court  rejected  the  prosecution’s  premise. 
The  North  Carolina  Supreme  Court  based  its  decision  on  the 
conditions surrounding the event: “We conceive that the riding 
through a courthouse or a street at 12 o’clock at night, when no 
one is present, is a very different thing from riding through at 
12 o’clock in the day, when the courthouse or street is full of 
people.”  The  fact  that  the  man  rode  at  a  canter  pace  through 
town  at  midnight  was not a public endangerment and did not 
break the peace.  

In English v. State, protected arms are defined as the arms of 

a militia, which are military-grade arms.  

III.  DANGEROUS CYBERWEAPONS 

The  US  Supreme  Court,  with  supporting  legal  precedence, 
has  declared  that  only  weapons  that  are  not  “dangerous  and 
unusual” are permissible.   

The next question is what would constitute a dangerous and 
unusual  cyber  weapon  that  would  preclude  ownership—
including  placement  on  computers—by  citizens.  First,  the 
existence  and  effect  of  the  weapon  must  be  known  to  the 
government  and  the  lawmaker  so  it  could  be  restricted.  A 
militiaman is armed with his personal armament: rifle, bayonet, 
and sidearm. In the nondigital world, as an example, claymore  
mines and hand grenades are not permissible weapons for the 
citizenry,  but  are  considered  “dangerous  and  unusual”  and 
therefore restricted to government use. The damage and hazards 
surrounding claymore mines and hand grenades are known to 
the government and the lawmaker. The tripwire  will detonate 
the claymore mine, and the hand grenade is thrown without a 
clear understanding of the final impact and effect. The mine is 
autonomous in its execution, and the grenade is not sufficiently 
accurate,  with  a  possibility  of  damages  beyond  the  intended 
scope  of  the  defender.  These  effects  are  known  to  the 
government. In cyber, this decision path is different. 

 The lawmaker needs to be aware of cyberweapons and the 
means of restricting them. Otherwise, the result would be a ban 
on  thought  and  innovation;  the  law  would  then  arbitrarily 
punish what in retrospect is considered “dangerous and unusual 
cyberweapons” through law that is ex-post-facto legislation.  

IV. DEFINITION OF CYBER ARMS 

There no precise definition of cyber arms or the anticipated 
capabilities and effects  of  their utilization. One  reason is that 
the  very  nature  of  software  creates  multiple  purposes  for 
utilization.  

The  US  Department  of  Defense  has  no  codified,  uniform 
definition, but refers to cyber arms as a “capability:” “a device, 
computer program, or technique, including any combination of 
software, firmware, or hardware, designed to create an effect in 
or through cyberspace” [5]. 

The  common  definition  of  cyber  arms  is  broad  and 
comprehensive.  One  definition,  by  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty 
Organization  (NATO)  Cooperative  Cyber  Defence  Centre  of 
Excellence (CCDOE), is [6] “…software, firmware or hardware 
designed  or  applied  to  cause  damage  through  the  cyber 
domain.”  

This  definition  is  legally  problematic  because  of  the 
assumption  that  the  intended  usage  of  software,  firmware,  or 
hardware would alter the status of a nonweapon to a weapon. 
This contradicts elementary principles in the rule of law, where 
legal rules altered after the fact are referred to as ex-post facto 
laws. The cyber community have yet not presented a commonly 
accepted definition, even if attempts have been made to define 
cyber weapons [7].  

The US Constitution specifically prohibits this in Article 1, 
Section 9: “No Bill of Attainder or ex-post facto Law shall be 
passed [8].” 

The Second Amendment does not  address the intent of the 
arms owner. In 1791, the right was derived from the status of a 
citizen  in  the  newborn  union  of  free  colonies.  The  military-
design, semi-automatic rifles that are protected by the Second 
Amendment  and  owned  by  citizens  are  primarily  hunting 
rifles—in other words, a utility that could, if necessary, serve as 
a weapon of military conflict. There is a similarity between the 
gun-powder-propelled  arms  that  are  protected  by  the  Second 
Amendment and dual-use hacking software, since the software 
is dual-use as both utility and weapon.    

V. UNUSUAL WEAPONS 

In  the  legal  precedence  [9],  as  exemplified  by  English  v. 
State,  35Tex.  473,  476  (1871),  Bowie-knives,  slungshots, 
daggers, and brass knuckles with no military value do not bring 
Second Amendment protection to bear. In the digital realm, the 
unusual  is  far  harder  to  prove  for  the  government  when  the 
weaponized software is in most cases of dual use.  A computer 
user  can  use  a  port  scanner  to  determine  which  ports  are 
responding to calls to install  a printer. Thus, the port scanner 
could be a hacking tool, but it  could also be a civilian utility 
software.  Networking  mapping  software,  such  as  the  open-
source  software  Nmap  [10],  is  primarily  a  tool  for  network 
discovery. Hackers could use Nmap software to increase their 
knowledge  of  network  topography,  but  Nmap  is  primarily  a 
utility tool, not a weaponized, hacking tool. A way to weaponize 
the  the  tool  is  to  cluster  multiple  Nmap  achieve  an  ability  to 
scan large portions of a network [11]. So the fact that clustered 
Nmap  can  be  a  weaponized  tool  and  the  single  use  of  the 
software would give military and intelligence hackers a tool to 
do network discovery, even if never intended to be a military 

 
 
 
 
tool, render Nmap status as a military useful software.  This dual 
use pertains not only in civilian and military realms, but also in 
the  multiple  purposes  of  cyberweapons  as  a  weaponized 
software,  and  a  networking  utility  undermines  government 
support for framing a hacker tool as an “unusual” weapon [12]. 
If  used  by  the  defense  establishment  and  the  intelligence 
community a claim that it is an “unusual weapon” is nullified, 
because government through actions have evidence that it is a 
“usual  weapon”.  Because  hacker  and  discovery  tools  are 
commonly  used  by  both  the  military  and  civilians,  both 
information 
communities  utilize 
technology such as wireless, sharing, data storage, Internet of 
Things, and communication [13],[14], the legal foundation for 
prohibiting  civilian  ownership  of  potentially  weaponized 
software evaporates.       

the  same  over-arching 

VI.  CORPORATE CYBER RIGHTS TO BEAR ARMS 

In the originalist thought, militiamen were volunteers ready 
to defend their state and community from hostile forces, and by 
doing  so,  risked  their  lives  in  the  engagement.  The  militia  is 
made up of citizens of the state that have the right to bear arms. 
A militia risks the lives of its members to defend its community 
and state. Therefore, sui genesis a militia is mortal: a militiaman 
could  die  from  combat  wounds  or  succumb  to  disease  and 
hardship as a result of combat.  

The  relationship  between  the  militia,  armed  citizens,  and 
lawmakers is a social contract where all parties surrender and 
receive.  Citizens  have  the  right  to  bear  arms,  but  citizens  are 
assumed to be reasonable—what in Roman legal tradition are 
described  as  bonus  pater  familias:  the  reasonable  good 
family—a  father  with  sound  judgment  and  values  who  will 
provide security when needed and defend his community. In the 
originalist view, the militia is presumed loyal to the state that 
emerged after the American Revolution. The Bill of Rights was 
ratified 1791, less than 10 years after the end of the American 
Revolutionary  War,  which  divided  the  colonists  of  the  13 
colonies  into  two  camps:  American  revolutionaries  and 
loyalists  to  the  King  of  England.  The  militia  gives  the  state 
manpower to protect the people of the state and the state itself 
if  needed,  surrender  their  freedom  partly  by  volunteering  as 
militiamen and accepting a risk of loss of life, and gain a right 
to bear arms. Each citizen that  who  is  given the right to  bear 
arms does not need to be a member of the militia to execute and 
take favor of the right to bear arms, but the militia is recruited 
from the armed citizenry.       

Federal US law establishes that a corporation is a US person 
under  federal  laws  and  executive  orders.  The  US  tax  code 
Internal  Revenue  Code  Section  7701(a)(30)  defines  a  US 
person as “a citizen or resident of the United States (including 
a  lawful  permanent  resident  residing  abroad  who  has  not 
formally notified the United States Citizenship and Immigration 
Services  in  order  to  abandon  that  status);  a  domestic 
partnership;  a  domestic  corporation.”  The  National  Security 
Agency, supported by US Presidential Executive Order 12333, 
states the following: “Federal law and executive order define a 

for  permanent 

US person as a citizen of the United States; an alien lawfully 
admitted 
residence;  an  unincorporated 
association  with  a  substantial  number  of  members  who  are 
citizens  of  the  U.S.  or  are  aliens  lawfully  admitted  for 
permanent  residence;  or,  a  corporation  that  is  incorporated  in 
the U.S.” 

The question is  whether any  corporation can claim Second 
Amendment rights to own  military-grade cyber  weapons as a 
part of the recruitment pool for the state militia and as free men 
with the right to bear arms.  

1)  Citizens enter a social contract by bearing arms 

The argument put forward in this manuscript is  that only a 
corporation  that  risks  corporate  death  and  demonstrates 
unquestionable loyalty to the United States could claim Second 
Amendment  rights  to  own  military-grade  cyber  arms.  A 
corporate  death  is  the  dissolution  of  the  corporation  and 
liquidation  of  assets,  often 
through  a  non-restructuring 
bankruptcy.  If  a  corporation  is  large  enough  to  survive  and 
sustain  operations  after  a  failed  cyber  engagement,  it  cannot 
have Second Amendment rights to access military-grade cyber 
weapons.  Therefore,  any  larger  corporation  would  be  a  US 
person, but would not meet the criteria to bear arms under the 
Second Amendment. The larger corporation is not a part of the 
social contract between the framers of the Bill of Rights and, at 
the time, the political leadership of the United States of America 
and its states, as well as the citizens of those states. The large 
corporation  could  instead  be  seen  as  a  rich  landowner  who 
wants to arm  his subordinates and workers, creating a private 
army within the nation-state, and not embody a militiaman. The 
government could entrust larger corporations to own and utilize 
military-grade  cyber  weapons,  but  ownership  is  based  on  a 
unilateral decision by the government and is not founded on the 
Second Amendment.    

2)  Those who bear arms are loyal to the United States of 

America 

to 

Loyalty to the United States of America is a qualifier for the 
right to bear arms, and if not expressed at the individual level, 
then a corporation that forms a smaller militia would not gain 
the right to own cyber weapons unless its loyalty to the state is 
unquestionable.  The  Second  Amendment 
the  US 
Constitution reads as follows: “A well-regulated militia, being 
necessary to the security of a free state, the right of the people 
to keep and bear arms, shall not be infringed.” The militia is, 
according to the framers of the Bill of Rights, “necessary to the 
security of the free state.”  A defender and provider of security 
to the free state must be loyal to the state. Otherwise, the right 
to  bear  arms  would  provide  a  right  to  arm  loyalists  to  the 
English  Crown,  and  in  the  context  of  contemporary  America 
any group that wants to overthrow the American government or 
support enemies of the state, as well.       

In  1791,  the  United  States  had  only  eight  years  earlier 
emerged as a free nation liberated through a rebellion against a 
former  colonial  power  that  lasted  seven  years.  The  American 

 
 
     
 
 
 
   
 
Revolution  split  families  and  communities.  Friends  became 
enemies  as  colonists  chose  either  to  join  the  revolution  or  to 
support continued British rule of the 13 colonies as loyalists to 
the Crown.  

The framers of the Bill of Rights sought to protect the people 
from  what  they  saw  as  oppression  under  British  rule.  In  the 
Second Amendment, a prerequisite is an unquestionable loyalty 
to the newborn nation and its states. The right to bear arms is 
reserved only for those loyal to the new republic. The Bill of 
Rights catalogs what the rebellious colonists considered wrong 
with British rule and provided remedies to protect the rights of 
the people of the new republic from abuse, tyranny, and absence 
of the rule of law. The rationale for the Bill of Rights is that it 
provided a legal foundation for securing the freedom and liberty 
gained  through  the  American  revolution.  As  an  example,  the 
Third Amendment reads as follows: “No soldier shall, in time 
of peace, be quartered in any house without the consent of the 
owner, nor in time of war but in a manner to be prescribed by 
law.” The Third Amendment is a safeguard against the British 
practice  of  quartering  soldiers  in  civilian  homes  without 
providing compensation or seeking homeowners’ consent.    

Similarly,  the  Fourth  Amendment  states:  “The  right  of  the 
people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects 
against  unreasonable  searches  and  seizures  shall  not  be 
violated, and no warrants shall issue but upon probable cause, 
supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the 
place to be searched and the persons or things to be seized.” The 
Fourth  Amendment  protects  against  the  British  practice  of 
arbitrarily and without any factual support conducting searches 
and seizures of colonists’ property and dwellings. The Fourth 
Amendment  introduces  probable  cause  as  a  threshold  for 
government intervention.  

Larger corporations fail to meet the mortal requirement in the 
social contract between the militiamen and the state, and also 
fail to  meet the loyalty requirement because they operate  and 
have ties with foreign countries; therefore, larger corporations, 
and  especially  multinational  corporations,  have  no  Second 
Amendment right to own or use military-grade cyber weapons.  
Therefore, only smaller, non-multinational corporations that 
can fail and be forced to dissolve and liquidate as a result of a 
cyber engagement can claim the right to own and use military-
grade cyber weapons under the Second Amendment. 

VII. 

PROHIBITION OF ZERO-DAY EXPLOITS 

A  zero-day  exploit  is  a  vulnerability  that  is  unknown  to 
anyone except its discoverer [15]. The IT industry, the computer 
security community, and the defense establishment are unaware 
of the vulnerability. After the zero-day exploit is found, a tool 
could be designed to take full advantage of the exploit.  

This zero-day exploit tool could be “dangerous and unusual,” 
but still is permissible to own based on the fact that the exploit 
the  tool  is  targeting  is  unknown  to  the  government.  In  any 
country  that  has  submitted  to  the  rule  of  law  and  democratic 
foundations, the government cannot ban and criminalize what it 
doesn’t know or create all-encompassing penal codes for such 
scenarios.     

A government is unaware of a zero-day exploit and until the 
utilization  of  the  zero-day  exploit,  not  only  the  exploit  is 
unknown, but also the extent of the effects and damage created 
by its exploitation. A tool that exploits zero-day exploits could 
only be prohibited after execution. 

VIII. 

THE CASTLE DOCTRINE  

The  scope  of  this  paper  is  cyber  arms  in  the  light  of  the 
Second  Amendment.  In  the  public  discourse,  the  Second 
Amendment and the Castle Doctrine tend to part of the  same 
discussion.  The  Castle  Doctrine  has  also  been  used  as  an 
argument to support legalization of corporate hack back [16]. 

The  Castle  Doctrine  is  a  common-law  doctrine  [17]  that 
supports  the  individual’s  option,  without  prosecution  or 
penalty, to use force in defending his residence and family. If 
attacked, there traditionally has been an obligation to retreat to 
avoid bodily harm and risk to human life. The Castle Doctrine 
supersedes the obligation to retreat if the attack occurs in  the 
personal  realm  that  the  doctrine  covers  based  on  state-level 
precedence.  In  some  states,  the  doctrine  extends  to  an 
individual’s  vehicles  and  workplace.  The  Castle  Doctrine’s 
lineage extends to older English common  law, under which a 
citizen was considered to have a right to peace and safety in his 
own  home.  The  Second  Amendment  and  the  Castle  Doctrine 
are separate; where the Second Amendment is the federal right 
to  bear  arms,  the  Castle  Doctrine  is  state-level  legislation  to 
define the boundaries between excessive force, the obligation 
to retreat,  and  the use of  lethal force to defend  one’s  life and 
property. The Second Amendment right to own and bear arms 
does not provide a right to protect life and property using deadly 
or  significant  force.  Therefore,  any  citizen’s  utilization  of 
military  grade  cyber  weapons  owned  and  procured  under  the 
rights given by the Second Amendment to protect himself from 
physically  harmful  cyber  attacks  is  contingent  not  only  on 
federal legislation as exemplified by the  Computer Fraud and 
Abuse  Act  (CFAA)[18],  but  also  by  state  legislation.  As  our 
society  merges  human  ability  and  physiology  with  digital 
mechanisms  and  initiates  a  broader  use  of  digital-human 
enhancement,  creating  a  personal  attack  surface  for  digital 
arms, the question of a cyber Castle Doctrine is a useful analogy 
from the non-digital reality.       

IX. CONCLUSION 

Currently, there is no cyber Second Amendment case of the 
first impression on the docket. Such a case would trigger a legal 
development  and  clarification,  but  already  a  distinct  legal 
doctrine is visible. According to the inquiry, the citizenry has 
the  right  to  own  and  operate  cyber  arms  under  identical 
conditions as firearms. The current US legal doctrine states that 
“unusual and dangerous” arms can be prohibited. The majority 
of  the  hacking,  network  discovery,  and  information  systems 
probing and exploiting tools are of military utility and value as 
enablers  of  cyber  capacity  even  if  in  civilian  hands  [19]. 
Therefore, these tools cannot be considered unusual in the light 
of the Second Amendment.  

The  question  then  becomes  whether  these  cyber  arms  are 
dangerous. The legal doctrine has developed an allowance for 

 
 
prohibiting  dangerous  weapons  that  would  harm  the  public 
beyond an intended military use or that lack safeguards such as 
intent  by  arming  and  using  the  weapon.  The  labeling  of  a 
weapon  as  “dangerous”  would  require  that  a  cyber  weapon 
autonomously initiate attacks without any human interaction, as 
intent is not required when the weapon is assessed on its own 
merits, and this is not applicable to the vast majority of cyber 
weapons. An example of what could be considered dangerous 
could be software that autonomously attacks other information 
systems at the bootup of a networked computer. The software 
has  no  controlled  harm  creation,  but  instead—without  any 
intent at the moment of engagement, nor human control—starts 
attacking other systems. Such software could be prohibited.   

The current Second Amendment doctrine would not exclude 
cyber  arms  unless  these  arms  are  of  no  military  value  or  not 
suitable for military use, or require no intent to be dangerous for 
the  general  population.  The  Second  Amendment  protects 
individual ownership of cyber arms, and to a degree corporate 
ownership,  and  the  case  for  government  intervention  and 
prohibition  of  cyber  arms  faces  significant  constitutional 
limitations to be a realistic policy option.    

REFERENCES 

[1]  S. P. Halbrook, A Right to Bear Arms: State and Federal Bills of Rights 

and Constitutional Guarantees. No. 243. 1989. 

[2]  S. P. Halbrook “What the Framers Intended: A Linguistic Analysis of 
the Right to Bear Arms,” in Law & Contemp. Probs. 49 (1986): 151. 

[3]  T. Jefferson, “No Freeman Shall Be Debarred the Use of Arms,” 
[Online]. Available: https://www.monticello.org/site/jefferson/no-
freeman-shall-be-debarred-use-arms-spurious-quotation [Accessed: June 
18, 2018]. 

[4]  District of Columbia v. Heller, 554 U.S. 570 (2008). 
[5]  Operations, Cyberspace. "Joint Publication 3--12 (R)." Joint Chief of 

Staffs (2013). 

[6]  NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence NATO 

CCDCOE, “Cyber definitions,” [Online]. Available: 
https://ccdcoe.org/cyber-definitions.html [Accessed: June 18, 2018]. 
[7]  C. Maathuis, W. Pieters and J. V. Den Berg, "Cyber weapons: a profiling 
framework," 2016 IEEE International Conference on Cyber Conflict 
(CyCon U.S.), Washington, DC, 2016, pp. 1-8. doi: 
10.1109/CYCONUS.2016.7836621 Available: 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.proxygw.wrlc.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnum
ber=7836621&isnumber=7836602 [Accessed: July 27, 2018]. 

[8]  US Constitution, Article 1, Section 9. 
[9]  District of Columbia v. Heller, 554 U.S. 570 (2008) (Docket no. 07-

290), p. 54.  

[10]  G. F. Fyodor, “Nmap network scanning: The official Nmap project 
guide to network discovery and security scanning,” Insecure, 2009. 
[11]  R. R. Rohrmann, V. J. Ercolani and M. W. Patton, "Large scale port 

scanning through tor using parallel Nmap scans to scan large portions of 
the IPv4 range," 2017 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence 
and Security Informatics (ISI), Beijing, 2017, pp. 185-187.doi: 
10.1109/ISI.2017.8004906 

[12]  Fromdev,  “100+  free  hacking  tools  to  become  a  powerful  hacker,” 
[Online].  Available:  https://www.fromdev.com/2014/09/free-hacking-
tools-hacker.html [Accessed: June 18, 2018]. 

[13]  S.  Samtani,  R.  Chinn  and  H.  Chen,  "Exploring  hacker  assets  in 
International  Conference  on 

forums,"  2015 

underground 

IEEE 

Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), Baltimore, MD, 2015, pp. 31-
36. doi: 10.1109/ISI.2015.7165935 

[14]  F. T. Johnsen et al., "Application of IoT in military operations in a smart 
city," 2018 IEEE International Conference on Military Communications 
and  Information  Systems  (ICMCIS),  Warsaw,  2018,  pp.  1-8.  doi: 
10.1109/ICMCIS.2018.8398690 

[15]  R. Ciancioso, D. Budhwa and T. Hayajneh, "A Framework for Zero Day 
Exploit  Detection  and  Containment,"  2017  IEEE  15th  Intl  Conf  on 
Dependable,  Autonomic  and  Secure  Computing,  15th  Intl  Conf  on 
Pervasive  Intelligence  and  Computing,  3rd  Intl  Conf  on  Big  Data 
Intelligence  and  Computing  and  Cyber  Science  and  Technology 
Congress(DASC/PiCom/DataCom/CyberSciTech),  Orlando,  FL,  2017, 
pp. 
10.1109/DASC-PICom-DataCom-
CyberSciTec.2017.116 

663-668. 

doi: 

[16]  J. Kallberg, “A Right to Cybercounter Strikes: The Risks of Legalizing 
Hack Backs,” IEEE IT Professional  vol.17, no. 1, pp. 30-35, 2015. 
[17]  D.  Paquette,  J.  Bihari,  and  E.  Elliott.  “The  State  of  the  Castle:  An 
Overview  of  Recent  Trends  in  State  Castle  Doctrine  Legislation  and 
Public  Policy,”  Criminal  Justice  Review  vol.  34,  no.  4,  pp.  515-535 
(2009). 

[18]  C.  Wilson,  "Holding  management  accountable:  a  new  policy  for 
protection  against  computer  crime,"  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  2000 
National  Aerospace  and  Electronics  Conference.  NAECON  2000. 
Engineering  Tomorrow  (Cat.  No.00CH37093),  Dayton,  OH,  2000,  pp. 
272-281. doi: 10.1109/NAECON.2000.894921 

[19]  S. Samtani, K. Chinn, C. Larson and H. Chen, "AZSecure Hacker Assets 
Portal:  Cyber  threat  intelligence  and  malware  analysis,"  2016  IEEE 
Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), Tucson, AZ, 
2016, pp. 19-24.doi: 10.1109/ISI.2016.7745437 

                   DISCLAIMER  

The views expressed are those of the author and do not reflect 
the  official  policy  or  position  of  the  Army  Cyber  Institute  at 
West  Point,  the  United  States  Military  Academy,  or  the 
Department of Defense. 

                                        ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

 The author thanks Robert E. Barnsby, JD, and Dr. Greg Conti 
for valuable input and information sharing.  

JAN  KALLBERG  is  currently  an  Assistant  Professor  of 
Political  Science  with  the  Department  of  Social  Sciences, 
United States Military Academy at West Point, and a Research 
Scientist with the Army Cyber Institute at West Point. He was 
earlier  a  researcher  with  the  Cyber  Security  Research  and 
Education  Institute,  The  University  of  Texas  at  Dallas,  an 
Assistant  Professor  at  Arkansas  Tech  University,  and  a  part-
time  faculty  member  at  George  Washington  University.  Dr. 
Kallberg earned his PhD and MA from the University of Texas 
at Dallas and earned a JD/LL.M. from Juridicum Law School, 
Stockholm  University.  Dr.  Kallberg  is  a  certified  CISSP  and 
ISACA CISM. He has authored papers in the Strategic Studies 
Quarterly, Joint Forces Quarterly, IEEE IT Professional, IEEE 
Access, IEEE Security and Privacy, and IEEE Technology and 
Society.  

 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
