[Regular Research Paper, Cyber Warfare, Cyber Defense, & Cyber Security (CSCI-ISCW)] 

Security Mental Model: Cognitive map approach 

Tahani Albalawi, Kambiz Ghazinour, and Austin Melton 
Department of Computer Science 
Kent State University 
Kent, USA 
{talbala1, kghazino, amelton}@kent.edu 

Abstract— Security models have been designed to ensure data 
is accessed and used in proper manner according to the security 
policies. Unfortunately, human role in designing security models 
has  been  ignored.  Human  behavior  relates  to  many  security 
breaches and plays a significant part in many security situations. 
In  this  paper,  we  study  users’  decision-making  toward  security 
and  usability  through  the  mental  model  approach.  To  elicit  and 
depict users’ security and usability mental models, crowd sourcing 
techniques and a cognitive map method are applied and we have 
performed an experiment to evaluate our findings using Amazon 
MTurk. 

Keywords—mental  model;  cognative  map;  security;  usability; 

human factor; decision; MTurk 

I.   INTRODUCTION  

The  computer  security  community  has  developed  formal 
methods  for  providing  security  properties  to  systems  and 
organizations.  However,  the  human  role  has  often  been 
overlooked in security. How  human behavior relates to many 
security  breaches  and  incidents  has  only  recently  been 
recognized  [20].  Expanding  on  this  concept,  [19]  shows  that 
security  is  not  only  a  mathematical  model  based  on  the 
probability of different risks and the effectiveness of different 
countermeasures, it is also based on psychological reactions of 
the user to both risks and countermeasures. One example is the 
use of certified seals in online stores to establish trust and make 
customers feel safe. The human factor has an effective role in 
computer security domain, and it is necessary to study and focus 
on the human side of security issues. The effort and solutions in 
this step will be added to those found in the technical and formal 
sides  to  increase  and  enhance  security  levels  throughout  the 
system. 

that 

lead 

The field of HCI provides many methods to study human 
behavior and interactions with computers. Many methods rely 
on  exploring  human  cognitive  processes 
to 
understanding  human  intelligence  and  behavior,  such  as  how 
the human  mind  works, and how people perceive, remember, 
think, and learn knowledge. In general, human cognition refers 
to "The mental action or process of acquiring knowledge and 
understanding through thought, experience, and the senses" [1].  
Metaphors  and  mental  models  are  common  methods  for 
studying human behavior in HCI area. Metaphors are frequently 
used in user interface  (UI), while the  mental  model interprets 
human behavior and reasoning, showing how people think and 
process  knowledge.  It’s  an  internal  representation  of  external 
reality that is a conceptual representation formed by the mind. 
It is used to anticipate events and shape human reasoning and 

decisions  [2].  The  primary  base  of  mental  model  techniques 
depends  on  the  notion  of  concept,  which  is  a  collection  of 
essential building blocks of human thoughts and beliefs [3]. The 
mental  model  portrays  human  cognitive  processing  and 
reasoning via a representation of concepts. The most influential 
concepts  are  the  main  driving  force  for  users’  reasoning  and 
decisions.  

The human factor in security domain is its correlation with 
the  usability  element.  Despite  the  usefulness  of  security 
policies, most often users consider the security as a secondary 
task, especially when they feel it hinders them from completing 
their primary tasks [4]. Therefore, they desire the security tasks 
to be quick and easy. When people feel that their primary task 
will  be  hindered  by  security,  they  resort  to  finding  ways  to 
circumvent security efforts. It is apparent how security is deeply 
tied up with usability. The mismatch between security goals and 
usability goals in users’ mental models contributes to making 
inappropriate security-related decisions. Security goals include 
confidentiality,  integrity,  and  availability,  which  provide 
protection for the data and resource. Meanwhile, usability goals 
concentrate  on  users’  preferences  such  as  effectiveness, 
efficiency, and satisfaction.  

Kainda et al. [5] indicate 6 categories in the current HCISec 
studies  that  show  where  the  security  issues  resulting  from 
human  behavior  are  related  to  usability.  The  categories  are 
Authentication,  Encryption,  PKI  (Public  Key  Infrastructure), 
Device  pairing,  Security  tools  and  Secure  systems.  These 
categories  were  determined  after  extensively  reviewing  the 
current  HCISec  and  usability  research  to  identify  the  main 
factors of security and usability. Their study concluded that the 
most security and usability problems appear under one of the 6 
aforementioned  categories.  This  could  give  an  extensive 
understanding  of  factors  affecting  human  decision-making 
when it comes to security.  

The  aim  of  this  paper  is  to  understand  users’  decision-
making  in  security  and  usability  through  the  mental  model 
approach.  To  elicit  and  depict  users’  security  and  usability 
mental models, crowd sourcing techniques and a cognitive map 
method are applied. Participants are recruited via MTurk. Sets 
of questionnaires are designed and distributed on MTurk. The 
questionnaires are designed based on the categories of [5] for 
the  security  and  usability  measurement.  The  results  and  the 
analysis  of  the  PKI  category  are  also  presented.  A  cognitive 
map  is  used  to  extract  and  visualize  concepts  from  the 
participants’ answers.  

 
 
[Regular Research Paper, Cyber Warfare, Cyber Defense, & Cyber Security (CSCI-ISCW)] 

II.  HUMAN FACTOR IN SECURITY 

Human factors play a significant role in cyber security. Human 
behavior  impacts  both  information  security  and  (ultimately) 
associated risks. For instance, the  lack of awareness on cyber 
threats  and  failure  to  comply  with  security  policies  have 
appeared  as  a  user  decision  that  impacts  the  security  of  an 
organization. The weakness of human behavior is becoming an 
important source for attackers. It shifts attacker’s attention from 
directly attacking the machine to targeting human vulnerability 
[6].  For  instance,  instead  of  using  exhaustive  efforts in  using 
application  programs  to  decode  encrypted  data,  an  attacker 
could  use  a  social  engineering  technique  to  obtain  sensitive 
information (e.g. a phishing method, where the attacker exploits 
the  victim’s  trust).  A  successful  phishing  attack  depends 
primarily on the weakness in a user’s awareness and attention. 
The  study  of  Dhamija  et  al.  in  [7]  shows  how  90%  of  users 
failed  to  identify  phishing  websites  in  a  controlled  lab 
experiment due to the lack of attention that resulted from visual 
deception practiced by the phishers. Although in [7] the primary 
targets for participants was related to security and users knew 
in advance they had to perform security tasks, a large proportion 
of them failed to realize risks and perform basic security checks.  
Despite  the  severity  of  human  weaknesses  in  security  and 
protection,  the  human  role  has  received  little  attention  in 
security domains. The role of humans is often neglected in favor 
of  technical  solutions  in  the  cyber  security  equation.  The 
technology side is an essential part in cyber security, but people 
are  strongly  involved  in  the  information  security.  They  are 
responsible for the design, implementation, and operation of the 
technology and tools used in security measures [8]. Preventing 
technical  problems  is  not  the  only  effective  way  to  assist  in 
maintaining the security of systems. The security of any system 
depends on human behavior. Recently, human behavioral issues 
have  created  more  challenging  issues  to  cyber  security  than 
more  technical  issues  [9].  Therefore,  understanding  human 
factors are vital step in cyber security. 

III.  SECURITY AND USABILITY FACTORS 

Kainda et al. [5] established the categories of security and 
usability  measurements  after  reviewing  current  HCISec  and 
usability  research.  They  then  identified  the  main  factors  that 
were the target of measurement for both usability and security. 
Their study concluded that most security and usability problems 
appear under one of the following categories: 

refers 

to  affirming 

1)  Authentication:  This 

the 
identification of the end user before allowing access to system 
resources.  The  focus  in  this  category  is  to  measure:  a) 
memorability:  the  degree  to  which  users  can  remember the 
password, or cognition: the process of verifying the identity by 
asking  questions  about  knowledge  that  only  the  user  should 
know and b) efficiency: the successful authentication within an 
acceptable amount of time and effort.  

2)  Encryption: the focus is on the users’ understanding the 
mechanisms of sending email securely. Email encryption may 
overlap  with  the  authentication  category.  The  difference 
between the two is that, unlike authentication mechanisms that 
focus on memorability and cognition, email encryption focuses 

on how users understand the knowledge behind the mechanisms 
of  sending  the  email  securely  (e.g.  guidelines  and  rules  that 
assist in avoiding phishing scams emails or awareness tips for 
downloading attachment files via email). 

the 

3) PKI (Public Key Infrastructure): PKI centers around the 
notion  of  determining  the  identity  via  system  interface.  The 
main purpose behind it is to facilitate the transfer of information 
in a secure manner that users can notice it directly through the 
system  interface.  The  major  focus  is  on  users’  knowledge  of 
particular  indicators  and  signs  to  see  if  users  can  distinguish 
whether the website is secure or not. PKI includes a variety of 
indicators  ranging  from 
traditional  padlock  symbol 
appearing  on  the  bottom  of  the  internet  browser,  to  using 
different colors in the address bar of the browser. The factors in 
this category involve vigilance, attention and awareness.  
4)  Device pairing: The focus is on: a) efficiency: the successful 
attempt of pairing device within an acceptable amount of time 
and effort, b) effectiveness (failure/success of pairing), and c) 
security failures: the process of device pairing is accomplished 
correctly but with an unfamiliar device.  "Security failures" is 
an  independent  factor  that  does  not  result  from  inefficient  or 
ineffective pairing. For instance, the user could pair the device 
successfully within an acceptable amount of time and effort but 
with the unfamiliar/untrusted device.  

5)  Security tools: Related security tools provide the system 
safeguards  and  protection  (e.g.  antivirus  software,  password 
managers, and firewalls). Like encryption, this category focuses 
on users’ knowledge related to using these tools. Lack of user 
awareness in using the security tools has a negative impact on 
the effectiveness of these tools. 

IV.  SECURITY MENTAL MODEL AND COGNITIVE MAP 

A.  Security mental models 
A  mental  model  (or  mental  map)  is  a  "small-scale  model”  to 
explain  people’s  thought  processes  [10].  It  represents  how 
people  understand  ideas  and  concepts  and  how  they  connect 
these concepts by relations. It is a kind of internal representation 
of external reality.  

The mental model was introduced in the psychology field 
by  Kenneth  Craik  [11];  he  suggested  that  the  human  mind 
builds and constructs “small-scale models” to anticipate events. 
Later,  the  mental  model  is  mentioned  in  other  domains  like 
cognitive field where Johnson-Laird proposed the mental model 
to be a basic structure for cognition. Johnson-Laird stated, “It is 
now plausible to suppose that mental models play a central and 
unifying role in representing objects, states of affairs” [12]. The 
mental  model  approach  in  security  people's  perceptions  and 
cognition of the concepts behind their security decision. Ideally, 
if people’s mental models aligned with security policies, then 
the  security  issues  and  problems  would  be  fewer  due  to  the 
people’s security awareness and perception. However, mental 
models  vary  among  individuals  and  depend  on  the  special 
characteristics and experiences of each person, e.g., a security 
expert’s mental model will be more rich and extensive than a 
novice user [13].   

 
[Regular Research Paper, Cyber Warfare, Cyber Defense, & Cyber Security (CSCI-ISCW)] 

Several  attempts  have  been  made  to  understand  human 
mental  models  relating  to  computer  security.  Wash  [13] 
identified eight mental models of security threats. His models 
targeted  non-expert  computer  users.  He  interviewed  people 
about  computer  security  threats  to  understand  how  their 
thinking  leads  to  security  practices  like  ignoring  security 
advice.  Camp  [14]  proposed  five  possible  high-level  mental 
models  for  computer  security  failures  in  the  following  areas: 
physical  security,  medical 
infections,  criminal  behavior, 
economics failure, and warfare. Her models show how people 
think  about  computer  security  in  each  of  these  areas. 
Coopamootoo et al. [15] used the cognitive  map approach to 
identify privacy concerns and behavior. 

B.  Cognitive map  
A cognitive map is a type of mental to enable the analyzing of 
tasks requiring mental operations [16]. The cognitive map was 
on  the  personal  construct  theory  [17]  that  was  originally 
proposed to understand how humans make sense of and operate 
in their world. Operational researchers have demonstrated  the 
uses of the cognitive map technique for working on a variety of 
different  tasks.  One  such  task  is  assisting  the  construction  of 
complex  data  in  the  domain  of  problem  solving  where  the 
problem  is  divided  into  smaller  task  sand  each  task  has  a 
particular characteristic to be solved. So, in case of a failure in 
solving the problem, the cognitive map allowed to pinpoint the 
possible  sources  of  failure  inherent  in  a  task.  Furthermore,  it 
provides aid in managing large amounts of qualitative data from 
documents by simplifying the presentation of data. It visualizes 
the  data  as  a  network  consisting  of  nodes  and  arrows  that 
represent the type of relationship between the entities of the data 
and the causal effects. Graph theory can be used to analyze the 
structure of the cognitive maps and give an explanation on how 
the  cognitive  map  represents  concepts.  For  instance,  graph 
density indicates how connected or sparse the maps are. If the 
density of the map is high, people see a large number of causal 
relationships among concepts. To construct cognitive map there 
is  a  variety  of  existing  methods  [18]  ranging  from  a) 
questionnaires, (b) extraction from written texts, (c) drawing a 
cognitive  map  from  data  that  shows  causal  relationships,  and 
(d) through interviews with people who draw it directly. 

V.  METHODOLOGY 

Our  methodology  used  Amazon’s  Mechanical  Turk  and  the 
cognitive mapping technique to elicit and depict users’ security 
and usability mental models. To obtain the cognitive map, the 
method of extracting the concepts  from written text was used. 
The  mental  model  was  constructed  by  analyzing  peoples’ 
answers  through  survey  questionnaires  distributed  in  MTurk. 
The crowdsourcing practice of recruiting participants via MTurk 
incorporates  crowdsourcing  in  the  security  decision-making 
analysis  and  to  capture  people’s  mental  models  in  a  scalable 
manner.  The  MTurk  platform  addresses  several  problems 
related to traditional surveys methods. For instance, it speeds up 
the time process of collecting data where the survey requester 
has access to a global, on-demand, 24/7 workforce around the 
world.  It  also  overcomes  the  problem  of  answers’  quality  by 

* https://cmap.ihmc.us/ 

offering  a  clear  monetary  benefit  for  participants  to  complete 
their task. At the same time, participants know that the requester 
already has the choice of assessing the quality of their answers 
and can reject the participant’s results if deemed inadequate or 
neglected.  Thus,  participants  are  eager  to  provide  careful 
answers and pay attention to the tasks. 

A.  Design  

Our experiment was a between-subject study that includes 
a different framing of  security and usability related questions 
requiring free text responses. The set of questions was designed 
as a Human Intelligence Task (HIT) in AMT. Focus questions 
centered  on  solving  a  particular  problem  were  asked.  The 
expected  answer  from  participants  was  unstructured  text  and 
the  text  was  analyzed  to  extract  the  main  concepts  used  to 
construct  the  mental  model.  The  questionnaire  list  had  5 
sections each representing one security and usability category 
from  [5].  Participants  were  equally  divided  and  assigned 
randomly to a section. About 232 participants were recruited. 
Due  to  space  constraints  of  this  paper,  the  results  and  the 
analysis  of  one  group,  the  PKI  group  (46  participants),  are 
presented.  Table  1  shows  the  demographic  information  for 
participants  including  gender,  age  range,  and  education.  The 
demographic information may be used for further investigation. 
For instance, does the education level usually reflect people’s 
behavior  and  attitude,  and  would  this  impact  their  decision-
making  on  security?  Also,  can  age  range  associated  with 
peoples’ experience influence the security decision-making? 

To  guarantee  the  quality  of  the  data,  participants  in  this 
study were required to have a lifetime MTurk approval rate (this 
refers  to  the  rate  of  successfully  completing  previous  tasks) 
greater  than  50%.  HITs  were  completed  over  3  days.  46 
responses were received, but due to incomplete answers 2 were 
discarded, yielding 44 valid responses.  The  average  time that 
participants  spent  per  HIT  was  11.20  minute  (M=75.07, 
SD=54.13), and they were paid at the rate of $1 per HIT.  

B.  Text process and visulazation  
We  used  CMapTools*  to  develop  and  visualize  the  concept 
maps of the mental model. The hierarchy structure of concepts 
offered a structured representation of a participant’s conceptual 
understanding  security  and  usability.  The  map  structure  is  a 
directional  graph  consisting  of  nodes  and  edges:  each  node 
labels  a  distinct  concept,  while  edges  depict  the  relationships 
between  concepts  and  portray  participants’  thought  processes 
toward a particular subject. The direction of the edge represents 
the cause/effect or means/ends relation. After collecting the free 
text, the following process for each response was performed: 

Table 1- Number of participants based on age, gender and educational level 

Male 

Age 

%58.69 

Female 

%41.30 

Under 18 years 

0 

18 to 24 years 

25 to 34 years 

19 

35 to 44 years 

45 to 54 years 

3 

55 and older 

Education 

Below high school 

0  High school  

Some college level 

7  Associate degree 

Bachelor's degree 

21  Some postgraduate 

Master's degree 

9 

PhD and above 

6 

15 

3 

3 

5 

1 

0 

 
 
 
 
 
[Regular Research Paper, Cyber Warfare, Cyber Defense, & Cyber Security (CSCI-ISCW)] 

1- Create two sets: 

a)  Concept_set: set of concepts in the mental model.  
b)  Delete_set: the deleted content from the text.  

2- Preprocess the text: 

a)  Clean up the text: Check spelling, correct typos and 
move the non-content words from text to the Delete 
set. E.g. conjunctions, noise words, numbers... etc.  

b)  Normalize words in the text by detecting word 

c) 

derivations and replacing them with the normal forms. 
Identify synonyms: words that have the exact or similar 
meaning to another word are combined.  

a) 

3- Divide the text into distinct sentences.  
4- For each sentence in the text starting from the first one: 
Identify and classify concepts and relations such as 
concept A performing an action on object concept B.  
If concept A does not exist in the Concept_set, add 
concept A to Concept_set and a vertex labeled with 
concept A is created. Similar situation for concept B. 
Arrow from A to B is labeled with identified relation. 
c)  Repeat steps a and b for the entire sentence in the text. 

b) 

The previous steps produced a mental model for each response 
by  each  individual.  To  develop  a  composite  conceptual  map 
involving  all  participants  the  individual  concept  maps  were 
aggregated  into  one  map  for  each  question.  The  aggregation 
process  unified  the  sets  of  nodes  in  the  Concept_set  for  all 
individuals’ maps with its relations. Each edge in the graph is 

labelled  by 
the  number  of  compatible  responses  form 
participants.  For  instance,  Figure  1.b  shows  5  participants 
relating  the  concept  “look”  with  the  concept  “professional”. 
Due to space limitations we only display the concepts relating 
to security and usability. 

C.  Result and analysis  
The PKI category involved 2 questions that tested participant 
security vigilance, attention and awareness. The first question 
aimed to see if participants could distinguish if the  web  page 
URL in the address bar was secure or not. The security of the 
URL could be identified quickly by the padlock symbol in the 
address bar where the style and the color of the URL changed 
depending on the security status of the website. In Figure 2 (see 
Appendix),  screenshots  from  four  browsers  are  presented  as 
online  car  stores,  and  the  participants  were  asked  to  choose 
which  store  they  preferred  to  use  in  order  to  buy  a  car.  The 
intent  of  the  first  question  was  to  not  mention  “security,” 
“trust,” or any other word that could shift participants’ minds to 
security.  Instead  the  process  of  buying  a  car  was  specified 
because to see if a buyer would still think of safety and buying 
from  a  reputable  source.  Each  URL  in  the  screenshot  had 
different style. The following shows the format of each choice 
with the percentage of participants’ choices: 

a)  green padlock with a gray warning triangle 

b)  padlock with a red strikethrough 

c)  green padlock 

d)  gray padlock with a yellow warning triangle 

Figure 1 - Cognitive maps of question one 

 
 
 
 
 
 
[Regular Research Paper, Cyber Warfare, Cyber Defense, & Cyber Security (CSCI-ISCW)] 

a) green padlock with a gray warning triangle: the site is secure 
but browser had blocked insecure content. (36.36%)  
b)  padlock  with  a  red  strikethrough:  the  connection  is  not 
secured. (36.36%)  
c) green padlock: the connection is encrypted. (9.09%) 
d) gray padlock with a yellow warning triangle: the connection 
is  only  partially  encrypted  and  doesn't  prevent  some  security 
issues. (18.18%) 
only a few made the safest choice (green padlock), and of those 
only 2 individuals chose this option for security reasons. The 
mental  map  of  the  green  padlock  option  Figure  1.c  shows  2 
participants indicated that the website “address” is “secure” as 
indicated  by  the  “green_padlock”  in  the  “URL”.  Other 
participants’ justifications belonged to usability concepts such 
as “easy” to “navigate,” “look,” “genuine,” “professional,” and 
“confidence”.  Security  vigilance  also  appeared  in  the  mental 
map of option a (green padlock with a gray warning triangle) 
Figure  1.a,  where  one  person  also  pointed  out  that  the  web 
address  is  more  “professional”  and  the  “https”  “green  lock” 
looks “secure”. The rest of the concepts in the map belong to 
usability concepts. In the concept map of choice b (padlock with 
a  red  strikethrough),  3  participants  indicated  the  concept  of 
“trustworthy”  and  linked  it  directly  with  the  concept  “look”, 
which  indicates  that  the  website  general  appearance  and 
interface  is  the  trigger  point  for  participants’  trustworthiness. 
All  other  concepts  in  the  choice  map  belong  to  the  usability 
element.  

The  second  question  aimed  to  was  to  test  participants’ 
vigilance  and  attention  in  mobile  applications.  Similar  to 
question 1, a set of  Android and Apple app screenshots  were 
presented  and  participants  were  asked  to  choose  one  app  to 
download as a security app. In this question, participants were 
divided into two sections based on the type of their cellphone. 
Contrary to the first question, the word security was explicitly 
mentioned  in  the  question  to  see  if  this  could  influence 
participants’  decisions.  The  criteria  that  we  used  to  edit  the 
screenshots  of  the  Android  group  are:  a)  people  review:  the 
reviews  are  considered  to  be  personal  recommendations, 
usually establishing the factor of trust in people and affecting 
their behavior; b) app ads: advertisement shows in apps; c) top 
developer  sign:  a  sign  provided  by  playstore  from  Google  to 
indicate  the  app  quality;  and  d)  a  fake  green  thumb  symbol 
(originally, the green thumb symbol did not exist in the Apple 
app stores and thus does not have meaning, but it is presented 
in  the  screenshot  to  see  if  it  has  an  effect  on  participants’ 
decisions). Surprisingly the choice  of the  fake  symbol  Figure 
3.a (see Appendix) received the highest percentage of choices 
(72.73%).  The  concept  map  of  this  choice  Figure  4.a  (see 
Appendix)  shows  that  the  factor  with  the  largest  effect  on 
participants’  decisions  was  people’s  “great”  rating  where  14 
participants relate the concept “great” with “rating”. Not having 
ads  was  the  second  factor.  The  concept  “safe”  appeared  as  a 
receiver  node  with  the  degree  of  3.  The  trigger  concepts 
responsible  for  the  appearing  of  concept  “safe”  are  “feel”, 
“lots”, “downloads”, “contain” and “ads” were found by tracing 
the direct and indirect connected nodes. People’s feelings, the 
number of downloads indicated by people’s reviews, and adds 

are the factors behind indicating the concept “safe”. Also, the 
concept “feel” related directly with the concept “trust”. None of 
the  participants  in  the  Android  section  noticed  the  formal 
symbol of top developer (only one participant chose this option 
and the mental map shows  the concept “nice” to describe the 
reason behind choosing it). 

In the Apple group, we used the following criteria to edit 
the apps’ screenshots: a) people review; b) green thumb symbol 
(like in the Android group); and c) age tag highlighting  the 
recommended  age. Similar to the Android group, the green 
thumb option received the highest rate of selection (41.67%). 
Figure 4.b show the concept map of this option. The map shows 
5  clusters  of  participants’  justifications.  In  the  thumb  symbol 
cluster,  participants  linked  the  concept  “thumbs  up”  with  the 
following  concepts:  “reassure,”  “positive,”  “rating,”  and 
“liked.” The thumbs up symbol gave a positive impression for 
the app and participants thought it was related to other people’s 
positive rating. Although the same app rating is presented under 
the app name in the most options, people were more influenced 
by the green thumb symbol.  

VI.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

The  mental  model  approach  provides  a  valuable 
framework  to  explore  the  links  between  security  decision-
making and usability. It illustrates the cognitive processing and 
reasoning behind the end user decision by depicting the concept 
set  that  leads  the  end  user  to  make  a  specific  decision.  
Exploring  the  security  knowledge  and  cognitive  processes  of 
people will assist researchers in creating security policies and 
designing and implementing security tools. Thus, contributing 
towards more usable security. This paper presents a composite 
mental model for peoples’ decision-making toward security and 
usability.  To  construct  the  model,  the  practice  of  crowd 
sourcing technique and cognitive map method were used. The 
cognitive map was based on the text analysis method. A set of 
questionnaires in the categories of the security and usability [5] 
was  designed  and  distributed  via  MTurk.  The  text  responses 
were then collected and analyzed. Afterwards, the results and 
analysis of the PKI category were presented. The cognitive map 
was  used  to  extract  and  visualize  the  concepts  from  the 
participants’  answers.  The  PKI  result  shows  that  security 
vigilance, attention and awareness were low due to the usability 
factor (e.g. in question 1 only 2 participants (9.09%) were aware 
of the safest URL option in the browser, while the attention of 
the other participants shifted to usability factors relating to the 
websites’ general appearances and interfaces. The analysis also 
shows that participants’ decisions were influenced by the green 
color  (green  thumb  symbol  and  the  green  app  logo).  The 
screenshots including the green color in all questions were the 
ones  most  selected  by  participants.  Moreover,  the  concept 
“feel”  frequently  appeared  in  some  cognitive  maps  which  is 
agrees  with  the  findings  in  [19]  where  it  shows  how  security 
decisions are affected by people’s feelings.  

For  future  work,  we  would  like  to  expand  the  security 
mental model and explore the cognitive map of users in other 
security and usability categories. Also, since the mental model 
methodology resulted in producing a graph, graph theoretical 

[Regular Research Paper, Cyber Warfare, Cyber Defense, & Cyber Security (CSCI-ISCW)] 

indices were used to analyze the structure of the cognitive maps. 
For instance, concept centrality gives a valuable insight for how 
important the concept is to the other concepts, as well as which 
were the most important concepts that affected concepts. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  Cognition  -  definition  of  cognition  in  English  from  the  Oxford 

dictionary". www.oxforddictionaries.com. Retrieved 2016-02-04 

[2]  Nersessian, Nancy J. (1992). "In the Theoretician's Laboratory: Thought 
Experimenting  as  Mental  Modeling" (PDF). PSA:  Proceedings  of  the 
Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association. 1992 
[3]  Carey,  Susan.  "Knowledge  acquisition:  Enrichment  or  conceptual 

change." Concepts: core readings (1999): 459-487. 

[4]  Whitten,  Alma,  and  J.  Doug  Tygar.  "Why  Johnny  Can't  Encrypt:  A 
Usability  Evaluation  of  PGP  5.0." USENIX  Security  Symposium.  Vol. 
348. 1999 

[5]  Kainda, Ronald, Ivan Flechais, and A. W. Roscoe. "Security and usability: 
Analysis  and  evaluation." Availability,  Reliability,  and  Security,  2010. 
ARES'10 International Conference on. IEEE, 2010. 

[6]  Basin,  David,  Saa  Radomirovic,  and  Lara  Schmid.  "Modeling  Human 
in  Security  Protocols." Computer  Security  Foundations 

Errors 
Symposium (CSF), 2016 IEEE 29th. IEEE, 2016. 

[7]  R.  Dhamija,  J.  D.  Tygar,  and  M.  Hearst,  “Why  phishing  works,”  in 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing 
systems. ACM, 2006, pp. 581–590. 

[8]  Lacey, David. Managing the Human Factor in Information Security: How 
to win over staff and influence business managers. John Wiley & Sons, 
2009. 

Appendix A 

[9]  Alavi,  Reza,  et  al.  "Managing  Social  Engineering  Attacks-Considering 

Human Factors and Security Investment." HAISA. 2015. 

[10]  Staggers, Nancy, and Anthony F. Norcio. "Mental models: concepts for 
human-computer  interaction  research." International  Journal  of  Man-
machine studies 38.4 (1993): 587-605. 

[11]  Craik,  Kenneth  James  Williams. The  nature  of  explanation.  Vol.  445. 

CUP Archive, 1967. 

[12]  Johnson-Laird, Philip N. Mental models: Towards a cognitive science of 
language, inference, and consciousness. No. 6. Harvard Uni. Press, 1983. 
[13]  Wash, Rick. "Folk models of home  computer security." Proceedings of 
the Sixth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security. ACM, 2010. 
[14]  Camp,  L.  Jean.  "Mental  models  of  privacy  and  security." IEEE 

Technology and society magazine 28.3 (2009). 

[15]  Coopamootoo,  Kovila  PL,  and  Thomas  Groß.  "Mental  Models:  An 
Approach  to  Identify  Privacy  Concern  and  Behavior." Symposium  on 
Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS). 2014. 

[16]  Rand,  Yaacov.  "Deficient  cognitive  functions  and  non-cognitive 
and 
determinants-an 
intervention." Mediated Learning Experience: Theoretical, Psychosocial 
and Learning Implications. London: Freund (1991). 

assessment 

integrating 

model: 

[17]  Kelly,  G.  A.  A  Theory  of  Personality:  The  Psychology  of  Personal 

Constructs. New York: W.W. Norton & Company; 1963. 

[18]  Özesmi,  Uygar,  and  Stacy  L.  Özesmi.  "Ecological  models  based  on 
cognitive  mapping 
a  multi-step 

people’s  knowledge: 
approach." Ecological modelling 176.1 (2004): 43-64. 

fuzzy 

[19]  Schneier, “The psychology of security (Part 1), 2008, available at 

https://www.schneier.com/essays/archives/2008/01/the_psychology_of_
se.html  

[20]  Smith, Sean W. "Security and cognitive bias: exploring the role of the 

mind." IEEE Security & Privacy 10.5 (2012): 75-78. 

a) 

green padlock with a gray warning triangle 

b) 

padlock with a red strikethrough 

c) 

green padlock 

d) 

gray padlock with a yellow warning triangle 

Figure 2 - Browsers’ screenshots for cars online stores 

 
 
 
 
 
 
[Regular Research Paper, Cyber Warfare, Cyber Defense, & Cyber Security (CSCI-ISCW)] 

a) 

c) 

b) 

d) 

Figure 3 - Android app screenshots 

a)  Android Green thumb symbol  

b)  Apple Green thumb symbol  
Figure 4 – Cognitive map of Apple 

c)  Apple green logo 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
