Supremacy by Accelerated Warfare through the Comprehension 

Barrier and Beyond: Reaching the Zero Domain and Cyberspace 

Singularity  

Jan Kallberg¹  

¹United States Military Academy, the Department of Social Sciences, and the Army 

Cyber Institute at West Point, Spellman Hall, 2101 New South Post Rd, West Point NY 

10996, USA  

Corresponding author: Jan Kallberg, United States Military Academy and Army Cyber 
Institute, Spellman Hall room 4-33, 2101 New South Post Rd, West Point NY 10996, 
USA, Email: jan.kallberg@usma.edu. 

Disclaimer: 

The views expressed are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy or position of the Army 
Cyber Institute at West Point, the United States Military Academy, or the Department of Defense. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Supremacy by Accelerated Warfare through the Comprehension 

Barrier and Beyond: Reaching the Zero Domain and Cyberspace 

Singularity 

“IN THE LAND OF THE BLIND, THE ONE-EYED MAN IS KING.” 

ERASMUS OF ROTTERDAM, 16TH CENTURY  

Introduction 

It is questionable and even unlikely that cyber supremacy could be reached by 

overwhelming capabilities manifested by stacking more technical capacity and adding 

attack vectors. The alternative is to use time as the vehicle to supremacy by accelerating 

the velocity of the engagements beyond the speed at which the enemy can target, and 

precisely execute and comprehend the events unfolding. The space created beyond the 

adversary’s comprehension is called the Zero Domain. Military traditionally sees the 

battle space as land, sea, air, space, and cyber domains. When fighting the battle beyond 

the adversary’s comprehension, no traditional warfighting domain serves as a battle 

space; it is not a vacuum nor an unclaimed terra nullius, but instead the Zero Domain.  

In the Zero Domain, cyberspace superiority surfaces as the outfall of the accelerated 

time and a digital space-separated singularity that benefit the more-rapid actor. The 

Zero Domain has a time space that is accessible only by the rapid actor and a digital 

landscape that is not accessible by the slower actor due to the execution velocity in 

enhanced accelerated warfare. Velocity achieves cyber Anti Access/Area Denial 

(A2/AD), which can be achieved without active initial interchanges by accelerating the 

execution and cyber ability in a solitaire state. During this process, any adversarial 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
probing engagements only affect the actor on the approach to the Comprehension 

Barrier and once arrived in the Zero Domain a complete state of A2/AD is present.  

From that point forward, the actor that reached the Zero Domain has cyberspace 

singularity while the accelerated actor is the only actor who can understand the digital 

landscape, engage unilaterally without an adversarial ability to counterattack or 

interfere, and hold the ability to decide when, how, and where to attack. In the Zero 

Domain, the accelerated singularity forges the battlefield gravity and thrust into a single 

power that denies adversarial cyber operations and acts as one force of destruction, 

extraction, corruption, and exploitation of targeted adversarial digital assets.  

Breaking through the Comprehension Barrier 

There is a point along the trajectory of accelerated warfare where only one warfighting 

nation comprehends what is unfolding and the sees the cyber terrain; it is an upper 

barrier for comprehension where the acceleration makes the cyber engagement 

unilateral. The Comprehension Barrier is dependent on its side’s abilities, technical 

maturity, and institutional structure, and the enemies’ weaknesses and lack thereof. 

Adversaries forged in organizational fear cultures and a strict command structure could, 

even if technically cognizant and competent, be less able to competitively accelerate the 

warfare than more agile and less technically able opponents.  If both fighting parties are 

engaged in interchanges, the engagements that are accelerating toward the 

Comprehension Barrier have increased intensity, as they are faster, more forceful, and 

less restrained when the stress of acceleration degrades the OODA (Observe, Orient, 

Decide, Act) loop, command, and control. Once one warfighter breaks through the 

Comprehension Barrier with maintained control, the conflict changes from a contested 

cyberspace to battle space singularity. The cyber ability in the Zero Domain battle is 

3 

 
derived from a single source. At that point, any engagement can affect only the slower 

party and not the owner of the singularity because the slower attacker is unable to 

understand the factual battle landscape and target, arrange its resources, and conduct 

warfare at the velocity that occurs on the other side of the Comprehension Barrier. If we 

use real-life references, the warfighter beyond the Comprehension Barrier has full 

access to situation awareness, can see the landscape and target, and can act as if the war 

occurred under normal conditions, while the slower warfighter that never reached the 

Comprehension Barrier is floating around weightless and in pure darkness. Accelerated 

warfare beyond the Comprehension Barrier caused the slower party to be unable to 

understand, sense, order, and coordinate the operations. When breaking the 

Comprehension Barrier, the first of the adversary’s final points of comprehension is 

human deliberation, directly followed by pre-authorization and machine learning, and 

then these final points of comprehension are passed and the more-rapid actor enters the 

Zero Domain.    

Time and the Lost Space 

In accelerated cyberwar, time is to cyber what combined time and place were for 

Clausewitz1 because the Zero Domain has nullified the importance of the other 

warfighting domains and created parsimonious singularity through the absence of a 

common battlespace. Space matters only before the Comprehension Barrier is crossed. 

The traditional concentration of forces—where and when—is replaced with then, 

because the singularity occurs first in the Zero Domain. As noted strategist Edward N. 

Luttwak stated, strategies without the ability to execute are pointless exercises.2 The 

accelerated warfare beyond the Comprehension Barrier, if reached, will eradicate the 

4 

 
influence of the opponent’s cyber strategy because singularity in the Zero Domain 

removes the opponent’s ability to execute.   

The Evaporated OODA Loop    

From an operational standpoint, action beyond the Comprehension Barrier will 

evaporate and nullify the traditional command and control scheme. In general terms, 

military command and control (C2) follow the steps of observe, orient, decide, and act, 

as described in the OODA loop developed by John Boyd in the 1960s (Fig. 1).3 

Accelerated warfare beyond the Comprehension Barrier nullifies the adversary’s OODA 

loop because there is nothing that could be accurately observed, no targets to orient 

toward, a lack of information and situation awareness with which to make a decision, 

and the ability to act is limited to spurious actions that have no bearing on the unfolding 

events. The unique tenets of cyber undermine the utility of the OODA loop.4 The 

OODA loop requires the ability to assess ongoing events (as in the initial step of 

“observe”), but under conditions of anonymity, computational speed in cyber execution, 

and lack of object permanence, the observations feeding the loop are likely to be 

inaccurate, if not spurious, as acceleration starts. In accelerated warfare, the OODA loop 

disappears for the slower party in the engagement if the faster actor breaks the 

Comprehension Barrier.  The rapid actor maintains its OODA loop in the Zero Domain, 

and conversely, if the rapid actor is no longer able to maintain its position in the Zero 

Domain, the OODA loop will reemerge for the slower actor as the formerly rapid actor 

is unable to maintain velocity beyond the Comprehension Barrier.   

5 

 
  
Accelerated warfare beyond the Comprehension Barrier does not seek to be inside the 
enemy’s OODA loop; it removes the OODA loop.  

Figure 1.     

“OODA Boyd” by Patrick Edwin Moran - own work. Licensed under CC BY 3.0 via Wikimedia Commons. 

The “orient” stage in the OODA loop—reacting to unfolding events and positioning for 

a better outcome—assumes a maneuverable space with favorable positions, but the lack 

of object permanence in cyber brings an ever-changing battlefield and permanent 

disorientation rather than re-orientation. When these nodes—ever-changing spaces 

lacking object permanence—are accelerated beyond the Comprehension Barrier, 

environmental information cannot be structurally understood or ordered outside of the 

Zero Domain. If the “observe” and “orient” stages are not relevant to the facts of the 

engagement, then the “decide” stage will fail to deliver the proper course of action and 

thus lead to an ineffective “act” stage.  

Computational speed exacerbates the inability to assess and act, and the increasingly 

shortened time frames likely to be found in future cyber conflicts will disallow any 

significant human deliberation. Enemy deliberation, either through leadership or pre-

authorization, are ultimately ineffectual once the Comprehension Barrier is passed.  

6 

 
 
 
The key to victory historically has been the concept of being able to be inside the 

opponent’s OODA loop, and thereby distort, degrade, and derail the opponent’s OODA 

assessments.5 In accelerated warfare beyond the Comprehension Barrier, there is no 

need to be inside the opponent’s OODA loop because the accelerated warfare concept 

removes the OODA loop for the opponent and by doing so disables the opponent’s 

ability to coordinate, seek effect, and command. 

The Zero Domain 

The five traditional battlespace domains are contested spaces (land, sea, air, space, and 

cyber) where parties interact, engage, have interchanges through which they can 

structure their understanding of the battle environment to make decisions. Both parties 

are present in the engagement, and even if one is weaker and less able to challenge, 

there is a mutual perception of the framing of the fight. The Zero Domain is the battle 

space beyond the Comprehension Barrier where battle space singularity occurs, and 

only one actor has access to the OODA loop. The Zero Domain is the warfighting space 

where accelerated velocity in the warfighting operations removes the enemy’s presence. 

It is the domain with zero opponents.  It is not an area denial, because the enemy is 

unable to accelerate to the level where it could enter the battle space, and it is not access 

denial because the enemy is not part of the fight once the Comprehension Barrier is 

broken. Instead, it is a state of cyber A2/AD, but there is no challenge to this state in the 

Zero Domain because it is an outfall of the establishment of the Zero Domain.    

Short Conclusion 

As a research note, these ideas and concepts are under development and are not the final 

output. The purpose of the note is to introduce new concepts, open up the discussion, 

7 

 
and catalyze comments.       

Figure 2.   

When breaking the Comprehension Barrier, the first of the adversary’s final points of comprehension is 
human deliberation, directly followed by pre-authorization and machine learning, and then these final points 
of comprehension are passed, and the rapid actor enters the Zero Domain.  

By Settles1 [CC BY-SA 3.0  (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0)], from Wikimedia Commons. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1] C. von Clausewitz, On War, ed. and trans. Michael Howard and Peter Paret. Princeton, NJ: 

Princeton University Press, 1976. 

[2] E. Luttwak, The Grand Strategy of the Roman Empire: From the First Century CE to the 

Third. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2016. 

[3] F. P. B. Osinga, Science, strategy and war: The strategic theory of John Boyd. New York, 

NY: Routledge, 2007. 

[4] J. Kallberg and T. S. Cook, “The unfitness of traditional military thinking in cyber: Four 

cyber tenets that undermine traditional strategies,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 8126-8130, April 
2017. [Online]. Available: Researchgate, 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/317328999_Unfitnesstraditionalthinking [Accessed 
August 12, 2018]. 

[5] J. R. Boyd, “The essence of winning and losing,” unpublished. 

9 

 
                                                 
