Security Implications of Fog Computing on the
Internet of Things

Ismail Butun1∗, Alparslan Sari2∗, and Patrik ¨Osterberg1
1Department of Information Systems and Technology, Mid Sweden University, Sundsvall, Sweden
2Department of Computer Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware, USA
e-mails:ismail.butun@miun.se, asari@udel.edu, patrik.osterberg@miun.se

8
1
0
2

p
e
S
7
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
9
4
0
1
.
9
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Recently, the use of IoT devices and sensors has been
rapidly increased which also caused data generation (information
and logs), bandwidth usage, and related phenomena to be
increased. To our best knowledge, a standard deﬁnition for the
integration of fog computing with IoT is emerging now. This
integration will bring many opportunities for the researchers,
especially while building cyber-security related solutions. In this
study, we surveyed about the integration of fog computing with
IoT and its implications. Our goal was to ﬁnd out and emphasize
problems, speciﬁcally security related problems that arise with
the employment of fog computing by IoT. According to our
ﬁndings, although this integration seems to be non-trivial and
complicated, it has more beneﬁts than the implications.

Index Terms—IoT, IIoT, vulnerabilities, trust, end-device, con-

ﬁdentiality, integrity, availability.

I. INTRODUCTION

Internet of Things (IoT) is having its hipe now, as the
Internet had its hipe two decades ago. IoT market is expected
to grow from more than 15 billion devices three years ago to
more than 75 billion in 2025 [1]. IoT needs a strong techno-
logical foundation for its rapid development and acceptance
from the scientiﬁc community. Hence, the fog computing is a
very strong candidate to provide this foundation for IoT. By
providing several advantages, fog computing is expected to
be one of the main backbone pillars of the IoT in terms of
computational support.

As shown in Fig. 1, from a conceptual point of view, we
are predicting fog computing to serve as an intermediate level
of service for seamlessly handshaking the protocols of cloud
computing and IoT. This will bring many beneﬁts: 1) Cloud
computing servers are super fast in contrast to the IoT devices.
Fog computing devices will provide an interface between the
two far set of devices. 2) This intermediate layer of fog
computing will allow several ﬁxes (such as patch updates, etc.)
to be done easier. Instead of making changes on IoT devices,
software updates can be pushed on to the fog device(s). 3) Fog
computing will bring all the advantages of edge-computing,
such as the agility, scalability, decentralization, etc.

As a centralized resource out of users control, the cloud
represents every possible opportunity to violate privacy. Un-
fortunately, privacy has become a luxury today, a situation

∗Corresponding authors and have equal contribution.
-This work was supported by SMART Project, EU Regional Fund (grant

number 20201010).

that will be exacerbated in the IoT [2]. Therefore, a remedy
is needed to enhance the privacy needs of the users in these
services and fog computing is a strong candidate to provide
this.

Fog computing actually is a tool for cloud-based services
(CBS) that can be thought of as an interface in between the real
end-devices and the rest of the CBS. CBS offers three service
models, namely Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as
a Service (PaaS) and Software as a Service (SaaS) [3]. We are
projecting that fog computing paradigm will act as an interface
for these CBS service models so that intended services can be
used by the front-end users seamlessly and promptly.

The Security Plane for CBS proposed by Butun et al. [3]
was intended to be used for the front-end IoT devices and to be
an interface to the cloud. After the proposal of fog computing,
this Security Plane kind of solution is highly implementable.
Therefore, we think of fog computing to provide extra services
such as security to the edge of the cloud for the CBS. For
example, the usage of fog computing would bring beneﬁts to
the Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) that are devised for
IoT. Hence early detection is important to stop ill effects
of intrusions, fog computing would bring early detection
opportunities to IDS algorithms working on IoT.

Fog computing brings three immediate advantages over
cloud computing: 1) Enhanced service quality to mobile users.
2) Enhanced efﬁciency to the network. 3) Enhanced location
awareness. Among these beneﬁts, the major beneﬁt of fog
computing over the cloud is that the support for location
awareness which might be very useful for the applications
that are employing location based services (LBS) [4].

Figure 1. Fog computing proposed as a gateway in between cloud computing
and IoT.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. An illustration of four different possible fog computing applications with IoT: Smart Ofﬁce, Smart Factory, Smart Home and Smart Trafﬁc.

II. BACKGROUND

and robustness are prioritized.

Large-scale IoT deployments created situations which cloud
computing could not handle efﬁciently and effectively. For
instance, applications which require low latency while process-
ing the data on the edge of the network. In real life, a massive
amount of data is being collected by IoT from many different
sensors in various environments such as factory production
lines, vehicles, machines, elevators etc. or individual purposes
such as smart home systems, hobby related sensors, etc.

These sensing devices have different characteristics and
features. They are connected to each other via hardwire
or WiFi. Large-scale device deployments in heterogeneous
environments bring management
intelligent
communications approaches are needed in which efﬁciency

issues. Hence,

Using a cloud network to stream data and analyze data
has its limitations such as bandwidth consumption and com-
munication costs. If the user data are sensitive, securing the
data is another important issue. The data are important for
auditing purpose or controlling the assets to improve efﬁciency
or preventing disasters etc.

The data analysis could be done on site by running the
software at local stations. The cloud would be used as storing
the analysis result for historical and audit purposes. The data
aggregation will reduce the bandwidth and also bandwidth
related cost.

Fig. 2 presents various possible application ﬁelds of fog
computing: Smart Ofﬁce concept can be an example of the
generic relation of IoT devices and fog computing. Smart

Table I
COMPARISON OF CLOUD AND FOG COMPUTING CONCEPTS.

Feature
Access
Access to the service
Availability
Content distributed to
Content generator
Content generation at
Control
Latency
Location of resources (i.e. processing and storage)
Mobility
Number of users
Virtual infrastructure location

Cloud computing
Wired or wireless
Through server
Mostly available
Edge device
Man made
Central server
Centralized
High
Center
Not supported
Millions
Enterprise server

Fog computing
Wireless
At the edge device
Mostly volatile
Anywhere
Sensor made
Edge device
Distributed
Minor
Edge
Supported
Billions
User devices

Factory is an example of industrial IoT (IIoT) and fog com-
puting application. There could be many IoT devices, sensors
(temperature, pressure etc.), electric actuators or other control
devices could be involved. Smart Home concept is emerging
with IoT devices and home appliances such as TV, washing
machine, dryer, refrigerator etc. as they are getting smarter
and intelligent. In Smart Trafﬁc example, data collection on
site and immediately analyzing and processing data on the
edge may help in fast decision making locally, instead of
sending data to a central location. For instance, in case of an
emergency, the trafﬁc lights can be controlled to open a way
for emergency vehicles such as ﬁre trucks and ambulances
based on local IoT devices. In these four different scenarios,
the common idea is that the devices generate a massive amount
of data and may need to collaborate with each other and to take
critical decisions reducing the delay. Hence, an agile response
is important and the philosophy of fog computing may help
to overcome bandwidth and latency related problems in this
manner.

Because of introducing agile response nearby the edge com-
ponents, we are expecting fast implementation and business
growth of fog computing for future IoT applications such as
smart-trafﬁc and smart-factories. Thereby, the integration will
not remain in just IoT but expand to industrial IoT (IIoT) and
further other areas. This will impose its own challenges to
IIoT [5], as well as bringing beneﬁts.

IoT and fog computing can be helpful in designing “smart”
things such as smart home, smart trafﬁc lights, smart cities,
etc. For instance, the sensors in a smart trafﬁc system can
detect accidents or sense the road conditions due to weather
or some other factors and inform the drivers. A trafﬁc jam can
be regulated by a smart trafﬁc system.

In recent years, due to the usage of IoT and other sensors,
the data generated by end-devices increased massively. The
question is where/when/how should these data be analyzed?
In cloud-centric design, IoT devices generate data and send
them to the cloud (operates as a central server) for storage and
analyses. However, in fog computing, the data is analyzed on
the edge stations and just necessary results are being sent to

the cloud.

Fog computing concept is recently introduced by CISCO
[6], which is a new vision that enables IoT devices to run
on the edge of the network. According to Bonomi et al. [7],
“Fog Computing” is not an alternative for “Cloud Computing”.
Fog extends the cloud computing and complements the cloud
computing with the concept of smart devices which can work
on the edge of the network. According to CISCOs vision, fog
computing has following characteristics: 1- Low latency, 2-
Location awareness, 3- Geographical distribution, 4- Mobility,
5- Very large number of nodes, 6- A predominant role of
wireless access, 7- Streaming and real-time applications, 8-
Heterogeneity [6].

OpenFog Consortium [8] is deﬁning the standards of the
fog computing with different committees and work-groups.
The founding members are Arm, Cisco, Dell, Intel, Microsoft
and Princeton University. The focus is to create and promote
an open reference architecture for fog computing to solve
challenges such as bandwidth, latency, etc. in various areas
like AI, IoT, industrial machinery, Robotics, etc. According to
OpenFog Consortium, the key pillars of the fog architecture
are security, scalability, openness, autonomy, reliability, avail-
ability, serviceability, agility, hierarchy, and programmability.
Fog computing is helping to the IoT, 5G and AI related
systems which need some special unique properties such as
security (trusted transactions), cognition (objective awareness),
agility (scalable), latency (real-time processing), and efﬁciency
(utilizing unused resources). According to OpenFog, the ben-
eﬁts of using fog computing are; low latency, business agility,
security, real-time analytics, reduced cost,
less bandwidth
usage.

Table I presents fog computing and cloud computing con-
cepts in a comparative way [9]. As can be seen, fog computing
presents more agile and rapid response when compared to
cloud computing, henceforth represents a strong candidate as
a technological solution for future IoT and IIoT based imple-
mentations. Fog computing would be a preferable approach
with various IoT designs and applications such as Smart
Home, Smart Trafﬁc (Transportation and Connected vehicles

etc.), Smart Grid, Industrial Automation and integration with
IIoT, Smart Health-care Systems, etc.

technology enables us to implement more secure and agile
payment systems as follows:

The beneﬁts of fog computing for IoT (and IIoT) can be

summarized as follows:

A. Smart Laundromats

• Reducing cost: The data will be processed on edge rather

then cloud

• Reducing the delay: Critical applications require low
latency to interpret the data and to take a decision. The
cloud computing is not suitable to serve this task.

• Agile response: Real-time applications may beneﬁt from
fog computing concept to gain speed during analysis or
decision making phase.

• Increased security: With fog computing,

service
providers can ﬁlter out sensitive personally identiﬁable
information (PII) and process it locally, sending the non-
sensitive information to the cloud for further processing
[10].

III. PRACTICAL APPLICATION SCENARIOS OF FOG
COMPUTING USAGE IN IOT

In this section, we introduced a subset of possible attack
scenarios from real-life and discussed possible related mitiga-
tion methods.

Coin, bill and card-based systems suffer from multiple
attack vectors. Asking the following question “How to hack
a vending machine?” on Google returns thousands and thou-
sands of results. Whether the hacks work or not does not really
mean anything,
the information of possible attack vectors
poses a great threat to existing vending machine domain since
one attack vector may work with an old (vulnerable) model. In
early 80-90s, many coin-operated machines including but not
limited to vending machines, arcade machines, public phones
etc. suffered from simple Coin-on-a-String trick [11]. Later,
this problem is mitigated with the one-way ratchet. Coin or
card systems can be bypassed by attacker [12], the machine
can be tampered [13]. Paper bills tampered with plastic tape
or other materials to get them back from machine after the
credit is earned or attacker tries to machine spit the bill back
after it is credited.

Even the vending machines in one of the most secured
places on the world can be hacked, such as the ones in Central
Intelligence Agency (CIA) facilities. According to BuzzFeed
News, a group of CIA contractors exploited a vulnerability
in the vending machines electronic payment systems to buy
snacks at no cost [14]. The total loss is around $3,314, but
the most shocking fact is even vending machines in CIA
are vulnerable and the unexpected can happen. Apparently,
attackers disconnected the FreedomPay network cable con-
nected to vending machines to exploit an “Availability” issue
which resulted in the machine permitting purchases made by
unfunded FreedomPay cards. Attackers are later on identiﬁed
by agency’s surveillance cameras.

The extreme example above from real-life has shown us
that we may more way to go in securing vending machines
kind of payment systems. Luckily, now fog computing IoT

In the real life, there have been many cases of laundromat
system hacking reported [15]. Accordingly, it can be stated
that none of the laundromat systems (whether token based,
magnetic card based, or even smart card based) that are being
used today is secure. One of the main reasons is that the ma-
chine usage is not controlled via the server but at the machines.
When a machine is hacked, or a token (card) is hacked, there
is no mechanism to check the validity (whether it is authentic
or not) of the transaction. Therefore, we project real-time (or
close to real-time) usage of authentication mechanism that is
governed by a central server (Authentication Management) and
served to the edge devices (laundromats) with the adoption of
fog computing.

B. Smart Vending Machines

As an application of fog supported-IoT to vending ma-
chines, a vending machine can report missing items to the
vendor so that they can be shipped on time. Besides, auto
status check report can be generated and can be sent to the
vendor for maintenance purposes.

Smart vending machines mitigates the security problems
but much more can be achieved from a “smart” machine. For
instance, detailed sales reports can be generated for the vendor.
A particular product can be tracked throughout the year, and
the vendor can get detailed insight about the sales of a product
or user buying habits like which product sales are best, when,
where, etc. Product-A sales are best in February, user-1 buys
product-B on Monday morning but buys product-C on Tuesday
evening, etc.

C. Smart Chip Card Systems

Smart Chip Card Systems are relatively secure than coin
or paper bill based systems. The threat model for these
systems is unencrypted or not well-encrypted cards. With a
card reader/writer, the value in the card can be easily updated
if the necessary preemptive steps are not taken. Another attack
vector would be, an attacker may clone the card and get
unlimited credit if there is not a mechanism to do validation
(checking transaction with a server etc.) If IoT is embedded
with the device in the production phase, it is unlikely that it
will be physically tampered by an attacker easily (assuming
human security details are overseeing the machine). A possible
solution is designing a fog computing-based system which
runs a micro-service to validate the transactions. Smart Chip
Card can be an identiﬁer for a legal user, once it is used in a
device, the micro-service on fog computing system validates
the user and transaction or escalates the situation and asks
mobile application based authentication. For instance, if the
card is used in a different location (same apartment complex
but different building etc.) this can be reported as an instance.
Another distinct advantage of using fog computing-based
IoT is the reduction of possible operational cost. For example,

Table II
POSSIBLE SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS WHEN THE FOG COMPUTING GATEWAY IS COMPROMISED

Feature
Access control
Authentication
Availability
Conﬁdentiality
Integrity
Privacy

Risk on IoT network
Moderate
Moderate/Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Moderate
Minimal
Signiﬁcant

Impact on Cloud
Minor
Minor/Major
Minor
Minor
None/Minor
Minor/Major

end-devices can connect to the smart grid and negotiate with
the grid on the unit electric price. On a queue based approach,
they can operate their tasks when the electric price is cheap
(during the daytime for instance).

IV. PROJECTIONS OF FOG COMPUTING USAGE IN IOT AND
ITS SECURITY IMPLICATIONS

According to the scientiﬁc projections, fog computing is
expected to be one of the main backbone structure of IoT in the
near future [1], [8], [10]. Inevitably, there will be implications
of this integration.

In ideal conditions, extra introduced components are desired
to bring no further burden on the overall operation of the
existing system. However, this is not the fact in real life
scenarios. Sometimes they bring an extra load (e.g. processing
and memory storage), and sometimes (preferably) decrease
existing load. The same is valid for security features.

Security implications of using fog computing for IoT sys-
tems is shown in Table II. There are six features (most
important ones being CIA, i.e. conﬁdentiality, integrity and
availability) that we considered in the case of a failure (cap-
ture) in defending the fog computing gateway (FCG):

1) Access Control: FCG devices provide a gateway between
IoT network and cloud. However, the functioning is like
providing ﬁeld data from the IoT to cloud and command
messages from the cloud to IoT. There is no way of
accessing databases of the cloud from FCG devices, on
the other hand, it is possible to command and conquer
all IoT devices connected to a rouge FCG device.
2) Authentication: Depending on the authentication algo-
rithm design, if several layered authentication methodol-
ogy (one at FCG, one at the cloud, etc.) is used then this
might be a very secure solution. Any compromise would
only affect limited number of IoT devices. Otherwise, if
all authentication operation is left to the FCG devices,
this might create problems when the FCG devices get
compromised.

3) Availability: Depending on the critical position of the
FCG, we expect a signiﬁcant impact on the availability
of the IoT resources if the communications are blocked.
However, this will not affect the cloud side marginally.
4) Conﬁdentiality: Conﬁdentiality of the data at FCG has
a moderate impact on IoT network, whilst has a minor
impact on the cloud (all the devices connected to FCG

gets affected, however, the rest of the IoT network and
the cloud remains safe operation).

5) Integrity: Depending on the communications scheme, we
expect minor (if end-to-end encryption is not employed)
to none (with encryption) effect of FCG on the integrity
of the messages.

6) Privacy: As in any service, privacy of the users in IoT is
critical and any leakage through FCG devices might have
serious consequences. This will affect all users that are
using the IoT though that hacked FCG device. However,
the rest of the data (resulting from other FCGs) at the
cloud will still be secure and private.

If these computers (gateways) are installed in a few num-
bers, they may constitute a single point of failure. Since, if
an attacker manages to harm this gateway, all the communi-
cation between cloud and IoT would be blocked. Therefore,
we suggest several gateways installed network architectural
implementation.

As discussed above and also listed in Table I, compromising
the fog computing gateway, will have an impact on cloud com-
puting layer from minor to critical levels; and the risk on IoT
network will be from minimal to signiﬁcant levels, depending
on the security feature that is observed. Therefore, in some
applications, the security of fog computing gateway might be
very important. Hardware and/or software security precautions
for the fog computing gateway should be considered while
deciding security provisioning for the overall network.

The fog computing layer can be leveraged by security
services as a proxy server with the ﬁrewall and/or IDS
capability. Most of the attacks can be prevented by the ﬁrewall.
Any harmful intrusion attempt can be detected by IDS and
mitigated at the fog computers before it can reach to main
servers on the cloud.

To improve privacy, a wiser suggested solution would be
keeping the private data on the edge while sending the just
necessary data to the cloud.

V. FUTURE REMARKS AND CONCLUSIONS

The proliferation of IoT devices in our surrounding envi-
ronment is indispensable and this will be possible due to the
dominant usage of fog computing as a backbone supporting
architecture. Throughout this article, we have discussed the
implications of using fog computing as a backbone architec-
ture for IoT, especially from cyber security point of view.

According to our ﬁndings, we have stated that usage of fog
computing for cloud-based IoT systems might have several
beneﬁts; in terms of cost, QoS and more importantly, security.

REFERENCES

[1] V.
the
of
on-the-edge-solving-the-challenges-of-edge-computing-in-the-era-of-iot/

Solving
era
https://data-economy.com/

(2018)
of
[Online].

Friedman.
challenges
iot.

edge
Available:

edge:
in

computing

the

On

the

[2] B. Zhang, N. Mor, J. Kolb, D. S. Chan, K. Lutz, E. Allman,
J. Wawrzynek, E. A. Lee, and J. Kubiatowicz, “The cloud is not enough:
Saving iot from the cloud.” in HotStorage, 2015.

[3] I. Butun, B. Kantarci, and M. Erol-Kantarci, “Anomaly detection and
privacy preservation in cloud-centric internet of things,” in Communica-
tion Workshop (ICCW), 2015 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE,
2015, pp. 2610–2615.

[4] T. H. Luan, L. Gao, Z. Li, Y. Xiang, and L. Sun, “Fog computing:
Focusing on mobile users at the edge,” CoRR, vol. abs/1502.01815,
2015. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.01815

[5] S. Forsstr¨om, I. Butun, M. Eldefrawy, U. Jennehag, and M. Gidlund,
“Challenges of securing the industrial internet of things value chain,” in
2018 Workshop on Metrology for Industry 4.0 and IoT.
IEEE, 2018,
pp. 218–223.

[6] “Fog computing and the internet of things: Extend the cloud to where

the things are,” Cisco White Paper, 2015.

[7] F. Bonomi, R. Milito, J. Zhu, and S. Addepalli, “Fog computing and
its role in the internet of things,” in Proceedings of the First Edition
of the MCC Workshop on Mobile Cloud Computing, ser. MCC ’12.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 13–16. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2342509.2342513

[8] O. penFog Consortium. (2018) What we do? [Online]. Available:

https://www.openfogconsortium.org/what-we-do/

[9] W. Stallings and L. Brown, Computer security: principles and practice.

Pearson Education, 2018.

[10] M.

icrosoft IoT. (2017) Five ways edge computing will

transform
business. [Online]. Available: https://blogs.microsoft.com/iot/2017/09/
19/ﬁve-ways-edge-computing-will-transform-business/

[11] Coin-on-a-string trick. [Online]. Available: http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/

pmwiki.php/Main/CoinOnAStringTrick

[12] Coin base laundromat hack. [Online]. Available: https://www.youtube.

com/watch?v=YS7rguwrauo

[13] Laundromat hack with lock pick. [Online]. Available: https://www.

youtube.com/watch?v=YsuLzCfNqYo

[14] J. Leopold and D. Mack.

(June 21, 2017) Buzzfeed: A bunch
of cia contractors got ﬁred for
from vending
machines. [Online]. Available: https://www.buzzfeed.com/jasonleopold/
cia-vending-thefts

stealing snacks

[15] (2015) Hack my laundry card? [Online]. Available: https://www.reddit.

com/r/hacking/\comments/2pjy5x/hack my laundry card/

