JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

1

Survey on UAV Cellular Communications:
Practical Aspects, Standardization Advancements,
Regulation, and Security Challenges

Azade Fotouhi, Student Member, IEEE, Haoran Qiang, Student Member, IEEE, Ming Ding, Senior Member, IEEE,
Mahbub Hassan, Senior Member, IEEE, Lorenzo Galati Giordano, Member, IEEE,
Adrian Garcia-Rodriguez, Member, IEEE, and Jinhong Yuan, Fellow, IEEE

9
1
0
2

r
a

M
1
3

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

2
v
2
5
7
1
0
.
9
0
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The rapid growth of consumer Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs) is creating promising new business opportu-
nities for cellular operators. On the one hand, UAVs can be
connected to cellular networks as new types of user equipment,
therefore generating signiﬁcant revenues for the operators that
can guarantee their stringent service requirements. On the other
hand, UAVs offer the unprecedented opportunity to realize UAV-
mounted ﬂying base stations that can dynamically reposition
themselves to boost coverage, spectral efﬁciency, and user quality
of experience. Indeed, the standardization bodies are currently
exploring possibilities for serving commercial UAVs with cellular
networks. Industries are beginning to trial early prototypes of
ﬂying base stations or user equipments, while academia is in
full swing researching mathematical and algorithmic solutions
to address interesting new problems arising from ﬂying nodes
in cellular networks. In this article, we provide a comprehensive
survey of all of these developments promoting smooth integration
of UAVs into cellular networks. Speciﬁcally, we survey (i) the
types of consumer UAVs currently available off-the-shelf, (ii)
the interference issues and potential solutions addressed by
standardization bodies for serving aerial users with the existing
terrestrial base stations, (iii) the challenges and opportunities for
assisting cellular communications with UAV-based ﬂying relays
and base stations, (iv) the ongoing prototyping and test bed
activities, (v) the new regulations being developed to manage
the commercial use of UAVs, and (vi) the cyber-physical security
of UAV-assisted cellular communications.

Index Terms—Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, Drones, Cellular
Networks, Standardization, 5G and Beyond, Flying User Equip-
ment, Flying Base Stations, Regulation, Security

I. INTRODUCTION

From aerial photography to search-and-rescue to package
delivery — the use cases of consumer unmanned aerial ve-

A. Fotouhi is with School of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of New South Wales (UNSW), Sydney, Australia, and also with Altran
Technologies, France (E-mail: a.fotouhi@unsw.edu.au).

H. Qiang is with School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications,
University of New South Wales (UNSW), Sydney, Australia, and also with the
Data61, CSIRO, Eveleigh, Australia (E-mail: h.qiang@student.unsw.edu.au).
M. Hassan is with School of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of New South Wales (UNSW), Sydney, Australia, and also with the Data61,
CSIRO, Eveleigh, Australia (E-mail: mahbub.hassan@unsw.edu.au).

M. Ding is with the Data61, CSIRO, Eveleigh, Australia (E-mail:

ming.ding@data61.csiro.au).

L. Galati Giordano, and A. Garcia-Rodriguez are with Nokia Bell Labs,
Ireland (E-mail: lorenzo.galati_giordano, adrian.garcia_rodriguez@nokia-bell-
labs.com).

J. Yuan is with School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunica-
tions, University of New South Wales (UNSW), Sydney, Australia (E-mail:
j.yuan@unsw.edu.au).

hicles (UAVs) (a.k.a. drones) are exploding. According to a
report from Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the ﬂeet
of drones will be more than doubled from an estimated 1.1
million vehicles in 2017 to 2.4 million units by 2022 [1]. It is
expected that new use cases will continue to emerge, fuelling
further growth in UAVs. As many of these use cases would
beneﬁt from connecting the UAVs to the cellular networks
for better control and communications,
the growth in the
UAV market is expected to bring new promising business
opportunities for cellular operators.

The Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), which
oversees the standards activities for cellular networks, has
recently concluded a study item [2] to explore the challenges
and opportunities for serving the UAVs as a new type of
user equipment (UE), referred to as aerial UE. An interesting
ﬁnding of this study is that the enhanced line-of-sight (LOS)
between aerial UE and ground base stations (BSs) would
signiﬁcantly increase interference in the system, which calls
for new strategies to seamlessly accommodate both aerial and
ground UEs in the same system. A variety of new techniques
have already been proposed to address such interference issue,
which show promising results.

While 3GPP is mainly concerned with connecting UAVs to
cellular networks, industry and academia are advancing to the
next level of research and development that promises to har-
ness the full potential of UAVs communications. In particular,
they are exploring the unprecedented opportunity to realize
UAV-mounted ﬂying relays and BSs that can dynamically
reposition themselves to boost coverage, spectral efﬁciency,
and user quality of experience (QoE). Major vendors have
already ﬁeld-trialled their prototypes to demonstrate the proof-
of-concept of such UAV-mounted ﬂying BSs [3], [4]. A large
number of papers have been published in recent years propos-
ing novel algorithms to optimize positioning and mobility of
ﬂying relays and BSs [5]–[7].

Given the signiﬁcant momentum and recent activities pro-
moting UAV in cellular networks, it is timely to survey this
brand-new ﬁeld. Although several survey articles on UAV have
been published in recent years, none of them had focused
on the practical aspects of cellular UAV communications. For
example, the surveys in [8], [9] focussed on forming ad hoc
networks between many UAVs in the sky. Hayat et al., [10]
surveyed communications demands for various applications
of UAV and analysed the suitability of existing wireless

 
 
 
 
 
 
JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

2

this section, the characteristics and features of a few typical
drones are summarized and explained (see Table I), with
special focus on their impact on UAV-aided cellular commu-
nications.

A. Payload

Payload refers to the maximum weight that a drone can
carry, which measures its lifting capability. Payloads of drones
vary from tens of grams up to hundreds of kilograms [18]. The
larger the payload, the more equipment and accessories can be
carried at the expense of a larger drone size, higher battery
capacity, and shorter duration in the air. Typical payloads
include video cameras and all sorts of sensors, which could
be used for reconnaissance, surveillance and commercial pur-
poses [19]. When assisting cellular communications, drones
can carry cellular UEs such as mobile phones or tablets, whose
weight is usually less than 1 kilogram [20]. BSs or remote
radio heads (RRHs) can also be carried by or mounted on
drones to provide cellular services. In this case, payload of
drones should be at least a few kilograms.

B. Flying Mechanism

Depending on their ﬂying mechanisms, drones can be

classiﬁed into three types:

• Multi-rotor drones (also known as rotary-wings drones)
allow vertical take-off and landing, and can hover over
a ﬁxed location to provide continuous cellular coverage
for certain areas. This high manoeuvrability makes them
suitable for assisting cellular communications, since they
can deploy BSs at the desired locations with high preci-
sion, or ﬂy in a designated trajectory while carrying BSs.
However, multi-rotor drones have limited mobility and
consume signiﬁcant power as they have to ﬁght against
gravity all the time.

• Fixed-wing drones can glide over the air, which makes
them signiﬁcantly more energy efﬁcient and able to carry
heavy payload. Gliding also helps ﬁxed-wing drones to
travel at a faster speed. The downsides of ﬁxed-wing
drones are that (i) they require a runway to take off and
land as vertical take-off and landing are not possible [21],
and (ii) they cannot hover over a ﬁxed location. Fixed-
wing drones are also more expensive than multi-rotor
drones.

• Hybrid ﬁxed/rotary wing drones have recently reached
the market to provide a compromise between the two
above-mentioned drone types. An illustrative example of
a hybrid ﬁxed/rotary wing drone is the Parrot Swing
shown in Fig. 2(a), which can take off vertically, quickly
reach its destination by gliding through the air, and then
switch to hovering using four rotors.

Fig. 1: Taxonomy of the survey

technologies, including Bluetooth, Zigbee, Wi-Fi, WiMAX,
and cellular, to meet these demands. In a magazine paper,
Sekander et al., [11] analyzed the opportunities for drones to
assist cellular networks, but specialized on combining drones
from different altitudes to form a multi-tier drone network. In
another magazine paper, Zeng et al., [12] surveyed the issues
and opportunities for using drones to assist wireless networks
in general without speciﬁc focus on cellular networks. Re-
cently, Mozaffari et al., [7] delivered a comprehensive tutorial
on UAV wireless communications. Our work complements
their vision by covering a variety of cellular-speciﬁc issues
such as the relevant 3GPP developments, vendor prototypes
of ﬂying BSs, regulations and cyber-security issues affecting
cellular UAVs, and the potential impacts of UAV adoption on
the cost and business models of cellular networks.

A graphical illustration of the detailed taxonomy of our
survey is presented in Fig. 1. This paper consists of seven
main sections where the sections’ headings are displayed in the
second level in Fig. 1. Accordingly, the third level represents
the subsections under each section. Speciﬁcally, we survey the
types of consumer UAVs currently available off-the-shelf high-
lighting their potential roles within cellular networks (Section
II), the 3GPP developments regarding interference issues and
solutions for serving aerial users (Section III), the challenges
and opportunities for assisting cellular communications with
UAV-mounted ﬂying base stations or relays (Section IV),
the most advanced UAV prototyping and ﬁeld trial examples
(Section V), the new regulations being developed to manage
the commercial use of UAVs (Section VI), the cyber-physical
security issues for UAV-assisted cellular communications (Sec-
tion VII), and ﬁnally an overlook of the most promising future
research directions (Section IX) followed by the conclusions
(Section X).

II. UAVS TYPES AND CHARACTERISTICS

C. Range and Altitude

UAVs, commonly known as drones, are available in different
sizes and speciﬁcations, as illustrated in Fig. 2. They can
be deployed quickly whenever needed, which makes them
promising candidates for providing cellular connectivity. In

The range (one hop) of a drone refers to the distance from
which it can be remotely controlled. The range varies from tens
of meters for small drones to hundreds of kilometers for large
ones. Altitude here refers to the maximum height a drone can

UAVs in Cellular NetworksRegulationPrototyping and Field TestsAerial BSsSecurityFuture DirectionsUAV Types Standardization• Cyber Security• Physical Security• Socio-Technical Concerns• Regulation Frameworks• Regulation History• Facebook Aquila• Google Loon• Nokia F-Cell• Eurecom Perfume• Huawei Digital Sky• Others• Placement Optimization• Mobility Optimization• Power Consumption• Fronthauling and Access• Cost Model• Mobile Edge Computing• AUE Identifications• UAV Simulators• UAV Antennas• Image Processing• Deep Learning• Physical Reliability• Aerial Caching • Characteristics    - Payload    - Flying Mechanism    - Range and Altitude    - Speed and Flight Time    - Power Supply• Classification• 3GPP Study Item    - Traffic Requirements    - Channel Modelling    - Performance Analysis    - Required Enhancements• 3GPP Work Item• Outside the 3GPPJOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

3

(a) Parrot Swing (front view).

(b) Kogan Nano Drone.

(c) Parrot Disco.

(d) DJI Spreading Wings S900.

(e) Scout B-330 UAV helicopter.

(f) Predator B.

Fig. 2: Images of different UAV types.
TABLE I: Characteristics of different drone types

Multi-rotor

Fixed-wing

Multi-rotor

Multi-rotor

Fixed-wing

Micro (weight(cid:54)100g)

Very Small
(100g<weight<2kg)

Model

Kogan Nano Drone

Parrot Disco

Ref.
Illustration
Weight
Payload
Flying
Mechanism
Range
Altitude
Flight Time
Speed

Power
Supply

Power Con-
sumption

[13]
Fig. 2(b)
16g
N/A

[14]
Fig. 2(c)
750g
N/A

50-80m
N/A
6-8min
N/A

2km
N/A
45min
80km/h

3.7V/160mAh
Li-battery

2700mAh/25A 3-cell
LiPo Battery

N/A

N/A

Application

Recreation; suitable to
carry sensors for indoor
wireless data collection

Recreation; suitable to
carry cellular UEs

Small
(2kg(cid:54)weight<25kg)
DJI Spreading Wings
S900
[15]
Fig. 2(d)
3.3kg
4.9kg

Medium
(25kg(cid:54)weight(cid:54)150kg)
Scout B-330 UAV
helicopter
[16]
Fig. 2(e)
90kg
50kg

Large (weight>150kg)

Predator B

[17]
Fig. 2(f)
2223kg
1700kg

N/A
N/A
18 min
57.6km/h
LiPo Battery (6S,
10000mAh∼15000mAh,
15C(Min))

Maximum: 3kW;
Hover: 1kW

Professional aerial
photography and
cinematography;
suitable to carry cellular
BSs or UEs

N/A
3km
180min
100km/h (horizontal)

1852km
15km
1800min
482km/h

Gasoline (heavy fuel
optional)

950-shaft-horsepower
Turboprop Engine

Engine: 21kW; Onboard
power generator for
payload: 1.5kW
Survey (data
acquisition), HD video
live stream; suitable to
carry or act as motorial
energy source for
wireless energy transfer,
and act as aerial caches;
can carry cellular BSs
or UEs

Engine: 712kW

Armed reconnaissance,
airborne surveillance,
and target acquisition

reach regardless of the country-speciﬁc regulations. The maxi-
mum ﬂying altitude of a given drone is a critical parameter for
UAV-aided cellular communications, since a UAV BS needs to
vary its altitude to maximize the ground coverage and satisfy
different quality of service (QoS) requirements [22]. Overall,
aerial platforms can be classiﬁed into two types depending on
their altitude:

• Low-altitude platforms (LAPs) are usually employed to
assist cellular communications since they are more cost-

effective and allow fast deployment. Moreover, LAPs
usually provide short-range line-of-sight (LOS) links
that can signiﬁcantly enhance the communication perfor-
mance [12], [23], [24].

• High-altitude platforms (HAPs) such as balloons can also
provide cellular connectivity [12]. Compared to LAPs,
HAPs have a wider coverage and can stay much longer in
the air. However, HAP deployment is more complex and
they are mainly considered as a vehicle to provide Internet

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

4

connectivity to large fractions of world population cur-
rently not served by cellular networks. More importantly,
using HAPs in cellular communications may cause total
network outage due to extremely large inter-cell interfer-
ence [25], [26]. As such, they are rarely considered in
the literature on UAV-aided cellular networks, but rather
pursued by Internet companies. In Section V, we discuss
examples of HAP introduced by Google and Facebook.

TABLE II: UAV communication requirements [2], [39], [42]

Data Type

Data Rate

Critical?

DL

UL

Synchronization (PSS/SSS)

Radio control (PDCCH)

N/A

Command and control (C&C)

60-100 kbps

Command and control (C&C)

60-100 kbps

Application data

Up to 50 Mbps

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:55)

D. Speed and Flight Time

Small drones typically travel at speeds below 15 m/s [27],
while large drones can reach an impressive speed of
100 m/s [12]. When a UAV BS/relay ﬂies in a designated
trajectory to maximize its energy and spectral efﬁciency, its
speed needs to be carefully considered if the trajectory requires
frequent turns. The trade-off between a drone’s speed and its
turning agility is studied in [28]. The maximum time a drone
can spend in the air without recharging or refueling is referred
to as its ﬂight time or endurance. Small commercial drones
usually have a ﬂight time of 20-30 minutes, while some large
drones can last for hours [29]. Emerging technologies have
prolonged the endurance of small drones. For example, the
Skyfront Tailwind drone can achieve an endurance of up to 4.5
hours with hybrid-electric power sources [30]. Nevertheless,
the limited endurance of the existing off-the-shelf UAVs is
currently one of the major practical factors restricting their
full-scale deployment in cellular networks.

E. Power Supply

A drone’s power supply signiﬁcantly determines its en-
durance. While rechargeable batteries power most commercial
drones, some large drones can be powered by fuels such as
gas for longer ﬂight times [31]. Employing solar energy to
power drones is also a promising technique [32]. For drone-
mounted BSs, power supply needs to support the functionality
of both the drone and its on-board equipment such as antenna
array, ampliﬁer, circuits, etc. For example, a typical aerial BS
requires 5 W as its maximum transmit power [33]–[35], which
should be supplied by its on-board energy source.

F. An Example of Drone Classiﬁcation

Civil aviation authorities usually classify drones based on
their gross weights. Table I demonstrates such weight-based
classiﬁcation as adopted by Civil Aviation Safety Authority
(CASA) Australia [36] by listing typical drones and their
features, which are depicted in Fig. 2(b)−(f).

III. STANDARDIZATION:
ENABLING UAV CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS

The cellular industry has recognized the importance of
providing support to low-altitude UAVs for enabling beyond
LOS control and establishing a reliable communication [2],
[37]–[40]. This section summarizes the outcomes and current
status of a number of industry-led initiatives with the above
targets.

A. 3GPP Study Item Phase

The third generation partnership group (3GPP) deﬁned a
study item (SI) in March 2017 with four fundamental objec-
tives: i) the understanding of the UAV trafﬁc requirements;
ii) the development of a channel model to characterize air-
to-ground propagation characteristics; iii) the determination
of whether the current LTE infrastructure could be reused to
provide cellular service to aerial devices; iv) the deﬁnition of
the enhancements required to effectively serve UAVs building
up on LTE Release 14 functionalities [41]. The SI ﬁnalized
in December 2017 and the main results in each of the above
four areas are summarized in the following [2].

i) 3GPP Study Item: UAV Trafﬁc Requirements

The 3GPP identiﬁed the trafﬁc types that cellular networks
should cater for UAVs ﬂying between ground level and 300
meters. These are summarized in Table II and can be classiﬁed
into three categories: 1) synchronization and radio control, 2)
command & control, and 3) application data.

1) The information contained within the synchronization
and radio control messages is essential for a success-
ful association and connectivity to the network. The
transmission of these signals must be robust enough to
guarantee that
they can be decoded by ﬂying UAVs.
Examples of synchronization and radio control signalling
include primary and secondary synchronization signals
(PSS/SSS) and the physical downlink control channel
(PDCCH), respectively.

2) Command & control (C&C) trafﬁc enables beyond line-
of-sight UAV piloting and has strict quality of service
requirements (QoS) in terms of latency and reliability.
Cellular operators have identiﬁed an attractive business
opportunity in the management of this trafﬁc, since it
can be offered as a complementary network service
to organizations interested in reliably controlling their
UAVs.

3) While downlink data trafﬁc is predominant in existing
cellular communications, UAV application data transmis-
sions are expected to be uplink-dominated. Transferral of
live video streaming data and photos captured by camera-
equipped UAVs contribute towards this trafﬁc imbalance.

ii) 3GPP Study Item: Channel Modelling

In order to characterize the performance of existing cellular
networks when serving both ground and aerial devices, the
3GPP developed a UAV-speciﬁc statistical channel model
building upon that deﬁned in [43]. This channel model com-

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

5

plements those developed by the academic community. These
academic models are summarized in Table III and Table IV
into three different categories (Air to Ground (A2G), Air to
Air (A2A), and Ground to Air (G2A)) for completeness. The
3GPP-proposed models for rural-macro (RMa), urban-macro
(UMa), and urban-micro (UMi) BS deployments are the result
of a large number of measurement campaigns carried out by
the standard-contributing companies and its main UAV-related
features can be summarized as follows:

• UAV spatial placement: The 3GPP deﬁnes ﬁve different
cases depending on the density of UAVs in the network,
i.e., it considers the deployment of Naerial = {0, 0.1, 1, 3, 5}
UAVs per cellular sector (out of a total of 15 mobile
devices). Airborne devices are uniformly distributed be-
tween 0 and 300 meters and travel at a speed of 160
km/h.

• LOS probability: The LOS probability between ground
BSs and UAVs grows as the latter increase their height.
Remarkably, UAVs ﬂying higher than 100 meters are con-
sidered to be in LOS with all the cellular BSs deployed
in the network in the UMa scenario.

• Path loss: The 3GPP model also captures the fact that
the path loss exponent of ground-to-aerial links generally
decreases as UAVs increase their height. Indeed, UAVs
in LOS with their BSs experience a path loss similar to
of free-space propagation (α = 2.2).

• Shadowing: The standard deviation of the log-normally
distributed shadowing gain diminishes for increasing
UAV heights, provided that the considered UAV-BS pair
is LOS.

• Fast-fading model: Three different alternatives with a
varying degree of implementation complexity are con-
sidered in [2], namely, 1) a variation of the cluster delay-
based channel model developed in [43] with UAV-speciﬁc
channel characteristics such as the existence of a specular
reﬂection on the building roof for the UMa scenario, 2)
an approach where the mean and standard deviation of
the large scale parameters deﬁned in [43] (delay spread,
angular spreads of departure and arrival, and K-factor)
are adjusted, and 3) a simpler alternative where, when
compared with the channel model of [43], only the K-
factor is adjusted.

iii) 3GPP Study Item: UAV Performance Analysis

Based on the above trafﬁc and channel characterizations,
the companies involved in the SI evaluated the performance
of cellular networks serving both airborne and ground users
(GUEs). These studies demonstrate that UAVs are more likely
to undergo downlink and uplink interference problems than
GUEs [2], [39], [40], [42], [55]–[59]. This is mainly due
to two factors, namely, that ﬂying UAVs are likely to be in
line-of-sight with a large number of base stations (BSs) [60],
and that the majority of these BSs are downtilted [61], since
their deployment has been optimized for providing coverage to
GUEs. This impacts all phases of the cellular communication,
i.e., 1) association and handover, 2) downlink transmissions,
and 3) uplink transmissions:

Fig. 3: 2D location of 150 meter-high UAVs (red dots) as-
sociated to a three-sector BS site located at the origin [39].
Hexagons illustrate the ground sectors covered by each BS.

1) Association and handover: In contrast to GUEs, ﬂying
UAVs do not generally associate to their physically
closest BS. This is because cellular BSs generally focus
their main antenna beam towards the center of their
ground coverage area [61]. Instead, the association of
airborne devices is dominated by the sidelobes of their
directive BS antennas [2], [39]. This can be observed in
Fig. 3, which adopts the perspective of a tri-sector BS site
located in the center of the scenario and illustrates the
2D location of its associated 150 meter-high UAVs (rep-
resented by red dots). These UAVs are clustered in three
angular regions, which are consistent with the orientations
of the central BSs (120◦, 240◦, and 270◦). Different
association ranges highlighted in green can be observed,
each corresponding to different antenna sidelobes of the
12◦-downtilted BSs. Instead, the white regions delimit
the areas where the antenna gain of the considered BSs
is smaller than -30 dB, i.e., close to the radiation nulls of
the downtilted antennas. In these areas, UAVs associate
to BSs other than those located in the origin because they
perceive an insufﬁcient signal strength from the latter. As
a result of the existence of these non-contiguous associ-
ation regions and the reception of high-power interfering
reference signals, UAVs experience increased outage and
handover failure probabilities when compared to ground
devices.

2) Downlink transmissions: As illustrated in Fig. 4, a UAV
receives line-of-sight transmissions from a large number
of BSs when increasing its altitude. Indeed, measure-
ment campaigns have demonstrated that airborne devices
ﬂying at around 100 meters can receive signals from
BSs located up to 10 kilometers away [62]. This entails
that a given UAV can undergo a substantial amount

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

6

TABLE III: Experimental studies for channel modeling

Type

Ref.

Frequency/Protocol

Altitude

A2G

[44]

[45]

PCS,
700MHz

AWS,

and

below 120m

(L-band),
(C-

5060MHz

970Mhz
and
band)

Environment Experiment Details
mixed subur-
ban (Califor-
nia)

Custom designed quadro-
tor drone (5m/s)

[20]

850Mhz, LTE

[46]

800MHz, LTE

560m

15,30,60,90,
and 120 m

15,30,60,
and 120 m

Near-urban
(Cleveland)

in

suburb
Victoria,
Australia

Denmark

Objective

Enhance the understanding of
aerial communications

Characterizing the channel for
air to ground communication

exponent

Modeling the excessive path
loss
considering
BS’s down-tilted antennas
Modeling the path loss expo-
nent and shadowing
Studying the impact of dis-
tance
Measuring path loss exponent
Measuring the diversity in
G2A links
Measuring path loss exponent

S-3B Viking aircraft

sony

commercial UAV,
Xperia

one
4.8m/s,
phone for logging
One commercial UAV ,
15km/h
Two AscTec Fireﬂy Hex-
acopter UAVs
Two Hexacopters

Fix-wing fuselag

Two Hexacopters

A2A

G2A

[47]

[48]

[49]

[48]

2.4GHz, IEEE 802.11

Below 50m

ZigBee 802.145.4

Below 20m

802.11b/g

75m

ZigBee 802.145.4

Below 20m

-

-

-

TABLE IV: Simulation studies for channel modeling

Type

Ref.

Frequency

Altitude

[50]

700MHz, 2000 MHz
and 5800MHz

200m-
3000m

[51]

5GHz

[52]

–

[53]

2.4GHz
BW)

[54]

5GHz

100m,
200m, 500m,
1000m and
2000m

(80MHz

–

–

–

A2G

A2A

G2A

Environment
Suburban,
Urban,
Dense
Highrise
Urban

and

Bristol
area
with irregu-
lar street

–

–

–

Simulation Details

Description

In-
MATLAB, Wireless
Site, One quasi-stationary
UAV

Finding a generic path loss
model based on urban param-
eters

Ray tracing software

Two UAVs (22m/s) in the
simulated area
Three UAVs, one as a re-
lay

MATLAB, one
(300m/s)

aircraft

Modeling LOS
based on building geometry

probability

Modeling the packet dropout
using Rician channel model
Modeling the bit rate over dif-
ferent channel models
Studying the
characters of
channel such as the Doppler,
and the type of fading

of interference from a multiplicity of ground BSs that
transmit towards other GUEs or UAVs. Consequently,
downlink transmissions towards aerial devices generally
suffer from poor signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratios
(SINRs) more often than their ground counterparts.
3) Uplink transmissions: UAVs’ good propagation condi-
tions with a multiplicity of BSs also impact the network’s
uplink performance. This is because airborne devices
transmitting data towards their serving BS can generate
strong interference to a variety of ground BSs, an issue
that becomes critical in networks with a large number
of UAVs [63]. As shown in Fig. 4, this UAV-generated
interference has the potential of damaging the uplink
communication of existing GUEs, who are more prone
to have non-line-of-sight links with their serving BSs.
Overall, both aerial and ground devices have been shown
to experience diminished SINRs in networks with a
substantial number of UAVs.

iv) 3GPP Study Item: Enhancing UAV Communications

the

To address

challenges described in
Sec. III-A, the 3GPP examined a number of complementary
interference mitigation techniques:

interference

1) Association and handover:

• UAV location and ﬂight plan knowledge can be lever-

Fig. 4: Illustration of the UAV interference challenge in
cellular networks: UAVs ﬂying above the building clutter
(e.g., the red-coloured UAV) generate/perceive interference
towards/from a multiplicity of line-of-sight BSs [39], [40].
Instead, UAVs ﬂying at low altitudes (e.g., the blue-coloured
UAV) only generate/perceive interference towards/from nearby
BSs.

aged to facilitate the handover procedure, e.g., by
anticipating BS candidates for a potential handover.
• Enhancement of existing report mechanisms through
the deﬁnition of UAV-speciﬁc handover triggering con-
ditions and an optimized control of the reporting load.

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

7

A detailed evaluation of these UAV mobility enhancement
techniques is part of the work item (WI) study deﬁned
in [64], as detailed in Sec. III-B.

2) Downlink transmissions:

• The full dimension MIMO (FD-MIMO) multi-antenna
BSs deﬁned in LTE Release 13 enhance the perfor-
mance of UAV communications thanks to a) their
beamformed transmissions, which allow reducing the
amount of interference generated towards the con-
strained spatial regions where UAVs lie, and b) their
spatial multiplexing capabilities, which in turn enable
a better utilization of the precious time/frequency re-
sources.

• UAVs with directional antennas and beamforming ca-
pabilities contribute to reduce the number of downlink
interferers perceived by aerial devices. These interfer-
ence mitigation gains can be further complemented
with a boost of the useful signal power in UAVs
beamsteering towards their serving BS. Clearly, this
solution entails a complexity increase in the design of
hardware UAV transceivers.

• Cooperative multipoint (CoMP) can convert the harm-
ful line-of-sight BS interferers into useful signal con-
tributors. Indeed, both UAV control and data transmis-
sions beneﬁt from intra- and inter-site cooperation [65].
However, the gains attainable with this approach are
limited in practical deployments due to the large num-
ber of BSs interfering towards a given UAV and the
increased inter-BS signalling load.

3) Uplink transmissions:

• Uplink power control is essential to harmonize the
coexistence among GUEs and aerial devices. In this
line, approaches that deﬁne different fractional path
loss compensation factors and offsets P0 for UAVs and
GUEs proved effective in mitigating the interference
generated by UAVs [24].

• Full dimension MIMO (FD-MIMO) can also beneﬁt
uplink transmissions by enabling spatial separation of
ground and aerial users, which have clearly distinguish-
able propagation characteristics.

• UAVs with directional antennas and beamforming ca-
pabilities generate a diminished amount of interference
to the GUE-generated uplink transmissions owing to a
potential decrease in both the number of interfered BSs
and the UAV transmission power.

As the reader might have noticed, updated information about
the ﬂying status of a mobile device is required to effectively
implement some of the above-mentioned solutions. The 3GPP
considered a variety of device- and network-based solutions
to acquire this information. Among others, these include the
use of explicit UAV identiﬁcation signalling, the exploitation
of mobility history information, or the employment of mea-
surement reports from mobile devices.

B. 3GPP Work Item: Main Outcomes and Way Forward

The above-mentioned observations led to the deﬁnition of
a WI in December 2017 [64]. The core part of this WI

was concluded in September 2018 and it provides further
enhancements to LTE in the following areas [66]:

• Uplink power control, by augmenting the existing frac-
tional power control mechanisms through a) the assign-
ment of a UAV-speciﬁc path loss compensation factor,
and b) the range extension of the P0 parameter [67].
• Signaling, to identify the status of airborne devices. For
instance,
the technical speciﬁcation (TS) 36.331 now
deﬁnes new reporting events that are triggered when
the UAV height is above or below a BS-conﬁgurable
threshold [67].

• Interference detection, by allowing UEs to trigger a mea-
surement report when a conﬁgurable number of reference
signals received from neighboring cells satisfy speciﬁc
power-related conditions [67].

• Subscription-based access, to prevent the non-authorized
connection of cellular-connected UAVs. This is enabled
through new network signaling from the core network to
cellular BSs, allowing the latter to determine whether the
UE subscription includes aerial functionalities.

• Mobility, where new radio resource control (RRC) sig-
nalling was included to facilitate the ﬂight plan commu-
nication from UAVs to their serving BS. This information
can be subsequently exploited to facilitate handovers.
Ultimately, it is expected that the 3GPP continues its work
on the UAV space in the future, possibly through the deﬁnition
of a new WI focused on 5G-based solutions like massive
MIMO [39], [40], [68]–[70].

C. UAV Standardization Outside the 3GPP

Other standardization bodies have also considered the par-
ticular characteristics of UAVs in the deﬁnition of new speci-
ﬁcations:

• The International Telecommunication Union Telecommu-
nication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) deﬁned the work
item Y.UAV.arch for providing a functional architecture
for UAVs and UAV controllers using IMT-2020 net-
works [71]. Additionally, this work item also aims at
deﬁning capabilities in the application layer, the service
and application support layer, as well as implementing
security measures for facilitating the integration of UAVs
in IMT-2020 networks.

• The European Telecommunications Standards Institute
(ETSI) technical report (TR) 103 373 aims at identify-
ing UAV-speciﬁc use cases and understanding whether
new spectrum rules are required for enabling them [72].
Additionally, the speciﬁcations of UAV wireless commu-
nications have been pondered for determining how the
future Internet Protocol (IP) suite architecture should be
shaped [73].

• The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE) deﬁned the Drones Working Group in 2015. This
group aims to develop a standard for consumer drones,
primarily with the intention of addressing privacy and
security concerns. With this purpose,
the standard is
currently focused on specifying 1) the taxonomy and
deﬁnitions related to UAVs [74], and 2) the requirements,

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

8

systems, methods,
testing and veriﬁcation required to
preserve the privacy and security of people and properties
within range of the UAVs [75].

IV. AERIAL BASE STATIONS: CHALLENGES AND
OPPORTUNITIES

The falling cost and increasing sophistication of consumer
UAVs combined with miniaturization of BS electronics have
made it technically feasible to deploy BSs on ﬂying UAVs.
Because UAV BSs can be quickly deployed at optimum
locations in 3D space, they can potentially provide much better
performance in terms of coverage, load balancing, spectral
efﬁciency, and user experience compared to existing ground-
based solutions.

The deployment of aerial BSs, however, faces several prac-
tical issues. In particular, placement and mobility optimization
are challenging problems for aerial BSs, which have attracted
signiﬁcant attention from the research community. The op-
timization of UAV power consumption and the development
of practical recharging solutions for UAVs are also important
challenges to overcome for sustaining the operation of aerial
BSs. Finally, the optimization of the end to end link when a
moving UAV connects a ground user to the wired backbone
of the network is a non-trivial problem. In this section, we
survey recent research addressing these issues.

A. Placement Optimization for Aerial BSs

The problem of optimum placement is more challenging
for aerial BSs compared to the conventional terrestrial BSs
because an aerial BS can be placed at many different heights
the coverage as well as
in the sky [42], [76]. However,
the UL and DL channels change with the altitude of the
BS. Different researchers employed different algorithms to
solve the placement optimization problem for aerial BSs.
Some researchers considered the height of the aerial BS as
a variable in their optimization formulation thus treating it as
a 3D placement problem, while others essentially solved 2D
placement problems for constant heights. Optimizations also
differed in whether the backhaul, interference from other BSs,
and existence of terrestrial BSs in the same coverage area were
considered in problem formulation. Finally, the objectives in
of these optimizations varied from maximizing the system
capacity to minimizing the required number of aerial BSs
to minimizing the total transmit power of the entire aerial
system. In this section, we survey these optimization studies
and compare their main features in Table V.

Using brute force search to maximize the 5th percentile
spectral efﬁciency of the system, Merwaday et al., [77] opti-
mized 2D placements of a small number of ‘helper’ aerial BSs
to improve coverage of a large service area where some of the
terrestrial BSs are damaged by natural disasters or malicious
attacks. Not surprisingly, the optimal locations for the aerial
BSs were proposed to be along the cell edges, which has the
most effect on the 5th percentile throughput. A less intuitive
observation was that the height had little effect on the overall
throughput, but lowering the height of the aerial BSs markedly
improved 5th percentile throughput. This was attributed to

rather line-of-sight environments in the simulations, which
caused better SNR for cell-edge users due to smaller distance
to the aerial BSs. Similar 2D placement optimizations were
also studied by Rohde et. al., [78] and Galkin et. al., [79], but
instead of brute force search, they employed genetic algorithm
and K-means clustering, respectively, to solve the optimization
problem.

Yaliniz et. al., [80] attempted 3D placement optimization for
aerial BSs in the context of heterogeneous networks (aerial
BSs are used to augment terrestrial BSs), but observed that
there are quadratic, exponential, and binary terms in the
problem formulation, which makes it a mixed integer non-
linear problem. The authors show that the problem can be
efﬁciently solved by using a combination of the interior point
optimizer and bisection search. Mozaffari et. al., [81] also
studied 3D placement optimizations, but sought to minimize
the total transmit power of a homogeneous network of aerial
BSs. For such scenarios, the authors solved the 3D placement
optimization problem by dividing the problem into two sub-
problems that are solved iteratively. Given the height of the
aerial BSs, the ﬁrst sub-problem obtains the optimal locations
of the UAVs using the facility location framework. In the
second sub-problem, the locations of aerial base stations are
assumed to be ﬁxed, and the optimal heights are obtained using
tools from optimal transport theory.

The authors of [77]–[81] sought to maximize the system
performance or minimize the total
transmit power of the
network. In contrast, Košmerl et. al., [82] and Lyu et. al.,
[83] analyzed the placement optimization problem with the
objective of obtaining the minimum number of aerial BSs
that can meet target user requirements in a given service area.
While Košmerl et. al., [82] employed evolutionary computing
to solve the problem, the authors of [83] observed that it can
be formulated as a Geometric Disk Cover (GDC) problem,
whose objective is to cover a set of ground users in a region
with the minimum number of disks of given radii where
the radii
is inﬂuenced by the height of the UAVs. Since
the GDC problem is NP-hard, a polynomial-time heuristic,
called spiral placement algorithm, was proposed to solve
the problem approximately. It was shown that the proposed
spiral placement algorithm achieved near optimal solutions
with signiﬁcantly lower complexity compared to the optimal
solution.

When a ground user is associated with an aerial BS, data
is downloaded or uploaded using two distinct wireless links,
the access link that connects the user to the UAV and the
backhaul link which connects the UAV to the core network.
The placement of the UAV will affect both of these links.
Works in [77]–[83] considers only the access link in their
optimization formulation and assumes that the backhaul link
has inﬁnite bandwidth. In a recent work, Sun and Ansari [84]
optimized the vertical placement of the aerial base station by
jointly considering the spectral efﬁciency of the backhaul link
as well as the access link.

B. Mobility Optimization for Aerial BSs

Placement optimization studies surveyed in Table V do not
include mobility of aerial BSs in problem formulation. Mo-

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

9

TABLE V: Comparison of aerial BS placement algorithms

Reference

Objective

Dimension

Backhaul

Algorithm

Merwaday et. al., [77] Maximize 5th percentile throughput

Rohde et. al., [78]

Maximize downlink throughput

Galkin et. al., [79]

Maximize downlink RSS

Yaliniz et. al., [80]

Maximize network revenue

Mozaffari et. al., [81]

Minimize total transmit power

Košmerl et. al., [82]

Minimize required number of aerial BSs

Lyu et. al.,

[83]

Minimize required number of aerial BSs

Sun and Ansari [84]

Maximize spectral efﬁciency

2D

2D

2D

3D

3D

2D

2D

1D

Ignored

Brute force search

Ignored

Genetic algorithm

Ignored

K-means clustering

Ignored

Ignored

Combination of interior point optimizer and
bisection search
facility location and optimal transport theory

Ignored

Evolutionary Computing

Ignored

Spiral placement algorithm

Considered

STABLE (self-derived algorithm)

1D: optimize vertical placement, i.e., the height for a speciﬁc 2D ground location
2D: optimize x and y coordinates on a horizontal plane at a speciﬁc height
3D: optimize horizontal coordinates as well as the height

bility, however, is an intrinsic feature and capability of aerial
BSs, which provide additional opportunities to dynamically
improve their placements in response to user movements on
the ground. To exploit the mobility features of aerial BSs, the
practical hardware limitations of the UAVs must be considered.
The limitations on speed and accelerations are studied through
ﬁled experiments in [28] using a consumer UAV. Based on the
transportation methods of aerial BSs, there are two types of
mobilities considered in the literature:

1) UAVs are used only to transport a BS to a particular
ground location where the BS autostarts to serve the
users. If the BS needs to be relocated, it must shut down
ﬁrst before being transported to the new location. This
type of aerial BSs therefore cannot serve while it is
in motion, but it can resume its service as soon as it
reaches a target location. As will be explained later in
Section V-C, prototypes from Nokia Bell Labs [85] fall
into this category.

2) UAVs continue to carry the BSs and the BSs can contin-
uously serve the ground users while they are ﬂying. For
example, prototypes from Eurecom [86], later described
in Section V-D, belong to this category.

Considering the ﬁrst type of aerial BSs, Chou et. al., [87]
studied a BS placement mechanism where the ground users
are not served by the BS when it is moving to a new location.
The loss of service time due to BS mobility therefore becomes
a critical parameter for the optimization. An aerial BS in this
case should consider both the user density of the target location
as well as the moving time to the new location when deciding
its target location. The authors of [87] have shown that this
problem can be modelled as facility location problem, where
the transport cost represents the loss of service time due to
the movement of the BS from previous location to the new
location.

The second type of aerial BS mobility opens up new
opportunities to employ aerial BSs due to their ability to
serve ground users while in motion. In particular, under this
scenario, the cost of BS mobility becomes negligible. It is then
possible to design more advanced solutions where aerial BSs
can continuously cruise the service area to maximise network

performance under geospatial variance of demands.

In both types, although a single UAV can perform plenty of
tasks, multiple UAVs can form a cooperative group to achieve
an objective more efﬁciently, and to increase the chance
of successful task operation. Additionally, the robustness of
the communications will increase by employing cooperative
UAVs [88]. Maintaining the connectivity and controlling the
distance between multiple UAVs is one of the main challenges
in employing cooperative UAVs [89]. Maximizing the cover-
age area [90], cooperative carrying task [91], [92], searching
and localizing a target [93] are among the tasks that can be
done by multiple UAVs.

Designing cruising aerial BSs requires autonomous mobility
control algorithms that can continuously adjust the movement
direction or heading of the BS in a way that maximizes system
performance. These algorithms must also insure that multiple
aerial BSs cruising in an area can maintain a safe distance from
each other to avoid collisions. Fotouhi et. al., [94] proposed
distributed algorithms that take the interference signals, mobile
users’ locations and the received signal strengths at UEs into
consideration to ﬁnd the best direction for BS movements at
any time. Controlling the mobility of a single serving UAV
is also discussed in [95]. Game theoretic mobility control
algorithms are proposed in [5], [96] for multiple aerial base
stations cruising freely over a large service area without being
subject to individual geofencing. The game theoretic mobility
control not only increased 5th-percentile packet throughput by
4x compared to hovering BSs, it also helped avoid collisions
as the BSs were implicitly motivated to move towards dif-
ferent directions to maximize coverage and throughput. The
trajectory of a single UAV also can be optimized to improve
the system performance. A UAV with a mission to ﬂy between
a source and destination point is studied in [97]. During this
mission it has to maintain a reliable connection by associating
with a ground base stations at each time. In [98] a UAV is
used to ofﬂoad data trafﬁc from cell edge users and improve
their performance. It is shown that by using one single UAV
and optimizing its trajectory, the throughput improves signif-
icantly compared with the conventional cell-edge throughput
enhancement scheme with multiple micro/small cells.

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

10

C. Power-Efﬁcient Aerial BSs

A critical problem of Aerial BSs is their short lifetime due
to the battery depletion problem. Power-efﬁcient operation
therefore is must to extend the battery lifetime. Power is
consumed by both communications (electronics) and mobility
(mechanical). Researchers therefore worked on both types of
energy saving.

Reducing Communication Energy

One alternative to reduce the communication energy of
UAV base stations is to minimize the transmission power. For
example, minimizing the transmission power of one UAV [99]
or multiple UAVs [100] when they are deployed in the optimal
location to cover the target area is studied in the literature.
The deployment of UAVs was optimized to minimize the total
transmit power for UAVs while satisfying the users’ data-rate
requirements is discussed in [81], [101]. Reducing the number
of transmissions to decrease the energy consumption of a UAV
is addressed in [102]. In this work, the minimum number
of stopping and transmission points for a UAV to cover all
downlink users are derived.

Another solution to improve communication energy efﬁ-
ciency is to develop optimal transmission schedule of UAVs,
especially when UAVs are ﬂying in a predetermined trajectory.
A scenario where UAVs are employed to collect sensor data
and forward them to a remote base station is studied in [103].
The frequent need of UAVs to recharge interrupts the data
collection, as a result, prolonging the UAVs lifetime is critical.
It is assumed that both UAVs and sensors exploit TDMA for
data transmission. In each TDMA frame, sensors broadcast
packets to all UAVs, and UAVs report the reception qualities
to the remote BS. In return, the BS proposes a scheduling
model to minimize the energy consumption of UAVs while
guaranteeing the required quality. A sub-optimal algorithm is
developed for indicating the allocation of packets, time slot
and power for each UAV. The simulation results show that
the proposed algorithm can extend UAVs lifetime around 60%
compared with some existing packet allocation algorithms. An
energy efﬁcient UAV system is addressed in [104] where a
UAV is ﬂying in a circular trajectory over a sensor ﬁeld to
collect data from sensor clusters. Apparently, the movement
of UAV results in varying distances between cluster heads
and the UAV, which consequently inﬂuences on the quality of
data transmission and energy efﬁciency. To improve the energy
efﬁciency, a game theoretic data collection method is proposed
to optimize the allocation of time slots to cluster heads to send
data to the UAV. The cluster heads are the intelligent players,
and the utility function reﬂects the number of transmitted bits
over the amount of consumed energy. This work is extended
for multiple UAVs in [105].

Optimal scheduling for beaconing messages in order to
maximize the energy efﬁciency of two competing UAVs is
discussed in [106]. In this work,
two UAVs are moving
randomly over areas including mobile users, and send pe-
riodically beaconing messages to users to announce their
presence. A non-cooperative game theory is proposed for
ﬁnding the best beaconing period for UAVs. Energy efﬁcient

uplink transmission between a terrestrial link and single LAP
aerial destination is addressed in [107]. Terrestrial nodes can
select either to communicate directly with LAP or to use other
terrestrial nodes as relay to reduce energy cost. Context aware
network is assumed in this work, where nodes are aware of
the necessary transmission and channel parameters (through
gossip control).

Although the proposed methods successfully reduce the
communication energy consumption for UAVs, one disadvan-
tage of these alternatives is that the ratio of communication
energy consumption to the total energy consumption of UAVs
is generally negligible [108]. This observation motivates the
efforts in reducing the mechanical energy consumed by UAVs,
as detailed in the following.

Reducing Mechanical Energy

To reduce mechanical energy of UAVs, ﬁrst, an energy
consumption model is needed. According to [109], [110], the
energy consumption of UAV can be modeled by

(1)

E = (β + α.h)t + Pmax(h/v),
where β is the minimum power needed to hover just over
the ground (when altitude is almost zero), and α is a motor
speed multiplier. Both β and α depend on the weight and
motor/propeller characteristics. Pmax is the maximum power
of the motor, v is the speed, and t is the operating time. The
term Pmax(v/h) refers to the power consumption needed to
lift to height h with speed v.

Another model for energy consumption is deﬁned in [108]
where the energy consumption of drone is related to its
altitude. Following this work, energy consumption of drone
can be calculated by m · g · h, where m is the mass of the
drone, g is the gravitational acceleration, and h is the altitude
of the drone.

According to these models, one solution to control
the
energy consumption of UAVs is to regulate their height.
However, changing the height might reduce the performance
of UAVs. For example, in target coverage, there is a tradeoff
between energy consumption and coverage radius. Higher
altitude means higher observation radius but higher energy
consumption [108]–[110]. Optimizing the ﬂight radius and
speed to improve energy efﬁciency is also addressed in [111].
One of the major advantages of these methods is that they have
targeted the mechanical energy consumption of UAVs, which
is considered as the main source of energy consumption for
UAVs.

Given that mechanical activities consume much more power
compared to electrical activities, manoeuvring of UAV BSs
must be controlled in a power-efﬁcient manner. Algorithms
that consider the battery and energy consumption of UAVs as a
constraint have also been studied in the literature. For instance,
some works consider a limited availability of energy [112]–
time [115] in developing path
[114], and a limited ﬂight
planning algorithms.

D. Recharging of Aerial BSs

Separate from reducing the energy consumption of UAVs,
another attractive solution to combat the short lifetime of

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

11

UAVs is to consider charging locations for them and replace
exhausted UAVs with the fully charged ones. Comparing to the
methods that focus on reducing the energy consumption, this
solution is more costly and complex, as replacing/charging
points must be designed in urban areas [109], [116], [117].
Moreover,
the battery consumption of UAVs needs to be
monitored regularly.

Sharma et al. [116] propose monitoring the battery level
of UAVs by Macro base stations (MBSs). When the battery
reaches a critical value, they are returned to MBS, and already
charged ones replace them. Similarly, replacing UAVs by
new ones is addressed in [109]. In this work, several UAVs
exist
to monitor mobile targets; however, an optimization
problem is formulated to minimize the number of required
UAVs. An algorithm for automating the replacement of UAVs
is presented in [118], which can be used in a multi-UAVs
environment. Employing this algorithm provides continuous
uninterrupted service for users. Small recharging garages in
BS towers, and in power-lines of urban areas are proposed
by [119] and [117], respectively.

E. Fronthauling and access communication links

Assuming that it is feasible to efﬁciently ﬂy a BS attached
to a UAV in terms of load, dynamic positioning and power
consumption, a crucial remaining aspect is the establishment
of a communication link between the UAV and the terrestrial
network. This link, conventionally referred to as fronthaul, is
crucial to guarantee enough bandwidth and reliability in the
access link between the UAV and the user terminals.

Due to the need of keeping the computational complexity
low, thus the associated energy consumption, it is foreseen
aerial BS will generally work as relay nodes that requires
the implementation of a reduced number of protocol stack
layers, with the simplest conﬁguration that involves only layer-
1 and substantially works as an amplify and forward node.
Moreover, another crucial aspect to minimize the use of the
spectrum will be the possibility for aerial BS to allow fronthaul
and access communications on the same frequencies. Recent
focus in the 3GPP 5G New Radio (NR) Release 15 was
precisely on Integrated Access and Backhaul (IAB) network
architectures [120].

Taking into considerations the above mentioned aspects, the
validation of the end-to-end performance of such a system
constitutes a fundamental pillar for justifying the adoption of
aerial BSs in cellular communication systems.

Initial attempts towards this goal can be found in [121]–
[123]. In [121], the authors analyse the achievable end-to-
end system performance with different deployment of small
cell relays served by the spatial multiplexing capabilities of a
massive MIMO wireless fronthaul link. Although not explicitly
addressing the UAV scenario, aerial BSs are indicated in
the paper as an important upgrade to increase the required
deployment ﬂexibility to jointly maximize fronthaul and access
propagation conditions. In line with this conclusion, and
focusing more on the aerial BS case, in [122], the authors study
the use of multiple UAVs for multi-hop relaying communica-
tions. The placement of the UAVs is optimized to maximize

the end-to-end signal-to-noise ratio when applying different
relay schemes, namely decode-and-forward and amplify-and-
forward. Additionally, in [123] a multi-tier 5G scenario with
IAB architecture, adopting massive MIMO terrestrial macro
BSs and full-duplex (FD) drone small cells, is investigated.
The achievable performance are presented for scenarios with
only one terrestrial macro BS, and one or more hovering aerial
BS. The obtained conclusions do not consider the potential in-
terference generated from and towards neighbouring terrestrial
macro BS which, due to high probability of LOS conditions
of the aerial BS, might result in harmful impact on a large
geographical area.

F. Paradigm-Shifting Cost Model of Aerial BSs

Next generation cellular networks are expected to be 50
times more cost effective than 4G [105], [124]. Therefore,
cost saving has become a major challenge for conventional
cellular operators. Costs of conventional cellular operators
usually include capital expenditure (CAPEX) and operational
expenditure (OPEX). CAPEX comprises acquisition, design
and construction of site, purchase and implementation of
equipment, etc. OPEX is made up of recurring costs such
as site maintenance and rental, personnel expenses, electricity,
etc. Fig. 5 depicts the CAPEX/OPEX breakdown in developed
countries.

It can be observed from Fig. 5 that cellular operators spend
more than half (52 %) of their CAPEX on site acquisition and
construction, which is followed by the costs of BSs, network
testing, power and backhaul. However, CAPEX breakdown for
drone-cells is expected to be quite different. With ﬂying drones
carrying cellular BSs, site-related costs could be signiﬁcantly
reduced or even completely removed. While the costs of BSs
and network testing for drone-cells should increase compared
to employment of terrestrial BSs due to the purchase and
operation of drones. Overall, drone-mounted BSs have the
potential to slash down the CAPEX of cellular operators by
signiﬁcantly reducing the site-related costs, which currently
account for the lion’s share of the CAPEX.

In terms of OPEX, site-related costs also occupy a major
proportion. Site rental makes this percentage even larger, if
cellular operators do not own their sites [126]. As it can
be seen from Fig. 5,
land rent constitutes up to 42% of
cellular operators’ OPEX in developed countries. The authors
in [127] also reveal that site rental dominates the OPEX of
cellular operators. Moreover, due to site shortage and stricter
environmental regulations, site rental is becoming increasingly
expensive [128]. Furthermore, promising 5G techniques such
as ultra-dense cell deployment make the costs of site rental
even higher since a large number of BSs will be required.
When using ﬂying BSs, the most expensive part of OPEX
could be greatly reduced, at the cost of potentially higher
expenses on electricity and backhaul. There will also be some
additional costs such as annual registration fee for drones,
ﬂying insurance and their battery replacement.

Compared to traditional cells equipped with terrestrial BSs,
cost model of drone-cells is paradigm-shifting. With BSs
mounted on ﬂying drones, both CAPEX and OPEX of con-
ventional cellular operators could be signiﬁcantly reduced by

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

12

(a) CAPEX

(b) OPEX

Fig. 5: CAPEX/OPEX breakdown in developed coun-
tries [125].

saving site-related costs, which contributes to the improvement
of cost effectiveness for conventional cellular operators. In
addition, when employing terrestrial BSs or relays to extend
the cellular coverage, cell reorganization is required and could
be expensive. This cost could be saved by deploying ﬂying
BSs/relays instead. Moreover, new business models may also
emerge. For example, the deployment of drone BSs could
follow the time-variant movement of people/cellular UEs,
which could be achieved by easy and cheap shipping means
such as public transportation systems (e.g. trains and buses).
For another example, such paradigm-shifting cost model also
enables some new cellular operators to provide opportunis-
tic communication services. For drone ﬂeet owners such as
Google and Amazon, goods and data could be delivered
simultaneously by ﬂying drones following designated routes.

Fig. 6: Illustration of Facebook Aquila system architecture.

V. PROTOTYPING AND FIELD TESTS

Several drone communication prototypes have been already
presented in literature or shown to a wider audience during
exhibitions and commercial events. Their main scope is to
extend coverage where ground wireless infrastructures are not
feasible or to improve end user performance using ﬂexible and
dynamic deployment of serving base stations where required.
In this section, we provide a description of the most interest-
ing ones targeting both high altitude (Facebook Aquila and
Google Loon) and low altitude (Nokia F-Cell and Eurecom
Perfume) applications. We also discuss an example of ‘digital
sky ecosystem’ (Huawei) designed to promote and study use
cases and applications. Finally, additional examples of testbeds
involving drones are presented.

A. Facebook Aquila

One interesting example of high altitude drone BS is the
Facebook Aquila project [129] [130], which aims at providing
Internet coverage in remote areas directly from the sky. The
main component of the system architecture is an unmanned
autonomous aircraft, named Aquila, which is capable of ﬂying
at an altitude of 18-20km over a deﬁned trajectory to create
a communication coverage region of about 100 km. Aquila is
self-powered through solar panels integrated on wings wider
than a Boeing 737 and has light weight
to increase the
ﬂying time. Moreover, it counts with a control system to
adjust the GPS-based route and monitoring the most important
ﬂying parameters (like heading, altitude, airspeed, etc ...),
and implements propellers able to operate at both low and
high altitudes, thus at different associated air densities. Aquila
employs free space optic (FSO) links to connect ground access
points, which in turn serve ground users using either Wi-Fi
or LTE technology. Facebook Aquila system architecture is
illustrated in Fig. 6.

B. Google Loon

Similar to Facebook Aquila, the Google Loon project [131]
aims at bringing Internet connectivity in remote areas. This
is achieved by adopting stratospheric balloons to relay radio

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

13

(a) Nokia F-Cell design, including the carbon ﬁbre external cradle and the
internal hardware.

Fig. 7: Google Loon system architecture.

communication links from ground stations to users’ LTE
phones out of the coverage of traditional ground cellular
communication infrastructures. However, Google’s Loon has
a number of features that makes it different to Facebook’s
Aquila. The ﬁrst one is that the communication may be directly
relayed to the end user and not to ground access points. The
second one is associated to the way the positioning of the
balloons in the sky is controlled to generate the required
coverage area at the ground. Instead of using propellers to
maintain a pre-deﬁned route, they appropriately adjust their
altitudes taking advantage of the stratiﬁed wind currents in the
stratosphere. In fact, each layer of stratosphere is associated to
a different wind direction and speed which can be monitored
through machine learning algorithms and used to keep the
balloon around the ideal location. Fig. 7 shows the system
architecture implemented by the project.

C. Nokia F-Cell

(b) Nokia F-Cell system architecture.

(c) Nokia F-Cell showcase performed at Sunnyvale, CA, USA.

Fig. 8: Nokia F-Cell: (a) Design (b) System Architecture, and
(c) Showcase.

An interesting example of drone base stations prototyping
for low altitude applications is the Nokia F-Cell project [85].
The fundamental problem that F-Cell tries to solve is the
high cost associated to the deployment and installation of a
large number of small cells. F-Cell is an innovative solar-
powered, self-conﬁgured and auto-connected drone deployed
small cell served by a massive MIMO wireless backhaul. The
F-Cell architecture is comprised of a closed loop, 64-antenna
massive MIMO array placed in a centralized location that is
used to spatially multiplex up to eight energy autonomous F-
Cells, each of which has been redesigned to require minimum
processing power and mount a solar panel no larger than the
cell itself. The key innovations proposed by F-Cell can be
summarized in the following three aspects:

1) Remove the need for a wired power supply through the
design of a energy-efﬁcient small cell that reduces to the
minimum the baseband signal processing, and the power
consumption of the transceivers and their associated radio
frequency hardware components to consume no more
than 15 Watts.

2) Remove the need for a wired backhaul

through the
exploitation of massive MIMO spatial multiplexing capa-
bilities below 6 GHz to provide high throughput wireless
links in non-LOS conditions.

3) Remove the constraint of a ﬁxed deployment through the
ﬂexibilities introduced at point 1) and 2), together with
an optimized design of the small cell, which weighs less
than 6 Kg. Fig. 8(a) illustrates the design of the F-Cell
prototype, including the external carbon-ﬁbre cradle with
integrated solar panels and the internal box containing
both hardware transceivers and processing boards. Over-
all, this allows the transportation and relocation of small
cells anywhere and at any time.

In order to remove these constraints, F-Cell promulgates a
novel system architecture, which is illustrated in Fig. 8(b). The
essential feature introduced by F-Cell was the combination of
both 1) a fully digital massive MIMO hub with 64 active
transceivers, and 2) analog repeaters. This transforms the
into a multi-stage wireless fronthaul with
wired backhaul
sparse remote radio heads (RRHs). Fig. 8(c) presents a ﬂying

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

14

test demonstration of the F-cell project, where the drone-
transported F-Cell and the massive MIMO hub are highlighted
in red. The proposed solution is completely transparent both to
the baseband units (BBUs) and to the user equipments (UEs).
Importantly, F-Cell supports non-LOS wireless networking
in frequency division duplex (FDD) mode, where downlink
(DL) and uplink (UL) transmissions are performed at different
frequencies. This generally entails the need of performing
complex signal processing tasks at the analog repeater during
the channel estimation procedure [132]–[135]. However, in
order to simplify the repeater and reduce both its power
consumption and associated weight, F-cell implements a joint
uplink (UL) and downlink (DL) channel estimation procedure
only at the massive MIMO hub side [136]–[138]. Additional
details of the baseband hardware (HW) and software (SW)
processing architecture and operations implemented at
the
massive MIMO hub are presented in [139].

idea is to validate the possibility of creating a ﬂying ad-
hoc network based on 802.11 standard able to establish
communication links among UAVs.

2) An autonomous helicopter is also used in [140], [141] to
investigate navigation system, comparing a pre-planned
trajectory with the actual ﬂight path by the helicopter. A
maximum error of 3 meters in one square kilometre area
of ﬁeld experiment is reported. The navigation system is
tested for a single UAV.

3) An experimental test when a UAV acts as a relay to trans-
mit information from an underwater vehicle to a ground
base station is described in [142]. In this setup, a UAV
moves in a circular way around an underwater vehicle
with the speed of 18m/s. The effect of altitude, trajectory
radius, waves, and weather conditions are analyzed in
the communication between the UAV and the underwater
vehicle.

D. Eurecom Perfume

In the context of a European Research Council (ERC)
5-years funding scheme, Perfume project has studied and
developed the concept of "autonomous aerial cellular relay
robots", where UAVs act as a relay base stations capable
to enhance connectivity and throughput performance for off-
the-shelf commercial terminals [86]. The key target of the
Perfume project is to design machine learning algorithms able
to ﬁnd and constantly update the optimal 3D position of ﬂying
wireless relays using ﬁne-grained information of their LOS
conditions together with other radio measurements [151].

E. Huawei Digital Sky

Huawei’s Wireless X Lab activated in 2017 the Digital
Sky Initiative to boost trials of speciﬁc use cases involving
connected drones. With this purpose, the city of Shanghai
has created an end-to-end ecosystem populated by key stake-
holders such as mobile operators, cloud management ﬁrms,
delivery companies, public transportation institutions, or even
air quality monitoring agencies. Two authorized ﬂying zones
of 6km diameter and with a maximum height of 200m have
been created, with distributed wireless charging zones at the
ground. In this ecosystem, cellular networks are involved to
ensure C&C between drones and ground control stations. In
particular, one interesting use case is a remotely operated
passenger carrying drone (a taxi drone), which is controlled
through live high quality video streaming transmitted over a
4.5G cellular network directly to the operation room [4].

F. Other relevant testbeds

There exist a number of smaller testbeds that verify practical
problems like the reliability of UAV communication links,
the UAV battery consumption, or the impact of weather
conditions. These testbeds are summarized in Table VI, and
below we expand about some of the most relevant ones:

VI. REGULATION
The evolution of UAV regulations should keep pace with the
rapid emergence of UAVs, which signiﬁcantly contributes to
the integration of UAV into national and international aviation
systems. In this section, socio-technical concerns of drone
operations are outlined ﬁrst. Then we explain the main criteria
that constitute the current UAV regulation frameworks. Finally,
the past and current status of UAV regulations are reviewed.

A. Socio-Technical Concerns of Drones

Emerging technologies have enabled the widespread use of
drones and their strong operational capabilities. As a result,
there are increasing concerns regarding privacy, data protection
and public safety from national and international aviation
authorities. To understand the motivation of the development
of UAV regulations, socio-technical concerns of drones need
to be analyzed.

• Privacy: The operation of drones can be a serious
threat to the privacy of both individuals and businesses.
For example, in the case that drones are employed for
deliberate surveillance, they could intentionally violate
individuals’ and businesses’ privacy. For missions such
as aerial photography and trafﬁc monitoring, privacy
breaches can instead be unintentional [159]. Moreover,
high maneuverability and sensitive on-board instruments
have made drones even more capable of privacy breaches.
For example, small drones with a low noise level can
easily enter a private property without being noticed.1
Indeed,
images and videos taken by high deﬁnition
(HD) camera could be streamed live [159]. Although
every country has legislation to protect the privacy of
the public’s and citizens’, such as the Commonwealth
Privacy Act 1988 in Australia and the US Privacy Act
of 1974 [161] [162], these rules might be out-of-date
due to the rapid development of emerging technologies.
Therefore, the operation of drones needs to be regulated
to further protect the privacy.

1) In [9], a realization of a low-cost test bed based on
AR.Drone 2 and Raspberry Pi is presented. The main

1The DJI Mavic Pro Platinum has achieved 4 dB (60%) noise reduction

compared to the DJI Mavic Pro [160].

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

15

TABLE VI: Speciﬁcations of testbeds and real experiments in the literature

Objective

Equipments

Protocol

Controller

Communication between multiple UAVs [9]

Raspberry Pi (Model B)

802.11

UAV Model

AR.Drone 2

Autonomous helicopter

Skywalker X8

Accuracy of the navigation system [140],
[141]

Investigating the impact of altitude, and mo-
tion on communication quality [142]

–

–

–

Senior Telemaster airplane kit

Evaluating load-carry-deliver protocol by one
UAV [143]

Dragonﬂyer X6

Aerial localization [144]

Lenovo W500 laptop,
Nokia N900

NexSTAR

Controlling the UAV path to improve link
quality between two mobile nodes [145]

Fixed-wing and rotor based UAVs

Validating the impact of UAV as a relay [146]

IRIS quadrotor

Deriving the energy consumption model [113]

–

–

–

Fireﬂy (Ascending Technologies)

Enhancing video streaming [147]

AscTec’s Ubuntu 12.04

IEEE 802.11

Fixed wing UAV, captive balloon,

Comparing the analytical and simulation re-
sults of different channel models [148]

ARM-7 CPU with Linux
OS

WLAN

Commercial UAV

Distinguishing between terrestrial and aerial
UEs [149], [150]

QualiPoc1
smart phone,

Android

LTE 800MHz

–

802.11g/
802.11b

802.11a/
802.11g/
802.11b

XBee

802.11b/
802.11g

WiFi

–

Software
controller
(NodeJs)

Software
controller (C)

Manual
control

remote

—

Software
controller

Software
controller

–

–

Manual
controller

Manual
controller

• Data Protection: During their operation, drones are usu-
ally equipped with sensors that collect personal data such
as images, videos and location data. How these personal
data will be processed, used, stored and disclosed should
concern public institutions. According to data protection
laws, citizens’ personal information should be protected
from abuses [163]. Invisible and indiscriminate data col-
lection capabilities of drones contribute to infringe data
protection rules. “Invisible” refers to the fact that drones
can secretly collect data due to their aerial capabilities
and sensitive equipment on-board such as high resolution
and night vision camera. Then collected data could be
immediately uploaded online or transferred to a location
that
is
is distant from the data subject. Therefore,
difﬁcult for data subjects to be aware of the leakage of
their personal information. Moreover, as a result of high
mobility, drones indiscriminately collect and store a mass
of data, which is against data protection principles [163].
Consequently, operation of drones should also be gov-
erned to protect personal information.

it

• Public Safety: Public safety is another major concern
for drone operations. Compared to traditional manned
aircraft, drones are usually insufﬁciently maintained and
more likely to encounter pilot errors. As a result, drone
operations are faced with higher safety risks. According
to [164], the accident rates for UAVs are signiﬁcantly
higher than those of manned aircraft. UAV accidents
include collisions with manned aircraft or terrain:
– UAV collisions with manned aircraft might lead to
engine shutdowns or damaged surfaces, risking the
loss of control. Therefore, in many countries there are
constraints such as maximum allowed ﬂight heights

and minimum distances to airports for drones’ oper-
ation [165].

– UAV collisions with terrain usually cause loss of
control, which might hurt civilians on the ground.
Hence some countries forbid drones to ﬂy over certain
areas such as speciﬁc urban areas with high population
density [165].

B. Criteria

Based on the socio-technical concerns speciﬁed above,
UAV regulations are framed and developed. Current UAV
regulations are mainly based on six criteria, as explained
below [166].

• Applicability: Applicability describes the scope that UAV
regulations apply to. For example, drones are usually
classiﬁed into groups based on weight or purpose, which
might be treated differently by UAV regulations.

• Technical requirements: Technical requirements specify
the mandatory instruments or techniques for drones.
For example, collision avoidance mechanism could be a
typical one.

• Operational limitations: UAV’s operation is usually re-
stricted by many factors. Typical operational limitations
include maximum ﬂight height, minimum distance to
airport and individuals, prohibited areas, etc.

• Administrative procedures: Certain procedures and doc-
uments might be required before a UAV is allowed to
operate, which include registration, operational certiﬁcate
and insurance.

• Human resource requirements: For certain categories of
UAV and purposes of operation, the pilot needs to be
qualiﬁed.

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

16

TABLE VII: Summary of the most representative current UAV regulations

Country

Applicability

Technical
Requirements

Australia
[36]

classiﬁcation:
weight/purpose

N/A

Canada
[152]

classiﬁcation:
weight/purpose

N/A

Chile
[153]

classiﬁcation:
weight

emergency
parachute
required

China
[154]

maximum
weight: 7kg

N/A

Japan
[155]

classiﬁcation:
weight/purpose

N/A

South
Africa
[156]

maximum
weight: 7kg;
classiﬁcation:
purpose

N/A

UK
[157]

classiﬁcation:
weight/purpose

US
[158]

classiﬁcation:
weight/purpose

beyond visual
line of sight
(BVLOS):
collision
avoidance
required

operation
during civil
twilight:
anti-collision
lights required

Operational Limitations

• minimum distance to people: 30m
• height limit: 120m
• minimum distance to airport: 5.5km
• daytime only (not after sunset)
• by visual line of sight (VLOS) only
• cannot operate over popular areas

• daytime only and not in clouds
• marked with pilot’s name, address and

telephone number

• maximum distance to pilot: 500m
• height limit: 90m and VLOS only
• minimum distance to vehicles, vessels

• minimum

and the public:
– 30m (250g<UAV’s weight(cid:54)1kg)
– 76m (1kg<UAV’s weight(cid:54)35kg)
heli-
distance
hazard

ports/aerodromes/natural
or disaster area: 1.9km/5.6km/9km
• away from controlled or restricted
interfere with

airspace and do not
police or ﬁrst responders

to

• minimum distance to people: 20m

(vertical); 30m (horizontal)

• height limit: 130m
• maximum take-off weight: 9kg
• by VLOS and daytime only

• minimum horizontal distance to other

aircraft: 10km

• minimum vertical distance to other
600m (altitude≤8400m);

aircraft:
1200m (altitude>8400m)
• maximum speed: 120km/h
• daytime only and by VLOS only

• daytime only
• by VLOS only
• minimum distance to people, other
UAVs, ground properties and water
surface: 30m

• cannot ﬂy over event sites
• cannot carry hazardous materials
• cannot drop any objects
• prohibited airspace:

– 150m above ground level
– airspace around airports
– densely inhabited districts (DID)

• height limit: 46m
• minimum distance to people and
property (unless permitted): 50m
• minimum distance to airport: 10km
• by VLOS only
• in daylight and clear weather condi-

tions

• minimum distance to people: 50m
• height limit: 122m
• minimum distance to congested area:

150m

• by VLOS only (up to 500m)

• height limit: 122m, VLOS only
• minimum vertical distance to clouds:

152m

• minimum horizontal

distance

to

clouds: 610m

• minimum distance to airport: 8km
• maximum speed: 161km/h

Administrative
Procedures

Human
Resources

Ethical
Constraints

insurance
strongly
recommended

>2kg: pilot’s
license
required

respect
personal
privacy

Special Flight
Operations
Certiﬁcate
required when
ﬂying drones
for work or
research, or the
drone weighs
over 35kg

N/A

respect the
privacy of
others

ﬂight
authorization
required

remote pilot’s
license
required

respect the
privacy of
others

operational
safety
evaluation
required

pilot
certiﬁcation
required

N/A

permission
required for
operation in
the prohibited
airspace

air services
license and
operational
certiﬁcate
required

N/A

N/A

remote pilot’s
license
required

respect
privacy-by-
laws

approvals vary
for different
operations

pilot
competency
required

protect data
integrity and
conﬁdentiality

aircraft
registration
required;
>25kg:
operational
certiﬁcate
required

remote pilot
certiﬁcation
required

respect
privacy-related
laws

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

17

• Implementation of ethical constraints: This criterion ap-
points the demands for data and privacy protection when
operating drones.

C. UAV Communications Regulation

The potential of UAV applications and their implications in
terms of reliability requirements and coexistence with other
systems have not gone unnoticed by communications-related
regulatory bodies. Below we summarize the most relevant
advances in this regard:

• The Electronic Communications Committee (ECC) within
the European Conference of Postal and Telecommunica-
tions Administrations (CEPT) formed a correspondence
group on spectrum requirements for drones in Dec. 2015.
This group produced the ECC 268 report discussing the
technical, regulatory aspects and the needs for spectrum
regulation for UAVs in Feb. 2018 [167]. This report
paves the way to the harmonisation across Europe of the
frequencies dedicated to UAV communications. The use
of cellular networks for UAV C&C communications is ad-
dressed in this report and is currently under further study.
Additionally, ECC 268 discusses the communications
requirements of both professional UAV use cases, which
could beneﬁt from using individual licensed spectrum,
and non-professional UAV applications, where unlicensed
bands may sufﬁce for short range communications.

• The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) in the
U.S. received in Feb. 2018 a petition for rule-making from
the Aerospace Industries Association (AIA)
[168]. The
petition is seeking to allow the secure communication of
C&C and non-payload data between UAVs and licensed
pilots in the 5030-5091 MHz band. The FCC has to gather
public comment before adopting a decision.

D. UAV Flying Regulation: Past and Present

• Past: The ﬁrst UAV regulation was proposed in 1944,
right after the World War II. The ﬁrst internationally
recognized aviation regulation, the Chicago Convention,
pointed out that the operation of UAVs should be autho-
rized to ensure the safety of manned civil aircraft [169].
Since 2000, due to the rapid development of UAV and
its increasing popularity, UAV regulations have evolved
both nationally and internationally. In 2002, the United
Kingdom and Australia ﬁrst published their UAV reg-
ulations. In 2006, the International Civil Aviation Or-
ganization (ICAO) announced that it was necessary to
issue an internationally acknowledged legislation for civil
operations of UAVs. Since 2012, an increasing number of
countries have established their own UAV regulations.
• Present: Table VII examines the current UAV regula-
tion frameworks of eight countries based on the criteria
detailed in Sec. VI-B. Notice that UAV operations are
currently prohibited in some countries such as Egypt and
Cuba [170]. As it could be seen from Table VII, every
country has speciﬁc operational limitations to preserve
the safety of both the public and UAVs. Moreover,

most countries require the operation of UAVs to respect
individuals’ privacy. However, currently only the UK is
aware of protecting the data collected by UAV operations.
It is worthy mentioning that some countries are also
proposing new drone regulations to address the safety
demand, increasing popularity and economic signiﬁcance
of drones, such as Canada [152]. Besides international
and national aviation authorities, large enterprise groups
are also making effort to help develop safe operations
for drones. Recently, waivers for regulations have been
given to Apple, Microsoft and Uber for their drone-testing
projects, which will help the Federal Aviation Authority
(FAA) shape the future development of UAV regulations
in the US [171].

VII. SECURITY

Security is a very important issue for any digital system.
For a UAV-aided wireless communication system, due to its
unmanned nature and required remote wireless communica-
tion, security is an even more serious problem. For exam-
ple, compared to terrestrial BSs, if a ﬂying cellular BS is
compromised by attackers, then its serving UEs are more
likely to lose cellular connections since the UAV may directly
crash. Moreover, cellular UEs served by terrestrial BSs might
suffer from strong interference due to LOS links, if a UAV is
manipulated by attackers. Therefore, it is signiﬁcant to ensure
the security of UAV systems when drones are used for cellular
communications. In this section, cyber-physical security of
UAV-assisted cellular communications is discussed.

A. Cyber Security

Since 2007, an increasing number of cyber-attacks to
the UAV systems have been reported due to popularity of
drones [172]. When launching cyber-attacks, adversaries target
the radio links of the UAV systems, which carry information
such as data requested by cellular UEs, control signals and
global positioning system (GPS) signals for UAVs’ navigation.
For example, with interception of these information, adver-
saries are able to steal data transmitted and requested by
drones or even directly manipulate operating drones by taking
advantage of their control signals. Since both data and control
signals are transmitted through the radio links, ensuring the
security of these wireless communication channels has become
an important aspect of the whole UAV system’s security. In this
subsection, we will ﬁrst present the scenarios where drones
are used for cellular communications. Then, we evaluate the
overall risk levels of different UAV connection types, namely,
satellite, cellular and Wi-Fi links. After that, we analyze and
list potential attack paths and corresponding defense strategies.
a) Use Cases: When drones are employed for cellular
communications, they can serve as cellular UEs or ﬂying
cellular BSs/relays, as shown in Fig. 9. In case of UAV UEs,
drones can be directly controlled either by terrestrial BSs
or by ground control stations (GCSs) through non-cellular
connections, which are mainly Wi-Fi connections [173]. In
the ﬁrst case, both data and C&C signals are transmitted
via cellular connections. In the second case, data and C&C

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

18

TABLE VIII: Risk analysis of radio links

Role of Drones

Radio Link (Risk Level)

Terrestrial BSs to drones: cellular (Low)

Cellular UEs

Drones to GPS satellites: satellite (Medium)

Drones to GCSs: Wi-Fi (High)

Flying BSs/Relays

Terrestrial BSs to drones: cellular (Low)

(Terrestrial BSs

Drones to GPS satellites:

controlled)

satellite (Medium)

Terrestrial BSs to drones: cellular (Low)

Flying BSs/Relays

Terrestrial BSs to third

(Third Party GCSs

party GCSs: cellular (low)

controlled)

Drones to GPS satellites: satellite (Medium)

Third party GCSs to drones: Wi-Fi (High)

signals use two separate radio links. Moreover, some drones
are remotely controlled by GCSs via satellite connections,
such as the well-known Predator [174]. When drones serve as
ﬂying BSs/relays, similar conditions are present with respect
to the previous UAV UEs case. However, in the presence
of a third party GCS, ﬂight path related data needs to be
communicated by the cellular network to the GCS. Navigation
information such as position,
timing and velocity can be
acquired from GPS satellites through satellite connections.
As could be seen from above, there are three categories of
radio links in these cases, which are satellite connection,
cellular connection and Wi-Fi connection respectively. It is
known that compared to cellular networks and GPS networks,
Wi-Fi networks are more insecure due to the unreliable and
[12]. For example, authors
vulnerable security techniques
in [175] inferred that commercial Wi-Fi based drones are
vulnerable to basic security attacks, which are even capable
by beginner hackers. They demonstrated that by exploiting
the standard ARDiscovery Connection process and the Wi-Fi
access point, a ﬂying Parrot Bebop 2 (its latest version) drone
can directly crash [175]. Since GPS signals are broadcast and
the signal format is speciﬁed to the public, it is easier to
attack satellite connections than cellular connections where
encryption keys and scrambling code are exchanged end-to-
end. Therefore, risk levels of cellular connections, satellite
connections and Wi-Fi connections are evaluated as low,
medium and high, respectively. Table VIII summarizes the
radio links and associated risk levels in the three cases above.
b) Threat Identiﬁcation and Countermeasure: After as-
sessing the overall risk levels of the radio links in the use cases
above, threats for these radio links are identiﬁed and listed.
Corresponding countermeasures are also presented. Finally,
likelihood and impact of identiﬁed threats are evaluated in
Table IX.

• Jamming: Adversaries generate interference signals in the
same frequency band to disrupt the reception process,
which is a common way of integrity attacks. For example,
GPS jamming has become a critical threat for drones. It
was reported that in 2012 a small drone crashed and led
to casualties, which was suspected to be caused by GPS
jamming for the legitimate receiver [176]. For jamming

(a) UAV UEs.

(b) UAV BSs/relays controlled by terrestrial BSs.

(c) UAV BSs/relays controlled by third party GCSs.

Fig. 9: Use cases for cellular UAVs.

attacks, increasing the signal to noise ratio (SNR) could
be a typical defense solution. However, this is always
limited by how much power the transmitter can provide
and how to lower the noise at the receiver by effective
receiver algorithms.

• Eavesdropping: Since both cellular and Wi-Fi connections
employ wireless channels, adversaries might be able to
obtain the transmitted information directly from the open
environment. Eavesdropping breaches the conﬁdentiality
aspect of security. Encryption and physical layer security
techniques could be used as a protective mechanism [?].
• Hijacking: Hijacking here refers to attacks that adver-
saries take over a radio link. For example, radio links
between drones and GCSs in our scenarios are all Wi-

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

19

Fi connections. To launch hijacking attacks, adversaries
could ﬁrst use deauthentication management frames to
the association between a drone and the
disconnect
corresponding GCS. Then the drone can be remotely
controlled by adversaries via 802.11 protocols. There
are several security techniques against deauthentication
attacks. Effective detection algorithms could be applied
and transmitted frames could be encrypted. For example,
WPA2 (802.11i-2004) encryption mechanism with proper
key length is recommended as a countermeasure [177].
Moreover, dynamic secret key generation could provide
a even stronger protection [178]. Alternatively, a Wi-Fi
access point (AP) could be hidden by disabling service
set identiﬁer (SSID) broadcasting and Wi-Fi UEs could
be restricted to those with certain media access control
(MAC) addresses.

• Spooﬁng: Adversaries can pretend to be some entity using
false information. A typical spooﬁng attack to drones is
GPS spooﬁng. By transmitting false GPS signals with
higher power than the authentic ones, drones could be
taken over by adversaries. To prevent GPS spooﬁng
attacks, defense solutions such as jamming-to-noise sense
and multi-antenna defense could be employed [179]
[180]. Another example of spooﬁng attack could be
address resolution protocol (ARP) cache poisoning at-
tack. In [175], authors successfully disconnected a drone
from its controller by continuously sending spoofed ARP
replies with the valid controller’s MAC address.

• Denial of Service (DoS): For a DoS attack, adversaries
will send excessive requests to the server, which causes
network congestion. As a result, the legitimate users will
lose their service. For example, in [175] authors employed
the Telnet application to fuzz the ARDiscovery (associa-
tion between UAV and its legitimate controller) process
with simultaneous requests to become the controller for
the UAV, which resulted in the crash of the UAV.

B. Physical Security

Besides cyber attacks, adversaries could also launch physi-
cal attacks to drones, which is another aspect of security con-
cerns for UAV systems. To launch physical attacks, adversaries
ﬁrst need to obtain access to drones, which is achievable under
two circumstances. First, adversaries can access a drone on
the ground (damaged or ran out of battery) or capture a ﬂying
drone. Second, adversaries can control drones by successfully
launching cyber attacks as introduced before. Here we sum-
marize the attack paths and corresponding countermeasures
according to attackers’ capability levels [181].

• Low: Attackers aim to disassemble the captured drone to
access its internal data, e.g. telemetry data via common
interfaces such as USB. To defend such attacks, self-
destruction mechanisms could be applied on drones,
which will be enabled under pre-deﬁned circumstances.
However, self-destruction mechanism should only be trig-
gered when necessary due to its strong side effects, e.g.
potential threat to public safety, loss of both data and
drones.

TABLE IX: Threat analysis

Threat
Jamming
Eavesdropping
Hijacking
Spooﬁng
DoS

Likelihood
High
High
Medium
Medium
High

Impact
Low
Medium
High
High
High

• Medium: Attackers could access data through higher stan-
dard interfaces such as Joint Test Action Group (JTAG)
and also access the embedded system. In this case,
information stored on the drone needs to be encrypted.
However, encryption may only delay the time taken by
adversaries to obtain their desired data.

• High: Adversaries are capable of launching advanced
attacks such as side-channel attacks, fault injection at-
tacks and software attacks to retrieve desired information
from a drone. To deal with such attacks, superior crypto-
graphic mechanisms and secure key management should
be equipped by drones.

VIII. LESSONS LEARNED

In this section, we summarize the key lessons learned during
this survey, providing an overall picture on the current status
of UAV cellular communications.

Sec. I: UAV types and characteristics. The variety of UAV
models and associated features is nowadays already very
wide. From consumer low-cost drones with limited capa-
bilities in terms of ﬂying time and payload – mainly suit-
able for recreational photo/video shooting applications
and possibly involving a single wireless communication
link towards a ground access point – to commercial or
military drones capable of travelling long distances and
carrying heavy payloads – mainly suitable for strategic
operations like surveillance or wide area communication
coverage involving high data throughput requirements
and complex wireless communication apparatuses. How-
ever, although there already exists the possibility of
ﬁnding a speciﬁc drone for almost every application, this
does not imply that the pick represents an economically
viable option. In our view, one of the main drawbacks
of the current UAV technology is still the presence of a
signiﬁcant trade-off between ﬂying time, carried payload
and associated costs. In the future, a joint optimization of
these three important metrics is desirable. Although the
research community is already working in this direction,
it seems that several years are still required to close this
gap.

Sec. II: Standardization. All the major standardization bod-
ies have already established dedicated study items and
working groups to analyse the speciﬁc requirements for
enabling reliable communications towards and from ﬂy-
ing UAV through current cellular networks. Nevertheless,
forecasting a future with a massive increase in the number
of ﬂying UAVs, classical network infrastructures, even
with all the required extensions, might not be capable
to contextually offer high quality of service to ground

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

20

and aerial users. This is because they have been mainly
designed to provide 2D coverage on the ground. With the
introduction of aerial users, future cellular communica-
tion systems must embrace also the third dimension, with
BSs able to point towards the sky and maybe dedicate
speciﬁc resources to this type of new users. For this
reason, massive MIMO 5G technology is foreseen as a
strong candidate for introducing the required 3D spatial
communication ﬂexibility, thus pushing for an increasing
focus in the 3GPP standardization activity to enhance
and complement massive MIMO with UAV-dedicated
solutions.

Sec. III: Aerial base stations. The widespread of UAV tech-
nology has generated a lot of interest in the possibility to
deploy BSs where and when needed. In theory, we foresee
beneﬁts such as the avoidance of over-provisioned ﬁxed
network infrastructures to cope with hardly predictable
data trafﬁc peaks in time and the reduction of CAPEX and
OPEX associated to site acquisition and maintenance or
wiring. However, in reality, multiple issues need to be ad-
dressed before considering aerial BSs a cost-effective so-
lution for replacing (even partially) conventional ground
BSs. Current major concerns and research activities are
focused on optimal placement and mobility of aerial BSs,
power efﬁciency, recharging, and security.

Sec. IV: Prototyping and ﬁeld tests. Several organizations
have focused on verifying in realistic conditions the
above-mentioned drawbacks and constraints associated
with aerial BSs. Innovative approaches include those
using futuristic autonomous solar-powered aircrafts, au-
tonomous balloons, and self-powered aerial small cells.
Although we ﬁnd all these solutions extremely interesting
and inventive, little can be said on their effectiveness in
a wider cellular architecture with a mixture of aerial and
ground BSs. Moreover, none of them have proven to be
a cost-effective solution ready for wide adoption into an
imminent product.

Sec. V: Regulation. Not only technical challenges are asso-
ciated with UAV communications, but also the one related
to privacy, public safety, administrative procedures, and
licenses. Rules have been put in place in the majority of
the countries in the world with the aim to control and
limit the use of drones. Although different countries ap-
ply similar regulations, mainly concerning ﬂying height,
weight and safety distance from people, we are still far
from an uniﬁed view on a basic common set of rules to
be adopted world wide.

Sec. VI: Security. With increasing number of drones ﬂying
in the sky, security becomes an extremely important
requirement for drones not only to prevent actual falling
and injuring people, but also to protect the data they are
capturing and transferring to the ground network against
possible hijacking. While it is clear that the problem can
be signiﬁcantly alleviated by adopting top notch software
and hardware technologies, we should be mindful about
the additional cost
introduce to cellular-
connected UAVs.

these might

IX. FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS

In this section, we discuss the future research directions of

UAV cellular networks.

A. UAV Simulator

Real experiments with UAVs are inherently difﬁcult due to
tough regulations and need for large open space. Consequently,
majority of researchers resort to simulations to evaluate the
performance of their proposed systems and algorithms. These
simulations often assume that UAVs can move at any direction
at any time without any speciﬁc constraints of obstacles or
any hardware restrictions. As a result, such simulation results
may be far from realistic for many speciﬁc scenarios. Indeed,
recent experiments with DJI quadcoptor drones have revealed
that there are speciﬁc hardware limitations in terms of lateral
acceleration, which prevents the drone from making turns at
arbitrary angles [28]. It would be useful to develop publicly
available simulators for UAVs, which would allow researchers
to accurately simulate different types of drones according to
their hardware speciﬁcations and subject to location-speciﬁc
obstacles.

There exists sophisticated open license simulators for
ground vehicles, such as SUMO [182], which allows re-
searchers to precisely simulate the microscopic movements of
each vehicle on the road subject to road restrictions available
from open maps, such as OpenStreetMap [183]. Currently,
these maps only show the ground-based structures, such as
roads and trafﬁc lights. A future direction could be to add ex-
tensions to these maps which include details of other obstacles,
such as high-rise buildings, roof-top cranes, etc., which could
affect UAV mobility in urban environment. Simulators such as
SUMO could be extended to simulate microscopic mobility
of UAVs of different makes and models. These extensions
would allow UAV communications researchers to enjoy similar
level of simulation support currently availed by researchers
working on vehicular communications. It is worth noting that
some drone vendors are offering their own simulators, such as
DroneKit from 3D Robotics [184], Sphinx from Parrot [185],
and DJI Assistant from DJI [186], which allow researchers to
connect a propelar-less drone to the laptop and then collect
drone telemetric data without actually having to go out and
ﬂy the drone. However, these simulators are still tied to the
real drone, which still need to be purchased and connected
to the laptop. As such, they do not provide the full beneﬁt
of a simulator, which can be used widely by anyone without
having to purchase drones.

B. Advanced UAV Mobility Control Based on Image Process-
ing and Deep Learning

Most consumer drones are equipped with high-ﬁdelity cam-
eras. With image processing and deep learning, UAVs can
be programmed to identify the optimal hovering location or
the optimal ﬂying direction which would provide the best
signal propagation between the UAV and the target ground
BS (when UAV is acting as an aerial UE), or between the
UAV and a ground UE (when the UAV is acting as an aerial

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

21

BS), while considering real-life obstacles, such as buildings,
rooftop cranes etc. Furthermore, energy status estimation and
potential battery charging operations should be considered in
advanced UAV mobility control as well.

C. UAVs Antennas

Because of the drones’ ability to move in any direction
with different speed, a new antenna design for airborne
communication is required to achieve high data rate. One
alternative to have high data rate transmission between UAVs
and ground base stations is to have a tracking antenna installed
on UAVs. The gyro, accelerometer and GPS information are
utilized in order to track the ground station and tilt the antenna
accordingly [187]. Moreover, limited space is another concern
for installing antennas on UAVs [188], specially for small
UAVs. A tilted beam circularly polarized antenna is proposed
to install on the bottom of UAV [189] to save space. Simulation
results showed that high performance in terms of return losses,
axial ratio and radiation pattern can be achieved using such
antenna.

D. Aerial UE Identiﬁcation

One of the main challenges in introducing aerial UEs in
LTE and 5G is identifying that an aerial UE has the proper
certiﬁcation to connect to the cellular networks. To this end,
3GPP proposed both UE-based and network-based solutions to
indicate that a UE is airborne. In the UE-based solutions, the
UE can report informations such as altitude, ﬂight mode and
etc. With network-based techniques, different characteristics
of the UE such as the mobility history, handover, etc. can
help in UE detection. As stated before, since having a LOS is
more probable for aerial UEs, they experience different radio
conditions and interference than ground users. In this regards,
three different machine learning techniques are employed
in [149], [150] to detect the presence of aerial UEs using
standard LTE radio measurements, such as RSRP (Reference
Signal Received Power) and RSSI (Received Signal Strength
Indicator). The aerial UEs can be detected by up to 99%
accuracy through these methods. Developing more advance
and intelligent algorithms, and utilizing various characteristics
in future will lead in more precise aerial UE detection.

E. Overcoming the Issue of Physical Reliability of UAVs

By nature, UAV-BSs are expected to suffer from a physical
reliability issue that does not concern existing terrestrial BSs.
For example, UAVs can unexpectedly run out of battery,
lose control due to sudden wind gusts, or even collide with
other airborne objects. Such physical reliability issues will
eventually affect the quality of wireless service and the overall
quality of experience for the users. The physical reliability
issue therefore must be addressed adequately before UAVs
are integrated into cellular systems. It may take a long time
before we can expect highly reliable UAVs systems at minimal
cost. In the meantime, physical reliability must be factored in
the optimization models when designing UAV systems. For
example, the placement optimization for UAV relays or BSs
can include some physical failure and redundancy factor to
improve overall network availability.

F. Mobile Edge Computing with UAV-BSs

Cellular networks are moving towards a new paradigm
called mobile edge computing where the BSs provide not only
communications, but also computing services to mobile users.
This paradigm essentially brings the so-called cloud services
closer to the mobile users thus reducing the latency for many
real-time compute-intensive applications, such as augmented
reality, speech recognition, and so on [190].

Several

issues arise when edge computing is supported
through UAV-BSs. To support computing services, UAV-BSs
will have to be ﬁtted with signiﬁcant computing platforms,
such graphical processing units (GPUs), which will increase
both payload and energy consumption of UAV. Energy op-
timizations for UAVs therefore will have to factor in the
computing tasks as well to ensure that UAV batteries can last
longer. Computing session continuity is another issue that will
have to be considered by the UAV path planning optimizations
as the mobility of UAV-BSs can cause serious disruptions to
ongoing computing tasks for mobile users. Indeed, researchers
have realized such challenges and started exploring edge
computing challenges and opportunities for UAVs [191].

G. UAV-supported Caching

of

the

With

rapid

Internet-of-Things
development
(IoT) [192], users’ demand for multimedia data such as videos
and images containing high data volume has signiﬁcantly
grown. Since the same popular contents are usually requested
by many users at different times, wireless caching can relieve
the pressure of data accessing by pre-caching the popular
contents in local memory [34]. Owing to UAV’s inherent high
mobility, aerial caching provides a superior solution to deliver
the contents more efﬁcient
than traditional static caching
by addressing the user mobility problem. Authors in [193]
proposed the proactive deployment of UAV-supported caching
to improve users’ QoS in a cloud radio access network
(CRAN). A very recent work investigated data popularity
analysis based on machine learning, which can be employed
in UAV-supported caching [194]. Authors in [195] also
showed that UAV-supported caching could achieve higher
multimedia data throughput in IoT system. Major challenges
for aerial caching include location optimization of UAVs,
user-UAV association, the contents to cache at UAVs and
efﬁcient power control strategy.

X. CONCLUSION

We have surveyed complementary activities from academia,
industry, and standardization on the important issue of integrat-
ing UAV into cellular systems. Our survey reveals that 3GPP
has recently launched new study items to explore opportunities
and challenges for serving UAVs using the existing 4G cellular
networks. The outcomes of these preliminary studies point to
some major interference issues arising from the height of the
UAVs, but most of them can be addressed by deploying addi-
tional mechanisms in the existing 4G systems. It is expected
that 5G and future systems will be better equipped to deal
with UAV related challenges. We have found that a number
of vendors have already built and demonstrated UAV-mounted

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

22

ﬂying base stations as a sign of their readiness to embrace UAV
into the cellular systems. Our survey has identiﬁed a rapidly
growing interest on this topic in the academic community,
which has resulted in a growing number of publications
and workshops. There is an increasing activity within the
regulation bodies to design and implement new regulations
for UAVs to promote public safety and individual privacy.
Finally, we have identiﬁed new cyber-physical security threats,
business and cost models, and future research directions for
UAV-assisted cellular communication. We believe that UAV
cellular communication is at a very early stage of development
and we would expect to see continuing interest and progress
in this exciting new research direction of cellular networking
in the coming years.

REFERENCES

[1] Hank Price. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Forecast Fiscal
https://www.faa.gov/news/fact_sheets/news_story.

Years 2017-2038.
cfm?newsId=22594/, 2018. [Online; accessed 25-Feb-2019].

[2] 3GPP Technical Report 36.777. Technical speciﬁcation group radio
access network; Study on enhanced LTE support for aerial vehicles
(Release 15). Dec. 2017.
Nokia and EE trial mobile base
[3] International Business Times.
stations ﬂoating on drones
rural 4G cover-
age. url: http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/nokia-ee-trial-mobile-base-stations-
ﬂoating-drones-revolutionise-rural-4g-coverage-1575795, 2016.

to revolutionise

[4] Huawei.

Connected

Aerial

Vehicle

Live.

http://www.huawei.com/en/industry-insights/innovation/xlabs/use-
cases/mbbf2017-connected-aerial-vehicle-live.
20-May-2018].

[Online;

accessed

[5] A. Fotouhi, M. Ding, and M. Hassan. Flying drone base stations for

macro hotspots. IEEE Access, 6:19530–19539, 2018.

[6] U. Challita, W. Saad, and C. Bettstetter. Deep reinforcement learning
for interference-aware path planning of cellular-connected uavs.
In
2018 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), pages
1–7, May 2018.

[7] M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, Y.-H. Nam, and M. Debbah. A
Tutorial on UAVs for Wireless Networks: Applications, Challenges,
and Open Problems. ArXiv e-prints, Mar 2018.

[8] L. Gupta, R. Jain, and G. Vaszkun. Survey of Important Issues in UAV
Communication Networks. IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials,
18(2):1123–1152, Secondquarter 2016.

[9] I. Bekmezci, I. Sen, and E. Erkalkan. Flying ad hoc networks (FANET)
In 2015 7th International Conference on
test bed implementation.
Recent Advances in Space Technologies (RAST), pages 665–668, June
2015.

[10] S. Hayat, E. Yanmaz, and R. Muzaffar.

Survey on Unmanned
Aerial Vehicle Networks for Civil Applications: A Communications
Viewpoint. IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, 18(4):2624–2661,
Fourthquarter 2016.

[11] Silvia Sekander, Hina Tabassum, and Ekram Hossain. Multi-tier Drone
Architecture for 5G/B5G Cellular Networks: Challenges, Trends, and
Prospects. CoRR, abs/1711.08407, 2017.

[12] Yong Zeng, Rui Zhang, and Teng Joon Lim. Wireless communications
IEEE
with unmanned aerial vehicles: opportunities and challenges.
Communications Magazine, 54(5):36–42, 2016.
Kogan Nano Drone.

https://www.kogan.com/au/buy/

[13] Kogan.

kogan-nano-drone/. Accessed: 2018-05-10.

[14] Parrot.

PARROT DISCO.

https://www.parrot.com/global/drones/

parrot-disco#parrot-disco. Accessed: 2018-05-10.

[15] DJI.

SPREADING WINGS S9000.

https://www.dji.com/

[16] Aeroscout.

spreading-wings-s900/info#specs. Accessed: 2018-05-10.
Scout B-330 UAV Helicopter.

https://www.aeroscout.
ch/index.php/scout-uav-helicopters/scout-uav-helicopters-2. Accessed:
2018-05-10.

[17] WIKIPEDIA. General Atomics MQ-9 Reaper, 2018 (accessed May 11,
2018). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_Atomics_MQ-9_Reaper.
[18] Lina Tang and Guofan Shao. Drone remote sensing for forestry
research and practices. Journal of Forestry Research, 26(4):791–797,
2015.

[19] Paul Fahlstrom and Thomas Gleason.

Introduction to UAV systems.

John Wiley & Sons, 2012.

[20] A. Al-Hourani and K. Gomez. Modeling cellular-to-uav path-loss
IEEE Wireless Communications Letters,

for suburban environments.
7(1):82–85, Feb 2018.

[21] Kenzo Nonami, Farid Kendoul, Satoshi Suzuki, Wei Wang, and
Daisuke Nakazawa. Introduction. In Autonomous Flying Robots, pages
1–29. Springer, 2010.

[22] A. Al-Hourani, S. Kandeepan, and S. Lardner. Optimal LAP Altitude
IEEE Wireless Communications Letters,

for Maximum Coverage.
3(6):569–572, Dec 2014.

[23] M. Ding, P. Wang, D. Lopez Perez, G. Mao, and Z. Lin. Performance
Impact of LoS and NLoS Transmissions in Dense Cellular Networks.
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 15(3):2365–2380,
March 2016.

[24] T. Ding, M. Ding, G. Mao, Z. Lin, D. López-Pérez, and A. Y. Zomaya.
Uplink performance analysis of dense cellular networks with LoS and
NLoS transmissions. IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
16(4):2601–2613, Apr. 2017.

[25] M. Ding and D. Lopez Perez. Please Lower Small Cell Antenna
In 2016 IEEE Global Communications Conference

Heights in 5G.
(GLOBECOM), pages 1–6, Dec 2016.

[26] M. Ding and D. López-Pérez. Performance impact of base station
IEEE Transactions on

antenna heights in dense cellular networks.
Wireless Communications, 16(12):8147–8161, Dec. 2017.

[27] Steven AP Quintero, Francesco Papi, Daniel J Klein, Luigi Chisci, and
Joao P Hespanha. Optimal UAV coordination for target tracking using
In Decision and Control (CDC), 2010 49th
dynamic programming.
IEEE Conference on, pages 4541–4546. IEEE, 2010.

[28] A. Fotouhi, M. Ding, and M. Hassan. Understanding autonomous drone
maneuverability for Internet of Things applications. In 2017 WoWMoM
Workshop on the Internet of Things, pages 1–6, June 2017.
A World

Technology
a-world-of-proliferated-drones-a-technology-primer, 2015.
accessed 20-May-2018].

Proliferated Drones: A
https://www.cnas.org/publications/reports/
[Online;

[29] Kelley

Primer.

Sayler.

of

[30] Skyfront. https://skyfront.com/. Accessed: 2018-05-10.
[31] Magdalena Dudek, Piotr Tomczyk, Piotr Wygonik, Mariusz Korkosz,
Piotr Bogusz, and Bartłomiej Lis. Hybrid Fuel Cell – Battery System
as a Main Power Unit for. Small Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV).
Int. J. Electrochem. Sci, 8:8442–8463, 2013.

[32] M Hasan Shaheed, Aly Abidali, Jibran Ahmed, Shakir Ahmed, Irman-
tas Burba, Pourshid Jan Fani, George Kwoﬁe, Kazimierz Wojewoda,
and Antonio Munjiza.
Flying by the Sun only: The Solarcopter
prototype. Aerospace Science and Technology, 45:209–214, 2015.
[33] Silvia Sekander, Hina Tabassum, and Ekram Hossain. Multi-tier
drone architecture for 5g/b5g cellular networks: Challenges, trends,
and prospects. IEEE Communications Magazine, 56(3):96–103, 2018.
[34] Haichao Wang, Guoru Ding, Feifei Gao, Jin Chen, Jinlong Wang,
and Le Wang. Power control in uav-supported ultra dense networks:
Communications, caching, and energy transfer. IEEE Communications
Magazine, 56(6):28–34, 2018.

[35] M. Ding, D. López-Pérez, G. Mao, and Z. Lin. Performance impact of
idle mode capability on dense small cell networks. IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, 66(11):10446–10460, Nov. 2017.

[36] CASA Advisory Cirular. AC 101-10 v1.2 - Remotely-piloted aircraft
systems – Operation of excluded RPA (other than model aircraft), 2016.
Available online: https://www.casa.gov.au/ﬁles/ac10110pdf (accessed
on 25 May 2018).

[37] X. Lin, V. Yajnanarayana, S. D. Muruganathan, S. Gao, H. Asplund,
. E. Wang. The
IEEE

H. Maattanen, M. Bergstrom, S. Euler, and Y.
Sky Is Not the Limit: LTE for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles.
Communications Magazine, 56(4):204–210, April 2018.

[38] B. van der Bergh, A. Chiumento, and S. Pollin. LTE in the sky: Trading
off propagation beneﬁts with interference costs for aerial nodes. IEEE
Communications Magazine, 54(5):44–50, May 2016.

[39] G. Geraci, A. Garcia-Rodriguez, L. Galati Giordano, D. Lopez-Perez,
and E. Bjoernson. Supporting UAV Cellular Communications through
Massive MIMO. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Commu-
nications Workshops (ICC Workshops), pages 1–6, May 2018.
[40] A. Garcia-Rodriguez, G. Geraci, D. López-Pérez, L. Galati Giordano,
Ming ding, and E. Björnson. The Essential Guide to Realizing 5G-
Connected UAVs with Massive MIMO. Available as arXiv:1805.05654,
May 2018.

[41] NTT DOCOMO Inc., Ericsson. New SID on enhanced support for

aerial vehicles. 3GPP RP-170779 RAN#75, Mar. 2017.

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

23

[42] D. López-Pérez, M. Ding, H. Li, L. Galati Giordano, G. Geraci,
A. Garcia-Rodriguez, Z. Lin, and M. Hassan. On the downlink
In
performance of uav communications in dense cellular networks.
2018 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), pages
1–7, Dec 2018.

[43] 3GPP Technical Report 38.901. Study on channel model for frequen-

cies from 0.5 to 100 GHz (Release 14). May 2017.

[44] Qualcomm.

LTE Unmanned Aircraft Systems, Trial Report.

In

Qualcomm Technologies, Inc., 2017.

[45] D. W. Matolak and R. Sun. Air-ground channel characterization for
unmanned aircraft systems: The near-urban environment. In MILCOM
2015 - 2015 IEEE Military Communications Conference, pages 1656–
1660, Oct 2015.

[46] R. Amorim, H. Nguyen, P. Mogensen, I. Z. Kovács, J. Wigard, and T. B.
Sørensen. Radio Channel Modeling for UAV Communication Over
Cellular Networks. IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, 6(4):514–
517, Aug 2017.

[47] N. Goddemeier and C. Wietfeld. Investigation of Air-to-Air Channel
Characteristics and a UAV Speciﬁc Extension to the Rice Model. In
2015 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), pages 1–5, Dec 2015.
[48] N. Ahmed, S. S. Kanhere, and S. Jha. On the importance of link char-
acterization for aerial wireless sensor networks. IEEE Communications
Magazine, 54(5):52–57, May 2016.

[49] H. T. Kung, C. K. Lin, T. H. Lin, S. J. Tarsa, and D. Vlah. Measuring
diversity on a low-altitude UAV in a ground-to-air wireless 802.11 mesh
network. In 2010 IEEE Globecom Workshops, pages 1799–1804, Dec
2010.

[50] A. Al-Hourani, S. Kandeepan, and A. Jamalipour. Modeling Air-to-
Ground Path Loss for Low Altitude Platforms in Urban Environments.
In 2014 IEEE GLOBECOM, pages 2898–2904, Dec 2014.

[51] Q. Feng, E. K. Tameh, A. R. Nix, and J. McGeehan. Modelling the
Likelihood of Line-of-Sight for Air-to-Ground Radio Propagation in
Urban Environments. In IEEE Globecom 2006, pages 1–5, Nov 2006.
[52] Y. Zhou, J. Li, L. Lamont, and C. A. Rabbath. Modeling of packet
In 2012 International
dropout for UAV wireless communications.
Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC),
pages 677–682, Jan 2012.

[53] I. Y. Abualhaol and M. M. Matalgah. Performance analysis of multi-
carrier relay-based UAV network over fading channels. In 2010 IEEE
Globecom Workshops, pages 1811–1815, Dec 2010.

[54] L. Ting-ting and L. Shun-lan. The simulation model of ground-to-air
channel and its application in SC-FDE. In 2009 ISECS International
Colloquium on Computing, Communication, Control, and Management,
volume 3, pages 186–189, Aug 2009.

[55] M. M. Azari, F. Rosas, A. Chiumento, and S. Pollin. Coexistence of
terrestrial and aerial users in cellular networks. In 2017 IEEE Globecom
Workshops (GC Wkshps), pages 1–6, Dec 2017.

[56] M. M. Azari, F. Rosas, and S. Pollin. Reshaping cellular networks
for the sky: Major factors and feasibility. In 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC), pages 1–7, May 2018.
[57] Z. Yin, J. Li, M. Ding, F. Song, and D. Lopez-Perez. Uplink
performance analysis of base station antenna heights in dense cellular
networks. 2018 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBE-
COM), pages 1–7, Dec. 2018.

[58] M. Ding and D. López-Pérez. On the performance of practical ultra-
dense networks: The major and minor factors. The IEEE Workshop
on Spatial Stochastic Models for Wireless Networks (SpaSWiN) 2017,
pages 1–8, May 2017.

[59] M. Ding, D. Lopez-Perez, H. Claussen, and M. A. Kaafar. On the
fundamental characteristics of ultra-dense small cell networks. IEEE
Network, 32(3):92–100, May 2018.

[60] M. Ding, D. López-Pérez, G. Mao, P. Wang, and Z. Lin. Will the Area
Spectral Efﬁciency Monotonically Grow as Small Cells Go Dense?
IEEE GLOBECOM 2015, pages 1–7, Dec. 2015.

[61] J. Yang, M. Ding, G. Mao, Z. Lin, D. Zhang, and T. H. Luan. Optimal
IEEE
base station antenna downtilt in downlink cellular networks.
Transactions on Wireless Communications, pages 1–1, 2019.

[62] R. Amorim, H. Nguyen, P. Mogensen, I. Z. Kovács, J. Wigard, and
T. B. Sørensen. Radio channel modeling for UAV communication over
cellular networks. IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, 6(4):514–
517, Aug. 2017.

[63] Huazhou Li, Ming Ding, David Lopez-Perez, Azade Fotouhi, Zihuai
Lin, and Mahbub Hassan. Performance analysis of the access link of
drone base station networks with LoS/NLoS transmissions. Springer
INISCOM2018, pages 1–7, Aug. 2018.

[64] Ericsson. New WID on enhanced support for aerial vehicles. 3GPP

RP-172826 RAN#78, Dec. 2017.

[65] Ming Ding and Hanwen Luo. Multi-point Cooperative Communication

Systems: Theory and Applications. Springer, 2013.

[66] 3GPP Technical Document RP 181644. Summary for WI Enhanced

LTE Support for Aerial Vehicles. Sept. 2018.

[67] 3GPP Technical Speciﬁcation 36.331. Evolved Universal Terrestrial
Radio Access (E-UTRA); Radio Resource Control (RRC); Protocol
speciﬁcation. Sept. 2018.

[68] G. Geraci, A. Garcia-Rodriguez, L. Galati Giordano, D. López-Pérez,
and E. Björnson. Understanding UAV Cellular Communications: From
Existing Networks to Massive MIMO. IEEE Access, 6:67853–67865,
2018.

[69] P. Chandhar and E. G. Larsson. Massive MIMO for drone communi-
cations: Applications, case studies and future directions. Available as
arXiv:1711.07668, Nov. 2017.

[70] P. Chandhar, D. Danev, and E. G. Larsson. Massive MIMO for
communications with drone swarms. Available as arXiv:1707.01039,
July 2017.

[71] ITU-T Work Item Y.UAV.arch. Functional architecture for unmanned
aerial vehicles and unmanned aerial vehicle controllers using IMT-2020
networks. 2017.

[72] ETSI Technical Report 103 373. Use cases and Spectrum Considera-

tions for UAS (Unmanned Aircraft Systems). Feb. 2018.

[73] ETSI Group Speciﬁcation Next Generation Protocols 001. Next
Generation Protocols (NGP); Scenarios Deﬁnitions (v1.1.1). Nov. 2016.
[74] IEEE Project P2025.1. Standard for Consumer Drones: Taxonomy and

Deﬁnitions. Oct. 2015.

[75] IEEE Project P2025.1. Standard for Consumer Drones: Privacy and

Security. Oct. 2015.

[76] C. Liu, M. Ding, C. Ma, Q. Li, Z. Lin, and Y. Liang. Performance
analysis for practical unmanned aerial vehicle networks with los/nlos
transmissions. 2018 IEEE International Conference on Communica-
tions Workshops (ICC Workshops), pages 1–6, May 2018.

[77] A. Merwaday and I. Guvenc. UAV assisted heterogeneous networks
In Wireless Communications and
for public safety communications.
Networking Conference Workshops (WCNCW), 2015 IEEE, pages 329–
334, March 2015.

[78] Sebastian Rohde, Markus Putzke, and Christian Wietfeld. Ad hoc
self-healing of OFDMA networks using UAV-based relays. Ad Hoc
Networks, 11(7):1893–1906, 2013.

[79] B. Galkin, J. Kibilda, and L. A. DaSilva. Deployment of UAV-mounted
access points according to spatial user locations in two-tier cellular
networks. In 2016 Wireless Days (WD), pages 1–6, March 2016.
[80] R Irem Bor-Yaliniz, Amr El-Keyi, and Halim Yanikomeroglu. Efﬁcient
3-D placement of an aerial base station in next generation cellular net-
works. In Communications (ICC), 2016 IEEE International Conference
on, pages 1–5. IEEE, 2016.

[81] M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Debbah. Optimal transport
theory for power-efﬁcient deployment of unmanned aerial vehicles. In
2016 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), pages
1–6, May 2016.

[82] J. Košmerl and A. Vilhar. Base stations placement optimization in
In 2014 IEEE
wireless networks for emergency communications.
International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC), pages
200–205, June 2014.

[83] J. Lyu, Y. Zeng, R. Zhang, and T. J. Lim. Placement Optimization of
UAV-Mounted Mobile Base Stations. IEEE Communications Letters,
21(3):604–607, March 2017.

[84] X. Sun and N. Ansari. Jointly optimizing drone-mounted base station
In 2018
placement and user association in heterogeneous networks.
IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), pages 1–6,
May 2018.

[85] NOKIA.

F-Cell

technology from Nokia Bell Labs revolutionizes
url:

small cell deployment by cutting wires, costs and time.
https://www.nokia.com/news/releases/2016/10/03/f-cell-technology-
from-nokia-bell-labs-revolutionizes-small-cell-deployment-by-cutting-
wires-costs-and-time/, Oct 2016.

[86] Eurecom. ERC Perfume Project. http://www.ercperfume.org/about/.
[87] S. F. Chou, T. C. Chiu, Y. J. Yu, and A. C. Pang. Mobile small cell
deployment for next generation cellular networks. In 2014 IEEE Global
Communications Conference, pages 4852–4857, Dec 2014.

[88] J. Zhao, F. Gao, G. Ding, T. Zhang, W. Jia, and A. Nallanathan.
Integrating communications and control for uav systems: Opportunities
and challenges. IEEE Access, 6:67519–67527, 2018.

[89] Y. Qu, J. Wu, B. Xiao, and D. Yuan. A fault-tolerant cooperative
positioning approach for multiple uavs. IEEE Access, 5:15630–15640,
2017.

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

24

[90] L. Ruan, J. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Xu, Y. Yang, H. Jiang, Y. Zhang,
and Y. Xu. Energy-efﬁcient multi-uav coverage deployment in uav
China Communications,
networks: A game-theoretic framework.
15(10):194–209, Oct 2018.

[91] T. Chen, Q. Gao, and M. Guo. An improved multiple uavs cooperative
In 2018 Chinese
ﬂight algorithm based on leader follower strategy.
Control And Decision Conference (CCDC), pages 165–169, June 2018.
[92] Y. H. Tan, S. Lai, K. Wang, and B. M. Chen. Cooperative heavy lifting
using unmanned multi-agent systems. In 2018 IEEE 14th International
Conference on Control and Automation (ICCA), pages 1119–1126, June
2018.

[93] P. de Sousa Paula, M. F. de Castro, G. A. L. Paillard, and W. W. F.
Sarmento. A swarm solution for a cooperative and self-organized team
of uavs to search targets. In 2016 8th Euro American Conference on
Telematics and Information Systems (EATIS), pages 1–8, April 2016.
[94] A. Fotouhi, M. Ding, and M. Hassan. Dynamic base station reposi-
In 2017
tioning to improve spectral efﬁciency of drone small cells.
IEEE 18th International Symposium on A World of Wireless, Mobile
and Multimedia Networks (WoWMoM), pages 1–9, June 2017.
[95] A. Fotouhi, M. Ding, and M. Hassan. Dynamic Base Station Reposi-
tioning to Improve Performance of Drone Small Cells. In 2016 IEEE
Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), pages 1–6, Dec 2016.

[96] A. Fotouhi, M. Ding, and M. Hassan. Service on Demand: Drone Base
Stations Cruising in the Cellular Network. In 2017 IEEE Globecom
Workshops (GC Wkshps), pages 1–6, Dec 2017.

[97] Shuowen Zhang, Yong Zeng, and Rui Zhang. Cellular-enabled UAV
communication: A connectivity-constrained trajectory optimization
perspective. CoRR, abs/1805.07182, 2018.

[98] J. Lyu, Y. Zeng, and R. Zhang. Uav-aided ofﬂoading for cellular
hotspot. IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, 17(6):3988–
4001, June 2018.

[99] M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Debbah. Drone Small Cells
in the Clouds: Design, Deployment and Performance Analysis. In 2015
IEEE GLOBECOM, pages 1–6, Dec 2015.

[100] M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Debbah. Efﬁcient De-
ployment of Multiple Unmanned Aerial Vehicles for Optimal Wireless
Coverage. IEEE Communications Letters, 20(8):1647–1650, Aug 2016.
[101] H. Claussen. Autonomous self-deployment of wireless access networks.

volume 14, pages 55–71, Spring 2009.

[102] M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Debbah. Unmanned Aerial
Vehicle With Underlaid Device-to-Device Communications: Perfor-
mance and Tradeoffs. IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
15(6):3949–3963, June 2016.

[103] K. Li, W. Ni, X. Wang, R. P. Liu, S. S. Kanhere, and S. Jha. Energy-
Efﬁcient Cooperative Relaying for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles. IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing, 15(6):1377–1386, June 2016.

[104] A. E. A. A. Abdulla, Z. M. Fadlullah, H. Nishiyama, N. Kato, F. Ono,
and R. Miura. An optimal data collection technique for improved utility
in UAS-aided networks. In IEEE INFOCOM 2014 - IEEE Conference
on Computer Communications, pages 736–744, April 2014.

[105] A. Abdulla, Z. M. Fadlullah, H. Nishiyama, N. Kato, F. Ono, and
R. Miura. Toward Fair Maximization of Energy Efﬁciency in Mul-
IEEE
tiple UAS-Aided Networks: A Game-Theoretic Methodology.
Transactions on Wireless Communications, 14(1):305–316, Jan 2015.
[106] S. Koulali, E. Sabir, T. Taleb, and M. Azizi. A green strategic activity
scheduling for UAV networks: A sub-modular game perspective. IEEE
Communications Magazine, 54(5):58–64, May 2016.

[107] S. Kandeepan, K. Gomez, L. Reynaud, and T. Rasheed. Aerial-
terrestrial communications: terrestrial cooperation and energy-efﬁcient
transmissions to aerial base stations. IEEE Transactions on Aerospace
and Electronic Systems, 50(4):2715–2735, October 2014.

[108] Elhadi M. Shakshuki, Dimitrios Zorbas, Tahiry Razaﬁndralambo,
Di Puglia Pugliese Luigi, and Francesca Guerriero. Energy Efﬁcient
Mobile Target Tracking Using Flying Drones. Procedia Computer
Science, 19:80 – 87, 2013.

[109] Luigi Di Puglia Pugliese, Francesca Guerriero, Dimitrios Zorbas, and
Tahiry Razaﬁndralambo. Modelling the mobile target covering problem
using ﬂying Drones. Optimization Letters, 10(5):1021–1052, 2016.

[110] Dimitrios Zorbas, Luigi Di Puglia Pugliese, Tahiry Razaﬁndralambo,
and Francesca Guerriero. Optimal drone placement and cost-efﬁcient
target coverage. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 75:16
– 31, 2016.

[111] Y. Zeng and R. Zhang. Energy-Efﬁcient UAV Communication With
Trajectory Optimization. IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communica-
tions, 16(6):3747–3760, June 2017.

[112] Sang-Jo Yoo, Jae hyun Park, Su hee Kim, and Anish Shrestha. Flying
path optimization in UAV-assisted IoT sensor networks. ICT Express,

2(3):140 – 144, 2016. Special Issue on ICT Convergence in the Internet
of Things (IoT).

[113] C. D. Franco and G. Buttazzo. Energy-Aware Coverage Path Planning
of UAVs. In Autonomous Robot Systems and Competitions (ICARSC),
2015 IEEE International Conference on, pages 111–117, April 2015.
[114] Marina Torres, David A. Pelta, José L. Verdegay, and Juan C. Torres.
Coverage path planning with unmanned aerial vehicles for 3D terrain
reconstruction. Expert Systems with Applications, 55:441 – 451, 2016.
[115] E. Yanmaz, R. Kuschnig, M. Quaritsch, C. Bettstetter, and B. Rinner.
On path planning strategies for networked unmanned aerial vehicles.
In Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2011
IEEE Conference on, pages 212–216, April 2011.

[116] Vishal Sharma, Kathiravan Srinivasan, Han-Chieh Chao, Kai-Lung
Intelligent deployment of UAVs in
Hua, and Wen-Huang Cheng.
5G heterogeneous communication environment for improved coverage.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 2016.

[117] Max Blenkin. Powerlines to charge drones:Lockheed Martin’s Mel-
bourne research lab takes ﬂight. http://australianaviation.com.au/2017/
08/lockheed-martins-melbourne-research-lab-takes-ﬂight/, 2017. Ac-
cessed: 2017-08-23.

[118] Milan Erdelj, Osamah Saif, Enrico Natalizio, and Isabelle Fantoni.
inspection through

Uavs that ﬂy forever: Uninterrupted structural
automatic uav replacement. Ad Hoc Networks, 2017.

[119] Y. Li and L. Cai. UAV-Assisted Dynamic Coverage in a Heterogeneous

Cellular System. IEEE Network, 31(4):56–61, July 2017.

[120] 3GPP TR 38.874. Study on integrated access and backhaul. Technical

Report (TR), May 2018.

[121] A. Bonfante, L. Galati Giordano, D. Lopez Perez, A. Garcia Rodriguez,
G. Geraci, P. Baracca, M. M. Butt, and N. Marchetti. 5G Massive
MIMO Architectures: Self-Backhauled Small Cells versus Direct Ac-
cess. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.03953v1, 2018.

[122] Y. Chen, N. Zhao, Z. Ding, and M. Alouini. Multiple UAVs as relays:
Multi-hop single link versus multiple dual-hop links. IEEE Transac-
tions on Wireless Communications, 17(9):6348–6359, Sept 2018.
[123] A. Fouda, A. S. Ibrahim, I. Guvenc, and M. Ghosh. UAV-Based in-
band Integrated Access and Backhaul for 5G Communications. ArXiv
e-prints arXiv:1807.07230, July 2018.

[124] Wonil Roh. 5G mobile communications for 2020 and beyond-vision
and key enabling technologies. Key note: at IEEE WCNC, 2014.
[125] Market Research Report: Emerging Market Opportunites. Analysys

Mason, 2010.

[126] Djamal-Eddine Meddour, Tinku Rasheed, and Yvon Gourhant. On the
role of infrastructure sharing for mobile network operators in emerging
markets. Computer Networks, 55(7):1576–1591, 2011.

[127] Ekkehard Lang, Simone Redana, and Bernhard Raaf. Business impact
of relay deployment for coverage extension in 3GPP LTE-Advanced.
In Communications Workshops, 2009. ICC Workshops 2009. IEEE
International Conference on, pages 1–5. IEEE, 2009.

[128] Harish Vadada.

Radio Network Sharing - new paradigm for
url: http://www.telecom-cloud.net/radio-network-sharing-the-

LTE.
new-paradigm/, March 2011.

[129] Facebook.

Building Communications Networks In The Strato-
https://code.facebook.com/posts/993520160679028/building-

sphere.
communications-networks-in-the-stratosphere/.

[130] T. Perry.

Facebook Aims to Remake Telecom With Millimeter
http://spectrum.ieee.org/view-from-

Waves
the-valley/telecom/wireless/facebook-aims-to-remake-the-telecom-
infrastructure-with-millimeter-waves-and-tethertennas, Apr. 2017.

and Tether-tennas.

[131] Google X.

Balloon-powered
https://www.google.com/intl/en-US/loon/.

Internet

for

everyone.

[132] E. Björnson, E. G. Larsson, and T. L. Marzetta. Massive MIMO: ten
IEEE Communications Magazine,

myths and one critical question.
54(2):114–123, Feb. 2016.

[133] T. L. Marzetta and B. M. Hochwald.

state information in wireless systems.
Processing, 54(4):1268–1278, Apr. 2006.

Fast

transfer of channel
IEEE Transactions on Signal

[134] L. P. Withers, R. M. Taylor, and D. M. Warme. Echo-MIMO: A two-
way channel training method for matched cooperative beamforming.
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 56(9):4419–4432, Sep. 2008.
[135] J. Choi, D. J. Love, and P. Bidigare. Downlink training techniques
for FDD massive MIMO systems: Open-loop and closed-loop training
with memory. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing,
8(5):802–814, Oct. 2014.

[136] T. L. Marzetta, O. Blume, P. Rulikowski, S. Maier, A. Pascht, and
T. Klein. Frequency division duplex (FDD) massive MIMO backhaul
for repeater small cells. Patent US 2 016 134 438 (A1), May 2016.

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

25

training for analog
IEEE

[137] S. Wesemann and T. L. Marzetta.

Channel

FDD repeaters: Optimal estimators and cramer-rao bounds.
Transactions on Signal Processing, 65(23):6158–6170, Dec. 2017.

[138] X. Yao, M. Ding, D. L. Pérez, Z. Lin, G. Mao, and Y. Wu. Performance
analysis of uplink massive mimo networks with a ﬁnite user density.
2018 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference
(WCNC), pages 1–6, Apr. 2018.

[139] L. Guan, L. Galati Giordano, and A. Bonfante. A ﬂexible HW and SW
co-operated baseband research platform for massive MIMO system. In
2017 IEEE ICC, pages 1–7, May 2017.

[140] Gurkan Tuna, Bilel Nefzi, and Gianpaolo Conte. Unmanned aerial
vehicle-aided communications system for disaster recovery. Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, 41:27 – 36, 2014.

[141] G. Tuna, T. V. Mumcu, and K. Gulez. Design strategies of unmanned
aerial vehicle-aided communication for disaster recovery. In High Ca-
pacity Optical Networks and Emerging/Enabling Technologies, pages
115–119, Dec 2012.

[142] T. A. Johansen, A. Zolich, T. Hansen, and A. J. Sorensen. Unmanned
aerial vehicle as communication relay for autonomous underwater
vehicle - Field tests. In 2014 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps),
pages 1469–1474, Dec 2014.

[143] C. M. Cheng, P. H. Hsiao, H. T. Kung, and D. Vlah. Maximizing
Throughput of UAV-Relaying Networks with the Load-Carry-and-
In 2007 IEEE Wireless Communications and
Deliver Paradigm.
Networking Conference, pages 4417–4424, March 2007.

[144] Z. Liu, Y. Chen, B. Liu, C. Cao, and X. Fu. HAWK: An Unmanned
IEEE
Mini-Helicopter-Based Aerial Wireless Kit for Localization.
Transactions on Mobile Computing, 13(2):287–298, Feb 2014.
[145] C. Dixon and E. W. Frew. Optimizing Cascaded Chains of Unmanned
Aircraft Acting as Communication Relays. IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, 30(5):883–898, June 2012.

[146] Z. M. Fadlullah, D. Takaishi, H. Nishiyama, N. Kato, and R. Miura.
A dynamic trajectory control algorithm for improving the communi-
cation throughput and delay in UAV-aided networks. IEEE Network,
30(1):100–105, January 2016.

[147] Severin Kacianka and Hermann Hellwagner. Adaptive Video Streaming
In Proceedings of the 7th ACM International
for UAV Networks.
Workshop on Mobile Video, MoVid ’15, pages 25–30, New York, NY,
USA, 2015. ACM.

[148] N. Goddemeier, K. Daniel, and C. Wietfeld. Coverage evaluation
In 2010 IEEE

of wireless networks for Unmanned Aerial Systems.
Globecom Workshops, pages 1760–1765, Dec 2010.

[149] J. Wigard, R. Amorim, H. C. Nguyen, I. Z. Kovacs, and P. Mo-
gensen. Method for detection of airborne UEs based on LTE radio
measurements. In 2017 IEEE 28th Annual International Symposium on
Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), pages
1–6, Oct 2017.

[150] R. Amorim, J. Wigard, H. Nguyen, I. Z. Kovacs, and P. Mogensen.
Machine-learning identiﬁcation of airborne uav-ues based on lte radio
In 2017 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps),
measurements.
pages 1–6, Dec 2017.

[151] J. Chen and D. Gesbert. Optimal positioning of ﬂying relays for
wireless networks: A LOS map approach. In 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC), pages 1–6, May 2017.

[152] Transport Canada.

safely and legally,
https://www.tc.gc.ca/en/services/aviation/drone-safety/ﬂying-

2018.
drone-safely-legally.html (accessed on 29 October 2018).

Flying your drone

[153] Direccion General De Aeronautica Civil Chile. Direccion General
De Aeronautica Chile Dan 151—Operaciones de Aeronaves Pilotadas
a Distancia (RPAS), 2015. Available online: http://http://www.dgac.
gob.cl/transparencia/pdf2017/DAN_151Ed2.pdf (accessed on 26 May
2018).

Civil Aviation Ad-
[154] Civil Aviation Administration of China.
the Administration of Air
ministration of China Measures for
Trafﬁc in Civil Unmanned Aircraft Systems, 2016.
Avail-
able online: http://www.caac.gov.cn/XXGK/XXGK/GFXWJ/201610/
P020161008345668760913.pdf (accessed on 26 May 2018).

[155] Civil Aviation Bureau.

Japan’s safety rules on Unmanned Aircraft
(UA)/Drone, 2015. http://www.mlit.go.jp/en/koku/uas.html (accessed
on 29 October 2018).

[156] South African Civil Aviation Authority.

RPAS regulations (Part
101), 2015.
Available online: http://www.caa.co.za/Pages/RPAS/
Remotely\%20Piloted\%20Aircraft\%20Systems.aspx (accessed on 26
May 2018).

[157] Civil Aviation Authority UK.

Operations

in UK Airspace – Guidance), 2015.

Unmanned Aircraft System
Available

online:
%20Edition\%20March\%202015.pdf (accessed on 25 May 2018).

https://publicapps.caa.co.uk/docs/33/CAP\%20722\%20Sixth\

[158] U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Aviation Administration.
Advisory Circular Small Unmanned Aircraft Systems (sUAS), 2016.
Available online: https://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/advisory_
circulars/index.cfm/go/document.list/parentTopicID/137 (accessed on
26 May 2018).

[159] B. Liu, M. Ding, T. Zhu, Y. Xiang, and W. Zhou. Using adversarial
noises to protect privacy in deep learning era. 2018 IEEE Global
Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), pages 1–6, Dec. 2018.

[160] DJI. MAVIC PRO PLATINUM, 2018 (accessed May 11, 2018). https:

//www.dji.com/mavic-pro-platinum.

[161] Beverly Sibthorpe, Erich Kliewer, and Len Smith. Record linkage in
australian epidemiological research: health beneﬁts, privacy safeguards
and future potential. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public
Health, 19(3):250–256, 1995.

[162] Marc Langheinrich. Privacy by design—principles of privacy-aware
ubiquitous systems. In International conference on Ubiquitous Com-
puting, pages 273–291. Springer, 2001.

[163] Rachel L Finn, David Wright, L Jacques, and P De Hert. Study
on privacy, data protection and ethical risks in civil remotely piloted
aircraft systems operations: Final report. Retrieved February, 27:2015,
2014.

[164] Christopher Bolkcom and Elizabeth Bone. Unmanned aerial vehicles:
Background and issues for congress, report for congress, congressional
research service. In Library of Congress, 2003.

[165] Bill Canis. Unmanned aircraft systems (UAS): Commercial outlook for

a new industry. Congressional Research Service Washington, 2015.

[166] Claudia Stöcker, Rohan Bennett, Francesco Nex, Markus Gerke, and
Jaap Zevenbergen. Review of the current state of uav regulations.
Remote sensing, 9(5):459, 2017.

[167] ECC Report 268. Technical and Regulatory Aspects and the Needs
for Spectrum Regulation for Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS). Feb.
2018.

[168] FCC Petition for Rulemaking. Aerospace Industries Association (AIA)
Petition for Rulemaking on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS). Feb.
2018.

[169] WM Sheehan. Air cabotage and the chicago convention. Harvard Law

Review, 63(7):1157–1167, 1950.
System International.

[170] UAV

Drones.
banned-restricted-countries-drones/ , May 2017.

For
Banned
url:https:// www.uavsystemsinternational.com/

Countries

[171] The Guardian. Apple, Microsoft and Uber test drones approved but
Amazon left out in cold. url:https:// www.theguardian.com/ technology/
2018/ may/ 10/ apple-microsoft-uber-drones-approved-testing-amazon,
May 2018.

[172] Ahmad Y Javaid, Weiqing Sun, Vijay K Devabhaktuni, and Mansoor
Alam. Cyber security threat analysis and modeling of an unmanned
In Homeland Security (HST), 2012 IEEE
aerial vehicle system.
Conference on Technologies for, pages 585–590. IEEE, 2012.
[173] Imad Jawhar, Nader Mohamed, Jameela Al-Jaroodi, Dharma P
Agrawal, and Sheng Zhang. Communication and networking of uav-
based systems: Classiﬁcation and associated architectures. Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, 84:93–108, 2017.

[174] Joseph A Ouma, Wayne L Chappelle, and Amber Salinas. Facets
of occupational burnout among us air force active duty and national
guard/reserve mq-1 predator and mq-9 reaper operators. Technical
report, School of Aerospace Medicine Wright Patterson AFB OH,
2011.

[175] Michael Hooper, Yifan Tian, Runxuan Zhou, Bin Cao, Adrian P Lauf,
Lanier Watkins, William H Robinson, and Wlajimir Alexis. Securing
commercial wiﬁ-based uavs from common security attacks. In Military
Communications Conference, MILCOM 2016-2016 IEEE, pages 1213–
1218. IEEE, 2016.

[176] CG Leela Krishna and Robin R Murphy. A review on cybersecurity
In Safety, Security and
vulnerabilities for unmanned aerial vehicles.
Rescue Robotics (SSRR), 2017 IEEE International Symposium on,
pages 194–199. IEEE, 2017.

[177] Daojing He, Sammy Chan, and Mohsen Guizani. Communication
security of unmanned aerial vehicles. IEEE Wireless Communications,
24(4):134–139, 2017.

[178] [Chitra Javali, Girish Revadigar, Ming Ding, and Sanjay Jha. Secret
key generation by virtual link estimation. The 10th EAI International
Conference on Body Area Networks, pages 301–307, Sep. 2015.
[179] Daniele Borio and Ciro Gioia. Real-time jamming detection using
the sum-of-squares paradigm. In Localization and GNSS (ICL-GNSS),
2015 International Conference on, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2015.

JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS

26

[180] Jaroslaw Magiera and Ryszard Katulski. Detection and mitigation of
gps spooﬁng based on antenna array processing. Journal of applied
research and technology, 13(1):45–57, 2015.

[181] Kamesh Namuduri, Serge Chaumette, Jae H Kim, and James PG
Sterbenz. UAV Networks and Communications. Cambridge University
Press, 2017.

[182] Michael Behrisch, Laura Bieker, Jakob Erdmann, and Daniel Kra-
jzewicz.
In
Proceedings of SIMUL 2011, The Third International Conference on
Advances in System Simulation. ThinkMind, 2011.

Sumo–simulation of urban mobility: an overview.

[183] OpenStreetMap contributors.

OpenStreetMap.

http://www.

openstreetmap.org/, 2004. [Online; accessed 1-May-2018].

[184] 3DR. DroneKit, Developer tools for drones. http://dronekit.io/, 2017.
https:// developer.parrot.com/ docs/ sphinx/
[185] Parrot. What is Sphinx.

whatissphinx.html, 2017.

[186] DJI Developer.

Testing,

Proﬁling

and Debugging

.

https://developer.dji.com/mobile-sdk/documentation/application-
development-workﬂow/workﬂow-testing.html, 2017.

[187] S. R. Ganti and Y. Kim. Design of Low-Cost On-board Auto-tracking
In 2015 12th International Conference on
Antenna for Small UAS.
Information Technology - New Generations, pages 273–279, April
2015.

[188] Randall L Musselman and Steve Eugene Watkins. Antenna Design for
Small UAV Locator Applications. American Society for Engineering
Education (ASEE), 2017.

[189] Yohandri, Asrizal, and J. T. S. Sumantyo. Design of tilted beam
circularly polarized antenna for CP-SAR sensor onboard UAV. In 2016
International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation (ISAP), pages
658–659, Oct 2016.

[190] Ejaz Ahmed, Arif Ahmed, Ibrar Yaqoob, Junaid Shuja, Abdullah Gani,
Muhammad Imran, and Muhammad Shoaib. Bringing computation
closer toward the user network: Is edge computing the solution? IEEE
Communications Magazine, 55(11):138–144, 2017.

[191] S. Jeong, O. Simeone, and J. Kang. Mobile edge computing via a uav-
mounted cloudlet: Optimization of bit allocation and path planning.
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 67(3):2049–2063, March
2018.

[192] M. Ding and D. L. Pérez. Promises and caveats of uplink iot ultra-
dense networks. 2018 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC), pages 1–6, Apr. 2018.

[193] Mingzhe Chen, Mohammad Mozaffari, Walid Saad, Changchuan Yin,
Mérouane Debbah, and Choong Seon Hong. Caching in the sky:
Proactive deployment of cache-enabled unmanned aerial vehicles for
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
optimized quality-of-experience.
Communications, 35(5):1046–1061, 2017.

[194] P. Cheng, C. Ma, M. Ding, Y. Hu, Z. Lin, Y. Li, and B. Vucetic.
Localized small cell caching: A machine learning approach based on
rating data. IEEE Transactions on Communications, 67(2):1663–1676,
Feb. 2019.

[195] B. Jiang, J. Yang, H. Xu, H. Song, and G. Zheng. Multimedia
data throughput maximization in internet-of-things system based on
optimization of cache-enabled uav. IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
pages 1–1, 2018.

