Cyber-Security in Smart Grid:  
Survey and Challenges 

1 

Z. Elmrabet1, H. Elghazi1, N. Kaabouch2, H. Elghazi1   

1STRS Lab, INPT, Rabat, Morocco  

2Electrical Engineering Department, UND, USA  

Abstract---  Smart  grid  uses  the  power  of 

information 
technology to intelligently deliver energy to customers by using a 
two-way  communication,  and  wisely  meet  the  environmental 
requirements by facilitating the integration of green technologies. 
Although  smart  grid  addresses  several  problems  of 
the 
traditional grid, it faces a number of security challenges. Because 
communication  has  been  incorporated  into  the  electrical  power 
with  its  inherent  weaknesses,  it  has  exposed  the  system  to 
numerous  risks.  Several  research  papers  have  discussed  these 
problems.  However,  most  of  them  classified  attacks  based  on 
confidentiality,  integrity,  and  availability,  and  they  excluded 
attacks  which  compromise  other  security  criteria  such  as 
accountability. In addition, the existed security countermeasures 
focus  on  countering  some  specific  attacks  or  protecting  some 
specific  components,  but  there  is  no  global  approach  which 
combines these solutions to secure the entire system. The purpose 
of  this  paper  is  to  provide  a  comprehensive  overview  of  the 
relevant  published  works.  First,  we  review 
the  security 
requirements.  Then,  we  investigate  in  depth  a  number  of 
important  cyber-attacks  in  smart  grid  to  diagnose  the  potential 
vulnerabilities along with their impact. In addition, we proposed 
a  cyber  security  strategy  as  a  solution  to  address  breaches, 
counter  attacks,  and  deploy  appropriate  countermeasures. 
Finally, we provide some future research directions. 

Index  Terms—  Smart  grid,  cyber-attacks,  vulnerabilities, 
IDS, 

integrity,  accountability, 

confidentiality,  availability, 
cryptography, network security. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

Traditional  electrical  distribution  systems  are  used  to 
transport  electrical  energy  generated  at  a  central  power  plant 
by  increasing  voltage  levels  and  then  delivering  it  to  the  end 
users  by  reducing  voltage  levels  gradually.  However,  this 
electricity grid has major shortcomings, including the inability 
to  include  diverse  generation  sources  such  as  green  energy, 
high  cost  and  expensive  assets,  time  consuming  demand 
response, high carbon emission, and blackouts. For example, a 
study  conducted  by  researchers  at  the  Berkeley  National 

Laboratory  in  2004  showed  that  power  interruptions  cost  the 
American economy approximately $80 billion per year; other 
estimates indicate a higher cost of $150 billion per year [1]. It 
is  evident  that  these  critical  problems  cannot  be  addressed 
with  existing  electricity  grid.  Smart  grid  promises  to  provide 
flexibility and reliability by facilitating the integration of new 
power  resources  (such  as  renewable  energy,  wind,  and  solar 
energy),  enabling  corrective  capabilities  when  failures  occur, 
reducing  carbon  footprint,  and  reducing  energy  losses  within 
the grid. 
is  a  system  based  on  communication  and 
Smart  grid 
information 
and 
technology 
consumption  of  energy  power.  It  uses  two-way  flow  of 
information  to  create  an  automated  and  widely  distributed 
system that has new functionalities such as, real time control, 
operational efficiency, grid resilience, and better integration of 
renewable  technology  which  will  decrease  carbon  footprint. 
However, risks can still exist in smart grid. Any interruptions 
in  power  generation  could  disturb  smart  grid  stability  and 
could  potentially  have  large  socio-economic  impacts.  In 
addition,  as  valuable  data  are  exchanged  among  smart  grid 
systems, theft or alteration of this data could violate consumer 
privacy. Because of these weaknesses, smart grid has become 
the  primary  target  of  attackers  [2],  which  attracted  the 
attention of government, industry, and academia. 

in  generation,  delivery, 

Several research papers have been published that provide an 
overview  of  the  prevailing  problems  related  to  cyber  security 
in  smart  grid  infrastructure  [3,  7].  In  [3],  Rawat  et  al. 
presented  a  study  of  the  challenges  present  in  smart  grid 
security.  They  classified  attacks  based  upon  the  type  of  the 
network,  namely,  home  area  network  (HAN),  neighborhood 
area  network  (NAN),  and  wide  area  network  (WAN).  In 
addition,  they  presented  the  impact  of  each  attack  on  the 
information security: confidentiality, integrity, and availability 
(CIA).  In  [4],  Shapsough  et  al.  discussed  security  challenges 
in  smart  grid  system,  especially  those  related  to  connectivity, 
trust,  customer  privacy,  and  software  vulnerabilities.  The 
authors  provided  also  an  overview  of  the  existing  security 
solutions,  particularly  network  security,  data  security,  key 
management,  network  security  protocols,  and  compliance 
checks. Another study, focusing on public networks, has been 
conducted  by  Liang  et  al.  in  [5].  The  paper  describes  a 
protection framework of smart grid based on a public network. 
This  framework  was  composed  of  three  layers,  main  station, 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communication  network,  and  terminals.  In  [6],  Dari  et  al. 
discussed  the  security  requirements  and  possible  threats  on 
smart grid. These threats were classified into three categories: 
people and policy, platform, and network threats. In [7], Wang 
et  al.  also  classified  attacks  based  on  the  CIA  requirements, 
and 
including 
network  security,  cryptographic,  secure  protocols,  and  secure 
architecture.  

they  described  several  countermeasures, 

While these survey papers provide various classifications of 
attacks  on  smart  grid,  most  of  them  are  based  upon  
confidentiality,  integrity,  or  availability.  However,  blended 
and  sophisticated  attacks  such  as  Stuxnet,  Duqu,  and  Flame 
[8] can compromise all of the security parameters at the same 
time. Therefore, such attacks are usually excluded from these 
classification  systems.  Furthermore,  countermeasures  and 
security  solutions  were  presented  individually  for  each  smart 
grid’s component, and there is no global approach or process 
to combine all security mechanisms in order to ensure security 
for the entire system. 

This  paper  provides  a  summary  of  the  current  status  and 
future  expectations  of  the  smart  grid  cyber  security.  The 
remainder  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  First,  we 
review  cyber  security  objectives  in  smart  grid.  Next,  we 
present a new classification system of cyber-attack based on a 
method  used  by  hackers  or  penetration  testers.  This  method 
allows one to better understand the process used by a hacker to 
compromise  the  smart  grid  security  [9].  Then,  we  summarize 
and 
recommend  a  number  of  countermeasures.  Some 
challenges  and  future  directions  are  discussed  in  the  last 
section.  

II.  SMART GRID OVERVIEW  

A.  Smart grid’s features  

The  main  benefits  expected  from  the  smart  grid  are 
increasing  grid  resilience  and 
improving  environmental 
performance.  Resilience  indicates  the  capability  of  a  given 
entity  to  resist  unexpected  events  and  recover  quickly 
thereafter  [1].  Today,  grid  resilience  as  a  feature  has  become 
nonnegotiable,  especially  when  power 
interruptions  can 
potentially  impact  the  economy.  Smart  grid  promises  to 
provide  flexibility  and  reliability  by  enabling  additional 
dispersed  power  supply,  facilitating  the  integration  of  new 
resources  into  the  grid,  and  enabling  corrective  capabilities 
when  failures  occur.  Moreover,  smart  grid  systems  are 
expected  to  enable  electric  vehicles  as  replacements  for 
conventional vehicles, reducing energy used by customers and 
reducing energy losses within the grid [10]. 

B.  Smart grid’s conceptual model  

to 

According 

the  national 

institute  of  standard  and 
technology  (NIST)  [2],  a  smart  grid  is  composed  of  seven 
logical  domains:  bulk  generation,  transmission,  distribution, 
customer,  markets,  service  provider,  and  operations,  each  of 
which  include  both  actors  and  applications.  Actors  are 
programs, devices, and systems whereas applications are tasks 

2 

performed  by  a  one  actor  or  more  in  each  domain.  Fig.  1 
shows the conceptual model of smart grid and the interaction 
of actors from different domains via a secure channel.   

three 

there  are 

Within the customer domain, the main actor is the end user. 
Generally, 
types  of  customers:  home, 
commercial/building, and industrial. In addition to consuming 
electricity,  these  actors  may  also  generate,  store,  and  manage 
the use of energy. This domain is electrically connected to the 
distribution  domain  and  communicates  with  the  distribution, 
operation, service provider, and market domains [2, 11]. 

Fig. 1.  Smart grid’s conceptual model based on NIST. 

In  the  market  domain,  actors  are  the  operators  and 
participants  in  the  electricity  markets.  This  domain  maintains 
the  balance  between  electrical  supply  and  the  demand.  In 
order  to  match  the  production  with  demand,  the  market 
domain  communicates  with  energy  supply  domains  which 
include  the  bulk  generation  domain  and  distributed  energy 
resources  (DER)  [2,  11].  The  service  provider  domain 
includes  the  organizations  that  provide  services  to  both 
electrical customers and utilities. These organizations manage 
services such as billing, customer account, and use of energy. 
The  service  provider  interacts  with  the  operation  domain  for 
situational  awareness,  system  control  and  also  communicates 
with  customer  and  market  domain  to  develop  smart  services 
such as enabling customer interaction with market and energy 
generation at home [2, 11]. The operations domain’s actors are 
the  managers  of  the  movement  of  electricity.  This  domain 
maintains efficient and optimal operations in transmission and 
distribution.  In  transmission,  it  uses  energy  management 
systems  (EMS),  whereas  in  distribution  it  uses  distribution 
management  systems  (DMS)  [2,  11].  Actors  in  the  bulk 
generation  domain  include  generators  of  electricity  in  bulk 
quantities. Energy generation is the first step in the process of 
delivering  electricity  to  the  end  user.  Energy  is  generated 
using  resources  like  oil,  flowing  water,  coal,  nuclear  fission, 
and solar radiation. The bulk generation domain is electrically 
connected  to  the  transmission  domain  and  communicates 

 
 
 
	
	
through  an  interface  with  the  market  domain,  transmission 
domain,  and  operations  domain  [2,  11].  In  the  transmission 
domain,  generated  electrical  power  is  carried  over  long 
distances  from  generation  domain  to  distribution  domain 
through multiple substations. This domain may also store and 
generate  electricity.  The  transmission  network  is  monitored 
and controlled via a SCADA system, which is composed of a 
communication  network,  control  devices,  and  monitoring 
devices  [2,  11].  The  distribution  domain 
the 
distributors  of  electricity  to  and  from  the  end  user.  The 
electrical distribution systems have different structures such as 
radial,  looped,  or  meshed.  In  addition  to  distribution,  this 
domain may also support energy generation and storage. This 
domain  is  connected  to  the  transmission  domain,  customer 
domain, and the metering points for consumption [2, 11]. 

includes 

C.  Smart grid’s systems  

Smart  grid 

is  composed  of  several  distributed  and 
heterogeneous  applications,  including    advanced  metering 
infrastructure (AMI) [12], automation substation [13], demand 
response  [13],  supervisory  control  and  data  acquisition 
(SCADA),  electrical  vehicle  (EV)  [14],  and  home  energy 
management (HEM) [13].  In this section we will discuss three 
critical  and  vulnerable  applications  in  the  smart  grid:    AMI, 
SCADA, and automation substation [1, 8, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17] . 
The other applications were discussed in detail in [12, 13].  

Advanced  metering  infrastructure  (AMI)  is  responsible  for 
collecting,  measuring  and  analyzing  energy,  water  and  gas 
usage. It allows two-way communication from the user to the 
utility. It is composed of three components: smart meter, AMI 
headend,  and  the  communication  network  [18].  Smart  meters 
are  digital  meters,  consisting  of  microprocessors  and  a  local 
memory,  and  they  are  responsible  first  for  monitoring  and 
collecting  power  usage  of  home  appliances,  and  also  for 
transmitting data in real time to the AMI headend in the utility 
side. An AMI headend is an AMI server consists of meter data 
management  system  (MDMS)  [12].  The  communication 
between the smart meters, the home appliances, and the AMI 
headend  is  defined  through  several  communication  protocols 
such as Z-wave and Zigbee [18].  

Supervisory  control  and  data  acquisition  (SCADA)  is  a 
system  that  measures,  monitors  and  controls  electrical  power 
grid.  It  is  typically  used  for  large-scale  environments.  It 
consists  of  three  elements:  the  remote  terminal  unit  (RTU), 
master  terminal  unit  (MTU),  and  human–machine  interface 
(HMI) [19]. RTU is a device composed of three components: 
first one used for data acquisition, second one responsible for 
executing  instructions  coming  for  the  MTU,  and  a  third  one 
designed for the communication. MTU is a device responsible 
for  controlling  the  RTU.  The  HMI  is  a  graphic  interface  for 
the SCADA system operator [19].  The communication within  
SCADA  system 
industrial  protocol 
is  based  on  many 
including  distributed  network  protocol  v3.0  (DNP3)  and  IEC 

3 

61850 [20].  

The substation is a key element in the power grid network. 
it performs several functions including receiving  power from 
generating facility, regulating distribution, and limiting power 
surge  [13].  It  contains  devices  that  regulate  and  distributes 
electrical energy such as a remote terminal unit (RTU), global 
positioning  system  (GPS),  human–machine  interface  (HMI), 
and  intelligent  electronic  devices  (IEDs)  [21].  The  substation 
sends operation data to the SCADA for controlling the power 
system.  Many  operations  are  automated  within  the  substation 
in order to increase the reliability of the power grid [1].  The 
communication  between  the  automation  substation  and  other 
devices  in  transmission  and  distribution  is  defined  by  the 
standard IEC 61850 [22].  

D.  Smart grid’s network protocols  

Distributed  and  heterogeneous  applications  in  smart  grid 
require  different  communication  protocols.  Fig.  2  illustrates 
the  smart  grid  network  architecture  and  the  protocol  used 
within each network. In the home area network (HAN), home 
appliances  uses  ZigBee  and  Z-wave  protocols  [18].  In  the 
neighborhood  area  network  (NAN),  devices  are  usually 
connected  via  IEEE  802.11,  IEEE  802.15.4,  or  IEEE  802.16 
standards  [18].  In  the  wide  area  network  (WAN)  and  in 
supervisory 
(SCADA) 
and  data 
applications,  several  industrial  protocols  are  used  specially  
distributed  networking  protocol  3.0  (DNP3)  and  modicon 
communication  bus 
  (ModBus)  [20].  Within  substation 
automation, protocol IEC 61850 is used [7].  In this section we 
will discuss two widely used  yet vulnerable protocols in smart 
grid [22-25]:  Modbus and DNP3. Bluetooth, Z-Wave, Zigbee, 
6LoWPAN,  WiMAX,  IEC  61850  protocol,  and  power  line 
communication are discussed in depth in [12, 14, 22]. 

acquisition 

control 

Modicon  communication  bus    (ModBus)    is  a  7  layer 
protocol of the model OSI; it was designed in  1979 to enable 
the  process  controller  to  communicate  in  real-time  with 
computers. There are three types of Modbus: Modbus ASCII, 
Modbus  RTU,  and  Modbus/TCP.  In  the  first  one,  messages 
are  coded  in  hexadecimal.  Though  it  is  slow,  it  is  ideal  for 
radio links and telephone communications. In the second one, 
the messages are coded in binary and it is used over RS232. In 
the  third  one,  the  masters  and  slaves  uses  IP  addresses  for 
communication  [23].  In  a  SCADA  system  ModBus  is  a 
master-slave  protocol  responsible  for  exchanging  instruction 
between  one  master,  remote  terminal  unit  (RTU)  or  master 
terminal  unit  (MTU),  and  several  slave  devices,  such  as 
sensors,  drivers,  and  PLCs    [23].  On  one  hand,  Modbus  is 
widely  used  in  industrial  architecture,  because  of  its  relative 
ease of use by communicating raw data without restriction of 
authentication,  encryption,  or  any  excessive  overhead  [26]. 
One  the  other  hand,  these  features  make  it  vulnerable  and 
easily exploitable [23, 25].  

 
 
 
4 

Fig. 2.  Illustration of smart grid network architecture 

Distributed network protocol v3.0 (DNP3) is another widely 
used  communication  protocol  for  critical  infrastructure,  more 
specifically  in  the  electricity  industry  [24].  It  was  initiated  in 
1990  as  a  serial  protocol  to  manage  communication  between 
“Master  stations”  and  slave  stations  called  “outstations’  [26]. 
In  electrical  stations,  DNP3  was  used  for  connecting  master 
stations,  such  as  RTUs,  with  outstations,  such  as  intelligent 
electrical devices (IEDs) [23]. In 1998, DNP3 was extended to 
work over IP network through encapsulation of TCP or UDP 
packets.  DNP3  uses  several  standardized  data  formats  and 
support  timed-stamped  (time-synchronized)  data,  making  the 
data transmission reliable and efficient [26]. At first DNP3 did  
not  provide  any  security  mechanism  such  as  encryption  or 
authentication,  but  this  problem  was  fixed  with  the  secure 
version of  DNP3 called DNP3 secure [7].  

III.  SECURITY REQUIREMENTS OF SMART GRID 

The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
has  defined  three  criteria  required  to  maintain  security  of 
information 
it  protected, 
the  smart  grid  and  keep 
specifically  confidentiality,  integrity,  and  availability  [10]. 
According to [27], accountability is another important security 
criterion. The description of each criterion is given below. 

in 

A.  Confidentiality  
In general, confidentiality preserves authorized restrictions on 
information  access  and  disclosure.  In  other  words,  the 
confidentiality  criterion  requires  protecting  both  personal 
privacy  and  proprietary  information  from  being  accessed  or 
disclosed  by  unauthorized  entities,  individuals,  or  processes. 
Once  an  unauthorized  disclosure  of  information  occurs, 
confidentiality  is  lost.  For  instance,  information  such  as 
control  of  a  meter,  metering  usage,  and  billing  information 
that  is  sent  between  a  customer  and  various  entities  must  be 
confidential  and  protected;  otherwise 
the  customer’s 
information could be manipulated, modified, or used for other 

malicious purposes [10]. 

B.  Availability  

Availability  is  defined  as  ensuring  timely  and  reliable 
access  to  and  use  of  information.  It  is  considered  the  most 
important  security  criterion  in  smart  grid  because  the  loss  of 
availability  means  disruption  of  access  to  information  in  a 
smart  grid  [10].  For  example,  loss  of  availability  can  disturb 
the  operation  of 
the 
information’s flow through the network, and therefore denying 
the network’s availability to control the system’s operators. 

the  control  system  by  blocking 

C.  Integrity  

Integrity  in  smart  grid  means  protecting  against  improper 
modification  or  destruction  of  the  information.  A  loss  of 
integrity  is  an  unauthorized  alteration,  modification,  or 
destruction  of  data  in  undetected  manner  [10].  For  example, 
power injection is a malicious attack launched by an adversary 
who intelligently modifies the measurements and relays them 
from  the  power  injection  meters  and  power  flow  to  the  state 
estimator. Both nonrepudiation and authenticity of information 
are  required  to  maintain  the  integrity.  Nonrepudiation  means 
that individuals, entity or organization, are unable to perform a 
particular action and then deny it later; authenticity is the fact 
that data is originated from a legitimate source. 

D.  Accountability 

Accountability  means  ensuring  tractability  of  the  system 
and that every action performed by a person, device, or even a 
public authority is recordable so that no one can deny his/her 
action.  This  recordable  information  can  be  presented  as  an 
evidence  within  a  court  of  law  in  order  to  determine  the 
attacker [28]. An example of an accountability problem would 
be the monthly electricity bills of customers. Generally smart 
meters  could  determine  the  cost  of  electricity  in  real-time  or 
day-to-day.  However,  if  these  meters  are  under  attack  this 
information  is  no  longer  reliable  because  they  have  been 

 
 
 
altered.  As  a  result,  the  customer  will  have  two  different 
electric bills, one from the smart meter and the other from the 
utility [27]. 

IV.  SECURITY PROBLEMS AND COUNTERMEASURES IN SMART 
GRID  

A.  Smart grid attacks 

In general and as shown in Fig. 3, there are four steps used 
by malicious hackers to attack and get control over a system, 
namely  reconnaissance,  scanning,  exploitation,  and  maintain 
access  [9].  During  the  first  step,  reconnaissance,  the  attacker 
gathers and collects information about its target. In the second 
step,  scanning,  the  attacker  tries  to  identify  the  system’s 
vulnerabilities.  These  activities  aim  to  identify  the  opened 
ports  and  to  discover  the  service  running  on  each  port  along 
with its weaknesses. During the exploitation step, he/she tries 
to  compromise  and  get  a  full  control  of  the  target.  Once  the 
attacker  has  an  administrative  access  on  the  target,  he/she 
proceeds  to  the  final  step  which  is,  maintaining  the  access. 
This step is achieved by installing a stealthy and undetectable 
program; thus he/she can get back easily to the target system 
later.  

Fig. 3.  Attacking cycle followed by hackers to get control over a system. 

In  smart  grid,  the  same  steps  are  followed  by  attackers  to 
compromise the security’s criteria [1].  During each step, they 
use different techniques to compromise a particular system in 
the grid.  Thus, attacks can be classified based on these steps. 
Fig. 4 illustrates the types of attacks during each step. As one 
can  see,  numerous  types  of  attacks  can  happen  during  the 
exploitation  step.  The  malicious  activities  and  attacks  during 
each step described below. 
1)  Reconnaissance  

The first phase, reconnaissance, includes the attacks: social 
engineering  and  traffic  analysis.  Social  engineering  (SE), 
relies  on  social  skills  and  human  interaction  rather  than 
technical  skills.  An  attacker  uses  communication  and 
persuasion  to  win  the  trust  of  a  legitimate  user  and  get 
credential  and  confidential  information  such  as  passwords  or 
PIN number to log on into a particular system. For examples, 
phishing  [29]  and  password  pilfering  attack  [30]  are  famous 
techniques  used  in  SE.  The  traffic  analysis  attack  is  used  to 
listen  to  the  traffic  and  analyze  it  in  order  to  determine  the 
devices  and  the  hosts  connected  to  the  network  along  with 
their  IP  addresses.  Social  engineering  and  traffic  analysis 

5 

compromise mainly the confidentiality of the information.  
2)   Scanning  

Scanning  attack  is  the  next  step  used  to  discover  all  the 
devices  and  the  hosts  alive  on  the  network.  There  are  four 
types  of  scans:    IPs,  ports,  services,  and  vulnerabilities  [9]. 
Generally, an attacker starts with an IPs scan to identify all the 
hosts connected in the network along with their IP addresses. 
Next, he or she goes deeper by scanning the ports in order to 
determine  which  port  is  open.  This  scan  is  executed  on  each 
discovered host on the network. The attacker then moves on to 
the  service  scan  in  order  to  find  out  the  service  or  system 
running behind each opened port. For instance, if the port 102 
is detected open on a particular system, the hacker could infer 
that  this  system  is  a  substation  automation  control  or 
messaging.  If  the  port  4713  is  open,  the  target  system  is  a 
Phasor  Measurement  Unit  (PMU)  [1].  The  final  step, 
vulnerabilities  scan,  aims  to  identify  the  weaknesses  and 
vulnerabilities related to each service on the target machine to 
exploit it afterward.  

Modbus  and  DNP3  are  two  industrial  protocols  vulnerable 
to scanning attacks. Given that Modbus/TCP was designed for 
communication  rather  than  security  purpose,  it  can  be 
compromised  by  an  attack  called  Modbus  network  scanning 
[31].  This  attack  consists  of  sending  a  benign  message  to  all 
devices connected in the network to gather information about 
these  devices  [31].  Modscan  is  a  SCADA  Modbus  network 
scanner  designed  to  detect  open  Modbus/TCP  and  identify 
device slave IDs along  with their IP addresses [25].  Nicolas 
R.  et  al.  have  proposed  an  algorithm  to  scan  the  DNP3 
protocol  and  discover  hosts,  specifically,  the  slaves,  their 
DNP3 addresses, and their corresponding master [24]. As one 
can  see,  these  attacks  target  mainly  the  confidentiality  of  the 
smart grid.  
3)  Exploitation 

to  exploit 

The  third  step,  exploitation,  includes  malicious  activities 
that  attempt 
the  smart  grid  component’s 
vulnerabilities  and  get  the  control  over  it.  These  activities 
include  viruses,  worms,  Trojan  horses,  denial  of  service 
(DOS)  attacks,  man-in-the-middle  (MITM)  attacks,  replay 
attacks,  jamming  channels,  popping  the  human  machine 
interface (HMI), integrity violations, and privacy violations. 
  A  virus  is  a  program  used  to  infect  a  specific  device  or  a 
system  in  smart  grid  [1,  32].  A  worm  is  self-replicating 
program.  It  uses  the  network  to  spread,  to  copy  itself,  and  to 
infect  other  devices  and  systems  [1,  32].  A  Trojan  horse  is  a 
program that appears to perform a legitimate task on the target 
system. However, it runs a malicious code in the background. 
An  attacker  uses  this  type  of  malware  to  upload  a  virus  or 
worm  on  the  target  system  [1,  32].  In  June  2010,  Roel 
Schouwenberg,  a  senior  research  at  Kaspersky  Lab,  detected 
Stuxnet, the first worm targeting supervisory control and data 
acquisition (SCADA) systems [8]. This is regarded as the first 
cyber attack against a physical industrial control system.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
6 

length  and  the  fragmentation  offset  fields  in  sequential  IP 
packets.  Once  the  target  system  receives  these  packets,  it 
crashes  because  the  instructions  on  how  the  fragments  are 
offset within these packets are contradictory.  

In  smurf  attack,  the  attacker  targets  not  only  a  specific 
system, but it can saturate and congest the traffic of an entire 
network.  It  consists  of  three  elements:  the  source  site,  the 
bounce site, and the target site. For source site, the adversary 
sends a spoofed packet to the broadcast address of the bounce 
site. These packets contain the IP address of the target system. 
Once the bounce site receives the forged packets, it broadcasts 
them  to  all  hosts  connected  to  the  network  and  then  causes 
these hosts to replay, saturating the target system [1, 32].  

In  puppet  attack  [15]  targets  the  advanced  metering 
infrastructure  (AMI)  network  by  exploiting  a  vulnerability  in 
dynamic  source  routing  (DSR)  protocol  and  then  exhausting 
the communication network bandwidth. Due to this attack, the 
packet delivery drops between 10% and 20%.  

The 

time-delay-switch  (TDS)  [34]  attack  consists  of 
introducing a delay in control system creating instability in the 
smart grid system.  

The  time  synchronization  (TSA)  attack  [35]  targets  mainly 
the  timing  information  in  smart  grid.  Because  power  grid  
operations  such  as  fault  detection  and  event 
location 
estimation  depend  highly  on  precise  time  information,  and 
also  most  of  the  measurement  devices  in  smart  grid  are 
equipped with global positioning system (GPS), attack such as 
TSA,  which  spoof  the  GPS  information,  could  have  a  high 
impact  on  the  system.  DOS  represents  a  significant  threat  to 
the  smart  grid  system  because  communication  and  control 
messages in such a system are time critical [11], and a delay of 
few seconds could compromise the system availability.  

The  man-in-the-middle  (MITM)  attack  is  performed  when 
an  attacker  inserts  itself  between  two  legitimate  devices  and 
listens, performs an injection, or intercepts the traffic between 
them. The attacker is connected to both devices and relays the 
traffic  between  them.  These  legitimate  devices  appear  to 
communicate  directly  when  in  fact  they  are  communicating 
via a third-device [1]. For example, an attacker could conduct 
a MITM, by placing himself on an Ethernet network to alter or 
misrepresent  I/O  values  to  the  human  machine  interface 
(HMI) and programmable logic controllers (PLC). The MITM 
could  also  be  used  to  intercept  TCP/IP  communication 
between the substation gateway and the transmission SCADA 
server [1]. Peter M. et al. have conducted several experiments, 
including the MITM attack, to compromise the integrity of the 
SCADA  communication.  They  demonstrated  the  impact  of 
such  attack  on  the  SCADA  servers  [17].    Ihab  D.  et  al.  [36] 
highlighted  the  vulnerability  of  the  protocol  DNP3  operating 
in  SCADA,  and  they  conducted  an  experiment  of  MITM 
attack with two scenarios showing  that it is easy to intercept 
the  messages  exchanged  between  the  master  station  and  the 
outstations, modify the packet’s content, and inject it into the 
network.  

Fig. 4.  Cyber attacks classification in smart grid based on the attacking cycle 

Stuxnet,  a  worm  of  500  Kilobytes,  exploited  many  zero-
days,  which  are  software  vulnerabilities  that  have  not  yet 
disclosed  by  the  software  owner.  It  infected  at  least  14 
industrial sites based in Iran, including a uranium-enrichment 
plant. More than one year later, two more worms that targeted 
industrial  control  systems  were  discovered,  Duqu  and  Flame. 
Unlike  Stuxnet,  Duqu  was  designed  to  gather  and  steal 
information  about  industrial  control  systems.  Flame,  on  the 
other  hand,  was  created  to  be  used  in  cyber  espionage  in 
industrial networks. It has been found in Iran and other Middle 
East countries [1, 8, 33]. Viruses and worms can compromise 
availability, as Stuxnet did, confidentiality, as Duqu did, or a 
combination of the security’s parameters. 

In  denial  of  service  (DOS)  attacks,  several  methods  are 
used,  particularly  SYN  attacks,  buffer  overflow,  teardrop 
attacks,  and  smurf  attacks  [1,  32],  puppet  attack  [15],  time-
delay-switch  (TDS)  [34],  and  time  synchronization  attack 
(TSA)  [35].  A  SYN  attack  exploits  the  three-way  handshake 
(SYN, SYN-ACK, ACK) used to establish a TCP session. The 
attacker  floods  a  target  system  with  connection  requests 
without responding to the replays, forcing the system to crash. 
The Modbus/TCP protocol is vulnerable to these attacks since 
it operates over TCP [26].   

In buffer overflow, the attacker sends a huge amount of data 
to  a  specific  system,  thereby  exhausting  its  resources.  For 
example, the ping-of-death is considered as a buffer overflow 
attack  as  it  exploits  the  internet  control  message  protocol 
(ICMP)  by  sending  more  that  65K  octets  of  data.  It  then 
makes the system crash.  

In  a  teardrop  attack,  an  attacker  alters  and  modifies  the 

Intercept/alter  attack  is  another  type  MITM  attack.  It 

 
 
 
 
 
attempts to intercept, alter, and modify data either transmitted 
across  the  network  or  stored  in  a  particular  device  [33].  For 
example,  in  order  to  intercept  a  private  communication  in 
advanced  metering  infrastructure  (AMI),  an  attacker  uses 
attack. 
electromagnetic/radio-frequency 
Eavesdropping  attack  is  also  another  MITM  attack’s  type, 
where the attacker intercepts private communications between 
two  legitimate  devices  [33].  All  these  MITM  attacks  attempt 
to  compromise  the  confidentiality,  the  integrity,  and  the 
accountability.  

interception 

the 

[1], 

then 

traffic 

integrity. 

destinations 

compromising 

industrial  control 

In  replay  attack,  as 

is 
transmitted in plain text, an attacker could maliciously capture 
packets,  inject  a  specific  packet,  and  replay  them  to  the 
the 
legitimate 
communication’s 
Intelligent  electronic  device 
(IED),which 
is  a  device  designed  for  controlling  and 
communicating  with    the  SCADA  system  [7],  could  be 
targeted  by  replay  attacks  so  that  false  measurements  are 
injected in a specific register [1]. Replay attack could also be 
used  to  alter  the  behavior  the  programmable  logic  controllers 
(PLC)  [1].  In    AMI,  where  an  authentication  scheme  is  used 
between  smart  meters,  a  replay  attack  involves  a  malicious 
host to intercept authentication packets sent from smart meter 
and  re-sending  them  at  a  later  point  in  time,  expecting  to 
authenticate and gain unauthorised entry into the network [37].  
In  the  jamming  channel  attack,  an  adversary  exploits  the 
shared  nature  of  the  wireless  network  and  sends a  random  or 
continuous flow of packets in order to keep the channel busy 
and then prevents legitimate devices from communicating and 
exchanging  data  [38].  Due  to  its  time-critical  nature,  smart 
grid requires a highly available network to meet the quality of 
service requirements and such an attack can severely degrade 
its performance [38]. Keke G. et al. [16] proposed a jamming 
attack named maximum attacking strategy using spoofing and 
jamming  (MAS-SJ)  that  targets  mainly  the  cognitive  radio 
network  (CRN)  in  the  wireless  smart  grid  network  (WSGN). 
Because WSGN is important for monitoring  power grid in the 
smart  grid  with  the  PMU  that  plays  a  key  component  by 
providing  time-synchronized  data  of  power  system  operating 
states [39],  attacks like MAS-SJ can disturb the operation of 
the system or even make it unavailable.   

device’s 

software 

especially 

Popping the HMI is an attack that exploits a known device’s 
or  OS 
vulnerability, 
vulnerabilities,  and  then  installs  a  remote  shell,  allowing  the 
attacker  to  connect  remotely  to  the  server  from  his  computer 
to get unauthorized access in order to monitor and control the 
compromised system [1]. SCADA systems, substations, or any 
system running an operation system with a console interface is 
considered as a potential target of this attack. Even given the 
potential  impact  of  such  an  attack,  it  does  not  require 
advanced  networking  skills  or  significant  experience  in 
security  and  industrial  control  system  to  perform.  Since  the 
devices’  vulnerabilities  documentation  are  publicly  available, 
a  hacker  or  the  so-called  script-kiddies  may  simply  use  open 
source tools such as Metasploit and meterpreter to launch such 

7 

an  attack  and  gain  full  control  of  the  target  system  [1].  The 
availability,  integrity,  confidentiality,  and  accountability  may 
be  compromised  based  on  the  attacker’s  objective  and 
motivation.  

In  the  masquerade  attack,  a  malicious  person  may  pretend 
to  be  a  legitimate  user  in  order  to  gain  access  to  a  system  or 
gain  greater  privileges  to  perform  unauthorized  actions.  This 
attack  could  tamper  with  the  programmable  communicating 
thermostat  (PCT)  which  is  used  to  reduce  electric  power  at  a 
residential  site.  It  compromises  the  availability,  integrity, 
confidentiality, and accountability of the system [33].  

Integrity violation attacks aim to violate the integrity and/or 
the accountability of the smart grid by altering intentionally or 
unintentionally  the  data  stored  in  a  given  device  in  the 
network. For instance, a customer could perform this attack to 
alter the smart meter data in order to reduce his electricity bill. 
This  attack  could  also  be  used  to  target  remote  terminal  unit 
(RTU),  so  wrong  data  will  be  reported  to  the  control  center, 
resulting  in  an  increased  outage  time.  False  data  injection 
(FDI)  [40]  attack  is  a  type  of  integrity  violation.  It  aims  to 
introduce  arbitrary  errors  and  corrupt  some  device’s 
measurements,  affecting  the  accuracy  of  the  state  estimate 
(SE).  Since  the  SE  is  important  for  system  monitoring  to 
ensure  reliable  operation  in  the  power  system,  and  for  the 
energy management system (EMS) to process a real-time data 
the  SCADA  system,  FDI  attack  could 
collected  by 
compromise the SE’s integrity leading to the instability of the 
smart grid system [40]. A detailed study on the impact of the 
FDI  attack  on  the  power  system  stability  was  conducted  by 
Adnan A. et al. in [41]. 

Privacy  violation  attack  aims 

to  violate  privacy  by 
collecting  private  information  about  customers  [28].  For 
example, as smart meters collect electricity usage many times 
per hour, information about the user electricity’s consumption 
could  be  obtained.  Thus,  if  a  meter  does  not  show  electricity 
usage  for  a  period  of  time,  that  commonly  indicates  that  the 
house  is  empty.  This  information  could  then  be  used  to 
conduct a physical attack like burglary [28]. Depeng L. et al. 
showed that the demand response programs and smart meters 
generate  high-resolution  data  about  the  customers’  privacy. 
This data could be exploited leading to the loss of customer’s 
information and disclosure of activity patterns [42]. 
4)  Maintaining access  

In  the  final  step,  maintaining  access,  the  attacker  uses  a 
special  type  of  attack  to  gain  permanent  access  to  the  target, 
especially backdoors, viruses, and Trojan horses.  A backdoor 
is  an  undetectable  program,  stealthy  installed  on the  target  to 
get back later easily and quickly [32]. If the attacker succeeds 
in embedding a backdoor into the servers of the control center 
of  the  SCADA,  he  or  she  can  launch    several  attacks  against 
the  system  which  can  cause  a  severe  impact  on  the  power 
system [43]. 

In IT network, security’s parameters are classified based on 
their  importance  in  the  following  order:  confidentiality, 
integrity,  accountability,  and  availability.  Whereas  in  smart 

 
 
 
8 

grid, they are classified: availability, integrity, accountability, 
and  confidentiality  [10,  28].  Thus,  we  can  say  that  attacks 
which  compromise  the  availability  of  the  smart  grid  systems 
have a high severity, while those targeting confidentiality have 
a low severity. In addition to the level of severity, each attack 
has a level of likelihood to be performed. For instance, attacks 
such as Stuxnet and Duqu [8], has a high severity because they 
are able to vandalize the industrial control system and bypass 
all  the  security  boundaries;  but,  they  are  complex  and 
sophisticated.  So,  these  viruses  have  high  severity,  but  their 
likelihood  to  be  performed  is  low.  Another  example  is  the 
HMI  popping  attack.  It  has  a  high  severity  and  it  does  not 
require advanced networking skills or significant experience in 
security and industrial control system to perform it. Since the 
devices’  vulnerabilities  documentation  are  publicly  available, 
a  hacker  or  the  so-called  script-kiddies  may  simply  use  open 
source tools such as Metasploit and meterpreter to launch such 
an attack [1]. Therefore, this attack has high severity and it is 
very  likely  to  be  performed.  Table  II  shows  the  likelihood of 
each  attack  to  be  performed  and  its  associated  level  of 
severity. 

B.  Smart grid countermeasures  

A  number  of  attack  detection  and  countermeasure 
techniques  are  proposed  in  the  literature  to  counter  cyber 
attacks.  For  instance,  Özçelik  I.  et  al  in  [44]  proposed  a 
solution for distributed denial of service (DDos).  In [38], Lu 
Z.  et  al.  proposed  a  technique  to  detect  jamming  channel 
attacks. In [45] Rawat D. et al. proposed a technique to detect 
False detection injection (FDI) attacks. Though these security 
solutions  contribute  to  the  smart  grid’s  security,  they  are 
insufficient  to  face  sophisticated  and  blended  attacks  [1]. 
Moreover, Stuxnet [8] showed that strategy like “Defense in-
depth” or “security by obscurity” [1] are no longer considered 
as valid solutions. We believe that security cannot be achieved 
through  one  specific  solution,  but  by  deploying  several 
techniques incorporated into a global strategy. In this section, 
and  as  Fig.  5  shows,  we  propose  a  cyber  security  strategy 

composed  of  three  phases:  pre-attack,  under  attack,  and  post-
attack.  As  follows,  and  for  each  phase,  relevant  published 
solutions in terms of security protocols, security technology,  
cryptography,  and  other  cyber-attack  countermeasures  are 
described.  
1)  Pre-attack  

During  this  first  phase,  pre-attack,  various  published 
solutions  are  recommended  to  enhance  the  smart  grid’s 
security  and  to  be  prepared  for  any  potential  attack.  Security 
countermeasures  commonly  fall  into  three  categories,  namely 
network  security,  cryptography,  and  device  security.  We  will 
discuss technologies and secure protocols such as IDS, SIEM, 
DLP  and  secure  DNP3  [1,  18,  46]  for  the  network  security. 
Encryption, authentication, and key management [4, 7, 32, 47] 
for  the  data  security.  Finally,  Host  IDS,  compliance  checks, 
and diversity technique for the device security.  

a) 

Network security 

The  network  is  the  backbone  of  a  smart  grid.  So,  network 
security plays a significant role in securing the entire system. 
Using  firewalls  supplemented  with  other  monitoring  and 
inspection  technologies  is  recommended  [1]  to  secure  the 
smart  grid  network.  A  firewall  is  intended  to  allow  or  deny 
network connections based on specific rules and policies. But 
an unknown or an advanced attack technique can easily bypass 
many  firewall  techniques.  Therefore,  firewalls  should  be 
associated  with  other  security  technologies  such  as  intrusion 
detection  system  (IDS),  security  information  and  event 
management  systems 
loss 
prevention  (DLP)  [1,  18,  46].  IDS  is  a  system  developed  for 
detecting  malicious  activity  either  on  a  network  or  on  a 
specific  host  [32].  SIEMS  are  information  management 
systems  that  collect  and  gather  information  such  as  operating 
system  logs,  application  logs,  and  network  flow  from  all 
devices in the network. Then the collected information will be 
analyzed  and  processed  by  a  centralized  server  in  order  to 
detect  any  potential  threat  or  a  malicious  activity  in  the 
network. Network DLP is a system responsible for preventing 
the loss or the theft of the data across the network [1]. 

(SIEM),  and  network  data 

Likelihood of the 
attack to be 
performed 

Severity of the attack 
Medium 

Low 

•  Traffic analysis  
[29, 30, 33] 

•  Privacy violation [28] 

•  Social engineering  

[1, 29] 

•  Scanning [25, 28] 

•  MITM [17, 36] 
•  Replay attack   
 [1, 34] 

High 
•  Virus, worms, Trojan 

horse [8] 
•  DOS [15, 35] 
•  Backdoor [43] 
•  Jamming channel  

[16, 38] 

•  Masquerade attack 

[33] 

•  Integrity violation  
[1, 41, 46] 
Popping the HMI [1] 

High 

Medium 

Low 

TABLE I :  LIKELIHOOD OF THE ATTACK TO BE PERFORMED AND ITS ASSOCIATED SEVERITY. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In  addition  to  these  security  systems,  secure  network 
protocols such as IPsec, transport layer security (TLS), secure 
sockets layer (SSL), secure DNP3 can also be used to enhance  
security in the network. DNP3 is an industrial protocol widely 
used in smart gird [24]. Initially, DNP3 protocol came without 
any  security  mechanisms.  In  other  words,  messages  are 
exchanged  in  plain  text  across  the  network  and  can  be  easily 
intercepted.    In  recent  years,  the  increased  number  of  cyber-
attacks targeting industrial and power system has attracted the 
attention  of  a  number  of  researchers  in  both  industry  and 
academia.  Consequently,  a  secured  variation  of  DNP3 
protocols has been released named secure DNP3.  

This  secured  version  added  a  secure  layer  for  encryption 
and authentication between the TCP/IP and application layer. 
Using  such  a  protocol,  several  attacks  can  be  avoided,  for 
example, authentication mechanism can protect against MITM 
attack,  whereas  encryption  decreases  eavesdropping  and 
replay attacks. Secure DNP3 is discussed further in [7].  

9 

generation,  key  distribution,  key  storage,  and  key  update  [4]. 
Due  to  the  distributed  nature  of  smart  grid,  some  specific 
requirements should be considered to design a cryptography  

Fig. 5.  Cyber security strategy for smart grid 

b) 

Cryptography for data security  
to 

aim 

ensure 

Encryption  mechanisms 

data’s 
confidentiality,  integrity,  and  nonrepudiation.  There  are  two 
types  of  key  encryptions:  symmetric  and  asymmetric.  In 
symmetric  key  encryption,  or  single-key  encryption,  one  key 
is  used  to  encrypt  and  to  decrypt  data.  The  most  used 
algorithms  employing  symmetric  encryption  are  advanced 
encryption  standard  (AES)  and  data  encryption  standard 
(DES).  Asymmetric  key  encryption,  on  the  other  hand,  uses 
two  keys  to  encrypt  and  decrypt  data:  private  key  and  public 
key.  RSA  (Rivest,  Shamir  and  Adleman)  is  a  widely  used 
asymmetric algorithm [32].  In smart grid, various components 
with  different  computational  capabilities  co-exist.  Therefore, 
both  symmetric  and  asymmetric  key  encryption  can  be  used, 
and  the  selection  depends  on  several  factors,  including  data 
criticality, time constraints, and computational resources [4].  

Authentication  is  defined  as  the  act  of  verifying  that  an 
object’s  identity  is  valid,  such  as  the  use  of  a  password  [32]. 
An object could be a user, a smart device, or any component 
connected to the smart grid network. Multicast authentication 
is  a  particular  type  of  authentication  and  its  applications  are 
widely  used  in  smart  grid  [47].  In  [4],  Shapsough  et  al. 
proposed three methods to achieve authentication for multicast 
applications:  secret-info  asymmetry,  time  asymmetry,  and 
hybrid asymmetry.  

Key  management  is  a  crucial  approach  for  encryption  and 
authentication. Public key management (PKI), or shared secret 
key  management,  can  be  used  to  ensure  authenticity  for 
communication  across  networks.  In  PKI  infrastructure,  the 
identities  of  two  parties  is  verified  by  a  certificate  delivered 
from  a  third  party  called  the  certificate  authority  (CA).  This 
mechanism 
is  done  before  establishing  any  connection 
between  the  two  parties.  In  shared  secret  key  management, 
four steps are used to maintain communication security:  key 

In 

addition, 

key management, W. Wang et al. in [7] present several basic 
yet  relevant  requirements  of  the  key  management  scheme, 
particularly  efficiency,  evolve-ability,  scalability,  and  secure 
management. 
several  key  management 
frameworks  have  been  proposed  specifically  for  the  power 
system:  single-key,  key  establishment  scheme  for  SCADA 
systems  (SKE),  key  management  architecture  for  SCADA 
systems (SKMA), advanced key management architecture for 
SCADA systems (ASKMA), ASKMA+, and scalable method 
of  cryptographic  key  management  (SMOCK)  to  name  a  few. 
The  choice  of  a  framework  relies  on  different  criteria, 
including  scalability,  computational  resource  capability,  and 
support  for  multicast.  The  authors  conducted  a  comparison 
between  the  key  management  schemes  listed  above.  The 
comparison  was  based  on  scalability,  support  for  multicast, 
robust  to  key  compromise,  and  power  system  application. 
ASKMA+ and SMOCK show interesting results. ASKMA+ is 
an efficient key management scheme and it supports multicast, 
but it still suffers from scalability. SMOCK, on the other hand, 
shows good scalability; however, it has some weaknesses such 
as no support for multicast and low computational efficiency. 

c) 

Device security  

Device protection is the third crucial element in the supply 
chain  of  smart  grid  security.  Many  research  papers  and 
recommendation  reports  have  been  published  contributing  to 
security  assurance  for  endpoints.  In  [1],  several  security 
technologies have been recommended, particularly, host IDS, 
anti-virus, and host data loss prevention (DLP). Additionally, 
Kammerstetter  et  al.  [48]  recommended  using  an  automated 
security  compliance  check.  Such  a  tool  performs  a  check 
against all smart grid components to verify that each device’s 
configuration  is  up  to  date,  especially  the  device’s  firmware 
and 
the  smart  grid 
components  are  highly  connected  and  a  weakness  in  one 
component can expose the entire system to risk, a compliance 

the  current  configuration  file.  As 

 
 
 
 
 
 
10 

check  is  a  crucial  tool.  In  [49],  Mclaughlin  et  al.  proposed  a 
diversity technique in smart meter’s firmware to limit a large-
scale attack. Using such a technique, an attacker can exploit a 
vulnerability  of  one  device’s  firmware,  but  he  or  she  cannot 
exploit the same vulnerability on other devices.  
2)  Under attack  

This  step  is  divided  into  two  tasks:  attack  detection  and 
attack mitigation. Several approaches and technologies can be 
used  during  each  task,  to  detect  the  malicious  activity,  and 
then deploy the appropriate countermeasures. 
During 
the  deployed  security 
the  attack  detection,  all 
technologies  are  recommended,  including  SIEMS,  DLP,  and 
IDS [1, 18, 46]. But, some of these solutions have a number of 
limitations and need improvements, particularly IDS. IDS is a 
widely used security system in IT network, and it is also used 
in  smart  grid  network;  but,  it  has  many  performance 
limitations specially reporting high rate of false positive. Thus, 
many  research  papers  were  published  to  improve  the  IDS 
performance in the smart context [46, 50, 51]. Y. Kwon et al. 
[50]  proposed  an  approach  based  on  IDS  for  the  IEC  61850 
protocol. They used both statistical analysis and specification-
based  metrics.  The  experimental  results  showed  that  their 
approach  could  detect  anomalies  in  large  networks  with  low 
false  positive.  In  [51],  U.  K.  Premaratne  et  al.    proposed  an 
IDS  IEC61850  automated  substations.  This  rule-based  IDS 
was developed based on collecting data from simulated attacks 
on  an  IED.  The  result  of  the  experiment  showed  that  the 
IEC61850 IDS was capable of detecting many attacks such as 
a DOS attack, a password cracking attack, and an ARP packet 
sniffer attack. Faisal M. et al. [18] proposed an architecture of 
IDS  in  AMI  based  on  stream  mining  algorithms.  They 
conducted  an  experiment  to  compare  the  seven  existing       
state-of-the-art  data  stream  mining  algorithms:  Accuracy 
Updated  Ensemble,  Active  Classifier,  Leveraging  Bagging, 
Limited Attribute Classifier, Bagging using ADWIN, Bagging 
using  Adaptive  Size  Hoeffding  Tree,  and  Single  Classifier 
Drift.  Their  comparison  was  based  on  several  metrics 
including  execution  time,  detection  accuracy,  and  memory 
consumption. For the assessment they used an original version 
of  the  KDD  Cup  1999  [52]  and  an  improved  version  of  this 
data  set.  The  results  showed  that  some  algorithms  do  not 
require  an  advanced  computational  resources,  so  they  are 
suitable for IDS in some devices such as smart meters. Other 
algorithms  have  a  high  accuracy  and  they  require  more 
computational resources; these algorithms can be used for the 
IDS in a data concentrator or in an AMI headends [18]. Zhang 
Y. et al. [46] proposed a distributed intrusion detection system 
for smart grids (SGDIDS) based on an intelligent model. This 
model can be used in every level of the smart grid: home area 
network  (HAN)  ,  neighborhood  area  network  (NAN),  and 
wide  area  network  (WAN).  The  proposed  IDS  was  based  on 
data  mining  algorithms:  support  vector  machine  (SVM)  and 
artificial immune system (AIS). To evaluate the  efficiency of 
their solution, they used a simplified and an improved version 
of  the  KDD  cup  1999  called  the  NSL-KDD  [53].  The 

combination  of  two  classifiers  SVM  and  AIS  have  produced 
satisfactory results in terms of detection malicious traffic [46].  
Once  the  attack  are  detected,  mitigation  can  be  executed 
using the following methods. S. Shapsough et al. [4] surveyed 
and  summarized  several  methods  used  to  mitigate  the  DOS 
attack,  especially  pushback  and  reconfiguration  methods.  In 
pushback,  the  router  is  configured  to  block  all  the  traffic 
coming  from  the  attacker’s  IP  address.  In  the  reconfiguration 
method,  the  network  topology  is  changed  to  isolate  the 
attacker.  For  jamming  attacks,  Lu  et  al.  [38]  discussed  anti-
jamming schemes such as frequency hopping spectrum spread 
(FHSS)  and  direct  sequence  spectrum  spread  (DSSS)  to 
mitigate  attacks.  Other  mitigation  techniques  for  buffer 
overflow,  man-in-the-middle,  CPU  exhausting,  and  replay 
attack,  distributed  denial  of  service  (DDos),  and  false  data 
injection (FDI) were discussed in detail in [3, 27, 44].  
3)  Post-attack  

When  an  attack  is  not  detected,  such  as  in  the  case  of 
Stuxnet [8], the post-attack period is an important step. First, it 
is  critical  to  identify  the  entity  involved  in  the  attack.  Then, 
the  IDS  signature,  anti-virus  database  and  security  policies 
must be kept up to date by learning from attacks and to protect 
the smart grid against future similar attacks. Forensic analysis 
is  the  primary  technique  used  during  the  post-attack.  Smart 
grid forensic studies collect, analyze, and intercept digital data 
in order to identify the entity involved in the event. They are 
also  useful  to  determine  and  address  cyber  and  physical 
vulnerabilities of the smart grid in order to anticipate potential 
attacks.  In  addition,  forensic  analysis  in  smart  grid  plays  an 
important  role  in  the  investigation  of  cyber-crimes  such  as 
hacking,  viruses,  digital 
terrorism, 
manipulating  the  operation  of  the  smart  grid,  violating  the 
consumer’s  privacy,  and  stealing  valuable 
information 
including intellectual property and state secrets [54]. 

espionage, 

cyber 

Table II shows a summary of the cyber attacks in smart grid 
based  upon 
the  fours  steps:  reconnaissance,  scanning, 
exploitation,  and  maintaining  access.  Each  step  includes 
attacks’  categories,  attacks’  examples, 
the  compromised 
component in the smart grid by each attack, the impact of each 
attack,  and  the  appropriate  countermeasures.  As  we  can  see, 
the  most  attacks  can  be  avoided  by  using  secure  network 
protocols  such  as  secure  DNP3,  and  also  by  enabling 
encryption and authentication mechanisms.   

V.  CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTION 

threat 

In  heterogeneous  systems  such  as  smart  grid,  different 
devices  coexist  and  communicate  through  various  network 
protocols. This heterogeneity represents a great challenge and 
a  potential 
the  smart  grid  security.  The 
communication  between  devices  requires  aggregation  of  data 
and  translation  between  protocols.  However,  this  aggregation 
can  enable  accidental  breaches  and  vulnerabilities  simply 
because  a  feature  in  one  protocol  could  not  be  translated 
properly into another [4].  

for 

 
 
 
 
Attack 
example 

Compromised 
application/protocol 
in smart grid. 

Compromised 
security’s 
parameter 

Modbus protocol, 
DNP3 protocol 

Confidentiality 

Attacking cycle 
step 

Reconnaissance 

Attack category 

Traffic analysis 

Social 
engineering 

Scanning 

Scanning IP, Port, 
Service, 
Vulnerabilities 

Virus, worms, 
Trojan horse 

Denial of service 
(DOS) 

Man-in-the-
middle (MITM) 

Replay attack 

Exploitation 

Jamming channel 

[33] 
Phishing [29] 
Password pilfering 
[30] 

Modbus network 
scanning [25] 

DNP3 network 
scanning [24] 

Stuxnet [8] 

Modbus Protocol 

DNP3 Protocol 

SCADA 
PMU, 
Control device 

Duqu [8] 

SCADA 

Puppet attack [15] 

TDS [34] 

TSA [35] 

AMI 
Instability of smart 
grid systems 

PMU, smart grid 
equipment’s GPS 

eavesdropping 
attack [1, 33] 
[17] 
[36] 
Intercept/alter [33] 
[1] 

HMI, PLC 

SCADA 
DNP3, SCADA 
AMI 
IED, SCADA, PLC 

[33] 

[38] 
MAS-SJ [16] 

Authentication 
scheme in AMI 

PMU 
CRN in WSGN 

SCADA, EMS, 
substations. 

Popping the HMI 

[1] 

Masquerade 
attack 

[33] 

PLC 

Confidentiality 

Confidentiality 
Integrity 
Availability 
Accountability 

Availability 

Confidentiality 
Integrity 

Confidentiality 
Integrity 

Availability 

Confidentiality 
Integrity 
Availability 
Accountability 

Confidentiality 
Integrity 
Availability 
Accountability 

[1] 

Smart meter, RTU 

Integrity violation 

FDI [40], [41] 

EMS, SCADA, AMI 

Integrity 
Availability 

Privacy violation 

[28], [42] 

Demand Response 
program, Smart 
meters. 

Maintaining 
access 

Backdoor 

[43] 

SCADA 

Confidentiality 

Confidentiality 
Integrity 
Availability 
Accountability 

TABLE II : CYBER ATTACKS IN SMART GRID, THEIR IMPACTS AND COUNTERMEASURE 

11 

Possible countermeasures 

Secure DNP3, PKI 
(SKMA, SMOCK), TLS, 
SSL, Encryption, 
Authentication[1, 7] 

IDS, SIEM, Automated[1] 
security compliance 
checks [48] 

DLP , IDS , SIEM, Anti-
virus [1], Diversity 
technique[49] 

SIEM, IDS [1], flow 
entropy, signal strength, 
sensing time measurement, 
transmission failure count, 
pushback, reconfiguration 
methods [4, 44] 

Secure DNP3, PKI 
(SKMA, SMOCK) [7], 
TLS, SSL, encryption, 
authentication [1] 

Secure DNP3, TLS, SSL, 
encryption, 
authentication[1] PKI 
(SKMA, SMOCK) [7], 
JADE, anti-jamming 
(FHSS, DSSS) [38] 
DLP, IDS , SIEM , Anti-
virus [1], automated 
security compliance 
checks [48] 

DLP, IDS, Secure DNP3,  
SIEM, TLS, SSL, 
encryption, authentication 
[1], PKI (SKMA, 
SMOCK)[7] 
DLP, IDS ,SIEM, Secure 
DNP3, TLS, SSL, 
encryption, authentication 
[1],  PKI (SKMA, 
SMOCK) [7, 45] 
Secure DNP3, PKI 
(SKMA, SMOCK)[7], 
TLS, SSL, encryption, 
authentication [1] 

IDS, SIEM,Anti-virus  [1], 
Diversity technique[49] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	
Furthermore,  the  majority  of  industrial  network  protocols 
used  in  smart  grid  such  as,  DNP3,  ICCP,  Modbus,  and 
Profibus,  were  designed  for  connectivity  but  not  for  security 
purposes.  Thus,  these  protocols  not  only  cannot  ensure  a 
secure  communication  channel,  but  they  may  also  be  used  as 
an  attack  surface.  Though  there  are  some  secure  version  of 
many industrial protocols, such as secure DNP3. However, the 
problem  with  this  new  version  is  its  incompatibility    with 
legacy installations [26]. 

In  addition  to  network  protocols,  operating  systems  and 
physical  equipment  in  smart  grid  may  be  vulnerable  and 
expose the system to a wide variety of attacks. Since operating 
systems  are  designed  for  control  in  automation  control 
components,  they  lack  security  features.  Moreover,  most  of 
the  physical  devices  are  obsolete  whereas  others  have 
insufficient memory space and limited computational capacity, 
so  they  cannot  support  advanced  security  mechanisms.  For 
and 
instance, 
computational  resources  because  they  are  designed  for  lower 
power  consumption,  so  they  cannot  support  some  important 
security  mechanisms  such  as  proper 
random  number 
generators and cryptographic accelerators [55]. Although these 
components  have  less  impact  on  the  smart  grid  operation,  if 
they  are  compromised,  they  represent  a  potential  vector  to 
compromise the whole system.  

smart  meters  have 

limited  memory 

example, 

system.  For 

Security  solutions  such  as  IDS,  firewalls,  and  encryption 
methods  play  a  significant  role  in  securing  the  conventional 
networks . However, these mechanisms have many limitations 
and  they  are  inappropriate  for  a  distributed  environment  with 
latency  and 
different  application  requirements  such  as 
bandwidth  [13].  In  addition,  these  solutions  are  unable  to 
counter the newest types of cyber-attacks. Since cyber-attacks 
are becoming more blended, sophisticated, and complex, they 
are  able  to  target  at  the  same  time  multiple  layers  of  a 
as  previously 
communication 
mentioned,  Stuxnet  [8]  was  able  to  vandalize  an  industrial 
control  system  by  bypassing  all  the  security  boundaries, 
demonstrating  that  the  security  solutions  deployed  in  those 
scenarios  are  unable  to  detect  such  an  effective  virus. 
Furthermore,  because  there  are  several  logical  domains  in 
smart  grid  (generation,  transmission,  distribution,  markets, 
customer,  and  service  provider),  security 
requirements 
necessarily differ from one domain to another. For instance, in 
the  generation  domain  denial  of  service  (DOS)  attacks  need 
fast  detection,  which  is  not  the  case  for  market  domain, 
customer domain, or service provider domain. In addition, the 
transmission domain requires delay-efficient key management, 
whereas 
large  scale  key 
management [7].  

the  market  domain  requires 

Therefore,  rather  than  applying  a  simple  security  approach 
or  deploying  a  specific  security  technology,  we  believe  that 
smart grid cyber-attacks may be mitigated more effectively by 
combining  several  security  mechanisms  through  a  cyber 
security  strategy.  Such  a  strategy  have  several  benefits, 
including,  addressing  the  system’s  vulnerabilities,  detecting  a 

12 

number  of 
countermeasures, and identifying the involved entity. 

cyber-attacks,  deploying 

the 

appropriate 

VI.  CONCLUSION  

In 

intelligently  deliver 

Smart  grid  is  a  system  composed  of  distributed  and 
heterogeneous  components 
the 
to 
electricity  and  easily  integrate  the  renewable  technologies. 
However,  this  critical  system  suffers  from  a  number  of 
this  paper,  we  provide  a 
security  weaknesses. 
comprehensive overview of cyber-security in smart grid and  
investigate  in  depth  the  main  cyber-attacks  threating  its 
infrastructure,  its  network  protocols,  and  its  applications.  In 
addition, we propose a strategy composed of  several tools and 
to  address  potential  components’ 
mechanisms  designed 
vulnerabilities, 
enhance 
communication  security  in  the  network,  and  protect  the 
customer’s privacy.  

detect  malicious 

activities, 

REFERENCE 

[1]  E. D. Knapp and R. Samani, Applied cyber security and the smart grid: 
implementing  security  controls  into  the  modern  power  infrastructure. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier, Syngress, 2013. 

[2]  N.  Framework,  “Roadmap  for  Smart  Grid  Interoperability  Standards, 

Release 2.0 (2012),” NIST Special Publication, vol. 1108. 

[3]  D. B. Rawat and C. Bajracharya, “Cyber security for smart grid systems: 
Status, challenges and perspectives,” in SoutheastCon 2015, pp. 1–6. 
[4]  S. Shapsough, F. Qatan, R. Aburukba, F. Aloul, and A. Al Ali, “Smart 
in  International 
grid  cyber  security:  Challenges  and  solutions,” 
Conference  on  Smart  Grid  and  Clean  Energy  Technologies  (ICSGCE), 
2015, pp. 170–175. 

[5]  X. Liang, K. Gao, X. Zheng, and T. Zhao, “A Study on Cyber Security 
of  Smart  Grid  on  Public  Networks,”  in  IEEE  Green  Technologies 
Conference, 2013, pp. 301–308. 
 M. Essaaidi and others, “An overview of smart grid cyber-security state 
of  the  art  study,”  in  3rd  International  Renewable  and  Sustainable 
Energy Conference (IRSEC), 2015, pp. 1–7. 

[6] 

[7]  W.  Wang  and  Z.  Lu,  “Cyber  security  in  the  Smart  Grid:  Survey  and 

challenges,” Computer Networks, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1344–1371, 2013. 

[8]  D. Kushner, “The real story of stuxnet,” IEEE Spectrum, vol. 50, no. 3, 

pp. 48–53, Mar. 2013. 

[9]  P.  Engebretson,  The  basics  of  hacking  and  penetration  testing:  ethical 

hacking and penetration testing made easy. Elsevier, 2013. 

[10]  S.  G.  I.  Panel,  “Guidelines  for  smart  grid  cyber  security:  Vol.  1,  smart 
grid  cyber  security  strategy,  architecture,  and  high-level  requirements, 
and  Vol.  2,  privacy  and  the  smart  grid,  National  Institute  of  Standards 
and Technology (NIST),” Interagency Rep, vol. 7628, 2010. 

[11]  W.  Wang,  Y.  Xu,  and  M.  Khanna,  “A  survey  on  the  communication 
architectures  in  smart  grid,”  Computer  Networks,  vol.  55,  no.  15,  pp. 
3604–3629, 2011. 

[12]  A. Usman and S. H. Shami, “Evolution of communication technologies 
for  smart  grid  applications,”  Renewable  and  Sustainable  Energy 
Reviews, vol. 19, pp. 191–199, 2013. 

[13]  V. C. Gungor et al., “A survey on smart grid potential applications and 
Industrial 

IEEE  Transactions  on 

communication 
Informatics, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 28–42, 2013. 

requirements,” 

[14]  A.  Mahmood,  N.  Javaid,  and  S.  Razzaq,  “A  review  of  wireless 
communications  for  smart  grid,”  Renewable  and  Sustainable  Energy 
Reviews, vol. 41, pp. 248–260, Jan. 2015. 

[15]   P. Yi, T. Zhu, Q. Zhang, Y. Wu, and J. Li, “A denial of service attack in 
advanced  metering  infrastructure  network,”  in  IEEE  International 
Conference on Communications (ICC), 2014, pp. 1029–1034. 

[16]  K.  Gai,  M.  Qiu,  Z.  Ming,  H.  Zhao,  and  L.  Qiu,  “Spoofing-Jamming 
Attack  Strategy  Using  Optimal  Power  Distributions  in  Wireless  Smart 
Grid Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, pp. 1–1, 2017. 
[17]   P. Maynard, K. McLaughlin, and B. Haberler, “Towards Understanding 

Man-In-The-Middle  Attacks  on  IEC  60870-5-104  SCADA  Networks,”   

 
 
 
 
13 

[41]  A.  Anwar,  A.  N.  Mahmood,  and  Z.  Tari,  “Identification  of  vulnerable 
node clusters against false data injection attack in an AMI based Smart 
Grid,” Information Systems, vol. 53, pp. 201–212, Oct. 2015. 

[42]  Depeng Li, Zeyar Aung, J. Williams, and A. Sanchez, “P2DR: Privacy-
Preserving  Demand  Response  system  in  smart  grids,”  in  International 
Conference  on  Computing,  Networking  and  Communications  (ICNC), 
2014, pp. 41–47. 

[43]  Y. Zhang, L. Wang, and Y. Xiang, “Power System Reliability Analysis 
With  Intrusion  Tolerance  in  SCADA  Systems,”  IEEE  Transactions  on 
Smart Grid, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 669–683, Mar. 2016. 

[44]  İ. Özçelik and R. R. Brooks, “Cusum - entropy: an efficient method for 
DDoS  attack  detection,”  in  4th  International  Istanbul  Smart  Grid 
Congress and Fair (ICSG), 2016, pp. 1–5. 

[45]  D.  B.  Rawat  and  C.  Bajracharya,  “Detection  of  False  Data  Injection 
in  Smart  Grid  Communication  Systems,”  IEEE  Signal 

Attacks 
Processing Letters, vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1652–1656, Oct. 2015. 

[46]  Y. Zhang, L. Wang, W. Sun, R. C. Green II, and M. Alam, “Distributed 
intrusion detection system in a multi-layer network architecture of smart 
grids,”  IEEE  Transactions  on  Smart  Grid,  vol.  2,  no.  4,  pp.  796–808, 
2011. 

[47]  Q. Li and G. Cao, “Multicast authentication in the smart grid with one-
time  signature,”  IEEE  Transactions  on  Smart  Grid,  vol.  2,  no.  4,  pp. 
686–696, 2011. 

[48]  M. Kammerstetter, L. Langer, F. Skopik, and W. Kastner, “Architecture-
driven smart grid security management,” in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM 
workshop  on  Information  hiding  and  multimedia  security,  2014,  pp. 
153–158. 

[49]  S. E. McLaughlin, D. Podkuiko, A. Delozier, S. Miadzvezhanka, and P. 
McDaniel, “Embedded Firmware Diversity for Smart Electric Meters.,” 
in HotSec, 2010. 

[50]  Y.  Kwon,  H.  K.  Kim,  Y.  H.  Lim,  and  J.  I.  Lim,  “A  behavior-based 
intrusion  detection  technique  for  smart  grid  infrastructure,”  in  IEEE 
PowerTech, 2015, pp. 1–6. 

[51]  U.  K.  Premaratne,  J.  Samarabandu,  T.  S.  Sidhu,  R.  Beresh,  and  J.-C. 
intrusion  detection  system  for  IEC61850  automated 
Tan,  “An 
substations,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 
2376–2383, 2010. 

[52]   The KDD99 dataset available at : 

https://kdd.ics.uci.edu/databases/kddcup99/task.html 

[53]  M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed 
analysis of the KDD CUP 99 data set,” in IEEE Symposium on 
Computational Intelligence for Security and Defense Applications . 
(CISDA), 2009, pp. 1–6. 

[54]  M. Erol-Kantarci and H. T. Mouftah, “Smart grid forensic science: 
applications, challenges, and open issues,” IEEE Communications 
Magazine, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 68–74, 2013. 

[55]  A. P. Fournaris, P. Kitsos, and N. Sklavos, “Security and Cryptographic 
Engineering in Embedded Systems,” in Embedded Computing Systems: 
Applications, Optimization, and Advanced Design, IGI Global, 2013, pp. 
420–438. 

in  Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on ICS \& SCADA 
Cyber Security Research 2014, pp. 30–42. 

[18]  M.  A.  Faisal,  Z.  Aung,  J.  R.  Williams,  and  A.  Sanchez,  “Data-stream-
based intrusion detection system for advanced metering infrastructure in 
smart grid: A feasibility study,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 
31–44, 2015. 

[19]  D.  Choi,  S.  Lee,  D.  Won,  and  S.  Kim,  “Efficient  secure  group 
communications  for  SCADA,”  IEEE  Transactions  on  power  delivery, 
vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 714–722, 2010. 

[20]   R. Radvanovsky and J. Brodsky, Handbook of SCADA/control systems 

security. CRC Press, 2013. 

[21]  D. Wei, Y. Lu, M. Jafari, P. M. Skare, and K. Rohde, “Protecting smart 
grid  automation  systems  against  cyberattacks,”  IEEE  Transactions  on 
Smart Grid, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 782–795, 2011. 

[22]  V.  C.  Gungor  et  al.,  “Smart  Grid  Technologies:  Communication 
Industrial 

IEEE  Transactions  on 

Technologies  and  Standards,” 
Informatics, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 529–539, Nov. 2011. 

[23]  R. Al-Dalky, O. Abduljaleel, K. Salah, H. Otrok, and M. Al-Qutayri, “A 
Modbus  traffic  generator  for  evaluating  the  security  of  SCADA 
systems,”  in  9th  International  Symposium  on  Communication  Systems, 
Networks Digital Sign (CSNDSP), 2014, pp. 809–814. 

[24]  N.  R.  Rodofile,  K.  Radke,  and  E.  Foo,  “DNP3  Network  Scanning  and 
Reconnaissance  for  Critical  Infrastructure,”  in  Proceedings  of  the 
Australasian Computer Science Week Multiconference, New York, NY, 
USA, 2016, pp. 39:1–39:10. 

[25]   M.  Bristow,  “ModScan:  a  SCADA  Modbus  network  scanner,”  in 

DefCon-16 Conf., Las Vegas, NV, 2008. 

[26]  E.  D.  Knapp  and  J.  T.  Langill,  Industrial  Network  Security:  Securing 
critical  infrastructure  networks  for  smart  grid,  SCADA,  and  other 
Industrial Control Systems. Syngress, 2014. 

[27]  J.  Liu,  Y.  Xiao,  and  J.  Gao,  “Achieving  accountability  in  smart  grid,” 

IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 493–508, 2014. 

[28]  J.  Liu,  Y.  Xiao,  S.  Li,  W.  Liang,  and  C.  P.  Chen,  “Cyber  security  and 
privacy  issues  in  smart  grids,”  IEEE  Communications  Surveys  & 
Tutorials, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 981–997, 2012. 

[29]  H.  Holm,  W.  R.  Flores,  and  G.  Ericsson,  “Cyber  security  for  a  Smart 
Grid-What about phishing?,” in IEEE PES ISGT Europe, 2013, pp. 1–5. 
[30]   Y. Yang, T. Littler, S. Sezer, K. McLaughlin, and H. F. Wang, “Impact 
of cyber-security issues on Smart Grid,” in  2nd IEEE PES International 
Conference  and  Exhibition  on  Innovative  Smart  Grid  Technologies 
(ISGT Europe), 2011, pp. 1–7. 

[31]  F.  Aloul,  A.  R.  Al-Ali,  R.  Al-Dalky,  M.  Al-Mardini,  and  W.  El-Hajj, 
“Smart  grid 
solutions,” 
International Journal of Smart Grid and Clean Energy, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 
1–6, 2012. 

security:  Threats,  vulnerabilities  and 

[32]  E. Cole, Network security bible, vol. 768. John Wiley & Sons, 2011. 
[33]  F.  M.  Cleveland,  “Cyber  security  issues  for  Advanced  Metering 
Infrasttructure (AMI),” in Power and Energy Society General Meeting-
Conversion  and  Delivery  of  Electrical  Energy  in  the  21st  Century,  
2008, pp. 1–5. 

[34]  A.  Sargolzaei,  K.  Yen,  and  M.  Abdelghani,  “Delayed  inputs  attack  on 

load frequency control in smart grid,” in ISGT, 2014, pp. 1–5. 

[35]  Z.  Zhang,  S.  Gong,  A.  D.  Dimitrovski,  and  H.  Li,  “Time 
Synchronization  Attack  in  Smart  Grid:  Impact  and  Analysis,”  IEEE 
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 87–98, Mar. 2013. 

[36]  I. Darwish, O. Igbe, O. Celebi, T. Saadawi, and J. Soryal, “Smart Grid 
DNP3  Vulnerability  Analysis  and  Experimentation,”  in  IEEE  2nd 
International  Conference  on  Cyber  Security  and  Cloud  Computing 
(CSCloud), 2015, pp. 141–147. 

[37]  B. Alohali, K. Kifayat, Q. Shi, and W. Hurst, “Replay Attack Impact on 
Advanced  Metering  Infrastructure  (AMI),”  in  Smart  Grid  Inspired 
Future Technologies, vol. 175, Springer International Publishing, 2017, 
pp. 52–59. 

[38]  Z.  Lu,  W.  Wang,  and  C.  Wang,  “From  jammer  to  gambler:  Modeling 
and  detection  of  jamming  attacks  against  time-critical  traffic,”  in 
Proceedings IEEE  INFOCOM, 2011, pp. 1871–1879. 

[39]  M. Qiu, W. Gao, M. Chen, J.-W. Niu, and L. Zhang, “Energy Efficient 
Security  Algorithm  for  Power  Grid  Wide  Area  Monitoring  System,” 
IEEE  Transactions  on  Smart  Grid,  vol.  2,  no.  4,  pp.  715–723,  Dec. 
2011. 

[40]  Y. Liu, P. Ning, and M. K. Reiter, “False data injection attacks against 
state  estimation  in  electric  power  grids,”  ACM  Transactions  on 
Information and System Security (TISSEC), vol. 14, no. 1, p. 13, 2011. 

 
 
 
 
