Smart False Data Injection attacks against  
State Estimation in Power Grid 

                                    Muneer Mohammad, PhD., Member IEEE  

Abstract—  In  this  paper  a  new  class  of  cyber  attacks  against 
state estimation in the  electric  power grid is considered. This 
class of attacks is named false data injection attacks. We show 
that  with  the  knowledge  of  the  system  configuration  an 
attacker  could  successfully  inject  false  data  into  certain  state 
variable  while  bypassing  existing  techniques  for  bad  data 
detection.  In  the  preliminary  section  we  consider  the 
feasibility  of  such  an  attack  and  the  necessary  condition  to 
successfully avoid detection. After that we show that with the 
knowledge  of  the  system  configuration,  certain  line  flow 
measurements  could  be  manipulated  to  lead  to  profitable 
misconduct.  By 
controlling  Regional  Transmission 
Organizations  (RTOs)  view  of  system  power  flow  and 
congestions,  an  attacker  could  manipulate  the  LMPs  of 
targeted buses according to prior biddings.  

Also, in this paper we show the implementation of the false 
data injection attacks. The numerical example considered was 
applied  to  a  malicious  data  detection  algorithm  that  was 
designed  on  a  microcontroller.  The  results  demonstrated  the 
effectiveness  of  injecting  false  data  measurements  into  the 
state estimation of electric power grids.   

Keywords-;  Power  system  state  estimation,  false  data 
injection attacks, bad data detection, cyber attack, power system 
security  

I.   INTRODUCTION  

The power grid is undergoing substantial changes as the 
idea  of  a  smart  grid  is  getting  more  popular.  The 
implementation  of  the  smart  grid  must  be  accompanied  by 
numerous  changes  in  the  way  the  power  grid  is  observed 
and  analyzed.  This  is  being  made  available  by  the 
technological  advances  in  sensing,  communication  and 
actuation.  While  the  majority  of  researchers  have  been 
involved 
the  power  system  operational 
efficiency and reliability, cyber attacks remain to be a vital 
threat  to  the  power  grid.  Therefore,  the potential risks of  a 
cyber  attack  should  be 
the 
implementation of a smart grid.  

further  studied  before 

improving 

in 

Power system researchers have realized the threat of bad 
data  measurements  and  developed  certain  techniques  for 
processing  them  e.g.,  [1]-[3].  The  techniques  developed 
involve two steps, first detect if there are bad measurements 
and then identify and remove them.  This technique as well 
as  other  techniques  is  aimed  at  filtering  arbitrary  bad 
measurements. If any smart attack is considered as random 
bad  data,  then  the  developed  methods  should  be  able  to 
successfully filter the false measurements.  

However, this paper shows that the developed bad data 
detection  techniques  could  be  bypassed  if  a  certain  smart 
attack  is  injected  into  the  system.  Nevertheless, 
the 
construction  of  certain  attacks  requires  knowledge  of  the 
power  grid  configuration.  The  reason  that  that  this  attack 
could  be  made 
that:  “when  bad 
measurements  are  present,  the  squares  of  differences 
between 
their 
corresponding estimates become significant [1].” Therefore, 
the  attacker  can  bypass  bad  measurement  detection  by 
violating  this  assumption.  This  can  be  carried  out  with  the 
proper knowledge of the power grid configuration. 

observed  measurements 

the  assumption 

and 

the 

is 

The  operation  of  the  power  grid  became  significantly 
different  after  the  industry  deregulation.  The  operation  of 
the  physical  power  systems  are  organized  into  Regional 
Transmission Organizations (RTOs). As a result, a potential 
cyber  attack  on  the  state  estimation  of  these  RTOs  has 
recently become a major concern. The Energy Management 
System (EMS) is responsible to relay a robust estimation of 
the  entire  system.  Therefore,  this  management  system  will 
be  a  major  target  for  attacker  aiming  to  manipulate  the 
system.  In  [4]  the  scheme  of  false  data  injection  attacks 
against a power grid’s state estimation was first introduced. 
The  paper  showed  that  by  acquiring  certain  information 
about 
the  bad  data  detection 
techniques  employed  by  SCADA  systems  could  be 
bypassed. In [5] two possible indices are proposed in order 
to  quantify  required  efforts  to  implement  such  a  class  of 
attack. 
to  develop 
computationally efficient heuristics to detect such false data 
attacks  against  state  estimators.  In  [7]  the  method  of 
employing  such  attacks  to  lead  to  profitable  financial 
misconduct was presented. Such profit could be acquired by 
virtual  bidding  the  ex-post  LMP  while  simultaneously 
injecting false data into the state estimation.  

the  network 

there  were 

topology 

attempts 

[6] 

In 

In this paper we present false data injection attacks from 
the attacker’s perspective. We first show that the bypassing 
of bad data detection could be achieved. We then apply the 
presented  injection  attacks  onto  a  5-bus  system.  Three 
scenarios  are  studied  on  the  same  system.  In  the  first 
scenario  actual  measurements  are  taken  directly  to  the 
system without bad data injection. Also, two methods were 
used  to  detect  bad  data:  Normalized  Residuals  and  Chi-
Square methods. In the second scenario, bad data is injected 
into  the  system  using  the  attack  scheme  presented.  The 
attack  scheme  aims  at  injecting  undetectable  random  data 
into  the  system.  It  is  then  shown  that  both  methods  of 
detection  fail  to  identify  the  presence  of  the  injected  bad 

 
 
 
 
measurements.  In  the  third  scenario  random  bad  data  is 
added to the system to demonstrate the effectiveness of bad 
data detection techniques of malicious bad data.  

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
gives  background and  shows  some  related  work.  Section 3 
presents  the  basic  principle  of  false  data  injection  attacks. 
Section  4  demonstrates  the  success  of  these  attacks  by 
simulation. Section 5 concludes this paper points out future 
research directions. 

II.  PRELIMIARIES 

A.  Power System (Power Grid)) 

The  power  transmission  system  consists  of  electric 
generators, transmission lines, and transformers that form a 
power  grid.  It  connects  a  variety  of  electric  generator 
together  with  a  host  of  users  across  a  large  geographical 
area.  Redundant  paths  and  line  are  provided  so  that  power 
can  be  routed  from  an  y  power  plant  to  any  customer, 
through  a  variety  of  routes,  based  on  the  economics  of 
transmission  paths  and  cost  of  power.  A  control  center  is 
usually  used  to  monitor  and  control  the  power  system  and 
devices in a geographical area. 

B.  State Estimation Backgroud 

It is essential to monitor and control the power flows and 
voltages  in  a  power  system  in  order  to  maintain  system 
reliability  and  stability.  Power  meters  scattered  around  the 
power  grid  provide  control  centers  with  the  necessary 
measurements  to  monitor  the  system.  These  measurements 
are  used  in  the  state  estimation  algorithm  of  the  EMS  to 
estimate  the  state  of  the  system  variables.  State  variables 
include bus voltages and magnitudes.  

The DC power flow model of a state estimation problem 
is  most  commonly  used.  This  is  a  linearization  of  the  AC 
power  flow  problem.  The  goal  is  to  estimate  the  power 
system  variables 
. 
Therefore, x and z are related according to  

  based on  measurements

                                 (1) 

where 

. The statistical estimation criteria most 

commonly used in the weighted least-square criterion. When 
meter error is assumed to be normally distributed with zero 
mean,  this  criteria  leads  to  an  identical  estimator  with  the 
following matrix solution 

where  R  is  the  inverse  of  W;  a  diagonal  matrix  whose 
elements are reciprocals of the variances of meter error.  

                (2) 

    (3) 

          (4) 

where 

 is the variance of the i-th meter 

 . 

C.  Bad Data Measurment Detection 

such 

reasons 

as  meter 

Bad  measurements  could  be  present  due  to 
failure, 
several 
miscommunication  and  malicious  attacks.  There 
are  certain  techniques  that  have  been  developed 
to  detect  these  bad  data  and  remove  them  to 
protect  the  robustness  of  the  state  estimator  [8]. 
In  a  regular  measurement,  a  meter  provides  an 
estimate  of  the  state  variable  close  to  the  actual 
value, while abnormal measurements are skewed 
from their true values. Researchers have proposed 
to calculate the measurement residual 
observed 
between 
difference 
(i.e. 
measurements  and  estimated  measurements)  and 
  to  detect  the 
then  use  its  L2-norm 
is 
presence  of  bad  data.  Essentially, 
compared to a threshold , if 
, then 
there is bad data.  

the 

 The  Normalized  Residual  method  takes  into 
account  the  maximum  normalized  residual  and 
compares  that  with  a  threshold  determined  by  a 
unit Gaussian function to determine the presence 
of bad data. Also it can be shown mathematically 
-distribution (chi-
that 
square), where v = m - n is the degree of freedom. 
This  method  is  called  the  Chi-Square  method  of 
  is 
detecting  bad  data  thus  the  threshold 
determined using a Chi-Square function.  

follows a 

A  level  of  certainty  is  associated  with  each 
choice  of
.  This  level  of  certainty  is  chosen  by 
the system operator to represent the level of trust 
we  associate  to  our  bad  data  detector.  In  this 
paper a certainty level of 99% was chosen. 

III.  FALSE DATA INJECTION ATTACK MODEL 

In  this  section  we  will  show  how  smart  false  data 
injection  could  be  carried  out  to  bypass  the  bad  data 
detection  methods  introduced  earlier.  Let  us  consider  a 
system  with  n  state  variables  x1,…,xn  and  m  meters  with 
measurements z1,…,zm. The H matrix described in Section 2 
is  then  an  m  x  n  matrix  that  describes  the  relationship 
between  the  measurements  and  the  state  variables.  This  H 
matrix is a constant matrix determined by the placement of 
the  meters  and  the  line  impedances.  In  [8]  it  is  described 
how  control  centers  construct  H.  In  our  application  we 
assume that the attacker has access to this H matrix as well 
as access to the meters to be compromised.  

In the  first part we discuss the smart random false data 
injection,  meaning  the  attacker  aims  at  injecting  false  data 
into random meters. Also, targeted false data is presented in 
which  the  attacker  aims  at  altering  a  specific  measurement 
for certain benefit.  
the 

the 
mathematical  principal of false data injection and how it is 
able  to bypass detection. Then  we  apply the  attack of each 
scenario.    

sub-sections  we  explain 

following 

In 

nRxmRzeHxznmjihH)(,zRHHRHxTT111)(1WR22221..mW2i)1(mixHzrˆ||ˆ||xHz||ˆ||xHz||ˆ||xHz2||ˆ||xHz)(2v                                
                     
                                          
  
 
            
 
 
 
eliminated. Then each such constructed vector could be used 
as an attack vector. 

IV.  NUMERICAL EXAMPLE 

In  this  section,  we  confirm  that  false  data  injection 
attacks  could  be  injected  into  state  estimators  and  remain 
undetected by bad data detection techniques. Also, we show 
that  false  data  could  be 
target  certain 
measurements  to  affect  the  Locational  Marginal  Price 
(LMP)  at  certain  nodes.  A  5-bus  system  with  6  branch 
measurements was used as our test system (figure 1). In the 
first part of the simulation the goal is to show the feasibility 
of  creating  an  attack  vector  that  could  bypass  bad  data 
detection.  

injected 

to 

level  of  1p.u.  Also, 

In our test case, a DC power flow model was assumed; 
all  nodes  have  a  voltage 
the 
measurements  are  real  power  branch  flow  measurements. 
The  H  matrix  was  derived  according  to  the  assumed  line 
impedances.  State  estimation  and  bad  data  detection  were 
simulated using MATALB R2008a, on the other hand LMP 
simulations were carried out in PowerWorld.   

A.  Basic Mathematical Principle 

that 

As defined earlier 

 is the original vector 
of  measurements  without  any  alteration.  Then  we  define  a 
vector  za 
the  vector  of  observed 
measurements  that  contains  malicious  data.  Therefore,  za 
can be represented as 
is 
the  attack  vector  that  contains  the  malicious  data  added  to 
the original measurements.  

represents 

, where 

 and 

Also, let 

 represent the  estimates of  x using 
the  original  measurements  z, 
malicious  data  za  and 
, where c is 
respectively. Then we can represent
a non-zero vector of length n. This vector c then represents 
the error injected by the attacker.  

Therefore, the attackers objective  would be to inject  an 
attack vector using Hc (i.e. a=Hc). Since bad data detection 
methods compute the L2-norm of the measurement residual 
to check for the existence of bad data. The  L2-norm of the 
malicious  data 
the  original 
measurements  if  an  attack  vector  is  chosen  in  that  way.  In 
other  words,  choosing  an  attack  vector  that  is  a  linear 
combination  of  the  columns  of  H  would  bypass  the 
detection  technique  that  utilizes  the  norm  of  the  residuals. 
Theorem 1 below shows the proof of the above claim.  

is  the  same  as  that  of 

THEOREM  1.  If  the  original  measurements  z  can  bypass 
bad  data  detection  then  the  malicious  measurements 
  can  pass  the  detection  test  if  a  is  a  linear 

combination of the column vectors of H [4].   

PROOF.  Since  z  can  pass  the  detection,  we  have 
  is  the  detection  threshold 
assigned.  Also,  if  we  have  a  =  Hc  then  the  norm  of  the 
measurement residual is,  

,  where 

                              (5) 

Figure 1: 5-Bus test system 

Thus, the norm of the measurement residual of za is also 
less  than  the  threshold
.  This  implies  that  za  can  also 
bypass  the  bad  data  detection  process.  The  attacker  can 
choose  a  random  vector  c  to  inject  random  false  data  into 
the  system;  alternatively  a  carefully  calculated  vector  c 
could change specific measurements to a desired value.  

B.  Random False Data Injection 

We  assume  the  attacker  has  access  to  k  meters  in  the 
power  grid.  Also  assume   
  is  the  set  of 
indices of those meters. Then the attacker needs to create an 
for 
attack  vector 
and a is a linear combination of the column vectors 
of  H.  There  are  several  methods  to  calculate  the  attack 
vector a. [8] presents a method that rewrites the relation a = 
and  P  is  defined  as 
Hc  as  Ba=0.  Where, 
.  In  [4]  it  is  also  shown  that  if 
then there exists an attack vector a in which 

  such  that 

 for 

. 

Construction  of  Attack  Vectors:  When  the  condition 
 is satisfied the attacker can directly perform 
column transformations on H, such that the resulting matrix 
is  a  linear  combination  of  the  columns.  However,  the 
elements  that  are  not  controlled  by  the  attacker  have  to  be 

Table I. Line impedance and Original Measurements 

Measurement 
(m) 

Branch 

Line Impedance 
(p.u.) 

Measurements 
Values (p.u.) 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

1-2 

1-3 

2-4 

2-5 

3-4 

4-5 

0.03 

0.05 

0.05 

0.08 

0.05 

0.08 

0.91 

-0.16 

0.19 

0.21 

0.89 

0.09 

A.  False Data Injection Results 

The case system used is shown in figure 1 and 
the  line  impedances  are  given  in  Table  I.  Three 
cases  are  applied  to  the  5  bus  system.  Case  1  is 
where  original  measurements  are  applied  to  the 
system  without  any  interference.  In  this  case  a 
normal  optimal  power  flow  is  solved  with  LMP 
considerations.  Therefore,  when  bad  data 
detection  is  applied  the  estimator  shows  that  the 
estimated  measurements  are  clean  of  malicious 

Tmzzz),...,(1azzaTmaaa),...,(1badxˆxˆcxxbadˆˆazza||ˆ||xHz||)ˆ(||||ˆ||cxHazxHzbada||)(ˆ||HcaxHz||ˆ||xHzkmiiI,...,1Tmaaa,...,10iamIiIPBTTHHHHP)(1nmk0iamIi1nmkBus 1Bus 2Bus 3Bus 4Bus 5GeneratorLoad144325Gen 2Gen 1Gen 3 
 
 
 
    
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
data. In case 2, a random vector is applied to the 
original measurement vector. The state estimator 
functions  properly  in  estimation;  as  well  as,  the 
bad  data  detection  which  reveals  the  false  data 
and reveals which branch measurement should be 
dropped  from  the  estimator.  Two  bad  data 
detection 
techniques  were  used:  Normalized 
residuals  and  Chi-Square  method  (discussed 
earlier). In case 3, smart false data is injected into 
the  measurement  vector.  This  attack  vector  is 
randomly  chosen  with  the  only  condition  is  to 
satisfy  a  =  Hc.  The  attack  vector  successfully 
alters  the  estimated  measurements  and  more 
importantly  bypasses  both  bad  data  detection 
techniques applied.  

B.  False Injection for Profit 

In  the  second  part  of  the  example,  the  ability  of  the 
attacker to manipulate the market price based on false data 
injection  was  tested.  The  5-bus  system  was  modeled  in 
PowerWorld with the appropriate line properties to maintain 
a constant H matrix. The loads were also designed to ensure 
the  real  power  line  flows  most  accurately  resembled  the 
original  measurements  taken.  The  generator  properties  and 
load  magnitudes  are  given  in  Tables  II  &III.  In  the  initial 
run  of  market  clearing  prices  with  OPF  constraints  the 
results  were  that  Gen  1.  would  generate  at  maximum 
capacity while Gen 2. would pick up the remaining load and 
Gen 3. was kept on reserve.   

The  false  data  injection  was  simulated  in  Matlab  to 
obtain the new (false) measurement estimates. The c vector 
was  calculated  to  simulate  congestion  on  line  3-4.  This 
would then limit the power production by the generator on 
bus 3. Then to model this change in measurements the load 
was  manipulated  in  PowerWorld  to  resemble  the  change. 
After  that,  the  market  clearing  prices  were  calculated  and 
the  result  was  that  Gen  3.  was  forced  to  operate,  thus 
increasing the LMP at buses 2,4 and 5. The change in LMP 
is shown in Table IV. Then the attacker would buy power at 
bus 1 before injection and sell power at bus 4 after false data 
injection  for  maximum  profit.  This  manipulation  of  the 
market  clearing  prices  would  remain  to  be  undetectable 
because of the inability of the bad data detection to sense the 
erroneous measurements.  

Table II. Generator Properties and Load Magnitudes 

Gen 
number 

Price 
($/MWh) 

1 

2 

3 

10 

15 

30 

Maximum 
Capacity 
(MW) 

250 

300 

500 

Table III. Load Magnitudes 

Load on Bus 
number 

Load Magnitude 
(MW) 

1 

2 

3 

100 

100 

200 

4 

5 

40 

60 

Table IV. LMP Before and After False Data Injection 

Bus 
number 

LMP Before 
False Injection 
($/MWh) 

LMP After 
False Injection 
($/MWh) 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

15 

15 

15 

15 

15 

22.57 

27.12 

15 

32.88 

30 

V.  HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION  

        In this section, the hardware implementation 
of our system design  is  presented  and discussed. 
The realization of such a system was designed on 
Proteus.  The  main  component  that  was  used  in 
our design was a PIC microcontroller. The source 
code is written on a PC host using a C compiler, 
assembled and downloaded to the chip as shown 
in Fig. 2. 

Fig. 2. Programming Operations of the PIC 

      A serial link is the connection unit that serves 
as a delivery communication between the host PC 
and  the  programming  unit.  The  PC  runs  a  C-
compiler, so that once a program has been written 
and  assembled,  it  is  downloaded  by  placing  the 
chip in a PICSTART Plus connected to a PC [9].  
Fig.  3  shows  the  proposed  design  for  the  PIC 
microcontroller that has been used in this project. 
      The  objective  of  the  PIC  in  this  project  is  to 
identify 
injected  bad 
measurements  based  on  the  simulation  has  been 
done by the Matlab 

the  presence  of 

the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
estimate  the  state  of  the  system  using  real 
measurements.  We  show  how  an  attacker  could 
inject  false  data  into  the  state  estimation  system 
while  bypassing  bad  data  detection  techniques. 
Also,  we  show  how  an  attacker  could  target 
specific  branches  to  change  the  LMP  on  certain 
nodes for financial gains.  

Some  future  directions  of  this  work  would  be 
to design a more robust state estimator that could 
detect  such  false  data  injection  attacks.  Some 
efforts have been done to design indices to show 
how  we  can  limit  such  attacks  [8].  Also,  a 
counter-attack  method  that  employs  a  linear 
combination of H could also be designed to stop 
the  effect  of  such  attacks.  Redundancy  methods 
would also offer a solution to  such a problem of 
malicious injected data.   

REFERENCES 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

Jeu-Min Lin; Heng-Yau Pan; , "A Static State Estimation Approach 
Including Bad Data Detection and Identification in Power Systems," 
Power Engineering Society General Meeting, 2007. IEEE , vol., no., 
pp.1-7, 24-28 June 2007. 
 Amr  A.  Munshi,  Yasser  Abdel-Rady  I.  Mohamed,  "Data  Lake 
Lambda  Architecture  for  Smart  Grids  Big  Data  Analytics", Access 
IEEE, vol. 6, pp. 40463-40471, 2018. 
 R. M. Lee, M. J. Assante, T. Conway, Analysis of the cyber attack 
on the ukrainian power grid, 2016.. 

[4]  Y.  Liu,  M.  K.  Reiter,  and  P.  Ning,  "False  data  injection  attacks 
against state estimation in electric power grids," in Proc. of the 16th 
ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Securty 2009. 

[5]  H. Sandberg, A. Teixeira, and K. H. Johansson, “On security indices 
for  state  estimators  in  power  networks,”  in  Preprints  of  the  First 
Workshop on Secure Control Systems, CPSWEEK 2010, 2010. 
[6]  Kosut,  O.;  Liyan  Jia;  Thomas,  R.J.;  Lang  Tong;  ,  "Limiting  false 
data attacks on power system state estimation," Information Sciences 
and  Systems  (CISS),  2010  44th  Annual  Conference  on  ,  vol.,  no., 
pp.1-6, 17-19 March 2010 

[7]  G.  Chaojun,  P.  Jirutitijaroen,  M.  Motani,  "Detecting  false  data 
injection attacks in ac state estimation", IEEE Transactions on Smart 
Grid, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 2476-2483, Sept 2015 

[8]  A.  Monticelli.    State  Estimation  in  Electric  Power  Systems,  A 

Generalized Approach. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1999. 
[9]  M. Battes, Interfacing PIC Microcontroler, Jan. 2007, vol. 35, no. 1. 
[10]  J. Iovine, PIC microcontroller project book. McGraw-Hill, Inc. New 

York, NY, USA, 2004. 

Fig. 3   Proteus Simulation of the Circuit Design 

       In  our  design,  a  20  MHz  crystal  circuit  is 
used  to  give  a  200ns  instruction  execution  time 
and to create a precise frequency when subject to 
electrical  stimulation,  which  is  more  convenient 
for analyzing program timing [10]. Moreover, the 
crystal  oscillator  needs  to  be  physically  near  the 
MCU  to  prevent  the  crystal  from  oscillating,  or 
affecting  the  resonant  frequency.  In  addition,  a 
10pF  capacitor  is  used  to  avoid  the  clock  signal 
causing  a malfunction, and  two  15Pf are used  to 
stabilize the frequency. 

        As shown in Fig. 3, the Proteus simulation 
software was used to write in C-compiler in order 
to provide virtual instruments which was used to 
build up the circuit, just as in a real application 

VI.  CONCLUSION   

In this paper we present a potential cyber attack 
on  the  state  estimation  system  used  in  Regional 
Transmission  Organizations 
(RTOs).  The 
SCADA  system  uses  DC  power  flow  model  to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
