Cyber-Physical Systems, a new formal paradigm to model redundancy 

and resiliency 

Mario Lezoche, Hervé Panetto 

Research Centre for Automatic Control of Nancy (CRAN), CNRS, 

Université de Lorraine, UMR 7039, Boulevard des Aiguillettes 

B.P.70239, 54506 Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France. 

e-mail: {mario.lezoche, herve.panetto}@univ-lorraine.fr 

Cyber-Physical  Systems  (CPS)  are  systems  composed  by  a  physical  component  that  is 

controlled or monitored by a cyber-component, a computer-based algorithm. Advances in 

CPS technologies and science are enabling capability, adaptability, scalability, resiliency, 

safety, security, and usability that will far exceed the simple embedded systems of today. 

CPS technologies are transforming the way people interact with engineered systems. New 

smart  CPS  are  driving  innovation  in  various  sectors  such  as  agriculture,  energy, 

transportation,  healthcare,  and  manufacturing.  They  are  leading  the  4-th  Industrial 

Revolution (Industry 4.0) that is having benefits thanks to the high flexibility of production. 

The  Industry  4.0  production  paradigm  is  characterized  by  high  intercommunicating 

properties of its production elements in all the manufacturing processes. This is the reason 

it is a core concept how the systems should be structurally optimized to have the adequate 

level of redundancy to be satisfactorily resilient. This goal can benefit from formal methods 

well  known  in  various  scientific  domains  such  as  artificial  intelligence.  So,  the  current 

research concerns the proposal of a CPS meta-model and its instantiation. In this way it 

lists all kind of relationships that may occur between the CPSs themselves and between 

their (cyber- and physical-) components. Using the CPS meta-model formalization, with 

an adaptation of the Formal Concept Analysis (FCA) formal approach, this paper presents 

a way to optimize the modelling of CPS systems emphasizing their redundancy and their 

resiliency. 

Keywords: Formal Concept Analysis; Modelling; Cyber Physical System; Redundancy 

optimization; Resiliency; Industry 4.0; Meta Model  

1.  Introduction 

The term cyber-physical systems (CPS) refers to a generation of systems with integrated 

computational and physical capabilities. Those systems can interact with other systems 

through many modalities. The interconnected systems create a large range of network that 

are multi-disciplinary and physically-aware engineered systems, adapted from (Gunes et 

al.,  2014).  Inside  this  kind  of  network  there  are  components  with  advanced  abilities: 

sensing, data collection, data transmission and mechanical actuation. 

In cyber-physical systems, physical and software components are deeply entangled. The 

components operate on different spatial and temporal scales interacting with each other 

in multiple ways that are context related. Opportunities and research challenges include 

the design and development of next-generation airplanes and space vehicles, hybrid gas-

electric vehicles, fully autonomous urban driving, and prostheses that allow brain signals 

to control physical objects. 

The CPS concept is strongly related to the 4-th Industrial Revolution (Industry 

4.0). This new industrial conception will have benefits from high flexibility of production, 

easy and more accessible contribution from all involved entities of business processes 

(Zuehlke,  2010).  The  strategic  imperatives  in  this  regard  reiterated  vendors  to  embed 

enhanced functionality into the core of enterprise systems to support industry strategy in 

pursuit of the smart factory for responsive, agile, holonic, and resilient manufacturing. 

Those  functionalities  could  harness  and  manage  changes  and  evolutions.  Personal 

interviews  with  industry  experts  clearly  demanded  for  strategic  alliances  with  the 

technology vendors to ensure incremental enhancement in the functions in pursuit of a 

smart  factory  to  ultimately  earn  manufacturing  excellence  and  resilience  (Asif  et  al., 

2018).  

Each component in both physical facilities and cyber devices needs an appropriate 

level of security guard. A scalable and distributed coordination layer is very important to 

ensure its resiliency. In Industry 4.0, the CPS potentially involve trillions of devices, and 

the communication among devices must be highly scalable. The research in this domain 

proposed several methods to find meaningful information from a large amount of noisy 

data by conducting trustworthiness linkage inference on a constructed object-alarm graph 

(Li  et  al.,  2018).  To  accelerate  the  assessment  of  this  new  conception,  the  following 

research directions related to the CPS play a key role: optimization of sensor networks 

organization, structural aspects for redundancy optimization, resiliency structures. Those 

fields can benefit from the artificial intelligence research domain. The actual investigation 

is  about  the  application  of  an  approach  named  Formal  Concept  Analysis  (FCA)  for 

modelling and analysing a large-scale set of collaborative systems (Lezoche et al., 2012), 

specifically CPSs. 

The research addressed in this paper is related to the study of FCA-based patterns 

for optimizing CPSs structure related to the properties of redundancy and resiliency.  

In the process of CPS software development (Yiping et al., 2016) stated that one 

should focus on events more than on functions or objects. In our research we focus on 

core function determination from system knowledge. Before addressing this topic, we are 

presenting  our  definition  of  what  a  CPS  is,  though  a  meta-model  showing  all  kind  of 

relationships  that  may  occur  between  CPSs  themselves  and  between  their  (cyber-  and 

physical-) components.  

2.  A Meta-Model of Cyber-Physical Systems 

Components of a CPS: lets denote as Pi and Ci respectively the set of physical and cyber 

components of a system CPSj. CPSj is a structural agglomerate of these elements Pi and 

Ci  which  can  also  include  other  subsystems  CPSk  into  a  composite  cyber-physical 

system. There are two relations of different nature between these components: 

•  R" - the relation between subsystems to be physically connected (e.g. in a 

production line) and signifies transmission of any kind of physical object 

between systems. 

•  R# - the relation of the connection between cyber components which signifies 

the presence of an information/control channel between the components. 

The components of a system perform certain functions depending on their role in 

the system, and according to that they have inputs Ii and outputs Oi, that capture the flows 

between this element and the elements that are related to by R" and R#. As an example, 

for  a  sensor,  inputs  and  output  reflects  the  transformation  of  mechanical  or  physical 

alterations of the physical world into a signal that quantitatively measures a particular 

property. The source and destination of the exchange can be either other components of 

the system or the environment or some external sources or sinks. To cover the latter case, 

we  introduce  into  the  sets  of  all  physical  and  all  cyber  elements  of  CPSs,  a  model 

composed of two elements e" and e# standing respectively for these environmental or 

external sources or destinations. 

We define a system of CPSs as a tuple CPSs = 〈𝒫, 𝒞, 𝒞𝒫𝒮, R", R#〉, where	𝒫 =

e" ∪ ⋃ P0

0

 is a set of physical components of individual CPS, 𝒞 = e# ∪ ⋃ C0

0

 is a set of 

cyber components, and 𝒞𝒫𝒮 which is set of CPSs. Each individual CPS of the set 𝒞𝒫𝒮, 

as it was defined before, is a tuple of subset of cyber components, physical components 

and other CPS that it consolidates. Here we assume that every element of 𝒫, 𝒞, and	𝒞𝒫𝒮 

has its corresponding inputs Ii and outputs Oi. The details of exchange do not have special 

interest for our research in this paper, in general Ii and Oi can be of any type and have any 

values or contents. 

Compositionally,  different  CPSs  c6, c7 ∈ 	𝒞𝒫𝒮  could  share  some  of  their 

components: c6 ∩ c7 ≠ ∅. For example, as in systems utilizing the same computational 

node to supervise physical production activities, or as an actuator such as a light switch 

which can be considered as a part of two systems: one is the local electrical circuit of an 

apartment,  and  the  other  is  a  smart-home  system  for  automating  and  controlling  the 

household  electronics.  Figure  1  is  an  example  of  two  simple  CPSs  consisting  of  one 

physical  (Pi)  and  one  cyber  (Ci)  component  each  forming  a  composite  CPS.  The 

communication between CPS1 and CPS2 is done through the relations between C1 and C2; 

and the composite CPS3 has its own actuator components P3 and C3. 

Figure 1, Composite CPS3 consisting of two subordinate systems CPS1 and CPS2 

and providing its proper functionality through components P3 and C3. 

2.1 CPS Meta model 

The  proposed  meta-model  CPSs  =  〈𝒫, 𝒞, 𝒞𝒫𝒮, R", R#〉  that  we  have  elaborated  is 

presented in UML 2.0 notation on  

Figure 2. In the scientific literature, some authors have proposed different results related 

to CPS meta models from different points of view. (Jeon at al., 2012) present the CPS 

Meta Modeller tool for designing complex and large-scale systems using the Electronics 

and  Telecommunication  Research  Institute  (ETRI1)  CPS  Modelling  Language. 

(Mezhuyev  et  al.,  2013)  show  the  geometrical  meta-metamodel,  allowing  to  link  the 

1 https://www.etri.re.kr/eng/main/main.etri 

 
                                                
physical properties of domains with its spatial structure. Some other authors (Son et al., 

2012) show how to transform a Simulink model into an ETRI CPS Modeling Language 

(ECML) model for modelling CPS for simulating its behaviour and (Klimeš, 2014) shows 

how  to  control  cyber-physical  systems  deriving  behavioural  specifications  from  user 

inputs. All these researches focused on the design and the internal behaviour of a CPS. 

Our  work  presents  a  formal  meta-model  of  the  structure  of  any  CPS,  for  proposing  a 

common formal foundation of a composite CPS, aggregating the broad definitions found 

in the literature.  

The  elaborated  meta  model  finds  its  focus  in  the  interaction  of  the  cyber 

component, which naturally stands for its computational functionality, and the physical 

component, which models its physical behaviour. The existence of those two entities let 

emerge the concept of Cyber-Physical System. If one of those components doesn’t exist 

there is no possibility to have a CPS. The Physical component is modelled as an abstract 

class,  it  could  be  composed  by  a  sensing  component,  an  actuating  component  or  by  a 

component that merges the two capabilities. A CPS component needs an input and an 

output. It cannot exist a CPS component that has got only one of those two properties. An 

atomic  CPS  is  the  one  that  does  not  have  any  subsystems,  but  his  own  functional 

elements. This definition is created to show, with the best detail possible, the relationships 

between  the  two  different  parts  of  the  entire  CPS  system.  It  stops  at  the  presented 

“atomic”  level  because  of  the  scope  of  this  scientific  paper  that  focuses  on  the 

relationships of the CPSs and the possibility to improve their interoperability.  

We also note that we do not make difference between physical and cyber types of 

communication and corresponding types of input and output interfaces, although it could 

be a worthwhile extension for a future model. 

The  relation  ‘is  part  of’  (physically)  is  introduced  into  the  model  to  represent 

physical structure of systems and their inclusion into one another on the physical level. 

As  an  extension  to  this  type  of  composition  of  complex  CPS  we  also  introduce  the 

aggregation  relation  ‘logically  includes’.  Together  with  inheritance  relation  between 

classes Composite CPS and Atomic CPS it complies to the structural Composite pattern. 

With  help  of  this  aggregation  relation,  we  model  the  property  of  CPS  of  dynamical 

reconfiguration  and  adaptation.  Any  system  can  lend  its  functionality  to  many  super-

systems  (we  borrow  the  utilisation  of  sub-  and  super-  prefixes  from  mathematics,  by 

analogy with subsets and supersets), although probably not at the same time. Inversely, 

any system can accommodate multiple subsystems. 

Figure 2 Meta-model of CPS 

The class of Cyber-Physical Production Systems can be viewed, in the proposed meta-

model, as a subclass of Composite CPS. This interpretation goes in the same direction of 

the Monostori definition (Monostor, 2014). There is a tight connection between these two 

relations  ‘is  physically  part  of’  and  ‘logically  includes’,  in  the  sense  that  whenever  a 

 
system is in the relation ‘is physically part of’ this also entails that it is being ‘logically 

included’ in that system, but not in the other direction.  

3.  Finding Resiliency structure in CPS sub-systems 

In the literature, we can find several definitions of the term “resilience”. In (Sterbenz et 

al., 2010) the resilience is the ability to provide and maintain an acceptable level of service 

in the face of faults and challenges to normal operation. Another definition in (Hollnagel, 

2006) positions the resilience as the “ability of a system or organization to react to and 

recover from disturbances at an early stage with minimal effect on its dynamic stability.” 

There are different ranges of threats and challenges for services that can vary from the 

simple  misconfiguration  over  large  scale  natural  disasters  (Smith,  2011).  In  order  to 

increase  the  resilience  of  a  given  system,  the  possible  defies  and  risks  need  to  be 

recognised and the proper metrics must be defined to protect the endangered service.  

Unlike the traditional resiliency method, in which a function is allocated to each 

abstract component, a CPS is modelled in our work as a set of sub-systems. Each one is 

represented by a subset of components. 

3.1 Related works 

The redundancy is the duplication of critical components or functions of a system, 

it is the ability of providers to have different alternatives. A resilient system must have 

duplicate components (physical redundancy) or otherwise more than one configuration 

for  working  systems’  components  (functional  redundancy).  The  higher  the  degree  of 

redundancy, the more resilient the system would be (Azadeh et al., 2018). 

Initially the intention of redundancy is the increasing reliability of the system but 

it can also present itself as modelling errors. Various methodologies exist in literature to 

face the redundancy optimization problems. (Aggarwal et al., 1975) state to select the 

stage where redundancy is to be added, an heuristic criterion is introduced which takes 

into  account  the  relative  increment  in  reliability  versus  decrement  in  performance. 

(Dokhanchi at al., 2018) propose a framework for the elicitation and debugging of formal 

specifications  for  Cyber-Physical  Systems  through  two  debugging  algorithms.  One 

checks for erroneous or incomplete temporal logic specifications without considering the 

system and the other can be used for the analysis of reactive requirements with respect to 

system test traces. The user study establishes that requirement errors are common and 

that the debugging framework can resolve many insidious specification modellers'  errors. 

The  redundancy  study  is  also  a  way  to  prevent  a  single-point  of  failure,  as  stated  by 

(Cardenas et al., 2008) or hardware failure that is not considered in design (Wan et al., 

2011) thus, practical systems may need to incorporate redundancy. The knowledge of the 

domain and application context may help to unify information presentation and permits 

subsystems reuse, so as to reduce information redundancy during the process of semantic 

interpretation in the agents. (Lin et al., 2010) define an ontology for the system domain 

to  reduce  information  redundancy  in  the  model  and  simplify  the  data  interpretation 

procedure. The redundancy problem has been studied under multiple points of views, our 

approach focuses the structural evidence coming from the formal knowledge extracted by 

the data clustering. It has become increasingly crucial that cognitive representations of 

the models need to be created as a pre-requisite for assessing and intelligently managing 

the complexity, maneuvering through uncertain environments and eventually achieving 

the optimized outcomes (Chung-Sheng et al., 2018). 

Resilience  is  not  only  related  with  decreasing  the  probability  of  failure.  It  also 

highlights  the  need  to  recuperate  from  unexpected  instabilities  in  the  operating 

environment (Tierney and Bruneau, 2007). Fundamentally, resilience indicates the ability 

of a system to recover, it is a function of various system properties, including component 

reliability  and  architecture  re-configurability.  Resilience  can  be  divided  into  two 

categories (Rose, 2007):  

(1)  the  “static  resilience”  is  related  to  the  “ability  of  an  entity  or  a  system  to 

maintain function,” or to survive, when disrupted;  

(2) the “dynamic resilience” deals with recovery of the system after a shock.  

Resilience is highly context dependent — it depends on the architecture of the system, its 

operational environment, and the disruptive event. For example: 

•  Different systems are resilient to different disruptions.  

•  A system could be resilient to one type of disruption but not to another type.  

The  resilience  approaches  can  also  be  comprehended  through  the  application  ways. 

Mostly,  this  refers  to  using  the  frameworks  for  three  different  purposes,  diagnostic, 

evaluative and planning: 

•  Diagnostic – evaluating the degree to which a system is resilient to diverse shocks 

for measuring and quantifying resilience. 

•  Evaluative  –  determining  the  level  to  which  resilience  activity  is  successful  in 

achieving its objective. 

•  Planning – formulating the consequences of the resilience approach to understand 

how the planned design fits into the intervention procedure. (Constas et al., 2014).  

The  Resilience  in  Industry  4.0  reiterates  optimal  manufacturing  to  reap  the  dream  of 

productivity and manufacturing excellence. Whilst all indications are that ERP system 

integrates all business processes, yet, the existing enterprise systems lack sophistication 

for data integration in relation to the manufacturing functionality for online planning and 

Control (OnP/OnC). Hence, there is a need of holistic research in this domain to optimise 

the  core  capabilities  of  industry  (company)-specific  production.  The  implications  of 

enterprise system implementation in the industry 4.0, may act as a precursor for future 

researchers to contemplate the interaction through whole the product life cycle. As an 

outcome of the research, the exploration of the role of the big data, the analytics and the 

cyber-physical systems in achieving the resilience objectives of a smart and connected 

cyber-physical factory would be a core research topic (Asif et al., 2018). 

Most resilience-related research uses some aspect of network theory to study effects of 

disruptions (Crucitti et al., 2005). Due to the analysis of many systems, it is not possible 

to assume homogenous nodes. The frameworks that make this assumption are not able to 

analyse  those  types  of  networks.  A  few  studies  have  considered  nodes  with  the  same 

function but different capacities (Crucitti et al., 2005) and managed to create a roadmap 

of  enabling  technologies  of  CPS  in  three  types  of  network.  Those  networks  are 

constructed to manage the resources such as computation power, storage, and bandwidth, 

and enable resilient services selection. (Chun Kit et al., 2018). 

Lately,  multilayer  networks  resilience  is  acquiring  attention  as  a  way  to  characterise 

heterogeneous networks. Networks can be modelled as multilayers in two different ways. 

The  network  may  consist  of  different  physical  layers  or  it  may  require  support  from 

different  layers.  The  results  of  the  studies  in  this  field  have  stated  the  concept  of 

interdependent  network  analyses  to  highlight  the  characteristics  of  such  networks 

(Rinaldi, 2004). Applying these studies to CPSs, designers can study how a failure in one 

network can have repercussions in the other and how interdependent networks can fail 

catastrophically after the removal of a small fraction of nodes. These results in turn can 

guide resource allocation at critical nodes.  

Recent research has tried to influence control theory to handle with resilience of 

interconnected  and  interdependent  systems  (Liu,  Slotine,  and  Barabasi  2011)  with  the 

ultimate goal of developing resilient controllers (Alessandri and Filippini, 2013). 

All the studied frameworks lack the rigorous and formal approach to analyse the 

structural features. Our proposal focuses on the formal structuration of key features that 

add more resilience to the studied system. 

3.2 Definitions 

In this work, we use the following definitions: 

Definition 1 (function): a function F is a candidate for an abstract component. F 

is formed by the tuple <I, O>, where I is the set of inputs I = {I1, I2, ... In}, and O is the 

set of outputs O = {O1, O2, ... Om}. 

Definition 2 (CPS subsystem function): A CPS subsystem function ssf Î F is an 

oriented graph Gssf = (Fssf, Essf) which corresponds to a part of a CPS. Fssf = {Fssf,1, Fssf,2, 

...,  Fssf,n}  is  the  set  of  functions  belonging  to  the  sub-system  ssf,  and  E  is  the  set  of 

dependency  relations  that  connect  these  functions,  where  <Fssf,i,  Fssf,j>  =  <Fssf,i.O  → 

Fssf,j.I> denotes the connection between functions Fssf,i and Fssf,j within the subsystem ssf. 

Definition 3 (function request): a function query Q is a directed graph Gq = (F, 

E), where S = {S1, S2, ..., Sn} is the set of nodes and each node corresponds to a function 

requested by a user. E is the set of arcs corresponding to the dependency relations between 

these requested services. 

Definition 4 (composite function): a composite function CF is a directed graph 

Gf  =  (SSF,  E),  where  SSF  is  a  set  of  CPS  subsystem  functions,  and  E  is  the  set  of 

dependency relations between them. A dependency relation <ssfi, ssfj> = <ssfi.O →ssfj.I> 

denotes  the  connection  between  subsystem  functions  ssfi  and  ssfj  within  the  candidate 

composition CF. A composite function CF satisfies a query Q if, and only if, Gf = (SSF, 

E) and Gq = (S, E) are isomorphic. 

4.  Applying a formal method to structure knowledge model 

Formal Concept Analysis (FCA) is a mathematical theory invented by Rudolf Wille in 

(Wille, 1982). The theory is a bridge between mathematics, data analysis and ordered set 

theory.  This  method  allows  grouping  objects  according  to  their  common  properties 

(Kumar and Singh, 2014). Two key FCA structures are exploited in the present work, 

namely formal context and Galois lattice. A formal context is the triplet (O, A, R), where 

O is a set of objects, A is a set of attributes and R = O×A is the set of binary relations 

between O and A. Assuming that an object o has the attribute a, the relation R between o 

and a is denoted by oRa. A formal context can be represented by a matrix (O×A), where 

the lines and columns respectively correspond to the objects and attributes, and the entries 

denote the relationships between them, that is, Rij = 1 if the object Oi contains the attribute 

Aj. Otherwise, Rij = 0. Table 2 shows an example of formal context K = (O, A, R), where 

O is a set of objects O = {O1, O2, O3, O4, O5, O6, O7, O8}, A is a set of attributes A = {A1, 

A2, A3, A4, A5}, and R is a set of binary relationships between O and A. 

Table 1 - Example of a formal context 

 
From  the  above  formal  context,  a  set  of  clusters  called  “formal  concepts”  are 

derived  to  form  a  complete  lattice  structure.  A  lattice  of  formal  concepts  can  be 

represented in the form of an ordered diagram, also called a Hasse diagram. Each node 

of this diagram corresponds to a cluster and the arcs represent the relations of inclusion 

between the concepts. Each formal concept has two sections. The Extent section regroups 

a sub-set of objects sharing the common attributes, whereas the Intent section contains 

those attributes shared by objects in the Extent part. The figure 3 shows an example of 

concept lattice corresponding to the formal context in Table 1 

Figure 3 - example of concept lattice 

Formal  Concept  Analysis  has  been  successfully  applied  in  several  domains,  such  as 

knowledge discovery, road networks modelling, information retrieval, ontology merging, 

software code analysis, etc. (Poelmans et al., 2013). We propose a method that describes 

 
 
a  new  way  of  finding  reliable  functions  by  reusing  CPS  subsystems.  To  allow  the 

extraction  of  relevant  CPS  subsystems,  we  start  in  the  next  section  by  modelling  and 

clustering the CPS subsystems according to their component functions. 

5.  Modelling CPS sub-systems functions 

The explicit definition of CPS substitutable functions (CSF), as well as their component 

functions  and  the  relationships  between  them,  is  the  first  step  toward  effective 

composition of CPS function subsystem. In this section, we model such CSF information 

in the form of a formal context. 

Consider  the  CSF  formal  context  Kf  =  (SSF,  F,  R),  where  F  is  the  set  CPS 

subsystems functions SSF = {SSF1, SSF2, SSF3, ..., SSFn}, F is the set of functions F = 

{F1, F2, F3, ..., Fn} and R is the set of binary relations between fragments and services. 

Table 2 shows an example of CSF formal context with eight subsystem functions and six 

functions that form the user request. 

 
Table 2 - Formal context KF of subsystem functions 

As  shown  in  the  formal  context  above,  the  entries  indicate  whether  a  fragment  𝑓 ∈ 𝐹 

contains a service s ∈ S (value 1) or s ∉ S (value 0). From the formal context KF, a set of 

clusters called formal concepts are derived to construct a complete lattice LF of fragments 

(see Figure 2). In the literature, there are several lattice construction algorithms such as 

Bordat, Godin, Dowling (Poelmans et al., 2010). We use the Bordat algorithm (Bordat, 

1986) to construct the lattice of fragments. This algorithm is very successful when it runs 

on  contexts  of  low  density.  The  lattice  of  fragments  is  illustrated  in  Figure  4  and 

represents the hierarchy of concepts that group the fragments according to their common 

component services. 

 
Figure 4 - Lattice LF of process fragments 

The  top  formal  concept  in  the  above  lattice  is  called  Supremum,  whereas  the 

bottom is called Infimum. From Table 3, we can deduct, from the empty Extent column 

in the formal concept C15, that there is no CPS subsystem offering all the functions {F1, 

F2, F3, F4, F5, F6} requested by the user.  

 
Table 3 - Formal concepts of the context KF 

The  concept  C8  shows,  through  its  Extent  column,  the  existence  of  a  CPS 

subsystem {SSF8} which offers the functions {F2, F4, F6}. The concept C3 shows that 

there exist two subsystems {SSF3, SSF6}, which offer two of the requested functions {F3, 

F4}.  Assume  that  a  user  sends  a  request  containing  the  functions  {F1,  F2,  F3,  F5}.  By 

running through the above lattice, we can satisfy this request using several combinations 

of subsystems: 

- Combination 1: C7.Extent ∪ C4.Extent 

- Combination 2: C1.Extent ∪ C2.Extent ∪ C4.Extent 

- Combination 3: C1.Extent ∪ C3.Extent ∪ C4.Extent 

 
Note that the conjunction of several Extent parts may lead to one or more CSF 

combinations.  As  an  example,  the  Extent  part  of  the  formal  concept  C1  contains  two 

candidate subsystems (SSF1 and SSF7) that offer two of the five requested functions (F1 

and F2), whereas C7.Extent contains only one candidate subsystem (SSF7) that offers three 

functions (F1, F2 and F3). To satisfy the user’s request, some CSF combinations can be 

extracted from the formal concepts C1, C2 and C4, which are {SSF1, SSF7}, {SSF2, SSF6} 

and  {SSF4,  SSF5}.  These  CSF  combinations  are  determined  by  analysing  the  hidden 

relations between formal concepts and checking if the function in their Intent parts may 

satisfy the user needs. 

In this way, analysing the formal context through a standard research algorithm, it is easy 

to highlight the weakness of a system finding the lack of redundancy and explicitly the 

absence of resiliency. The lack of redundancy, as stated also in (Zheng et al, 2017), could 

expose the whole system to a vulnerability in the systems security domain. The presented 

method  is  used  to  find  the  absence  of  redundancy  and  not  to  list  a  gradient  of  the 

redundancy level. 

5.1 Hierarchical structures of the meta-model and the corresponding algebraic 

lattice representation through a simple case study 

Unlike  our  previous  approach  (Morozov  et  al,  2017)  where  we  modelled  CPS  using 

Formal Concept Analysis in a standard object-attribute fashion, currently we extend the 

modelling approach to also take into account links that exist between components and 

also for hierarchical inclusion of systems one into another according to their composite 

structure. 

In  this  way,  CPSs  can  be  modelled  independently  in  the  physical  and  cyber 

perspectives using corresponding relations, each one defining an algebraic lattice. The 

hierarchical structure gives rise to the third lattice that can be used for tacit knowledge 

recognition and further explicitation. 

Given the CPS model in Figure 4, we can list the functions offered by each element of 

the atomic CPS subsystems. The functionalities offered by the atomic Physical parts of 

this CPS are resumed in the following 

Table 4. 

Table 4 – Functions offered by Physical part of the CPS atomic subsystems 

 
 
On the other part the functionalities offered by the atomic Cyber parts of this 

CPS are resumed in the following 

Table 5. 

Table 5 – Functions offered by Cyber part of the CPS atomic subsystems 

At  this  stage,  we  will  not  focus  on  the  Inputs  and  Outputs  of  the  elementary 

functions taking in account that, for simplicity, they are the same for the equal function 

and there is not a partial overlapping of the domains and ranges. Given this information 

about  the  CPS  functionality  we  will  describe  and  formalise  manually  the  experts’ 

knowledge that will be a key point to let the model and the formal tool to work properly. 

 
 
Figure 5 CPS Functional Model example. 

In 

the 

following 

Table  6,  we  will  present  what  are  the  same  functions  offered  by  the  Physical 

elements and the Cyber elements of the same CPS of Figure 5. We will also name the 

function to be ready to be used in the formal context creation. 

 
 
Table 6 – Equal functions offered by Cyber and Physical part of the CPS 

In  our  analysis,  we  will  include  also  the  implicit  “part  of”  property  of  the  atomic 

subsystems towards the complete one. The following Table 7 presents the three functions 

representing that knowledge. 

Table 7 – Equal functions offered by Cyber and Physical part of the CPS 

Taken in account all that information, we can create the formal context for the CPS of 

Figure 5. 

 
 
Table 8 – Formal context of Figure 5 CPS 

From this formal context, we are able to automatically produce the following formal 

concepts, summarised in the Table 9. 

 
Table 9 – Formal concepts of Figure 5 CPS 

Analysing 

the 

formal 

context 

in 

 
 
Table 

8 

and 

the 

formal 

concepts 

in 

Table 9, we can easily produce lattices representing various information of the studied 

CPS and following the CPS Meta-model presented in  

Figure 2.  

The lattices in Figure 6 represents the Cyber part (6a) and the Physical part (6b) of the 

CPS presented in Figure 5. 

 
Figure 6 – 6a: Cyber part of CPS – 6b: Physical part of CPS 

The lattice in Fig 7 represents the CPS in its completeness highlighting the “part of” 

relations through the inclusive functions 𝐹?

6, 𝐹?

7, 𝐹?

@. 

Figure 7 – Lattice representation of CPS depicted on Figure 5 

 
 
As 

we 

can 

simply 

deduce, 

from 

the 

Table 9, the Figure 6 and the Figure 7 lattices, that the analysed CPS is not fully resilient. 

In fact, there are three functions that are nowhere duplicated. If the following functions 

A, 𝐹B
𝐹@

C and 𝐹D

C would stop working no other CPS subsystem could replace them. Using 

the Figure 6 representation we can rapidly identify the CPS redundancy focusing on the 

node labels. The node that includes more than one CPS subsystems shows the existence 

of the redundancy subsystem in the entire system. As an example, in the Figure 6a we 

find the CPS2 and CPS6 duplicating the same cyber functions and in the Figure 6b we find 

the CPS4 and CPS6 duplicating the same physical functions. 

 
5.2 A simple real case study to present the proposed process 

In this section we schematize an enterprise with four production lines and we will show 

the process to perform a redundancy and a resiliency analysis.  

The Figure 8 presents the schema of the shop floor where the four manufacturing lines 

are controlled by two cameras that send the data flow towards a malfunctions detection 

software.  Each  production  line  is  composed  by  a  machine,  that  performs  a  particular 

manufacturing function FRx, linked to some intelligent sensors measuring some physical 

dimensions. The following definitions explain the various functions:  

•  FWx represent the water sensors monitoring if there is unattended humidity in parts 

of the production line where it should not be. 

•  FPx represent the pressure sensors monitoring a level of pressure not tolerable by the 

manufacturing machines. 

•  FTx represent the temperature sensors monitoring the environmental temperature. 

•  FCx represent the camera controlling the four manufacturing lines. The data flow is 

sent to a software to detect potential malfunctions. 

In Table 10 are presented the functions offered by the system. This table represents the 

experts knowledge related to the presented system. 

Equal Function offered 

FC = FC1 = FC2 

FRa = FR1 = FR4 

FRb = FR2 = FR3 

FT = FT1 = FT2 

Table 10 – Equal functions offered by the CPSx 

Figure 8 – Four production lines controlled by two cameras 

Taken in account all the information from the Table 10 and the Figure 8, we can create 

the Table 11 in which there will be the formal context for the entire production system.  

Functions 

FC 

FRa 

FRb  FW1  FW2  FP1 

FP2 

FT 

Subsystems 

CPS1 

CPS2 

CPS3 

CPS4 

CPS5 

CPS6 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

0 

Table 11 in which there will be the formal context for the entire production system 

From this formal context, we are able to automatically produce the following formal 

concepts, summarised in the Table 12. 

 
 
 
Formal Concepts 

Concept Name 

< {Concept Extent}, {Concept Intent} > 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

< {CPS1, CPS2}, {FC}> 

< {CPS3}, {FRa, FW1, FP1} > 

< {CPS4, CPS5}, {FRb, FT} > 

< {CPS5}, {FRb, FW2, FT} > 

< {CPS6}, {FRa, FP2} > 

< {CPS3, CPS6}, {FRa} > 

< {CPS1, CPS2, CPS3, CPS4, CPS5, CPS6}, {} > 

< {}, {FC, FRa, FRb, FW1, FW2, FP1, FP2, FT} > 

Table 12 Formal concepts derived from the Formal context presented in Table 11. 

Given the Formal concepts it is immediate, through a simple research algorithm, finding 

particular configurations of the intents, the offered functions, that are related to the 

extents, the subsystems composed by the CPSs. 

For examples the controller function, FC, is assured only by the CPS1 and CPS2. 

CPS3 and CPS6 have the common manufacturing function FRa but they differ in 

relation to the other sensors, so a possible logical derivation could be to extend the 

specific sensors to one another. 

The formal concept number 7 gives the information that there is no function offered by 

all the subsystems.  

The formal concept number 8, in a complementary way, states that there is no 

subsystem that offers all the functionalities. 

5.3 Assisting the Cyber-Physical Systems Modelling Process 

Following the various proposals in literature (Khaitan, 2015), we describe the generalized 

CPS model as a system of components. Those components can be unmistakeably divided 

onto two disjoint groups:  

1.  a control decision and a sensor part, that represents the system cyber layer,  

2.  a  physical  counter-part,  i.e.  all  actuators  that  bridge  the  information  into  real-

world actions. 

This explicit separation between the two system abstracts parts imposes a limitation on 

the modelling approach. However, its application does not lead to any restrictions on how 

the system will be later specified or implemented. In our modelling approach, we propose 

this two layers’ division as a separation between the system components functional roles. 

We  consider  the  physical  nodes  as  terminal  execution  nodes  which  highlight  the 

behaviour of the system. In contrast sensor and computation nodes from the cyber layer 

provide data and decisions. The cases where a cyber-node itself realizes tail end functions 

can be inferred from the above case by separating its modelling element into two disjoint 

elements: the physical one which takes over the functions and the cyber one which serves 

for computations.  

Our research investigates the properties of concept lattices, it proposes an illustrative case 

study of its application to CPS. The comprehension of a system is an iterative process, 

spacing from a general view to focus towards specific subsystems. In FCA toolset, which 

is built around a complete lattice, this topic is addressed by arising clusters which covers 

all  levels  of  generalization.  The  lattice  diagram  helps  in  visual  navigation  and  the 

implication outlines the axioms proper to the studied domain. 

Another relevant topic in the CPSs field is related to deal with big scale systems and the 

production of a great quantity of data. The literature on FCA proposes various techniques 

tackling  this  issue:  iceberg  concept  lattices  (Stumme,  2002),  projections  of  pattern 

structures (Ganther, 2001), and feature selection methods. 

6.  Conclusion 

Two results are achieved in this scientific work. 

1.  The first one is the presentation of a CPS meta model that represents a first step 

towards the knowledge formalisation needed to structure the use of formal tools, 

2.  and the second is the FCA adaptation to this domain to find hidden knowledge 

thanks to the implicit relations existing in the structure of the system. 

We analysed and discovered in an automatic and simple way the lack of resilience and 

the presence of redundancy in the analysed CPS looking directly at the CPS model. The 

simple  example  presented  show  how  to  focus  the  weakness  of  a  system  and  how-to 

strength  its  resiliency  analysing  the  Lattice  and  the  formal  concepts  created  from  the 

system model. In the same way, we can balance the redundancy of the system lowering 

the number of the repeated functions offered by different subsystems. The system context 

is  a  key  knowledge  to  optimize  the  redundancy  level.  The  context  expresses  reality 

constraints. Formalizing those constraints and integrating them in the FCA formal context 

will  improve  the  accuracy  of  the  model  and  let  understand  the  hidden  links  between 

existing concepts. Generally, those links represent the redundant concepts to optimize. 

This analysis is under study to use the appropriated formal way.  

Formal  Concept  Analysis  has  been  applied  in  many  domains  as  a  knowledge 

representation  and  discovery  tool.  The  current  paper  adapts  this  approach  and  its 

evaluation for the needs of CPS modelling and analysis. The proposed result highlights 

the FCA bottom-up approach focusing with the particularities of the domain and building 

upon  them  a  structure  to  allow  to  discover  the  general  dependencies.  Some  research 

studying relations between the FCA and the graph modelling methods (Carbonnel et al., 

2016),  (Morozov  et  al.,  2017)  specifies  the  need  of  the  use  of  extra  filtering  after  the 

lattice building process. As a further development of the approach, we plan to study the 

use of the resulting lattice-models to response some of the pressing questions of Industry 

4.0 such as the identification of redundancies in functionalities, the improvement of the 

systems plasticity and their auto-adaptation to environment changes. The future research 

would be to implement an approach of reinforcement learning algorithms in the CPS so 

that, by themselves, following several iterations, the systems could learn the specificities 

of each other and build, autonomously and in a collaborative way, their own global model. 

Another feature to add to the presented approach would be the interpretation of the models 

through  some  extra  knowledge  derived  from  formal  representations  (e.g.  Ontologies). 

This property would improve the automatic modelling and discovery steps. The formal 

knowledge  representation  would  be  complementary  in  relation  to  the  informal  (expert 

experiences) source of knowledge. The definition of correspondences between the lattices 

will be used for a much more optimised improvement of systems’ resilience. 

References 

Aggarwal  K.K.,  Gupta  J.S.,  Misra  K.B.,  "A  New  heuristic  criterion  for  solving  a 
redundancy optimization problem", 1975, IEEE Trans. Reliability, vol. R-24, pp. 86-87. 

Alessandri, A., & Filippini, R., 2012, Evaluation of resilience of interconnected systems 
based  on  stability  analysis.  In International  Workshop  on  Critical  Information 
Infrastructures Security (pp. 180-190). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 

Asif R., Tariq M., Erkoyuncu J. A., Tjahjono B., Khan N. & Shami M., 2018, Enterprise 
systems’ life cycle in pursuit of resilient smart factory for emerging aircraft industry: a 
synthesis of Critical Success Factors’(CSFs), theory, knowledge gaps, and implications, 
Enterprise Information Systems, 12:2, 96-136, DOI: 10.1080/17517575.2016.1258087 

Azadeh A., Salehi V., Salehi R. & Hassani S.M., 2018, Performance optimization of an 
online  retailer  by  a  unique  online  resilience  engineering  algorithm,  Enterprise 
Information Systems, 12:3, 319-340, DOI: 10.1080/17517575.2017.1365173 

Bordat  J.,  1986,  "Calcul  pratique  du  treillis  de  galois  d'une  correspondance.", 
Mathématiques, Informatiques et Sciences Humaines, 24(94): pp. 31-47. 

Carbonnel, J., Bertet, K., Huchard, M., Nebut, C., 2016, “FCA for Software Product Lines 
Representation: Mixing Configuration and Feature Relationships in a Unique Canonical 
Representation”, In CLA: Concept Lattices and their Applications, pp. 109-122, CEUR 
Workshop Proceedings. 

Cardenas A. A., Amin S., Sastry, S., 2008, Secure control: Towards survivable cyber-
physical systems. In Distributed Computing Systems Workshops, 2008. ICDCS'08. 28th 
International Conference on (pp. 495-500). IEEE. 

Chun Kit Ng, Chun Ho Wu, Kai Leung Yung, Wai Hung Ip & Tommy Cheung, 2018, A 
semantic similarity analysis of Internet of Things, Enterprise Information Systems, 12:7, 
820-855, DOI: 10.1080/17517575.2018.1464666 

Chung-Sheng Li, Frederica Darema & Victor Chang, 2018, Distributed behavior model 
orchestration  in  cognitive  internet  of  things  solution,  Enterprise  Information  Systems, 
12:4, 414-434, DOI: 10.1080/17517575.2017.1355984 

Constas,  M.,  Frankenberger,  T.;  Hoddinott,  J.;  Mock,  N.;  Romano,  D.;  Béné,  C.  and 
Maxwell, D., 2014, A Common Analytical Model for Resilience Measurement: Causal 
Framework  and  Methodological  Options,  Food  Security  Information  Network  (FSIN) 
Technical Series No. 2, Rome: World Food Programme. 

Crucitti,  P.,  Latora,  V.,  &  Marchiori,  M.,  2005,  Locating  critical  lines  in  high-voltage 
electrical power grids. Fluctuation and Noise Letters, 5(02), L201-L208. 

Dokhanchi A., Hoxha B., Fainekos G., 2018, Formal requirement debugging for testing 
and verification of cyber-physical systems. ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing 
Systems (TECS), 17(2), 34. 

Ganter,  B.,  &  Kuznetsov,  S.  O.,  2001,  “Pattern  structures  and  their  projections”.  In 
International  Conference  on  Conceptual  Structures,  pp.  129-142,  Springer  Berlin 
Heidelberg. 

Gunes, V., Peter, S., Givargis, T., Vahid, F., 2014, “A Survey on Concepts, Applications, 
and Challenges in Cyber-Physical Systems,” KSII Trans. Internet Inf. Syst., vol. 8, no. 
12, pp. 4242–4268. 

Hollnagel E., Nemeth C.P., 2016, editors. Resilience Engineering Perspectives, Volume 
2: Preparation and Restoration. Boca Raton: CRC Press;. 310 p. 

Jeon J., Chun I., Kim W., 2012, Metamodel-Based CPS Modeling Tool, in Embedded 
and Multimedia Computing Technology and Service, Springer Netherlands, pp. 285-291 

Khaitan,  S.  K.,  McCalley,  J.  D.,  2015,  “Design  techniques  and  applications  of 
cyberphysical systems: A survey”, IEEE Systems Journal, 9(2), pp. 350-365. 

Klimeš J., 2014, Using Formal Concept Analysis for Control in Cyber-Physical Systems, 
24th DAAAM International Symposium on Intelligent Manufacturing and Automation, 
Procedia Engineering 69, pp. 1518–1522 

Kumar,  C.  A.,  &  Singh,  P.  K.,  2014,  Knowledge  representation  using  formal  concept 
analysis: a study on concept generation. Global Trends in Intelligent Computing Research 
and Development (No. 11), pp. 306–336. 

Lezoche M., Yahia E., Aubry A., Panetto H., Zdravković M., 2012, Conceptualising and 
structuring semantics in Cooperative Enterprise Information Systems Models, Computers 
in Industry, Elsevier, 63 (8), pp.775-787. 

Li  Da  Xu  &  Lian  Duan,  2018,  Big  data  for  cyber  physical  systems  in  industry  4.0:  a 
survey, Enterprise Information Systems, DOI: 10.1080/17517575.2018.1442934 

Lin  J.,  Sedigh  S.,  Miller,  A.,  2010,  Modeling  cyber-physical  systems  with  semantic 
agents. In Computer Software and Applications Conference Workshops (COMPSACW), 
2010 IEEE 34th Annual (pp. 13-18). IEEE. 

Liu, Y.Y., Slotine, J.J., Barabasi, A.L., 2011, Controllability of complex networks. Nature 
473 (7346), pp. 167–173. 

Mezhuyev  V.,  Samet  R.,  2013,  Geometrical  Meta-Metamodel  for  Cyber-Physical 
Modelling, Cyberworlds (CW), 2013 International Conference 

Monostori, L., 2014, Cyber-physical production systems: roots, expectations and R&D 
challenges. Procedia Cirp, 17: pp.9-13. 

Morozov, D., Lezoche, M., Panetto, H., 2017, FCA modelling for CPS interoperability 
optimization  in  Industry  4.0,  7th  International  Conference  on  Information  Society  and 
Technology, ICIST 2017, Kopaonik, Serbia. 1, pp. 55-59, 2017. 

Poelmans, J., Elzinga, P., Viaene, S., & Dedene, G., 2010, “Formal concept analysis in 
knowledge  discovery:  a  survey.”,  Conceptual  Structures:  From  Information  to 
Intelligence, pp. 139-153. 

Poelmans, J., Ignatov, D. I., Kuznetsov, S. O., Dedene, G., 2013, Formal concept analysis 
in  knowledge  processing:  A  survey  on  applications.  Expert  systems  with  applications, 
Vol. 40(No. 16), pp. 6538–6560.  

Rinaldi,  S.  (2004).  Modeling  and  simulating  critical  infrastructures  and  their 
interdependencies. Proceedings of the 37th Conference on System sciences, pp. 1–8. 

Rose, A., 2007, Economic resilience to natural and man-made disasters: Multidisciplinary 
origins and contextual dimensions. Environmental Hazards, 7(4), pp. 383-398. 

Smith,  P.,  2011,  "Network  resilience:  a  systematic  approach",  IEEE  Communications 
Magazine, vol.49, no.7, pp. 88-97, July 2011. DOI: 10.1109/MCOM.2011.5936160. 

Son  H.S.,  Kim  W.Y.,  Kim  R.,Y.,  Min  H.,  2012,  Metamodel  Design  for  Model 
Transformation  from  Simulink  to  ECML  in  Cyber  Physical  Systems,  in  Computer 
Applications for Graphics, Grid Computing, and Industrial Environment, Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, pp. 56-60 

Sterbenz J.P.G., Hutchison D., Çetinkaya E.K., Jabbar A., Rohrer J.P., Schöller M., Smith 
P., 2010, "Resilience and survivability in communication networks: Strategies, principles, 

and survey of disciplines", Special issue "Resilient and survivable networks, Computer 
Networks Volume 54, Issue 8, 1 June 2010, pp. 1245-1265, 2010. 

Stumme, G., Taouil, R., Bastide, Y., Pasquier, N., Lakhal, L., 2002, “Computing iceberg 
concept lattices with TITANIC”. Data & knowledge engineering, 42(2), pp. 189-222. 

Tierney,  K.,  Bruneau,  M.,  2007.  Conceptualizing  and  measuring  resilience:  a  key  to 
disaster loss reduction. 

Yiping Jiang, C.L. Philip Chen & Junwei Duan, 2016, A new practice-driven approach 
to  develop  software  in  a  cyber-physical  system  environment,  Enterprise  Information 
Systems, 10:2, 211-227, DOI: 10.1080/17517575.2014.939107 

Wan J., Yan H., Suo H., Li, F., 2011, Advances in cyber-physical systems research. KSII 
Transactions on Internet and Information Systems (TIIS), 5(11), pp. 1891-1908. 

Wille,  R.  (1982).  Restructuring  lattice  theory:  an  approach  based  on  hierarchies  of 
concepts. In Ordered sets (pp. 445-470). Springer, Dordrecht. 

Zheng  Z.,  Reddy  A.L.N.,  2017,  Towards  Improving  Data  Validity  of  Cyber-Physical 
Systems through Path Redundancy, CPSS '17 Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Workshop on 
Cyber-Physical System Security, pp. 91-102 

Zuehlke, D., 2010, Smart Factory - Towards a Factory-of Things, IFAC Annual Reviews 
in Control, Vol. 34, Issue 1 

