Reference for citations:  

Radanliev, P., De Roure, C.., Cannady, S., Montalvo, R.M., Nicolescu, R., Huth, M., 2018. Economic impact of IoT cyber risk 
- analysing past and present to predict the future developments in IoT risk analysis and IoT cyber insurance, in: Living in the 
Internet of Things: Cybersecurity of the IoT - 2018. Institution of Engineering and Technology, London. 
https://doi.org/10.1049/cp.2018.0003 

Economic Impact of IoT Cyber Risk - Analysing past and present 
to predict the future developments in IoT risk analysis and IoT 
cyber insurance 

Petar Radanliev, Dave De Roure *, Stacy Cannady, Rafael Mantilla Montalvo †, Razvan Nicolescu, 
Michael Huth¨, 

*The University of Oxford, Oxford e-Research Centre, UK, † Cisco Systems, USA, ¨ Imperial College London, UK 

Keywords:  IoT  Cyber  Risk,  IoT  risk  analysis,  IoT  cyber 
insurance, IoT MicroMort, Cyber Value-at-Risk 

Abstract 

This  paper  is  focused  on  mapping  the  current  evolution  of 
Internet of Things (IoT) and its associated cyber risks for the 
Industry 4.0 (I4.0) sector. We report the results of a qualitative 
empirical  study  that  correlates  academic  literature  with  14  - 
I4.0 frameworks and initiatives. We apply the grounded theory 
approach to synthesise the findings from our literature review, 
to compare the cyber security frameworks and cyber security 
quantitative impact assessment models, with the world leading 
I4.0  technological  trends.  From  the  findings,  we build  a  new 
impact assessment model of IoT cyber risk in Industry 4.0. We 
therefore  advance  the  efforts  of  integrating  standards  and 
governance into Industry 4.0 and offer a better understanding 
of economics impact assessment models for I4.0. 

1  Introduction 

The evolution of IoT represents multiple categories of cyber-
physical  systems,  integrating  technologies  related  to  smart 
grids,  smart  homes,  intelligent  transportation,  manufacturing 
and  supply  chain  and  smart cities, to  name  a few.  Such  new 
technologies  come  with  new  types  of  risks  that  existing  risk 
assessment/management  methods  are  not  designed 
to 
anticipate  or  predict.  Safeguarding  an  IoT  deployment  IoT, 
while simultaneously harnessing its economic value, requires 
systematic  consideration  of  multiple  factors, 
including: 
privacy,  ethics,  trust,  reliability,  acceptability  and  security. 
Such  a  systematic  approach  would  go  far  to  ensure  the 
integrity, confidentiality, and availability of the data contained 
in  IoT  devices  and  services.  Cyber  security  has  been 
recognised as a critical national policy issue. by many countries 
Economic impact of cyber risk and cyber security importance 
is  growing  as  the  integration  of  IoT  connected  devices  into 

smart  manufacturing  and  supply,  cities,  intelligent  transport 
systems,  smart  grids  and  more  aspects  of  modern  life, 
including  banking,  finance,  autonomous  cars  and  personal 
medical  devices.  Cyber-attacks  are  increasing  in  frequency, 
and the and increasingly target  IoT  devices  (for example  the 
Mirai  botnet).  The  severity  of  future  attacks  could  be  much 
greater than what has been observed to date. 

A critical question for government policy and for private sector 
business strategies for IoT connected products, platforms and 
services is the sufficiency of cyber security to minimize cyber 
risk that accompanies IoT deployments. This answer must be 
partially  addressed  by  economic  analysis,  such  as  cost  and 
frequency  analysis  of  cyber-attacks.  Such  analysis  would 
the  process  of  building  frameworks  and 
complement 
methodologies  for  mitigating  the  economic  impact  of  cyber 
risk  of  commercial  use  of  deployments  of  IoT  connected 
products and services.  

The research problem investigated in this paper is the present 
lack of standardised methodology that would measure the cost 
and  probabilities  of  cyber-attacks  in  specific  IoT  related 
verticals  (ex.  connected  spaces  or  commercial  and  industrial 
IoT equipment) and the economic impact (IoT product, service 
or platform related) of such cyber risk. As a result, the growth 
of the IoT cyber risk finance and insurance markets are lacking 
empirical  data  to  construct  actuarial  tables.  Despite  the 
development  of  models  related  to  the  impact  of  cyber  risk, 
there is a lack of such models related to specific IoT verticals. 
Hence,  banks  and  insurers  are  unable  to price  IoT  cyber  risk 
with the same precision as in traditional insurance lines. Even 
more concerning,  the  current  macroeconomic costs  estimates 
of cyber-attacks related to IoT products, services and platforms 
are entirely speculative. The approach by ‘early adopters’ that 
IoT  products  are  ‘secure  by  default’  could  be  somewhat 
misleading. Even governments advocate security standards ex. 
standards  like  ISA  99,  or  C2M2  [1],  [2]  that  accept  that  the 
truth  on  the  ground  is  that  IoT  devices  are  unable  to  secure 

1 

 
 
 
 
themselves, so the logical placement of security capability is in 
the communications network.  

in competitiveness triggered by higher cost and fears of cyber-
attacks.  

The  research  methodology  in  this  paper  proposes  combining 
the Cyber  VaR,  NIST and  FAIR  frameworks  to  build a  new 
model for calculating the economic impact of IoT cyber risk. 
There is a limited  research  on  the economic impact of cyber 
risk. There is even less research on the economic impact related 
to  cyber  risks  from  different  IoT  verticals.  The  economic 
impact of IoT related cyber risks in present time are assessed 
by applying methodologies established before the development 
of IoT verticals (ex. automated, digital, social machines, cyber-
physical  and  coupled  systems).  Present  day  critical 
infrastructure systems are far more complex, creating new risks 
for failures. Further, risk in an IoT deployment might extend to 
many entities. A interruption in services delivered by a smart 
grid or smart city would impact many businesses, agencies and 
individuals. For example, failure in MY IoT deployment might 
cost  millions  due  to  interrupted  services.  This  creates  the 
rationale 
impact  model  and  assessment 
methodology  are  needed  that  would  anticipate  economic 
impact  of  cyber  risks  and  benefits  from  the  IoT  ecosystem. 
This research would build upon existing cyber risk models (e.g. 
VaR,  Cyber  VaR).  The  research  aim  is  to  develop  a  robust 
economic  model  to  estimate  the  economic  impact  in  IoT 
critical 
(ex. 
verticals 
infrastructure).  

communications 

that  a  new 

network, 

or 

Genesis of IoT 

The  IoT  term  was  created  in  1999  [3]  and  the  first  IoT 
principles  were  published  shortly  after  in  the  book  ‘When 
Things  Start  to  Think’  [4].  According  to  Gartner’s  IT  Hype 
Cycle, the IoT market adoption will take 5-10 years, as of 2012 
[5]. 

Research rationale  

Cyber risk in the IoT is increasing at an alarming rate and cyber 
security  is  of  increasing  relevance  to  early  adopters  for 
harnessing  economic  value  from  the  IoT,  without  exposing 
critical infrastructure to cyber risks. Some of the technologies 
(not all) that are used every day are (at present) not connected 
with the internet, such as: gas meters, house lights, healthcare 
devices,  water  distribution  systems,  cars  and  other  road 
transport  vehicles.  However,  such  devices  are  increasingly 
becoming  digitally  connected  and  communicating  through 
mobile  (or  wireless)  networks,  e.g.  M2M.  Some  examples 
include connected spaces, smart meters and autonomous cars. 
Ultimately IoT may revolutionise our business ecosystem. This 
evolution is triggered by a number of factors and forces. Some 
include: objects connected to the IoT can reduce costs through 
use of the data they collect, create business opportunities, and 
can  promote  new  services.  IoT  products  and  services  are 
disadvantaged compared to non-connected devices, because of 
the concern  over cyber  risks.  This is  similar  to  the  story that 
played out during the emergence of cloud computing. It seems 
likely that customer concern will drive new opportunities for 
promoting cyber security that could lead to reducing this gap 

IoT 

risks  of 

related  cyber-attacks 

The growth of the IoT market (ex. in the critical infrastructure 
vertical) could increase significantly if policymakers have the 
methodology  to  assess,  predict,  analyse  and  address  the 
economic 
the 
communications  network.  Without 
the  appropriate  risk 
assessment  methodology,  the  likelihood  of  serious  economic 
impact  due  to  attack,  can  only  be  determined  by  subjective 
assessment. Connecting the economic impact of different IoT 
verticals  cyber  risk  to  critical  infrastructure  through  impact 
models,  can  provide  feedback  sensors  and  real  time  data 
mechanisms.  This  would  assist  and  enable  industry  and 
policymakers  to  visualise  the  problem  and  address  the 
economic risk created by IoT related cyber-attacks. 

in 

New Theoretical Frontiers  

New  theoretical  model  that  integrates  cyber  risks  from  the 
physical  and  cyber  subsystems  is  necessary.  The  new 
theoretical model needs to provide an overall understanding of 
the design, development, and evolution of IoT cyber risks. The 
model  needs to integrate  theories  of  IoT,  control  of  physical 
systems,  and  the  interaction  between  the  physical  and  the 
digital worlds. 

2  Literature review 

Economic value of IoT digital infrastructure 

the  analysis  of 

According  to  a  2013  Cyber  Power  Index  [6],  The  United 
Kingdom  has  been  ranked  as  the  overall  global  superpower 
followed by the United States. However, according to the same 
report, 
industry  application  of  digital 
infrastructure  in  key  sectors  (Smart  Grids,  E-Health,  E-
Commerce,  Intelligent  Transportation  and  E-Government), 
The United Kingdom drops much lower to the 5th place and 
United States on the 3rd place of the index. It seems that the 
UK  and  US  are  strongly  protected  to  withstand  digital 
infrastructure  cyber-attacks,  which  is  crucial  in  developing 
digital  economy  [7].  But  the  UK  and  US  seem to  be  lagging 
behind in terms of capabilities to capitalise on the new digital 
era. This lagging behind in the harnessing of economic value 
from  digital  infrastructure  could  be caused  by the  barriers to 
adoption of smart manufacturing technologies (such as cost), 
especially  for  small  enterprises  [8].  New  infrastructure  for 
smart manufacturing technology would create large savings for 
manufacturers,  in  the  US  the  savings  are  estimated  to  $57.4 
billion  annually  [8].  This  could  improve  the  harnessing  of 
economic  value  from  digital  infrastructure,  but  the  concerns 
about  the  economic  impact  of  IoT  cyber  risk  would  remain, 
especially  in  cyber  risk  insurance  policies  for  SME’s.  For 
example, ICT cyber insurance either gives genuine protection, 
or  it  offers  more  of  a  consulting  relationship  where  the 
insurance provider offers initial training and measures, and will 
come in after an attack to assist in recovery. These approaches 
do  not  seem to  be in  the  interest  of  SMEs  because the cyber 

 
 
insurance cab be void (e.g. if the insurance broker finds out that 
a  specific  software  update  was  not  done  by  midnight  of  a 
certain  date)  and  the  recovery  usually  comes  at  a  premium 
price. As such, current cyber insurance policies do not seem to 
considerably  help  with  making  ICT  systems  more  resilient 
against  cyberattacks.  If  cyber  insurance  companies  could 
predict  with  precision  the  maximum  economic  impact,  this 
could  enable  the  insurance  companies  to  provide  more 
comprehensive  policies  which  would  help  SME’s  protect 
against  cyber  risk  impact  that  exceeds  their  individual  risk 
impact tolerance level.  

Economic impact of IoT cyber crime 

Cyber  risk  has  not  been  clearly  quantified  through  historical 
measures because of the risk environment is changing fast [9]. 
The common figure stated is a loss of $1 trillion to cybercrime, 
but estimates range from: 300bn and $1tn [10], $400bn to over 
$575bn  [9],  or  $400bn  to  over  $2tn  [11].  The  difference  in 
these  figures  shows  that  the  numbers  are  rough  estimates  at 
best,  and  the  real  economic  impact  of  cyber  risk  remains 
unknown  [11].  The  main  difficulties  in  calculating  the 
economic impact of cyber risk are the lack of suitable data and 
the  lack  of universal  standardised  framework  to assess cyber 
risk  [12].  Adding  to  these,  there  is  the  need  to  quantify 
accumulated  risk  on  a  shared  technology  platform  (such  as 
cloud computing) and hyper-connectivity in the digital supply 
chain [13]. Analysing the economic impact of cyber risk is also 
complicated because of the impact on brand reputation, the cost 
of downtime, legal liability, cost of intellectual property loss, 
and many other variables. Merely the media coverage of cyber 
risk  has  created  such  significant  economic  impact  that 
managing risk has become ‘imperative’ [10]. 

Economic impact IoT data ownership  

In  terms  of  data  ownership,  data  privacy  and  Economic 
lifespan  of  digital assets, it has already  been  established that 
digital assets can outlive humans [14], triggering the question 
of data ownership after end of data owners’ life. Adding to this 
argument, a large quantity of low-quality or duplicated data are 
never deleted,  creating  ‘data  pollution’.  Such  complex topics 
triggers  the  question  of  do  we  need  to  set  a  ‘self-deletion’ 
phase.  Some  studies  have  simplified  the  topic  with  the 
assumption  of a limited economic lifespans  for all classes of 
digital assets [13]. Because human society is an event driven 
system, where digital abstractions of the physical world have a 
lifespan. 

Economic impact of IoT 

IoT  is  essential  for  future  economic  competitiveness,  but 
technological  innovations  are  necessary  for  harnessing  the 
economic value [15]. Maximising the economic impact of IoT 
should  contain:  extreme-yield  agriculture  [16]  supported  by 
energy-aware  buildings  and  cities  [7],  physical  critical 
infrastructure with preventive maintenance, and self-correcting 
cyber-physical  systems  [15],  [16].  On  the  other  hand,  the 

economic impact of IoT cyber risk can be quite damaging. The 
electric  power  grid  represents  one  of  the  largest  complex 
interconnected networks, and under stressed conditions, even a 
single  failure  can  trigger complex  cascading effects,  creating 
wide-spread  failure  and  blackouts,  [16].  Distributed  energy 
resource  technologies  such  as  wind  power,  create  additional 
stress and vulnerabilities [7], [15], [16].  

Economic Impact of Cyber Risk from the Internet of 
Things 

The world is experiencing the fourth industrial revolution [16]–
[18], where the IoT real-time enabled platforms [7] represents 
the foundation for digital industry [17], [19]. Digital industry 
would  be  supported  with  more  intelligent,  resilient  and 
interconnected  manufacturing  equipment  [7],  [20],  [15].  The 
integration of artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning, the 
cloud,  and  IoT  will  create  systems  of  machines  capable  of 
interacting  with  humans  [7],  [19].  The  application  of 
behavioural  economics  into  these  systems  of  machines  [21] 
already enables market speculation on human behaviour [22] 
to  determine  consumer 
and  even  neuromarketing  [23] 
purchasing  behaviour.  We  can  expect  to  see  autonomous 
machines  adopting  the  use  of  this  methods  to  predetermine 
human behaviour [19].  

Technologies that  would  enable the integration  of  IoT  in  the 
digital  industry  include  software  defined  networks  [24]  and 
software  defined  storage  [25].  The  foundations  that  IoT  and 
CPS  industrial  integration  are  built  upon  are  protocols  and 
enterprise grade cloud hosting (Carruthers, 2016); AI, machine 
learning, and data analytics [26]; and mesh networks and peer-
to-peer  connectivity  [27].  IoT  transforms  the  sensory  and 
control  cyber  physical  systems,  creating  security  and  risk 
management vulnerabilities due to many factors, including 
complexity  of  the  deployment,  uncertainty  of  the 
inventory  in  the  deployment,  the  access  points  of  the 
deployment to the Internet and from integrating less secured 
or unsecured systems, triggering into the deployment. This 
s many questions on risk management and liability for breaches 
or damages [19]. 

Cyber risk mitigation modelling requires:  

•  A  management  strategy  for:  espionage,  theft,  or  terrorist 
attacks,  which  in  effect  requires  electronic  and  physical 
security [16], [15].  

• 

Insider threats must also be covered, including interception 
and  analysis  of  non-communications  electromagnetic 
radiations [9].  

•  A  cyber  risk  mitigation  model  also  requires  information 
assurance,  data  security and  protection  for data  in transit, 

 
 
from physical and electronic domains and storage facilities 
[7], [9], [28].  

•  A cyber risk mitigation model requires anti-counterfeit and 
supply  chain  risk  management  to  counteract  components 
introduced in the supply chain, modified from its original 
design  to enable a  disruption  or  an  unauthorised  function 
[9], [29].  

•  Limiting  the  source  code  access  to  crucial  personal 
provides  software  assurance  and  application  security  is 
necessary 
and 
vulnerabilities [16].  

eliminating 

deliberate 

flaws 

for 

•  A  cyber  risk  mitigation  model  should  be  supported  with 
forensics, prognostics, and recovery plans, for analysis of 
for  coordination  with  agencies 
cyber-attacks  and 
responsible  to  identify  external  cyber-attack  vectors  [9]. 
Internal  track  and  trace  network  process  can  assist  in 
determining and prevent the existence of weaknesses in the 
logistics security controls [9].  

identified 

•  Anti-malicious and anti-tamper system process is needed to 
prevent  vulnerabilities 
reverse 
engineering attacks [9], emphasising the need for security 
and privacy [16]. To prevent continuation of cyber-attacks, 
information  sharing  and  reporting,  fast  cyber-attack 
reporting  and  shared  database  resources  should  also  be 
developed ([9], [17].  

through 

3 Research methodology 

This section outlines the research methodology applied in the 
research. The section starts with detailing the models applied 
and adapted. Then the complexities of designing a new impact 
assessment model are discussed. Finally, the early models are 
compared with most research modelling approaches to define 
the rationale for the research methodology applied.  

Economic impact frameworks and models 

field 

‘Cybernomics’ 

The  Cyber  Value-at-Risk  (CyVaR)  framework  has  been 
promoted for standardisation of language, models and methods 
[30] which has been further developed by Deloitte (2016). This 
framework  represents  the  first  attempt  to  understand  the 
economic impact of cyber risk for individual organisations [12] 
The  first  unifying  economic  framework  encompassing  the 
proposed 
of 
cross-disciplinary 
measurement  units  for  cyber  risk  [13].  Multidisciplinary 
methodologies  are  applied,  along  with  established  risk 
measurement  methods  to  define  individual  risk  units:  e.g. 
MicroMort  (MM)  for  measuring  medical  risk,  Value-at-Risk 
(VaR) for measuring market risk for measuring cyber risk [13]. 
The main weakness of this framework is that it has not been 
tested or validated with real data. It has taken years to validate 
VaR and decades to validate MM due to the time required for 
data  collection.  Other  cyber  value  analysis  methods  have 
advanced  to calculate the  cost of  different cyber-attack  types 
[31],  but  the  same  problem  with  lack  of  data  to  validate  the 

lack  of  data  has  motivated 

model  persists.  This 
the 
development of a proof of concept method [12] that is based 
on  data  assumptions.  The  weakness  in  this  approach  is  that 
economic impact is calculated on organisations’ ‘stand-alone’ 
cyber  risk,  because  data  assumptions  can  only  be  made  on 
individual cases. However, Business impact for the same risk 
can  vary  widely  between  companies  based  on  the  specific 
circumstances  of  each  company.  Furthermore,  that  approach 
the  correlation  effect  of  organisations  sharing 
ignores 
infrastructure  and  information,  and  by  default,  sharing  cyber 
in  multiple  physical, 
risk  exposure.  Cyber  risk  exists 
information,  cognitive,  and  social  domains, 
(software, 
hardware, firmware, adjacent systems, energy supplies, supply 
chains)  and  the  economic  impact  is  related  to  these  closely 
interconnected systems. This close interconnection of disparate 
systems  increases  the  probability  of  ‘cascading  impacts’  [9]. 
This  is  of  great  concern  especially  in  sharing  cyber  risk  in 
critical  infrastructure  [12],  because  critical  infrastructure  is 
vital for a strong digital economy [16]. 

Complexities 
theoretical model  

in  building 

economic 

impact 

There are multiple problems in building one theoretical model 
that  would  rule  all  of  the  complexities  discussed.  There  are 
additional complexities that are almost impossible to quantify. 
For example, in information assets such as intellectual property 
of  digital  information,  the  future  value  is  lost  regardless  of 
early detection [12]. Therefore, the economic value of digital 
assets has to reflect their economic functions first before their 
value can be properly assigned [13].  

Table 1 lists a number of cyber risk management 
methodologies as used or proposed in industry and academia.  

Qualitative Methods 

1)  The IT Infrastructure Library (ITIL)  
2)  Control Objectives for Information and 

Related Technology (COBIT)  

3)  ISO/IEC 27005:2011  
4)  Information Security Forum (ISF) Simplified 
Process for Risk Identification  (SPRINT) 
and Simple to Apply Risk Analysis (SARA)  
5)  Operational Critical Threat and Vulnerability 

Evaluation (OCTAVE)  

6)  NIST Special Publication 800-53  
7)  NIST Special Publication 800-37  
8)  ISO/IEC 31000:2009  
9)  Consultative, Objective and Bi-functional 

Risk Analysis (COBRA)  

10) Construct a platform for Risk Analysis of 
Security Critical Systems (CORAS)  
11) Business Process: Information Risk 

Management (BPIRM)  

Quantitative Methods 

 
 
12) Information Security Risk Analysis Method 

(ISRAM) 

13) Central computer and Telecommunication 
Agency Risk Analysis and Management 
Method (CRAMM) 

14) BSI Guide- RuSecure- Based on 
15) BS7799 Standard  
16) Cost-Of-Risk Analysis (CORA)  

Existing  cyber  risk  frameworks  and  methodologies  are 
constrained by a number of limitations. Cyber risk assessment 
frameworks are based on security control domains and assess 
security posture, but are not effective in assessing high risk loss 
scenarios  developed  around  critical  digital  assets  [13]. 
Furthermore,  cyber  risk  assessment  methodologies  have 
created an  inconsistency  in  measuring  cyber  risk,  because of 
the absence of a common point of reference [13].  

Comparison of early and more recent models on the 
economic impact of cyber risk 

Earlier  literature  suggested  methods  based  on  Return  on 
Investment  (ROI)  and  Net  Present  Value  (NPV),  have  been 
proposed  to  assess  the  information  security  investment,  that 
include broad set of criteria, including ‘economics of privacy’ 
[32],  ‘optimal  amount  to  invest’  [33],  ‘risk  averseness’  [34], 
but these methods are not validated with real data. In addition, 
cyber  risk  covers  more  elements  than  information  security 
financial  cost,  and  a  method  is  needed  that  would  integrate 
the 
cyber  risk  directly  with  economics  [13].  Because 
motivation for cyber risk can be different than purely financial 
(ex.  espionage),  and  yet  still  creating  economic  impact. 
Therefore, the impact should be calculated in terms of average 
and in the most severe scenario [12].  

To make such calculations with a reasonable precision of the 
impact assessment, different modelling approaches need to be 
integrated in a new and more reliable economic impact 
assessment model. This research proposes a design of such 
model for calculating the economic impact of IoT cyber risks, 
by integrating the CyVaR with the MM model and the 
recommendations from earlier models.  

4 The model  

We need a reliable model for costing cybercrime [35] and the 
first step in developing a costing model for IoT cyber risk, is to 
determine the cybercrime units of costings. To determine the 
risk  of  cybercrime,  we  refer  to  established  methods  for 
calculating risk.  

Risk  =  Likelihood  ×  Consequences,  and  cyber-risk  can  be 
defined as a function of:  

R = {si, pi, xi }, i = 1, 2, ... , N,  

R – risk;  s – the description of a scenario (undesirable event);  
p  –  the  probability  of  a  scenario;   x  –  the  measure  of 

consequences  or  damage  caused  by  a  scenario;   N  –  the 
number  of  possible  scenarios  that  may  cause  damage  to  a 
system. 

To build a model for calculating the impact of IoT cyber risk, 
we  need  to  combine  established  risk  models  [13],  such  as 
MicroMort  (MM)  and  Value-at-Risk  (VaR)  for  measuring 
market risk and adapt a new cyber risk units for IoT MicroMort 
(IoTMM)  and  IoT  MicroMort2  (IoTMM2)  as  the  value  of 
reducing the risk by a given IoTMM.  

The economic functions of IoT assets requires an International 
IoT  Asset  Classification  (IIoTAC).  The  term  is chosen  to  be 
compliant  with  the  proposed  International  Digital  Asset 
Classification (IDAC) [13].  

IoT  digital  assets  can  be  categorised  as:  (1)  IoT  core  value 
assets (IoTCA), where digital assets which are directly part of 
goods or services that T profits from; (1a) IoT digitised assets 
(IoTDA), where goods and services digitised from traditional 
goods and services; (1b) IoT assets born digital, representing 
things  and  services  that  are  intrinsically  digital;  and  (2)  IoT 
operational assets (IoTOA), representing assets that support the 
creation,  consumption  and  distribution  of  IoT  goods  and 
service. 

Thing’s (T) IoT composition can be described by the ratio of 
its 
assets: 
assets 
CA:OA={ci,pi}:{oj,qj} i=1,2,...,Nc, j=1,2,....,No where  

operational 

value 

core 

to 

IoTCA  –  T’s  core  value  assets;   IoTOA  –  T’s  operational 
assets;  c – a type of asset listed in IDAC which is of core value 
to T;  p – T’s core digital asset c;  o – a type of asset listed in 
IDAC which is of operational value to T;  q – T’s operational 
asset o;  Nc – the number of core value assets in T;  No – the 
number of operational assets in T.  

By  using the  same  formula,  T’s  DA  (digitised assets)  to  AD 
(assets  born  digital)  ratio  can  also  be  calculated.  T’s  digital 
value  composition  describes  its  nature  of  innovation,  e.g. 
traditional goods have a high OA:CA ratio, while software has 
a high CA:OA ratio and a high AD:DA ratio. Other valuation 
parameters  are:  Intrinsic  value  of  IoT  digital  asset  can  be 
determined through fundamental analysis without reference to 
its market value. Market value of IoT digital asset is the price 
at  which  the  digital  valuable  would  trade  in  a  competitive 
market. Subjective value of IoT digital asset is determined by 
the importance the T places on it.  

Following  these  valuation  parameters,  the  value  of  (1a)  IoT 
assets  is  directly  converted  from  their  physical  equivalents. 
The  value  of  (1b)  IoT  assets  requires  their  own  valuation 
analyses.  (2)  IoT  assets  can  be  valued  with  Business  Impact 
Analysis  (BIA).  According  to  this  formula  of  the  existing 
economic theory of value to digital asset, the T’s total digital 
value can be calculated as: 

 
 
where:  

V – total digital value of T;  cv – value of core value asset c of 
T;  ov – value of operational asset o of T;  Nc – the number 
of core value assets in T; No – the number of operational assets 
in T.  

This  valuation  requires  Key  IoT  Cyber  Risk  Factors 
(KIoTCRF) correlated with a T’s risk profile. Established Key 
Cyber  Risk  Factors  (KCRF)  risk  categorisations  [13]  can  be 
adopted to IoT, where: Technological factors are related to the 
usage of technology. Non-technological factors are related to: 
people,  process,  socio-  economic,  geo-political  factors. 
Inherent factors are related to T’s nature of business, industry, 
core operations, goods and services. Control factors represent 
T’s control effectiveness against cyber loss. Therefore, the T’s 
residual cyber risk can be calculated as:  Residual cyber risk = 
inherent risk ÷ control effectiveness. This valuation allows for 
MM to be applied to define cyber risk units for class D assets 
and to define IoT MicroMortD (IoTMMD) for a given class D 
digital assets as 1 in a million probability of its digital death, 
where  the  value  of  1  IoTMMD  is the amount  of  money T  is 
willing to pay to reduce 1 IoTMMD for its class D assets. 

Since  IoT  residual  risk  IoTMM  is  not  statistically  available, 
when it becomes statistically available for various types of IoT 
assets, it could  be aggregated  with asset  values  to generate a 
cyber VaR curve, representing T’s residual cyber risk:   

To  compute  the  cyber  VaR  curve,  historical  simulation  and 
Monte Carlo simulation can be used, where VaR is Value-at-
Risk for all IoT digital assets of T; T’s digital asset inventory 
D = {D1, D2, ..., Dn}; the value of each asset V = {V1, V2, ..., 
Vn}; and fDi is the amount of residual risk Di is exposed to, 
measured  in  IoTMMD  is.  Monte  Carlo  can  generate  a  large 
number of paths using repeated random sampling to produce a 
probability  distribution.  In  this  scenario,  the  risk  measure 
IoTMM2  can  be  defined  as  a  12-month  IoTMM2  VaR 
representing the loss limit T can afford from cyber incidents. 
Where  IoTMM2  is  the  cost  T  is  willing  to  pay  to  reduce  its 
IoTMM2  by  1%  for  the  same  loss  limit.  The  VaR  can  be 
calculated for 12 months to represents cyber risk exposure over 
one  financial  year,  required  for  budget  planning  in  ERM 
frameworks.  

The proposed  valuation  depends  on advanced data analytics, 
capable to support a trajectory of exponential growth. We have 
the advantage of storing and processing large datasets, hence 
the  main  obstacle  is  not  the  lack  of  capabilities  to  compute 
datasets,  but  to  break  down  non-technological  barriers  and 
establish a wide range of data points in the proposed categories. 

It may take years or decades to validate the economic impact 
of  IoT  cyber  risk,  because  of  the  time  required  for  data 
collection.  However,  it  is  important  to  set  the  categories  in 
order  for  the  data  collection  to  be  performed  in  a  structured 
manner. 

5  Applying 
MicroMort calculations   

the  proposed  model 

for  IoT 

To test, validate and verify the findings of the new model, (a) 
the  IoTMM  for  2017  is  calculated;  and  (b)  for  2020  is 
forecasted,  from  the  following  data.  There are estimated  378 
Million Devices Potentially Vulnerable to Hacking in 2017 out 
of 8.4 billion connected things [36]. These numbers emerged 
from  the  BullGuard's  IoT  Scanner,  where  310,000  users 
scanned  their  network  for  vulnerabilities  and  4.5  percent 
(nearly  14,000  devices),  were  reported  as  ‘could  be  easily 
hacked’.  This  data  is  combined  with  Garner  report  that  8.4 
billion connected things will be in use worldwide in 2017 [37]. 
To forecast the IoTMM for 2020, the forecasted data is used 
from  the  same  report  showing  that  the  number  of  IoT 
connected devices will reach 20.4 billion by 2020, with more 
than 900 million potentially vulnerable devices by 2020.  

Therefore, (a) the IoTMM for 2017 is calculated as 0.045 

and (b) the IoTMM for 2020 is calculated as 0.044 

The next step is to calculate the enterprises ‘willingness to pay’ 
to reduce 1 IoTMM. This is representative of the cost sum for 
an enterprise to accept a one-in-a-million IoTMM, or the cost 
sum that enterprise might be willing to pay to avoid a one-in-
a-million  chance  of  IoTMM.  For  the  purposes of testing  this 
model,  we  could  apply  a  nominal  Value  of  a  Statistical  Life 
(VSL) or the Value for Preventing a Fatality (VPF) to evaluate 
the  cost-effectiveness  of  expenditure  on  cyber  security.  The 
IoT security spending is estimated to increase to $840.5 million 
in 2020 [38]. This would IoT market value of 1 IoTMM in 2020 
as  $840.5.  However,  it  is  important  to  understand  what  does 
the  value  of  1  IoTMM  represent  in  this  scenario.  We  can 
explain  this  with  an  example,  e.g.  each  T  in  a  sample  of 
100,000  T’s  willingness  to  pay  for  a  reduction  in  their 
individual IoT risk of 1 in 100,000, or 0.001%, over the next 
year.  Since  this reduction  in  risk  would  mean  that  we  would 
expect one  fewer  IoTMM  among  the  sample  of  100,000 T’s 
over the next year on average. Supposing that the answer was 
$840.5,  then  the  total  dollar amount that  the  group  would  be 
willing  to  pay  to  save  one  statistical  life  in  a  year  would  be 
$840.5 per T × 100,000 T’s, or $84,050,000 million. This is a 
very generic estimate that cannot be used by governments as 
guidance  point  for  creating  standards  and  governance. 
Calculating the IoTMM for 8.4 billion connected things would 
result with a number far greater than the estimated IoT security 
spending of $840.5 million in 2020. Unfortunately, we have no 
data as to how the experts estimated the IoT security spending, 
and the utility functions in such estimates are often not linear. 
Therefore, the economic value of 1 IoTMM does not represent 
a precise calculation of the value and risk. It represents more 

 
 
 
 
of a guidance point to show that as more IoT devices become 
connected,  their  cyber  security  is  not  competitively  priced, 
which increases the risk, and we need to be aware that we have 
no  precise  calculation  of the  IoT  cyber  risk,  or  cyber  risk in 
general.  

The findings from this research lead to the conclusion that there 
many challenges in understanding the types and nature of cyber 
risk and their dependencies/interactions in this new space. This 
paper informs on how one may assess economic impact with 
mathematical formalisms.  

Enterprises can obtain a valuation more precise to their T’s by 
assessing  the  previously  described  valuation  formula  where 
T’s  digital  asset  inventory  D  =  {D1,  D2,  ...,  Dn};  combined 
with the value of each asset V = {V1, V2, ..., Vn}; and fDi is 
the  amount  of  residual  risk  Di  is  exposed  to,  measured  in 
IoTMMD is. Resulting with the calculation of the value of 1 
IoTMMD in 2020 as the amount of money T is willing to pay 
to reduce 1 IoTMMD for its class D assets, valued with: 

The multiple complexities explained in the study, in terms of 
calculating the economic impact of IoT cyber risk, also lead to 
the conclusion that impact can only be assessed with new risk 
metrics, and a new valuation method specific for the new risk 
metrics,  combined  with  new  regulatory  framework  and 
standardisation IoT data bases with new risk vectors as defined 
in the form of International IoT Asset Classification (IIoTAC) 
and Key IoT Cyber Risk Factors (KIoTCRF). 

6 Discussion 

The figures we are applying are just to verify the new model. 
Since  there  is  no  International  IoT  Asset  Classification 
(IIoTAC)  and  no  established  Key  IoT  Cyber  Risk  Factors 
(KIoTCRF),  the  calculations  of  the  new  model  serve  just  to 
verify the new model. After the establishment of IIoTAC and 
KIoTCRF, the new model could be applied to calculate more 
precise ‘willingness to pay’ that T is willing to pay to reduce 1 
IoTMMD. 

We need to mention that the local linearity of the utility curve 
means that the MicroMort is useful for small incremental risks 
and  rewards,  not  necessarily  for  large  risks.  Therefore,  the 
IoTMM  is  not  an  ideal  measure  to  calculate  the  IoT  risk. 
Instead,  IoTMM  is  better  placed  to  measure  for  a  given  T 
willingness to pay to reduce 1 IoTMMD for its class D assets.  

Finally, we need to discuss the lack of IoT data. For example, 
the 
latest  forecast  from  Gartner  Inc.  says  worldwide 
information security spending will reach $86.4 billion (USD) 
in 2017  and $93  billion  in  2018.  That  forecast  doesn’t cover 
the IoT, ICS (Industrial Control Systems) and IIoT (Industrial 
Internet of Things) security [39]. Given the lack of data on IoT 
cyber risk, cyber loss, or profits from different IoT vectors, it 
is  extremely  difficult  to  conduct  IoT  cyber  risk  analysis  and 
argue  on  the  soundness  of  the  analysis.  Since  the  cyber 
insurance  is  in  its  infancy,  insurance  companies  have  not 
mastered the valuation of cyber risk in general. For example, 
Target was insured for $100 millions of cyber risk in 2017, and 
suffered over $450 millions of loss, with estimated to total at 
$1 billion by the end of 2017 [40]. This example clearly states 
that  cyber  insurance  needs  a  lot  more  data  to  calculate, 
correlated  and  transfer  risk  with  an  acceptable  degree  of 
certainty.  While  general  cyber  risk  cannot  be  calculated,  the 
emergence of IoT has created new IoT risk vectors that are not 
at all defined in the cyber insurance policies. 

7 Conclusion  

This paper presents new risk metrics, by adapting established 
methods for calculating risks and uncertainties, and identifies 
some  specific  grand  challenges  for  calculating  the  economic 
impact of IoT cyber risk. The paper combined common basic 
terminology,  common  approaches  and  incorporated  existing 
standards  into  a  new  model  for  calculating  the  economic 
impact of IoT cyber risk. 

This work was supported by the UK EPSRC with project [grant 
number EP/N02334X/1 and EP/N023013/1] and by the Cisco 
Research Centre [grant number 2017-169701 (3696)].  

8 References 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

U.S. Department of Energy, “Energy Sector 
Cybersecurity Framework Implementation 
Guidance,” 2015. 

U.S. Department of Energy, “Cybersecurity 
Capability Maturity Model (C2M2) | Department of 
Energy,” Washington, DC, 2014. 

K. Ashton, “In the real world, things matter more than 
ideas,” RFID J., vol. 22, no. 7, 2011. 

N. A. Gershenfeld, When things start to think. New 
York, NY, USA: Henry Holt, 1999. 

J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic, and M. Palaniswami, 
“Internet of Things (IoT): A vision, architectural 
elements, and future directions,” Futur. Gener. 
Comput. Syst., vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 1645–1660, Sep. 
2013. 

Allen and Hamilton, “Cyber Power Index: Findings 
and Methodology,” McLean, Virginia, 2014. 

P. Marwedel and M. Engel, “Cyber-Physical 
Systems: Opportunities, Challenges and (Some) 
Solutions,” Springer International Publishing, 2016, 
pp. 1–30. 

[8] 

G. Anderson, “The Economic Impact of Technology 

 
 
 
 
Infrastructure for Smart Manufacturing,” NIST Econ. 
Anal. Briefs, vol. 4, 2016. 

Systems architecture for Industry 4.0-based 
manufacturing systems,” 2015. 

[9] 

D. DiMase, Z. A. Collier, K. Heffner, and I. Linkov, 
“Systems engineering framework for cyber physical 
security and resilience,” Environ. Syst. Decis., vol. 
35, no. 2, pp. 291–300, 2015. 

[21] 

T. C. Leonard, “Richard H. Thaler, Cass R. Sunstein, 
Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and 
happiness,” Const. Polit. Econ., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 
356–360, 2008. 

[10]  C. Biener, M. Eling, and J. H. Wirfs, “Insurability of 
Cyber Risk 1,” The Geneva Association, Geneva, pp. 
1–4, 2014. 

[22] 

T. Rutter, “The rise of nudge – the unit helping 
politicians to fathom human behavior,” Guard., vol. 
7, no. 23, p. 2015, 2015. 

[11] 

S. J. Shackelford, “Protecting Intellectual Property 
and Privacy in the Digital Age: The Use of National 
Cybersecurity Strategies to Mitigate Cyber Risk,” 
Chapman Law Rev., vol. 19, pp. 412–445, 2016. 

[23]  D. Lewis and D. Brigder, “Market Researchers make 
Increasing use of Brain Imaging,” Adv. Clin. 
Neurosci. Rehabil., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 36–37, 2004. 

[12]  R. Koch and G. Rodosek, Proceedings of the 15th 

[24]  K. Kirkpatrick, “Software-defined networking,” 
Commun. ACM, vol. 56, no. 9, p. 16, Sep. 2013. 

European Conference on Cyber Warfare and 
Security : ECCWS 2016 : hosted by Universität der 
Bundeswehr, Munich, Germany 7-8 July 2016. 2016. 

[25] 

[13]  K. Ruan, “Introducing cybernomics: A unifying 
economic framework for measuring cyber risk,” 
Comput. Secur., vol. 65, pp. 77–89, 2017. 

S. J. Ruffle, G. Bowman, F. Caccioli, A. W. Coburn, 
S. Kelly, B. Leslie, and D. Ralph, “Stress Test 
Scenario: Sybil Logic Bomb Cyber Catastrophe,” 
Cambridge Risk Framew. Ser. Cent. Risk Stud. Univ. 
Cambridge., 2014. 

[14] 

[15] 

P. Leitão, A. W. Colombo, and S. Karnouskos, 
“Industrial automation based on cyber-physical 
systems technologies: Prototype implementations and 
challenges,” Comput. Ind., vol. 81, pp. 11–25, 2016. 

[27] 

[16]  R. (Raj) Rajkumar, I. Lee, L. Sha, and J. Stankovic, 

“Cyber-Physical Systems: The Next Computing 
Revolution,” in Proceedings of the 47th Design 
Automation Conference on - DAC ’10, 2010, p. 731. 

[28] 

[17]  W. Wahlster, J. Helbig, A. Hellinger, M. A. V. 

Stumpf, J. Blasco, H. Galloway, and H. Gestaltung, 
“Recommendations for implementing the strategic 
initiative INDUSTRIE 4.0,” Federal Ministry of 
Educationand Research, 2013. 

J. Ouyang, S. Lin, S. Jiang, Z. Hou, Y. Wang, Y. 
Wang, J. Ouyang, S. Lin, S. Jiang, Z. Hou, Y. Wang, 
Y. Wang, J. Ouyang, S. Lin, S. Jiang, and Y. Hou, 
Zhenyu; Wang, Yong; Wang, “SDF: software-defined 
flash for web-scale internet storage systems,” in 
Proceedings of the 19th international conference on 
Architectural support for programming languages 
and operating systems - ASPLOS ’14, 2014, vol. 42, 
no. 1, pp. 471–484. 

[26]  K. Kambatla, G. Kollias, V. Kumar, and A. Grama, 

“Trends in big data analytics,” J. Parallel Distrib. 
Comput, vol. 74, pp. 2561–2573, 2014. 

T. Wark, P. Corke, P. Sikka, L. Klingbeil, Y. Guo, C. 
Crossman, P. Valencia, D. Swain, and G. Bishop-
Hurley, “Transforming Agriculture through Pervasive 
Wireless Sensor Networks,” IEEE Pervasive 
Comput., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 50–57, Apr. 2007. 

T. A. Longstaff and Y. Y. Haimes, “A holistic 
roadmap for survivable infrastructure systems,” IEEE 
Trans. Syst. Man, Cybern. - Part A Syst. Humans, vol. 
32, no. 2, pp. 260–268, Mar. 2002. 

[29] 

P. C. Evans and M. Annunziata, “Industrial Internet: 
Pushing the Boundaries of Minds and Machines,” 
General Electric, 2012. 

[18]  N. Jazdi, “Cyber physical systems in the context of 

Industry 4.0,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference 
on Automation, Quality and Testing, Robotics, 2014, 
pp. 1–4. 

[30]  World Economic Forum, “Partnering for Cyber 
Resilience Towards the Quantification of Cyber 
Threats,” Geneva, 2015. 

[19]  K. Carruthers, “Internet of Things and Beyond: 

Cyber-Physical Systems - IEEE Internet of Things,” 
IEEE Internet of Things, Newsletter, 2014, 2016. 

[31]  M. A. Roumani, C. C. Fung, S. Rai, and H. Xie, 

“Value Analysis of Cyber Security Based on Attack 
Types,” ITMSOC Trans. Innov. Bus. Eng., vol. 1, pp. 
34–39, 2016. 

[20] 

J. Lee, B. Bagheri, and H.-A. Kao, “A Cyber-Physical 

[32]  R. Anderson and T. Moore, “The Economics of 

 
 
Information Security,” Sci. AAAS, vol. 314, no. 5799, 
pp. 610–613, 2006. 

[33] 

L. A. Gordon and M. P. Loeb, “The economics of 
information security investment,” ACM Trans. Inf. 
Syst. Secur., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 438–457, Nov. 2002. 

[34]  G. Rodewald and Gus, “Aligning information security 
investments with a firm’s risk tolerance,” in 
Proceedings of the 2nd annual conference on 
Information security curriculum development - 
InfoSecCD ’05, 2005, p. 139. 

[35] 

[36] 

[37] 

J. Armin, B. Thompson, D. Ariu, G. Giacinto, F. Roli, 
and P. Kijewski, “2020 Cybercrime Economic Costs: 
No Measure No Solution,” in 2015 10th International 
Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security, 
2015, pp. 701–710. 

Lipman Paul, “New Reaper IoT Botnet Leaves 378 
Million IoT Devices Potentially Vulnerable to 
Hacking,” 2017. 

 van der R. Meulen, “Gartner Says 8.4 Billion 
Connected &quot;Things&quot; Will Be in Use in 
2017, Up 31 Percent From 2016,” Egham, 2017. 

[38]  K. Savage, “IoT Devices Are Hacking Your Data 

&amp; Stealing Your Privacy - Infographic,” 2017. 

[39] 

S. Morgan, “Gartner: Worldwide information security 
spending to hit $93B in 2018,” 2017. 

[40]  C. Skroupa, “The Cost Of Cyber Breach - How Much 

Your Company Should Budget,” Forbes, 19-Apr-
2017. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
