Big Data Meet Cyber-Physical Systems: A
Panoramic Survey

Rachad Atat, Lingjia Liu, Senior Member, IEEE, Jinsong Wu, Senior Member, IEEE, Guangyu Li, Chunxuan Ye,
and Yang Yi, Senior Member, IEEE

1

8
1
0
2

t
c
O
9
2

]

G
L
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
9
3
2
1
.
0
1
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The world is witnessing an unprecedented growth of
cyber-physical systems (CPS), which are foreseen to revolutionize
our world via creating new services and applications in a
variety of sectors such as environmental monitoring, mobile-
intelligent transportation systems and so on.
health systems,
The information and communication technology (ICT) sector is
experiencing a signiﬁcant growth in data trafﬁc, driven by the
widespread usage of smartphones, tablets and video streaming,
along with the signiﬁcant growth of sensors deployments that
are anticipated in the near future. It is expected to outstandingly
increase the growth rate of raw sensed data. In this paper, we
present the CPS taxonomy via providing a broad overview of data
collection, storage, access, processing and analysis. Compared
with other survey papers, this is the ﬁrst panoramic survey
on big data for CPS, where our objective is to provide a
panoramic summary of different CPS aspects. Furthermore, CPS
require cybersecurity to protect them against malicious attacks
and unauthorized intrusion, which become a challenge with the
enormous amount of data that is continuously being generated in
the network. Thus, we also provide an overview of the different
security solutions proposed for CPS big data storage, access and
analytics. We also discuss big data meeting green challenges in
the contexts of CPS.

Index Terms—cyber-physical systems (CPS), Internet of Things
(IoT), context-awareness, social computing, cloud computing, big
data, clustering, data mining, data analytics, machine learning,
real-time analytics, space-time analytics, cybersecurity, green,
energy, sustainability

I. INTRODUCTION

T HE growing number of “things”, such as embedded

devices, sensors, radio-frequency identiﬁcation (RFID),
and actuators have revolutionized the world through their
integrated communication and tight interactions to create per-
vasive and global cyber-physical systems (CPS). Indeed, it is
expected that over 50 billion sensors will be connected to
the Internet, with an average of 6.58 devices per person by

A part of this work was presented in the Ph.D.

thesis of R. Atat
under the guidance of Dr. L. Liu [1]. This work is supported in part
by the U.S. National Sciecne Foundation (NSF) under grants NSF/ECCS-
1802710, NSF/ECCS-1811497, and NSF/CNS-1811720, Chile CONICYT
under grant Fondecyt Regular 181809, and China Hunan Provincial Nature
Science Foundation under grant 2018JJ2535. Corresponding authors are L. Liu
(ljliu@ieee.org) and J. Wu (wujs@ieee.org). R. Atat is with the Electrical and
Computer Engineering Department, Texas A&M University at Qatar, Doha,
Qatar; L. Liu and Y. Yi are with the Bradley Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA; J. Wu is with
the Department of Electrical Engineering, Universidad de Chile, Santiago,
Chile; G. Li is with School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing
University of Science & Technology, 210094 Nanjing, P. R. China; and
Chunxuan Ye is with InterDigital Communications, LLC., San Diego, CA
92121, USA.

2020 [2]. This has allowed the rapid development of myriad
of applications in health-care, public safety, environmental
management, vehicular networks, industrial automation, and
so on. A CPS mainly consists of physical components and a
cyber twin interconnected together, where a cyber twin is a
simulation model representative of the physical things such
as a computer program [3]. Internet of Things (IoT), on the
other hand, allows different CPS to be connected together for
information transfer. This means that IoT acts as a connection
bridge to network different cyber-physical things. The global
expansion of interconnected CPS is facilitated by standard-
ization efforts. For instance, the standardization activities of
IoT are being led by the industry (AllSeen Alliance, Open
Interconnect Consortium, Industrial Interconnect Consortium)
and IEEE P2413 project on standards speciﬁcations of IoT
architectural framework [4]. CPS have resulted in a tsunami of
new information, also known as big data, which can help boost
revenues of many businesses, by identifying customer needs
and providing them with superior services. However, this enor-
mous amount of data is so large in size and complex in real-
time that it exceeds the processing capacities of conventional
systems. That is why, cloud computing techniques along with
machine learning tools, data mining, artiﬁcial intelligence,
and fog computing can help the sensed data to be easily
stored, processed, and analyzed to uncover hidden patterns,
unknown correlations and other useful information [5]. That
is why big data are referred to as “the 21st century new oil”.
The characteristics of big data was well summarized in the
Introduction section of [6]. The relevances of big data era and
CPS actually are also highly relevant to global sustainability
development goals recently discussed in [7].

Before any processing or analysis, data need to be ac-
quired. The technological advancements in sensors have led
to smarter, more efﬁcient and low-cost sensors; the fact that
facilitated their wide deployment. Two main sources to sense
the data from: i) context-aware computing and communica-
tions [8], ii) social computing. With context-aware computing
and communications [8], data are sensed from physical sen-
sors, virtual sensors which retrieve data using web services
technology, logical sensors which combines both virtual and
physical sensors such as gathering weather information, global
sensors which collect data from middleware infrastructure, and
remote sensors for earth sciences applications [9], [10]. As
for social computing, participatory sensing and mobile crowd-
sensing have led to shaping the structure of social networks,
in which users collect and share sensed data using their own
smartphones rather than relying on sensors [11]–[13].

 
 
 
 
 
 
Cloud computing facilitates big data storage, processing and
management in CPS, by breaking them down into workﬂows,
which are then distributed over multiple dedicated servers.
This allows CPS to provide pervasive sensing services beyond
the capacities of individual things, in addition to lower latency
and power consumption and larger scalability.

Once the data have been collected, making sense of them
becomes one the most important aspects of CPS. However,
it is important ﬁrst to eliminate redundant information and
reduce data complexity so useful information extraction can
be efﬁciently performed. In this survey, we will discuss about
different tools to assist with the data mining process, mainly,
feature selection, dimensionality reduction, knowledge discov-
ery in databases, information visualization, computer vision,
classiﬁcation/clustering techniques, and real-time analysis.

After the data

are transformed into manageable

sizes,
data mining tools (HDFS [14], MapReduce [15], R [16],
S),
[17],
real-time big data analytic tools (Storm [16],
Splunk [18]), and cloud-based big data analytic tools
(GFS [19], BigTable [20], MapReduce) can be used to extract
useful information and make sense of data, which would rev-
olutionize the ﬁeld of smart cities, environmental monitoring
and others.

The ubiquitous cyber-physical world is susceptible to se-
curity threats to a large degree. These security vulnerabilities
are made easier with the inability to effectively handle the
large amount of data that is constantly ﬂowing through the
network; that, in addition to the lack of qualiﬁed security
experts. Sensitive data stored in the cloud can be accessed
or altered by unauthorized users. Cyber-security attacks on
the computations, such as false data injection, can affect
the integrity and accuracy of extracted results. For all these
reasons, research efforts have been shifting towards proposing
robust security solutions for big data CPS. In this survey, we
provide an overview of these proposed solutions.

In recent years, there have been growing interests in green
information and communications technologies. Addressing
green issues for CPS allows for a more sustainable and energy
efﬁcient systems. Green solutions are proposed for many
aspects of CPS, mainly for i) data collection/storage, such
as minimizing the number of relay transmissions, removing
redundant transmission links, and the use of data compression
techniques; ii) CPS computing such as dynamic voltage and
frequency scaling and trafﬁc engineering techniques; iii) CPS
processing such as designing energy-efﬁcient orchestrators,
checkpointing aided parallel execution (CAPE), reducing the
amount of exchanged data between clouds, the use of cloudlets
which are closer to users than distant clouds, among other
solutions.

We summarize the contributions of our paper as follows:
• First,

to the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
panoramic survey on big data for cyber-physical systems.
Unlike other previous relevant literature surveys [21] [22]
[9], [23], [24] [25] [26] [5], this paper provides a broader
viewpoint on CPS from different aspects, mainly data
collection and storage, processing, analytics, cybersecu-
rity, and green solutions, rather than focusing on speciﬁc
aspects of CPS.

• Second, we provide a broader summary of security so-
lutions proposed for big data CPS in data collection,
storage, and access, as well as in data processing and
analytics; unlike previous survey papers such as [15],
[27], [28] that only focused on security of a particular
component or element of big data.

• Third, we provide a summary in big data, storage, and

communications for CPS.

• Fourth, we provide a broader view of big data meeting

green challenges for CPS, unlike [6], [29]–[32].

TABLE I: List of acronyms and their descriptions.

Acronym
BLE
CAPE
CPS
D2D
DVFS
GFS
GIS
HDFS
IoT
KDD
M2M
MBAN
MCS
MEMS
MIMO
MTC
NoSQL
RFID
RS
RSS
SDN
VM
QoC

Description
Bluetooth low energy
Checkpointing aided parallel execution
Cyber-physical systems
Device-to-device
Dynamic voltage and frequency scaling
Google ﬁle system
Geographical information systems
Hadoop distributed ﬁle system
Internet of Things
Knowledge discovery in databases
Machine-to-machine
Medical body area network
mobile crowd-sensing
Micro-electromechanical systems
Multiple input multiple output
Machine-type communications
Not only structured query language
Radio-frequency identiﬁcation
Remote sensing
received signal strength
Software deﬁned network
Virtual machine
Quality of context

The sections of this paper are organized as follows. Sec-
tion II compares this paper with other related surveys in liter-
ature. Section III describes the different sources, generations,
and collections of big data for CPS, mainly context-aware
computing, communications, and social computing, while Sec-
tion IX presents different CPS-related big data applications.
Then, in Section IV, we discuss about big data caching and
routing for better CPS data management. In Section V, we
present the different big data processing tools from cloud data
processing and multi-cloud processing to big data clustering
techniques, NoSQL and fog computing that help facilitate
the analysis of large volume of data. In Section VI, an
overview of big data analytics techniques and tools is provided.
Section VII provides a summary of the different security
solutions proposed for CPS, mainly in storage, access and
analysis. Section VIII addresses the relevances of big data and
green challenges for CPS. Finally, SectionX identiﬁes CPS
big data challenges and open issues. Conclusion remarks are
presented in Section XI. A list of acronyms used in this paper
is provided in Table I.

II. RELEVANT WORKS

Several survey papers have focused on speciﬁc aspects of
big data, IoT, and CPS. However, to the best of our knowledge,
none of them have investigated the interconnections of these
concepts together in an extensive survey like this one.

2

In [21], the authors provided an overview on IoT from def-
initions to technologies to applications and standardizations,
while presenting the different solutions proposed in literature
for deterring security threats and preserving data integrity in
RFID systems. In [9], the authors provided a brief overview on
IoT, with emphasis on sensor networks and their relationships
to IoT. Then, context-aware computing deﬁnitions, categories
and characteristics from an IoT perspective were thoroughly
presented. In [23], context data were surveyed for mobile
ubiquitous environments, with the main focus being on pro-
viding efﬁcient context data distribution for real network sys-
tems via highlighting context distribution architecture’s layers,
network deployments and taxonomy. In [24], different mobile
crowd sensing incentives and types were reviewed to motivate
normal users to participate and contribute to different sensing
applications. In [25], caching big data techniques to optimize
computational time and reduce storage overhead as well as
improve system performance, scalability and efﬁciency were
presented. In [5], different cloud computing schedulers using
Hadoop-MapReduce with their pros and cons were presented
for purpose of improving scheduling in cloud environment.
In [22], big data analytics from challenges to solutions to
open research issues were explored for efﬁcient information
extraction and decisions making.

In [15], different security and privacy protocols for MapRe-
duce were surveyed for integrity, correctness and conﬁdential-
ity of cloud data computations. As for fog computing, which
extends cloud computing to the edge of the networks, [27] re-
viewed the different security and privacy challenges, solutions
and open issues. For speciﬁc CPS applications, [28] provided
a thorough survey on cybersecurity issues for smart grids, with
emphasis on security requirements, network vulnerabilities,
and secure communication protocols and architectures. Green
challenges facing big data cloud computing and processing
were surveyed in [6], [29], [30], [32], with different green
IoT applications in [31].

CPS has also been surveyed in literature. For instance,
in [33], CPS features, energy control, transmission, resource
allocation and software designs were presented. The work [34]
discussed the integration of cloud computing with CPS by
categorizing them in three different areas: remote brain, big
data manipulation, and virtualization. The paper [35] surveyed
the general concepts, challenges and applications for CPS.

Most of the previous surveys have not discussed big data
in the contexts of CPS, which is the main focus of this paper.
Furthermore, the green and security challenges and solutions
are explored speciﬁcally for big data in CPS. Therefore, this
survey paper provides a big umbrella addressing promising
research frontiers and insights in many challenges and open
issues facing big data meeting CPS. Table II provides a
summary comparison of the previously mentioned related
surveys in the ﬁeld.

III. SOURCES, GENERATIONS, AND COLLECTIONS OF BIG
DATA FOR CPS

Several factors have driven the expansive uses of sensors,
mainly for micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) such as

TABLE II: A summary of different related surveys.

Survey
[21]
[9]
[23]

[33]

[34]
[35]
[24]
[25]
[5]
[22]
[15]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[6], [32]

Scope
IoT deﬁnitions, technologies and applications
IoT context-aware deﬁnitions, categories and characteristics
Context data distribution for mobile ubiquitous environments
CPS features, energy, transmission, resource allocation
and software designs
Cloud computing in CPS
CPS general concepts, challenges and applications
Mobile crowd-sensing incentives
Caching big data
Cloud computing schedulers
Big data analytics challenges and solutions
Security and privacy protocols for MapReduce
Fog computing security challenges, solutions and open issues
Cybersecurity for smart grids
Energy efﬁcient cloud data centers and computing
Green big data processing for smart grids
Green IoT applications
Big data meet green challenges

accessible design boards (Raspberry pi, Onion, Arduino) [36],
and the new efﬁcient hardware architectures and components,
which made sensors more robust to hardware wearing from
harsh environments. Moreover, many of these sensors incor-
porate accelerometers that are 1000x more powerful in terms
of sensitivity than those used in a Nintendo Wii [37]. In this
section, we discuss the different sensed big data sources and
types by grouping them into social computing and context-
aware computing. An illustration is provided in Fig 1.

A. Context Aware Computing and Communications

The general deﬁnition of context-aware communications
and networking (CACN) was provided in [8]. Context-aware
computing could be considered as CACN operating in the
higher networking layers. The data that sensors collect for
its speciﬁc application purposes are considered raw data,
which have been directly collected from the environment
without further processing. With raw data alone, it becomes
challenging to analyze and interpret them, and let alone the big
data generated by the large scale deployment of sensors. For
data which provide relevant information that is meaningful and
easily interpretable, sensors need to engage in context-aware
computing; that is, sensors need to store processed meaningful
information, also known as “context
is
easily understandable [8], [38]. An example to highlight the
difference between raw sensor data and context information
would be the blood sugar readings collected by bio-medical
sensors on the bodies of patients, which are considered raw
data. When these readings are processed and represented as a
patient’s average glucose level in the blood, they are referred
to as context information. The quality of context (QoC) metric
is used to assess the quality, validity, precision and up-
to-date context information [23]. Context-aware computing
from acquisition, processing, storing and reasoning, can be
performed by the applications themselves, or by using libraries
and toolkits, or even by using a middleware platform [9].

information”,

that

As for sources of context information, they can be retrieved
directly from physical sensors, from virtual sensors (they
collect data from different sources by using web services

3

Fig. 1: An illustration of the different CPS big data sources and types.

it as sensor data), from logical
technology and represent
sensors ( a combination of physical and virtual sensors), from
a middleware infrastructure (global sensor networks), from
context servers (databases, web services), or even manually
provided such as retrieving users’ preferences. The context
information can be further classiﬁed into primary context
and secondary context, which provides information on how
the data were obtained. For example, reading RFID tags
directly from different production parts in industrial plants
is considered the primary context, while obtaining the same
information from the plant’s database is referred to as the
secondary context [9], [21].

B. Remote sensing

Collecting sensor data of objects from a distance is referred
to as remote sensing (RS) [39]. RS is an integral part of
earth sciences. For instance, space-borne and airborne sensors
collect multi-spatial and multi-temporal RS big data from
the global atmosphere for purposes of earth observation and
climate monitoring [40]. Other remote sensing applications
include Google Earth that provides pictures of the earth’s
surface, weather reporting, trafﬁc monitoring, hydrology and
oceanography [41].

In [42], the authors proposed a big data analytical architec-
ture for real-time RS data processing using earth observatory
system. The real-time processing includes ﬁltration, load bal-
ancing and parallel processing of the useful RS data. The RS
datasets are normally geographically distributed across several
data centers,
leading to difﬁculties in loading, scheduling
and transmission of data. Moreover, the high dimensionality
of the RS data makes their storage and data access rather
complicated [40]. That is why, in [43], Wang et al. proposed a
wavelet transform to represent RS big data by decomposing the
datasets into multiscale detail coefﬁcients, which are estimated
using expectation-maximization likelihood. In [44], the authors

evaluated the quality of RS data using statistical inference via
using the prior knowledge of the dataset to get an unbiased
estimator for the quality.

C. Social Computing

With the explosive increase in smartphones usage, mobile
data have experienced an unprecedented growth, carrying enor-
mous amount of information on user applications, network per-
formance data, service characteristics, geographic information,
subscriber’s proﬁle, and so on [45]. This has led to shaping the
notion of “mobile big data”, which, unlike traditional big data
in computer networks, have their own unique characteristics.
One of these characteristics is the ability to partition mobile
data in time and space domains, such as in minutes, hours,
days, location, and so on. Furthermore, due to the features
of smartphones’ usage, the same trafﬁc, on one hand, can be
highly likely requested by a group of subscribers in certain
time and location; and on the other hand, subscribers in close
proximity may exhibit similar behavior and mobility patterns,
all of which can help optimize network performance [46].

Social computing allows the integration of these social
behaviors and contexts into web technologies to assist with
predicting social dynamics, which can render the operation,
planning and maintenance of social wireless networks easier
than ever [47], [48]. For instance, due to high social cor-
relations and relationships among subscribers, a user social
network can be formed, in which the habit, interests, mobility,
and sharing patterns can be used to construct social community
structures and analyze communication behaviors. One such an
example of user social application is the popular Pokemon Go
game, where users in close proximity share real-time maps
to hunt for Pokemon characters [46]. Another example where
social computing can be beneﬁcial is in emergency situations,
such as the spread of infectious diseases, where taking the
appropriate policies by analyzing human interactions and

4

predicting the emergency’s evolution can help protect
the
public health [47]. This article [49] introduced Cybermatics
as a broader vision of the IoT (called hyper IoT) to address
science and technology issues in the heterogeneous cyber-
physicalsocialthinking (CPST) hyperspace. Next, we list two
different social computing tools for data collection, mainly,
participatory sensing and crowd-sensing.

1) Participatory sensing: Participatory sensing or commu-
nity sensing allows users to collect and share information
either within social groups (social sensing) or with everyone
(public sensing) using their own smart devices [11], [12].
This means that sensors can be substituted by users for
purpose of data collection, which can signiﬁcantly reduce the
monetary costs of deploying physical sensors. However, with
participatory sensing comes several challenges such as the
quality and trustworthiness of collected data, the willingness
of participants to engage in the sensing tasks and protecting
participants’ personal information.

In [11], the authors proposed a participant coordination
architecture that selects the most efﬁcient participants without
exposing participants’ personal information to the application
server. To protect participants’ privacy, in [50], Chang et
al. proposed a secure scheme called PURE which allows
participants to reach the global model to estimate via peer
reviewing the local regression models. This enables partici-
pants to only report intermediate results back to the server
without the need of sharing local private data with the server.
In [51], Messaoud et al. proposed a mobile sensing scheme
that reduces the sensing time required by participants, and
increases the fairness of sensing tasks assignment to ensure
participants’ commitment to sensing while maintaining same
data quality as in non-fair schemes. In an attempt to maximize
the overall data quality, in [52], Wang et al. proposed a multi-
task allocation framework (MTPS) which pays participants a
compensation from a shared budget for each sensing task,
with additional compensation if a participant is assigned more
than one task. This greedy framework allows the allocation
of multiple tasks to participants. In [53], participatory sensing
for environmental data collection was used, where the urban
resolution metric was used to measure the quality of urban
sensing. In [54], participatory sensing was applied to vehicular
networks, where location, speed, and fuel consumption of
vehicles can be communicated with the server through phones
aboard via a WiFi interface to reduce data transfer delay time.
2) Mobile crowd-sensing: Mobile crowd-sensing (MCS)
can be considered as an extension to participatory sensing.
In addition to collecting data from mobile devices (mobile
sensing), MCS uses social sensing via integrating and fusing
the contributed data from mobile devices with that of the
mobile social network services in order to provide solutions
to more complex queries [13]. In vehicular networks, with
participatory sensing, we can collect warning messages from
vehicles to determine the trafﬁc status. However, if in addition,
a driver needs to know whether the route is safe to drive on
based on authorities’ recommendations, residents’ preferences,
and so on, then MCS can be useful (see Fig. 1).

In [55], Xiang et al. used MCS to construct accurate
outdoor received signal strength (RSS) maps using error-prone

smartphones. In [56], Wang et al. proposed an energy-efﬁcient
cost-effective data uploading in MCS via providing incentives
to participants to use the appropriate timing and network
to upload the data. Data was ofﬂoaded to Bluetooth/WiFi
gateways via using predictions on users’ calls and mobility. To
maintain relatively good performance of MCS applications, a
sufﬁcient number of participants need to make contributions
to sensing. In [24], the authors discussed about the different
incentives for MCS from entertainment, service and monetary
incentives, in which participants can be recruited in multiple
sensing tasks.

IV. BIG DATA STORAGE AND COMMUNICATIONS

Caching CPS big data can lead to a reduction in the
amount of trafﬁc exchanged, which contributes to a better data
management, lower latency and energy consumption. In this
section, we discuss some of the solutions proposed for CPS
big data caching and routing.

A. Big Data Caching and Storage for CPS

The high amount of trafﬁc driven by the popular use of
mobile video and online social media applications along with
the scarcity of backhaul resources have pushed researchers
and mobile operators to ﬁnd solutions. Content caching in
CPS is of high interest, especially that a big proportion of the
trafﬁc load originates from fetching data from different sources
such as databases, cache servers and network gateways [57].
Rather than caching data from the cloud, performing the
caching at the edge of mobile wireless networks, such as base
stations and user equipments, offers the advantage of better
data management [58], [59]. For instance, in [57], Zeydan et
al. proposed a big data proactive caching architecture that
predicts popular content from users’ behavior and network
characteristics to perform caching at the base stations. This
has the advantage of backhaul ofﬂoading to the edge, so that
data get closer to users, thereby enhancing users’ quality of
experience and reducing latency. The proposed architecture is
validated using dataset from a Turkish mobile operator, where
it was shown that proactive caching can yield 100% user
satisfaction by ofﬂoading 98% of the backhaul to the edge.
The proactive caching at the edge is envisioned to solve big
data management in future 5G networks, especially that base
stations densiﬁcation and acquiring new spectrum do not seem
quite effective in terms of cost, scalability and ﬂexibility [25],
[57]. A new approach to reducing network trafﬁc in telehealth
systems was suggested in [60], where a ﬁlter is used inside the
sensors which associates a scale to each record, to determine
the data ﬁelds that need to be sent to the server.

Different works have been proposed to deal with challenges
facing Hadoop for handling big data storage and process-
ing [61]–[63]. For instance, in [62], the authors proposed
a novel cache to store the intermediate data, which helps
eliminate redundancy in storage and processing of the big data
set, in addition to speeding up the performance of the system
by fetching the data from the cache rather than running mapper
functions. Dache, a data-aware cache framework for big-data
applications, was suggested in [63] to accelerate the execution

5

of MapReduce tasks. The transmitters of the tasks send their
intermediate data to a cache manager, which is then used to
fetch potential processing results.

Cache memory can help speed up CPS communications via
increasing the execution speed and decreasing the time spent
on memory access to fetch the required data. For instance,
in medical CPS, a timely response from medical sensors to
servers’ requests is required, where caching can be very useful.
However, as mentioned in [64], cache misses are highly likely
in CPS, especially when a task is interrupted by a higher
priority task, triggering a cache interference cost. A potential
solution to this problem is cache partitioning where different
tasks with shared resources are isolated and assigned reserved
partitions of a cache memory. This can be very useful for real-
time CPS applications such as mobile-health, environmental
monitoring, trafﬁc surveillance, aerospace and so on, where
reliability and predictability are of high importance. Moreover,
with the large-scale network of CPS, temporal interferences
from a large number of devices contending on shared re-
sources, such as processor cores, buses, I/O devices, can sig-
niﬁcantly reduce the runtime of CPS and lead to unpredictable
systems. Several algorithms and component-based approaches
have been proposed to help reduce the temporal interferences
of CPS [65]–[67].

B. Big Data Communications for CPS

To accommodate the big data environment for CPS, build-
ing a resilient network infrastructure for the data-intensive
applications and services has become essential [68]. The
data collections, the data chunks distribution to data centers
and the data delivery to intended users, necessitate a fast
and reliable networking to bridge these stages together. For
instance, machine-type communications (MTC), a class of
technologies related to IoT and deﬁned by the 3rd Generation
Partnership Project (3GPP), are becoming more popular as
we move towards a smart city. In an attempt to make homes
smarter, Apple introduced the HomeKit, which uses Siri to
control different things inside the home remotely using the
iPhone, iPad and even AppleTV [69]. Samsung, on the other
hand, introduced SmartThings that allow the automation of
many home tasks using WiFi, Zigbee, Bluetooth low energy
(BLE), and Z-Wave [70]. These new technologies allow all
the devices to be interconnected and to be communicated
together. Many of the MTC communications are envisioned
to run over current cellular networks [71], providing MTC
devices with ubiquitous coverage, global connectivity, relia-
bility and security. However, this creates a set of challenges
for cellular network providers [72], such as the inability to
handle MTC trafﬁc on networks optimized for human com-
munications, excessive congestions due to signaling overhead,
packet scheduling problems due to MTC trafﬁc requiring a
number of radio resources below the minimum allocated to
a cellular device;, and the large interferences generated from
MTC devices [73]. Different relevant works, such as [74]–[77],
suggested ofﬂoading the MTC trafﬁc onto device-to-device
(D2D) communications links. As a matter of fact, Google
OnHub router can support direct D2D communications, as

well as WiFi, BTL and 802.15.4 using Brillo as a stripped OS
version of Android. The D2D technology provides an ideal so-
lution to support the massive communications of MTC devices,
especially that these devices are anticipated to be located close
to each other [78]. The paper [79] discussed the integration of
wireless sensor networks (WSNs) and mobile cloud computing
(MCC) and proposed a sensory data processing framework to
transmit desirable sensory data to the mobile users in a fast,
reliable, and secure manner.

In [80],

the authors proposed two different sustainable
routing designs called SustainMe. The ﬁrst model uses a
dedicated backup protection in which network components are
turned off after data is fully delivered to help save energy. The
second model uses shared backup protection to achieve a trade-
off between energy efﬁciency and capacity usage efﬁciency.
The latter is shown to consume less capacity than the the ﬁrst
model, but at the expense of an increase in energy expenditure.
In [81],
the authors proposed a software deﬁned network
(SDN) routing for Hadoop to accelerate the speed of big data
delivery through speeding up the MapReduce data shufﬂing.
This is useful for time-sensitive big data applications. As
a matter of fact, SDN can signiﬁcantly improve big data
applications, especially which separates the control and data
planes, allowing the control plane to be logically centralized
so that decisions and network optimization are performed
efﬁciently via having a global view of the network. All these
SDN’s features can make the big data acquisition, processing,
transmission and storage much easier and faster. On the
other hand, big data can also assist in efﬁciently designing
and optimizing SDN functions through trafﬁc engineering,
cross-layer design, security and inter- and intra-data center
communications [82].

In [68], [83], taking advantage of social and geographical
community structures, routing, navigation services, and data
delivery performance can all be improved. In [6], different big
data routing algorithms for energy efﬁciency were reviewed,
such as selecting routing paths for data centers that achieve the
lowest energy costs, parallelizing data transfers by using multi-
ple cores in data routing, and balancing big data trafﬁc through
a distributed adaptive routing algorithm that minimizes packet
delivery.

In massive high-density environment, data collections and
transmissions can be challenging tasks especially with the
different data ﬂow information, quantities and characteristics.
In [84], cyclists’ data collections and transmissions were
studied. Autonomous data collection using automated video
analysis can be performed in order to overcome the need for
costly manual data collection. For instance, a computer vision
system can group users’ features based on spatial proximity
data, speed, trajectory and others. The obtained information
can be input to an algorithm that obtains valuable information
such as trafﬁc stream, number of cyclists, lane density and so
on.

In high-density environment, it is important for data to be
efﬁciently collected in a short period of time to ensure up-to-
date information. For this purpose, concurrent data collection
trees can be valuable where multiple data collection streams
can be initiated by different users on same set of devices [85].

6

This can be extremely helpful for delay-sensitive applica-
tions. In [86], the authors proposed concurrent massive data
transmission for remote real-time health monitoring system.
An input/output(I/O) Completion Port (IOCP) main server
dynamically binds Internet protocol (IP) addresses to massive
sensors before they can send their data. The main server
assigns one of the IOCP servers with the least number of
concurrent connections to micro sensors using Oracle Real
Application Cluster (RAC). Finally, data storage is separated
from Oracle server instances using Network Attached Storage
(NAS) technology to allow for greater I/O performance for
massive concurrent connections. The paper [87] ﬁrstly ana-
lyzed the objective of massive access control for machine-
type communications (MTC) or machine-to-machine com-
munications (M2M), another terms of CPS used in 3GPP
standardizations for wireless cellular networks, and proposed
distribution reshaping to enable data arrival distribution with
highly coordinated manner to notably reduce multiple access
congestions.

Real-time data fusions are important for heterogeneous
IoT/CPS data streams and unreliable networks with increasing
data size. To support locally available computational values to
help real-time analytics, the work [88] proposed the fusion of
three different data models with relational, semantical, and big
data based data and metadata. The paper [89] proposed two-
layer architecture for IoT data analysis, where the ﬁrst layer
is with the service oriented gateway based generic interface
to obtain data from multiple interfaces and IoT systems and
store them scalably and make relevant real-time analysis to
extract high-level activities, while the second layer works for
the probabilistic fusion of these high-level activities.

C. Summary and Insights

To summarize, different strategies can be employed to
enhance CPS performance via speeding up data collection,
processing and distribution. At the CPS trafﬁc level, data
collection and processing can be accelerated through caching
at the edge, ﬁltering the data to make it more manageable in
size, caching execution tasks, and using cloudlets whenever
possible. At the CPS devices level, the use of on-ﬂy D2D,
SDN, backup protection, and social/geographical community
structures along with navigation services can help accelerate
data delivery and reduce latency. The use of these technologies
and solutions can signiﬁcantly speed up data handling while
at the same time extending the communication range of CPS
trafﬁc.

V. BIG DATA PROCESSING FOR CPS

Cloud computing along with data clustering facilitates the
parallel processing and execution of tasks and queries. Map-
ping and scheduling workﬂows in a multi-cloud environment
speeds up the processing and allows for a better big data
management. In this section, we discuss cloud computing,
big data clustering, NoSQL and fog computing for big data
workﬂows processing.

A. Cloud Data Processing

With the large volume of data in the order of exabyte,
it becomes almost impractical to process the data on indi-
vidual machines, no matter how powerful they are. Parallel
processing of the data chunks on dedicated servers, such as
MapReduce tool proposed by Google, offers advantages over
conventional processing methods; however it is still not very
effective to handle a large amount of data, mainly due to
scalability, latency, availability, and inefﬁcient programming
techniques, including but not limited to database management
systems [90], [91]. One attractive solution to dedicated servers
is the processing on cloud centers, which offers users the abil-
ity to rent computing and storage resources in a pay-as-you-go
manner [92]. In addition, even though users will be sharing a
common hardware, the shared resources appear exclusive to
them through machine virtualization via hiding the platform
details [93]. However, this approach can create problems in the
pay-as-you-go environment due to untruthfulness, unfairness
and inefﬁciency of resources and workload transactions [94].
The main difference between parallelizing tools, such as
MapReduce and cloud computing, is that MapReduce uses
mappers and reducers to produce intermediate results and
ﬁnal results, respectively. However, public clouds offers users
with virtual machines (VMs) with a highly elastic resource
allocation [92]. The function of Map is in charge of processing
input key-value pairs and generating intermediate key-value
pairs; while Reduce function is used to further compress
the value set into a smaller set based on the intermediate
values with the same keys [95]. To maximize the query rate
of remotely located data in an attempt to maximize system
performance, the authors in [96] designed a dynamic resource
allocation algorithm that takes into account the computations
of query streams across the nodes and the limiting number of
resources available.

Due to the volume and velocity characteristics of big data,
streaming data processing and storage might require different
compression techniques to ensure efﬁciency and scalability.
Yang et al. proposed a novel low data accuracy loss com-
pression technique for cloud data processing and storage. A
similarity check was performed on partitioned data chunks
and a compression is conducted over the data chunks rather
than the basic data units [97]. Another similarity check-based
compression technique was proposed in [98] using weighted
fast compression distance.

Integrating cloud computing in IoT can take the processing
of sensing data streams to the next level to provide ubiquitous
sensing services beyond the capacities of individual things.
When combined with artiﬁcial intelligence, machine learning,
and neuromorphic computing techniques, it is envisioned that
new applications will be developed with automated decision
making, which would revolutionize the ﬁeld of smart cities,
industrial plants, environmental monitoring and others (see
Fig. 2). Cloud computing will enable IoT applications to have
a reduced latency, power consumption and enhanced scalabil-
ity. Examples of such applications include but not limited to
healthcare, where patients’ information can be accessed using
a cloudlets-based infrastructure [99]. Cloudlets are clouds that

7

trade-off between energy consumption and quality of service is
taken into consideration in the optimization problem. The cost
of data access and storage limitations of national cloud centers
was considered in [109], where the authors used Lagrangian
relaxation based heuristics algorithm to obtain the optimal data
centers placement that can reduce data access costs.

The distribution of users’ tasks on geographically distributed
cloud centers was addressed in [110], where the authors
proposed a big data management solution to maximize sys-
tem throughput such that fairness of limited resources usage
by users is guaranteed and the operational cost of service
providers is reduced. To allocate resources of multi-cloud
centers to users, a multi-round combinational double auction
based mechanism was proposed in [111], where auctions on
different VMs were performed by both users and data centers
in multiple rounds to maintain a high quality of service level.

C. Big Data Clustering

Data clustering refers to partitioning a set of objects com-
prising of attributes into different groups of similar objects
and features [112]. Data clustering becomes very useful in
big data applications, where there is a high need to process
and analyze large volume of data. Estimating the number
of clusters becomes important as clustering facilitates the
distribution of the data storage, tasks execution, parallel com-
puting, and queries requests [113]. Fig. 3 shows two groups
of clustering methods researched in depth in literature: i)
hierarchical clustering, and ii) centroid-based clustering. In
hierarchical clustering, nearby objects have higher probability
of being grouped together than far away objects. On the
other hand, in centroid-based clustering, objects closer to the
cluster center are grouped together. The paper [114] discussed
a ﬂexible multiple clustering analytic and service framework,
and a novel tensor-based multiple clusterings (TMC) approach.
One of the most popular centroid-based clustering is k-
means due to its computational efﬁciency and low-complexity
implementation. However, as the number of clusters increases,
k-means clustering suffers from the empty clustering problem
and the increase in number of iterations for convergence.
This means that traditional k-means is not suitable for big
data applications. Different works have suggested enhanced
versions of k-means clustering for purposes of improving
clustering quality, execution time, and accuracy. For instance,
in [115], the authors used an enhanced version of the k-
means clustering, where the initial centroids of the cluster
are not selected randomly but based on averaging the data
points. This achieves higher accuracy than conventional k-
means. Another enhanced version of k-means clustering was
suggested in [116], to help eliminate the empty clustering
problem of traditional k-means. The clustering approach was
based on a combination of Fireworks and Cuckoo-search
algorithms with representative points being selected as the
centroids. In [117], the authors also used a centroid calculation
heuristics to help enhance the clustering performance as the
number of clusters increases.

In [112], for instance, the authors used hierarchical cluster-
ing in their proposed algorithm, where the number of clusters

Fig. 2: CPS cycle to automation.

are closer to users to help overcome the high latency and power
consumption of distant clouds [100]. Other cloud application
examples include vehicles trafﬁc control system [101], genome
analysis [102], earth surface analysis [103] and many others.

B. Multi-Cloud Data Processing

In many IoT scientiﬁc applications,

the data collection
and generation, computation, processing and analysis are
broken down into workﬂows, consisting of interdepending
computing entities. Due to the data-intensive nature of IoT
applications, the large-scale workﬂows need to be distributed
across multiple cloud centers [104]. To allow the support
of multiple applications and to overcome the limitations of
current frameworks that are dedicated to a unique type of
applications, the authors in [105] proposed a distributed ap-
plication management framework in multi-cloud environment
by using a domain speciﬁc language (DSL) to describe ap-
plications in a hierarchical manner. However, the inter-cloud
communications constitute a big deal of the ﬁnancial costs of
processing workﬂows due to their large volume. In [104], to
optimize system performance, Wu et al. proposed a budget-
constrained workﬂow mapping in multi-cloud environment.
An efﬁcient pay-on-demand pricing strategy for streaming
big data processing in multi-cloud environment was proposed
in [106], to offer a low price for data load processing, while
maximizing the revenues of cloud service providers. As for
building trust across multiple cloud centers that collaborate
together on data storage and processing, Li et al. in [107]
proposed a trust-aware monitoring architecture between users
and cloud centers with hierarchical feedback mechanism to
enhance the robustness and reliability of the quality of service
of cloud providers, which helps provide them with a rating
based on their trust reputation. This allows users to select
services from different cloud providers based on feedback and
past service records.

In [108], Wang et al. optimized virtual machine (VM)
placement in national cloud data centers to help minimize the
energy consumption of data-intensive services, such as planet
analysis. In these cloud centers, VMs are assigned to physical
servers, which helps provide users with a high quality of
service but at the expense of greater energy consumption. The

8

is carefully selected based on the cluster head workload and
its distance to the base station to achieve energy efﬁciency.
In [126], the authors tried to solve the cascaded subnetworks’
failures problem in CPS by obtaining an upper bound on the
small clusters’ size to mitigate networks’ failure, especially
when they are tightly coupled. In [127],
the authors pro-
posed a secure clustering method for vehicular CPS, where
a trust metric is calculated for each vehicle based on their
transmission characteristics in order to create secure clusters.
Another secure clustering for vehicular CPS was proposed
in [128], where the clustering problem is formulated as a
coalition game taking into consideration the relative velocity,
position and bandwidth of vehicles. Furthermore, incentives
and penalty mechanisms are suggested to prevent selﬁsh nodes
from degrading the communication quality performance. A
density-based stream data clustering for real-time monitoring
CPS applications was suggested in [129], where the authors
used FlockStream algorithm to group similar data streams.
Each data point is associated with an agent, and similar agents
within a visibility range of each other in the virtual space, form
a ﬂock allowing for real-time stream clustering. A summary of
the different big data clustering techniques for CPS is provided
in Table III.

D. NoSQL

Conventional relational database management systems are
not suitable for heterogeneous big data processing, as they
consist of strict data model of pre-deﬁned data structures and
constraints with a ﬁxed schema [140]. NoSQL (Not Only
Structured Query Language) relaxes many of the relational
databases’ properties such as ACID transactional properties
to allow for greater querying ﬂexibility, operational scalabil-
ity and simplicity, higher availability and faster read/write
operations of unstructured big data through replicating and
partitioning the data across several nodes [141], [142].

NoSQL databases can store data in three different forms:
key-value stores, document databases, and column-oriented
databases [143]. In the document databases form, the data is
stored in a complex structure form such as XML documents.
Column-oriented databases store columns of data in data
tables, allowing greater ease of adding and deleting columns
compared to row-oriented databases.

Furthermore, two main classes for NoSQL systems: op-
erational NoSQL systems (Cassandra, MongoDB, Oracle
NoSQL), and analytical NoSQL systems which are based on
MapReduce, Hadoop, and Spark. Operational NoSQL systems
include online transaction processing (OLTP) systems, while
analytical NoSQL systems include decision support systems
(DSSs). The main difference between OLTP and DSSs is that
the latter involves processing over larger tables and hence,
involves complex queries processing (scanning, joining, and
aggregating), while OLTP performs read/write operations for
a smaller number of entries in the database [142]. For instance,
in [144], the authors used NoSQL for big data workﬂows
execution to improve the scalability, parallelism and execution
compared to traditional MapReduce framework.

Fig. 3: An illustration comparing centroid-based clustering
and hierarchical clustering (adapted from [118] and [119]).

was estimated visually based on a reordered distance matrix.
The data samples were clustered using single linkage (SL),
which cuts large edges of the clustering tree in a minimum
spanning tree (MST). The algorithm was shown to be superior
in terms of clustering speed and accuracy when compared to
other clustering algorithms like k-means. Another hierarchical
clustering was suggested in [120], where users themselves
deﬁne the number of clusters based on different similarity
measures such as homogeneity and the relative population of
each cluster. This helps improve user satisfaction of the clus-
tering algorithm. A hierarchical k-means clustering algorithm
was proposed in [121] to ﬁnd high quality initial centroids.
The centroids were obtained based on a hierarchical structure
of k-means that consists of several levels, where the ﬁrst level
is the original dataset. Subsequent levels are compromised of
smaller size datasets that consist of similar patterns as the orig-
inal dataset. Fuzzy clustering, another clustering technique,
is similar to k-means; however an object can be associated
with more than a single cluster depending on its degrees of
membership that are usually calculated based on Euclidean
distances between the object and the data center [122].

Another big data clustering is clustering features (CF),
where a CF-tree includes a summary of data patterns in a clus-
ter. It uses a threshold preset by users to set the size of micro
clusters in a CF-tree. However, this method can have time and
scalability complexities, especially with the large number of
data that needs to be scanned and assessed to construct the tree.
Clustering based on summary statistics allows the threshold
to be different for different micro clusters by dynamically
adjusted it based on regions’ densities [123]. Graph clustering
attempts to cluster data points based on network’s structure and
nodes’ connections, where similarities between nodes allow
them to be connected to build a community. An example would
be building a Tweet graph for Twitter online social application
where Tweets (nodes) with similarities (similar URL count,
similar hashtag count, or similar username count) are con-
nected together with edges [124]. Finally, incremental mining
helps deal with the increasing network size and data growth
challenges by incrementally updating the clusters without the
need for reconstructing them from scratch.

In the context of CPS applications, [125] attempted to
perform structuralized clustering for sensor-based CPS for
purposes of reducing the energy consumption of the sensor
network. The sensor network is basically structured into small
equal units, each consisting of a set of clusters, whose number

9

TABLE III: Summary of big data clustering techniques for CPS

Relevant Research Works
[120], [130], [131]

Big Data Clustering Techniques
Clustering based on similarity measures

[121], [132]

Hierarchical k-means solutions

Hierarchical clustering

[122], [133], [134]

Fuzzy clustering

[123]

[135], [136]
[112], [137]

Clustering based on summary statistics

Incremental mining
Minimum Spanning Trees

Centroid-based clustering

[138]

Consensus clustering statistics

[124], [139]

Graph clustering/Spectral clustering

TABLE IV: Comparisons among different parallel processing techniques

MapReduce parallel processing

Single cloud parallel processing

Advantages
dedicated resources to users

i) scalability and availability in handling
big data; ii) elastic resource allocation

Multi-cloud parallel processing

i) Better quality of service; ii) overcomes
storage limitations; iii) maximizes system
throughput; iv) achieves fairness of limited
resources

Disadvantages
inefﬁcient at handling large data
i) shared resources; ii) users need to
pay to rent VMs; iii) untruthfulness
and unfairness in using resources
i) requires VMs placement
optimization; ii) might be costly to
implement; iii) increases energy
consumption, iv) complicates data
access and management; v) requires
robust security solutions

E. Fog Data Computing

Cloud computing and services can be extended to the
edge of network via the fog computing paradigm. Though
both cloud and fog provide data computations, storage and
application services to end-users, the distinguished features
of fog from cloud include its proximity to end-users, the
dense geographical distribution and its mobility support [145].
These features facilitate fog computing for latency-sensitive
applications. Consider an example [146] of smart trafﬁc lights
and connected vehicles, where an ambulance ﬂashing lights
sensed by a video camera could automatically trigger street
lights to open lanes for the ambulance to pass through the
trafﬁc. In smart grid scenario [145], the fog devices at the edge
collect the data generated by grid sensors, real-time process
the data, and issue control commands to the actuators. A
fog-based intelligent decision support system was proposed
in [147] for driver safety and trafﬁc violation monitoring
based on the IoT. A smart city speeding trafﬁc surveillance
scheme using fog computing paradigm was provided in [148],
and its effectiveness was validated by intensive experiments
conducted using real-world trafﬁc surveillance video streams.
Fog computing could make possible the early predictions
of biomarkers to enable automated decisions making in a
connected health scenario [149]. A fog computing system
for e-Health applications was implemented in [150], where
fog nodes were installed in home to achieve the smallest
processing time. Disaster decision support systems, deployed
with fog nodes, could process acquired real data and trigger
alarms in case of an emergency [151]. An augmented brain
computer interaction game based on fog computing and linked
data was developed in [152]. Other exemplary scenarios [146]
for fog computing could be wireless sensor and actuator net-

works, decentralized smart building control, software deﬁned
networks, and so on.

Beyond the latency-sensitive applications, fog computing
could also ofﬂoad the core network trafﬁc and keep the
sensitive data inside the network [2]. In [153], fog computing
at smart gateways was shown to enhance the health monitoring
system through the usage of advanced techniques such as
embedded data mining, distributed storage and notiﬁcation
service at the edge of network. In [154], the authors proposed
a high level programming model, called mobile fog, for
future Internet applications that are geospatially distributed,
large-scale and latency-sensitive. The placement and migration
method for infrastructure providers was proposed in [155] to
incorporate cloud and fog resources. Speciﬁcally, the network
intensive operators were placed on distributed fog devices
while computationally intensive operators were placed in the
cloud. Some design goals and challenges in fog computing
platform were described in [156], which also suggested several
i.e.,
important components of a fog computing platform,
authentication and authorization, ofﬂoading management, lo-
cation services, system monitor, resource management, virtual
machine scheduling.

The security and privacy issues were examined in the
context of smart grids [28] and machine-to-machine commu-
nications [157], and so on. These security solutions for cloud
computing may not be directly applicable to fog computing, as
fog devices are placed at the edge of networks. One security
issue of fog computing is the authentication at different levels
of gateways. The compromise of gateways serving as fog
devices could lead to the Man-in-the-Middle attack [158].
Since a certain amount of fog networks are connected through
wireless, typical wireless attacks (e.g., jamming attacks, sniffer

10

attacks, and so on) could be possible threats for fog comput-
ing [27]. Furthermore, the leakage of private information, such
as data, location or usage could be the main concerns of end
users.

F. Summary and Insights

From Table IV, we can observe that users’ workloads can
be more efﬁciently processed in a multi-cloud environment,
especially that most CPS applications deal with a large volume
of data. However, such a solution requires additional opti-
mization techniques to optimize VMs placement for energy,
security, fairness, and costs. We have discussed relevant
issues in fog computing relevant issues, while there would
be also more relevant big data processing issues in cloud
computing and edge computing, such as relevant architectures
and applications, distributed data analytical frameworks, cyber
defense and cyber intelligence as well as convergence and
complexity issues.

VI. BIG DATA ANALYTICS

Big data analytics constitutes one of the most important
arenas in big data systems, as it allows to uncover hidden
patterns, unknown correlations and other useful information,
which in turn assist in boosting the revenues for many busi-
nesses. In this section, we present an overview of relevant big
data analytics techniques and tools. Readers may ﬁnd some
introductions of big data analytics in [159].

A. Data Mining

in sensing,

One of the interesting features of CPS is the automated
decision making. This means that CPS objects are supposed
to be smart
identifying events and interacting
with others [160]. The massive data collected by CPS needs
to be converted into useful knowledge to uncover hidden
patterns to ﬁnd solutions, enhance system performance and
quality of services. The process of extracting this useful
information is referred to as data mining. One solution to
facilitate the data mining process is to reduce data complexity
via allowing objects to capture only the interesting data rather
than all of it. Before data mining can be applied to the data,
some processing steps need to be completed such as key
features selection, preprocessing and transformation of data.
Dimensionality reduction is one potential method to reduce the
number of features of the data [161]. For instance, in [162],
Chen et al. used neural network with k-means clustering via
principal component analysis (PCA) to reduce the complex-
ity and the number of dimensions of gene expression data
to extract disease-related information from gene expression
proﬁles. Knowledge discovery in databases (KDD) is also
used in different CPS scenarios to ﬁnd hidden patterns and
unknown correlations in data so that useful information can
be converted into knowledge [163]. One such use of KDD is
in smart infrastructures systems, where these systems need to
answer queries and make recommendations about the system
operation to the facility manager [164].

Tsai et al. [5] broke down the core operations of data mining
into three main operations: data scanning, rules construction

and rules update. Data scanning is selecting the needed data
by the operator. Rules construction includes creating candidate
rules by using selection, construction and perturbation. Finally,
candidate rules are checked by the operator, then evaluated
to determine which ones will be kept for the next iteration.
The process of scanning, construction and update operations is
repeated until the termination criteria is met. This data mining
framework works for deterministic mining algorithms such as
k-means, and the metaheuristic algorithms such as simulated
annealing and genetic algorithm.

Clustering, classiﬁcation and frequent pattern are different
mining techniques that can be used to make CPS smarter. Clus-
tering methods have already been discussed in Section V-C.
Tsai et al. [5] discussed about two different purposes for clus-
tering: i) clustering for infrastructure of IoT, and ii) clustering
for services of IoT. Clustering for infrastructure of IoT helps
enhance system performance in terms of identiﬁcation, sensing
and actuation, such as in [165], where nodes can exchange
information between each other to identify whether they can
be grouped together depending on the needs of the IoT
applications. As for services of IoT, clustering can help provide
higher quality services such as in smart homes [166]. On the
other hand, classiﬁcation does not require prior knowledge
to complete the partitioning of objects into clusters, also
known as unsupervised learning. Classiﬁcation tools include
decision trees, k-nearest neighbor, naive Bayesian classiﬁca-
tion, adaboost and support vector machines. Classiﬁcation can
also be done to improve infrastructure as well as services
of IoT. Finally, frequent pattern mining is about uncovering
interesting patterns such as which items will be purchased
together with previously purchased items, or suggest items
for customers to purchase based on customer’s characteristics,
behavior, purchase history, and so on. Fig. 4 illustrates the CPS
big data mining process for useful information extraction.

Fig. 4: CPS big data mining process.

The paper [167] proposed NextCell algorithm to improve
the location prediction via utilizing the social interplay mined
in cellular call records.

11

B. Real-time Analytics

C. Cloud-Based Big Data Analytics

Real-time analysis is another approach to produce useful
information from massive raw data. Real-time streams data
are ﬁrst converted to a structured form data before being
analyzed by big data analysis tools such as Hadoop. Many ap-
plication domains such as healthcare, transportation systems,
environmental monitoring, and smart cities will require real-
time decision making and control [12]. For example, Twitter
data can be real-time analyzed to enhance the prediction
process and to provide useful recommendations to users [168];
terrorist incidents data can be real-time analyzed to predict
future incidents [169]; big data stream in healthcare can be
analyzed to help medical staff make decisions in real-time,
which can help save patients’ lives and improve the healthcare
services provided, while reducing medical costs [170]. Near
real-time big data analysis architecture for vehicular networks
was proposed in [171], which consists of a centralized data
storage for data processing and a distributed data storage for
streaming processed data in real-time analysis.

In [172], a real-time hybrid-stream big data analytics model
was proposed for big data video analysis. The paper [173]
considered the online network analysis as a stream analysis
issue and proposed to utilize Spark Streaming to monitor and
analyze the high-speed Internet trafﬁc data in real-time. The
work [174] proposed mobile edge computing nodes deployed
on a transit bus with descriptive analytics to explore mean-
ingful patterns of real-time data streams for transit. The paper
[175] discussed the term and related concepts of Real Time
Analytics (RTA) for industry big data analytical solutions. This
paper [176] provided a framework to efﬁciently leverage big
data technology and allow deep analysis of large and complex
datasets for real-time big data warehousing.

Arranging the data in a representative form can provide
information visualization, which makes the information ex-
traction and understanding of complex large-scale systems
much easier [177]. Geographical information systems (GIS)
is one important tool of visualization [178], as it can help
real-time analysis of many applications such as in healthcare,
urban and regional planning, transportation systems, emer-
gency situations, public safety, and so on. In [178], the authors
proposed a large-scale system data visualization architecture
called X-SimViz, which allows users for real-time dynamic
data analytics and visualization. Computer vision is another
approach to detecting security anomalies. Visualization can
also be useful tool in predicting real-time cyber attacks. For
instance, in [130], the authors used computer vision to trans-
form the network trafﬁc data into images using a multivariate
correlation analysis approach based on a dissimilarity measure
called Earth Mover’s Distance to help detect denial-of-service
attacks. A computer vision deep learning algorithm for human
activity recognition was proposed in [179]. The model is
capable of recognizing twelve types of human activities with
high accuracy and without the need of prior knowledge, which
is useful for security monitoring applications.

Cloud-based analysis in CPS constitutes a scalable and
reliable architecture to perform analytics operations on big
data stream, such as extracting, aggregating and analyzing
data of different granularities [180]. A massive amount of data
are usually stored in spreadsheets or other applications, and
a cloud-based analytics service, using statistical analysis and
machine learning, helps reduce the big data to a manageable
size so information can be extracted, hypothesis can be tested,
and conclusions can be drawn from non-numerical data such
as photos. Data can be imported from the cloud and users are
able to run cloud data analytics algorithms on big datasets,
after which data can be stored back to the cloud [181]. For
instance, in [182], the authors used cloud computing using
MapReduce algorithm to conduct analysis on crime rates in
the city of Austin using different attributes like crime type and
location to help build a design that prevents future crimes for
public safety.

Even though cloud computing is an attractive analytics tool
for big data applications, it comes with several challenges,
mainly concerning security, privacy and data ownership, which
will be discussed further in Section VII. In [99], the authors
extended the use of clouds to mobile cloud computing to
help overcome the challenge of resources limitations such as
memory, battery life and CPU power. A mobile cloud com-
puting architecture was suggested for healthcare applications
with discussion on various big data analytic tools available.
In [183], the authors suggested using a hybrid cloud computing
consisting of public and private clouds to accelerate the
analysis of massive data workloads on MapReduce framework
without requiring signiﬁcant modiﬁcations to the framework.
In a private cloud, cloud services delivered over the physical
infrastructure are exclusively dedicated to the tenant. The
hybrid cloud uses a set of virtual machines running on the
private cloud, which take advantage of data locality, and
another set of virtual machines run on a public cloud to run
the analysis at a faster rate.

To optimize the utilization of cloud computing resources,
predicting the expected workload and the amount of resources
the
needed becomes important to reduce waste. In [184],
authors developed a system that predicts the resources re-
quirements of a MapReduce application to optimize bandwidth
allocation to the application, while, in [185], the authors used
linear networks along with linear regression to predict the
future need of new resources and VMs. When the system
fails short in predicting the right amount of resources needed,
it becomes incapable of accommodating a high workload
demand,
leading to anomalies. Anomalies detection is an
essential part of big data analytics, as it helps improve the
quality of service via checking whether the measurements of
the workload observed and the baseline workloads diverge
by a speciﬁc margin, where the baseline workloads provide
a measure on how the demand changes during a period of
time based on historical records [186].

12

D. Spatial-Temporal Analytics

Massively data obtained from widely deployed spatio-
temporal sensors have caused grand challenges on data stor-
age, process scalability, and retrieval efﬁciency. The paper
[187] proposed distributed composite spatio-temporal index
approach VegaIndexer for efﬁciently processing the large
amount of spatio-temporal sensor data. The paper [188] in-
vestigated the big data issues in Internet of Vehicles (IOV)
applications and proposed to use clouding based big data
space-time analytics to enhance the analysis efﬁciency. The
paper [189] proposed STAnD to determine anomaly patterns
for potential malicious events within these spatial-temporal
data sets. Massively data obtained from widely deployed
spatio-temporal sensors have caused grand challenges on data
storage, process scalability, and retrieval efﬁciency. The spatial
distributed CPS nodes also can be used to analyze location
information. The paper [190] proposed an efﬁcient indoor
positioning based on a new empirical propagation model
using ﬁngerprinting sensors, called regional propagation model
(RPM), which is based on the cluster based propagation
model theory, and then the paper [191] used particle swarm
optimization (PSO) to estimate the location information via
Kalman ﬁlter to update the initial estimated location.

E. Big Data Analytical Tools

In this section, some typical tools are brieﬂy introduced for
aforementioned three methods of big data analytics, namely
data mining, real-time big data analytics and cloud-based big
data analytics.

1) Tools for Data Mining: Hadoop [22] is an open source
managed by the Apache Software Foundation. There are two
main components for Hadoop, namely HDFS [14] and MapRe-
duce [15]. HDFS is developed from an inspiration of GFS [19],
and it is a scalable and distributed storage system, which is
an appropriate solution for data-intensive applications, such
as Gigabyte and Terabyte scale. Rather than just being a
storage layer of Hadoop, HDFS is also beneﬁcial to throughput
improvement of the system and it supplies efﬁcient fault
detection and automatic recovery. MapReduce is a framework
which is used to analyze massive data sets in a distributed
fashion by means of numerous machines [192]. There are
two functions in the mathematical model of MapReduce
including Map and Reduce, both of which are available to be
programmed. R is also an open-source software environment
for data mining developed by AT&T Bell Labs [16]. Actually,
R is a realization of the S language used to explore data,
implement statistical analysis and draw plots. Compared with
S, R is more popular and supported by a large number of
database manufacturers, such as Teradata and Oracle.

2) Tools for Real-Time Big Data Analytics: Storm [16],
[17] is a distributed real-time computing system for big
data analysis. Compared with Hadoop, Storm is easier to
operate and more scalable to provide competitive and efﬁcient
services. Storm makes use of distinct topologies for different
storm tasks in terms of storm clusters, which are composed of
master nodes and worker nodes. The master nodes and worker
nodes play two kinds of roles in the ﬁelds of big data analysis,

namely nimbus and supervisor, respectively. The functions of
these two roles are in agreement with jobtracker and task-
tracker of the MapReduce framework. Nimbus takes charge
of code distribution across the storm cluster, the schedule
and assignment of worker nodes tasks, and the whole system
surveillance. The supervisor compiles tasks given by nimbus.
Splunk [18] is also a real-time platform designed for big data
analytics. Based on the web interface, Splunk is available
to search, monitor and analyze machine-generated big data,
and the results are exhibited in different varieties including
graphs, reports, alerts and so on. Compared with other real-
time analytical tools, Splunk provides various smart services
for commercial operations, system problem diagnosis, and so
on.

Fig. 5: An illustration of CPS taxonomy.

3) Tools for Cloud-Based Big Data Analytics: As the most
popular tool for cloud-based big data analytics, Google’s
cloud computing platform [193] consists of GFS [26] (big
data storage), BigTable [20] (big data management) and
MapReduce (cloud computing), which was discussed in the
previous section. GFS is a distributed ﬁle system and it
is enchanced to meet the requirements of big data storage
and usage demands of Google Inc. In order to deal with
the commodity component failure problem, GFS facilitates
continuous surveillance, errors detection and component faults
tolerance. GFS adopts clustered approach that divides data
chunks into 64-KB blocks and stores a 32-bit checksum
for each block. BigTable supplies highly adaptable, reliable,
applicable and dynamic control and management in the ﬁeld of
big data placement, representation, indexing and clustering for
enormous and distributed commodity servers, and it constitutes
of a row, column, record tablet and time stamp.

13

F. Summary and Insights

To better extract information from big data, it is of ut-
most importance to enhance cloud’s analysis performance. A
combination of different techniques discussed in this section
can be used to optimize cloud computing resources. If VMs
and cloud’s resources and requirements can be predicted
beforehand, then workloads can be efﬁciently processed and
analyzed by taking advantage of cloud analytical tools previ-
ously discussed. Furthermore, using a hybrid cloud can further
speed up the analysis of workloads, leading to reduced latency
and efﬁcient data mining.

though deduplication can save up to 95% in terms of needed
storage for backup applications [200], and 68% for standard
ﬁle systems [201], it wastes resources, and consumes energy,
and makes the data management very complicated. In [202],
Yan et al. attempted to solve the deduplication problems via
proposing a scheme, where the users upload the encrypted
data to the cloud along with a token for data duplication
check, which is then used by the cloud service providers to
check whether the data has already been stored. A scheme
to verify data ownership was presented to ensure secure data
management.

VII. BIG DATA CYBERSECURITY AND PRIVACY

In the realm of cyber physical systems, the tight interaction
among physical objects which collect and transmit a large
volume of data place security threats under the spotlight
of attention. With this enormous amount of data that are
constantly ﬂowing through the network, it becomes essential
to protect the system from cyber attacks [194]. In this section,
we provide an overview of the different security solutions pro-
posed for big data storage, access and analytics (see Table V
for a summary).

A. Security in Big Data Storage and Access

While data storage in the cloud offers several advantages in
terms of data storage, availability, scalability and processing,
it increases the chance of malicious attacks, that in addition
to potential privacy invasion by cloud operators who can
have accesses to sensitive data. All
this puts a question
mark on whether cloud data storage is feasible, especially
for governmental agencies and ﬁnancial industries. Several
works have attempted to solve the security challenges of cloud
storage. For instance, Gai et al. proposed a method that splits
ﬁles into encrypted parts and store them in distributed cloud
servers without users’ data being directly reached by cloud
service operators [195]. In [196], the authors optimized the
data placement on cloud servers that minimizes the retrieval
time of data ﬁles while guaranteeing their security based on
the distance between nodes that store the data chunks, such
that the malicious attacker cannot guess the locations of all the
data chunks. In [197], the authors suggested that data should
be encrypted and decrypted before being sent to clouds. The
paper [198] addressed iOS devices as case studies and stressed
the possible applications for pairing mode in iOS devices,
which supports a trusted relationship between an iOS device
and a personal computer, for covert data exﬁltration.

When data need to be transferred from one cloud to another,
data privacy and integrity become important. In [199], Ni et al.
proposed a secure data transfer scheme where users encrypt the
data blocks before uploading to the cloud. When transferring
from one cloud to another, a security protocol was described
using secret keys and a signature checking with polynomial-
based authentication was performed without retrieving data
from the source cloud. While the mentioned works considered
encryption as a way to protect the data from privacy violations,
encryption introduces a new challenge: cloud data deduplica-
tion, especially when data is shared among many users. Even

14

B. Security in Big Data Analytics

Enabling security and privacy aspects of big data analytics
has attracted a great attention from the scientiﬁc community
mainly due to different reasons. First, the data are more likely
stored, processed and analyzed in several cloud centers leading
to security issues due to the the random locations of data.
Second, big data analytics treats sensitive data in similar
way to other data without taking security measures such as
encryption or blind processing into consideration [203]. Third,
big data computations need to be protected from malicious
attacks in order to preserve the integrity of the extracted
results. In the realm of CPS, an enormous amount of data make
the surveillance of security-related information for anomaly
detection a challenging task for analysts. In healthcare, for
instance, the security issues of information extraction from
massive amount of data and accurate analytics are of high
importance. Sensitive data recorded in databases need to be
protected via monitoring which applications and users get
accesses to the data [204]. In order to guarantee a strong secure
big data analytics, the following tasks can be performed [205]:

• Surveillance and monitoring of real-time data streams,
• Implementation of advanced security controls such as
additional authentication and blocking suspicious trans-
actions,

• Anomaly detection in behavior, usage, access and net-

work trafﬁc,

• Defending the system against malicious attacks in real-

time,

• Adoption of visualization techniques that give a full
overview of network problems and progress in real-time.

In [206], the authors tackled the big data analytics in mobile
cellular networks based on random matrix theory, where big
data is represented in matrix form of size n
N , where n
is the number of data samples of a random vector x, and N
is the number of independent realizations of x. For cellular
networks, big data manifests as big signaling data consisting
of

×

1) a large number of control messages to ensure reliability,

security and efﬁciency of communications,

2) big trafﬁc data which require trafﬁc monitoring and
analysis to balance network load and optimize system
performance

3) big location data generated by GPS sensors, Bluetooth,
in different areas such as

WiFi and so on,

to assist

transportation systems, public safety, crime hot spots
analysis and so on,

4) big radio waveforms data emanating from 5G massive
MIMO systems to estimate users’ moving speed for
purposes of ﬁnding correlation among transmitted signals
as well as assist in channel estimation,

5) big heterogeneous data such as data rate, packet drop,
mobility and so on that can be analyzed to ensure
cybersecurity.

The work [207] proposed a secure high-order clustering al-
gorithm via fast search density peaks on hybrid cloud for
industrial Internet of Things.

Machine learning, among other tools, offers a promising
solution to automate many of the above mentioned security-
related tasks, especially with the continuous growth of the
ﬂowing data in terms of scale and complexity. Through the
process of training datasets, machine learning makes possible
the detection of future security anomalies via detecting unusual
activities in the network trafﬁc. To achieve a higher accuracy,
a large volume of training datasets are needed, but this would
be at the cost of added overhead and storage constraints. The
process of training can be supervised, unsupervised or semi-
supervised, depending on whether the outcome of a particular
dataset is already known. Particularly, the system starts via
classifying similar datasets into clusters to determine their
anomaly. A human analyst can then explore and identify any
unusual data. The outcome found by the analyst can then be
fed back to the training system in order to make it more
“supervised” [208]. This has the potential in enabling the
training system adapt to new forms of threats without human
intervention, so actions can be immediately taken before actual
damages occur.

Different approaches for anomaly detection exist in litera-
ture such as discretizing the continuous domain into different
dimensions such as in the surveillance system in [209], where
the author partitioned the surveillance area into a square grid
where the positions and velocities of the moving objects falling
in each cell are modeled by a Poisson point process. Another
approach is the multivariate Gaussian analysis in which data
are ﬂagged as abnormal when they lie a number of standard
deviations away from the mean. For instance, in [210], the
authors used multivariate Gaussian analysis to detect Internet
attacks and intrusions via analyzing the statistical properties of
the IP trafﬁc captured. In clustering methods such as k-means
clustering, data points can be grouped into clusters based on
their distance to the center of the cluster. Then, if some data
point lies outside of the group cluster, it is considered as an
anomaly. The authors in [211] used kernel k-means clustering
with local-neighborhood information to detect a change in
an image by optimally computing the kernel weights of the
image features such as intensity and texture features. As for the
artiﬁcial neural network approach, one implementation of such
a model is the autoencoder, also known as replicator neural
network, which ﬂags anomalies based on calculations of the
difference between the test data and the reconstructed one.
This means that if the error between test and reconstructed
data exceeds a speciﬁed threshold, then it is considered far
away from a healthy system distribution [212]. An example

of such an approach is given in [213], where the authors used
the autoencoder as a high accuracy and low-latency model to
detect anomalies in the energy consumption and operation of
smart meters.

Privacy preserving data analytics and mining can be quite
challenging tasks since analyzing encrypted data is an inefﬁ-
cient, costly and non-straightforward solution. Homomorphic
encryption is one of the solutions proposed to enable analytical
operations to be performed on ciphertexts using multiple
mathematical operations [214], [215]. For instance, in [216],
the authors used Efﬁcient Privacy-preserving Outsourced cal-
culation with Multiple keys (EPOM) homomorphic encryption
to encrypt data before sending to cloud. The cloud then uses
ID3 algorithm to perform data mining on encrypted data. The
algorithm uses a hierarchical tree decision to determine which
attributes from a set of samples provide the best prediction
or information gain. Another approach for processing mining
on encrypted data in cloud using homomorphic encryption
was suggested in [217]. A cloud service provider (CSP)
collects and stores encrypted data, while a server, referred to
as Evaluator, collaborates with CSP to perform mining over
encrypted data. A miner submits encrypted mining queries to
CSP which in turn computes inner product between vectors to
determine the frequency of the mining itemset without CSP
and Evaluator having access to the sensitive data. However,
homomorphic encryption can be computationally expensive
and impractical for big datasets [218].

One potential approach to protect private data during the
analytic processes is the k-anonymization proposed in [219].
First, users who access the data need to be authenticated and
authorized based on the level of shared results’ privacy. Then,
a list of hashed and primary identiﬁers is generated to act
as a data ﬁlter for the information that can be accessible
by the authorized user. K-anonymization is then applied on
the personally identiﬁable columns in the dataset in order to
generalize or suppress values in the output dataset. The result
is an k-anonymized list on which analysis and mining can be
performed on the authorized accessible data.

Although k-anonymization appears to be a promising adapt-
able approach to privacy preserving data analytics independent
of the underlying processes, its feasibility in the big data
contexts is possibly not further evaluated for data types and
computational
time. Furthermore, k-anonymization can be
problematic if different datasets contain same sensitive val-
ues [220]. One approach that attempts to solve this problem is
the cosine similarity computation protocol suggested in [218],
[221]. The proposed approach allows for larger datasets scal-
ability for both binary and numerical data types in a time-
efﬁcient manner. The idea is to allow data to be shared without
disclosing the sensitive information to unauthorized users.
This can be done via computing the scalar product between
different vectors of numerical values, such as calculating the
cosine of the angle between them. Having the result closer to
1 indicates that vectors are more similar to each other.

On the other hand, many of the big data applications have
hierarchical structures in nature, and thus require hierarchical
privacy preserving solutions. For instance, in [222], hierarchi-
cal cloud and community access control can be implemented

15

to strengthen privacy preserving in smart homes and smart me-
ters. The home controller, which protects household personal
data, is connected to a cloud platform through a community
network, which provides privacy preserving solutions to homes
through data separation, aggregation and fusion. The cloud
combines the access control schemes for homes and commu-
nity in more complex and stronger privacy protection process.

C. Summary and Insights

From Table V, it is clear that a single security solution
is not sufﬁcient to ensure a robust system against attackers.
It
is quite necessary to incorporate different strategies to
face security ﬂaws that stem from poor systems designs. For
instance, it makes sense to combine advanced security controls
with cryptography to guarantee that only legitimate users have
accesses to data. However, such a solution might not work well
for delay-sensitive CPS applications such as e-health systems,
especially in the cases that the small sensors have limited
computational capabilities. For such applications, it is more
efﬁcient to employ visualization detection along with machine
learning-based anomaly detection techniques to protect users’
sensitive data.

VIII. BIG DATA MEET GREEN CHALLENGES FOR CPS

There are two view directions for big Data meeting green
challenges for CPS. Firstly, we address greening big data
systems for CPS, including CPS big data collection/storage,
computing and processing. Secondly, we discuss big data with
CPS toward green applications. Table VI shows different sus-
tainable applications, along with challenges and solutions for a
greener CPS. Table VII provides a summary of these solutions
proposed in different research papers, while Table VIII groups
them into three different categories: green data management,
green architectures and green software solutions.

A. Greening big data for CPS

1) Green Data Collections and Communications: With a
massive number of interacting objects, gathering sensed data
poses a challenge in terms of energy consumption, mainly
due to the limited communication range between subnetworks,
necessitating that objects act as relays for surrounding objects
in order to extend their communications. This affects the
lifetime of objects since each object needs to relay large
volume of data generated by its neighbors [233]. In this
context, different solutions have been proposed for different
big data applications. In [233], Takaishi et al. proposed energy
efﬁcient solutions for data collection in densely distributed
sensor networks. In an attempt to reduce the number of relay
transmissions needed, sensor nodes transmit their data to a
data collector node, the sink node, when they become close
in proximity to it. Therefore, it becomes important to ﬁgure
out the trajectory that the sink node needs to follow the nodes’
information such as location and residual energy, as well as the
cluster formation in order to reduce the energy consumption
of data collection. Data compression technology is another so-
lution to help deal with challenges of data storage, collection,

transmission, processing, and analysis. For instance, in [262],
the authors proposed a highly efﬁcient lossy data compression
based on smart meters’ load features, states and events with a
small reconstruction error. ZIP-IO compression technique was
proposed in [263] using FPGA as a potential implementation
framework. Video compression is another important tool in
big data for surveillance applications. The authors in [264]
proposed a background-based coding optimization algorithm
that uses the residual gradient and the block edge differences
to improve picture quality while achieving a high level of
compression.

To achieve higher power savings for machine-to-machine
(M2M) or machine type communications (MTC), this paper
[265] proposed improved approaches for M2M devices, radio
access networks and core networks with simpliﬁed activities
under optimized signaling ﬂow without introducing negative
impacts on legacy human-to-human (H2H) terminals. In wire-
less cellular networks, when mobile terminals can directly
communicate each other without the aids of central stations
or base stations, the communications in those scenarios are
called device-to-device (D2D) communications [266], which is
another term of CPS in those scenarios. The paper [267] stud-
ied energy-efﬁcient power control for D2D communications
underlaying cellular networks with multiple D2D pairs and
co-channel interference caused by resource sharing. The work
[268] proposed an architecture using D2D multicast for en-
ergy efﬁcient content delivery in cellular networks. Removing
redundant transmission links can also reduce energy consump-
tion while increasing network capacity. Topology control al-
gorithms such as local minimum spanning tree (LMST) [239]
and Local Tree-based Reliable Topology (LTRT) [240] have
low computational complexities and can help obtain the best
logical topology which can be beneﬁcial for energy efﬁcient
data collections. In addition to removing redundant transmis-
sion links, removing redundant data can help save energy, such
as in [242], where a compressive-sensing-based collection
framework was proposed for reducing data redundancy and
saving energy. To implement this solution, an online learning
module predicts the amount of data (principal data) that needs
to be collected for compressive sensing. This means that the
principal data are supposed to represent the whole big data
using the compressive sensing technique. Then, each node can
locally tweak the collection strategy dynamically depending
on neighbors status, residual energy, and link quality. Nodes’
clustering can also contribute to energy saving via reducing
the number of data collection and transmissions, such as fan-
shaped clustering proposed in [241] for large-scale networks
with energy efﬁcient selection of a cluster head and relay node.
Other clustering algorithms have existed in literature, such as
the well-known Low-Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy
(LEACH) [269], which can be useful for big data wireless
sensor networks. The work [270] adopted an energy-efﬁcient
architecture for Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) with a
sense entities domain, RESTful service hosted networks, a
cloud server, and user applications to balance the trafﬁc load
and support a longer lifetime of the whole system. The paper
[271] mainly studied two important issues: 1) performing
cyber-physical systems (CPS) communications over cellular

16

TABLE V: Summary of security solutions proposed for CPS

Literature

Security Solu-
tions

Advantages

Disadvantages

Key
Encryption
and Digital
Signatures

[26]

[195]

[196]

Secure
data
placement on
cloud

i) ensures users’ data protection on
clouds; ii) does not require complex
signatures and keys; iii) provides data
privacy at users’ side

[195]

[199]
[223] [215]

[197]
[202]

Cryptographic
Solutions

i) ensures information protection, data
privacy and integrity; ii) works in
conjunction with other security
solutions for more robust security

Data Access
Permission
Restrictions

Visualization
Detection of
Anomalies

[50]
[224] [225]

[204]

Advanced se-
curity controls

Anomaly De-
tection

[130]

[208]
[211]
[213]
[226]
[228]

[210]
[212]
[224]
[227]
[229] [230]

i) selective access control;
ii) can be used in conjunction with
cryptography for a more robust security;
iii) good for real-time data streams;
iv) provides additional layer of protection
i) does not require costly solutions
such as signatures and keys;
ii) works for a variety of attacks with
varying malicious behaviors;
iii) can detect abnormal trafﬁc patterns
with no associated signature

i) data might need to be encrypted/decrypted
before transferring to clouds;
ii) can have a long data retrieval time;
iii) not suitable for making real-time network
decisions; iv) not very robust as attackers can
guess data’s locations; v) service providers can
have access to users’ data; vi) complicated data
management and access
i) costly in terms of computational overhead;
ii) can have a large power consumption;
iii) increases latency;
iv) inefﬁcient for many CPS devices with limited
computational capabilities; v) works only for
ﬁxed malicious behaviors

i) difﬁcult to access for legitimate users;
ii) needs to be combined with other solutions;
iii) not sufﬁcient by itself to protect users’ data;
iv) might increase latency from accessing the data

i) requires a large dataset for training;
ii) costly in terms of overhead and storage of
training data; iii) might require human analysts’
intervention to make the detection more
textbackslash supervise

[179]

[130]
[211] [232]

[231]
[209]

Visualization
Techniques

i) ideal for monitoring real-time trafﬁc;
ii) provides global overview of network
problems

i) not accurate if trafﬁc patterns are misclassiﬁed;
ii) requires complex statistical analysis of trafﬁc;
iii) might need to be supervised by humans;
iv) might require prior knowledge for a better
intrusion detection

TABLE VI: Sustainable CPS: applications, challenges and solutions.

Applications

Sustainable CPS
Challenges

Environmental Monitoring

- Air/Water pollution
- Oil spills pollution
- Noise pollution

- Limited communications
between subnetworks

- Storage limitations

Power Management

- Smart Grids
- Green buildings
- Green infrastructure
- Renewable energy sources

Green Transportation

- Fuel management
- Electric vehicles
- Sustainable transport
- Transport planning

Green Energy

- Energy harvesting
- Energy conservations

- Redundant transmission
links

- Deduplication

- Redundant information in
data collection
- Increased energy expenditure
in cloud data centers

Increased power consumption
of networked devices

- Large volume of exchanged data
between cloud centers

- Cloud data centers distant from
users

-VM placement in cloud centers

- Increased energy consumption
in case of hardware/software
failures

- Provide relay incentives to extend communication [24], [56], [128],
[145], [233]

Solutions

-Minimize the number of relay transmissions [233]

- Data reduction techniques(aggregation, compression, network
coding) [57], [58], [59], [60], [61]–[63], [184], [234], [235], [236],
[237], [238]

- Remove redundant transmission links using energy-efﬁcient
topology control algorithm and clustering [125], [126], [127], [128], [129],
[239], [240], [241],
- Employ data duplication checks [202]

- Employ compressive sensing- based data collection [242], [243]

- Efﬁcient utilization of resources [99], [184], [185]

- Integrate energy harvesting from renewable sources [244], [245]

- Sleep scheduling for unused data centers [30], [245]

- Employ energy-efﬁcient hardware(DVFS) [29], [246], [247], [248]

- Design energy-efﬁcient cloud data centers [30]
- Activity scheduling (switch devices to sleep mode) [245]
- Power control and adjustment of networked devices [247], [248]
- Design architectures for power saving [30], [246]
- Energy-efﬁcient routing and trafﬁc engineering techniques [56], [80],
[249], [250], [251], [252], [253], [254], [255], [256]
- Employ advanced communication technologies (MIMO)
- Employ cloudlets [99], [100]
- Energy-efﬁcient VM techniques (VM migration, VM placement,
VMallocation) [108], [257]
- Reduce unnecessary executions using backups [258], [259], [260], [261]

17

networks with ubiquitous coverage, global connectivity, relia-
bility and security, 2) ofﬂoading a proportion of CPS trafﬁc to
small cells and freeing more network resources to other users.
2) Greening big data computing: While cloud centers are
becoming an important aspect of big data computing to
process data chunks in parallel, they contribute to a high
energy expenditure, leading to increased costs and mainte-
nance [272]. Therefore, research efforts are shifting towards
creating sustainable big data computing techniques. Shojafar et
al. proposed a job scheduler between servers called MMGreen
to reduce energy consumption of computing in cloud data
centers [246]. The MMGreen architecture is composed of
physical servers hosting VMs connected to a front-end compo-
nent that manages the incoming workload. Scheduler jobs that
use dynamic voltage and frequency scaling (DVFS) technique
for energy efﬁcient servers include static scheduler whose
power consumption is independent of clock rates and usage,
and sequential schedulers which attempt to minimize recon-
ﬁguration costs via performing ofﬂine resource provisioning
via predicting future workload information [29]. The paper
[273] proposed 1) thermal-aware and power-aware hybrid
energy consumption model jointly including the information
of computing, cooling, and migration energy consumption, 2)
a tensor-based task allocation and frequency assignment model
to reﬂect the relationship among different tasks, nodes, time
slots, and frequencies, 3) a thermal-aware and DVFS-enabled
big data task scheduling algorithm for the energy consumption
reduction of data centers.

In [246],

techniques to
the authors described different
reduce energy consumption such as DVFS to reduce VMs’
frequencies and real-time adjustment of VMs frequencies pro-
cessing and switching while maintaining quality of service to
users. In [247], [248], M2M power savings were optimized via
reducing the execution frequency of some activities without
negatively impacting the human-to-human communications.

Besides targeting the energy efﬁciency of cloud servers,
network devices also need energy efﬁcient solutions, since
they also contribute to the total energy expenditure of the
cloud data center. Trafﬁc engineering is one solution for
this problem, which takes advantage of the trafﬁc prediction
to turn off network devices such as switches during idle
periods in order to reduce power consumption [249]–[252].
Trafﬁc engineering techniques, such as the software deﬁned
networking (SDN)-based trafﬁc engineering [253], allow the
network devices to dynamically adapt to current workload.
One problem with trafﬁc engineering techniques is that the
predicted trafﬁc pattern might not be accurate due to the
variability of big data applications running in the data center.
This makes the network conﬁguration suffer from frequent os-
cillations, since the network conﬁguration needs to be updated
frequently leading to performance degradation [254]. To take
into consideration this time-varying aggregate trafﬁc load, one
proposed solution is to include ﬂow deadlines to measure the
speed at which requests’ responses are delivered to users. This
allows the design of energy-efﬁcient scheduling and routing
for data center networks [254]–[256]. Another solution to
enhance the inaccurate trafﬁc engineering techniques is to take
into consideration the unique features of data centers such as

regularity of the topology, VM assignment, application char-
acteristics. Such a framework was proposed in [257], where
the energy-saving problem was solved in two steps: i) a VM
assignment algorithm that integrates application characteristics
and network topology to better understand trafﬁc patterns for
energy efﬁcient routing, and ii) an algorithm that minimizes
the number of switches and balances trafﬁc ﬂow among them.
Experimental results showed a 50% energy savings using the
proposed framework.

3) Green Processing: An energy-efﬁcient orchestrator for
smart grid applications was proposed in [30]. The green
orchestrator coordinates sustainability between smart grids and
big data enterprises from green infrastructure (data centers)
to running green frameworks such as Hadoop MapReduce.
The orchestrator’s main components are: i) a green lesser
to establish a per-job service-level agreements (SLA) that
takes into account the available power, the power consumption
statistics of jobs, the network and server states; ii) a pre-
execution analyzer that executes jobs based on their power
consumption statistics; iii) a network and server states pre-
dictors; iv) a network trafﬁc analyzer which helps eliminate
redundant trafﬁc using trafﬁc engineering techniques; v) a
VMizer that intelligently places VMs such that some nodes are
put to sleep; (vi) a pizer that schedules and places processes to
a subset of clusters such that system resources are efﬁciently
utilized; and (vii) a post-execution analyzer to analyze the
energy proﬁle of completed jobs.

Another green big data processing architecture is check-
pointing aided parallel execution (CAPE), which uses check-
points that save the sates of processes to avoid restarting
unnecessary executions from beginning in case of hardware
or software failures [258]–[260]. CAPE also allows threads
of a shared-memory program to be executed in parallel on a
distributed memory architecture rather than a shared memory
architecture. The CAPE architecture can lead to energy saving
since if the execution period of processors is short, they can go
to idle mode rather than staying active for the whole execution
of the program. This makes it beneﬁcial in processing big data
in CPS applications [260], [261].

Another approach to green big data processing is the efﬁ-
cient utilization of network resources by reducing the volume
of communications that need to be exchanged in cloud data
center networks. For instance, Asad et al. proposed spate
coding for the purpose of reducing the amount of exchanged
data, but without compromising the rate of information ex-
change [234]. Spate coding incorporates both index coding and
network coding, and uses side information originating from
several processes sharing a physical node to encode packets.
This coding technique was shown to reduce the volume of
communications by 62%, along with other advantages such
as improving the utilization of system resources from disk
utilization, queue size, and the number of bits transmitted dur-
ing shufﬂe phase of Hadoop (200%) [234]. Other approaches
to reduce the burden on data centers from the information
exchange include trafﬁc ﬂow prediction to reduce network
transfers [184], [235], and redundancy elimination scheme
to remove redundant information data exchange, among oth-
ers [236]–[238].

18

B. CPS-based Big Data toward Green Applications

CPS-based big data applications can contribute to greening
different sectors, environment, economic, and social/technical
issues [6], [31], [32]. As for the environment, efforts are made
to reduce air/water pollution as well as the impact of climate
changes. For instance, sensors can be deployed to monitor air
and water qualities. Using MapReduce or Spark programming
frameworks, the concentration of pollutants can be monitored
and studied [274]; the air quality not covered via monitoring
stations can be estimated [275], and the causalities of air pol-
lutants can be identiﬁed using urban big data dynamics [276].
Pollution can also originate from oil spills. Predicting such
catastrophes very early can help save beaches, coastlines and
waters [6], [32]. Marine oil spills can be detected using a
large archive of remote sensing big data [10]; and a real-time
warning can be generated from a quantitative data analysis
using supervised oil system [277]. Concerning water pollu-
tion, underwater sensors can be deployed to monitor water
environment, such as water level, water ﬂow, temperature, and
pressure. The sensor network can be connected to a cloud
platform via a wireless transceiver for analysis and visualiza-
tion [278]. Noise pollution in cities is another contributing
factor to environmental pollution, which can have negative
impact on health, especially with the increasing number of
circulating vehicles [6], [32]. Noise pollution levels can be
predicted via collecting four data sources: complaint data,
social media, points of interests, and road network data [279].
These data can be gathered via deploying static municipal
sensors, together with participatory sensing with smart phones
in order to provide more accurate noise maps [280].

As for green economics, CPS applications can be targeted
for optimizing the energy use. One example is FirstFuel,
which monitors temperature and lightnings inside buildings
by checking the running status of the equipments, such as
fans, heating and cooling units [6]. Power management can be
realized using sensors monitoring the whole building, as well
as using smart meters for electricity consumption measure-
ments. A solution in energy efﬁcient smart meters has been
proposed in [281] using coalition game that maximizes the
pay-off values of smart meters. An approach to predict daily
electricity consumption inside buildings using data analysis
was proposed in [282]. The authors used canonical variate
analysis to group electricity consumption proﬁles into clusters
in order to identify abnormal energy usage. Energy efﬁciency
can also be employed in transportation systems to reduce fuel
wastage. One example is [283], where the authors used electric
vehicles (EV) battery model to estimate the driver’s behaviors
and driving range to improve energy efﬁciency.

Social media and participatory sensing can also be used
toward greener environments. For instance,
the
authors used social media to optimize smart grid management.
In [285], participatory sensing was used to implement a
navigation service called GreenGPS to allow drivers to obtain
customized routes that are the most fuel-efﬁcient.

in [284],

IX. CPS BIG DATA APPLICATIONS

We now present some of the main CPS big data applications
in different ﬁelds, such as energy utilization, city management,

and disaster events applications, along with a public safety
case study model. Fig. 6 shows different CPS applications
and their big data generation. For instance, the intelligent
transportation system would generate big data consisting of
driver’s behavior, passenger information, vehicles’ locations,
trafﬁc signals management, accidents’ reporting, automated
fare calculations, and so on. Each one of the CPS applications
generate a large amount of data that need to be stored,
processed and analyzed in order to improve services and
applications’ performance.

A. Smart Grids

Smart grids constitute an important aspect of sustainable
energy utilization and are becoming more popular, especially
with the advances in sensing and signal processing technolo-
gies. Automated smart decisions based on millions of data and
control points play an important role in managing the energy
usage patterns, understanding users’ behaviors, reducing the
need to build power plants, and addressing supply ﬂuctuations
by using renewable resources [244]. The large number of
embedded power generator sensors and their communications
with different home sensors and appliances are expected to
generate a large amount of data. These advanced sensing and
control technologies used in smart grids are often limited to
a small region such as a city; however they are envisioned
to be deployed on a much larger scale such as the whole
country. This will introduce several challenges, among which
information management, processing and analysis are the main
ones [292]. These big data tasks get even more complicated
with the increasing number of transactions that need to be
processed for millions of customers. For instance, one smart
grid utility is expected to handle two million customers with
22 gigabytes of data per day [292]. That is why big data
tools from cloud computing [244], mining and analytics [293],
[294], performance optimization [295] and others have been
dedicated for smart grids applications.

Moreover, for reliable power grid, smart grids highly depend
on cyber infrastructure. This poses several challenges such as
exposing the physical operations of smart grid systems to cyber
security attacks [296]. Furthermore, the collection of users’
energy usage information such as the types of appliances they
use, the eating/sleeping patterns, and so on, can be very bene-
ﬁcial in optimizing smart grids’ performance; however users’
privacy can also be affected. In [297], Yassine et al. proposed
a game theoretic mechanism to balance between users’ private
information and the beneﬁcial uses of data. In [298], a big data
architecture for smart grids based on random matrix theory
was proposed to conduct high dimensional analysis, identify
data correlations, and manage data and energy ﬂows among
utilities. The proposed architecture not only allows large-scale
big data analysis but also can be used as an anomaly detection
tool to detect security ﬂaws in smart grids.

For security threats that occur in short time, a security
situational awareness technique was proposed in [299], which
uses fuzzy cluster analysis based on game theory and re-
inforcement learning to enhance security in smart grids. A
big data computing architecture for smart grids was proposed

19

TABLE VII: Summary of different green solutions proposed for CPS

Data Collection/Storage

Computing

Processing

Literature
[233]
[239], [240], [241]
[262], [263], [264], [242]
[29], [246], [247], [248]
[56], [80], [249], [250], [251], [252], [253], [254], [255], [256]
[30]
[258], [259], [260], [261]
[57], [58], [59], [60], [61]–[63], [184], [234], [235], [236], [237], [238]
[99], [100]
[108], [257]

Green Solutions
Minimizing number of relay transmissions
Removing redundant transmission links
Data compression techniques
Dynamic voltage and frequency scaling
Trafﬁc engineering
Energy-efﬁcient orchestrators
Checkpointing aided parallel execution (CAPE)
Reducing the amount of exchanged data
Cloudlets
Virtual machine placement for energy efﬁciency

TABLE VIII: Different Green Solutions Approaches

Green Data Management Solutions
Minimizing number of relay transmissions

Green Architectural Solutions
Dynamic voltage and frequency scaling

Green Software Solutions

Removing redundant transmission links

Trafﬁc Engineering

Data compression techniques

Energy-efﬁcient orchestrators

Trafﬁc engineering

Cloudlets

Reducing the amount of exchanged data

Virtual machine placement

Trafﬁc Engineering

Reducing the amount of exchanged data

Data compression techniques

Checkpointing aided parallel execution (CAPE)

Fig. 6: Big data meet CPS applications (adapted from [286]–[291]).

20

Fig. 7: A public safety model for CPS.

in [300] with four main elements: 1) data resource where
smart grids data is generated by different devices, companies
and systems with complex correlated relationship among them,
2) data storage where only meaningful information is stored
and processed with in stream mode or batch mode, 3) data
analysis using demand-side management or load forecasting
for purposes of categorizing the total demand response in
a speciﬁc region, and 4) data transmission which bridges
the previous elements together. Using this architecture with
energy scheduling scheme based on game theory and a generic
algorithm-based optimization to obtain the optimal deploy-
ment of energy storage devices for each customer, the results
show a signiﬁcant reduction in total costs of consumers over
long term. In [301], the combined temporal encoding, delayed
feedback networks (DFNs) reservoir computing (RC) imple-
mentation, and a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) were used to
execute effective attack detection for smart grid networks.

B. Military Applications

Big data can also be exploited to improve military ex-
periences, services, and training. Real-time authentication of
command and control messages in cyber-physical infrastruc-
tures is of high importance for military services to ensure
security. In [302], the authors developed a novel broadcast
authentication scheme using special digital signatures for
faster signature generation and veriﬁcation, and packet loss
tolerance. This can be useful to efﬁciently and rapidly secure
military communications. In [303], the authors used Markov
decision process to propose an approach to identify and
reduce attacks’ cost in military operations in order to pro-
tect important information through obtaining attack policies.
Military satellite communications require being resilient to
ensure missions’ success. This can be achieved using matrix-
based protection assessment approach based on traditional risk

analysis, where an attack can be assessed in terms of both ease
of attack and impact of attack [304]. Mitigating the following
ﬁve core threats allows the satellite communications to be
free from weak vulnerabilities that can be easily exploited by
attackers: waveform, RF access to enemy, foreign presence,
physical access, and trafﬁc concentration [304].

C. City Management

Big data can facilitate daily activities by using smart infras-
tructures and services. With the increasing number of sensors
deployed in in urban environment either indoor or outdoor,
from smart phones, smart cards, on-board vehicle sensors and
so on, the city is faced with a large amount of information
that need to be exploited to detect different urban dynamic
patterns [305]. For instance, trafﬁc patterns can be analyzed
and routes can be computed to allow people to reach their
destinations faster. In [306], the authors proposed to deploy
road sensors to obtain information on the overall trafﬁc, such
as speed and location of individual vehicles. This information
is then processed using graph algorithms by taking advantage
of big data tools such as Giraph, Spark and Hadoop. This
helps provide real-time intelligent decisions for smart efﬁcient
transportation. Since wireless sensor networks (WSN) are the
main infrastructures for smart cities to monitor and gather
information from the environment, several works have focused
on extending network’s lifetime. For instance in [307], the
authors proposed using software-deﬁned networking (SDN)
controller to reduce WSN trafﬁc and improve decisions mak-
ing. In [243], compressive sensing and consensus ﬁlter were
used to reconstruct signals from fewer sensor nodes, leading
to power savings. Sleep scheduling with renewable energy
resources such as solar harvesting were also suggested in [?] to
prolong WSN lifetime. CPS based big data may also support
localization applications [190], [191].

21

An IoT-based general architecture for smart cities was
presented in [305], which consists of four different layers: 1)
technologies layer consisting of self-conﬁgured and remotely-
controlled sensors and actuators, 2) middleware layer where
data from different sensors are collected to provide context
information, 3) management layer where different data ana-
lytic tools are used to extract information, test hypothesis and
draw conclusions, and 4) services layer consisting of services
provided by smart cities based on the previous layers such
as environmental monitoring, energy efﬁciency in buildings,
intelligent transportation systems an so on.

Safety systems, such as deploying surveillance systems,
are other city management big data applications. A computer
vision deep learning algorithm for human activity recognition
was proposed in [179]. The model is capable of recognizing
twelve types of human activities with high accuracy and
without the need of prior knowledge, which makes it useful
for security monitoring applications. Crowd detection and
surveillance is another safety system big data application.
A target individual needs to be easily inferred from visual
information. In [231], the authors proposed such a framework
that can easily detect target location and update the motion
information to improve the detection.

D. Medical Applications

CPS health systems are foreseen to shape the future of
tele-medicine in different areas such as cardiology, surgery,
patients’ health monitoring, which will signiﬁcantly enhance
the healthcare system by providing timely, efﬁcient and ef-
fective medical decisions for a myriad of health applications
such as diabetes management, blood pressure and heart rhythm
monitoring, elderly support and so on [308]. With 774 million
connected health-related devices [309] by 2020, a large volume
of data from small-scale networks, such as e-health systems
or mobile-health systems, needs to be stored, processed and
analyzed to enable timely intervention and better management
of patients’ health.

With e-health systems becoming widely deployed in hospi-
tals and health centers, research has been focused on efﬁciently
deploying medical body area networks (MBANs) to reduce
interference on medical bands from other devices [310]. In
MBANs, biomedical sensors are placed in the vicinity of
patient’s body or even inside her to sense health-related vital
signals using short-range wireless technologies. The collected
data are then multi-hopped to remote stations, so that medical
staff can efﬁciently monitor patients’ physiological conditions
and disease progression [310]. For instance, in [311], elderly
patients’ health tracking application was proposed, where a
mixed positioning algorithm allows for 24-hour monitoring
of patients’ activities and transmits an alarm to medical staff
through SMS, e-mail or telephone in case of an abnor-
mal event or emergency. However, transmitting this health
information in a timely and energy-efﬁcient manner is of
utmost importance for e-health systems. In [312], a micro
Subscription Management System (µSMS) middleware for e-
health systems was presented. The µSMS platform allows
sensor nodes to exchange information to provide event-driven

services with dynamic memory and variable payload such as
GPS coordinates, Home Context and so on. The designed
architecture achieves lower memory overhead, lower software
components load time and lower event propagation time than
other similar proposals, which are all critical requirements
for energy efﬁciency, reliability and scalability of e-health
systems. The paper [313] proposed locality sensitive hashing
to learn sensor patterns for monitoring health conditions of
dispersed users.

E. Disaster Events Applications

Network resilience and survivability are the utmost
requirements for public safety networks. In case of a disaster
or emergency event,
the people who are ﬁrst on scene
are referred to as ﬁrst responders, and they include law
enforcement, ﬁreﬁghters, medical personnel and others [314].
Some of
the major public safety requirements relate to
the necessity of ﬁrst responders to exchange information
(voice and/or data) in a timely manner [314]. The big data
can be used to support disaster events, such as analyzing
big data from high resolution maps, ﬂoor plans and on-
ﬁeld video transmissions to transmit warning messages
to authorities [315]. The remote sensing big data can be
analyzed using a scalable hybrid parallelism approach to
reduce the analytics execution time [316]. The large amount
of data collected from previous earthquakes can be used
the future service availability areas, which can
to predict
improve preparation and response to such events [317]. A
disaster domain-speciﬁc search engine can be constructed
using big data to make the understanding and preparation of
disaster attacks easier and faster for authorities [318].

F. A Public Safety Case Study Model

Fig. 7 depicts a public safety (PS) model, where the
base station is unavailable due to network failure,
indoor
or underground communications or cell-edge locations. This
fact necessitates that users form a device-to-device (D2D)
network autonomously without assistance of any network
infrastructure. In this model, each D2D cluster sends its PS-
related data ﬁndings
such as maps, videos, pictures and
so on to a command center for data analysis. This can be
done through satellites or by raising in the sky a balloon
with attached 4G eNodeB (AeNB) to restore temporarily
connectivity (Project ABSOLUTE [319]). LTE is suggested as
a technology enabler for PS communications [320]. LTE pro-
vides high rate and very low latency IP connectivity. LTE can
complement existing Private Mobile Radio (PMR) networks
like TETRA/TETRAPOL/Project25. In terms of end-to-end
latency requirement, messages are expected to be delivered
within 5-10 milliseconds (ms) with a reliability of 99.99% of
packets successfully delivered within a time window [321],
[322]. Moreover, the downlink peak data rates are expected
to be over 50 Mbps with an uplink data rate of over 25
Mbps [323]. The command center should be able to analyze
timely, useful and
different data types and then transmit
accurate dynamic messages to each D2D cluster head. The

22

command center can transmit information such as assessment
of the level of assistance needed, emergency notiﬁcation
messages, emergency service providers coordination, and so
on. Each D2D cluster head in turn multicasts this information
to its members for decision making. This poses a challenge:
some users might be far away from the multicast transmitter or
their link quality suffers, which would decrease the coverage
probability of the receiver and might require several re-
transmissions to send the message successfully. Obviously,
there is a trade-off between throughput (or end-to-end delay)
and reliability due to the random transmission errors caused
by the unpredictable behavior of the wireless channel. It is
evident that we need to minimize delay, while maintaining
some good degree of reliability. In what follows, we brieﬂy
derive the end-to-end delay and reliability for public safety
networks.

Let δi be the indicator variable deﬁned as:

δi =

(cid:26)

1 if packet is successfully received by node i
0 otherwise.

The set of nodes that have received successfully in the jth
round of multicasting can be deﬁned as:

N ⋆

j =

i

δi = 1

.

(1)

{

|
In order to minimize the total delay, D, for distributing the
1 (L is the total number of nodes),
j to multicast in the jth round of

data to all nodes, L
we need to select node k⋆
multicasting such that:

−

}

k⋆
j = arg max
j {
i∈N ⋆

min
l /∈N ⋆
j

,

Ri,l}

(2)

where Ri,l is the transmission rate between nodes i and l.
Deﬁne the set of unvisited nodes as Πu and the set of the
visited nodes as Πv Initially, we have Πv = 1, Πu = L
1,
−
and D = 0. In the jth round of multicasting by node k⋆
j , D
gets updated by adding to it the time of last node receiving
the packet successfully as:

D = D + max
i∈ ¯Nj

ti,

(3)

i

{

}

∈

Πu|

δi = 0

where ¯Nj =
, and ti is the minimum access
time of node i. The multicasting rounds continue until either i)
all unvisited nodes become visited, i.e., Πu = Πv, or ii) When
D exceeds a threshold θD, in that case the packet is dropped.
Reliability can be deﬁned as the ability of the network to
perform its required functions for a certain period of time
without service interruption. A link breakage can occur due to
the following reasons:

• The receiver is outside of the transmission range of the

transmitter

• The packet is lost due to channel errors
• The packet is lost due to total delay D exceeding thresh-

old θD.

Assuming users are not moving, as in [324], each D2D
receiver is randomly and independently located around its cor-
responding transmitter with isotropic direction and Rayleigh
distributed distance with probability density function (PDF):

fD(r) = 2πλre−λπr

2

, r

0.

≥

(4)

23

The probability that a user is outside the transmission

2

.

range R of the transmitter can be calculated as pR = 1
R
0 fD(r)dr = e−πλR
Considering log-normal shadow fading, the signal fades:
R
(1) deterministically with a path-loss exponent α, and (2)
stochastically represented by a random variable with zero
mean and a variance σ. Therefore, the probability pe that a
packet is not lost due to channel errors is given in [325]:

−

pe = 1

1
2

+

1
2

−

erf

(cid:18)

βth

−

α

10 log(r)

×
√2σ

,

(cid:19)

(5)

where βth is the minimum threshold required to deliver a
packet between nodes.

Finally, we combine what we have discussed to get the link

reliability as:

RL = pe + pR + pdrop.

(6)

where pdrop =

(D > θD).

P

X. BIG DATA CHALLENGES AND OPEN ISSUES FOR CPS

While ongoing research is focusing on CPS enterprise
development and applications, effective solutions to combat
security ﬂaws have not received the enough attention, which
places question marks on the foreseen integration of CPS in
critical infrastructures. This matter is made worse with CPS
devices having i) computational challenges in ensuring data
conﬁdentiality and privacy protection; ii) the semi- or fully-
autonomous security management [326]; and iii) the high
computational costs of employing cryptography [327]. Low-
complexity and lightweight ciphers such as PRESENT [328]
have been developed; however research efforts should go be-
yond cryptography, especially that such solutions can be costly
in terms of i) latency, ii) power consumption, and iii) key
management complexity [329], [330]. Furthermore, different
CPS applications might have different security perimeters with
a multitude of interactions among devices. This complicates
further the access control decisions, the trustworthiness of
entities, and their authentication management. Therefore, there
is a high need to deﬁne secure interoperation protocols and
strategies for dynamic CPS, where devices from different
applications interact together to complete speciﬁc tasks [331].
Privacy preserving is an important aspect of big data an-
alytics and mining. Homomorphic encryption techniques, as
mentioned in Section VII-B, have been suggested to perform
analysis on encrypted data in cloud. However, they turned out
to be impractical and inefﬁcient in terms of computational
time and overhead for large amount of datasets. Although
anonymization techniques constitute a more efﬁcient solution
for privacy protection big data analytics, further research
efforts are needed to determine their applicability for different
big data types, and their performance evaluation and endurance
in different mining techniques as outlined in Section VI-A.
Moreover, future solutions should be based on the hierarchy
property of many CPS big data applications [222]. This means
that future research should be directed towards proposing
integrated privacy preserving protocols in the modules of
the CPS hierarchical structure that can perform analytical

processes on encrypted variety of big data types in a time-
and cost-efﬁcient manner.

Correctness of CPS is another research area under the
spotlight of attention. Due to dynamic nature of physical envi-
ronment, CPS need to constantly be adapted to new situations
while operating and functioning properly with little or no
human supervision [332]. The use of models can allow the
early detection of failures by simulating different components
of complex designs to verify the integration of the whole
system [333], [334]. CPS components veriﬁcation to ensure
they are working properly or that they meet execution time
requirements is another approach to ensure correctness [335]–
[337]. Future research shall focus on creating robust real-time
anomaly detection and correctness techniques that have low
overhead and implementation costs.

With CPS being employed on a large scale, data access,
routing, transmissions, and processing might consume a sig-
niﬁcant amount of time,
leading to real obstacles in the
way of realizing ultra-reliable and low latency communica-
tions (URLLC), a key feature for emerging 5G technologies.
In URLLC, stringent requirements are placed on latency,
throughput, and availability. Future research should be directed
towards faster data access from the clouds with fewer data re-
transmissions in order to free up resources and reduce latency.
Obviously, there is a trade-off between throughput (or end-
to-end delay) and reliability due to transmission errors that
might be caused by links failure, security policies, caching
misses, scarcity of resources and so on. For instance, cross-
layer designs protocols between different CPS layers (sensing,
middleware, transmission, management and services layers)
can be used in a similar way to the wireless communication
protocols to help optimize different parameters from latency to
reliability and security. An example would be the transmission
layer communicating with the sensing layer about integrating
data ﬁltering aimed at prioritizing the sensed data in the case
of too many re-transmissions.

For faster data collection, research efforts need to shift
towards devices that do not need to preconﬁgure to a network
with dynamic on-the-ﬂy D2D connectivity, and without the
need of controllers or infrastructure deployment. Furthermore,
to extend the communication range among devices, incen-
tivized devices with tokens will replace dedicated relays [338].
In terms of CPS computing, research directions should shift
towards faster data processing via moving data processing
closer to the sources and speeding-up big data handling. For a
faster and efﬁcient CPS analysis, research activities need to be
further conducted on information fusion techniques, especially
that information originates from heterogeneous devices with
varying capabilities. Through perfecting the fusion algorithms,
related information can be aggregated for analysis leading to
higher quality information [339].

As mentioned in this survey, big data analytics is one
of the most important aspects of CPS, as it helps to pave
the way for new opportunities and services, in addition to
enhancing or even optimizing systems’ performance. However,
as discussed in Section III,
the sensed data can originate
from a variety of sources with unstructured formats. Merging
these different data types into single homogeneous structures

is vital to ease and speed up the analysis process so meaning-
ful conclusions can be drawn and automated decisions can
be made [340]. How to homogenize different data sources
remains an open research issue for CPS. Moreover, different
CPS applications might need to collaborate together to achieve
a speciﬁc mission. For instance, the mobile-health application
might need to collaborate with the transportation system to
get an ambulance as fast as possible in the case of patient’s
biomedical sensors revealing an emergency situation. In such
scenarios, data analytics becomes a challenging task as it
requires to be able to put the different analysis fragments
from different CPS applications together to provide broader
conclusions and decisions making.

XI. CONCLUSION

The emerging CPS technologies mutually beneﬁt the tech-
nological advancements in big data processing and analysis.
When combined with artiﬁcial intelligence, machine learning,
and neuromorphic computing techniques, CPS will bring about
new applications, services and opportunities, all envisioned
to be automated with little or without human intervention.
This will help revolutionize the “smart planet” concept, where
smarter water management, smarter healthcare, smarter trans-
portation, smarter energy, and smarter food will create a
radical shift
in our lives. In this survey paper, we have
provided a broad overview of CPS big data collection, storage,
access, caching, routing, processing, and analysis to support
understanding and discovering the challenges facing CPS,
the existing proposed solutions, and the open issues that are
yet to be addressed. Then, we have discussed the security
vulnerabilities of CPS and the different security solutions,
as well as how big data meet green challenges for CPS
systems to address sustainability and environmental concerns.
Finally, some challenges and open issues for CPS have been
addressed.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Atat, “Enabling cyber-physical communication in 5G cellular net-
works: Challenges, solutions and applications,” PhD Thesis, University
of Kansas, USA, 2017.

[2] CISCO, “Fog computing and the internet of things: extend the cloud
to where the things are,” white paper, CISCO, Tech. Rep., 2015.
[3] J. Lee, B. Bagheri, and H.-A. Kao, “A cyber-physical systems archi-
tecture for industry 4.0-based manufacturing systems,” Manufacturing
Letters, vol. 3, pp. 18–23, 2015.

[4] T. Muhonen, “Standardization of industrial internet and iot (iot–internet
of things)–perspective on condition-based maintenance,” University of
Oulu, Finland, 2015.

[5] C. W. Tsai, C. F. Lai, M. C. Chiang, and L. T. Yang, “Data mining for
internet of things: A survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials,
vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 77–97, First 2014.

[6] J. Wu, S. Guo, J. Li, and D. Zeng, “Big data meet green challenges:
Greening big data,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 873–887,
Sept 2016.

[7] J. Wu, S. Guo, H. Huang, W. Liu, and Y. Xiang, “Information and
communications technologies for sustainable development goals: State-
of-the-art, needs and perspectives,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2389–2406, 2018.

[8] J. Wu, I. Bisio, C. Gniady, E. Hossain, M. Valla, and H. Li, “Context-
aware networking and communications: Part 1 [guest editorial],” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 14–15, June 2014.
[9] C. Perera, A. Zaslavsky, P. Christen, and D. Georgakopoulos, “Context
aware computing for the internet of things: A survey,” IEEE Com-
munications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 414–454, First
2014.

24

[10] M. Chi, A. Plaza, J. A. Benediktsson, Z. Sun, J. Shen, and Y. Zhu, “Big
data for remote sensing: Challenges and opportunities,” Proceedings of
the IEEE, vol. 104, no. 11, pp. 2207–2219, Nov 2016.

[11] B. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Z. Ren, J. Ma, and W. Wang, “Energy-efﬁcient
software-deﬁned data collection by participatory sensing,” IEEE Sen-
sors Journal, vol. 16, no. 20, pp. 7315–7324, Oct 2016.

[12] Y. Sun, H. Song, A. J. Jara, and R. Bie, “Internet of things and big data
analytics for smart and connected communities,” IEEE Access, vol. 4,
pp. 766–773, 2016.

[13] B. Guo, C. Chen, D. Zhang, Z. Yu, and A. Chin, “Mobile crowd sensing
and computing: when participatory sensing meets participatory social
media,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 131–137,
February 2016.

[14] M. Chen, S. Mao, and Y. Liu, “Big data: A survey,” Mobile Networks

and Applications, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 171–209, Apr 2014.

[15] P. Derbekoa, S. Dolevb, E. Gudesb, and S. Sharmab, “Security and
privacy aspects in mapreduce on clouds: A survey,” Computer Science
Review, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 1–28, May 2016.

[16] W. Fan and A. Bifet, “Mining big data: Current status, and forecast to
the future,” SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1–5, Apr. 2013.
[Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2481244.2481246
[17] H. Hu, Y. Wen, T. S. Chua, and X. Li, “Toward scalable systems for
big data analytics: A technology tutorial,” IEEE Access, vol. 2, pp.
652–687, 2014.

[18] P. Zadrozny and R. Kodali, Big data analytics using Splunk: Deriving
operational intelligence from social media, machine data, existing data
warehouses, and other real-time streaming sources. Apress, 2013.

[19] M. Wang, B. Li, Y. Zhao, and G. Pu, “Formalizing google ﬁle system,”
in Proc. 2014 IEEE 20th Paciﬁc Rim International Symposium on
Dependable Computing, Nov 2014, pp. 190–191.

[20] P. Derbekoa, S. Dolevb, E. Gudesb, and S. Sharmab, “Security
in mapreduce on clouds,” Comput. Sci.
[Online]. Available:

and privacy aspects
Rev., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 1–28, May 2016.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cosrev.2016.05.001

[21] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The internet of things: A
survey,” Comput. Netw., vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2787–2805, Oct. 2010.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2010.05.010
[22] D. Acharjya and K. Ahmed, “A survey on big data analytics: Chal-
lenges, open research issues and tools,” International Journal of
Advanced Computer Science and Applications, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 511–
518, Feb 2016.

[23] P. Bellavista, A. Corradi, M. Fanelli, and L. Foschini, “A survey
of context data distribution for mobile ubiquitous systems,” ACM
Computing Surveys, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 24:1–24:45, Sep. 2012.
[Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2333112.2333119
[24] X. Zhang, Z. Yang, W. Sun, Y. Liu, S. Tang, K. Xing, and X. Mao, “In-
centives for mobile crowd sensing: A survey,” IEEE Communications
Surveys Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 54–67, Firstquarter 2016.
[25] S. Tamboli and S. S. Patel, “A survey on innovative approach for im-
provement in efﬁciency of caching technique for big data application,”
in Pervasive Computing (ICPC), 2015 International Conference on, Jan
2015, pp. 1–6.

[26] B. Rao and L. Reddy, “Survey on improved scheduling in Hadoop
MapReduce in cloud environments,” International Journal of Computer
Applications, vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 29–33, Nov 2011.

[27] S. Yi, Z. Qin, and Q. Li, “Security and privacy issues of fog computing:
a survey,” in Wireless Algorithms, Systems, and Applications. Springer
International Publishing, 2015, pp. 685–695.

[28] W. Wang

and

Z. Lu,

the
“Survey
smart grid: Survey and challenges,” Comput. Netw., vol. 57,
no.
[Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2012.12.017

1344–1371, Apr.

security

2013.

cyber

pp.

in

5,

[29] A. Beloglazov, R. Buyya, Y. C. Lee, A. Zomaya, and Others, “A taxon-
omy and survey of energy-efﬁcient data centers and cloud computing
systems,” Advances in Computers, vol. 82, no. 2, pp. 47–111, 2011.

[30] Z. Asad and M. A. R. Chaudhry, “A two-way street: Green big data
processing for a greener smart grid,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. PP,
no. 99, pp. 1–11, 2016.

[31] C. Estevez and J. Wu, “Recent advances in green internet of things,” in
Proc. 2015 7th IEEE Latin-American Conference on Communications
(LATINCOM), Nov 2015, pp. 1–5.

[32] J. Wu, S. Guo, J. Li, and D. Zeng, “Big data meet green challenges:
Big data toward green applications,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 10,
no. 3, pp. 888–900, Sept 2016.

[33] J. Shi, J. Wan, H. Yan, and H. Suo, “A survey of cyber-physical
systems,” in Proc. 2011 International Conference on Wireless Com-
munications and Signal Processing (WCSP), Nov 2011, pp. 1–6.

25

[34] R. Chaari, F. Ellouze, A. Koubaa, B. Qureshi, N. Pereira, H. Youssef,
and E. Tovar, “Cyber-physical systems clouds: A survey,” Computer
Networks, vol. 108, pp. 260 – 278, 2016.
[Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1389128616302699

[35] V. Gunes, S. Peter, T. Givargis, and F. Vahid, “A survey on concepts,
applications, and challenges in cyber-physical systems,” KSII Transac-
tions on Internet and Information Systems (TIIS), vol. 8, no. 12, pp.
4242–4268, 2014.

[36] A. P. Nugroho, T. Okayasu, M. Horimoto, D. Arita, T. Hoshi,
H. Kurosaki, K.-i. Yasuba, E. Inoue, Y. Hirai, M. Mitsuoka et al.,
“Development of a ﬁeld environmental monitoring node with over the
air update function,” Agricultural Information Research, vol. 25, no. 3,
pp. 86–95, 2016.

[37] D. N. Chorafas, Business, Marketing, and Management Principles for
IT and Engineering. Boca Raton, FL, USA: Auerbach Publications,
June 22 2011.

[38] L. Sanchez, M. Bauer, J. Lanza, R. Olsen, and M. Girod-Genet, “A
generic context management framework for personal networking envi-
ronments,” in Proc. the 2006 Third Annual International Conference
on Mobile and Ubiquitous Systems: Networking and Services.
Los
Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2006, pp. 1–8.

[39] J. A. ALLAN, “A review of: Remote sensing: Principles and interpre-
tation by FLOYD F. SABINS, JR. (San Francisco: W. H. Freeman,
1978.) [pp. 1-426.],” International Journal of Remote Sensing, vol. 1,
no. 3, pp. 307–308, 1980.

[40] Y. Ma, H. Wu, L. Wang, B. Huang, R. Ranjan, A. Zomaya, and
W. Jie, “Remote sensing big data computing,” Future Gener. Comput.
Syst., vol. 51, no. C, pp. 47–60, Oct. 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2014.10.029

[41] L. Zhang, L. Zhang, and B. Du, “Deep learning for remote sensing
data: A technical tutorial on the state of the art,” IEEE Geoscience and
Remote Sensing Magazine, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 22–40, June 2016.
[42] M. M. U. Rathore, A. Paul, A. Ahmad, B. W. Chen, B. Huang,
and W. Ji, “Real-time big data analytical architecture for remote
sensing application,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth
Observations and Remote Sensing, vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 4610–4621, Oct
2015.

[43] L. Wang, H. Zhong, R. Ranjan, A. Zomaya, and P. Liu, “Estimating
the statistical characteristics of remote sensing big data in the wavelet
transform domain,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Com-
puting, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 324–337, Sept 2014.

[44] H. Xie, X. Tong, W. Meng, D. Liang, Z. Wang, and W. Shi, “A mul-
tilevel stratiﬁed spatial sampling approach for the quality assessment
of remote-sensing-derived products,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics
in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, vol. 8, no. 10, pp.
4699–4713, Oct 2015.

[45] M. A. Alsheikh, D. Niyato, S. Lin, H. p. Tan, and Z. Han, “Mobile big
data analytics using deep learning and apache spark,” IEEE Network,
vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 22–29, May 2016.

[46] X. Zhang, Z. Yi, Z. Yan, G. Min, W. Wang, A. Elmokashﬁ, S. Mahar-
jan, and Y. Zhang, “Social computing for mobile big data,” Computer,
vol. 49, no. 9, pp. 86–90, Sept 2016.

[47] M. Tang, H. Zhu, and X. Mao, “A lightweight social computing ap-
proach to emergency management policy selection,” IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 1075–
1087, Aug 2016.

[48] M. Parameswaran

and A. B. Whinston,

overview,”

An
Information
Systems,
http://aisel.aisnet.org/cais/vol19/iss1/37/

Communications
19,
vol.

of
2007.

the

“Social

computing:
for
Association
[Online]. Available:

[49] H. Ning, H. Liu, J. Ma, L. T. Yang, and R. Huang, “Cybermatics: Cy-
berphysicalsocialthinking hyperspace based science and technology,”
Future generation computer systems, vol. 56, pp. 504–522, March
2016.

[50] S. Chang, H. Zhu, W. Zhang, L. Lu, and Y. Zhu, “Pure: Blind
regression modeling for low quality data with participatory sensing,”
IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 27, no. 4,
pp. 1199–1211, April 2016.

[51] R. B. Messaoud and Y. Ghamri-Doudane, “Fair qoi and energy-
aware task allocation in participatory sensing,” in 2016 IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference, April 2016, pp. 1–6.

[52] J. Wang, Y. Wang, D. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Xiong, S. Helal, Y. He, and
F. Wang, “Fine-grained multi-task allocation for participatory sensing
with a shared budget,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. PP, no. 99,
pp. 1–1, 2016.

[53] L. Liu, W. Wei, D. Zhao, and H. Ma, “Urban resolution: New metric
for measuring the quality of urban sensing,” IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing, vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 2560–2575, Dec 2015.
[54] X. Sun, S. Hu, L. Su, T. F. Abdelzaher, P. Hui, W. Zheng, H. Liu, and
J. A. Stankovic, “Participatory sensing meets opportunistic sharing:
Automatic phone-to-phone communication in vehicles,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Mobile Computing, vol. 15, no. 10, pp. 2550–2563, Oct
2016.

[55] C. Xiang, P. Yang, C. Tian, L. Zhang, H. Lin, F. Xiao, M. Zhang,
and Y. Liu, “Carm: Crowd-sensing accurate outdoor rss maps with
error-prone smartphone measurements,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing, vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 2669–2681, Nov 2016.

[56] L. Wang, D. Zhang, Z. Yan, H. Xiong, and B. Xie, “effsense: A novel
mobile crowd-sensing framework for energy-efﬁcient and cost-effective
data uploading,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics:
Systems, vol. 45, no. 12, pp. 1549–1563, Dec 2015.

[57] E. Zeydan, E. Bastug, M. Bennis, M. A. Kader, I. A. Karatepe, A. S.
Er, and M. Debbah, “Big data caching for networking: moving from
cloud to edge,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 54, no. 9, pp.
36–42, September 2016.

[58] M. Ji, G. Caire, and A. F. Molisch, “Wireless device-to-device caching
networks: Basic principles and system performance,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 176–189, Jan
2016.

[59] K. Poularakis, G. Iosiﬁdis, A. Argyriou, I. Koutsopoulos, and L. Tas-
siulas, “Caching and operator cooperation policies for layered video
content delivery,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2016 - The 35th Annual IEEE
International Conference on Computer Communications, April 2016,
pp. 1–9.

[60] H. Zhao, K. Gai, J. Li, and X. He, “Novel differential schema for
high performance big data telehealth systems using pre-cache,” in High
Performance Computing and Communications (HPCC), 2015 IEEE 7th
International Symposium on Cyberspace Safety and Security (CSS),
2015 IEEE 12th International Conferen on Embedded Software and
Systems (ICESS), 2015 IEEE 17th International Conference on, Aug
2015, pp. 1412–1417.

[61] L. Lundberg, H. Grahn, D. Ilie, and C. Melander, “Cache support in a
high performance fault-tolerant distributed storage system for cloud and
big data,” in Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium Workshop
(IPDPSW), 2015 IEEE International, May 2015, pp. 537–546.
[62] S. G. Kanbargi and S. K. S, “Cache utilization for enhancing ana-
lyzation of big-data increasing the performance of hadoop,” in 2015
International Conference on Trends in Automation, Communications
and Computing Technology (I-TACT-15), vol. 01, Dec 2015, pp. 1–7.
[63] Y. Zhao, J. Wu, and C. Liu, “Dache: A data aware caching for big-data
applications using the mapreduce framework,” Tsinghua Science and
Technology, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 39–50, Feb 2014.

[64] S. C. Suh, U. J. Tanik, J. N. Carbone, and A. Eroglu, Applied cyber-

physical systems. Springer, 2014.

[65] M. Wahler, M. Oriol, and A. Monot, “Real-time multi-core components
for cyber-physical systems,” in Proc.
the 18th International ACM
SIGSOFT Symposium on Component-Based Software Engineering, ser.
CBSE ’15. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2015, pp. 37–42. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2737166.2737176

[66] B. Akesson and K. Goossens, “Architectures and modeling of pre-
dictable memory controllers for improved system integration,” in Proc.
2011 Design, Automation Test in Europe, March 2011, pp. 1–6.
[67] A. Herkersdorf and M. Paulitsch, “Multicore enablement for embed-
ded and cyber physical systems (dagstuhl seminar 13052),” Dagstuhl
Reports, vol. 3, no. 1, 2013.

[68] J. Huang, S. Wang, X. Cheng, and J. Bi, “Big data routing in
d2d communications with cognitive radio capability,” IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 45–51, August 2016.

[69] G. Mone, “Intelligent living,” Commun. ACM, vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 15–
16, Nov. 2014. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2676393
[70] S. Tibken, “Samsung, smartthings and the open door to the smart

home,” cnet CES, 2015.

[71] 3rd Generation Partnership Project, “3GPP speciﬁcation: 37.868; RAN
improvements for machine-type communications,” Tech. Rep., August
2011.

[72] K. Zheng, S. Ou, J. Alonso-Zarate, M. Dohler, F. Liu, and H. Zhu,
“Challenges of massive access in highly dense LTE-advanced networks
with machine-to-machine communications,” IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 12–18, June 2014.
[73] A. Laya, L. Alonso, and J. Alonso-Zarate, “Is the random access chan-
nel of LTE and LTE-A suitable for M2M communications? a survey of

alternatives,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 1,
pp. 4–16, First 2014.

[74] M. Condoluci, L. Militano, A. Orsino, J. Alonso-Zarate, and G. Araniti,
“LTE-direct vs. WiFi-direct for machine-type communications over
LTE-A systems,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE 26th Annual International
Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communications
(PIMRC), Aug 2015, pp. 2298–2302.

[75] G. Rigazzi, N. K. Pratas, P. Popovski, and R. Fantacci, “Aggregation
and trunking of M2M trafﬁc via D2D connections,” in Proc. 2015
IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), June 2015,
pp. 2973–2978.

[76] G. Rigazzi, F. Chiti, R. Fantacci, and C. Carlini, “Multi-hop D2D
networking and resource management scheme for M2M communi-
cations over LTE-A systems,” in Proc. 2014 International Wireless
Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), Aug
2014, pp. 973–978.

[77] S. Wu, R. Atat, N. Mastronarde, and L. Liu, “Improving the cov-
erage and spectral efﬁciency of millimeter-wave cellular networks
using device-to-device relays,” IEEE Transactions on Communications,
vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 2251–2265, May 2018.

[78] N. K. Pratas and P. Popovski, “Zero-outage cellular downlink with
ﬁxed-rate D2D underlay,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communica-
tions, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 3533–3543, July 2015.

[79] C. Zhu, H. Wang, X. Liu, L. Shu, L. T. Yang, and V. C. M. Leung, “A
novel sensory data processing framework to integrate sensor networks
with mobile cloud,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 1125–
1136, Sept. 2016.

[80] B. Luo, W. Liu, and A. Al-Anbuky, “Sustainme if you can: Sustainable
transmission networking design for big data,” in 2016 IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS),
April 2016, pp. 265–270.

[81] L. W. Cheng and S. Y. Wang, “Application-aware SDN routing for big
data networking,” in 2015 IEEE Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM), Dec 2015, pp. 1–6.

[82] L. Cui, F. R. Yu, and Q. Yan, “When big data meets software-deﬁned
networking: Sdn for big data and big data for sdn,” IEEE Network,
vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 58–65, January 2016.

[83] M. Bakillah, S. H. L. Liang, A. Mobasheri, and A. Zipf, “Towards
an efﬁcient routing web processing service through capturing real-
time road conditions from big data,” in Proc. Computer Science and
Electronic Engineering Conference (CEEC), 2013 5th, Sept 2013, pp.
152–155.

[84] M. H. Zaki and T. Sayed, “Automated cyclist data collection under
high density conditions,” IET Intelligent Transport Systems, vol. 10,
no. 5, pp. 361–369, 2016.

[85] C. T. Cheng, N. Ganganath, and K. Y. Fok, “Concurrent data collection
trees for iot applications,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 793–799, April 2017.

[86] S. Chen, X. Zhu, S. Zhang, and J. Wang, “A framework for massive
data transmission in a remote real-time health monitoring system,” in
Proc. 18th International Conference on Automation and Computing
(ICAC), Sept 2012, pp. 1–5.

[87] H. Chao, Y. Chen, J. Wu, and H. Zhang, “Distribution reshaping
for massive access control in cellular networks,” in 2016 84-th IEEE
Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Fall), September 2016, pp. 1–
5.

[88] S. Jabbar, K. R. Malik, M. Ahmad, O. Aldabbas, M. Asif, S. Khalid,
K. Han, and S. H. Ahmed, “A methodology of real-time data fusion for
localized big data analytics,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 24 510–24 520,
April 2018.

[89] A. Akbar, G. Kousiouris, H. Pervaiz, J. Sancho, P. Ta-Shma, F. Carrez,
and K. Moessner, “Real-time probabilistic data fusion for large-scale
iot applications,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 10 015–10 027, February
2018.

[90] T. Kraska, “Finding the needle in the big data systems haystack,” IEEE

Internet Computing, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 84–86, Jan 2013.

[91] D.

J. DeWitt

and M. Stonebraker. Mapreduce: A major
step backwards. Accessed on July 10, 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://databasecolumn.vertica.com/database-innovation/mapreduce-a-major-step-backwards/

[92] D. Wang and J. Liu, “Optimizing big data processing performance in
the public cloud: opportunities and approaches,” IEEE Network, vol. 29,
no. 5, pp. 31–35, September 2015.

[93] M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Grifﬁth, A. D. Joseph, R. Katz, A. Konwinski,
G. Lee, D. Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoica, and M. Zaharia, “A view of
cloud computing,” Commun. ACM, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 50–58, Apr. 2010.
[Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1721654.1721672

26

[94] S. Tang, B. S. Lee, and B. He, “Towards economic fairness for big data
processing in pay-as-you-go cloud computing,” in Proc. 2014 IEEE 6th
International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and Science
(CloudCom), Dec 2014, pp. 638–643.

[95] S. Blanas, J. M. Patel, V. Ercegovac, J. Rao, E. J. Shekita, and
log processing
Y. Tian, “A comparison of
in mapreduce,” in Proc.
the 2010 ACM SIGMOD International
Conference on Management of Data, ser. SIGMOD ’10. New
[Online]. Available:
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2010, pp. 975–986.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1807167.1807273

join algorithms for

[96] A. Destounis, G. S. Paschos, and I. Koutsopoulos, “Streaming big
data meets backpressure in distributed network computation,” in Proc.
IEEE INFOCOM 2016 - The 35th IEEE International Conference on
Computer Communications, April 2016, pp. 1–9.

[97] C. Yang and J. Chen, “A scalable data chunk similarity based compres-
sion approach for efﬁcient big sensing data processing on cloud,” IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. PP, no. 99, pp.
1–1, 2016.

[98] J. M. Lillo-Castellano,

I. Mora-Jimnez, R. Santiago-Mozos,
F. Chavarria-Asso, A. Cano-Gonzalez, A. Garcia-Alberola, and
J. L. Rojo-Alvarez, “Symmetrical compression distance for arrhythmia
discrimination in cloud-based big-data services,” IEEE Journal of
Biomedical and Health Informatics, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 1253–1263,
July 2015.

[99] L. A. Tawalbeh, R. Mehmood, E. Benkhlifa, and H. Song, “Mobile
cloud computing model and big data analysis for healthcare applica-
tions,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 6171–6180, 2016.

[100] M. Whaiduzzaman, A. Gani, and A. Naveed, “Pefc: Performance
enhancement framework for cloudlet in mobile cloud computing,” in
Proc. 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Robotics and Manufac-
turing Automation (ROMA), Dec 2014, pp. 224–229.

[101] D. Zhang, Y. Shou, and J. Xu, “The modeling of big trafﬁc data
processing based on cloud computing,” in Proc. 2016 12th World
Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation (WCICA), June 2016,
pp. 2394–2399.

[102] H. Yeo and C. H. Crawford, “Big data: Cloud computing in genomics
applications,” in Big Data (Big Data), 2015 IEEE International Con-
ference on, Oct 2015, pp. 2904–2906.

[103] I. Zinno, L. Mossucca, S. Elefante, C. D. Luca, V. Casola, O. Terzo,
F. Casu, and R. Lanari, “Cloud computing for earth surface deformation
analysis via spaceborne radar imaging: A case study,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Cloud Computing, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 104–118, Jan 2016.
[104] C. Q. Wu and H. Cao, “Optimizing the performance of big data
workﬂows in multi-cloud environments under budget constraint,” in
Proc. 2016 IEEE International Conference on Services Computing
(SCC), June 2016, pp. 138–145.

[105] L. M. Pham, A. Tchana, D. Donsez, V. Zurczak, P. Y. Gibello, and
N. de Palma, “An adaptable framework to deploy complex applica-
tions onto multi-cloud platforms,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Computing Communication Technologies - Research,
Innovation, and Vision for the Future (RIVF), Jan 2015, pp. 169–174.
[106] H. Li, M. Dong, K. Ota, and M. Guo, “Pricing and repurchasing for
big data processing in multi-clouds,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging
Topics in Computing, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 266–277, April 2016.
[107] X. Li, H. Ma, W. Yao, and X. Gui, “Data-driven and feedback-enhanced
trust computing pattern for large-scale multi-cloud collaborative ser-
vices,” IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, 2015.

[108] S. Wang, A. Zhou, C. H. Hsu, X. Xiao, and F. Yang, “Provision of
data-intensive services through energy- and qos-aware virtual machine
in national cloud data centers,” IEEE Transactions on
placement
Emerging Topics in Computing, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 290–300, April 2016.
[109] J. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Luo, and A. Song, “Efﬁcient location-aware data
placement for data-intensive applications in geo-distributed scientiﬁc
data centers,” Tsinghua Science and Technology, vol. 21, no. 5, pp.
471–481, Oct 2016.

[110] Q. Xia, Z. Xu, W. Liang, and A. Y. Zomaya, “Collaboration- and
in distributed clouds,” IEEE
fairness-aware big data management
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 27, no. 7, pp.
1941–1953, July 2016.

[111] Y. Zhao, Z. Huang, W. Liu, J. Peng, and Q. Zhang, “A combinatorial
double auction based resource allocation mechanism with multiple
rounds for geo-distributed data centers,” in Proc. 2016 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Communications (ICC), May 2016, pp. 1–6.

[112] D. Kumar, J. C. Bezdek, M. Palaniswami, S. Rajasegarar, C. Leckie,
and T. C. Havens, “A hybrid approach to clustering in big data,” IEEE
Transactions on Cybernetics, vol. 46, no. 10, pp. 2372–2385, Oct 2016.

[113] C. K. K. Reddy, K. E. B. Chandrudu, P. R. Anisha, and G. V. S. Raju,
“High performance computing cluster system and its future aspects
in processing big data,” in Proc. 2015 International Conference on
Computational Intelligence and Communication Networks (CICN), Dec
2015, pp. 881–885.

[114] Y. Zhao, L. T. Yang, and R. Zhang, “A tensor-based multiple clustering
approach with its applications in automation systems,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 283–291, 2018.

[115] R. Shettar and B. V. Purohit, “A mapreduce framework to implement
enhanced k-means algorithm,” in Proc. 2015 International Conference
on Applied and Theoretical Computing and Communication Technology
(iCATccT), Oct 2015, pp. 361–363.

[116] J. Karimov and M. Ozbayoglu, “High quality clustering of big data
and solving empty-clustering problem with an evolutionary hybrid
algorithm,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE International Conference on Big Data
(Big Data), Oct 2015, pp. 1473–1478.

[117] J. Karimov, M. Ozbayoglu, and E. Dogdu, “k-means performance
improvements with centroid calculation heuristics both for serial and
parallel environments,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE International Congress on
Big Data, June 2015, pp. 444–451.
Visualization
Tips.
17,

De-
Available:

Accessed
[Online].

[118] Data

2016.

on

cember
http://www.sthda.com/english/wiki/hierarchical-clustering-essentials-unsupervised-machine-learning

[119] I. K. Kabul. (2016, May 26) Understanding data mining clustering
[Online]. Available:

methods. Accessed on December 17, 2016.
http://blogs.sas.com/content/subconsciousmusings/2016/05/26/data-mining-clustering/

[120] Y. Zhao, C. H. Chi, C. Ding, R. Wong, W. Zhao, and C. Wang,
“Hierarchical clustering using homogeneity as similarity measure for
big data analytics,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE International Conference on
Services Computing (SCC), June 2015, pp. 348–354.

[121] T. S. Xu, H. D. Chiang, G. Y. Liu, and C. W. Tan, “Hierarchical k-
means method for clustering large-scale advanced metering infrastruc-
ture data,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. PP, no. 99, pp.
1–1, 2015.

[122] A. AlShami, W. Guo, and G. Pogrebna, “Fuzzy partition technique for
clustering big urban dataset,” in Proc. 2016 SAI Computing Conference
(SAI), July 2016, pp. 212–216.

[123] J. Fu, Y. Liu, Z. Zhang, and F. Xiong, “Big data clustering based
on summary statistics,” in Proc. 2015 First International Conference
on Computational Intelligence Theory, Systems and Applications (CC-
ITSA), Dec 2015, pp. 87–91.

[124] S. Dutta, S. Ghatak, M. Roy, S. Ghosh, and A. K. Das, “A graph
based clustering technique for tweet summarization,” in Proc. 2015
4th International Conference on Reliability, Infocom Technologies and
Optimization (ICRITO) (Trends and Future Directions), Sept 2015, pp.
1–6.

[125] J. Cao and H. Li, “Energy-efﬁcient structuralized clustering for sensor-
based cyber physical systems,” in Proc. 2009 Symposia and Workshops
on Ubiquitous, Autonomic and Trusted Computing, July 2009, pp. 234–
239.

[126] Z. Huang, C. Wang, A. Nayak, and I. Stojmenovic, “Small cluster
in cyber physical systems: Network topology, interdependence and
cascading failures,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed
Systems, vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 2340–2351, Aug 2015.

[127] R. S. Bali and N. Kumar, “Secure clustering for efﬁcient data
dissemination in vehicular cyber-physical systems,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 56, pp. 476 – 492, 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X15002836
[128] Y. Huo, W. Dong, J. Qian, and T. Jing, “Coalition game-based secure
and effective clustering communication in vehicular cyber-physical
system (vcps),” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 3, p. 475, 2017.

[129] G.
in
vol.
1021,
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050915008960

detection
“Pattern
Computer
Science,
[Online]. Available:

Spezzano
cyber-physical
52,

A.
systems,”
–

Vinci,
Procedia
2015.

1016

and

pp.

[130] Z. Tan, A. Jamdagni, X. He, P. Nanda, R. P. Liu, and J. Hu, “Detection
of denial-of-service attacks based on computer vision techniques,”
IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 64, no. 9, pp. 2519–2533, Sept
2015.

[131] J. S. Lee and I. Y. Ko, “Service recommendation for user groups in in-
ternet of things environments using member organization-based group
similarity measures,” in Proc. 2016 IEEE International Conference on
Web Services (ICWS), June 2016, pp. 276–283.

[132] S. Chen, X. Yang, and Y. Tian, “Discriminative hierarchical k-means
tree for large-scale image classiﬁcation,” IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 2200–2205, Sept
2015.

27

[133] H. R. Arkian, R. E. Atani, and S. Kamali, “Fcvca: A fuzzy clustering-
based vehicular cloud architecture,” in Proc. 2014 7th International
Workshop on Communication Technologies for Vehicles (Nets4Cars-
Fall), Oct 2014, pp. 24–28.

[134] R. Poorvadevi and S. Rajalakshmi, “A cluster based signature eval-
uation mechanism for protecting the user data in cloud environment
through fuzzy ordering approach,” in Proc. 2015 International Confer-
ence on Computing and Communications Technologies (ICCCT), Feb
2015, pp. 392–397.

[135] J. C. C. Tseng, J. Y. Gu, P. F. Wang, C. Y. Chen, C. F. Li, and V. S.
Tseng, “A scalable complex event analytical system with incremental
episode mining over data streams,” in Proc. 2016 IEEE Congress on
Evolutionary Computation (CEC), July 2016, pp. 648–655.

[136] L. Yang, K. Wang, C. Xu, C. Zhu, and Y. Sun, “An incremental
learning classiﬁcation algorithm based on forgetting factor for ehealth
networks,” in Proc. 2016 IEEE International Conference on Commu-
nications (ICC), May 2016, pp. 1–6.

[137] D. Fu, T. Zhou, ZeyuZheng, Y. Fu, and Y. Tong, “A modiﬁed-distance-
based minimum spanning tree method for analyzing hierarchical struc-
ture of power generation system,” in 2016 12th World Congress on
Intelligent Control and Automation (WCICA), June 2016, pp. 422–425.
[138] S. Li, G. Oikonomou, T. Tryfonas, T. M. Chen, and L. D. Xu,
“A distributed consensus algorithm for decision making in service-
oriented internet of things,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informat-
ics, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1461–1468, May 2014.

[139] E. Al-sharoa and S. Aviyente, “Evolutionary spectral graph clustering
through subspace distance measure,” in Proc. 2016 IEEE Statistical
Signal Processing Workshop (SSP), June 2016, pp. 1–5.

[140] Y. S. Kang, I. H. Park, J. Rhee, and Y. H. Lee, “Mongodb-based
repository design for iot-generated rﬁd/sensor big data,” IEEE Sensors
Journal, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 485–497, Jan 2016.

[141] R. Cattell, “Scalable sql and nosql data stores,” SIGMOD Rec.,
[Online]. Available:

vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 12–27, May 2011.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1978915.1978919

[142] J. M. Patel, “Operational nosql systems: What’s new and what’s next?”

Computer, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 23–30, Apr 2016.

[143] C. Strauch, U.-L. S. Sites, and W. Kriha, “NoSQL databases,” URL:
http://www. christof-strauch. de/nosqldbs. pdf (łł Łłł 07.11. 2012), 2011.
[144] A. Mohan, M. Ebrahimi, S. Lu, and A. Kotov, “A nosql data model
for scalable big data workﬂow execution,” in Proc. 2016 IEEE Inter-
national Congress on Big Data (BigData Congress), June 2016, pp.
52–59.

[145] F. Bonomi, R. Milito, J. Zhu, and S. Addepalli, “Fog computing and
its role in the internet of things,” in Proceedings of the First Edition
of the MCC Workshop on Mobile Cloud Computing, ser. MCC ’12.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 13–16. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2342509.2342513

[146] I. Stojmenovic and S. Wen, “The fog computing paradigm: Scenarios
and security issues,” in Proc.
the 2014 Federated Conference
on Computer Science and Information Systems, ser. Annals of
Computer Science and Information Systems, M. P. M. Ganzha,
L. Maciaszek, Ed., vol. 2.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–8. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15439/2014F503

[147] . S. Roy, R. Bose, and D. Sarddar, “A fog-based dss model for driving
rule violation monitoring framework on the internet of things,” Journal
of Advanced Science and Technology, vol. 82, p. 23?2, 2015.
[148] N. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. You, H. Ling, P. Liang, and R. Zimmermann,
“Dynamic urban surveillance video stream processing using fog com-
puting,” in Proc. 2016 IEEE Second International Conference on
Multimedia Big Data (BigMM), April 2016, pp. 105–112.

[149] Y. Cao, S. Chen, P. Hou, and D. Brown, “Fast: A fog computing assisted
distributed analytics system to monitor fall for stroke mitigation,” in
Proc. 2015 IEEE International Conference on Networking, Architecture
and Storage (NAS), Aug 2015, pp. 2–11.

[150] R. Craciunescu, A. Mihovska, M. Mihaylov, S. Kyriazakos, R. Prasad,
and S. Halunga, “Implementation of fog computing for reliable e-health
applications,” in Proc. 2015 49th Asilomar Conference on Signals,
Systems and Computers, Nov 2015, pp. 459–463.

[151] R. Brzoza-Woch, M. Konieczny, B. Kwolek, P. Nawrocki,
“Holistic
urgent
support,” Procedia Computer
[Online]. Available:

T. Szydo,
computing
Science, vol. 51, pp. 2387 – 2396, 2015.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050915012223

and K. Zieliski,
decision
for

approach

ﬂood

to

[152] J. K. Zao, T. T. Gan, C. K. You, S. J. R. Mndez, C. E. Chung,
Y. T. Wang, T. Mullen, and T. P. Jung, “Augmented brain computer
interaction based on fog computing and linked data,” in Proc. 2014

28

International Conference on Intelligent Environments, June 2014, pp.
374–377.

[153] T. N. Gia, M. Jiang, A. M. Rahmani, T. Westerlund, P. Liljeberg,
and H. Tenhunen, “Fog computing in healthcare internet of things:
A case study on ecg feature extraction,” in 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Computer and Information Technology; Ubiquitous
Computing and Communications; Dependable, Autonomic and Secure
Computing; Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, Oct 2015, pp. 356–
363.

[154] K. Hong, D. Lillethun, U. Ramachandran, B. Ottenw¨alder, and
B. Koldehofe, “Mobile fog: A programming model for large-scale
applications on the internet of things,” in Proceedings of the Second
ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Mobile Cloud Computing, ser. MCC
[Online].
’13. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2013, pp. 15–20.
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2491266.2491270

[155] B. Ottenw¨alder, B. Koldehofe, K. Rothermel, and U. Ramachandran,
“Migcep: Operator migration for mobility driven distributed complex
event processing,” in Proceedings of
the 7th ACM International
Conference on Distributed Event-based Systems, ser. DEBS ’13.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2013, pp. 183–194. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2488222.2488265

[156] S. Yi, Z. Hao, Z. Qin, and Q. Li, “Fog computing: Platform and
applications,” in 2015 Third IEEE Workshop on Hot Topics in Web
Systems and Technologies (HotWeb), Nov 2015, pp. 73–78.

[157] R. Lu, X. Li, X. Liang, X. Shen, and X. Lin, “Grs: The green, reliability,
and security of emerging machine to machine communications,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 28–35, April 2011.

[158] L. Zhang, W. Jia, S. Wen, and D. Yao, “A man-in-the-middle attack
on 3g-wlan interworking,” in 2010 International Conference on Com-
munications and Mobile Computing, vol. 1, April 2010, pp. 121–125.
[159] H. J. Watson, “Tutorial: Big data analytics: Concepts, technologies,
and applications,” Communication of the Association for Information
Systems, vol. 34, Article 65, pp. 124–168, 2014.

[160] F. Qu, F. Y. Wang, and L. Yang, “Intelligent transportation spaces:
vehicles, trafﬁc, communications, and beyond,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 48, no. 11, pp. 136–142, November 2010.

[161] L. Xu, J. Li, Y. Shu, and J. Peng, “Sar image denoising via clustering-
based principal component analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
and Remote Sensing, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 6858–6869, Nov 2014.
[162] T. C. Chen, S. Sanga, T. Y. Chou, V. Cristini, and M. E. Edgerton,
“Neural network with k-means clustering via pca for gene expression
proﬁle analysis,” in Proc. 2009 WRI World Congress on Computer
Science and Information Engineering, vol. 3, March 2009, pp. 670–
673.

[163] U. M. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, and P. Smyth, “Advances in
knowledge discovery and data mining,” U. M. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-
Shapiro, P. Smyth, and R. Uthurusamy, Eds. Menlo Park, CA, USA:
American Association for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 1996, ch. From Data
Mining to Knowledge Discovery: An Overview, pp. 1–34. [Online].
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=257938.257942

[164] M. Behl and R. Mangharam, “Interactive analytics for smart cities
infrastructures,” in Proc. 2016 1st International Workshop on Science
of Smart City Operations and Platforms Engineering (SCOPE) in
partnership with Global City Teams Challenge (GCTC) (SCOPE -
GCTC), April 2016, pp. 1–6.

[165] V. Kardeby, “Automatic sensor clustering: connectivity for the internet
of things,” in Licentiate thesis, Mid Sweden University, Department of
Information Technology and Media, 2011.

[166] P. Rashidi, D. J. Cook, L. B. Holder, and M. Schmitter-Edgecombe,
“Discovering activities to recognize and track in a smart environment,”
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 23, no. 4,
pp. 527–539, April 2011.

[167] D. Zhang, D. Zhang, H. Xiong, L. T. Yang, and V. Gauthier, “Nextcell:
predicting location using social interplay from cell phone traces,” IEEE
Transactions on Computers, vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 452–463, 2015.
[168] A. Sotsenko, M. Jansen, M. Milrad, and J. Rana, “Using a rich context
model for real-time big data analytics in twitter,” in Proc. 2016 IEEE
4th International Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud
Workshops (FiCloudW), Aug 2016, pp. 228–233.

[169] I. Toure and A. Gangopadhyay, “Real

time big data analytics for
incidents,” in Proc. 2016 IEEE Symposium on

predicting terrorist
Technologies for Homeland Security (HST), May 2016, pp. 1–6.
[170] V.-D. Ta, C.-M. Liu, and G. W. Nkabinde, “Big data stream computing
in healthcare real-time analytics,” in Proc. 2016 IEEE International
Conference on Cloud Computing and Big Data Analysis (ICCCBDA),
July 2016, pp. 37–42.

[171] A. Daniel, A. Paul, and A. Ahmad, “Near real-time big data analysis
on vehicular networks,” in Proc. 2015 International Conference on
Soft-Computing and Networks Security (ICSNS), Feb 2015, pp. 1–7.

[172] K. Wang, J. Mi, C. Xu, L. Shu, and D.-J. Deng, “Real-time big
data analytics for multimedia transmission and storage,” in Proc.
2016 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China
(ICCC), July 2016, pp. 1–6.

[173] B. Zhou, J. Li, S. Guo, J. Wu, Y. Hu, and L. Zhu, “Online internet
trafﬁc measurement and monitoring using spark streaming,” in Proc.
IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2017,
pp. 1–6.

[174] H. Cao, M. Wachowicz, and S. Cha, “Developing an edge computing
platform for real-time descriptive analytics,” in Proc. 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), Dec. 2017, pp. 4546–
4554.

[175] S. Trinks and C. Felden, “Real time analytics state of the art: Potentials
and limitations in the smart factory,” in Proc. 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Big Data (Big Data), Dec. 2017, pp. 4843–4845.
[176] A. R. Ali, “Real-time big data warehousing and analysis framework,”
in Proc. 2018 IEEE 3rd International Conference on Big Data Analysis
(ICBDA), March 2018, pp. 43–49.

[177] S. Liu, J. Yin, X. Wang, W. Cui, K. Cao, and J. Pei, “Online visual
analytics of text streams,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 2451–2466, Nov 2016.
[178] P. Chopade, J. Zhan, K. Roy, and K. Flurchick, “Real-time large-
scale big data networks analytics and visualization architecture,” in
Proc. Emerging Technologies for a Smarter World (CEWIT), 2015 12th
International Conference Expo on, Oct 2015, pp. 1–6.

[179] L. Mo, F. Li, Y. Zhu, and A. Huang, “Human physical activity
recognition based on computer vision with deep learning model,”
in Proc. 2016 IEEE International Instrumentation and Measurement
Technology Conference Proceedings, May 2016, pp. 1–6.

[180] S. Singh and Y. Liu, “A cloud service architecture for analyzing big
monitoring data,” Tsinghua Science and Technology, vol. 21, no. 1, pp.
55–70, Feb 2016.

Center,

daytona:

“Project
2016.

Download
on windows

Iterative
[Online]. Available:

[181] Microsoft
mapreduce
azure,”
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=52431
[182] Y. Yetis, R. G. Sara, B. A. Erol, H. Kaplan, A. Akuzum, and
M. Jamshidi, “Application of big data analytics via cloud computing,”
in Proc. 2016 World Automation Congress (WAC), July 2016, pp. 1–5.
[183] F. J. Clemente-Castell, B. Nicolae, K. Katrinis, M. M. Raﬁque,
R. Mayo, J. C. Fernndez, and D. Loreti, “Enabling big data analytics in
the hybrid cloud using iterative mapreduce,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE/ACM
8th International Conference on Utility and Cloud Computing (UCC),
Dec 2015, pp. 290–299.

[184] M. V. Neves, C. A. F. D. Rose, K. Katrinis, and H. Franke, “Pythia:
Faster big data in motion through predictive software-deﬁned network
optimization at runtime,” in Proc. Parallel and Distributed Processing
Symposium, 2014 IEEE 28th International, May 2014, pp. 82–90.

[185] S.

Islam, J. Keung, K. Lee, and A. Liu, “Empirical prediction
models for adaptive resource provisioning in the cloud,” Future Gener.
Comput. Syst., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 155–162, Jan. 2012. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2011.05.027

[186] R. Buyya, K. Ramamohanarao, C. Leckie, R. N. Calheiros, A. V.
Dastjerdi, and S. Versteeg, “Big data analytics-enhanced cloud comput-
ing: Challenges, architectural elements, and future directions,” in Proc.
2015 IEEE 21st International Conference on Parallel and Distributed
Systems (ICPADS), Dec 2015, pp. 75–84.

[187] Y. Zhong, J. Fang, and X. Zhao, “VegaIndexer: A distributed composite
index scheme for big spatio-temporal sensor data on cloud,” in Proc.
2013 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium
(IGARSS), July 2013, pp. 1713–1716.

[188] D. Zheng, K. Ben, and H. Yuan, “Research of big data space-time
analytics for clouding based contexts-aware IOV applications,” in Proc.
2014 Second International Conference on Advanced Cloud and Big
Data, Nov. 2014, pp. 150–156.

[189] M. Sinda and Q. Liao, “Spatial-temporal anomaly detection using
security visual analytics via entropy graph and eigen matrix,” in Proc.
2017 IEEE 15th Intl Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure
Computing, 15th Intl Conf on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing,
3rd Intl Conf on Big Data Intelligence and Computing and Cyber Sci-
ence and Technology Congress(DASC/PiCom/DataCom/CyberSciTech),
Nov. 2017, pp. 511–518.

[190] G. Ding, Z. Tan, J. Wu, and J. Zhang, “Efﬁcient indoor ﬁngerprint-
ing localization technique using regional propagation model,” IEICE

29

Transactions on Communications, vol. E97-B, no. 8, pp. 1728–1741,
Aug. 2014.

[191] G. Ding, Z. Tan, J. Wu, J. Zeng, and L. Zhang, “Indoor ﬁngerprinting
localization and tracking system using particle swarm optimization and
kalman ﬁlter,” IEICE Transactions on Communications, vol. E98-B,
no. 3, pp. 502–514, Mar. 2015.

[192] K. Singh and R. Kaur, “Hadoop: Addressing challenges of big data,”
in Proc. 2014 IEEE International Advance Computing Conference
(IACC), Feb 2014, pp. 686–689.

[193] I. A. T. Hashem, I. Yaqoob, N. B. Anuar, S. Mokhtar, A. Gani, and
S. Ullah Khan, “The rise of Big Data on cloud computing,” Inf.
Syst., vol. 47, no. C, pp. 98–115, Jan. 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2014.07.006

[194] R. Atat, L. Liu, H. Chen, J. Wu, H. Li, and Y. Yi, “Enabling cyber-
physical communication in 5G cellular networks: challenges, spatial
spectrum sensing, and cyber-security,” IET Cyber-Physical Systems:
Theory Applications, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 49–54, Apr. 2017.

[195] K. Gai, M. Qiu, and H. Zhao, “Security-aware efﬁcient mass distributed
storage approach for cloud systems in big data,” in Proc. 2016 IEEE
2nd International Conference on Big Data Security on Cloud (Big-
DataSecurity), IEEE International Conference on High Performance
and Smart Computing (HPSC), and IEEE International Conference on
Intelligent Data and Security (IDS), April 2016, pp. 140–145.
[196] S. Kang, B. Veeravalli, and K. M. M. Aung, “A security-aware data
placement mechanism for big data cloud storage systems,” in Proc.
2016 IEEE 2nd International Conference on Big Data Security on
Cloud (BigDataSecurity),
IEEE International Conference on High
Performance and Smart Computing (HPSC), and IEEE International
Conference on Intelligent Data and Security (IDS), April 2016, pp.
327–332.

[197] K. Sekar and M. Padmavathamma, “Comparative study of encryption
algorithm over big data in cloud systems,” in Proc. 2016 3rd Interna-
tional Conference on Computing for Sustainable Global Development
(INDIACom), March 2016, pp. 1571–1574.

[198] C. J. DOrazio, K.-K. R. Choo, and L. T. Yang, “Data exﬁltration from
internet of things devices: iOS devices as case studies,” IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 524–535, April 2017.

[199] J. Ni, X. Lin, K. Zhang, Y. Yu, and X. S. Shen, “Secure outsourced data
transfer with integrity veriﬁcation in cloud storage,” in 2016 IEEE/CIC
International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC), July
2016, pp. 1–6.

[200] opendedup. (2016) Accessed on July 1, 2017. [Online]. Available:

http://opendedup.org/

[201] D. T. Meyer and W. J. Bolosky, “A study of practical deduplication,”
in the 9th USENIX conference on File and stroage technologies, Feb.
2011, pp. 14:1–14:20.

[202] Z. Yan, W. Ding, X. Yu, H. Zhu, and R. H. Deng, “Deduplication on
encrypted big data in cloud,” IEEE Transactions on Big Data, vol. 2,
no. 2, pp. 138–150, June 2016.

[203] Y. Gahi, M. Guennoun, and H. T. Mouftah, “Big data analytics: Secu-
rity and privacy challenges,” in 2016 IEEE Symposium on Computers
and Communication (ISCC), June 2016, pp. 952–957.

[204] S. Rao, S. N. Suma, and M. Sunitha, “Security solutions for big data
analytics in healthcare,” in Advances in Computing and Communication
Engineering (ICACCE), 2015 Second International Conference on,
May 2015, pp. 510–514.

[205] T. Mahmood and U. Afzal, “Security analytics: Big data analytics for
cybersecurity: A review of trends, techniques and tools,” in Information
Assurance (NCIA), 2013 2nd National Conference on, Dec 2013, pp.
129–134.

[206] Y. He, F. R. Yu, N. Zhao, H. Yin, H. Yao, and R. C. Qiu, “Big data
analytics in mobile cellular networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 1985–
1996, 2016.

[207] Y. Zhao, L. T. Yang, and J. Sun, “A secure high-order CFS algorithm
internet of things,” IEEE Transactions on

on clouds for industrial
Industrial Informatics, vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 3766–3774, 2018.

[208] D. He, S. Chan, Y. Zhang, C. Wu, and B. Wang, “How effective are
the prevailing attack-defense models for cybersecurity anyway?” IEEE
Intelligent Systems, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 14–21, Sept 2014.

[209] B. Ristic, “Detecting anomalies from a multitarget tracking output,”
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 50, no. 1,
pp. 798–803, January 2014.

[210] E. Rocha, P. Salvador, and A. Nogueira, “Detection of illicit network
activities based on multivariate gaussian ﬁtting of multi-scale trafﬁc
characteristics,” in 2011 IEEE International Conference on Communi-
cations (ICC), June 2011, pp. 1–6.

[211] L. Jia, M. Li, P. Zhang, Y. Wu, and H. Zhu, “Sar image change detection
based on multiple kernel k-means clustering with local-neighborhood
information,” IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters, vol. 13,
no. 6, pp. 856–860, June 2016.

[212] J. Murphree, “Machine learning anomaly detection in large systems,”

in 2016 IEEE AUTOTESTCON, Sept 2016, pp. 1–9.

[213] Y. Yuan and K. Jia, “A distributed anomaly detection method of opera-
tion energy consumption using smart meter data,” in 2015 International
Conference on Intelligent Information Hiding and Multimedia Signal
Processing (IIH-MSP), Sept 2015, pp. 310–313.

[214] T. Plantard, W. Susilo, and Z. Zhang, “Fully homomorphic encryption
using hidden ideal lattice,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics
and Security, vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 2127–2137, Dec 2013.

[215] H. Kumarage, I. Khalil, A. Alabdulatif, Z. Tari, and X. Yi, “Secure data
analytics for cloud-integrated internet of things applications,” IEEE
Cloud Computing, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 46–56, Mar 2016.

[216] Y. Li, Z. L. Jiang, X. Wang, and S. M. Yiu, “Privacy-preserving id3 data
mining over encrypted data in outsourced environments with multiple
keys,” in Proc. 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computational
Science and Engineering (CSE) and IEEE International Conference on
Embedded and Ubiquitous Computing (EUC), vol. 1, July 2017, pp.
548–555.

[217] S. Qiu, B. Wang, M. Li, J. Liu, and Y. Shi, “Toward practical privacy-
preserving frequent itemset mining on encrypted cloud data,” IEEE
Transactions on Cloud Computing, 2017.

[218] R. Lu, H. Zhu, X. Liu, J. K. Liu, and J. Shao, “Toward efﬁcient and
privacy-preserving computing in big data era,” IEEE Network, vol. 28,
no. 4, pp. 46–50, July 2014.

surveillance,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE International Conference on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), Oct 2015, pp. 1827–1832.

[232] P. Sarigiannidis, E. Karapistoli, and A. A. Economides, “Visiot: A
threat visualisation tool for iot systems security,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE
International Conference on Communication Workshop (ICCW), June
2015, pp. 2633–2638.

[233] D. Takaishi, H. Nishiyama, N. Kato, and R. Miura, “Toward energy
efﬁcient big data gathering in densely distributed sensor networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, vol. 2, no. 3,
pp. 388–397, Sept 2014.

[234] Z. Asad, M. A. R. Chaudhry, and D. Malone, “Greener data exchange
in the cloud: A coding-based optimization for big data processing,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 34, no. 5,
pp. 1360–1377, May 2016.

[235] A. Das, C. Lumezanu, Y. Zhang, V. Singh, G. Jiang, and C. Yu,
“Transparent and ﬂexible network management for big data processing
in the cloud,” in Proc. the 5th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in
Cloud Computing. Berkeley, CA: USENIX, 2013. [Online]. Available:
https://www.usenix.org/conference/hotcloud13/workshop-program/presentations/Das

[236] D. Perino, M. Varvello, and K. P. N. Puttaswamy, “Icn-re: Redundancy
elimination for information-centric networking,” in Proc. the Second
Edition of the ICN Workshop on Information-centric Networking, ser.
ICN ’12. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 91–96. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2342488.2342508

[237] C. Yan, Y. Song, J. Wang, and W. Guo, “Eliminating the redundancy
in mapreduce-based entity resolution,” in Cluster, Cloud and Grid
Computing (CCGrid), 2015 15th IEEE/ACM International Symposium
on, May 2015, pp. 1233–1236.

[219] A. Chakravorty, T. Wlodarczyk, and C. Rong, “Privacy preserving data
analytics for smart homes,” in Proc. 2013 IEEE Security and Privacy
Workshops, May 2013, pp. 23–27.

[238] K. Lee, D. Kim, and I. Shin, “Reboost: Improving throughput in wire-
less networks using redundancy elimination,” IEEE Communications
Letters, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–1, 2016.

[220] T. M. Truta and B. Vinay, “Privacy protection: p-sensitive k-anonymity
property,” in Proc. 22nd International Conference on Data Engineering
Workshops (ICDEW’06), 2006, pp. 94–94.

[239] N. Li, J. C. Hou, and L. Sha, “Design and analysis of an mst-
based topology control algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 1195–1206, May 2005.

[221] Z. Gheid and Y. Challal, “An efﬁcient and privacy-preserving similarity
evaluation for big data analytics,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE/ACM 8th
International Conference on Utility and Cloud Computing (UCC), Dec
2015, pp. 281–289.

[222] Y. T. Lee, W. H. Hsiao, Y. S. Lin, and S. C. T. Chou, “Privacy-
preserving data analytics in cloud-based smart home with community
hierarchy,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, vol. 63, no. 2,
pp. 200–207, May 2017.

[223] S. Chen, M. Ma, and Z. Luo, “An authentication framework for
multi-domain machine-to-machine communication in cyber-physical
systems,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), Dec
2015, pp. 1–6.

[224] N. Tamani and Y. Ghamri-Doudane, “Towards a user privacy preser-
vation system for iot environments: a habit-based approach,” in Proc.
2016 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE),
July 2016, pp. 2425–2432.

[225] V. Sivaraman, H. H. Gharakheili, A. Vishwanath, R. Boreli, and
O. Mehani, “Network-level security and privacy control for smart-
home iot devices,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE 11th International Conference
on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications
(WiMob), Oct 2015, pp. 163–167.

[226] C. Liu, S. Ghosal, Z. Jiang, and S. Sarkar, “An unsupervised spatiotem-
poral graphical modeling approach to anomaly detection in distributed
cps,” in Proc. 2016 ACM/IEEE 7th International Conference on Cyber-
Physical Systems (ICCPS), April 2016, pp. 1–10.

[227] P. Y. Chen, S. Yang, and J. A. McCann, “Distributed real-time anomaly
detection in networked industrial sensing systems,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Electronics, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 3832–3842, June 2015.

[228] Y. Kwon, H. K. Kim, Y. H. Lim, and J. I. Lim, “A behavior-based
intrusion detection technique for smart grid infrastructure,” in Proc.
2015 IEEE Eindhoven PowerTech, June 2015, pp. 1–6.

[229] H. H. Pajouh, R. Javidan, R. Khayami, D. Ali, and K. K. R. Choo,
“A two-layer dimension reduction and two-tier classiﬁcation model for
anomaly-based intrusion detection in iot backbone networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, vol. PP, no. 99, pp.
1–1, 2016.

[230] H. Sedjelmaci, S. M. Senouci, and M. Al-Bahri, “A lightweight
anomaly detection technique for low-resource iot devices: A game-
theoretic methodology,” in Proc. 2016 IEEE International Conference
on Communications (ICC), May 2016, pp. 1–6.

[231] M. S. Zitouni, J. Dias, M. Al-Mualla, and H. Bhaskar, “Hierarchical
crowd detection and representation for big data analytics in visual

[240] K. Miyao, H. Nakayama, N. Ansari, and N. Kato, “Ltrt: An efﬁcient
and reliable topology control algorithm for ad-hoc networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 6050–
6058, December 2009.

[241] H. Lin, L. Wang, and R. Kong, “Energy efﬁcient clustering protocol for
large-scale sensor networks,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 15, no. 12,
pp. 7150–7160, Dec 2015.

[242] L. Kong, D. Zhang, Z. He, Q. Xiang, J. Wan, and M. Tao, “Embracing
big data with compressive sensing: a green approach in industrial
wireless networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 54, no. 10,
pp. 53–59, October 2016.

[243] Z. Zhao, J. Feng, and B. Peng, “A green distributed signal reconstruc-
tion algorithm in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp.
5908–5917, 2016.

[244] Y. Simmhan, S. Aman, A. Kumbhare, R. Liu, S. Stevens, Q. Zhou, and
V. Prasanna, “Cloud-based software platform for big data analytics in
smart grids,” Computing in Science Engineering, vol. 15, no. 4, pp.
38–47, July 2013.

[245] K. Li, L. Shu, M. Mukherjee, D. Wang, and L. Hu, “Prolonging
network lifetime with sleep scheduling for solar harvesting industrial
wsns,” in Proc. 2016 IEEE 18th International Conference on High Per-
formance Computing and Communications; IEEE 14th International
Conference on Smart City; IEEE 2nd International Conference on Data
Science and Systems (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS), Dec 2016, pp. 1532–
1533.

[246] M. Shojafar, C. Canali, R. Lancellotti, and J. Abawajy, “Adaptive
computing-plus-communication optimization framework for multime-
dia processing in cloud systems,” IEEE Transactions on Cloud Com-
puting, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–1, 2016.
-

saving
[247] H. Chao
in
(m2m)
communications,” in Machine-to-machine (M2M) Communications,
Oxford: Woodhead
C. Antn-Haro
Publishing,
[Online]. Available:
–
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9781782421023000150

and M. Dohler, Eds.
290.
269

machine-to-machine

optimizing

networks

J. Wu,

“15
for

cellular

power

2015,

and

pp.

[248] H. Chao, Y. Chen, and J. Wu, “Power saving for machine to machine
communications in cellular networks,” in Proc. 2011 IEEE GLOBE-
COM Workshops (GC Wkshps), Dec 2011, pp. 389–393.

[249] P. Mahadevan, P. Sharma, S. Banerjee, and P. Ranganathan, “A power
benchmarking framework for network devices,” in Proc. the 8th Inter-
national IFIP-TC 6 Networking Conference, ser. NETWORKING ’09.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 795–808.

30

[250] X. Wang, Y. Yao, X. Wang, K. Lu, and Q. Cao, “Carpo: Correlation-
aware power optimization in data center networks,” in Proc. 2012
Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM, March 2012, pp. 1125–1133.

[251] B. Heller, S. Seetharaman, P. Mahadevan, Y. Yiakoumis, P. Sharma,
S. Banerjee, and N. McKeown, “Elastictree: Saving energy in data
center networks,” in Proc. the 7th USENIX Conference on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation, ser. NSDI’10. Berkeley, CA,
USA: USENIX Association, 2010, pp. 17–17. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1855711.1855728

[252] Y. Zhang and N. Ansari, “Hero: Hierarchical energy optimization for
data center networks,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 406–
415, June 2015.

[253] Y. Han, S. s. Seo, J. Li, J. Hyun, J. H. Yoo, and J. W. K. Hong,
“Software deﬁned networking-based trafﬁc engineering for data center
networks,” in Proc. 2014 16th Asia-Paciﬁc Network Operations and
Management Symposium (APNOMS), Sept 2014, pp. 1–6.

[254] L. Wang, F. Zhang, K. Zheng, A. V. Vasilakos, S. Ren, and Z. Liu,
“Energy-efﬁcient ﬂow scheduling and routing with hard deadlines
in data center networks,” in Proc. 2014 IEEE 34th International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), June 2014,
pp. 248–257.

[255] H. Zhang, K. Chen, W. Bai, D. Han, C. Tian, H. Wang, H. Guan,
and M. Zhang, “Guaranteeing deadlines for inter-data center transfers,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–17,
2016.

[256] J. Zhang, K. Li, D. Guo, H. Qi, W. Li, and Y. Jin, “Mdfs: Deadline-
driven ﬂow scheduling scheme in multi-resource environments,” IEEE
Transactions on Multi-Scale Computing Systems, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 207–
219, Oct 2015.

[257] L. Wang, F. Zhang, J. A. Aroca, A. V. Vasilakos, K. Zheng, C. Hou,
D. Li, and Z. Liu, “Greendcn: A general framework for achieving
energy efﬁciency in data center networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–15, January 2014.

[258] E. Renault, “Parallel execution of for loops using checkpointing
techniques,” in Proc. the 2005 International Conference on Parallel
Processing Workshops, ser. ICPPW ’05. Washington, DC, USA:
IEEE Computer Society, 2005, pp. 313–319. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICPPW.2005.65

[259] L. Mereuta and E. Renault, “Checkpointing aided parallel execution
model and analysis,” in Proc. the Third International Conference on
High Performance Computing and Communications, ser. HPCC’07.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2007, pp. 707–717. [Online].
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2401945.2402023
[260] . Renault and S. Boumerdassi, “Towards an energy-efﬁcient tool for
processing the big data,” in Proc. 2014 International Conference on
Future Internet of Things and Cloud (FiCloud), Aug 2014, pp. 448–
452.

[261] A. Katal, M. Wazid, and R. H. Goudar, “Big data: Issues, challenges,
tools and good practices,” in Contemporary Computing (IC3), 2013
Sixth International Conference on, Aug 2013, pp. 404–409.

[262] X. Tong, C. Kang, and Q. Xia, “Smart metering load data compression
based on load feature identiﬁcation,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid,
vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 2414–2422, Sept 2016.

[263] S. W. Jun, K. E. Fleming, M. Adler, and J. Emer, “Zip-io: Archi-
tecture for application-speciﬁc compression of big data,” in Field-
Programmable Technology (FPT), 2012 International Conference on,
Dec 2012, pp. 343–351.

[264] L. Tian, H. Wang, Q. Tang, and Y. Zhou, “Surveillance source com-
pression with background modeling for video big data,” in 2016 IEEE
International Conferences on Big Data and Cloud Computing (BD-
Cloud), Social Computing and Networking (SocialCom), Sustainable
Computing and Communications (SustainCom) (BDCloud-SocialCom-
SustainCom), Oct 2016, pp. 105–110.

[265] H. Chao, Y. Chen, and J. Wu, “Power saving for machine to machine
communications in cellular networks,” in 2011 IEEE GLOBECOM
Workshops (GC Wkshps, December 2011, pp. 389–393.

[266] H. Chen, L. Liu, T. Novlan, J. D. Matyjas, B. L. Ng, and J. Zhang,
“Spatial spectrum sensing-based device-to-device cellular networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 15, no. 11, pp.
7299–7313, Nov 2016.

[267] K. Yang, S. Martin, C. Xing, J. Wu, and R. Fan, “Energy-efﬁcient
power control for device-to-device communications.” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 3208–3220,
December 2016.

[268] Y. Xu, S. Jiang, and J. Wu, “Towards energy efﬁcient device-to-device
content dissemination in cellular networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp.
25 816–25 828, 2018.

31

[269] A. and H. Y. Kong, “Energy efﬁcient cooperative leach protocol for
wireless sensor networks,” Journal of Communications and Networks,
vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 358–365, Aug 2010.

[270] K. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Sun, S. Guo, and J. Wu, “Green industrial
internet of things architecture: An energy-efﬁcient perspective,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 48–54, December 2016.
[271] R. Atat, L. Liu, J. Wu, J. Ashdown, and Y. Yi, “Green massive traf-
ﬁc ofﬂoading for cyber-physical systems over heterogeneous cellular
networks,” Mobile Networks and Applications, pp. 1–9, 2018.
[272] A. Greenberg, J. Hamilton, D. A. Maltz, and P. Patel, “The cost
of a cloud: Research problems in data center networks,” SIGCOMM
Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 68–73, Dec. 2008.
[Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1496091.1496103
[273] H. Liu, B. Liu, L. T. Yang, M. Lin, Y. Deng, K. Bilal, and S. U. Khan,
“Thermal-aware and DVFS-enabled big data task scheduling for data
centers,” IEEE Transactions on Big Data, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 177–190,
2018.

[274] H. Ayyalasomayajula, E. Gabriel, P. Lindner, and D. Price, “Air
quality simulations using big data programming models,” in 2016 IEEE
Second International Conference on Big Data Computing Service and
Applications (BigDataService), March 2016, pp. 182–184.

[275] J. Y. Zhu, C. Sun, and V. O. K. Li, “Granger-causality-based air
quality estimation with spatio-temporal (s-t) heterogeneous big data,”
in 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops
(INFOCOM WKSHPS), April 2015, pp. 612–617.

[276] J. Y. Zhu, Y. Zheng, X. Yi, and V. O. K. Li, “A gaussian bayesian model
to identify spatio-temporal causalities for air pollution based on urban
big data,” in 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Communications
Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), April 2016, pp. 3–8.

[277] M. Fingas and C. Brown, “Review of oil spill remote sensing,” Marine
Pollution Bulletin, vol. 83, no. 1, pp. 9 – 23, 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0025326X14002021
[278] G. Suciu, V. Suciu, C. Dobre, and C. Chilipirea, “Tele-monitoring
system for water and underwater environments using cloud and big
data systems,” in Proc. 2015 20th International Conference on Control
Systems and Computer Science, May 2015, pp. 809–813.

new york

[279] Y. Zheng, T. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu, and E. Chang,
data,”
city’s
“Diagnosing
in Proc.
on
Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing, ser. UbiComp ’14. New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2014, pp. 715–725.
[Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2632048.2632102

ubiquitous
Joint Conference

the 2014 ACM International

noises with

[280] S. Hachem, V. Mallet, R. Ventura, A. Pathak, V. Issarny, P. G. Raverdy,
and R. Bhatia, “Monitoring noise pollution using the urban civics
middleware,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE First International Conference on Big
Data Computing Service and Applications (BigDataService), March
2015, pp. 52–61.

[281] S. Bera, S. Misra, and M. S. Obaidat, “Energy-efﬁcient smart metering
for green smart grid communication,” in Proc. 2014 IEEE Global
Communications Conference, Dec 2014, pp. 2466–2471.

[282] X. Li, C. P. Bowers, and T. Schnier, “Classiﬁcation of energy con-
sumption in buildings with outlier detection,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 3639–3644, Nov 2010.

[283] C. H. Lee and C. H. Wu, “Collecting and mining big data for electric
vehicle systems using battery modeling data,” in Proc. 2015 12th In-
ternational Conference on Information Technology - New Generations
(ITNG), April 2015, pp. 626–631.

J. Housell,
for

“Cloud-based
data
[284] Y. B. Qin,
smart grid management,”
analytics
in Proc.
on Cloud and
Autonomic Computing, ser. ICCAC ’14. Washington, DC, USA:
IEEE Computer Society, 2014, pp. 97–100.
[Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICCAC.2014.39

framework
the 2014 International Conference

and I. Rodero,
autonomic

[285] F. Saremi, O. Fatemieh, H. Ahmadi, H. Wang, T. Abdelzaher, R. Ganti,
H. Liu, S. Hu, S. Li, and L. Su, “Experiences with greengps–fuel-
efﬁcient navigation using participatory sensing,” IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 672–689, March 2016.
[286] E. B. Hamida, H. Noura, and W. Znaidi, “Security of cooperative intel-
ligent transport systems: Standards, threats analysis and cryptographic
countermeasures,” Electronics, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 380–423, 2015.

[287] Environmental
cessed
http://www.ge3s.org/service/environmental-monitoring/

Accessed
[Online].

monitoring.

December

GE3S.

2017.

on

1,

on
Ac-
Available:

[288] Defense

industry

remote management

-
Remote Management

Industry

fense
cessed
https://www.wti.com/t-defense-remote-management-application.aspx

Application.

December

[Online].

2017.

on

1,

application. De-
Ac-
Available:

[289] Smart
cessed
http://www.facilitiesbooking.com/smart-facilities
[290] Naonworks. Accessed on January 10, 2018.

facilities.
on

Facilities
1,

December

Booking

2017.

System.

Ac-
Available:

[Online].

[Online]. Available:

http://www.naonworks.com/old/inc html/sub2 3.html

[291] Mp08

comunicacions
June

industrials
1,

Accessed
2018.
https://sites.google.com/site/fcazorlay/mp08

on

-

francesc

[Online].

cazorla.
Available:

[292] J. Baek, Q. H. Vu, J. K. Liu, X. Huang, and Y. Xiang, “A secure cloud
computing based framework for big data information management of
smart grid,” IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing, vol. 3, no. 2, pp.
233–244, April 2015.

[293] A. Ukil and R. Zivanovic, “Automated analysis of power systems
disturbance records: Smart grid big data perspective,” in Proc. 2014
IEEE Innovative Smart Grid Technologies - Asia (ISGT ASIA), May
2014, pp. 126–131.

[294] J. Yang, J. Zhao, F. Wen, W. Kong, and Z. Dong, “Mining the big
data of residential appliances in the smart grid environment,” in Proc.
2016 IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM), July
2016, pp. 1–5.

[295] L. Liu and Z. Han, “Multi-block admm for big data optimization in
smart grid,” in Proc. 2015 International Conference on Computing,
Networking and Communications (ICNC), Feb 2015, pp. 556–561.

[296] S. Cui, Z. Han, S. Kar, T. T. Kim, H. V. Poor, and A. Tajer,
“Coordinated data-injection attack and detection in the smart grid: A
detailed look at enriching detection solutions,” IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 106–115, Sept 2012.

[297] A. Yassine, A. A. N. Shirehjini, and S. Shirmohammadi, “Smart meters
big data: Game theoretic model for fair data sharing in deregulated
smart grids,” IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 2743–2754, 2015.

[298] X. He, Q. Ai, R. C. Qiu, W. Huang, L. Piao, and H. Liu, “A big data
architecture design for smart grids based on random matrix theory,”
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 674–686, March
2017.

[299] J. Wu, K. Ota, M. Dong, J. Li, and H. Wang, “Big data analysis based
security situational awareness for smart grid,” IEEE Transactions on
Big Data, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–1, 2017.

[300] K. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Hu, Y. Sun, D. J. Deng, A. Vinel, and
Y. Zhang, “Wireless big data computing in smart grid,” IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 58–64, April 2017.

[301] K. Hamedani, L. Liu, A. Rachad, J. Wu, and Y. Yi, “Reservoir
computing meets smart grids: Attack detection using delayed feedback
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 2017.
[302] A. A. Yavuz, “An efﬁcient real-time broadcast authentication scheme
for command and control messages,” IEEE Transactions on Informa-
tion Forensics and Security, vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 1733–1742, Oct 2014.
[303] V. Nguyen, M. Guirguis, and G. Atia, “A unifying approach for the
identiﬁcation of application-driven stealthy attacks on mobile cps,”
in Proc. 2014 52nd Annual Allerton Conference on Communication,
Control, and Computing (Allerton), Sept 2014, pp. 1093–1101.
[304] G. M. Lehto, G. Edlund, T. Smigla, and F. Aﬁnidad, “Protection eval-
uation framework for tactical satcom architectures,” in Proc. MILCOM
2013 - 2013 IEEE Military Communications Conference, Nov 2013,
pp. 1008–1013.

[305] M. V. Moreno, F. Terroso-Saenz, A. Gonzalez-Vidal, M. Valdez-Vela,
A. F. Skarmeta, M. A. Zamora, and V. Chang, “Applicability of big
data techniques to smart cities deployments,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 800–809, April 2017.
[306] M. M. Rathore, A. Ahmad, A. Paul, and G. Jeon, “Efﬁcient graph-
oriented smart transportation using internet of things generated big
data,” in Proc. 2015 11th International Conference on Signal-Image
Technology Internet-Based Systems (SITIS), Nov 2015, pp. 512–519.
[307] B. T. de Oliveira and C. B. Margi, “Distributed control plane archi-
tecture for software-deﬁned wireless sensor networks,” in Proc. 2016
IEEE International Symposium on Consumer Electronics (ISCE), Sept
2016, pp. 85–86.

[308] A. Pantelopoulos and N. G. Bourbakis, “A survey on wearable sensor-
based systems for health monitoring and prognosis,” IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews),
vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 1–12, Jan 2010.

[309] E. Kartsakli, A. S. Lalos, A. Antonopoulos, S. Tennina, M. D. Renzo,
L. Alonso, and C. Verikoukis, “A survey on M2M systems for mhealth:
A wireless communications perspective,” Sensors, vol. 14, no. 10, pp.
18 009–18 052, 2014.

[310] M. R. Yuce, “Implementation of wireless body area networks
systems,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical,

for healthcare

vol. 162, no. 1, pp. 116 – 129, 2010.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0924424710002657

[Online]. Available:

[311] H. Yan, H. Huo, Y. Xu, and M. Gidlund, “Wireless sensor network
based e-health system - implementation and experimental results,”
IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 2288–
2295, November 2010.

[312] J. F. Martinez, M. S. Familiar, I. Corredor, A. B. Garcia, S. Bravo,
and L. Lopez, “Composition and deployment of e-health services over
wireless sensor networks,” Mathematical and Computer Modelling,
vol. 53, no. 3-4, pp. 485–503, 2011, telecommunications Software En-
gineering: Emerging Methods, Models and Tools. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0895717710001548

[313] P. Jiang, J. Winkley, C. Zhao, R. Munnoch, G. Min, and L. T. Yang, “An
intelligent information forwarder for healthcare big data systems with
distributed wearable sensors,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 10, no. 3,
pp. 1147–1159, Sept 2016.

[314] G. Baldini, S. Karanasios, D. Allen, and F. Vergari, “Survey of wireless
communication technologies for public safety,” IEEE Communications
Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 619–641, Feb. 2014.
[315] D. Cui, “Risk early warning index system in the ﬁeld of public safety
in big data era,” in Proc. 2015 Sixth International Conference on
Intelligent Systems Design and Engineering Applications (ISDEA), Aug
2015, pp. 704–707.

[316] U. M. Bhangale, K. R. Kurte, S. S. Durbha, R. L. King, and N. H.
Younan, “Big data processing using hpc for remote sensing disaster
data,” in Proc. 2016 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Symposium (IGARSS), July 2016, pp. 5894–5897.

[317] L. Zhong, K. Takano, Y. Ji, and S. Yamada, “Big data based service
area estimation for mobile communications during natural disasters,”
in Proc. 2016 30th International Conference on Advanced Information
Networking and Applications Workshops (WAINA), March 2016, pp.
687–692.

[318] P. Tin, T. T. Zin, T. Toriu, and H. Hama, “An integrated framework
for disaster event analysis in big data environments,” in Proc. 2013
Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Information Hiding and
Multimedia Signal Processing, Oct 2013, pp. 255–258.

[319] FP7 Project ABSOLUTE. Accessed on July 10, 2017. [Online].

Available: http://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/106035 en.html

[320] R. Ferrus, O. Sallent, G. Baldini, and L. Goratti, “LTE: the technology
driver for future public safety communications,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 154–161, October 2013.

[321] K. Flynn, “ETSI Summit on Future Mobile and Standards for 5G,

3GPP, nov. 2013.”

[322] A. Lucent, “Government technology how-to guide: for LTE in public

safety,” Government Technology Magazine, 2010.

[323] D. Witkowski, “Effectively testing 700 MHz public safety LTE
broadband and P25 narrowband networks,” White paper by Anritsu
Company, Accessed on July 10, 2017. [Online]. Available http://www.
anritsu.
com/en-US/Products-Solutions/Solution/Effectively-testing-
700MHz-public-safety. aspx [Accessed April 2013], 2013.

[324] Y. Xiao, K.-C. Chen, C. Yuen, and L. DaSilva, “Spectrum sharing
for device-to-device communications in cellular networks: A game
theoretic approach,” in Proc. 2014 IEEE International Symposium on
Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (DYSPAN), April 2014, pp. 60–71.
[325] A. Bagayoko, B. Paillassa, and R. Dhaou, “Practical link reliability for
ad hoc routing protocol,” in Proc. 2011 IEEE Vehicular Technology
Conference (VTC Fall), Sept 2011, pp. 1–5.

[326] M. Wang and Z. Yan, “Security in D2D communications: A review,”
in Proc. 2015 IEEE Trustcom/BigDataSE/ISPA, vol. 1, Aug 2015, pp.
1199–1204.

[327] Y. Gong, Y. Fang, and Y. Guo, “Privacy-preserving collaborative
learning for mobile health monitoring,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE Global
Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), Dec 2015.

[328] J. Pospiil and M. Novotnł, “Evaluating cryptanalytical strength of
lightweight cipher present on reconﬁgurable hardware,” in Proc. 2012
15th Euromicro Conference on Digital System Design (DSD), Sept
2012, pp. 560–567.

[329] Z. Li and T. J. Oechtering, “Privacy-aware distributed bayesian detec-
tion,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 9,
no. 7, pp. 1345–1357, Oct 2015.

[330] F. Canelo, B. M. C. Silva, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, and Z. Zhu,
“Performance evaluation of an enhanced cryptography solution for m-
health applications in cooperative environments,” in Proc. 2013 IEEE
Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), Dec 2013, pp.
1711–1716.

[331] I. Ray and I. Ray, “Access control challenges for cyber-physical

systems.”

32

[332] K. Ly, W. Sun, and Y. Jin, “Emerging challenges in cyber-physical
systems: A balance of performance, correctness, and security,” in
Proc. 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops
(INFOCOM WKSHPS), April 2016, pp. 498–502.

[333] D. Cancila, H. Zaatiti, and R. Passerone, “Cyber-physical system
and contract-based design: A three dimensional view,” in Proc.
the WESE’15: Workshop on Embedded and Cyber-Physical Systems
Education, ser. WESE’15. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2015, pp. 4:1–
4:4. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2832920.2832924
[334] A. G. Tllez and M. M. Pl, “Multithreaded translation of ptolemy ii
designs on multicore platforms,” in Complex, Intelligent and Software
Intensive Systems, 2008. CISIS 2008. International Conference on,
March 2008, pp. 607–612.

[335] H. Chen and S. Mitra, “Synthesis and veriﬁcation of motor-
for electric vehicles,” in Proc. 2014
transmission shift controller
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems (IC-
CPS), April 2014, pp. 25–35.

[336] J. Espinosa, C. Hernandez, J. Abella, D. de Andres, and J. C.
Ruiz, “Analysis and rtl correlation of instruction set simulators for
robustness veriﬁcation,” in 2015 52nd
automotive microcontroller
ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC), June 2015,
pp. 1–6.

[337] M. M. Bersani and M. Garcia-Valls, “The cost of formal veriﬁcation
in adaptive cps. an example of a virtualized server node,” in Proc.
2016 IEEE 17th International Symposium on High Assurance Systems
Engineering (HASE), Jan 2016, pp. 39–46.

[338] N. Mastronarde, V. Patel, J. Xu, L. Liu, and M. van der Schaar, “To
relay or not to relay: Learning device-to-device relaying strategies in
cellular networks,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 15,
no. 6, pp. 1569–1585, June 2016.

[339] I. R. Goodman, R. P. Mahler, and H. T. Nguyen, Mathematics of Data

Fusion. Norwell, MA, USA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997.

[340] A. Ali, J. Qadir, R. u. Rasool, A. Sathiaseelan, A. Zwitter, and
J. Crowcroft, “Big data for development: applications and techniques,”
Big Data Analytics, vol. 1, no. 2, 2016.

PLACE
PHOTO
HERE

Rachad Atat received the B.E. degree (with dis-
tinction) in computer engineering from the Lebanese
American University, Beirut, Lebanon, in 2010, the
M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the King
Abdullah University of Science and Technology
(KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia, in 2012, and the
Ph.D. degree (with Hons.) in electrical engineering
from the University of Kansas (KU), Lawrence,
KS, USA, in 2017. He is currently a postdoctoral
research associate at Texas A&M University at
Qatar, working on dynamic metering allocation with
integrated cybersecurity measures in smart grids. His current research interests
include smart grids, cybersecurity, and Internet of Things. Dr. Atat was a
recipient of the 2016 IEEE Global Communications Conference Best Paper
Award, the NSF Travel Grant Award in 2016, the KU Engineering Fellowship
Award, and the KAUST Discovery Scholarship Award.

33

PLACE
PHOTO
HERE

Lingjia Liu (SM’15) received the B.S. degree in
Electronic Engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China, and the Ph.D. degree
in Electrical and Computer Engineering from Texas
A&M University, College Station, TX, USA. He
spent more than three years working in the Stan-
dards & Mobility Innovation Laboratory, Samsung
Research America (SRA) where he received the
Global Samsung Best Paper Award twice (in 2008
and 2010, respectively). He was leading Samsungs
efforts on multiuser MIMO, coordinated multipoint
(CoMP), and heterogeneous networks (HetNets) in 3GPP LTE/LTE-Advanced
standards.

Lingjia Liu is an Associate Professor in the Bradley Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) of Virginia Tech (VT). He is also
serving as the Associate Director for Afﬁliate Relations in Wireless@Virginia
Tech. Prior to that he was an Associate Professor in the Electrical Engineering
and Computer Sciences Department, University of Kansas (KU). His research
interests include emerging technologies for Beyond 5G cellular networks
including machine learning for wireless networks, massive MIMO, massive
MTC communications, and mmWave communications. Lingjia Liu was a
recipient of the Air Force Summer Faculty Fellow from 2013 to 2017, the
Miller Scholar at KU in 2014, the Miller Professional Development Award
for Distinguished Research at KU in 2015, the 2016 IEEE GLOBECOM Best
Paper Award, the 2018 IEEE ISQED Best Paper Award, the 2018 IEEE TAOS
Best Paper Award, and the 2018 IEEE TCGCC Best Conference Paper Award.

PLACE
PHOTO
HERE

Jinsong Wu (SM’11) received his Ph.D. in Elec-
trical and Computer Engineering from Queen’s Uni-
versity, Kingston, Canada. He was the leading Editor
and a co-author of the comprehensive book, entitled
“Green Communications: Theoretical Fundamentals,
Algorithms, and Applications”, published by CRC
Press in September 2012. His ﬁrst-authored paper
won 2017 IEEE System Journal Best Paper Award.
He received 3 best paper awards for IEEE confer-
ence papers. He received IEEE Green Communi-
cations and Computing Technical Committee 2017
Excellent Services Award for Excellent Technical Leadership and Services
in the Green Communications and Computing Community. He also received
IEEE Outstanding Leadership Award in 2013 IEEE International Conference
on Green Computing and Communications (Greencom) and 2016 IEEE
International Conference on Big Data Intelligence and Computing (DataCom),
IEEE Computer Society. He is elected Vice Chair, Technical Activities,
IEEE Environmental Engineering Initiative, a pan-IEEE effort under IEEE
Technical Activities Board (TAB). He was the founder (2011) and founding
Chair (2011-2017) of IEEE Technical Committee on Green Communications
and Computing (TCGCC). He is also the primary co-founder (2015) and
founding Vice-Chair of IEEE Technical Committee on Big Data (TCBD). He
was the proposer (2012), founder (2014) and Series Editor (2014 - 2017)
of IEEE Series on Green Communication and Computing Networks in the
IEEE Communications Magazine. He is Area Editor (2016 - present) of
IEEE Transactions on Green Communications and Networking. He was the
original proposer (2012) and Series Editor (2014-2016) of the IEEE Journal of
Selected Areas on Communications (JSAC) Series on Green Communications
and Networking. He is Editor of IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials,
Associate Editor of IEEE Systems Journal, Associate Editor of IEEE Access.
He was the one of the earliest key proposers and a long term promotor
from Green Track to a full green symposium in ﬂagship conferences of
IEEE Communications Society. He opened and established Big Data Track
with general and wide topic coverage in the ﬂagship conferences of IEEE
Communications Society, starting at IEEE Globecom 2016. He has been
conference chairs and main organizers in a number of IEEE conferences and
workshops.

PLACE
PHOTO
HERE

Guangyu Li received the B.S. degree from China
University of Mining and Technology and M.S.
degree from Tongji University, China, in 2008 and
2011, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer
science from University of Paris-Sud, Paris, France,
in 2015. He is currently working as an assistant
professor with the Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Infor-
mation of Ministry of Education, Nanjing University
of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China. His
current research interests include routing protocol
design for vehicular networks, big data transmission, electric vehicles charg-
ing/discharging strategy design in smart grid and trafﬁc control.

PLACE
PHOTO
HERE

Chunxuan Ye received his Ph.D. from University of
Maryland, College Park in 2005. Between 2005 and
2012, he worked for InterDigital Communications,
Inc. on multiple advanced research projects in the
wireless communications ﬁeld. He worked for Intel
on LTE modem chipset development between 2012
and 2015. He has been working for InterDigital
Communications, Inc. as a 3GPP RAN1 standards
delegate for new radios (5G) since 2015. Chunxuan
Ye has more than 30 book chapters, conference and
journal papers. He also has more than 60 U.S. and
international patent applications with 25 U.S. patents granted. His special-
ties include wireless communications, wireless standards and technologies,
information theory, software and ﬁrmware development.

PLACE
PHOTO
HERE

Yang Yi (M’09-SM’16) is an assistant professor in
the Bradley Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer engineering at
the Virginia Tech.
She is an IEEE senior member. She received the
B.S. and M.S. degrees in electronic engineering at
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and the Ph.D. degree
in electrical and computer engineering at Texas
A&M University. Her research interests include very
large scale integrated (VLSI) circuits and systems,
computer-aided design (CAD), neuromorphic archi-
tecture for brain-inspired computing systems, and
low-power circuits design with advanced nano-technologies for high-speed
wireless systems..

34

