J. Mod. Power Syst. Clean Energy
DOI 10.1007/s40565

A Survey on Synchrophasor Data Quality and Cybersecurity
Challenges, and Evaluation of their Interdependencies

Aditya Sundararajan, Tanwir Khan, Amir Moghadasi, Arif I. Sarwat

8
1
0
2

v
o
N
3
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
7
5
9
0
.
1
1
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract Synchrophasor devices guarantee situation
awareness for real-time monitoring and operational vis-
ibility of the smart grid. With their widespread imple-
mentation, signiﬁcant challenges have emerged, espe-
cially in communication, data quality and cybersecu-
rity. The existing literature treats these challenges as
separate problems, when in reality, they have a com-
plex interplay. This paper conducts a comprehensive
review of quality and cybersecurity challenges for syn-
chrophasors, and identiﬁes the interdependencies be-
tween them. It also summarizes diﬀerent methods used
to evaluate the dependency and surveys how quality
checking methods can be used to detect potential cyber-
attacks. In doing so, this paper serves as a starting point
for researchers entering the ﬁelds of synchrophasor data
analytics and security.

Keywords Synchrophasors, data quality, cybersecu-
rity, methodologies.

1 Introduction

Smart grid has complex dependencies between physical
and cyber realms [1–4]. This has been demonstrated by
recent attacks on smart grid (Table 3) [5–10]. These at-
tacks exploited a limited visibility of the system and in-
adequate support from reliability coordinators [11–22].
Wide-area measurement systems (WAMS) increase the
situation awareness (SA) for operators [23–25]. WAMS
devices that are part of the wide area monitoring, pro-
tection, automation and control include phasor mea-
surement units (PMUs) at transmission, frequency dis-
turbance recorders (FDRs) at low-voltage distribution

A. Sundararajan, T. Khan, A. Moghadasi, A.I. Sarwat
EC 3920, 10555 W Flagler St, Miami, FL, USA
Email: [asund005,tkhan016,amogh004,asarwat]@ﬁu.edu

the date of receipt and acceptance should be inserted later

and micro-PMUs (µ−PMUs) for distributed renewables,
called synchrophasors [26–35].

Signiﬁcant challenges to the implementation of syn-
chrophasors have emerged in communication, data qual-
ity and cybersecurity. The existing communication in-
frastructure is slow, expensive and inﬂexible. To lever-
age SA and support timeliness, adequate quality check-
ing methods must be in-place at the phasor data con-
centrators (PDCs) which aggregate and process raw
data and ﬂag corrupt data. Due to their ubiquity, syn-
chrophasors have an increased attack surface. The ap-
plications and challenges of synchrophasors are well-
researched [36–41]. However, the challenges of data qual-
ity and cybersecurity are considered one independent of
the other, when in reality, they are interdependent [42–
69]. Further, the literature does not leverage the knowl-
edge of one challenge to address the other. For exam-
ple, studying the changes to data quality can be key to
potentially identify an underlying attack vector or an
unexploited vulnerability.

The main contributions of this paper are: (1) maps
the dependencies between data quality and cybersecu-
rity challenges of synchrophasors; (2) reviews the meth-
ods to evaluate the challenges; and (3) surveys how
data quality checking methods can leverage their obser-
vations to detect issues related to security. The paper
also provides a high-level overview of synchrophasors,
their standards, key applications, and challenges [70–
73]. It is key to know that poor quality can be due to de-
vice errors or communication challenges like congestion
and packet collision. Similarly, all cyber-attacks do not
impact the data, although reduction in quality is one of
the biggest observable consequences of a successful at-
tack. A layout of WAMS comprising synchrophasors is
shown in Fig. 1. This paper explores the challenges for
PMUs at transmission and FDRs at distribution level.

This survey paper considers data quality and cyber-
security as challenges, where each has diﬀerent issues.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Aditya Sundararajan, Tanwir Khan, Amir Moghadasi, Arif I. Sarwat

manipulation deals with attacks that alter the infor-
mation, thereby impacting integrity. Theft captures at-
tacks which compromise the conﬁdentiality of data such
as snooping, spooﬁng or espionage. These attacks occur
at diﬀerent levels of the synchrophasor hierarchy: device
corresponds to the edge devices like PMUs, FDRs, or
µ−PMUs, while aggregator implies Local PDCs or Su-
perPDCs. Communication refers to the synchrophasor
network while Application contains the diﬀerent power
system applications that use synchrophasor data.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 summarizes the architecture, major applications
and key challenges of synchrophasors. The characteris-
tics are described in Section 3, and their interdependen-
cies mapped in Section 4. While evaluation methods for
data quality and cybersecurity are discussed in Section
4.1, Section 4.2 surveys methods which use data quality
characteristics to detect potential cyber-attacks. Sec-
tion 5 highlights future directions of research in syn-
chrophasor data analytics and cybersecurity.

2 Architecture, Applications, Challenges

Synchrophasors can be standalone devices with dedi-
cated purposes, or be a part of a larger system like the
substations, depending on various functional and oper-
ational requirements. With increased penetration of re-
newables and smart loads, synchrophasors are used at
distribution transformers and points of common cou-
pling to study frequency disturbances and harmonics.
The architecture of synchrophasor devices are summa-
rized at the device and network levels below.

PMU device: It comprises Current Transformers
(CTs) and Potential Transformers (PTs) that measure
current and voltage magnitudes which are then con-
verted to digital data, a microprocessor module that
compiles these values, computes phasors, and synchro-
nizes them with the Coordinated Universal Time (UTC)
standard reference used by global positioning system
(GPS) receivers that acquire a time-lag based on the
atomic clock of GPS satellites [23, 74–77]. They mea-
sure local frequency and its rate of change, and can
record individual phase voltage and current along with
harmonics, negative and zero sequence values [78]. The
information paints a dynamic picture of the grid at a
given time. PMUs and PDCs transmit measured data
as frames [79]. A 16-bit cyclic redundancy check ensures
data integrity. PDCs equipped with logging functional-
ity use comma separated values or transient data ex-
change for data logs, and Common Format for Event
Data Exchange for event logs [80, 81]. The data trans-
fer rate of PMUs, which determine the message process-
ing delays and network latencies, depend greatly on the
timing requirements of applications.

Fig. 1 Layout of smart grid WAMS comprising PMUs,
µ−PMUs, FDRs and PDCs

Issues are the ways in which the particular challenge
manifests when observed. Figure 2 maps the challenges
to their corresponding issues. The challenge of quality
manifests in three ways: noise, outliers and missingness.
Noise can be due to logical inconsistencies in data values
or attributes while outliers result from poor integrity
and origination. Missing data is a direct consequence
of poor completeness and availability. Accuracy is im-
pacted by noise, outliers as well as missingness while
plausibility is a characteristic impacted by noise and
outliers. These characteristics are discussed in Section
3.1. Cybersecurity manifests as delay/loss, manipula-
tion or theft. While a delay/loss corresponds to a packet
delay or drop due to congestion, timeout, buﬀer full-
ness or an intentional attack that aﬀects availability,

Fig. 2 The proposed structure of this survey paper

A Survey on Synchrophasor Data Quality and Cybersecurity Challenges, and Evaluation of their Interdependencies

3

PMU network: If there are multiple PMUs in a
substation, Local PDCs aggregate site-level data and
then transmit to a SuperPDC. PDCs conduct various
data quality checks and set ﬂags according to the is-
sues encountered, log performance, validate, transform,
scale and normalize data, and convert between proto-
cols [82]. There is typically a direct interface between
PDC and the utility’s SCADA or energy management
system. PDCs can be deployed as standalone devices or
integrated with other systems in the grid.

FDR device: The Oak Ridge National Labora-
tory and the University of Tennessee Knoxville have
been leading the FNET/GridEye project since 2004.
FDRs have been installed and managed to capture dy-
namic behaviors of the grid. Although FDRs are essen-
tially PMUs, they are connected at 120V , and hence
incur lower installation costs than traditional PMUs
do [83]. FDRs are largely deployed at renewable integra-
tion zones of the grid, and measure nearly 1, 440 sam-
ples per second with a hardware accuracy of ±0.5mHz
while PMUs measure between 10 and 240 samples per
second and use GPS receivers that have 1µs accuracy
for synchronization [84–87]. Given the availability of an
extensive discussion of the architecture by the author
of [88, 89], it is beyond the scope of this paper.

FDR network: FDRs use the internet to send data
directly to the central servers for analytics and can pro-
vide information on transients, load shedding, breaker
reclosing and the switching operations of capacitor banks
and load tap changers [87]. Unlike PMUs, FDRs can be
installed at buildings and oﬃces.

Synchrophasor standards: Multiple standards ex-
ist for PMU data measurement, transfer and commu-
nication, proposed by IEEE, the National Institute of
Standards & Technology (NIST), the North American
Electric Reliability Commission (NERC) and the In-
ternational Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) [90–97].
Due to multiple speciﬁcations and guidelines, there are
possible contradictions in recommendations [70–73,98].
A North American SynchroPhasor Initiative (NASPI)
report in early 2016 identiﬁed the need for standard-
izing deﬁnitions related to synchrophasor data quality
and availability by establishing the PMU applications
requirements task force (PARTF) [99]. IEEE standard
C37.X deals with WAMS, speciﬁcally PMUs [82, 100,
101]. These standards are summarized in Table 1 with
their core contributions highlighted. A more compre-
hensive review of the synchrophasor standards is docu-
mented in [102].

Applications: Synchrophasors streamline security,
reliability and stability of power systems. They have
online and oﬄine applications [103]. Online applica-
tions of PMUs include enhancing real-time SA, analyz-

ing faults and disturbances, detecting and appraising
oscillations and harmonics that impact power quality,
and improving accuracy and reducing computational
time of state estimation. Oﬄine applications include
congestion management, providing eﬀective protection
schemes, benchmarking, system restoration, overload
monitoring and dynamic rating, validating the network
model of SCADA, and improving overall power qual-
ity [25,104,105]. Real-time (online) applications of FDRs
include frequency monitoring interface integrated with
command and control centers in the future for power
system health diagnosis to prevent cascading failures,
and event trigger module that detects and notiﬁes the
mismatch between generation and load caused by fre-
quency variations. Oﬄine applications include event vi-
sualization that renders the data read from the even
data ﬁles [106].

Challenges: One of the major drawbacks of syn-
chrophasors is the lack of transmission protocol, which
makes them vulnerable to spooﬁng attacks [26]. The
existing architecture is not scalable since it entails an
initially high investment. NASPI’s research initiative
task force (RITT) emphasizes optimal placement as
a signiﬁcant challenge but also one dependent on the
nature of applications the utility intends to use them
for [18]. The literature has multiple models including
but not limited to genetic algorithm, simulated anneal-
ing, Tabu search, Madtharads method, particle swarm
optimization, artiﬁcial neural networks, binary search
and binary integer programming to address this chal-
lenge [27, 28, 31–34, 107, 108]. More recently, manag-
ing and analyzing large volumes of synchrophasor data
has become increasingly challenging. Lack of standard-
ized data management solutions for smart grid has only
made this problem more challenging. The ubiquitous
presence of these devices has expanded their attack
surface, making them vulnerable to diﬀerent types of
attacks. These two challenges are elaborated in the fol-
lowing section since they percolate to applications that
directly operate upon the streaming data subject to
minimal processing owing to timeliness requirements.

3 Data Quality and Cybersecurity Challenges
in Synchrophasors

Due to their wide-ranging communication and automa-
tion capabilities, the challenges of synchrophasor data
quality and cybersecurity have gained prominence.

3.1 Data Quality Challenges

NERC’s real-time tools best practices task force (RTBPTF)
and NASPI’s PARTF impose requirements to ensure
synchrophasor data quality [42, 109]. Data quality can

4

Aditya Sundararajan, Tanwir Khan, Amir Moghadasi, Arif I. Sarwat

Table 1 Various standards and guidelines for Synchrophasors

Body

IEEE

IEC

Standard

1344-1995

C37.118-2005

C37.239-2010

1711-2010

C37.118.1-2011

C37.118.2-2011

C37.238-2011

C37.242-2013

C37.244-2013

C37.111-2013

1686-2013

C37.240-2014

61850

61850-90-5

62351-1,2

62351-6

Core Contribution

Original parameter deﬁnitions for synchrophasors

Improved message formats, inclusion of time quality, Total Vector Error (TVE)

PMU/PDC event logging

Serial SCADA Protection Protocol for substation serial link cybersecurity

PMU measurement provisions, performance requirements

Synchrophasor data transfer requirements

Common proﬁle for applying Precision Time Protocol (PTP) using Ethernet

Synchronization, calibration, testing and installation of PMUs for PC

PDC functions and requirements for PC and monitoring

PMU/PDC data logging using COMFEDE

Procuring, installing and commissioning IED cybersecurity

Sound engineering practices for high cybersecurity of substation APC

Interoperable and adaptable architectures to substation automation

Requirements for data exchange between PMUs, PDCs, PCs and control center

Security threats and vulnerabilities in smart grid devices

Prescribes digital signature using asymmetric cryptography for sending PMU data

NERC

NIST

CIP 002-009

NISTIR 7628

Series of standards to ensure enterprise, ﬁeld and personnel security

Provides guidelines for smart grid cybersecurity (including WAMS)

be contextualized in diﬀerent ways, depending on the
needs of the concerned domain. For instance, data qual-
ity requirements of a smart meter recording energy con-
sumption might diﬀer from those of a net meter at a
solar photovoltaic (PV) power plant. NASPI contextu-
alizes synchrophasor data quality to determine “ﬁtness
of use” in terms of accuracy and lineage for static data
points; lineage, completeness and logical consistency for
static datasets; and availability, timeliness and origina-
tion for streams of data points [42].

There could be diﬀerent causes for poor data qual-
ity: a) Device: poor calibration of device, biases due
to CT, PT; erroneous ﬁlter design, poor synchroniza-
tion of timing measurements, and issues due to mea-
surement channel; b) Communication: latency exceed-
ing stipulated limits, network congestion, signal inter-
ferences and failure of communication nodes; c) Aggre-
gator: Data transformation resulting in errors, delayed
arrival of packets dropped due to time-limit exceeding,
and unwanted duplication or corruption of data during
computations; and d) Application: storage and main-
tenance issues, insuﬃcient training size, erroneous ma-
nipulations to the data and poor association of context.
Although data quality requirements vary with applica-
tions, they have been extensively documented [42, 52,
102,109]. The existing literature on synchrophasor data
quality is summarized in Table 2.
Completeness: focuses on the gaps between diﬀerent
values, accounts for missing values [42]. The attributes
of completeness deﬁned at device and aggregator-levels

are: gap rate- number of gaps in data per unit time;
mean gap size- mean of the length of known gaps; and
largest known gap- length of the largest known gap
among the diﬀerent gaps. While completeness is im-
pacted by device malfunction, packet drops and com-
munication link failure, the literature does not recog-
nize the possibility of an attack behind such causes.
Accuracy: can be of the value or attribute, primarily
measured in Total Vector Error (TVE), which accord-
ing to IEEE standard C37.118, is the vector diﬀerence
between the measured and expected phasor value (mag-
nitude, angle and frequency). Accuracy is categorized
into that of: data values- impacted by factors like the
diﬀerence between expected and observed signals or the
introduction of noise to the data within the synchropha-
sor; and data attributes- aﬀected by factors like accu-
racy of the measured timestamp, agreement between
encoded and actual location coordinates of the device,
and alignment of the location recorded in the power
system topology with its actual location [46].

Plausibility and Availability: Measurement speci-
ﬁers are the attributes of data which describe whether
the process of measuring some phenomenon of the power
system (observed value) and calculating its value (ex-
pected value) are documented eﬀectively in terms of
standard units to a given precision and are within a
stated conﬁdence interval [46,48]. These speciﬁers have
decisive sub-attributes inﬂuencing the qualitative value
of data: data representing the measurement of quality
or condition of the grid, and data represented in the

A Survey on Synchrophasor Data Quality and Cybersecurity Challenges, and Evaluation of their Interdependencies

5

Table 2 Summary of existing research in Synchrophasor Data Quality Challenges and Solutions

Challenges

Solutions

Attribute

Completeness
(Device,
aggregator) [42, 50,
144]

Measurement
Accuracy
(Device) [42, 43, 138–
140, 144]

– PMU/PDC device damage
– Faulty PMU-PDC communication
– Network error
– Database storage error
– Data missing for failing to comply with

latency and QoS requirements

– Expected signal diﬀers from measured
signal due to harmonic interference

– Introduction of noise to data

Attribute Accuracy
(Device, aggregator,
communication) [42,
44]

– Measured vs actual timestamp discrep-
ancy due to satellite timing error; dis-
agreement between encoded and actual
location of PMU

– Acquiring better management techniques
– Use of TCP protocol to re-transmit the lost

data packets at the cost of timeliness

– Adjusting the synchrophasor frame rate by in-

creasing the wait time at PDC

– Improving phase error using ﬁltering techniques
– NIST calibration per Standard C37.118-2005
– Omnidirectional antennas
– Context-based reconstruction of missing data
– Network Time Protocol (NTP), e-Loran and

Chip Scale Atomic Clock (CSAC)

– Development of linear state estimation tools
– Avoiding timestamp discrepancy by modifying

real-time clock element

– Using OMP-based identiﬁcation, BB algorithm

to solve PMU location discrepancies

Plausibility and
Availability
(Communication,
application) [47–49,
51, 142, 143]

Origination (Device,
aggregator,
communication,
application) [42, 53,
145, 146]

Logical Consistency
(Aggregator,
communication) [42]

– Impact of measurement system on indi-

vidual data points

– Data inaccessibility due to high network

latency or device failure.

– Use of Electrical Data Recorder (EDR) tools
for capturing high-rate time series data, data
storage and analysis

– A more lenient time limit could be set for non-

– Delayed data arrival due to increased

critical application usage.

routing traﬃc

– Latency-aware application design

– Poor standard interpretation,

imple-

– Redundancy in communication by using wire-

mentation

less and wired connections

– Misalignment, erroneous compression
– Latency, loss of communication nodes
– Data corruption due to delivery time of

– Lagrange interpolating polynomial method
– Data substitution,
and extrapolation

imputation,

interpolation

PDC exceeding permissible slot

– Stochastic forecasting with Prediction Error

– Network unavailability to process in-

Minimization (PEM)

coming data streams

– Data transmitted contains no headers
– Sampling rate of data changed at PMU

without being adjusted at PDC
– Data duplication while processing
– Data from diﬀerent PMUs with incor-

rect timestamps

– Logical consistency can be ensured by main-
taining the PMU registries and data protocols

form of SI units up to 3 decimal places with a conﬁ-
dence interval included.

to. The latency requirements for synchrophasors rec-
ommended by the standards are very stringent.

Network availability plays an important role in stream-

ing data [49], and in-turn aﬀects data availability. In
case of high network latency, the incoming data streams
from diﬀerent synchrophasors get delayed or lost, caus-
ing applications to perceive them as missing or incom-
plete. Hence, network availability can be considered an
indirect attribute aﬀecting quality. This can be miti-
gated if the overlying applications are programmed to
account for the delays, or if a more lenient waiting time
limit is set. However, the second solution is dependent
on the kind of applications the synchrophasors cater

Origination: is the source from which the data is mea-
sured. Its trustworthiness is associated with the back-
ground and source. Its attributes are: point of origin:
the class of device from where the data originated (Mea-
surement (M) or Performance (P) for PMUs), the stan-
dard followed by the device, and any data manipula-
tion or standardization techniques through which the
data passes [42, 110]; coverage: physical location of the
device based on its geospatial or electrical topology lo-
cation [44, 45]; and transformation applied to the data
at the device, aggregator or application level.

6

Aditya Sundararajan, Tanwir Khan, Amir Moghadasi, Arif I. Sarwat

Table 3 Summary of the Recent Cyberattacks on Smart Grid Impacting Data Quality

Source of Attack
(Year)

Target of Attack

Data Quality
Characteristic
Impacted

California ISO (CAISO)
web servers

Consistency,
accuracy

Programmable Logic
Controllers (PLCs) at
SCADA

Human-Machine
Interface of utility grid
control systems

ICS/SCADA

Accuracy,
consistency,
plausibility

Plausibility, origin,
accuracy, consistency

Plausibility, origin,
accuracy, consistency

Vulnerability in
network ﬁrewall
(2001)

Stuxnet worm (2010)

BlackEnergy (2011)

Remote Access
Trojan; watering-hole
attack (2014)

Trojan.Laziok
reconnaissance
malware (2015)

BlackEnergy3 (2015)

Energy companies

Origin, plausibility

Conﬁdentiality

Ukrainian grid control
center

Plausibility, origin,
accuracy, consistency

Conﬁdentiality,
Integrity,
Availability

WannaCry
ransomware
cryptoworm (2017)

Computers running MS
Windows Operating
System

Availability, origin

Availability

Cybersecurity
Characteristic
Impacted

Integrity

Integrity,
Availability

Conﬁdentiality,
Integrity,
Availability

Conﬁdentiality,
Integrity,
Availability

Attack Speciﬁcs

Poor security
conﬁguration during
planned maintenance

Exploits zero-day
vulnerabilities of
PLCs

General Electric’s
HMI targeted

Conducted by
Dragonﬂy, Energetic
Bear

Gathered
information from
compromised devices

Lack of SA left
220,000+ customers
without power

Used EternalBlue, a
vulnerability in older
Windows systems

Consistency: determines how agreeable the data is
with the overall structure of its type. Incompatibility of
attributes in terms of measurement rates or header la-
beling between datasets results in outliers, leading to an
inconsistent result from an application. The attributes
of consistency are: Header frame consistency: consis-
tency of the Header frame of the device. This could
be categorized into: persistence of PMU Header that
states whether the PMU header structure is consis-
tent over time, and persistence of PDC Header that
states whether the PDC header structure is consistent
over time; Data frame consistency: consistency of Data
frames of the device. This could be categorized into:
persistence of PMU Data frame that states whether the
PMU data frame structure is consistent over time, and
persistence of the PDC Data frame that states whether
the PDC data frame structure is consistent over time;
order consistency of Data frames: whether the order in
which the Data frames are recorded is consistent in the
device; consistency in compliance to standards recom-
mended for PMU and all the devices associated with it;
and consistency of reporting rate: whether data report-
ing rate is consistent across all devices.

Emerging research in this area has lately focused on
determining solutions for ensuring data quality. These
solutions include using omnidirectional antennas to im-
prove GPS availability, context-aware determination of
missing data streams using accurate timing informa-

tion, Network Time Protocol (NTP) and associated chip
scale atomic clocks (CSACs) as backups for synchro-
nization when GPS fails, imputation, interpolation and
extrapolation, stochastic forecasting with prediction er-
ror minimization (PEM) and data substitution [52].
Evaluation of Quality: Methods to evaluate quality
is discussed in Section 4.1. The approach for perfor-
mance evaluation is to ﬁrst study the impacts of device
calibration and network conditions on quality, then ex-
amine how poor quality reduces the application per-
formance [42]. Two eﬀective methods are proposed to
evaluate the impact of quality on performance: bench-
marking that tests an application multiple times with
numerous erroneous datasets in contrast to those with
no known errors, and standardization that documents,
for each application, the level of tolerable errors.

3.2 Cybersecurity Challenges

Synchrophasors cater to applications like state estima-
tion, contingency analysis and optimal power ﬂow that
need real-time high-resolution data measurement, com-
munication and analytics [111]. Therefore, a successful
attack on these devices might cause erroneous SA or
cascading failures [56,112]. Yet, many industrial organi-
zations do not consider synchrophasors as critical cyber
assets. Recent cyberattacks on the smart grid (Table 3)
mostly used powerful malware like worms, viruses or
Trojan horse, but a few attacks like the one on the Pa-

A Survey on Synchrophasor Data Quality and Cybersecurity Challenges, and Evaluation of their Interdependencies

7

Table 4 Summary of Existing Research in Synchrophasor Cybersecurity Challenges and Solutions

Level

Challenges

Device,
Aggregator [54, 55,
97, 102, 137, 144]

– Device damage
– Device calibration tam-

pering

– Forging PMU data
– GPS spooﬁng

Communication [57,
61, 62, 66, 139–143]

– Denial of Service
– Man-in-the-Middle
– False Data Injection
– Snooping attack
– Delay attack

Application [63–65,
145, 146]

– Phishing and social engi-

neering

– APT and insider threats
– Replay attacks

Solutions
– Multi-alteration technique to trace adversary in event of GPS

spooﬁng

– Visible GPS satellite prediction
– Anomaly between expected and measured GPS signals
– Using SSL/TLS or IPSec to encrypt data before transmission
– Using state estimation technique to mitigate device calibra-

tion and tampering

– Rigorous penetration testing prior to installation

– Airgapping PMU network
– Filtering routers, disabling IP broadcasts, applying security

patches, disabling unused ports

– Server authentication by clients before establishing connection
– Use of time-series state estimation
– Cryptographic methods like AES, DES
– Mutual authentication
– Cyber trust model with blockchains
– NASPInet hub-spoke model
– Optimal key generation and distribution

– Authentication, Authorization and Accounting (AAA)
– Use of secure data transfer protocol to prevent replay attack

ciﬁc Gas & Electric transmission substation relied on
physical means. These attacks jeopardized not just the
availability of power but also that of control data (in-
formation). Cybersecurity of synchrophasors are cate-
gorized into: 1) Device, Aggregator, 2) Communication,
and 3) Control center application.

Device, Aggregator: NASPI Network (NASPInet) is
logically capable of integrating WAMS across multiple
geographically distant organizations using phasor gate-
ways (PGWs). The attacks at this level compromise
data integrity, targeting devices from individual PMUs
to PDCs, SuperPDCs or even PGWs. Some attacks in-
clude: 1) tampering the signal measurement units of
devices through interference, 2) illicitly changing the
calibration of devices to report erroneous readings, 3)
forging data to reﬂect wrong measurements, and 4)
GPS spooﬁng by broadcasting fabricated signals to the
receiver to yield erroneous synchronization of phasors
computed, modifying satellite position, or replaying le-
gitimate GPS signals at later timestamps [54].

GPS spooﬁng can be mitigated by enabling the re-
ceiver to predict visible GPS satellites at a given posi-
tion and time instant and use the Coarse/Acquisition
(C/A) code from those satellites. Another strategy com-
pares the measured GPS signal to the estimated signal
and computes the anomaly error which must have an
accuracy of ≤ 40ns for nearly 95% of the values accord-
ing to IEEE C37.118 [44]. Synchrophasors must be sub-

ject to rigorous testing before installation. Some meth-
ods include port scans, device security feature robust-
ness, network congestion testing, denial of service test-
ing, network traﬃc sniﬃng and disclosure testing [55].
These tests should be periodically conducted by cer-
tiﬁed white hat penetration testers after installation.
Regular patches and conﬁguration updates must be made
down to the end-device level.

Communication: Synchrophasors support bidirectional
communication channels, where data measurements ﬂow
from devices to the control center while control signals
ﬂow the other way. The vulnerabilities of the protocols
used by the devices also contribute to the overall secu-
rity. Attacks on communication channels compromise
integrity, availability and conﬁdentiality. Some attacks
include: 1) Denial of Service (DoS) by overwhelming
PMUs, PDCs or other aggregation devices higher in the
hierarchy with bogus frames so that legitimate frames
are lost, delayed, denied or dropped, 2) Man-in-the-
Middle (MITM) attacks by a malicious entity posing
itself as PDC (to PMU) or PGW (to PDC) and send-
ing malicious commands that causes PMUs/PDCs to
behave in an abnormal manner that triggers failures, 3)
False Data Injection (FDI) by intercepting frames over
the channel, altering or replacing them with malicious
information that then gets propagated to higher levels
of the WAMS, 4) Snooping by the attacker eavesdrop-
ping on the channel for incoming or outgoing frames,

8

Aditya Sundararajan, Tanwir Khan, Amir Moghadasi, Arif I. Sarwat

Table 5 Summary of the Interdependency between Quality and Cybersecurity Challenges

Level

Quality Attribute

Quality Issue

Cyber-Attack
Observed

Device

Completeness, accuracy,
plausibility

Synchronization signal
loss, measurement signal
loss, missing data

GPS spooﬁng, replay,
device tamper, changing
device calibration, FDI

Security
Attribute
Impacted

Integrity

Aggregator

Communication

Origin, consistency,
plausibility

Availability, origin,
consistency

Corrupted data,
anomalies, outliers

FDI, Tampering, Buﬀer
overﬂow, MITM

Conﬁdentiality,
Integrity

Anomalies, outliers,
inconsistent, out-of-order
data

DoS, MITM, FDI,
snooping, replay, delay

Application

Origin, availability,
consistency, completeness,
accuracy

DoS, delay, APT, FDI,
theft/fraud, insider
attack

corrupted data,
missingness, anomalies,
outliers

Conﬁdentiality,
Integrity,
availability

Conﬁdentiality,
Integrity,
Availability

typically not modifying or stealing but just capturing a
copy of that information for packet replay or espionage,
and 5) Delay caused by compromising communication
routers that deliberately induce latencies in propaga-
tion to critically aﬀect the grid’s SA.

Many authentication and authorization algorithms
are proposed to secure synchrophasor data over commu-
nication channels [57]. These methods range from con-
ventional encryption methods to cyber trust. Due to the
ubiquity and widespread range of these devices, key dis-
tribution and management becomes a problem. Mutual
authentication is also proposed to account for trust [61].
Decentralized, blockchain-based trust acquisition is be-
ing considered too. The publish-subscribe hub-spoke
architecture proposed by NASPInet supports dynamic
sharing of device data to alleviate shortcomings of the
communication medium like delays and latencies. Stan-
dards like IEC 61850-90-5 recommend trusted key dis-
tribution center to generate and distribute keys that
meet system requirements [63–66].

Application: Despite being protected by enterprise
security tools for intrusion detection and prevention,
virtualization, segmentation, authentication, authoriza-
tion and access control, cyberattacks still proliferate [67,
68]. It is understood that any successful attack at the
other two levels perpetrated in a manner undetectable
by the enterprise security systems can pose a signiﬁcant
threat. The attacks at this level are the most danger-
ous, since crucial power system applications use data
from WAMS to conduct analysis to address reliability,
power quality, network topology, and faults. An ad-
verse impact on these calculations could compromise
the “self-healing” nature of the grid. More recent solu-
tions include game theory, machine learning, proactive
data visualization, and Defense-in-depth [12, 113].

3.2.1 Evaluation of Security

Works have tested the resilience of PMUs and PDCs
against diﬀerent attacks. The authors in [114] conducted
penetration testing of a synchrophasor network in IEEE
68-bus system to map vulnerabilities against the Com-
mon Vulnerabilities Exposure (CVE) database. Poten-
tial corrective measures to ensure the security of PMUs
and PDCs is proposed [115]. Considering the security at
substation and information levels, the authors provide a
wide range of tools to mitigate breaches at both fronts.
A multilayered architecture at the substation is pro-
posed where diﬀerent levels of data abstraction is pro-
vided between PMUs and external environment, sup-
plemented by ﬁrewalls, User Datagram Protocol (UDP)
Secure for communication over untrusted networks, and
remote access using Secure Shell (SSH).

4 The Data Quality-Cybersecurity Dependency

The severity of an attack can be understood from the
extent of its impacts on the targeted system. With
the smart grid encouraging interoperability between de-
vices, information, applications, and protocols, a trans-
parent and direct information exchange is now feasible.
This also means that if information in one of the inter-
connected systems is infected, it is bound to propagate
to other systems upon exchange, aﬀecting the whole
network. Synchrophasor devices harbor such vulnera-
bilities, as summarized in Section 3.2. However, to mit-
igate cyberattacks on interconnected systems, the rela-
tionship between devices and data must be known.

Table 5 summarizes key interdependencies between
the two challenges. There is a tight coupling between
data quality and cyber-attacks, implying it is wise to
study synchrophasor cybersecurity by accounting for
the impacts on quality. In most attacks, plausibility,
completeness, accuracy and consistency are primarily

A Survey on Synchrophasor Data Quality and Cybersecurity Challenges, and Evaluation of their Interdependencies

9

Table 6 Summary of Evaluation Methods for Quality (DQ) and Cybersecurity (CS) Issues

Issue

Noise (DQ)

Challenge

Consistency, accuracy

Outlier (DQ)

Consistency, origin, accuracy

Missingness (DQ)

Completeness, availability, accuracy

Delay/loss (CS)

All levels

Manipulation (CS)

Device, Aggregator, Communication

Theft (CS)

Device, Aggregator, Communication

Evaluation Methods

– Cable conﬁguration, testing, validation
– Specifying conﬁdence interval, precision, TVE,

ROCOF for measurements

– Evaluating instrumentation channels

– Model-based correction
– State estimation-based error ﬁltering

– Presistence in Data/Header frames
– Standards compliance

– Standardization, benchmarking
– Enhancing endpoints with switches, routers
– Specifying device model, coverage and content

– Dedicated communication channels
– Enhancing endpoints with switches, routers

– Regular penetration testing of all levels
– Link-level encryption, selective encryption
– Dedicated communication channels
– Data redundancy for fault tolerance

– Regular penetration testing of all levels
– Link-level encryption, selective encryption
– Data abstraction, multi-layered architecture
– Data redundancy for fault tolerance
– Augmenting ID/IPS, ﬁrewalls, ACLs, VPNs

– Regular penetration testing of all levels
– Data abstraction, multi-layered architecture
– Data redundancy for fault tolerance
– Augmenting ﬁrewalls, ACLs, VPNs

impacted [152, 153]. In Section 4.1, speciﬁc evaluation
methods for quantifying this relationship are reviewed.
Section 4.2 looks at how data quality characteristics
can be used as markers to detect potential cyber-attacks
within the context of synchrophasors. Results from these
subsections are summarized in Tables 6 and 7, respec-
tively.

4.1 Interdependency Evaluation Methods

Next to communications, cybersecurity was found to
impact the design and installation costs for synchropha-
sors [116]. This is because they are critical to the mission-
support systems of the grid. Diﬀerent practical ways for
utilities to mitigate quality issues like accuracy, time-
liness and consistency are also identiﬁed. Some meth-
ods include employing dedicated communication chan-
nels between PMUs and PDCs, encrypting PMU data
before communication, and enhancing communication
endpoints using ﬁrewalls and routers. The report, how-
ever, does not delve into the details of how such meth-
ods could impact latency (and hence, timeliness) and
availability of the data.

Given diﬀerent manufacturers of devices, there will
be diﬀerences in measurement and calibration quality
despite adhering to the standards. The varying applica-
tion requirements cause diﬀerences in application-level
PMU performance, of which data quality is a major one.
The static and dynamic PMU testing eﬀorts of the Per-
formance and Standards Task Team (PSTT) of NASPI
and the PMU performance characterization are brieﬂy
summarized in [117]. In it, the diﬀerent steady-state
tests performed on magnitude, phase and frequency
evaluate their conformance to accuracy requirements,
which is an important attribute of data quality and is
a direct target of many cyberattacks. Given the impact
of instrumentation channels on the quality, they have
been well-characterized and evaluated for impacts on
accuracy in the literature. The errors induced by them
could be rectiﬁed through model-based correction algo-
rithms and state estimation based error ﬁltering. Some
other avenues where data quality could be evaluated
include the cable conﬁgurations, testing and validating
the devices to ensure accurate, consistent performance
and interoperability at all levels [118, 119]. Although

10

Aditya Sundararajan, Tanwir Khan, Amir Moghadasi, Arif I. Sarwat

not explicit, these works hint at the improvement in
the resilience of synchrophasor devices against poten-
tially malicious activities by accounting for proper test-
ing methods to characterize and evaluate the diﬀerent
sources of errors prior to deployment that might con-
tribute to poor quality.

Final conclusions can be gathered from [120]. The
report by the Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory
(PNNL) analyzes existing synchrophasor networks in
terms of their communication and information-level in-
teroperability, security and performance. It concluded
that latency is a key issue for the future synchropha-
sor designs which is expected to compound latency due
to PDC functionality. It also emphasized that substa-
tions generally did not employ redundancy; there is
little consistency in adoption of security methods for
synchrophasor networks. Some tools include link-level
encryption, virtual private networks (VPNs), ID/IPS,
ﬁrewalls and access control lists (ACLs). Further, ex-
isting data quality checking methods locate a compro-
mise in integrity by identifying faulted data values (due
to measurement errors, communication delays or exter-
nal events) but not due to result of device tampering,
MITM, spooﬁng or FDI. Since both faults and attacks
have the same impact on quality, it is important to
diﬀerentiate the two causes while checking for the at-
tributes such as accuracy, consistency and timeliness.

To summarize, the following measures can be used
as metrics to quantify data quality: TVE, errors in mag-
nitude, phase, frequency and ROCOF, harmonics and
noise for measurement accuracy; comparison between
measured and expected results, conﬁdence interval and
precision for measurement speciﬁers; temporal, geospa-
tial and topological accuracy for attribute accuracy;
device model speciﬁcations, geospatial and topological
coordinates, coverage and content for origination; per-
sistence in Header and Data frames, standards compli-
ance, reporting rate and order for logical consistency;
and gap rate, gap size and largest known gap for com-
pleteness. Benchmarking and standardization are two
methods that can be used to evaluate data quality. Sim-
ilarly, cybersecurity can be quantiﬁed by conducting
extensive penetration testing of the synchrophasor net-
works integrated into benchmarked IEEE bus systems
for diﬀerent types of attacks (DoS, MITM, FDI, spoof-
ing, probing, cache poisoning) and discovering poten-
tial vulnerabilities that could be exploited. While doing
so, it would be important to also repeat the evaluation
of the quality attributes using the above metrics and
explore how they are impacted due to the speciﬁc at-
tacks, and whether they violate the industry standards
requirements speciﬁed for diﬀerent applications.

4.2 Addressing Cyber-attacks Using Quality Issues

It can be seen from Table 7 that successful cyberattacks
compromise synchrophasor data quality since the secu-
rity requirements are violated [121]. Given synchropha-
sors use TCP/UDP on the transport layer for their
communications, attacks typically possible on TCP/IP
stack like DoS, MITM, packet replay or spooﬁng are
possible in synchrophasor domains as well.

Physical attacks like device tampering causes loss
or incurs theft of critical information, easily observed
through large gaps sizes, poor accuracy in obtained
values and unreliable origin. The lost data is typically
handled through substitution, either statistical or in-
telligent [122, 123]. The best way to prevent physical
attacks like cable disconnects, direct damage to device,
etc. is by ensuring the devices are isolated from external
weather and human elements.

Spooﬁng synchrophasor data is achievable through
polynomial ﬁtting or data mirroring techniques. Such
attacks impact quality that manifests as outliers or noise.
Several methods have been proposed to counter these
attacks: intra-PMU and inter-PMU correlations to de-
termine the relationship between PMU parameters and
across PMUs in a locality, respectively; machine learn-
ing techniques like Support Vector Machines (SVMs)
and more [124–126].

GPS spooﬁng exploits publicly available civilian GPS
signals using air or cable to produce signals that ini-
tially align with the original, but slowly start increas-
ing the power to drown the authentic signal and thereby
compromising the receiver [54,127]. By introducing mea-
surement errors in the time synchronization, the at-
tacks induce changes in data consistency and plausi-
bility which can be used as markers to identify the like-
lihood of the attack [128–130].

In a successful DoS where multiple synchrophasor
devices get compromised, packet delay or loss is ob-
served. This impact in quality can serve a clue to the
onset of DoS-style attacks. Typical solutions involve
augmenting inline blocking tools, high bandwidth con-
nections, disabling IP broadcasts and port hardening.
MITM is possible in synchrophasors where the at-
tacker acts as a legitimate PDC to the PMUs and vice-
versa, thereby intercepting and/or modifying all mes-
sages exchanged. This is noticed by quality checking
methods in the form of poor accuracy and consistency
in values between what was sent by PMU and what was
received by PDC. It can be avoided by having the de-
vices employ mutual authentication and a digital cer-
tiﬁcate mechanism with an actively managed Certiﬁ-
cate Revocation Lists (CRLs) and certiﬁcate authori-
ties [59, 123].

A Survey on Synchrophasor Data Quality and Cybersecurity Challenges, and Evaluation of their Interdependencies

11

Table 7 Summary Showing How Quality Can Help Identify Cybersecurity Issues

Cyber-attack

Quality Aﬀected

Quality Check Looks For Mitigation Methods Using Quality

Device tampering
(delay/loss, theft)
[122, 123]

Completeness,
plausibility, accuracy,
consistency,
origination

Large gap sizes, inaccurate
readings, ping fail

Spooﬁng PMU data

(manipulation)

[124–126]

Consistency,
accuracy, plausibility

GPS Spooﬁng
(manipulation,
delay/loss)
[54, 127–129]

Consistency,
origination,
plausibility

Unexpected values, errors,
mismatch with SCADA
values, redundant
timestamp, out-of-order
packet arrival

Inaccurate timing value,
TVE > 1%, packets arrive
out-of-order

Denial of Service
(delay/loss)

Completeness,
accuracy, consistency

[123]

Congestion at
PDCs/network, delayed
arrival of packets, dropped
packets, inability to reach
suspected device

– Statistical substitution: regression, im-

putation, interpolation

– Intelligent

substitution: neural net-
works, logistic regression, optimization

– Securing the physical devices

– Monitoring line impedances for anoma-

lies

– Divergence and miscorrelation between

SCADA and PMU data

– Using multiple synchronization sources

or telecommunications

– Anti-spooﬁng checking methods at re-

ceivers

– Internal holdover oscillators as backups
for providing accurate timing signals
– Spooﬁng match algorithm with Golden

Search for lighter computation

– Augmenting PDCs with inline blocking

tools

– Employ port hardening and disable IP

broadcasts

– Use high bandwidth communications

(expensive)

Man-in-the-Middle
(delay/loss,
manipulation, theft)
[123]

Origination,
accuracy, availability,
consistency

Mismatch between obtained
and expected value,
abnormal delay in packet
arrival

– Mutual authentication, message au-

thentication codes

– Digital certiﬁcates with active manage-

ment of CRLs

False Data Injection
(manipulation, theft)
[131–135]

Plausibility,
consistency, accuracy,
origination

Mismatch with SCADA
values, unexpected values,
spatio-temporal outliers

Snooping, Sniﬃng

Plausibility, origin

(theft)

[59, 123]

No observable changes-
additional analysis needed

– Spatio-temporal correlations, density-

based local outlier factoring

– Monitor line impedance for anomalies
– Random time-hopping of packets
– Divergence and miscorrelation between

SCADA and PMU data

– Using secure gateway/VPN communi-

cation

– Employing TLS/SSL, SSH, lightweight

selective encryption

Delay (delay/loss)
[59, 123]

Completeness,
consistency,
availability, accuracy

Observable patterns in gaps,
slow arrival of packets

– Statistical and intelligent substitutions
– Redundant measurement devices on the

same line

APT, Insider threat
(delay/loss, theft,
manipulation) [113]

Accuracy,
consistency, origin,
plausibility

No observable changes-
additional analysis needed

– Defense-in-depth
– Machine learning, advanced data ana-

lytics

FDI impacts the consistency, accuracy and plausi-
bility of the data. The eﬀects are typically observed
as spatio-temporal outliers in the data. Quality check-
ing methods check for this anomaly and may employ
correlation across diﬀerent timestamps to identify the
corruption of data. FDI is one of the widely explored

attacks on synchrophasor domain, with solutions like
determining the mismatch between the values obtained
from PMUs and that observed in SCADA, monitoring
the line impedances which get aﬀected when data is ma-
nipulated, and using density-based Local Outlier Filter
(LOF) analysis [131–135].

12

Aditya Sundararajan, Tanwir Khan, Amir Moghadasi, Arif I. Sarwat

Sometimes, attackers simply capture the packets ﬂow-

ing in a channel with an intent to listen. Such sniﬀ-
ing/snooping attacks have been conducted using Wire-
Shark to realize messages are exchanged in plaintext.
This attack is diﬃcult to detect using data quality check-
ing methods since most often, no quality characteristic
is impacted as the attackers do not aﬀect the data ac-
tively. However, technologies like VPN, encryption of
selective messages (to reduce the overall process over-
head), or Transport Layer Security (TLS)/Secure Socket
Layer (SSL), Secure Shell (SSH) can be used to miti-
gate them. While TLS has been shown to be susceptible
to poisoning attacks and VPN to side channel attacks,
careful network design can account for them [123, 136].

With the increased frequency of campaign eﬀorts
and nation-sponsored attacks against the grid, synchro-
phasors could be lucrative targets for sophisticated at-
tacks like advanced persistent threats (APTs), social
engineering, watering-hole attacks and malware-based
intrusions [147–151]. While these attacks scale beyond
speciﬁc devices in the synchrophasor hierarchy, the qual-
ity checking methods alone would not be suﬃcient [113].
The use of defense-in-depth model augmented with stake-
holder interactions, awareness and training, and intel-
ligent solutions like machine learning for attack data
classiﬁcation and/or event prediction, root-cause anal-
ysis of observed events, developing evolving defense to-
pographies using moving target defense, and advanced
visualization techniques for eﬃcient cognition of events
would play a critical role.

The key takeaway from this section is that impacts
on data quality can provide strong markers for an un-
derlying cyber-attack. Noise, outliers and missing val-
ues are all commonly observed issues which quality check-
ing methods may be programmed to detect, analyze
and base decisions on. Certain sophisticated attacks
like APTs, insider threats, sniﬃng, and social engineer-
ing have indirect impacts on quality which a checking
method may not be able to detect with enough con-
ﬁdence or precision. Additional solutions are required
to mitigate such attacks in the synchrophasor domain.
These solutions include statistical methods like diver-
gence, correlation, regression and substitution; intelli-
gent methods like neural networks and evolutionary al-
gorithms for event classiﬁcation and prediction, logistic
regression for substitution; technologies like VPNs, ﬁre-
walls, ID/IPS, anomaly detectors, selective encryption,
port hardening, network isolation and use of TLS/SSL,
SSH; and human-in-the-loop solutions like advanced
visualization techniques, awareness and training, and
stakeholder engagements. While the impacts on quality
can also be due to underlying device or measurement
errors, most of the works in the literature assume the

data has been subject to delay/loss, manipulation or
theft intentionally. This paves way for the recommen-
dation that the upcoming research in this area must
look at ways to diﬀerentiate the impacts on data qual-
ity due to attacks from errors.

5 Future Directions of Research and Conclusion

The future directions of research in the areas of syn-
chrophasor data quality, cybersecurity and communi-
cations are multi-faceted. Addressing data quality chal-
lenges must begin with a strong push to the adoption of
industry-wide, vendor-agnostic data management, pro-
cessing and storage standards for smart grid. Most re-
cent cyber-attacks were successful due to the diﬀerence
in speed of cognition of the information generated by
automated vulnerability detection tools and the speed
with which the machine data is created (called cogni-
tive gap) [113]. The design of synchrophasor devices
are also expected to improve in the future [103]. Keep-
ing in mind the quality challenges, an improvement
to PDC design called ﬂexible integrated synchropha-
sor system (FIPS) was proposed to minimize issues in
quality and communication, and tackles speciﬁc tasks
of PDC such as data alignment, employs cryptographic
methods to ensure conﬁdential exchange of data with-
out jeopardizing integrity, and establishes relevance to
the NASPInet [137]. To ensure device and application-
level interoperability, development of technical stan-
dards and conformance testing rules is expected. Fur-
ther, the emergence of distribution-level µ−PMUs will
evoke the need for developing measurement, commu-
nication, quality and security standards. Further, with
the deployment of distributed renewable sources, elec-
tric and autonomous vehicles, energy storage and trans-
active energy, there is a strong impetus for enhancing
technologies behind monitoring and control, of which
synchrophasors will play a major role [116].

To conclude, while existing research has focused on
the synchrophasor challenges of quality and cybersecu-
rity individually, their interdependency has largely been
ignored. This paper makes one of the ﬁrst attempts
at highlighting the impacts of cyber-attacks on various
quality attributes, thereby recommending that the fu-
ture research on the design and development of security
solutions should account for their impacts on quality as
well, and that diﬀerent quality characteristics can be
used by quality checking methods to ﬂag for potential
cyber-attacks. Plausibility, completeness, accuracy and
consistency are some of the attributes that are most ad-
versely impacted by a majority of the attacks on syn-
chrophasors. At the same time, not all cases of poor

A Survey on Synchrophasor Data Quality and Cybersecurity Challenges, and Evaluation of their Interdependencies

13

data quality imply a successful cyber-attack as the rea-
son. Diﬀerent metrics that could be used to quantify
quality attributes were summarized, and the methods
that help evaluate the impacts of quality and security
on performance were also brieﬂy highlighted. This pa-
per serves as a starting point for researchers entering
these areas as it summarizes and determines their in-
terdependency and relevance to smart grid security.

Acknowledgments

This material is based on work supported by the Na-
tional Science Foundation Grant No. CNS-1553494 and
the Department of Energy Grant No. 800006104. Any
opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the NSF and
DOE.

References

[1] Ozgur U, Nair HT, Sundararajan A, et al (2017) An
Eﬃcient MQTT Framework for Control and Protec-
tion of Networked Cyber-Physical Systems. IEEE Con-
ference on Communications and Network Security, Las
Vegas, NV, USA, October 9-11, 2017, 421-426, doi:
10.1109/CNS.2017.8228674

[2] Sanjab A, Saad W, Guvenc I, et al (2016) Smart
Grid Security: Threats, Challenges, and Solutions.
arXiv:1606.06992 [cs.IT]

[3] Sundararajan A, Pons A, Sarwat AI (2015) A Generic
Framework for EEG-Based Biometric Authentication.
In: Proceedings of the 12th International Conference
on Information Technology
New Generations, Las
Vegas, NV, USA, April 13-15, 2015, 139-144, doi:
10.1109/ITNG.2015.27

[4] Anzalchi A, Sarwat A (2015) A survey on security assess-
ment of metering infrastructure in Smart Grid systems.
IEEE SoutheastCon, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, April 9-
12, 2015, doi: 10.1109/SECON.2015.7132989

[5] Dagle JE (2004) Data Management Issues Associated
with the August 14th, 2003 Blackout Investigation. In:
Proceedings of IEEE Power Engineering Society General
Meeting, Denver, CO, USA, June 6-10, 2004, 1-5, doi:
10.1109/PES.2004.1373160

[6] Larsson S, Ek E (2004) The Blackout in Southern Sweden
and Eastern Denmark, September 23, 2003. In: Proceed-
ings of IEEE Power Engineering Society General Meeting,
Denver, CO, USA, October 29-November 1, 2006, 309-313,
doi: 10.1109/PSCE.2006.296324

[7] Corsi S, Sabelli C (2004) General Blackout in Italy
Sunday September 28th, 2003, h 03:28:00. In: Proceed-
ings of IEEE Power Engineering Society General Meet-
ing, Denver, CO, USA, June 6-10, 2004, 1-12, doi:
10.1109/PES.2004.1373162

[8] Berizzi A (2004) The Italian 2003 Blackout. In: Pro-
ceedings of IEEE Power Engineering Society General
Meeting, Denver, CO, USA, June 6-10, 2004, 1-7, doi:
10.1109/PES.2004.1373159

[9] Gomes P (2004) New Strategies to Improve Bulk Power
Systems Security: Lessons Learned from Large Blackouts.
In: Proceedings of IEEE Power Engineering Society Gen-
eral Meeting, Denver, CO, USA, June 6-10, 2004, 1-6, doi:
10.1109/PES.2004.1373163

[10] Imai S (2004) TEPCO observations on August 14 black-
out and recommendations to prevent future blackouts
based on TEPCOs experience. In: Proceedings of IEEE
Power Engineering Society General Meeting

[11] Jamei M, Sarwat AI, Iyengar SS, et al (2015) Security
Breach Possibility with RSS-Based Localization of Smart
Meters Incorporating Maximum Likelihood Estimator. In:
Selvaraj H, Zydek D, Chmaj G (eds) Progress in Systems
Engineering. Advances in Intelligent Systems and Com-
puting, vol 366, Springer, Cham, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-
08422-0-20

[12] Wei L, Sarwat AI, Saad W (2016) Risk assessment of
coordinated cyber-physical attacks against power grids:
A stochastic game approach. IEEE Industry Applications
Society Annual Meeting, Portland, OR, USA, 1-7, doi:
10.1109/IAS.2016.7731849

[13] Hauer JF, Bhatt NB, Shah K, et al (2004) Performance
of ”WAMS East” in providing dynamic information for
the North East blackout of August 14, 2003. In: Proceed-
ings of the 2004 IEEE Power and Energy Society gen-
eral meeting, Denver, CO, USA, June 6-10, 2004, 1-6, doi:
10.1109/PES.2004.1373161

[14] U.S.-Canada Power System Outage Task Force
(2004) Final Report on the August 14, 2003 Black-
out in the United States and Canada: Causes and
Recommendations. North American Electric Relia-
bility Commission (NERC) Report, accessed from:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/ﬁles/oeprod/
DocumentsandMedia/Outage Task Force -
DRAFT Report on Implementation.pdf,
October, 2017

access

date:

[15] Zima M, Larsson M, Korba P, et al (2005) De-
sign aspects
for wide-area monitoring and control
system. Proceedings of the IEEE 93(5):980-996, doi:
10.1109/JPROC.2005.846336

[16] Wei L, Sarwat A, Saad W, Biswas S (2014) Stochas-
tic Games for Power Grid Protection Against Coordinated
Cyber-Physical Attacks. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid
PP(99):1-1, doi: 10.1109/TSG.2016.2561266

[17] Ashton PM, Taylor GA, Irving MR, et al (2012) Prospec-
tive wide area monitoring of the Great Britain transmission
system using phasor measurement units. In: Proceedings
of IEEE Power Engineering Society General Meeting, July
22-26, 2012, 1-8, doi: 10.1109/PESGM.2012.6345306

[18] Chow JH, Beard L, Patel M, et al (2015) Guide-
for Siting Phasor Measurement Units. North
lines
American SynchroPhasor
Initiative Research Initia-
tive Task team (NASPI-RITT) Report, accessed from:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/279658581
Guidelines for Siting Phasor Measurement Units Version
8 June 15 2011 North American SynchroPhasor Initiative
NASPI Research Initiative Task Team RITT Report
[19] Gomes P, Martins N, de Mello P, et al (1998) Assur-
ing System Reliability in a Competitive Environment. In:
Proceedings of CIGRE Meeting

[20] de Azevedo R, Allen D, Perpuly Y, et al (2015) PMU
placement considering data uncertainty and redundancy.
IEEE SoutheastCon, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, April 9-
12, 2015, 1-5, doi: 10.1109/SECON.2015.7133034

[21] Parvez I, Islam A, Kaleem F (2014) A key management-
IEEE

based two-level encryption method for AMI.

14

Aditya Sundararajan, Tanwir Khan, Amir Moghadasi, Arif I. Sarwat

PES General Meeting — Conference & Exposition, Na-
tional Harbor, MD, USA,
jULY 1, 2014, 1-5, doi:
10.1109/PESGM.2014.6939551

[22] Wang Y, Saad W, Sarwat AI, et al (2017) Reac-
tive Power Compensation Game under Prospect-Theoretic
Framing Eﬀects. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 99:1-1,
doi: 10.1109/TSG.2017.2652846

[23] Ma J, Zhang P, Fu HJ, et al (2010) Application of Pha-
sor Measurement Unit on Locating Disturbance Source for
Low-Frequency Oscillation. IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, 1(3):340-346, doi: 10.1109/TSG.2010.2071889

[24] Narendra K (2007) Role of Phasor Measurement
Unit (PMU) in Wide Area Monitoring and Control.
ERL Phase Power Technologies Report, accessed from:
http://www.erlphase.com/downloads/application notes/
Roles of PMUs in Wide Area Monitoring and Control.pdf
[25] Novosel D, Vu K (2006) Beneﬁts of PMU Tech-
nology for Various Applications.
International Coun-
cil on Large Electric systems- Cigre Croatian Na-
tional Committee, 7th Symposium on Power System
Management, November 5-8, 2006, Cavtat, accessed
from: https://www.ieee.hr/ download/repository/Pozivno
predavanja Novosel Vu Cigre 06.pdf

[26] Ferrari L, Gentz R, Scaglione A, et al. (2014) The pulse
coupled phasor measurement units. IEEE International
Conference on Smart Grid Communications (SmartGrid-
Comm), Venice, Italy, November 3-6, 2014, 320-325, doi:
10.1109/SmartGridComm.2014.7007666

[27] Sreenivasareddy PS, Chowdhury SP, Chowdhury S
(2010) PMU Placement- A Comparative Survey and Re-
view. IET International Conference on Developments in
Power System Protection, Manchester, UK, March 29-
April 1, 2010, 1-4, doi: 10.1049/cp.2010.0326

[28] Aamre K, Centeno VA, Pal A (2015) Uniﬁed PMU Place-
ment Algorithm for Power Systems. North American Power
Symposium (NAPS), Charlotte, NC, October 4-6, 2015, 1-
6, doi: 10.1109/NAPS.2015.7335254

[29] Parvez I, Sarwat AI, Wei L, Sundararajan A (2016)
Securing Metering Infrastructure of Smart Grid: A Ma-
chine Learning and Localization Based Key Manage-
ment Approach. MDPI Journal of Energies 9(9), doi:
10.3390/en9090691

[30] Parvez I, Jamei M, Sundararajan A, Sarwat AI (2014)
RSS based loop-free compass routing protocol for data
communication in advanced metering infrastructure (AMI)
of Smart Grid. In: Proceedings of 2014 IEEE Symposium
on Computational Intelligence Applications in Smart Grid
(CIASG), Orlando, FL, USA, December 9-12, 2014, 1-6,
doi: 10.1109/CIASG.2014.7011570

[31] Negash K, Khan B, Yohannes E (2016) Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence Versus Conventional Mathematical Techniques: A
Review for Optimal Placement for Phasor Measurement
Units. Technological Economic Smart Grids Sustainable
Energy, doi: 10.1007/s40866-016-0009-y

[32] Rahman NHA, Zobaa AF (2016) Optimal PMU Place-
ment using topology transformation method in power sys-
tems. Journal of Advanced Research, 7:6-625-634, doi:
10.1016/j.jare.2016.06.003

[33] Nazari-Heris M, Mohammed-Ivatloo B (2016) Applica-
tion of heuristic algorithms to optimal PMU placement
in electric power systems: An updated review. Renew-
able and Sustainable Energy Reviews 50:214-228, doi:
10.1016/j.rser.2015.04.152

[34] Chouhan D, Jaiswal V (2016) A Literature Review
on Optimal Placement of PMU and Voltage Stability.
Indian Journal of Science & Technology, 9(47):1-7, doi:
10.17485/ijst/2016/v9i47/101724

[35] Meier A, Stewart E, McEachern A, et al (2017) Pre-
cision Micro-Synchrophasors for Distribution Systems: A
Summary of Applications. IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid. 8:2926-2936, doi: 10.1109/TSG.2017.2720543

[36] Sexauer J, Javanbakht P, Mohaghehi S (2013) Phasor
Measurement Units for the Distribution Grid: Necessity
and Beneﬁts. In: Proceedings of IEEE PES Innovative
Smart Grid Technologies, Washington DC, February 24-
27, 2013, 1-7, doi: 10.1109/ISGT.2013.6497828
(2011)
[37] Singh B, Sharma NK, Tiwari AN, et al
Applications of Phasor Measurement Units
(PMUs)
in electric power system networks incorporated with
FACTS controllers. International Journal of Engineer-
ing, Science and Technology 3(3):64-82, accessed from:
https://www.ajol.info/index.php/%EE%80%80ijest%EE%
80%81/article/viewFile/68423/56504

[38] Sanchez-Ayala G, Aguerc JR, Elizondo D, et al (2013)
Current trends on applications of PMUs in distribution
systems. In: Proceedings of IEEE PES Innovative Smart
Grid Technologies (ISGT), Washington DC, February 24-
27, 2013, doi: 10.1109/ISGT.2013.6497923

[39] Lee H, Tushar, Cui B, et al (2017) A review of syn-
chrophasor applications in smart grid. WIREs Energy En-
viron, 6(3):1-31, doi: 10.1002/wene.223

Improve Reliability Task Force

[40] Lauby M (2010) Real-time Application of PMUs
(RAPIR TF).
from:

to
NERC
https://www.nerc.com/comm/oc/related%20ﬁles%20dl
/rapir oc slides.pdf

Presentation,

Technical

accessed

[41] Mohanta DK, Murthy C, Roy DS (2016) A Brief Review
of Phasor Measurement Units as Sensors for Smart Grid.
Electric Power Components and Systems 44:411-425, doi:
10.1080/15325008.2015.1117538

[42] NASPI PMU Applications Requirements Task Force
White Paper (2017) PMU Data Quality: A Framework for
the Attributes of PMU Data Quality and a Methodology
for Examining Data Quality Impacts to Synchropha-
sor Applications. NASPI Technical Report, accessed
from: https://www.naspi.org/sites/default/ﬁles/reference
documents/PARTF WhitePaper 20170314 Final PNNL
26313.pdf

[43] Christoforidis GP, Meliopoulos APS (1990) Eﬀects
of Modeling on the Accuracy of Harmonic Analysis.
IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 5:1598-1607, doi:
10.1109/61.58006

[44] Zhu F, Youssef A, Hamouda W (2016) Detec-
tion Techniques for Data-Level Spooﬁng in GPS-Based
Phasor Measurement Units.
International Conference
on Selected Topics
in Mobile & Wireless Network-
ing (MoWNeT), Cairo, Egypt, April 11-13, 2016, doi:
10.1109/MoWNet.2016.7496634

[45] Yang B, Yamazaki J, Saito N, et al (2015) Big Data
Analytic Empowered Grid Applications- Is PMU a big data
issue?. In: Proceedings of 12th International Conference on
the European Energy Market (EEM), Lisbon, Portugal,
May 19-22, 2015, doi: 10.1109/EEM.2015.7216718

[46] Rahman NHA, Zobaa AF (2016) Optimal PMU place-
ment using Topology transformation method In power
systems. Journal of Advanced Research, 7(5):625-34, doi:
10.1016/j.jare.2016.06.003

[47] Veda

of

S, Chaudhuri NR, Baone CA,

al
of Data Quality
Impact
(2014) Assessment
PMU-Based Applications. CIGRE US Na-
on
Sympo-
of
tional Committee Grid
accessed from: http://cigre-usnc.tamu.edu/wp-
sium,
content/uploads/2015/06/Assessment-of-Impact-of-Data-
Quality-on-PMU-Based-Applications.pdf

the Future

et

A Survey on Synchrophasor Data Quality and Cybersecurity Challenges, and Evaluation of their Interdependencies

15

[48] Zhu K (1988) A method for plausibility checks and data
validation in power systems. IEEE Transactions on power
systems, 3(1):267-271, doi: 10.1109/59.43210

[49] Danielson CFM, Vanfretti L, Almas MS, Choom-
poobutrgool Y, Gjerde JO (2013) Analysis of communi-
cation network challenges for synchrophasor-based wide-
area applications. Bulk Power System Dynamics and
Control
IX Optimization, Security and Control of
the Emerging Power Grid (IREP), 2013 IREP Sym-
posium, Rethymno, Greece, August 25-30, 2013, doi:
10.1109/IREP.2013.6629379

-

[50] Hu Y, Novosel D (2006) Challenges in Implementing
a large-scale PMU System. Power System Technology
PowerCon, Chongqing, China, October 22-26, 2006, doi:
10.1109/ICPST.2006.321829

[51] Jones KD, Pal A, Thorp JS (2015) Methodology for Per-
forming Synchrophasor Data conditioning and validation.
IEEE transactions on Power Systems, 30(3):1121-1130, doi:
10.1109/TPWRS.2014.2347047

[52] Huang C, Li F, Zhan L, et al (2016) Data quality is-
sues for synchrophasor applications Part II: problem for-
mulation and potential solutions. Journal of modern power
systems and clean Energy, 4:353-361, doi: 10.1007/s40565-
016-0213-8

[53] Huang C, Li F, Zhan L, et al (2016) Data quality issues
for synchrophasor applications Part I: a review. Journal of
modern power systems and clean Energy, 4:342-352, doi:
10.1007/s40565-016-0217-4

[54] Shepard DP, Humphreys TE (2012) Evaluation of the
Vulnerability of Phasor Measurement Units to GPS Spoof-
ing Attacks. Sixth Annual IFIP WG 11.10 International
Journal on Critical Infrastructure Protection, 5:146-153,
doi: 10.1016/j.ijcip.2012.09.003

[55] Morris T, Pan S, Lewis J, et al (2011) Cybersecurity
Testing of Substation Phasor Measurement Units and Pha-
sor Data Concentrators. In: Proceedings of the Seventh
Annual Workshop on Cyber Security and Information In-
telligence Research, ACM New York, USA, Article 24, doi:
10.1145/2179298.2179324

[56] Hao Y, Wang M, Chow J (2015) Likelihood of Cyber
Data Injection Attacks to Power Systems. Signal and In-
formation Processing (GlobalSIP), IEEE Global Confer-
ence on, Orlando, FL, USA, December 14-16, 2015, doi:
10.1109/GlobalSIP.2015.7418278

[57] Kumar S, Soni MK, Jain DK (2015) Cyber Se-
curity Threats
in Synchrophasor System in Wide
Area Monitoring System. TELKOMNIKA Indonesian
Journal of Electrical Engineering, 15(3):436-444, doi:
10.11591/ijeecs.v15.i3.pp436-444

[58] Lin H, Deng Y, Shukla S, et al (2012) Cyber security
impacts on all-PMU state estimator-a case study on co-
simulation platform GECO. In: Proceedings of IEEE Third
International Conference on Smart Grid Communications
(SmartGridComm), Tainan, Taiwan, November 5-8, 2012,
doi: 10.1109/SmartGridComm.2012.6486049
synchropha-
power
security vulnerabilities. Master’s
sor network cyber
Dissertation, Clemson University,
from:
https://tigerprints.clemson.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article
=2995&context=all theses

[59] Beasley CT (2014) Electric

accessed

[60] Rizzetti TA, Canha LN, Milbradt R, et al (2015)
Security Aspects on PMU data communication Based
on IP Networks in Smart Grids.
In: Proceedings of
23rd
on Electricity Dis-
tribution, Lyon, June 15-18, 2015, accessed from:
http://cired.net/publications/cired2015/papers/CIRED
2015 1477 ﬁnal.pdf

International Conference

[61] Saxena N, Choi BJ (2015) State of the Art Authenti-
cation, Access Control, and Secure Integration in Smart
Grid. MDPI Journal of Energies, 8(10):11883-11915, doi:
10.3390/en81011883

[62] Deng Y, Shukla S (2012) Vulnerabilities and Coun-
termeasures A Survey on the Cyber Security Issues
in the Transmission Subsystem of a Smart Grid. Jour-
nal of Cyber Security and Mobility, accessed from:
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Vulnerabilities-
and-Countermeasures-%E2%80%93-A-Survey-on-a-Deng-
Shukla/6c4b97cc4f70fb34cad8c2b03f7fb5dfb8a5e84d

detection

[63] Pan S (2014) Cybersecurity testing
for

and intru-
sion
systems.
PhD Dissertation, Mississippi State, accessed from:
https://search.proquest.com/docview/1640913316?pq-
origsite=gscholar

cyber-physical

power

[64] Ashok A, Hahn A, Govindarasu M (2014) Cyber-
physical security of Wide-Area Monitoring, Protection and
Control in a smart grid environment. Journal of Advanced
Research, 5(4):481-489, doi: 10.1016/j.jare.2013.12.005
[65] Adhikari U, Morris T, Pan S (2016) WAMS Cyber-
Physical Test Bed for Power System, Cybersecurity Study,
and Data Mining. IEEE Transactions in Smart Grid,
8(6):2744-2753, doi: 10.1109/TSG.2016.2537210

[66] Paudel S, Smith P, Zseby T (2016) Data Integrity At-
tacks in Smart Grid Wide Area Monitoring. In: Proceed-
ings of the 4th International Symposium for ICS & SCADA
Cyber Security Research, Queen’s Belfast University, UK,
74-83, doi: 10.14236/ewic/ICS2016.9

[67] Akyol BA (2012) Cyber Security Challenges in Us-
ing Cloud Computing in the Electric Utility In-
dustry. DOE Technical Report by Paciﬁc North-
west National Laboratory (PNNL), accessed from:
https://www.pnnl.gov/main/publications/external/ tech-
nical reports/PNNL-21724.pdf

[68] Weekes MA, Hydro M, Hydro KWM (2007) PMU Chal-
lenges and Performance Issues. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
Power Engineering Society General Meeting, Tampa, FL,
USA, June 24-28, 2007, doi: 10.1109/PES.2007.386004
[69] Song H, Wu J, Wu K (2014) A Wide-Area Measurement
Systems-Based Adaptive Strategy for Controlled Island-
ing in Bulk Power Systems. MDPI Journal of Energies,
7(4):2631-2657, doi: 10.3390/en7042631

[70] Johnson

(2017)

A
Synchrophasors.

Standards
IEEE

PES

with
Meeting

ated
eral
accessed
https://www.naspi.org/sites/default/ﬁles/2017-
03/01 sce johnson Standards Associated with
Synchrophasors 20161019.pdf

Presentation,

Associ-
Gen-
from:

[71] Martin K (2015) Synchrophasor Measurements Un-
der the IEEE Standard C37.118.1-2011 With Amend-
ment C37.118.1a. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery,
30(3):1514-1522, doi: 10.1109/TPWRD.2015.2403591

[72] Ali I, Aftab MA, Hussain SMS (2016) Performance com-
parison of IEC 61850-90-5 and IEEE C37.118.2 based wide
area PMU communication networks. Journal of Modern
Power Systems Clean Energy (MPCE), 4(3):487-495, doi:
10.1007/s40565-016-0210-y

[73] Retty HA (2013) Evaluation and Standardizing of Pha-
sor Data Concentrators. Masters Thesis, Virginia Poly-
technic Institute and State University, accessed from:
http://hdl.handle.net/10919/32064

[74] Premerlani WJ, Kasztenny BZ, Adamiak MG
(2006) System and Method for Synchronized Pha-
sor Measurement. United States Patent Application
Publication, US 2006/0247874 A1,
accessed from:
https://patents.google.com/patent/US7444248

16

Aditya Sundararajan, Tanwir Khan, Amir Moghadasi, Arif I. Sarwat

[75] (2011) IEEE Standard for Synchrophasor Data Trans-
fer for Power Systems. IEEE Power and Energy So-
ciety Standard, published on December 28, 2011, doi:
10.1109/IEEESTD.2011.6111222

[76] Phadke AG, Thorp JS (2017) Synchronized Pha-
sor Measurements and Their Applications. Springer
Science+Business Media, Edition 2, accessed from:
https://www.springer.com/us/book/9783319505824

[77] Rihan M, Ahmed M, Beg MS (2011) Phasor measure-
ment units in the Indian smart grid. In: Proceedings of
IEEE Conference on Innovative Smart Grid Technologies
India (ISGT India), Kollam, Kerala, India, December 1-3,
2011, doi: 10.1109/ISET-India.2011.6145392

accessed

[78] NASPI Time Synchronization Task Force

(2017)
Time Synchronization in the Electric Power Sys-
tem. NASPI Technical Report,
from:
https://www.naspi.org/sites/default/ﬁles/reference
documents/tstf electric power system report pnnl 26331
march 2017 0.pdf
IEEE
Power
Society

sors
Energy
accessed
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1611105/,
10.1109/IEEESTD.2006.99376

Synchropha-
and
Power
from:
doi:

Standard
Systems.

for
IEEE

[79] (2006)

Standard,

for

[80] Kezunovic M, Dutta P (2011) The Role of Data
Exchange Standards in Developing Automated Fault Dis-
turbance Monitoring. In: Proceedings of 6th International
Workshop on Deregulated Electricity Market Issues in
South-Eastern Europe (DEMSEE), 1-6, accessed from:
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/f8c3/8c8d8aac32b6cb
fa1d84948db977fc8d6a8e.pdf

[81] (2011)

for

IEEE Standard for Synchrophasor Mea-
Power
Systems.
from:
doi:

surements
and
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6111219/,
10.1109/IEEESTD.2011.6111219

IEEE
accessed

Standard,

Society

Energy

Power

[82] (2014)

IEEE Guide
centrator Requirements
tection, Control,
and
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6514039/,
10.1109/IEEESTD.2013.6514039

for Phasor Data Con-
System Pro-
for Power
IEEE Power
and Monitoring.
from:
doi:

Standard,

accessed

Society

Energy

[83] Chai J, Liu Y, Guo J, et al (2016) Wide-area Measure-
ment Data Analytics Using FNET/GridEye: A Review.
Power Systems Computation Conference, Genoa, Italy,
June 20-24, 2016, doi: 10.1109/PSCC.2016.7540946

[84] Eissa MM, El-Mesalawy MM, Liu Y, et al (2012) Wide
Area Synchronized Frequency Measurement System Ar-
chitecture with Secure Communication for 500kV/220kV
Egyptian Grid. IEEE International Conference on Smart
Grid Engineering (SGE‘12), Oshawa, Canada, August 27-
29, 2012, doi: 10.1109/SGE.2012.6463967

[85] Liu Y (2014) FNET/GridEye. Technical Docu-
ment of Oak Ridge National Laboratory, accessed from:
https://web.ornl.gov/sci/renewables/docs/factsheets/FNET-
GridEye-Factsheet.pdf

[86] Stenbakken G, Zhou M (2007) Dynamic Phasor Mea-
surement Unit Test System. In: Proceedings of IEEE Power
Engineering Society General Meeting, Tampa, FL, USA,
June 24-28, 2007, doi: 10.1109/PES.2007.386139

[87] Wang L, Burgett J, Zuo J, et al (2007) Frequency
Disturbance Recorder Design and Developments.
In:
Proceedings of IEEE Power Engineering Society Gen-
eral Meeting, Tampa, FL, USA, June 24-28, 2007, doi:
10.1109/PES.2007.385880

[88] Wang L (2010) Next Generation Frequency Distur-
bance Recorder Design and Timing Analysis. Doctor of

Philosophy Dissertation Thesis Report, Virginia Poly-
technic Institute and State University, accessed from:
http://hdl.handle.net/10919/77096

[89] Culliss JA (2015) A 3rd Generation Frequency
Disturbance Recorder: A Secure, Low Cost Syn-
Disser-
chrophasor Measurement
tation, University
from:
https://trace.tennessee.edu/utk graddiss/3495/

Device.
of Tennessee,

PhD
accessed

[90] IEEE Power and Energy Society (2013) IEEE Standard
for Intelligent Electronic Devices Cyber Security Capa-
bilities. IEEE Power and Energy Society Standard, doi:
10.1109/IEEESTD.2014.6704702

[91] IEEE Power and Energy Society (2014) IEEE Standard
Cybersecurity Requirements for Substation Automation,
Protection, and Control Systems. IEEE Power and Energy
Society Standard, doi: 10.1109/IEEESTD.2015.7024885
[92] IEEE Power and Energy Society (2011) IEEE Trial-Use
Standard for a Cryptographic Protocol for Cyber Security
for Substation Serial Links. IEEE Power and Energy Soci-
ety Standard, doi: 10.1109/IEEESTD.2011.5715000

[93] Firouzi SR, Hooshyar H, Mahmood F, et al (2016) An
IEC 61850-90-5 Gateway for IEEE C37.118.2 Synchropha-
sor Data Transfer. In: Proceedings of 6th NASPI-ISGAN
International Synchrophasor Symposium, Boston, MA,
USA, July 17-21, 2016, doi: 10.1109/PESGM.2016.7741393
[94] Mackiewicz R (2006) Overview of IEC 61850 and Ben-
eﬁts. IEEE PES Power Systems Conference and Expo-
sition, Atlanta, GA, October 29-November 1, 2006, doi:
10.1109/PSCE.2006.296392

[95] International Electrotechnical Commission

(2013)
Common format for transient data exchange (COM-
TRADE) for power systems. IEC 60255-24 Part 24, doi:
10.1109/IEEESTD.2013.6512503

[96] SGIP (2010) Introduction to NISTIR 7628 Guidelines for
Smart Grid Cyber Security. The Smart Grid Interoperabil-
ity Panel Cyber Security Working Group Report, accessed
from: https://www.smartgrid.gov/ﬁles/nistir 7628 .pdf
[97] Sun CC, Liu CC, Xie J (2016) Cyber-Physical System
Security of a Power Grid: State-of-the-Art. MDPI Journal
of Electronics, 5(3):40, doi: 0.3390/electronics5030040
[98] Mehta H (2011) Will the current set of standards assure
measurement subsystem interoperability?. NASPI PSTT
Meeting Report

[99] Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, National Insti-
tute of Standards & Technology Team (2017) Synchropha-
sor Data Quality Attributes and a Methodology for Ex-
amining Data Quality Impacts Upon Synchrophasor Ap-
plications – Overview. NASPI Technical Report, accessed
from: https://www.nist.gov/publications/synchrophasor-
data-quality-attributes-and-methodology-examining-data-
quality-impacts

[100] (2013)

IEEE Guide for Synchronization, Calibra-
tion, Testing, and Installation of Phasor Measurement
Units (PMUs) for Power System Protection and Con-
trol. IEEE Power and Energy Society Standard, doi:
10.1109/IEEESTD.2013.6475134

[101] (2010)

IEEE Standard for Common Format

for
Event Data Exchange (COMFEDE)
for Power Sys-
tems. IEEE Power and Energy Society Standard, doi:
10.1109/IEEESTD.2010.5638582

[102] Huang C, Li F, Zhou D, et al (2016) Data Quality Issues
for Synchrophasor Applications Part I: A Review. Journal
of Modern Power Systems and Clean Energy 4(3):342-352,
doi: 10.1007/s40565-016-0217-4

[103] Sarwat AI, Sundararajan A, Parvez I, et al (2018)
Toward a Smart City of Interdependent Critical Infras-
tructure Networks. Sustainable Interdependent Networks,
chapter 3, 21-45, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-74412-4 3

A Survey on Synchrophasor Data Quality and Cybersecurity Challenges, and Evaluation of their Interdependencies

17

[104] Sarwat AI, Sundararajan A, Parvez I (2017) Trends and
Future Directions of Research for Smart Grid IoT Sensor
Networks. In: Proceedings of International Symposium on
Sensor Networks, Systems and Security, Chapter 3, doi:
10.1007/978-3-319-75683-7 4

[105] Aminifar F, Fotuhi-Firuzabad M, Safdarian A, et al
92014) Synchrophasor Measurement Technology in Power
Systems: Panorama and State-of-the-Art. IEEE Access,
2:1607-1628, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2015.2389659

[106] Zhang Y, Markham P, Xia T, et al (2010) Wide-Area
Frequency Monitoring Network (FNET) Architecture and
Applications, IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 1(2):159-
167, doi: 10.1109/TSG.2010.2050345

[107] Yuill W, Edwards A, Chowdhury S, et al (2011) Opti-
mal PMU placement: A comprehensive literature review.
In: Proceedings of IEEE Power and Energy Society Gen-
eral Meeting, Detroit, MI, USA, July 24-29, 2011, doi:
10.1109/PES.2011.6039376

[108] Manousakis NM, Korres GN, Georgilakis PS (2011)
Optimal placement of phasor measurement units: A liter-
ature review. International Conference on Intelligent Sys-
tem Applications to Power Systems, Hersonissos, Greece,
September 25-28, 2011, doi: 10.1109/ISAP.2011.6082183

[109] NERC

(2010)

Real-Time

Application

for

Synchrophasors
NERC
accessed
https://www.smartgrid.gov/document/real time
application synchrophasors improving reliability

Report:1-77,

Improving

Technical

of
Reliability.
from:

[110] NASPI

PRSVTT,
(2016)

NASPI
Categorizing

DNMTT Work-
Phasor Mea-
by Application Data Require-
accessed
related
https://www.naspi.org/sites/default/ﬁles/2016-

ing Group
surement Units
ments. Draft
from:
09/naspi prsvtt report 20141023.pdf

Report,

article

[111] Idaho National Laboratory (INL) (2016) Cyber Threat
and Vulnerability Analysis of the U.S. Electric Sector.
Mission Support Center Analysis Report, accessed from:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/ﬁles/2017/01/f34
/Cyber%20Threat%20and%20Vulnerability%20Analysis
%20of%20the%20U.S.%20Electric%20Sector.pdf

[112] Reinhard K, Pinte B, Kirihara K, et al (2015) Syn-
chrophasor Data Quality Activity Research Update. Trust-
worthy Cyber Infrastructure for the Smart Grid, accessed
https://tcipg.org/sites/default/ﬁles/rgroup/tcipg-
from:
reading-group-spring 2015 02-27 0.pdf

[113] Sundararajan A, Khan T, Aburub H, et al (2018) A
Tri-Modular Human-on-the-Loop Framework for Intelli-
gent Smart Grid Cyber-Attack Visualization. IEEE South-
east Conference, Tampa, FL, April 18-22, 2018

[114] Beasley C, Venayagamoorthy GK, Brooks R (2014)
Cyber security evaluation of synchrophasors in a power
system. Clemson University Power Systems Confer-
ence, Clemson, SC, USA, March 11-14, 2014, doi:
10.1109/PSC.2014.6808100

[115] Stewart J, Maufer T, Smith R, et al (2011) Syn-
chrophasor Security Practices. 14th Annual Georgia
Tech Fault
and Disturbance Analysis Conference,
Atlanta, GA, USA, May 9-10, 2011, accessed from:
https://cdn.selinc.com/assets/Literature/Publications/
Technical%20Papers/6449 SynchrophasorSecurity EE
20100913 Web.pdf?v=20150812-082045
[116] US Department of Energy (DOE)

(2016) Ad-
vancement of Synchrophasor Technology in Projects
Funded by the American Recovery and Reinvest-
ment Act
of Electricity Deliv-
ery and Energy Reliability Report, accessed from:

2009. Oﬃce

of

https://www.energy.gov/oe/downloads/advancement-
synchrophasor-technology-projects-funded-american-
recovery-and-reinvestment

[117] Huang Z, Kasztenny B, Madani V, et al (2008)
Performance Evaluation of Phasor Measurement Sys-
tems. IEEE Power Engineering Society General Meet-
ing, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, July 20-24, 2008, doi:
10.1109/PES.2008.4596880

[118] Stenbakken G, Huang H, Martin, K, et al (2007)
PMU System Testing and Calibration Guide. Techni-
cal Report for the North American SynchroPhasor Ini-
tiative, Performance and Standard Task Team, accessed
from: https://www.naspi.org/sites/default/ﬁles/reference
documents/pmu system test guide 20071230.pdf
(2007)

SynchroPhasor Measure-
ment Accuracy Characterization. Technical Report for
the North American SynchroPhasor
Initiative, Per-
formance and Standard Task Team, accessed from:
https://www.naspi.org/node/657

[119] Meliopoulos

S

[120] Taft J (2018) Assessment of Existing Synchropha-
sor Networks. Paciﬁc Northwest National Labora-
tory (PNNL) Technical Report, April 2018, accessed
from:
https://gridarchitecture.pnnl.gov/media/white-
papers/Synchrophasor net assessment ﬁnal.pdf

[121] Kumar S, Soni MK, Jain DK (2015) Cyber Secu-
rity Threats in Synchrophasor System in WAMS. Inter-
national Journal of Computer Applications, 115(8):17-22,
doi: 10.1.1.695.2420

[122] Oleka EU, Khanal A, Osareh AR, et al. (2015) Explor-
ing the Challenging Issues with Synchrophasor Technology
Deployments in Electric Power Grids. International Jour-
nal of Energy and Power Engineering, 9(9):1085-1088, doi:
10.1999/1307-6892/10002927

[123] Esfahani MS (2014) Security Analysis of Pha-
Smart Grid Com-
sor Measurement Units
Thesis,
munication
University
from:
Nebraska-Lincoln,
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article
=1038&context=ceendiss

in
Infrastructures.

Master’s

accessed

of

[124] Landford J, Meier R, Barella R, et al. (2016) Fast
Sequence Component Analysis for Attack Detection in
Synchrophasor Networks. 5th International Conference
on Smart Cities and Green ICT Systems (SMART-
GREENS), Rome, Italy, April 23-25, 2016, accessed from:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7951353/

[125] Pal S, Sikdar B, Chow J (2016) Detecting Data
Integrity Attacks on SCADA Systems Using Limited
PMUs. IEEE International Conference on Smart Grid
Communications (SmartGridComm), Sydney, NSW, Aus-
tralia, November 6-9, 2016, doi: 10.1109/SmartGrid-
Comm.2016.7778818

[126] Pal S, Sikdar B (2014) A Mechanism for Detecting Data
Manipulation Attacks on PMU Data. IEEE International
Conference on Communication Systems, Macau, China,
November 19-21, 2014, doi: 10.1109/ICCS.2014.7024804
[127] University of Tennessee Knoxville (2012) Frequency
Disturbance Recorder
Installation Guide.
UT Knoxville User Guide Report, accessed from:
https://powerit.utk.edu/fdr/FDRInstallAndConﬁgGuide
.pdf

(FDR)

[128] Fan X, Du L, Duan D (2017) Synchrophasor Data
Correction under GPS Spooﬁng Attack: A State Estima-
tion Based Approach. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid,
9(5):4538-4546, doi: 10.1109/TSG.2017.2662688

[129] Almas MS, Vanfretti L, Singh RS (2017) Vulnerability
of Synchrophasor-based WAMPAC Applications’ to Time

18

Aditya Sundararajan, Tanwir Khan, Amir Moghadasi, Arif I. Sarwat

Synchronization Spooﬁng. 9(5):4601-4612, IEEE Transac-
tions in Smart Grid, doi: 10.1109/TSG.2017.2665461

Advances in Signal Processing 73-81, doi: 10.1186/s13634-
015-0203-4

[143] Maass H, Cakmak HK, S W, et al (2013) First eval-
uation results using the new electrical data recorder
IEEE Transactions on In-
for power grid analysis.
strumentation and Measurement 62(9):2384-2390, doi:
10.1109/TIM.2013.2270923

[144] Wu H, Giri J (2006) PMU Impact on State Estimation
Reliability for Improved Grid Security. In: Proceedings of
2005/2006 IEEE/PES Transmission and Distribution Con-
ference and Exhibition, Dallas, TX, USA, May 21-24, 2006,
doi: 10.1109/TDC.2006.1668709

[145] Castello P, Ferrari P, Flammini A, et al (2015) A
distributed PMU for electrical substations with wire-
less redundant process bus. IEEE Transactions on In-
strumentation and Measurement 64(5):1149-1157, doi:
10.1109/TIM.2014.2363749

[146] Dua D, Dambhare S, Gajbhiye RK, et al (2008) Opti-
mal multistage scheduling of PMU placement: An ILP ap-
proach. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 23(4):1812-
1820, doi: 10.1109/TPWRD.2008.919046

[147] Tong Y (2015) Data Security and Privacy in Smart
Grid. PhD Dissertation, University of Tennessee, accessed
from: https://trace.tennessee.edu/utk graddiss/3476

[148] Lau F, Rubin SH, Smith MH, et al (2000) Distributed
denial of service attacks. IEEE Inter-National Conference
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Nashville, TN, USA,
October 8-11, 2000, doi: 10.1109/ICSMC.2000.886455
[149] Liu L, Esmalifalak M, Ding Q, et al (2014) Detect-
ing False Data Injection Attacks on Power Grid by Sparse
Optimization. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 5(2):612-
621, doi: 10.1109/TSG.2013.2284438

[150] Zhang J, Domnguez-Garca AD (2014) On the failure
of power system automatic generation control due to mea-
surement noise. In: Proceedings of 2014 IEEE PES General
Meeting & Conference Exposition, National Harbor, MD,
USA, July 27-31, 2014, doi: 10.1109/PESGM.2014.6939464
[151] Hastings J, Laverty Dm, Morrow DJ (2014) Securing
the smart grid. Power Engineering Conference (UPEC),
49th International Universities, Cluj-Napoca, Romania,
September 2-5, 2014, doi: 10.1109/UPEC.2014.6934753

[152] Srivastava AK (2015) Meeting

PMU Data
for Mission Critical Ap-
from:

PSERC Webinar,

Quality Requirements
plications.
https://pserc.wisc.edu/documents/general information
/presentations/pserc seminars/announcements/2015
webinars/Srivastava PSERC Webinar Nov 2015
Announcement.pdf

accessed

and control

[153] Zhu K (2013) Data Quality in wide-area Mon-
systems, PMU data Latency,
of wide-Area Damp-
Institute
https://www.diva-

itoring
Completeness,
and Design
ing Systems. Master’s Thesis, KTH Royal
of Technology,
accessed
portal.org/smash/get/diva2:649889/FULLTEXT01.pdf

from:

[130] Yu DY, Ranganathan A, Locher T, et al (2014) Short
paper: detection of GPS spooﬁng attacks in power grids.
In: Proceedings of the 2014 ACM conference on Security
and privacy in wireless & mobile networks, Oxford UK,
July 23-25, 2014, doi: 10.1145/2627393.2627398

[131] Aman MN, Sikdar B (2016) Detecting data tamper-
ing attacks in synchrophasor networks using time hopping.
IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference
Europe (ISGT-Europe), Ljubljana, Slovenia, October 9-12,
2016, doi: 10.1109/ISGTEurope.2016.7856326

[132] Wu M, Xie L (2017) Online Detection of False
Data Injection Attacks
to Synchrophasor Measure-
ments: A Data-Driven Approach. Proceedings of the
50th Hawaii International Conference on System Sci-
ences, doi: 10.24251/HICSS.2017.389, accessed from:
http://hdl.handle.net/10125/41544

[133] Pal S, Sikdar B, Chow J (2017) Classiﬁcation and De-
tection of PMU Data Manipulation Attacks Using Trans-
mission Line Parameters. IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, 9(5):5057-5066, doi: 10.1109/TSG.2017.2679122
[134] Mao Z, Xu T, Overbye TJ (2017) Real-time Detec-
tion of Malicious PMU Data. 19th International Confer-
ence on Intelligent System Application to Power Systems
(ISAP), San Antonio, TX, USA, September 17-20, 2017,
doi: 10.1109/ISAP.2017.8071368

[135] Zhang J, Chu Z, Sankar L, et al (2017) False Data
Injection Attacks on Phasor Measurements That Bypass
Low-rank Decomposition. IEEE International Conference
on Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), Dres-
den, Germany, October 23-27, 2017, doi: 10.1109/Smart-
GridComm.2017.8340729

[136] Khan R, Albalushi A, McLaughlin K, et al. (2017)
Model based Intrusion Detection System for Synchropha-
sor Applications in Smart Grid. IEEE Power & Energy
Society General Meeting, Chicago, IL, USA, July 16-20,
2017, doi: 10.1109/PESGM.2017.8274687

[137] Armenia A, Chow JH (2010) A Flexible Phasor Data
Concentrator Design Leveraging Existing Software Tech-
nologies. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 1(1):73-81, doi:
10.1109/TSG.2010.2046509

[138] Terzija V, Valverde G, Cai D, et al (2010) Wide-
Area Monitoring, protection, and control of future elec-
tric power networks. Proceedings of IEEE, 99(1):80-93, doi:
10.1109/JPROC.2010.2060450

[139] Cokkinides GJ, Miliopoulos APS, Stefopoulos G, et
al (2007) Visualization and Characterization of Stabil-
ity Swings via GPS-Synchronized Data. In: Proceedings
of 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on Sys-
tem Sciences, Waikoloa, HI, USA, January 3-7, 2007, doi:
10.1109/HICSS.2007.607

[140] Stenbakken G, Nelson T (2007) Static Calibration
and Dynamic Characterization of PMUs at NIST. In:
Proceedings of IEEE Power Engineering Society Gen-
eral Meeting, Tampa, FL, USA, June 24-28, 2007, doi:
10.1109/PES.2007.385974

[141] Zhu H, Shi Y (2014) Phasor Measurement Unit
Placement for Identifying Power Line Outages in Wide-
Area Transmission System Monitoring. In: Proceedings
of 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Sci-
ences, Waikoloa, HI, USA, January 6-9, 2014, doi:
10.1109/HICSS.2014.311

[142] Maa H, Cakmak HK, Bach F, et al (2015) Data process-
ing of high-rate low-voltage distribution grid recordings for
smart grid monitoring and analysis. EURASIP Journal on

