Building  Confidence  not  to  be  Phished  through 
a Gamified Approach: Conceptualising User’s 
Self-Efficacy  in  Phishing  Threat  Avoidance 
Behaviour 

Gitanjali Baral and Nalin Asanka Gamagedara Arachchilage 
School of Engineering and Information technology 
University of New South Wales at Canberra, Australia 
g.baral@student.adfa.edu.au  
nalin.asanka@adfa.edu.au 

Abstract.  Phishing attacks are prevalent and humans are central to  this 
online  identity  theft  attack,  which  aims  to  steal  victims’  sensitive  and 
personal  information  such  as  username,  password,  and  online  banking 
details. There are many anti-phishing tools developed to thwart  against 
phishing  attacks.  Since  humans  are  the  weakest  link  in  phishing,  it  is 
important  to  educate  them  to  detect  and  avoid  phishing  at-  tacks. 
One  can  argue  self-efficacy  is  one  of  the  most  important  determinants 
of individual’s motivation in  phishing  threat avoidance behavior,  which 
has  co-relation  with  knowledge.  The  proposed  research  endeavors on 
the  user’s  self-efficacy  in  order  to  enhance  the  individual’s  phishing 
threat  avoidance  behavior  through  their  motivation.  Using  social 
cognitive  theory,  we  explored  that  various  knowledge  attributes  such  as 
observational  (vicarious) knowledge,  heuristic knowledge and structural 
knowledge contributes immensely towards the  individual’s self-efficacy 
to  enhance  phishing  threat  prevention  behavior.  A  theoretical  frame- 
work  is  then  developed  depicting  the  mechanism  that  links  knowledge 
attributes,  self-efficacy,  threat  avoidance  motivation  that  leads  to  users’ 
threat  avoidance  behavior.  Finally,  a  gaming  prototype  is  designed  in- 
cooperating the knowledge elements identified in this research that aimed 
to  enhance  individual’s  self-efficacy  in  phishing  threat  avoidance 
behavior.   

Keywords:  Phishing  attack  ·  Self-Efficacy  ·  Knowledge  ·  Threat 
avoidance motivation and behavior · Gamification/Gamified approach. 

1  Introduction 

The  “Wannacry  Ransomeware”  attack, in  year  2017, is  one  of  the  biggest  cyber 
attack  in  20th  century  which  has  affected  150  countries  worldwide.  This  crypto 
worm  infected  more  than  230,000  computers  with  over  200,000  victims  held  for 
ransom  of  $300-$600  (via  bitcoin)  [19].  This  Wannacry  Ransomware  initially 
started propagating  through  a  phishing  attack  (i.e.  phishing  email).  Phishing 
is  an  online  identity  theft,  in  which,  the  perpetrator  attempts  to  steal  victims’ 
sensitive  and  personal  information  such  as  username,  password,  online  banking 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

No Author Given 

details, personal and  professional credentials [11] [13] [18]. Phishing attacks are 
carried  out  through  various  email  tricking  (a.k.a  email  spoofing)  and  website 
mimicking  (a.k.a  website  spoofing)  methods  for  social,  financial  and  organisa- 
tional  secret  service  frauds  [24, 30].  As  the  look  and  feel  of  both  legitimate  and 
fake websites and emails are same, it is quite challenging to differentiate between 
them,  thereby  making  users  prone  to  this  type  of  attack.  With  the  advancement 
in technology and widespread use of internet enabled devices, new phishing tech- 
niques  are  introduced  every  day  and  this  trend  may  continue  for  many  years  to 
come [34, 37]. 

Recently,  many  anti-phishing  solutions  have  been  proposed  and  developed  to 
avoid  and  regulate  phishing  attack  and  also  to  provide  protection  to  computer 
users  [10].  These  phishing detection  approaches  can  be  broadly  categorized  into 
three  major  categories:  Software-based  methods;  User  warning  methods;  and 
Knowledge-based methods [28]. However, the Software-based, User warning, and 
Knowledge-based approaches using computing systems are not self-operated  and 
thus  must  be  functioned  by  its  users.  In  addition,  it  is  the  user  that  provides  in- 
puts  to  the  computer  systems  and  accesses  its  expected  output  by  making  them- 
selves  as  its  integral  part  of  this  computing  system  as  well  as  phishing  solution. 
It  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  educate  users  how  to  differentiate  legitimate  and 
illegitimate  websites.  Web-based  training,  interactive  game-based  training,  con- 
textual  training  or  spear  phishing  experiments,  embedded  training  (i.e.  through 
machine  and  software  that  people  normally  use)  and  non-embedded  training  are 
some  of  the  anti-phishing  awareness  methods  used  by  the  researchers  to  build 
and  enhance  user’s  knowledge about  cyber  threats  [5]. 

Classroom  based  discussions  and  training  [33]  and  web-based  ant-phishing 
training  materials  from  organisations such as  eBay,  Microsoft,  etc  [38] are  some 
of the methods used to impart anti-phishing training to the user. Recently, Hanna 
Alghamdi [6] developed a phishing quiz mobile application to  check the phishing 
detection ability of  the user  and to assess efficacy  of online anti-phishing  educa- 
tional  materials.  However,  the  study  results  acknowledged  that  the  users  found 
trouble  in  understanding  the  phishing  avoidance  educational  materials.  The  au- 
thor  argued  that some  factors  like  language  of  the  learning  material,  complexity 
and  difficult  terminology  used  in  the  teaching  material  could  be  possible  con- 
tributing  factor.  The  author  also  argued  that  it  is  essential  to  simulate  real  life 
phishing  attacks  via  the  phishing  quiz  applications  to  observe  peoples’  reactions 
in  the  environment.  Study  conducted  by  authors  in  [7]  have  found  that  teaching 
phishing  education  does  not  always  make  the  user  better  at  recognising  what  is 
a  phish  and  differentiating  between  a  legitimate  and  fake  websites  due  to  their 
increased level  of suspiciousness.  Kumaraguru et al. [28] designed and  evaluated 
the  two  educational  interventions  for  their  embedded  training  system;  one  con- 
taining  warning  with  actionable  items  such  as  text  and  graphics,  and  the  other 
containing  comic  strip  format  to  deliver  similar  data.  Their  result  demonstrated 
that  embedded  training  was  more  effective  with  the  comic  characters  than  the 
previous  format  of  security  notices.  Authors  also  noted  that  further  implemen- 

 
 
 
 
Building Confidence not to be Phished 

3 

tation of the embedded system with different design features such as short video 
of a story is also possible. 

Game-based  learning  is  another  highly  interactive  approach  for  educating 
computer  users  to  gain  knowledge  of  phishing  attacks  while  playing  the  game 
[8] [13]. Authors in [20] designed a cyber  video game, CyberCIEGE, to provide 
security  training  to  employees  in  an  interactive  and  engaging  format  that  acted 
as  a  security  awareness  tool.  The  result  of  their  study  clearly  demonstrated  the 
effectiveness  as  well  as  flexibility  of  video  games  in  both  general  and  organi- 
sational  context.  Authors  in  [9]  designed  an  anti-phishing  mobile  gaming  tool 
for  computer  users  to  protect  themselves  from  phishing  attacks.  The  game  was 
aimed  to  enhance  the  user’s  avoidance  behaviour  through  their  motivation  to 
secure  themselves  from  phishing  attacks.  The  authors  demonstrated  the  efficacy 
of  game  based  tools  in  enhancing  the  motivation  of  users  in  avoiding  phishing 
attacks.  Authors  in  [36]  conducted  a  comparative  study  to  determine  the  effi- 
cacy  of different anti-phishing training such as playing a video game, reading the 
tutorial  of  the  game  and  reading  online  training  materials.  Authors  found  that 
the  participants  who  played  the  video  game  were  better  prepared  in  thwarting 
the  phishing  attack.  Authors  in  [14]  designed  a  prototype  of  a  mobile  game  to 
enhance  user’s  threat  avoidance  behaviour  through  their  motivation  to  combat 
against  phishing  attacks.  The  study  was  conducted  among  40  participants  with 
pre  and  post-test,  where  20  test  takers  played  the  mobile  game  and  the  rest  20 
were  asked  to  read  the  website  directly.  The  research  results  illustrated  that  mo- 
bile game participants were more successful in identifying the illegitimate website 
than  the  participants  who  read the  website  directly.  The  researchers in  this  study 
believed that the concept of  teaching users through this mobile game helps them 
to  avoid  and  protect  themselves  from  phishing  attacks.  The  advantages  of  this 
game-based  learning  methods  are  that  it  is  more  challenging,  motivating  and 
engaging  and thus,  it  delivers  more  knowledge  with  a  better  outcome  [3]. 

We, the end users or the humans, are the weakest link in the security chain 
[27]. Due to this human factor, vulnerability exists in the system which is tar- 
geted  by  the attacker. Phishing attackers take advantage of this  human vulner- 
ability (i.e., mistake made by the end user while operating a computing system) 
rather than  system  vulnerabilities  (i.e.,  flaw  or  weakness  present  in  a  system) 
by observing the  human interaction with the computers  or  by portraying  mes- 
sages [35]. This human vulnerability  may  occur  due to the lack  of confidence 
and knowledge while using a computing system and anti-phishing tool [12]. For 
example, it is always difficult to identify the potential phishing attacks without 
the confidence  and knowledge  of  using the computing system.  Unfortunately, 
computing  systems  are  not  self-operated  and  thus  must  be  functioned  by  its 
users. It is, therefore, necessary to be confident while the end-user interacts with 
the  computer  system  and  making  security  trust  decisions.  It  is  also  true  that 
these machines are unlikely to perform flawlessly without proper user interfaces, 
user knowledge and confidence. Previous research  has revealed that there is a 
co-relation between user’s knowledge and their self-efficacy. Users with more 

 
 
 
 
4 

No Author Given 

knowledge  of  phishing  attacks  are the  ones  who  are  more  confident in thwarting 
phishing attacks  [12]. 

This  research  aims  to  incorporate  the  user’s  confidence  into  a  Game  based 
learning tool,  which will  create  and enhance user awareness through  their phish- 
ing  threat  avoidance  behaviour  through  their  motivation.  The  proposed  research 
will  help  users  to  build  their  confidence  in  a  knowledge-based  way  so  that  the 
occurrence of such phishing attacks can be minimised or prevented. Thus, this re- 
search  intends to determine  if  knowledge  attributes such as  observational  knowl- 
edge  and  past-experience  knowledge  influence  on  computer  users  self-efficacy 
to  combat  against  phishing  attacks.  The  contributions  of  this  research  are;  de- 
velopment  of  a  theoretical  model  to  correlate  different  knowledge  attributes  to 
users’  self-efficacy;  and  development  of  gaming  scenarios  to  conceptualise  this 
theoretical model  to a  game  based learning tool.  This  research  focuses on inves- 
tigating  the  knowledge  factors  or  attributes  that  enhance  the  user’s  self-efficacy 
in  phishing  threat  avoidance  behaviour.  The  proposed  research  would  lead  to 
enhancement  of  user  confidence  through  their  increased  awareness and  phishing 
avoidance  behaviour.  The  outcome  of  the  proposed  research  would  contribute  in 
the reduction in number of phishing attacks. The rest of this paper is organised as 
follows.  A  background  literature  survey  on  the  proposed  research  is  provided  in 
Section 2; theoretical framework  is developed and  presented in Section 3;  while, 
Section  4  presents  a  game  design  with  a  story  that  explains  how  one  can  inte- 
grate  the  elements  derived  from  our  proposed  theoretical  model.  The  proposed 
game  design  teaches  people  how  to  thwart  phishing attacks.  The  conclusion  and 
future  work is provided in Section 5. 

2  Background  Literature 

Consideration of users’ self-efficacy factor while developing the user educational 
anti-phishing  tool  is  very  nominal  in  the  existing  literature  [6, 20, 28, 33].  In  ad- 
dition,  existing  literature  from  previous  research  has  also  revealed  that  there 
is  a  strong  relationship  between  people’s  self-efficacy  and  their  active  involve- 
ment and achievements  [18].  Bandura in  [17]  defined  self-efficacy  as  one’s  own 
judgments  about  their  capabilities  to  establish  and  execute  actions  to  acquire 
certain  target.  Bandura  also  argued  that  people  are  more  active  to  put  them- 
selves  in  certain  behaviours  if  they  think  they  are  confident  in  executing  those 
behaviours  successfully.  According  to  authors  in  [10],  it  is  necessary  to  build 
threat  perception  in  user  so  that  they  will  motivate  themselves  to  combat  phish- 
ing  attack  through  their  avoidance  behaviour.  Self-efficacy  leads  to  individual’s 
better  threat  perception  and  such  threats  are  available  on  the  cyber  space.  If 
you  are  more  knowledgeable  about  the  phishing  threats,  your  threat  perception 
would  be  significantly  high.  As  identified  by  authors  in  [35],  cyber  criminals 
target  and  exploit  human  vulnerability  rather  than  the  system  vulnerability. 
Therefore,  user-centred  security  educational  tools  should  consider  the  user  self- 
efficacy  factor  that  will  directly  motivate  them  to  perceive  threat  while  working 
on cyber-space to avoid phishing  attacks. Being  knowledgeable gives rise to  our 

 
 
 
 
Building Confidence not to be Phished 

5 

inner  confidence.  Hence,  the  more  knowledge  we  have,  the  more  confident  we 
are. 

Authors  in  [29]  proposed  a  Technology  Threat  Avoidance  Theory  (TTAT) 
model  to  describe  how  individual  IT  user’s  are  motivated  to  avoid  an  IT  threat 
by  taking  a  safeguarding  measure  when  they  perceive  an  IT  threat  exists.  The 
users’  believe  that  the  threat  can  be  avoided  by  following  safeguarding  mea- 
sures  such  as  perceived  cost  and  self-efficacy.  Research  conducted  by  authors 
in [22, 23]  has identified  the co-relationship  of self-efficacy with knowledge. For 
example,  a  user  is  more  confident  to  take  action  against  Phishing  attack  if  they 
have  knowledge on how to avoid  phishing threats [12].  TTAT  Theory shows  that 
self-efficacy  is  an  important  factor  in  determining  malicious  IT  threat  avoidance 
motivation phenomenon. In addition, author in [31] has identified that knowledge 
can  be  influenced  by  learning  procedural  and  conceptual  knowledge in  technical 
context. Consistent  with  this   relationship  authors    in   [12]  derived   a   theoreti- 
cal  model  based  on  TTAT  model.  The  derived  theoretical  model  describes  how 
an  individual  IT  users’  threat  avoidance  behaviour  is  determined  by  avoidance 
motivation  and  affected  by  self-efficacy.  The  theoretical  model  investigated  the 
effect  of  conceptual  and  procedural  knowledge  on  user’s  self-efficacy  to  com- 
bat  against  phishing  threats.  Their  study  clearly  showed  that  the  combination 
of both conceptual and procedural knowledge positively affects user’s confidence 
by  enhancing their  phishing threat  avoidance  behaviour.  However,  one  can  argue 
that  knowledge  cannot  be  limited  within  procedural  and  conceptual  knowledge 
and  there  are  other  knowledge  elements  that  help  raise  the  user’s  self-efficacy. 
Expanding user’s self-efficacy beyond conceptual and procedural knowledge will 
help  them  to  protect  themselves  from  any  potential  phishing  attacks. 

The main idea of ‘know how to do it’ knowledge is simply  procedural knowl- 
edge  [32].  Conceptual  knowledge,  on  the  other  hand, is  simply  consists  of  ideas 
that  give  some  power  to  think  (‘know  that’)  in  technological  context  [32].  Prob- 
lem  solving,  process,  strategic  thinking  are  the  ideas  behind  the  procedural 
knowledge [31].  Whereas, conceptual  knowledge  is concerned  with  relationships 
among  ‘items’  of  knowledge  [31].  The  inter-relationship  of  conceptual  and  pro- 
cedural  knowledge  is  the  idea  to  ‘know-how-to-it-by-knowing-that’.  However,  it 
is  not  sufficient to  know  ‘how’  and  ‘that’.  In  order  to  know  how,  you  must  have 
the idea to  know  why  to  do  that  [25].  Therefore, these  two (conceptual  and  pro- 
cedural  knowledge)  knowledge  learning  attributes  are  not  sufficient  to  enhance 
users’  knowledge  without  knowing  ‘why‘  to  apply  these  knowledge.  Structural 
knowledge is nothing but the idea of ‘know why’. Hence, structural knowledge is 
applicable in creation of plans and strategies, setting conditions for different  pro- 
cedures, and what to do when failure arises or when a part of information is miss- 
ing [1]. Thus, the structural knowledge enhances users’ self-efficacy. According to 
social cognitive theory, self-efficacy comes from four main sources: mastery expe- 
riences,  observational  learning,  social  persuasion  and  emotional  arousal  [15].  In 
addition, judgments of self-efficacy are the outcome of past experience, vicarious 
experience  (i.e.  the  experience  modelled  by  others),  social  persuasion/influence 
after  training  and  feedback,  and  also  from  the  physical  and  emotional  state 

 
 
6 

No Author Given 

of  individuals  [2].  Therefore,  both  observational  learning  and  past  experience 
knowledge have a strong impact to increase individuals’ self-efficacy. 

3  Theoretical Model development 

The  literature  review  in  the  previous section  has identified  that knowledge learn- 
ing attributes  have  influence  on  IT  user’s  self-efficacy.  The  proposed  theoretical 
model shown in Figure 1 is derived from the Arachchilage and  Love’s [12] theo- 
retical  model.  The  proposed  model  incorporates  various  knowledge  elements  to 
enhance users’ self efficacy and describes how users’ self efficacy influences users’ 
IT  threat  avoidance  motivation  and  IT  threat  avoidance  behaviour.  Self-efficacy 
is  influenced  by  procedural  knowledge,  conceptual  knowledge  and  their  inter- 
action  along  with  structural  knowledge,  heuristic  knowledge  and  observational 
knowledge.  Lastly,  the  research  reported  in  this  paper  attempted  to  examine 
whether  all  these  knowledge  learning  attributes  (structural  knowledge,  heuris- 
tic  knowledge  and  observational knowledge)  affects  on  IT  users’ self-efficacy  to 
combat  against  phishing  attacks. 

The  Hypotheses (H) are described as follows: 

H1:  Avoidance  behavior  is positively  influenced by  avoidance  motivation. 
H2: Avoidance motivation is positively influenced by self-efficacy. 
H3a: Procedural knowledge positively influences self-efficacy. 
H3b: Conceptual knowledge positively influences self-efficacy. 
H3c:  The  combination  of  both  procedural  and  conceptual  knowledge  positively 
influences  self-efficacy. 
H3:  The  combination  of  H3a,  H3b  and  H3c  along  with  structural  knowledge 
positively influences self-efficacy. 
H4a: Heuristic knowledge positively influences self-efficacy. 
H4b: Observational knowledge positively influences self-efficacy. 
H4c: The combination of heuristic knowledge and observational knowledge  pos- 
itively influences self-efficacy. 

In  the  proposed  theoretical  model,  knowledge  elements such  as  observational 
knowledge,  heuristic  knowledge  and  structural  knowledge  have  been  included 
in  the  TTAT  based  theoretical  model  developed  in  [12].  Additional  knowledge 
elements,  as  shown  as  dashed  line,  have  been  included  to  evaluate  their  effect 
on  users’  self-  efficacy  and  hence  users’  ability  to  take  actions  against  Phishing 
attacks  after  gaining  these  knowledge  elements.  The  proposed  model  intended 
to  determine  the  effect  of  knowledge  elements  and  interaction  between  knowl- 
edge elements in enhancing users’ self-efficacy. It also helps determine how these 
knowledge  elements  enhance  the  user’s self-efficacy  and  motivate  themselves to 
avoid  phishing  threat  through  their  motivation.  The  proposed  knowledge  ele- 
ments  contribute  to  the  users’  learning  process  and  build  their  confidence  level. 
Ths  earning  phishing  URLs  and  websites  through  observation,  experience,  and 
structural manner will improve IT users’ self-efficacy. 

 
 
 
 
 
Building Confidence not to be Phished 

7 

Procedural Knowledge 

H3a  

H3c 

Structural 
Knowledge 

H3 

Conceptual Knowledge 

H3b  

Heuristic Knowledge 

H4a  

H4c 

Self-Efficacy 

H2 

Avoidance Motivation 

H1 

Avoidance  Behaviour 

Observational  K now ledge 

H4b  

Interaction Point 

Contribution 

Fig. 1. Theoretical Framework. 

3.1  Observational Knowledge 

Knowledge  is  gained  through  a  variety  of  ways  such  as  by  thinking,  observ- 
ing, experimenting, from science, theory and from experience [31]. Observational 
knowledge  is  the  knowledge  learned  while  observing  a  particular  work  or  task 
being performed [21]. For example, when a new  employee  joins an organisation, 
the  employee  is  assigned  to  a  supervisor  (i.e.  an  experienced  employee),  who 
works as a mentor. The new employee is asked to observe work being  performed 
by  others to gain knowledge (i.e. learning knowledge by  observing peers’ work). 
According to Bandura’s social cognitive theory, people learn by observing others 
behavior  without  undergoing  the  trial  and  error  process  of  operating  it  [16].  In 
addition  to  this, the  social  cognitive  theory  also  explains that  if  individual’s  ob- 
served  behavior  produces  expected  result  then  the  individual  is  more  motivated 
to  adopt  the  behavior  and  repeat  it  in  the  future  [16].  Bandura’s  self-efficacy 
theory  also  suggests  that  one’s  ability  to  perform  a  desired  outcome  influences 
both  thought and action process [16]. In general, the higher self-efficacy will act 
as  a  positive  construct  for  taking  action,  whereas  lower  self-efficacy  beliefs  can 
have  negative impact on the decision to execute  a particular course of action  [4]. 
With  regard  to  technology  in  teaching  and  learning,  user’s  self-efficacy  is  also 
influenced  by  thoughts  and  actions  [4].  Observing  a  particular  work  is  nothing 
but  an  action  by  individual.  It  is  expected  that  high  self-efficacy  beliefs  will 
function  as  a  positive  support  to  observe  a  particular  course  of  action.  Thus,  the 
higher observational knowledge about phishing  URLs/Emails will increase  one’s 
self-efficacy by increasing their phishing threat avoidance behavior.  For example, 
one  can  observe  the  action  on  how  to  recognize  phishing  URLs/Emails  and  gain 
the  observational  knowledge  about  phishing  websites  and  Emails.  This  knowl- 
edge  will  create  phishing  threat avoidance  behavior  and  ultimately  enhance  their 
self-efficacy  to  protect  themselves  against  phishing  attacks.  Therefore,  the  ob- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 

No Author Given 

servational knowledge  contributes to  the  enhancement  of  observer’s  self-efficacy 
positively.  Therefore,  the  hypothesis  for  this  attribute  is  defined  as  follows: 

H4b: Observational knowledge positively influences self-efficacy. 

3.2  Heuristic Knowledge 

Heuristic knowledge is the knowledge gained from past experience and is derived 
from previous experiences with similar problems [26]. These strategies rely on 
using readily accessible, though loosely applicable, information to control prob- 
lem solving in human beings, machines, and abstract issues. For example, if a 
person is cheated while doing online transaction then if the same person needs to 
do another online transaction after some days, that individual will use the past 
experience (i.e. previous online transaction experience) to avoid being cheated 
again. According to social cognitive theory, people learn through their vicarious 
experience and this knowledge enables people to store the information required to 
guide their future behavior [16]. Self-efficacy beliefs not only influence decisions 
and behavior, but also these self-efficacy beliefs are influenced by other char- 
acteristics and prior experience within a particular domain [4]. Bandura in [17] 
described that past experiences have strong influence on self-efficacy beliefs and 
thus have a strong influence on behavior. Thus, the heuristic knowledge about 
phishing URLs/Emails will increase one’s self-efficacy by using their phishing 
threat avoidance behaviour. Hence, heuristic knowledge is another source of an 
individual’s self-efficacy. Therefore, the hypothesis for this attribute is defined 
as follows: 

H4c: Heuristic knowledge positively influences self-efficacy. 

3.3  Structural Knowledge 

Self-efficacy is influenced by procedural and conceptual knowledge which is ba- 
sically  the  idea  to  know  “how”  and know  “that”.  However,  it  is  not sufficient  to 
know “that”.  In  order  to  know  how,  you  must  have  the  idea to  know  ‘why’  [25]. 
Structural knowledge gives the idea to know why; it describes  the rule sets, con- 
cept  relationships,  concept-to-object  relationships  [25].  For  example,  mango  is 
a  kind  of  fruit,  fruit  is  a  kind  of  crop  and  crop  information  is  part  of  agricul- 
tural  knowledge.  Structural  knowledge  is  basic  to  problem-solving  and  is  the 
knowledge  of  how  the  ideas  within  a  domain  are  integrated  and  interrelated. 
Procedural  knowledge  involves  the  idea  how  to  do  something.  For  example,  by 
knowing how to differentiate between  fake and real URLs/Emails (i.e., by know- 
ing how  the  URLs/Emails  are  constructed)  IT  user  can  develop  their  procedural 
knowledge.  Conceptual  knowledge  conveys  the  idea  of  understanding  concepts 
and  recognizing  their  application.  For  instance,  IT  user  can  learn  the  concept 
of  features  that  fake  and  real  URLs/Emails  contain.  Whereas,  structural  knowl- 
edge  shows  the  idea  of  why  to  apply  these  concepts  fake  and  real  URLs/Emails 
of  learning  and  how  to  recognize  them  (i.e., how-to-do-it-why-to-do-it-when).  In 
general,  Structural  knowledge  mediates the  translation  of  conceptual  knowledge 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Building Confidence not to be Phished 

9 

into  procedural  knowledge  and  provides  the  application  of  procedural  knowl- 
edge  [25].  Therefore,  having  procedural,  conceptual  and  structural  knowledge 
will  give  the  better  idea to  differentiate  legitimate  and illegitimate  URLs/Emails. 
Thus the structural  knowledge could be a factor  in self-efficacy and this research 
intends to  determine  its’  influence  on  users  self-efficacy.  The  hypothesis  for  this 
attribute  is  defined  as  follows: 

H3: The combination  of  H3a,  H3b and H3c  along with structural knowledge 

positively influences self-efficacy. 

4  Integrating Theoretical Model into an Anti-Phishing 

Gaming Tool 

The  main focus of this research is to investigate  how one can better educate peo- 
ple  through  various  kind  of  knowledge  representation  (i.e.,  observational  knowl- 
edge,  heuristic  knowledge  and  structural  knowledge)  into  a  gaming  tool.  The 
game  design  enhances  users’  self-efficacy  to  protect  themselves  from  phishing 
attacks.  The  aim  is  also  to  demonstrate  that  while  developing  an  anti-phishing 
learning  tool,  these  knowledge  factors  can  be  taken  into  consideration  for  better 
education.  The  outcome  will  show that the knowledge  attributes  which  enhances 
IT  user’s  self-efficacy  can  be  also  be  integrated  into  the  anti-phishing  learning 
tool.  To explore this mechanism, a gaming prototype will be developed. A screen 
shot  of the  video game is shown in Figure ??. 

4.1  Game  Story  and  Design 

The game story is based on the game scenario of a balloon shooter. The main 
character of this game is Tom (i.e., the user or game player) who needs to shoot 
the  balloons to  play the  game.  Balloons are randomly  generated  in the  game. 
Each  balloon  is  associated  with  URLs/Emails  which  appear  as  a  dialog  box. 
Some balloons are associated with legitimate URLs/Emails and some of them 
are  associated  with  fake  URLs/Emails.  To  score  well,  the  player  (i.e.,  Tom) 
should be careful while shooting the balloons and Tom should shoot the balloons 
with  real  URLs/Emails.  When  Tom  will  point  the  gun  towards  the  balloon, 
URL/Email associated with it will be displayed for the recognition of fake and 
legitimate ones. If the correct balloon (i.e., legitimate URLs/Emails) is shot by 
Tom then he will be awarded positive score and if not then he will be provided 
with “Facts-and-advice”. Facts-and-advice is the opportunity for the game player 
to know about his/her mistake while recognising the URLs/Emails as summary 
and caution.  It  will  help  the  player  not to  repeat the same  mistake  again.  The 
other  character  of  this  proposed  game  is  Jerry  who  plays  the  role  of  a  guide 
and will provide the help to identify the URLs/Emails when asked by Tom (i.e., 
when  Tom  click  the  help  button).  Demonstration  video  (i.e.,  animated  video) 
will be played before starting of the game to give a clear idea of how to play it. 
The proposed game design will have three different stages such as easy, medium 
and advance stage. The complexity will grow as the players are promoted from 

 
 
 
 
 
10 

No Author Given 

Fig. 2. Screen shot of the video game. 

one stage to another stage. The proposed game design prototype determines how 
to  identify  legitimate  URLs/Emails  through  the  knowledge  attribute  (i.e.,  the 
knowledge gained by observation, experience and by knowing the structure of 
URLs/Emails). 

Scoring  Mechanism  For  easy  stage,  a  total  of  10  balloons  will  be  shown  out 
of  which  there  will  be  7  and  3  balloons  showing  real  and  fake  URLs/Emails 
respectively.  To  complete  this  stage  the  players  will  be  given  a  total  of  150 
seconds  (i.e.,  15 second  for  each  balloon).  The number  of  lives  given  to a  player 
will  be  3.  Each  correctly  shot  balloon  will  add  5  points  to  the  score  and  each 
wrong shot balloon will deduct 1  point from the score. 

For  the  medium  stage,  a  total  of  15  balloons  will  be  shown  out  of  which 
there will be 8 balloons showing real URLs/Emails and 7 balloons showing fake 
URLs/Emails. Out of these 7 fake URLs/Emails displaying balloons, 3 balloons 
will display the fake URLS/Emails from the easy stage. To complete this stage 
the players will be given a total of 225 seconds (i.e., 15 seconds for each balloon). 
The number of lives given to a player will be 3. Each correctly shot balloon will 
add 5 points to the score and each wrong shot balloon will deduct 1 point from 
the score. 

For  the  advance  stage,  a  total  of  20  balloons  will  be  shown  out  of  which 
there will be 10 balloons showing real URLs/Emails and 10balloons showing 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Building Confidence not to be Phished 

11 

fake  URLs/Emails.  Out  of  these  10  fake  URLs/Emails  displaying  balloons,  4 
balloons will display the fake URLS/Emails from the medium stage. To complete 
this stage the players will be given a total of 300 seconds (i.e., 15 seconds for 
each  balloon). The number  of lives  given  to a  player  will be 3.  Each correctly 
shot  balloon  will  add  5  points  to  the  score  and  each  wrong  shot  balloon  will 
deduct 1 point from the score. 

Game  Design  Scenario  for  Determining  Observational  Knowledge  To 
incorporate  the  observational  knowledge  of  the  user into this  gamified approach, 
Tom  (i.e.,  game  player)  will  be  asked  to  play  the  game.  Firstly,  the  animated 
demo video of the game will be played in front Tom. The idea of playing this video 
is to  learn  how  to  differentiate  between  legitimate  and  illegitimate  URLs/Emails 
by  observing  the  demo  video.  Tom  (game  player)  is  not  allowed  to  skip  the 
demo  video  as  it  is  important  to  learn  how  and  what  to  observe.  Each  element 
will  be  able  to  be  measured  once  game  is  developed.  At  that  time,  in  order 
to  gain  observational  knowledge,  Tom  will  observe  how  the  video  shows  tricks 
to  identify  real  and  fake  URLs/Emails.  After  observation  session  is  finished, 
Tom will be provided with a set of questions to  check whether he has  gained any 
knowledge about identifying URLs/Emails while  observing demonstration  of the 
game.  Further,  Tom  will  be  asked to  play  the  actual  game  after  finishing a  short 
training. After finishing the game  Tom will be again provided  by a questionnaire 
that  will  contains  all  the  URLs/Emails.  The  idea  behind  this  is  to  know  how 
Tom  uses  his  observational  knowledge  (i.e.,  why  and  how  he  marked  the  given 
URLs/Emails  as  fake  or  true)  to  play  the  game.  This  process  will  incorporate 
users’ observational knowledge in to a game based learning tool. The score will be 
calculated through  Tom’s performance and the effect of observational knowledge 
on  Tom  will  be  checked  and  evaluated.  This  mechanism  will  determine  whether 
or  not  observational  knowledge  influences  users’  self-efficacy  to  thwart  against 
phishing  attacks. 

Game  Design  Scenario  for  Determining  Heuristic  Knowledge  As    men- 
tioned  before,  the  game  will  contain  three  different  stages  of  difficulty  such  as 
easy,  medium  and advanced.  Firstly,  the  demo  video  will  be  played  and this  will 
give  an  opportunity  to  Tom  to  gain  some  experience  about  how  to  recognize 
and  differentiate  real  and  fake  URLs/Emails.  After  this  the  game  player  will 
play  the  easy  stage  first  and  the  score  will  be  recorded.  After  playing  the  easy 
stage,  the  same  player  will  be  asked  to  come  and  play  the  medium  stage.  The 
medium stage  will  contain some  balloons  (i.e.,  maximum  3 balloons)  with  same 
URLs/Emails as the easy stage.  The result of the medium stage will be  recorded. 
The  third  stage,  which  is  advanced  stage,  will  contain  same  balloons  (i.e.,  four 
balloons)  from  both  easy  and  medium  stage.  The  result  of  the  advanced  stage 
will  also  be  recorded.  After  Tom  finishes  playing  all  the  stages  of  the  game,the 
game player will be asked how he uses his experience of demo play while playing 
the game by himself.  The recorded results will be analysed to  check the effect of 
past  experience  (heuristic)  knowledge  later  in  the  evaluation  stage.  This  anal- 

 
 
 
 
12 

No Author Given 

ysis  will  be  carried  by  comparing  Tom’s  response  to  the  balloons  with  same 
URLs/Emails  for  all  stages  of  the  game.  This  will  show  his  experience  gained 
from  the  first  stage  and  its  application  in  the  next  stage.  The  analysis  would 
determine  the  performance  of  Tom  while  playing  all  stages  of  game  with  the 
same URLs/Emails. This game design scenario  will enable us  to check the effect 
of past experience knowledge. 

Game  Design  Scenario  for  Determining  Structural    Knowledge    To    ex- 
plore  structural  knowledge  through  game-based  learning  tool,firstly  the  demo 
video  will  be  played  in  front  of  Tom.  The  demonstration  video  will  show  the 
concept  behind  fake  and  real  URLs/Emails,  procedure  to    identify    them    and 
basic  problem  solving  knowledge  to  correctly  recognize  them  (i.e.,  structural 
knowledge). In general this video will describe  the structure of legitimate and il- 
legitimate  URLs/Emails  along  with  the  concept  and  procedure.  In  addition,  this 
process  teaches  Tom  how  to  identify  the  Phishing  URLs  and  phishing  emails 
through  their  structure  (i.e.,  how  they  are  constructed)  and  their  particular  fea- 
tures  for  easy  recognition.  After  gaining  this  information,  Tom  will  play  the 
game  and  the  outcome  will  be  stored.  After  playing  game,  Tom  will  be  asked 
to clarify his answer this means he will say how he recognize  all  the illegitimate 
and  legitimate  URLs/Emails  by  using  his  conceptual,  procedural  and  structural 
knowledge. The outcome will be checked against his structural knowledge gained 
from  demo  video  through  a  set  of  questionnaire  in the  evaluation  phase.  The  set 
of the questionnaire will ask the game player how they used the structural knowl- 
edge  to  differentiate  fake  and  legitimate  URLs/Emails. 

Fact  and  Advice  After  finishing  playing  a  game,  a  “Fact  and  Advice”  option 
will  be  made  available  to  the  player.  The  fact  option  will  show  the  summary 
of the game that the  player  made  mistakes.  In  addition  to  this,  it  will  also 
tell  the  player  what  the  mistake  is  and  why  it  is  a  mistake  (wrong  decision). 
The  advice  option  is  basically  the  caution  to  the  player  and  will  show  a  set  of 
guidelines  on  how  to  avoid  the  mistakes  and  try  not  doing  the  same  mistake 
again  in  future.  The  provision  of  fact  and  advice  to  players  can  be  considered 
as providing feedback to players. Players will learn new strategies for identifying 
phishing  threats  through  the  feedback  they  receive.  When  constructive  feedback 
is  provided  to  the  players,  it  can  affirm  to  players that  they  know  what  they  are 
doing  and  that  would  eventually  enhance  their  self-efficacy  in  phishing  threat 
avoidance.  The  knowledge  representation  of  this  feature  is  to  guide  the  game 
player  on  how  to  get  observational,  heuristic  and structural  knowledge  and store 
them  in  their  memory  and  apply  them  to  protect  themselves  from  phishing 
attacks. 

5  Conclusion  and  Future  Work 

As we have become more and more dependent on Internet and its enabled devices 
for relaying our everyday life, we are becoming highly vulnerable to cyber-attacks 

 
 
 
 
 
Building Confidence not to be Phished 

13 

and one of the dangerous attacks is known as Phishing. Many anti-phishing solu- 
tions  have  been  proposed  and  developed  to  avoid  and  regulate  phishing  attacks 
and  also  to  provide  protection  to  users  against  such  attacks.  There  is  also  a  cat 
and  mouse  game  between  anti-phishing tool  developers  and  cyber  criminals  (i.e. 
phishing  attackers).  Since  we  humans  are  the  end  user  of  the  computer  system 
and  most  vulnerable  to  phishing  attacks,  we  can  avoid  being  attacked  by  in- 
creasing  our  awareness  of  vulnerability  and  increasing  our  understanding  and 
knowledge of phishing attack. Self-efficacy with its co-relation with knowledge is 
one  of  the  most  important  determinants  of  individual’s  motivation  in  phishing 
threat avoidance behaviour.  The proposed research endeavours  on the user’s self- 
efficacy in order to enhance the individual’s phishing threat avoidance behaviour 
through  their  motivation.  Using  social  cognitive  theory,  we  explored  that  vari- 
ous  knowledge  attributes  such  as  observational  knowledge,  heuristic  knowledge 
and  structural  knowledge  contributes  immensely  towards  the  individual’s  self- 
efficacy.  Thus,  this  research  aims  to  incorporate  user’s  confidence  to  enhance 
their  phishing  awareness  through  their    phishing    threat    avoidance    motivation 
and  behaviour.  The  proposed  research  contributes  in  the  reduction  in  number 
of  phishing  attacks  and  enhancement  of  user  confidence  through  their  increased 
awareness and phishing avoidance knowledge. 

The  future  work  for  this  proposed  research  will  empirically  investigate  the 
proposed  theoretical  model.  With  the  research  findings, a  prototype  of  the  game 
will  be  designed  and  developed  with  the  aforementioned  scenarios.  A  series  of 
questionnaires  will  be  developed  and  proper  environment  will  be  created  to  test 
the  prototype  of  the  game.  At  the  time  of  writing  of  this  paper,  the  type,  struc- 
ture  and number of questionnaires to  evaluate the prototype is still being  worked 
upon.  Finally,  the  last  part  of  this  research  is  to  test  the  proposed  theoretical 
model through the participants’ engagement with the developed game  prototype. 

References 

1.  Knowledge  structure.  http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/knowledge- 

structure.html [Retrieved October 11, 2018] 

2.  The relationship between self-efficacy and academic achievement in adults. Athens 

Journal of Education (August 2014) 

3.  Abawajy,  J.:  User  preference  of  cyber  security  awareness  delivery  methods.  Be- 

haviour and Information Technology 33(3), 237–248 (2014) 

4.  Abbitt, J.T.: An investigation of the relationship between self-efficacy beliefs about 
technology  integration  and  technological  pedagogical  content  knowledge  (tpack) 
among  preservice  teachers.  Journal  of  digital  learning  in  teacher  education  4(27) 
(2011) 

5.  Al-Daeef, M.M., Basir, N., Saudi, M.M.: Security awareness training: A review. In: 
Proceedings of the World Congress on Engineering. vol. 1. London, U.K. (July 5 - 
7 2017) 

6.  Alghamdi, H.: Can phishing education enable users to recognize phishing attacks? 

In: Dublin Institute of Technology ARROW at DIT (2017) 

7.  Anandapara,  V.,  Dingman,  A.,  Jacobsson,  M.,  Liu,  D.,  Roinestad,  H.:  Phishing 
iq  tests  measure  fear,  not  ability.  In:  Dietrich,  S.,  Dhamija,  R.  (eds.)  Financial 

 
 
 
14 

No Author Given 

Cryptography  and  Data  security.  Lecture  Notes  in  Computer  Science,  vol.  4886. 
Springer Berlin, Heidelberg (2007) 

8.  Arachchilage, G., Asanka, N. Security awareness of computer users: A game-based 
learning approach. Ph.D. thesis, Brunel University, School of Information Systems, 
Computing and Mathematics (2012) 

9.  Arachchilage,  N.,  Cole,  M.:  Design  a  mobile  game  for  home  computer  users  to 
prevent  from  p h i s h i n g   attacks.  Information  Society  (2011),  ieeexplore.ieee.org 
10.  Arachchilage,  N.A.G.,  Hameed,  M.A.:  Integrating  self-efficacy  into  a  gamified 
approach  to  thwart  phishing  attacks.  In:  5th  International  Conference  on 
Cybercrime  and Computer  Forensics (ICCCF), IEEE, Cryptography and Security. 
Sofitel Gold-  coast Broadbeach (July 2017) 

11.  Arachchilage,  N.A.G.,  Love,  S.:  A  game  design  framework  for avoiding  phishing 

attacks. Computers in Human Behavior 29(3), 706–714 (2013) 

12.  Arachchilage, N.A.G., Love, S.: Security awareness of computer users: A phishing 
threat avoidance perspective. Computers in Human Behavior 38, 304–312 (Septem- 
ber 2014) 

13.  Arachchilage, N.A.G., Love, S., Beznosov, K.: Phishing threat avoidance behaviour: 
An empirical investigation. Computers in Human Behavior 60, 185–197 (2016) 
14.  Arachchilage,  N.A.G.,  Love,  S.,  Maple,  C.:  Can  a  mobile  game  teach  computer 
users  to  thwart  phishing  attacks?  International  Journal  for  Infonomics  (IJI)  6(3, 
4) (September - December 2013) 

15.  Bandura,  A.:  Self-efficacy.  No.  4,  Academic  Press  (1994) 
16.  Bandura, A.: Social foundations  of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. 

Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall (1986) 

17.  Bandura, A.: Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. Worth Publishers (1997) 
18.  Baslyman,  M.,  chiasson,  S.:  Smells  phishy?:  An  educational  game  about  online 
phishing  scams.  In:  APWG  Symposium  on  Electronic  Crime  Research  (eCrime). 
pp. 1–11. IEEE (2016) 

19.  BBC-News: Bbc news: Cyber-attack: Europol says it was unprecedented in scale. 

www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-39907965 [Access date: 22 May 2017]. 

20.  Cone, B.D., Irvine, C.E., Thompson, M.F., Nguyen, T.D.: A video game for cyber 
security  training  and  awareness.  computers  and  security  2(6),  63  –72  (2007),  de- 
partment  of  Computer  Science,  Center  for  Information  Systems  Security  Studies 
and  Research,  Code  CS/Ic,  Naval  Postgraduate 

21.  Hendry,  G.D., Oliver, G.R.: Seeing is believing: The benefits of peer observation. 

Journal of University Teaching & Learning Practice 1(9) (2012) 

22.  Hsu, M., Ju, T.,  Yen,  C., Chang,  C.:  Knowledge sharing  behavior in  virtual  com- 
munities:  The  relationship  between  trust,  self-efficacy,  and  outcome  expectations. 
International  Journal  of  Human-Computer  Studies  65(2)  (2007) 

23.  Hu,  W.W.: Self-efficacy and individual knowledge sharing.  In: International con- 
ference  on  information  management,  innovation  management and  industrial  engi- 
neering (ICIII). vol. 2, pp. 401–404 (2010) 

24.  James, L.: Phishing exposed. Syngress publishing, canada (2005) 
25.  Jonassen,  D.H.,  Beissner,  K.,  Michael,  Y.:  Structural  knowledge,  Techniques  for 
representing,  conveying,  and  acquiring  structural  knowledge.  Taylor  and  Francis 
(1993) 

26.  Judea, P.: Heuristics: Intelligent Search Strategies for Computer Problem Solving. 

Addison-Wesley, New York (1983), iSBN 978-0-201-05594-8 

27.  Khonji,  M.,  Iraqi,  Y.,  Jones,  A.:  Phishing  detection:  A  literature  survey.  IEEE 

Communications Surveys and Tutorials (2013) 

 
 
Building Confidence not to be Phished 

15 

28.  Kumaraguru, P., Rhee, Y., Acquisti, A., Cranor, L., Hong, J., Nunge, E.: Protecting 
people  from  phishing:  the  design  and  evaluation  of  an  embedded  training  email 
system. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. San Jose, California, USA (April - May 2007) 

29.  Liang,  H.,  Xue,  Y.:  Avoidance  of  information  technology  threats:  A  theoretical 

perspective. MIS Quarterly 33(1), 71–90 (2009) 

30.  Lininger, R., Vines, R.D.: Phishing: Cutting the identity theft line. John Wileyand 

sons (2005) 

31.  McCormick,  R.:  Conceptual  and  procedural  knowledge.  International  Journal  of 

Technology and Design Education 7(1), 141–159 (1997) 

32.  Plant, M.: How is science useful to technology? In: McCormick, R., Banks, F. (eds.) 
Design and technology in the secondary curriculum: A book of readings. The Open 
University, Milton Keynes, 96D108 (1994) 

33.  Robila,  S.A.,  Ragucci,  J.W.:  Don’t  be  a  phish:  Steps  in  user  education.  ITiCSE 

(2006) 

34.  Sawer,  P.:  Internet  and  mobile-phones  become  all  pervasive    in    modern    so- 
ciety. 
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/2461923/Internet-and-mobile- 
phones-become-all-pervasive-in-modern-society.html, [Date accessed: 24 Oct 2018] 
third    wave  of    network  attacks. 
http://www.schneier.com/crypto-gram-0010.html#1  (October  2000),  crypto-gram 
newsletter [Access Date - 12 June 2018] 

35.  Schneier,  B.:    Semantic  attacks:    The 

36.  Sheng,  S.,  Magnien,  B.,  Kumaraguru,  P.,  Acquisti,  A.,  Cranor,  L.F.,  Hong,  J., 
Nunge,  E.:  Anti-phishing  phil:  The  design  and  evaluation  of  a  game  that  teaches 
people  not  to  fall  for  phish.  Tech.  rep.,  Institute  for  Software  Research  (2007), 
http://repository.cmu.edu/isr/22 

37.  Shillair, R., Cotten, S.R., Tsai, H.Y.S., SaleemAlhabasha, LaRose, R., and, N.J.R.: 
Online safety begins with you and me: Convincing internet users to protect them- 
selves. Computers in Human Behavior 48, 199 – 207 (2015) 

38.  Varshney, G., Misra, M.,  Atrey, P.K.:  A survey and classification of web phishing 

detection schemes. Security and Communications Networks (2016)  

39.  Arachchilage, N., Cole, M.: "Designing a Mobile Game for Home Computer Users 
to Protect Against “Phishing Attacks”, Intenatioal Journal for e-Learning Security 
(IJeLS), Infonomics Society, 8 (2011).  

 
 
