Certiﬁed Ethical Hacker v.10 Online Course
a Case Study

Tam N. Nguyen
North Carolina State University
tam.nguyen@ncsu.edu
https://www.linkedin.com/in/tamcs/

8
1
0
2

t
c
O
7
1

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
7
8
8
2
0
.
1
1
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—CEH v.10 Certiﬁcation Self-study Course is an
online course preparing learners for one of the most prestige
cyber security certiﬁcations in the world - the Certiﬁed Ethical
Hacker (CEH) v.10 Certiﬁcation. Due to a pay wall and the
practical rather than theoretical nature, most researchers have
limited exposure to this course. For the ﬁrst time, this paper will
analyze the course’s instructional design based on the highest
national standards and related peer-reviewed published research
works. The sole intention is to push the course to a higher
ground, making it the best online course for cyber security. More
importantly, the paper’s instructional design evaluation strategy
can well be extended and applied to any other online course’
instructional design review and/or evaluation process.

Index Terms—cybersecurity, e-learning, applied computing

I. INTRODUCTION

Cybersecurity is a very challenging ﬁeld due to the fast-
pace attack-defense chess game. With the threat landscape
constantly evolves, cyber security awareness education be-
comes a crucial part in the sustainability and growth of any
corporation. The Certiﬁed Ethical Hacker (CEH) v10 Online
Self-study course 1 is one of the shining stars, as professionals
with the CEH certiﬁcation are well sought after by many of the
Fortune 500 companies. With the intention to help build this
course to be the best of its kind, the paper performs an initial
independent instructional analysis of the course, providing
recommendations for future improvements.

The paper’s structure is as followed. Section 2 provides
a brief overview of the course. Due to copyright concerns,
the paper will not provide detailed screenshots of the actual
course interface but rather, descriptions and basic component
mapping. Section 3 focuses on pedagogical analysis. Great
care was shown by employing a careful blend of the highest
national standards for online course evaluation. Through ﬁve
pedagogical evaluation categories of ”Meaningful”, ”Engag-
ing”, ”Measurable”, ”Accessible”, and ”Scalable”, the section
presents the course’s strong points as well as potential areas for
improvements. Section 4 focuses on the digital technologies
behind the course’s cyber range (lab). Section 5 offers potential
remedies to the issues at hand with speciﬁc actionable details.
The main contributions of the paper include: a 30-point
check sheet for evaluating the CEH v10 course, 11 identiﬁed
national standard points that were not met, and ﬁve general
directions for future improvements. As far as the author’s

1https://www.eccouncil.org/programs/certiﬁed-ethical-hacker-ceh/

knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst to analyze a prestige online
cyber security program like the CEH v10 Online Preparation
Course. Its contributions can be well extended to other cyber
security related courses or be used for any other initial
instructional design development/evaluation projects.

II. OVERVIEW OF CEH V.10
OFFICIAL PREPARATION COURSE

CEH v.10 Online Self-study Course was designed to help
potential test takers prepare for the CEH v.10 certiﬁcation test.
CEH certiﬁcation is a well-recognized industry standard and
is a core sought after certiﬁcation by many of the Fortune
500 organizations. It is ANSI 17024 compliant covering latest
topics that a practical cyber security consultant should know.
The course is in its 10th iteration while still sticking to its
original ultimate goal - teaching cyber security professionals
to think like a hacker in order to defend against hackers. The
course covers ﬁve common phases of an attack cycle which are
Reconnaissance, Gaining Access, Enumeration, Maintaining
Access, and Cleaning up traces. The target audience are system
administrators, network administrators and engineers, Web
managers, Auditors, ethical hackers and other types of cyber
security professionals.

CEH v10 course qualiﬁes for the ”Massive” and ”Online”
criteria because the course is 100% online and its learners
come from around the world [9]. However, it is not qualiﬁed
for ”Open” because of a signiﬁcant pay wall ($1,899 for a
package of education suite and certiﬁcation exam voucher).
This pay wall may contributes to the difference in learners
motivations and behaviors but investigation into that hypothe-
sis is beyond the scope of this paper. Therefore, it is assumed
that the CEH v10 course can be held to the same standards as
a regular MOOC (Massive Open Online Course).

Learning suite includes e-book; online learning management
system with video lectures, online textbook, a note-taking app;
and online labs. Labs can be launched from web browsers,
allowing learners access to lab environments with latest op-
erating systems, virtual network appliances, preconﬁgured
enterprise systems, and so on. It is advised that learners spend
more than 40% on the virtual labs. There are 20 modules
and after each module, there is a hacking challenge to help
learners transform knowledge into skills that can be applied
to real life situations. The engine behind the labs is actually

 
 
 
 
 
 
the well known ”Learn On Demand System” (LODS) which
will be discussed in later section.

Fig. 1. CEH v.10 Site Structure

to just ﬁve principles for MOOC success [6] which are Mean-
ingful, Engaging, Measurable, Accessible and Scalable. This
approach was embraced by the University of North Carolina
(UNC) System in their request for proposals to develop a
MOOC on Emerging Economies. Those ﬁve principles were
chosen as the ﬁve objectives as detailed by Dr. Tom Ross,
President of the UNC System [18].

Because it is not common for MOOCs to satisfy the strict
QualityMatters criterias for higher-education online learning
course standards [14], the paper takes a mixed approach of
mapping the above-mentioned QualityMatters standards into
the ﬁve success principles for online course by Drake, enriched
with additional details from iNACOL National Standards.

The paper believes a group of ﬁve principles is the right
amount at the right abstraction level for an initial informal
online course evaluation. It is also more approachable to read-
ers who do not have in-depth knowledge about instructional
design and/or do not care much about ﬁne-grained evaluation
criteria. The side effect is the relaxation or even elimination
of some QualityMatters check points. However, since most
MOOCs do not meet those points [14] and with additional
points from iNACOL standards, the paper does not give CEH
v10 an unfair evaluation.

Pedagogical evaluation results are shown in Table I.

III. PEDAGOGICAL EVALUATIONS

A. Meaningful

The paper aims to perform instructional analysis of the CEH
v10 course from an outsider, ”black-box” perspective with no
insider’s help regarding collected usage data or any other form
of internal insights. The evaluation approach is a combination
of actual course studying by a real learner with real intention
to ﬁnish the course in order to take the certiﬁcation exam,
well-established standards, and previous research works on
evaluation criteria for MOOC (Massive Open Online Course).
Because instructional design choices have ”a signiﬁcant
impact on deep and meaningful learning” [8] there are nu-
merous studies on how to evaluate the designs of MOOC.
Conole [4] suggested MOOCs to be evaluated by twelve
dimensions of: Open, Massive, User of media, Degree of
communication, Degree of collaboration, Learning pathway,
Quality assurance, Amount of reﬂection, Certiﬁcation, Formal
learning, Autonomy and Diversity.

QualityMatters [17] grouped evaluation criteria into eight
groups of (i) Course overview and introduction (ii) Learning
objectives (iii). Assessment and measurement (iv) Instructional
materials (v) Learner interaction and engagement (vi) Course
technology (vii) Learner support (vii) Accessibility (Quality
Matters, 2014). Other evaluation methods include: the Rubric
for Online Instruction [3], iNACOL National Standards for
Quality Online Courses [12], and the ﬁve pillars of quality
framework for quality online course design by the Online
Learning Consortium 2.

In another attempt, Drake studied different evaluation meth-
ods as well as case studies and compressed everything down

2onlinelearningconsortium.org/about/quality-framework-ﬁve-pillars

is this course about,

Starting with course introduction, learners should be able
the order
to quickly recognize what
of learning objectives, schedules and how to generally nav-
igate the course. Prerequisites and/or competencies are well
communicated with easy to ﬁnd links. Description of ex-
pected learning outcomes is presented in a way that is easy
to understand even to learners with difﬁculties/disabilities.
Learning activities are well-explained as to how accomplishing
those activities will help learners acquire the necessary skills.
The levels of learning and the relationships between course
components within each level are well organized and match the
expected content mastery for each level. Instructional materials
are all up to date.

Good signs include but are not limited to cognitive and
meta-cognitive prompts, short distilled lectures on single
topics, study guides, concept maps, self-assessment quizzes,
discussion board. Bad signs may include irrelevant topics, poor
idea integration, confusing order, insufﬁcient examples.

Evaluation shows that the course’s introductory materials
provided really good details on the course layout mostly in
the form of ”Table of Content”. Because this is a self-paced
course, no expected schedule was listed. However, it was
emphasized that learners will have up to 1 year of access
to the instructional materials and 6 months of access to the
lab. Explicit navigational instruction was not listed but rather
enforced by noticeable visual clues like large buttons. The
purpose of the course and how the learning process should be
followed are apparent.

The course’s module objectives are listed at the beginning
of each module and there is a summary at the corresponding

OBJECTIVES

1. Meaningful

2. Engaging

3. Measurable

4. Accessible

5. Scalable

CHECK POINTS

MET

NOT
MET

+ Introductory materials gives learners a good picture of course layouts,
order and schedules as well as navigational instructions (QM 1.1)
+ Introductory materials presented clear purpose of the course and how
the learning process will be (QM 1.2)
+ Prerequisite and/or competencies are well communicated (QM 1.7)
+ Learning objectives and expected learning outcomes is presented in a
way that is easy to understand to all learners, including the ones with
difﬁculties (QM 2.3)
+ Learning activities are well explained as to how accomplishing those
activities will help the learners reach the planned learning competencies
(QM 2.4)
+ Levels of learning are well organized and match the expected content
mastery (QM 2.5)
+ Instructional materials are up-to-date (QM 4.4)
+ Communication netiquette is well communicated (QM 1.3)
+ Communication plans are clearly stated (QM 5.3, 5.4)
+ Instructor was able to create a sense of connection with the learners,
being approachable (QM 1.8)
+ Introductory activities help create a welcoming learning environment,
and a sense of community (QM 1.9)
+ Learners’ sense of achievement is frequently promoted (QM 5.1)
+ Interactive activities and Active learning is encouraged through
meaningful interactions that align with the course objectives (QM 5.2)
+ Course tools promote active learning and engagements (QM 6.2)
+ Feedbacks are timely, accurate and in various forms coming from both
instructors, peers and tools (QM 3.5)
+ Learning competencies/objectives were described clearly using terms
that are speciﬁc, measurable, and observable (QM 2.1, 2.2)
+ There are assessments to measure the stated learning competencies
(QM 3.1)
+ Learners are provided multiple ways to demonstrate progress and
mastery of the competencies (QM 3.4)
+ Progress tracking mechanisms are provided to both instructors and
learners (QM 3.5)
+ Technology requirements as well as needed technical skills were
clearly communicated prior to the course (QM 1.5, 1.6)
+ A variety of instructional materials is used, contributing to the stated
learning objectives, containing well-referenced sources (QM 4.1, 4.3,
4.5)
+ Tools used are of various types, easily accessible, relevant to course
objectives while protecting learners’ privacy (QM 6.1, 6.3, 6.4)
+ Instructions, Privacy policies, Accessibility policies and other Support
documents are clearly accessible to learners (QM 6.4, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4)
+ Course navigation system was well-designed and intuitive to learners,
reﬂecting thoughtful strategies that promote effective learning (QM 8.1)
+ Course designs maximize usability and efﬁcient learning (QM 8.2)
+ Course designs bear no barrier to learners with disabilities, accessible
design practices are followed (QM 8.3)
+ Course multimedia facilitate ease of use with alternative means of
access (QM 8.4, 8.5)
+ The course is designed to meet internationally recognized
interoperability standards. (iNACOL)
+ Copyright and licensing status, including permission to share where
applicable, is clearly stated and easily found. (iNACOL)
+ The course accommodates multiple school calendars, schedules, etc.
(iNACOL)

TABLE I
CEH V10 EVALUATION CHECK POINTS

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

end. Learning activities which are reading text book and doing
labs were emphasized at during course orientation. Levels of
competencies are well organized and instructional materials
are all up to date.

Prerequisite for the course were not well communicated.
There is an assessment test 3 but it stays completely separate

from the ofﬁcial training site 4. There is also no dedicated
page on required tech skills, hardware and software for the
course. However, there is always an option to chat or leave a
message with a representative at the bottom right of each page
in the main e-course interface.

3eccouncil.org/programs/certiﬁed-ethical-hacker-ceh/ceh-assessment/

4https://iclass.eccouncil.org/learning-options/

instructor interactions (discussion board exchanges, FAQ,...),
learner-content interactions (assigned readings, assigned work-
book, online exercises,...), learner-learner interaction (group
discussions, small-group projects, group discussions, peer cri-
tiques,...), learners’ sense of achievement should be frequently
promoted.

Good signs include but are not limited to short videos,
bite-size assignments with immediate feedback (automated
grading for example, automated emails, automated reminders),
discussion groups, virtual chat rooms, even local meet-ups
[20].

The course evaluations shows that the instructor has decades
of teaching IT courses and was able to establish trust, com-
ing across as an approachable professional. The major and
probably the only force that drives engagement is the iLabs
which basically provides learners a virtual environment with
real solution stacks to exercise and experiment with.

What missing is a sense of community with no discussion
board within the online course itself. There is no way to
communicate with other self-pace learners, no quick way
to reach the instructor or mentors. Consequently,
there is
no established guideline on communication netiquette, no
communication plan. Feedback from instructor and peers are
unavailable.

The course is also lacking in building methods to constantly
reinforce learners’ sense of achievement. Except for clicking
the ”complete” check box after each module, learners receive
no other success indicator or encouragement from the system.
Together with the lack of a built-in discussion board may make
the learner feel really lonely in this challenging course.

C. Measurable

On-line courses should be measurable from both of the
course designers’ and the learners’ perspectives. Learning
competencies and objectives should be described clearly using
terms that are simple, speciﬁc, measurable and observable.
One example is a short description of what learners will learn
and what learners should be able to perform after each module.
At the same time, there are measures to immediately identify
if competencies are met. Because learners come from a broad
and diverse background, assessments should be provided in
various forms and formats to give learners multiple ways
to demonstrate their mastery of corresponding competencies.
Examples of various assessments include polls, one question
quizzes, quizzes, short essays, short programming, reaction
videos, forum posts, etc.

Progress tracking mechanisms should be provided to both
instructors and learners. Examples include: voting buttons,
completion check boxes, self-mastery tests, interactive sim-
ulations, self-scoring quizzes, automatic grading of program-
ming assignments, practice written assignments that receive
feedback, peer review papers,etc.

The course’s learning competencies and objectives were
described clearly using terms that are speciﬁc, measurable, and
observable. Progress tracking mechanisms are clearly visible.
While there are multiple ways for learners to demonstrate

Fig. 2. E-textbook Core Navigational System

B. Engaging

Since it is very common to have just 5% of registered
learners ﬁnished a course [5], we should engage learners
as often as possible. There are Cognitive engagement (task-
speciﬁc thinking), Emotional engagement (affective responses
towards learning, teachers and peers) and Behavioral engage-
ment (participation in an activity that leads to a completion of
something) driven by the psychological needs of autonomy,
relatedness and competence [10]. It is also important to note
that
there are different groups of students with different
interests. There are students who valuate the importance of
course atmosphere, the importance of exercise, the importance
of teacher, or the importance of exams more than the others
[11].

An engnaging course starts with a clear guideline on com-
munication netiquette, and clear communication plans. Since
participants of a course come from different regions of the
world, it is important to have guidelines that embrace and
respect all cultures. Instructors are able to establish a sense
of connection with the learners right from the beginning by
professional in content, friendly in tone, proper visual appeals
and so on. Learners, on the other hand, should also be given
the opportunity to introduce themselves, promoting a sense of
community.

Active learning such as discovering, processing, or applying
concepts and information is encouraged through meaningful
activities, interactions and tools that align well with course ob-
jectives as well as expected levels of mastery. Through learner-

progress, there is only one way for learners to demonstrate the
mastery of the competencies - ﬁnishing the iLab challenges.
There are at least two main big disadvantages of using just
iLab challenges as the only true measurement of learners’
knowledge. First, the iLabs only appear at the end of each
module. Therefore, it is not possible to measure learners’
comprehensions of the sub-modules prior to the iLab sub-
modules. Second, due to the nature of a real but virtualized
environment, it is impossible to link certain mistakes made in
the iLab environment with corresponding instructional section
for later reference.

Due to those reasons, besides the course progress, learners
do not have access to further statistics regarding their mastery
levels. For example, learners do not know at a particular point
in time what are the learning points that they are most good
or bad at.

D. Accessible

Required technologies as well as technical skills were
clearly communicated prior to the course such as needed
webcam, plugins, mobile applications, etc. A variety of in-
structional materials is used, being aligned with the stated
learning objectives, containing well-referenced resources. In-
structions, privacy policies, accessibility policies and other
support documents are clearly accessible to learners.

Course navigation system was well-designed and intuitive to
learners, reﬂecting thoughtful strategies that promote effective
learning. Course designs maximize usability and bear no
barrier to learners with disabilities. Accessible design practices
are followed. Course multimedia facilitate ease of use with
alternative means of access.

A variety of instructional materials is used including videos,
e-text book, simulated environments,
text-to-speech, ﬂash
cards,etc. Tools used are of various types, easily accessible and
relevant to stated course objectives. Course designs maximize
usability and efﬁcient learning by limiting distractions, driving
the focus to what really matters. The course also has a good
navigation system including hierarchical
index tree, book-
marks, slide bar for navigation, search bar, ﬁgure browsing,
and in-page notebook/scratchpad. Accessibility functions are
decent and include ”Read aloud”, ”Night display” and captions
for instructional videos.

Areas of improvements for this section include: a more
accessible privacy policies, accessibility policies, instructions
and self-support documentations; more accessible instructional
videos that cater to users who are not ﬂuent in English, have
limited bandwidth, users with hearing difﬁculties.

E. Scalable

This principle deals with how the architecture, funding, and
content development of the course allow it to be scaled. The
course design has to meet internationally recognized inter-
operability standards, supporting multiple school calendars,
schedules. Copyright and licensing status must be clearly
stated.

Scalability is probably the strongest point of this online
course. With decades of training learners internationally, the
designers of CEH v10 know how to design an educational
system that is easy to update and scalable. At the moment, they
are still improving and expanding the course. Further details
regarding scalable technologies will be discussed in section 4.

IV. CYBER RANGE EVALUATION

CEH OPC lab environment

is powered by ”Learn On
Demand Systems” (LODS) of which history can be dated
back 25 years. LODS has extensive experience in providing
simulation platforms for technical training, creating training
contents with clients from all over the world including cer-
tiﬁcation authorities like CompTIA, EC-Council, ISC2 and
big international corporations like Google, Microsoft. At the
moment, there are 13,500,000 labs launched; 40,000,000 VMs
deployed; 5,000,000 students trained with LODS [13]. This
section highlights several key features that differentiate LODS
from other cyber simulation systems.

A. Flexible and scalable virtualization technologies

LODS supports multiple virtualization strategies and plat-
forms, including Azure [2], Amazon [15], Hyper-V [1] and
VMware [21]. The system has a capability portfolio of hosting
in Local Datacenters, hosting on a Cloud Platform, testing
of virtualizations, automatic Screen Scaling, easy migration
and moving of Virtual Machine (VM) images and disks,
highly conﬁgurable Networking, Advanced Network Interfac-
ing/Monitoring, and high User Concurrency supporting over
5000 users simultaneously from a single location.

Its ”Cloud Slice” technology offers the ﬂexibility of inte-
grating directly with one’s own cloud provider on parts of the
overall training system, in conjuntion with LODS clouds, with
independent virtual machines hosted on bare-metals, and even
with evironments that do not use virtual machines. All VMs
are accessible through web browsers without users’ overhead
of downloading and installing new client softwares.

Through IP tracking and API, LODS allows smart caching
and load-balancing of labs. On one hand, geo-location in-
formation derived from clients IPs hints LODS on preferred
geo-location. Lab ﬁles will then be proactively replicated to
corresponding data-centers. On the other hand, if a region
is being over-loaded with demands, users’ requests can be
forced-directed and be handled by data-centers from different
regions.

B. Activity-based Assessments

Activity-based assessments include automated checks and
quizzes as two main ways to check learners’ knowledge
while they are working on a lab. Quizzes have traditional
options such as multiple choices, true or false, type-in an-
swers to be checked by regex, etc. Automated checks are
scripts conﬁgured to run against VMs and/or other virtual
instances/appliances.

These scripts look for forensic evidences of certain ac-
tions that are supposed to be performed by the learners.

For example, automated scripts can check if learners have
been following the recommended steps correctly. Automated
scripts can also be used to help the learners recognize and
understand their mistakes, as well as to give the conﬁrmations
and encouragements as needed. Finally, automated checks can
also be leveraged to perform lab steps that are supposed to
be performed by the system but only in response to certain
actions performed by the learners. Scoring can be switched
on or off for both automated checks and quizzes.

In addition, learners can manually initiate system checks by
using the ”On-demand evaluation” button whenever they are
done with a particular task list. On the other hand, some tasks
are required before learners may advance to the next step.
Feedback will be displayed to the learners after their answer
submissions.

Fig. 3. User view of tasks

C. Shared-lab and role-playing

Interestingly, LODS also supports the Shared-lab model
with role-playing among learners with instructor’s supervision
and orchestration. This model mimics real-world situations
where there are different
teams working on the same in-
frastructure, supporting each other. Learners will be assigned
different roles with different responsibilities, different tasks
but they will all be working in the same lab environment. This
model encourage them to cross-train, collaborate, communi-
cate and learn from each other. In a broader scale, the model
can be extended into massive cyber exercises where teams
from different organizations, different geographical locations
can participate at the same time. Finally, the shared-lab model
helps with reducing operational costs.

D. Integrated Life-cycle Actions

Another great feature is the Integrated Life-cycle Actions
where the lab can be integrated and/or dynamically extended
to other platforms via main actions of sending web requests,
sending emails and execution of commands. Whenever there
is an event happening inside LODS, one or several associated
actions can be triggered. The sending of web requests can
be ”GET” or ”POST (inbound or outbound), url based with
parameters corresponding to speciﬁed APIs of the destination
applications. The sending of notiﬁcations can be sent via
the lab interface or be sent via emails. The execution of
commands requires learners to be logged on a VM and can
provide powerful effects. All of these features technically

allow LODS to be ”pluggable” with all other systems, which
may include Machine Learning/Artiﬁcial Intelligence As-A-
Service systems, intelligent tutoring systems, etc.

Most importantly, LODs supports the Learning Tools In-
teroperability (LTI) standard 5 with main features of: Deep
linking (more intuitive way to add and link contents from
learning tools or publisher library), Assignment and Grade
Services (exchanging assignemnt progresses and scores be-
tween platforms), Provisioning service (specifying roles and
protecting security as well as privacy). For example, LODS
can be integrated seamlessly with edX (a well-known MOOC
platform) as a LTI provider. Progresses and scores can be
instantly recorded by edX system for immediate analysis and
appropriate actions.

E. Lab Managements

General management of labs include creation, design, im-
port, export, cloning, etc. An administrator may delegate
class editing to another user. Courses can be created from
scratch with videos, virtual labs, assessments, surveys and
other downloadable materials. However, courses can also be
built from trusted content providers such as Microsoft, Logical
Operations, EC-Council, GTSLearning, IBM and VMware.
Automatic check-in/check-out will be done whenever a course
is being edited in order to manage changes effectively. Course
statistics can be easily exported securely. For example, course
survey results may be exported via API using the ExportSur-
veyResponses method with the option to remove names and
emails.

Powerful announcement feature allows course managers
to make announcements and notiﬁcations around events, on
demand subscriptions, enrollments and other related learning
processes. Announcements may be prioritized into levels of
mandatory, high, or normal, appearing in speciﬁc locations
with mutable expiration dates. Announcements can also be
time-based - a very useful feature considering time is on of the
main interests for online courses. For example, a time-based
reminder may be automatically sent to learners who may be
late for an assignment submission.

V. RECOMMENDATIONS

In studying the successful recipes from three highly rated
MOOCs [10], Hew conﬁrmed that the three psychological
needs of Autonomy, Relatedness and Competence play critical
roles in student online course engagements, which in turn
are the key to the MOOCs’ success. The factors of ”peer
interaction” and ”instructor accessibility” were found to be
half of the driving forces behind those important psychological
needs. Therefore, the paper will center its recommendations
around these two important factors.

A. Create a stronger sense of community

Peer-learning was found to be highly beneﬁcial to cyber
security education [16]. A discussion board should be built
into the online course and be used by self-paced learners

5https://www.imsglobal.org/activity/learning-tools-interoperability

to communicate with others including mentors. There can
also be leader boards, hall of fame, or even a section to set
up time and dates for local meet-up events. Limited amount
of information regarding learners progresses can be made
available to the community so that members can know where
they are among others in term of the course’s progresses
and achievements. Certiﬁed learners can be invited to be
mentors, helping instructors out with answering questions,
giving tips, even sharing own struggles while studying the
course. Research have shown that the act of tutoring others
learners’ conceptual elaboration, enhancing the
will boost
transferability of acquired knowledge [22].

There must be a strong guideline for community engage-
ments, respecting differences among the diverse group of
international learners. There should also be a communication
plan covering as many possible situations as possible. For
one example, after a learner has been in active for weeks,
the system may contact the learner via mobile text messages,
checking if he or she is having some issues with the course.

B. Quizzes as a measurement tool

Quizzes may appear to be insigniﬁcant in the context of an
online preparation course preparing learners for the certiﬁca-
tion test rather than a GPA number. However, quizzes are more
than just a quantitative tool - they can also be sensors used
to evaluate meaningful learning [23]. Identiﬁed by Ausubel
(Ausubel, 1963), meaningful learning happens within one’s
cognitive structure by substantively integrating new knowledge
with existing relevant ideas. However, cognitive structure is not
visible and has to be mapped out to the real world by methods
such as Concept Mapping. Quizzes can help with building such
Concept Maps (CMs) to be evaluated by both learners and the
instructors. From such CMs, interventions can be executed to
prevent permanent misconceptions. It is important to note that
a learner with misconceptions may still be able to pass the
certiﬁcation test.

The initial assessment test should be a part of the course
introduction. In fact, the common practice among most cer-
tiﬁcation preparation courses is having the learners do a full
simulated test, with the same time length and the same amount
of questions. After ﬁnishing the assessment, learners will be
presented with a strength map, indicating the areas they are
most good at and the areas they should pay more attentions
to.

At the end of each sub-module, there should be a one-
question quiz. A short quiz with three to ﬁve questions should
be presented after the summary of each module. The quizzes
together with the initial assessment test can be used to measure
learners’ mastery of the module objectives. On the course
designers’ side, such measures can be used to plan incremental
course upgrades. This is especially important when the CEH
v10 course is a living online course.

C. More ways to show competencies

At the moment and within the scope of the course’s current
version, the only way for learners to prove their mastery of

a module’s educational objectives is to successfully ﬁnish the
iLab for that module. Access to the iLab is limited to 6 months
which is half of the time for the entire course. While learners
are provided options to buy and extend access to iLab and
while it makes sense that the best way to test an ethical hacker
is through actual labs, the course still need to add more ways
for the diverse group of learners to show their content mastery.
It is important to note that the iLab still requires learners to
be in a very speciﬁc setting to carry on the labs.

Options may include short quizzes as previously mentioned,
Q&A, relevant news sharing, mobile messaging quizzes, polls,
etc. Q&A model allows a learner to act as a peer mentor
and answer questions using his/her own interpretation of the
acquired knowledge. Whenever learners spot news about hack-
ing incidents, pieces of malware, or any potential emerging
threats relating to what had been taught in the course, they
can post the news to the board for further discussions. Mobile
messaging quizzes gear toward learners with extremely low
bandwidth or learners who are frequently on the go. A short
True/False question will be sent to the learners and all they
need to do is replying back with either ”T” or ”F”. Polls can
be a good way for learners to learn from community consensus
about a highly debatable topic.

D. Providing feedback to learners more often

Learners should be encouraged more often. It can be done
after each time they ﬁnish a quiz or an important milestone,
ﬁnish a lab within a short amount of time, reaching a certain
page in the e-textbook, or spending a good amount of study
time for several days straight. Encouragements may come in
a form of simple congratulations, non-monetary rewards, an
interesting fact, or even a bonus hidden problem for learners
to tackle, etc. Encouragements sent from the system are even
more important when interactions with the instructors are
limited. Encouragements help maintain affective engagement
and even improve cognitive engagement [10].

From reported behavior studies, affective feedback when
done properly may alter learners’ cyber-security related be-
haviors for the better [19]. This is particularly useful in cases
where learners were unaware of their previous risky behaviors.
This and other types of feedback - especially the one informing
learners of potential misstep - could be provided by a low-cost,
adaptive system [7].

E. Make videos more accessible

Instructional videos should be made more accessible to all
types of learners. Video transcripts should be downloadable
to help those with extremely limited bandwidth. Video player
should have speed adjustment functions. Learners who are
familiar with the competencies targeted by the videos may up
the play speed. Learners who are not proﬁcient with English
may slow the videos down. Transcripts of videos should also
contain links to related course materials to make it easier for
learners to cross-reference key knowledge points.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

[15] S. Mathew. Overview of Amazon Web Services. Technical Report

November, 2014.

[16] J. M. Pittman and R. E. Pike. An Observational Study of Peer Learning
for High School Students at a Cybersecurity Camp. pages 1–10, 2015.
[17] Quality Matters. Higher Ed Course Design Rubric — Quality Matters.
[18] T. Ross, J. Goodnight, and A. Gopdnight. UNC and SAS MOOC

Partnership, 2014.

[19] L. A. Shepherd and J. Archibald. Security Awareness and Affective

Feedback : Categorical Behaviour vs . Reported Behaviour.

[20] W. Sugar, A. Brown, and K. Luterbach. Examining the anatomy of a
screencast: Uncovering common elements and instructional strategies.
International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning,
11(3):1–20, 2010.

[21] VMware Inc. VMware Infrastructure Architecture Overview. White

Paper, page 14, 2007.

[22] E. Walker, N. Rummel, and K. R. Koedinger. To tutor the tutor: Adaptive
domain support for peer tutoring. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(including subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture
Notes in Bioinformatics), 2008.

[23] W. Wei and K.-B. Yue. Integrating Concept Mapping into Information
Systems Education for Meaningful Learning and Assessment. Technical
Report 6, 2017.

Overall, the CEH v10 Preparation Online Course was well
designed but there are still plenty of rooms for improvements.
The cyber threat landscape is constantly evolving and the
designers of the course honestly admitted that
the whole
course is a living one with the course contents are still being
developed, matured, and extended.

The paper embraces this approach and contributed a com-
plete sheet of 30 checkpoints categorized into ﬁve instructional
design objectives of: Meaningful, Engaging, Measurable, Ac-
cessible and Scalable. The current state of the course does
not meet 11 check points which lead to the paper’s second
contribution of ﬁve main recommendations with a focus on
building a better community for learners within the course.
”Self-paced” does not mean ”working alone”. By building a
community within this pay-walled course, more values can
be offered to learners. Since it is community-based, the total
investment costs can be really affordable. The paper hopes
CEH v10 course designers will receive the recommendations
with open arms and future improvements will arrive soon.

Finally,

the paper hopes its strategy for evaluating an
online course can be adopted by companies for their initial
evaluations of the courses or the training platforms they will
invest in. Smart measurement methods must be implemented
in order for early detection of misconceptions, even minor
ones. Smart measurement also means better statistics leading
to better justiﬁcations of the quality the education system is
providing.

REFERENCES

[1] Why Hyper-V? v1.0. Technical report, 2013.
[2] M. K. Azurecat. Structured review of Azure architectures A guide
for web application review Structured review of Azure architectures:
A guide for web application review 2. Technical report, 2018.
[3] California State University. Rubric for Online Instruction. 2009.
[4] G. Conole. A new classiﬁcation schema for MOOCs. The International
Journal for Innovation and Quality in Learning, (3):65–77, 2014.
[5] J. Daniel. Making Sense of MOOCs: Musings in a Maze of Myth,
Paradox and Possibility. Journal of Interactive Media in Education,
2012(3):18, 2012.

[6] J. R. Drake, M. O’hara, and E. Seeman. Five principles for MOOC

design: With a case study. Technical report, 2015.

[7] C. Feng, G. Guo, S. Jin, and C. Zhou. Authoring Tools for Easy Creation

of Adaptive Tutoring. Technical report.

[8] D. R. Garrison and M. Cleveland-Innes. Facilitating Cognitive Presence
in Online Learning: Interaction Is Not Enough. American Journal of
Distance Education, 19(3):133–148, 2005.

[9] Global Knowledge Training LLC. 2016 IT Skills and Salary Report A
Comprehensive Study from Global Knowledge. Technical report, 2016.
[10] K. F. Hew. Promoting engagement in online courses: What strategies
can we learn from three highly rated MOOCS. British Journal of
Educational Technology, 47(2):320–341, 3 2016.

[11] S. Holstein and A. Cohen. The Characteristics of Successful MOOCs in
the Fields of Software, Science, and Management, According to Students
Perception. Interdisciplinary Journal of e-Skills and Lifelong Learning,
12:247–266, 2016.

[12] INACOL. National Standards for Quality Online Courses National
Standards for Quality Online Courses (Version 2). (October):1–44, 2011.

[13] LODS. Learn on Demand Systems - Experiential Learning Solutions.
[14] P. Lowenthal and C. Hodges. In Search of Quality: Using Quality Mat-
ters to Analyze the Quality of Massive, Open, Online Courses (MOOCs).
The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning,
16(5), 9 2015.

