Differential Privacy Techniques for Cyber Physical
Systems: A Survey

Muneeb Ul Hassan, Mubashir Husain Rehmani, and Jinjun Chen

1

9
1
0
2

p
e
S
7
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

3
v
2
8
2
2
0
.
2
1
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Modern cyber physical systems (CPSs) has widely
being used in our daily lives because of development of informa-
tion and communication technologies (ICT). With the provision of
CPSs, the security and privacy threats associated to these systems
are also increasing. Passive attacks are being used by intruders
to get access to private information of CPSs. In order to make
CPSs data more secure, certain privacy preservation strategies
such as encryption, and k-anonymity have been presented in
the past. However, with the advances in CPSs architecture,
these techniques also need certain modiﬁcations. Meanwhile,
differential privacy emerged as an efﬁcient technique to protect
CPSs data privacy. In this paper, we present a comprehensive
survey of differential privacy techniques for CPSs. In particular,
we survey the application and implementation of differential
privacy in four major applications of CPSs named as energy
systems, transportation systems, healthcare and medical systems,
and industrial Internet of things (IIoT). Furthermore, we present
open issues, challenges, and future research direction for differ-
ential privacy techniques for CPSs. This survey can serve as basis
for the development of modern differential privacy techniques to
address various problems and data privacy scenarios of CPSs.

Index Terms—Differential privacy, cyber physical systems
(CPSs), smart grid (SG), health care systems, transportation
systems, industrial Internet of things (IIoT), privacy preservation.

I. INTRODUCTION

Previously, embedded computers were used to control and
monitor the physical processes via feedback loop control [1].
With the passage of time, integration of computation technolo-
gies with traditional embedded physical systems lead the foun-
dation of new type of systems named as cyber physical systems
(CPSs) [2]. The advances in CPSs have gathered considerable
attention over the last ten years [3]. The major reason behind
this stupendous attention is the dual nature of CPSs, via which
they integrate the dynamic properties of embedded computers
with those of information and communication technologies
(ICT) [4]. Similarly, the merger of ICT and embedded systems
spread to a number of physical domains of dynamic nature, in-
cluding energy, transportation, healthcare, medical, industrial,
and manufacturing systems [5]. Majority of CPSs are deployed
in life support devices, critical infrastructures (CI), or are very
vital to our everyday lives. Therefore, CPSs users expect them

M. Ul Hassan and J. Chen are with the Swinburne University of Tech-
nology, Hawthorn VIC 3122, Australia (e-mail: muneebmh1@gmail.com;
jinjun.chen@gmail.com).

M.H. Rehmani is with the Department of Computer Science, Cork In-
stitute of Technology, Rossa Avenue, Bishopstown, Cork, Ireland (e-mail:
mshrehmani@gmail.com).

Please direct correspondence to M.H. Rehmani.
This paper is partly supported by Australian Research Council (ARC)

projects DP190101893, DP170100136, LP140100816 and LP180100758.

to be emancipated from every type of vulnerabilities. One
of the critical issue in deployment of CPSs in real world is
their privacy, as any type of information leakage can result
in very serious consequences [6]. Particularly, the complex
architecture of CPSs make it difﬁcult to assess the privacy
threats, and new privacy issues arises. It is also strenuous
to trace, identify, examine, and eliminate privacy attacks that
may target multiple components of CPSs such as real-time
sensors, wearable health devices, industrial control systems,
etc. [6]. Similarly, CPSs basically rely on diverse number
of sensors and data centres containing very huge amount
of personal and private data. For example, wearable devices
of patients are continuously reporting their real-time data to
consulting doctors [7]. However, if one does not use a strong
privacy preservation scheme during this communication, then
any adversary can try to hack this personal information and
can use it for illegal beneﬁts such as blackmailing, false
information injection, etc [8]. Therefore, there is a strong
possibility of compromising the personal privacy of CPS users
in the absence of proper privacy protection strategy [9].

Attacks on CPSs can be classiﬁed into passive (privacy
oriented) or active (security oriented). The basic objective of
passive attacks is to access a certain amount of private data
being shared in the network, or to infer about any critical in-
formation from public dataset [5]. Many researchers proposed
cryptographic techniques to preserve data privacy [13]–[15].
However, these cryptographic techniques are computationally
expensive, because users’ needs to maintain the set of en-
cryption keys. Moreover, it becomes more difﬁcult to ensure
privacy in a situation when public sharing of data is required.
Similarly, anonymization techniques such as k-anonymity [16]
are also proposed by researchers to address privacy issues.
However, these anonymization strategies do not guarantee
complete level of protection from adversaries because the
chances of re-identiﬁcation increase if size of attributes in
dataset increases [11]. An adversary trying to infer the data
can match the non-anonymized data with anonymized data,
which in turn will lead to privacy breach. Another important
privacy scheme named as differential privacy was introduced
in 2006 to overcome these privacy issues. Currently, the use of
differential privacy is emerging as a future of privacy [17]. Dif-
ferential privacy protects statistical or real-time data by adding
desirable amount of noise along with maintaining a healthy
trade-off between privacy and accuracy. In differential privacy,
user can control the level of privacy or indistinguishability,
which in turn will lead to protection of maximum possible
privacy for any particular individual in dataset. For example,
the value of privacy parameter can be used to control trade-off

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF PRIVACY PRESERVATION STRATEGIES ON THE BASIS OF METHOD, MERITS, WEAKNESSES, AND
COMPUTATIONAL OVERHEAD.

Privacy
Name

Encryption

Anonymization

Differential
Privacy
(focus of this
survey article)

Method to Protect Privacy

Merits
(Advantages)

Public and private keys are assigned
to transmitted data that are used to
decrypt data at receiving end

• Original data is not lost
• Data becomes inaccessible
to unauthorized users

Personal identiﬁable information
(e.g. name, date of birth, passport
number etc.) is removed before query
evaluation
Random noise is added using various
mathematical algorithms, e.g. Laplace,
Gaussian, etc.

• Limits disclosure risks
• Works with high
dimensional data

• Low complexity
• Original data is not lost
• Privacy can be controlled
according to need by varying
privacy parameter

Weaknesses
and
Challenges

• Computationally complex
• Reduces system speed
• Not Suitable for public
databases
• Original data is lost
• 100% privacy is not guaranteed
• Chances of re-identiﬁcation
exists in large data
• Dimensionality curse
• Reduction in data utility
• Selecting desirable trade-off
between privacy and accuracy is
tough

Computational
Overhead

Very high [10]

High [11]

Low [12]

between utility and privacy, it can either be 100% utility or
100% privacy depending upon the requirement of system. A
detailed overview of these privacy preserving strategies along
with their merits and demerits is presented in Table. I.

Differential privacy has the capability to preserve large pro-
portion of data from both, databases and real-time data [20].
Data perturbation is carried out in majority of differential
privacy techniques. In data perturbation, amount of noise is
calculated using differential privacy algorithms and this noise
is further added to query data to make it secure and indistin-
guishable for observer. This perturbation has direct effect with
the accuracy of data being reported. On the other hand, the
more perturbed data ensures that privacy is strongly protected.
Therefore, while using differential privacy, one needs to main-
tain an advantageous trade-off among accuracy and privacy.
Due to this privacy and accuracy trade-off, utilizing differential
privacy in CPSs is a challenging task, because various CPSs
applications require accurate reporting of data, for example
health care and medical systems. To efﬁciently use differential
privacy techniques in CPSs, various techniques in energy
systems, transportation systems, healthcare, machine learning,
and industrial systems have been proposed in literature. The
actual goal is to improve privacy level along with minimizing
the trade-off with accuracy.

A. Motivation: Differential Privacy for Cyber Physical Sys-
tems

To date, various privacy preservation strategies have been
proposed by researchers to overcome certain privacy threats.
Encryption is one of the traditional privacy preserving tech-
nique used by majority of systems to protect the data from
adversaries and unauthorized users [18], because it provides
feature of data inaccessibility to unauthorized users. However,
in modern CPSs, encryption can barely be applied, because
of the sensors’ limitation of computing capacity [10]. For
example in public key cryptography also called as asymmetric
cryptography, the generation, and distribution of public and
private keys is a computationally complex task and cannot
easily be carried out with small devices having limited re-
sources [21]. Furthermore, various attacks, such as brute-force

attack may be used by any vulnerability against the encrypted
CPS data [22]. Similarly, in a network of multiple sensors,
encryption strategies require the interconnection of every node
for generation and transmission of private keys in the network.
Therefore, if one node gets failed in a network of n number of
nodes, then the decryption and collection of data from CPSs
nodes becomes nearly impossible, because of missing keys in
the network [10].

Another privacy preserving strategy used by researchers
is data anonymization [23]. However, recent literature work
indicates that privacy of anonymized data can easily be com-
promised. For example, Montjoye et al. [24] collected and
simply anonymized mobility data for 15 minutes of 1.5 million
people. Even from this anonymized data, they identiﬁed a
person with around 95% accuracy via four temporal points
only. Furthermore, the weaknesses of simply anonymized data
was conﬁrmed further by a test carried out on credit card
transactions [25], and researchers re-identiﬁed the individuals
with 90% accuracy by using only four temporal points.
Existing privacy preservation schemes being used in CPSs
pose serious challenges to users’ privacy. Therefore, a pertur-
bation technique that protects the private data with appropriate
mechanism was the need. In 2006, C. Dwork proposed the con-
cept of differential privacy as an efﬁcient privacy preserving
approach to obstruct adversaries from recovering data [26].
Similarly, a statistical differential privacy interpretation was
developed by Wasserman in 2010 [27]. Continuing this re-
search line, researchers proposed membership privacy [28] and
differential identiﬁability [29] to address certain problems in
differential privacy framework. In context of CPSs, Zhu et al.
in [3] suggested the usage of differential privacy in advanced
CPSs. Contrary to encryption, differential privacy provides
a less complex, privacy preservation mechanism. The actual
reason is that computational cost of differential privacy only
comprises of noise computation using a pre-deﬁned probability
distribution. However, the nodes using encryption has to carry
out certain tasks of generation, and distribution of keys along
with encrypting and decrypting data. Therefore, the computa-
tional complexity of differential privacy is fairly low as com-
pared to encryption. Furthermore, in differential privacy, CPSs

3

TABLE II
UTILITY-PRIVACY COMPARISON BETWEEN DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY, ANONYMIZATION, AND ENCRYPTION .

Privacy
Technique

Major
Constraint

Description

Anonymization

Limited privacy

Anonymization does not guarantee complete privacy as it is claimed that anonymized data is either
protected or either usable, because chances of re-identiﬁcation always exists in anonymization [11].

Encryption

Third-party
privacy

Protects data from third-party intruders along with providing complete privacy, but privacy is not protected
from observing analyst [18].

Differential
Privacy

Utility-privacy
trade-off

Deals with utility-privacy trade-off that can be controlled by data provider according to privacy require-
ment [19].

users can control the level of privacy according to the need by
varying noise addition parameter “ε”. Unlike anonymization,
original data of CPSs is not lost during query evaluation
using differential privacy because data is protected using
perturbation methodology. Various noise addition mechanisms
of differential privacy provide strong privacy protection against
numeric and non-numeric queries [30]. By keeping in view
its tremendous beneﬁts, mathematical and theoretical basis,
and easy realization, differential privacy has been applied
extensively in CPSs to preserve individual privacy [31].

B. Contributions of This Survey Article

While few previous survey articles have highlighted some
speciﬁc aspects of differential privacy techniques in certain
CPSs domains, to the best of our knowledge there is no com-
prehensive survey over the implementation and applications
of differential privacy techniques in CPSs. In this paper, we
survey state-of-the-art work on differential privacy techniques
in CPSs scenarios. In summary, following contributions are
made in the article:

• We review previous survey articles on differential privacy

and highlight important features of them.

• We focus more on the presenting practical aspects of

differential privacy in CPSs.

• We provide a thorough survey of differential privacy and

its implementation in CPSs.

• We provide an extensive survey of applications of differ-

ential privacy in CPSs.

• We survey the work done over implementation of differ-
ential privacy in energy systems, transportation system,
healthcare, and industrial IoT systems.

• We outline certain open issues, challenges, and possible
future research direction for differential privacy based
CPSs.

C. Review of Related Survey Articles

TABLE III
LIST OF ACRONYMS AND CORRESPONDING DEFINITIONS.

Acronyms Deﬁnitions
AMI
BLH
CI
CIDS
CPS
D2D
DSM
DSRC
EM
EV
FHMM
HA
HetVNET
ICS
ICT
IIoT
IoT
IoV
ITS
LM
LPWA
LTE
MAB
MANET
NCS
NILM
PII
PKC
RER
SG
UNB
V2D
V2V

Advanced Metering Infrastructure
Battery Load Hiding
Critical Infrastructure
Collaborative Intrusion Detection Systems
Cyber Physical System
Device-to-Device
Demand Side Management
Dedicated Short-Range Communication
Exponential Mechanism
Electric Vehicle
Factorial Hidden Markov Model
Hybrid Automation
Heterogeneous Vehicular Networks
Industrial Control Systems
Information and Communication Technologies
Industrial Internet of Things
Internet of Things
Internet of Vehicle
Intelligent Transportation System
Laplace Mechanism
Low Power Wide Area
Long-Term Evolution
Multi-Armed Bandit
Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks
Networked Control System
Non-Intrusive Load Monitoring
Personally Identiﬁable Information
Public Key Cryptography
Renewable Energy Resource
Smart Grid
Ultra Narrow Band
Vehicle-to-Device
Vehicle-to-Vehicle

Our present survey article on differential privacy in CPSs
is distinct from all previous studies, as we extensively cover
the area of differential privacy implementation in CPSs. There
is a comprehensive literature of previous survey articles that
has focus on differential privacy, and few of them focused
over differential privacy in big data analysis. However, to
the best of our knowledge, there is no prior detailed survey
article that thoroughly addresses differential privacy strategies

in CPSs. We categorize the previous survey literature work
over differential privacy into seven major categories named as
statistical databases, social networks, mobile sensing system,
ﬁnite precision semantics, sensitive data mining, machine rec-
ommender systems, miscellaneous. The application scenario,
major contribution and considered factors about these survey
articles is presented in Table IV.

An extensive literature on differential privacy in context

4

TABLE IV
SUMMARY COMPARISON OF PREVIOUS SURVEY ARTICLES OF DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY (DP) WITH THEIR APPLICATION

SCENARIO, YEAR, MAJOR CONTRIBUTIONS, AND CONSIDERED FACTORS.

✔ INDICATES THAT THE TOPIC IS COVERED, ✗ INDICATES THAT THE TOPIC IS NOT COVERED, AND ✽ INDICATES THAT THE
TOPIC IS PARTIALLY COVERED.

Application
Scenario

Mobile Sensing
System

Ref
No.
[19]

Year

Major Contribution

Considered Factors

2017

A comprehensive survey on improvement of data utility

[32]

2011

A comprehensive survey over privacy techniques in
social networks including differential privacy

Social Networks

[33]

2014

Finite Precision
Semantics
Sensitive Data
Mining
Mobile
Recommender
System

Statistical
Databases

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

2016

2014

2016

2008

2012

2017

Communication in
Big Data

[11]

2018

Miscellaneous

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

2016

2016

2017

2018

A comprehensive survey of differential privacy in social
networks is carried out and after that two differential
privacy based outlink privacy and partition privacy
standards are proposed
A discussion about method of quantifying of data privacy
by ﬁnite precision
An investigation is done over learning base data release
mechanism
An overview of privacy preserving algorithms including
differential privacy is given by focusing on collection,
generation, and storage in mobile recommender systems
A presentation of two basic techniques of differential
privacy
An investigation and approach on individual experience
cost as a function of privacy loss is proposed
An overview about differential privacy and its relevance
with other data science topics

A comprehensive comparison of differential privacy
with other privacy preservation approaches is carried
out in scenario of big data from the perspective of
communication
Overview of differential privacy methods to chose
accurate epsilon value for a better trade-off
A detailed study on data clustering and privacy
framework

Analysis over data publishing and data analysis using
differential privacy
A comparison of differential privacy with other big data
privacy schemes

[44]

2018

A survey on fundamental ideas of privacy budget and
sensitivity in differential privacy

[45]

2019

A detailed survey over integration of modern differential
privacy algorithms with deep learning models

[46]

2019

In-depth analysis of more than 50 variants of differential
privacy from perspective of methodology

Cyber Physical
Systems

This
Work

2018

An in-depth survey of differential privacy techniques
in applications of cyber physical systems (energy,
transportation, healthcare, medical, and industrial IoT
systems)

Discussed
CPSs
✽

✽

✽

✗

✗

✽

✗

✗

✗

✽

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✗

✔

• Distribution • Optimization
• Calibration • Transformation
• Decomposition
• Privacy breaches
• Anonymization in social
networks
• Triangle count
and distribution
• Graph modelling

• Computational error

• Loss function

• Privacy risks

• Learning theory
• Statistical data inference
• Privacy and accuracy trade-
off
• Computational complexity
• Cryptography • Theoretical
computer science
• Privacy attacks
• Privacy risks in big data

• Epsilon value

• Cryptography
• Data mining
• Biometric privacy
• Game theory
• Data release mechanism
• Efﬁciency • Accuracy
• Execution time
• Complexity
• Data utility
• Noise calculation mechanism
• Fundamental architectures for
differential privacy
• Privacy attacks
• Private data extraction
• Deep learning layers
• Privacy loss
• Differential privacy
deﬁnitions
• Computational effect of
variants
• Privacy preservation
• CPSs applications
• Privacy attacks
• Design mechanism
• Technical challenges

of salient privacy related features of differential privacy from
context of data analytic, big data, and privacy budget is pre-
sented in [40]–[44]. The term big data refers to transmission,
collection, storage, or usage of large amount of data collected
from any source [47]. Zhou et al. [40] discussed about different
methods of calculation of accurate (ε) value to minimize
privacy and accuracy trade-off. A brief analysis over data
release mechanism, efﬁciency, and accuracy of differential
privacy is presented in [42]. In [41], a detailed study on data
clustering and privacy framework is presented by focusing
mainly over cryptography, data mining, biometric privacy, and
game theory. A survey over comparison of execution time,
complexity, and data utility of differential privacy with other
privacy schemes of big data is given in [43]. While, Jain et
al. [44] surveyed the fundamental ideas of sensitivity and
privacy budget by focusing on fundamental architecture and
noise calculation mechanism of differential privacy.

A comprehensive survey on improvement of data utility of
differential privacy in mobile sensing systems is presented
in [19]. The discussion in [32] covers the aspect of privacy
breaches for differential privacy techniques including differ-
ential privacy in social networks. Similarly, in [33] authors
carried out a comprehensive survey of differential privacy in
social networks and then presented two privacy techniques
(outlink privacy and partition privacy) based on the concept
of differential privacy. A method of quantifying data privacy
and reducing computational error by ﬁnite precision based
differential privacy is discussed in [34].
The detailed investigation about sensitive data mining, loss
function, and learning from data bases by focusing on differ-
ential privacy is carried out in [35]. Furthermore, the imple-
mentation of various privacy preserving algorithms of mobile
recommender system is compared with differential privacy by
Xu et al. [36] in context of privacy risks. Studies on privacy
preservation of statistical databases using differential privacy
has been presented in [37]–[39]. C. Dwork in [37], laid the
foundation of differential privacy for statistical data inference
and surveyed two basic techniques of differential privacy. Sim-
ilarly, an investigation and approach on individual experience
cost as a function of their privacy and accuracy trade-off is
proposed in [38]. Furthermore, the comparison of differential
privacy with other data science privacy strategies by focusing
on computational complexity, and theoretical basis is carried
out in [39]. The ﬁeld of privacy preservation in big data from
the perspective of communication is analysed by Wang et
al. in [11]. The paper presents the comparison of differential
privacy with other privacy preservation approaches in context
of framework and preserving technique. Furthermore, it also
highlights certain privacy attacks that needs to be analysed
in the mentioned privacy preserving approaches. A detailed
discussion about the integration of differential privacy with
various deep learning models is presented in [45]. The authors
ﬁrst discusses three aspects of deep learning models along
with the possible privacy attacks. Afterwards, authors demon-
strated the integration of differential privacy in these models
from perspective of layer-wise implementation. Similarly, an
in-depth technical analysis over extensions and variants of
differential privacy is covered by authors in [46]. The paper

5

presents dimension, axioms, and relation based analysis of 54
differential privacy variants and analysed them from the point-
of-view of computational complexity, and privacy loss.
However, the privacy topics of all differential privacy surveys
do not address the applications and implementation of differ-
ential privacy in CPSs from any perspective.

D. Article Structure

A list of acronyms that are used throughout our survey paper
is presented in Table. III. The remainder of this paper is orga-
nized as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of differential
privacy and CPSs, while Section 3 surveys differential privacy
techniques in energy systems. Section 4 provides a detailed
survey of privacy preservation of transportation systems using
differential privacy. Section 5 surveys implementation of dif-
ferential privacy in healthcare and medical systems. Similarly,
Section 6 surveys differential privacy approaches in industrial
Internet of things systems. In Section 7, we outline certain
open issues, challenges, and future research directions. Finally,
Section 8 concludes the survey article.

II. DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY AND CYBER PHYSICAL
SYSTEMS: AN OVERVIEW

Privacy can be deﬁned as a method of protecting infor-
mation that can be sensitive to any individual. The basic
reason of privacy preservation is to prevent an intruder from
learning more than minimum required information regarding
any speciﬁc individual either in case of real-time or statistical
data.

A. Privacy Attacks

Adversaries always try to attack crucial systems in order to
get complete or partial access to information. In this section,
certain privacy attacks closely related to CPSs and differential
privacy are discussed.

1) Disclosure Attack: Disclosure attack is a trafﬁc pattern
analysis attack, and in this type of attack, adversary is able to
recognize the deﬁned set of receivers on the basis of observed
trafﬁc [48], [49]. Adversaries use this attack method to iden-
tify the speciﬁc receiver and compromise its communication.
However, disclosure attacks are not easy to implement because
they require a certain level of computational efﬁciency. This is
because of fact that adversary has to scan the whole network
several times in order to get accurate receivers’ identity that
makes it difﬁcult to launch [50]. Still, in order to overcome
this attack,
the real-time information being communicated
between sender and receiver needs to be protected; that even
if adversary is able to compromise the receiver, he will not be
able to judge the accurate information.

2) Linking Attack: The type of attacks in which external
data is combined with anonymized or protected data in order
to infer critical information is known as linking attack [51]. For
example, two anonymized datasets are linked together having
different types of data about same individuals; re-identiﬁcation
can easily be carried out using linking attack. In the age of
big data, launching an effective linking attack can be quite

easy for any adversary. Thus, even anonymized data is not
safe, and it can be used to breach any individual privacy.
Therefore, a privacy protection strategy to efﬁciently protect
query evaluation over statistical data is required.

3) Differencing Attack: Direct queries about any individual
are usually blocked during a query evaluation to avoid any
privacy breach. For example, in a hospital database, queries
like “does Mark have diabetes” are restricted because such
queries directly violate privacy of individuals. Instead of these,
queries for aggregated results are usually allowed, for example
“how many men in a speciﬁc region have diabetes”. However,
an adversary can submit multiple queries to get personal
information about certain individual. For example, an intruder
can ﬁrst ask “How many individuals in the dataset have
diabetes”, and then it can submit query as “How many people
in the diabetic dataset, not named Mark”. Thus, by repeating
such queries, adversary will be able to determine the diabetes
status of Mark. This type of repetitive query evaluation attack
is known as differencing attack [11]. A privacy mechanism
that does not give 100% accurate output to adversary for
such statistical queries is required to protect secret data of
individuals.

4) Correlation Attack: In real-world data, strong correlation
may exist such as shared relationships and family members
share attributes in various social networking datasets. If an
adversary tries correlation attack using similar datasets, then
this existing correlation may lead to disclosure of more than
expected information [52], [53]. An intruder having different
anonymized datasets for comparison can obtain private infor-
mation of individuals in datasets by performing correlation
attack, thereby it directly violates the principles of privacy.
For example, anonymized datasets of a hospital can be merged
and correlated to ﬁnd the presence of any speciﬁc disease in
members of family. This certain type of attack is called as cor-
relation attack, and adversaries can easily launch correlation
attack to identify certain details if they have rich data about
their targets. In order to prevent correlation attack, a privacy
preserving mechanism with efﬁcient data handling is required
that reduces the risk of information leakage even in case of
public query evaluation.

B. Differential Privacy

To date, most of work on privacy preservation is done
in perspective of databases. This work can be categorized
into two major domains; ﬁrst domain involves the protection
of complete data from database in which anonymization
techniques play a major roles, and the second one involves
development of a good theoretical framework on the basis of
privacy requirement in which differential privacy came up as
a viable solution. Anonymization techniques initiated from k-
anonymity, to l-diversity, and then to t-closeness method [54].
theoretical framework based differential privacy
Similarly,
strategies are further divided into differential identiﬁability
and membership privacy
[41]. The detailed discussion
about these derivatives is out of the scope of this article.
However, detailed discussion about differential privacy and
its integration in different CPSs domain is presented. In this

6

that

section, classiﬁcation, comparison, and application scenarios
of differential privacy is discussed. The concept of differential
privacy technique on the basis of probability model was
ﬁrst introduced by C. Dwork [26]. The model was totally
independent of the prior knowledge of adversary [26], [55].
The aim of differential privacy is to make sure that the output
result of any query should not reveal enough information
about any individual
leads to its identiﬁcation. The
randomized algorithm ℜ of differential privacy ensures that
the output values of query cannot be distinguished irrespective
of absence or presence of a speciﬁc member in the database
ß. This means,
that query results of neighboring datasets
are indiscernible by introducing some randomized value of
noise [19]. This sums up the conclusion, that adversary will
not be able to presume sensitive information of any dataset
with conﬁdence. Differential privacy can formally be deﬁned
on the basis of two neighboring databases ß and ß′ that differs
from each other in only one single member.

Deﬁnition 1 (Neighboring Datasets): A randomized algorith-
mic function ℜ satisﬁes ε-differential privacy condition PR if
for any two adjacent datasets ß and ß′, and for any sort of
possible outcome ξ ∈ Range(ℜ), we get:

PR[ℜ(ß) ∈ ξ] ≤ exp(ε) × PR[ℜ(ß′) ∈ ξ]

(1)

In above equation, Range(ℜ) is the range of resultant
output function ℜ. Similarly, “ε” is the epsilon privacy
parameter, that determines the actual
level of privacy for
proposed mechanism. The lower value of ε is desired in order
to have stronger privacy and vice versa [56].

Deﬁnition 2 (Global Sensitivity): The value of sensitivity ac-
tually determines the required amount of perturbation in
differentially private mechanism. Similarly, the term global
sensitivity works over the phenomenon of maximum possible
difference between query outputs from two datasets differing
with each other by only one element (also known as neighbor-
ing datasets). For a randomized query f : ß → ℜ, the value
of global sensitivity ∆fgs can be found using the following
formula [30]:

∆fgs = max

ß,ß′ ||f (ß) − f (ß′)||

(2)

The basic noise addition mechanism for differential privacy is
shown in Fig. 1. Discussion about differential privacy can be
divided into two major branches; differential privacy existing
methods, and noise addition mechanisms.

1) Differential Privacy Existing Methods: Differential pri-
vacy existing protocols can be divided into two major cat-
egories, one according to the perspective of differential pri-
vacy optimization, and other according to the perspective of
datasets. The integration of differential privacy in any data
can further be categorized on the basis of two categories:
(i) Distribution Optimization [57]–[62], in this branch, the
probability density function of differential privacy is optimized
without taking in account the dataset. In these techniques, dif-
ferential privacy is generally achieved by adding randomized

7

Fig. 1: Analyst query evaluation scenario explaining data output with Differential Privacy (DP) preservation (protected data)
and without DP preservation (unprotected data).

Fig. 2: Differential privacy implementation in cyber physical systems can broadly be classiﬁed into two scenarios (real-time
data and stored data), however both the categories face some similar technical challenges such as selection of value of epsilon,
sensitivity, data utility, and attack protection.

noise calculated via Laplacian or Exponential mechanism. The
probability distribution of these schemes is further partitioned
into centralized and distributed schemes. (ii) Sensitivity Cali-
bration [63]–[69], in these techniques, data utility is improved
by calibrating the sensitivity value to an optimal state. The
sensitivity is further smoothed and lowered in order to enhance
the data utility. These two mentioned categories perturbs data
on the basis of mentioned criteria, for example if one needs
to preserve data according to a certain probability distribution,
then it will use the ﬁrst “distribution optimization”, or if one is
interested to protect data according to its sensitivity value then
“sensitivity calibration” is the most suitable option for that.
However, these both types of integrations are also interlinked
with each other in a manner that one can adjust both values
at the same time to achieve desirable results. For example,

a person wants to protect its data can use any probability
distribution (such as Exponential, Laplacian, etc.) along with
its required sensitivity value.

Similarly, the branch of differential privacy in perspective
of dataset is also divided into two major subcategories: (i)
Synopsis of Original Databases and Datasets [70]–[81]. In this
method, the synopsis of datasets is built by applying various
techniques of decomposition, transformation, or compression.
The noise in these techniques is added in such a way that
it minimizes rate of error and improves utility of data, along
with satisfying ε-differential privacy value; (ii) Correlation
Exploitation [63], [70] [82]–[84], in these proposed strategies
of differential privacy, the correlation among attributes and
data records is exploited to reduce the effect of noise and
redundancy, that in return preserves data privacy more effec-

MEDICAL RECORD BASED DEMONSTRATION OF EXPONENTIAL MECHANISM OF DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY.

TABLE V

THE TABLE SHOWS THE TRADE-OFF BETWEEN PRIVACY AND UTILITY SUCH THAT 0.2 AT ε =0 DEMONSTRATES THAT
THERE ARE 20% CHANCES OF THAT SPECIFIC ANSWER BEING PICKED WHICH MEANS 100% PRIVACY, AND 0.72 IN ε =1
DEMONSTRATES THE CHANCES FOR HEADACHE ARE 72%, WHICH MEANS MINIMUM PRIVACY.

8

Analyst Query

No. of Applicant

ε = 0

ε = 0.1

Cough

Asthma

Cholesterol

Dehydration

Headache

32

18

24

12

34

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.275

0.136

0.185

0.101

0.303

ε = 1

0.2675
2.4 x 10−4
4.9 x 10−3
1.2 x 10−5

0.727

tively.

2) Data Perturbation Mechanisms: In differential privacy,
noise addition mechanism is referred as a way to protect
data by perturbing it via pre-deﬁned mechanisms. Three
noise adding mechanisms are generally used in differential
privacy approaches. They are named as Laplace mechanism
(LM) [85], Gaussian mechanism [86], and Exponential mech-
anism (EM) [44]. The actual magnitude of added noise directly
depends upon the global sensitivity and privacy budget [87].
Another term named as privacy bound do also contribute
while noise addition in some circumstances. Generally, privacy
bound is referred as privacy budget unless a speciﬁc bound is
required [88].

In Laplace mechanism,

a) Laplace Mechanism:

the
noise is computed using the Laplacian function, and each
coordinate of data is perturbed using the calculated Laplacian
noise from LM distribution. The sensitivity of the differential
privacy function determines the scale of noise being added.
In a given dataset ß, function ℜ, and the global sensitivity δfs,
the randomized algorithm ˚A in Eq. 3 satisﬁes ε-differential
privacy parameter, if the calculated noise value complies with
the actual value of Laplace distribution; which is, noise ∼
Lap(δfs/ε). LM is generally used in case of numerical output
results [85].

˚A = ℜ(ß) + Lap(δfs/ε)

(3)

b) Exponential Mechanism: A method to implement
differential privacy in case of non-numerical outputs is Expo-
nential mechanism. Exponential mechanism was speciﬁcally
developed for certain conditions in which the best response
was required to be picked. In a given dataset ß, l ∈ Ł denotes
the possible answer, in a score function u : ß × Ł → Ł; and a
randomized algorithm ˚A selects a probability based answer,
then the given randomized algorithm ˚A will satisfy the ε-
differential privacy according to Eq. 4 [44].

˚A(ß, u) = l : |PR[l ∈ Ł]∞exp(εu(ß, l)/2∆u)

(4)

In the above presented equation, ∆u denotes the sensitivity of
exponential score function. The value of ∆u varies according
to the requirement of user.
For example, Table V discusses an example of exponential
mechanism, in which we take the value of sensitivity ∆u =

1, and the dataset of medical records is evaluated on the basis
of different epsilon values. The third column of table shows
that when ε is taken as 0, then the mechanism can uniformly
pick any option from all ﬁve options because the probability of
selection of all possible outcomes becomes the same. Hence, it
guarantees 100% privacy, but the utility is minimum. Similarly,
in case of ε = 0.1, Headache has the maximum probability of
being picked from the samples and Dehydration has minimum
probability. Although, the gap between values is not very large,
thus the value of ε = 0.1 can provide a considerable level of
privacy. Finally, when ε = 1, the gap of probability between
Headache and Dehydration is very signiﬁcant which indicates
a very high utility value, but the level of privacy reduces via
considerable amount.

c) Gaussian Mechanism: Gaussian mechanism is an-
other essential block that is currently being used in implemen-
tation of differential privacy algorithms. Similar to Laplace
mechanism, noise in Gaussian mechanism is calculated using
normal (Gaussian) distribution [56], [86]. In a query function
f , let value of ε be between 0 and 1, then the output for
Gaussian perturbation σ will be as follows:

σ =

∆2f
ε p2log(1.25/ε)

(5)

Composition Theorem [89]: In addition to noise addition
mechanisms, differential privacy also has two composition
theorems, which can be deﬁned formally as follows:

Theorem # 01 (Sequential Composition): The basic
concept of sequential composition theorem states that if we
have n-algorithms that are differentially private individually,
to feed results of ﬁrst algorithm to second
and we want
one, and so on, without sacriﬁcing the complete privacy of
output results. Then, sequential composition theorem allows
such operations. Sequential composition theorem is usually
beneﬁcial for algorithms involving multiple iterations over
same dataset.

Proof: A mechanism M(B) follows nε-sequential composition
differential privacy theorem if it obeys following property.
Let B1&B2 be two neighboring datasets then:

Pr[M (B1) = xn] = Pr[M1(B1) = x1]Pr[M2(B1; x1) = x2]...

Pr[Mn(B1; x1, ...xn−1) = xn]

n

Pr[Mk(B2; x1, ...xk−1) = xk]

≤ exp(nε)

Y
k=1
= exp(nε)Pr[M (B2) = xn]

Theorem # 02 (Parallel Composition): Parallel composition
applied in a condition when there is a single dataset which is
further partitioned into n disjoint subsets. Privacy bound can be
improved when queries are applied to disjoint subset of data.
Primarily, if we partition input records into disjoint sets that
are independent of actual data, then ultimate privacy guarantee
of differential privacy depends only over worst guarantees of
each differential privacy analysis subjected to data, not the
sum.
Proof: A mechanism M(B) follows parallel composition dif-
ferential privacy theorem if it obeys following property.
Let B1&B2 be two neighboring datasets then:

Pr[M (B1) = xn] =

n

Y
k=1

Pr[Mk(B2; x1, ...xk−1) = xk]

≤ exp(ε)Pr[ML(B2; x1, ...xL) = xL]

n

Y
k6=L

Pr[ML(B1; x1, ...xk−1) = xL]

= exp(ε)Pr[M (B2) = xn]

C. Technical Challenges in Application of Differential Privacy

Although the basic privacy preservation concept of differ-
ential privacy is not much complex and most of the tech-
niques require only data perturbation, but its implementation
in certain applications faces numerous technical challenges.
In this section, we highlight few challenges that researchers
and industries do face while implementing differential privacy
in emerging applications. A graphical illustration of some
technical challenges in application of differential privacy in
different scenario is presented in Fig. 2

1) Sensitivity: Differential privacy was actually introduced
to maintain the level of indistinguishability between certain
cases, e.g., the presence or absence of record of some spe-
in dataset. In practical datasets, statistical
ciﬁc individual
queries are evaluated with low sensitivity using differential
privacy [90]. For example, any random value x may be 1, or
may even be 10,000,000 in a statistical record, thus, its domain
will be x ∈ [1, 107]. A malicious administrator submits a
query to aggregate all values of x such as SU M (x) which also
involve the sensitive value of a participant. In this case, dif-
ferential privacy algorithm calculates and adds Laplace noise
in accordance to its standard deviation that will be directly
proportional to range 107. In such cases, noise potentially
hides the useful information and does not let intruders to know
the exact sensitive protected value of individual participant.
However, high value of sensitivity in a differential privacy
algorithm will lead to undesirable loss of utility in various
queries related to aggregation. Therefore, in order to maintain

9

a certain utility level, privacy is relaxed by service providers
or individuals and a degree of information is allowed to get
leaked [11]. For example, a case in which an adversary is able
to estimate salary of a certain participant in a certain range is
better than the case in which adversary will not be able to infer
any participant salary while performing statistical analysis. In
this way, relaxation in differential privacy algorithms allow
highly private output but along with privacy loss. That is why
trade-off is always there that needs to be maintained between
utility and privacy. Several emerging services and applications
are using diverse sensitivities [91]–[93]. Therefore, it is still
a challenge for researchers to propose optimal algorithms
which overcome the privacy-utility trade-off by using optimal
sensitivity value in the most efﬁcient way.

2) Choosing Epsilon Value: Despite of being mathemati-
cally sound, still there is no rigorous method that explains
choosing and generation of optimal value of ε. Epsilon param-
eter serves to be one of the most important factor in controlling
the trade-off between utility and privacy [94]. A smaller value
of ε indicates quite high level of noise in the mechanism;
thus, adversary will not be able to attack individual privacy.
However, this high value of ε results in loss of utility or
accuracy in output data. Therefore, choosing the optimal value
of ε in various practical scenarios is a challenging task and
is not completely addressed by researchers yet. In literature,
certain researches have been carried out to ﬁnd most optimal
value of ε. In [37], [94]–[98], various approaches have been
proposed to calculate optimal ε value on the basis of certain
criteria such as success probability, largest affordable value,
etc. However, choosing an accurate ε is still a considerable
technical challenge for researchers.

3) Data Correlation: Strong coupling correlation often
exhibits in real-world datasets, and certain records can be
correlated with each other; that results in disclosure of in-
formation [99]. For instance, differential privacy assures that
modifying, adding, or removing any individuals’ record from
a set of data will have no effect over aggregated data. How-
ever, presence of data correlation can beneﬁt adversary by
providing information that may help to infer private data of
any speciﬁc individual. For example, in case of any social
networks data, the presence of any speciﬁc disease in a speciﬁc
family, and adjacent spatio-temporal location continuity can
help the adversary to infer private individual information; this
directly violates differential privacy deﬁnition. In [63], [100],
[101], researchers developed model-based approaches, based
over sensitivity weights, correlation degree, and correlated
sensitivity to overcome this issue. Similarly, transformation-
based approaches working over principle of transformation of
actual correlated data to independent data while maintaining
key information have also been proposed by researchers in
[72], [74], [102]–[104]. However, experimental results eval-
uated that model-based approaches do not cover all aspects
of correlation, and transformation-based approaches actually
damages the correlated data up to some extent [11]. Therefore,
overcoming correlation in differential privacy algorithm is
currently among few biggest challenges for differential privacy
researchers.

10

Fig. 3: Application Scenarios of cyber physical systems describing the information ﬂow and physical sensing between cyber
space and connected physical devices.

TABLE VI
COMPARISON OF DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY AND INFORMATION THEORETIC PRIVACY FROM TECHNICAL PERSPECTIVE.

Privacy Factor

Privacy Bound

Differential Privacy
Privacy bound controlled by eε sensitivity and ∆
factor [20]

Information-Theoretic Privacy

Privacy bound controlled by entropy mechanism (such
as Shannon entropy) [105]

Privacy Guarantee

Provides guarantee for users’ privacy [19]

Characterises conﬁdentiality property of program [106]

Privacy Deﬁnition

Can be added by adding appropriate random noise [57]

It limits the probability of inferring secret information
via entropy [107]

Privacy Strength

Differential privacy is termed as a stronger privacy as it
implies bound on mutual information [108]

Restricts the probability of guessing but does not have
bound over differential privacy mechanism [108]

D. Effect of Differential Perturbation over Analyst and Adver-
sary

Differential privacy mechanism ensures that the privacy of
user gets protected from adversary, and in order to do so, it
perturbs data using various differential mechanisms. However,
choice of sensitivity and epsilon value play an important role
in determining the trade-off between accuracy and privacy.
One important factor that differential privacy ensures is that
the adversary will not be able to judge with conﬁdence about
presence or absence of any individual in a dataset. In order
to analyse it, let’s imagine two datasets D and D′ differing
with each other by just one record. If an adversary makes
a query “F” on both presented datasets, then there is a very

high probability that adversary will get same result “R” in both
cases. On the basis of this result, the adversary will not be able
to differentiate that a speciﬁc person “X” is present or absent in
the dataset. However, on the other hand, a genuine analyst who
wants to analyse the data in a legitimate way and do not have
any intention to intrude into details of any speciﬁc individual
will not feel much difference in the results. In this manner,
differential privacy ensures that the output result should not
disclose too much statistical information about any speciﬁc
individual of that dataset.

E. Comparison Between Differential Privacy and Information-
Theoretic Privacy

In recent years, another modern privacy preservation strat-
egy named as “information-theoretic privacy” is being used
by researchers to protect users’ data which is emerged from
information-theoretic ﬂow security. Similar to differential pri-
vacy, information-theoretic privacy do also work over preserv-
ing the private information by using statistical and analytical
tools by leveraging the concept of data disclosure [109], [110].
Information-theoretic privacy quantiﬁes and characterises con-
ﬁdentiality of query evaluation and limits the probability of
disclosure of secret information using certain entropy based
techniques such as Shannon entropy [107], [108]. Where
Shannon entropy can be termed as average rate via which the
information is generated by an available data source. Formally,
Shannon entropy is deﬁned as a negative log function of the
product of probabilities of bunch of independent events [111].
Another important concept in information-theoretic privacy
mechanism is mutual
information which is referred as a
parameter that signiﬁes the relation between two random
variables within dataset [106]. For example, within a dataset,
the amount of information that a variable “A” can provide
about variable “B” is termed to be its mutual information
parameter. Similarly, this parameter will be zero if these vari-
ables are totally independent and irrelevant of each other. This
parameter also serves as a foundation of many information
theoretic approaches and researches are being carried out
actively to enhance this parameter to an optimal level in order
to provide maximum privacy guarantee.
In order to compare information theoretic privacy with differ-
ential privacy, ﬁrst we need to consider their theoretical bounds
and strength. Firstly, differential privacy works over the phe-
nomenon of noise addition which depends upon ε and ∆ factor
that are referred as privacy parameter and sensitivity respec-
tively. However, contrary to differential privacy, information
theoretic privacy mechanisms are controlled by entropy based
mechanisms that controls the level of indistinguishability for
quantitative analysis [105]. Furthermore, differential privacy
guarantees privacy of user and by only providing analytical
proof for private answer of query. However,
information
theoretic privacy protects data by varying the difﬁculty of
guessing the correct answer which can also be termed as
leakage [112]. Finally, in order to compare privacy strength,
certain researches have showed that differential privacy is a
stronger privacy guarantee as it implies bound on Shannon
mutual information
revtwoand this bound approach value of “0” as the privacy
controlling parameter ε approaches “0”. (A detailed discussion
about this is elaborated by Alvim et al. in [108].) Contrary to
this, information theoretic privacy does not impose any bound
over any parameter of differential privacy. Keeping in view
all the discussion it can be summarized that both information
theoretic privacy and differential privacy provides strong pri-
vacy guarantee to their respective usage application and both
have their advantages and limitations that can be adjusted
according to requirement. A detailed technical comparison
between information theoretic privacy and differential privacy

11

is given in Table VI. Moreover, since information theoretic
privacy is in itself a huge topic,
therefore, in this paper,
we only focused on differential privacy. However, interested
readers can further understand information-theoretic privacy
from the following references [107], [110], [113]–[115].

F. Cyber Physical Systems

In 1946, ﬁrst computer was invented to perform ballistic
calculations [116]. With the passage of time, the position
of computers got strengthened in various close loop controls
around different physical systems. From this motivation, in
1973, the ﬁrst computer which was capable of real-time com-
putations was developed [117], which addressed the problem
of scheduling multiple tasks so that every job gets completed
before the deadline. Since then, the interest initiated in CPSs,
though the actual name invented quite late. In the late 90’s,
the interest between interaction of physical and computational
systems nourished when industries started modelling physical
plants using differential equations which was named as hybrid
systems [118].

In the meantime, another path named networks was also
leading towards this area from the origin of Internet and cellu-
lar telephony [119]. This ﬁeld of network control paved its way
with the development of Smart Dust Project in 1998 [120],
in which the nodes connected with the network can bring
information regarding the physical environment around the
devices. This evolutionary path initiated from communication,
computation, and network control merged into a broader
domain called as networked CPS [118]. Another path that
have traces in the present CPSs is control system, which
paved its path towards modern CPSs by invention of digital
control approximately 50 years ago [118]. Around 2006, the
researchers working in hybrid systems, control systems, and
real-time systems devised the name Cyber Physical Systems
to describe the systems incorporating cyber and physical
worlds. Currently, the modern CPSs that we see all around us
are basically the merger of communication, computing, and
control technologies.

In the modern world, CPSs are closely linked with certainly
every ﬁeld of life including healthcare, energy, automotive,
civil infrastructure, transportation, and industry. The infor-
mation is being generated, sensed, and transmitted from all
these technologies, and is being stored in certain databases
and servers [121], [122]. Securing this transmission and data
sensing gives birth to another critical domain of privacy and
security in CPSs. In this section, we will be discussing system
architectures, and applications of CPSs. While the privacy
of CPSs and implementation of differential privacy will be
discussed in Section II-G.

1) System Architectures: Generally, CPSs architectures
consists of two major functional components [123]: (i) Ad-
vanced Connectivity, in which the real-time data transmission
and reception is taking part between physical world and
cyber space; and (ii) Intelligent Data Management, in which
computational, and analytical capabilities are developed that is
the core part of cyber space. Researchers have divided CPSs
into certain models on the basis of their architecture. In this
section, we review three major architectures of CPSs.

a) Networked Control Systems (NCS): The mediation
of communication network between computing and physical
devices is one of the major attribute of modern CPSs, and
these types of control systems are called as networked control
systems (NCSs) [118]. In NCSs,
the control signals from
devices and feedback signals from output can be exchanged in
between system components. Owning this communication net-
work based control, NCSs have many beneﬁts as compared to
traditional control systems. NCSs eliminate the use of unnec-
essary wires, they are less complex, cost friendly in designing
and implementation, and can be upgraded or modiﬁed without
major reformations in the basic structure [124]. On the other
hand, NCSs do also have certain issues as well. The major
issues NCSs face are: reduction of network trafﬁc load due to
sampling [125]–[127], network induced delays [128], packet
dropout phenomenon [129], and quantization errors [130].

b) Hybrid Systems: Systems which work on the switch-
ing phenomenon between multiple operation modes are known
as switching systems. Similarly, the framework of CPSs that
is able to capture both, transitions between various continuous
and discrete states over time is known as hybrid automation
(HA) [118]. HA is generally used to model the complex
dynamic nature of CPSs via several mathematical and compu-
tational formalisms [131], [132].

c) Distributed Hybrid Systems: These types of systems
are quite complex, because they involve the differential equa-
tions based dynamic, discrete models, and real-time commu-
nication and computation technologies [118]. These types of
systems are basically the composition and combination of
several cyber and physical systems. Researchers are working
in proving correctness of these systems by developing certain
systematic methods and compositional frameworks.

2) Applications of CPSs: The research spectrum of CPSs
is quite broad and it is hard to limit CPSs to few selected
domains. CPSs are present in approximately every phase of
life, from our homes to ofﬁces, and from our public life to
personal life. The applications of CPSs with respect to infor-
mation transmission and physical sensing is shown in Fig. 3.
In this section, we discuss few beneﬁts that CPSs research is
providing and can provide in some selective application areas.
a) Energy Systems (Smart Grid): Traditional energy
systems can be summed up into generation, transmission,
and distribution of electricity. But the modern energy systems
named as smart grids are a combination of energy and ICT.
Smart grid is said to be next generation infrastructure that
will be capable of managing all our energy, and environ-
mental needs, by providing us un-interrupted, cost-effective,
and environment friendly electricity [133]. The production,
transmission, and distribution efﬁciency of electric system can
be optimized by using real-time measurements, analysis, and
sensing techniques. Moreover, cyber and physical interactions
are playing a vital role in advancement of efﬁcient smart grid,
and various new technologies, and certain methods are being
developed to facilitate smart grid users. Few of them are real-
time pricing, demand response, load forecasting, real-time load
monitoring, etc [134].

b) Transportation Systems:

transportation
systems (ITSs) is one of the emerging ﬁeld of CPSs. In ITSs,

Intelligent

12

development of trafﬁc systems, vehicles, mass transit, and
other similar factors are being addressed in order to enhance
efﬁciency, congestion, sustainability, and safety [118]. A new
terminology named as Internet of Vehicles (IoV) is introduced
by researchers, in which every vehicle travelling in a certain
radius will be connected with each other via device-to-device
(D2D) and vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communication [135]. By
using these capabilities, intelligent vehicles can aid the drivers
or can even drive intelligently by sensing, estimating, and
monitoring their surrounding circumstances and conditions.
Moreover, the electric vehicles (EV) that are considered to be
future of cars are being made fully intelligent, autonomous,
and environmental friendly. ITSs are considered to be future
of transportation systems and CPSs technologies are playing
a vital role in practical implementation of this system in our
daily life.

c) Healthcare and Medical Systems: Healthcare and
medical systems are considered to be one of the most sensitive
systems because they are directly linked with the wellbeing
of people connected to them. Similarly, the evolutionary tech-
nologies of CPSs being implemented in healthcare systems are
making them efﬁcient, reliable, and intelligent. Healthcare sys-
tems generally contain wearable body sensors, OT (operation
theatre) equipment, and physiological hardware devices. In
modern era, these devices are made smart by connecting them
with Internet and naming these things as e-Health. Wireless
sensors are also being implanted in majority of these devices
for real-time monitoring, but wireless devices have their own
limitations and constraints [118]. Similarly, real-time response
and user personal data protection are few major issues of these
devices that are currently being observed and improved by
medical researchers and biomedical engineers.

d) Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT): With the evolu-
tion of fourth generation of industry (Industry 4.0), the indus-
trial systems are becoming smarter day by day. This term of In-
dustrial Internet of Things (IIoT) ﬂourished when researchers
started integrating concepts of Internet of Things (IoT) with
the environment of industrial control systems (ICS) [136]. The
rise of IIoT is expected to enhance the process optimization,
workers safety, factory management, etc [137]. At the same
time, the practical implementation of IIoT in industries is
facing certain difﬁculties, e.g., developing efﬁcient commu-
nication protocols, security and privacy issues of massive
datasets, and formulation of efﬁcient design patterns [138].
Researchers on the other hand are also focusing over the
merger of various technologies such as edge computing, fog
computing, and cloud computing with IIoT to make these
systems more advance and autonomous.

G. Motivation of Using Differential Privacy in CPSs

Differential privacy has the potential to provide substantial
amount of privacy to majority of application of CPSs and it
may be a good choice where critical or public information
needs to be preserved [139]. Similarly, integration of differen-
tial privacy with modern CPSs has emerged as a hot-topic
not only in academic ﬁeld but it is also paving its paths
in industry [140]. Most of CPSs applications are real-time,

13

TABLE VII
DESIGN REQUIREMENTS OF DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY IN APPLICATIONS OF CYBER PHYSICAL SYSTEMS

Application
Name

Smart Grid

Level of
Privacy
Required
Medium

Data
Types

Time-Series

Transportation
Systems
Healthcare
&
Medical
Systems
Industrial
Internet of
Things

Medium

Time-Series

Extremely
High

High

Time-Series
and
Statistical

Time-Series
and
Statistical

Sensitivity
Calibration

Common Attacks

Considered
Factors

3rd Party
Aggregation

Instance / Point-wise
sensitivity
Instance / Point-wise
sensitivity
Instantaneous sensitivity
and global sensitivity

• Non-intrusive load
monitoring (NILM) attacks
• Correlation attacks

Cost effectiveness

Timeliness

• Inference attacks

Data accuracy

Yes

Yes

No

Instantaneous sensitivity
and global sensitivity

• Stealthy attacks

Secure communica-
tion

No

that generates large amount of data named as big data. In
order to handle and protect transmission, communication, and
storage of this big data of CPSs, a strong privacy preservation
approach such as differential privacy is required. In this
subsection, we provide few of the major stimulating causes
for applying differential privacy in CPSs:

• Various privacy techniques, such as encryption, k-
anonymity, l-diversity, and t-closeness have been pro-
posed for big data. At the same time, certain applications
of CPSs are also being evaluated over these privacy
techniques. However, differential privacy is one of the
most suitable option to preserve privacy because it does
not degrade systems’ speed as compared to other tech-
niques because of the light-weight nature of algorithms
of differential privacy [43]. For example, in encryption,
generation and distribution of public and private cryp-
tographic keys in the network becomes a hectic task
and if one node in the network of “n” nodes gets failed
then the aggregation of data becomes impossible due to
missing distributed keys in that network [141]. Similarly,
anonymizing complete dataset that contains millions of
records is not feasible option for certain service provides
because of limited computational capacity. Furthermore,
in order to keep original records, the database companies
have to store both datasets along with; one anonymized
dataset for query evaluation, and one original dataset for
their internal use. However, differential privacy eradicates
both of the mentioned issues as it only protects data at
run time by using basic low-complex algorithms which
require calculations using Laplacian, exponential, and
Gaussian distributions.

• Differential privacy provides enough quantitative theoreti-
cal basis which provides researchers an exact information
that how much statistical CPSs data is safe to release
along with what amount of accuracy [39].

• The original data of CPSs applications is very critical
and the owner of data cannot take risk of losing that
data. Therefore, in differential privacy preservation, the
original dataset remains the same and is not modiﬁed at
all. Irrespective of k-anonymity, l-diversity, or t-closeness
schemes, where original values of data are manipulated
to preserve identity [142]–[144].

• Differential privacy perturbs data by adding noise in such
a way that the preserved CPSs statistical or real-time data
can still be used by analysts according to their required
needs [43], [140].

• Differential privacy provides substantial protection even
in distributed CPSs environment, irrespective of other
privacy preservation schemes that cannot provide efﬁ-
cient results because of correlation issues among at-
tributes [145].

• Most of the encryption strategies used by real-time de-
vices are computationally complex and need the genera-
tion of private encrypted keys at every node. But differ-
ential privacy provides a light-weight solution to preserve
privacy for CPSs devices as compared to computationally
complex encryption schemes as it only perturbs the data
with certain calculated amount of noise [146], [147].
• If the list of queries is large in any CPSs database,
traditional differential privacy suffers from utility loss,
however integration of modern machine learning and
deep learning algorithms with differential privacy is
turning out to be a feasible solution. Researches have
proved that differential privacy integrated with state-of-
the-art machine learning and deep learning algorithms can
effectively meet the demands of listing, perturbing, and
query evaluation in large databases [3].

• In social CPSs, differential privacy provides both node
privacy and edge privacy, by protecting individual infor-
mation and any speciﬁc relationship information respec-
tively [33].

H. Design Requirements of Differential Privacy in CPSs Ap-
plications

Differential privacy is a light-weight privacy preservation
strategy that does not require complex hardware to run
upon [12]. However, design and efﬁciency requirements vary
in different applications of CPSs. Moreover, the optimality
of differentially private mechanism also varies according to
the application requirement. For example, in some cases the
optimal solution will be complete preservation of privacy,
however in some cases providing a certain level of utility
can be termed as an optimal solution. Similarly, one cannot
determine any deﬁnition of optimal solution of differential

14

Fig. 4: Use case scenarios of differential privacy in applications of cyber physical systems such data analysing by analyst, storage databases,
user query evaluation, and adversary query request.

TABLE VIII
MILESTONES ACHIEVED IN DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY FROM PERSPECTIVE OF CYBER PHYSICAL SYSTEMS

2006 • [26] C. Dwork proposed the concept of differential privacy to obstruct adversaries from recovering private data.
2011 • [148] G. Acs for ﬁrst time integrated differential privacy with private smart metering data.
2013 • [149] F. Kargl implemented differential privacy with policy enforcement framework to protect transportation data.
2014 • [150] J. Zhao introduced the concept of integration of battery load balancing with differential privacy protection.
2015 • [151] H. Li developed private partition algorithm for electronic health record protection using differential privacy.
2015 • [152] N. Mohamed used differential privacy to protect cancer database from SQL queries.
2015 • [153] S. Han used concept of join differential privacy to protect real-time data reported by EVs.
2015 • [154] M. Savi conducted experiment to protect smart metering data by using Gaussian white & colored noise.
2016 • [155] G. Rodriguez worked over integration of differential privacy & k-anonymity for industrial systems.
2017 • [156] G. Eibl proposed the notion of pointwise differential privacy for smart metering real-time data.
2017 • [157] H. Zhai carried out differentially private auction to protect EV identities from swap stations during bidding.
2017 • [158] Y. Shi protected railway freight data using apriori and differential privacy algorithm.
2017 • [159] J. Zhang examined use of differential privacy in real-time health data via adaptive sampling.
2017 • [160] Y. Wang presented the use of differential privacy to protect privacy of linear distributed control systems.
2018 • [161] H. Cao carried out private differentially private aggregation of smart grid over fog nodes.
2018 • [162] T. Zhang proposed differentially private machine learning approach for vehicular networks
2018 • [163] L. Raisaro presented the use of encryption in combination with differential privacy for genomic & clinical data.
2018 • [164] L. Ni designed a differentially private algorithm for scanning in multi-core data clustering in industrial database systems.

privacy, therefore researchers working in differential privacy
of use the term “approximate optimal solution ” while refer-
ring towards the most suitable solution according to require-
ment. Moving towards applications of CPSs, in context of
smart grid, devices enabling differential privacy usually deal
with communication of time-series data from one destination
to another (mainly from smart meter to grid utility and vice
versa). Therefore, point-wise privacy is generally considered in
most of smart grid applications. Similarly, the most common
attack in energy systems is non-intrusive load monitoring
(NILM) attack, whose purpose is to identify the routine
and appliance usage of smart home users [161]. Therefore,
implementation of differential privacy techniques in smart
grid usually consider overcoming these attacks. The aim of
implementation of differential privacy strategies in energy
systems is to provide a cost-effective medium level privacy
protection by considering a healthy trade-off between accuracy
and privacy [165]. Moving further to transportation systems,

the V2V and D2D communication also requires a privacy strat-
egy to ensure time-series data protection at a speciﬁc instant
of time without delay. The major task in ITSs is to protect the
real-time location data co-ordinates that are being transmitted
between different vehicles and devices in the network. This
type of communication is vulnerable to correlation attacks,
in which the correlation between real-world data may reveal
more than expected information [145], [166]. Therefore, most
of differential privacy techniques being implemented over ITSs
consider overcoming this attack in order to provide secure
real-time location transmission. Another important aspect to
consider in ITSs implementation is timeliness, the privacy
schemes should not be complex enough to cause delays during
protection. Therefore, this aspect cannot be neglected while
designing ITSs privacy algorithms.
In healthcare and medical systems, the most important de-
sign requirement is to provide extremely high level privacy
along with maximum accuracy, because these systems are

15

directly linked with lives of patients and concerned people.
That
is why there is no chance of considering any less
that optimal trade-off between accuracy and privacy [167].
Similarly, because of presence of both type of (statistical
and time-series) data in these systems, differential privacy
mechanisms need to consider instantaneous and global privacy
both for real-time reporting, and query evaluation mechanisms
respectively. Finally, in case of industrial IoT systems, high
level privacy is required to secure statistical and time-series
industrial data. Various IIoT systems are vulnerable to stealthy
attacks that may cause certain privacy harms such as false
data injection [168]. Differential privacy strategies in IIoT
systems needs to overcome such stealthy attacks in order
to make these systems resilient from adversary interference.
Use case scenarios after integration of differential privacy in
CPSs applications is presented in Fig. 4. Similarly, taxonomy
diagram of differential privacy from CPS perspective is given
in Table VIII. The detailed design requirements of differen-
tial privacy implementation in different CPSs applications is
presented in Table VII.

concerns for people living inside the house. For instance, any
intruder can detect the routine of residents and can plan a
theft, or advertising companies can do targeted advertisements
by detecting the missing appliance in home. Therefore, the
privacy protection of SG users has always been the most
crucial point among researchers working over SG. Majority
of smart grid scenarios come under real-time data monitoring
because smart grid devices are transmitting real-time data after
a speciﬁc interval and therefore point-wise differential privacy
protection is normally used to protect user’s privacy in these
scenarios. In order to protect this critical data, researchers have
proposed numerous techniques to overcome privacy issues in
SG. Here, beneﬁts and trends of differential privacy in SG have
been discussed. We divide differential privacy implementation
in energy systems into three subclasses named as grid demand
response, grid load monitoring, and grid data collection using
fog computing, as illustrated in Fig. 5. Furthermore,
the
detailed taxonomy of energy systems is given in Table IX
and Fig. 6. In this section, we discuss four major scenarios of
SG over which researchers have applied differential privacy.

III. DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY IN ENERGY SYSTEMS
(SMART GRID)

The term smart grid (SG) is traditionally used for electrical
grid which is the enhanced version of power grid of 20th cen-
tury [169]. Traditional forms of power grids are generally used
to perform basic tasks of transmitting energy from generating
station to customers. On the other hand, modern power grid or
SG uses bidirectional ﬂow of information and electricity [170].
This bidirectional communication in SG is usually carried out
using modern communication technologies, such as ZigBee,
Bluetooth, wireless LAN, powerline communication, optical
networks, and cognitive radio communication [171]. Because
of this two-way ﬂow of information and electricity, smart
grid outperforms traditional energy grid by delivering energy
in more efﬁcient ways and by tackling large number of
drawbacks of traditional power grid [169].
Along with the beneﬁts of SG, the efﬁcient way of communi-
cation and SG data storage also paved the path towards certain
security and privacy issues [172]. For instance, leakage of real-
time energy reading of SG user can become a serious threat
towards that individual’s personal life [173], [174]. Moreover,
certain non-intrusive load monitoring (NILM) techniques have
been designed to know exact appliance usage of any speciﬁc
home during speciﬁc interval of time [175]. George W. Hart
introduced the concept of NILM for the ﬁrst time which further
lead to the development of modern NILM techniques we have
nowadays [176]. NILM is referred as a technique to determine
every minute detail about energy consumed inside the targeted
area, e.g. usage of any speciﬁc appliance in a certain time
slot can be extracted using such NILM techniques [177].
Furthermore, the key steps included in NILM techniques can
be termed as event detection, feature extraction, and load
identiﬁcation. Since 2010, researchers are actively working
to develop more advanced NILM techniques to extract every
minute detail from load data. However, getting exact usage
pattern of smart home appliances can cause certain privacy

A. Grid Demand Response

One of the important goal of SG is to make energy use more
efﬁcient [178]. While, in order to obtain energy efﬁciency,
management of volatile energy demands using scalable infor-
mation is very important. The term demand side management
(DSM) covers all aspects of demand response according to
customer needs. DSM is quite important in operational cost
reduction, elimination of blackouts, and reduction in emission
of CO2 [179]. Generally, smart meter data is used for calcula-
tion of demand response. Contrary to this, if any intruder gets
the high resolution demand response data, then this data can
be used for various monitoring and unethical purposes [180].
Therefore, this data requires protection in order to secure
individual private information [181]. As discussed in the prior
section, the real-time data is protected using data perturbation
strategy of differential privacy. But the calculation of demand
response from this perturbed data is actual problem that arises.
To resolve this problem, P. Barbosa et al. [10] masked the
data using Laplacian noise and after that worked over demand
response calculation by dealing with individual appliance data.
Similarly, they also evaluated two types of privacy attacks
and showed that differential privacy is an optimal solution to
overcome privacy risks. Therefore, the proposed differential
privacy scheme efﬁciently protects demand response data by
perturbing required features.

B. Smart Buildings

Recent facts and ﬁgures showed that more than 54% of
population of world is living in modern cities and urban areas,
and it is predicted that by 2050 this ratio will reach up to
66% [191]. This rapid increase in urban population has raised
certain social, economic, organizational, and technical issues,
which can be a harmful threat to economical and environmen-
tal situation of these areas. In order to overcome such situation,
majority of governments are taking steps towards development
and integration of “smart” concepts in all possible domains.

16

Fig. 5: Illustration of organization of differential privacy (DP) implementation in energy systems into four scenarios: direct data perturbation,
battery load balancing, demand response protection, and DP with fog node. When DP is incorporated into these scenarios, real-time smart
metering data of smart meter users is protected and the data stored by database can be used for query evaluation.

Similarly, the concept of “smart city” refers to impliﬁcation
of all possible available resources and technologies in a
coordinated and intelligent manner with an aim to develop
more sustainable and habitable urban centers [192], [193].
One important sub block that requires considerable attention
in such advancements are smart buildings. The concept of
smart building refers to a modern building/home that
is
capable of performing measuring, controlling, monitoring, and
optimizing operations without any external support. Smart
buildings can further be classiﬁed into commercial and res-
idential homes in which latest communication technologies
are integrated to make them more suitable to live. Modern
ICT technologies play an important role in such automation
by providing a platform to carry out such real-time operations.
The data stream from such smart buildings can be analysed to
carry out certain automation tasks in order to make the city
smart [194]. For example, smart buildings can regulate their
own heating and lighting based on the presence or absence of
habitants [195], can monitor the quality and structural health
of their own [196], and can make use of intelligent and smart
appliance in order to automate daily tasks [197]. In order to
summarize, it can be said that multiple number of sensors,
actuators, and controllers installed in a smart building work

together to provide a comfortable, and energy efﬁcient living to
its habitants. Despite of all these advantages, smart buildings
are not 100 % perfect and are prone to many security and
privacy threats. Many service providers, involved parties, and
third parties dealing with smart buildings at different stages
have access to plenty of private data which can further be
used to infer into personal information of its users [198]. The
data that can be used to attack privacy can be categorised
into four sources: published data, observable data, leaked data,
and repurposed data. The adversaries can use one of these
four types of data to infer into personal life of habitants of
smart buildings, which in turn can cause severe implications
if not protected on time [199]. One of the prospective method
to preserve privacy of such data is to integrate differential
privacy protection before storage or transmission of data. In
this section, we discuss the integration of differential privacy
in two major scenarios of smart buildings.

1) Sensors Data Stream: One important feature of smart
building is that they produce real-time environmental data
from sensors in order to make effective predictions and
calculations. However, leakage of this data can cause severe
issues towards privacy of that building [200]. In order to
overcome this issue, integration of differential privacy with

TABLE IX
COMPARATIVE VIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY TECHNIQUES IN ENERGY SYSTEMS (SMART GRID) WITH THEIR
SPECIFIC TECHNIQUE, OPTIMIZED PARAMETERS, PRIVACY CRITERION, SCENARIO, AND EXPERIMENTAL PLATFORM.

17

Main
Category

Ref
No.

Year

Privacy
Mechanism

Technique of DP Used

Enhancement due to
Differential Privacy

Privacy
Criterion

Platform
Used

Scenario

[148]

2011

[184]

2014

[150]

2014

DREAM
(Differentially
private Smart
Metering)
Light weight privacy
for smart metering
data
Multitasking - BLH
- Exp3

Perturbed noise using
Gamma distribution and
encryption is used for
aggregation
Random masking value
generated using Empirical
model and error value
Context aware battery
load hiding strategy

[183]

2015

Stateless and
stateful privacy
protection schemes

[154]

2015

[182]

2017

Precision-Privacy
trade-off data
perturbation
technique for Smart
Metering
Differential privacy
battery supported
meter reading

[165]

2017

Cost friendly
differential privacy
(CDP) scheme

Proposed relaxed
differential privacy
strategy by adjusting
noise distribution along
with battery capacity
White and colored
Gaussian noise used
for data perturbation

Differential privacy
concept is used in
conjunction with battery,
and multi-armed bandit
(MAB) algorithm
Differential privacy with
battery load balancing and
MAB algorithm

[156]

2017

[186]

2018

[185]

2018

Differential privacy
for real smart
metering data
Differential privacy
based distributed
load balancing for
smart grid
Differentially private
crypto-system based
smart metering

[187]

2018

[188]

2018

[189]

2017

[190]

2018

[10]

2017

[161]

2018

HIDE (Differential
privacy for
smart micro-grid
architecture)

Data clustering
using differential
privacy for
intelligent electrical
IoT
Differential privacy
based monitoring of
real-time sensors’
data

Differentially
privacy private
trafﬁc obfuscation
framework for smart
community
Differential privacy
strategy to protect
appliance usage in
smart metering

Differentially private
data disclosure in
smart grid

Point-wise differential
privacy with Laplacian
noise is used
3ε based differential
privacy using Laplacian
noise

Perturbation and
encryption based
aggregation algorithm
integrated with task
assigning algorithm
is used to protect user
privacy
Privacy preserving data
publishing differential
privacy using greedy
algorithm and Markov
assumptions
K-means data clustering
algorithm is combined
with traditional
differential privacy

Perturbing, grouping,
& smoothing based
differential privacy
applied over sensors’
streaming
Utility-aware &
exponential differential
privacy mechanism for
gateway selection

Data masking using
random Laplacian noise

Factorial Hidden Markov
Model (FHMM) is used
to implement differential
privacy

Smart
Meter
Load
Monitor-
ing

Smart
Buildings

Grid
Demand
Response

Grid
Data
Collec-
tion
using
Fog
Comput-
ing

• Reduced cluster error
• Preserved appliances
multiple slot privacy

ε-
differential
privacy

Electricity
Trace
Simulator

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Arduino
micro-
controller

N/A

N/A

Java

N/A

N/A

• Masked residential and
industrial load proﬁles

• Enhanced mutual
information sharing
• Optimized event detection
accuracy
• Mutual information
sharing optimized in
differential capacities of
battery

• Enhanced aggregated data
privacy

• Reduces extra cost
• Reduces mutual
information sharing

• Optimized prices in both
static and dynamic metering
environment
• Reduces mutual
information sharing
Enhanced privacy and
smoothing of signal

Optimized efﬁciency, and
ﬁne grained reporting
without trusted third party

• Blocked ﬁltering attack
• Prevented true value attack

• Privacy-utility trade-off is
minimized
• Max query, count query,
and average query is
enhanced
• Enhanced F-score
• Enhanced clustering
privacy

• Protected stream query
privacy
• Protected sensors’ event
monitoring

• Ensure unlinkability in
Internet trafﬁc
• Reduction in network
resource consumption

• Enhances real-time data
privacy
• Improved utility
performance by demand
response calculation
• Enhanced F-1 score
• Optimized kullback leibler
divergence

ln-
mechanism
privacy
(ε, δ)-
differential
privacy

(ε, δ)-
differential
privacy

ε-
differential
privacy

(ε, δ)-
differential
privacy

(ε, δ)-
differential
privacy

ε-
differential
privacy
ε-
differential
privacy

(ε, δ)-
differential
privacy

(ε, δ)-
differential
privacy

ε-
differential
privacy

ε-
differential
privacy

(ε, δ)-
differential
privacy

ε-
differential
privacy

ε-
differential
privacy

Time
Compl-
exity
O(n)

O(n2

)

O(log n)

−

−

−

O(log n)

−

O(kn)

−

−

O(n)

Real-
time

Real-
time

Real-
time

Real-
time

Real-
time

Real-
time

Real-
time

Real-
time

Real-
time

Real-
time

Real-
time

Real-
time

Real-
time

-

Real-
time

O(n2M)

2

Simulators
in C

Real-
time

O(1)

NILMTK

Real-
time

O(km)

Differential Privacy Approaches in Energy Systems
(Smart Grid)
Sec. III

18

Grid Demand
Response
Sec. III-A

Used Appliances
Data and Worked
over Demand
Response [10]

Smart Buildings
Sec. III-B

Smart Meter Load Monitoring
Sec. III-C

Grid Data Collection
using Fog Computing
Sec. III-D

Real-time Data
Analysis
[189], [190]

DP with
Battery Load
Balancing [182],
[165], [150], [183]

Direct Data
Perturbation [148],
[184], [154], [156]

Markov Model use for
Noise Addition [161]

Sensors Data
Analysis
[189]

Internet
Trafﬁc Anal-
ysis [190]

MAB
Algorithm
[182], [165]

State Aware
Scheme
[150], [183]

Empirical
Model
[184]

Laplacian
Noise
[156], [186]
[187]

Gamma
Distribution
[148]

Gaussian
Noise
[154], [185]

K-means
Algorithm
[188]

Fig. 6: The differential privacy approaches implemented in energy systems (smart grid) can be mainly classiﬁed into real-time
data monitoring, demand response, and combination with fog computing.

data of sensors before transmission came up as a viable
solution. The authors in [189] proposed PeGaSus mechanism
that incorporates differential privacy over monitoring of real-
time sensors’ data. Proposed technique use the concept of
perturbing, grouping, and then smoothing of data to protect
sensors streaming. The authors further worked over differential
privacy based query evaluation for hierarchical streams. In
order to evaluate the performance of their proposed strategy,
the authors performed experiment over data from 4000 access
points collected over a period of 6 months. Similarly, the
authors preserved event monitoring, hierarchical aggregation,
and different query responses by using differential privacy
perturbation. The proposed strategy was over sensors stream-
ing, however to make it more relevant to smart city and
smart buildings, the authors presented a next step of this
work in [201]. In [201], the authors evaluated PeGaSus on
real-world IoT scenarios for smart buildings and developed
a tested and differential privacy engine for data stream. The
authors concluded that the presented differential privacy based
methodology successfully preserve sensors’ streaming privacy
for smart building scenarios.

2) Home Trafﬁc Analysis: As discussed earlier in this
section, residential smart buildings constitute an important part
of network of smart buildings. Residential smart buildings
also known as smart homes are capable of monitoring and
controlling their energy and data ﬂow and these smart homes

combine to form a communication known as smart commu-
nity [202]. In smart homes, majority of devices are connected
to the Internet for monitoring and controlling purposes, this
connectivity helps to take timely decisions via automating
tasks. However, on the other hand this connectivity also raises
certain threats that can be exploited by adversaries to carry
out cyber-attacks on these homes and their residents. One such
issue is highlighted by Liu et al. in [190], the authors stated
that the Internet trafﬁc from smart homes can cause leakage
of private information. Furthermore, authors claimed that even
cryptographic tools cannot protect data privacy because of
effective machine learning algorithms used by adversaries.
To tackle this issue, authors proposed a differentially private
trafﬁc obfuscation framework for smart homes in a smart
community network. The authors proposed utility-aware and
exponential differential privacy mechanism for gateway se-
lection of Internet trafﬁc. From this work, authors ensured
that accumulated data from such trafﬁc ensure unlinkability
and enhance privacy along with reduction in network resource
consumption. The authors modelled this mechanism design as
a linear optimization problem and proposed a differentially
private strategy to overcome all mentioned issues. Finally, the
authors carried out extensive simulation work to show that
their algorithm enhanced privacy and reduced delay in a smart
community network. Keeping in view this discussion, it is
not hard to claim that differential privacy serves as a viable

solution to protect privacy of smart homes.

C. Smart Meter Load Monitoring

One of the biggest hurdle in the implementation of SG is the
privacy concerns of SG users [182], [193]. The smart meters
are connected with each other and the main electricity grid
utility via strong communication network and they constitute
to make a complex network named as advanced metering in-
frastructure (AMI). Smart meters send their energy utilization
information to SG utility after a speciﬁc interval of time (e.g.,
10 minutes), and if any adversary gets access to these reported
readings, then this data can leak sensitive information of smart
meter user [176], [203]. This can lead to various threatening
consequences; for instance, any burglar can detect the occu-
pancy or un-occupancy schedule of a house before attempting
any burglary, similarly, potential targets can be selected by
vendors to market their campaigns. [154]. Therefore, certain
standardization bodies [204], [205] and smart meter users
require a privacy-friendly and secure framework for real-time
monitoring of SG data that provides useful data to SG utility
by keeping in view the conﬁdentiality and privacy of users.
Extensive amount of literature is presented on smart meter data
aggregation using encryption technologies, so that only the SG
utility knows the exact usage information of users [206]–[209].
However, various implementations showed that encryption is
hard to apply over real-time smart metering data because
of the requirement of high computational capacity [141].
Another obstacle in application of encryption is the necessity
of cooperation between all smart meters, because all smart
meters have to exchange distributed keys and in case of
failure of even a single smart meter, faults may arise in
the whole network [10]. Another popular privacy approach
to protect smart metering data is anonymization [210]. One
approach discussed the idea of hiding individual privacy by
providing two different identities, one for billing and other for
monitoring purpose [210]. Similarly, the transmission of data
using low-frequency and high-frequency ID is also proposed
in the literature. However, this data can further be mined, and
identiﬁcation can be carried out using the anonymized data.
This certain piece of information can further be classiﬁed to
a speciﬁc group of people in order to deduce their average
behaviours [211].
Therefore, protecting real-time data by adding desired amount
of noise is one of the most desirable approach to transmit
data without compromising privacy [212]. Implementing dif-
ferential privacy in order to protect real-time data has been
employed by various researchers in the past on the basis of
different SG scenarios, and different ways of addition of noise
in the data. It can be classiﬁed into two major categories.
One method is protection of real-time smart meter data by
combining the advantages of differential privacy and battery
load balancing, while the second one is direct perturbation of
data using differential privacy, as shown in Fig. 6.

1) Differential Privacy with Battery Load Balancing: An
effective way to protect smart meter data privacy is to balance
the load by using an external battery, this technique is also
known as battery load hiding (BLH). But there are few major

19

downsides of using direct BLH mechanisms that cannot be
disregarded. For example, BLH techniques do lack theoretical
discussion, as they are usually evaluated in context of their
relative entry, regression, and clustering classiﬁcation [150].
However, there is no proved evidence to show their relevance
directly to privacy protection. Therefore, in order to measure
the exact protection and accuracy of privacy mechanisms,
researchers used BLH schemes with differential privacy pro-
tection. In [182], the authors proposed a differential privacy
based smart meter reading mechanism by perturbing the
data without violating the limitations of battery. The authors
worked over parameters of noise distribution and also com-
bined multi-armed bandit (MAB) algorithm to further decrease
the battery cost. The proposed techniques in [165] enhanced
the privacy loss in a battery based differential privacy scenario.
Furthermore, the authors worked over reduction of cost under
both dynamic and static pricing environment, and formulated
two cost friendly approaches. The study in [150] analysed
previous BLH techniques by identifying their shortcomings,
and then proposed a multitasking-BLH algorithm that success-
fully enhances the constraints of traditional BLH algorithms by
optimizing event detection accuracy. The authors in [183] ﬁrst
analysed the theoretical and practical challenges of differential
privacy in BLH mechanisms, and then proposed stateless
and stateful differential privacy BLH mechanisms in order to
optimize mutual information sharing in different capacities of
battery.

2) Direct Data Perturbation: To protect smart meter user
privacy, perturbing real-time smart metering data has been
adopted by many researchers. Noise dimensioning is the most
important factor to consider while perturbing the data directly.
The correct amount of noise according to the scenario require-
ment makes differential privacy schemes more useful [154].
Choice of noise addition parameter ε cannot be neglected in
this discussion, because it determines the level of privacy.
Therefore, a vast amount of literature argues over choosing
the most efﬁcient ε value [213]. Another parameter which
is important to consider while selecting differential privacy
for smart metering data is sensitivity. Generally, differential
privacy techniques have been applied over counting data
according to time-series [74]. In counting data, the sensitivity
parameter is generally taken as 1, while smart metering data
cannot be depicted as counting data and the value of global
sensitivity is not known, therefore the sensitivity cannot be
directly taken same as of counting data [156].
In [148], real-time smart metering data is perturbed using
Gamma distribution, and in order to make the aggregation
secure, the authors used encrypted aggregation strategy. Fur-
thermore, the proposed strategy reduced cluster errors in a
SG scenario, and preserved appliance multiple slot privacy.
The simulations of this proposed technique is performed using
electricity trace simulator. The authors in [184] proposed a
light weight differential privacy approach that generated a
random masking value based upon empirical model and error
value. Analysis is carried out in the paper after masking
residential and industrial proﬁles with differential privacy
approach. Savi et al.
in [154] ﬁrst analytically derived ε

parameter to satisfy privacy guarantee in data aggregation,
and then perturbed the data using Gaussian white and colored
noise. They aggregated the data from different smart meters
and at the end concluded that Gaussian colored noise provides
a desirable level of privacy protection. Similarly in [185],
authors proposed a differentially private crypto-system based
smart metering approach to preserve users privacy. In order
to make perturbation more efﬁcient and secure, the authors
merged Gaussian noise based perturbation with task assigning
algorithm and encryption. Furthermore, the authors analysed
two privacy attacks named as ﬁltering and time value attack
and claimed that their proposed strategy efﬁciently protects
smart meter users’ privacy.
In [156], authors analysed the trade-off of privacy and accu-
racy for real-time smart metering data and proved that differ-
ential privacy can be applied over real-time data and suitable
advantages can be achieved using this approach. The authors
further proposed the notion of point-wise privacy stating
that the requirements of differential privacy in real-time data
are different from differential privacy in statistical databases.
Taking another step ahead, the authors in [186] proposed
3ε-differential privacy approach and analysed the outcomes
using Arduino micro-controller. The practical output results
showed that differential privacy optimized the efﬁciency value,
and provided ﬁne grained data reporting using Arduino even
without need of any trusted third party. In [187], HIDE mech-
anism is proposed to address problem of privacy-utility trade-
off in smart micro-grid scenario. The authors enhanced max
query, count query, and average query along with using greedy
algorithm, Markov assumption model, and Laplace noise for
differential privacy. Contrary to traditional differential privacy
approaches, authors in [188] introduced the concept of secure
and private data clustering in intelligent energy systems using
differential privacy. The authors proposed a light-weight secure
clustering algorithm and tested the algorithm over different ε
values to optimize performance and privacy-utility trade-off
accordingly.

D. Grid Data Collection using Fog Computing

Data collected from smart meters is usually aggregated and
stored in data centres operating on cloud computing. During
the transmission and storage, data may encounter delay and
can decrease the response time. In order to overcome these
issues, fog computing came up as a practical solution. Fog
computing can be deﬁned as a computing paradigm which was
introduced to overcome burdens of data centers in traditional
cloud technology. With time, fog computing emerged as a
to latency sensi-
most viable solution to provide support
tive, geographically distributed, QoS aware applications of
IoT [214]. However, recent researches demonstrate privacy and
security as the most important challenges for fog-computing
based IoT applications. As fog computing nodes are not
completely trusted and are vulnerable to certain threats and
adversaries [215]. Therefore, protecting privacy of data being
communicated from fog-nodes is important. For example,
what if a fog node aggregating the smart meter data gets
compromised. To answer this question, researchers suggested

20

usage of differential privacy along with fog computing in SG
systems, to maintain the efﬁciency and privacy of data [147],
[161]. One of the differential privacy approach considering
fog computing in SG scenario has been implemented by H.
Cao et al. in [161]. The authors proposed factorial hidden
markov model (FHMM) based differential privacy approach to
aggregate data in fog nodes. Authors claimed that the proposed
technique protects fog nodes data from any sort of NILM
strategies. Furthermore, the given technique improved F-1
score [216] along with optimizing kullback leibler divergence
in fog computing scenario. Energy consumption of every
appliance is perturbed with a noise generated by FHMM, and
the data is transmitted to fog node for storage purpose. Thus,
this protected data can further be transmitted to analysts or the
control centres to carry out certain DSM operations.

E. Summary and Lessons Learnt

The integration of ICT technologies in energy systems have
paved the path for modern, intelligent, and secure energy,
collectively named as SG [133]. However, plenty of issues
still needs to be resolved, and the most important of them
is securing users’ private data to maximum extent. On the
other hand, utility also requires smart meter data for certain
calculations, such as demand response, load forecasting, etc.
Researchers have proposed various strategies to overcome
security and privacy issues of SG,
including, encryption,
battery load balancing, anonymization, and differential privacy.
However, from above discussion, we can say that differential
privacy provides a suitable solution to majority of SG scenar-
ios. For example, when differential privacy is used with battery
load hiding, it proves to be the backbone of mathematical
analysis for BLH strategies. Similarly, the use of differential
privacy in direct data perturbation showed that it also provides
privacy protection at a speciﬁc instant of time by perturbing
the instantaneous value of measured reading. Correspondingly,
differential privacy incorporated with smart buildings can
efﬁciently preserve sensors’ and the Internet trafﬁc data.
Demand response calculation strategies do also require a spe-
ciﬁc level of privacy preservation to protect personal predicted
data of users. Therefore, differential privacy comes up as a
viable solution to protect demands response data. Likewise,
along with privacy protection, efﬁciency, and speed is also
required. Therefore, the integration of differential privacy with
fog computing paved the way for future secure energy systems.
However, there are certain ﬁeld of smart grid that still needs to
be preserved using differential privacy. For instance, fault in-
formation and transmitting information needs to be preserved,
in order to make it private from any intruder that needs to
attack any speciﬁc damaged area. Similarly, load proﬁling in-
formation and meteorological data also needs critical attention
in context of privacy. Moreover, preserving billing information
along with maintaining dynamic pricing policy needs to be
addressed in different SG scenarios. Furthermore, preserving
the identity of buyer and seller using differential privacy must
be considered for buying and auction of renewable energy
resources (RERs) applications. Similarly, ﬁrmware updates for
smart meters needs to be carefully considered to protect the
leakage of any speciﬁc software component of smart meters.

21

Fig. 7:
Illustration of organization of differential privacy (DP) implementation in transportation systems into three scenarios: electric
vehicle, automotive data, and train transportation system. When DP is incorporated into these scenarios, automotive, demand response,
charging schedule, and train systems data of transportation systems is protected and the data stored by database can be used for query
evaluation.

IV. DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY IN TRANSPORTATION
SYSTEMS

Transportation systems are advancing day by day, and the
major purpose behind all these advancements is to provide
improved services for riders and drivers in the system [220]–
[222]. Since the beginning of 1970s, ITSs have been develop-
ing in various forms and are now considered to be the future of
transportation systems [223]. ITSs incorporate a large number
of advanced technologies such as data transmission technolo-
gies, intelligent control technologies, and electronic sensing
technologies into traditional transportation systems [224]. In
ITSs, every kind of transport (e.g., cars, trains, buses, etc.)
is equipped with multiple wireless devices that are generating
data for vehicle-to-device (V2D) and vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V)
communications [225]. ITSs communication is usually carried
out using certain modern technologies, such as mobile ad
hoc network (MANET), IEEE 1609 or dedicated short-range
communication (DSRC), cognitive radio, and heterogeneous
vehicular networks (HetVNET) [226], [227]. The participants
of ITSs periodically share their vehicular information to com-
municate with other users in the network. This effective and

accurate data is also used by various sources, in order to
provide better and reliable services for ITSs [228], [229].
Most of these V2V and V2D communication schemes rely
on trustworthiness of sources receiving or aggregating their
data [230].
However, the communication and storage of ITSs data is prone
to many attacks and adversaries. For instance, an attacker can
record the transmitted messages of any vehicle and can re-
use these messages to get access to certain resources like
compromising toll services, etc. Similarly, any false accident
warning can be transmitted from a compromised vehicular
network to block trafﬁc from a certain highway. Moreover, the
identity of a train, vehicle, or bus can be impersonated and can
be used for unethical causes [231]. Therefore, the privacy of
ITSs data needs to be considered before implementing ITSs in
our daily lives [162]. Many privacy protection strategies have
been implemented in the past to consider different scenarios
of modern transportation systems. In this section, we divide
differential privacy implementation in transportation systems
into three subclasses named as railways freight networks,
vehicular networks, and automotive manufacturer data, as

Differential Privacy Approaches in Transportation Systems
Sec. IV

22

Railways Network
Sec. IV-A

Vehicular Network
Sec. IV-B

Automotive
Manufacturers Data
Sec. IV-C

EV Microgrid
Auction [157]

EV Demand
Response [157]

EV Charging
Mecha-
nism [153]

Intrusion
Detection [162]

Protecting Freight
Data [158]

Vehicular Trajectory
Protection [217],
[218]

Trafﬁc Data
Protection [149]

Automobile
Cars Data
Protection [219]

Fig. 8: The differential privacy approaches implemented transportation systems can be divided into railways network, vehicular
network and automotive manufacturer’s data privacy techniques.

illustrated in Fig. 7. The taxonomy diagram for differential
privacy in transportation systems is given in Fig. 8, and the
summary table of literature work of differential privacy in
transportation systems is provided in Table X.

A. Railways Freight Network

Railways are considered as one of the most important mean
of freight transportation in the world. The arrival of technology
of big data in the railway freight system has brought various
opportunities along with some challenges [232]. Because
of involvement of big data analytics technology, customers’
requirements, timeliness, and efﬁciency can be achieved in
railways. However, this evolution also comes up with certain
privacy and security risks. One of the major issue in the way
of achieving efﬁciency through big data is data privacy and
conﬁdentiality [233]. Privacy risks can arise in the way of
sharing and communication of information, any adversary can
try to attack the shared data and can get restricted freight
information. This leakage of data can be hazardous to one’s
personal privacy. Very few researches are carried out so far
in order to protect privacy of railway freight systems [158].
Previously researchers worked over proposing of game model
to protect freight data. However, the proposed models only
proved to be a macro solution, and no speciﬁc implementation
was carried out. Since, railway networks deal with the pas-
senger’s data stored in their databases and this data is further
used to calculate the commute rate, hourly, daily, weekly, and
monthly travel rates. Therefore, statistical differential privacy
is applied to such scenarios.
Similarly, in order to prevent leakage of private information
of citizens, Yajuan et al.
in [158] proposed a differential
privacy based correlation approach for railway freight systems.
In [158], the authors ﬁrst sliced the original service data
to an optimal length, and then used apriori and differential
privacy algorithm to introduce Laplace noise in the datasets
of candidates. By following this method, they ensured that
customer’s information is protected even if any adversary is
successful in getting access to the background knowledge.

Therefore, in context of railway networks, differential privacy
strategies prove to be viable and efﬁcient because they provide
suitable solution without being computationally complex.

B. Vehicular Networks

Modern vehicular networks made it possible for drivers or
vehicles to communicate with surrounding vehicles or drives.
In this way, vehicle is aware of its surroundings environment,
which considerably improves on-boards services, and road
trafﬁc safety [234]. For instance, the vehicles in a speciﬁc area
can detect or expect dangerous situations in their way that may
cause severe damages such as collisions or accidents. As a con-
sequence, the vehicles can take intelligent decisions in order
to prevent themselves from such incidents [235]. Although,
this real-time information may also be exploited by any
attacker or adversary for unauthorized tracking of vehicles’
location [236]. Generally, wireless medium is used for V2V
and V2D communication that can easily be compromised, and
broadcasts can easily be eavesdropped by a passive adversary.
This unethical eavesdropping data can be a serious threat to
someone’s personal privacy. For instance, getting the informa-
tion about the frequency of visits to a certain hospital can raise
many doubts about the health of driver. Moreover, the life of
driver can be put at a risky situation if the adversary eaves-
dropping the broadcast is a criminal [225], [237]. Similarly,
information about charging/discharging of EV and, auction
information for EV in microgrids also needs to be protected, in
order to prevent adversaries from monitoring the daily routine
of EV users [157]. We have divided the privacy protection in
vehicular networks into two subcategories; protection of EVs
auction and charging information, and preserving privacy of
intrusion detection systems of vehicular networks.

1) EV Auction and Charging Protection: As discussed
earlier, the privacy protection of communication between EVs
is an important issue that is currently being addressed by
many researchers. Similarly, the auction phenomenon of EVs
while selling or buying energy also needs speciﬁc attention. In
context of ﬂexible storage, EVs can beneﬁt demand response

23

TABLE X
COMPARATIVE VIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY TECHNIQUES IN TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS WITH THEIR SPECIFIC
TECHNIQUE, OPTIMIZED PARAMETERS, PRIVACY CRITERION, SCENARIO, AND EXPERIMENTAL PLATFORM.

Main
Category

Ref
No.

Year Privacy

Mechanism

Technique of
DP Used

Vehicular
Network

[153] 2015 EV Charging

truthful
mechanism
via differential
privacy

[157] 2017 ExPO:

Exponential
based privacy
preserving
online auction

[217] 2017 Differentially

private
vehicular
trajectory
protection
algorithm

[162] 2018 Machine

learning based
collaborative
intrusion
detection
(PML - CIDS)
to preserve
privacy
Private real-
time vehicular
trajectory data
release

[218] 2019

Railways
Network

Automobile
Data

[158] 2017 Railway freight
data correlation
analysis using
differential
privacy

[149] 2013 Differential

privacy in
intelligent
transportation
system (ITS)

Used exponen-
tial differential
privacy along
with drawing
random
vector from
distribution
Exponential
differential
privacy is used

Exponential
differential
privacy in
collaboration
with trajectory
partition &
clustering
algorithm is
used
Machine
learning based
differential
privacy
approach with
dual variable
perturbation

Laplacian
perturbation
& Kalman ﬁlter
based position
protection for
dynamically
sampled data
Laplacian
noise is added
using Apriori
algorithm

Enhancement due
to Differential
Privacy
• Enhanced
truthfulness of
privacy mechanism

Privacy
Criterion

Platform
Used

N/A

(ε, δ)-
differential
privacy

Scenario Time
Com-
plexity
−

Statistical
Database

• Demand
response
•
Improved
peak load along
with privacy
preservation
• Protected
information loss
• Enhanced data
utility & efﬁciency

ε-
differential
privacy

MATLAB Real-
time

(ε, δ)-
differential
privacy

SUMO

Real-
time

−

−

• Enhancement of
empirical risk

N/A

(ε, δ)-
differential
privacy

Statistical
Database

−

ε-
differential
privacy

MATLAB Real-
time

O(m2)

• Enhanced
accuracy
• Reduced error
rate
• Enhanced data
availability

Improved

•
privacy in freight
data mining

N/A

ε-
differential
privacy

Statistical
Database

−

−

−

Smooth
sensitivity
using Laplacian
perturbation

• Preserved
ﬂoating car data
(FCD) in trafﬁc
data centres

N/A

ε-
differential
privacy

Real-
time

[219] 2017 Differential

Privacy scheme
in automotive
Industry

Laplace,
exponential,
and randomized
mechanisms are
discussed

• Protected per-
sonal identiﬁable
information (PII)

N/A

(ε, ∆)-
differential
privacy

Statistical
Database

functionalities of energy grids. Particularly, EVs are designed
in such a way that they can be charged in low electricity and
in the time of need they can be discharged or can sell their
energy to other EVs or SG [238]. Recently, swap stations are
being introduced for charging of EVs. By using swap station
technology, EVs charging speed is improved greatly [239].
Various efforts have been put in by researchers on scheduling
the charging of EVs from swap stations [240]. Similarly, the
discharging EVs sale out their surplus electricity to other
EVs or smart homes and this trading is carried out using
an auction process. This auction is usually a game-theoretic
process in which selling price and incentives are determined
after collecting bids and asks from buyers and sellers re-
spectively [241]. However, the charging, discharging, auction,
and demand response data of EVs needs to be preserved
even from swap stations, because making this data public
sacriﬁces the individual privacy of EVs [157]. Wireless sensor
networks and cloud computing is the general medium used for
communication and storage between EVs and swap stations.
Therefore, it is easy for any passive adversary to eavesdrop
the information being transmitted [242].
Researches have been done in order to protect the auction
privacy of EVs, few researchers suggested the use of cryptog-
raphy to protect auction privacy [243]. Due to computational
complexity and communication overhead, the performance
of cryptographic strategies decreases. However, the privacy
protection mechanism of differential privacy emerged as one
of the optimal solution to preserve individual privacy of
auction based strategies of EVs [244]. One of the most
signiﬁcant work in implementation of differential privacy in
EV auction is carried out by Haitao et al. in [157]. The
authors used exponential based differential privacy to protect
private information of EV owner from being compromised by
adversary. They used auctioneer to maximize social welfare of
market by matching sellers and buyers. The demand response
calculated after using the given scheme improved the peak load
requirement without compromising the privacy of EV users.
Another noteworthy work in order to protect charging schedule
of EVs via differential privacy is carried out by Shuo et al.
in [153]. The authors used the idea of joint differential privacy
to limit power and involvement of users at the time of reporting
their speciﬁcations for Online auction. The proposed strategy
ensured that even if any EV misreport its speciﬁcations to me-
diator or swap station, it will not get much beneﬁt from it, that
in turn will lead to truthfulness. Moreover, differential privacy
can provide secure bidding in conjunction with energy auction
scenario of EVs by successfully controlling the information
and only displaying the minimum required information. Thus,
differential privacy easily surpasses other privacy preservation
strategies in context of EVs data protection.

2) Vehicle Trajectory Protection:

In modern world it is
predicted that every vehicle will be connected to Internet
and every vehicle will be sharing its real-time information
with the network in order to develop a seamless trafﬁc and
transportation system. However, this real-time reporting do
also raises certain issues and vehicular trajectory leakage is
most crucial among them. These trajectories can be used
to predict behaviour of passengers that may further lead to

24

leakage of personal life routine of that individual [245]–[247].
This data can further be supplied to certain corporation and
companies that may exploit this location data for their business
purposes such as carpooling companies [248]. Researches are
being carried out to overcome this issue in the most efﬁcient
way in which the individual will be able to share its real-time
location along with preserving its private information. One
such effort is carried out in [217], the authors developed a
differentially private vehicular trajectory protection algorithm
in which they explored and integrated exponential differential
privacy protection with trajectory partition and clustering
algorithm. Furthermore, the authors worked over preserving
information loss along with enhancing efﬁciency and data
utility of differentially private algorithm. Similarly, another
work which protects real-time user location is carried out by
Ma et al. in [218]. The authors ﬁrst adopted dynamic sampling
strategy in order to process real-time location data, and further
used Kalman ﬁlter to ensure data availability. Afterwards,
the authors used Laplacian perturbation of differential privacy
to protect user data. By doing so, authors ensured that the
protected data provides enough utility along preserving it from
malicious adversaries. The output results presented by authors
ensured that the privacy and data availability increased as
compared to similar approaches.

3) Privacy of Intrusion Detection Systems: Intrusion detec-
tion systems play a vital role to mitigate threats of vehicular
networks by detection adversarial behaviour using signature
based and/or anomaly based approaches [249]. An advanced
architecture of intrusion detection systems is collaborative
intrusion detection systems (CIDS), that enable nodes to share
the detected knowledge about attacks, and in return increase
detection accuracy [250]. CIDS enable the EVs to utilize
labelled dataset of other vehicles; that speeds up the training
process for each EV without burdening the EVs storage
capacity. Moreover, the workload is also distributed among
all EVs by sharing the laborious task of collecting labelling
data. Data communication between EVs is not completely
secure and can cause serious privacy threats to training data
because of distributed environment. If any adversary is able to
successfully extract the private information of EVs, then it can
maliciously pretend to be some EV in the network which can
observe its surrounding vehicles or it can also observe and ma-
nipulate the outcomes of learning process [162]. Therefore, a
privacy preserving mechanism for intrusion detection systems
in EVs is important. In order to protect this real-time CIDS
data, Tao et al. in [162] proposed a differential privacy based
machine learning CIDS approach that enhances empirical risk
in the network by making the data private via dual variable
perturbation. The authors in the paper ﬁrst captured the privacy
notation and then worked over dynamic differential privacy for
data perturbation in machine learning scenario. Furthermore,
the detection accuracy, design, and privacy-security trade-offs
of CIDS in context of differential privacy are also considered
and enhanced by the authors. From above discussion, it can be
concluded that sharing data between modern electric vehicles
can be made more secure and private using differential privacy
strategies.

25

C. Automotive and Manufacturer Data

As discussed earlier, the data from connected vehicles is
prone to many security and privacy risks. When it comes to
EVs, this problem of privacy protection needs to be tackled
and solved by the manufacturing companies in order to main-
tain trust of drivers. One of the major aspect that manufac-
turers are considering the most is conﬁdentiality of personally
identiﬁable information (PII) [219]. A common notion while
working with privacy protection of PII is to remove the data
that is linked with PII, such as names, tracking numbers, etc.
However due to lack of any exact technical deﬁnition, it is
surprisingly difﬁcult to deﬁne and identify perfect PII [251].
Moreover, Gao et al. in [252] demonstrated that the speed of
driving can be combined with road maps in order to trace the
exact location of vehicle. Furthermore, Tockar [253] showed
that anonymized cab data of NYC combined with public
data, revealed sufﬁcient information to detect celebrities and
passengers that made visits to sensitive places within the city.
By keeping in view the above discussion, we can say that it
is also the responsibility of smart car manufacturers to keep
the point of view of privacy in mind while designing modern
cars.
One of the most promising privacy technique that can be
implemented by manufactures to preserve privacy of indi-
viduals without damaging the original data is differential
privacy [219]. Boes et al. proposed the application of dif-
ferential privacy for real-time automotive data. Furthermore,
the authors discussed various types of noises (e.g., Laplace,
exponential, and randomized mechanism) that can be used
to perturb data according to manufacturer’s requirement. The
authors in [149] integrated differential privacy with policy-
enforcement framework in order to protect ﬂoating car data
storage in trafﬁc data centres. Moreover, they provided speciﬁc
guidelines to ensure the speciﬁc privacy guarantee along with
providing efﬁcient data accuracy. Thus, differential privacy
can prove to be a viable solution to solve certain privacy
leakage problems according to manufacturer’s point of view.
As differential privacy efﬁciently adds noise in desirable
PII, so users’ travelling in vehicles have control over the
information they are sharing and that is how they can control
their privacy according to the need.

D. Summary and Lessons Learnt

can be used in case of power shortage or failure via discharge
process [255]. However, this modernization comes up with
certain privacy issues. For instance, the real-time location,
battery status, and charging/discharging schedule reveal a
large number of personal information of EV users. Therefore,
the most successful approach presented by researchers to
prevent this privacy leakage is differential privacy. The above
discussion mainly focuses over two major aspects of EVs;
charging/discharging protection, and protection of intrusion
detection strategies. It is found out that by considering the
advantages of differential privacy in EVs, we can publicise the
data of EV without worrying about the privacy of individuals.
The privacy control according to Manufacturers’ point of
view is also discussed in this section along with speciﬁcally
mentioning the protection of PII in modern vehicles. Because
certain experiments have been conducted by researchers in
which they combined two anonymized datasets and suc-
cessfully achieved the precise information about individual
activities. However, if we preserve the data using differential
privacy, then the anomaly will not be able to break in to the
privacy. Similarly, differential privacy is also implemented in
railways freight network to protect customers’ information for
data mining.
However, many ﬁelds of transportation system still need
consideration in order to protect them from anomalies, ﬁrst
and foremost of them is device-to-device (D2D) communi-
cation. Whenever, devices in a transportation networks are
communicating, they are sharing a considerable amount of
personal data that can be a threat to someone’s privacy in case
of an attack. Therefore, research efforts to protect D2D via
differential privacy needs to be made. Furthermore, securing
the storage of big data of ITSs also needs more attention
in order to remove any sort of confusion or privacy concern
from minds of ITSs users or customers. Similarly, live trafﬁc
information also needs to be preserved in order to disrupt any
adversary from tracking the lifestyle of any EV user. Moreover,
researchers need to focus about enhancement and protection
of privacy in V2V communication as well, because a large
number of V2V applications may have crucial signiﬁcances
in case of privacy leakage.

V. DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY IN HEALTHCARE AND
MEDICAL SYSTEMS

Network of connected devices in transportation system
ensures reliable service, but it also comes up with certain
privacy and security related issues. A major issue being faced
in ITSs is privacy leakage of individual identity of EV users.
The adversary can compromise a communication channel
by the help of passive attacks. Therefore, proper privacy
preservation of data being transmitted throughout the network
should be maintained. Researchers proposed differential pri-
vacy as one of the optimal solution to overcome these real-
time and database privacy issues. But still plenty of issues in
transportation system needs to be resolved.
An important application of transportation systems is modern
EVs, which improve reliability, safety, and security in every
perspective [254]. These EVs can be charged at low power and

One of the most attractive application of connecting cyber
and physical world is healthcare and medical systems [256].
This connection has a great potential in CPSs, and it gives
rise to many healthcare applications such as real-time health
monitoring, ﬁtness programs, remote health monitoring, and
elderly care. Medication and treatment from distant places or
homes is another potential application of this connection [257].
Similarly, storage of health records using big data, and per-
forming data analytic surveys for better diagnosing of disease
at early stage is also under development phase. Therefore,
the healthcare and medical systems are considered to be one
of the core part of CPSs. These modern healthcare systems
surpass traditional healthcare systems by improving time, cost,
and quality of life. Furthermore, the modernization of these

26

Fig. 9: Illustration of organization of differential privacy (DP) implementation in healthcare and medical systems into two scenarios: wearable
devices, and hospital record database. When DP is incorporated into these scenarios, heart rate, ECG, blood oxygen level, and patient record
data of healthcare and medical systems is protected and the data stored by database can be used for query evaluation.

systems provides efﬁcient scheduling of ﬁnite resources by
assuring their most efﬁcient use.
One major issue to consider in healthcare systems is the timely
measurement and diagnosis of critical factors for treatment
of disease. In majority of cases, the late diagnosis leads to
dangerous chronic diseases, certain advanced cancer stages,
or even death in some cases [258]. Another important fac-
tor to consider in healthcare and medical CPSs practical
implementation is its privacy preservation, because even a
minor privacy threat can risk someone’s life [259]. Majority
of these healthcare and medical devices are connected via
wireless networks for data reporting and transmission [260].
This timely measurement and reporting requires seamless
communication infrastructure. Generally in healthcare CPSs,
4G long-term evolution (LTE), ultra-narrow band (UNB),
ingenu, and low power wide area (LPWA) technologies are
used to carry out communication [261]. These technologies
transmit real-time health data by causing minimum delays. The
medical data contains speciﬁc patterns for real-time or e-health
monitored data, and these patterns should be protected with
certain privacy control because they are directly linked with
someone’s personal life. For instance, date of appointment
from a speciﬁc doctor, health insurance ending date, a speciﬁc
glucose level in the body, diagnosis of any speciﬁc disease,
etc. If any intruder gets access to this real-time data, then it can
directly or indirectly have an effect on the life of the patient.
Researchers have proposed many privacy protection tech-
niques in the past for various applications of healthcare and
medical systems. For example, encryption, and data pertur-
bation for real-time data, key-agreement, and anonymization
for e-health data sets, etc. However, in this section we di-
vide differential privacy implementation in healthcare and
medical systems into three subcategories named as real-time

health data, electronic health record, and health survey data
protection, as illustrated in Fig. 9. The taxonomy diagram
for differential privacy in healthcare and medical systems is
given in Fig. 10, and the summary table of literature work
of differential privacy in healthcare and medical systems is
provided in Table XI.

A. Real-Time Health Data

With the rapid expansion of wireless devices in our daily
lives, the way we deal with our health is also changing. Real-
time health data is being reported to doctors or databases to
keep track of user behaviour and activities [159]. For example,
data of heart rate, sleep conditions, blood pressure, walk
steps can be shared with doctor, hospital, or with insurance
companies. However, the disclosure of unnecessary data can
lead to severe privacy concerns [268]. While sharing the health
data two things are generally considered as ﬁrst priority, (i)
(ii) privacy (disclosure of
utility (usefulness of data) and
less than a certain privacy budget). One of the major source
of real-time health data are wearable medical devices; that
can be deﬁned as non-invasive, and autonomous devices
designed to perform any speciﬁc medial function such as
health data monitoring [269]. Vital signs of patients such as
blood pressure, heart rate, body fat, blood oxygen level, and
respiration are constantly being measured and monitored to
be aware of any upcoming undesirable situations. Similarly,
athletes also use such wearable medical devices in order to
measure their calorie burn, pace, heart rate, and speed during
exercise and report it to their coaches. This data contains
speciﬁc patterns, which may provide critical information about
any individuals’ health life. However, if this personal data of
any patient or athlete gets stolen by any adversary, then the
respective individual may face severe health circumstances.

27

TABLE XI
COMPARATIVE VIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY TECHNIQUES IN HEALTH AND MEDICAL SYSTEMS WITH THEIR
SPECIFIC TECHNIQUE, OPTIMIZED PARAMETERS, PRIVACY CRITERION, SCENARIO, AND EXPERIMENTAL PLATFORM.

Ref
No.

Year

Privacy
Mechanism

Technique of DP
Used

Enhancement due to
Differential Privacy

Privacy
Criterion

Platform
Used

Scenario

Main
Cate-
gory

Real-
time
Health
Data

[159]

2017

[151]

2015

Real-time health
data releasing
scheme (Re-
Dpoctor)
Efﬁcient E-health
data release

[152]

2015

Private
and Secure
management
of databases
of health care
database

Elec-
tronic
Health
Record
Privacy

[264]

2017 Health data
differential
privacy algorithm
for range queries

[163]

2018 MedCo (Privacy

preservation
of genomic
and distributed
clinical data)

[265]

2018 Genomic

data privacy
protection

[263]

2018

End-to-end
differentially
private deep
learning health
record protection

[262]

2019 Differentially

private data
clustering
(EDPDCS)
framework for
medical data
Secure E-
Health data
aggregation with
fair incentives

Privacy-Utility
trade-off in
health record
systems

[266]

2019

[267]

2018

Health
Survey
Data
Protec-
tion

Data perturbation
is used along with
adaptive sampling
and ﬁltering
Heuristic
hierarchical query
method and private
partition algorithm
proposed for DP
Used Laplace
mechanism for
data privacy

• Mean absolute
error and mean
relative errors are
enhanced
• Enhanced time,
overhead, and query
error

• Reduced
computational
overhead

Partitioning by data
and work load are
implemented with
use of Laplacian
noise
Encryption in
combination
with differential
privacy is used to
secure and preserve
sensitive data
Protecting
encrypted data
using differential
privacy and two
step decryption
Differentially
private stochastic
gradient descent
based deep learning
method
K-means clustering
based differentially
private machine
learning over
MapReduce

Combined local
differential privacy
with Boneh-Goh-
Nissim crypto
system & Shamir’s
secret sharing
K-Anonymity
and random
data perturbation
discussed

• Optimized error
rate of queries

• Enhanced i2b2
database privacy
• Optimized runtime,
and network over
head

• Enhanced training
accuracy
•
computational cost

Improved

• Optimized privacy
allocation budget
•
accuracy

Improved learning

•
Improved key
generation overhead
• Aggregation
privacy

• Discussed and
improved survey data
according to users
perspective

Time
Compl-
exity
O(n)

PIP Con-
troller

Real-
time

N/A

Statistical
Database

O(n)

Statistical
Database

O(N log2N )

Prototype
in Java16
using
Big
Integer

N/A

Statistical
Database

Postgre-
SQL

Statistical
Database

(ε, δ)-
differential
privacy

(ε, ∆)-
differential
privacy

(ε, ∆)-
differential
privacy

ε-
differential
privacy

ε-
differential
privacy

N/A

(ε, δ)-
differential
privacy

Statistical
Database

(ε, δ)-
differential
privacy

Hadoop

Statistical
Database

ε-
differential
privacy

Java
(JPBC
library)

Real-
time

O(√t)

-

N/A

Statistical
Database

−

−

−

−

−

−

• Enhanced execution
time • preserved
secret keys leakage in
dual decryption

ε-
differential
privacy

NFLib

Statistical
Database

Differential Privacy Approaches in Healthcare
(Medical Systems)
Sec. V

28

Real-Time Health Data
Sec. V-A

Electronic Health Record
(E - Health)
Sec. V-B

Health Survey
Data Protection
Sec. V-C

From Wearable
Devices [159]

Improving
Processing
Speed

Addressing
Range
Queries [264]

Encryption,
Crypto System,
and
SQL Queries

Users Perspective [267]

Addressing
Hierarchical
Queries [151]

Machine
Learning
[262], [263]

Cancer Data
[152]

Genomic Data
[265], [163]

Secure
Incentivization
[266]

Fig. 10: The differential privacy approaches implemented health care and medical systems can be categorized into real-time
health data, electronic health data, and survey data record strategies.

Several methods including encryption [270], limitation and
participation restrictions (privacy by design) [271] have been
proposed by researchers to preserve this crucial data. But none
of the proposed method ensures complete privacy protection,
because encryption protocols are computationally complex,
and the restriction methods have loophole regarding deﬁnition
of exact PII. However, differential privacy emerged out to be
one of the possible and most viable solution to protect real-
time wearable medical devices data. Zhang et al. in [159]
proposed Re-DPoctor scheme to provide budget allocation and
adaptive sampling using differential privacy. The proposed
strategy satisﬁes all conditions of differential privacy and
reduces mean relative error and mean absolute error of the
transmitted data. Moreover, the authors used proportional-
integral-plus (PIP) controller and compared utility and pri-
vacy trade-off by applying differential privacy over real-time
health data. Keeping in view the above discussion, it can be
seen that differential privacy can provide a healthy trade-off
between privacy and accuracy for real-time health data. As
the mathematical models of differential privacy can efﬁciently
be used for data protection by adding desired value of noise,
therefore including differential privacy approach in wearable
devices can preserve PII to maximum extent. Thus, we can
conclude that data perturbation using differential privacy is
the most suitable solution, if someone wants to preserve their
personal privacy for real-time healthcare and medical systems.

B. E-Health Records

Over the past decade,

the trend of hospitals adopting
electronic way of storing patient records has increased dra-
matically [272]. This speciﬁc mechanism named as e-health
mechanism [273] integrates advanced ICT features, such as
electronic storage, and data outsourcing. This health data
contains PII, such as date of birth, presence of any speciﬁc

disease, medical symptoms, weekly or monthly heart rate,
blood pressure level, etc. Data stored in PII datasets is ex-
tremely sensitive and should not be disclosed to anyone else
except the patient and doctor. Typically, these datasets are
protected using obscuring or anonymizing methods during
data preparation and cleaning. In obscuring, identiﬁers such
as the quasi identiﬁers, key identiﬁers, and certain other types
of sensitive and personal data identiﬁers are masked, after
that a separate and protected dataset is prepared for min-
ing [274], [275]. However, these cleaned and protected datasets
can easily expose certain PII when they are analysed and
mixed with different other feature sets [276]. Another valuable
scheme used to preserve the conﬁdentiality of e-health data
is encryption. In this scheme, the data is protected using
public and private generated keys. But the major challenge
in encryption is to make sure the conﬁdentiality of encrypted
data while allowing query execution over it [152]. Keeping in
view all these points, the most suitable scheme that comes up
to protect e-health data is differential privacy.
Using differential privacy data perturbation algorithm, one
can publicize e-health data for query execution without com-
promising any sort of privacy [277]. Similarly, majority of
differential privacy algorithms do not have high computational
complexity. Therefore, differential privacy can be implemented
in basic level e-health databases. Furthermore, e-health records
purely deal with statistical data preservation because these
health records are further used by various organizations and
hospitals to enquire and predict about status of patient. There-
fore, statistical differential privacy is usually applied to such
electronic health records. Researches have been carried out till
now in order to implement differential privacy in various e-
health databases for query execution. Li et al. in [151] ﬁrst
developed a heuristic hierarchical query method, and then pro-
posed a private partition algorithm for differential privacy in

order to enhance time, overhead and query error. Similarly, the
authors in [263] worked over end-to-end differential privacy
based deep learning approach to enhance training accuracy and
efﬁciency. The authors proposed a private stochastic gradient
descent based deep learning approach that preserves privacy
via efﬁciently perturbing the clinical data. To secure it further,
the authors integrated this differential privacy strategy with
cryptographic encryption. Authors claimed that their devel-
oped mechanism is private, secure, and efﬁcient as it efﬁciently
protects privacy and security along with reducing compu-
tational cost. Another work over preserving privacy while
enhancing learning accuracy is carried by authors in [262], the
authors proposed a differential privacy based data clustering
algorithm that works over k-means clustering and protects
private data by integrating differential privacy with machine
learning. Furthermore, the presented framework operated over
Hadoop and efﬁciently optimize privacy allocation budget
along with improving learning accuracy. Similarly, the authors
in [264] preserved privacy using Laplacian noise and worked
over data partitioning and work load for optimization of error
rate of queries. Furthermore, Mohammed et al. in [152] used
the Laplace noise of differential privacy to enhance data
privacy by performing experiments over cancer patient’s data.
The authors reduced the computational overhead by develop-
ing a lightweight framework that supports complex data min-
ing tasks and a variety of SQL queries. The ﬁeld of genomic
data record protection is explored by researchers in [163],
[265]. In [163], authors preserved the privacy of genomic and
distributed clinical data by ﬁrst encrypting the data and then
perturbing it using differential noise mechanism. Furthermore,
they worked over informatics for integrating biology and
bedside (i2b2) framework, and enhanced its privacy along with
reducing the network overhead. Similarly, the authors in [265]
also preserved genomic data privacy by using traditional
differential privacy approach and two way decryption method
to save it from any attacker. The authors enhanced privacy
and execution time of i2b2 framework in electronic genomic
data records. Moreover, the authors in [266] developed a
differentially private aggregation strategy which aggregated
health devices data and do also provides timely incentives to
its users. The proposed strategy combined differential privacy,
Boneh-Goh-Nissim crypto system, and Shamir’s secret sharing
to enhance both the security and privacy of users. The model
is developed using JPBC library of java and it ensures the
reduction of computational overhead. Therefore, the proposed
strategy is more suitable for health IoT devices that have
limited computational capacity. As differential privacy was
ﬁrst designed for statistical databases, therefore the mathe-
matical models of differential privacy perfectly ﬁts healthcare
and medical system databases, and this data can easily be
secured from intruders using differential privacy perturbation.
Keeping in view all the above discussion, we can conclude
that differential privacy applied in e-health databases provides
a desirable solution to protect privacy during query execution.

C. User Perspective for Health Survey Data Protection

As discussed in the above section, sometime the access
of databases is given to certain companies and media cells

29

to conduct surveys or query executions in order to learn
more about a particular disease or to solve any speciﬁc
problem. For instance, medical data and patient symptoms
data can be used by mobile recommender systems to suggest
a medication having less side effects [278]. Certain therapies
can be suggested by recommender system, that matches best
with the dispositions of patient [279], [280]. However, these
beneﬁts come with a trade-off of privacy. For example, if
the query conducting media cell becomes an adversary or
get compromised. It can then try to infer in to the personal
details of patients, in such cases it is responsibility of data
providers to protect users’ data before publicising it for any
survey. The major question here arises, how to choose correct
and desirable level of privacy without compromising over
the beneﬁts. The purpose of this section is to provide users’
perspective over applying privacy in health domain for their
personal data. Especially the perspective of a common person
towards privacy-precision trade-off of differential privacy.
In [267], authors analysed the users’ perspective over two dif-
ferent privacy preservation schemes; k-anonymity [281], and
differential privacy [26]. The authors presented the point of
view of common people to give their data towards future health
care and for commercial purposes. The experimental results
showed that users’ perspective towards their conﬁdentially of
data was quite strict if the data was about to be given for a
commercial use. While the patients showed reluctance while
providing the same data for scientiﬁc use. Furthermore, peo-
ple showed various reservations for anonymization strategies
because of the examples that privacy can be breached even
after anonymization. However, differential privacy seemed
suitable for users upon its idea of preserving privacy by data
perturbation and by providing a privacy-precision trade-off.
But the most confusing question for users was; how exactly
data perturbation protects the privacy? Furthermore, users felt
comfortable being the part of large crowd while applying
differential privacy to their dataset. By keeping in view all
these points, we can conclude that differential privacy used
with large datasets is fairly optimal strategy to protect data
according to users’ perspective.

D. Summary and Lessons Learnt

The new wave of modernizing and digitalizing medical
devices and records has seen an exponential growth over the
past decade and medical devices are being connected with
each other and other databases via wireless networks. This
replacement of old system to digitalized medical systems has
paved the path to several privacy and security issues [282]. The
actual concern is that medical devices data contains certain
PII, such as name, address, heartrate, blood pressure level,
symptoms of any disease, certain medical test outcome, etc.
This data can be used by malicious attackers to target a speciﬁc
person, blackmail them, steal their money, and so on [283].
However, we cannot deny the importance of this digitalized
data as well, because doctors and hospitals require this data
to overcome any severe consequences within time [282].
Therefore, a certain level of privacy is required by the medical
systems to utilize the data efﬁciently without risking it.

30

Fig. 11: Illustration of organization of differential privacy (DP) implementation in industrial Internet of thing (IIoT) systems into two
scenarios: distributed control, and industrial systems. When DP is incorporated into these scenarios, industrial sensors data and distributed
control signals of IIoT systems is protected and the data stored by database can be used for query evaluation.

One important application of healthcare and medical systems
is real-time data monitoring from certain medical equipment
that are used as wearable devices such as smart watches, heart
rate sensors, etc. This data contains speciﬁc patterns that can
be used to judge personal information about any individual.
However, this data cannot directly be perturbed because it
should be useful for the required observer, e.g., physician,
coach, and hospital administration. Certain techniques to pro-
tect this data is proposed by researchers, but the most suitable
technique to provide efﬁcient results is differential privacy.
Differential privacy perturbs the data in such a way that even
if any intruders compromises the real-time data, still it will not
be able to get the useful information. However, this ﬁeld is just
under consideration and researchers are working to provide
efﬁcient ways to protect this real-time data without reducing
data efﬁciency.
Another important application of health care data is data
mining for early detection of diseases by viewing symptoms.
Query execution is carried out by medical companies or
hospitals to know better about early symptoms regarding
any disease, or to perform statistical analysis of data. How-
ever, protecting the privacy during this query execution is
a challenging task. But after the introduction of differential

privacy in 2006 for statistical databases, the healthcare and
medical data is also being protected using the applications of
differential privacy. Still, a lot of work needs to be carried out
in future. For instance, the artiﬁcially intelligent algorithms are
being introduced to provide useful results in health databases
without compromising the privacy.
The protection of healthcare and medical systems using dif-
ferential privacy has been carried out by many scientists and
researchers, however a large number of applications of health-
care systems still needs a considerable attention. For instance,
introduction of machine learning in healthcare system is the
new trend. Similarly, differential privacy can be incorporated
with machine learning algorithms in order to ensure complete
privacy of health data. Furthermore,
the body sensors or
wearable devices are becoming smaller in size with passage
of time. Therefore, light-weight and less complex differential
privacy algorithms are required to ﬁt in to such devices. To
sum up, differential privacy is a vital solution for healthcare
and medical systems, but still a lot of efforts are required to
address all applications of healthcare and medical system.

VI. DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY IN INDUSTRIAL

31

Differential Privacy Approaches in Industrial Internet of Things
(IIoT)
Sec. VI

Industrial Systems
Sec. VI-A

Distributed
Control Systems
Sec. VI-B

Industrial
Database Systems
Sec. VI-C

Preserving
Consumer Data
of IoT [155]

Location Privacy
in IIoT [284]

Protecting Shared
Resource Partici-
pation [160], [285]

Multicore Database
Cluster [164]

Machine
Learning on
Cloud [3], [286]

Fig. 12: The differential privacy approaches implemented industrial Internet of things (IIoT) can be classiﬁed into industrial
systems, distributed control systems, and industrial database systems.

INTERNET OF THINGS

interoperable

connected with

The term IoT was ﬁrst

introduced to address unique
identiﬁable
a
objects
wireless technology named as radio-frequency identiﬁcation
(RFID) [287]. This concept of IoT shifted gradually from
RFID to Internet. However, with the rapid advancement of
IoT technologies, modern Internet has taken over the world in
every aspect. Physical layer of IoT devices are connected with
each other using Internet protocol (IP) to form an IoT system
[288]. The trend of using IoT technologies in industries is
exponentially increasing because of its effectiveness [289],
[290]. However, standard CPSs communication systems does
not cope with IIoT systems because modern IIoT systems
have certain extra requirements such as hostile environment
operation, predictable throughput, maintenance by some
other than communication specialists, and extremely low
downtown [291]. The two most common IIoT communication
systems include Fieldbus, and supervisory control and data
acquisition (SCADA) [292]. Large number of projects related
to food industry, agriculture, security surveillance, and other
similar ﬁelds have been conducted using IIoT technologies.
As IIoT technologies are being used extensively in a large
number of industrial projects, there are various commercial
and political interests in it [293]. Because of those interests,
the intruders always try to launch targeted attacks to obtain
maximum possible data from IIoT systems and databases in
order to damage that speciﬁc industry.
Keeping in view all these points, it can be said that it is
very important to protect the privacy of IIoT systems. A
large number of privacy preservation technologies for IoT
have been recently discussed in [294]–[297], but most of
them focuses over basic IoT systems privacy preservation.
However, the privacy of industrial systems differs from that
of general IoT systems because critical decisions without
time delays needs to be made in IIoT devices. Few researches
proposed limit
release [298], data distortion [299], and
data encryption [300], [301] as a solution to preserve IIoT
privacy, but with constant observation it can be seen that their
advantages are limited and they cannot be implied broadly
over every IIoT system.

Differential privacy is a new standard to preserve the privacy
if IIoT systems. Differential privacy deﬁnes a detailed attack
model, reduces privacy risks for data disclosure, and ensure
data availability at same time of query or decision [164], [302].
On the basis of privacy preservation using differential privacy,
IIoT systems can be further divided into three subcategories;
industrial systems, distributed control systems, and industrial
database systems, as illustrated in Fig. 11. In this section,
we discuss the implementation of differential privacy in these
IIoT systems. The detailed taxonomy of differential privacy
implementation in IIoT systems is presented in Table XII and
Fig. 12.

A. Industrial Systems

The rapid development of ICT technologies also changed
the perspective of controlling traditional industrial devices.
Similarly, merger of IoT, and ICT with traditional industry
have revolutionized these systems and a new era of “Fourth
Industrial Revolution” is on its way [303]. Modern trends
of IoT, and ICT are greatly inﬂuencing automation of in-
dustrial devices and higher degree of inter-connection among
devices is being achieved using these technologies [304]. In
industry 4.0, almost every sort of communication will happen
via wireless medium, therefore researchers are working over
implementation of modern ways of communications (e.g., 5G)
in industrial devices and sensors. The communication between
these sensors and devices needs to be secured because these
sensors and devices generate a large amount of safety-critical
and privacy-sensitive data. Safe and secure operation of this
data needs to be ensured for smooth running of industry [305].
Generally, the privacy threats of IIoT systems [306] can be
classiﬁed into two subcategories; based on preserving data
and over preserving of location. Traditional approaches used
to preserve data and location privacy are anonymity [307]
fuzziﬁcation technology [284].
However, because of multiple data fusion, and techniques of
re-identiﬁcation of anonymized data, these techniques do not
show very considerable outcomes in IIoT system. Therefore,
differential privacy appeared as one of the most suitable solu-

tion to communicate this data from sensors to required devices
without compromising the integrity and privacy. Researches
are being carried out over implementation of differential pri-
vacy in different scenarios of industrial automation. Similarly,
the authors in [155] improved data privacy by implement-
ing differential privacy with k-anonymity. The authors used
the traditional concept of differential privacy, integrated it
with k-anonymity and enhances anonymization of data, their
preserved data can be aggregated and transmitted without
risking the privacy component. However, the authors in [284]
considered the factor of preserving location of industrial sen-
sors using differential privacy. The authors ﬁrst demonstrated
that extracting location of IIoT sensors can prove to be a
serious threat to industry and later on authors provided the
solution by merging differential privacy with these sensors.
In [284], MATLAB and PyCharm are used to implement
tree node accessing frequency model with Laplacian noise
perturbation to enhance data utility timeliness. The authors
ﬁrmly believe, in order to protect location and data privacy of
industrial systems, differential privacy is an optimal solution
in context of accuracy and timeliness. By keeping in view
the above discussion regarding industrial automated systems
privacy, and considering the effectiveness of dynamic nature
of differential privacy strategies, it can be said that differential
privacy can efﬁciently preserve privacy when applied with
industrial systems.

B. Distributed Control Systems

In recent years, the interest in advancement of distributed
control systems has increased exponentially in industrial do-
main [308]. These types of systems involve cooperation of
all connected devices in order to take intelligent decisions
on the basis of input data. This control is generally achieved
using emergent behaviour of various autonomous, simple and
cooperative agents/devices [309]. On one hand, the real-time
sensing and sharing of this information provides large number
of beneﬁts, and on other hand, if any attacker gets access to
this information then it can cause serious issues. For instance,
halting or even destroying of industrial machines [310]. There-
fore, preserving crucial
information of modern distributed
control systems is very important for their complete implemen-
tation in industrial sector. Different approaches to overcome
privacy issues of these autonomous distributed control systems
have been proposed by researchers such as encryption, and k-
anonymity. But the most promising approach to protect the
privacy without losing the originality of data of these systems
is differential privacy.
In case of linear distributed systems, differential privacy can
easily preserve real-time continuously varying data from dis-
tributed linear devices by using the metric method presented
in [311]. The authors in [160] used this metric based method of
differential privacy and perturbed the data using random Lapla-
cian noise. By following this pattern, the authors minimized
entropy of system along with increasing the privacy of data
being communicated between devices. Similarly, the authors
in [285] deﬁned inherent differential privacy for systems based
on feedback-control. The authors calculated the minimum

32

amount of Gaussian noise that is required to ensure privacy
of system. Furthermore, the provided mechanism improves
performance, privacy, and attack resiliency of system. Both
of the proposed methodologies showed that data perturbation
technique of differential privacy can preserve this real-time
ﬂoating data between control devices. Thus, by viewing the
nature and privacy requirements of distributed control systems
data, we can say that differential privacy provides is the best
light-weight approach to preserve real-time data privacy in
distributed control systems.

C. Industrial Database Systems

Advances in IoT systems coupled with social networks
are providing more intelligent and comprehensive services
in our daily life [312]–[315]. These systems generate large
proportion of data that
is stored usually in cloud servers
or databases. Certain functions in these social IoT systems
are carried out via predeﬁned interfaces using the stored
big data [316]–[318]. The data is continuously being shared
between clients and servers, and during this process, any
information can be leaked if the data is not preserved properly.
This in return can generate huge security and privacy threats
to the databases of all social systems, because the individual
privacy can easily be compromised during communication
and query evaluation [9]. Large number of current researches
proposed cryptographic encryption to preserve the privacy
of social IoT systems [13], [15]. However, certain number
of keys needs to be maintained in cryptographic schemes
that makes it impossible to implement in databases where
data needs to be shared with public or query evaluation. To
overcome these issues, Dwork proposed the idea of differential
privacy for statistical database [26]. Nevertheless, because of
advancements in machine learning algorithms and multiple
query releases in datasets, the traditional differential privacy
cannot be used in social IoT systems [319].
In order to tackle the problems of traditional differential
privacy approaches in social IoT systems, many researchers
proposed different ways to overcome it. In [164], Ni et al.
proposed a powerful differential privacy approach using the
combination of random Laplacian noise and data cluster-
ing technology using MATLAB simulator. Furthermore, as
compared to traditional privacy protection approaches, the
authors improved efﬁciency, accuracy, and overall network
data privacy. A step ahead of the pack, the authors in [286]
proposed a scheme to preserve multiple data-providers privacy
using differential privacy. Instead of data providers, the noise
is added via cloud server in this scheme. To further preserve
conﬁdentiality,
the authors also encrypted the data using
double decryption algorithm in combination with differential
privacy. Zhu et al. in [3] worked over implementation of
machine learning along with differential privacy for efﬁcient
query evaluation. The authors reduced mean absolute er-
ror and preserved privacy of data using prediction model.
To sum up, databases of social IoT systems needs to be
preserved from cyber-attacks. Therefore, modern differential
privacy approaches provide efﬁcient privacy protection from
all vulnerabilities along with enhanced query evaluation and
providing support for machine learning algorithms.

TABLE XII
COMPARATIVE VIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY TECHNIQUES IN INDUSTRIAL INTERNET OF THINGS WITH THEIR
SPECIFIC TECHNIQUE, OPTIMIZED PARAMETERS, PRIVACY CRITERION, SCENARIO, AND EXPERIMENTAL PLATFORM.

33

Main
Category

Ref
No.

Year

Privacy
Mechanism

Technique of DP
Used

Privacy
Criterion

Platform
Used

Scenario

Industrial
Systems

[155] 2016

Differential
privacy for IoT

Distributed
Control
Systems

[284] 2017

[160] 2017

[285] 2017

[164] 2018

[286] 2018

Industrial
Database
Systems

[3]

2018

Location privacy
for IIoT using
Differential
privacy
Differential
privacy in linear
distributed
control systems
Differential
privacy
mechanism for
feedback control
systems
Differential
privacy for
multicore
DB scan
clustering (DP-
MCDBScan)
Preserving
Multiple data-
providers privacy
via differential
privacy
mechanism
Differential
privacy model
machine learning
mechanism
in CPS using
prediction model

Enhancement due
to Differential
Privacy
• Enhanced
anonymization

• Entropy
minimization

• Improved privacy,
performance, and
attack resiliency

k-anonymity
with traditional
differential privacy
is used
Tree node
accessing frequency
model is used with
Laplacian noise
Randomized
Laplacian noise is
used in distributed
systems data
Minimum required
Gaussian noise is
calculated

• Maximize data
utility and timeliness

(ε, δ)-
differential
privacy

MATLAB
and
PyCharm

Real-
time

Real-
time

Real-
time

Real-
time

N/A

ε-
differential
privacy

N/A

N/A

(ε, ∆)-
differential
privacy

(ε, δ)-
differential
privacy

ε-
differential
privacy

Random Laplacian
noise is used with
data clustering

• Improved
efﬁciency, accuracy
and privacy of
network data

MATLAB

Statistical
Database

Perturbation
is added to
cipher text
after encrypting
Laplacian noise

Machine learning
model publishing
is used with
traditional
differential privacy

• Multiple-providers
data is preserved

ε-
differential
privacy

MAGMA
and Java
Simula-
tor

• Mean absolute
error is enhanced

N/A

ε-
differential
privacy

Real-
time

Real-
time

Time
Compl-
exity

−

−

O(T 3/
Nε2 )

−

−

−

−

D. Summary and Lessons Learnt

The development of IoT technology has paved paths for
many future applications, one of the most important among
them is the involvement of IoT in industry. Modern industrial
devices are equipped with sensors that are communicating
with each other in real-time to take crucial control decisions.
However, leakage of this real-time information can cause se-
vere privacy threats to the machinery or individuals associated
with it [320]. For instance, an unmanned steel mill was halted
and destroyed using cyber-attacks in Germany by disrupting
and manipulating the control mechanism [310]. Therefore, a
certain privacy level for IIoT systems is required in order
to operate smoothly. Industrial systems are one of the major
aspects of IIoT, these systems include large industrial ma-
chines that are communicating with each other using sensors
in real-time. With the introduction of fourth generation of
industry, these systems are developing very rapidly, and a large
amount of data is being transmitted every second from one
device to another. However, protecting the privacy of these
real-time systems by focusing on data and location privacy
of these sensors and devices is the actual challenge at the
moment [321]. Differential privacy came out as an optimal
solution to protect the privacy up to a certain extent without

compromising the usefulness of data. Till now, differential
privacy preserved the data integrity during data aggregation
and data transmission of industrial systems. Nevertheless, a
large of ﬁelds of industrial systems still needs to be preserved.
For example, extensive efforts are required to secure the
industrial and ofﬁces automation control.
Another important application similar to industrial systems is
distributed control systems. In these systems, intelligent deci-
sion is taken on the basis of feedback or input data. Therefore,
this input data needs to be protected before transmitting it to
system, because if any intruders gets access to the input or
feedback then disastrous results can be seen. For example, in
Iran in 2008, a centrifuge is sabotages at a uranium enrichment
plant [310]. Therefore, preserving input privacy is very crucial
for such systems. Several techniques related to differential
privacy have been presented by researchers to protect privacy
without losing the originality of data. However, certain ﬁelds
such as handling of big data of such systems still needs to
be explored. Similarly, ﬁnding the most efﬁcient trade-off
between accuracy and privacy is also a challenge for industrial
researchers.
the crucial data of IIoT systems is usually
Furthermore,
stored in cloud or large databases. These databases holders

usually allow companies to perform query execution over
them in order to conduct surveys and other statistical tasks.
However, if the company or utility becomes a hacker then the
sensitive data of users can be leaked. For instance, the database
of any social network contains a large amount of personal
information whose privacy needs to be ensured before allowing
companies to perform query execution. To cope up with this
privacy challenge, data scientists apply data perturbation using
differential privacy in these databases before allowing any
company to perform query evaluation. This data perturbation
allows different companies to execute query evaluation without
risking users’ data. Although, there are many ﬁelds that still
needs to be explored by researchers. One important application
is the implementation of privacy protection in data mining and
machine learning systems to make the artiﬁcially intelligent
systems more secure. Another future domain to protect is
buying/auction of industrial products. For example, buyers do
not want to disclose their identity to sellers and similarly
sellers do not want to disclose their identity to buyers. To
sum up, differential privacy actively played the role to protect
privacy of industrial systems. However, certain number of
domains still needs to be protected and efforts needs to be
made over these domains to make secure and reliable further
generation IIoT systems.

VII. OPEN ISSUES, CHALLENGES, AND FUTURE
RESEARCH DIRECTIONS

Currently, differential privacy implementation in cyber
physical systems is facing a large number of challenges,
because of dynamic nature of CPSs. In this section, we discuss
few challenges, open issues, and future research directions for
implementation of differential privacy in CPSs.

A. Energy Systems Issues and Research Directions

Smart grid is the future of energy systems, because it
incorporates capabilities of both; traditional energy systems
and modern information and communication technologies.
However, there are certain applications of smart grid that still
need considerable attention in context of user privacy. In this
section, we discuss such applications of smart grid in which
differential privacy can improve the privacy preservation in an
exceptional way.

1) Billing with Dynamic Pricing: One of the biggest beneﬁt
of smart metering is accurate calculation of bills within a
dynamic pricing environment [322]. This pricing strategy
requires detailed energy consumption information, which on
other hand may leak private information of smart meter
users. Therefore, implementing differential privacy along with
accurate dynamic pricing billing is a challenge for researchers.
In recent year, many researches focused over dynamic private
billing using differential privacy protection [323]. The trade-
off between accuracy and privacy of real-time data reporting is
the biggest hurdle in implementation of differential privacy in
smart meters. Many researchers are working and developing
efﬁcient algorithms to overcome this trade-off to a maximum
level. Still, there is a large room that requires to be ﬁlled in
order to preserve privacy along with dynamic consumption
reporting for dynamic billing.

34

2) Auction of Micro-Grid Energy Resources: The demand
of renewable energy is increasing due to rising costs of
traditional fossil fuel based energy. Most of these energy
resources such as small wind turbines, and solar panels will
be deployed in smart homes [133]. Energy consumption of
each house is different, therefore, some smart homes may
use all their produced energy while others may still have
excessive energy left that is not of their use. Smart homes can
then auction this excessive energy to other buyers, they can
auction this energy and buyers purchase it according to their
need [324]. However, during this process, buyer and seller
usually do not want to disclose their identity to each other.
Therefore, preservation of this information is very crucial for
smooth running of auction mechanism in smart grid [187]. Few
proposed researches considered micro-grid in EV scenario,
but the speciﬁc application of auction in RERs based smart
home is still not addressed in the literature. In order to secure
this mechanism, techniques of differential privacy need to be
proposed.

3) Firmware Updates: Smart meters usually operate over
an installed ﬁrmware that determines every functionality of
them. Generally, this ﬁrmware is developed by smart meter
vendors who usually update them to improve functionality or
to remove any detected bug. Similarly, utility companies some-
times do also require ﬁrmware updates in case of any change
among pricing or laws [324]. Since the ﬁrmware update ﬁle
is proprietary, therefore it needs to be communicated to smart
meters in a secure and private manner. Furthermore, sometimes
update is required for only certain group of smart meters
instead of all, in which utility requires case access control.
However, to protect this ﬁrmware ﬁle, certain security and
privacy based mechanisms are required. Till now, researchers
only proposed security based approaches to overcome this
problem. However, privacy requirement cannot be neglected in
this application. We believe that incorporation of differential
privacy scheme with other security schemes such as encryption
can provide optimal results in this scenario.

4) Resource Constrained Micro-Grids: In order to get a
cost-effective supply and power management alternative in
remote areas, micro-grid resource constrained architectures
are the optimal solution [325]. To minimize operational cost,
certain lossy networks are used to carry out communication
between these resource constrained architectures. However,
these lossy networks are prone to many adversaries and privacy
attacks because of their unreliable nature [326]. This loss
of privacy can provoke various crimes, such as energy theft
etc. Existing data preservation strategies cannot directly be
applied to these lossy networks because these algorithms do
not cope-up with cost requirements in rural areas. As per our
point of view, light-weight differential privacy can mitigate
these privacy risks and provide a larger control over power
management, distribution and anonymization [326]. Therefore,
researches need to carry out in privacy preservation of resource
constrained micro-grids using differential privacy techniques.

B. Transportation Systems Issues and Research Directions

Smart transportation system is the need of a smart city.
Therefore, governments are trying to improve the quality of

transportation systems day by day. Along with the enhance-
ment in quality and rapid communication between vehicles,
certain security and privacy issues arises that need to be tack-
led along with quality enhancement. In this section, we discuss
two major applications that require considerable attention in
context of privacy preservation.

1) Live Trafﬁc Information: In order to overcome delays
due to congestion, live trafﬁc information is generally used by
route planning applications [327]. These applications consider
live feed from connected cars, connected mobile devices, smart
signals, and public transport to plan the shortest and less
congested path for drivers. This is an advantageous feature
that saves time of drivers, but on the other side of coin, it can
cause serious threats to location privacy of connected devices
and cars. If the network is unprotected, then any intruder can
hack the system of these applications and may have access
to the live location tracking of connected cars. Therefore, it
is important to protect location privacy before reporting it to
route planning applications. Differential privacy can provide
real-time location privacy by perturbing location or identity in
order to preserve drivers’ privacy. Therefore, this ﬁeld of ITSs
has a lot potential and it needs to be explored in future.

2) Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) Communication: With the ex-
ponential development of wireless communication technolo-
gies, vehicular ad-hoc networks, and V2V communication
have become progressively popular. Certain services such
as VoIP, web browsing, and video conferencing have been
carried out with help of these networks and V2V commu-
nication [328]. In recent years, certain privacy and security
issues of V2V communication has arisen. These issues have
attracted attention from both academia and industries. Encryp-
tion is considered to be the most famous strategy to secure
communication between two vehicles, but it also comes with
certain faults and loopholes. Therefore, in order to preserve
privacy in communication among two vehicles, differential
privacy can be an optimal solution. Future researches should
consider integrating differential privacy with different V2V
communication scenarios.

C. Healthcare and Medical Systems Issues and Research
Directions

The trend of connecting cyber and physical worlds in
healthcare and medical system has increased tremendously.
However, this connection comes up with certain issues that
needs to be resolved before its successful implementation in
daily lives. In this section, we discuss few applications of
healthcare systems in which differential privacy can be applied
to get advantageous results.

1) Body Sensors Data: With the advancement in wireless
technologies, the trend of using body sensors for medical
purposes is also increasing dramatically. These sensors (i.e.,
heart rate sensor, and body temperature sensors) monitor
your real-time readings and report them to your physician
or trainer [329]. Although, this information cannot directly
be transmitted to required person without protecting it from
adversaries. Encryption is one of the solution for this type
is computationally complex. On the
of application, but

it

35

other hand, differential privacy based real-time reporting of
data can be a light weight solution to solve this particular
problem. The technique presented by Zhang et al. in [159]
is a great step towards implementing differential privacy in
real-time health data sensing and reporting. Still this ﬁeld has
a lot of room and needs to be explored further. For instance,
the real challenge is implementing differential privacy noise
addition mechanism in low memory devices such as small
micro-controllers. We believe that modern differential privacy
algorithms can enhance this ﬁeld and can produce optimal
results in real-time health data reporting.

2) Elderly Home Sensor Network: Retirement homes or
elderly homes do also need considerable attention because
the people living in there require full time care and attention.
Therefore, many healthcare devices are placed in these homes
for monitoring and diagnostic purposes [330]. However, along
with monitoring, these devices also need considerable privacy
protection, because even a small loophole in privacy can cause
severe circumstances [331]. The whole elderly home network
can be protected using differential privacy techniques in the
devices. The potential applications of differential privacy in el-
derly homes can be protecting electronic patient records [332],
that contains all useful
identity, and medical
information,
records of people living in that home.

D. Industrial Internet of Things Systems Issues and Research
Directions

The advancements in industry is highly inﬂuenced by
modern IoT technologies. As IoT is taking over industry
by providing autonomous control, efﬁcient data storage, and
reliable communication, although it also comes up with risk
of attacks related to security and privacy of industry. Few
past events occurred in industries showed that these advanced
technologies can be targeted, hackers can get access to private
industrial data. These malicious adversaries can also control
machinery or can even destroy industrial systems. Therefore,
certain IIoT ﬁelds need to be secured ﬁrst for smooth running
of IoT systems in industry.

1) Industrial Big Data Trading (Auction): One major issue
in applications of big data in industry is to handle auction
of products or services. Trusted third-party platforms are
generally used to carry out auction between buyer and seller.
However, fully trusting third party platform is difﬁcult because
of many reasons, including insider adversaries, cyber threats,
and platform insecurities [333]. We believe that, in order to ad-
dress this issue of privacy protection in third-party platforms,
differential privacy is a suitable solution. Because of strong
mathematical modelling background, differential privacy can
provide a desirable level of privacy in auction scenario of big
data in industries.

E. Other Issues and Research Directions

1) Big Data: The horizon of big data is not only limited to
CPSs, this covers almost every aspect of human life ranging
from schools to ofﬁces and from farming to industry. In
this section, we will be discussing particularly about some
future directions and challenges regarding implementation

of differential privacy in certain big data applications. We
believe that as the data is increasing, differential privacy
based algorithms are also becoming advanced and more
responsive. However, there are certain challenges that still
need to be addressed for big data.

a) Intuitive Privacy Deﬁnition: In context of differential
privacy itself, one of the major challenge is deﬁning the exact
privacy. Even after establishing of mathematical proofs and
strict privacy model, differential privacy lacks in giving an in-
tuitive deﬁnition of privacy according to big data. Thus, ﬁnding
a more intuitive deﬁnition of privacy in accordance with big
data analytics is still a challenge for data scientists [19].

b) Composition Theorem: As we discussed earlier (see
that composition theorem plays an active
Section II-B2),
role in designing of algorithm, and allocation of privacy
budget. However, existing methods of deciding privacy budget
using composition theorem are not optimal [334]. Therefore,
optimal computation of composition of differential privacy in
big data analytics is still an unsolved challenge. Similarly,
in the domain of big data, maintaining privacy protection
along with issue of dimensionality because of large data
volume and computation overhead is a big challenge for
researchers [335], [336].
In context of future research directions, few novel approaches
based on the principal of differential privacy such as
local privacy [337], concentrated privacy [338], w-event
privacy [339], and Bayesian differential privacy [101] have
very large scope in big data applications. For instance, dealing
with time-series data publishing, w-event privacy provides
an optimal balance between event-level and user-level
privacy [340]. As for future work, researches should focus
on handling the privacy for large data volumes and designing
of optimal privacy budget for different notions of differential
privacy.

2) Machine Learning: The actual purpose of any machine
learning algorithm is to extract beneﬁcial information from
given data. However, preserving individual privacy along with
extracting data is one of the most challenging task of future
machine learning algorithms [341]. For example, if one is
analysing sensitive medical data, then ﬁrst it needs to be made
sure privacy is preserved properly, and query evaluation can be
performed [342]. To tackle this issue, researchers have started
working over merging differential privacy data perturbation
technique with machine learning algorithms [35], [343], [344].
Future research directions in this ﬁeld needs to examine
the merger of efﬁcient differential privacy data preservation
techniques with complex machine learning algorithms.

3) Cloud Computing: Huge amount of data generated
through ubiquitous communication among smart devices
paved the path towards a reliable and secure storage named as
cloud computing [345]–[347]. Furthermore, cloud computing
emerged as a new computing paradigm and business model
that enables on-demand supply of storage and computational
resources. However, outsourcing this data to any third party
can cause certain privacy issues [348]. These privacy risks are
generally caused due to information redundancy in big data

36

from different sources, multi-tenancy, and ubiquitous access
features of platforms of cloud computing [349]. Traditional
method of protecting cloud privacy is to store encrypted
data over cloud platform, and data owners must download
and decrypt the data locally to be sent for processing [350].
However, with the increase in size of data, it is becoming
hard for data owners to afford this computationally complex
approach [351]. Differential privacy is now emerging as a new
practical approach to overcome these privacy issues of cloud
computing scenario. Researchers have started work towards
privacy preservation of cloud computing data using differential
privacy. Privacy of certain cloud applications such as big
graphs [351], multi-agent programs [352], blockchain-based
cloud [353], and scalable processing platforms [349] have
been enhanced via modern differential privacy algorithms. We
believe that this ﬁeld has a large potential and light-weight
differential privacy algorithms can revolutionize privacy stan-
dards of cloud computing.

4) Wireless Edge Computing: Along with increase in smart
devices, edge computing has now become a mainstream while
dealing with wireless communication scenario. Wireless edge
computing provides broad beneﬁts according to aspects of
mining and analysing data, and intelligently perceiving the
information of location [354]. These wireless edge computing
networks contain large amount of private data that cannot be
sent directly for data prediction and processing. Therefore,
protecting important features of wireless edge computing
needs to be made sure before any sort of query evaluation.
In order to tackle this situation, researchers are proposing dif-
ferential privacy based strategies as an optimal solution [355],
[356]. Keeping in view all this discussion, it can be said that
modern differential privacy algorithms can enhance wireless
edge computing, and these algorithms should be explored and
presented in future.

In the past

5) Blockchain Technology:

few years,
blockchain emerged as one of the novel distributed strategy
that allows the secure storage of transactions, or any other
type of data without need of any predeﬁned centralized
data authority [357], [358]. The notion of blockchain was
tightly coupled with Bitcoin for some time, but now it has
been adopted widely in many applications e.g., healthcare,
ﬁnances, and logistics [359]–[361]. The feature of public
accessibility without any centralized authority made it famous
among its users, but on the other hand it also raised certain
security and privacy issues in it. Because of inadequacy of
existing blockchain protocols [362], most of the blockchain
users are worried about their transaction privacy. To overcome
this issue, researchers are proposing certain privacy schemes
on the basis of identity, anonymity, and perturbation [363]–
[365]. Researchers are enhancing data perturbation strategies
by making them artiﬁcially intelligent using machine learn-
ing algorithm. We believe that, modern differential privacy
algorithms in conjunction with blockchain can eradicate the
issue of privacy loss even in case of public query evaluation.
Because of mathematical background and light-weight privacy
model, differential privacy can preserve transactions and other
data storage in blockchain technology. Therefore, researchers
should focus on integration of these two modern world tech-

nologies to achieve efﬁcient results.

6) Game Theory: Game theory addresses issues in which
multiple participants compete with each other having contra-
dictory goals or incentives [322], [366]. Similarly, in order
to enhance administrators’ decision making, game theory can
be used to analyse large number of possible scenarios before
taking the most appropriate action such as smart grid energy
trading [367]. Security and privacy is also an important aspect
of game theory algorithms. As we discussed earlier in context
of differential privacy,
trade-off between privacy and
utility is a critical issue being considered at the moment (see
Section II-B1). This trade-off between privacy and utility is
being evolved further into a game problem. Researchers have
now started developing modern differential privacy approaches
by efﬁciently handling utility-privacy trade-off with help of
game theory based algorithms [368], [369]. We believe that
game theory based differential privacy techniques can be used
to handle privacy of certain differential privacy and CPSs
applications. Therefore, researches in this ﬁeld need to be
carried out in future.

that

VIII. CONCLUSION

With the advancement in information and communication
technologies (ICT), cyber physical systems (CPSs) have be-
come an essential part of our lives, ranging from our homes to
industries and from ofﬁces to hospitals. However, this advance-
ment comes up with certain security and privacy risks attached
to it. Various privacy attacks are carried out in CPSs to access
critical data or information from private or public datasets.
One of the most optimal solution to overcome these privacy
hazards is preserving data by noise addition using differential
privacy perturbation mechanisms. In this article, we have
presented a detailed and up-to-date survey of implementation
of differential privacy techniques in various CPSs applications.
We have comprehensively covered all dimensions and aspects
of differential privacy implementation in major CPSs domains.
Integration of differential privacy in four application scenarios
of CPSs, named as energy systems, transportation systems,
healthcare and medical systems, and industrial systems is
presented in the paper. Within energy systems, we surveyed
privacy protection of demand response data, real-time data,
and fog computing communication systems using differential
privacy. Similarly, in transportation systems, we covered the
aspect of privacy preservation with help of differential pri-
vacy in railway networks, vehicular networks, and automotive
manufactures databases. Moreover, in healthcare and medical
systems, we surveyed differential privacy approaches in real-
time health data, and e-health databases. Furthermore, accord-
ing to industrial point of view, we presented implementation of
differential privacy techniques in industrial, distributed control
systems, and industrial database systems. We then concluded
the survey article by highlighting challenges, open issues, and
future research directions in differential privacy techniques for
CPSs.

REFERENCES

[1] C. Yu, S. Jing, and X. Li, “An architecture of cyber physical system
based on service,” in IEEE International Conference on Computer
Science & Service System (CSSS), 2012, pp. 1409–1412.

37

[2] E. A. Lee, “Cyber physical systems: Design challenges,” in 11th
IEEE Symposium on Object Oriented Real-Time Distributed Computing
(ISORC), 2008, pp. 363–369.

[3] T. Zhu, P. Xiong, G. Li, W. Zhou, and S. Y. Philip, “Differentially
private model publishing in cyber physical systems,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, in Print, 2018.

[4] J. Shi, J. Wan, H. Yan, and H. Suo, “A survey of cyber-physical sys-
tems,” in IEEE International Conference on Wireless Communications
and Signal Processing (WCSP), 2011, pp. 1–6.

[5] J. Giraldo, E. Sarkar, A. A. Cardenas, M. Maniatakos, and M. Kantar-
cioglu, “Security and privacy in cyber-physical systems: A survey of
surveys,” IEEE Design & Test, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 7–17, 2017.

[6] Q. Xu, P. Ren, H. Song, and Q. Du, “Security-aware waveforms for
enhancing wireless communications privacy in cyber-physical systems
via multipath receptions,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 4,
no. 6, pp. 1924–1933, 2017.

[7] M. Gowtham and S. S. Ahila, “Privacy enhanced data communication
protocol for wireless body area network,” in 4th IEEE International
Conference on Advanced Computing and Communication Systems
(ICACCS), 2017, pp. 1–5.

[8] M. Li, W. Lou, and K. Ren, “Data security and privacy in wireless
body area networks,” IEEE Wireless communications, vol. 17, no. 1,
2010.

[9] Z. Wang, H. Chen, Q. Cao, H. Qi, Z. Wang, and Q. Wang, “Achieving
location error tolerant barrier coverage for wireless sensor networks,”
Computer Networks, vol. 112, pp. 314–328, 2017.

[10] P. Barbosa, A. Brito, and H. Almeida, “A technique to provide
differential privacy for appliance usage in smart metering,” Information
Sciences, vol. 370, pp. 355–367, 2016.

[11] T. Wang, Z. Zheng, M. H. Rehmani, S. Yao, and Z. Huo, “Privacy
preservation in big data from the communication perspective — a
survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 1, pp.
753 – 778, 2018.

[12] Y. Shen and H. Jin, “Privacy-preserving personalized recommendation:
An instance-based approach via differential privacy,” in IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), 2014, pp. 540–549.
[13] L. Chen, S. Thombre, K. Jarvinen, E. S. Lohan, A. Alen-Savikko,
H. Leppakoski, M. Z. H. Bhuiyan, S. Bu-Pasha, G. N. Ferrara,
S. Honkala et al., “Robustness, security and privacy in location-based
services for future IoT: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 8956–8977,
2017.

[14] K. Muhammad, R. Hamza, J. Ahmad, J. Lloret, H. H. G. Wang,
and S. W. Baik, “Secure surveillance framework for IoT systems
using probabilistic image encryption,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, in Print, vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 3679 – 3689, Aug. 2018.
[15] W. Meng, E. W. Tischhauser, Q. Wang, Y. Wang, and J. Han, “When
intrusion detection meets blockchain technology: a review,” IEEE
Access, vol. 6, pp. 10 179–10 188, 2018.

[16] L. Sweeney, “k-anonymity: A model for protecting privacy,” Interna-
tional Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Sys-
tems, vol. 10, no. 05, pp. 557–570, 2002.

[17] C. Dwork, “A ﬁrm foundation for private data analysis,” Communica-

tions of the ACM, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 86–95, 2011.

[18] R. Lu, H. Zhu, X. Liu, J. K. Liu, and J. Shao, “Toward efﬁcient and
privacy-preserving computing in big data era,” IEEE Network, vol. 28,
no. 4, pp. 46–50, 2014.

[19] X. Yang, T. Wang, X. Ren, and W. Yu, “Survey on improving
data utility in differentially private sequential data publishing,” IEEE
Transactions on Big Data, no. 1, pp. 1–1, 2017.

[20] Y. Cao, M. Yoshikawa, Y. Xiao, and L. Xiong, “Quantifying differential
privacy in continuous data release under temporal correlations,” IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2018.

[21] K.-A. Shim, “A survey of public-key cryptographic primitives in
wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 577–601, 2016.

[22] K. Apostol, Brute-force Attack. SaluPress, 2012.
[23] M. E. Skarkala, M. Maragoudakis, S. Gritzalis, L. Mitrou, H. Toivonen,
and P. Moen, “Privacy preservation by k-anonymization of weighted
social networks,” in Proceedings of IEEE Computer Society Interna-
tional Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining
(ASONAM), 2012, pp. 423–428.

[24] Y.-A. De Montjoye, C. A. Hidalgo, M. Verleysen, and V. D. Blondel,
“Unique in the crowd: The privacy bounds of human mobility,”
Scientiﬁc reports, vol. 3, p. 1376, 2013.

[25] Y.-A. De Montjoye, L. Radaelli, V. K. Singh et al., “Unique in
the shopping mall: On the reidentiﬁability of credit card metadata,”
Science, vol. 347, no. 6221, pp. 536–539, 2015.

[26] C. Dwork, “Differential privacy,” in Proceedings of the 33rd Interna-
tional Conference on Automata, Languages and Programming - Volume
Part II, ser. ICALP’06. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2006, pp.
1–12.

[27] L. Wasserman and S. Zhou, “A statistical framework for differential
privacy,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 105, no.
489, pp. 375–389, 2010.

[28] N. Li, W. Qardaji, D. Su, Y. Wu, and W. Yang, “Membership privacy: a
unifying framework for privacy deﬁnitions,” in Proceedings of the 2013
ACM SIGSAC conference on Computer & communications security,
2013, pp. 889–900.

[29] J. Lee and C. Clifton, “Differential identiﬁability,” in Proceedings of the
18th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery
and data mining, 2012, pp. 1041–1049.

[30] T. Zhu, G. Li, W. Zhou, and P. S. Yu, Preliminary of Differential
Privacy. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 7–16.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-62004-6 2
[31] H. Zhang, Y. Shu, P. Cheng, and J. Chen, “Privacy and performance
trade-off in cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Network, vol. 30, no. 2, pp.
62–66, 2016.

[32] E. Zheleva and L. Getoor, “Privacy in social networks: A survey,” in

Social network data analytics. Springer, 2011, pp. 277–306.

[33] C. Task and C. Clifton, “What should we protect? deﬁning differential
privacy for social network analysis,” in State of the Art Applications
of Social Network Analysis. Springer, 2014, pp. 139–161.

[34] I. Gazeau, D. Miller, and C. Palamidessi, “Preserving differential pri-
vacy under ﬁnite-precision semantics,” Theoretical Computer Science,
vol. 655, pp. 92–108, 2016.

[35] Z. Ji, Z. C. Lipton, and C. Elkan, “Differential privacy and machine
learning: a survey and review,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.7584, 2014.
[36] K. Xu and Z. Yan, “Privacy protection in mobile recommender systems:
A survey,” in Springer International Conference on Security, Privacy
and Anonymity in Computation, Communication and Storage, 2016,
pp. 305–318.

[37] C. Dwork, “Differential privacy: A survey of results,” in Springer
International Conference on Theory and Applications of Models of
Computation, 2008, pp. 1–19.

[38] K. Ligett and A. Roth, “Take it or leave it: Running a survey when
privacy comes at a cost,” in Springer International Workshop on
Internet and Network Economics, 2012, pp. 378–391.

[39] S. Vadhan, “The complexity of differential privacy,” in Tutorials on the

Foundations of Cryptography. Springer, 2017, pp. 347–450.

[40] X. Yao, X. Zhou, and J. Ma, “Differential privacy of big data: An
overview,” in IEEE 2nd International Conference on Big Data Security
on Cloud (BigDataSecurity), 2016, pp. 7–12.

[41] S. Yu, “Big privacy: Challenges and opportunities of privacy study in
the age of big data,” IEEE access, vol. 4, pp. 2751–2763, 2016.
[42] T. Zhu, G. Li, W. Zhou, and S. Y. Philip, “Differentially private data
publishing and analysis: a survey,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering, vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 1619–1638, 2017.

[43] S. H. Begum and F. Nausheen, “A comparative analysis of differential
privacy vs other privacy mechanisms for big data,” in IEEE 2nd
International Conference on Inventive Systems and Control (ICISC),
2018.

[44] P. Jain, M. Gyanchandani, and N. Khare, “Differential privacy: its
technological prescriptive using big data,” Journal of Big Data, vol. 5,
no. 1, p. 15, 2018.

[45] J. Zhao, Y. Chen, and W. Zhang, “Differential privacy preservation in
deep learning: Challenges, opportunities and solutions,” IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 48 901–48 911, 2019.

[46] D. Desfontaines and B. Pej´o, “Sok: Differential privacies,” arXiv

preprint arXiv:1906.01337, 2019.

[47] D. Lv and S. Zhu, “Achieving correlated differential privacy of big
data publication,” Computers & Security, vol. 82, pp. 184–195, May
2019.

[48] D. Agrawal and D. Kesdogan, “Measuring anonymity: The disclosure
attack,” IEEE Security & privacy, vol. 99, no. 6, pp. 27–34, 2003.
[49] R. Boussada, M. E. Elhdhili, and L. A. Saidane, “A survey on privacy:
Terminology, mechanisms and attacks,” in IEEE/ACS 13th Interna-
tional Conference of Computer Systems and Applications (AICCSA),
2016, pp. 1–7.

[50] S. Gambs, M.-O. Killijian, and M. N. del Prado Cortez, “De-
anonymization attack on geolocated data,” Journal of Computer and
System Sciences, vol. 80, no. 8, pp. 1597–1614, 2014.

[51] G. Danezis, “Statistical disclosure attacks,” in IFIP International
Information Security Conference. Springer, 2003, pp. 421–426.

38

[52] X. Zhou, S. D. Wolthusen, C. Busch, and A. Kuijper, “Feature
correlation attack on biometric privacy protection schemes,” in IEEE
Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Information Hiding and
Multimedia Signal Processing, IIH-MSP’09., 2009, pp. 1061–1065.

[53] F. Li, B. Luo, P. Liu, A. C. Squicciarini, D. Lee, and C.-H. Chu,
“Defending against attribute-correlation attacks in privacy-aware in-
formation brokering,” in International Conference on Collaborative
Computing: Networking, Applications and Worksharing.
Springer,
2008, pp. 100–112.

[54] B. C. M. Fung, K. Wang, R. Chen, and P. S. Yu, “Privacy-preserving
data publishing: A survey of recent developments,” ACM Comput.
Surv., vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 14:1–14:53, Jun. 2010.

[55] F. McSherry and K. Talwar, “Mechanism design via differential pri-
vacy,” in 48th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science, FOCS, 2007, pp. 94–103.

[56] F. Liu, “Generalized gaussian mechanism for differential privacy,”
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 31, no. 4,
pp. 747 – 756, Apr. 2018.

[57] Q. Geng and P. Viswanath, “The optimal noise-adding mechanism in
differential privacy,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 62,
no. 2, pp. 925–951, 2016.

[58] F. Eigner, A. Kate, M. Maffei, F. Pampaloni, and I. Pryvalov, “Differ-
entially private data aggregation with optimal utility,” in Proceedings
of the 30th ACM Annual Computer Security Applications Conference,
2014, pp. 316–325.

[59] Q. Geng and P. Viswanath, “The optimal mechanism in differential
privacy,” in IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory
(ISIT), 2014, pp. 2371–2375.

[60] J. Soria-Comas and J. Domingo-Ferrer, “Optimal data-independent
noise for differential privacy,” Information Sciences, vol. 250, pp. 200–
214, 2013.

[61] A. Ghosh, T. Roughgarden, and M. Sundararajan, “Universally utility-
maximizing privacy mechanisms,” SIAM Journal on Computing,
vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 1673–1693, 2012.

[62] M. Gupte and M. Sundararajan, “Universally optimal privacy mecha-
nisms for minimax agents,” in Proceedings of the twenty-ninth ACM
SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGART symposium on Principles of database sys-
tems, 2010, pp. 135–146.

[63] T. Zhu, P. Xiong, G. Li, and W. Zhou, “Correlated differential pri-
vacy: hiding information in non-iid data set,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 229–242, 2015.
[64] Y. Xiao and L. Xiong, “Protecting locations with differential privacy
under temporal correlations,” in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2015, pp.
1298–1309.

[65] G. Kellaris and S. Papadopoulos, “Practical differential privacy via
grouping and smoothing,” in Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment,
vol. 6, no. 5. VLDB Endowment, 2013, pp. 301–312.

[66] X. Xiao, G. Bender, M. Hay, and J. Gehrke, “ireduct: Differential
privacy with reduced relative errors,” in Proceedings of
the ACM
SIGMOD International Conference on Management of data, 2011, pp.
229–240.

[67] K. Nissim, S. Raskhodnikova, and A. Smith, “Smooth sensitivity and
sampling in private data analysis,” in Proceedings of the thirty-ninth
annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, 2007, pp. 75–84.

[68] W.-Y. Day and N. Li, “Differentially private publishing of high-
dimensional data using sensitivity control,” in Proceedings of
the
10th ACM Symposium on Information, Computer and Communications
Security, 2015, pp. 451–462.

[69] A. Inan, M. E. Gursoy, and Y. Saygin, “Sensitivity analysis for non-
interactive differential privacy: Bounds and efﬁcient algorithms,” IEEE
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, in Print, 2017.

[70] G. Cormode, C. Procopiuc, D. Srivastava, E. Shen, and T. Yu, “Dif-
ferentially private spatial decompositions,” in IEEE 28th international
conference on Data engineering (ICDE), 2012, pp. 20–31.

[71] G. Acs, C. Castelluccia, and R. Chen, “Differentially private histogram
publishing through lossy compression,” in IEEE 12th International
Conference on Data Mining, 2012, pp. 1–10.

[72] X. Xiao, G. Wang, and J. Gehrke, “Differential privacy via wavelet
transforms,” IEEE Transactions on knowledge and data engineering,
vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 1200–1214, 2011.

[73] Y. D. Li, Z. Zhang, M. Winslett, and Y. Yang, “Compressive mech-
anism: Utilizing sparse representation in differential privacy,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 10th annual ACM workshop on Privacy in the electronic
society, 2011, pp. 177–182.

[74] V. Rastogi and S. Nath, “Differentially private aggregation of dis-
tributed time-series with transformation and encryption,” in Proceed-
ings of the ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management
of data, 2010, pp. 735–746.

[75] S. Papadimitriou, F. Li, G. Kollios, and P. S. Yu, “Time series
compressibility and privacy,” in Proceedings of the 33rd international
conference on Very large data bases. VLDB Endowment, 2007, pp.
459–470.

[76] X. Yang, X. Ren, J. Lin, and W. Yu, “On binary decomposition
based privacy-preserving aggregation schemes in real-time monitoring
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems,
vol. 27, no. 10, pp. 2967–2983, 2016.

[77] J. Hua, Y. Gao, and S. Zhong, “Differentially private publication of
general time-serial trajectory data,” in IEEE Conference on Computer
Communications (INFOCOM), 2015, pp. 549–557.

[78] W. Qardaji, W. Yang, and N. Li, “Differentially private grids for
geospatial data,” in IEEE 29th International Conference on Data
Engineering (ICDE), 2013, pp. 757–768.

[79] R. Chen, N. Mohammed, B. C. Fung, B. C. Desai, and L. Xiong,
“Publishing set-valued data via differential privacy,” Proceedings of
the VLDB Endowment, vol. 4, no. 11, pp. 1087–1098, 2011.

[80] R. Chen, B. Fung, B. C. Desai, and N. M. Sossou, “Differentially
private transit data publication: a case study on the montreal transporta-
tion system,” in Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD international
conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, 2012, pp. 213–
221.

[81] R. Chen, G. Acs, and C. Castelluccia, “Differentially private sequential
data publication via variable-length n-grams,” in Proceedings of the
ACM conference on Computer and communications security, 2012, pp.
638–649.

[82] H. Li, L. Xiong, X. Jiang, and J. Liu, “Differentially private histogram
publication for dynamic datasets: an adaptive sampling approach,”
in Proceedings of
the 24th ACM International on Conference on
Information and Knowledge Management, 2015, pp. 1001–1010.
[83] L. Fan and L. Xiong, “An adaptive approach to real-time aggregate
monitoring with differential privacy,” IEEE Transactions on knowledge
and data engineering, vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 2094–2106, 2014.

[84] L. Fan, L. Bonomi, L. Xiong, and V. Sunderam, “Monitoring web
browsing behavior with differential privacy,” in ACM Proceedings of
the 23rd international conference on World wide web, 2014, pp. 177–
188.

[85] C. Dwork, A. Roth et al., “The algorithmic foundations of differential
privacy,” Foundations and Trends® in Theoretical Computer Science,
vol. 9, no. 3–4, pp. 211–407, 2014.

[86] B. Balle and Y.-X. Wang, “Improving the gaussian mechanism for
differential privacy: Analytical calibration and optimal denoising,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.06530, 2018.

[87] A. Machanavajjhala, X. He, and M. Hay, “Differential privacy in the
wild: A tutorial on current practices & open challenges,” in Proceedings
of the ACM International Conference on Management of Data, 2017,
pp. 1727–1730.

[88] Z. Lu and H. Shen, “A new lower bound of privacy budget for
distributed differential privacy,” in 18th International Conference on
Parallel and Distributed Computing, Applications and Technologies
(PDCAT).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 25–32.

[89] F. D. McSherry, “Privacy integrated queries: an extensible platform
for privacy-preserving data analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2009 ACM
SIGMOD International Conference on Management of data, 2009, pp.
19–30.

[90] J. Soria-Comas, J. Domingo-Ferrer, D. S´anchez, and D. Meg´ıas,
“Individual differential privacy: A utility-preserving formulation of
differential privacy guarantees,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Forensics and Security, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 1418–1429, 2017.

[91] E. ElSalamouny and S. Gambs, “Differential privacy models for
location-based services,” Transactions on Data Privacy, vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 15–48, 2016.

[92] X. He, G. Cormode, A. Machanavajjhala, C. M. Procopiuc, and
D. Srivastava, “Dpt: differentially private trajectory synthesis using
hierarchical reference systems,” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment,
vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 1154–1165, 2015.

[93] Q. Xiao, R. Chen, and K.-L. Tan, “Differentially private network data
the 20th ACM
release via structural
SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data
mining, 2014, pp. 911–920.

inference,” in Proceedings of

[94] J. Hsu, M. Gaboardi, A. Haeberlen, S. Khanna, A. Narayan, B. C.
Pierce, and A. Roth, “Differential privacy: An economic method

39

for choosing epsilon,” in IEEE 27th Computer Security Foundations
Symposium (CSF), 2014, pp. 398–410.

[95] J. Lee and C. Clifton, “How much is enough? choosing ε for differ-
ential privacy,” in International Conference on Information Security.
Springer, 2011, pp. 325–340.

[96] L. K. Fleischer and Y.-H. Lyu, “Approximately optimal auctions for
selling privacy when costs are correlated with data,” in Proceedings of
the 13th ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, 2012, pp. 568–
585.

[97] P. Dandekar, N. Fawaz, and S. Ioannidis, “Privacy auctions for recom-
mender systems,” ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation,
vol. 2, no. 3, p. 12, 2014.

[98] C. Li, D. Y. Li, G. Miklau, and D. Suciu, “A theory of pricing private
data,” ACM Transactions on Database Systems (TODS), vol. 39, no. 4,
p. 34, 2014.

[99] C. Han and K. Wang, “Sensitive disclosures under differential privacy
guarantees,” in IEEE International Congress on Big Data (BigData
Congress), 2015, pp. 110–117.

[100] E. Shen and T. Yu, “Mining frequent graph patterns with differential
the 19th ACM SIGKDD international
privacy,” in Proceedings of
conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, 2013, pp. 545–
553.

[101] B. Yang, I. Sato, and H. Nakagawa, “Bayesian differential privacy on
correlated data,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD international
conference on Management of Data, 2015, pp. 747–762.

[102] X. Xiao, “Differentially private data release: Improving utility with
wavelets and bayesian networks,” in Asia-Paciﬁc Web Conference.
Springer, 2014, pp. 25–35.

[103] W. Jiang, C. Xie, and Z. Zhang, “Wishart mechanism for differentially
private principal components analysis.” in AAAI, 2016, pp. 1730–1736.
[104] C. Dwork, K. Talwar, A. Thakurta, and L. Zhang, “Analyze gauss:
optimal bounds for privacy-preserving principal component analysis,”
in Proceedings of the forty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory
of computing, 2014, pp. 11–20.

[105] G. Barthe and B. Kopf, “Information-theoretic bounds for differentially
private mechanisms,” in 24th IEEE Computer Security Foundations
Symposium, 2011, pp. 191–204.

[106] G. Giaconi, D. G¨und¨uz, and H. V. Poor, “Smart meter privacy with
renewable energy and an energy storage device,” IEEE Transactions
on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 129–142,
2018.

[107] N. Zhang and W. Zhao, “Privacy-preserving olap: an information-
theoretic approach,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data En-
gineering, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 122–138, 2011.

[108] M. S. Alvim, K. Chatzikokolakis, P. Degano, and C. Palamidessi, “Dif-
ferential privacy versus quantitative information ﬂow,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1012.4250, 2010.

[109] L. Sankar, S. R. Rajagopalan, and S. Mohajer, “Smart meter privacy:
A theoretical framework,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 4,
no. 2, pp. 837–846, 2013.

[110] S. Li, A. Khisti, and A. Mahajan, “Information-theoretic privacy for
smart metering systems with a rechargeable battery,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Information Theory, vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 3679–3695, 2018.

[111] P. D. B. R. K. Pathria, Statistical Mechanics, Elsevier, Ed. Academic

Press, 2011.

[112] C. Cachin, “Entropy measures and unconditional security in cryptog-

raphy,” Ph.D. dissertation, ETH Zurich, 1997.

[113] S. Asoodeh, F. Alajaji, and T. Linder, “Notes on information-theoretic
privacy,” in 52nd Annual Allerton Conference on Communication,
Control, and Computing (Allerton).

IEEE, 2014, pp. 1272–1278.

[114] L. Sankar, S. R. Rajagopalan, and H. V. Poor, “An information-
theoretic approach to privacy,” in 48th Annual Allerton Conference on
Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton).
IEEE, 2010, pp.
1220–1227.

[115] M. Bezzi, “An information theoretic approach for privacy metrics.”

Trans. Data Privacy, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 199–215, 2010.

[116] J. Eckert and J. Mauchly, “Outline of plans

for development
of electronic computers,” Avail-able: http://archive. computerhistory.
org/resources/access/text/2010/08/102660910-05-01-acc. pdf, 1946.

[117] C. L. Liu and J. W. Layland, “Scheduling algorithms for multiprogram-
ming in a hard-real-time environment,” Journal of the ACM (JACM),
vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 46–61, 1973.

[118] K.-D. Kim and P. R. Kumar, “Cyber–physical systems: A perspective
at the centennial,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 100, no. Special
Centennial Issue, pp. 1287–1308, 2012.

[119] B. M. Leiner, V. G. Cerf, D. D. Clark, R. E. Kahn, L. Kleinrock, D. C.
Lynch, J. Postel, L. G. Roberts, and S. Wolff, “A brief history of the
Internet,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 39,
no. 5, pp. 22–31, 2009.

[120] J. M. Kahn, R. H. Katz, and K. S. Pister, “Next century challenges:
mobile networking for “smart dust”,” in Proceedings of the 5th an-
nual ACM/IEEE international conference on Mobile computing and
networking, 1999, pp. 271–278.

[121] G.-G. Wang, X. Cai, Z. Cui, G. Min, and J. Chen, “High performance
computing for cyber physical social systems by using evolutionary
multi-objective optimization algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Emerg-
ing Topics in Computing, in Print, 2017.

[122] Z. Cui, B. Sun, G. Wang, Y. Xue, and J. Chen, “A novel oriented
cuckoo search algorithm to improve dv-hop performance for cyber–
physical systems,” Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, vol.
103, pp. 42–52, 2017.

[123] J. Lee, B. Bagheri, and H.-A. Kao, “A cyber-physical systems archi-
tecture for industry 4.0-based manufacturing systems,” Manufacturing
Letters, vol. 3, pp. 18–23, 2015.

[124] X.-M. Zhang, Q.-L. Han, and Y.-L. Wang, “A brief survey of recent
results on control and ﬁltering for networked systems,” in 12th IEEE
World Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation (WCICA), 2016,
pp. 64–69.

[125] P. Tabuada, “Event-triggered real-time scheduling of stabilizing control
tasks,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 52, no. 9, pp.
1680–1685, 2007.

[126] J. Lunze and D. Lehmann, “A state-feedback approach to event-based

control,” Automatica, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 211–215, 2010.

[127] X. Wang and M. D. Lemmon, “Self-triggered feedback control systems
with ﬁnite-gain l2 stability,” IEEE transactions on automatic control,
vol. 54, no. 3, p. 452, 2009.

[128] J. P. Hespanha, P. Naghshtabrizi, and Y. Xu, “A survey of recent results
in networked control systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 95, no. 1,
pp. 138–162, 2007.

[129] J. Xiong and J. Lam, “Stabilization of networked control systems with
a logic zoh,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 54, no. 2,
pp. 358–363, 2009.

[130] D. Nesic and D. Liberzon, “A uniﬁed framework for design and anal-
ysis of networked and quantized control systems,” IEEE Transactions
on Automatic control, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 732–747, 2009.

[131] N. Lynch, R. Segala, F. Vaandrager, and H. B. Weinberg, “Hybrid i/o
automata,” in Springer International Hybrid Systems Workshop, 1995,
pp. 496–510.

[132] A. Platzer, Logical analysis of hybrid systems: proving theorems for
complex dynamics. Springer Science & Business Media, 2010.
[133] M. H. Rehmani, M. Reisslein, A. Rachedi, M. Erol-Kantarci, and
M. Radenkovic, “Integrating renewable energy resources into the
smart grid: recent developments in information and communication
technologies,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 14,
no. 7, pp. 2814 – 2825, Jul. 2018.

[134] M. H. Cintuglu, O. A. Mohammed, K. Akkaya, and A. S. Uluagac, “A
survey on smart grid cyber-physical system testbeds.” IEEE Commu-
nications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 446–464, 2017.
[135] Z. MacHardy, A. Khan, K. Obana, and S. Iwashina, “V2X access
technologies: Regulation, research, and remaining challenges,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1858 – 1877,
2018.

[136] L. Da Xu, W. He, and S. Li, “Internet of things in industries: A survey,”
IEEE Transactions on industrial informatics, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 2233–
2243, 2014.

[137] Z. Cui,

J. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Cao, X. Cai, W. Zhang,
and J. Chen, “A pigeon-inspired optimization algorithm for many-
objective optimization problems,” Science China Information Sciences,
vol. 62, no. 7, p. 70212, Jan 2019.
[Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s11432-018-9729-5

[138] G. Bloom, B. Alsulami, E. Nwafor, and I. C. Bertolotti, “Design
patterns for the industrial Internet of things,” in 14th IEEE International
Workshop on Factory Communication Systems (WFCS), 2018.
[139] X. Hu, M. Yuan, J. Yao, Y. Deng, L. Chen, Q. Yang, H. Guan, and
J. Zeng, “Differential privacy in telco big data platform,” Proceedings
of the VLDB Endowment, vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 1692–1703, 2015.
[140] H. Ye, J. Liu, W. Wang, P. Li, T. Li, and J. Li, “Secure and efﬁcient
outsourcing differential privacy data release scheme in cyber-physical
system,” Future Generation Computer Systems, in Print, 2018.
[141] M. Naehrig, K. Lauter, and V. Vaikuntanathan, “Can homomorphic
encryption be practical?” in Proceedings of the 3rd ACM workshop on
Cloud computing security workshop, 2011, pp. 113–124.

40

[142] P. Jain, M. Gyanchandani, and N. Khare, “Big data privacy: a tech-
nological perspective and review,” Journal of Big Data, vol. 3, no. 1,
p. 25, 2016.

[143] A. Gosain and N. Chugh, “Privacy preservation in big data,” Interna-
tional Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 100, no. 17, 2014.
[144] A. S. Thanamani, “Comparison and analysis of anonymization tech-
niques for preserving privacy in big data,” Adv. Comput. Sci. Technol,
vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 247–253, 2017.

[145] R. Chen, B. C. Fung, P. S. Yu, and B. C. Desai, “Correlated network
data publication via differential privacy,” The VLDB Journal—The
International Journal on Very Large Data Bases, vol. 23, no. 4, pp.
653–676, 2014.

[146] R. Lu, K. Heung, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A lightweight
fog computing-

privacy-preserving data aggregation scheme for
enhanced IoT,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 3302–3312, 2017.

[147] C. Xu, J. Ren, D. Zhang, and Y. Zhang, “Distilling at the edge: A
local differential privacy obfuscation framework for IoT data analytics,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 20–25, 2018.

[148] G.

´Acs and C. Castelluccia, “I have a dream!(differentially private
smart metering),” in Springer International Workshop on Information
Hiding, 2011, pp. 118–132.

[149] F. Kargl, A. Friedman, and R. Boreli, “Differential privacy in intelligent
transportation systems,” in Proceedings of the sixth ACM conference
on Security and privacy in wireless and mobile networks, 2013, pp.
107–112.

[150] J. Zhao, T. Jung, Y. Wang, and X. Li, “Achieving differential privacy of
data disclosure in the smart grid,” in IEEE Proceedings of INFOCOM,
2014, pp. 504–512.

[151] H. Li, Y. Dai, and X. Lin, “Efﬁcient e-health data release with
consistency guarantee under differential privacy,” in IEEE 17th Inter-
national Conference on E-health Networking, Application & Services
(HealthCom), 2015, pp. 602–608.

[152] N. Mohammed, S. Barouti, D. Alhadidi, and R. Chen, “Secure and
private management of healthcare databases for data mining,” in IEEE
28th International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems
(CBMS), 2015, pp. 191–196.

[153] S. Han, U. Topcu, and G. J. Pappas, “An approximately truthful
mechanism for electric vehicle charging via joint differential privacy,”
in IEEE American Control Conference (ACC), 2015, pp. 2469–2475.
[154] M. Savi, C. Rottondi, and G. Verticale, “Evaluation of the precision-
privacy tradeoff of data perturbation for smart metering,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Smart Grid, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 2409–2416, 2015.

[155] C. R. G. Rodr´ıguez et al., “Using differential privacy for the Internet
of things,” in Springer IFIP International Summer School on Privacy
and Identity Management, 2016, pp. 201–211.

[156] G. Eibl and D. Engel, “Differential privacy for real smart metering
data,” Computer Science-Research and Development, vol. 32, no. 1-2,
pp. 173–182, 2017.

[157] H. Zhai, S. Chen, and D. An, “Expo: Exponential-based privacy
preserving online auction for electric vehicles demand response in
microgrid,” in IEEE 13th International Conference on Semantics,
Knowledge and Grids (SKG), 2017, pp. 126–131.

[158] Y. Shi, C. Piao, and L. Zheng, “Differential-privacy-based correlation
analysis in railway freight service applications,” in IEEE International
Conference on Cyber-Enabled Distributed Computing and Knowledge
Discovery (CyberC), 2017, pp. 35–39.

[159] J. Zhang, X. Liang, Z. Zhang, S. He, and Z. Shi, “Re-dpoctor: Real-time
health data releasing with w-day differential privacy,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.00232, 2017.

[160] Y. Wang, Z. Huang, S. Mitra, and G. E. Dullerud, “Differential privacy
in linear distributed control systems: Entropy minimizing mechanisms
and performance tradeoffs,” IEEE Transactions on Control of Network
Systems, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 118–130, 2017.

[161] H. Cao, S. Liu, L. Wu, Z. Guan, and X. Du, “Achieving differential
privacy against non-intrusive load monitoring in smart grid: A fog
computing approach,” Concurrency and Computation: Practice and
Experience, p. e4528, 2018.

[162] T. Zhang and Q. Zhu, “Distributed privacy-preserving collaborative
intrusion detection systems for VANETs,” IEEE Transactions on Signal
and Information Processing over Networks, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 148–161,
2018.

[163] J. L. Raisaro, J. Troncoso-Pastoriza, M. Misbach, J. S. Sousa, S. Prader-
vand, E. Missiaglia, O. Michielin, B. Ford, and J.-P. Hubaux, “Medco:
Enabling secure and privacy-preserving exploration of distributed clin-
ical and genomic data,” IEEE/ACM transactions on computational
biology and bioinformatics, in Print, 2018.

[164] L. Ni, C. Li, H. Liu, A. G. Bourgeois, and J. Yu, “Differential
private preservation multi-core dbscan clustering for network user
data,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 129, pp. 257–262, 2018.
[165] Z. Zhang, Z. Qin, L. Zhu, J. Weng, and K. Ren, “Cost-friendly
differential privacy for smart meters: Exploiting the dual roles of the
noise,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 619–626,
2017.

[166] D. Kifer and A. Machanavajjhala, “Pufferﬁsh: A framework for math-
ematical privacy deﬁnitions,” ACM Transactions on Database Systems
(TODS), vol. 39, no. 1, p. 3, 2014.

[167] F. K. Dankar and K. El Emam, “Practicing differential privacy in health
care: A review.” Trans. Data Privacy, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 35–67, 2013.
[168] R. Zhang and P. Venkitasubramaniam, “Stealthy control signal attacks
in linear quadratic gaussian control systems: detectability reward trade-
off,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 12,
no. 7, pp. 1555–1570, 2017.

[169] X. Fang, S. Misra, G. Xue, and D. Yang, “Smart grid—the new and
improved power grid: A survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 944–980, 2012.

[170] H. Liang, A. K. Tamang, W. Zhuang, and X. S. Shen, “Stochastic
information management in smart grid,” IEEE Communications Surveys
& Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1746–1770, 2014.

[171] A. A. Khan, M. H. Rehmani, and M. Reisslein, “Cognitive radio for
smart grids: Survey of architectures, spectrum sensing mechanisms,
and networking protocols,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 860–898, 2016.

[172] J. Lopez, J. E. Rubio, and C. Alcaraz, “A resilient architecture for the
smart grid,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 2018.
[173] S. Finster and I. Baumgart, “Privacy-aware smart metering: A survey,”
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1732–
1745, 2014.

[174] S. Desai, R. Alhadad, N. Chilamkurti, and A. Mahmood, “A survey
of privacy preserving schemes in IoE enabled Smart Grid Advanced
Metering Infrastructure,” Cluster Computing, pp. 1–27, 2018.
[175] S. Welikala, C. Dinesh, M. P. B. Ekanayake, R. I. Godaliyadda, and
J. Ekanayake, “Incorporating appliance usage patterns for non-intrusive
load monitoring and load forecasting,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 448 – 461, Jan. 2017.

[176] G. W. Hart, “Nonintrusive appliance load monitoring,” Proceedings of

the IEEE, vol. 80, no. 12, pp. 1870–1891, 1992.

[177] E. Aladesanmi and K. Folly, “Overview of non-intrusive load monitor-
ing and identiﬁcation techniques,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 48, no. 30,
pp. 415–420, 2015.

[178] G. W. Arnold, “Challenges and opportunities in smart grid: A position
article,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 99, no. 6, pp. 922–927, 2011.
[179] J. S. Vardakas, N. Zorba, and C. V. Verikoukis, “A survey on demand
response programs in smart grids: Pricing methods and optimization
algorithms,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 1,
pp. 152–178, 2015.

[180] R. Anderson and S. Fuloria, “Who controls the off switch?” in
First IEEE International Conference on Smart Grid Communications
(SmartGridComm), 2010, pp. 96–101.

[181] P. Gope and B. Sikdar, “An efﬁcient data aggregation scheme for
privacy-friendly dynamic pricing-based billing and demand-response
management in smart grids,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2018.
[182] Z. Zhang, W. Cao, Z. Qin, L. Zhu, Z. Yu, and K. Ren, “When privacy
meets economics: Enabling differentially-private battery-supported me-
ter reporting in smart grid,” in IEEE 25th International Symposium on
Quality of Service (IWQoS), 2017, pp. 1–9.

[183] Z. Zhang, Z. Qin, L. Zhu, W. Jiang, C. Xu, and K. Ren, “Toward practi-
cal differential privacy in smart grid with capacity-limited rechargeable
batteries,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.03000, 2015.

[184] P. Barbosa, A. Brito, H. Almeida, and S. Clauß, “Lightweight privacy
for smart metering data by adding noise,” in Proceedings of the 29th
Annual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, 2014, pp. 531–538.
[185] U. B. Baloglu and Y. Demir, “Lightweight privacy-preserving data
aggregation scheme for smart grid metering infrastructure protection,”
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection, vol. 22, pp.
16–24, 2018.

[186] X. Liao, P. Srinivasan, D. Formby, and A. R. Beyah, “Di-prida:
differentially private distributed load balancing control for the smart
grid,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, in
Print, 2017.

[187] R. Pal, P. Hui, and V. K. Prasanna, “On optimal privacy engineering
for the smart micro-grid,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, in Print, 2018.

41

[188] J. Xiong, J. Ren, L. Chen, Z. Yao, M. Lin, D. Wu, and B. Niu,
“Enhancing privacy and availability for data clustering in intelligent
electrical service of IoT,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, in Print,
2018.

[189] Y. Chen, A. Machanavajjhala, M. Hay, and G. Miklau, “Pegasus: Data-
adaptive differentially private stream processing,” in Proceedings of the
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
2017, pp. 1375–1388.

[190] J. Liu, C. Zhang, and Y. Fang, “Epic: A differential privacy framework
to defend smart homes against internet trafﬁc analysis,” IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1206–1217, 2018.

[191] M. Sookhak, H. Tang, Y. He, and F. R. Yu, “Security and privacy
of smart cities: A survey, research issues and challenges,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, in Print, 2018.

[192] J. M. Barrionuevo, P. Berrone, and J. E. Ricart, “Smart cities, sustain-
able progress,” IESE Insight, vol. 14, no. 14, pp. 50–57, 2012.
[193] J. Xie, H. Tang, T. Huang, F. R. Yu, R. Xie, J. Liu, and Y. Liu, “A survey
of blockchain technology applied to smart cities: Research issues and
challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, in Print, pp. 1–
1, 2019.

[194] “Smart buildings enable smart cities [Online],” 2016.
[195] A. St˚ahlbr¨ost, A. S¨allstr¨om, and D. Hollosi, “Audio monitoring in

Smart Cities: an information privacy perspective,” -, 2014.

[196] A. W. Burange and H. D. Misalkar, “Review of internet of things in
development of smart cities with data management & privacy,” in IEEE
International Conference on Advances in Computer Engineering and
Applications, 2015, pp. 189–195.

[197] A. Bartoli, J. Hern´andez-Serrano, M. Soriano, M. Dohler, A. Koun-
touris, and D. Barthel, “Security and privacy in your smart city,” in
Proceedings of the Barcelona smart cities congress, vol. 292, 2011.

[198] P. Pappachan, M. Degeling, R. Yus, A. Das, S. Bhagavatula,
W. Melicher, P. E. Naeini, S. Zhang, L. Bauer, A. Kobsa et al., “To-
wards privacy-aware smart buildings: Capturing, communicating, and
enforcing privacy policies and preferences,” in IEEE 37th International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems Workshops (ICDCSW),
2017, pp. 193–198.

[199] D. Eckhoff and I. Wagner, “Privacy in the smart city—applications,
technologies, challenges, and solutions,” IEEE Communications Sur-
veys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 489–516, 2018.

[200] R. Jia, R. Dong, S. S. Sastry, and C. J. Sapnos, “Privacy-enhanced
architecture for occupancy-based hvac control,” in ACM/IEEE 8th
International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems (ICCPS), 2017,
pp. 177–186.

[201] S. Ghayyur, Y. Chen, R. Yus, A. Machanavajjhala, M. Hay, G. Miklau,
and S. Mehrotra, “Iot-detective: Analyzing iot data under differential
privacy,” in Proceedings of International Conference on Management
of Data. ACM, 2018, pp. 1725–1728.

[202] X. Li, R. Lu, X. Liang, X. Shen, J. Chen, and X. Lin, “Smart
community: an internet of things application,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 68–75, 2011.

[203] C. Laughman, K. Lee, R. Cox, S. Shaw, S. Leeb, L. Norford, and
P. Armstrong, “Power signature analysis,” IEEE power and energy
magazine, vol. 99, no. 2, pp. 56–63, 2003.

[204] A. Lee, “Guidelines for smart grid cyber security,” -, Tech. Rep., 2010.
[205] H. Kreutzmann, S. Vollmer, N. Tekampe, and A. Abromeit, “Protection
proﬁle for the gateway of a smart metering system,” German Federal
Ofﬁce for Information Security, 2011.

[206] M. Jawurek, F. Kerschbaum, and G. Danezis, “Sok: Privacy technolo-
gies for smart grids–a survey of options,” Microsoft Res., Cambridge,
UK, 2012.

[207] Z. Erkin, J. R. Troncoso-Pastoriza, R. L. Lagendijk, and F. P´erez-
Gonz´alez, “Privacy-preserving data aggregation in smart metering
systems: An overview,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 30,
no. 2, pp. 75–86, 2013.

[208] G. Danezis, C. Fournet, M. Kohlweiss, and S. Zanella-B´eguelin, “Smart
meter aggregation via secret-sharing,” in Proceedings of the ﬁrst ACM
workshop on Smart energy grid security, 2013, pp. 75–80.

[209] C. Rottondi, G. Verticale, and A. Capone, “Privacy-preserving smart
metering with multiple data consumers,” Computer Networks, vol. 57,
no. 7, pp. 1699–1713, 2013.

[210] C. Efthymiou and G. Kalogridis, “Smart grid privacy via anonymization
of smart metering data,” in First IEEE International Conference on
Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), 2010, pp. 238–243.
[211] T. Baumeister, “Literature review on smart grid cyber security,” Collab-
orative Software Development Laboratory at the University of Hawaii,
2010.

[212] L. Fan and L. Xiong, “Real-time aggregate monitoring with differential
privacy,” in Proceedings of the 21st ACM international conference on
Information and knowledge management, 2012, pp. 2169–2173.
[213] C. Clifton and T. Tassa, “On syntactic anonymity and differential
privacy,” in IEEE 29th International Conference on Data Engineering
Workshops (ICDEW), 2013, pp. 88–93.

[214] M. Mukherjee, L. Shu, and D. Wang, “Survey of fog computing:
Fundamental, network applications, and research challenges,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1826–1857,
2018.

[215] J. Ni, K. Zhang, X. Lin, and X. S. Shen, “Securing fog computing
for internet of things applications: Challenges and solutions,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 601–628,
2018.

[216] K. D. Anderson, M. E. Berges, A. Ocneanu, D. Benitez, and J. M.
Moura, “Event detection for non intrusive load monitoring,” in IEEE
38th Annual Conference on Industrial Electronics Society (IECON),
2012, pp. 3312–3317.

[217] Z. Zhou, Y. Qiao, L. Zhu, J. Guan, Y. Liu, and C. Xu, “Differential
privacy-guaranteed trajectory community identiﬁcation over vehicle ad-
hoc networks,” Internet Technology Letters, vol. 1, no. 3, 2018.
[218] Z. Ma, T. Zhang, X. Liu, X. Li, and K. Ren, “Real-time privacy-
preserving data release over vehicle trajectory,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, in Press, pp. 1–1, 2019.

[219] B. Nelson and T. Olovsson, “Introducing differential privacy to the
automotive domain: Opportunities and challenges,” in IEEE 86th
Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Fall), 2017, pp. 1–7.
[220] S.-h. An, B.-H. Lee, and D.-R. Shin, “A survey of intelligent trans-
portation systems,” in IEEE Third International Conference on Com-
putational Intelligence, Communication Systems and Networks, 2011,
pp. 332–337.

[221] N.-E. El Faouzi, H. Leung, and A. Kurian, “Data fusion in intelligent
transportation systems: Progress and challenges–a survey,” Information
Fusion, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 4–10, 2011.

[222] J. Zhang, F.-Y. Wang, K. Wang, W.-H. Lin, X. Xu, C. Chen et al.,
“Data-driven intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 1624–
1639, 2011.

[223] L. Zhu, F. R. Yu, Y. Wang, B. Ning, and T. Tang, “Big data analytics
in intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 383 – 398, Jan.
2018.

[224] L. Qi, “Research on intelligent transportation system technologies and
applications,” in IEEE Workshop on Power Electronics and Intelligent
Transportation System, PEITS., 2008, pp. 529–531.

[225] D. Eckhoff, R. German, C. Sommer, F. Dressler, and T. Gansen,
“Slotswap: strong and affordable location privacy in intelligent trans-
portation systems,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 49, no. 11,
2011.

[226] K. Zheng, Q. Zheng, P. Chatzimisios, W. Xiang, and Y. Zhou, “Hetero-
geneous vehicular networking: A survey on architecture, challenges,
and solutions,” IEEE communications surveys & tutorials, vol. 17,
no. 4, pp. 2377–2396, 2015.

[227] A. Nshimiyimana, D. Agrawal, and W. Arif, “Comprehensive survey
of v2v communication for 4g mobile and wireless technology,” in
IEEE International Conference on Wireless Communications, Signal
Processing and Networking (WiSPNET), 2016, pp. 1722–1726.
[228] Q. Shi and M. Abdel-Aty, “Big data applications in real-time trafﬁc op-
eration and safety monitoring and improvement on urban expressways,”
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 58, pp.
380–394, 2015.

[229] N. Mohamed and J. Al-Jaroodi, “Real-time big data analytics: Appli-
cations and challenges,” in IEEE International Conference on High
Performance Computing & Simulation (HPCS), 2014, pp. 305–310.

[230] C. Gosman, C. Dobre, and F. Pop, “Privacy-preserving data aggregation
transportation systems,” in IFIP/IEEE Symposium on
in intelligent
Integrated Network and Service Management (IM), 2017, pp. 1059–
1064.

[231] A.-S. K. Pathan, Security of self-organizing networks: MANET, WSN,

WMN, VANET. CRC press, 2016.

[232] A. Thaduri, D. Galar, and U. Kumar, “Railway assets: A potential
domain for big data analytics,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 53,
pp. 457–467, 2015.

[233] F. Ghofrani, Q. He, R. M. Goverde, and X. Liu, “Recent applications
of big data analytics in railway transportation systems: A survey,”
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 90, pp.
226–246, 2018.

42

[234] J. Guo, B. Song, Y. He, F. R. Yu, and M. Sookhak, “A survey on
compressed sensing in vehicular infotainment systems,” IEEE Com-
munications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2662–2680, 2017.
[235] A. Boualouache, S. Senouci, and S. Moussaoui, “A survey on
pseudonym changing strategies for vehicular ad-hoc networks,” IEEE
Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 770–790,
Firstquarter 2018.

[236] K. Emara, W. Woerndl, and J. Schlichter, “Vehicle tracking using
vehicular network beacons,” in IEEE 14th International Symposium
and Workshops on a World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia
Networks (WoWMoM), 2013, pp. 1–6.

[237] D. Eckhoff, “Privacy and surveillance: Concerns about a future trans-
portation system,” 1st GI/ITG KuVS Fachgespr¨ach Inter-Vehicle Com-
munication (FG-IVC 2013), p. 15, 2013.

[238] U. K. Madawala and D. J. Thrimawithana, “A bidirectional inductive
power interface for electric vehicles in v2g systems,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 4789–4796, 2011.
[239] D. T. Hoang, P. Wang, D. Niyato, and E. Hossain, “Charging and
discharging of plug-in electric vehicles (pevs) in vehicle-to-grid (v2g)
systems: A cyber insurance-based model,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp.
732–754, 2017.

[240] W. Wei, F. Liu, and S. Mei, “Charging strategies of ev aggregator under
renewable generation and congestion: A normalized nash equilibrium
approach,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1630–
1641, 2016.

[241] M. Zeng, S. Leng, S. Maharjan, S. Gjessing, and J. He, “An incentivized
auction-based group-selling approach for demand response manage-
ment in v2g systems,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 1554–1563, 2015.

[242] M. Naor, B. Pinkas, and R. Sumner, “Privacy preserving auctions and
mechanism design,” in Proceedings of the 1st ACM conference on
Electronic commerce, 1999, pp. 129–139.

[243] M. Pan, J. Sun, and Y. Fang, “Purging the back-room dealing: Secure
spectrum auction leveraging paillier cryptosystem,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 866–876, 2011.
[244] Q. Xiang, L. Kong, X. Liu, J. Xu, and W. Wang, “Auc2reserve: A dif-
ferentially private auction for electric vehicle fast charging reservation,”
in IEEE 22nd International Conference on Embedded and Real-Time
Computing Systems and Applications (RTCSA), 2016, pp. 85–94.
[245] K. Al-Hussaeni, B. C. Fung, F. Iqbal, G. G. Dagher, and E. G. Park,
“Safepath: Differentially-private publishing of passenger trajectories in
transportation systems,” Computer Networks, vol. 143, pp. 126–139,
2018.

[246] X. Ma, J. Ma, H. Li, Q. Jiang, and S. Gao, “Agent: an adaptive geo-
indistinguishable mechanism for continuous location-based service,”
Peer-to-Peer Networking and Applications, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 473–
485, 2018.

[247] C. Xu, L. Zhu, Y. Liu, J. Guan, and S. Yu, “Dp-ltod: Differential privacy
latent trajectory community discovering services over location-based
social networks,” IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, in Print,
2018.

[248] A. Machanavajjhala and X. He, “Analyzing your location data with
provable privacy guarantees,” in Handbook of Mobile Data Privacy.
Springer, 2018, pp. 97–127.

[249] W. Zhang, R. Rao, G. Cao, and G. Kesidis, “Secure routing in ad
hoc networks and a related intrusion detection problem,” in MILCOM,
vol. 2, 2003, pp. 735–740.

[250] T. Anantvalee and J. Wu, “A survey on intrusion detection in mobile
ad hoc networks,” in Wireless Network Security. Springer, 2007, pp.
159–180.

[251] A. Narayanan and V. Shmatikov, “Myths and fallacies of personally
identiﬁable information,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 53, no. 6,
pp. 24–26, 2010.

[252] X. Gao, B. Firner, S. Sugrim, V. Kaiser-Pendergrast, Y. Yang, and
J. Lindqvist, “Elastic pathing: Your speed is enough to track you,”
in Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Joint Conference on
Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing, 2014, pp. 975–986.

[253] A. Tockar, “Riding with the stars: Passenger privacy in the nyc taxicab

dataset. neustar research,” 2014.

[254] Q. Wang, X. Liu, J. Du, and F. Kong, “Smart charging for electric
vehicles: A survey from the algorithmic perspective,” IEEE Communi-
cations Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1500–1517, 2016.

[255] Y. Zhang, J. Li, D. Zheng, P. Li, and Y. Tian, “Privacy-preserving
communication and power injection over vehicle networks and 5g smart
grid slice,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 2018.

43

[256] Z. Pang, “Technologies and architectures of the Internet-of-things (IoT)
for health and well-being,” Ph.D. dissertation, KTH Royal Institute of
Technology, 2013.

[278] W. Zhang, H. Zou, L. Luo, Q. Liu, W. Wu, and W. Xiao, “Predicting
potential side effects of drugs by recommender methods and ensemble
learning,” Neurocomputing, vol. 173, pp. 979–987, 2016.

[257] S. R. Islam, D. Kwak, M. H. Kabir, M. Hossain, and K.-S. Kwak,
“The Internet of things for health care: a comprehensive survey,” IEEE
Access, vol. 3, pp. 678–708, 2015.

[258] A. Rizwan, A. Zoha, R. Zhang, W. Ahmad, K. Arshad, N. A. Ali,
A. Alomainy, M. A. Imran, and Q. H. Abbasi, “A review on the role of
nano-communication in future healthcare systems: A big data analytics
perspective,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 41 903–41 920, 2018.

[259] Y. Yang, X. Zheng, W. Guo, X. Liu, and V. Chang, “Privacy-preserving
fusion of IoT and big data for e-health,” Future Generation Computer
Systems, vol. 86, pp. 1437–1455, 2018.

[260] N. Sharma and R. Bhatt, “Privacy preservation in wsn for healthcare
application,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 132, pp. 1243–1252,
2018.

[261] M. M. Alam, H. Malik, M. I. Khan, T. Pardy, A. Kuusik, and Y. L.
Moullec, “A survey on the roles of communication technologies in IoT-
based personalized healthcare applications,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp.
36 611–36 631, 2018.

[262] Z. Guan, Z. Lv, X. Du, L. Wu, and M. Guizani, “Achieving data utility-
privacy tradeoff in internet of medical things: A machine learning
approach,” Future Generation Computer Systems, in Print, 2019.
[263] B. K. Beaulieu-Jones, W. Yuan, S. G. Finlayson, and Z. S. Wu,
“Privacy-preserving distributed deep learning for clinical data,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1812.01484, 2018.

[264] A. Alnemari, C. J. Romanowski, and R. K. Raj, “An adaptive differen-
tial privacy algorithm for range queries over healthcare data,” in IEEE
International Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI), 2017, pp.
397–402.

[265] J. L. Raisaro, G. Choi, S. Pradervand, R. Colsenet, N. Jacquemont,
N. Rosat, V. Mooser, and J.-P. Hubaux, “Protecting privacy and
security of genomic data in i2b2 with homomorphic encryption and
differential privacy,” IEEE/ACM transactions on computational biology
and bioinformatics, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 1413 – 1426, Sep. 2018.
[266] W. Tang, J. Ren, K. Deng, and Y. Zhang, “Secure Data Aggregation
of Lightweight E-healthcare IoT Devices with Fair Incentives,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, in Print, 2019.

[267] A. C. Valdez and M. Zieﬂe, “The users’ perspective on the privacy-
utility trade-offs in health recommender systems,” International Jour-
nal of Human-Computer Studies, in Print, vol. 121, pp. 108–121, Jan.
2019.

[268] J. Lane and C. Schur, “Balancing access to health data and privacy:
a review of the issues and approaches for the future,” Health services
research, vol. 45, no. 5p2, pp. 1456–1467, 2010.

[269] D. Hemapriya, P. Viswanath, V. Mithra, S. Nagalakshmi, and
G. Umarani, “Wearable medical devices—design challenges and is-
sues,” in IEEE International Conference on Innovations in Green
Energy and Healthcare Technologies (IGEHT), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[270] W. J. Long and W. Lin, “An authentication protocol for wearable
medical devices,” in 13th IEEE International Conference and Expo
on Emerging Technologies for a Smarter World (CEWIT), 2017, pp.
1–5.

[271] A. Cavoukian, A. Fisher, S. Killen, and D. A. Hoffman, “Remote home
health care technologies: how to ensure privacy? build it in: Privacy by
design,” Identity in the Information Society, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 363–378,
2010.

[272] B. Shickel, P. Tighe, A. Bihorac, and P. Rashidi, “Deep ehr: a survey
of recent advances in deep learning techniques for electronic health
record (ehr) analysis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03446, 2017.
[273] T. Sahama, L. Simpson, and B. Lane, “Security and privacy in ehealth:
Is it possible?” in IEEE 15th International Conference on e-Health
Networking, Applications & Services (Healthcom), 2013, pp. 249–253.
[274] R. Agrawal and R. Srikant, Privacy-preserving data mining. ACM,

2000, vol. 29, no. 2.

[275] X. Jiang, S. Cheng, and L. Ohno-Machado, “Quantifying ﬁne-grained
privacy risk and representativeness in medical data,” in Proceedings of
the ACM workshop on Data mining for medicine and healthcare, 2011,
pp. 64–67.

[276] P. Shi, L. Xiong, and B. Fung, “Anonymizing data with quasi-sensitive
attribute values,” in Proceedings of the 19th ACM international con-
ference on Information and knowledge management, 2010, pp. 1389–
1392.

[277] S. Sharma, K. Chen, and A. Sheth, “Toward practical privacy-
preserving analytics for IoT and cloud-based healthcare systems,” IEEE
Internet Computing, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 42–51, 2018.

[279] Q. Zhang, G. Zhang, J. Lu, and D. Wu, “A framework of hybrid
recommender system for personalized clinical prescription,” in IEEE
10th International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Knowledge
Engineering (ISKE), 2015, pp. 189–195.

[280] B. Esteban, ´A. Tejeda-Lorente, C. Porcel, M. Arroyo, and E. Herrera-
Viedma, “Tpluﬁb-web: A fuzzy linguistic web system to help in the
treatment of low back pain problems,” Knowledge-Based Systems,
vol. 67, pp. 429–438, 2014.

[281] R. J. Bayardo and R. Agrawal, “Data privacy through optimal k-
anonymization,” in IEEE 21st International Conference on Data Engi-
neering, ICDE, 2005, pp. 217–228.

[282] B. Y¨uksel, A. K¨upc¸ ¨u, and ¨O. ¨Ozkasap, “Research issues for privacy and
security of electronic health services,” Future Generation Computer
Systems, vol. 68, pp. 1–13, 2017.

[283] G. Fimiani, “Supporting privacy in a cloud-based health informa-
tion system by means of fuzzy conditional identity-based proxy re-
encryption (FCI-PRE),” in IEEE 32nd International Conference on Ad-
vanced Information Networking and Applications Workshops (WAINA),
May 2018, pp. 569–572.

[284] C. Yin, J. Xi, R. Sun, and J. Wang, “Location privacy protection based
on differential privacy strategy for big data in industrial Internet-of-
things,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, in Print, vol. 14,
no. 8, pp. 3628 – 3636, 2017.

[285] J. Giraldo, A. Cardenas, and M. Kantarcioglu, “Security and privacy
trade-offs in cps by leveraging inherent differential privacy,” in IEEE
Conference on Control Technology and Applications (CCTA), 2017, pp.
1313–1318.

[286] P. Li, T. Li, H. Ye, J. Li, X. Chen, and Y. Xiang, “Privacy-preserving
machine learning with multiple data providers,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, in Print, 2018.

[287] K. Ashton. (2009, Jun.). Internet of things. RFID J. [Online]. Available:

http://www.rﬁdjournal.com/articles/view?4986.

[288] F. Javed, M. K. Afzal, M. Sharif, and B. Kim, “Internet of things
(IoT) operating systems support, networking technologies, applications,
and challenges: A comparative review,” IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2062–2100, thirdquarter 2018.

[289] Y. Li, M. Hou, H. Liu, and Y. Liu, “Towards a theoretical framework
of strategic decision, supporting capability and information sharing
under the context of Internet of things,” Information Technology and
Management, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 205–216, 2012.

[290] K. R. Sollins, “Iot big data security and privacy vs. innovation, in

print,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1–1, 2019.

[291] L. M. Thompson, Industrial data communications.
[292] H. Li, A. D. Dimitrovski, J. B. Song, Z. Han, and L. Qian, “Communi-
cation infrastructure design in cyber physical systems with applications
in smart grids: A hybrid system framework.” IEEE Communications
Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1689–1708, 2014.

Isa, 2007.

[293] X. Lu, Q. Li, Z. Qu, and P. Hui, “Privacy information security classi-
ﬁcation study in Internet of things,” in IEEE International Conference
onIdentiﬁcation on Information and Knowledge in the Internet of
Things (IIKI),, 2014, pp. 162–165.

[294] C. M. Medaglia and A. Serbanati, “An overview of privacy and security
issues in the Internet of things,” in The Internet of Things. Springer,
2010, pp. 389–395.

[295] P. De Leusse, P. Periorellis, T. Dimitrakos, and S. K. Nair, “Self
managed security cell, a security model for the Internet of things and
services,” in First International Conference on Advances in Future
Internet, 2009, pp. 47–52.

[296] B. Shen and Y. Liu, “Privacy and security in the exploitation of Internet
of Things,” Journal of Dialectics of Nature, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 77–83,
2011.

[297] Y. Sun, J. Zhang, Y. Xiong, and G. Zhu, “Data security and privacy
in cloud computing,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor
Networks, vol. 10, no. 7, p. 190903, 2014.

[298] L. Sweeney, “Achieving k-anonymity privacy protection using gen-
eralization and suppression,” International Journal of Uncertainty,
Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 10, no. 05, pp. 571–
588, 2002.

[299] Y. Saygin, V. S. Verykios, and A. K. Elmagarmid, “Privacy preserving
association rule mining,” in IEEE Twelfth International Workshop on
Research Issues in Data Engineering: Engineering E-Commerce/E-
Business Systems, RIDE-2EC, 2002, pp. 151–158.

[300] A. C.-C. Yao, “How to generate and exchange secrets,” in IEEE 27th
Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, 1986, 1986,
pp. 162–167.

[301] C. Clifton, M. Kantarcioglu, J. Vaidya, X. Lin, and M. Y. Zhu,
“Tools for privacy preserving distributed data mining,” ACM Sigkdd
Explorations Newsletter, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 28–34, 2002.

[302] V. Tudor, V. Gulisano, M. Almgren, and M. Papatriantaﬁlou, “BES:
Differentially private event aggregation for large-scale IoT-based sys-
tems,” Future Generation Computer Systems,in Print, 2018.

[303] L. Bassi, “Industry 4.0: Hope, hype or revolution?” in IEEE 3rd
International Forum on Research and Technologies for Society and
Industry (RTSI), 2017, pp. 1–6.

[304] M. Wollschlaeger, T. Sauter, and J. Jasperneite, “The future of industrial
communication: Automation networks in the era of the Internet of
things and industry 4.0,” Industrial Electronics Magazine, vol. 11,
no. 1, pp. 17–27, 2017.

[305] Z. Lv, H. Song, P. Basanta-Val, A. Steed, and M. Jo, “Next-generation
big data analytics: State of the art, challenges, and future research
topics,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 13, no. 4,
pp. 1891–1899, 2017.

[306] F. Xiao, L. Sha, Z. Yuan, and R. Wang, “VulHunter: A discovery for
unknown bugs based on analysis for known patches in industry Internet
of things,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, pp.
1–1, 2018.

[307] C. Yin, S. Zhang, J. Xi, and J. Wang, “An improved anonymity model
for big data security based on clustering algorithm,” Concurrency and
Computation: Practice and Experience, vol. 29, no. 7, p. e3902, 2017.
[308] R. W. Brennan, “Toward real-time distributed intelligent control: A
survey of research themes and applications,” IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews),
vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 744–765, 2007.

[309] H. Parunak, “Autonomous agent architectures: a non-technical intro-

duction,” Industrial Technology Institute Report, 1993.

[310] K. Zetter, “A Cyberattack Has Caused Conﬁrmed Physical
the Second Time Ever,” Wired, 8 Jan. 2015;

Damage
www.wired.com/2015/01/german-steel-mill-hack-destruction.

for

[311] K. Chatzikokolakis, M. E. Andr´es, N. E. Bordenabe,

and
C. Palamidessi, “Broadening the scope of differential privacy using
metrics,” in Springer International Symposium on Privacy Enhancing
Technologies Symposium, 2013, pp. 82–102.

[312] T. Song, R. Li, B. Mei, J. Yu, X. Xing, and X. Cheng, “A privacy pre-
serving communication protocol for IoT applications in smart homes,”
in IEEE International Conference on Identiﬁcation, Information and
Knowledge in the Internet of Things (IIKI), 2016, pp. 519–524.
[313] R. Li, T. Song, N. Capurso, J. Yu, J. Couture, and X. Cheng, “IoT
applications on secure smart shopping system,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 1945–1954, 2017.

[314] T. Song, N. Capurso, X. Cheng, J. Yu, B. Chen, and W. Zhao, “Enhanc-
ing gps with lane-level navigation to facilitate highway driving,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 4579–4591,
2017.

[315] Y. Liang, Z. Cai, Q. Han, and Y. Li, “Location privacy leakage through
sensory data,” Security and Communication Networks, vol. 2017, 2017.
[316] H.-J. Yim, D. Seo, H. Jung, M.-K. Back, I. Kim, and K.-C. Lee, “De-
scription and classiﬁcation for facilitating interoperability of heteroge-
neous data/events/services in the Internet of things,” Neurocomputing,
vol. 256, pp. 13–22, 2017.

[317] Z. Cui, Y. Cao, X. Cai,

“Optimal
LEACH protocol with modiﬁed bat algorithm for big data sensing
systems in Internet of Things,” Journal of Parallel and Distributed
Computing, vol. 132, pp. 217 – 229, 2019.
[Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0743731517303453

and J. Chen,

J. Cai,

[318] Z. Song, Y. Sun, J. Wan, L. Huang, Y. Xu, and C.-H. Hsu, “Exploring
robustness management of social Internet of things for customiza-
tion manufacturing,” Future Generation Computer Systems, in Print,
vol. 92, pp. 846–856, Mar. 2019.

[319] C. Li and G. Miklau, “Optimal error of query sets under

the
differentially-private matrix mechanism,” in Proceedings of the 16th
ACM International Conference on Database Theory, 2013, pp. 272–
283.

[320] A.-R. Sadeghi, C. Wachsmann, and M. Waidner, “Security and privacy
challenges in industrial Internet of things,” in 52nd ACM/EDAC/IEEE
Design Automation Conference (DAC), 2015, pp. 1–6.

[321] J. Sathishkumar and D. R. Patel, “Enhanced location privacy algorithm
for wireless sensor network in internet of things,” in IEEE International
Conference on Internet of Things and Applications (IOTA), 2016, pp.
208–212.

44

[322] D. Alahakoon and X. Yu, “Smart electricity meter data intelligence
for future energy systems: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 425–436, 2016.

[323] M. R. Asghar, G. D´an, D. Miorandi, and I. Chlamtac, “Smart meter
data privacy: A survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2820–2835, 2017.

[324] D. Li, Q. Yang, W. Yu, D. An, X. Yang, and W. Zhao, “A strategy-proof
privacy-preserving double auction mechanism for electrical vehicles de-
mand response in microgrids,” in IEEE 36th International Performance
Computing and Communications Conference (IPCCC), 2017, pp. 1–8.
[325] A. V. Kayem, C. Meinel, and S. D. Wolthusen, “A smart micro-
grid architecture for resource constrained environments,” in IEEE 31st
International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and
Applications (AINA), 2017, pp. 857–864.

[326] P. L. Ambassa, A. V. D. M. Kayem, S. D. Wolthusen, and C. Meinel,
“Privacy risks in resource constrained smart micro-grids,” in IEEE 32nd
International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and
Applications Workshops (WAINA), May 2018, pp. 527–532.

[327] M. Gohar, M. Muzammal, and A. U. Rahman, “Smart tss: Deﬁning
transportation system behavior using big data analytics in smart cities,”
Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 41, pp. 114–119, 2018.

[328] M.-C. Chuang and J.-F. Lee, “Ppas: A privacy preservation authenti-
cation scheme for vehicle-to-infrastructure communication networks,”
in IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics, Commu-
nications and Networks (CECNet), 2011, pp. 1509–1512.

[329] S. Purri, T. Choudhury, N. Kashyap, and P. Kumar, “Specialization
of IoT applications in health care industries,” in IEEE International
Conference on Big Data Analytics and Computational Intelligence
(ICBDAC), 2017, pp. 252–256.

[330] L. Patrono, P. Primiceri, P. Rametta, I. Sergi, and P. Visconti, “An
innovative approach for monitoring elderly behavior by detecting home
appliance’s usage,” in 25th IEEE International Conference on Software,
Telecommunications and Computer Networks (SoftCOM), 2017, pp. 1–
7.

[331] V. Alagar, K. Periyasamy, and K. Wan, “Privacy and security for
patient-centric elderly health care,” in IEEE 19th International Confer-
ence on e-Health Networking, Applications and Services (Healthcom),
2017, pp. 1–6.

[332] P. E. Network, “Electronic health privacy and security in developing
countries and humanitarian operations,” Protecting medical information
in eHealth projects. London: London School of Economics and Political
Science, pp. 1–28, 2010.

[333] W. Gao, W. Yu, F. Liang, W. G. Hatcher, and C. Lu, “Privacy-preserving
auction for big data trading using homomorphic encryption,” IEEE
Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, in Print, 2018.

[334] J. Murtagh and S. Vadhan, “The complexity of computing the optimal
composition of differential privacy,” in Springer Theory of Cryptogra-
phy Conference, 2016, pp. 157–175.

[335] J. Zhang, G. Cormode, C. M. Procopiuc, D. Srivastava, and X. Xiao,
“Privbayes: Private data release via bayesian networks,” ACM Trans.
Database Syst., vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 25:1–25:41, Oct. 2017. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3134428

[336] R. Chen, Q. Xiao, Y. Zhang, and J. Xu, “Differentially private
high-dimensional data publication via sampling-based inference,” in
Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2015, pp. 129–138.

[337] P. Kairouz, K. Bonawitz, and D. Ramage, “Discrete distribution esti-

mation under local privacy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07387, 2016.
[338] C. Dwork and G. N. Rothblum, “Concentrated differential privacy,”

arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.01887, 2016.

[339] G. Kellaris, S. Papadopoulos, X. Xiao, and D. Papadias, “Differentially
private event sequences over inﬁnite streams,” Proceedings of the VLDB
Endowment, vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 1155–1166, 2014.

[340] C. Dwork, M. Naor, T. Pitassi, and G. N. Rothblum, “Differential
the forty-
privacy under continual observation,” in Proceedings of
second ACM symposium on Theory of computing, 2010, pp. 715–724.
[341] Z. Cui, F. Xue, X. Cai, Y. Cao, G.-g. Wang, and J. Chen, “Detection
of malicious code variants based on deep learning,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Informatics, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 3187–3196, 2018.
[342] C. Elkan, “Preserving privacy in data mining via importance weight-
ing,” in Springer International Workshop on Privacy and Security
Issues in Data Mining and Machine Learning, 2010, pp. 15–21.
[343] M. Senekane, M. Mafu, and B. M. Taele, “Privacy-preserving quantum
machine learning using differential privacy,” in IEEE AFRICON, 2017,
pp. 1432–1435.

[344] X. Ma, J. Ma, S. Gao, and Q. Yao, “Apdl: A practical privacy-
preserving deep learning model for smart devices,” in International

Conference on Mobile Ad-Hoc and Sensor Networks. Springer, 2017,
pp. 377–390.

[345] R. Buyya, C. S. Yeo, S. Venugopal, J. Broberg, and I. Brandic, “Cloud
computing and emerging it platforms: Vision, hype, and reality for
delivering computing as the 5th utility,” Future Generation computer
systems, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 599–616, 2009.

[346] Y. Li, H. Yu, B. Song, and J. Chen, “Image encryption based on a
single-round dictionary and chaotic sequences in cloud computing,”
in Print,
Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience,
2019.

[347] Z. Sanaei, S. Abolfazli, A. Gani, and R. Buyya, “Heterogeneity
in mobile cloud computing: taxonomy and open challenges,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 369–392,
2014.

[348] Z. Xiao and Y. Xiao, “Security and privacy in cloud computing,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 843–859,
2013.

[349] X. Zhang, L. Qi, W. Dou, Q. He, C. Leckie, K. Ramamohanarao,
and Z. Salcic, “Mrmondrian: Scalable multidimensional anonymisation
for big data privacy preservation,” IEEE Transactions on Big Data. in
Print, 2017.

[350] M. Zhang, H. Wang, Z. Cui, and J. Chen, “Hybrid multi-objective
local search,” Memetic Computing,

cuckoo search with dynamical
vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 199–208, 2018.

[351] S. Sharma, J. Powers, and K. Chen, “Privategraph: Privacy-preserving
spectral analysis of encrypted graphs in the cloud,” IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering, in Print, 2018.

[352] M. T. Hale and M. Egerstedt, “Cloud-enabled differentially private
multi-agent optimization with constraints,” IEEE Transactions on Con-
trol of Network Systems, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 1693 – 1706, Dec. 2017.

[353] M. Yang, A. Margheri, R. Hu, and V. Sassone, “Differentially private
data sharing in a cloud federation with blockchain,” IEEE Cloud
Computing, vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 69–79, 2018.

[354] L. Kong, D. Zhang, Z. He, Q. Xiang, J. Wan, and M. Tao, “Embracing
big data with compressive sensing: a green approach in industrial
wireless networks,” IEEE communications magazine, vol. 54, no. 10,
pp. 53–59, 2016.

[355] M. Du, K. Wang, Z. Xia, and Y. Zhang, “Differential privacy preserving
of training model in wireless big data with edge computing,” IEEE
Transactions on Big Data, in Print, 2018.

[356] M. Du, K. Wang, X. Liu, S. Guo, and Y. Zhang, “A differential privacy-
based query model for sustainable fog data centers,” IEEE Transactions
on Sustainable Computing, in Print, 2017.

[357] G. Karame and S. Capkun, “Blockchain security and privacy,” IEEE

Security & Privacy, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 11–12, 2018.

[358] F. Gao, L. Zhu, M. Shen, K. Sharif, Z. Wan, and K. Ren, “A
blockchain-based privacy-preserving payment mechanism for vehicle-
to-grid networks,” IEEE Network, in Print, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 184 –
192, Apr. 2018.

[359] Z. Xiong, Y. Zhang, D. Niyato, P. Wang, and Z. Han, “When mobile
blockchain meets edge computing: challenges and applications,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1711.05938, 2017.

[360] M. Banerjee, J. Lee, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A blockchain future for
internet of things security: a position paper,” Digital Communications
and Networks, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 149–160, 2018.

[361] A. Alnemari, S. Arodi, V. R. Sosa, S. Pandey, C. Romanowski,
R. Raj, and S. Mishra, “Protecting infrastructure data via enhanced
access control, blockchain and differential privacy,” in International
Conference on Critical Infrastructure Protection. Springer, 2018, pp.
113–125.

[362] R. Henry, A. Herzberg, and A. Kate, “Blockchain access privacy:
Challenges and directions,” IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 16, no. 4,
pp. 38–45, 2018.

[363] G. Zyskind, O. Nathan et al., “Decentralizing privacy: Using
blockchain to protect personal data,” in Security and Privacy Workshops
(SPW), 2015 IEEE.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 180–184.

[364] M. U. Hassan, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Chen, “Privacy preservation in
blockchain based iot systems: Integration issues, prospects, challenges,
and future research directions,” Future Generation Computer Systems,
vol. 97, pp. 512–529, Aug. 2019.

[365] H. Halpin and M. Piekarska, “Introduction to security and privacy on
the blockchain,” in IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy
Workshops (EuroS&PW), 2017, pp. 1–3.

[366] X. Liang and Y. Xiao, “Game theory for network security,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 472–486,
2013.

45

[367] M. Pilz and L. Al-Fagih, “Recent advances in local energy trading in
the smart grid based on game–theoretic approaches,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Smart Grid, in Print, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1363 – 1371, Mar.
2017.

[368] X. Wu, T. Wu, M. Khan, Q. Ni, and W. Dou, “Game theory based
correlated privacy preserving analysis in big data,” IEEE Transactions
on Big Data, in Print, 2017.

[369] L. Xu, C. Jiang, Y. Qian, J. Li, Y. Zhao, and Y. Ren, “Privacy-Accuracy
Trade-off in Differentially-Private Distributed Classiﬁcation: A Game
Theoretical Approach,” IEEE Transactions on Big Data, in Print, 2018.

PLACE
PHOTO
HERE

Muneeb Ul Hassan received his Bachelor degree
in Electrical Engineering from COMSATS Institute
of Information Technology, Wah Cantt, Pakistan,
in 2017. He received Gold Medal
in Bachelor
degree for being topper of Electrical Engineering
Department. Currently, he is pursuing the Ph.D.
degree from Swinburne University of Technology,
Hawthorn VIC 3122, Australia. His research inter-
ests include privacy preservation, blockchain, game
theory, and smart grid. He served in the TPC for the
IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing
Technology and Science (CloudCom 2019). He is a reviewer of various
journals, such as the IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Elsevier Future Generation
Computing Systems, Journal of Network and Computer Applications, Com-
puters & Electrical Engineering, IEEE ACCESS, Wiley Transactions on
Emerging Telecommunications Technologies, IEEE Journal of Communica-
tions and Networks, Springer Wireless Networks, Human-centric Computing
and Information Sciences, and KSII Transactions on Internet and Information
Systems. He also has been a Reviewer for various conferences, such as IEEE
Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC)-Spring 2019, Vehicular Technology
Conference (VTC)-Fall 2018, IEEE International Conference on Communi-
cations (ICC) - 2019, International workshop on e-Health Pervasive Wireless
Applications and Services e-HPWAS’18, IEEE Globecom 2018 workshop:
Security in Health Informatics (SHInfo2018), Frontiers of Information Tech-
nology 2019, Frontiers of Information Technology 2018.

(M’14-SM’15)

PLACE
PHOTO
HERE

Mubashir Husain Rehmani
re-
ceived the B.Eng. degree in computer systems en-
gineering from Mehran University of Engineering
and Technology, Jamshoro, Pakistan, in 2004, the
M.S. degree from the University of Paris XI, Paris,
France,
in 2008, and the Ph.D. degree from the
University Pierre and Marie Curie, Paris, in 2011. He
is currently working as Assistant Lecturer at Cork
Institute of Technology (CIT), Ireland. He worked
at Telecommunications Software and Systems Group
(TSSG), Waterford Institute of Technology (WIT),
Waterford, Ireland as Post-Doctoral researcher from Sep 2017 to Oct 2018.
He served for ﬁve years as an Assistant Professor at COMSATS Institute
of Information Technology, Wah Cantt., Pakistan. He is currently an Area
Editor of the IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials. He served for
three years (from 2015 to 2017) as an Associate Editor of the IEEE
Communications Surveys and Tutorials. Currently, he serves as Associate
Editor of IEEE Communications Magazine, Elsevier Journal of Network
and Computer Applications (JNCA), and the Journal of Communications
and Networks (JCN). He is also serving as a Guest Editor of Elsevier Ad
Hoc Networks journal, Elsevier Future Generation Computer Systems journal,
the IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, and Elsevier Pervasive and
Mobile Computing journal. He has authored/ edited two books published
by IGI Global, USA, one book published by CRC Press, USA, and one
book with Wiley, U.K. He received “Best Researcher of the Year 2015 of
COMSATS Wah” award in 2015. He received the certiﬁcate of appreciation,
“Exemplary Editor of the IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials for the
year 2015” from the IEEE Communications Society. He received Best Paper
Award from IEEE ComSoc Technical Committee on Communications Systems
Integration and Modeling (CSIM),
in IEEE ICC 2017. He consecutively
received research productivity award in 2016-17 and also ranked # 1 in all
Engineering disciplines from Pakistan Council for Science and Technology
(PCST), Government of Pakistan. He also received Best Paper Award in 2017
from Higher Education Commission (HEC), Government of Pakistan.

Dr. Jinjun Chen is a Professor from Swinburne Uni-
versity of Technology, Australia. He is Deputy Di-
rector of Swinburne Data Science Research Institute.
He holds a PhD in Information Technology from
Swinburne University of Technology, Australia. His
research interests include scalability, big data, data
science, data systems, cloud computing, data privacy
and security, health data analytics and related various
research topics. His research results have been pub-
lished in more than 160 papers in international jour-
nals and conferences, including various IEEE/ACM

PLACE
PHOTO
HERE

Transactions.

46

