Michael Robinson1, Kevin Jones1, Helge Janicke2 and Leandros Maglaras2

Developing Cyber Buffer Zones

1Airbus Group, U.K.

2DE Montfort University, U.K.

INTRODUCTION

Cyberspace has become the latest domain of war (Robinson, Jones, & Janicke, 2015), where modern international actors aggressively
pursue  their  national  security  and  foreign  policy  goals (Martins,  2018). Much  research  has  been  focused  upon  this  area,  covering
topics such as the ethics of cyberwarfare (Dipert, 2010), legal aspects (Baradaran & Habibi, 2017) and how best to conduct military
operations  inside  of  cyberspace (Liles,  Rogers,  Dietz,  &  Larson,  2012).    Surveys  of  the  literature  show  a  vast  range  of  additional
topics, demonstrating that research interest into cyber warfare is lively and diverse (Robinson, Jones, & Janicke, 2015). Whilst it is
clear that interest in cyber warfare is high, there has been less attention paid to its aftermath.  What effects on societies persist after
cyber warfare and do these effects stymie work to restore peace and security to conflict torn regions?

The field  of  cyber  peacekeeping addresses  these  questions,  looking  at  conflicts  which  contain  cyber  warfare  through  the  lens  of
peacekeeping.
In  this  chapter,  we  provide  a  background  to  cyber  peacekeeping  and  survey  existing  literature.    We then make  a
contribution to the field by developing the concept of a cyber buffer zone.

BACKGROUND

The  concept  of  cyber  peacekeeping  can  be  traced  back  to  an  article  by  Cahill,  Rozinov  and  Mule (2003). They  noted  that  cyber
warfare  would likely have devastating  effects  well  beyond  the  boundaries  of  the combatants and  that  some  kind  of  peacekeeping
capability  in  cyberspace  would  be  needed (Cahill,  Rozinov,  &  Mule,  2003). Some  potential  cyber  peacekeeping  activities were
proposed, such  as  cyber  border  management  and monitoring/verification  and  their  overall  approach  was  to  explore  how  existing
peacekeeping doctrine could be mapped to cyber warfare. The topic did not receive any further attention for ten years until Kleffner
and  Dinniss (2013) reignited discussion.    They  drew attention  to the  convergence  of  two  significant global  trends: an  increase in
conflicts which involve a cyber component and the increasing deployment of complex peace operations.  They noted that these trends
made it  natural  to  assume  that  peacekeepers  will  find  themselves  asked  to  keep  the  peace  in  environments  where  the  peace  is
threatened by cyber incidents (Kleffner & Dinniss, 2013).

Akatyev and James (2015) contributed by proposing a cyber peacekeeping model, including a set of goals and proposals of activities
to perform during three stages:  no conflict, conflict and post-conflict.  In this regard, the model covers all three phases of warfare with
the primary goal of protecting civilians. The need for cyber peacekeeping was reinforced two years later by Dorn (2017), who states
that cyberpeackeepers could patrol and act in cyberspace just as current UN peacekeepers patrol and act in the world’s conflict zones.
Faced with a huge disaster bill and a potential for vast escalation in attacks, an investment in cyber peacekeeping would seem like a
bargain (Dorn, 2017).

In 2018, Robinson et al. (2018) built upon the foundations set by Cahill, Rozinov and Mule back in 2003.  They reinforced the need
for cyber peacekeeping with specific cases where cyber warfare would present a threat to international peace and security as defined
by the United Nations. They explored how the activities of a modern multi-dimensional peacekeeping operation could be translated
into  a  cyber  warfare  context, and evaluated  each  one  according to two  core  criteria:  value  and  feasibility. Any  activity  performed
during cyber peacekeeping must bring clear value towards restoring peace and security, and must also be feasible to perform. They
conclude that many of the existing UN peacekeeping activities would bring value in a cyber warfare context, but that feasibility can
vary due to technical and political constraints.

FOCUS OF THE ARTICLE

In this article, we build upon the work of Robinson et al. (2018) by taking a closer examination of just one of the proposed activities:
cyber  buffer  zones.    We  begin  with  a  brief  background  of  traditional  physical  buffer  zones  as  used  by  UN  peacekeeping,  before
progressing to propose how a cyber buffer zone would be constructed and how it could bring value.

Interposition as a buffer zone is one of the core activities of a traditional UN peacekeeping operation.  The UN defines a buffer zone
as “an area established between belligerents and civilians that is protected and monitored by battalion peacekeeping forces and where
disputing  or  belligerent forces  and  attacks  on  each  other  and  the  civilian  population  have been  excluded” (United  Nations,  2012).
Peacekeepers keep this buffer zone free from military personnel, weapons, installations and activities and have the authority to use
force in order to protect the safety and integrity of the buffer zone (United Nations, 2012).

Robinson et al. (2018) adapted this definition to produce a definition of a cyber buffer zone:  “A network or site that is protected and
monitored by peacekeeping forces, where cyber attacks have been excluded.” They proposed that a cyber buffer zone would be most

valuable at sites where the greatest threats to peace exist, and an example of critical national infrastructure was given.  These are sites
that civilians rely upon for essential services such as electricity, water and transport. A cyber buffer zone could be deployed reactively
(i.e. after a suspected attack) or proactively (preventive deployment in anticipation of an attack). The literature regarding buffer zones
was distilled down to two core pieces of value which need to be preserved when designing cyber buffer zones:

1. Deterrence:  potential  attackers  are  deterred  from  initiating  an  attack,  due  to  the  high  probability  of  being  detected  and

intercepted (increased chance of failure).

2. Robust force projection: When deterrence fails, the consequences for an attacker are significant e.g. incarceration, injury or

death (increased consequence of failure).

It  was  suggested that  deterrence  in  a cyber  buffer  zone can  feasibly  be  achieved  in  a  number  of  ways. Raising  awareness  that  a
particular site is under peacekeeping protection, knowledge that the site will be monitored by highly capable staff, and the increased
likelihood of tracing attacks back to their origin could all have the potential to act as a deterrent.

With  regards  to  projecting  robust  force, an  approach  which  uses both  short  and  long  term  activities was  recommended.    Further
development of these activities was cited as future work, and this is where this chapter places its focus: proposing how such a cyber
buffer zone would technically operate in order to achieve robust force projection and ultimately contribute towards maintaining peace.

SOLUTIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

To begin, it is prudent to first become familiar with the activities of a traditional physical buffer zone. The UN has been operating
buffer zones for many decades, and this experience provides us with a solid foundation from which to consider cyber buffer zones.
The activities they perform in a physical buffer zone have been refined and improved over the years, based upon field experience.  We
therefore can assume that any activity performed at a UN buffer zone is proven to have value towards restoring peace and is feasible
in at least some cases.

The UN Infantry Battalion Manual Volume II (United Nations, 2012) provides a list of the specific tasks that peacekeepers running a
buffer zone perform, along with a description of what each task involves.  These are presented in Table 1.

TASK
Tactical
Deployment

Monitoring

Interposition

Supervision

Repositioning of
Belligerent
Forces

Control of BZ

Civilian
Activities

Contain

Investigations

Proactive
Deployment

Area of
Limitations

Interface and
Coordination
Assist
Establishment of
Local Authority
Assist  in  Good

DESCRIPTION
Deploy tactical sub-units and detachments (both permanent and temporary) to effectively cover the entire
frontage.
Observe, monitor, supervise and verify the cessation of hostilities/ceasefire/Truce/armistice agreements,
compliance of agreements, troop deployments, etc.
Interpose between opposing forces to stabilize the situation, where formal peace agreements are not in force.

Supervise the implementation of the disengagement agreement.

Accompany and support opposing forces to redeploy/withdraw to agreed dispositions and subsequent
adherence to military status quo.

Ensure no presence of military personnel, weapons, installations and activities, assist in securing the
respective areas/line to prevent/intervene entry/intrusion without consent of military personnel, arms or
related material in the Buffer Zone.
Monitor Crossing/Control Points across buffer zone for safe and orderly passage through by civilians in
conjunction with opposing forces. Facilitate daily subsistence and routine activities of civilians in the buffer
zone.
Prevent/contain violations/cross border attacks/isolated incidents taking place and if taken place, prevent it
from escalating in to major conflicts.

Follow up on complaints by investigations

Proactive troop deployment to prevent an incident or its recurrence

Visit, monitor and ascertain compliance of activities periodically in stipulated “Areas of Limitations” (where
military restrictions on deployment of body of troops and weapons systems and massing of troops not
permitted).

Act as go-betweens for the hostile parties with good liaison, close contact and effective coordination.

Assist/coordinate with local Government/belligerent parties in restoring its effective  authority in respective
areas

Facilitate good governance in the area of separation/buffer zone, contribute to  maintenance and restoration of

Governance

Assist other
entities

Mine Awareness

Facilitate
Humanitarian
Access
Reconciliation
and
Rapprochement
Assist
Negotiation and
Mediation
Other Activities

law and order and policing, establish interface with the inhabitants and help resumption of routine civilian
activity (farming, electricity,  water, medical support) for establishing normalcy.
Assist/support formed military police elements, formed UN police elements/UNPOL, UN agencies in the area
and other international organizations when tasked.
Support mine awareness, identify and mark minefields, and help in clearance of mines and unexploded
ordnance.

Extend assistance to help ensure humanitarian access to civilian populations, provision of medical aid and
facilitate voluntary and safe return of displaced personnel

Play an active and constructive role which is critical in preventing a recurrence of hostilities/to prevent flash
point, detrimental to the peace process and work towards a comprehensive political solution.

Assist UN mediator and undertake mediation and negotiation when tasked or required.

Facilitate exchange of prisoners, refugees, IDPs, dead bodies and to retrieve livestock.

Table 1:  UN buffer zone activities

Looking at Table 1 we can see that the value a buffer zone brings goes beyond just deterrence and robust force projection.  It in fact
serves to support multiple other peacekeeping activities ranging from humanitarian assistance to peacemaking. This emphasises the
view that the activities of peacekeeping are synergistic:  no one activity in itself can restore peace, but together they all work towards a
common  goal. When  designing  a  cyber  buffer  zone,  opportunities  for  synergy  with  the  wider  peacekeeping  operation  must  be
highlighted and encouraged.

An initial practical step in considering the design of cyber buffer zones is to determine if these existing activities could map to a cyber
warfare context in a way that would be valuable towards restoring peace.  We take the same table and colour each activity: green if the
activity holds potential value in cyber warfare, red if not.  The description box is used to show our justification.

TASK
Tactical
Deployment

DESCRIPTION FOR CYBER BUFFER ZONE
Deployment of cyber peacekeeping resources to effectively cover the network/site. E.g. experts, monitoring
tools.

Monitoring

Use of cyber peacekeeping resources (examples above) to monitor cyber related ceasefire terms.

Interposition

Defend the network from cyber attacks: perform active cyber defence

Supervision

Repositioning of
Belligerent
Forces

Control of BZ

Dependent upon disengagement agreement.  But some potential in a cyber context e.g. neutral observation of
collaborative efforts to restore control of network to rightful owner or collaboratively remove malware as part
of a political agreement.

Cyber troops are difficult to observe and can attack from anywhere. Attempting to monitor or guide their
repositioning would not be valuable in a cyber context

Ensure no presence of cyber attacks and malware. Regular scanning of the infrastructure to ensure it remains
clean and free of malicious activity/content.

Civilian
Activities

Contain

Monitor cyber infrastructure for safe and orderly use by civilians for peaceful purposes. Some infrastructure
will be used by civilians for peaceful and essential services.  Peacekeepers can ensure the system remains
available use e.g. banking, commerce, and government services.
Prevent or contain cyber attacks from impacting the infrastructure.  Isolating and neutralising cyber attacks to
avoid escalation into further conflict or relapse into warfare.

Investigations

Follow up on complaints of cyber attack/malware infections (cyber forensic capability)

Proactive
Deployment

Area of
Limitations

Proactive deployment of cyber defences to pre-empt and thwart potential attacks

Spot checks of networks to ensure that they are not compromised.  This could relate to networks that do not
have a full time cyber peacekeeping presence but should still be occasionally checked for compromise

Interface and
Coordination
Assist
Establishment
of Local
Authority
Assist in  Good
Governance
Assist other
entities

Mine Awareness

Facilitate
Humanitarian
Access
Reconciliation
and
Rapprochement
Assist
Negotiation and
Mediation

Other Activities

Cyber Peacekeepers in a cyber buffer zone can act as go-betweens for the hostile parties

Assisting the rightful owner of the network in regaining control e.g. restoring power grid and ensuring no
unauthorised access remains

Advise network owner on how to best protect the network and potentially go beyond security to provide
performance/optimisation advice.  Long term cyber security capacity building.
Assist police and other entities e.g. assisting with trace backs, providing cyber forensic capability in case of
cybercrime.

Identify and contain malware, assist in malware clearance in the network and report on possible malware
outside of infrastructure (e.g. detection of external botnet for other teams to follow up on)

Potential to protect hospitals from cyber attack, keep routes open (e.g. airport systems, air traffic control) and
ensure basic services such as power and water to help humanitarian efforts succeed.

Cyber peacekeepers in a cyber buffer zone are unlikely to perform reconciliation duties

Some potential to assist wider negotiations through detailed knowledge of the network.  E.g. How exposed it
is, current events, when can the cyber buffer zone be withdrawn etc.

Table 2: Existing buffer zone activities mapped to cyberspace

N/A to cyber peacekeeping

Studying Table 2, many of the existing buffer zone activities have potential to bring value as part of a cyber buffer zone.  But this is
only one piece of the puzzle:  it shows there is value to be found but not how to feasibly achieve that value.  The second piece of the
cyber buffer zone puzzle is how to implement the cyber buffer zone and realise that value in a feasible way.

Looking to the field of cyber security, the concept of securing some infrastructure in the face of cyber attacks is not new. The domain
of  cyber  incident  response  is  a  well-established  field  which  can  serve  as  a  foundation  for  implementing  a  cyber  buffer  zone. The
NIST computer security incident handling guide (Paul Cichonski, 2012) sets out four main tasks of incident response:

Preparation


 Detection and analysis



Containment eradication and recovery
Post incident activity

These guidelines provide a good foundation but do not necessarily apply well to critical infrastructure (Ying, Maglaras, Janicke, &
Jones, 2015) or indeed to a cyber buffer zone.  For example, in regards to preparation it is suggested that network diagrams and lists of
critical assets be created and stored.  In the context of a reactive cyber buffer zone, peacekeepers may not have time to collect and
study such documents. However, other parts are useful.  For example we are reminded that a forensic capability is not only important
for later legal proceedings, but also in the immediate concern of providing insight into the current state of the system (Eden, et al.,
2016).

The US  based  ICS-CERT (United  States  Homeland  Security,  2009) provides  guidance  which  is  more  tailored  towards  industrial
control systems and much of the guidance provided can be adapted to help design cyber buffer zones.  For example, it describes a
number  of  staffing  roles  that  are  necessary  including  control  system  engineers,  network  specialists,  system  administrators,  legal
experts and vendor support specialists.  This highlights how peacekeepers running a cyber buffer zone must bring expertise from a
range of domains to protect the site. However, while we can use this guidance it is also not specific to a peacekeeping environment
where  one  of  the  primary  goals  is  the  protection  of  civilians (UN  Department  of  Peacekeeping  Operations,  2015). We  therefore
propose a set of activities for a cyber buffer zone, built using existing guidance where it makes sense but with new proposals where
necessary to suit the goals and conditions of peacekeeping.

Peacekeepers at a cyber buffer zone will conduct two sets of activities following its establishment:




Phase One: Immediate Activities
Phase Two: Longer Term Activities

PHASE ONE

Phase one consists of the immediate activities.  These are rapid and decisive actions designed to gain situational awareness, stabilise
the site, address any critical conditions which are an immediate threat to peace and security and restore essential services.

The  phase  begins  by  leveraging  an  existing  concept  from  peacekeeping:  a  technical  assessment  mission  (TAM) (United  Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, 2014).  In a proactive deployment, this will be a small team of experts who visit the site and
assess its suitability for a cyber buffer zone.  Since it is a proactive deployment, time will be available to become familiar with the site,
collect network maps, asset lists, note observed problems and estimate the expertise that will be required.  This is in line with existing
guidance relating to the preparation phase of cyber incident response. In a reactive deployment, less time for preparation is available.
A rapid response team may be a suitable way to address this problem: a team of peacekeepers who are able to quickly enter a site and
perform a rapid assessment. The outcome is to gain situational awareness of the infrastructure, the resources required to secure and
stabilise it and a determination on if the site would be suitable for a cyber buffer zone.  Some key questions the TAM must answer
include:

 Does the peace operation have the required resources to effectively run a cyber buffer zone at this site?
 Would  a  cyber  buffer  zone  at  this  site  provide  value  to  the  wider  peace  operation  (e.g.  could  failure  of  the  site  threaten

civilians, lead to state collapse, hamper restoration of state authority…)

If the TAM concludes that the site would be suitable for a cyber buffer zone, a team is established consisting of the required expertise.
The process for establishing this team and ways of working (e.g. creation of a war room and communication procedures) can follow
best practices described in the ICS-CERT guidance (United States Homeland Security, 2009).

The maintenance of peace and security must remain the overarching priority for a cyber buffer zone.  We therefore propose that after
establishment, a cyber buffer zone will conduct the following immediate tasks:

Stabilisation – In reactive deployments, a site such as a power plant or water treatment plant may currently be under attack, remotely
via a network or locally via malware or insider.  An essential task will be to prevent the condition of the site deteriorating. By this we
mean working to prevent additional damage which could lengthen the amount of downtime or present a physical threat (e.g. explosion
or contamination of water supply). Both of these are critical to avoid, since they are direct threats to peace and security. In proactive
deployments where no negative effects are yet observed, the site will already be in a stable condition. Stabilisation will involve the
following subtasks:

1. Situational  Awareness – Both  in  reactive  and  proactive  deployments,  peacekeepers  will  need  to  quickly  gain  situational
awareness:  an understanding of the infrastructure, its assets, interdependencies, protocols and people. Information collected by
the TAM will be useful here as a foundation. Confirmation of what is working and what is failing.  Triage of expertise to specific
components of the infrastructure for further analysis on the cause of the failures e.g. malware, exploited vulnerability, hardware
fault, human error, malicious insider.  In the case of attack, the team must determine the attack vector used.

2. Action Plan – Once the cyber buffer zone team has gained awareness of the infrastructure, an understanding of where failures are
and attack vectors used an action plan can be developed.  This plan will aim to directly address the most critical obstacles towards
the site being stabilised and assign resources to actions.  For example, vendor support experts may be assigned to replace failed
hardware whilst malware and forensics specialists work to identify and neutralise malware on engineering stations. Others will be
assigned to close the specific vulnerabilities used in attacks. The action plan must be discussed and agreed with all stakeholders,
including local staff. Note that tasks one and two will not always be linear: following the action plan the team reassess the site
and modify the plan based on new information or a change in the environment.

Phase one can be considered successful when there are no remaining immediate threats to civilians, damage is not spreading, malware
has been neutralised (e.g. contained, command and control cut) and actively exploited vulnerabilities have been closed. The team can
then proceed to phase two: longer term activities.

PHASE TWO

The goals of this phase are to restore service and establish a long term security capability at the site.

1. Restoration of Service – Once a site has been stabilised the next goal is to restore operation and resume provision of the service.
Again this will require input from a number of areas including local staff, vendors and experts from the industry in question.

2. Active defence - Once service has been resumed, it will be necessary to monitor the infrastructure and defend against any new
attacks. Peacekeepers will deploy cyber defences: IP address blocking, load balancing, reconfiguration and redirecting of denial
of  service  traffic  are  all examples  possible  defences. Companies  such  as  Google  have  expressed  interest  in  assisting  the
mitigation  of  denial  of  service  attacks  for  good  causes  such  as  election  monitoring  groups  and  human  rights  organisations

(Google, 2016).  Organisations such as this would make good partners for a cyber buffer zone and demonstrates how important
technology partners could be in making cyber buffer zones effective.

3. Vulnerability  assessment and  hardening – With  the  site  stabilised,  the  team  can  begin  the  process of identifying other
weaknesses  in  the  security  of  the  infrastructure:  known  vulnerable  or  unnecessary  software/services,  misconfigurations,  weak
credentials,  unnecessary  external  connections,  weak  policies, security  blindspots,    gaps  in physical security or  human  resource
security. These are vulnerabilities which threaten the ongoing security of the site, but were not actively being exploited in phase
one. Due to the fragile nature of industrial control systems (Wedgbury & Jones, 2015), vulnerabilities will not be closed until a
plan  is  developed in  collaboration  with all  stakeholders  including  local  staff.      The  reason  for  this  is  twofold:  first  because
patching software or changing long standing configurations may have unexpected consequences upon the operation of the site.
Second, local stakeholders need to be engaged and involved in decision making to ensure ongoing cooperation and success of the
buffer zone. The end result will be a hardened infrastructure, resilient to future attacks.

4. Restoration  of  Control – The  immediate  activities  focused  upon  protecting  civilians  by  tackling  critical  threats,  not  upon
restoring  all  systems  back  to the  control  of the legitimate  owner.    In this  regard,  non-critical systems  at the  site  might  still  be
under attacker control even after phase one has completed.  This activity aims to restore full control of all systems at the site back
to the legitimate owner.

5. Monitoring  and  Supervision - With  the  immediate  threats  countered,  cyber  peacekeepers monitor  the  site  and  supervise

collaborative efforts e.g. collaboration between two parties to remove malware, arranged as part of a peace agreement.

6. Cyber  Forensics - Cyber  peacekeepers  can  begin  to  provide  forensics  services  to  identify  how  breaches  occurred  and  what
information was stolen etc.  This is useful for verifying ceasefire agreements and for third party enquiries such as national police.

7. Peace Support - Cyber peacekeepers can use their knowledge of the site and its staff to support wider peacekeeping tasks.  For
example they can provide evidence on compliance with cyber terms, report upon ongoing attacks from external sources, act as an
intermediary between the hostile parties, support police investigations and share information on malware which may be valuable
for other cyber buffer zones in a region.

8. Training - Local  staff are trained  in  security  best  practices  specific  to  the  infrastructure  they  are  maintaining,  for  example
developing  incident  response  plans  relevant  to  industrial  control  systems. The  goal  is  to  build  a  local capability so  that
peacekeeping forces can proceed to phase three and withdraw from the site.

Phase two activities will  continue  until local staff are  able  to  maintain the security of  the  infrastructure without  cyber  peacekeeper
assistance.    This  goal  is  in  line  with  existing  peacekeeping  doctrine,  which  strongly  encourages  local  capacity  building  to  enable
eventual withdrawal of UN forces (United Nations, 2008).

PHASE THREE

Withdrawal – The eventual goal of peacekeepers, in all domains, is to build a local security capability and hand over responsibility
for security to local staff. A cyber buffer zone will be no different:  peacekeepers cannot stay at the site forever, and must eventually
withdraw once a local capability has been built. This local capability should be effective enough to ensure the site is well protected in
the long term. Activities in phase two are designed to contribute towards this: hardening of the site and training are both activities
which aim to enable eventual withdrawal of cyber peacekeeping services.

A visual representation of the three phases, along with how each activity maps to the existing activities of a physical buffer zone is
presented in Figure 1.

Figure 1: The three phases of a cyber buffer zone

CONCEPT EVALUATION - FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS

The proposals made in this article are crafted to fulfil the goals of a UN peace operation (namely, to protect civilians) whilst remaining
feasible to perform.  In this section, we discuss where obstacles may arise and avenues for future research.

Local Resistance

The success of a cyber buffer zone as described in this article is highly reliant upon the cooperation of local staff.  Cyber peacekeepers
will find it difficult to perform the activities we describe if local staff do not provide assistance, or actively resist.  Cooperation of
local staff should be measured by the technical assessment mission, and a lack of cooperation is grounds for denying a buffer zone.
Unfortunately this could place the UN in a difficult situation.  For example, in a case where critical infrastructure is failing to the point
where it presents a threat to civilians yet local cooperation is lacking.  This is a challenging scenario where future research would be
welcomed.

Lack of Consent

While local resistance represents an unwillingness to cooperate at the field level, we must also consider a lack of consent at higher
levels.  Consent of the parties is one of the core principles of UN peacekeeping (United Nations, 2008), and is required for the success
of the operation.  Take a scenario where critical infrastructure is failing and threatening civilian security, and local staff appear to be
unsuccessful in tackling the threat.  The UN may feel that a cyber buffer zone is critical for peace and security in the region but may
find  that  consent  is  not  given  by  the  host  nation. Following  existing  doctrine,  this  naturally  leads  to  the question  of  peace
enforcement.

Peace enforcement has been used in the past for the following purposes (Bellamy & Williams, 2010):




To restore or maintain international peace and security.
To enforce sanctions.






To defend peacekeeping personnel.
To provide physical protection to civilians.
To protect humanitarian activities.
To intervene in internal conflicts.

It is therefore not radical to propose that the UN has the option to forcefully impose a cyber buffer zone at CNI which threatens the
physical security of civilians or the maintenance of international peace and security.  The importance of the UN's authority to enforce
peace was supported by ex-secretary general Boutros-Ghali who stated that “while such action should only be taken when all peaceful
means have failed, the option of taking it is essential to the credibility of the United Nations as a guarantor of international security”
(United Nations, 1992).  If it is agreed that the authority to enforce a cyber buffer zone exists, it must be asked if it would be feasible.
This would be a valuable area for future work.

Ensuring Impartiality

Impartiality is the second core principle of UN peacekeeping, and must be upheld when establishing cyber buffer zones. Ensuring that
a buffer  zone is  impartial,  and  is  seen  as such, may  become  a  challenging  task.    This is because cyber  peacekeepers  are taking  an
active role: bolstering defences, training staff and restoring control.  Care must be taken to ensure that any buffer zone has the clear,
publicised aim of protecting civilians. It is necessary to emphasise that they will only be established at sites where a lack of protection
could endanger the human rights of civilians.  Military sites and systems will not be protected.  It must also be made clear that a buffer
zone is focused upon defence, and not offence.

A potential threat to the appearance of impartiality is that establishing a UN cyber buffer zone to protect CNI frees up that nation's
cyber troops to focus upon offence rather than defence.  This has the potential to lead to undesirable incentives such as letting CNI fail
or purposely creating incidents so that the UN will step in and provide protection.  This is a valid concern that must be considered.
One response is to only provide a buffer zone once peace has been agreed.  If a nation then wishes to cheat and continue offensive
cyber operations while enjoying the benefits of the buffer zone, this is a risk that could result in consequences on the international
stage.

The  problem  of  resource  hoarding  also  exists. Country  A may  request  many cyber  buffer  zones simply  to  consume  UN  cyber
resources and deny the service to its rival. Cyber peacekeeping resources must therefore be provisioned in a balanced manner, with
restraint  in  mind. The  technical  assessment  missions  will  be  crucial  here,  to  decline  requests  where  there  is  no  clear  need. The
protection of civilians will always be the greatest deciding factor regarding where cyber buffer zones are established.

Securing Critical National Infrastructure

It has been argued that cyber buffer zones will likely bring most value when established at a critical national infrastructure (CNI). It is
a  known  issue  that  the  hardware,  software  and  protocols  which  operate CNI are  particularly  challenging  to  secure  from  a  cyber
perspective.  Firstly they make attractive targets to a wide spectrum of attackers. Nation states, terrorist groups, hackers, activists,
organised crime and disgruntled insiders all potentially have an interest in attacking CNI (Robinson, 2013). Secondly, the technology
used at such sites is known to possess characteristics which make it particularly vulnerable to cyber attack and challenging to defend
(Merabti, Kennedy, & Hurst, 2011). A discussion into all of the security issues of CNI is beyond the scope of this paper, but extensive
literature exists in this area (Robinson, 2013) (Gao, et al., 2014) (Nicholson, Webber, Dyer, Patel, & Janicke, 2012).  Instead, we will
highlight challenges that present a specific problem to a cyber buffer zone.

Arguably  one  of  the  major  challenges  peacekeepers  will  face  in  building  a  cyber  buffer  zone will  be to  work  with  the hardware,
software and protocols. These components can be decades old, built using proprietary  technologies, fragile in their operation and
designed/tested in  an  isolated  environment.    These  characteristics  will  make  establishing  a  cyber  buffer  zone  at  CNI  much  more
challenging than in a traditional ICT environment.

To  give  a  concrete  example,  let  us  consider  phase  one.    During  this  phase,  the  peacekeepers  aim  to  stabilise  the  infrastructure  by
identifying where critical negative effects are originating from and resolving the issue.  At a traditional ICT based environment, this
would involve the use of various monitoring tools.  The NIST guidance suggests the use of network and host-based IDPSs, antivirus
software and log analysers (Paul Cichonski, 2012). Research suggests that using such tools at CNI could have negative effects on the
functioning of core components, causing them to become unresponsive, slow or unpredictable in behaviour (Coffey, Smith, Maglaras,
It is  also rare  for such  components to hold  any  logs or  other  forensic  artefacts  of  value which  can  be  retrieved
&  Janicke,  2018).
(Eden, et al., 2016). Even the act of closing a vulnerability through patching firmware, software or making a configuration change
could be enough to cause unexpected results which worsens the situation. The conclusion we must reach is that peacekeepers entering
CNI to establish a buffer zone will require very specific skillsets in order to correctly diagnose and remediate cyber incidents without
making the incident worse.

Gaining Situational Awareness

In the case of a reactive cyber buffer zone, peacekeepers may be asked to deploy with no or limited pre-existing knowledge of the
site’s hardware, software and protocols.  This makes gaining situational awareness of the infrastructure an important task but difficult
task.    The age  of  the  components  at  the  site  make  it possible  that  the  vendor  who  produced them is  no  longer  in  business.    This
immediately presents an obstacle towards finding expertise, documentation and replacement parts.  Network diagrams may be missing
or  inaccurate.    In  the  context  of  a  warfare  environment,  local  staff  who  could  share  knowledge  may  be  absent. A  site  suffering
negative effects which are directly harming civilians (e.g. faulty water treatment) will also place pressure upon the team to act quickly.
Work which explores how a cyber buffer zone team can quickly gain knowledge and situational awareness of critical infrastructure
under these conditions would therefore be valuable.

Difficulty to train

Peacekeepers  working  on other  activities  can  perform  training to  prepare  themselves  for  deployment  in  the  field.    For  example,
exercises can be run to simulate a physical buffer zone and the types of scenarios they could face.  Simulating a cyber buffer zone for
training purposes will be more challenging.  Due to the problem of fragility at CNI and a 100% uptime requirement, the UN will have
difficulty  finding  a  site  where cyber  peacekeepers  can  test  their  tools  and  processes.    Simulations  are  a  possible  solution  here,  but
producing  such  a  simulation,  which  could  accurately  model  cyber  warfare’s  effects  on  critical  national  infrastructure  and  its
components is a complex task. Efforts in this area do exist (Ferreira, Machado, Costa, & Rezende, 2015) but further research would
bring value to developing effective cyber buffer zones.

Securing cyber expertise

Cyber security expertise is in high demand across the world, with some estimating that by 2021 there will be 3.5 million unfilled cyber
security roles across the public and private sector (Morgan, 2017). With threats in cyber space only rising, the demands for staff with
cyber expertise will only continue to grow.  This presents a challenge to the concept of cyber peacekeeping: where is the expertise
going to come from and how will it be funded?  Peacekeeping organisations such as the UN rely upon contributions of troops from
member  states,  but  it  is  questionable  if  states  already  short  on  cyber  expertise  would  be  willing to  lose  them  to  support  a  peace
operation.    We have  also  proposed  that  a  cyber  buffer  will  need  a  range  of  skillsets, including  some  which  come from  the  private
sector.  It must therefore be asked what incentives these private organisations would need to contribute their expertise.  Research on
why states contribute towards peace operations is well established (Bove & Elia, 2011) (Bellamy & Williams, 2013), and it would be
useful to explore how this body of work can be applied to the concept of cyber buffer zones.

Political, legal and social concerns

The  concept  of  peacekeeping  is  one  which  touches  upon  multiple  domains  of  thought.    Legal,  social,  political  and  military
considerations all come together to make peacekeeping a success.  A cyber buffer zone will be no different.  Studies which examine
the legal implications and requirements will be essential.  For example, it is likely that many sites critical to the protection of civilians
will be owned by private entities and not the nation state itself. This raises questions about a state’s ability to consent to a buffer at
sites  it  does  not  outright  own.    Questions  of  privacy  and  data  protection  may  also  arise  in  the  case  of  peacekeepers  of  multiple
nationalities entering infrastructure to perform monitoring of network traffic. On the political aspect, highly cyber developed nations
may be wary of sending their cyber experts to work alongside those from rival nations.  There is even the possibility for cases where a
nation is conducting or condoning cyber attacks on one hand, whilst contributing cyber peacekeepers with the other.  In this regard
there is potential for the goals of a cyber buffer zone to become subverted for ulterior motives, or at least for the suspicion of such to
exist between nations.  Research which explores and resolves these aspects is valuable towards making cyber buffer zones a success.

CONCLUSION

UN  Peacekeeping  has  been  operating  since  1948,  working  to  maintain  peace  and  protect  civilians  around  the  world.    As  war
increasingly gains a cyber component, it is important to consider how peacekeeping must adapt to remain effective.  The field of cyber
peacekeeping addresses this issue, and in this chapter we have made a contribution by building upon the idea of a cyber buffer zone.

Buffer zones have been used throughout the history of UN peacekeeping to physically separate conflicting forces, protect civilians and
ensure peace in a region.  We have proposed that the concept of a cyber buffer zone is valuable, but that there are many challenges to
overcome.

From  the  perspective  of  value,  a  cyber  buffer  zone  can  directly  address  one  of  the  main  goals  of  UN  Peacekeeping:  protection of
civilians.    As  societies  become  increasingly  reliant  upon  cyber  space  for  the  provision  of  services  such  as  power,  water,  finance,
transport and commerce, the impact that cyber warfare could have upon these services rises.  Failure of a smart grid, air traffic control

or the rail network could at the very least prevent a nation and its citizens from recovering to a level where peace can be maintained.
In some cases, it could lead to loss of life.

We have therefore designed cyber buffer zones as an activity which consists of both immediate and longer term activities.  The focus
of  the  immediate  activities  is  to  rapidly  address  any  pressing  threats  to  civilians  and  peace.    Once  this  has  been  achieved, cyber
security at the site is bolstered so that it remains resilient into the future.

While a cyber buffer zone is valuable, we have shown that there are many challenges to overcome.  Critical national infrastructure can
be difficult to secure, especially at short notice without much prior knowledge of the hardware, software and protocols in use.  It will
also require specific expertise that will likely be expensive in a market where cyber expertise is in high demand.  Whilst these and
other challenges exist, we propose that future research will be able to overcome them.

Bibliography
Akatyev, N., & James, J. I. (2015). Digital Forensics and Cyber Crime: 7th International Conference, ICDF2C
2015, Seoul, South Korea, October 6-8, 2015. Revised Selected Papers. In I. J. James, & F. Breitinger
(Eds.). Springer International Publishing.

Baradaran, N., & Habibi, H. (2017). Cyber Warfare and Self-Defense from the Perspective of International

Law. J. Pol. & L., 10, 40.

Bellamy, A., & Williams, P. (2010). Understanding Peacekeeping. Polity.
Bellamy, A., & Williams, P. (2013). Providing Peacekeepers: The Politics, Challenges, and Future of United

Nations Peacekeeping Contributions. OUP Oxford.

Bove, V., & Elia, L. (2011). Supplying peace: Participation in and troop contribution to peacekeeping missions.

Journal of Peace Research, 48, 699-714.

Cahill, T. P., Rozinov, K., & Mule, C. (2003, 6). Cyber warfare peacekeeping. Information Assurance

Workshop, 2003. IEEE Systems, Man and Cybernetics Society, (pp. 100-106).

Coffey, K., Smith, R., Maglaras, L., & Janicke, H. (2018). Vulnerability Analysis of Network Scanning on

SCADA Systems. Security and Communication Networks.

Dipert, R. R. (2010). The Ethics of Cyberwarfare. Journal of Military Ethics, 9, 384-410.
Dorn, W. (2017). Cyberpeacekeeping: A New Role for the United Nations? (Vol. 18). Georgetown Journal of

International Affairs.

Eden, P., Blyth, A., Burnap, P., Cherdantseva, Y., Jones, K., Soulsby, H., et al. (2016). A Cyber Forensic

Taxonomy for SCADA Systems in Critical Infrastructure. In E. Rome, M. Theocharidou, & S.
Wolthusen, Critical Information Infrastructures Security. CRITIS 2015. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol 9578 (pp. 27-39). Springer.

Eden, P., Blyth, A., Burnap, P., Cherdantseva, Y., Jones, K., Soulsby, H., et al. (2016). Forensic readiness for

SCADA/ICS incident response. Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium for ICS & SCADA
Cyber Security Research (pp. 1-9). Swindon: BCS Learning & Development Ltd.

Ferreira, A., Machado, A., Costa, F. A., & Rezende, J. L. (2015). Use of simulation to achieve better results in

cyber military training. IEEE Military Communications Conference. Tampa.

Gao, J. J., Rajan, B., Nori, R., Fu, B., Xiao, Y., Liang, W., et al. (2014). SCADA communication and security

issues. Security and Communication Networks, 175-194.

Google. (2016). Project Shield. Retrieved from https://www.google.com/ideas/products/project-shield/
Kleffner, J. K., & Dinniss, H. A. (2013). Keeping The Cyber Peace: International Legal Aspects of Cyber

Activities in Peace Operations. International Law Studies, 89, 512-539.

Liles, S., Rogers, M., Dietz, J. E., & Larson, D. (2012). Applying traditional military principles to cyber

warfare. Cyber Conflict (CYCON), 2012 4th International Conference on, (pp. 1-12).

Martins, R. P. (2018, 4). Punching Above Their Digital Weight. International Journal of Cyber Warfare and

Terrorism, 8, 32-46.

Merabti, M., Kennedy, M., & Hurst, W. (2011). Critical infrastructure protection: A 21st century challenge.

International Conference on Communications and Information Technology. Aqaba.

Morgan, S. (2017). Cybersecurity Jobs Report 2018-2021. Cybersecurity Ventures.

Nicholson, A., Webber, S., Dyer, S., Patel, T., & Janicke, H. (2012). SCADA security in the light of Cyber-

Warfare. Computers and Security, 418-436.

Paul Cichonski, T. M. (2012). Computer Security Incident Handling Guide. National Institute of Standards and

Technology.

Robinson, M. (2013). The SCADA Threat Landscape. Proceedings of the 1st International Symposium on ICS

& SCADA Cyber Security Research 2013 (pp. 30-41). UK: BCS.

Robinson, M., Jones, K., & Janicke, H. (2015). Cyber warfare: Issues and challenges . Computers & Security,

49, 70-94.

Robinson, M., Jones, K., Janicke, H., & Maglaras, L. (2018). An introduction to cyber peacekeeping. Journal of

Network and Computer Applications, 114, 70-87.

Rrushi, J. L. (2012). SCADA Protocol Vulnerabilities. In J. Lopez, R. Setola, & S. D. Wolthusen, Critical

Infrastructure Protection (pp. 150-176). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

UN Department of Peacekeeping Operations. (2015). The Protection of Civilians in United Nations

Peacekeeping. United Nations.

United Nations. (1992, 6 17). An Agenda for Peace A/47/277.
United Nations. (2008, 1). United Nations Peacekeeping Operations: Capstone Doctrine.
United Nations. (2012, 8). United Nations Infantry Battalion Manual Volume 1. United Nations.
United Nations. (2012, 8). United Nations Infantry Battalion Manual Volume 2. United Nations.
United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations. (2014). Planning Toolkit. United Nations.
United States Homeland Security. (2009). Developing an Industrial Control Systems Cybersecurity Incident

Response Capability.

Wedgbury, A., & Jones, K. (2015). Automated Asset Discovery in Industrial Control Systems - Exploring the

Problem. 3rd International Symposium for ICS & SCADA Cyber Security Research.

Ying, H., Maglaras, L., Janicke, H., & Jones, K. (2015). An Industrial Control Systems incident response
decision framework. IEEE Conference on Communications and Network Security. Florence.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Akatyev, N., & James, J. I. (2015). Cyber Peacekeeping, Digital Forensics and Cyber Crime: 7th International
Conference,  ICDF2C  2015,  Seoul,  South  Korea,  October  6-8,  2015.  Revised  Selected  Papers.  In  I.  J.
James, & F. Breitinger (Eds.). Springer International Publishing.

Bellamy, A., & Williams, P. (2010). Understanding Peacekeeping. Polity.
Dorn,  W. (2017). Cyberpeacekeeping: A New Role for the United Nations? (Vol. 18). Georgetown Journal of

International Affairs.

Kleffner,  J.  K.,  & Dinniss,  H.  A.  (2013).  Keeping  The  Cyber  Peace:  International  Legal  Aspects  of  Cyber

Activities in Peace Operations. International Law Studies, 89, 512-539.

Maglaras L.  & Ferrag M. A.  & Derhab A.  & Mukherjee  M.  &  Janicke H. &  Rallis  S.  (2018). Threats,
Protection and Attribution of Cyber Attacks on National Critical Infrastructures, EAI Transactions on Security
and Safety

KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS

CNI: Critical National Infrastructure.
DDR: Disarmament, Demobilisation and Reintegration
UN United Nations

