Fishy Cyber Attack Detection in Industrial Control Systems
An approach based on sequence learning LSTM networks

Manikanta Reddy Dornala
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur

9
1
0
2

b
e
F
4
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
9
0
4
3
0
.
2
1
8
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Cyber attacks have become serious threats to Industrial Control
systems as well. It becomes important to develop a serious threat de-
fense system against such vulnerabilities. For such process control
systems, safety should also be assured apart from security. As un-
earthing vulnerabilities and patching them is not a feasible solution,
these critical infrastructures need safeguards to prevent accidents,
both natural and artificial, that could potentially be hazardous.
Morita proposed an effective Zone division[3], capable of evalu-
ating remote and concealed attacks on the system, coupled with
Principal Component Analysis. But the need to analyze the node
that has been compromised and stopping any further damages,
requires an automated technique.
Illustrating the basic ideas we’ll simulate a simple Water plant. We
propose a new automated approach based on Long Short Term
Memory networks capable of detecting attacks and pin point the
location of the breach.

KEYWORDS
Industrial Control Systems, Attack Detection, LSTM, Cyber-Security,
Concealment, Machine Learning

1 INTRODUCTION
In the age of Internet, cyber attacks have become a major threat.
Until recently only private and information centered systems were
breached. But now, cyber attacks are a threat to Industrial Sys-
tems as Well. Serious security vulnerabilities are patched in regular
personal computers and commercial spaces, quite frequently but
Industrial control systems are seldom fixed as these patches could
lead to new conflicts in the system.
This opens up a wide space for attackers to sneak in. A prime exam-
ple would be of Stuxnet, that sabotaged Iranian uranium enrichment
facilities in 2010.

1.1 The Stuxnet malware
Stuxnet utilized existing vulnerabilities in the operating system,
along with a good understanding of the PLCs to formulate a mal-
ware. The sole target of the malware was to manipulate the working
of centrifuges that enriched Uranium. Such carefully crafted attacks
cannot be prevented unless a perfect system is built. Instead, it is
enough to detect such breaches and then assess the damage. Thus
it is important to build a reliable security and safety mechanism to
prevent against attacks like Stuxnet.

1.2 Zone Based PCA
Hashimoto proposed a method of securing the information system
by dividing the network into ”plural zones”. By Zone Division

[1] the probability of detecting possible attacks and accidents is
increased.

Conjoined with PCA [3], Zone Based PCA can analyze the re-
lationship between the variables in plural zones and detect any
changes caused by potential concealed breaches and unintended
accidents. There can many types of relationships between the vari-
ables that are analyzed differently by Zone-Based PCA. An on-board
safety personnel is still required, who may notice the change in
PCA variables and report an anomaly.

1.3 Sequence Learning
We propose a new approach based on sequence learning algorithms,
to detect changes from regular working unlike relationships be-
tween variables. The neural network architecture, utilized is capable
of learning how the normal functioning of the system looks like
and detect if something has changed.

In order to illustrate the working of the system, we simulate a

simple water plant, that circulates hot water between two tanks.

2 SIMULATED SYSTEM
The simulation is a very basic version of the plant. In this sys-
tem(Figure 1), water circulates between two tanks (Tank1 and
Tank2) . The systems contain SCADA and other operators. The
plant consists of many sensors and controls (Figure 2).

Figure 1: Simulated Water Plant

2.1 Variables in the System
L1 and L2 are levels of water in Tank1 and Tank2 respectively.
Similarly, T1 and T2 measure the temperatures. The Heater (H)
provides heat to increase the temperature of water in Tank2. The
Pump (P) pumps the heated water into Tank1. Valves V1 and V2 are
controlled to allow water to flow across them. Tank1 is assumed to
radiate heat and cool down the water.

We define two kinds of variables in our system. Process variables
are the ones that are measured by sensors. Control Variables can

 
 
 
 
 
 
be manipulated and change the state of the plant.

Process Variables: L1, L2, T1, T2, F1, F2, F3
Control Variables: V1, V2, H, P

2.2 Network Configuration of the System
The network is divided into two control zones, such that the control
of a control variable that directly affects a process variable is in a
different zone.

3 ZONE BASED PCA
Principal Component analysis re-projects the data in the study into
new space, with coordinates of high variance. Thus the variables
with high variance can be maximally noted across them. PCA in
a simple sense brings down the high dimensionality of the data
to a smaller number. In our experiments, we’ve considered top 3
coordinates, in decreasing order of variance. Figure 3 shows this
behavior of normal functioning.

Zone 1: L1, T1, V2, F2, H
Zone 2: L2, T2, V1, F1, F3, P

A control variable in a zone cannot directly affect process vari-
ables in the same zone. In the current setup, L1 depends directly on
the flow F1 controlled by V1. Therefore they are being separated.
The rest of the division can be explained by similar logic fashion.
H decides the amount of heat delivered into the system. There
by it controls both T1 and T2, yet it is clubbed with T1 in Zone1 as
there is more direct dependency between H and T2 as compared
to H and T1. A formal method based on decidability matrices was
presented by Hashimoto [1]

Figure 3: PCA projection of an un-compromised plant.

The order of variance is as follows; blue, green, red in decreasing
order. The periodic nature of the plot is due to the way water is
circulated. Now we’ll simulate a data injection attack with conceal-
ment.

The attack manipulates Zone 2 and takes over the control of
variables V1 and P. By setting them both to 0, the water in Tank1
doesn’t decrease and the temperature of Tank1 increase to the
extent where it depressurizes.

Figure 2: Information Flow Network of the Water Plant
OPC: OLE for Process Control,
CADS: Cyber Attack Detection System

Figure 4: PCA projection of compromised plant.
Zone 2 variables are remotely manipulated.

2

0200400600800100012001400Evaluation Points−80−60−40−200204060Top 3 scoresPCA Based Detection (Top 3 Scores).0200400600800100012001400Evaluation Points−200−150−100−50050100Top 3 scoresPCA Based Detection (Top 3 Scores).Figure 4 shows the dynamics of this process. The attack begins

at simulation point 500.

There is drastic change in the behavior of the projection in blue.
Any on-board personnel can realize such a change of high magni-
tude and shut down the systems if necessary.

It becomes difficult with increasing types of manipulation to
identify what kind of change in the systems produces a particular
kind of behavior in the PCA projection.

4 ZONE BASED LSTM NETWORK
The PCA method evaluates relationships between variables and
raises alarm when the relationships or the dependencies between
the variables changes. The relationships can change in many differ-
ent ways when the number of variables involved is very large.

Instead of understanding the dependency between them, we
focus on differentiating the modes of running of the plant as a whole.
A normal working state is very different from a compromised state.
As the systems tend to repetitive work, it is not hard to notice that
there is a pattern to the way an un-compromised plant produces
data.

In order to achieve this, we use sequence learning LSTM net-

works in our method.

4.1 Long Short Term Memory

Figure 6: LSTM score of an un-compromised plant.

Normal functioning ensures a score match near close to 1, which

is expected.

In Figure 7 we compromise zone2 in a similar fashion. Both P

and V1 are set to 0 here.

Figure 5: Long Short Term Memory, LSTM, Units in action.
Img ref: colah

LSTM[2] is a form of Recurrent Neural Network, it remembers
what’s important and forgets the trivial things. It is capable of
learning patterns in data and identify those that don’t match.

LSTM achieves this by what are termed as memory control gates
in the unit. There are different gates to control and filter data. The
gates decide what kind of variables at a simulation point are impor-
tant. By doing so repeatedly, it learns the values of the variables to
look for to understand the sequence pattern. It then assigns a score
, that signifies how strongly it believes in the pattern.

We train an LSTM network with a logged data of the normal
functioning of plant, and use it to give a confidence score to the
previous 50 points at every evaluation point. This enables us to
know if the current sequence of data generated is in high correlation
with data generated during normal functioning.

Figure 7: LSTM score of compromised plant.
Zone 2 variables are remotely manipulated and P is set to 0.

It is to be noted that when the zone is compromised, the running
of the plant produces a different pattern of data. Then the LSTM
network gives us a correlation score with the actual pattern of
functioning, which in this case, when P is set to 0 averages around
a value of 0.85.

When the variable P is set to 1 (Figure 8), the pattern of execution

produces scores averaging around 0.8.

By thresholding at different values we can easily identify which
variable the attacker has modified. We can also detect the zone
which has been compromised.

3

05001000150020002500Evaluation Point0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4ScoreNeural Network Based Prediction.0200400600800100012001400Evaluation Point0.50.60.70.80.91.0ScoreNeural Network Based Prediction.Figure 8: LSTM score of compromised plant.
Zone 2 variables are remotely manipulated and P is set to 1.

A plausible set of thresholds to detect the variable could be.
P = 0: score ∈ (0.8, 0.9)
P = 1: score ∈ (0.75, 0.85)

5 CONCLUSION
Attack Detection is of paramount importance as opposed to un-
earthing vulnerabilities and fixing them, in Industrial Systems due
to high latency in patching their systems. The proposed method
for intrusion detection, based on LSTM is also capable of diagnos-
ing the attack for points of failure. Sequence-based learning and
anomaly detection have an advantage over PCA-based methods in
this regard. This approach shows an example of interdisciplinary
work on implementing machine learning technologies for tackling
the problems of Industrial Systems and Networks.

REFERENCES
[1] Yoshihiro Hashimoto, Takeshi Toyoshima, Shuichi Yogo, Masato Koike, Takashi
Hamaguchi, Sun Jing, and Ichiro Koshijima. Safety securing approach against
cyber-attacks for process control system. Computers & Chemical Engineering,
57:181–186, 2013.

[2] Sepp Hochreiter and J¨urgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural

computation, 9(8):1735–1780, 1997.

[3] T Morita, Shuichi Yogo, Masato Koike, Takashi Hamaguchi, S Jung, Ichiro Koshi-
jima, and Yoshihiro Hashimoto. Detection of cyber-attacks with zone dividing
and pca. Procedia Computer Science, 22:727–736, 2013.

4

0200400600800100012001400Evaluation Point0.50.60.70.80.91.0ScoreNeural Network Based Prediction.