9
1
0
2

n
a
J

4

]
T
I
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
5
0
1
0
.
1
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Cyber Security Challenges and Solutions for V2X
Communications: A Survey

Aljawharah Alnassera,b, Hongjian Sunb,∗, Jing Jiangc

aDepartment of Information Technology, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
bDurham University, Durham, UK
cDepartment of Mathematics, Physics and Electrical Engineering, Northumbria
University, UK

Abstract

In recent years, vehicles became able to establish connections with other ve-
hicles and infrastructure units that are located in the roadside. In the near
future, the vehicular network will be expanded to include the communica-
tion between vehicles and any smart devices in the roadside which is called
Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) communication. The vehicular network causes
many challenges due to heterogeneous nodes, various speeds and intermittent
connection, where traditional security methods are not always eﬃcacious. As
a result, an extensive variety of research works has been done on optimizing
security solutions whilst considering network requirements.
In this paper,
we present a comprehensive survey and taxonomy of the existing security
solutions for V2X communication technology. Then, we provide discussions
and comparisons with regard to some pertinent criteria. Also, we present
a threat analysis for V2X enabling technologies. Finally, we point out the
research challenges and some future directions.

Keywords: V2X communications, LTE, cyber security, vehicular network.

∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: alalnasser@ksu.edu.sa (Aljawharah Alnasser),

hongjian.sun@durham.ac.uk (Hongjian Sun), jing.jiang@northumbria.ac.uk (Jing
Jiang)

Preprint submitted to Computer Networks

January 7, 2019

 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Abbreviations used throughout the paper.

3GPP
D2D
eNodeB
IoT
LTE
RSU
UE
V2I
V2P
V2V
V2X
QoS

3rd Generation Partnership Project
Direct-to-Direct
Evolved Node B
Internet of Things
Long-Term Evolution
Road Side Unit
User Equipment
Vehicle-to-Infrastructure
Vehicle-to-Pedestrian
Vehicle-to-Vehicle
Vehicle-to-Everything
Quality of Service

1. Introduction

As a result of massive spread of Internet, a new notion has emerged which
converts rigid objects to smart objects and connects them together, known as
Internet of Things (IoT). This is achieved by embedding extra hardware such
as sensors and communication interface within each device and combining
them with a software system. Thus, the devices can sense the surrounding
environment and share information using wireless communications.

IoT has been broadly applied in various domains such as health-care,
smart cities and industry. Indeed, the people spend the most times in homes,
oﬃces and transportation. According to the U.S. Department of Transporta-
tion and Safety Administration, the people spend 500 million hours per week
in the vehicle. As a result, based on Alcatel-Lucents research which was
accomplished in 2009, they found that over 50% of participants liked the
idea of connected vehicles and 22% are willing to pay fees for communication
services (Araniti et al. (2013)). Consequently, the need has been increased
for joining transportation system under the umbrella of IoT. Initially, trans-
portation system was transformed into cyber physical system by embedding
software into vehicles. Hence, vehicles can form a network and communicate
with any smart device as a part of IoT.

With the integration of IoT technologies, vehicular networks became vul-
internal or external attacks. In-
nerable to various types of cyber-attacks:
ternal attacks are initiated by the fully authorized node which can bypass
the authentication model, while external attacks are launched by an unau-
thorized node. In the latter case, secure authorization model can minimize

2

the eﬀect of these attacks.

Many security solutions were studied to protect the vehicular networks
against various types of cyber attacks.
In this survey, we aim to provide
a deep research in this area and study the security solutions for all types
of vehicular communications. We believe that this survey will guide future
research for addressing challenges of the future vehicular network.

1.1. Relations to Existing Surveys

Although there are a large number of publications regarding the secu-
rity aspects in vehicular networks, there is so far no comprehensive survey
on that for Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) communications. Vehicular ad-hoc
network is one type of vehicular networks. There exist surveys focusing on
general structure of vehicular ad-hoc network: Al-Sultan et al. (2014) pro-
vided a survey on vehicular ad-hoc network structure, enabling technologies,
applications, and research challenges. Karagiannis et al. (2011) proposed the
basic characteristics and requirements of vehicular ad-hoc network, and the
standardization eﬀorts in intelligent transportation systems.

There are some surveys on general security challenges in vehicular ad-hoc
networks only. For instance, Al-Kahtani (2012) published a survey on the
potential cyber attacks on vehicular ad-hoc networks and the proposed secu-
rity methods to guard against them. Engoulou et al. (2014) provided security
requirements and threats in vehicular ad-hoc networks. Also, they discussed
the attacks characteristics and security solutions. In addition, Fonseca and
Festag (2006) reviewed the existing security solutions and described them on
a comparable level. Mishra et al. (2011) presented a general review of some
security research in vehicular ad-hoc network.

On the other hand, there exist some surveys on a speciﬁc security mech-
anism that can be used in vehicular networks. Mejri et al. (2014) classiﬁed
the security solutions in vehicular ad-hoc networks based on cryptographic
schemes and compared them to evaluate their performance. While, Zhang
(2011) analysed existing trust-based solutions in multi-agent systems, mo-
bile ad-hoc networks and vehicular ad-hoc networks. Kerrache et al. (2016a)
reviewed the main existing trust-based models and studied when trust-based
solution is more suitable than cryptography, and the opposite. In this sur-
vey, we conduct an in-depth analysis on two dimensions. The ﬁrst dimension
includes the ability of security services in IEEE802.11p and Long-Term Evo-
lution for V2X (LTE-V2X) to defend against various cyber-attacks. The
second dimension covers the security challenges for various security methods

3

which were applied on vehicular networks. This will ﬁve the researchers the
full picture regards the security constraints for each communication protocol
and also for each security method.

1.2. Contributions and Structure

The main aim of this survey is to present a comprehensive and organized
overview of various security solutions in vehicular networks and discuss the
design challenges of security model for V2X communications. This paper
makes three signiﬁcant contributions to the ﬁeld of V2X security:

1. The proposed taxonomy classiﬁes the security solutions of vehicular
networks to study the challenges of designing security model for the
V2X network which is a novel approach to the subject.

2. Threats analysis for V2X enabling technologies is conducted. Based on
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst such analysis for threats in IEEE802.11p
and LTE-V2X.

3. We evaluate the eﬀectiveness of security solutions on the considered

attack, message type, latency limit and model structure.

The paper is organized as follow: in section 2 we present some necessary
background information. In section 3 we mention the security requirements
and threats analysis for V2X enabling technologies. A taxonomy of security
methods for V2X technology is presented in Section 4.
In Section 5, we
classify and examine the presented methods. Some challenges and research
direction are given in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 concludes this survey.

2. Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) communication Technology

V2X technology refers to intelligent transportation system where all road
entities including vehicles, pedestrians, cycles, motorcycles and infrastruc-
ture units are interconnected with each other. This connectivity will pro-
duce more accurate information about the traﬃc situation across the entire
network. Thus, it will help in improving traﬃc ﬂows and reduce accidents.
In 2015, Siemens implemented the ﬁrst fully dynamic system on Germany’s
A9 highway. The result showed 35% fewer accidents and reduction of people
injured at roads with 31% (Siemens (2015)).

4

2.1. Architecture

Intelligent transportation system applies data processing, communica-
tion, and sensor technologies to vehicles, infrastructure units and roadside
users to increase safety and eﬃciency of the transportation system. The het-
erogeneous network consists of two main sub-networks (Hamida et al. (2015))
as shown in Figure 1:

• Intra-vehicle network comprises of a collection of sensors which are
located in the vehicle. The interactions among sensors are bridged via
Ethernet, ZigBee or WiFi connections.

• Inter-vehicle network covers the communication between the vehicle

and surrounding devices. It comprises of four entities as follows:

– On-board unit is the main entity in intelligent transportation
system. Each vehicle is equipped with on-board unit to be able to
process the collected data and interact with surrounding entities.

Figure 1: General Structure of intelligent transportation system.

5

SensorIntra-vehicle sub-networkInter-vehicle sub-networkV2S communicationV2V communicationV2P communicationV2I communicationCentral server– Roadside users such as pedestrian, motorcyclists, bikers and

roller skates.

– Road Side Unit (RSU) is the transportation infrastructure unit
which exist in the roadside. it has information about local topol-
ogy which assists in providing several services to the road entities.

– Central/Cloud server has a central control on all road entities,

traﬃc and roads.

2.2. Communications

V2X supports a uniﬁed connectivity platform for the connected entities.
Also, it allows road entities to transmit information such as their current
speed, position, and direction to their ﬁxed and moving neighboring entities.
Then, they use this information to make intelligent decisions. The commu-
nication type depends on the entities that establish the link. It supports ﬁve
types of communications (3GPP (2017)):

• Vehicle-to-Sensors (V2S) represents the communication between sen-

sors in intra-vehicle sub-network;

• Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) covers the communication between vehicles

using V2V application;

• Vehicle-to-Pedestrian (V2P) provides the connection between the ve-

hicle and roadside users using V2V application;

• Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) supports the communication between vehicles

and the electric grid to charge Electric Vehicles.

• Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) represents the communication between

road entities and infrastructure units.

In one vehicular network, all road entities are supposed to generate and
exchange messages. The messages can be used to support variety of appli-
cations, e.g., applications related to safety, traﬃc and infotainment. The
messages are categorized into four types (Ahmed and Lee (2017)):

• Periodic message (beacon): Road entity periodically broadcasts a
status message, which contains information such as speed, location and
direction, to the neighboring entities. It generated at regular intervals

6

between 100ms to 1s. As a result, each entity can perceive the local
topology. Also, they can predict and anticipate dangerous situations or
traﬃc congestion. This type of messages is not time critical (300ms).

• Local event triggered message: Road entity sends the message
when a local event is detected such as the critical warning or intersec-
tion assist. It is sent locally to the neighboring entities using V2V/V2P
links where it contains useful information for neighborhood area only.
In addition, it is a time critical which requires to be delivered with a
low latency around 100ms.

• Global event triggered message: Road entity sends the message
when a global event is detected such as road construction and road
congestion. This message needs to be propagated over a wider area.
As a result, road entities use V2I communication link to transmit the
message.

• Emergency vehicle message: It is used to support a smooth move-
ment for emergency vehicles. It is sent by emergency vehicles to the
surrounding vehicles using V2V/V2P links to clear the road.

2.3. Applications

As a result of the technological improvements in the areas of sensing and
wireless networking, intelligent transportation system permits for the existing
of various applications that are related to safety, traﬃc, and infotainment
(Hamida et al. (2015)).

• Safety-related applications use wireless communications between sur-
rounding entities to decrease accidents and protect the commuters
from dangers. Each road entity periodically sends safety message to
its neighbors to report its current status. Furthermore, they may also
need to transmit warning messages when local or global event is de-
tected.

• Traﬃc-related applications are deployed to manage the traﬃc eﬃciently
and ensure smoothly traﬃc ﬂow. They are responsible for collecting
the traﬃc information and transmitting them wirelessly to a remote
server for analysis. After that, the analysis results are sent to vehicles
for future usage.

7

• Infotainment-related applications aim at improving the driving expe-
rience by supporting various services such as Internet access, online
gaming, video streaming, weather information.

3. Security for V2X Enabling Technologies

Supporting safety-related applications is the core of vehicle-to-vehicle
communication. Since ten years ago, V2X technology has been enabled by
IEEE802.11p, which has been standardized, implemented and examined.

One of the most critical challenges to make V2X technology feasible is
how to ensure interoperability among heterogeneous devices. As a result,
the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) has worked on standard-
ization for LTE protocol to ﬁt the requirements and services of the V2X
communications. 3GPP has concentrated on supporting diﬀerent types of
communications using one standard. The ﬁrst release (Release 8) was in
2008. The standardization of LTE Advanced Pro (Release 14) ﬁnalized at
the beginning of 2017 (3GPP (2017)).

The safety of commuters relies on the performance of these technologies.
Consequently, it is important to analyse the security services oﬀered by these
technologies.

3.1. IEEE 802.11p
3.1.1. Overview

It is an enhanced version of the ad-hoc mode in IEEE802.11a. It was im-
plemented for supporting the communication between mobile nodes with the
presence of obstacles, dynamic topology and intermittent connection. The
main purpose of IEEE802.11p is to support non-line of sight (Filippi et al.
It was proposed for supporting intelligent transportation system
(2017)).
applications in vehicular adhoc networks. It provides ad-hoc communication
between vehicles and RSUs. It gives vehicles the ability to share information
with their neighboring vehicles using V2V and V2I only.

IEEE 802.11p can be easily deployed with minimum cost, however, it lacks
of scalability, unlimited delays, and Quality of Service (QoS). Furthermore, it
can only oﬀer intermittent V2I connectivity because of the short radio range
(Dawood et al. (2014)).

8

3.1.2. Security Measures

IEEE P1609.2 is based on cryptography standards such as elliptic curve
cryptography, wireless access in vehicular environment certiﬁcate formats,
and hybrid encryption methods (ITS Committee (2013)). Broadcast Mes-
sages usually are not directed to particular destination and they related to
safety-related applications. Also, they contain the timestamp which is ob-
tained from the internal clock for synchronization. However, these messages
are only signed with the sender’s certiﬁcate. Elliptic Curve Digital Signa-
ture Algorithm is the signature algorithm in the standard (Laurendeau and
Barbeau (2006)). Transaction Messages are generally unicast messages and
they may be used to access location-based services and personal data. Conse-
quently, to protect the data, these messages are encrypted with a symmetric
encryption algorithm. To ensure more protection, the algorithm uses ran-
dom key which is encrypted using elliptic curve integrated encryption scheme
(Laurendeau and Barbeau (2006)).

3.2. LTE-V2X
3.2.1. Overview

It has the potential to deal with the low-latency and high-reliability V2X
use cases. LTE-V2X is mainly composed of six main components (3GPP
(2017)) as shown in Figure 2:

• User Equipment (UE) is the device that is used directly by an end-user

to communicate with eNodeB or other UEs.

• Evolved Node B (eNB) is the wireless interface for LTE network which
allows for sending and receiving radio transmissions to/from all UEs in
one or more cells.

• V2X Application Server is responsible for distribution of V2X messages

to diﬀerent target areas.

• V2X Control Function is responsible for authorization and revocation
It provides various services after successful mutual

of V2X services.
authentication and security key generation.

• Multimedia Broadcast Multicast Service supports eﬃcient delivery for

multicast services over areas typically spanning multiple cells.

9

Figure 2: General Structure of LTE-based V2X network.

• Single-cell Point-to-Multipoint provides the delivery of multicast ser-

vices over a single cell.

In LTE-V2X, the messages are sent using two types of links, as shown in

Figure 3:

• Cellular-based communication covers the two way communication be-
tween UE and eNB over LTE air interface (Asadi et al. (2014)). The
communication going from UE to eNB is called uplink and when it is
going from eNB to a UE it is called downlink. Cellular-based commu-
nication covers wide area with high capacity. It is used by V2X ap-
plication server to broadcast messages to vehicles and beyond, or send
them to the server via a unicast connection.
In addition to one-to-
one communications between eNB and UE, eNB supports one-to-many
communications via downlink. eNB uses single-cell point-to-multipoint

10

Serving GWMobility Management EntityMultimedia Broadcast Multicast GWPacket Data Network GWHome Subscriber ServerBroadcast Multicast Service CenterV2X Control FunctionV2X Application ServerE-UTRANUEUEPC5S1M1SGmb/SGi-mbS6aS5/S8V4V2MB2-C/MB2-ULTE-UuFigure 3: Communication links in LTE-V2X.

service for the transmissions over a single cell and multimedia broadcast
multicast service for communications over multiple cells.

• Device-to-Device communication (D2D) enables the direct connection
between UEs without traversing eNB and it is called side-link. It sup-
ports multi-hop communications between network entities to enhance
the end-to end connectivity. Also, it provides a short-range communi-
cation and low latency for safety messages. It allows for UE to transmit
data directly to other UEs over the side-link even if they reside out-
of-network coverage. Every D2D pair can communicate via Inband or
Outband modes (Asadi et al. (2014)). Inband mode uses the cel-
lular spectrum for both D2D and cellular communications. Underlay
communication allows for both of them sharing and reusing the same
radio resources to improve the spectrum eﬃciency. The main draw-
back is the high possibility of collision between D2D links and cellular
links. In contrast, overlay communication allocates dedicated cellular
resources for D2D connections between the transmitter and the re-
ceiver. To minimize the interference between D2D and cellular links,
outband mode uses unlicensed spectrum such as 2.4 GHz industrial,
scientiﬁc and medical radio band. However, it is necessary to have an
extra interface that implements Wi-Fi Direct or Bluetooth.

In LTE-V2X, RSU can be implemented in two ways (3GPP (2017)). First,
it can be executed as stationary UE; then it receives V2X messages via the
In this case, the V2X application can
sidelink as shown in Figure 4 (a).

11

Figure 4: RSU implementation in V2X.

communicate with other V2X application. Second, it can be implemented in
eNB, where it receives V2X messages via LTE radio interface as shown in
Figure 4 (b). In this case, V2X application in UE communicates with the
V2X application server in eNB.

3.2.2. Security Measures

There are two types of LTE security mechanisms based on the type of

communications as follows.

• Cellular-based communications: There is a mutual authentication be-
tween UE and the core network. This is achieved by using the evolved
packet core authentication and key agreement procedure and generat-
ing ciphering key and an integrity key. Moreover, UEs apply diﬀerent
keys for diﬀerent communication sessions where session keys are pro-
duced using ciphering key and integrity key (Schlienz J (2015)). When
an UE connects to the LTE network over LTE radio interface, the

12

(a) RSU as stationary UE(b) RSU as a part of eNodeBUE (B) StationaryV2X ApplicationRSUUE (A) VehicleV2X ApplicationPC5eNodeBV2X Application ServerRSUUE (A) VehicleV2X ApplicationLTE-Uumobility management entity is responsible for executing a mutual au-
thentication with the UE. First, the UEs send authentication requests
to the mobility management entity. Second, the mobility management
entity checks the request validity and forwards it to home subscriber
server, which is combined with the authentication centre, to manage
and check user authenticity. Third, the authentication centre gener-
ates and sends the authentication vector for speciﬁc UE to the mobil-
ity management entity (Zhang and Fang (2005)). However, the token
that is sent by UE is not encrypted and not integrity protected. Af-
ter mutual authenticated, the key is exchanged between the mobility
management entity and UEs, then the UEs will be able to access the
core network. UE uses a pre-shared symmetric keying and integrity
algorithm for signalling packets that is sent to the network. However,
for user plane data, only ciphering algorithm is applied between UE
and eNB (5G-Americas (2016)).

• D2D communications: Before starting D2D communication, UEs have
to ﬁnish authentication procedure with the core network (Hsu and Lee
(2015)). Because the core network is responsible for managing the se-
curity parameters, the availability of accessing the network will directly
aﬀect the security level of D2D communications. The connectivity of
UEs is based on three scenarios (Yan et al. (2017)). In-network cov-
erage when both UEs are located in the network coverage, they can
communicate securely by the assist of the core network; partial cover-
age when only one UE is in the network coverage, the communication
is also managed by the core network, thus, they can establish a secure
communication. Also, it includes when both are located at the edge
of eNB coverage. They can forward their information to other covered
UEs using D2D link to communicate with the eNB. In this case, the
core network fully manages D2D communications as same as the ”In-
network coverage” scenario; and out-network coverage when the UEs
In this case, each UE
cannot communicate with the core network.
saves the authentication vector which is released by the authentication
centre for securing D2D communications (Hsu and Lee (2015)). The
authentication parameters are valid for speciﬁc time and they might be
revoked at any time, however, the security risk is increased.

To overcome this challenge, each group has a group ID, which is cor-
responding to the ProSe group ID (layer 2), Algorithm ID and proSe

13

group key. Also, each UE within the group has a particular member ID
(Schlienz J (2015)). Each proSe group key is provided with an expiry
time. When UE is located out-of-network coverage, the UE may work
for a longer time without extra provisioning when proSe group keys
valid at that time. The data in D2D communication is encrypted by
proSe encryption key which is derived from proSe group key (Schlienz J
(2015)). In this case, the conﬁdentiality requirement is achieved in data
transmission. However, there is no integrity protection on the user data
because the integrity key is shared by all group members.

3.3. Threats Analysis for IEEE 802.11p and LTE-V2X

Similar to most communication networks, V2X security requirements can
be divided into ﬁve points: availability, data integrity, conﬁdentiality, au-
thenticity and non-repudiation (Kerrache et al. (2016a)). However, in the
V2X environment, attacks which targeting information availability are the
most dangerous because they cause a serious eﬀect on safety-critical situa-
tions. The following presents the security requirements for V2X network and
threats against each one. Also, we present security analysis for IEEE802.11p
and LTE-V2X.

3.3.1. Threats on Availability

They prevent the authorized users from access the information such as:

• Blackhole and Greyhole attacks: the compromised node stops relaying
packets to the neighboring nodes. Thus, it blocks up the spreading
of information over the network. The attacker drops all packets that
received in blackhole attack, while drops some packets in the greyhole
attack. In IEEE 802.11p, each node must be authenticated to be a part
of packets’ route. In this case, the authentication process can deny the
external attacker from initiate blackhole/greyhole attacks. However,
the standard fails to protect the network from internal attackers. The
broadcast of warning packets could reduce the eﬀect of attack because
of the diﬀuse multiple copies over the network.

On the other hand, LTE-V2X is capable of eliminating external at-
tackers by applying mutual authentication between UEs and the core
network. In D2D communications when two UEs are located out of the
network coverage, there is a possibility that UEs communicate with an-
other UEs with revoked credentials because they are not provisioned by

14

the core network. In addition, the internal attacker is possible in case
of partial D2D coverage when UE that is located at the edge of eNB
coverage uses other UEs to relay the packets to eNB. In this case, the
relaying node could be a compromised node which drops the received
packets and blocks the communication with eNB.

• Flooding attack : The attacker sends a huge volume of packets to make
victim node unavailable. The IEEE 802.11p MAC is vulnerable to
ﬂooding attack. To initiate the attack, the attacker may exploit the
binary exponential backoﬀ scheme. Among the competing nodes, the
winning node captures the channel by sending data constantly. Thus,
it causes delay in transmitting data by forcing loaded neighbors to
backoﬀ for a long time (Mokhtar and Azab (2015)). Another weakness
in IEEE 802.11p MAC is network allocation vector ﬁeld (Mokhtar and
Azab (2015)). When there is a communication between two nodes,
the nearby nodes update their network allocation vector based on the
communication duration. During that period, all neighboring nodes
stop transmission and only overhear for the channel. On the other
hand, the attacker may transmit bogus message to cause errors in the
transmitted packets. As a result of MAC authentication, the previous
attacks could only be initiated by internal attackers.

In LTE-V2X, there may be two potential techniques to initiate ﬂooding
attack against a speciﬁc UE (Seddigh et al. (2010)). First, the mali-
cious node can use the resource scheduling information to transmit an
uplink control signal when another node uses the channel to transmit
its information. Thus, it causes a conﬂict at the eNB. Second, the UE
is permitted to stay in active mode, but turn oﬀ its radio transceiver
to save its power resource. During that mode, the UE is still allowed
to transmit packets in urgent situations. However, the attackers can
inject packets during that period to cause ﬂooding attack.

Moreover, each UE transmits periodically buﬀer status reports to eNB
which are used for packet scheduling and load balancing (Seddigh et al.
(2010)). Flooding attack could happen when the attacker impersonates
other UE and sends fake reports that indicate larger data volume than
in the real UE. As a result, eNB may stop accepting new requests for
joining the cell because it thinks that the cell is fully loaded (Seddigh
et al. (2010)).

15

• Jamming attack : the attacker broadcasts signals to corrupt the data
or jam the channel. Both IEEE802.11p and LTE-V2X physical layer is
based on the orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing technology. In
fact, a jammer requires to recognize the presence of packets to launch
jamming attack. However, non of current solutions can prevent jam-
ming signals. Using directional antennas could minimize the eﬀect of
this attack and allow for vehicles to avoid the jamming area (Lauren-
deau and Barbeau (2006)).

• Coalition and platooning attacks: a group of compromised nodes col-
laborate to initiate malicious activities such as blocking information or
isolate legitimate vehicles. For instance, when several internal attackers
collaborate and initiate blackhole attack, it could aﬀect the informa-
tion delivery even with broadcast nature that it is supported by the
IEEE802.11p. Also, these attacks are not only limited to blackhole but
include any malicious behavior.
In LTE-V2X, several compromised
node could prevent the traﬃc from the node at the edge of eNB cover-
age.

3.3.2. Threats on Integrity

Ensuring the data integrity includes the assurance of the accuracy and
consistency of data that spreading over the network. The following attacks
address data integrity (Al-Kahtani (2012)):

• Alter or inject false messages attack : the compromised node spreads
bogus messages in the network, by generating a new message or modi-
fying the received one. In both cases, it misleads the vehicles by giving
them a wrong information and putting them in a danger situation.

In IEEE802.11p, it is possible that internal attacker may try to broad-
cast false safety messages through the network. Broadcast messages are
intended for all surrounding nodes, but they need to be signed in order
to hinder external attackers from generating bogus messages. Because
internal attacker is an authenticated node, it could use its digital certiﬁ-
cate to sign any number of false messages (Laurendeau and Barbeau
(2006)). However, the standard requires an additional scheme to be
able to detect the attackers and then includes them in certiﬁcate revo-
cation lists. In addition, these messages are protected from alternation
because they are digitally signed by the sender’s certiﬁcate.

16

In LTE-V2X, external attacker cannot inject/alter any packet because
the user data in LTE-Advanced is encrypted with ciphering key which
is generated after a mutual authentication. On the other hand, the in-
ternal attackers can inject false information in the network. Also, they
can alter the received messages because in all communication scenarios
the integrity algorithm is only applied on signalling packets.

• Replay attack : the compromised node captures the packets and replays
them in a diﬀerent time to look like that they were sent by the original
sender.The vehicles which are operating in IEEE802.11p can defend
against replay attacks where each node has a cache of recently received
messages. Any new message is compared with the ones in the cache,
and messages older than a predeﬁned time are rejected (Mokhtar and
Azab (2015)). To prevent replay attack, LTE-V2X uses a timestamp
and a nonce in each message. Also, the message has a short lifetime
in the network, which leads to reject any repeated messages (Seddigh
et al. (2010)).

• GPS spooﬁng attack : the compromised node sends messages with fake
location or after a period of time. In general, GPS is responsible for
delivering both location and time to the surrounding nodes. However,
GPS antennas are vulnerable to damage from storms and lightning.
In addition, the antennas are susceptibility to jamming or spooﬁng
attacks.
In both protocols, the attackers can send fake location by
generating strong signal from a GPS satellite simulator. Moreover, a
successful replay attack could happen when UE uses GPS clock for
message timestamp because it is easy for the attacker to spoof GPS
clock (Cheng et al. (2017)). Thus, the repeated message, which is
sent after a while, could be accepted as a new message (Laurendeau
and Barbeau (2006)).
In this case, the protocols require to propose
plausibility checks to detect fake location and time.

3.3.3. Threats on Conﬁdentiality

The conﬁdentiality requirement allows for information to be known only
by the intended receiver. This is usually achieved by encrypting the message
with the public key of the receiver where it only can be decrypted by the
private key of the intended receiver. Some threats violate this requirement
(Mejri et al. (2014)), such as:

17

• Eavesdropping attack :

it aims to capture packet’s information and
acquire sensitive and conﬁdential information. Broadcast messages
generally contain traﬃc safety information which are considered non-
conﬁdential information (Mokhtar and Azab (2015)). On the other
hand, location based services and other types of transaction applica-
tion information are encrypted in IEEE802.11p. As long as the internal
attacker can collect information without a permission from other users,
it considers a challenge.

In LTE-V2X, the UEs use the pre-shared secret keys which are issued
by the authentication centre to establish a secure communication with
the core network. Thus, the external attacker cannot collect infor-
mation because the communication is encrypted. While in D2D com-
munication, the UE use a pre-shared secret key for each application.
However, this may cause additional computation costs on UEs (Hsu
and Lee (2015)). In both communications, internal attacker can gather
network information. To reduce the latency and computation cost, the
message is not encrypted. As a result, the external attacker can collect
conﬁdential information.

• Location tracking: sharing the location with neighboring nodes is very
important for various vehicular applications. As a result, attackers can
collect and use these information for tracking users. In IEEE802.11p,
every time an on-board unit broadcasts message to warn neighboring
vehicles regarding a safety update, it digitally signs the message with
its own certiﬁcate. Therefore, the receiving nodes can identify the
sending on-board unit and its current position. Unfortunately, wireless
access in vehicular environment cannot support anonymous broadcast
In LTE-V2X, the core
messages (Laurendeau and Barbeau (2006)).
network assigns diﬀerent temporary identiﬁers, which are continuously
changed, to UEs. The temporary identiﬁer is sent to UEs in a plain
text. Thus, the passive attacker is able to identify the location of the
user at that time (Seddigh et al. (2010)). However, location tracking
could be achieved only if the attacker can perform the mapping between
various identiﬁers and the UE. As a consequence, both internal and
external attackers can initiate that attack.

18

3.3.4. Threats on Authenticity

Ensuring the authenticity includes the process of giving nodes access to
the network based on their identity using certiﬁcates and digital signatures.
It works like a wall that protects the network from external attacks. Some
threats violate this requirement (Fonseca and Festag (2006)) such as:

• Certiﬁcate replication attack : the compromised node uses replicated
certiﬁcates to conceal itself by deleting the certiﬁcates that were added
to the blacklist.

• Sybil attack : a single compromised node pretends many fake identities.

• Masquerading attack or impersonation attack :The attacker exploits a
legitimate identity to obtain access to the network and conﬁdential
information.

Using fake identity in IEEE802.11p by the internal or external attacker
could be prevented using certiﬁcate revocation lists. Each on-board units
and RSUs can be identiﬁed by their certiﬁcate and in case that the normal
node turns to behave maliciously, the identity will be added to the certiﬁcate
revocation lists. In LTE-V2X, the home subscriber server is able to avoid
the messages that come from unauthorized UEs by applying the mutual
authentication. However, the attacker could send a repeated message with
a new timestamp. Because the replay attack can be detected in LTE-V2X,
the home subscriber server can detect the replication and drop the message.
As a result, the user impersonation or sybil attack will also be prevented
(Ghafghazi et al. (2014)). However, UEs are not protected when they are
located out of the network coverage because they cannot ensure that they
have the updated certiﬁcate revocation list.

3.3.5. Threats on Non-repudiation

Non-repudiation is responsible for identifying the real node’s ID which
performs a speciﬁc behavior.
It is a method to ensure message transmis-
sion between entities via digital signature and/or encryption (Kerrache et al.
(2016a)). In IEEE802.11p, the periodic message and warning messages are
signed with the sender certiﬁcate. Also, the location based services and any
sensitive information are encrypted. Thus, the node identity can be identiﬁed
when it launches a malicious behavior.

In addition, the message exchange between UEs and eNB is encrypted
with cipher key. In addition to the encryption, LTE-V2X applied integrity

19

protection on the signalling packets. On the other hand, it is severe to achieve
non-repudiation requirements in cooperative D2D communications because
of trust concept. Indeed, if one node trusts another node, it communicates
with it even if it used fake identity. Thus, that violates some features of
non-repudiation (Haus et al. (2017)).

3.4. Summary

In this section, we provide a summary for the supported security ser-
vices in each communication protocol. Table 2 summarizes the comparison
between IEEE802.11p and LTE-V2X regarding to security services. We con-
cluded that D2D link in LTE-V2X is the most exposed protocol to external
and internal attacks. The reason behind is that D2D link is not managed
by the core network when both nodes are located out of the network cov-
erage. Therefore, designing a security model for D2D link is recommended
to achieve high security level. In contrast, IEEE802.11p has more security
services which achieve more secured ad-hoc link between vehicles.

4. Security Solutions for V2X communications

Vehicular communications encounter many challenges, therefore, ensur-
ing a secure communication is considered a complex function. Because of the
shortage of the security services in both enabling technologies of V2X commu-
nications, additional security model is needed to protect vehicular network.
This section presents various security solutions that were proposed for vehic-
ular networks. We divided them based on the security method into three cat-
egories: cryptography-based, behavior-based and identity-based. The outline
of the proposed classiﬁcation scheme is shown in Figure 5.

4.1. Cryptography-based Solutions

Cryptography is responsible for achieving a secure communication be-
tween sender and receiver by developing protocols that prevent unauthorized
users from accessing the network (Du et al. (2009)). As a result, these so-
lutions concentrate on external attacks that are launched by unauthorized
users. Encryption is the main technique in cryptography-based solutions
where it uses various algorithms to transform the data into another form
that is only readable by intended users (Boneh et al. (2004)). For example,
Li et al. (2015) proposed a lightweight secure navigation system for vehicular
ad-hoc network. Each vehicle applies encryption and the digital signature

20

for supporting a secure communication between the vehicle and RSU. The
system addressed the replay attack and man-in-the-middle attack. In addi-
tion, the proposed model in (Abdelgader and Shu (2017)) applied advanced
encryption standard to achieve the user privacy. The key distribution prob-
lem of advanced encryption standard is addressed by taking advantage of the
randomness of the channel in vehicular networks to share the secret key. In
addition, a Secure and Intelligent Routing protocol (Bhoi and Khilar (2014))
used a double encryption for the data packets and applied authentication
scheme to measure node’s trust. However, it caused an increase in the pro-
cessing time and raised the network overhead.

Shukla et al. (2016) proposed a model that obtains the security in the
vehicular network using multiple operating channels where the encrypted
data is sent on multiple channels. The receiver considers the mean value
of the received data. For example, if the attacker hacks some channels and
alters the data. Then, the partial incorrect data is received which is improved
partially by taking the mean of the received data. Also, in case of jamming
of particular channels, the receiver still can receive the data using other
channels. However, this method is only considered when the security is a
major concern rather than resources because it achieves a high bandwidth

Table 2: Comparison between IEEE802.11p and LTE-V2X regarding to security services

Security
Requirements

Threats

Availability

Integrity

Conﬁdentiality

Authenticity

Non-repudiation

Blackhole
Greyhole attacks
Flooding attack
Jamming attack
Coalition attack
Alter messages attack
Inject false
messages attack
Replay attack
GPS spooﬁng attack
Eavesdropping attack
Location tracking
Certiﬁcate
replication attack
Sybil attack
Masquerading
/impersonation attack
Any

IEEE802.11p

LTE-V2X

Cellular-based

D2D-based

External

Internal External

Internal External

Internal

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:55)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:55)
(cid:51)
(cid:55)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

-

(cid:55)

(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:51)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

-

(cid:55)

(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:51)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)

(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:51)

(cid:55)

(cid:51)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)
(cid:55)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:55)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:55)
(cid:51)
(cid:55)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

-

21

Figure 5: Overview of the surveyed research works - Classiﬁed according to the security
methods.

waste.

Key management process manages the cryptographic keys in a crypto-
system which includes the generation, exchange and storage of the keys. For
instance, Hong et al. (2008) proposed a situation aware trust that is based on
vehicle situations. For building the situation aware trust, it ﬁrst deﬁnes the
attribute (static or dynamic) such as time, company and location. The group
which belong to speciﬁc attribute share the same key. Then, the packet is
encrypted using that key where it only can be read by the group members.
For example, if there is a taxi from company A and want to send a message
to other drivers. The message has four attributes as follows (Company, Taxi,
Time, Location). As a result, only vehicles with these attribute can read
the message. Moreover, Zhang (2017) proposed a novel method based on
one-time identity-based authenticated asymmetric group key agreement to

22

Security SolutionsCryptography-based solutionsEncryptionLi et al (2015), Abdelgaderand Shu (2017), Bhoiand Khilar(2014), Shukla et al (2016)Key ManagementHong et al. (2008), Zhang (2017), Lei et al. (2017), Wan et al. (2016), Zhu et al. (2017)AuthenticationChuang and Lee (2014), Yang et al. (2017), Mamun et al. (2014), Ying and Nayak (2017), Sun et al. (2017)Behavior-based solutionsWeighted-sumGazdaret al. (2012), Kerracheet al. (2016b), Patel and Jhaveri(2015), Wei et al. (2014), Abdelaziz et al (2014), Golleet al. (2004), Yang (2013), Ding et al. (2010a), Dixit et al. (2016),  Rostamzadehet al. (2015) Li et al. (2013), Khan et al. (2015), Shen et al. (2013).Rewarding schemeHaddadouet al. (2013), Haddadouet al. (2015), Jesudosset al. (2015), Kerracheet al (2015)Fuzzy LogicMarmoland Perez (2012), Rafique et al. (2016), Ding et al. (2010b)OtherSupport Vector MachineFan et al. (2016), Kim et al. (2017)Rule-basedSedjelmaciand Senouci(2015)Dempster Shafer TheoryLi and Song (2016)Subjective logicHuang et al. (2017)Packet modificationChen et al. (2010), Jahan and Suman (2016), Zhang et al. (2016)Heuristics-basedWu et al. (2016)Identity-based solutionsGeographic proximityAl Mutazet al. (2013)Random pseudonymsShaikh and Alzahrani(2014), Kang et al. (2017), Raya and Hubaux(2007), Sun et al. (2010), Chen and Wei (2013)Group IDTajeddineet al. (2010)create cryptographic mix-zones which resist malicious eavesdroppers. The
safety messages are encrypted using a group secret key to improve vehicle
privacy. Thus, any external entity cannot track the safety messages in the
cryptographic mix-zones. In addition, Lei et al. (2017) proposed a novel key
management scheme for key exchange among security managers in hetero-
geneous networks. They used blockchain concept for allowing key exchange
securely within the security manager network. Flexible transaction collection
period was proposed to reduce the key exchange time in blockchain scheme.
A key generation model in (Wan et al. (2016)) used received signal strength
to guarantee the randomness in key generation. The node senses the received
signal and transforms the received signal strength values to binary value by
applying upper threshold (T hup) and lower threshold (T hlow). For key gen-
eration, the node sets one if the received signal strength value greater than
T hup and zero if the received signal strength value less than T hlow. Any
value in between is ignored. Also, Zhu et al. (2017) proposed a scheme which
grants the vehicles the ability to generate a shared secret key from received
signal strength indicator values with low probability of getting the same key
by neighboring vehicles.

Authentication schemes were proposed using various techniques to detect
unauthorized nodes and prevent them from launching malicious attacks. For
instance, Chuang and Lee (2014) introduced a scheme for authenticating the
vehicles by considering them trusted nodes if they are successfully authen-
ticated. On the other hand, Yang et al. (2017) proposed two lightweight
anonymous authentication schemes for the V2X network. One scheme was
applicable for V2V communication, while the other was suitable for V2I com-
munications. Both schemes were considered the limitations in V2X such as
resource constraints of on-board unit and latency limit.

Mamun et al. (2014) presented a reliable and standard chosen plaintext
secure group signature solution for vehicular network applications. It allows
any ﬁxed entities such as RSUs to link messages, and recognize if they are
generated by one or group of vehicles, without breaching their privacy. Thus,
it prevents malicious complaints against normal nodes. In addition, Ying and
Nayak (2017) proposed an anonymous and lightweight authentication based
on smart card protocol. It consists of two main phases which are user au-
thentication and data authentication. It protects the network against various
attacks such as oﬄine password guessing attack, impersonation attack and
many others. Also, the anonymity is achieved by using dynamic identities.

The work of Sun et al. (2017) applied a model which achieved the pri-

23

vacy requirements. It is composed of two schemes which are identity-based
signature and pseudonym scheme. Also, it provides the authentication in
inter-vehicle communications.

4.2. Behavior-based/Trust-based Solutions

They were proposed as complementary solutions to cryptography, where
traditional cryptography-based solutions are not able to detect internal at-
tackers because they are authenticated users (Al-Kahtani (2012)). The trust
evaluation is typically conducted by monitoring nodes, which monitor and
collect other nodes’ behavior information. The most common methods that
are used for trust management in vehicular networks as follows:

• The weighted-sum method is the most common methodology for
trust management, where trust evaluation is computed by assigning
diﬀerent weights for each trust component. When the node behaves
maliciously; the total trust value decreases until reach to zero (Ahmed
et al. (2015)). Total trust is computed by:

Ttotal =

U
(cid:88)

i=1

wi × Tx

(1)

where wi is a weight value for Tx, Tx is a trust value for trust level x such
as direct and indirect. Indeed, direct trust measures trust level of one-
hop neighbors using direct monitoring, while indirect trust measures
trust level of two-hops neighbors using the recommendations from other
nodes. U is the number of trust levels that will be considered.

Gazdar et al. (2012) proposed a dynamic and distributed trust model
for vehicular adhoc network that used the monitoring nodes for ob-
serving their neighboring nodes and sending an alert about any mali-
cious activity such as packet dropping or packet modiﬁcation. On the
other hand, Kerrache et al. (2016b) proposed trust model that provided
two trust metrics: vehicle-based and RSU-based. Each node is able
to monitor its neighbors and measure local trust value. Then, RSUs
are responsible for managing a global and historical trust information
about all nodes which locate in the same road segment. At the same
time, the model could work without the existence of RSU. Patel and
Jhaveri (2015) applied ant colony optimization algorithm for choosing

24

the shortest trusted path by isolating non-cooperative nodes. However,
the node is compelled to transmit the packets to the next hop even if all
neighbors are malicious. Unlike (Patel and Jhaveri (2015)), Wei et al.
(2014) proposed a trust model for detecting non-cooperative nodes on
V2V communications only. Moreover, Abdelaziz et al. (2014) proposed
intrusion detection system to enhance the message relay mechanism by
evaluating the trustiness of received messages.

Event-based models collect data and monitor diﬀerent events going on
in the environment to build the reputation. In the vehicular networks,
some models were proposed to monitor traﬃc events and evaluate the
trustworthiness of these events. For example, event-based reputation
model was proposed in (Golle et al. (2004)) for checking data con-
sistency.
Indeed, the sensors provide redundant information which
allowed for each node to process the data and remove malicious in-
formation. If inconsistencies occur, the security model is activated to
detect the malicious node. Furthermore, similarity mining technique
was suggested in (Yang (2013)) for recognizing similarity among vehi-
cles and messages. For instance, at a similar location and similar time,
messages about the same event that are generated by the same vehi-
cle usually have similar trust values. In addition, Ding et al. (2010a)
proposed event-based reputation model to ﬁlter fake warning messages
and increase the accuracy of the network.
It measures the reputa-
tion of the event based on its roles (event reporter, event observer or
event participant) to check if the event triggered is real or fake alarm.
Furthermore, trust value can be related to a speciﬁc location. For ex-
ample, when trustworthy interactions are established between vehicles
in a speciﬁc road segment, then, the corresponding trust value for that
location and time is increased. Dixit et al. (2016) proposed a model
for selecting the trusted location using Ad Hoc On Demand Distance
Vector routing protocol where RSUs were responsible for controlling
packets routing. However, as the number of malicious nodes increased,
the vehicles may follow the wrong path.
In addition, the proposed
framework in (Rostamzadeh et al. (2015)) composed of two modules:
the ﬁrst one implements three security checks to measure the message’s
trustworthiness. First, it examines that the message is generated from
a trusted location and followed a trusted route. Second, it inspects that
message route does not contain any malicious nodes. Third, it checks

25

that it has a valid content. Indeed, it computes a trust value for each
road section and for each neighborhood. Once a message is evaluated
and considered trusted, then it looks up for a trusted route to forward
the message.

The most recent malicious nodes behave intelligently and conceal them-
selves from detection by alternating between normal and malicious be-
haviors. To protect the network from smart attacks, Li et al. (2013)
oﬀered a Reputation-based Global Trust Establishment to address a
smart blackhole attack by considering the past behavior of nodes.

The monitoring role could be concentrated on the message content.
The monitor nodes measure trust value based on the validity of the
received messages. For instance, Khan et al. (2015) proposed an algo-
rithm for vehicular ad-hoc networks which provides distributed message
It gave the monitoring roles to speciﬁc nodes called
authentication.
veriﬁer nodes. These nodes were responsible for verifying the message
and transmitting the decision through the network. The model con-
sidered three parameters for choosing appropriate veriﬁers which are
load, distance and trust value.
In addition, Shen et al. (2013) pro-
posed a distributed authentication scheme where veriﬁer vehicles were
responsible for checking the validity of the message while non-veriﬁer
vehicles depend on veriﬁcation results. The choice of veriﬁer nodes is
made using three methods: N-nearest method, most-even distributed
method and hybrid method.

• The rewarding-based method uses credit to reward cooperative
nodes. For instance, the node rewards its neighboring node while it
behaves normally and cooperates with other nodes. Thus, a node with
high trust value considered a reliable node. The rewarding method is
used as a security solution to encourage non-cooperative nodes to par-
ticipate in packet forwarding process. For example on this, Haddadou
et al. (2013) and Haddadou et al. (2015) proposed a rewarding scheme
for detecting blackhole and greyhole attacks. Moreover, Jesudoss et al.
(2015) proposed a Payment Punishment Scheme where it is applied
during election and routing processes. They used vickrey, clarke and
groves model and designed the payments in a way that the collaborative
node will gain rewards and be able to participate in election and routing
processes. In addition, the model assigns monitoring nodes which are

26

responsible for monitoring the behavior of the relay nodes. The work in
(Kerrache et al. (2015)) represents trust-based routing protocol which
is composed of two main phases. The ﬁrst phase includes the trust
measurement, which is done periodically and in distributed manner.
When the node receive a data packet, it applies trust model on the
received packet. Thus, it is able to evaluate the sender behavior and
compute its trust value. Then, based on the previous step, the second
phase involves sending the data through the most trusted route.

• The fuzzy logic method incorporates a series of IF-THEN rules to
solve a control problem rather than attempt to model a system math-
ematically. The main steps of the fuzzy logic model are as follows
(Zhang et al. (2013)). First, the fuzzy sets and criteria are deﬁned;
next, the input variable values are initialized; then, the fuzzy engine
applies the fuzzy rules to determine the output data and evaluate the
results. For instance, M´armol and P´erez (2012) proposed a security
model that worked on detecting selﬁsh nodes that transmit false or bo-
gus messages. The model deﬁned a fuzzy set to classify each node with
three diﬀerent trust levels. Based on the source node trustworthiness
level, the receiver can decide whether it has to receive, forward or drop
it. Also, fuzzy logic models were proposed in (Raﬁque et al. (2016))
to detect packet dropping attack. Moreover, Ding et al. (2010b) pro-
posed a fuzzy reputation based model to prevent the spreading of false
messages.

• Others methods Some existing models utilized diﬀerent methods to
detect internal attacks. For example, Fan et al. (2016) proposed a de-
tection system using support vector machine learning algorithm to stop
replay attack. It applied a training phase to fetch attack’s character-
istics. In addition, Kim et al. (2017) proposed collaborative security
attack detection mechanism in a software-deﬁned vehicular cloud ar-
information aggregation phase
chitecture.
where each vehicle analyses the received information and transmits the
result periodically to the controller for training the support vector ma-
chine, and Multi-class support vector machine training phase. Then,
the classiﬁcation using support vector machine is started where each
vehicle applied the classiﬁer to detect malicious nodes. However, this
method is not energy-eﬃcient because it requires training phase to be

It consists of two phases:

27

able to detect the attack. Sedjelmaci and Senouci (2015) proposed a
framework as intrusion detection system that concentrated on behav-
ioral attacks. It addressed various attacks in vehicular adhoc networks
such as selective forwarding, blackhole, wormhole and sybil attacks. It
uses special agents which are responsible for monitoring the nodes’ be-
havior and triggering an alarm when the misbehavior is detected. It
is composed of two detections systems and decision system. First, lo-
cal intrusion detection system which operates on each node to monitor
its neighbors and the cluster head. Second, global intrusion detection
system which runs at the cluster head level to monitor its cluster mem-
bers. Finally, global decision system runs at RSU level to calculate
trust level for each node by aggregating the reputation of each node
and broadcast the blacklist through the network.

In addition, Li and Song (2016) proposed a model using dempster-
shafer theory of evidence to combine multiple evidence even if some of
them might not be accurate. It was proposed to evaluate two types of
trust: data trust and node trust. In particular, data trust is used to
evaluate the received data and indicate if it is acceptable based on a
calculated trust value. On the other hand, node trust assesses the node
based on its behavior with neighboring nodes and indicates whether or
not it is trusted.

A distributed reputation management system was proposed in (Huang
et al. (2017)) for securing vehicular edge computing. Vehicular edge
computing servers are used to implement local reputation management
tasks for vehicles. In addition, they applied multi-weighted subjective
logic for computing the reputation values. On the other hand, some
existing solutions implemented adjustments on routing protocol to in-
crease the security level. For instance, in the model that was proposed
in (Chen et al. (2010)), each node appends a list of trust opinions with
the cluster data. Also, it applies conﬁdence level for its opinion to de-
termine the assurance level about the computed trust value. Moreover,
Jahan and Suman (2016) proposed a change in routing protocol to de-
tect non-cooperative nodes using a double acknowledge technique. In
another work, Zhang et al. (2016) proposed an amendment to adhoc
on-demand distance vector routing protocol to identify packet drop-
ping behavior by adding new ﬁelds to the control packets. The main
drawback of this method is the risen network overhead as a result of

28

the increase in packet size.

Moreover, Wu et al. (2016) proposed MobiFish which is a lightweight
anti-phishing application. They develop enhanced version of heuristics-
based method by addressing the high relying on web page source code.
They implemented it on a Google Nexus 4 smartphone running the
Android 4.2 OS.

4.3. Identity-based Solutions

They address attacks that exploit users’ identity for malicious activities
such as sybil attack and breach user’s privacy. Most security solutions used
the vehicles identity to identify them and revoke malicious node. As a result,
user’s privacy has been revealed and misused by an attacker. To resolve this
issue, the security model should operate on an identity anonymous environ-
ment. For example, Shaikh and Alzahrani (2014) proposed the ﬁrst trust
management scheme which takes into account the anonymous identity.
It
protects vehicular ad-hoc networks from spreading messages with fake lo-
cation and time. Each node calculates its conﬁdence value regarding the
received messages about a speciﬁc event. The conﬁdence value is based on
four parameters: location closeness, time closeness, location veriﬁcation and
timestamp veriﬁcation. Then, it calculates the trust value for each message
that reporting the same event and makes the decision regarding that message
based on the trust value.

Moreover, Tajeddine et al. (2010) proposed a privacy-preserving trust
framework that allowed for collecting information about vehicles’ behavior
while preserving their privacy by applying a group ID rather than real iden-
tity. Also, Chen and Wei (2013) proposed a beacon-based trust model that
ensured the vehicular ad-hoc networks safety while preserving the drivers’
privacy. All transmitted messages were protected by cryptography and the
pseudo identity schemes.

One common approach to preserving the privacy of vehicles’ location is
the use of pseudonyms. Indeed, the vehicle broadcasts its information with
pseudonyms that frequently changes (Raya and Hubaux (2007)). As an ex-
ample of this, Kang et al. (2016) proposed a defend system for two cases
of eavesdropping. The ﬁrst case, an adversary tracks a target vehicle by a
speciﬁc pseudonym. In this case, the security solution used a random Virtual
Machine identiﬁers which make the mapping relationship fail. Unfortunately,
the ﬁrst solution was vulnerable to identity mapping attack. Because of that,

29

they proposed Pseudonyms Changing Synchronization Scheme to improve
detection accuracy. In addition, Sun et al. (2010) presented the vehicular
ad-hoc network security system which based on three main techniques. First,
a pseudonym-based technique which was used to assign pseudonym/private
key pairs to the vehicles which are traveling in the home domain or other
domains. Second, Threshold signature which was applied to send the secret
information for recovering a malicious vehicles identity. Meanwhile, it pre-
vents compromised nodes from having a full authority to revoke a normal
node. Third, Threshold authentication based defence scheme which provides
a mechanism to distinguish between malfunctioning and malicious behavior.
Geographic proximity technique is used to detect sybil attack when ma-
licious node uses multiple identities. Al Mutaz et al. (2013) applied this
method to identify sybil identities where the geographic proximity of the
compromised node and all its sybil identities last for a long time and re-
peated.

4.4. Summary

In this section, we provide a summary to get an overview of the proposed
security methods. Table 3 summarizes characteristics of the main security
models were proposed for vehicular networks. The parameters of this sum-
mary are presented as follows:

• Organization: indicates whether the model applied on ﬂat or clustered

network.

Table 3: Main security solutions in vehicular networks

Organization

Topology
Architecture (Use of RSU)

Flat Clustered Centralized Distributed Hybrid

Purpose

Secure
Route

Secure
Content

IDS

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

Sedjelmaci and Senouci (2015)
Haddadou et al. (2015)
Rostamzadeh et al. (2015)
Kerrache et al. (2016b)
Chuang and Lee (2014)
Li et al. (2012)
Eiza et al. (2016)
Zhang (2017)
Zhu et al. (2017)
Sun et al. (2010)
Harsch et al. (2007)
Lei et al. (2017)
Huang et al. (2017)
Sun et al. (2017)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

*Av: Availability, Int: Integrity, Conf: Conﬁdentiality, Auth: Authentication and NRep: Non-repudiation

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

30

Addressed Attacks

Security Requirements

Internal
attack
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

External
attack

Both Av.

Int. Conf. Auth. NRep.

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)

• Architecture: indicates whether the model used the centralized struc-

ture, distributed or hybrid.

• Purpose: indicate whether the aim of the model is intrusion detection

system, achieve a secure route or protect message content.

• Addressed attacks: indicates which attacks is addressed in the model.

We concluded that the most research applied the security model on a
ﬂat network where all nodes have the same responsibility. In addition, many
security solutions focused on addressing one type of attacks:
internal or
external. Using central unit for security measurements was frequently used.
However, centralized models are not applicable in vehicular networks where
the node could be located out of the network coverage.

5. Comparison and Discussion

In this section, we discuss the eﬀectiveness of security methods for pro-
tecting V2X communications. Based on our analysis, we noticed that most of
proposed models were applied on vehicular ad-hoc network where the security
model was implemented on vehicles (homogeneous network). Because V2V
is part of V2X communications and both of them support the communica-
tions in vehicular network, they have common characteristics such as various
speeds, non-stable connection and dynamic topology. As a result, studying
the security solutions in V2V is required to address their challenges while
designing security model for V2X communication. In addition, few proposed
security models (Khan et al. (2015); Sedjelmaci and Senouci (2015); Chen
et al. (2010); Jesudoss et al. (2015)) considered clustering vehicular network
and all of them are behavior-based solutions.

After analyzing the existing solutions, we evaluated them based on four

parameters as follows:

• The considered attack: study the ability of various security methods in

protecting the network against internal or external attacks.

• The message type: study to which extent the security method is im-

portant for delivering various V2X messages.

• The latency limit: study the eﬀect of applying various security methods

on message delivery time.

31

• The security model structure: study the impact of security method on

the model structure.

5.1. The considered attacks

Some existing works (Shukla et al. (2016); Bhoi and Khilar (2014); Chuang
and Lee (2014)) used traditional security scheme for protecting vehicular
networks such as encryption and authentication. These methods are impor-
tant in protecting the network from external attacks, and also they achieved
high-security levels in a centralized network. However, they are not reliable
solutions for distributed networks. Moreover, based on the study on V2V
applications which was done in (Harding et al. (2014)), they listed some
limitations of various cryptography-based methods. Symmetric key systems
causes additional overhead and delay in key distribution phase. While, asym-
metric cryptography is suitable for distributed systems where nodes is highly
dynamic. However, it is slower than symmetric key systems and causes a
huge latency. Furthermore, the revocation process in group signature method
needs for high computation power and also the signature is too large to trans-
mit over the air.

Based on the previous comparison between the main vehicular network
communication protocols, we noticed that the most external attacks are con-
sidered by protocol security services. Thus, applying additional cryptography
model will increase the overhead on the network.

Behavior-based solutions can be implemented as a supplemental solution
to ﬁll the gap of classical cryptography solutions, as proposed in (Bali and Ku-
mar (2016); Yan et al. (2013)). They commonly are necessary against internal
attackers which they own legitimate certiﬁcate. Also, they are mostly ap-
plied on distributed and semi-centralized network (Kerrache et al. (2016a)).
The weighted-sum method has some challenges such as setting the weights
and trust threshold, however, it is considered a common and lightweight
method for vehicular networks. Because the vehicular networks require low
latency in message delivery, a lightweight security method is recommended.
Furthermore, there are a few works recommended a fuzzy logic for the vehic-
ular network because it needs for a training phase, and it is suitable for the
predictable environment. On the other hand, the rewarding-based method
is suitable for encouraging non-cooperative nodes. Therefore, it limited to
address the selﬁsh behavior attack.

In addition, the shortcoming of identity-based solutions is the focus on
attacks that exploit user’s information to track them or pretend false iden-

32

tity. Thus, it is ordinarily used as complementary solution to protect user
information where both protocols were not supported anonymous identity.
As a result, the need for designing identity-based solutions is increased.

Some researchers made eﬀorts to address the previous limitation by ap-
plying hybrid system which combines multiple security methods to increase
the security level of the network. For instance, Eiza et al. (2016) utilized
Ant Colony Algorithm with graph model to detect internal attacks of rout-
ing control packets. It considers the external attacks by applying a digital
signature. Also, it addresses internal attacks using plausibility checks such
as QoS, link breakage and control messages broadcast. Moreover, Harsch
et al. (2007) suggested a security solution that combined a distributed plau-
sibility checks and digital signature technique. The model used time stamps,
transmission range and vehicles velocity to detect false position injection.

5.2. The message type
5.2.1. The event-based messages

The message encryption is applied to keep the message content conﬁ-
dential while traverse through multi-hop route. However, the encryption
is not essential for event-based message because it is directed towards all
nodes in the area and not targeting speciﬁc destination. Thus, the message
should be delivered to all nodes in a plain text to be able to read its con-
tent and make a decision regarding the traﬃc in a short period (Harding
et al. (2014)). As a consequence, the encryption could aﬀect negatively on
the network performance. On the other hand, unauthorized nodes may start
behaving maliciously and mislead other nodes by sending false messages. As
a result, all nodes should be authenticated to be able to generate message to
protect the network from false alarm which is injected by the external attack-
ers. In addition, generating false alarm is not limited to external attackers
but it can be initiated by authorized nodes. Much research (Gazdar et al.
(2012); Khan et al. (2015); Rostamzadeh et al. (2015); M´armol and P´erez
(2012)) were proposed behavior-based solutions for securing packet content
and detect internal attacker.

The risk of tracking users by mapping event-based messages is too low
because the road entity will generate a message when an event is triggered.
Thus, the attacker can know the current location of the road entity but he
has to wait for next event to know its next location. As a result, hiding user’s
information is not critical.

33

5.2.2. periodic messages

As we mentioned in section 2, the beacon message contains user’s infor-
mation such as location, speed and direction. This information is targeting
on the nodes which are belonging to the network. Thus, this message should
be encrypted to prevent external attacker from tracking users.

Moreover, internal attackers may send false status information to mis-
lead neighboring nodes. For instance, the model in (Shaikh and Alzahrani
(2014)) proposed to detect beacon messages with false location and time.
Moreover, some recent works (Chen and Wei (2013); Wei et al. (2011)) sug-
gested beacon-based trust where the node’s trust value is measured based on
the validity of beacon message.

As a result of missing mechanism in vehicular network protocols which
supports user privacy, applying identity-based methods is necessary for bea-
con messages. The attacker can follow the beacon message and track the
user’s location because it is sent periodically and has much information about
the user. Applying random identities is one of the main solutions for user
privacy, however, it is vulnerable for mapping attack. The model in (Kang
et al. (2016)) proposed Pseudonyms Changing Synchronization Scheme to
improve the user privacy.

5.3. The latency limit

As we know that vehicular network is latency sensitive because the infor-
mation should be delivered to other nodes in short time approximately 300
ms. As a consequence, applying complicated model will increase the deliv-
ery time. The main communication protocols for vehicular network support
encryption and authentication services. Thus, applying additional cryptog-
raphy solutions increase the packet delivery time. For instance, the model in
(Bhoi and Khilar (2014)) proposed double encryption scheme which increase
the computation overhead.

Behavior-based solution were proposed as a lightweight solution, however,
some research work (Wei et al. (2014)) were proposed complex mathematical
model to measure trust value. Also, some of these solutions apply machine
learning algorithms such as support vector machine in (Fan et al. (2016);
Kim et al. (2017)) where the complexity is high for training phase and testing
phase.

Identity-based solutions are lightweight where it only based on random
pseudonyms (Shaikh and Alzahrani (2014); Chen and Wei (2013); Kang et al.

34

(2016); Sun et al. (2010)) or group ID (Tajeddine et al. (2010)). These
methods have simple calculations which not require much time to apply them.

5.4. The Model structure

The most cryptography-based solutions applied centralized structure (Li
et al. (2012); Zhang (2017); Sun et al. (2010); Ying and Nayak (2017)).
However, centralized model is not suitable for the vehicular network because
the central units such as RSUs are not always available along the roadside.
Because of that, (El Zouka (2016); Shen et al. (2013)) proposed distributed
authentication schemes. In addition, El Zouka (2016) proposed distributed
authentication scheme where if the node would like to request a cloud service,
it sends a message containing its own identity and its location to neighboring
nodes; then, the neighboring nodes authenticate the message using reputation
list. However, it concentrated on V2V communication.

Behavior-based solutions designed to give the nodes ability to manage
security model independently from the central unit. However, some models
used central units for gathering trust values from vehicles such as (Raﬁque
et al. (2016); Sedjelmaci and Senouci (2015); Dixit et al. (2016)). The main
drawback in distributed structure is deﬁcient in global knowledge about
the network. For example, if vehicle A meet vehicle B for the ﬁrst time,
vehicle A don’t have information about the security record of vehicle B.

The proposed model in (Kerrache et al. (2016b)) applied a hybrid system
which manages both model structures. The distributed structure applied
when the vehicles are located in the area that is not covered by a central
unit. However, this assumption gives us non-stable detection accuracy.

6. Challenges and Research Direction

The security in the vehicular network is still considered open research
area. vehicular ad-hoc networks gave researchers the opportunity to study
and evaluate their works. As a part of communication progress, the future
vehicular network will not be limited to vehicles and RSUs, but it will include
all roadside entities. As a result, applying traditional solutions in the V2X
network cannot perform as it is expected.

Major eﬀorts have been made; however, several open issues are still need-
ing more consideration to achieve a high-security level for V2X communica-
tions. Some of these issues are discussed in the following section.

35

6.1. Security attacks

In trust-based solutions, the evaluation is based on monitoring neighbors
behavior. As a result, they are susceptible to trust attacks, such as white-
In these
washing attack, on-oﬀ attack and good/bad mouthing attacks.
attacks, the compromised node behaves smartly to conceal itself from being
detected by alternate between normal and malicious behavior. Unfortunately,
most existing works did not address them in vehicular networks except the
proposed model in (Li et al. (2013)) considered intelligent compromised nodes
which behave maliciously for intermittent periods.

The wireless communication is the prospective method to facilitate the
communication inside large public transportation systems such as trains,
metro and buses. However, it is more susceptible to various cyber attacks
than the wired communication. Therefore, implementing security model
for intra-vehicle subnetwork is recommended. For instance, Liyanage et al.
(2016) proposed secure system based on host identity protocol. It is designed
to protect intra-vehicular communication from common IP based attacks.

The most centralized security solutions used RSU as a fully trusted unit
for updating security records. Thus, the vehicles require communicating
with RSU to get updated information. However, this assumption is not
applicable in vehicular networks because RSUs are not always available along
the roadside. Also, RSUs, like any road entities, are vulnerable to various
attacks (Hamida et al. (2015)). As a result, in case of RSU attacks, these
solutions are not working eﬃciently and have a huge impact on network
performance. For instance, Hao et al. (2008) developed security protocols for
the key distribution, which are able to detect the compromised RSUs and
their collusion with the malicious vehicles.

6.2. Security vs. QoS management

The term Quality of Service (QoS) is used to represent the level of perfor-
mance provided to users. In traditional networks, high levels of QoS can be
obtained by resource allocation and suﬃcient infrastructure. However, the
control over the network resources, such as bandwidth, equipment, power
consumption and transmission delay, is diﬃcult in the vehicular networks
because the network lacks of consistent infrastructure and stable topology.
For instance, Wang et al. (2018) proposed method to fuse vehicle spacing
information and estimate average traﬃc density estimation. However, some
security mechanisms can be added to the message frame to prevent attack
on the spacing information. Therefore, achieving the trade-oﬀ between QoS

36

and security level in the vehicular networks is an essential task. The security
model should always consider the eﬃcient use of devices’ resources because
the road entities in V2X communication have various capabilities and re-
sources. An example of this is the power consumption, all current security
models did not consider the power consumption as a challenge because they
were implemented on vehicles which have a long life battery. However, in
V2X, some road entities such as mobile phones have a limited battery. As a
result, designing a lightweight security model is recommended for V2X.

In addition, QoS includes the useful use of the network resources such
as the bandwidth. Indeed, Zheng et al. (2016) proposed a two-stage delay-
optimal scheme by integrating software deﬁned networking and radio resource
allocation into an LTE system for vehicular networks. Also, the proposed
model in (Shukla et al. (2016)) used multiple channels to send the same
In
information which achieves the availability but wastes the bandwidth.
addition, the proposed models in (Jahan and Suman (2016); Zhang et al.
(2016)) caused further overhead by increasing the packet size.

For critical applications such as safety-related applications in vehicular
networks require a minimum delay for delivering warning messages to obtain
a high safety level. However, the most encryption methods need a time for
encryption and decryption processes. Thus, they protect the information and
achieve conﬁdentiality but they have a negative impact on the QoS.

Moreover, the existing solutions did not take into account the environ-
ment in the simulation model such as if the road is highway or urban. Also,
they did not simulate the real propagation and mobility parameters which
are aﬀected by various factors such as signal fading, multi-path propagation
and obstacles. Therefore, lack of applying models which simulate the real
environment aﬀects the performance metrics. In addition, existing security
solutions did not consider the malfunction behavior or communication condi-
tion when making a decision about malicious node. Finally, edge computing
was applied on IoT-devices to allow data to be processed near to where it is
created rather than crossing long route to reach central server/cloud. Thus, it
reduces the delay that is resulted from the packets transmission. Edge com-
puting has been applied on V2X communication which is called vehicular
edge computing because it works eﬃciently with latency-sensitive use cases.
This is suitable for situations that require very short latency such as warn-
ing messages. However, security and privacy are still serious challenges in
vehicular edge computing that require to be considered in the future (Zhang
et al. (2018)).

37

7. Conclusion

The rapid evolution of the transportation sector has caused security chal-
lenges which made the vehicular network vulnerable to various cyber-attacks
that hinder the secure V2X communication. In addition, we should take into
account the features of the V2X network while designing the security model.
In this survey paper, we ﬁrst clariﬁed the key features and architecture of
the V2X network. Also, we proposed the threats analysis for V2X enabling
technologies. Then, we classiﬁed the current security solutions in vehicular
networks based on the security method. Also, we presented the comparison
and discussion of various security methods.

Finally, we mentioned the main challenges and future research directions
for novel contributions to this research area. As a conclusion, combining
cryptography and trust strategies will protect the network from internal and
external attacks and thus guarantee high security level.

References

References

3GPP, 2017. Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS); LTE;
Architecture enhancement for V2X services (3GPP TS 23.285 version
14.2.0 release 14). Tech. rep., ETSI.

5G-Americas, 2016. V2X cellular solutions. Tech. rep.

Abdelaziz, K. C., Lagraa, N., Lakas, A., 2014. Trust model with delayed
veriﬁcation for message relay in VANETs. In: Wireless Communications
and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), 2014 International. IEEE,
pp. 700–705.

Abdelgader, A. M., Shu, F., 2017. Exploiting the physical layer security for
providing a simple user privacy security system for vehicular networks. In:
Communication, Control, Computing and Electronics Engineering (ICC-
CCEE), 2017 International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 1–6.

Ahmed, A., Bakar, K. A., Channa, M. I., Haseeb, K., Khan, A. W., 2015.
TERP: A trust and energy aware routing protocol for wireless sensor net-
work. IEEE Sensors Journal 15 (12), 6962–6972.

38

Ahmed, K. J., Lee, M. J., 2017. Secure, LTE-based V2X service. IEEE In-

ternet of Things Journal.

Al-Kahtani, M. S., 2012. Survey on security attacks in vehicular ad hoc
networks (VANETs). In: Signal Processing and Communication Systems
(ICSPCS), 2012 6th International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 1–9.

Al Mutaz, M., Malott, L., Chellappan, S., 2013. Leveraging platoon dis-
persion for sybil detection in vehicular networks. In: Proceedings of the
Eleventh Annual International Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust
(PST). IEEE, pp. 340–347.

Al-Sultan, S., Al-Doori, M. M., Al-Bayatti, A. H., Zedan, H., 2014. A com-
prehensive survey on vehicular ad hoc network. Journal of network and
computer applications 37, 380–392.

Araniti, G., Campolo, C., Condoluci, M., Iera, A., Molinaro, A., 2013.
LTE for vehicular networking: a survey. IEEE Communications Magazine
51 (5), 148–157.

Asadi, A., Wang, Q., Mancuso, V., 2014. A survey on device-to-device com-
munication in cellular networks. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tuto-
rials 16 (4), 1801–1819.

Bali, R. S., Kumar, N., 2016. Secure clustering for eﬃcient data dissemination
in vehicular cyber–physical systems. Future Generation Computer Systems
56, 476–492.

Bhoi, S. K., Khilar, P. M., 2014. SIR: a secure and intelligent routing protocol

for vehicular ad-hoc network. IET Networks 4 (3), 185–194.

Boneh, D., Di Crescenzo, G., Ostrovsky, R., Persiano, G., 2004. Public key
encryption with keyword search. In: International Conference on the The-
ory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques. Springer, pp. 506–522.

Chen, C., Zhang, J., Cohen, R., Ho, P.-H., 2010. A trust modeling frame-
work for message propagation and evaluation in VANETs. In: Informa-
tion Technology Convergence and Services (ITCS), 2010 2nd International
Conference on. IEEE, pp. 1–8.

39

Chen, Y.-M., Wei, Y.-C., 2013. A beacon-based trust management system
for enhancing user centric location privacy in VANETs. Journal of Com-
munications and Networks 15 (2), 153–163.

Cheng, Y., Fu, X., Du, X., Luo, B., Guizani, M., 2017. A lightweight live
memory forensic approach based on hardware virtualization. Information
Sciences 379, 23–41.

Chuang, M.-C., Lee, J.-F., 2014. TEAM: Trust-extended authentication
mechanism for vehicular ad hoc networks. IEEE systems journal 8 (3),
749–758.

Dawood, M., Fuhrmann, W., Ghita, B. V., 2014. Assay of white space tech-

nology standards for vehicular cognitive access.

Ding, Q., Li, X., Jiang, M., Zhou, X., 2010a. Reputation-based trust model
in vehicular ad hoc networks. In: Wireless Communications and Signal
Processing (WCSP), 2010 International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 1–6.

Ding, Q., Li, X., Jiang, M., Zhou, X., 2010b. Reputation management in
vehicular ad hoc networks. In: Multimedia Technology (ICMT), 2010 In-
ternational Conference on. IEEE, pp. 1–5.

Dixit, K., Pathak, P., Gupta, S., 2016. A new technique for trust computa-
tion and routing in VANET. In: Colossal Data Analysis and Networking
(CDAN), Symposium on. IEEE, pp. 1–6.

Du, X., Guizani, M., Xiao, Y., Chen, H., 2009. A routing-driven elliptic curve
cryptography based key management scheme for heterogeneous sensor net-
works. IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications 8 (3), 1223–1229.

Eiza, M. H., Owens, T., Ni, Q., 2016. Secure and robust multi-constrained
QoS aware routing algorithm for VANETs. IEEE Transactions on Depend-
able and Secure Computing 13 (1), 32–45.

El Zouka, H. A., 2016. A secure interactive architecture for vehicular cloud
environment. In: Proceedings in IEEE International Conference on Smart
Cloud (SmartCloud). IEEE, pp. 254–261.

Engoulou, R. G., Bella¨ıche, M., Pierre, S., Quintero, A., 2014. VANET se-

curity surveys. Computer Communications 44, 1–13.

40

Fan, Q. G., Wang, L., Cai, Y. N., Li, Y. Q., Chen, J., 2016. VANET rout-
ing replay attack detection research based on SVM. In: Proceedings of
Conferences on MATEC Web. Vol. 63. EDP Sciences, p. 05020.

Filippi, A., Moerman, K., Martinez, V., Semiconductors, A. T.-N., Haran,
O., Toledano-Autotalks, R., 2017. IEEE802.11p ahead of LTE-V2V for
safety applications.

Fonseca, E., Festag, A., 2006. A survey of existing approaches for secure ad
hoc routing and their applicability to VANETs. NEC network laboratories
28, 1–28.

Gazdar, T., Rachedi, A., Benslimane, A., Belghith, A., 2012. A distributed
advanced analytical trust model for VANETs. In: Proceedings of Global
Communications Conference (GLOBECOM). IEEE, pp. 201–206.

Ghafghazi, H., El Mougy, A., Mouftah, H. T., 2014. Enhancing the pri-
vacy of LTE-based public safety networks. In: Local Computer Networks
Workshops (LCN Workshops), 2014 IEEE 39th Conference on. IEEE, pp.
753–760.

Golle, P., Greene, D., Staddon, J., 2004. Detecting and correcting malicious
data in VANETs. In: Proceedings of the 1st ACM international workshop
on Vehicular ad hoc networks. ACM, pp. 29–37.

Haddadou, N., Rachedi, A., Ghamri-Doudane, Y., 2013. Trust and exclu-
sion in vehicular ad hoc networks: an economic incentive model based
approach. In: Proceedings of Computing, Communications and IT Appli-
cations Conference (ComComAp). IEEE, pp. 13–18.

Haddadou, N., Rachedi, A., Ghamri-Doudane, Y., 2015. A job market sig-
naling scheme for incentive and trust management in vehicular ad hoc
networks. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 64 (8), 3657–3674.

Hamida, E. B., Noura, H., Znaidi, W., 2015. Security of cooperative intel-
ligent transport systems: Standards, threats analysis and cryptographic
countermeasures. Electronics 4 (3), 380–423.

Hao, Y., Cheng, Y., Ren, K., 2008. Distributed key management with pro-
tection against RSU compromise in group signature based VANETs. In:

41

Global Telecommunications Conference, 2008. IEEE GLOBECOM 2008.
IEEE. IEEE, pp. 1–5.

Harding, J., Powell, G., Yoon, R., Fikentscher, J., Doyle, C., Sade, D., Lukuc,
M., Simons, J., Wang, J., 2014. Vehicle-to-vehicle communications: Readi-
ness of v2v technology for application. Tech. rep., National Highway Traﬃc
Safety Administration.

Harsch, C., Festag, A., Papadimitratos, P., 2007. Secure position-based rout-
ing for VANETs. In: Vehicular Technology Conference, 2007. VTC-2007
Fall. 2007 IEEE 66th. IEEE, pp. 26–30.

Haus, M., Waqas, M., Ding, A. Y., Li, Y., Tarkoma, S., Ott, J., 2017. Security
and privacy in Device-to-Device (D2D) communication: A review. IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials 19 (2), 1054–1079.

Hong, X., Huang, D., Gerla, M., Cao, Z., 2008. SAT: situation-aware trust
architecture for vehicular networks. In: Proceedings of the 3rd interna-
tional workshop on Mobility in the evolving internet architecture. ACM,
pp. 31–36.

Hsu, R.-H., Lee, J., 2015. Group anonymous D2D communication with end-
to-end security in LTE-A. In: Communications and Network Security
(CNS), 2015 IEEE Conference on. IEEE, pp. 451–459.

Huang, X., Yu, R., Kang, J., Zhang, Y., 2017. Distributed reputation man-
agement for secure and eﬃcient vehicular edge computing and networks.
IEEE Access 5, 25408–25420.

ITS Committee, 2013. IEEE standard for wireless access in vehicular
environments-security services for applications and management messages.
IEEE Vehicular Technology Society 1609.

Jahan, R., Suman, P., 2016. Detection of malicious node and development
of routing strategy in VANET. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Signal Processing and Integrated Networks (SPIN). IEEE,
pp. 472–476.

Jesudoss, A., Raja, S. K., Sulaiman, A., 2015. Stimulating truth-telling and
cooperation among nodes in VANETs through payment and punishment
scheme. Ad Hoc Networks 24, 250–263.

42

Kang, J., Yu, R., Huang, X., Jonsson, M., Bogucka, H., Gjessing, S., Zhang,
Y., 2016. Location privacy attacks and defenses in cloud-enabled internet
of vehicles. IEEE Wireless Communications 23 (5), 52–59.

Karagiannis, G., Altintas, O., Ekici, E., Heijenk, G., Jarupan, B., Lin, K.,
Weil, T., 2011. Vehicular networking: A survey and tutorial on require-
ments, architectures, challenges, standards and solutions. IEEE communi-
cations surveys & tutorials 13 (4), 584–616.

Kerrache, C. A., Calafate, C. T., Cano, J.-C., Lagraa, N., Manzoni, P.,
2016a. Trust management for vehicular networks: An adversary-oriented
overview. IEEE Access.

Kerrache, C. A., Lagraa, N., Calafate, C. T., Cano, J.-C., Manzoni, P., 2016b.
T-VNets: A novel trust architecture for vehicular networks using the stan-
dardized messaging services of ETSI ITS. Computer Communications 93,
68–83.

Kerrache, C. A., Lagraa, N., Calafate, C. T., Lakas, A., 2015. TROUVE: A
trusted routing protocol for urban vehicular environments. In: Proceedings
of the 11th IEEE International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Com-
puting, Networking and Communications (WiMob). IEEE, pp. 260–267.

Khan, U., Agrawal, S., Silakari, S., 2015. Detection of malicious nodes
(DMN) in vehicular ad-hoc networks. Procedia Computer Science 46, 965–
972.

Kim, M., Jang, I., Choo, S., Koo, J., Pack, S., 2017. Collaborative security
attack detection in software-deﬁned vehicular networks. In: Network Oper-
ations and Management Symposium (APNOMS), 2017 19th Asia-Paciﬁc.
IEEE, pp. 19–24.

Laurendeau, C., Barbeau, M., 2006. Threats to security in DSRC/WAVE.
In: International Conference on Ad-Hoc Networks and Wireless. Springer,
pp. 266–279.

Lei, A., Cruickshank, H., Cao, Y., Asuquo, P., Ogah, C. P. A., Sun, Z., 2017.
Blockchain-based dynamic key management for heterogeneous intelligent
transportation systems. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 4 (6), 1832–1843.

43

Li, G., Ma, M., Liu, C., Shu, Y., 2015. A lightweight secure VANET-based
navigation system. In: Proceedings in IEEE Conference on Global Com-
munications(GLOBECOM). IEEE, pp. 1–6.

Li, Q., Malip, A., Martin, K. M., Ng, S.-L., Zhang, J., 2012. A reputation-
based announcement scheme for VANETs. IEEE Transactions on Vehicu-
lar Technology 61 (9), 4095–4108.

Li, W., Song, H., 2016. ART: An attack-resistant trust management scheme
for securing vehicular ad hoc networks. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems 17 (4), 960–969.

Li, X., Liu, J., Li, X., Sun, W., 2013. RGTE: a reputation-based global
trust establishment in VANETs. In: Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Intelligent Networking and Collaborative Systems (INCoS).
IEEE, pp. 210–214.

Liyanage, M., Kumar, P., Soderi, S., Ylianttila, M., Gurtov, A., 2016. Per-
formance and security evaluation of intra-vehicular communication archi-
tecture. In: Communications Workshops (ICC), 2016 IEEE International
Conference on. IEEE, pp. 302–308.

Mamun, M. S. I., Miyaji, A., Takada, H., 2014. A multi-purpose group sig-
nature for vehicular network security. In: Network-Based Information Sys-
tems (NBiS), 2014 17th International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 511–516.

M´armol, F. G., P´erez, G. M., 2012. TRIP, a trust and reputation
infrastructure-based proposal for vehicular ad hoc networks. Journal of
Network and Computer Applications 35 (3), 934–941.

Mejri, M. N., Ben-Othman, J., Hamdi, M., 2014. Survey on VANET secu-
rity challenges and possible cryptographic solutions. Vehicular Communi-
cations 1 (2), 53–66.

Mishra, B., Nayak, P., Behera, S., Jena, D., 2011. Security in vehicular adhoc
networks: a survey. In: Proceedings of the 2011 International Conference
on Communication, Computing & Security. ACM, pp. 590–595.

Mokhtar, B., Azab, M., 2015. Survey on security issues in vehicular ad hoc

networks. Alexandria Engineering Journal 54 (4), 1115–1126.

44

Patel, K. N., Jhaveri, R. H., 2015. Isolating packet dropping misbehavior in
VANET using Ant Colony Optimization. International Journal of Com-
puter Applications 120 (24).

Raﬁque, N., Khan, M. A., Saqib, N. A., Bashir, F., Beard, C., Li, Z., 2016.
Blackhole prevention in VANETs using trust management and fuzzy logic
analyzer. International Journal of Computer Science and Information Se-
curity 14 (9), 1226.

Raya, M., Hubaux, J.-P., 2007. Securing vehicular ad hoc networks. Journal

of computer security 15 (1), 39–68.

Rostamzadeh, K., Nicanfar, H., Torabi, N., Gopalakrishnan, S., Leung, V. C.,
2015. A context-aware trust-based information dissemination framework
for vehicular networks. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 2 (2), 121–132.

Schlienz J, R. A., 2015. Whitepaper: Device to device communication in

LTE. Tech. rep., ROHDE & SCHWARZ.

Seddigh, N., Nandy, B., Makkar, R., Beaumont, J.-F., 2010. Security ad-
vances and challenges in 4G wireless networks. In: Privacy Security and
Trust (PST), 2010 Eighth Annual International Conference on. IEEE, pp.
62–71.

Sedjelmaci, H., Senouci, S. M., 2015. An accurate and eﬃcient collaborative
intrusion detection framework to secure vehicular networks. Computers &
Electrical Engineering 43, 33–47.

Shaikh, R. A., Alzahrani, A. S., 2014. Intrusion-aware trust model for ve-
hicular ad hoc networks. Security and communication networks 7 (11),
1652–1669.

Shen, W., Liu, L., Cao, X., Hao, Y., Cheng, Y., 2013. Cooperative message
authentication in vehicular cyber-physical systems. IEEE Transactions on
Emerging Topics in Computing 1 (1), 84–97.

Shukla, N., Dinker, A. G., Srivastava, N., Singh, A., 2016. Security in vehic-
ular ad hoc network by using multiple operating channels. In: Computing
for Sustainable Global Development (INDIACom), 2016 3rd International
Conference on. IEEE, pp. 3064–3068.

45

Siemens, 2015. Vehicle-to-X (V2X) communication technology. Tech. rep.,

Siemens.

Sun, C., Liu, J., Xu, X., Ma, J., 2017. A privacy-preserving mutual authen-
tication resisting dos attacks in VANETs. IEEE Access 5, 24012–24022.

Sun, J., Zhang, C., Zhang, Y., Fang, Y., 2010. An identity-based security
system for user privacy in vehicular ad hoc networks. IEEE Transactions
on Parallel and Distributed Systems 21 (9), 1227–1239.

Tajeddine, A., Kayssi, A., Chehab, A., 2010. A privacy-preserving trust
model for VANETs. In: Computer and Information Technology (CIT),
2010 IEEE 10th International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 832–837.

Wan, J., Lopez, A. B., Al Faruque, M. A., 2016. Exploiting wireless channel
randomness to generate keys for automotive cyber-physical system secu-
rity. In: Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Cyber-Physical
Systems. IEEE Press, p. 13.

Wang, J., Huang, Y., Feng, Z., Jiang, C., Zhang, H., Leung, V. C., 2018.
Reliable traﬃc density estimation in vehicular network. IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology.

Wei, Y.-c., Chen, Y.-m., Shan, H.-l., 2011. Beacon-based trust management
for location privacy enhancement vanets. In: Network Operations and
Management Symposium (APNOMS), 2011 13th Asia-Paciﬁc. IEEE, pp.
1–8.

Wei, Z., Yu, F. R., Boukerche, A., 2014. Trust based security enhancements
for vehicular ad–hoc networks. In: Proceedings of the fourth ACM inter-
national symposium on Development and analysis of intelligent vehicular
networks and applications. ACM, pp. 103–109.

Wu, L., Du, X., Wu, J., Aug. 2016. Eﬀective defense schemes for phishing
attacks on mobile computing platforms. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology 65 (8), 6678–6691.

Yan, G., Wen, D., Olariu, S., Weigle, M. C., 2013. Security challenges in ve-
hicular cloud computing. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems 14 (1), 284–294.

46

Yan, Z., Xie, H., Zhang, P., Gupta, B. B., 2017. Flexible data access control

in D2D communications. Future Generation Computer Systems.

Yang, N., 2013. A similarity based trust and reputation management frame-
work for VANETs. International Journal of Future Generation Communi-
cation and Networking 6 (2), 25–34.

Yang, Y., Wei, Z., Zhang, Y., Lu, H., Choo, K.-K. R., Cai, H., 2017. V2X
security: A case study of anonymous authentication. Pervasive and Mobile
Computing.

Ying, B., Nayak, A., 2017. Anonymous and lightweight authentication for
secure vehicular networks. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology
66 (12), 10626–10636.

Zhang, D., Yu, F. R., Wei, Z., Boukerche, A., 2016. Trust-based secure rout-

ing in software-deﬁned vehicular ad-hoc networks. arXiv journal.

Zhang, J., 2011. A survey on trust management for VANETs. In: Advanced
information networking and applications (AINA), 2011 IEEE international
conference on. IEEE, pp. 105–112.

Zhang, L., 2017. OTIBAAGKA: A new security tool for cryptographic mix-
zone establishment in vehicular ad hoc networks. IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security 12 (12), 2998–3010.

Zhang, M., Fang, Y., 2005. Security analysis and enhancements of 3GPP
authentication and key agreement protocol. IEEE Transactions on wireless
communications 4 (2), 734–742.

Zhang, Y., Wang, L., Sun, W., 2013. Trust system design optimization in
smart grid network infrastructure. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 4 (1),
184–195.

Zhang, Y., Zhang, H., Long, K., Zheng, Q., Xie, X., 2018. Software-deﬁned
and fog-computing-based next generation vehicular networks. IEEE Com-
munications Magazine 56 (9), 34–41.

Zheng, Q., Zheng, K., Zhang, H., Leung, V. C., 2016. Delay-optimal virtu-
alized radio resource scheduling in software-deﬁned vehicular networks via
stochastic learning. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 65 (10),
7857–7867.

47

Zhu, X., Xu, F., Novak, E., Tan, C. C., Li, Q., Chen, G., 2017. Using
wireless link dynamics to extract a secret key in vehicular scenarios. IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing 16 (7), 2065–2078.

48

