Cyber Security Awareness Campaigns: Why do they 
fail to change behaviour? 

Maria Bada1, Angela M. Sasse2 and Jason R.C. Nurse3 

1 Global Cyber Security Capacity Centre, University of Oxford maria.bada@cs.ox.ac.uk 
2 Department of Computer Science, University College London a.sasse@cs.ucl.ac.uk 
3 Cyber Security Centre, Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford 
jason.nurse@cs.ox.ac.uk 

Abstract 

The present paper focuses on Cyber Security Awareness Campaigns, and aims to identify key factors 
regarding security which may lead them to failing to appropriately change people’s behaviour. Past 
and current efforts to improve information-security practices and promote a sustainable society 
have not had the desired impact. It is important therefore to critically reflect on the  challenges 
involved in improving information-security behaviours for citizens, consumers and employees. In 
particular, our work considers these challenges from a Psychology perspective, as we believe that 
understanding  how  people  perceive  risks  is  critical  to  creating  effective  awareness  campaigns. 
Changing behaviour requires more than providing information about risks and reactive behaviours 
–  firstly,  people  must  be  able  to  understand  and  apply  the  advice,  and  secondly,  they  must  be 
motivated and willing to do so – and the latter requires changes to attitudes and intentions. These 
antecedents of behaviour change are identified in several psychological models of behaviour. We 
review the suitability of persuasion techniques, including the widely used ‘fear appeals’. From this 
range of literature, we extract essential components for an awareness campaign as well as factors 
which  can  lead  to  a  campaign’s  success  or  failure.  Finally,  we  present  examples  of  existing 
awareness campaigns in different cultures (the UK and Africa) and reflect on these.  

Keywords:  awareness  campaign;  cybersecurity;  behaviour;  culture;  persuasion  techniques;  risk; 
fear appeal 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
 
 
 
 
Introduction 

1 
Governments  and  commercial  organizations  around  the  globe  make  extensive  use  of 
Information and Communications Technologies (ICT), and as a result, their security is of utmost 
importance.  To  achieve  this,  they  deploy  technical  security  measures,  and  develop  security 
policies  that  specify  the 
‘correct’  behaviour  of  employees,  consumers  and  citizens. 
Unfortunately, many individuals do not comply with specified policies or expected behaviours 
[1]. There are many potential reasons for this, but two of the most compelling are that people 
are not aware of (or do not perceive) the risks or, they do not know (or fully understand) the 
‘correct’ behaviour. 

The  primary  purpose  of  cyber  security-awareness  campaigns  is  to  influence  the  adoption  of 
secure behaviour online. However, effective influencing requires more than simply informing 
people about what they should and should not do: they need, first of all, to accept that the 
information is relevant, secondly, understand how they ought to respond, and thirdly, be willing 
to do this in the face of many other demands [2][3].   

This paper engages in a focused review of current literature and applying psychological theories 
to awareness and behaviour in the area of cyber security. Our aim is to take a first step towards 
a better understanding of the reasons why changing cyber security behaviour is such a challenge. 
The study also identifies many psychological theories of behavioural change that can be used to 
make information security awareness methods significantly more effective. 

This  paper  is  structured  as  followed.  Section  2  reviews  current  information  on  security-
awareness campaigns and their effectiveness. In Section 3, we examine the factors influencing 
change in online behaviour, such as personal, social and environmental factors. Section 4 reflects 
on persuasion techniques used to influence behaviour and encourage individuals to adopt better 
practices online. In Section 5, we summarise the essential components for a successful cyber 
security awareness campaign, and consequently, factors which can lead to a campaign’s failure. 
Finally, Section 6, presents examples of existing awareness campaigns in the UK and Africa and 
initially reviews them in the light of our study’s findings. 

2  Cyber security awareness campaigns 
An  awareness  and  training  program  is  crucial,  in  that,  it  is  the  vehicle  for  disseminating 
information that all users (employees, consumers and citizens, including managers) need. In the 
case  of  an  Information  Technology  (IT)  security  program,  it  is  the  typical  means  used  to 
communicate  security  requirements  and  appropriate  behaviour.  An  awareness  and  training 
program  can  be  effective,  if  the  material  is  interesting,  current  and  simple  enough  to  be 
followed. Any presentation that ‘feels’ impersonal and too general as to apply to the intended 
audience, will be treated by users as just another obligatory session [4].  

Security awareness is defined in NIST Special Publication 800-16 [4] as follows: “Awareness is 
not training. The purpose of awareness presentations is simply to focus attention on security. 
Awareness presentations are intended to allow individuals to recognize IT security concerns and 
respond accordingly”. This clearly highlights where the main emphasis on awareness should be. 
It identifies the fact that people need not only to  be aware of possible cyber risks but also, 
behave accordingly. 

In terms of the public more generally, governments encourage citizens to transact online and 
dispense advice on how to do so securely.  However, major cyber security attacks continue to 
occur [5]. Although a likely reason for this could be the fact that attackers are becoming more 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
skilled, there is also the reality that security interfaces are often too difficult for the layman to 
use. 

Another  relevant  point  that  has  arisen  from  the  literature  is  the  fact  that  people  know  the 
answer  to  awareness  questions,  but  they  do  not  act  accordingly  to  their  real  life  [6].  It  is 
proposed that it is essential for security and privacy practices to be designed into a system from 
the  very  beginning.  A  system  that  is  too  difficult  to  use  will  eventually  lead  to  users  making 
mistakes and avoiding security altogether [7]. This was the case in 1999 [8] and is still the case 
today [9].  

The fact today is that security awareness as conceived is not working. Naturally, an individual 
that is faced with so many ambiguous warnings and  complicated advice, may be tempted  to 
abandon all efforts for protection, and not worry about any danger. Threatening or intimidating 
security messages are not particularly effective, especially because they increase stress to such 
an extent that the individual may even be repulsed or deny the existence of the need for any 
security decision.  

3  Factors influencing change in online behaviour 
The  increased  availability  of  information  has  significant  positive  effects,  but  simply  providing 
information often has surprisingly modest and sometimes unintended impacts when it attempts 
to change individuals’ behaviour [10]. A considerable amount of investment is being spent by 
governments and companies on influencing behaviour online [11], and the success in doing so 
would be maximised if they draw on robust evidence of how people actually behave. 

Various research articles have investigated the factors which influence human behaviour and 
behaviour change but one of the most  complete is the Dolan, et al. [12].   In their article the 
authors  present  nine  critical  factors,  namely:  (1)  the  messenger  (who  communicates 
information); (2) incentives (our responses to incentives are shaped by predictable mental short 
cuts, such as strongly avoiding losses); (3) norms (how others strongly influence us); (4) defaults 
(we follow pre-set options); (5) salience (what is relevant to us usually draws our attention); (6) 
priming (our acts are often influenced by sub-conscious cues); (7) affect (emotional associations 
can powerfully shape our actions); (8) commitments (we seek to be consistent with our public 
promises,  and  reciprocate  acts);  (9)  ego  (we  act  in  ways  that  make  us  feel  better  about 
ourselves). 

These  factors  hint  at  the  key  ingredients  for  an  overall  approach  to  influencing  behaviour 
change, since the psychological mechanisms which they refer to, are core in making any type of 
decision. Furthermore, these mechanisms can influence the user’s motivation to actually adopt 
the knowledge offered by a security campaign and behave accordingly. In order to enact change, 
the current sources of influence (conscious or unconscious, personal, environmental or social) 
need to be identified. The following section describes these aspects. 

3.1  Personal factors 
Reflecting  on  literature,  it  is  well  recognised  that  an  individual’s  knowledge,  skills  and 
understanding of cyber security as well as their experiences, perceptions, attitudes and beliefs 
are the main influencers of their behaviour [13]. Of these, personal motivation and personal 
ability,  are  two  of  the  most  powerful  sources  of  influence.  Specifically,  it  is  the  difference 
between what people say and what people do that needs to be addressed. In many cases, people 
will have to overcome existing thought patterns in order to form new habits.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
People can sometimes get tired of security procedures and processes, especially if they perceive 
security  as  an  obstacle,  preventing  them  from  their  primary  task  (e.g.,  being  blocked  from 
visiting  a  music  download  website  because  the  browser  has  stated  that  the  site  might  have 
malware). It can also be stressful to remain at a high level of vigilance and security awareness. 
These feelings describe the so called ‘security fatigue’, and they can be hazardous to the overall 
health of an organization or society [14][15].  

In the security domain, the so called ‘Security, Functionality and Usability Triangle’, describes 
the situation of trying to create a balance between three, usually conflicting, goals [16]. If you 
start in the middle and move toward security, you also move further away from functionality 
and  usability.  Move  the  point  toward  usability,  and  you  are  moving  away  from  security  and 
functionality. If the triangle leans too far in either direction, then this can lead to a super secure 
system  that  no  one  can  use,  or  an  insecure  system  that  everyone  can  use  (even  unwanted 
individuals, such as hackers). Security fatigue becomes an issue when the triangle swings too far 
to the security side and the requirements are too much for the users to handle. Therefore, there 
has to be a balance between system security and usability [9].  

Moreover, perceived control is a  core  construct that can also  be  considered as an aspect of 
empowerment [17]. It refers to the amount of control that people feel they have, as opposed to 
the amount of their actual control [18][19][20]. The positive effects of perceived control mainly 
appear in situations where the individuals can improve their condition through their own efforts. 
Also, the greater the actual threat, the greater the value that perceived control can play. When 
we  apply  this  theory  to  cyber  security,  we  could  assume  that  home-computer  users  often 
experience high levels of actual control over their risk exposure. This is because they can choose 
which  websites  to  visit,  whether  to  open  email  attachments  and  whether  to  apply  system 
updates [21]. 

In Psychology, the Regulatory Focus theory [22] proposes that in a promotion-focused mode of 
self-regulation, individuals’ behaviours are guided by a need for nurturance, the desire to bring 
oneself into alignment with one’s ideal self (‘ideal self’ is what usually motivates individuals to 
change),  and  the  striving  to  attain  gains.  In  a  prevention-focused  mode  of  self-regulation 
individual’s behaviours are guided by a need for security, the need to align one’s actual self with 
one’s ought self by fulfilling duties and obligations and the striving to ensure non-losses. Thus, 
the effectiveness of advertising campaigns for adolescents may be enhanced either by using two 
types of messages (prevention and promotion focused) or by priming one type of regulatory 
focus through the advertising vehicle. 

3.2  Cultural and environmental factors  
Culture is also an important factor that can have a positive security influence to the persuasion 
process.  Messages  and  advertisements  are  usually  preferred  when  they  match  the  cultural 
theme  of  the  message  recipient.  As  a  result,  cultural  factors  are  one  of  the  most  important 
factors for consideration when designing education and awareness messages [23]. 

The cultural systems of a society shape a variety of their psychological processes. Intrinsically 
motivated behaviours emanate from the self and are marked by the enjoyment and satisfaction 
of engaging in an activity. Conversely, extrinsic motivation refers to motivation to engage in an 
activity  in  order  to  achieve  some  instrumental  end,  such  as  earning  a  reward  or  avoiding  a 
punishment.  Messages  tend  to  be  more  persuasive  when  there  is  a  match  between  the 
recipient’s cognitive, affective or motivational characteristics and the content of framing of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
message. Also, messages are more persuasive if they match an individual’s ought or self-guides, 
or self-monitoring style [24]. People might be motivated to follow a cyber security campaign’s 
advice.  But  if  that  causes  certain  limitation  on  the  sites  they  can  visit  online,  then  this  can 
automatically result in emotional discomfort, thus leading to ignorance of a suggested ‘secure’ 
behaviour.  

Perception  of  risk  can  be  a  collective  phenomenon  and  it  is  crucial  for  awareness  raising 
specialists  to  be  aware  of  the  different  cultural  characteristics.  The  values  that  distinguish 
country cultures from each other could be categorised into four groups [25]: (1) Power Distance; 
(2)  Individualism  versus  Collectivism;  (3)  Masculinity  versus  Femininity;  and  (4)  Uncertainty 
Avoidance. In more individualistic cultures, such as the West, people tend to define themselves 
in terms of their internal attributes such as goals, preferences and attitudes. For example, in 
cyber security, a message used in a Western country would tend to avoid presenting the general 
risks of not being secure online and rather focus on the benefits of being secure.  

In more collectivist cultures, such as those typically found in the East, individuals tend to define 
themselves in terms of their relationships and social group memberships [26]. In this cultural 
context,  individuals  tend  to  avoid  behaviours  that  cause  social  disruptions.  Therefore,  they 
favour  prevention  over  promotion  strategies  focusing  on  the  negative  outcomes,  which  they 
hope to avoid rather than the positive outcomes they hope to approach [27]. Moreover, risk is 
also  seen  as  the  other  side  of  trust  and  confidence,  a  perception  being  imbedded  in  social 
relations [28]. The emphasis on different risks, in different cultural contexts is another important 
aspect that needs to be addressed when creating cyber security awareness campaigns.  

4  Persuasion techniques  
Persuasion can be defined as the “attempt to change attitudes or behaviors or both (without 
using coercion or deception)” [29]. There are two ways of thinking about changing behaviour: 
(1) by influencing what people consciously think about (rational or cognitive model)  and (2) by 
shaping behaviour focused on the more automatic processes of judgment and influence (context 
model) without changing the thinking. In this section we present the different persuasion and 
influence techniques, in an effort to examine potential challenges in the area of cyber security 
awareness. 

4.1  Influence strategies 
People do not usually simply follow advice or instructions on how to behave online even if they 
come from an expert or a person of authority. In many cases, end users are not fully aware of 
the dangers of interacting online, and to exacerbate the issue, security experts provide them 
with too complicated information, often evoking emotions of fear and despair [30]. The basic 
persuasion  techniques  include:  fear,  humour,  expertise,  repetition,  intensity,  and  scientific 
evidence.  

People base their conscious decisions on whether they have the ability to do what is required 
and whether  the effort is worth it. Examples of messages aimed at persuading individuals to 
change their behaviour online, can be found in advertising, public relations and advocacy. These 
‘persuaders’ use a variety of techniques to seize attention, to establish credibility and trust, and 
to motivate action. These techniques are commonly referred to as the ‘language of persuasion’. 
They can also be found in cyber security awareness campaigns. For example, fear is often being 
used as a persuasion technique for cyber security. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Surveys  have  shown  that  the  invocation  of  fear  can  be  a  very  persuasive  tactic  to  specific 
situations, or indeed a counterproductive tactic in others [31]. Security-awareness campaigns 
mostly tend to use fear invocations, by combining messages with pictures of hackers in front of 
the screen of a computer. Even, the word ‘cyberspace’, indicates something unknown to many, 
thus leading to fear. Typically, invocations of fear, are accompanied with recommendations that 
are as efficacious in preventing the threat. Thus, the three central structures in fear invocations 
are fear, threat and efficacy.  

Various behavioural theories including the Drive Model [32], the Parallel Response Model [33], 
or the Protection Motivation Theory [34], consider the cost and efficiency of a reaction and have 
independent effects on persuasion. According to the Protection Motivation Theory for instance, 
the  way  a  person  responds  to  and  carries  out  a  cyber  security  awareness  campaign’s 
recommendations  depends  on  both  the  cyber  threat  appraisal  but  also  on  the  person’s  self-
efficacy. 

The attempt to change a certain behaviour is much more difficult when the person is bombarded 
by a large number of  messages  about  certain  issues. However,  even  when  the  design  of  the 
message is taken into account, there is a big gap between the recognition of the threat and the 
manifestation of the desired behaviour at regular intervals. Specifically for security awareness 
campaigns, the behaviour that users will need to adopt, should be as simple and easy as possible 
highlighting the advantages of adopting it.  

Moreover, findings suggest that interventions based on major theoretical knowledge to change 
behaviour  (e.g.,  social  learning  theory  or  the  theory  of  self-efficacy)  that  take  into  account 
cultural beliefs and attitudes, and are more likely to succeed [35]. 

5  Factors leading to success or failure of a cyber security 

awareness campaign 

There  are  several  components  which  need  to  be  taken  into  consideration  in  order  for  an 
awareness campaign to be successful. One of the most crucial parts is that of communication. 
Teaching new skills effectively can lead to prevention of high-risk online behaviour, since what 
appears to be lack of motivation is sometimes really lack of ability [36]. 
There is a wide discussion about security-awareness campaigns and their effort to secure the 
human  element,  leading  to  a  secure  online  behaviour.  In  many  cases,  security-awareness 
campaigns demand a lot of effort and skills from the public, while measures do not provide real 
insight on their success in changing behaviour. Often, solutions are not aligned to risks; neither 
progress  nor  value  are  measured;  incorrect  assumptions  are  made  about  people  and  their 
motivations; and unrealistic expectations are set [6]. 

As  previously  discussed  fear  invocations  have  often  proved  insufficient  to  change  behaviour 
[31]. For example, a message combined to a photo of a hacker, might prove to be funny rather 
than frightening or might cause the public to feel not related to the advertisement.  

In order for a campaign to be successful, there are also several pitfalls which need to be avoided. 
The first is not understanding what security awareness really is. Second, a compliance awareness 
program does not necessarily equate to creating the desired behaviours. Third, usually there is 
lack  of  engaging  and  appropriate  materials.  Fourth,  usually  there  is  no  illustration  that 
awareness is a unique discipline. Fifth, there is no assessment of the awareness programmes 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
[37]. Sixth, not arranging multiple training exercises but instead focusing on a specific topic or 
threat does not offer the overall training needed [38].  

Perceived control and personal handling ability, the sense one has that he/she can drive specific 
behaviour,  has  been  found  to  affect  the  intention  of  behaviour  but  also  the  real  behaviour 
[18][19].  We  suggest  that  a  campaign  should  use  simple  consistent  rules  of  behaviour  that 
people can follow. This way, their perception of control will lead to better acceptance of the 
suggested behaviour. 

Cultural differences in risk perceptions can also influence the maintenance of a particular way of 
life. Moreover, even when people are willing to change their behaviour, the process of learning 
a new behaviour needs to be supported [22][23]. We suggest that cultural differences should 
be taken into consideration while planning a cyber security awareness campaign. 

Measuring the effectiveness of information security awareness efforts for the public though, can 
be  a  very  complicated  process.  Metrics  such  as  the  number  of  phishing  e-mails  opened  or 
number of accesses to unauthorised pages are difficult to measure in a larger scale. This is why, 
defined large scale metrics are needed, to help security-awareness  efforts  be  evaluated  and 
assessed. 

The present paper has thus far, reviewed some of the various personal, social and environmental 
factors influencing online behaviour change as it relates to cyber security. Also, we have tried to 
identify the factors which can lead to a cyber security awareness campaign’s success or failure.  

6  Case studies 
This section will present existing awareness campaigns on cyber security in the UK and in Africa. 
These  two  countries  were  selected  in  an  effort  to  explore  possible  core  cultural  differences 
reflected 
in  awareness  efforts.  The  two  countries  differ  not  only  regarding  cultural 
characteristics,  but  also  in  the  amount  of  investment  being  spent  on  influencing  secure 
behaviour online. 

6.1  Cyber security awareness campaigns in the UK 
There are various awareness efforts in UK aiming to improve online security for businesses and 
the public. Below, we present two of the most popular of these. 

A) The GetSafeOnline Campaign [39] is a jointly-funded initiative between several government 
departments  and  the  private  sector,  and  focuses  on  users  at  home  and  in  businesses.  The 
positive message of ‘’Get safe online’’ itself is an intriguing one, and at its core, emphasises to 
individuals  that  they  have  the  responsibility  for  getting  safe  online.  The  campaign  offers  a 
comprehensive repository of information on threats and how-to advice on protecting oneself 
and one’s enterprise. The charge, however, is on individuals to make use of this information and 
properly apply it to their context.  

B) The Cyber Streetwise Campaign [40] also concentrates on users at home and in businesses. 
The new Home Office Cyber Streetwise site advises businesses to adopt five basic measures to 
boost  their  security.  These  include,  using  strong,  memorable  passwords,  installing  antivirus 
software on all work devices, checking privacy settings on social media, checking the security of 
online  retailers  before  loading  card  details,  and  patching  systems  as  soon  as  updates  are 
available. This is a campaign which tries to cause a behavioural change by providing tips and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
advice on how to improve online security. The  campaign uses a positive message method to 
influence the behaviour of users, ‘’In short, the weakest links in the cyber security chain are you 
and me’’.  

6.2  Cyber security awareness campaigns in Africa  
A)  The  ISC  Africa  [41]  is  a  coordinated,  industry  and  community-wide  effort  to  inform  and 
educate Africa’s citizens on safe and responsible use of computers and the Internet, so that the 
inherent  risks  can  be  minimised  and  consumer  trust  can  be  increased.  The  campaign  uses  a 
positive message method to influence the behaviour  of users in a more collectivist approach 
‘’Working together to ensure a safe online environment for all’. Here, we can see an obvious 
difference to the messages used in awareness campaign in the UK, that is, the cyber security-
awareness efforts in Africa have been aligned to the cultural aspects of that society.  

B) Parents’ Corner  Campaign  [42]  is  intended  to  co-ordinate the work done by government, 
industry  and  civil  society.  Its  objectives  are  to  protect  children,  empower  parents,  educate 
children and create partnerships and collaboration amongst concerned stakeholders. Parents’ 
Corner  tips  for  a  safer  Internet  include:  ‘’People aren’t  always  who  they  say  they  are,  Think 
before you post, Just as they would in real life - friends must protect friends’’. Once again, one of 
the main messages refer to users protecting users in terms of their relationships and social group 
memberships. 

6.3  Comparing cyber security awareness campaigns in the UK and 

Africa 

In  our  effort  to  investigate  potential  differences  in  cyber  security-awareness  campaigns,  in 
different cultural contexts, we considered existing campaigns in the UK and Africa. 
We have to state that there are a large number of existing national campaigns in the UK, but we 
selected two of the most popular of these. On the contrary, in Africa the number of existing 
awareness  campaigns  is  limited.  This  difference  could  indicate  lack  of  resources,  or  lack  of 
current emphasis on cyber security in Africa. Moreover, it could even indicate that Africa has a 
more  organised and coherent security-awareness  plan, with a small number of targeted and 
coordinated campaigns. 

As previously discussed, messages and advertisements are usually preferred when they match 
a  cultural  theme of the message recipient  [23].  While  reviewing  the  main  messages  used  by 
campaigns in the UK, it became clear that most of them refer to the individual [25]. For example 
The GetSafeOnline Campaign uses the message ‘’Get safe online’’ by emphasising to individuals 
and their responsibility for getting safe online. On the contrary, the messages used by campaigns 
in Africa, refer to users in terms of their relationships and social group memberships, as well as 
the need to fulfil duties and obligations (Parents’ Corner Campaign includes a message saying: 
Just as they would in real life - friends must protect friends).  

The  cultural  aspects  have  been  reflected  in  the  awareness  campaigns,  in  both  cases,  using  a 
more individualist approach in UK and a more collectivist approach in Africa [23][25][27]. It is 
important to decide the target group of a campaign and try to match a cultural theme of the 
message  recipient  but  also,  match  the  recipient’s  cognitive,  affective  or  motivational 
characteristics with the content of framing of the message [27][26][29]. 

Usually,  most  of  official  awareness-campaign  sites  include  advice  which  usually  comes  from 
security  experts  and  service  providers,  who  monotonically  repeat  suggestions  such  as  ‘use 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strong passwords’.  Such advice pushes responsibility and workload for issues that should be 
addressed by the service providers and product vendors onto users. One of the main reasons 
why  users  do  not  behave  optimally  is  that  security  systems  and  policies  are  often  poorly 
designed [9]. There is a need to move from awareness to tangible behaviours.  

Another important aspect is that most of the official awareness-campaign sites in UK and Africa 
do not offer the possibility to users to call a help-line, not only to report cybercrime but also to 
receive help. Less skilled users could find this feature useful. 

7 Conclusions 
This  paper  presents  a  review  of  current  literature  based  on  the  psychological  theories  of 
awareness and behaviour in the area of cyber security, and considers them to gain insight into 
the reasons why security-awareness campaigns often fail. 

Simple transfer of knowledge about good practices in security is far from enough [6]. Knowledge 
and awareness is a prerequisite to change behaviour but not necessarily sufficient, and this is 
why  it  has  to  be  implemented  in  conjunction  with  other  influencing  strategies.  It  is  very 
important to embed positive cyber security behaviours, which can result to thinking becoming 
a habit, and a part of an organisation’s cyber security culture. One of the main reasons why users 
do not behave optimally is that security systems and policies are poorly designed – this has been 
presented time and time again throughout research [9]. 

Behaviour change in a cyber security context could possibly be measured through risk reduction, 
but not through what people know, what they ignore or what they do not know.  Answering 
questions correctly does not mean that the individual is motivated to behave according to the 
knowledge gained during an awareness programme. A campaign should use simple consistent 
rules of behaviour that people can follow. This way, people’s perception of control will lead to 
better acceptance of the suggested behaviour [18][19][20].  

Based  on  our  review  on  the  literature  and  analysis  of  several  successful  and  unsuccessful 
security-awareness campaigns, we suggest that the following factors can be extremely helpful 
at enhancing the effectiveness of current and future campaigns: (1) security awareness has to 
be professionally prepared and organised in order to work; (2) invoking fear in people is not an 
effective tactic, since it could scare people who can least afford to take risks [30]; (3) security 
education  has  to  be  more  than  providing  information  to  users  –  it  needs  to  be  targeted, 
actionable,  doable and  provide  feedback;  (4)  once people are willing to change, training and 
continuous  feedback  is  needed  to  sustain  them  through  the  change  period;  (5)  emphasis  is 
necessary  on  different  cultural  contexts  and  characteristics  when  creating  cyber  security-
awareness campaigns [35].  

In future work, we will aim to conduct a more substantial evaluation of several cyber security-
awareness campaigns around the world, especially in North America and Asia, to examine the 
extent  to  which  they  have  implemented  the  factors  mentioned  above  and  their  levels  of 
campaign success.  

References 

1.  Humaidi, N., Balakrishnan, V.: Exploratory Factor Analysis of User’s Compliance Behaviour towards Health 

Information System’s Security. J Health Med Inform 4(2), (2013).  

2.  Rogers, R.W. Attitude change and information integration in fear appeals. Psychological Reports, 56, (1985) 

183–188. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  Witte, K. Message and conceptual confounds in fear appeals: The role of threat, fear and efficacy. The Southern 

Communication Journal, 58(2), (1993) 147-155. 

4.  National Institute of Standards and Technology - NIST: Building an Information Technology Security Awareness 
and Training Program. Wilson, M. and Hash, J. Computer Security Division Information Technology Laboratory. 
October 2003. http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-50/NIST-SP800-50.pdf  

5.  Kirlappos, I., Parkin, S., Sasse, M. A.: Learning from Shadow Security: Why understanding non-compliance 

provides the basis for effective security. Workshop on Usable Security, 2014. 

6.  Information Security Forum (ISF): From Promoting Awareness to Embedding Behaviours, Secure by choice not 

by chance, February 2014. https://www.securityforum.org/shop/p-71-170 

7.  Coventry, D.L., Briggs, P., Blythe, J., Tran, M.: Using behavioural insights to improve the public’s use of cyber 

security best practices. Government Office for Science, London, UK, 2014. 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/309652/14-835-cyber-
security-behavioural-insights.pdf 

8.  Whitten, A., Tygar, J.D.: SSYM'99 Proceedings of the 8th conference on USENIX Security Symposium - Volume 8, 

(1999) 14-14. USENIX Association Berkeley. 

9.  Nurse, J.R.C., Creese, S., Goldsmith, M., Lamberts, K.: Guidelines for usable cybersecurity: Past and present, in 

The 3rd International Workshop on Cyberspace Safety and Security (CSS 2011) at The 5th International 
Conference on Network and System Security (NSS 2011), Milan, Italy, 6-8 September. 

10. Smith, M.S., Petty, E.R.: Message Framing and Persuasion: A Message Processing Analysis. Pers Soc Psychol Bull 

22(3) (1996) 257-268.  

11. UK - Cabinet Office. The UK Cyber Security Strategy, Report on Progress and Forward Plans, December 

2014.https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/386093/The_UK_Cyber
_Security_Strategy_Report_on_Progress_and_Forward_Plans_-_De___.pdf    

12. Dolan P., Hallsworth, M., Halpern, D., King,D., Vlaev, I.: MINDSPACE Influencing behaviour through public policy, 

Institute for Government, Cabinet Office, (2010). 
http://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/sites/default/files/publications/MINDSPACE.pdf 

13. Hogan, J.: Motivation, In J.J. Bolhuis (Ed.), The behaviour of animals: Mechanisms, function and evolution (2005) 

41-70. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.  

14. O'Donnell A. How to Prevent IT 'Security Fatigue. http://netsecurity.about.com/od/advancedsecurity/a/How-

To-Avoid-IT-Security-Fatigue.htm   

15. NTT Com Security Inc. Risk: Value Research Report 2014. 

https://www.nttcomsecurity.com/us/landingpages/risk-value-research/   
16. Waite, A. InfoSec Triads: Security/Functionality/Ease-of-Use. June 12, 2010. 
17. Eklund, M., & Backstrom, M.:  The role of perceived control for the perception of health by patients with 

persistent mental illness. Scandinavian Journal of Occupational Therapy, 13, (2006) 249-256.  
18. Bandura, A. Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. W.H. USA: Freeman and Company Pbl. (1997). 
19. Ajzen, I. Perceived Behavioral Control, Self-Efficacy, Locus of Control, and the Theory of Planned Behavior. 

Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 32, (2002) 665-683. 

20. Wallston, K.A. Control beliefs. In N. J. Smelser & P. B. Baltes (Eds.), International encyclopedia of the social and 

behavioral sciences. Oxford, UK: Elsevier Science (2001). 

21. More J.: Measuring Psychological Variables of Control, In Information Security, (2011). 

http://www.sans.org/reading-room/whitepapers/awareness/measuring-psychological-variables-control-
information-security-33594  

22. Higgins, E.T.: Promotion and prevention: Regulatory focus as a motivational principle. Advances in Experimental 

Social Psychology, 30 (1998) 1-46.  

23. Kreuter, M. W., & McClure, S. M.: The role of culture in health communication. Annual Review of Public Health, 

25, (2004) 439-455.   

24. Uskul, A.K., Sherman, D.K. Fitzgibbon J.: The cultural congruency effect: Culture, regulatory focus, and the 

effectiveness of gain- vs. loss- framed health messages. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45(3), (2009) 
535-541.   

25. Hofstede, G., Hofstede, J.G., Minkov, M. Cultures and Organizations: Software of the Mind. 3rd Edition, 

McGraw-Hill USA, 2010.  

26. Triandis, H.C.: The self and social behaviour in differing cultural contexts. Psychological Review, 96 (1989) 506-

520. 

27. Lockwood, P., Marshall, T., & Sadler, P.: Promoting success or preventing failure: Cultural differences in 

motivation by positive and negative role models. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31 (2005) 379-392.  

28. Dake, K. Myths of Nature: Culture and the Social Construction of Risk. Journal of Social Issues 48(4) (1992) 21–

37. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
29. Fogg, B. J.: Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We Think and Do. Morgan Kaufmann 

(2002). 

30. Witte, K. Fear control and danger control: A test of the Extended Parallel Process Model (EPPM). 

Communication Monographs, 61, (1994) 113-134. 

31. Ahluwalia, R.: An Examination of Psychological Processes Underlying Resistance to Persuasion. Journal of 

Consumer Research, 27 (2) (2000) 217-232. 

32. Janis, I.L. Effects of Fear Arousal on Attitude Change: Recent Developments in Theory and Experimental 
Research, in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 3, ed. Leonard Berkowitz, San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press, (1967) 166-224. 

33. Leventhal, H.: Findings and theory in the study of fear communications. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in 

experimental social psychology (Vol. 5, pp. 119-186). New York: Academic Press (1970). 

34. Rogers, R.W. A protection motivation theory of fear appeals and attitude change. Journal of Psychology, 91, 

(1975) 93-114. 

35. Arthur, D., Quester, P.: Who’s afraid of that ad? Applying segmentation to the Protection Motivation Model.  

Psychology & Marketing, 21 (9) (2004) 671-696. 

36. Winkler I. & Manke S.: 6 essential components for security awareness programs (2013).  

http://www.csoonline.com/article/2133971/strategic-planning-erm/6-essential-components-for-security-
awareness-programs.html 

37. Khan, B., Alghathbar, S.K., Nabi, S.I., & Khan, M.K.: Effectiveness of information security awareness methods 
based on psychological theories. African Journal of Business Management 5 (26) (2011) 10862-10868. 
http://www.academicjournals.org/article/article1380536009_Khan%20et%20al.pdf 
38. Winkler I. & Manke S.: 7 Reasons for Security Awareness Failure, CSO Magazine, (2013).  

http://www.csoonline.com/article/2133408/network-security/the-7-elements-of-a-successful-security-
awareness-program.html 

39. GetSafeOnline Campaign [Accessed online November 2014] www.getsafeonline.org  
40. The Cyber Streetwise campaign [Accessed online November 2014]  www.cyberstreetwise.com 
41. ISC Africa [Accessed online November 2014]  http://iscafrica.net/#home 
42. Parents corner [Accessed online November 2014]  http://www.parentscorner.org.za/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
