1

1
2
0
2

l
u
J

9
1

]

Y
S
.
s
c
[

4
v
3
0
3
2
0
.
1
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

PMU-based Distributed Non-iterative Algorithm for
Real-time Voltage Stability Monitoring

Kishan Prudhvi Guddanti, Student Member, IEEE, Amarsagar Reddy Ramapuram Matavalam, Member, IEEE,
Yang Weng, Member, IEEE

Abstract—The Phasor measurement unit (PMU) measurements
are mandatory to monitor the power system’s voltage stabil-
ity margin in an online manner. Monitoring is key to the
secure operation of the grid. Traditionally, online monitoring
of voltage stability using synchrophasors required a centralized
communication architecture, which leads to the high investment
cost and cyber-security concerns. The increasing importance of
cyber-security and low investment costs have recently led to the
development of distributed algorithms for online monitoring of
the grid that are inherently less prone to malicious attacks. In
this work, we proposed a novel distributed non-iterative voltage
stability index (VSI) by recasting the power ﬂow equations as
circles. The processors embedded at each bus in the smart
grid with the help of PMUs and communication of voltage
phasors between neighboring buses perform simultaneous online
computations of VSI. The distributed nature of the index enables
the real-time identiﬁcation of the critical bus of the system with
minimal communication infrastructure. The effectiveness of the
proposed distributed index is demonstrated on IEEE test systems
and contrasted with existing methods to show the beneﬁts of
the proposed method in speed, interpretability, identiﬁcation of
outage location, and low sensitivity to noisy measurements.

Index Terms—voltage stability, wide-area monitoring and con-

trol, Phasor measurement units, voltage collapse.

I. INTRODUCTION

The advent of phasor measurement units (PMUs) and their
wide-spread acceptance has made it possible to obtain real-
time and time-synchronized information of voltage and current
phasors for use in diversiﬁed applications [1], [2]. Conse-
quently, the proliferation of PMUs transformed the power grid
into a tightly integrated cyber-physical system, where local
computation is viable for distributed monitoring and coordi-
nated control actions in real-time for wide-area monitoring,
protection, and control (WAMPAC).

Among WAMPAC applications, online monitoring of long-
term voltage instability (LTVI) is an area of interest for
industry [3]. Speciﬁcally, LTVI is a quasi-static bifurcation
(nose point of the PV curve) [4], caused by the inability of the

K. P. Guddanti

and Y. Weng are with the School of Electri-
cal, Computer and Energy Engineering at Arizona State University,
emails:{kguddant,yang.weng}@asu.edu; A. R. R. Matavalam is with Depart-
ment of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Iowa State University, email:
amar@iastate.edu.

©2020 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional
purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
Full citation: Guddanti, Kishan Prudhvi, Amarsagar Reddy Ramapuram
Matavalam, and Yang Weng. ”PMU-Based Distributed Non-Iterative Algo-
rithm for Real-Time Voltage Stability Monitoring.” IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid 11, no. 6 (2020): 5203-5215. DOI: 10.1109/TSG.2020.3007063

This is the ﬁrst method in the literature that is NOT Thevenin and NOT
sensitivity type of approach in the literature while retains the advantages
of both Thevenin and Sensitivity based methods together.

generation and transmission system to provide sufﬁcient power
to loads, e.g., due to increased demand, generation outage, or
generators on VAR limits [5], [6]. If left unattended, LTVI
results in a system-wide voltage collapse and blackout [7],
[8]. Using PMU measurements, we can compute the margin
(a measure of distance) from the current operating condition
to LTVI. This measure of distance is quantiﬁed using metrics
known as voltage collapse proximity indices (VCPIs). The
accuracy of VCPIs depends on the theoretical basis used to
derive them, e.g., Thevenin circuit, sensitivity methods [9],
[10]. These methods compute the VCPIs by either decentral-
ized(local) or centralized communication architectures.

Conventional centralized VCPIs typically use Jacobian-
based sensitivity indices. These methods use Jacobian to
identify LTVI since the Jacobian matrix becomes singular
at LTVI [11], [12]. However, the calculation of the Jacobian
requires voltage phasor information at every bus in the power
system, which is expensive [13]–[16]. In addition to this,
the interpretability of sensitivity based VCPIs is harder than
decentralized(local) VCPIs. It is hard because, when the oper-
ating point is close to the limit, the corresponding centralized
VCPI value suddenly increases, becoming unbounded. The un-
bounded nature and non-linear behavior make the centralized
VCPI hard to interpret as a fair distance to the critical loading.
References [13], [14], [17] address the non-interpretability
partially in a centralized manner using measurements from
all the nodes in the system. Speciﬁcally, the original n-bus
system is simpliﬁed into a 2-bus multi-port coupled network
equivalents. However, there is no theoretical proof that the
LTVI of the full-system can always be identiﬁed using these
simpliﬁcations.

To overcome the drawbacks of centralized methods, meth-
ods (indices) that utilize only local PMU measurements at
a substation are developed to monitor the LTVI locally, and
these indices are referred to as decentralized VCPIs [18]. Such
VCPIs employ Thevenin-based methods by utilizing the quasi-
steady-state behavior of the power system to calculate a 2-bus
Thevenin equivalent at a bus [18]. In such an equivalent model,
one node represents the bus of interest while the other accounts
for the rest of the system. The equivalent circuit estimation
only requires local measurements (i.e., requires only a single
PMU) at a bus of interest over a time period, making it
a decentralized architecture. Once the equivalent circuit is
estimated, an index value is computed at the bus of interest
using maximum power transfer theorem [18]. Therefore, these
Thevenin-based methods have a nice property of decentralized
computation of the index values [18]–[21]. It is also shown
that the local index can theoretically (in the presence of no
measurement noise) always identify the LTVI of the full sys-

 
 
 
 
 
 
tem by correlating it with the Jacobian [11]. Interpretability is
an additional advantage of decentralized VCPIs, as the values
are usually between 0 and 1. Unfortunately, the decentralized
method suffers from errors in practice, especially due to the
presence of measurement noise, e.g., the local VCPIs can be
inaccurate with large errors [22].

As the centralized and decentralized methods have trade-
offs between accuracy, cost, and interpretability, we are in-
terested in an intermediate scheme to include these advan-
tages without minimal trade-offs. Speciﬁcally, the centralized
method requires measurements from the entire system, while
the decentralized method only requires the PMU measurement
on the bus of interest. In this paper, we propose to use
an intermediate approach that requires PMU measurements
from the neighboring buses of the interested bus to calculate
the proposed VCPI. This set up is known as a distributed
monitoring scheme, as shown in Fig. 1. In this scheme, PMUs
communicate their measurements at a bus in the physical layer
with its adjacent buses via the cyber layer. The processor
embedded at each bus only uses its adjacent buses’ voltage
phasor measurements to compute the proposed VCPI referred
to as voltage stability index (VSI).

Fig. 1: Cyber-physical form of a futuristic power system with
communication links. The PMUs cover all nodes in this cyber
layer and only communicate between neighbours. This is when
VCPI of every node needs to be computed. In a scenario where
the operator would like monitor only a few critical nodes that
are important, only a few PMUs are needed as shown in Fig. 2.

The structure of the power system in Fig. 1 is for a
future grid communication architecture. Some of these com-
munication advantages are robustness to cyber-attacks on
the communication nodes, and improved reliability of com-
munications due to shorter communication links [23], [24].
Hence it is highly desired to have a distributed communi-
cation architecture due to its various advantages in contrast
to star/centralized architecture. Hence it has been of interest
in the community recently for distributed implementation
of various applications. For example, WAMPAC [25]–[27],
load shedding [28], [29], optimal power ﬂow [30], economic
dispatch [31], transfer capability assessment [32], and control
techniques in microgrids [33], [34]. Even for VCPI, [26] uses
such a distributed communication setup, where the Jacobian is
used to calculate a sensitivity index iteratively. Unfortunately,
the advantage of the trade-off between centralized method
and the decentralized method is not utilized fully, making
[26] suffer from 1) necessity for PMUs to cover all buses, 2)

2

increasing computational time as the power system operating
point gets closer to critical loading, 3) non-interpretable nature
of the index, 4) theoretical ﬂaw of assuming eigenvalues of
the Jacobian to be non-negative (invalid in the IEEE 300-bus
network).

Contributions: In this paper, we propose a novel dis-
tributed index that overcomes the drawbacks of [26] mentioned
above. Instead of exploiting the properties of the Jacobian,
we analyzed the power ﬂow equations themselves with a
new perspective as circles in a distributed framework. This
leads to a new voltage stability index (VSI) that 1) does not
need PMUs at all buses 2) is non-iterative leading to fast
computation irrespective of system loading, 3) is interpretable
(normalized between 1 and 0), where 1 indicates no-load and 0
indicates maximum load, 4) is exact (assumption free) unlike
other indices in literature [13], [14], [17], [18]. This is the
ﬁrst time that a non-iterative, approximation free as well as
distributed communication based method has been proposed
for monitoring the LTVI.

The paper is organized as follows: Section II explains the
power ﬂow equations as circles in a distributed framework.
Section III quantiﬁes the distance between the power ﬂow
circles as a measure of margin to LTVI. Section IV shows
the efﬁcacy of the proposed scheme and VSI via simulations
on different IEEE systems. Section V concludes the paper.

II. POWER FLOW EQUATIONS AS INTERSECTION OF

CIRCLES
Let pd and qd be the active and reactive power injections at
bus d. Let gk,d + j · bk,d be the (k, d)th element of the admit-
tance matrix Y . vd,r and vd,i be the real and imaginary part
of the voltage phasor at bus d, respectively. We represent bus
d’s neighboring bus set as N (d ). The power ﬂow equations
used in this paper are in rectangular coordinate form. They
are given by

pd = td,1 · v 2

d,r + td,2 · vd,r + td,1 · v 2

d,i + td,3 · vd,i,

qd = td,4 · v 2

d,r − td,3 · vd,r + td,4 · v 2

d,i + td,2 · vd,i.

(1a)

(1b)

The parameters td,1, td,2, td,3 and td,4 are given by

td,1 = −

gk,d, td,2 =

(vk,rgk,d − vk,ibk,d),

k ∈N (d)
X

k ∈N (d)
X

(2a)

td,3 =

(vk,rbk,d + vk,igk,d), td,4 =

bk,d. (2b)

k ∈N (d)
X

k ∈N (d)
X

A. Distributed Nature of Power Flow Equations as Circles

The advantage of using power ﬂow equations (1) comes
from their visualization as circles. Speciﬁcally, for ﬁxed con-
stants td,1, td,2, td,3, td,4, equations (1a) and (1b) represents
two circles at bus d in vd,r and vd,i space [12]. The real power
equation (1a) at bus d can be represented as a circle with center
op and radius rp. The reactive power equation (1b) at bus d

can be represented as a circle with center oq and radius rq.
These centers and radii are given by

op =

rp =

rq =

−td,2
2td,1

,

(cid:18)

pd
td,1

qd
td,4

s

s

+

+

td,3
2td,4

,

−td,2
2td,4 (cid:19)

,

, oq =

−td,3
2td,1 (cid:19)
(cid:18)
(td,2)2 + (td,3)2
4t2

d,1
(td,3)2 + (td,2)2
4t2

,

.

d,4

(3a)

(3b)

(3c)

Using the centers and radii (3); the intersection points of
real and reactive power circles at bus d provides the voltage
solution vd at bus d where vd = vd,r +j ·vd,i. It is important to
note that the expressions for the centers and radii of the power
ﬂow circles at bus d contain td,2 and td,3 which contain the
neighboring bus voltages vk,r + j · vk,i where k ∈ N (d ). To
plot the power ﬂow circles at bus d, the centers and radii in
(3) are calculated locally by the embedded processor at bus d
using the voltage phasor measurements from the PMUs located
at the immediate neighboring buses to bus d. For example, to
plot the power ﬂow circles at bus 3 in Fig. 2, we only need
the voltage phasors from the PMUs at buses 2 and 4; branch
admittance of lines joining bus 3 to 2 and 4. Fortunately, in the
proposed distributed scheme, we do not need the admittance
matrix of the entire system.

Fig. 2: Cyber-physical form of the power system to monitor
the VCPI of bus 3 in the network using proposed method. To
monitor the margin at bus 3 in an online fashion, we only need
the PMU measurements from its adjacent buses i.e., buses 2,
4 and branch admittance of lines joining bus 3 to 2 and 4. We
do not need the admittance matrix of entire system.

The discussion above is for PQ buses with constant real and
reactive power constraints. In the case of PV buses, we get
constant real power and voltage constraints, which also lead
to two circles, namely the real power circle (1a) and voltage
circle centered at the origin with radius |Vspeciﬁed|. We will next
discuss how the power ﬂow circles are impacted due to load
increase.
B. Impact of Load Increase on Power Flow Circles

The long-term voltage instability is caused when the gener-
ation and transmission system cannot supply power demanded
by the load. This situation corresponds to the lack of a solution
for the power ﬂow equations. This can be identiﬁed by looking
at the intersection of power ﬂow circles constructed using
PMU measurements at bus d. Geometrically, two circles can

3

have two, one or no points of intersections. Hence, the voltage
solution at bus d represented as an intersection of power
ﬂow circles can have (a) two common points to indicate
multiple feasible voltage solutions, or (b) one common point
to indicate a single feasible voltage solution corresponding to
the nose point (LTVI) of PV curve, or (c) no common points
to represent the in-feasibility of operating conditions.

Before we provide an example, here we present a high-
level data-ﬂow of any voltage stability monitoring method
and explain the overall procedure for the calculation of a
VCPI. The sequential steps for any online stability monitoring
method are: (a) Collection of real-time PMU measurements
from the grid, (b) Estimation of power system states from
the PMU measurements, and (c) Utilizing the estimated states
to calculate an index that provides a metric of the system
stability (VCPI). At a given time step or “snapshot”, we are
monitoring the voltages in the power grid directly from the
PMUs. When there is a load change in the power grid changes
in the next snapshot, the PMU voltage measurements in the
next snapshot are automatically updated since PMU device
voltages are functions of loading on the power grid. Using
these real-time PMU measurements directly the proposed
index is calculated. Alternatively, the input measurements to
calculate the proposed index can also be obtained from the
output of a preprocessor such as a state estimator.

For illustration purpose, we use a completely connected 3-
bus system with the same branch admittance value of 1−j ·0.5
p.u. To showcase the behavior of power ﬂow circles due to
the impact of load change, we will increase the loading on
the power grid until there is a blackout and observe the power
ﬂow circles’ behavior. We also assume the same apparent load
at bus 2 and 3, e.g., S2 = S3 for simplicity. The loads at
bus 2 and 3 are increased in 5 different time instants with
the following values (in p.u.) [−0.01 + j · 0.33, −0.04 + j ·
0.40, −0.13 + j · 0.44, −0.28 + j · 0.45, −0.49 + j · 0.43] until
the power ﬂow circles at bus 3 had only one common point.
To calculate the power ﬂow circles’ radius and center corre-
sponding to the 5 different time instants in real-time, we use
the distributed communication architecture described in Fig. 2
to directly collect the real-time PMU voltage measurements
for the 5 different time instants. Using these neighboring bus
PMU voltages and (3), the circles can be drawn in real-time.
The corresponding power ﬂow circles’ intersection is plotted
as shown in Fig. 3, where the solid and dashed circles indicate
the reactive and real power circles respectively.

In Fig. 3, the common points “A”, “B”, “C”, “D”, and “E”
indicate the higher magnitude voltage solutions corresponding
to an apparent power load of [−0.01 + j · 0.33, −0.04 + j ·
0.40, −0.13 + j · 0.44, −0.28 + j · 0.45, −0.49 + j · 0.43] p.u.
respectively at the bus 3. It can be observed that the reactive
power circle steadily becomes smaller, and the real power
circle steadily becomes larger as the system load increases.
This behavior of power ﬂow circles shows that the circles
move further away from each other until
they have only
one common point (nose point) as the load increases to the
critical value. This occurs in Fig. 3 at the intersection of black
power ﬂow circles. It corresponds to the critical loading in the
system and has only one intersection point “E”. This point

0.8

0.6

i
,
3

V

0.4

0.2

0
-0.4

E

D

C

B

A

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4
V

3,r

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

Fig. 3: Power ﬂow circles at bus 3 with the voltage solutions
for increasing loads.

represents the nose point of the PV curve. It is to be noted
that all the power ﬂow circles at every bus will not touch each
other externally at a given snapshot, but only the power ﬂow
circles at the bus that is critically loaded will touch externally
indicating the LTVI. Thus, the distance between the power
ﬂow circles at the critical bus decreases to zero as the load
increases to the critical value. Hence, this distance can be used
as an indicator of LTVI. Quantifying the distance between the
circles for deriving a VSI is described in the next section.
III. CHARACTERIZING THE DISTANCE BETWEEN POWER

FLOW CIRCLES FOR VSI
The distance between the power ﬂow circles constructed
using the PMU measurements indicates the margin to reach
LTVI. There are several ways to quantify the distance between
two circles. One such indicator may consider the distance
between the circles using their centers and radii. This distance
is positive, zero and negative when the circles intersect, touch
externally and do not intersect with each other, respectively.
Another indicator is the Euclidean distance between the two
common points when the circles intersect each other. When
the circles intersect, touch externally, and do not intersect with
each other, the Euclidean distance between the two voltage
solutions is positive, zero, and does not exist, respectively.
We observed that the proposed index (VSI) derived below
in contrast
to the above mentioned possible formulations
of distributed indices has a relatively better behavior with
changing loading.

Different than the indicators mentioned above, the proposed
index is derived by using the concept of the family of circles
instead of directly using (1a) and (1b). In this section ﬁrst, we
introduce the concept of determinant to infer the intersection
of any two circles. Second, using the determinant, we derive
the expression for the proposed distributed voltage stability
index.
A. Identifying the Intersection of Power Flow Circles Using

Determinant
Given real and reactive power circles, two important aspects
have to be inferred to derive the proposed indicator. They are
1) the existence of a feasible solution, i.e., does the power
ﬂow circles intersect? and 2) if there is a feasible solution,
then what is the distance to voltage collapse point?. These two
aspects are analyzed by representing the power ﬂow circles as
a family of circles, and this analysis is facilitated by using the
determinant concept [35].

To study (1) and (2) aspects mentioned in the above
paragraph, we need to analyze how the real and reactive power

TABLE I: Properties of circles and family of circles.

4

Fig. 4: Family of circles corresponding to the power ﬂow
circles (arbitrary loading condition) at bus 3 of the 3-bus
system described in Section II-B.

circles interact together i.e., family of circles (parameter of
circles). Given two circles C1 and C2, their family of circles
Cf is represented by the equation Cf = λ1 · C1 + λ2 · C2
∀ λ1, λ2 ∈ R. For a given (λ1, λ2) pair, Cf represents a
single circle that passes through the common points of circles
C1 and C2. Fig. 4 shows a typical illustration of family of
circles Cf with radical axis. In Fig. 4, the radical axis is the
line that passes through the common points of circles C1 and
C2. Table I presents some important geometrical properties of
Cf .

From Tab. I, [35] shows that the determinant can be used
to study the property of symmetry of Cf around the radical
axis. We can see from Tab. I that the symmetry around the
radical axis can directly indicate the common points between
the two given circles. The following provides the inferences
for the approach selected in this paper.

For example, when the power ﬂow circles intersect, then
we have common points between them and vice versa. From
Table I, the mirror image (symmetry) around the radical axis is
a good indicator to identify if the power ﬂow circles intersect.
Mathematically, property of symmetry around the radical axis
in Fig. 4 is indicated by the determinant value of Cf [35]. For
example, a non-negative determinant value of Cf indicates the
symmetry around radical axis, i.e., power ﬂow circles intersect,
and thereby a feasible solution exists. Similarly, a negative
determinant value of Cf indicates that the power ﬂow circles
do not intersect. In Section III-B, we show that family of
circles Cf corresponding to real and reactive power circles
can be represented in a square matrix form. This square matrix
form enables us to calculate its determinant.
B. Proposed Voltage Stability Indicator

In this subsection to derive the proposed VSI using determi-
nant, ﬁrst at given a loading condition, the power ﬂow circles
are computed locally at a bus using PMU voltage phasor

5

measurements from its adjacent buses and these circles are
then represented as square matrices to enable the determinant
calculation. Second, we derive the proposed VSI by utilizing
the properties of determinant inferred in Section III-A.

Equation (4) represents the standard homogeneous form of
a circle (Ck) with locus z = x + j · y and z ∗ is complex
conjugate of z. The center and radius of the circle Ck are
denoted by γ = α + j · β and ρ respectively. Reference [35]
shows the idea of representing circle as a hermitian matrix as
shown in (5). The derivation from (4) to (5) is provided in
Appendix A.

where

∆p =

cp −

kbpk2

4 !

, ∆q =

cq −

kbqk2

4 !

,

∆pq =

1
8

· kbp − bqk2 −

1
2

·

kbpk2
4

− cp

−

!

1
2

·

kbqk2
4

2

.

− cq

!!

Ck (z , z ∗) = A · z · z ∗ + B · z + C · z ∗ + D = 0,

,

A B
C D

,

1
−γ

−γ∗
(γ · γ∗ − ρ2)

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

(cid:20)

,

(cid:21)

(4)

(5)

where A 6= 0. A and D are always real, B and C are
always complex conjugates for a circle. Since the power
ﬂow equations are also circles, they can be represented as
hermitian matrices and such matrix representation of power
ﬂow equations enable the determinant calculation which helps
to derive the proposed index.

Matrix Representation of Power Flow Equations and
Proposed VSI: Once we obtain the matrix form of power ﬂow
equations, its determinant is useful to 1) identify the existence
of power ﬂow solution and 2) distance to voltage collapse
point. Similar to the above calculations, the elements of real
power circle-matrix Cp are calculated using its center (3a) and
radius (3b) as shown below.

Cp ,

Ap Bp
Cp Dp

,

(cid:21)

(cid:20)

∗
Ap = 1, Bp = − (op)

= −

Cp = − (op) = −

Dp = (op) · (op)

∗

(cid:18)
=

−bp
2
(cid:19)
(cid:18)
− r 2
p = cp,

−bp
2
bp
2

(cid:18)

∗

=

bp
2

(cid:18)

∗

,

(cid:19)

(cid:19)

,

(cid:19)

(6)

T

td,2
td,1

where bp =
−pd
td,1
matrix Cq is also shown below.

(cid:20)
and cq =

−qd
td,4

, bq =

−td,3
td,3
td,4
td,1 (cid:21)
. Similarly, the reactive power circle-

td,2
td,4 (cid:21)

, cp =

(cid:20)

T

Cp = 

1
bp
2





(cid:18)

(cid:19)

∗

(cid:19)



, Cq = 

bp
2

cp

(cid:18)

1
bq
2





(cid:18)

(cid:19)

∗

(cid:19)



.

bq
2

cq

(cid:18)









Finally, the power ﬂow equations are represented as matrices
Cp and Cq respectively. As discussed in Section III-A, to study
the voltage collapse phenomenon one must analyze the real
and reactive power circles together i.e., family of circles (λ1 ·
Cp + λ2 · Cq). Using the inferences and property of determinant
described in Section. III-A, at a given loading condition Cf is
given by Cp + Cq and the expression for its determinant |Cf |
(say ∆∗) is given by (7).

∆∗ = ∆p · ∆q − ∆2

pq.

(7)

We determine ∆∗ by calculating ∆p, ∆q and ∆pq at a given
loading condition using the centers and radii. The power ﬂow
circles touch each other at the voltage collapse point (nose
point of the PV curve). In such a scenario, Tab. I shows that the
determinant ∆∗ should become zero. Hence the lower bound
of ∆∗ is zero, which occurs at the nose point of the PV curve
(externally touching circles). However, to interpret the results
of the proposed index, it should range between 1 and 0. In
order to bound the upper limit of ∆∗, we normalize it using
the no-load value of the index. The normalized form of ∆∗ is
the proposed VSI, as shown below.

Proposed VSI ≡ ∆∗

norm =

∆∗

∆∗

no-load

,

(8)

where ∆∗
no-load is the value of (7) with zero load. Appendix B
provides an explanation of the near-linear behaviour of the
proposed index for a 2-bus system.

Remark 1. (VSI for PV Buses): (8) is the distributed VSI for
a PQ bus, and a similar VSI can be derived for a PV bus. For
PV buses, the voltage solution is determined by the intersection
of voltage and real power circles, and the distance between
them indicates the VAR limit violation. These circles are again
computed using the PMU voltage phasor measurements of
adjacent buses.

IV. SIMULATIONS AND DISCUSSION

The proposed distributed non-iterative VSI is tested on
various test cases such as IEEE 30, 300 and 2383-bus systems
[36]. To obtain the voltage phasor measurements and true
voltage stability margin, we use an adaptive Newton-Raphson
step size based power ﬂow solver known as continuation
power ﬂow (CPF) [37] from MATPOWER [38]. CPF calcu-
lates the voltage solution on the PV curve by increasing the
load and generation along a load/generator increase direction
parametrized by continuation parameter λ [37].

In this section, we show that the proposed distributed VSI is
advantageous compared to both centralized and decentralized
VCPIs. We also compare the proposed distributed index with
the only other distributed method [26] in the literature to show
its merits. Finally, we show the behavior of the proposed index
for line & generator outages.

 
 
 
 
 
A. Non-iterative Distributed VSI Versus Centralized VCPIs

TABLE II: Comparison between centralized, proposed dis-
tributed VSI and decentralized VCPIs to monitor buses 14, 29
and 30 in IEEE-30 bus system [36].

6

VCPI calculation
method

No. of
PMUs
required

Sensitivity
to noise

Centralized

Distributed :
iterative index [26]

Distributed :
proposed index

Decentralized

30

30

5

3

Full
admittance
matrix

Required

Not required

Single
point
failure

Yes

No

Low

Low

Low

Not required

No

High

Not required

No

The power system operator generally monitors the power
system from a control room. In practice, there are speciﬁc
regions of the power system that are critical for LTVI and can
be identiﬁed by ofﬂine means. Thus, the operator is interested
in online LTVI monitoring in a few strategic locations/regions.
For instance, in the IEEE-30 bus system, the operator would
like to monitor the buses 14, 29 and 30. To calculate cen-
tralized VCPIs at buses 14, 29 and 30, the voltage measure-
ments at all the buses in the power system are required, i.e.,
full observability. To calculate the proposed distributed index
at buses 14, 29 and 30, the voltage measurements at only
their immediate neighboring buses are required. The adjacent
nodes connected to buses 14, 29 and 30 are buses (12, 15),
(27, 30) and (27, 29) respectively. Thus we only require 5
PMUs at buses 12, 15, 27, 29 and 30 to calculate the proposed
distributed VSI.

Additionally, the proposed VSI does not require the com-
plete knowledge of the system admittance matrix. Instead, it
takes advantage of the sparse nature of power system graph by
using only branch admittance values of branches connecting
to buses 14, 29 and 30 to calculate the proposed distributed
index. Table II presents the requirements of centralized, de-
centralized, and distributed methods such as proposed index,
existing iterative index [26] to monitor buses 14, 29 and 30. It
is important to note that even though the iterative distributed
index proposed in [26] uses communication links between the
neighboring buses, [26] mandates requirement of PMUs at all
buses in the grid for convergence of its iterative algorithm.
Whereas the proposed method does not require PMUs to cover
all the buses.
B. Non-iterative Distributed VSI Versus Decentralized VCPIs
In this subsection, we compared the proposed VSI with
other methods (decentralized and distributed index [26]) when
there is noise in the PMU measurements, and we show that
the proposed VSI is less prone to noisy measurements. To
understand the impact of noise on the proposed methodology,
an additive Gaussian noise with zero mean and standard devi-
ation of 0.001 p.u. on voltage magnitude (σVm = 0.001p.u.),
0.5◦ on phase angles (σVa = 0.5◦) are introduced in the
measurements according to the analysis of ﬁeld-tested PMUs
by New England ISO [39], [40] and IEEE standard for
acceptable PMU errors [41]. To demonstrate the robustness
of the proposed VSI with regard to noise, it is compared to

Fig. 5: Effect of noisy measurements with different noise levels
on decentralized (LTI) and proposed distributed index. LTI is
more sensitive to noise due to its approximation errors.
the local Thevenin index (LTI) i.e., a decentralized VCPI [18],
[21], [42] and distributed sensitivity index [26]. The results are
shown in Tab. III and Fig. 5 under different noise levels.

TABLE III: The standard deviation (σ) for the proposed VSI,
LTI and distributed sensitivity index [26] at bus 30 in IEEE-30
bus system when Gaussian noise is introduced in the voltage
phasor measurements.

Noise in voltage
angle (σVa) and
magnitude (σVm )

Proposed
index

(VSI)

σVm = 0.001p.u.
σVa = 0.01◦, [41]

σVm = 0.001p.u.
σVa = 0.5◦, [39]

σVm = 0.001p.u.
σVa = 0.5◦, [39]

σ =
0.0043

σ =
0.0058

σ =
0.0058

Local
Thevenin
index
(LTI)
σ =
0.0184

σ =
0.1942

σ =
0.1942

Distributed
iterative sensitivity
index [26]

σ = 0.0057 when
convergence
tolerance = 0.001
σ = 0.0084 when
convergence
tolerance = 0.1
algorithm diverges
when convergence
tolerance = 0.001

From Tab. III, it can be observed that the proposed VSI
has a minimal standard deviation when compared to that
of both LTI and distributed sensitivity index [26] for dif-
ferent noise levels. Additionally, the standard deviation of
LTI increases considerably when σVa = 0.5◦. However, the
proposed index and distributed iterative sensitivity index [26]
are not so impacted by the increase in the noise of voltage
angle measurements. Despite the lower standard deviation of
distributed iterative sensitivity index in Tab. III, it is important
to note that the method [26] suffers from non-convergence
as the noise increases. For example, when σVm = 0.001p.u.
and σVa = 0.5◦, the distributed sensitivity index [26] does
not converge when its convergence tolerance is 0.001 but
converges for a lower level noise of σVa = 0.01◦ with
same tolerance setting. This creates a challenge in setting the
threshold for convergence [26] when deployed in the ﬁeld
since the PMU measurements have variable noise levels. In
contrast, the proposed index has no such drawback as it is a
non-iterative index and it is also least sensitive to the noise in
PMU measurements as shown in Tab. III.

From Fig. 5, LTI is more sensitive to noise than that of
the proposed distributed index due to its approximation errors
[18]. Similarly, from Tab. III, the distributed iterative index is

more sensitive to noise than the proposed distributed index due
to its iterative nature. While the proposed distributed index is
the least sensitive one to noise.
C. Effect of PMU Voltage Phasor Data: Measurement Noise
Variability, Large Measurement Outliers, and Missing Data
We further investigate the effect of bad quality phasor mea-
surements from PMUs on the proposed index. To handle these
bad quality phasor measurements, one must use a preprocessor
that takes bad quality measurements like input and outputs the
ﬁltered/better measurements. These ﬁltered measurements are
used to calculate the proposed distributed index. Depending on
the quality of data, this preprocessor can be a state estimator,
bad data detector, low-rank matrix methods, etc. and this
preprocessor is independent of the proposed methodology.
Various types of errors such as clock drift errors, measurement
spikes, high amount of noise, and missing data can lower
the quality of the PMU data [43]. We generate PMU voltage
phasor data that is very close to the real-world using the error
statistics presented in [39], [43] as shown in Fig. 6. In this
subsection, we use noisy PMU measurements to calculate the
proposed index at buses 28, 29, and 30 of IEEE-30 bus system.
Since these noisy measurements with different types of errors
can directly impact the quality of the VCPIs, the proposed
index is calculated by using the output measurements of a
preprocessor that uses simple robust statistic such as median
of the PMU measurements in the given time window (e.g.,
1 sec). Fig. 6 shows that the proposed index is not affected
by any of the data dropouts, measurement spikes, and the
device clock errors. In contrast to [26], due to the iterations
involved, it is unclear how the distributed iterative index [26]
handles the different kinds of noise like missing data, time
skew, measurement spikes and large white noise. Different
methodology based preprocessors provide different quality of
measurements. Irrespective of the preprocessor, for a given
same amount of input noise signal, we show that the proposed
index is robust (Tab. III, Fig. 5) and fast (Tab. IV, Tab. V) when
compared to other methods [18], [21], [26], [42].

Thus, the proposed methodology is robust to various kinds
of noise types and levels when compared to [18], [21],
[26], [42], ensuring that the alarms triggered using this VSI
will have fewer false-positive rates, providing a reliable grid
monitoring scheme. For an illustration of the impact of a
preprocessor on the proposed index, we present two cases i.e.,
1) distributed state estimator that uses both current and voltage
measurements, and 2) low-rank matrix method. 1) Fig. 7 shows
a preprocessor that uses the same distributed communication
architecture requirement as that of the proposed VSI can use
redundant local branch current measurements to improve the
noisy data and thereby increase the accuracy of the proposed
method. Generally, the proposed index is robust to noise.
However, in cases when there is an impact of noise, it is
recommended to use a distributed state estimation based pre-
processor that uses redundant branch current measurements to
further improve the performance of the proposed methodology.
2) Fig. 8 shows a preprocessor that can recover large chunks
of missing data where a simple median statistic will fail.
Speciﬁcally, we used the OLAP-t method [44] to recover the
missing data in a 2 second window frame from a PMU located

7

Fig. 6: The subplots in this ﬁgure present the different types
of PMU errors observed in real-world [43]. These different
noisy measurements are generated by using the error statistics
from [43]. The last subplot shows the performance of the
proposed index that uses a simple median statistic on a one
second window size to handle various bad quality PMU data
mentioned above.

Fig. 7: Preprocessor 1: Reduction of noise in PMU mea-
surements using only voltage or both voltage and current
measurements (SE). Improvement in the accuracy of proposed
VSI due to better quality measurements.

at bus 8. In the IEEE-30 bus system, buses 6, 8, 27 are the
neighboring buses to bus 28. It is important to use data only
from buses 6, 8, 27 to recover the missing data at bus 8 due to
the distributed communication architecture (framework) used
by the proposed methodology. We used the recovered data
from [44] and a simple heuristic that uses last known non-zero
values to calculate the proposed index at bus 28. Fig. 8 shows
that [44] is more accurate than the simple heuristic method
especially when there is more missing data.
D. Non-iterative Distributed VSI Versus Iterative Distributed

Sensitivity Index
In this subsection, we compare the interpretability of the
proposed index and iterative distributed sensitivity index [26]
and show that the proposed index can provide a measure
of distance to system voltage collapse. We also discuss the
number of iterations taken by [26] in contrast with the non-
iterative nature of the proposed index.

8

for IEEE-30 bus system. The ﬁrst observation is that at the
critical loading (corresponding to λ = 2.8), bus 30 has the
lowest voltage magnitude of 0.51 p.u. in the entire network.
The reason for bus 30 to be critical is due to its location being
electrically farthest away from the generators and synchronous
condensers. When the load scaling factor λ is greater than 2.8,
there is no feasible operating solution identiﬁed by CPF due
to the LTVI phenomenon. Consequently, when λ = 2.8, the
proposed distributed index value calculated at bus 30 is the
smallest among all buses, and it is very close to 0, implying
that this is the critical bus in the system that causes the LTVI.
This fact is also veriﬁed by comparing it with a distributed
iterative sensitivity method [26]. Fig. 9b presents the index
values of [26] versus load scaling factor (λ) and it also shows
that the critical bus is bus 30 i.e., the bus with maximum
sensitivity index value at λ = 2.8. Thus the VSI correctly
identiﬁes the critical bus in the system. However, It can be
seen that the sensitivity index varies in an extremely non-linear
manner with the load scaling (continuation) parameter (λ).
Distributed iterative sensitivity index in Fig. 9b is unbounded
at λ = 2.8, making it hard to interpret
the distance to
voltage collapse point. Whereas, the distributed non-iterative
VSI in Fig. 9a is bounded between 1 and 0 corresponding
to no-load and loadability limit, respectively. This makes the
proposed index a good indicator to interpret the distance to
voltage collapse point. Hence the non-interpretability and non-
linear nature of the sensitivity methods makes it hard to set
monitoring thresholds to reliably trigger controls while the
proposed index solves these problems by effectively using
the PMU measurements. A similar study for larger test case
systems such as IEEE-300 and IEEE-2383 along with their
critical buses are also presented in Fig. 10a and Fig. 10b
respectively.

Even though the proposed index value at the critical bus
(e.g., bus 30) is expected to be 0 at critical loading (λ = 2.8),
we observe that the index value is a very small non-zero
value (VSI = 0.03) from Fig. 9a. This behavior is due to the
numerical instability (ill-conditioned Jacobian) of the power
ﬂow solver (CPF) from MATPOWER [38], which is used to
generate the voltage phasor measurements. For example, when
the loading condition λ is very close to the nose point of
the PV curve, it is well-known that the power ﬂow Jacobian
becomes ill-conditioned and power ﬂow solvers diverge [45].
Due to this divergence behavior, it is not possible to accurately
generate the voltage phasor measurements corresponding to
the nose point of the PV curve, where the proposed index
becomes zero. Hence we see very small non-zero values in
Fig. 9a. However, this limitation is not present when the
proposed index is deployed on the ﬁeld because the voltage
phasor measurements are taken from the PMUs directly.
2) Computation Performance of VSI

In this case, we ﬁrst compare the performance of the
proposed distributed non-iterative index with that of the dis-
tributed iterative index [26] under two scenarios. They are a)
increase in system loading and b) the presence of noise in
voltage phasor measurements. a) In case of an increase in
system loading λ, from Tab. IV, in the presence of both noise
and no noise, the time is taken by the distributed iterative

Fig. 8: Preprocessor 2: Recovery of large chunks of missing
data using [44] and a simple heuristic that uses the last known
non-zero measurement value. The output of the preprocessor
with [44] improves the accuracy of the proposed index when
there are large chunks of missing data from PMUs due to their
CT/PT failures.

(a) Proposed index values with increase in system loading to a critical
value (λ = 2.8) from no load condition (λ = 0).

(b) Index values from [26] with increase in system loading to a critical
value (λ = 2.8) from no load condition (λ = 0).

Fig. 9: Index values of proposed VSI and [26] versus system
load scaling factor.
1) Proportional Load & Generation Increase

In this case, ﬁrst, we verify the proposed VSI correctly
identiﬁes the critical bus in the system that causes the LTVI
by comparing it with the only other distributed method [26]
in the literature. Second, we show that the proposed VSI is
easier to interpret compared to [26]. λ (continuation parameter
from CPF) is deﬁned as the load scaling factor that scales the
loads and generations in IEEE-30 bus system and continuation
power ﬂow (CPF) solver [37] from MATPOWER [38] is
used to generate voltage phasor measurements for each λ.
The voltage measurements for each λ are used to calculate
the proposed non-iterative distributed VSI. Fig. 9a shows the
proposed distributed index values versus load scaling factor λ

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

I

S
V
e
v
i
t
a
r
e
t
i
-
n
o
n
d
e
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
D

i

Bus = 282
Bus = 287
Bus = 291
Bus = 297
Bus = 268
Bus = 99
Bus = 138
Bus = 46
Bus = 136

0

0

0.5
, Continuation parameter
(a) The distributed non-iterative voltage stability index for IEEE-300
bus systems. The weakest bus when the entire load in the system
proportionally increases is bus 282.

1.5

1

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

Bus = 466
Bus = 230
Bus = 221
Bus = 57
Bus = 1907
Bus = 1906
Bus = 796
Bus = 880

I

S
V
e
v
i
t

a
r
e

t
i
-
n
o
n

t

d
e
u
b
i
r
t
s
D

i

0

0

0.5

1
, Continuation parameter
(b) The distributed non-iterative voltage stability index for IEEE-2383
bus systems. The weakest bus when the entire load in the system
proportionally increases is bus 466.

1.5

2

Fig. 10: The distributed non-iterative voltage stability index
for IEEE-300 and IEEE-2383 bus systems.
TABLE IV: Total time and iterations taken by the proposed
and existing method [26] with different directions of load
increase at buses 1−16 and 17−30 for various system loading
values (λ) and noise.

method [26] increases with increase in system loading λ.
This behavior is not desirable since the updating frequency
(calculation time) of the distributed iterative index is not
constant, and it is dependent on the loading condition (λ).
Fortunately, the time taken by the proposed index is constant
and almost negligible for any loading λ due to its time
complexity being O(1) (non-iterative index). b) In presence
of noise in voltage phasor measurements, it can be seen from
Tab. IV that for any system loading λ, the time taken by the
distributed iterative index [26] is higher than that of the no
noise scenario. To speed-up the distributed iterative index, its
convergence tolerance has to be varied based on the noise
level in measurements. However, it is not practical to adjust
the convergence tolerance depending on varying noise levels in
an online monitoring application. Fortunately, again the time
taken by the proposed method is not affected by the noise level
in measurements due to its approximation free formulation and
non-iterative nature.

TABLE V: Total time, iterations, Flop and Flops (ﬂop per
second) taken by the proposed and existing [26] methods to
calculate their indices value for bus 30.

9

For a better comparison of the proposed and existing
iterative method [26], Tab. V presents the totals ﬂoating-point
operations per second (Flops) taken by both the methods.
To calculate the ﬂops, we use the information from [46] to
determine the count of ﬂop needed for performing mathemat-
ical operations such as addition, subtraction, multiplication,
and division. The number of ﬂops required to calculate the
proposed index at bus n, which has “M ” neighboring buses =
8 · M + 37. While, the total count of ﬂop required to calculate
the existing iterative method = 16 · M + (16 · M + 360) · I,
where “I” is the total iterations taken by the iterative method
to converge. In case of the proposed method, since it is a
non-iterative approach the required number of ﬂops expression
does not have “I” (number of iteration) in it.
E. Behavior of Proposed VSI after Line & Generator Outage
Network reconﬁguration due to line outage (either due to
faults or for maintenance) is a frequent occurrence in the
power system. One key input to the proposed method is the
admittance of lines connecting neighboring buses. In case of a
line outage, this information is outdated and so it is important
to investigate the behavior of the index in this scenario.
We identiﬁed that the proposed index accurately tracks the
system stress in real-time even when using the outdated line
admittances. In order to study the effect of topology change
on the VSI, the line between buses 15 and 23 in the IEEE
30-bus system is taken out of service at time t = 138 secs as
the load is increasing. Fig. 11 plots the VSI at buses 14, 15, 18
& 19 and it is observed that VSI drops the moment the line
outage occurs at time t = 138 secs, indicating that the system
is stressed and margin to voltage collapse point has reduced.
It is also observed from Fig. 11 that the values of the VSI
at various buses are very similar when using un-updated and
updated connectivity information. Thus the distributed VSI
calculation methodology provides a reasonable estimate of the
VSI for the operator/relay to trigger controls/alarms in the time
it takes to correct the admittance information, thus improving
the situational awareness of the grid. In addition, it can also
be observed that the index at bus 15 that is closest to the line
outage reduces the most and this fact can be used to identify
the fault location in an unsupervised manner.

Another disturbance that is common is the outage of a
generator. We investigated this scenario and observed that
the proposed VSI accurately tracks the system stress after a
generator outage and can identify the critical buses. Consider
the IEEE-30 bus system, generator two located at bus 2 is
outaged at 50 secs and generator ﬁve located at bus 23 is
outaged at 93 secs. We can observe from Fig. 12 that at
time t= 50 secs and t=93 secs, VSI at all the buses drop,

 
 
 
 
10

event detection and localization of other events. Finally, the
distributed nature of the index makes it possible to utilize
cloud computing infrastructure and other recent trends in the
big data analytics ﬁeld for efﬁcient computation and storage.
REFERENCES
[1] A. G. Phadke, “Synchronized phasor measurements in power systems,”

IEEE Comp. App. in Power, 1993.

[2] Q. Cui and Y. Weng, “Enhance high impedance fault detection and
location accuracy via µ -pmus,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 2019.
[3] D. Novosel, V. Madani, B. Bhargave, K. Vu, and J. Cole, “Dawn of the
grid synchronization,” IEEE Power and Energy Magazine, 2008.
[4] I. Dobson, “Observations on the geometry of saddle node bifurcation and
voltage collapse in electrical power systems,” IEEE Trans. on Circuits
and Systems I, 1992.

[5] T. Van Cutsem and C. Vournas, “Voltage stability analysis of electric

power systems,” 1998.

[6] V. Ajjarapu, Computational techniques for voltage stability assessment

and control. Springer Science & Business Media, 2007.

[7] M. H. Bollen, “Voltage recovery after unbalanced and balanced voltage
dips in three-phase systems,” IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery, 2003.
[8] L. Y. Taylor and S.-M. Hsu, “Transmission voltage recovery following a
fault event in the metro Atlanta area,” IEEE Power Eng. Society Summer
Meeting, 2000.

[9] A. Chebbo, M. Irving, and M. Sterling, “Voltage collapse proximity
indicator: behaviour and implications,” IEE Proc. C-Generation, Trans-
mission and Distribution, 1992.

[10] M. Haque, “A fast method for determining the voltage stability limit of

a power system,” Electric power systems research, 1995.

[11] A. R. R. Matavalam and V. Ajjarapu, “Sensitivity based Thevenin index
with systematic inclusion of reactive power limits,” IEEE Trans. on
Power Systems, 2018.

[12] Y. Weng, R. Rajagopal, and B. Zhang, “Geometric understanding of the

stability of power ﬂow solutions,” IEEE Trans. on Smart Grid, 2019.

[13] Y. Wang, I. R. Pordanjani, W. Li, W. Xu, T. Chen, E. Vaahedi, and
J. Gurney, “Voltage stability monitoring based on the concept of coupled
single-port circuit,” IEEE Trans. on Power Systems, 2011.

[14] J.-H. Liu and C.-C. Chu, “Wide-area measurement-based voltage stabil-
ity indicators by modiﬁed coupled single-port models,” IEEE Trans. on
Power Systems, 2014.

[15] M. Glavic and T. Van Cutsem, “Wide-area detection of voltage instability
from synchronized phasor measurements. part i: Principle,” IEEE Trans.
on Power Systems, 2009.

[16] M. Glavic and T. Van Cutsem, “Wide-area detection of voltage instability
from synchronized phasor measurements. part ii: Simulation results,”
IEEE Trans. on Power Systems, 2009.

[17] P. Kessel and H. Glavitsch, “Estimating the voltage stability of a power

system,” IEEE Trans. on power delivery, 1986.

[18] K. Vu, M. M. Begovic, D. Novosel, and M. M. Saha, “Use of local
measurements to estimate voltage-stability margin,” IEEE Trans. on
Power Systems, 1999.

[19] F. Gubina and B. Strmcnik, “Voltage collapse proximity index determi-
nation using voltage phasors approach,” IEEE Trans. on Power Systems,
1995.

[20] B. Milosevic and M. Begovic, “Voltage-stability protection and control
using a wide-area network of phasor measurements,” IEEE Trans. on
Power Systems, 2003.

[21] G. Verbic and F. Gubina, “A new concept of voltage-collapse protection
based on local phasors,” IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery, 2004.
[22] M. Zima, M. Larsson, P. Korba, C. Rehtanz, and G. Andersson, “Design
aspects for wide-area monitoring and control systems,” Proc. of the
IEEE, 2005.

[23] P. Baran, “On distributed communications networks,” IEEE Trans. on

Communications Systems, 1964.

[24] Y. Wang, P. Yemula, and A. Bose, “Decentralized communication and
control systems for power system operation,” IEEE Trans. on Smart
Grid, 2014.

[25] A. D. Dominguez-Garcia and C. N. Hadjicostis, “Distributed algorithms
for control of demand response and distributed energy resources,” IEEE
Decision and Control Conference, 2011.

[26] J. W. Simpson-Porco and F. Bullo, “Distributed monitoring of voltage
collapse sensitivity indices,” IEEE Trans. on Smart Grid, 2016.
[27] Y. Weng, M. D. Ili´c, Q. Li, and R. Negi, “Distributed algorithms for
convexiﬁed bad data and topology error detection and identiﬁcation
problems,” International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems,
2016.

Fig. 11: Line outage between buses 15 and 23 in IEEE-30 bus
system. Effect of updating Ybus (new Ybus) and not updating
Ybus (old Ybus) on proposed index.

Bus 5
Bus 15
Bus 24
Bus 30

Gen-2 out of service

Gen-5 out of service

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

I

S
V
e
v
i
t
a
r
e
t
i
-
n
o
n

d
e
t

u
b
i
r
t
s
D

i

0

0

20

40
Time in seconds

60

80

100

Fig. 12: Behavior of VSI for gen-2 (bus 2) and gen-5 (bus 23)
outages in IEEE-30 bus system.

indicating rising overall system stress. Further, the drop is
more at locations closer to the generator with larger power
output (gen-2), quantifying the severity of the outage.

Thus, these results validate the proposed VSI’s ability to
identify LTVI and demonstrate it’s utility to monitor voltage
stability using measurements in a distributed manner under
various disturbances such as network reconﬁguration and
generator outage.

V. CONCLUSION

This paper proposes a PMU measurement-based voltage
stability index that can accurately identify long term voltage
instability of the system. The key novelty of this work is
the mathematical derivation of the index to reﬂect voltage
security and its distributed nature. The index is derived by
analyzing the power ﬂow equations in the rectangular form as
circles, and at the nose point, the value of the index at the
critical bus is zero. In addition, the distributed communication
framework between neighboring buses makes the calculation
of index scalable and secure for the grid. In the various test
scenarios such as noisy measurements, different load increase
directions, line outage and generator outage, the index detected
the critical bus and quantiﬁed the stress in the system. The
proposed index behavior is also compared with distributed
and decentralized methods and is shown to have a superior
& reliable performance, particularly for noisy measurements
and large grids. The wide area nature of the proposed in-
dex makes it robust to measurement and system noise that
adversely affects similar techniques such as local Thevenin
methods, etc. Furthermore, the proposed index can localize
the line/gen outage locations in an unsupervised manner purely
using PMU measurements, making it a promising method for

 
 
[28] Y. Xu, W. Liu, and J. Gong, “Stable multi-agent-based load shedding

algorithm for power systems,” IEEE Trans. on Power Systems, 2011.

[29] Q. Xu, B. Yang, C. Chen, F. Lin, and X. Guan, “Distributed load shed-
ding for microgrid with compensation support via wireless network,”
IET Generation, Transmission & Distribution, 2018.

[30] S. Magn´usson, P. C. Weeraddana, and C. Fischione, “A distributed
approach for the optimal power-ﬂow problem based on ADMM and
sequential convex approximations,” IEEE Trans. on Control of Network
Systems, 2015.

[31] F. D¨orﬂer, J. W. Simpson-Porco, and F. Bullo, “Breaking the hierarchy:
Distributed control and economic optimality in microgrids,” IEEE Trans.
on Control of Network Systems, 2016.

[32] J.-H. Liu and C.-C. Chu, “Iterative distributed algorithms for real-time
available transfer capability assessment of multiarea power systems,”
IEEE Trans. on Smart Grid, 2015.

[33] J. W. Simpson-Porco, Q. Shaﬁee, F. D¨orﬂer, J. C. Vasquez, J. M.
Guerrero, and F. Bullo, “Secondary frequency and voltage control of
islanded microgrids via distributed averaging.” IEEE Trans. on Industrial
Electronics, 2015.

[34] Z. Wang, W. Wu, and B. Zhang, “Distributed newton method for primary
voltage control in islanded dc microgrid,” IEEE Power & Energy Society
General Meeting, 2017.

[35] H. Schwerdtfeger, Geometry of complex numbers: circle geometry,
Moebius transformation, non-euclidean geometry. Courier Corporation,
1979.

[36] R. D. Christie,

IEEE-30 Bus system description, 1993.

[Online].

Available: labs.ece.uw.edu/pstca/pf30/pg tca30bus.htm

[37] V. Ajjarapu, P. L. Lau, and S. Battula, “An optimal reactive power
planning strategy against voltage collapse,” IEEE Trans. on Power
Systems, 1994.

[38] R. D. Zimmerman, C. E. Murillo-S´anchez, R. J. Thomas et al., “Mat-
power: Steady-state operations, planning, and analysis tools for power
systems research and education,” IEEE Trans. on power systems, 2011.
[39] Q. Zhang, X. Luo, D. Bertagnolli, S. Maslennikov, and B. Nubile, “PMU
data validation at ISO New England,” in IEEE Power & Energy Society
General Meeting, 2013.

[40] M. Brown, M. Biswal, S. Brahma, S. J. Ranade, and H. Cao, “Charac-
terizing and quantifying noise in PMU data,” in IEEE Power and Energy
Society General Meeting, 2016.

[41] K. E. Martin, “Synchrophasor measurements under the ieee standard
c37. 118.1-2011 with amendment c37. 118.1 a,” IEEE Trans. on Power
Delivery, 2015.

[42] S. Corsi and G. N. Taranto, “A real-time voltage instability identiﬁcation
algorithm based on local phasor measurements,” IEEE Trans. on Power
Systems, 2008.

[43] I.

Idehen, W. Jang, and T. Overbye, “PMU Data Feature Con-
siderations for Realistic, Synthetic Data Generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.05244, 2019.

[44] G. M. D. Mijolla, S. Konstantinopoulos, P. Gao, J. H. Chow, and
M. Wang, “An evaluation of algorithms for synchrophasor missing data
recovery,” in IEEE Power Systems Computation Conference, 2018.
[45] S. Iwamoto and Y. Tamura, “A load ﬂow calculation method for ill-
conditioned power systems,” IEEE Trans. on Power Apparatus and
Systems, no. 4, pp. 1736–1743, 1981.

[46] H. A. Thant, Khaing Moe San, Khin Mar Lar Tun, T. T. Naing,
and N. Thein, “Mobile Agents Based Load Balancing Method for
Parallel Applications,” in Asia-Paciﬁc Symposium on Information and
Telecommunication Technologies, 2005.

[47] S.-C. Moon, H.-S. Park, and K.-J. Kim, “Effects review on transformer
IEEE Tencon-

and line impedance by X/R ratio in power system.”
Spring, 2013.

[48] “IEEE Application Guide for AC High-Voltage Circuit Breakers > 1000
Vac Rated on a Symmetrical Current Basis,” IEEE Std C37.010-2016
(Revision of IEEE Std C37.010-1999), 2017.

APPENDIX

A. Matrix Representation of Standard Circle:

First, the matrix form of a standard circle is derived. Let
z = x + j · y in complex plane be set of all the points in a
circle Ck (z , z ∗) with radius ρ and center γ = α + j · β. Then,

11

(9)

(10)

the equation of this circle is given by (9)

(x − α)2 + (y − β)2 = ρ2,
|z − γ|2 = ρ2,
(z − γ) · (z ∗ − γ∗) = ρ2,
z · z ∗ − γ∗ · z − γ · z ∗ + γ · γ∗ − ρ2 = 0,
1
−γ

−γ∗
(γ · γ∗ − ρ2)
(cid:21)

A B
C D

,

,

(cid:20)

,

(cid:20)
where A = 1, B = −γ∗, C = −γ and D = γ · γ∗ − ρ2.
B. Proof for linear behavior of proposed index in case of

(cid:21)

transmission networks:

Fig. 13: 2-bus system with load connected to an inﬁnite bus.

Fig. 13 shows a simple 2-bus system which consists of one
load fed by an inﬁnite bus through a transmission line. The
inﬁnite bus is represented by an ideal voltage source with
constant voltage given by E = Er + j · Ei = 1 + j · 0. The
transmission line is represented by its admittance Y = g +j ·b.
The load consumes an apparent power of S = P + j · Q
with a constant power factor cos(φ) and it is represented by
a constant equivalent impedance Z L = RL + j · XL.

The proposed distributed non-iterative index is given by

∆∗

norm =

∆∗

,

where ∆∗ is given by (12), ∆∗
zero load and voltage of 1 p.u. at all buses of the network.

no-load

∆∗
no-load is the value of ∆∗ with

(11)

∆∗ =

cp −

kbpk2

4 !

·

cq −

−

1
2

·

kbpk2
4

− cp

−

1
2

·

!

kbqk2

4 !
kbqk2
4

−

1
8

(cid:18)

− cq

!!

· kbp − bqk2

2

,

(12)

where

bp =

cp =

T

, bq =

td,3
td,1 (cid:21)
, cq =

td,2
td,1
(cid:20)
−pd
td,1

−qd
td,4

.

−td,3
td,4

(cid:20)

T

td,2
td,4 (cid:21)

,

Let load power factor be unity (cos(φ) = 1). Now, calculate
the terms bp, bq, cp and cq as shown below for the 2-bus
example that is described above.

T

−b
g

(cid:21)

, bq =

−1

h

T

,

g
b

i

, cq = 0 (since unity power factor).

bp =

−1

cp =

(cid:20)
P
g

 
 
 
 
12

x/r = 0.6
x/r = 1.19
x/r = 8.51
x/r = 18.99
x/r = 30

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3
0.4
Real power

0.5

0.6

0.7

x
e
d
n

i

e
v
i
t

a
r
e

t

t
i
-
n
o
n
d
e
u
b
i
r
t
s
d
d
e
s
o
p
o
r
P

i

Fig. 14: Proposed index for various values of x/r ratio of the
2-bus system from Fig. 13. Low x/r ratios such as 0.6, 1.19
represent distribution networks while high x/r ratios such as
8.51, 18.99, 30 represent the transmission networks.

x
e
d
n

i

e
v
i
t

a
r
e

t
i
-
n
o
n

d
e
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
d

i

d
e
s
o
p
o
r
P

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

power factor = 0.6
power factor = 0.7
power factor = 0.8
power factor = 0.9
power factor = 1

0.5

1

1.5
Real power

2

2.5

3

Fig. 15: Proposed index for various values of the load power
factor when the x/r ratio of the transmitting branch is 10.

change of the slope of the proposed index. From (16), when
x/r = 10, this rate of the change of slope of the proposed
index is bounded by the coefﬁcient of “P 2” and it is negligible
(−7.8424e−4 ≈ 0) for transmission network lines due to
high x/r ratio as discussed. In other words, as the x/r ratio
increases, the coefﬁcient of P 2 becomes negligibly small.
Hence the proposed index tends to behave linearly for all the
transmission network case studies presented in this paper.

norm)

d2(∆∗
dP 2

d2

=

(cid:16)

− 4 P 2

10201 − 40 P
dP 2

101 + 1

(cid:17)

= −7.8424e−4.

(16)

2) Effect of load power factor on the proposed index:
For a given x/r ratio of 10, Fig. 15 shows the proposed
index (13) for various values of load power factor. The
proposed index’s linear behavior is not effected unless the
power factor decreases to as low as 0.6 which is not realistic
for transmission networks.

Substitute above terms (bp, bq,cp, and cq) in (11) and upon

further simpliﬁcation, (11) is given by

∆∗

norm =

b4 + 2 b2 g2 − 4 b2 g P − 4 b2 P 2 + g4 − 4 g3 P
(b2 + g2)2

,

(13)

Bounds of proposed index: First, we will show that the
proposed index is bounded between 1 and 0 at no load (P = 0)
and nose point of the PV curve (P = Pmax) respectively.
The maximum transferable power (P = Pmax) for the 2-bus
system from Fig. 13 when the load power factor is unity is
given by

Pmax =

−(b2 + g2)g + (b2 + g2)
(2b2)

3
2

,

No load condition: ∆∗

norm =

b4 + 2 b2 g2 + g4
(b2 + g2)2

= 1,

Full load condition (P = Pmax): ∆∗

norm = 0.

Linear behavior of proposed index for transmission
networks: Second, we show that even though the proposed
index (13) is a quadratic equation in real power (P ), the
equation behaves linearly for various practical power system
operation ranges since the coefﬁcient of (P 2) term is negligi-
ble. Speciﬁcally, we showcase that the proposed index behaves
linearly under various r/x ratios of the transmission line and
various load power factors.
1) Effect of x/r ratio on the linear behavior of the
index: The x/r ratio is a critical power system parameter
that effects the maximum power transfer capability of the
grid. For example, a low x/r ratio enables more maximum
power transfer when compared to that of a high r/x ratio
power line. Fig. 14 shows that the proposed index (13) behaves
linearly for various values of x/r ratios corresponding to
different levels of voltage (22 kV to 765 kV) [47], [48].
Fig. 14 shows that the proposed index behaves linearly for high
x/r values (transmission networks) and behaves in a slightly
curved fashion for low x/r values (distribution networks).

For example, when x/r = 5 and x/r = 10 then (13) can
be further simpliﬁed to (14) and (15) respectively. From (14)
and (15), we can see that the high values of x/r makes the
coefﬁcient of “P 2” term negligible and hence the linear part
of the equation i.e., “P ” term dominates resulting in the linear
behavior of the proposed index.
P 2
(13) (when x/r = 5) = −
169

10 P
13

10 P
13

+ 1 ≈ −

+ 1.

−

(14)

(13) (when x/r = 10) = −

4 P 2
10201

−

40 P
101

+ 1 ≈ −

40 P
101

+ 1.
(15)

Additionally, the proposed index does not deviate a lot
from its original slope and hence it tends to stay fairly linear.
For example, we know that the ﬁrst order differentiation of
(13) gives the slope of the proposed index. The second order
differentiation of the (13) gives the information about the

 
 
 
 
 
 
