Gamification Techniques for Raising Cyber 
Security Awareness 

Sam Scholefield 
Lynsay A. Shepherd 

This is the accepted version of a paper presented at the 1st International 
Conference on HCI for Cybersecurity, Privacy and Trust, HCI-CPT 2019, 
Held as Part of HCI International 2019, Orlando, Florida, USA, July 26-
31, 2019.  The proceeding will be published by Springer. 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gamification Techniques for Raising Cyber Security 
Awareness 

Sam Scholefield and Lynsay A. Shepherd[0000-0002-1082-1174] 

School of Design and Informatics, Abertay University, 
Dundee, DD1 1HG, United Kingdom 

lynsay.shepherd@abertay.ac.uk 

Abstract. Due to the prevalence of online services in modern society, such as 
internet banking and social media, it is important for users to have an understand-
ing of basic security measures in order to keep themselves safe online. However, 
users  often  do  not  know  how  to  make  their  online  interactions  secure,  which 
demonstrates an educational need in this area. Gamification has grown in popu-
larity in recent years and has been used to teach people about a range of subjects.  
This paper presents an exploratory study investigating the use of gamification 
techniques  to  educate  average  users  about  password  security,  with  the  aim  of 
raising overall security awareness.  To explore the impact of such techniques, a 
role-playing quiz application (RPG) was developed for the Android platform to 
educate users about password security.  Results gained from the work highlighted 
that users enjoyed learning via the use of the password application, and felt they 
benefitted from the inclusion of gamification techniques.  Future work seeks to 
expand the prototype into a full solution, covering a range of security awareness 
issues. 

Keywords: Gamification, games-based learning, security awareness, usable se-
curity, human-centered cyber security. 

1 

Introduction 

Society has become increasingly reliant on the Internet for banking, and e-commerce.  
Typical transactions involve the exchange of personal information such as home ad-
dresses, and credit card details.  Despite the introduction of biometric authentication 
mechanisms such as fingerprint-based systems [1], passwords continue to be the pri-
mary authentication mechanism for accessing such services, therefore it is important to 
ensure  users  remain  secure  online  whilst  using  passwords.   The  aim  of  the  research 
presented in this paper is to raise security awareness and improve password hygiene via 
the use of gamification techniques. 

The following sections of the paper will outline the need to improve end-user secu-
rity awareness, focusing on the topic of password security.  Gamification techniques 
and their application in the context of the learning environment will also be explored 

 
 
before linking these to the domain of security awareness.  Subsequently an overview of 
the  Android-based  role-playing  quiz  application  (RPG)  is  provided.    Finally,  results 
will be presented and discussed, allowing conclusions to be drawn as to the usefulness 
of this approach. 

1.1  Raising End-User Security Awareness 

When browsing the web, there are many ways in which users may potentially place 
themselves at risk.  These can include interacting with poorly coded websites, creating 
weak passwords, and downloading data from websites containing malicious files [2]  
There are a number of methods which have been used to raise end-user security aware-
ness  when  engaging  in  online  transactions,  from  contextual  affective  feedback  pre-
sented in a web browser [3-4], to visualizing privacy policies [5], and phishing aware-
ness applications [6].  Owing to the ubiquity of passwords, this work focusses on secu-
rity awareness tools developed to improve password security. 

Users often find the creation and retention of strong, secure passwords to be prob-
lematic  [7-8],  and  a  number  of  studies  have  been  conducted  to  address  the  issue  of 
security awareness regarding passwords. 

A common method of raising password security awareness has involved the use of 
password meters which are typically placed next to forms on a web page to give users 
a general indication of password strength.  Though meters are widely used, the way in 
which they measure strength can be poor, meaning trivial passwords can be shown as 
“safe” [9].  Research has shown additional factors must be considered when using pass-
word meters, for example, work by Egelman et al. [10] explored if meters had an impact 
upon the password created, i.e. if the meter assisted the user in creating a strong pass-
word.  Results showed that password strength was related to whether the participant 
felt their account was important, as opposed to the information provided by the pass-
word meter.  Meters may not necessarily have an impact on raising awareness of creat-
ing secure passwords suggesting alternative solutions are needed. 

Ciampa  [11]  also  performed  a  study  to  explore  the  impact  of  different  password 
strength meters, investigating if feedback prompted participants to create stronger pass-
words.  In the study, participants were asked to record four passwords they may use 
online for accounts. Subsequently, they had to visit websites which offered password 
strength  checking  services.  Participants  also  had  to  record  if  the  password  strength 
checks  encouraged  them  to  change  their  passwords.  Results  from  this  experiment 
showed that “any feedback mechanism can influence users to create passwords with 
higher entropy”.  This suggests that user behaviour can be influenced by encouraging 
users to reflect on their password strength. 

Fear appeals are another potential method of raising security awareness.  Fear ap-
peals have been described as “persuasive messages designed to scare people by de-
scribing the terrible things that will happen to them if they do not do what the message 
recommends” [12].  Vance et al. [13] explored the concept of fear appeals in relation 
to password security. In this work, participants were asked to register for an account, 
and the password strength chosen was observed.  Multiple groups of participants were 

 
 
used in the study: one group were given no guidance as to how to create a strong pass-
word; the static fear appeal treatment group received security information that did not 
change on user input; another group received an interactive password meter; and a final 
group received an interactive fear appeal treatment which provided security guidance 
that updated on user input.  Results showed that the interactive fear appeal treatment 
performed better in terms of choosing stronger passwords, and that such an approach 
may aid in raising end-user security awareness. 

Although previous research has highlighted a number of attempts to raise end-user 
password security, the prevalence of issues related to password hygiene suggests these 
are not working.  This indicates the need for more effective ways of conveying pass-
word security information to the end-user. 

1.2  Gamification Techniques and Applications 

Gamification can be defined as “the application of gaming mechanics to non-gaming 
contexts with the aim of inducing engagement and raising levels of motivation” [14] 
and aspects of this can be applied to keep a user engaged in learning.  Work by Mar-
czewski [15] cataloged the number and types of mechanics which can be used in the 
process of developing a gamification-based solution.  To date, the work has identified 
52 mechanisms which can be used, ranging from signposting (preventing users from 
becoming lost within an application), to providing users with challenges and physical 
rewards. 

Various gamification techniques have also been discussed by Zichermann and Cun-
ningham [16], who explored the concept of a rewards system which can apply to dif-
ferent  contexts,  known  as  SAPS  (Status,  Access,  Power,  and  Stuff).    SAPS  utilises 
gamification in the delivery of rewards.  Status is derived from how the user performs 
or compares to their peers.  The mechanism of a leaderboard is one method of integrat-
ing status into a gamified application as it allows users to compete against each other.  
Access can be implemented via the use of a loyalty scheme, encouraging users to re-
main engaged.  A notion of power can be achieved by rewarding a user with moderator 
duties.  Finally, the authors explore the category of “stuff” whereby free rewards are 
given, providing users with an incentive to continue using a particular application or 
platform. 

Several of these gamification techniques have previously been used in educational 
games such as Duolingo [17] (for learning new languages), and ClassDojo [18] (for 
parents and teachers to help teach developmental skills to children). 

Gamification in education has also been applied to University level courses.  Re-
search conducted by Ibanez, Di-Serio and Delgado-Kloos [19] presented the results of 
a study in which gamified learning activities were used to teach introductory C-pro-
gramming at undergraduate level.  By using a combination of rewards such as points 
and badges, and allowing students to show their social standing via the use of a leader-
board, the implementation of gamification in this scenario improved knowledge acqui-
sition.  However, gamification did not work for all students, whereby some reached one 

 
hundred points within the learning activity and stopped playing rather continuing to 
engage with additional tasks.  

 Similar work has been carried out at University level by O’Donovan, Gain and Ma-
rais [20] drawing similar conclusions, observing that their “approach to gamification 
is effective in a university setting”.  Again, they raise similar issues to Ibanez, Di-Serio 
and Delgado-Kloos [19], noting that gamification must be implemented with careful 
planning, to ensure it is beneficial. 

Given the success of gamification in an educational context, it seems reasonable to 
suggest that these concepts have the potential to apply to other domains, such as raising 
security awareness.   

1.3  Gamification and Security Awareness 

A number of cyber security-based games have previously been developed to educate 
users.  Many of these games have been aimed primarily at children and young people, 
such as the Webonauts Internet Academy, an online game designed to educate children 
about online etiquette [21].  In this game, users travel around space, visiting different 
planets, learning to deal with different behaviours exhibited on each of them.  These 
skills are synonymous with behaviour on the Internet.   

Another educational game is the Cybersecurity Lab, designed to teach young people 
basic cyber security skills [22].  In this scenario, the user assumes the role of a Chief 
Technology Officer at a social media company who must defend the application against 
a  number  of  attacks.    Though  the  game  is  designed  to  provide  a  level  of  security 
knowledge, the educator guide for the game suggests it will take 75 minutes to play 
through [23], indicating this is a self-contained game which does not promote continu-
ous engagement and ongoing development  of  cyber security skills.    A  full  browser-
based RPG game for children in which they have to save the world from a password 
crisis [24] was also released.   

The role of gamification and cyber security training has also been explored with high 
school students [25].  Funded by the National Security Agency, and the National Sci-
ence Foundation, a number of summer camps (named GenCyber) were run in the USA 
to raise awareness of cyber security, and to encourage interest in computing, covering 
topics such as secure online behaviour, and social engineering.   

Training games in this domain have also been made available for specialist fields, 
such as law enforcement.  Research has been conducted into the use of serious games 
(i.e. games which are not solely designed for entertainment purposes) examining how 
these can be used to deliver cybercrime training for law enforcement officers attending 
a crime scene [26].  A similar game has been made available for Board Members of 
organisations.  Pwc developed Game of Threats [27] which aims to teach the top level 
of an organisation how to handle a cyber incident. 

Pertaining to mobile devices, an Android application targeted towards the general 
public, called NoPhish [28] was developed to assist users in identifying phishing links. 
The game consists of multiple levels where users are presented with a URL and are 
asked to determine its safety. In a subsequent evaluation, participants gave significantly 
more correct answers when asked about phishing, suggesting this type of application 

raised their security awareness.  A follow-up study was conducted five months later 
which showed participants still performed well when asking about phishing links how-
ever, their overall performance decreased, which suggests issues with retention. 

Though many of these games have been created to appeal to children, or specialists, 
the ubiquity of internet services means that the general population will require security 
awareness  training.    The  majority  of  these  games  are  also  browser-based,  however 
given the level of worldwide mobile phone ownership [29], it would be beneficial to 
have a security awareness game application which would appeal to this platform.  By 
creating a level-based approach, this would break learning down into smaller sections, 
thus ensuring consistency with differing learning attention spans of various age groups 
[30].  As new cyber security threats are developed, updates could be pushed to the ap-
plication, keeping end-user knowledge relevant. 

Given these factors, the development of a mobile-based application focusing on rais-
ing password security awareness has the potential to be an effective tool to help users.  
In the following section, the methodology behind the research is outlined, explaining 
how a simplistic password security quiz was turned into a prototype security awareness 
application via the use of gamification.  

2  Methodology 

As part of an exploratory study, a Unity role-playing quiz application (RPG) was de-
veloped  for  the  Android  platform  to  educate  users  about  password  security.  With  a 
market share of approximately 75% [31], the Android platform was chosen for the de-
velopment  of  the  prototype  application  because  it  would  have  the  ability  to  reach  a 
larger target audience in comparison to the iOS platform.  Similarly, developing the 
application in Unity provided a number of advantages.  Unity is a multi-platform game 
engine, and the associated Asset Store allows developers to download free and paid-for 
assets for use in applications created. 

On opening the application (Fig. 1), the end-user is presented with 2 characters on 
the screen: One is a golden knight (the end-user), the other is a dark knight (the char-
acter the end-user is fighting) [32].  The application contains questions related to pass-
word security, designed to educate the end-user.  These questions cover topics such as 
choosing a strong password, avoiding the use of commonly used passwords, and prac-
ticing good password hygiene.  If the end-user answers correctly, the dark knight loses 
health points.  If the user is incorrect, the golden knight loses health points.  This con-
tinues until one character defeats the other, educating the user regarding password se-
curity in the process. 

 
 
Fig. 1. Screenshot from the Android application 

The underlying application is a simplistic multiple-choice quiz.  However, aspects 
of gamification were included, with the goal of motivating users to learn and progress.  
These features were chosen owning to their suitability to integrate into the context of a 
quiz-based game, enhancing the experience.  Gamification features integrated include 
a specific theme (RPG-style game with characters), on-screen progress/feedback (the 
health bar per character), time pressure (timer), consequences (if the user is incorrect, 
they lose health points), and competition (by means of a leaderboard) [15].  

To evaluate the potential impact of the application, 17 participants over the age of 
18 years were recruited for the pilot study.  Participants varied in gender, and level of 
education.  During the evaluation phase, participants were instructed to play through 
the application. 

Following this, they were provided with a series of statements which they were asked 
to rate against a 5-point Likert scale (1- strongly disagree, 5- strongly agree), providing 
quantitative data.  Statements which the participants were asked to rate included “Your 
knowledge in computer security is strong”, “The password security game helped in-
crease your knowledge on password security”, “The password game was enjoyable”, 
and “Gamification is an effective method of teaching computer security”.  Additionally, 
a qualitative free-form question was asked, to gather general feedback on the applica-
tion. 

 
 
 
3 

Results and Discussion 

Overall results highlighted that participants exhibited positive opinions towards the use 
of an RPG-style quiz application which will be discussed in detail, including quantita-
tive data from the Likert-based questions, and qualitative data from the free-form ques-
tions. 

3.1  Quantitative Data 

When participants were asked to rate the statement “Your knowledge in computer 
security is strong” using a 5-point Likert scale (1- strongly disagree, 5- strongly agree), 
only 3 of the participants agreed, or strongly agreed with this assertion, as shown in 
Fig. 2 (n=17, mode=2, mean=2.7). 

Therefore, this indicates the majority of participants did not consider themselves to 
have a good understanding of computer security.  This suggests there is a real educa-
tional need in this area. 

Your knowledge in computer security is strong

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P
f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

Strongly Agree

Agree

Neutral

Disagree

Strongly
Disagree

Responses

Fig. 2. Participants’ self-reported knowledge of computer security 

When examining the password game and the concept of gamification, results indi-
cated it was well received by participants.  Participants were presented with the state-
ment “The password security game helped increase your knowledge on password se-
curity”  (Fig.  3),  and  the  mode  indicated  the  majority  agreed  (n=17,  mode=4, 
mean=2.52). 

Although participants felt their knowledge of password security increased, this needs 
further  investigation  with  a  longitudinal  study.    When  attempting  to  raise  security 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
awareness, there are typically a number of issues users experience, namely long-term 
retention,  long  term  behavioural  change  and  security  fatigue.  The  term  “security  fa-
tigue”  is  linked  to  security  awareness,  highlighting  that  even  though  there  are  pro-
grammes to educate people about security, people may still fail to engage with the good 
practice they have been taught [33].  Essentially, users can tire of being bombarded 
with security information and may reject the advice they have been given [34]. 

A longitudinal study comparable to work conducted by Canova et al. [28] would 
allow the long-term impact of the application to be assessed.  After using the password 
security application for a specified period of time, the participants would complete a 
questionnaire  to  assess  knowledge  gained.    A  similar  questionnaire  would  be  given 
again some months later.  Results of the two questionnaires would be compared to es-
tablish  if  playing  the  password  application  had  a  long-term  impact  on  security 
knowledge. 

The password security game helped increase your 
knowledge on password security

s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P
f
o

r
e
b
m
u
N

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Strongly
Agree

Agree

Neutral

Disagree

Responses

Strongly
Disagree

Fig. 3. Participants’ response when asked if the password security game helped increase their 
knowledge of password security 

Furthermore, the majority of participants agreed with the statement that “The pass-
word game was enjoyable” (shown in Fig. 4, n=17, mode=4, mean=3.65).  Regarding 
the final Likert scale-based statement, “Gamification is an effective method of teaching 
computer security”, again the mode indicated that the majority of participants agreed 
(shown in Fig. 5, n=17, mode=4, mean=4.18). 

The values given by participants when asked if they felt gamification was effective 
are in line with previous research.  Canova et al.’s work [28]  on developing a phishing 
awareness game showed that it helped users learn about phishing attacks they may fall 
victim to.  The success of gamification has also been exhibited when teaching a games-
development course at undergraduate level [20]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The password game was enjoyable

s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P
f
o

r
e
b
m
u
N

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Strongly Agree

Agree

Neutral

Disagree

Strongly
Disagree

Responses

Fig. 4. Participants’ response when asked if the password game was enjoyable 

Gamification is an effective method of teaching computer 
security

s
t
n
a
p
i
c
i
t
r
a
P
f
o

r
e
b
m
u
N

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Strongly Agree

Agree

Neutral

Disagree

Strongly
Disagree

Responses

Fig. 5. Participants’ response when asked if gamification was an effective method of teaching 
security 

However, despite these positive findings, the use of gamification may need to be 
considered carefully regarding impact.  Work by Domínguez et al. [35] conducted a 
study using gamification, providing exercises on an e-learning platform for a general 
ICT class, some of which were gamified.  Results found that students who engaged 
with  gamified  content  performed  poorly  on  written  tasks,  but  strongly  on  practical 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tasks.  This suggests that whilst gamification may be effective, it must be used within 
the right context.   

3.2  Qualitative Data 

Participants were asked to give an indication as to whether they enjoyed/disliked using 
the password application.  Generally, participants who enjoyed using the application 
submitted favourable comments relating to the aesthetics of the game, and the imple-
mentation of characters.  Additionally, these participants claimed it was a fun and in-
teresting method of learning about password security.  Those who disliked using the 
application indicated this was due to a lack of feedback provided, expressing this would 
have helped them learn from their errors. 

Feedback Provided 
Several of the participants pointed to the lack of feedback provided in the prototype 
game with statements such as: 

─  “Maybe explaining why the questions were wrong would have helped?” 

─  “Fun but wanted answers to wrong questions” 

The need to include feedback whilst utilising gamification is concurrent with work 
by Ibanez, Di-Serio, and Delgado-Kloos [19], stating that feedback is required, partic-
ularly in an educational setting as it prevents people from becoming confused about the 
current task. 

The use of specific words may influence user behaviour when providing feedback, 
for example, in work by Ur et al. [36] when a password was described as “weak”, this 
prompted users to try and create a stronger password. Text-based feedback is seen to 
be an appropriate method of delivering feedback to the end-user as it is a more direct 
way  of  communicating  [37].    When  applying  feedback  in  the  password  application, 
careful consideration must be given as to how this is implemented, ensuring it is helpful 
to the user. 

Gamification Elements 
As discussed in the methodology, a number of elements of gamification were included 
within the application.  These comprised of an overarching theme, on-screen feedback, 
time pressure, consequences, and competition. 

Leaderboards 
Leaderboards  are  commonly  used  when  introducing  the  concept  of  gamification 
[16][20].  Participants in this exploratory study did not consider the leaderboard which 

 
 
 
 
had been implemented to be an important factor in their enjoyment of the game, and 
instead focussed on other elements. 

Theme 
Many of participants commented on the theme of the application (medieval RPG), with 
particular comments relating the characters used [32]. 

─  “The characters were fun to look at, was like playing an RPG” 

─  “I enjoyed the character animations” 

Participants also generally expressed that the overall application was fun, indicating 

the concept was an interesting way to learn about security. 

─  “It looked nice and felt like I was playing a game” 

─  “Learnt information about security in an enjoyable way” 

─  “Was an interesting way to ask questions” 

This result is of interest owing to previous literature establishing how people learn, and 
the impact which particular themes can have upon the learner.  Work by Parker and 
Lepper [38] examined the use of fantasy contexts in relation to the way children learned 
to use the Logo programming language.  It was found that the use of fantasy contexts 
such as scenarios involving pirates and detectives motivated children to learn.  Given 
that the password application makes use of a medieval theme, this has the potential to 
lead to a similar effect.  However, others have debated the level of knowledge gained 
from what is referred to as “edutainment media” – games or films which are designed 
to be fun and educational, and have highlighted the need for longitudinal evaluative 
studies to be conducted [39]. 

Overall, qualitative data gained from participants who used the application revealed 
that, whilst they liked the concept of the application, they felt there were several fea-
tures missing from the prototype which would have helped their understanding.  One 
such issue was the lack of feedback provided during the game.  Ultimately, comments 
gained from the evaluation were useful for informing how the research work will de-
velop in the future.  Before developing a full version of a gamified security awareness 
application, it is important to consider human-centered design changes following re-
sponses from participants. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3  Limitations 

The research contained a number of limitations.  This was an exploratory study, with 
a small sample size, and no long-term evaluation regarding the retention of knowledge 
in relation to password security was conducted.   

Gender differences also need to be explored as this demographic was not included 
in the participant questionnaire.  Previous work in the field has identified that males 
find game-based learning more enjoyable than females [25].  This may indicate that the 
password security application may need to be modified to ensure it is consumed by the 
maximum number of target users. 

4 

Conclusion and Future Work 

To  conclude,  the  RPG-style  application  was  viewed  positively  by  participants.    The 
results  indicated  that  participants  enjoyed  playing  this  type  of  application,  and  they 
suggested it increased their knowledge on password security.  Additionally, participants 
felt gamification was a useful method of raising security awareness.  Owing to the pos-
itive results derived from this exploratory study, future work seeks to develop the pro-
totype application into a full security awareness application, covering a range of topics 
including phishing and information sharing.  This will also allow a longitudinal study 
to be developed to compare knowledge gained from the security awareness application 
against real-word security practices exhibited by end-users. 

Some users highlighted that the application still seemed like a quiz, despite the in-
clusion  of  several  gamification  elements.    To  overcome  this  issue,  placing  the  quiz 
within the context of an overarching storyline may make the application more immer-
sive [15]. 

Finally, future work seeks to adapt the application to ensure it appeals to varying age 
ranges, such as children and the elderly, helping them learn about password security in 
a fun, yet effective manner. 

References 

1.  Bhagavatula, C., Ur, B., Iacovino, K., Kywe, S., Cranor, L., Savvides, M. (2015). 

Biometric Authentication on iPhone and Android: Usability, Perceptions, and Influences 
on Adoption.  USEC ’15: 8 February 2015, San Diego, CA , Proceedings. pp. 1-10. 

2.  Shepherd L.A., Archibald J., Ferguson R.I. (2013). Perception of Risky Security 

Behaviour by Users: Survey of Current Approaches. In: Marinos L., Askoxylakis I. (eds) 
Human Aspects of Information Security, Privacy, and Trust. HAS 2013. Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, vol 8030. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 

3.  Shepherd L.A., Archibald J., Ferguson R.I. (2017). Assessing the Impact of Affective 
Feedback on End-User Security Awareness. In: Tryfonas T. (eds) Human Aspects of 
Information Security, Privacy and Trust. HAS 2017. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
vol 10292. Springer, Cham 

4.  Shepherd, L.A., Archibald, J. (2017). Security awareness and affective feedback: 

 
 
Categorical behaviour vs. reported behaviour, 2017 International Conference On Cyber 
Situational Awareness, Data Analytics And Assessment (Cyber SA), London, pp. 1-6. 

5.  Kelley, P.G., Bresee, J., Cranor, L.F. and Reeder, R.W. (2009). A nutrition label for 

privacy. In Proceedings of the 5th Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (p. 4). 
ACM. 

6.  Canova G., Volkamer M., Bergmann C., Borza R. (2014). NoPhish: An Anti-Phishing 
Education App. In: Mauw S., Jensen C.D. (eds) Security and Trust Management. STM 
2014. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 8743. Springer, Cham. 

7.  Furnell, S., Jusoh, A. and Katsabas, D. (2006). The challenges of understanding and using 

security: A survey of end-users. Computers & Security, 25(1), pp.27-35. 

8.  Shay, R., Ur, B., Bauer, L., Christin, N., Cranor, L., Forget, A., Komanduri, S., Mazurek, 
M., Melicher, W. and Segreti, S. (2015). A Spoonful of Sugar?. Proceedings of the 33rd 
Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI '15, pp. 2903-
2912. 

9.  De Carné De Carnavalet, X. and Mannan M. (2015). A Large-Scale Evaluation of High-
Impact Password Strength Meters. ACM Transactions. Information. Systems. Security. 
18(1), Article 1. 

10.  Egelman, S., Sotirakopoulos, A., Muslukhov, I., Beznosov, K. and Herley, C. (2013). Does 
my password go up to eleven?. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems - CHI '13, pp.2379-2388. 

11.  Ciampa, M. 2013. A comparison of password feedback mechanisms and their impact on 
password entropy. Information Management & Computer Security. 21:5. pp. 344–359.  
12.  Witte, K. (1992). Putting the fear back into fear appeals: The extended parallel process 

model. Communication Monographs, 59(4), pp.329-349. 

13.  Vance, A., Eargle, D., Ouimet, K. and Straub, D. (2013). Enhancing Password Security 

through Interactive Fear Appeals: A Web-Based Field Experiment. 2013 46th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, pp.2988-2997. 

14.  Growth Engineering. (2018). What is the Definition of Gamification and What Does it 

Mean? http://www.growthengineering.co.uk/definition-of-gamification/ 

15.  Marczewski, A. (2018). 52 Gamification Mechanics and Elements. Gamified UK - 
#Gamification Expert. https://www.gamified.uk/user-types/gamification-mechanics-
elements/ 

16.  Zichermann, G. and Cunningham, C. (2011). Gamification by Design: Implementing 

Game Mechanics in Web and Mobile Apps. Sebastopol, Calif.: O'Reilly. 
17.  Duolingo. (2018). Learn a language for free. https://www.duolingo.com/  
18.  ClassDojo. (2018). Learn all about ClassDojo. https://www.classdojo.com/ 
19.  Ibanez, M., Di-Serio, A. and Delgado-Kloos, C. (2014). Gamification for Engaging Com-
puter Science Students in Learning Activities: A Case Study. IEEE Transactions on Learn-
ing Technologies, 7(3), pp.291-301. 

20.  O'Donovan, S., Gain, J. and Marais, P. (2013). A case study in the gamification of a uni-

versity-level games development course. In Proceedings of the South African Institute for 
Computer Scientists and Information Technologists Conference (pp. 242-251). ACM. 
21.  LearningWorks for Kids. (2019). Webonauts Internet Academy - LearningWorks for Kids. 

https://learningworksforkids.com/apps/webonauts-internet-academy/ 

22.  Pbs.org. (2019). Cybersecurity Lab | NOVA Labs | PBS. 

https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/labs/lab/cyber/ 

23.  Pbs.org. (2019). The Cybersecurity Lab - Educator Guide | NOVA Labs | PBS. 

https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/labs/about-cyber-lab/educator-guide/ 

24.  TrueKey. (2017). World Password Day Game. https://game.truekey.com/EN/ 
25.  Jin, G., Tu, M., Kim, T., Heffron, J. and White, J. (2018). Evaluation of Game-Based 

Learning in Cybersecurity Education for High School Students. Journal of Education and 
Learning (EduLearn), 12(1), p.150. 

26.  Coull, N., Donald, I., Ferguson, I., Keane, E., Mitchell, T., Smith, O. V., Tomkins, P. 

(2017). On the use of serious games technology to facilitate large-scale training in 
cybercrime response. European Police Science and Research Bulletin, Special Conference 
Edition (3), pp. 123-130.  

27.  PwC. (2015). Game of Threats. https://www.pwc.co.uk/issues/cyber-security-data-

privacy/services/game-of-threats.html 

28.  Canova, G., Volkamer, M. Bergmann, C. Reinheimer, B. (2015). NoPhish App Evaluation: 

Lab and Retention Study. In: NDSS workshop on usable security. pp. 1-10. 
29.  Statista. (2019). Number of mobile phone users worldwide 2015-2020 | Statista. 

https://www.statista.com/statistics/274774/forecast-of-mobile-phone-users-worldwide/ 
30.  Gómez-Pérez, E. and Ostrosky-Solís, F. (2006). Attention and Memory Evaluation Across 
the Life Span: Heterogeneous Effects of Age and Education. Journal of Clinical and 
Experimental Neuropsychology, 28(4), pp.477-494. 

31.  StatCounter Global Stats. (2018). Mobile Operating System Market Share Worldwide | 

StatCounter Global Stats. http://gs.statcounter.com/os-market-
share/mobile/worldwide/2019 

32.  Pomazan, A. (2018). Fantasy Medieval Character Pack - Asset Store. 

https://assetstore.unity.com/packages/2d/characters/fantasy-medieval-character-pack-
81647aff 

33.  Furnell, S. and Thomson, K. (2009). Recognising and addressing ‘security fatigue’. Com-

puter Fraud & Security, 2009(11), pp.7-11. 

34.  Herley, C., (2009), September. So long, and no thanks for the externalities: the rational re-
jection of security advice by users. In Proceedings of the 2009 workshop on New security 
paradigms workshop.  pp. 133-144. ACM.  

35.  Domínguez, A., Saenz-de-Navarrete, J., de-Marcos, L., Fernández-Sanz, L., Pagés, C. and 

Martínez-Herráiz, J. (2013). Gamifying learning experiences: Practical implications and 
outcomes. pp.380-392. 

36.  Ur, B., Kelley, P., Komanduri, S., Lee, J., Maass, M., Mazurek, M., Passaro, T., Shay, R., 
Vidas, T., Bauer, L., Christin, N. and Cranor, L. (2012). How does your password measure 
up? The effect of strength meters on password creation. In: Security 2012 Proceedings of 
the 21st USENIX Conference on Security Symposium. 

37.  Dehn, D. and Van Mulken, S. (2000). The impact of animated interface agents: a review of 
empirical research. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 52(1), pp.1-22. 

38.  Parker, L. and Lepper, M. (1992). Effects of fantasy contexts on children's learning and 

motivation: Making learning more fun. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
62(4), pp.625-633. 

39.  Okan, Z. (2003). Edutainment: is learning at risk?. British Journal of Educational Technol-

ogy, 34(3), pp.255-264. 

 
