9
1
0
2

r
a

M
6

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
4
2
7
5
0
.
4
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Improving SIEM for Critical SCADA Water
Infrastructures Using Machine Learning

Hanan Hindy1, David Brosset2, Ethan Bayne1,
Amar Seeam3, and Xavier Bellekens1

1 Division of Cyber Security, Abertay University, Dundee, Scotland, UK
{1704847,e.bayne,x.bellekens}@abertay.ac.uk
2 Naval Academy Research Institute, France
david.brosset@ecole-navale.fr
3 Department of Computer Science, Middlesex University, Mauritius
a.seeam@mdx.ac.mu

Abstract. Network Control Systems (NAC) have been used in many
industrial processes. They aim to reduce the human factor burden and
eﬃciently handle the complex process and communication of those sys-
tems. Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems are
used in industrial, infrastructure and facility processes (e.g. manufac-
turing, fabrication, oil and water pipelines, building ventilation, etc.)
Like other Internet of Things (IoT) implementations, SCADA systems
are vulnerable to cyber-attacks, therefore, a robust anomaly detection
is a major requirement. However, having an accurate anomaly detection
system is not an easy task, due to the diﬃculty to diﬀerentiate between
cyber-attacks and system internal failures (e.g. hardware failures). In this
paper, we present a model that detects anomaly events in a water sys-
tem controlled by SCADA. Six Machine Learning techniques have been
used in building and evaluating the model. The model classiﬁes diﬀerent
anomaly events including hardware failures (e.g. sensor failures), sabo-
tage and cyber-attacks (e.g. DoS and Spooﬁng). Unlike other detection
systems, our proposed work focuses on notifying the operator when an
anomaly occurs with a probability of the event occurring. This additional
information helps in accelerating the mitigation process. The model is
trained and tested using a real-world dataset.

Keywords: Cyber-Physical Systems · Machine Learning · SCADA ·
SIEM

1

Introduction

An increasing number of networked control systems are being deployed for the
monitoring, control and response of physical infrastructure. Deprecated infras-
tructure is being replaced by SCADA systems that are compatible with IoT
devices, enabling remote monitoring and control of previously isolated systems.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

H. Hindy et al.

Fig. 1: Network Architecture

Through this upgrade, industries are able to achieve higher reliability and ﬂexi-
bility of deployed systems. However, by enabling external internet access, indus-
tries are introducing the increased risk of cyber-attacks to potentially critical
infrastructure [26].

Vulnerabilities in critical infrastructure protection (CIP) infrastructure is
due to ﬁve factors. The ﬁrst is the lack of open protocols. Current programmable
logic controllers (PLCs) are often controlled through proprietary network pro-
tocols that have not been scrutinized by security professionals and act as a
black box, hence increasing the attack surface [9]. The second is due to the lack
of segmentation in network infrastructure [15]. Current PLCs are connected to
control networks for the data to be analysed in real time by higher manage-
ment. Whilst this may increase proﬁt margins and decrease the reaction time to
market changes, the lack of segmentation allows for transversal network attacks.
The third one is due to the number of oﬀ-the-shelf equipment being set up in the
network [8]. By including oﬀ-the-shelf hardware, the attack surface increases,
and introduce other potentially weak links (i.e. Entry points). The fourth one
is due to the lack of training received by the operators and the inability of the
operator to distinguish between incidents and cyber-attacks [6,2]. Finally, the
ﬁfth one is due to the exponential growth of organized cyber-crime and nation
state-sponsored cyber-warfare to destabilize countries [14,25].

Critical infrastructure network Security is intrinsically diﬀerent from com-
puter networks as the interaction between the nodes is done in real time at a
physical level. Numerous eﬀorts have been made to apply current cyber-security
solutions to CIP networks, however, the solutions proposed are often not suited
for the infrastructure and do not consider the underlying risks posed by compro-
mised sensor data [12]. As a results, despite the advances made in the design and
implementation of cyber-security solutions, there is little research being made
with the goal of improving SIEM and increase the resilience of CIP against cyber-
incidents. In recent years, the number of attacks against critical infrastructure
has signiﬁcantly increased. The Stuxnet malware is an example of a high-proﬁle
SCADA attack, which was ﬁrst discovered in an Iranian power plant in 2010.
Stuxnet was used to infect and reprogramme the PLCs while hiding the changes

Improving SIEM for Critical SCADA Water Infrastructures

3

made using a custom-made PLC rootkit [17]. Another example is the Maroochy
attack against a sewage system, causing 800.000L of sewer waste to be released
in waterways and parks. The Maroochy attack was perpetrated by an insider,
taking advantage of insecure communication between the pumping station and
the central SCADA control system [7]. The Ukrainian power grid attack is an-
other example of a large SCADA attack, where 225,000 people were aﬀected by
the loss of power. The attacker managed to switch oﬀ 30 substations for over
6 hours. In total, over 74 MWh of electricity was not supplied to the energy
grid, representing a total of 0.015% of the daily electricity consumption of the
country. The attack was later attributed to ”Sandworm”, a Russian group of
hackers known for advanced persistent threats [20]. These attacks demonstrate
that when attacking a CIP, attackers often study the system extensively to per-
petrate the attack as stealthily as possible, tailoring their strategies towards the
particular system.

In this manuscript, we aim at improving Security Information and Event
Management (SIEM) for critical infrastructure using machine learning to identify
patterns in the data reported by PLCs in a water system controlled by SCADA.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:

– We provide a new SIEM methodology that leverage sensor data and the

event-driven nature of cyber-physical systems.

– We categorize the attacks in 14 categories, based on the data emerging from
the dataset. Out prototype features 3 experiments using machine learning
algorithms for the detection of the said anomalies.

– We conduct a thorough evaluation of SIEM performances through a op-
erational scenarios in the third experiment. The two best predictions are
proposed to the operator allowing him to alleviate cyber-attacks when an
event is detected. The anomaly detection provides an accuracy of 95.64%
with an 85% conﬁdence.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows; Section 2 discusses equip-
ment used to generate the dataset. Section 3 provides an overview of the dataset,
the scenarios and the features, while Section 4 presents the results obtained by
applying machine learning technique to diﬀerentiate between diﬀerent scenarios.
Section 5 discusses the results and limitations discovered. Section 6 presents re-
lated work in this ﬁeld. The paper ends by concluding our ﬁndings in Section 7.

2 Experimental Set-up

In this section we describe the architecture of SCADA controlled critical in-
frastructure (CI) used to gather the dataset described in Section 3. Current CI
systems are interconnected and are increasingly prone to faulty operations and
cyber-attacks. Risks present are caused by the fragmentation of technology in-
corporated into the CI, vulnerabilities within hardware and software components
and through physical tampering of equipment by malicious actors. The design of
the CI presented in this research represents a real world, real-time system that

4

H. Hindy et al.

is capable of working under normal and abnormal conditions. Additionally, the
presented system can be exposed to the aforementioned vulnerabilities.

Figure 1 provides a high level overview of the network of the system. The
system is composed of two tanks— the main tank and a secondary tank. Each
tank can contain either fuel or water and can be set to two distinct modes—
acting either as a distributor or as storage. The main and secondary tank has a
capacity of 9 and 7 litres respectively. The main tank is composed of four sensors
connected to a PLC. The sensors are then connected to both Pump1 and Pump2.
Both pumps control the ﬂow of water between the main tank and the secondary
tank. The main tank utilizes the four sensors to measure the level of liquid,
whilst the secondary tank monitors ﬂuid volume with an ultrasound sensor.
Data gathered from the sensors are transferred to the control and monitoring
network using the Modbus protocol.

2.1 Modbus Protocol

The Modbus protocol operates at the application layer of the open systems in-
terconnection (OSI) model. It enables communication between interconnected
network nodes based on a request and reply methodology. The protocol requires
little processing overhead, which makes it a sensible candidate for communica-
tions between PLCs, Sensors, or Remote Terminal Units (RTUs).

The Modbus protocol works independently of protocols implemented in other
layers of the OSI model, hence, it can be used both on routable network or used
for serial communications [13].

The data being stored by the Modbus protocol in slave devices can be cate-

gorized in four diﬀerent ways as listed below:

– Discrete Input Read-Only Access, it provides Physical I/O
– Input Register Read-Only Access, it provides Physical I/O
– Holding Register Read-Only Access, it provides Read-Write Data
– Coil Read-Write Access, it provides application data

Each table can contain up to 9,999 values, however, some devices can allow
up to 65,536 addresses across all tables. Each vendor has its own speciﬁcation of
the Modbus data tables, and the set-up often requires the operator to read the
vendor-speciﬁc documentation.

2.2 Sensors and PLC

As shown in Figure 1 the system is composed of a single PLC. The PLC is
a compact Base Twido PLC, with 40 discrete I/O, 24 discrete inputs, and 14
relays. The system is also composed of a Modicon M238 logic controller. The
system can be sent instructions through the touch screen or via a remote system
connected to the network.

The system is also composed of ﬁve sensors as shown in Figure 1 . Four
discrete level sensors are located in the main tank. The ﬁrst sensor (S0) indicates

Improving SIEM for Critical SCADA Water Infrastructures

5

Fig. 2: System Architecture

a low level in the tank (1.25L), the second sensor (S1) indicates a measure of less
than 3.35L, the third sensor (S2), indicates a level of 8L while the last sensor
(S3) indicates a full tank measure (9L).

The secondary tank is ﬁtted with a single ultrasound sensor. The ultrasound
sensor is a Schneider-Electric cylindrical M18 ultrasonic sensor. The sensor is
ﬁtted at the top of the tank and is used to measure the distance of the liquid
surface to the top of the tank. The sensor can also be used to detect the presence
or absence of liquid in the tank.

2.3 Operation Mode

The system is controlled automatically through the PLC to avoid the spillage of
liquid stored in tanks. Figure 2 illustrates the physical system. For the purpose
of this research, the primary tank is ﬁlled from a recovery tank, however, the
recovery tank in our system can be substituted by other liquid source, such as a
river, a fuel line, etc.

Once the primary tank is ﬁlled from the recovery tank using pump2, the PLC

activates Pump1 to transfer liquid to the secondary tank to avoid spillage.

To simulate a constant liquid consumption from the tanks, valves at the
bottom of both the primary and the secondary tanks can be opened. The PLC
monitors tank volumes by reading all sensor data registers at 0.1 second intervals.
The PLC will automatically refuel the primary tank using Pump 2 when the
volume of liquid goes below 1.25L. Similarly, Pump2 will be instructed to stop
when a total volume of 9L is reached. The secondary tank will be refuelled when
ultrasound sensors detect the liquid level to be below 2.1L. Furthermore, the

6

H. Hindy et al.

Table 1: Registers Extracted Bits Representation

Reg.
No.

2

4

Bit No.

Value

4
5
6
7
16-bits

Discrete Sensor 3
Discrete Sensor 2
Discrete Sensor 1
Discrete Sensor 0
Depth Sensor

Reg.
No.

3

Bit No.

Value

0
1
5
4

Pump 2
Pump 1
Pump 2 Valve
Pump 1 Valve

PLC will only deactivate pump 1 once the ultrasound sensor detects that the
secondary tank has reached a level of 6.3L.

3 Dataset

This section describes the dataset gathered by the IC and the scenarios recorded.
The dataset used in this manuscript has been published separately in a dataset
publication [19].

The CI presented in section 2 was used to gather data for the dataset and
outputted into CSV format. The dataset comprises actuator and sensor readings
that the PLC recorded periodically at 0.1 second intervals. Within the data
collected, PLC registers 2 through 4 provided output data describing the state
of the system that was used for analysis.

Table 1 provides an overview of the diﬀerent registers used by the PLC. As
shown, Register 2, provides the bits indicating the binary state of the discrete
sensors. A population count can be done on the register to retrieve the state
of each sensor separately. Register 3 contains the state of the pump, either as
active or inactive, while Register 4 contains the step value from 0 to 10,000 of
the ultrasound sensors (e.g. Step 3,000 represents 2.1L of liquid in the tank).

3.1 Scenarios

The dataset consists of 14 diﬀerent scenarios as shown in Table 2. Each scenario
covers one of 5 operational scenarios representing the potential threat (i.e. sab-
otage, accident, breakdown, or cyber-attack) as well as 6 aﬀected components.
The aﬀected components are system components that are directly aﬀected by
the anomaly.

The recorded data is organized in 15 diﬀerent CSV ﬁles of variable duration
based on the type of incident recorded (i.e. a sabotage incident may take less
time than a distributed denial of service).

3.2 Pre-processing

This subsection highlights the pre-processing of the data obtained. The pre-
processing is composed of six steps.

Improving SIEM for Critical SCADA Water Infrastructures

7

Table 2: Dataset Scenarios, Operational Scenarios and Aﬀected Components

1
2
3
4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Scenario

Normal
Plastic bag
Blocked measure 1
Blocked measure 2
Floating objects in
main tank (2
objects)
Floating objects in
main tank (7
objects)
Humidity
Discrete sensor
failure
Discrete sensor
failure
Denial of service
attack
Spooﬁng

13

11
12 Wrong connection
Person hitting the
tanks (low intensity)
Person hitting the
tanks (medium
intensity)
Person hitting the
tanks (high intensity)

15

14

Aﬀected
Component
None

Ultrasound Sensor

Operational
Scenario
Normal
Accident/Sabotage

Breakdown/Sabotage

No. of
instances
5519
10549
226
144

Accident/Sabotage

Discrete sensor 1

Discrete sensor 2

Breakdown

Network

Cyber-attack

Breakdown/Sabotage

Whole subsystem

Sabotage

854

733

157

1920

5701

307

10130
6228

347

281

292

1. Extract Instances

Firstly, each scenario instances are extracted from the log ﬁle. An instance is
represented by the recording of the register values at a speciﬁc time. Each log
ﬁle has 10 rows per instance. Each row contains The Date, Time, the Register
Number, and the Register Value of the PLC.

2. Calculate rate of change of Register 4

The value of Register 4 is the most signiﬁcant. Its signiﬁcance can be seen in
the rate of change over time. Figure 3 shows the rate change in Register 4 value
over 15 diﬀerent scenarios.

For each instances, the rate of change is calculated over 10 time frames as

expressed in Equation 1.

Rate of changei =

reg4i − reg4i−10
timei − timei−10

(1)

8

H. Hindy et al.

Fig. 3: Rate of change of register 4 value over diﬀerent scenarios

3. Apply Threshold

Table 2 shows the number of recorded instances per scenario. As shown in the
table, the events are not statistically distributed over the scenarios. Therefore,
the most instances scenario will bias the classiﬁcation model output. A threshold
is applied to take only the ﬁrst N instances of each ﬁle.

4. Serialization

A single ﬁle is needed for the training process. All Instances are, therefore,
serialized.
5. Normalization
6. Split

Finally, the data is normalized and split into 80% training and 20% testing

sets.

4 Experiments and Results

This section outlines three experiments conducted and how accurately threats
could be identiﬁed.

The aim of the experiments is to alert, and provide the operator with the
most likely aﬀected components, in order to decrease the time to apply the
corrective action.

050100150200250300350400Time (in sec)0200040006000800010000Register 4 ValuePerson htting lowPerson htting medPerson htting highBlocked measure 1Blocked measure 22 Floating objects7 Floating objectsDiscrete Sensor 1Discrete Sensor 2Wrong connectionDoSSpoofingPlastic bagHumidityImproving SIEM for Critical SCADA Water Infrastructures

9

Fig. 4: Anomaly Classiﬁcation Accu-
racy

Fig. 5: Aﬀected Component
Classiﬁcation Accuracy

Six machine learning techniques are used for the classiﬁcation models, namely,
Logistic Regression (LR) Gaussian Na¨ıve Bayes (NB) , k-Nearest Neighbours (k-
NN) , Support Vector Machine (SVM) , Decision Trees (DT) and Random
Forests (RF) [27] [16] [21] [24] [18] [5].

4.1 Parameters

All experiments are conducted using the following computation parameters:

– Training Set : Testing Set = 80% : 20%
– Evaluation: The overall accuracy is calculated as follows:

OverallAccuracy =

T P + T N
T P + T N + F P + F N

Where:

• True Positive (TP): Number of anomaly instances which scenario is cor-

rectly detected

• True Negative (TN): Number of normal instances which are correctly

detected

• False Positive (FP): Number of normal instances which are detected as

one of the anomaly scenarios

• False Negative (FN): Number of anomaly instances which are detected

as normal scenarios

4.2 First Experiment

The aim of the ﬁrst experiment is to alert the user when an anomaly occurs
without specifying the associated scenario. The aim is to provide the operator
of the CI with a binary output.

Figure 4 shows the classiﬁcation results of the six machine learning algo-
rithms applied to data. The algorithms provide a binary output. As shown, the
highest accuracies reached are 93.42%, 93.48% and 94% using DT, RF and k-NN
respectively.

10

H. Hindy et al.

Fig. 6: Scenarios Classiﬁcation Ac-
curacy. Trial One (Single scenario
reported)

Fig. 7: Scenarios Classiﬁcation Ac-
curacy (Alerting with two probable
scenarios)

Providing an alert that an anomaly exists in the data recorded by the sensors
is considered important, however, as the alert is provided in a binary fashion,
the operator is – in this case – unable to identify the anomaly at ﬁrst sight and
take corrective action. To this end, a second experiment was established with
the aim of proving more information to the operator.

4.3 Second Experiment

The second experiment aims at giving the operator capital information about
the anomaly. The alert in this case includes the aﬀected component. The model
classiﬁes what components are aﬀected by the ﬁve components present in the
CI (i.e. Network, Discrete Sensor 1, Discrete Sensor 2, Ultrasound Sensor and
Whole System) as well as the ’None’ aﬀected case.

Figure 5 shows the classiﬁcation results of the diﬀerent machine learning al-
gorithms. The highest accuracies reached are 82.56% and 82.8% using k-NN and
RF respectively. The result shows a trade-oﬀ between the binary classiﬁcation
oﬀered in the ﬁrst experiment and by providing the operator with more detailed
information. As shown trade-oﬀ limits, the accuracy of the system accounts for a
large number of false positive, potentially misleading the operator during normal
operations.

4.4 Third Experiment

The third experiment aims at notifying the operator with an occurring scenario.
To this end, the third experiment is divided in three operational trials.

Trial One:
In the ﬁrst trial, models are trained to classify the diﬀerent scenarios. The oper-
ator is notiﬁed with the scenario occurring. Figure 6 shows the results of these
trial. As shown, the accuracy is reduced and demonstrate a high false negative
rate, with the highest accuracy only reaching 81.89%

Improving SIEM for Critical SCADA Water Infrastructures

11

Table 3: Distribution of probabilistic classiﬁcation of scenarios

Algorithm

DT

k-NN

RF

Maximum
number of
probable
scenarios per
instance

Number of
instance with
1 probable
scenario

Number of
instance with
2 probable
scenarios

Number of
instance with
3 probable
scenarios

Number of
instance with
4 probable
scenarios

1

3

4

3053
100%
1882
61.64%
1737
56.9%

-
-
962
31.51%
1004
32.89%

-
-
209
6.85%
297
9.71%

-
-
-
-
15
0.5%

To overcome this high false positive rate, the scenarios were reviewed and
the following conclusions were made: (a) The scenarios are co-related. (b) When
models are trained to output the probability of an event belonging to another
of the 14 scenarios, a maximum of 4 scenarios have non-zero probabilities. For
example, Table 3 shows the count of instances having 1, 2, 3 or 4 probable
scenarios. In the second row of Table 3, 61.64% of the instances are classiﬁed to
a single scenario, 31.51% are classiﬁed to be one of 2 possible scenarios and only
6.85% are classiﬁed to be one of 3 possible scenarios.

As a result of this analysis, trial two to four are based on reporting two prob-

able scenarios to the operator, reducing the uncertainty of our approach.

Trial Two:
In the second trial, the operator is notiﬁed with two potential attack scenarios in-
stead of a single one. The two scenarios are the highest probabilities provided by
the algorithms. Figure 7 demonstrates that this technique increased the accuracy
to reach 95.55% and 95.64% using RF and k-NN receptively. By providing the
operator with a probability in the attack scenario he is able to act accordingly
and alleviate the attack, hence reducing the overall response time needed.

Table 4 shows an example of correctly classiﬁed instances when two probable
scenarios are considered. The numbers are calculated in reference to the k-NN
classiﬁer. For example, in the ﬁrst row, ’2 Floating Objects’ scenario misclassiﬁed
instances are shown . 53 are misclassiﬁed as ’Plastic Bag’ sabotage. However, 48
of them can be correctly classiﬁed by considering the second probable scenario.
In the same manner, in Table 4 row 4, 85 instances of the ’Plastic Bag’ scenario
are misclassiﬁed to be ’2 Floating Objects’ (38 instances), ’Sensor Failure’ (24
instances), ’Spooﬁng’ (18 instances), ’Normal’ (3 instances) and ’Wrong Con-
nection’(2 instances). 75 can be correctly classiﬁed with the second probable
scenario in consideration.

While the operator is notiﬁed with two probable scenarios, it can also be
misleading. For this reason our third attempt provides a conﬁdence measure to
the operator increasing his situational awareness.

12

H. Hindy et al.

Table 4: Co-relation of scenarios that are misclassiﬁed based on highest probable
scenario and correct with the second probable one (Calculated based on k-NN
experiment)

Instances count
where X

Scenario (Y) The count of instances classiﬁed
as Y while the correct is X

Is Not
1st
Scenario

Is 2nd
Scenario

2
Floating
Objects

7
Floating
Objects

Normal

Plastic
Bag

Sensor
Failure

Spooﬁng

Wrong
Connec-
tion

53

5

80

85

183

45

102

48

5

58

75

137

25

72

-

-

-

38

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

5

-

-

-

3

75

-

23

53

-

1

-

53

37

5

-

-

68

24

-

8

69

-

-

-

18

5

-

-

-

5

11

2

50

-

-

Scenario
(X)

2
Floating
Objects
7
Floating
Objects
Normal
Plastic
Bag
Sensor
Failure
Spooﬁng
Wrong
Connec-
tion

Trial Three and Four:
In the third and fourth trials, a single scenario is reported to the operator unless
the probability is less than the conﬁdence percentage. Figure 8 shows the results
for 75% conﬁdence. In the ﬁrst case, a single scenario is reported if its probability
is greater than or equal to 0.75, otherwise, if the threshold is reached a second
scenario is reported as well. The accuracy provided is 91.84%.
This accuracy rises when using an 85% conﬁdence. Figure 8 shows a maximum
accuracy of 95.64% using k-NN.

It can be seen from Figure 7 and 8 that DT accuracy is the same. This is due
to the DT output, as a single scenario for each instance is available, therefore it
is not possible to output two probable scenarios to the operator.
Finally, the result shows that the fourth operational trial is the most convenient
for the operator as a single scenario is provided, unless the threshold is reached.
The accuracy provided by the fourth operational scenario also reaches 95.64%,
hence reducing the uncertainty of the attack currently at hand, and the ability
of the operator to alleviate the attack.

5 Discussion and Limitations

In this section, we discuss the main takeaways based on the experiments evalu-
ated in Section 4. Additionally, the limitations of our models are listed.
Key takeaways:

Improving SIEM for Critical SCADA Water Infrastructures

13

Fig. 8: Scenarios Classiﬁcation Accuracy (Alerting with one/two scenario(s)
based on 75% and 85% conﬁdence)

– Using high conﬁdence: Probabilities are considered to solve the trade-oﬀ
between the co-related scenarios and reducing the amount of information
provided to the operator (i.e. multiple scenarios). This implies reporting the
probability of having a scenario occurring. For this piece of work, a conﬁdence
interval of 85% is evidenced to provide the best results.

– Sensors location and architecture: The position of the sensors and the
architecture of the SCADA system aﬀects the collected data and, conse-
quently, aﬀects the model detection accuracy. Moreover, the collection of
data greatly aﬀect the pre-processing stages, it is therefore important to
gather data consistently.

– Longer recording periods needed: In order to increase the accuracy of
the machine learning model, the operators should have the recordings of long
periods of time for all sensor data. This helps have multiple instances over
time and therefore, more instances for training. Moreover, it is recommended
to have similar recording duration for the diﬀerent scenarios. In the case of
massively diﬀerent recording lengths, ﬁles need to be serialised in order to
avoid bias towards the scenario with the longest recording time.

– Importance of scenarios: The more recorded scenarios used for training,
the more robust the detection model. With more scenarios, the model can
learn variations in scenarios. Moreover, the operator will be provided with
higher conﬁdence of reported anomalies.

Limitations:

– Limited Number of Scenarios: The experiments were conducted using
15 log ﬁles which covered 14 scenarios. Any new scenario other than the ones
covered in the log ﬁles will not likely be reported to the operator.

14

H. Hindy et al.

– Model Evaluation: Models are evaluated using six machine learning tech-

niques. Hence, the results are limited to these algorithms.

– Architecture: The data is limited to the scale of the CI used in this study.
More complex architecture – such as introducing more tanks and sensors –
may not yield the same anomaly detection accuracy.

– Real-Time testing: The model is built and tested based on the dataset,
however, testing the model real-time is essential to measure the performance.

6 Related Work

The area of critical infrastructure protection and Security Information and Event
Management has a rich history of books, deployments and lessons learned from
both universities and organizations deploying tools and techniques to protect
their environments.

Robert Mitchell and Ing-Ray Chen [23] presented a survey on recent Cyber-
Physical Systems (CPS) intrusion detection systems. They classiﬁed CPSs into
two categories based on potential detection technique: (1) Knowledge-Based or
Misuse Detection and (2) Behaviour-Based. While the survey provides a general
overview of potential threats, it focuses essentially on the network traﬃc rather
than on data provenance and data accuracy. This survey, however, provides the
stepping stone of the ﬁeld. In [4] and [3] Amin et al. provide an overview a
security threat assessment of a networked CI including diﬀerent layers (i.e. su-
pervisory and control networks). The manuscripts present a grey-box approach
where the hacker possesses a certain level of knowledge of the system and is able
to perpetrate a deception attack against the system in order to enable liquid
spilling from the canal the IDS was tested on. Cheng et al. [11] provide a tech-
nique to alleviate control-oriented attacks, code-injection attacks or code-reuse
attacks on embedded devices. The highlight the lack of existing mechanisms and
present ’Orpheus’, a program behaviour model, taking advantage of the event-
driven nature of embedded devices controlling critical infrastructure. Mathur [22]
discusses the limitations of the detecting a incidents in critical infrastructures by
analysing processes. The manuscript refers to two methods, the ﬁrst described
is the CUSUM [10]. CUMSUM is a statistical method allowing to detect anoma-
lies in time series, corresponding to a speciﬁed process. The technique requires
two parameters to operate, the ’bias’ and thethreshold’. The CUMSUM provides
the cumulative sum of the deviation for the process measured. By plotting the
predicted and observed state, the operator is able to identify the state of the
facility and identify changes in behavior. The second methodology is based on
State Entanglement (SE) [1]. SE combines the states of multiple components of a
system to construct a state space. The state space act as a blacklist, highlighting
prohibited states during normal operations.

7 Conclusion and Future Work

This work focused on building an anomaly detection and a SIEM tool for a
SCADA water system. The model was evaluated using a real-world dataset cov-

Improving SIEM for Critical SCADA Water Infrastructures

15

ering 14 anomaly scenarios including normal system behavior. The presented
scenarios covered a wide range of events, ranging from hardware failure to sab-
otage. Three experiments were conducted using 6 Machine Learning techniques.
The experiments varied based on the level of information reported to the
operator. The First experiment allowed anomaly event to be reported to the op-
erator as a binary output. While events where being detected as either anomalies
or normal operation, the operator was unaware of the type of anomaly occurring.
The second experiment reported the aﬀected component, providing the operator
with information relating to a single or multiple sensor data. Finally, the third
experiment - which provided the best results - reported the anomaly with an
accuracy level, helping the operator to take subsequent correcting steps.

The overall evaluation showed that k-NN, Decision Tree and Random Forest
outperformed ’Gaussian Na¨ıve Bayes, SVM and kernel SVM. Moreover, k-NN
results demonstrated the highest accuracy amongst all algorithms in the three
experiments. The experiments achieved the accuracy of 94% for the binary out-
put and 95.64% for the scenarios classiﬁcation. As aforementioned, the scenarios
are co-related, therefore, the operator - in the third experiment - is notiﬁed with
the most probable scenarios/anomaly occurring. Moreover, a conﬁdence level
was used to provide the operator with the best information available.

To further enhance the detection accuracy, the following should be consid-
ered. Increasing the dataset instances to enhance the training process and build-
ing hybrid model to classify subgroups of events.

References

1. Adepu, S., Mathur, A.: Distributed detection of single-stage multipoint cyber at-
tacks in a water treatment plant. In: Proceedings of the 11th ACM on Asia Con-
ference on Computer and Communications Security. pp. 449–460. ACM (2016)
2. Ahmed, I., Roussev, V., Johnson, W., Senthivel, S., Sudhakaran, S.: A scada system
testbed for cybersecurity and forensic research and pedagogy. In: Proceedings of the
2nd Annual Industrial Control System Security Workshop. pp. 1–9. ACM (2016)
3. Amin, S., Litrico, X., Sastry, S.S., Bayen, A.M.: Cyber security of water scada sys-
temspart ii: Attack detection using enhanced hydrodynamic models. IEEE Trans-
actions on Control Systems Technology 21(5), 1679–1693 (2013)

4. Amin, S., Litrico, X., Sastry, S., Bayen, A.M.: Cyber security of water scada
systemspart i: Analysis and experimentation of stealthy deception attacks. IEEE
Transactions on Control Systems Technology 21(5), 1963–1970 (2013)

5. Barber, D.: Bayesian reasoning and machine learning. Cambridge University Press

(2012)

6. Bellekens, X., Seeam, A., Nieradzinska, K., Tachtatzis, C., Cleary, A., Atkinson, R.,
Andonovic, I.: Cyber-physical-security model for safety-critical iot infrastructures.
In: Wireless World Research Forum Meeting. vol. 35 (2015)

7. Brenner, J.F.: Eyes wide shut: The growing threat of cyber attacks on
industrial control systems. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 69(5), 15–20
(2013). https://doi.org/10.1177/0096340213501372, https://doi.org/10.1177/
0096340213501372

16

H. Hindy et al.

8. Bujari, A., Furini, M., Mandreoli, F., Martoglia, R., Montangero, M., Ronzani,
D.: Standards, security and business models: key challenges for the iot scenario.
Mobile Networks and Applications 23(1), 147–154 (2018)

9. Calder´on Godoy, A.J., Gonz´alez P´erez, I.: Integration of sensor and actuator net-
works and the scada system to promote the migration of the legacy ﬂexible manu-
facturing system towards the industry 4.0 concept. Journal of Sensor and Actuator
Networks 7(2), 23 (2018)

10. C´ardenas, A.A., Amin, S., Lin, Z.S., Huang, Y.L., Huang, C.Y., Sastry, S.: At-
tacks against process control systems: risk assessment, detection, and response. In:
Proceedings of the 6th ACM symposium on information, computer and communi-
cations security. pp. 355–366. ACM (2011)

11. Cheng, L., Tian, K., Yao, D.D.: Orpheus: Enforcing cyber-physical execution se-
mantics to defend against data-oriented attacks. In: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Computer Security Applications Conference. pp. 315–326. ACM (2017)

12. Gupta, B., Agrawal, D.P., Yamaguchi, S., Arachchilage, N.A., Veluru, S.: Editorial
security, privacy, and forensics in the critical infrastructure: advances and future
directions (2017)

13. Huitsing, P., Chandia, R., Papa, M., Shenoi, S.: Attack taxonomies for the mod-
bus protocols. International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection 1, 37–44
(2008)

14. Jensen, E.T.: Computer attacks on critical national infrastructure: A use of force

invoking the right of self-defense. Stan. J. Int’l L. 38, 207 (2002)

15. Jiang, N., Lin, H., Yin, Z., Xi, C.: Research of paired industrial ﬁrewalls in defense-
in-depth architecture of integrated manufacturing or production system. In: In-
formation and Automation (ICIA), 2017 IEEE International Conference on. pp.
523–526. IEEE (2017)

16. Jr, D.W.H., Lemeshow, S., Sturdivant, R.X.: Applied logistic regression, vol. 398.

John Wiley & Sons (2013)

17. Langner, R.: Stuxnet: Dissecting a cyberwarfare weapon. IEEE Security Privacy

9(3), 49–51 (May 2011). https://doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2011.67

18. Larose, D.T., Larose, C.D.: Discovering knowledge in data: an introduction to data

mining. John Wiley & Sons (2014)
D.,

P.M.,

Brosset,

and malicious

19. Laso,
lies
https://doi.org///doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2017.07.038,
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352340917303402, iD: 311593
20. Lee, R.M., Assante, M.J., Conway, T.: Analysis of the cyber attack on the ukrainian

anoma-
subsystem (2017).
http://www.

J.:
cyber-physical

Puentes,

Dataset

acts

in

of

a

power grid. SANS ICS Report) (2016)

21. Lior, R.: Data mining with decision trees: theory and applications, vol. 81. World

scientiﬁc (2014)

22. Mathur, A.: On the limits of detecting process anomalies in critical infrastructure.
In: Proceedings of the 4th ACM Workshop on Cyber-Physical System Security.
pp. 1–1. ACM (2018)
23. Mitchell, R., Chen,

for
cyber-physical systems. ACM Comput. Surv. 46(4), 55:1–55:29 (Mar 2014).
https://doi.org/10.1145/2542049, http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2542049

intrusion detection techniques

I.R.: A survey of

24. Steinwart, I., Christmann, A.: Support vector machines. Springer Science & Busi-

ness Media (2008)

25. Tan, E.E.: Cyber deterrence in singapore: Framework & recommendations (2018)

Improving SIEM for Critical SCADA Water Infrastructures

17

26. Ten, C.W., Manimaran, G., Liu, C.C.: Cybersecurity for critical

infrastruc-
tures: Attack and defense modeling. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics-Part A: Systems and Humans 40(4), 853–865 (2010)

27. VanderPlas, J.: Python data science handbook: Essential tools for working with

data. ” O'Reilly Media, Inc.” (2016)

