Machine Learning in IoT Security:
Current Solutions and Future Challenges

Fatima Hussain, Rasheed Hussain, Syed Ali Hassan, and Ekram Hossain

1

9
1
0
2

r
a

M
4
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
3
7
5
0
.
4
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The future Internet of Things (IoT) will have a
deep economical, commercial and social impact on our lives.
The participating nodes in IoT networks are usually resource-
constrained, which makes them luring targets for cyber attacks.
In this regard, extensive efforts have been made to address the
security and privacy issues in IoT networks primarily through
traditional cryptographic approaches. However, the unique char-
acteristics of IoT nodes render the existing solutions insufﬁcient
to encompass the entire security spectrum of the IoT networks.
This is, at least in part, because of the resource constraints,
heterogeneity, massive real-time data generated by the IoT
devices, and the extensively dynamic behavior of the networks.
Therefore, Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL)
techniques, which are able to provide embedded intelligence in
the IoT devices and networks, are leveraged to cope with different
security problems. In this paper, we systematically review the
security requirements, attack vectors, and the current security
solutions for the IoT networks. We then shed light on the gaps
in these security solutions that call for ML and DL approaches.
We also discuss in detail the existing ML and DL solutions for
addressing different security problems in IoT networks. At last,
based on the detailed investigation of the existing solutions in the
literature, we discuss the future research directions for ML- and
DL-based IoT security.

Index Terms—Internet of Things (IoT), IoT Applications,

Security, Attacks, Privacy, Machine Learning, Deep Learning

I. INTRODUCTION

IoT is considered as an interconnected and distributed
network of embedded systems communicating through wired
or wireless communication technologies [1]. It is also deﬁned
as the network of physical objects or things empowered with
limited computation, storage, and communication capabilities
as well as embedded with electronics (such as sensors and
actuators), software, and network connectivity that enables
these objects to collect, sometime process, and exchange data.
The things in IoT refer to the objects from our daily life
ranging from smart house-hold devices such as smart bulb,
smart adapter, smart meter, smart refrigerator, smart oven,
AC, temperature sensor, smoke detector, IP camera, to more
sophisticated devices such as Radio Frequency IDentiﬁcation
(RFID) devices, heartbeat detectors, accelerometers, sensors

F. Hussain is with API Operation and Delivery Squad, Royal Bank of

Canada, Toronto, Canada (email: fatima.hussain@rbc.com).

R. Hussain is with Networks and Blockchain Laboratory, Innopolis Uni-

versity, Innopolis, Russia (email: r.hussain@innopolis.ru).

S. A. Hassan is with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science (SEECS), National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST),
Pakistan (email: ali.hassan@seecs.edu.pk).

E. Hossain

is with Department

of Electrical

Engineering at University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada
Ekram.Hossain@umanitoba.ca).

and Computer
(email:

in parking lot, and a range of other sensors in automobiles
etc. [2]. There are a plethora of applications and services
offered by the IoT ranging from critical
infrastructure to
agriculture, military, home appliances, and personal health-
care [3]. Furthermore, the domains covered by the IoT services
include, but not
limited to, energy, building management,
medical, retail, transportation, manufacturing, and so on. The
huge scale of IoT networks brings new challenges such as
management of these devices, sheer amount of data, storage,
communication, computation, and security and privacy. There
have been extensive researches covering these different aspects
of IoT (e.g. architecture, communication, protocols, applica-
tions, security and privacy) [3]–[17]. However, the cornerstone
of the commercialization of IoT technology is the security
and privacy guarantee as well as consumer satisfaction. The
fact that IoT uses enabling technologies such as Software-
Deﬁned Networking (SDN), Cloud Computing (CC), and fog
computing, also increases the landscape of threats for the
attackers.

Data generated by the IoT devices is massive and therefore,
traditional data collection, storage, and processing techniques
may not work at this scale. Furthermore, the sheer amount
of data can also be used for patterns, behaviors, predictions,
and assessment. Additionally, the heterogeneity of the data
generated by IoT creates another front for the current data
processing mechanisms. Therefore, to harness the value of
the IoT-generated data, new mechanisms are needed. In this
context, Machine Learning (ML) is considered to be one of the
most suitable computational paradigms to provide embedded
intelligence in the IoT devices [18]. ML can help machines
and smart devices to infer useful knowledge from the device-
or human-generated data. It can also be deﬁned as the ability
of a smart device to vary or automate the situation or behavior
based on knowledge which is considered as an essential part
for an IoT solution. ML techniques have been used in tasks
such as classiﬁcation, regression and density estimation. Vari-
ety of applications such as computer vision, fraud detection,
bio-informatics, malware detection, authentication, and speech
recognition use ML algorithms and techniques. In a similar
manner, ML can be leveraged in IoT for providing intelligent
services. In this paper, however, we focus on the applications
of ML in providing security and privacy services to the IoT
networks.

A. Characteristics of IoT Networks

In the following we discuss some unique characteristics of

IoT networks.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Heterogeneity: In an IoT network, a multitude of different
devices with different capabilities, characteristics and different
communication protocols communicate with each other. More
precisely, the devices could use different standards for com-
munication, and different communication paradigms (such as
cellular or Ethernet) and variable constraints on the hardware
resources.
Massive scale deployment: It is speculated that the billions
of devices connected with each other and through Internet will
likely surpass the capabilities of the current Internet. The de-
ployment of IoT on massive scale also brings challenges. Some
of these challenges include design of networking and storage
architecture for smart devices, efﬁcient data communication
protocols, proactive identiﬁcation and protection of IoT from
malicious attacks, standardization of technologies, and devices
and application interfaces [19], [20] etc.
Inter-connectivity: IoT devices are expected to be connected
to global information and communication infrastructure and
can be accessed from anywhere and anytime. The connectivity
depends on the type of service and application provided by the
IoT service provider(s). In some cases, the connectivity could
be local (such as in case of connected car technology or swarm
of sensors) whereas in other cases it could be global such as
in case of smart home access through mobile infrastructure
and critical infrastructure management.
Communication in close proximity: Another salient feature
of IoT is the communication in close proximity without
involving the central authorities such as base stations. Device-
to-Device communication (D2D) leverages the characteristics
of point-to-point communication such as Dedicated Short
Range Communication (DSRC) and similar technologies. The
architecture of traditional Internet is more inclined towards
network-centric communication whereas recently the decou-
pling of networks and services also enable device-centric as
well as content-centric communication which enriches the IoT
service spectrum.
Ultra-Reliable

and Low Latency Communication
(URLLC): This property of IoT networks is required in critical
real-time applications such as industrial process automation,
remote surgery, and intelligent trafﬁc transport system, where
the major performance constraints are both delay and reliabil-
ity.
Low-power and low-cost communication: Massive connec-
tivity of IoT devices requires ultra low-power and low cost
solutions for efﬁcient network operations.
Self-organization and self-healing characteristics: These
are required for urgent and contemporary IoT communication
that includes emergency or disaster situations. In such situa-
tions, reliance on the network infrastructure is not an option
and therefore, self-organizing networks should be deployed.
Dynamic changes in the network: IoT consists of massive
number of devices that need to be managed in an efﬁcient
way. These devices will act dynamically, for instance the
sleep/wakeup time of devices will depend on the application,
when do these device use Internet and when do they commu-
nicate directly, and so on. These characteristics must also be

2

incorporated into the IoT networks.

Safety: Among other characteristics, safety is also of
paramount importance for the smooth functionality of the IoT
networks. Safety is considered for both the consumers and
devices because the large number of IoT devices connected
to Internet may jeopardize the personal data that is shared
through these devices. Furthermore, privacy and the security
of device itself is also an important factor.
Intelligence: One of the most intriguing characteristics of
IoT is the intelligence through which timely and informed
decisions are made. The data generated by IoT devices should
be processed in a way to make real sense out of it and perform
actions as a results of decisions made on the basis of the
processed data.

B. Security Challenges in IoT Deployment

Security and privacy are two of the main factors in the
commercial realization of the IoT services and applications.
Current Internet is the luring playground for security attacks
ranging from simple hacks all the way to corporate level
well-coordinated security breaches that have adversely affected
different industries such as health-care and business. The limi-
tations of the IoT devices and the environment they operate in,
pose additional challenges for the security of both applications
and the devices. To date, security and privacy issues have
been extensively researched in the IoT domain from different
perspectives such as communication security, data security,
privacy, architectural security, identity management, malware
analysis, and so on [4]. Detailed discussion regarding security
challenges and threat model follows in Section II.

C. Gaps in the Existing Security Solution for IoT Networks

For the successful realization IoT, it is important to analyze
the roots of the security and privacy issues. More precisely
the term IoT has been tossed from the existing technologies
and therefore, it is imperative to know whether the security
challenges in IoT are new or a rehash of the inheritance
from the old technologies. Fernandes et al. [21] focused on
similarities and differences of the security issues in IoT and
the traditional IT devices. Furthermore,
they also focused
on the privacy issues. The main driving factors to argue on
the similarities and differences include software, hardware,
network, and applications. Based on these classiﬁcations, there
are fundamental similarities between the security issues in
traditional IT domain and the IoT. However,
the primary
concern of the IoT is the resource-constraints that hinder the
adaptation of already available sophisticated security solutions
in IoT networks. Furthermore, solutions to the security and
privacy issues in IoT require cross-layer design and optimized
algorithms. For instance due to computational constraints, IoT
devices may need new breed of optimized cryptographic and
other algorithms to cope with security and privacy. On the
other hand, the number of devices in IoT pose other challenges
for the security mechanisms.

Most of the security challenges are complex and the so-
lutions cannot be discrete. For instance, in case of security

3

challenges such as DDoS or intrusion, there is a probability of
false positives which will render the solutions to be ineffective
against these attacks. Additionally, it will also decrease the
consumer trust and thereby degrading the effectiveness of these
solutions. Therefore, a holistic security and privacy approach
towards IoT will have nominations from the existing security
solutions as well as development of new intelligent, robust,
evolutionary, and scalable mechanisms to address security
challenges in IoT.

devices to perform complex sensing and recognition tasks to
enable the realization of new applications and services consid-
ering real-time interactions among humans, smart devices and
physical surroundings. Some of the security related real-world
applications of ML are as follows:

• Face recognition for forensics: pose, lighting, occlusion

(glasses, beard), make-up, hair style, etc.

• Character recognition for security encryption: different

handwriting styles.

• Malicious code identiﬁcation: identifying malicious code

D. Machine Learning: A Solution to IoT Security Challenges

in applications and software.

Machine learning refers to intelligent methods used to
optimize performance criteria using example data or past
experience(s) through learning. More precisely, ML algorithms
build models of behaviors using mathematical techniques on
huge data sets. ML also enables the ability (for smart devices)
to learn without being explicitly programmed. These models
are used as a basis for making future predictions based on the
newly input data. ML is interdisciplinary in nature and inherits
its roots from many disciplines of science and engineering that
include artiﬁcial intelligence, optimization theory, information
theory, and cognitive science, to name the few [22]. Machine
learning is utilized when human expertise either do not exist
or cannot be used such as navigating a hostile place where
humans are unable to use their expertise, for instance robotics,
speech recognition etc. It is also applied in situations where
solution to some speciﬁc problem changes in time (routing in
a computer network or ﬁnding malicious code in a software or
application). Furthermore, it is used in practical smart systems,
for instance Google uses ML to analyze threats against mobile
is also
endpoints and applications running on Android. It
used for identifying and removing malware from infected
handsets. Likewise, Amazon has launched a service Macie
that uses ML to sort and classify data stored in its cloud
storage service. Although ML techniques perform well
in
many areas; however, there is a chance of false positives and
true negatives. Therefore, ML techniques need guidance and
modiﬁcation to the model if inaccurate prediction is made. On
the contrary, in Deep Learning (DL), a new breed of ML, the
model can determine the accuracy of prediction by itself. Due
to self-service nature of DL models, it is rendered as more
suitable for classiﬁcation and prediction tasks in innovative
IoT applications with contextual and personalized assistance.
Although traditional approaches are widely used for differ-
ent aspects of IoT (e.g. applications, services, architectures,
protocols, data aggregation, resource allocation, clustering,
analytics) including security, the massive scale deployment
of IoT however, advocates for intelligent, robust, and reliable
techniques. To this end, ML and DL are promising techniques
for IoT networks due to several reasons, e.g. IoT networks
produce sheer amount of data which is required by ML and DL
approaches to bring intelligence to the systems. Furthermore,
the utility of the data generated by the IoT is better utilized
with the ML and DL techniques which enable the IoT systems
to make informed and intelligent decisions. ML and DL
are largely used for security, privacy, attack detection, and
malware analysis. DL techniques can also be used in IoT

• Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) detection: detecting
DDoS attacks on infrastructure through behavior analysis.
Using ML and DL techniques in IoT applications on the
other hand bring along new challenges. These challenges are
multi-faceted. For instance,
is challenging to develop a
it
suitable model to process data from diverse IoT applications.
Similarly, labeling input data effectively is also a cumbersome
task. Another challenge is using minimum labelled data in
the learning process. Other challenges stems from the deploy-
ment of these models on resource-constrained IoT devices
where it is essential to reduce the processing and storage
overhead [23]. Similarly, critical infrastructure and real-time
applications cannot withstand the anomalies created because
of ML or DL algorithms. In the above context, it is imperative
to systematically review the security solutions of IoT that
leverage ML and DL.

E. Existing Surveys

IoT has a rich literature and to date, many surveys have been
published that cover different aspects of the IoT security. In
this section, we summarize the existing surveys and compare
them with our work. To the best of our knowledge, most of
the surveys we found in the literature do not focus on the
ML techniques used in IoT. Furthermore, the existing surveys
are either application-speciﬁc or do not encompass the full
spectrum of the security and privacy in the IoT networks.
Table I summarizes the existing surveys in the literature
that cover different aspects of the IoT. In this table, we
outline the topics covered in these surveys and the respective
enhancements in our survey.

The current literature covers the security in IoT by inves-
tigating the existing traditional solutions and the solutions
provided through the new emerging technologies. However,
surveys covering ML- and DL-based solutions do not exist.
Although ML and DL have been covered in few surveys but
the overall information on the comprehensive usage of ML and
DL is scarce. To ﬁll the gaps, we conduct a comprehensive
survey of the ML and DL techniques used in IoT security.

F. Scope of This Survey and Contributions

We carry out in-depth systematic survey of ML- and DL-
based security solutions in IoT. First we discuss the security
requirements of IoT applications, threats and attacks in IoT
networks. Then we discuss the role of ML and DL in IoT
and discuss different ML and DL techniques that are actively

leveraged for IoT applications and services. To focus more on
the functional side of the IoT, we dive deeper into the ML-
and DL-based security solutions in IoT. To this end, we also
discuss the existing research challenges and future directions
for more research on the ML and DL for IoT networks. Our
aim is to bridge the gap between the requirements of the IoT
security and the capabilities of the ML and DL which will help
addressing the current security challenges of the IoT networks.
We pictorially illustrate the scope of this survey in Fig. 1.

The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as

follows:

1) We present an in-depth systematic and comprehensive
survey of the role of machine and deep learning mech-
anisms in IoT.

2) We describe state-of-the-art results on ML and DL in
IoT network with a focus on security and privacy of the
IoT networks.

3) We describe the limitations of the existing security
solutions of the IoT networks that lead to using ML
and DL techniques.

4) We also present an in-depth review of different research
challenges related to the application of ML and DL
techniques in IoT that need to be addressed.

To the best of our knowledge and based on our extensive
search in the literature, this is the ﬁrst such effort to review
IoT from ML and DL standpoint. We carry out an in-depth
investigation of the security and privacy in the IoT networks.
In essence, we investigate in detail, the security requirements,
attack surface in IoT, and then discuss the ML and DL-based
solutions to mitigate the security attacks in IoT networks. It
is worth mentioning that we have covered the existing surveys
till 2019. Furthermore, our survey contains the recent works
carried out in the ﬁelds of ML and DL for IoT networks.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Table II lists
all the acronyms used in the paper. We discuss threat model
of IoT networks in Section II. In Section III, we discuss the
role of ML in the IoT networks and brieﬂy review different
ML and DL techniques. We survey the existing ML- and DL-
based solutions for IoT networks in Section IV. The future
research directions are discussed in Section V and Section VI
concludes this paper.

II. SECURITY CHALLENGES AND THREAT MODELS IN IOT

In essence, IoT employs a transformative approach to pro-
vide consumers with numerous applications and services. The
pervasive deployment of large number of devices also increase
the attack surface. On the other hand, the fact that IoT devices
are (usually) resource-constrained; therefore, it is not feasible
to use sophisticated security mechanisms against notorious
attacks. Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that the original
Internet was not designed for IoT. Therefore, it is impera-
tive to provide IoT security on top of the existing security
mechanisms of the Internet and the underlying technologies.
To this end, IoT uses different communication technologies
such as, but not limited to, IPv6, Zigbee, 6LoWPAN, Blue-
tooth, Z-Wave, WiFi, and Near Field Communications (NFC),
to name a few [24]. These aforementioned communications

4

technologies have their own shortcomings and limitations
from security standpoint and these limitations are inherited
in the IoT domain as well. In addition to these issues,
the underlying TCP/IP based communication infrastructure is
prone to challenges such as scalability, complexity, addressing,
conﬁguration, and insufﬁcient resource utilization that limit the
possibilities of using it for diverse and heterogeneous networks
such as IoT [25]. To this end, different alternative technologies
such as information-centric networking (ICN) and software-
deﬁned networking (SDN) have been utilized to serve as
underlying communication infrastructures for IoT [25], [26].
Here, we provide the summary of the threats and attacks faced
by IoT. Without loss of generality, security attacks in IoT
can be abstractly divided into physical, network, transport,
application, and encryption attacks.

A. Physical Attacks

In physical attacks,

the attackers have direct access to
the devices and manipulate different aspects of the devices.
To get access to the physical devices, social engineering
is one of the most prominent methods where the attackers
access the devices and perform real attack that ranges from
physical damage to the device to eavesdropping, side-channels,
and other related attacks [27], [28]. Despite the fact
that
different technologies are used at the physical layer for IoT,
the nature of physical attacks mostly resemble and need social
engineering-like approaches. Furthermore, to launch physical
attacks, the attackers must be in the close proximity of the
devices/hardware with different intentions such as physically
destroying the hardware, limiting its lifetime, endangering the
communication mechanism, tampering with the energy source,
and so on. It is also worth noting that physical attacks maybe
stepping stone for other attacks, for instance disabling an
alarm in a home could lead to a burglary or other related
damage in smart home environment. Similarly, a replacement
of sensor with a malicious sensor would lead to sensitive
data leakage. Injection of malicious node into the network can
also cause man-in-the-middle attack that enables that attacker
to escalate privileges and launch other attacks. Furthermore,
such tampering with devices may also enable the attackers to
make changes in the routing tables and security keys that will
affect the communication with upper layers [29]–[31]. Other
physical attacks include jamming radio frequencies which
denies the communication in IoT environment. Among many
other repercussions, jamming causes denial of service in IoT
thereby adversely affecting the functionality of IoT applica-
tions [32], [33]. As has been mentioned, the attackers also
use different social engineering approaches to have physical
access to hardware/devices for different purposes such as the
attacks we already mentioned. Through social engineering, the
attackers may manipulate users to gain physical access to the
devices [34], [35].

B. Physical (PHY) and Link Layer Security Issues

IoT combines various communication technologies at the
lower layers of TCP/IP protocol stack and thus-forth provides
a complex heterogeneous network. These technologies include,

but not limited to, ZigBee, WSN, MANET, WiFi, RFID, NFC,
and so forth and furthermore these technologies have their own
security issues. In this subsection, we will put light on the
security issues in the physical and data link layers of IoT. Yang
et al. [36] and Granjal et al. [4] discussed in detail, the security
issues in IoT at different layers and their existing solutions. As
has been mentioned before, the heterogeneity is introduced at
physical layer of the IoT and then different amendments are
made at data link layer, for instance special channel design
and so forth, depending on the underlying physical
layer
technology. To this end, the security mechanisms of IoT must
encompass the heterogeneity at the physical and data link
layer.

There are different security issues in physical

layer of
IoT depending on the underlying technology, for instance in
case of sensor nodes, physical attacks on sensor nodes must
be mitigated. Furthermore, detection of malfunction in the
hardware is also of paramount importance and must be handled
to avoid anomalies at upper layer. Intrusion is another physical
security issue that needs efﬁcient countermeasures from both
detection and prevention standpoint. It is worth noting that
there could be many attack vectors even for intrusion detection
at upper layers, for instance routing attack [37]. From fault
detection standpoint, it is important at par to detect the faulty
nodes in IoT because it directly affects the quality of service
(QoS) of the IoT application [38], [39].

that

The main objective of IoT is to provide a common ground
for low-energy constrained devices (aka things) to co-exist
at the lower layers (PHY and Link layers) and provide a
common communication platform for heterogeneous devices.
To this end, IEEE has mandated a standard known as IEEE
802.15.4 to allow constrained device communicate efﬁciently
[40]. The fact
in IoT, higher layers use low power
protocols such as 6LoWPAN and Constrained Application
Protocol (CoAP), a mechanism is needed at lower layers to
enable these protocols work seamlessly. In this context, IEEE
802.15.4 provides the necessary amendments at the lower lay-
ers for these protocols. It is worth noting that, IEEE 802.15.4
incorporates security only at the data link layer. Data link or
MAC layer is responsible for the channel access for different
devices in addition to frame validation, access management,
time management, and security. Here we particularly focus
on the security at this layer provided by IEEE 802.15.4. The
security provided by this standard at MAC layer does not only
make sure that the node level data transmission is secure,
but also complements the security of upper layers. In this
regard, symmetric cryptography algorithms such as AES are
proved to be fast and efﬁcient when implemented on chip,
therefore such implementation in IEEE 802.15.4 hardware
will compliment the lower layer security [41], [42]. IEEE
802.15.4 standard implements AES algorithm and different
implementations have been proposed to deal with the resource
constraints of the devices [43]. The standard supports different
security modes at the link layer, for instance the data may not
be encrypted with only integrity check, or the data may be
encrypted along with the integrity check.

C. Network Layer Attacks

5

At

the network level,

the attacks are aimed at routing,
data and trafﬁc analysis, spooﬁng, and launching man-in-the-
middle attack. Besides, sybil attacks are also possible at the
network layer where fake identities/sybil identities are used to
create illusions in the network [49], [50]. On the other hand,
intrusion through different means, provides a way-in for the
attacker to the system where the attackers can launch plethora
of other attacks and therefore, securing the network is essential
to contain the attacks at early stages. At the network layer,
the attacker can also leverage a compromised node to use it
as fake forwarding node and create a sinkohole. This type of
attack, usually associated with sensor networks and mobile ad
hoc networks, is equally dangerous in IoT environment [51].
With these attacks, the possibility of launching a collaborative
DDoS attacks increases, and thereby disrupting the whole IoT
network. At the network layer, the attacker can achieve this
by bombarding the network with more trafﬁc through com-
promised nodes than the network can handle. Compromising
IoT nodes and masquerading identities will have catastrophic
consequences on the network because with such fake nodes
(either non-existent fake identities or existing compromised
identities) enable the attackers to launch sybil attacks where
sybil nodes (fake nodes) give the illusion to the core network
as if real nodes were sending data. To summarize, the attack
vectors in network layer target the communication aspects
of the IoT and exploit the resource constraints and lack of
sophisticated authentication and authorization schemes.

D. Transport Layer Attacks

Transport layer is responsible for process to process delivery
where transport protocols enable the processes to exchange
data. In the context of IoT, the traditional transport layer
security issues still persist. The most serious attack at this
layer is the denial of service attack that chokes the network
and results in denial of services to the applications. It is worth
mentioning that due to the nature of IoT, traditional TCP and
UDP protocols do not scale with resource-constrained devices,
and therefore lightweight versions of transport protocols have
been proposed in the literature [52]–[54]. However, the secu-
rity of these protocols is of primary importance to alleviate
the DoS and DDoS attacks in IoT.

E. Application Layer Attacks

IoT applications are relatively lucrative targets for the
attackers because applications level attacks are relatively easy
to launch. Some of the well-known attacks include, but not
limited to, buffer overﬂow attacks, malware attacks, denial
of services, phishing, exploiting the WebApp vulnerabilities,
cryptographic attacks, side channel attacks, and man-in-the-
middle attacks. Buffer overﬂows are one of the mostly used at-
tack vectors in different applications [55]. Existing techniques
to mitigate buffer overﬂow mechanism include static and
dynamic code analysis, and other sophisticated mechanisms
such as symbolic debugging; however, these techniques cannot
be used with IoT due to resource constraints. IoT applications

Year

Paper

Topic(s) of the survey

Related sections in
our paper

Enhancements in our paper

TABLE I
EXISTING SURVEYS

6

2015

2017

2017

2017

2018

2018

2018

2019

2019

[4]

Communication security protocols

[36]

IoT authentication and access control

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

Security in the edge layer of IoT

System architecture, and security, privacy in
edge-/fog-based IoT

Security of IoT framework architectures

Sec. II

IoT-enabled attacks on different sectors and as-
sess different attacks in critical infrastructure
Security threats in IoT

ML-based techniques for IDS in IoT

Sec. II

Sec. II

Sec. IV

Data security in IoT and data lifecycle

N/A

2017

[13]

Threats and vulnerabilities in IoT applications,
architecture and possible attacks

Sec. II

Sec. II

Sec. II

Sec. II

Sec. II

Sec. II

IDS in IoT, detection methods, placement and
validation strategies

Security of IoT applications in different domains

Sec. II

Current development in IoT security, challenges,
simulators, and tools
Secure routing protocols in IoT
Security protocols and key distribution

Sec. II and IV

N/A
Sec. II

Security challenges in IoT and sensor networks

Sec. II

Trust models for service management in IoT

N/A

Open issues and challenges in IoT and enabling
technologies

IoT data analytics through DL

Sec. V

N/A

Security requirements, threats, vulnerabilities, and
ML- and DL-based solutions
Detailed security and privacy solutions through ML
and DL in IoT
Coverage of entire IoT from security, privacy
standpoint
Enhanced coverage of state-of-the-art ML- and DL-
based security and privacy in generic IoT
In-depth coverage of security and privacy in
generic IoT with focus on state-of-the-art ML and
DL techniques
In-depth coverage of security issues, threats, at-
tacks, and solutions in generic IoT
Enhanced threats, attacks, and solutions in IoT
Coverage of security and privacy and ML-based
techniques in IoT
Covering in-depth security issues and their ML-
and DL-based solutions in IoT
Enhanced threat landscape, requirements, attacks,
and their respective solutions in generic IoT secu-
rity spectrum
Detailed coverage of security and privacy issues
and state-of-the-art based on ML and DL
Coverage of generic IoT applications with solu-
tions, independent of particular domains
In-depth and more detailed survey of the security
requirements, threats, attacks, and solutions in IoT
Focus on the applications security and privacy
Focus on security in a holistic way
Detailed security challenges, attacks, and solutions
in IoT
Coverage of different aspects of security with so-
lutions based on ML and DL
Enhanced state-of-the-art and research challenges
in ML-driven IoT security
In-depth review of ML- and DL-based security
solutions in IoT

TABLE II
ACRONYMS AND THEIR EXPLANATIONS

Explanation

Acronym

Explanation

Machine Learning
Ultra-Reliable and Low Latency Communication
Reinforce Learning
Support Vector Regression
Naive Bayes
Deep Neural Network
Principal Component Analysis
Multi-Layer Perception
ELM-based Semisupervised Fuzzy C-Means
Long-Short Term Memory
Quality of Service
Software-Deﬁned Network
Near-Field Communication
Distributed Denial of Service
Role-Based Access Control
Policy-Based Access Control
Usage Control-based Access Control
Organizational-based Access Control
Open Authentication
Constrained Application Protocol
Multivariate Correlation Analysis
Cyber Physical System
Linear Discriminant Analysis
Illegal Memory Access
Deep Eigenspace Learning
Body Area Network

RFID
DL
SVM
KNN
NN
CNN
RNN
ELM
ANN
DRL
CSI
D2D
ICN
OWASP
CWAC
ABAC
CAC
XACML
UMA
FCM
SINR
IRG
RaNN
XSS
WMS
AML

Radio Frequency IDentiﬁcation
Deep Learning
Support Vector Machine
K-Nearest Neighbour
Neural Network
Convolutional Neural Network
Recurrent Neural Network
Extreme Learning Machine
Artiﬁcial Neural Network
Deep Reinforcement Learning
Channel State Information
Device-to-Device Communication
Information-Centric Networking
Open Web Application Security Project
Context-Aware Access Control
Attribute-Based Access Control
Capability-based Access Control
eXtensible Access Control Markup Language
User-Managed Access
Fuzzy C-Means
Signal-to-Interference Noise Ratio
Inﬂuential Relative Grade
Random Neural Networks
Cross-Site Scripting
Wireless Multimedia System
Adversarial Machine Learning

2017

2019

2019

2016
2015

2018

2017

2018

2018

[14]

[44]

[15]

[45]
[16]

[17]

[46]

[47]

[48]

Acronym

ML
UURLLC
RL
SVR
NB
DNN
PCA
MLP
ESFCM
LSTM
QoS
SDN
NFC
DDoS
RBAC
PBAC
UCAC
OAC
OAuth
CoAP
MCA
CPS
LDA
IMA
DEL
BAN

7

Fig. 1. Taxonomy of the survey.

are also prone to malicious code injection as a result of buffer
overﬂow and other vulnerabilities such as SQL injection,
cross-site scripting, object referencing, and so forth. Open
Web Application Security Project (OWASP) identiﬁed the top
10 vulnerabilities that causes different attacks on applica-
tions. The latest list of most widely found vulnerabilities was
compiled by OWASP in 20171. These vulnerabilities lead to
range of other attacks that could be launched, for instance,
injection of malicious code, phishing, access control, privilege
escalation, and so on. Furthermore, through malicious code
injection attacks, the attacker can steal sensitive information,
tampering with information, and range of other malicious
activities [56]. Furthermore, botnets are other serious threats
to IoT infrastructure and the applications [57]. Mitigation
of attacks launched through intelligent botnets is a serious
challenge for IoT because such botnets intelligently scan and
crawl through the network looking for known vulnerabilities
and exploiting them to launch different attacks such as massive
DDoS. It is also worth mentioning that due to resource con-
straints, sophisticated cryptographic protocols are not feasible
for IoT devices which leaves them at the mercy of capable
attackers to launch cryptographic attacks. In a nutshell, the
attack surface at application layer of the IoT infrastructure is
wide and relatively computationally expensive to mitigate.

the previous discussion. Trafﬁc analysis attacks are passive
attacks where the attackers passively listen to the trafﬁc and
try to make sense out of it. These attacks are very hard
to mitigate because the communicating parties usually have
no idea that their trafﬁc is being monitored. The attackers
look for interesting information in the internet trafﬁc such as
users’ personal information, business logic details, credentials,
and other information that is of any value to the attacker.
Besides, data transfer security is also of paramount importance
in IoT. The data produced in the IoT environment is used for
decision-making purpose; therefore, it is essential to guarantee
the quality and health of the data. The compromise in the
security of the data in IoT will have dire consequences on the
underlying applications. It is worth mentioning that SDN has
been leveraged to achieve a range of beneﬁts for IoT applica-
tions and IoT security [58]. The rich functionality provided by
SDN control plane enables organizations to efﬁciently control
millions of sensors and things in the IoT paradigm. However,
despite all the aforementioned advantages of SDN, the open
interfaces in SDN open pandora of new attacks on already
vulnerable IoT devices, infrastructure, and applications [59],
[60]. Therefore, the security of IoT is directly dependent on
the security of SDN as well.

F. Multi-Layered Attacks

In addition to the aforementioned attacks, there are multi-
layered attacks that could be launched on IoT infrastructure.
These attacks include trafﬁc analysis, side-channel attacks,
replay attacks, man-in-the-middle attacks, and protocol at-
tacks. Some of these attacks have already been discussed in

1https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Top 10-2017 Top 10

G. Security Issues in Cloud-Based IoT

Another very important enabler for IoT is the cloud comput-
ing which is leveraged for processing massive data generated
by the IoT subsystems. Security consideration in IoT is of
prime importance from cloud tenants perspective as well as
from service providers perspective [61]. It is worth mentioning
that cloud can be an essential part of the IoT infrastructure due
to several-fold reasons: handling big data, storing and process-

ing huge amount of data from IoT, and producing end-results
to the respective applications in IoT environment. Additionally,
cloud platform also provides a range of services such as device
management, resource management, data processing, analysis,
and management. The sheer scale of IoT devices pose a serious
challenge for achieving the required security and privacy goals
for IoT. Furthermore, the IoT applications are designed from
a single domain in mind and thus-forth do not encompass the
whole range of other domains that may use the data originated
from one particular IoT domain. Therefore, the number of
devices added to IoT networks and the data produced by
these devices, and then stored processed, and analyzed by the
cloud need viable, efﬁcient, and scalable security and privacy
considerations.

III. IOT SECURITY AND MACHINE LEARNING

In this section, we discuss various machine learning algo-

rithms and their applicability in IoT applications.

A. Basic Machine Learning Algorithms

The ML algorithms can be classiﬁed into four categories;
supervised, unsupervised, semi-supervised, and reinforcement
learning algorithms (Fig. 2).

Supervised Learning: Supervised learning is performed
when speciﬁc targets are deﬁned to reach from certain set
of inputs. For this type of learning, the data is ﬁrst labeled
followed by training with labeled data (having inputs and
desired outputs). It tries to identify automatically rules from
available datasets and deﬁne various classes, and ﬁnally predict
the belonging of elements (objects, individuals, and criteria)
to a given class.
Unsupervised Learning: In unsupervised learning, the envi-
ronment only provides inputs without desired targets. It does
not require labeled data and can investigate similarity among
unlabeled data and classify the data into different groups.

Supervised learning and unsupervised techniques mainly
focus on data analysis problems while reinforcement learning
is preferred for comparison and decision-making problems.
This categorization and choice of ML technique depends on
the nature of available data. When the type of input data and
the desired outputs (labels) are known, supervised learning
is used. In this situation, the system is only trained to map
inputs to the desired outputs. Classiﬁcation and regression
are the examples of supervised learning techniques where
regression works with continuous and classiﬁcation works
with discrete outputs. Various regression techniques such
as Support Vector Regression (SVR), linear regression, and
polynomial regression are commonly used techniques. On the
other hand, classiﬁcation works with discrete output values
(class labels). Common examples of classiﬁcation algorithms
include K-nearest neighbor, logistic regression, and Support
Vector Machine (SVM). Some algorithms can be used for both
classiﬁcation and regression such as neural networks. When
outputs are not well-deﬁned and the system has to discover the
structure within the raw data, unsupervised learning methods
are used to train the system. Unsupervised learning includes

8

clustering which groups objects based on established similarity
criteria such as K-means clustering. The degree of precision
of the predictive analytics depends on how well the respective
ML technique has used past data to develop models and, how
well is it able to predict the future values. Algorithms such as
SVR, neural networks, and Naive Bayes are used for predictive
modeling.
Semi-supervised Learning: In the previous two types, either
there are no labels for all the observation in the dataset or
labels are present for all the observations. Semi-supervised
learning falls in between these two. In many practical situa-
tions, the cost to label is quite high, since it requires skilled
human experts to do that. So, in the absence of labels in
the majority of the observations but present in few, semi-
supervised algorithms are the best candidates for the model
building.
Reinforcement Learning: In Reinforcement Learning (RL),
no speciﬁc outcomes are deﬁned, and the agent learns from
feedback after interacting with the environment. It performs
some actions and makes decisions on the basis of the reward
obtained. An agent can be rewarded for performing good
actions or punishment for bad actions and use feedback criteria
to maximize the long term rewards. It is greatly inspired by
learning behaviors of humans and animals. Such behaviors
make it an attractive approach in highly dynamic applications
of robotics in which the system learns to accomplish certain
is also very
tasks without explicit programming [62]. It
important to choose the suitable reward function because the
success and failure of the agent depends on the accumulated
total reward [63].

B. Deep Learning (DL) and Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL)

Deep Learning: DL is a machine learning technique origi-
nated from ANN. The neural network is comprised of neurons
(considered as variables) connected through weighted con-
nections (considered as parameters). To achieve the desired
set of outputs, supervised or unsupervised learning technique
is associated with the network. The learning is carried out
by using labeled and unlabeled data from supervised or
unsupervised learning techniques, respectively followed by
the iterative adjustment of the weights among each pair of
neurons. Therefore, while discussing about DL, we refer to
large deep neural networks where the term deep refers to the
number of layers in that network [64], [65].

DL is known for distributed computing and, learning and
analysis of sheer amount of unlabeled, un-categorized, and
unsupervised data. It develops a hierarchical model of learn-
ing and feature representation motivated by layered learning
process in the human brain [66]. DL models contribute to
various ML applications such as speech recognition, computer
vision and NLP by providing improved classiﬁcation modeling
and generating better data samples. Furthermore, these models
also beneﬁt the data compression and recovery, both in time
and spatial domains because of its effectiveness in extracting
patterns and features from large amounts of data and extract-
ing relationships within time-dependent data. The different

9

Fig. 2. Machine learning classes.

DL architectures available in literature include, Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN),
Boltzmann Machine (BM), Long-short Term Memory (LSTM)
Networks, Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN), Feed
forward Deep Networks (FDN) and Deep Belief Networks
(DBN). CNN (used in spatially distributed data) and RNN
(used in time series data) are the most widely used deep
learning architectures.

Deep Reinforcement Learning: DL is one type of ML
techniques used for function approximation, classiﬁcation, and
prediction whereas RL is another type of ML techniques used
for decision making in which a software agent learns about op-
timal actions by interacting with an environment over various
states. DL and RL come into play together in situation when
the number of states and data dimensionality are very large and
the environment is non-stationary. Therefore, traditional RL is
not efﬁcient enough. By combining DL and RL, agents can
learn by themselves and come up with a good policy to obtain
maximum long-term rewards. In this approach, RL obtains
help from DL to ﬁnd the best policy and DL performs action
values approximation in order to ﬁnd the quality of an action
in a given state. Furthermore, RL and DL beneﬁt from each
other. DL is capable of learning from complex patterns but is
prone to mis-classiﬁcation. In this situation, RL has a powerful
capability to automatically learn from environment without
any feature crafting and helps DL in efﬁcient classiﬁcation
[67]–[69]. DRL integrates RL’s decision making and DL’s
perception. This combination has been used in game playing
program “AlphaGo” developed by Google [70]. It can help
solving tasks with high dimensional and raw data with some
policy controls [71]. Most recent work in DRL can be found
in [72], [73].

C. Machine Learning Techniques Used in IoT Security

In the following, we discuss various ML algorithms focus-
ing on the underlying security and privacy problems in IoT
networks, as shown in Table III. More precisely, we consider
authentication, attack detection and mitigation, Distributed
Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks, anomaly and intrusion
detection, and malware analysis.

Supervised learning algorithms work with labelled data and
are utilized in IoT networks for spectrum sensing, channel
estimation, adaptive ﬁltering, security, and localization prob-
lems. This category holds two distinct types of techniques:
classiﬁcation and regression. Classiﬁcation under supervised
machine learning is used for predication as well as modeling
of the available data sets. Regression is used for predicting
continuous numeric variables. SVM, Naive Bayes, Random
Forest, Decision Tree are few of the widely used classiﬁcation
algorithms. SVM uses a mechanism called kernels that is used
to ﬁnd difference between two points of the two separate
classes. SVMs are able to model non-linear decision bound-
aries. However, SVM is inherently memory intensive and is
difﬁcult to decide suitable kernel, and it becomes difﬁcult to
model large datasets. Therefore, random forests are usually
preferred over SVM. While Naive Bayes (NB) is used to model
real world problems like text classiﬁcation and spam detection.
Being naive and all input features being independent of each
other makes random forest algorithms ideal for modelling
real world problems. Random forest algorithms are easier to
implement and are adaptive to the size of available data set.
These algorithms take longer time to train as compared to
other supervised algorithms such as SVM and NB. But it
achieves higher degree of accuracy and takes less time for pre-
diction. Furthermore, it is based on constructing the graph with
branches and leafs, signifying decision and class respectively.
For classiﬁcation of an event, a top-down approach is used by

10

TABLE III
MACHINE LEARNING TECHNIQUES USED IN IOT SECURITY

Machine Learning Algorithm
NaiveBayes

K-Nearest Neighbour

K-Means Algorithm

Random Forest and Decision Tree
(DT)

Support Vector Machines (SVM)

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)

Principal Component Analysis

Q-Learning

Deep Learning

Description
It is the classiﬁcation algorithm used with binary and multi-class
environment. It is named as “Naive”, as over-simpliﬁed assumptions
are made for the calculation of probabilities for speciﬁc hypothesis.
All the attributes are assumed to be conditionally independent instead
of calculating the actual values [74].
It is simple and effective supervised learning algorithm and is used
for associating new data points to the existing similar points by
searching through the available dataset. The model is trained and
grouped according to some criteria and incoming data is checked for
similarity within K neighbours [75].
The most commonly used well know technique is K-means clustering
algorithm belonging to the unsupervised category of ML family.
K-Means clustering is used to classify or group devices based on
attributes or parameters, into K number of groups, where K is a
positive integer number and its value has to be known for the algorithm
to work [76].
It is a supervised learning method. It deﬁnes a model by implementing
certain rules inferring from the data features. Afterwards, this model
is used to predict the value of new targeted variable. Decision tree is
used in classiﬁcation and as well as regression problems. Essentially,
these trees are used to split dataset into several branches based on
certain rules [77].
SVM is a supervised ML algorithm with low computational complex-
ity, used for classiﬁcation and regression. It has the ability to work with
binary as well as with multi-class environments [78], [79]. It classiﬁes
input data into n dimensional space and draws n − 1 hyperplane to
divide the entire data points into groups.
This is a supervised learning algorithm used to develop a cascaded
chain of decision units for solving the complex problems [80]. It
essentially constructs network with certain number of inputs to trigger
outputs. Various types of neural networks have been proposed in the
literature, e.g. Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs), and Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [81], [82],
[83].
It is an unsupervised ML algorithm and is multivariate technique for
data compression. It performs dimensionality reduction in large data
sets and extracts useful information in the form of set comprised
of orthogonal variables known as “principal components”. These
components are organized in an increasing order of variance where
ﬁrst component is associated with highest variance of the data and
it continues to the last. The least variance components having least
information can be discarded [84].
It is used for resource scheduling in spectrum management in addition
to security in IoT. Q-learning belongs to reinforcement learning (RL)
class of the ML. In RL, an agent learns by trial and error that how
its actions effect the environment. It estimates the reward after each
action and moves to the new state accordingly [76]. It will get reward
for good action and penalty for bad actions.
It is essentially a feed forward Neural Network (NN) in which each
neuron is connected to another layer and no connection exists within
the layer. The term deep learning refers to multiple layers holding
multiple levels of perception such that each layer receives input from
the previous layer and feeds the result to following layer [85].

traversing the tree until a decision is made for a class. Nearest
neighbors and logistic regression are to famous regression
algorithms. These algorithms are also known as “instance-
based”, that make predictions for each new observation by
searching for the most similar training data. However, these
algorithms are memory-intensive and perform poorly for high-
dimensional data.

The family of unsupervised learning algorithms deals with
unlabeled data and utilize input data in a heuristic manner.
These are used in anomaly, fault, and intrusion detection, cell
clustering, and load balancing. Clustering under unsupervised

learning category is used for data groupings based on some
inherent similarities and dissimilarities. The clustering is un-
supervised, and therefore, there are no right or wrong answers.
To evaluate the accuracy of the results, data visualization is
used. If there is a possible right or wrong answer, then the
clusters can be pre-labeled in datasets and in this scenario,
classiﬁcation algorithms are preferred. K-means and hierarchi-
cal clustering are two popular clustering algorithms. K-Means
is most popular because it is a simple and ﬂexible algorithm
that forms clusters based on geometric distances between data
points. Clusters are grouped around centroids resulting into

TABLE IV
SECURITY PROBLEMS IN IOT NETWORKS AND APPLIED MACHINE LEARNING TECHNIQUES

11

Research Objective/Problems
Authentication

Attack Detection and Mitigation

Distributed DOS Attack

Anomaly/Intrusion Detection

Malware Analysis

Machine Learning Techniques(Surveyed References)

• Deep Learning
• Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [80]
• Q-learning and Dyna-Q [86]
• Deep Neural Network (DNN) [87]

• SVM
• Deep Learning [88], [89], [90]
• Unsupervised learning, stacked autoencoders
• Extreme Learning Machine

(ELM)-based

supervised Fuzzy C-Means (ESFCM)

• K-Nearest Neighbour (NN) and SVM [91]

semi-

• K-Nearest Neighbour [75]
• Support Vector Machine [75]
• Random Forest and Decision Tree [75]
• Neural Network [75]
• Multivariate Correlation Analysis (MCA) [92]
• Q learning [93]

• K-means clustering and Decision Tree [94]
• Artiﬁcial Neural Network ANN [95]
• Novelty and Outlier Detection [96]
• Decision Tree [97]
• Naive Bayes [97], [98]

• Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) [81]
• ensemble learning algorithm Random Forest supervised

classiﬁer [77]

• Deep Eigensapce Learning and Deep Convolutional

Networks [85]

• SVM [78]
• PCA, one-class SVM, and naive anomaly detector

based on unseen n-grams [84]

• CNN [83]
• Artiﬁcial Neural Network [82]
• Linear SVM [79]
• SVM and PCA [99], [100]

globular with the same size. However, the of clusters has to be
speciﬁed before clustering starts and it is not always possible
and efﬁcient to do. Also, if clusters are not globular, it results
into poor cluster formation. Most of the IoT applications, falls
under the unsupervised learning approaches with very less
initial information about the environment, similar to natural
learning processes of the living species. For instance, the zero-
day attacks on IoT networks have little or no information to
start with.

RL techniques learn by exploiting various stages and de-
velop the reward and action relationship between agent and the
environment. This relationship of action reward is very useful
in solving various IoT problems [101]. It does not require
extensive training data set; however, the agent is required to
have the knowledge of the state transition function. It is com-
putationally simple but requires signiﬁcant time to converge
to a steady state. This slow convergence and knowledge of
the state transition function or optimal policy are the key
challenges in using RL algorithms in dynamic environments

of IoT networks.

DL relies on strong function approximation, estimation and
the learning capabilities thus providing more efﬁcient solutions
in various problem areas of IoT domain and security/privacy
is no exception. IoT devices due to their resource constraints
may not be able to host or run complex computational algo-
rithms for any type of task such as communication, analytic
and prediction. Therefore, DL-based algorithms show better
performance with lower latency and complexity compared
to conventional theories and techniques [66]. Additionally,
DNNs are good in locating and deﬁning low dimensional
representations from any type (text, image, audio) of high
dimensional data patterns. DRL and its variants are used
for authentication and DDoS detection in heterogeneous IoT
networks. The major DRL algorithms used for security and
privacy are; deep deterministic policy gradient, continuous
DQN, prioritized experience replay, asynchronous N -step Q-
learning, deep SARSA, Dueling network DQN, and asyn-
chronous advantage actorcritic.

Table IV lists different security challenges along with uti-

lized ML and DL techniques.

D. Limitations in Applying Machine Learning in IoT Networks

IoT trafﬁc is usually characterized by its sheer volume, di-
versity, variable speed, and uncertainty. Most of the traditional
ML techniques are not inherently efﬁcient and scalable enough
to manage IoT data and thus need considerable modiﬁcations
[22]. Moreover, inherent uncertainties exist in IoT data and
is difﬁcult to expunge these intrinsic unpredictability. In the
following, we discuss some of the common limitations of using
ML techniques in IoT networks.

1) Processing power and energy: Machine learning algo-
rithms inherently possess some complexity issues such as
memory, computational, and sample complexity. Also, con-
ventional ML approaches lack scalability and are only limited
to low-dimensional problems. IoT devices are small and typ-
ically have energy constraints with limited processing power.
Therefore, direct application of conventional ML techniques
is not suitable in resource-constrained environments. On the
other hand, smart IoT devices require real-time data processing
for real time applications, while traditional ML techniques are
not designed to handle constant streams of data in a real-time.
In the wake of such limitations, it is imperative to merge the
existing streaming solutions with ML algorithms; however, it
will increase the overall complexity of an algorithm.

In addition to this, ML-based networks are developed as-
suming that the entire data set is available for processing
during training phase. However, this is not true for the IoT
data. This phenomenon gives rise to various challenges when
traditional techniques have to handle an unprecedented volume
of data. Also, predictive ability of an algorithm decreases
with the increase in the dimensionality of data [102]. The
preceding discussion is, at par, applicable for the security-
related functions in the IoT where real-time data is processed
for possible attack vectors such as intrusion and so on.

2) Data management and analytics: Wireless data can
be generated from different sources including networked in-
formation systems, and sensing and communication devices
[103]. Data is the crown-jewel for IoT systems where efﬁcient
analysis must be performed to obtain meaningful information
from the data; however, massive data management is a serious
challenge in IoT from every application standpoint. The data
generated in IoT networks is diverse in nature with differ-
ent types, formats and semantics, thus exhibiting syntactic
and semantic heterogeneity. Syntactic heterogeneity refers to
diversity in the data types, ﬁle formats, encoding schemes,
and data models. While semantic heterogeneity refers to
differences in the meanings and interpretations of the data.
Such heterogeneity leads to problems in terms of efﬁcient
and uniﬁed generalization, speciﬁcally in case of big data and
various datasets with different attributes.

Machine learning assumes that

the statistical properties
across the entire dataset remain the same, and requires pre-
processing and cleaning of the data before ﬁtting within a
speciﬁc model. However, that is not the case in real-world
where data from various sources have different formatting and
representations. Furthermore, there might also be differences

12

among different parts of the same dataset. This situation
causes difﬁculties for machine learning algorithms because
the algorithms are usually not designed to handle semantically
and syntactically diverse data. This phenomenon advocates for
efﬁcient solutions to the heterogeneity problem.

IV. SURVEY OF EXISTING MACHINE LEARNING-BASED
SOLUTIONS FOR IOT SECURITY

In this section, we survey the existing ML-based solutions

addressing different security issues in IoT.

A. Authentication and Access Control in IoT

Authentication is one of the primary security requirements
in IoT. The users must be authenticated in order to use IoT
applications and/or services. Typically, IoT applications and
services are based on data exchange across different platforms.
The data retrieved from the IoT devices is pre-processed,
processed, and then passed through a decision-support system
to make sense out of it. These processes may vary depending
upon the underlying IoT architecture; however, data ﬂow may
be identical in these systems. Without loss of generality, when
an application and/or a user needs some data from an IoT
device, the entity (user or application) must be authenticated
to IoT network and it should be made sure that the requester
has required access rights for the data. Otherwise, the request
to access such data will be denied. Like other networks, access
importance in IoT networks
control
and equally challenging due to, but not limited to, network
heterogeneity, volume of network, resource constraints of the
devices, network (in)security, and attacks vulnerabilities, to
name a few. Furthermore, it is also important to grant and
revoke the access of certain users to the critical data of IoT
applications and services. Before, we discuss ML-based access
control mechanisms in IoT, it is important to put light on
different categories of access control.

is also of paramount

Taylor et al. divided the access control mechanisms in IoT
into three categories, Role Based Access Control (RBAC),
Context Aware Access Control (CWAC) and Policy Based Ac-
cess Control (PBAC) [104]. Whereas Ouaddah et al. extended
this classiﬁcation into more categories that include Attribute-
based Access Control (ABAC), Usage Control-based Access
Control (UCAC), Capability-based Access Control (CAC), and
Organizational-based Access Control (OAC) [105]. Most of
the existing work fall under one of these categories. Ouaddah
et al. conducted a comprehensive survey on the currently used
access control mechanisms in IoT and identiﬁed challenges
faced by access control in IoT [105]. The authors discuss the
existing mechanisms based on the underlying IoT applications.
IoT applications can broadly be divided into two major classes,
personal and enterprise. Personal applications include smart
homes, health-care, smart ofﬁce, body area networks, sensors
networks, whereas enterprise applications include smart cities,
smart
infrastructure, and so on. Access
control mechanism can be used both at application layer
and at the architecture layer. At the architecture layer, the
service providers have variety of choices such as deﬁning an
access control markup language such as Extensible Access

industries, critical

Control Markup Language (XACML) [106], [107], Open Au-
thorization (OAuth) [108], and User-Managed Access (UMA)
[109]. These architectural level access control mechanisms are
already being used by many existing protocols of IoT, for in-
stance OAuth is implemented over existing IoT protocols such
as MQTT2 and Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)3.
Furthermore, services providers such as Google, Facebook,
and Microsoft, Instagram, Flikr, Netﬂix, and many more, have
billions of user accounts that use OAuth. Next, we discuss the
existing ML- and DL-based authentication and access control
mechanisms in IoT networks.

1) ML-based authentication and access control in IoT:

Xiao et al. [86] proposed a physical
layer authentication
mechanism for IoT. The proposed authentication mechanism
uses physical channel properties such as signal strength. In
essence, Xiao et al. used two revolutionary methods for
physical layer authentication, game theoretic approach and
machine learning technique, to isolate spoofers from benign
IoT users. The authentication mechanism is formulated as
a zero-sum game where the spooﬁng nodes try to increase
their utility through maximizing the attack frequency. Whereas
the channel frequency responses are used to establish Nash
Equilibrium (NE). It is worth mentioning that the packets re-
ceived through radio interface have certain channel state which
could be leveraged to test for a particular threshold based on
which authentication decision is taken. For this purpose the
authors used reinforcement learning (Q learning) and Dyna-
Q which helps in understanding the channel state without
having detailed information about the channel. The authors
through experiments concluded that the detection accuracy and
performance of Dyna-Q is better than Q-learning technique.
Another similar physical-layer authentication scheme based on
distributed Frank-Wolf (dFW) algorithm is proposed in [110].
2) DL-based authentication and access control in IoT: Shi
et al. [87] proposed a user authentication technique for IoT
based on human physiological activities through WiFi signals.
The proposed authentication scheme is based on both activity
recognition and human identiﬁcation. Activity recognition can
be performed with coarse-grained data and a smaller number
of features. For this purpose, the channel state information
in WiFi signals generated by IoT devices is used to derive
characteristics of different features of the activities. Shi et al.
use 3 layer Deep Neural Network (DNN) to learn the human
physiological and behavioral characteristics that are used in
authentication. In the three layers, the DNN extracts the type
of activity (whether walking or stationary), then at the second
layer, details of the activity are learnt, and at the third layer,
high-level features based on which, the user is authenticated.

B. Attack Detection and Mitigation

In the preceding subsections, we described in detail, differ-
ent attacks launched on IoT at different layers. The hetero-
geneity and scarcity of resources in IoT devices make them a
perfect playground for attackers. Usually attackers exploit the
known vulnerabilities in both networks and in the device and

2http://mqtt.org/
3http://coap.technology/

13

launch different kinds of attacks. It is worth mentioning that
these attacks vary from a low-proﬁle hacking into a device for
fun to a massive scale ransomware attacks such as WanaCry
and even more sophisticated attacks such as Mirai and Dyn.
The traditional attack detection and mitigation mechanisms
are based on cryptographic primitives and sometimes suffer
from lack in accuracy and cause false positives. Therefore,
ML-based techniques such as SVM, DL, autoencoders, K-
NN, unsupervised learning, and so on. Here we brieﬂy discuss
the ML-based methods leveraged for attack detection and
mitigation in IoT networks. In the following we investigate
the existing ML-and DL-based techniques

1) ML-based attack detection and mitigation in IoT:
Rathore et al. [90] proposed a semi-supervised learning-based
attack detection mechanism for IoT. In essence, the proposed
scheme is based on Extreme Learning Machine (ELM) algo-
rithm and leverages Fuzzy C-Means (FCM) methods, collec-
tively referred to as ESFCM. ESFCM is also implemented in
fog infrastructure. One distinct feature of ESFCM is that it
deals with labeled data, therefore it increases the detection
rate of distributed attacks. However the detection accuracy of
ESFCM is less than the previous two DL-based mechanisms
but it outperforms the traditional ML algorithms for attack de-
tection. Nevertheless, the semi-supervised learning mechanism
harnesses the features of both supervised and unsupervised
learning and makes it more efﬁcient than its counterparts.

As aforementioned, IoT has many breeds ranging from
personal networks (body area network) to more sophisticated
critical
industry infrastructure such as smart grid. Attack
detection is important at par in these infrastructures. For
instance in smart grid, the measurements are critical and must
be genuinely retrieved and not tampered with as a result of
an attack. In this direction, Ozay et al. [91] studied in detail,
different ML algorithms for attack detection in smart grid.
The authors particularly investigated the role of supervised
learning, semi-supervised learning, feature space fusion, and
online learning algorithms for attack detection. The authors
divided the networks into small and large networks and
found out through experiments that in small networks, k-NN
performs better whereas in large networks, SVM performs
better in terms of the attack detection accuracy.

2) DL-based attack detection and mitigation in IoT: Diro
et al. [88] proposed a DL-based attack detection mechanism
in IoT by leveraging fog ecosystem. In essence, the attack
detection mechanism is implemented at the edge near the
smart infrastructure. The distributed attack detection mecha-
nism takes into account different parameters from the learning
mechanism and decides upon the output of the learning
architecture on a given data. The rationale for using fog
infrastructure is the resource constraints and the application
nature of IoT. In case of critical infrastructure the learning
mechanism must be as near as possible to the data-generating
nodes in order to take timely and informed decision in case
of potential attacks. Similarly Abeshu et al. [89] proposed
a distributed DL-based attack detection mechanism in IoT.
They used fog computing architecture (which is one of the
favored architecture to realize IoT applications) to implement
DL techniques for attack detection. The proposed technique

focused on fog-to-thing communication where the learning
module is implement at the fog layer which is the optimal
point for detection mechanism because it both reduces the
latency for communication and utilizes the resources.

C. DoS and Distributed DoS (DDoS) Attacks

DoS and DDoS attacks are two of the most notorious
attacks and hard to mitigate in IoT environment. There are
several-fold reasons that make it hard to provide effective
solutions against such attacks. These reasons include the sheer
number of connected IoT devices to the Internet, heterogene-
ity, poor security mechanisms due to resource constraints
of the IoT devices, cross-platform communications, massive
scale communication, and so on. These phenomena bring the
vulnerabilities of IoT devices against DDoS attacks to the
fore. Such attacks must be prevented to guarantee the smooth
functionalities of IoT applications. In this regard, Vlajic et al.
[111] referred to the IoT as the ”Land of opportunities for
DDoS attackers”.

The year 2016 witnessed an unprecedented growth in attacks
against IoT infrastructure with a massive scale. Mirai4 was
one of these attacks that almost brought down the Internet
where household devices such as babycams, printers, and
webcams etc. were used as bots to launch DDoS attacks on
many organizations. Similarly, other Mirai-like bots have been
reported in [112]. Since its inception in 2016, the Mirai is a
family of malware that caused serious disruptions in Internet
services due to its sophisticated spreading mechanism in the
IoT network. A detailed surgery of Mirai malware can also be
found in [113]. The fact that IoT devices are not only hacked
but used as frontline tools to launch notorious attacks against
large organizations, advocates for serious intelligent security
measures that will secure these devices. To date, noteworthy
research results have been yielded through different mecha-
nisms to mitigate DDoS attacks in IoT; however, different
architectures make it really hard to devise a uniﬁed mechanism
to combat DDoS attacks in different IoT platforms [114].

Traditional DDoS detection and mitigation mechanisms in
IoT networks are applied at the gateways, routers, and the entry
points for IoT networks with the help of both intrusion detec-
tion and prevention mechanisms. As mentioned before, MQTT
and CoAP are two of the most widely used telemetry protocols
in IoT. Pacheco et al. [115] evaluated the effect of DDoS attack
on generic IoT network that uses CoAP. This work used only
reﬂection attack [116] to assess the withstanding capabilities
of IoT network. In addition to detection and mitigating DDoS
attacks in IoT from inside, other enabling technologies such
as fog and cloud computing have also been used to aid the
DDoS detection mechanism in IoT. For instance, Alharbi et
al. [117] used fog computing based approach to secure IoT
communications and mitigate malicious attacks.

Among other ﬂavors of IoT networks, industrial and crit-
ical
infrastructure-aided IoT networks must exhibit strong
resilience to DDoS attacks. Similarly, a fog and cloud

4https://www.csoonline.com/article/3258748/security/

the-mirai-botnet-explained-how-teen-scammers-and-cctv-cameras-almost-\
brought-down-the-internet.html

14

computing-based DDoS mitigation framework is proposed in
[118]. In this multi-level DDoS detection framework, tradi-
tional mechanisms are used at multiple layers of industrial IoT
infrastructure. The lowest level uses edge computing with SDN
gatweways, and then network trafﬁc data is gathered at the
fog computing level which consists of SDN controllers, and
analyze the data for possible DDoS. Furthermore, honeypots
are also utilized at this level. Finally at the cloud computing
level, applications-generated data is analyzed at
the cloud
platform to detect any threat of potential DDoS attack.

From the preceding discussion, it is clear that there is no
silver bullet that could solve the DDoS problem in resource-
constrained networks and it is also clear from literature that
more intelligent mechanism is essential to detect and mitigate
DDoS. Furthermore, false positives are still not out of question
in such cases and benign requests might be blocked. Therefore,
the resource-constrained and poor security-enabled devices in
IoT networks provide alluring playground for the malicious
attackers. Despite the recent advancements in mitigating such
types of attacks, it is still essential to work on intelligent
mechanisms that not only take into account the amount of
trafﬁc, but also the behavior of the attackers. In this context,
machine learning is the most suitable candidate to be leveraged
for DDoS detection in IoT networks. To mitigate DDoS attacks
in IoT networks, a number of ML and DL techniquest have
been leveraged by the research community.

1) ML-based techniques to address DoS and DDoS attacks
in IoT: Doshi et al. carried out a detailed comparison of the
existing ML mechanisms for DDoS detection in IoT networks
[75]. They leveraged the distinctive features of the IoT trafﬁc
where IoT devices usually engage in a ﬁnite communication
with end-points rather than back-end servers. Doshi et al. com-
pared K-nearest neighbors, decision trees, neural networks,
random forest, and SVM to detect DDoS in IoT. Similarly, Ye
et al. [119] proposed SVM-based DDoS detection mechanism
in SDN environment which complements the IoT applications.
Another such SVM-based DDoS detection in SDN is proposed
by Kolika et al. [120] with almost same accuracy as that of
Ye et al.’s scheme [119]. Kolika et al. also compared other
techniques such as Naive Bayes, Random Forest, Bagging,
and Radial Basis Function (RBF).

Besides SVM, other ML techniques have also been used
for DDoS detection. For instance, Tan et al. [92] leveraged
Multivariate Correlation Analysis (MCA) for DDoS detection.
MCA-based DDoS detection mechanism focuses on the server
side and in the context of the IoT, this mechanism will detect
DDoS attack as a result of data ﬂow between the back-end
servers for data gathering, processing, and decision-making. In
essence, MCA techniques is based on behavioral analysis of
the trafﬁc where normal behavior is isolated from abnormal.
Features are generated from network trafﬁc and then MCA
is applied on those features. MCA determines and extract
the correlation between the features obtained from the ﬁrst
step. Ideally, the intrusions cause disruption in the correlation
among features which could be an indication for possible intru-
sive activity. Finally, any known anomaly detection technique
is used for decision making.

A Signal-to-Interference-plus-Noise-Ratio (SINR)-based

DoS attack detection mechanism for Cyber-Physical System
(CPS) is proposed by Li et al. [93]. The authors have for-
mulated the DoS attack as a game between the sensor and
attacker with multiple energy levels. Furthermore, in this work,
the authors focus on the transmission power consumption
for the sensor and the interference power consumption for
the attacker. To establish a balanced equilibrium between
the players of the game, the authors use Nash Q-learning
algorithm.

2) DL-based Techniques to Address DoS and DDoS Attacks
in IoT: Hodo et al. [121] used supervised Artiﬁcial Neural
Networks (ANNs) technique to thwart DDoS in IoT. Similarly,
Kulkarni et al. [122] used Multi-Layer Perception (MLP)
mechanism to detect DoS attack in sensor networks which
is mainly used in IoT.

D. Anomaly/Intrusion Detection

Here we outline brieﬂy,

the existing technique to both
detect and mitigate intrusion in IoT. We brieﬂy outline the
common techniques for intrusion detection and focus in detail
on the ML-based intrusion detection mechanisms in IoT. To
date, a number of ML-based techniques have been used to
detect anomalies and intrusions in the IoT networks and their
different breeds [123], [124]. Trafﬁc ﬁltering is one of the
most widely used mechanism for intrusion detection where
per packet analysis or batch analysis is performed to isolate
legitimate packets from the malicious ones. However, despite
the effectiveness of trafﬁc classiﬁcation, the higher number
of false positives produced as a result of such classiﬁcation,
render this method to be less reliable. On the other hand,
behavior-based models are also used to detect intrusion in the
network. In the context of IoT, both trafﬁc classiﬁcation, and
behavior-based models are used. Meng et al. [125] discussed a
trust-based approach for intrusion detection in IoT networks.
Unlike the traditional mechanisms, trust-based approach takes
into account the level of conﬁdence in a device in combination
with the type and class of trafﬁc. The authors proposed the
combination of trust management and trafﬁc classiﬁcation to
detect intrusion in the IoT networks.

However, it is important to note that traditional signature-
based and behavior-based schemes fail
to detect zero-day
intrusions. Therefore, artiﬁcial intelligence and its breeds are
employed in intrusion detection system (IDS). Li et al. [126]
proposed an Artiﬁcial Intelligence- (AI) based mechanism
for intrusion detection in SDN-driven IoT. This scheme is
based on network trafﬁc ﬂow where the intrusion detection
component of the network captures the ﬂow and applies two
algorithms for features extraction, i.e. Bat algorithm (with
swarm division) and differential mutation. Afterwards random
forest technique is used to classify the trafﬁc ﬂow to identify
potential intrusion to the system. The aim is to improve the
detection accuracy and reduce the false positives. Intrusion
types of
may occur in the IoT network through different
attacks, the likes of which can be found in the normal networks
such as spooﬁng, masquerading, distributed denial of service,
hijacking control, and so forth [127].

In essence, IoT is the mixture of existing networking
technologies that have paved their way into integration with

15

our daily lives such that sensor networks, bluetooth, RFID,
WiFi, and so on. Therefore, the security mechanisms, access
control, and protection techniques are not homogeneous across
different platform. In this context,
the intrusion detection
techniques need special attention depending on the underlying
technologies. To address the issue of intrusion detection in
different technologies, Gendreau et al. [128] conducted a sur-
vey of intrusion detection techniques in different networking
paradigms. Similarly,
the authors focused
in [129], [130],
on IDS in wireless sensors networks. As discussed earlier,
a number of intrusion detection techniques are proposed in
the literature to detect and/or mitigate network intrusion in
IoT. Colom et al. [131] proposed a distributed framework for
intrusion detection in IoT based on task distribution among
different nodes depending on the security requirements and
the state of available resources. A controller component in the
proposed framework administers the intrusion detection in an
attack scenario.

Finally, an architecture-focused survey on IDS in IoT is
carried out by Benkhelifa et al. [132]. This survey highlights
the existing protocols, detection methods, and points out the
future research challenges in this direction. Intrusion detection
in IoT is very hard to mitigate due to the inherent nature
of the IoT and the fact that most of the intrusion detection
methods are behavior-based, makes perfect sense to focus on
the evolutionary methods of intrusion detection. In this spirit,
ML and DL methods are employed for this purpose.

1) ML-based IDS in IoT: Shukla et al. [94] proposed ML-
based lightweight IDS for low-power IoT networks running
6LoWPAN. They used the IDS mechanism to detect wormhole
attacks in IoT networks. The proposed IDS mechanism uses
three ML techniques, i.e. K-means clustering (unsupervised
learning), decision tree (supervised learning), and a hybrid
technique combining the aforementioned techniques. On the
other hand, Canedo et al. [95] leveraged two ML techniques
to detect intrusions at the IoT gateways. The authors used
ANN and genetic algorithms for IoT security.

Other ML techniques used for intrusion and anomaly de-
tection include outlier detection, naive Bayes, RNN, decision
tree, and DL. In [96], used outlier detection mechanism to
deal with the unhealthy data in IoT networks. Traditional out-
lier detection methods include regression analysis, statistical
methods that are known to require sheer amount of data to
draw conclusions about the outliers in the data. Nesa et al. [96]
used non-parametric approach that is suitable for IoT because
it does not require large storage to store the incoming data. The
authors leverage sequence-based supervised learning which
is based on Inﬂuential Relative Grade (IRG) and Relative
Mass Function (RMF) which efﬁciently detects the outliers.
Viegas et al. [97] aim at energy-efﬁcient and hardware-friendly
implementation of the intrusion detection systems in IoT. The
authors leveraged 3 classiﬁers, Decision Tree (DT), Naive
Bayes (NB), and Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) during
their experimentation for intrusion detection. In this work, the
authors ﬁrst analyzed the effect of single classiﬁer among the
afore-mentioned classiﬁers and then used the combination of
these classiﬁers to see the effect on the detection. Similarly,
Sedjelmaci et al. [133] also focused on the balance between

energy consumption and intrusion detection in IoT networks.
The authors used game theoretic approach for the detection of
new types of intrusion in IoT networks.

2) DL-based IDS in IoT: Deep learning is also leveraged for
IDS in heterogeneous IoT networks. For instance, Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN) is used by Kim et al. [134] to
train the IDS model which is based on Long Short Term
Memory (LSTM) architecture. Similarly, Saeed et al. [135]
used Random Neural Networks (RaNN) for the realization of
efﬁcient and fast anomaly-based intrusion detection in low-
power IoT networks. The authors proposed a two-layer model
where at the ﬁrst layer, normal behavior is learnt by the system
and at the second layer, different kinds of Illegal Memory
Access (IMA) bugs and data integrity attacks on the network
are detected. The proposed solution is centralized where the
results are sent to a central server.

E. Malware Analysis in IoT

The surge in the number and heterogeneity of IoT devices
provide a perfect and lucrative playground for cyber-attackers.
One of the most notorious attack domains is malicious code
injection and execution in IoT devices by exploiting the
existing vulnerabilities in IoT devices. The vulnerabilities
that could be used for malware injection could be related to
application security, authentication, and authorization. Apart
from these methods, tampering the IoT devices physically
for software modiﬁcation and misconﬁguration of security
parameters could also enable attackers for the injection of
malicious code. Before diving into the details of the malware,
it is important to understand the types of the malware that
endanger the IoT security. A malware is a threat that persists
as a result of the aforementioned vulnerabilities and executed
through a number of attacks. The common types of malware
include, but not limited to, bot, spyware, ransomware, adware,
trojan, and virus, to name a few. In this section, ﬁrst we
summarize the classiﬁcation of malware that affect the IoT
devices and then discuss the existing solutions including ML-
based techniques that can keep IoT devices safe.

It has been found out through many exploratory studies that
there are enormous smart devices that are connected to internet
without any proper security protection that do not only pose
threats to the device itself, but also enable the attackers to
tap resources for the attacks at massive scale such as DDoS.
For instance Moos et al. [136] tested his music device for
vulnerability and exploited it to launch malicious-code attack
which was very successful. Another project namely Insecam5
lists the webcams that are potentially vulnerable to attacks
and connected to Internet. These web-based cameras cover
residential, public places, ofﬁces, and restaurants and can
be used by attackers for malicious purposes. The types of
Malware that have been successful in disrupting the normal
functionality of the organization, application, or target entities
include, but not limited to, NotPetya, Stuxnet, Cryptlocker,
Red October, Night Dragon, and so on.

Makhdoom et al. [137] provided a detailed taxonomy and
working principles of these malwares. These are the generic

16

malware attacks whereas there are optimized families of
malware attacks that particularly target the IoT devices. Such
attacks include WanaCry, Cryptlocker, Mirai, Stuxnet, and
so on. These are the malware attacks that have costed the
industry staggering amount of money and other loss such as
public image of the company. The details of these attacks are
out of the scope of this paper. However it is important to
know the generalized approach of attackers to launch attack
through malware [137]. First of all, the attackers gather knowl-
edge about the potential target, for instance sensor networks,
through reconnaissance. There are many methods to carry out
reconnaissance, for instance tools such as Nmap, Metasploit,
and Wireshark as well as social engineering. Some of the
existing tools provide meta information about the exploits
which is makes it even easier for the attackers.

The ﬁrst step gives a clear idea to the attackers as to what
kind of vulnerability to use against a speciﬁc class of devices.
To date, standard application security assessment methods
such as Open Web-Application Security Project (OWASP)6
provides the major sources of vulnerabilities among which
the attacker can choose appropriate vulnerability. In principle,
OWASP provides the sources of exploitations that could be
used by the attackers such as SQL injection, security miscon-
ﬁgurations, broken authentication, Cross-Site Scripting (XSS),
and so on. Furthermore, depending on the type of the device
and the exploit, the attackers can send the payload to the target
through several means such as phishing, updates, rootkit, and
so on. The malware families vary from a simple single-task
malware to a more complex, intelligent, dormant and multi-
purpose evolving malware. Today’s intelligent malwares are
also adaptive according to the IoT environment where they can
assess the network, and adapt its execution according to the
underlying network. For instance, some malwares can evade
the detection mechanism and stay dormant for sometime and
do not execute the malicious code until it is safe for them not to
compromise their intent. In this regard, there are a number of
countermeasure techniques for malware to evade the detection
mechanisms [138]–[140].

1) Malware evasion techniques: You et al. [138] outlined
different approaches for malwares to evade the detection tech-
niques. Encrypted malwares refer to an encrypted malicious
code with respective decryptor to bypass the signature-based
antivirus. However, since the decryptor remains the same for
different versions of the same malware, therefore it can still
be detected. To overcome this problem, the decryptor can be
mutated and thus bypasses the detection mechanism. This type
of malware is referred to as oligomorphic malware. Similarly,
polymorphic malware generates countless decryptor which
makes it even harder for detection engines to detect malware.
Finally, metamorphic malware is the most sophisticated among
the malware groups where it evolves to a new generation
where it is different from the previous one and very hard to be
detected. You et al. [138] discussed the obfuscation techniques
for polymorphic and metamorphic malwares that include dead-
code insertion, register reassignment, instruction substitution,
subroutine recording, and code integration. Furthermore, Rudd

5www.insecam.org

6https://www.owasp.org/

et al. [139] outlined in detail, the stealth malware and its
mitigation techniques. To date, a number of malware detection
techniques have been proposed in the literature for different
breeds of the IoT networks.

However,

the traditional malware detection techniques
might not be effective against sophisticated malwares; there-
fore, behavior-based intelligent malware analysis techniques
are essential for IoT networks. In this context, ML and DL-
based malware analysis techniques have been developed in the
literature. Here we discuss these techniques in detail. ML and
DL techniques such as RNN, random forest, Deep Eigenspace
Learning (DEL), SVM, PCA, CNN, and ANN have been
leveraged for malware analysis in IoT.

2) ML-based malware analysis in IoT: Alam et al. [77]
used ensemble supervised learning technique with random
forest classiﬁer to detect android-based malware. The classiﬁer
is checked for the detection accuracy of the malware samples
in android applications. In [78], Zhou et al. investigated the
malware detection and propagation in IoT-based Wireless
Multimedia System (WMS). The authors proposed a cloud-
based approach where SVM is leveraged to detect the po-
tential malwares and their propagation, and used state-based
differential game to suppress the malwares. After achieving
the Nash Equilibrium, the authors try to ﬁnd optimal strategies
for WMS to defend against malwares. Similarly, Ham et al.
[79] proposed a linear SVM-based technique for malware
classiﬁcation in android-based IoT. The authors also compared
the results with other classiﬁers. Although SVM incurs more
classiﬁcation time due to the removal of unnecessary features;
however, it is favorable due to its less complexity and better
accuracy. To assess the detection accuracy of the detection
model, the authors considered different types of malwares and
their features.

An et al. [84] proposed ML-based malware detection tech-
niques to secure home routers again DDoS attacks. They used
PCA, one-class SVM and an anomaly detector based on n-
grams. Home routers in a smart home scenario are the luring
targets for malware-based attacks where known vulnerabilities
will provide a perfect playground for the attackers. The
authors focused on anomaly detection through semi-supervised
approaches and the experimental results reported in the paper
demonstrate that these classiﬁers achieve higher detection rate
and accuracy.

Similarly, Esmalifalak et al. [100] use SVM and PCA to
detect false data injection and stealthy attacks in smart grid.
The application of this technique could be easily incorporated
into IoT. The authors used two methods, in the ﬁrst method,
SVM is leveraged where labeled data is used for supervised
learning for training the SVM whereas in the second methods
no training is used. Additionally the authors also used unsu-
pervised learning. These ML techniques are used to isolate the
tampered data from the normal data and thus-forth detecting
the attacks.

3) DL-based malware analysis in IoT: Pajouh et al. [81]
proposed an RNN-based DL approach for malware analysis
technique in IoT. The authors considered Advanced RISC
Machines (ARM)-based applications in IoT. The authors train
their models with different existing malware datasets and

17

then test their framework with the new malware. Similarly,
in another work, Azmoodeh et al. [85] aimed at a breed of
IoT known as Internet of Battleﬁeld Things (IoBT) and used
DL technique to analyze the Operational Code (OpCode) se-
quence of the devices. The authors leveraged deep eigenspace
learning and deep convolutional networks techniques to clas-
sify the malware in ARM-compatible IoT applications. In
their analysis, the authors used Class-Wise Information Gain
technique for features selection where both benignware and
malware samples were selected for training. The authors used
the OpCode sequences of the selected applications for the
classiﬁcation.

Karbab et al. [82] proposed MalDozer, a DL-based malware
analysis tool for android application framework. The detection
framework is based on ANN and tested with both benign
and malware applications in the android platform. In essence,
MalDozer is based on sequences such as API method calls
in android, resource permissions, raw method calls, and so
on. Furthermore, the proposed technique also automatically
engineers features during the training. On the other hand,
Su et al. [83] proposed an image recognition-based DDoS
malware detection mechanism in IoT networks. In this so-
lution, the authors ﬁrst collect and classify two major families
of malware, i.e. Mirai and Linux.Gafgyt and then convert
the program binaries of the IoT applications to grey-scale
images. After that a small-scale CNN is applied to classify
the images to goodware and malware. Meidan et al. [141]
used deep autoencoders to detect Botnet attacks in IoT. In
this solutions, the authors extract the network behavior and
then use deep autoencoders to isolate the anomalous network
behavior. The preceding discussion on machine and deep
learning approaches for malware detection in IoT networks
show that these approaches both require large amount of data
for training and extensive training to detect new unknown
malware.

F. Lessons Learned

Increasing interest in the interdisciplinary research has led
to the increased use of ML analytics and related tools. Various
ML techniques such as DL, RL and NN are being used
to make IoT devices smart and intelligent. Decrease in the
computational costs, improved computing power, availability
of unlimited solid-state storage and integration of various
technological breakthroughs have made this possible.

ML is used to create models, that are used to design, test,
and train the data sets. These ML algorithms are used to
detect possible patterns and similarities in large data sets and
can make predictions in new upcoming data. However, the
fundamental limitation of ML approaches is that, it mostly
needs dataset to learn from, and then the learned model is
applied to the real data. This phenomena may not encompass
the whole range of features and properties of the data. In
this regard, DL techniques have been employed to address
the limitations of the ML techniques.

Few consumer related examples, starting from Apple’s Siri,
Microsoft’s Cortana, Amazon’s Alexa to Google Photos and
from Spotify to Grammarly, are all driven by DL algorithms.

Similarly, DL is also used in industrial domains such as ﬁnan-
cial industry for predicting stock price, health-care industry for
re-purposing tested drugs for diseases, and for governmental
institutions to get real-time predictions in food predication and
energy infrastructure.

DL, RL, and DRL algorithms are some of the promising
research areas leveraged for automated extraction of complex
features from large amounts of high dimensional unsupervised
data. Despite the fact that recent research in this domain has
shown good performance, concrete theoretical and analytic
foundations are still missing. The combined computational
capabilities of RL and DL incur computational and storage
overhead. Therefore, despite of their performance, these meth-
ods may not be well-suited for the resource-constrained IoT
devices and for the moderate size datasets.

Although ML and DL are considered to be efﬁcient tech-
niques for classiﬁcation and predictions in several tasks, these
are not the silver bullets that will cater all the challenges faced
by the IoT networks. Furthermore, despite the fact that ML
and DL are the latest technological and computational trends,
they exhibit distinct limitations and challenges that need to be
addressed before its widespread adaptation in IoT networks.
Also, like other ML techniques, DL is susceptible to mis- and
over-classiﬁcation. Additionally, RL suffers from instability
and divergence when all possible action-reward pairs are not
used in a given scenario [67].

V. FUTURE RESEARCH CHALLENGES

In this section, we discuss the challenges faced by and
future research opportunities in ML and DL techniques for
the security of IoT networks.

A. Challenges and Limitations of DL and DRL

1) DL – one size does not ﬁt all: DL techniques are very
much application-speciﬁc where a model trained for solving
one problem might not be able to perform well for another
problem in the similar domain. The models usually need to
be retrained with respective data to be used for other similar
problems. This phenomenon might not be a problem for some
static networks; however, for the real-time IoT applications,
such models will be difﬁcult to use. We believe that more
insights are needed for DL techniques to be optimized and
used for particular IoT applications.

2) Neural networks are black boxes: Deep neural networks
act like a Blackbox, as we do not know how does any DL
model reach a conclusion by manipulating parameters and
input data. Just like human brain, it is impossible to ﬁnd
how the brain works and the obtained solution is the result
of embedded neurons at
intricately interconnected layers.
Similarly in DNN, it is impossible to see how complex is
the process of decision-making from one layer is transported
to the next. Therefore, it is hard to predict the exact layer for
the possible failure and hence becomes unsuitable for those
applications in which veriﬁcation is important. For instance,
if DNNs are used in disease prediction and diagnosis for
a patient, solid reasoning for his prediction is required to
assure the accuracy of diagnosis. Similarly, attack detection

18

and intrusion detection, for instance, follow the same pattern
and the shortcomings of deep networks must be addressed.

3) Longer convergence time: Bootstrapping is one of the
major challenges faced during RL convergence phase. Most
of the RL algorithms becomes NP-hard as it takes longer to
converge. This convergence problem becomes very dangerous
in some situation (e.g. autonomous driving), thus making it
unsuitable for real time applications. Furthermore, in case of
safety-critical systems, time is essence, and the system cannot
accommodate delays. Therefore, more research is needed to
design efﬁcient bootstrapping mechanisms.

4) Butterﬂy effect of ML and DL: Butterﬂy effect is a
phenomenon where a minute change in the input of a system
creates chaos in the output. In this regard, ML and DL are
also susceptible to this effect where a slight change in the input
data to the learning system will create enormous change in the
output which is the learned model. This phenomenon expose
ML and DL techniques used in IoT to security attacks where
the attackers deliberately change the input data to make the
system unstable. As aforementioned, AML uses the noise in
the input data where the learned networks behave completely
differently. Therefore, it is important to maintain the integrity
of the input data which is not an easy task where sheer amount
of data with high frequency is created. Another important point
is that such attacks are more dangerous since these attacks do
not need an access to the system itself. More investigation is
needed in this direction to devise integrity mechanism for each
domain of the IoT applications.

5) Challenges for DL in the edge: IoT will leverage the
advantages of edge computing and leveraging ML and DL for
IoT applications, as aforementioned, will increase the appli-
cations and services space. However, the overhead incurred
by DL techniques and the sheer amount of data generated by
IoT devices, it will be hard to implement DL techniques in
the edge devices. Furthermore, the time required for training
a deep network also plays an important role where real-
time and time-critical applications would not able to take the
advantage of DL in the edge. The stability of DL models is
also important where newly available information will affect
the already trained model. Therefore, more investigation is
needed in this direction.

6) Vulnerability to security breaches: Deep learning is
expected to empower cybersecurity; however, it may be vul-
nerable to malicious attacks. As drastic different output can
be obtained if input modiﬁcations are made to such models.
For instance, DL is used to control self-driving vehicles and
if malicious user happen to access and change the inputs to
the deep learning model, vehicle can be potentially controlled
by adversary. Therefore, more in-depth investigation is needed
from security standpoint in such systems.

B. Challenges Related to IoT Data

The heterogeneity of the IoT network enables the production
of sheer amount of data with very high frequency from
different domains. This huge amount of data from varying
data leads to various issues related to data collection, security,
dependency and unavailability of appropriate and enough data

sets. More in-depth investigation is needed to come up with
big data techniques to cater with the volume and heterogeneity
of IoT-generated data.

1) Data collection: Data collection from every domain
is not straight forward. For instance, data collected from
vehicular sensors is used for the management and maintenance
of the vehicles and also for the efﬁcient trafﬁc management.
Similarly data generated from smart home appliances and
body sensors contain personal information that would easily
jeopardize user privacy. Similarly, medical data of the patience
collected by the service providers have similar challenges. All
the aforementioned data is subject to processing with ML and
DL algorithms. However, unbalanced negative and positive
data and false positive will have catastrophic consequences
on our lives. Therefore, the ML and DL techniques must be
matured enough to be used commercially in such sensitive
domains. One way would be to develop ML and DL methods
that do not solely rely on the previous data and sharply learn
from the patterns and able to decide in a way that minimize
the side effects of the possible outcomes. This phenomenon is
more important in situations when ML and DL are used for
security solutions where false positives and true negative will
have dire consequences on the networks. One solution could
be the context-aware ML and DL solutions. In this regard,
more research is needed.

2) Proximity effect: Proximity can play a pivotal role in the
data collection. The fact that the Internet is walled-off, adds to
the challenges of collecting data in IoT networks. Usually the
Internet in such domains has limited access from the outside to
mitigate different kinds of attacks; however, it adversely affects
the utility of the applications. This phenomenon is also related
to the legislation indirectly where the data collection policies
must be deﬁned for cross-platform, cross-network, and cross-
organization. The storage of these data is also subject to in-
depth investigation. For instance, where and how to store the
medical records of the patients, whether in public or private
cloud, who should have access to such data, how to apply
ML and DL algorithms to such data and what level of privacy
should be preserved by the ML and DL algorithms. These
questions must be further investigated. Furthermore, cloud
and fog computing technologies are vulnerable to plethora
of attacks that will jeopardize the health of the data and the
security of users.

3) Data dependency: DL algorithms are data hungry and
are required to learn progressively from data, and work best
if hight quality data is available. Similar to human brain
that needs lots of experience to learn ﬁrst and afterwards is
able to make conclusions; it requires huge amount of data
to make powerful abstractions. Similarly, DL algorithm can
predict about company’s stocks after thoroughly learning about
historic rise and fall in company’s stocks. If enough data
is not available, the DL system will fail to make profound
predictions. This is due to the fact that DL algorithm works
in a systematic way; that is, ﬁrst learn about the domain and
afterwards solve the problem. During the training phase, DL
algorithm starts from scratch and needs a huge number of
data/parameters to tune/play around.

19

4) Unavailability of training datasets: Efﬁcient use of ML
and DL solutions need profound datasets that are currently
the rules and policies required for
missing. Furthermore,
deﬁning the learning strategies still need to be explored. Addi-
tionally, authentic datasets from real physical environment are
required to analyze and compare the performance of various
DL and RL algorithms. To date, efforts have been made to
cope with this challenge, but more research is needed in this
direction.

C. Efﬁciency of Security Solutions

The degree of sophistication of a security mechanism de-
pends on the capabilities of the device and the system where
it
is used. The limitations of the IoT devices is a major
challenge in applying sophisticated security mechanisms. In
the previous section, we discussed the ML- and DL-based
security mechanisms; however, the resource constraints create
a set-back where a trade-off is needed between the level of
security and the capabilities of the IoT devices. Sophisticated
security solutions need considerable amount of computing,
storage, and communication resources which are the assets in
IoT networks. Furthermore, it is also important to determine
where to put the logic of ML and DL techniques in the
network. Therefore, in-depth investigation is needed for the
efﬁciency of the security mechanisms that use ML and DL
techniques. This phenomenon is essential
in mission- and
time-critical applications. In this regard, low-cost and highly
efﬁcient security mechanisms must be investigated for IoT
where they can harness the beneﬁts of the ML and DL as
well.

1) Complex cyber threats:

IoT networks use resource-
constrained devices ranging from home-appliances to personal
gadgets. These devices are usually easy targets for cyber
attacks. As aforementioned, sheer amount of data is gen-
erated by these devices which might be used by ML and
DL techniques for different applications. The compromise of
these devices will have dire consequences on the outcomes
of the applications. It is note that for applications such as
smart home, the consequences might not be that critical as
compared to critical-infrastructure and medical applications.
These applications will not be able to withstand the results
from the ML and DL systems as a result of compromised
data. It could even endanger human lives. Therefore, it is
essential to make sure the device safety and the health of the
data that is input to the ML and DL systems. Furthermore,
the compromised devices could also be used as bots by the
attackers as launching pads for other attacks. Therefore, for
ML and DL systems to work in a safe way, it is essential to
focus on the security aspects of the IoT devices and on the
health of the generated data. In this context, research on the
quality of data is a good direction in future.

2) Privacy preservation in ML- and DL-based solutions:
The big data generated by IoT networks is used by analytical
systems that leverage ML and DL techniques. These data
contain personal and critical information that would not only
identify the users but also their behavior and lifestyle. For
instance, the data generated by BAN and other health-care

related applications might compromise the user privacy and
the data from smart home might result in exposing personal
lifestyle as well as behavior. Therefore, it is important to make
sure that the data used by ML and DL techniques does not
put the user privacy at stake. To date, many anonymization
techniques have been used that anonymize the data before
using it for analytics; however, researches have also shown that
the anonymization techniques can be hacked and the training
models can be compromised by injecting false data. Learning
is the essence of the ML and DL techniques and therefore,
feeding the wrong data will fail the purpose of these models.
It is, therefore important to investigate data protection and user
privacy preservation techniques in ML and DL-based analytics
for IoT networks.

3) Adversarial machine learning and IoT: Machine learn-
ing is a double-edge sword where on one hand it nourishes
the value of the data, but on the other hand, can be used by
the attackers for malicious purposes. Such branch of ML is
called Adversarial Machine Learning (AML). In AML, the
attackers use the features of the ML to attack the system.
For instance, much research has been done by playing with
the training parameters and misleading the learning system
to learn the opposite of what it is supposed to do. More
precisely, perturbation has been used in object recognition
where changes into the classiﬁers causes the system to identify
the wrong object. Recently, a one-pixel perturbation was used
to fool a DNN [142]. It is therefore important to investigate
the role and effects of AML in the IoT networks and address
these challenges.

4) Lack of awareness and consumer’s conﬁdence in IoT
security: For the successful realization and commercialization
of IoT applications, it is essential to increase the consumer
stimulation in using IoT services. Consumer satisfaction is of
paramount importance for the investors to invest in the IoT.
However, recent surveys show that IoT security and privacy
are two of the main concerns in using IoT services and the
consumers do not seem to feel safe while using IoT services. In
presence of such concerns, it is extremely important to devise
efﬁcient security solutions for IoT applications. More research
is needed in this direction that encompass the whole security
and privacy spectrum.

VI. CONCLUSION

IoT security and privacy are of paramount

importance
and play a pivotal role in the commercialization of the IoT
technology. Traditional security and privacy solutions suffer
from a number of issues that are related to the dynamic nature
of the IoT networks. ML and more speciﬁcally DL and DRL
techniques can be used to enable the IoT devices to adapt
to their dynamic environment. These learning techniques can
support self-organizing operation and also optimize the overall
system performance by learning and processing statistical
information from the environment (e.g. human users and IoT
devices). These learning techniques are inherently distributed
and do not require centralized communication between device
and controller. However,
the datasets needed for ML and
DL algorithms are still scarce, which makes benchmarking

20

the efﬁciency of the ML- and DL-based security solutions a
difﬁcult task. In this paper, we have considered the role of
ML and DL in the IoT from security and privacy perspective.
We have discussed the security and privacy challenges in IoT,
attack vectors, and security requirements. We have described
different ML and DL techniques and their applications to
IoT security. We have also shed light on the limitations of
the traditional ML mechanisms. Then we have discussed the
existing security solutions and outlined the open challenges
and future research directions. In order to mitigate some of the
shortcomings of machine learning approaches to IoT security,
the theoretical foundations of DL and DRL will need to be
strengthened so that the performances of the DL and DRL
models can be quantiﬁed based on certain parameters such
as computational complexity, learning efﬁciency, parameter
tuning strategies, and data driven topological self-organization.
Furthermore, new hybrid learning strategies and novel data
visualization techniques will be required for intuitive and
efﬁcient data interpretation.

REFERENCES

[1] O. Novo, N. Beijar, and M. Ocak, “Capillary Networks - Bridging the
Cellular and loT Worlds ,” IEEE World Forum on Internet of Things
(WF-IoT), vol. 1, pp. 571–578, December 2015.

[2] F. Hussain, Internet of Things; Building Blocks and Business Modles.

Springer, 2017.

[3] A. Al-Fuqaha, M. Guizani, M. Mohammadi, M. Aledhari, and
M. Ayyash, “Internet of things: A survey on enabling technologies,
protocols, and applications,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials,
vol. 17, pp. 2347–2376, Fourthquarter 2015.

[4] J. Granjal, E. Monteiro, and J. S. Silva, “Security for the internet
of things: A survey of existing protocols and open research issues,”
IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 17, pp. 1294–1312,
thirdquarter 2015.

[5] A. Mosenia and N. K. Jha, “A comprehensive study of security of
internet-of-things,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Com-
puting, vol. 5, pp. 586–602, Oct 2017.

[6] J. Lin, W. Yu, N. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Zhang, and W. Zhao, “A survey
on internet of things: Architecture, enabling technologies, security and
privacy, and applications,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 4,
pp. 1125–1142, Oct 2017.

[7] M. Ammar, G. Russello, and B. Crispo, “Internet of things: A survey
on the security of iot frameworks,” Journal of Information Security and
Applications, vol. 38, pp. 8 – 27, 2018.

[8] I. Stellios, P. Kotzanikolaou, M. Psarakis, C. Alcaraz, and J. Lopez, “A
survey of iot-enabled cyberattacks: Assessing attack paths to critical
infrastructures and services,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials,
vol. 20, pp. 3453–3495, Fourthquarter 2018.

[9] F. Restuccia, S. DOro, and T. Melodia, “Securing the internet of things
in the age of machine learning and software-deﬁned networking,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, pp. 4829–4842, Dec 2018.

[10] K. A. da Costa, J. P. Papa, C. O. Lisboa, R. Munoz, and V. H. C.
de Albuquerque, “Internet of things: A survey on machine learning-
based intrusion detection approaches,” Computer Networks, vol. 151,
pp. 147 – 157, 2019.

[11] J. Hou, L. Qu, and W. Shi, “A survey on internet of things security
from data perspectives,” Computer Networks, vol. 148, pp. 295 – 306,
2019.

[12] D. E. Kouicem, A. Bouabdallah, and H. Lakhlef, “Internet of things
security: A top-down survey,” Computer Networks, vol. 141, pp. 199
– 221, 2018.

[13] F. A. Alaba, M. Othman, I. A. T. Hashem, and F. Alotaibi, “Internet
of things security: A survey,” Journal of Network and Computer
Applications, vol. 88, pp. 10 – 28, 2017.

[14] B. B. Zarpelo, R. S. Miani, C. T. Kawakani, and S. C. de Alvarenga, “A
survey of intrusion detection in internet of things,” Journal of Network
and Computer Applications, vol. 84, pp. 25 – 37, 2017.

[15] M. binti Mohamad Noor and W. H. Hassan, “Current research on in-
ternet of things (iot) security: A survey,” Computer Networks, vol. 148,
pp. 283 – 294, 2019.

[16] K. T. Nguyen, M. Laurent, and N. Oualha, “Survey on secure com-
munication protocols for the internet of things,” Ad Hoc Networks,
vol. 32, pp. 17 – 31, 2015. Internet of Things security and privacy:
design methods and optimization.

[17] K. Sha, W. Wei, T. A. Yang, Z. Wang, and W. Shi, “On security
challenges and open issues in internet of things,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 83, pp. 326 – 337, 2018.

[18] M. at. el, “Machine Learning for Internet of Things Data Analysis:A
Survey ,” Journal of Digital Communications and Networks, Elsevier,
vol. 1, pp. 1–56, Feburary 2018.

[19] D. B. J. Sen, “Internet of Things - Applications and Challenges
in Technology and Standardization,” IEEE Transactions in Wireless
Personal Communication, May 2011.

[20] U. S. Shanthamallu, A. Spanias, C. Tepedelenlioglu, and M. Stanley, “A
Brief Survey of Machine Learning Methods and their Sensor and IoT
Applications ,” IEEE Conference on Information, Intelligence, Systems
and Applications, March 2018.

[21] E. Fernandes, A. Rahmati, K. Eykholt, and A. Prakash, “Internet of
things security research: A rehash of old ideas or new intellectual
challenges?,” IEEE Security Privacy, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 79–84, 2017.
[22] J. Qiu, Q. Wu, G. Ding, Y. Xu, and S. Feng, “A survey of machine
learning for big data processing,” EURASIP Journal of Advance Signal
Process, May 2016.

[23] S. et al., “Deep Learning for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Journal of

Computer, vol. 51, pp. 32–41, May 2018.

[24] S. Al-Sarawi, M. Anbar, K. Alieyan, and M. Alzubaidi, “Internet of
things (iot) communication protocols: Review,” in 2017 8th Interna-
tional Conference on Information Technology (ICIT), pp. 685–690,
May 2017.

[25] Y. Liu, Y. Kuang, Y. Xiao, and G. Xu, “Sdn-based data transfer security
for internet of things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, pp. 257–
268, Feb 2018.

[26] J. Chen, S. Li, H. Yu, Y. Zhang, D. Raychaudhuri, R. Ravindran,
H. Gao, L. Dong, G. Wang, and H. Liu, “Exploiting icn for real-
izing service-oriented communication in iot,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 54, pp. 24–30, December 2016.

[27] I. Andrea, C. Chrysostomou, and G. Hadjichristoﬁ, “Internet of things:
Security vulnerabilities and challenges,” in 2015 IEEE Symposium on
Computers and Communication (ISCC), pp. 180–187, July 2015.
[28] S. Benzarti, B. Triki, and O. Korbaa, “A survey on attacks in inter-
net of things based networks,” in 2017 International Conference on
Engineering MIS (ICEMIS), pp. 1–7, May 2017.

[29] A. Perrig, J. Stankovic, and D. Wagner, “Security in wireless sensor

networks,” Commun. ACM, vol. 47, pp. 53–57, June 2004.

[30] P. Li, L. Sun, X. Fu, and L. Ning, Security in Wireless Sensor Networks,

pp. 179–227. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.

[31] A. G. Finogeev and A. A. Finogeev, “Information attacks and security
in wireless sensor networks of industrial scada systems,” Journal of
Industrial Information Integration, vol. 5, pp. 6 – 16, 2017.

[32] H. B. Salameh, S. Almajali, M. Ayyash, and H. Elgala, “Spectrum
assignment in cognitive radio networks for internet-of-things delay-
sensitive applications under jamming attacks,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, pp. 1–1, 2018.

[33] L. Hu, H. Wen, B. Wu, F. Pan, R. F. Liao, H. Song, J. Tang, and
X. Wang, “Cooperative jamming for physical layer security enhance-
ment in internet of things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5,
pp. 219–228, Feb 2018.

[34] A.-R. Sadeghi, C. Wachsmann, and M. Waidner, “Security and privacy
challenges in industrial internet of things,” in Proceedings of the 52Nd
Annual Design Automation Conference, DAC ’15, (New York, NY,
USA), pp. 54:1–54:6, ACM, 2015.

[35] H. K. Patil and R. Seshadri, “Big data security and privacy issues
in healthcare,” in 2014 IEEE International Congress on Big Data,
pp. 762–765, June 2014.

[36] Y. Yang, L. Wu, G. Yin, L. Li, and H. Zhao, “A survey on security and
privacy issues in internet-of-things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 4, pp. 1250–1258, Oct 2017.

[37] S. Raza, L. Wallgren, and T. Voigt, “Svelte: Real-time intrusion
detection in the internet of things,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 11, no. 8,
pp. 2661 – 2674, 2013.

[38] P. Jadav and V. K. Babu, “Fuzzy logic based faulty node detection
in wireless sensor network,” in 2017 International Conference on
Communication and Signal Processing (ICCSP), pp. 0390–0394, April
2017.

[39] Y. Nishiguchi, A. Yano, T. Ohtani, R. Matsukura, and J. Kakuta, “Iot
fault management platform with device virtualization,” in 2018 IEEE

21

4th World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), pp. 257–262, Feb
2018.

[40] M. Khanafer, M. Guennoun, and H. T. Mouftah, “A survey of beacon-
enabled ieee 802.15.4 mac protocols in wireless sensor networks,”
IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 16, pp. 856–876, Second
2014.

[41] C. Yicheng, Z. Xuecheng, L. Zhenglin, H. Yu, and Z. Zhaoxia,
“Energy-efﬁcient and security-optimized aes hardware design for ubiq-
uitous computing,” Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics,
vol. 19, pp. 652–658, Aug 2008.

[42] G. Bansod, N. Raval, and N. Pisharoty, “Implementation of a new
lightweight encryption design for embedded security,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 10, pp. 142–151, Jan
2015.

[43] S. Oukili and S. Bri, “High speed efﬁcient advanced encryption stan-
dard implementation,” in 2017 International Symposium on Networks,
Computers and Communications (ISNCC), pp. 1–4, May 2017.
[44] P. Asghari, A. M. Rahmani, and H. H. S. Javadi, “Internet of things
applications: A systematic review,” Computer Networks, vol. 148,
pp. 241 – 261, 2019.

[45] D. Airehrour, J. Gutierrez, and S. K. Ray, “Secure routing for internet
of things: A survey,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications,
vol. 66, pp. 198 – 213, 2016.

[46] J. Guo, I.-R. Chen, and J. J. Tsai, “A survey of trust computation mod-
els for service management in internet of things systems,” Computer
Communications, vol. 97, pp. 1 – 14, 2017.

[47] A. olakovi and M. Hadiali, “Internet of things (iot): A review of
enabling technologies, challenges, and open research issues,” Computer
Networks, vol. 144, pp. 17 – 39, 2018.

[48] M. Mohammadi, A. Al-Fuqaha, S. Sorour, and M. Guizani, “Deep
learning for iot big data and streaming analytics: A survey,” IEEE Com-
munications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 20, pp. 2923–2960, Fourthquarter
2018.

[49] R. Hussain and H. Oh, “On secure and privacy-aware sybil attack detec-
tion in vehicular communications,” Wireless Personal Communications,
vol. 77, pp. 2649–2673, Aug 2014.

[50] W. Dong and X. Liu, “Robust and secure time-synchronization against
sybil attacks for sensor networks,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, vol. 11, pp. 1482–1491, Dec 2015.

[51] G. Han, X. Li, J. Jiang, L. Shu, and J. Lloret, “Intrusion detection
algorithm based on neighbor information against sinkhole attack in
wireless sensor networks,” The Computer Journal, vol. 58, pp. 1280–
1292, June 2015.

[52] S. Katsikeas, K. Fysarakis, A. Miaoudakis, A. V. Bemten, I. Askoxy-
lakis, I. Papaefstathiou, and A. Plemenos, “Lightweight secure indus-
trial iot communications via the mq telemetry transport protocol,” in
2017 IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC),
pp. 1193–1200, July 2017.

[53] A. Mondal and S. Bhattacharjee, “A reliable, multi-path, connection
oriented and independent transport protocol for iot networks,” in 2017
9th International Conference on Communication Systems and Networks
(COMSNETS), pp. 590–591, Jan 2017.

[54] A. Haroon, S. Akram, M. A. Shah, and A. Wahid, “E-lithe: A
lightweight secure dtls for iot,” in 2017 IEEE 86th Vehicular Tech-
nology Conference (VTC-Fall), pp. 1–5, Sept 2017.

[55] T. Buddhika and S. Pallickara, “Neptune: Real time stream processing
for internet of things and sensing environments,” in 2016 IEEE In-
ternational Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS),
pp. 1143–1152, May 2016.

[56] T. Heer, O. Garcia-Morchon, R. Hummen, S. L. Keoh, S. S. Kumar,
and K. Wehrle, “Security challenges in the ip-based internet of things,”
Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 61, pp. 527–542, Dec 2011.
[57] E. Bertino and N. Islam, “Botnets and internet of things security,”

Computer, vol. 50, pp. 76–79, Feb 2017.

[58] T. H. Szymanski, “Security and privacy for a green internet of things,”

IT Professional, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 34–41, 2017.

[59] S. Scott-Hayward, G. O’Callaghan, and S. Sezer, “Sdn security: A sur-
vey,” in 2013 IEEE SDN for Future Networks and Services (SDN4FNS),
pp. 1–7, Nov 2013.

[60] M. C. Dacier, H. Konig, R. Cwalinski, F. Kargl, and S. Dietrich, “Se-
curity challenges and opportunities of software-deﬁned networking,”
IEEE Security and Privacy, vol. 15, pp. 96–100, Apr. 2017.

[61] J. Singh, T. Pasquier, J. Bacon, H. Ko, and D. Eyers, “Twenty security
considerations for cloud-supported internet of things,” IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, vol. 3, pp. 269–284, June 2016.

[62] D. Ambedkar, “Reinforcement Learning Algorithms: Survey and Clas-
siﬁcation,” Indian Journal of Science and Technology, vol. 10, pp. 1–8,
January 2017.

[63] C. Wirth, R. Akrour, G. Neumann, and J. Frnkranz, “A Survey
of Preference-Based Reinforcement Learning Methods,” Journal of
Machine Learning Research, vol. 18, pp. 1–46, January 2017.
[64] L. et al., “Tagoram: Real-time tracking of mobile RFID tags to high
precision using COTS devices,” ACM international conference on
Mobile computing and networking, vol. 1, pp. 237–248, 2014.
[65] L. et al., “DeepEar: robust smartphone audio sensing in unconstrained
acoustic environments using deep learning,” ACM International Con-
ference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 1, pp. 283–294,
2015.

[66] T. Wang, C.-K. Wen, H. Wang, F. Gao, T. Jiang, and S. Jin, “Deep
Learning for Wireless Physical Layer:Opportunities and Challenges,”
IEEE China Communication, vol. 14, pp. 92–111, October 2017.
[67] M. Mahmud, M. S. Kaiser, A. Hussain, and S. Vassanelli, “Applications
of deep learning and reinforcement learning to biological data,” IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 29,
pp. 2063–2079, June 2018.

[68] M. Mohammadi, A. Al-Fuqaha, M. Guizani, and J. Oh, “Semisuper-
vised deep reinforcement learning in support of iot and smart city
services,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, pp. 624–635, April
2018.

[69] N. D. Nguyen, T. Nguyen, and S. Nahavandi, “System design per-
spective for human-level agents using deep reinforcement learning: A
survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 27091–27102, 2017.

[70] D. et al., “Review on the Research and Practice of Deep Learning and
Reinforcement Learning in Smart Grids,” CSEE Journal of Power and
Energy Systems, vol. 4, pp. 362–370, September 2018.

[71] S. at. el, “Machine Intelligence Techniques for Next-Generation
Context-Aware Wireless Networks,” AAAAI, vol. 1, pp. 1–9, 2018.
[72] K. Arulkumaran, M. P. Deisenroth, M. Brundage, and A. A. Bharath,
“A Brief Survey of Deep Reinforcement Learning,” IEEE Signal
Processing Magazine, May 2017.

[73] B. Lake, T. Ullman, J. Tenenbaum, and S. Gershman, “Building
Machines That Learn and Think Like People,” The Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 2016.

[74] L. Deng, D. Li, X. Yao, D. Cox, and H. Wang, “Mobile network
intrusion detection for iot system based on transfer learning algorithm,”
Cluster Computing, Jan 2018.

[75] R. Doshi, N. Apthorpe, and N. Feamster, “Machine learning ddos
detection for consumer internet of things devices,” in 2018 IEEE
Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW), pp. 29–35, May 2018.
[76] F. Hussain, A. Anpalagan, A. S. Khwaja, and M. Naeem, “Resource
Allocation and Congestion Control in Clustered M2M Communication
using Q-Learning,” Wiley Transactions on Emerging Telecommunica-
tions Technologies, 2015.

[77] M. S. Alam and S. T. Vuong, “Random forest classiﬁcation for
detecting android malware,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference on
Green Computing and Communications and IEEE Internet of Things
and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing, pp. 663–669, Aug
2013.

[78] W. Zhou and B. Yu, “A cloud-assisted malware detection and suppres-
sion framework for wireless multimedia system in iot based on dynamic
differential game,” China Communications, vol. 15, pp. 209–223, Feb
2018.

[79] H.-S. Ham, H.-H. Kim, M.-S. Kim, and M.-J. Choi, “Linear svm-based
android malware detection for reliable iot services,” Journal of Applied
Mathematics, vol. 2014, p. 10, 2014.

[80] J. Chauhan, S. Seneviratne, Y. Hu, A. Misra, A. Seneviratne, and
Y. Lee, “Breathing-based authentication on resource-constrained iot
devices using recurrent neural networks,” Computer, vol. 51, pp. 60–67,
May 2018.

[81] H. HaddadPajouh, A. Dehghantanha, R. Khayami, and K.-K. R. Choo,
“A deep recurrent neural network based approach for internet of things
malware threat hunting,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 85,
pp. 88 – 96, 2018.

[82] E. B. Karbab, M. Debbabi, A. Derhab, and D. Mouheb, “Maldozer:
Automatic framework for android malware detection using deep learn-
ing,” Digital Investigation, vol. 24, pp. S48 – S59, 2018.

[83] J. Su, D. V. Vargas, S. Prasad, D. Sgandurra, Y. Feng, and K. Sakurai,
“Lightweight classiﬁcation of iot malware based on image recognition,”
CoRR, vol. abs/1802.03714, 2018.

[84] N. An, A. Duff, G. Naik, M. Faloutsos, S. Weber, and S. Mancoridis,
“Behavioral anomaly detection of malware on home routers,” in 2017

22

12th International Conference on Malicious and Unwanted Software
(MALWARE), pp. 47–54, Oct 2017.

[85] A. Azmoodeh, A. Dehghantanha, and K. R. Choo, “Robust malware de-
tection for internet of (battleﬁeld) things devices using deep eigenspace
learning,” IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Computing, pp. 1–1, 2018.
[86] L. Xiao, Y. Li, G. Han, G. Liu, and W. Zhuang, “Phy-layer spooﬁng
detection with reinforcement learning in wireless networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 65, pp. 10037–10047, Dec
2016.

[87] C. Shi, J. Liu, H. Liu, and Y. Chen, “Smart user authentication
through actuation of daily activities leveraging wiﬁ-enabled iot,” in
Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Symposium on Mobile Ad
Hoc Networking and Computing, Mobihoc ’17, (New York, NY, USA),
pp. 5:1–5:10, ACM, 2017.

[88] A. A. Diro and N. Chilamkurti, “Distributed attack detection scheme
using deep learning approach for internet of things,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 82, pp. 761 – 768, 2018.

[89] A. Abeshu and N. Chilamkurti, “Deep learning: The frontier for
distributed attack detection in fog-to-things computing,” IEEE Com-
munications Magazine, vol. 56, pp. 169–175, Feb 2018.

[90] S. Rathore and J. H. Park, “Semi-supervised learning based distributed
attack detection framework for iot,” Applied Soft Computing, vol. 72,
pp. 79 – 89, 2018.

[91] M. Ozay, I. Esnaola, F. T. Y. Vural, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor,
“Machine learning methods for attack detection in the smart grid,”
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 27,
pp. 1773–1786, Aug 2016.

[92] Z. Tan, A. Jamdagni, X. He, P. Nanda, and R. P. Liu, “A system
for denial-of-service attack detection based on multivariate correlation
analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems,
vol. 25, pp. 447–456, Feb 2014.

[93] Y. Li, D. E. Quevedo, S. Dey, and L. Shi, “Sinr-based dos attack on re-
mote state estimation: A game-theoretic approach,” IEEE Transactions
on Control of Network Systems, vol. 4, pp. 632–642, Sept 2017.
[94] P. Shukla, “Ml-ids: A machine learning approach to detect wormhole
attacks in internet of things,” in 2017 Intelligent Systems Conference
(IntelliSys), pp. 234–240, Sept 2017.

[95] J. Caedo and A. Skjellum, “Using machine learning to secure iot
systems,” in 2016 14th Annual Conference on Privacy, Security and
Trust (PST), pp. 219–222, Dec 2016.

[96] N. Nesa, T. Ghosh, and I. Banerjee, “Non-parametric sequence-based
learning approach for outlier detection in iot,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 82, pp. 412 – 421, 2018.

[97] E. Viegas, A. Santin, L. Oliveira, A. Frana, R. Jasinski, and V. Pedroni,
“A reliable and energy-efﬁcient classiﬁer combination scheme for
intrusion detection in embedded systems,” Computers & Security,
vol. 78, pp. 16 – 32, 2018.

[98] H. H. Pajouh, R. Javidan, R. Khayami, D. Ali, and K. R. Choo, “A
two-layer dimension reduction and two-tier classiﬁcation model for
anomaly-based intrusion detection in iot backbone networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, pp. 1–1, 2018.
[99] M. Esmalifalak, N. T. Nguyen, R. Zheng, and Z. Han, “Detecting
stealthy false data injection using machine learning in smart grid,”
in 2013 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM),
pp. 808–813, Dec 2013.

[100] M. Esmalifalak, L. Liu, N. Nguyen, R. Zheng, and Z. Han, “Detecting
stealthy false data injection using machine learning in smart grid,” IEEE
Systems Journal, vol. 11, pp. 1644–1652, Sept 2017.

[101] T. Park, N. Abuzainab, and W. Saad, “Learning How to Communicate
in the Internet of Things: Finite Resources and Heterogeneity,” IEEE
Access, vol. 4, pp. 7063–7073, November 2016.

[102] A. LHeureux, K. Grolinger, H. F. Elyamany, and M. A. M. Capretz,
“Machine Learning With Big Data: Challenges and Approaches,” IEEE
Access, vol. 5, pp. 7776 – 7797, April 2017.

[103] T. E. Bogale, X. Wang, and L. B. Le, “Machine Intelligence Techniques
for Next-Generation Context-Aware Wireless Networks,” Arxiv, vol. 19,
pp. 1–10, January 2018.

[104] M. Taylor, D. Reilly, and B. Lempereur, “An access control man-
agement protocol for internet of things devices,” Network Security,
vol. 2017, no. 7, pp. 11 – 17, 2017.

[105] A. Ouaddah, H. Mousannif, A. A. Elkalam, and A. A. Ouahman,
“Access control in the internet of things: Big challenges and new
opportunities,” Computer Networks, vol. 112, pp. 237 – 262, 2017.

[106] A. A. A. El-Aziz and A. Kannan, “A comprehensive presentation to
xacml,” in Third International Conference on Computational Intel-
ligence and Information Technology (CIIT 2013), pp. 155–161, Oct
2013.

23

[130] A. Abduvaliyev, A. K. Pathan, J. Zhou, R. Roman, and W. Wong,
“On the vital areas of intrusion detection systems in wireless sensor
networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 15, pp. 1223–
1237, Third 2013.

[131] J. F. Colom, D. Gil, H. Mora, B. Volckaert, and A. M. Jimeno,
“Scheduling framework for distributed intrusion detection systems
over heterogeneous network architectures,” Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, vol. 108, pp. 76 – 86, 2018.

[132] E. Benkhelifa, T. Welsh, and W. Hamouda, “A critical review of
practices and challenges in intrusion detection systems for iot: To-
wards universal and resilient systems,” IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials, pp. 1–1, 2018.

[133] H. Sedjelmaci, S. M. Senouci, and M. Al-Bahri, “A lightweight
anomaly detection technique for low-resource iot devices: A game-
theoretic methodology,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), pp. 1–6, May 2016.

[134] J. Kim, J. Kim, H. L. T. Thu, and H. Kim, “Long short

term
memory recurrent neural network classiﬁer for intrusion detection,”
in 2016 International Conference on Platform Technology and Service
(PlatCon), pp. 1–5, Feb 2016.

[135] A. Saeed, A. Ahmadinia, A. Javed, and H. Larijani, “Intelligent
intrusion detection in low-power iots,” ACM Trans. Internet Technol.,
vol. 16, pp. 27:1–27:25, Dec. 2016.

[136] J. Moos, “Iot, malware and security,” ITNOW, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 28–29,

2017.

[137] I. Makhdoom, M. Abolhasan, J. Lipman, R. P. Liu, and W. Ni,
“Anatomy of threats to the internet of things,” IEEE Communications
Surveys Tutorials, pp. 1–1, 2018.

[138] I. You and K. Yim, “Malware obfuscation techniques: A brief survey,”
in 2010 International Conference on Broadband, Wireless Computing,
Communication and Applications, pp. 297–300, Nov 2010.

[139] E. M. Rudd, A. Rozsa, M. Gnther, and T. E. Boult, “A survey
of stealth malware attacks, mitigation measures, and steps toward
autonomous open world solutions,” IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials, vol. 19, pp. 1145–1172, Secondquarter 2017.

[140] C. S. Veerappan, P. L. K. Keong, Z. Tang, and F. Tan, “Taxonomy
on malware evasion countermeasures techniques,” in 2018 IEEE 4th
World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), pp. 558–563, Feb 2018.
[141] Y. Meidan, M. Bohadana, Y. Mathov, Y. Mirsky, A. Shabtai, D. Breit-
enbacher, and Y. Elovici, “N-baiotnetwork-based detection of iot botnet
attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 17,
pp. 12–22, Jul 2018.

[142] J. Su, D. V. Vargas, and K. Sakurai, “One pixel attack for fooling deep

neural networks,” CoRR, vol. abs/1710.08864, 2017.

[107] F. P. Diez, A. C. Vasu, D. S. Touceda, and J. M. S. Cmara, “Modeling
xacml security policies using graph databases,” IT Professional, vol. 19,
pp. 52–57, November 2017.

[108] S. Cirani, M. Picone, P. Gonizzi, L. Veltri, and G. Ferrari, “Iot-oas:
An oauth-based authorization service architecture for secure services
in iot scenarios,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 15, pp. 1224–1234, Feb
2015.

[109] D. Rivera, L. Cruz-Piris, G. Lopez-Civera, E. de la Hoz, and I. Marsa-
Maestre, “Applying an uniﬁed access control for iot-based intelligent
agent systems,” in 2015 IEEE 8th International Conference on Service-
Oriented Computing and Applications (SOCA), pp. 247–251, Oct 2015.
[110] L. Xiao, X. Wan, and Z. Han, “Phy-layer authentication with multiple
landmarks with reduced overhead,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 17, pp. 1676–1687, March 2018.

[111] N. Vlajic and D. Zhou, “Iot as a land of opportunity for ddos hackers,”

Computer, vol. 51, pp. 26–34, July 2018.

[112] C. Kolias, G. Kambourakis, A. Stavrou, and J. Voas, “Ddos in the iot:
Mirai and other botnets,” Computer, vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 80–84, 2017.
[113] G. Kambourakis, C. Kolias, and A. Stavrou, “The mirai botnet and
the iot zombie armies,” in MILCOM 2017 - 2017 IEEE Military
Communications Conference (MILCOM), pp. 267–272, Oct 2017.

[114] D. Yin, L. Zhang, and K. Yang, “A ddos attack detection and mitigation
with software-deﬁned internet of things framework,” IEEE Access,
vol. 6, pp. 24694–24705, 2018.

[115] L. A. B. Pacheco, J. J. C. Gondim, P. A. S. Barreto, and E. Alchieri,
“Evaluation of distributed denial of service threat in the internet of
things,” in 2016 IEEE 15th International Symposium on Network
Computing and Applications (NCA), pp. 89–92, Oct 2016.

[116] V. Paxson, “An analysis of using reﬂectors for distributed denial-of-
service attacks,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 31, pp. 38–
47, July 2001.

[117] S. Alharbi, P. Rodriguez, R. Maharaja, P. Iyer, N. Subaschandrabose,
and Z. Ye, “Secure the internet of things with challenge response
authentication in fog computing,” in 2017 IEEE 36th International
Performance Computing and Communications Conference (IPCCC),
pp. 1–2, Dec 2017.

[118] Q. Yan, W. Huang, X. Luo, Q. Gong, and F. R. Yu, “A multi-level
ddos mitigation framework for the industrial internet of things,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 56, pp. 30–36, Feb 2018.

[119] J. Ye, X. Cheng, J. Zhu, L. Feng, and L. Song, “A ddos attack detection
method based on svm in software deﬁned network,” Security and
Communication Networks, vol. 2018, p. 8, 2018.

[120] K. RT, S. T. Selvi, and K. Govindarajan, “Ddos detection and analysis
in sdn-based environment using support vector machine classiﬁer,” in
2014 Sixth International Conference on Advanced Computing (ICoAC),
pp. 205–210, Dec 2014.

[121] E. Hodo, X. Bellekens, A. Hamilton, P. Dubouilh, E. Iorkyase, C. Tach-
tatzis, and R. Atkinson, “Threat analysis of iot networks using artiﬁcial
neural network intrusion detection system,” in 2016 International
Symposium on Networks, Computers and Communications (ISNCC),
pp. 1–6, May 2016.

[122] R. V. Kulkarni and G. K. Venayagamoorthy, “Neural network based
secure media access control protocol for wireless sensor networks,” in
2009 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, pp. 1680–
1687, June 2009.

[123] J. W. Branch, C. Giannella, B. Szymanski, R. Wolff, and H. Kargupta,
“In-network outlier detection in wireless sensor networks,” Knowledge
and Information Systems, vol. 34, pp. 23–54, Jan 2013.

[124] M. A. Alsheikh, S. Lin, D. Niyato, and H. Tan, “Machine learning
in wireless sensor networks: Algorithms, strategies, and applications,”
IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 16, pp. 1996–2018,
Fourthquarter 2014.

[125] W. Meng, “Intrusion detection in the era of iot: Building trust via trafﬁc

ﬁltering and sampling,” Computer, vol. 51, pp. 36–43, July 2018.

[126] J. Li, Z. Zhao, R. Li, and H. Zhang, “Ai-based two-stage intrusion de-
tection for software deﬁned iot networks,” CoRR, vol. abs/1806.02566,
2018.

[127] D. Li, Z. Cai, L. Deng, X. Yao, and H. H. Wang, “Information
security model of block chain based on intrusion sensing in the iot
environment,” Cluster Computing, Mar 2018.

[128] A. A. Gendreau and M. Moorman, “Survey of intrusion detection
systems towards an end to end secure internet of things,” in 2016 IEEE
4th International Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud
(FiCloud), pp. 84–90, Aug 2016.

[129] I. Butun, S. D. Morgera, and R. Sankar, “A survey of intrusion detection
systems in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys
Tutorials, vol. 16, pp. 266–282, First 2014.

