Helping IT and OT Defenders Collaborate 

Glenn A. Fink  
National Security Directorate 
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory 
Richland, Washington, USA 
Glenn.Fink@pnnl.gov 

Penny McKenzie 
National Security Directorate 
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory 
Richland, Washington, USA 
penny.mckenzie@pnnl.gov

Abstract— Cyber-physical systems, especially in critical infra-
structures, have become primary hacking targets in international 
conflicts and diplomacy. However, cyber-physical systems present 
unique challenges to defenders, starting with an inability to com-
municate.  This  paper  outlines  the  results  of  our  interviews  with 
information technology (IT) defenders and operational technology 
(OT) operators and seeks to address lessons learned from them in 
the structure of our notional solutions. We present two problems 
in this paper: (1) the difficulty of coordinating detection and re-
sponse between defenders who work on the cyber/IT and physi-
cal/OT  sides  of  cyber-physical  infrastructures,  and  (2)  the 
difficulty of estimating the safety state of a cyber-physical system 
while an intrusion is underway but before damage can be effected 
by  the  attacker.  To  meet  these  challenges,  we  propose  two  solu-
tions: (1) a visualization that will enable communication between 
IT defenders and OT operators, and (2) a machine-learning ap-
proach  that  will  estimate  the  distance  from  normal  the  physical 
system is operating and send information to the visualization.  

Keywords—Cyberphysical  systems,  CPS,  Internet  of  Things, 

IoT, visualization, machine learning, deep learning 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

For  years  the  NSA  and  FBI  have  been  publicly  warning 
utility owners that cyber attacks on their physical infrastructures 
were imminent [1].  In December of 2015 and 2016 the world 
saw the first major manifestation of the cyber vulnerability of 
infrastructural cyber-physical systems as Ukraine's electric grid 
was  repeatedly  attacked,  resulting  in  a  quarter  million 
Ukrainians  going  without  power  in  winter  temperatures  [2].  
More  recently,  the  VPNFilter  malware  was  noted  to  have  the 
capability to monitor devices on control-systems networks [3].  
Networked computer systems have become an attack vector for 
cyber-physical infrastructures that can produce severe physical 
and political effects. However, meeting this threat requires co-
ordinating  defenses  between  cyber  security  staff  and  physical 
plant operators. Human effectiveness is a challenge for cyber-
physical systems (CPS) security, but human influence adds both 
resilience and complexity to cyber-physical systems.  Research 
is required to enable the needed collaboration.   

We present two problems in this paper and two matching so-
lutions. The first problem is the difficulty of coordinating detec-
tion  and  response  between  defenders  who  work  on  the  cyber 
(Information Technology, IT) and physical (Operational Tech-
nology, OT) sides of infrastructures. The proposed matching so-
lution is a visualization that will enable communication between 
IT defenders and OT operators. The second problem is the dif-
ficulty of estimating the safety state of a cyber-physical system 
while an intrusion is underway but before the attacker can do 

damage. The proposed solution is a machine-learning approach 
that will estimate the distance from normal the physical system 
is operating and send information to the visualization. This work 
outlines the results of our interviews with IT defenders and OT 
operators and seeks to address lessons learned from them in the 
structure of our notional solutions. 

II.  BACKGROUND 

The  United  States  President’s  National  Security 
Telecommunications  Advisory  Committee  (NSTAC)  defines 
CPS as follows: 

Decentralized  network  of  objects 
(or  devices), 
applications,  and  services  that  can  sense,  log,  interpret, 
communicate, process, and act on a variety of information 
or  control  devices  in  the  physical  environment.    These 
devices range from small sensors on consumer devices to 
sophisticated  computers  in  industrial  control  systems 
(ICS).  Ultimately, the devices have some type of kinetic 
impact on the physical world, whether directly or through 
a mechanical device to which they are connected [4]. 

Protecting  OT/CPS  in  critical  infrastructures  is  a  principle 
concern for any nation. Cyber weapons may be as lethal to in-
frastructures as kinetic warfare, and, as Stuxnet demonstrated, 
not  even  air-gapped  systems  are  safe  [5].  Software-borne 
weapons  in  embedded  systems  may  stay  dormant  or  subtly 
active for months or years as the remote attackers wait for the 
right moment to attack.  Detection of attacks from the physical 
side alone may be very difficult, and once attackers gain access 
to  a  control  system  they  may  cause  a  variety  of  distracting 
problems.  There are five stages the attacker goes through when 
hacking a complex cyber-physical control system [6]: 

1.  Access: gained through traditional hacking approaches 
2.  Discovery: determining the unique physical and logical 

functions of the victim system 

3.  Control: learning the limits of control available via soft-

ware 

4.  Damage: deciding on and producing the kinds of damage 

he or she would like to inflict, and finally 

5.  Cleanup: causing the operators to believe what the at-

tacker wants them to believe about the attack. 

The  access  phase  presents  the  best  hope  for  discovering 
attackers in cyber-physical systems from the cyber side.  From 
the  physical  side,  noting  anomalies  during  the  discovery  and 
control phases is the most likely way to stop an attack before 

XXX-X-XXXX-XXXX-X/XX/$XX.00 ©20XX IEEE 

 
damage occurs.  The discovery and control phases may require 
months  or  years  of  development  after  initial  access  is  gained 
before  noticeable  damage  may  be  inflicted.    Thus,  unless 
attackers  are  caught  during  the  discovery  and  control  phases, 
correlating the attack activities back to the cyber indicators of 
the access phase may be very difficult for the defenders. 

Detection of attacks from the cyber side is difficult because, 
typically,  cyber  operators  do  not  understand  the  protocols, 
physical processes, or potential consequences of attacks on the 
physical system.  Even when defenders detect attackers gaining 
access, it is difficult to understand the ultimate goal of attacks or 
to determine whether the attackers have achieved their purposes.  
Similarly, the cyber side has complexities not well understood 
by the control-systems operators.  Both groups of operators need 
to  understand  previous  cyber  attacks  so  they  can  understand 
potential risks to the physical plant in the future.  

A.  Welcome to XYZ, Corp. 

For our study, we refer to network configurations and secu-
rity conditions at a fictitious company, XYZ Corp., that is made 
of a conglomeration of real companies from whose systems, net-
works, and operators we gathered information. Fig. 1 shows the 
basic network setup of XYZ Corp. 

Fig. 1.  XYZ Corporation IT/OT Network. 

As  shown  in  the  figure,  XYZ’s  network  is  divided  into  a 
corporate  Local  Area  Network  (LAN),  a  demilitarized  zone 
(DMZ), and an ICS network (which XYZ Corp. calls the facili-
ties  network).  Each  zone  is  cordoned  off  from  the  others  and 
from the internet via a firewall and access-control rules. Con-
trolled remote access allows the site to collect data from rented 
facilities that have their own networks and allows collaborators 
authenticated access to data and OT systems.  

Ideally,  there  would  be  only  a  single,  tightly  controlled 
connection between the corporate LAN and the control systems 
LAN.    However,  there  may  be  many  access  points  (some  of 
which cross air gaps) implying inconsistent access controls and 
multiple paths for an attacker to target.  Systems on the corporate 
LAN need occasional access to systems on the facilities network 
for control/status and to perform updates.  Even air gaps must be 
considered high-latency internet connections. 

At XYZ, the cyber-physical systems in the facilities network 
are  generally  composed  of  remote  telemetry  units  (RTUs), 

programmable  logic  controllers  (PLCs),  intelligent  electronic 
devices (IEDs), and the sensors and actuators that control and 
read from the physical devices. We collectively refer to these as 
control systems devices or controllers. There is also a set of IT 
servers that collect and provide access to the data from the con-
trollers, and human-machine interface (HMI) devices that ena-
ble a command and status channel to the human operators.   

As  control  systems  devices  increase  in  computational  and 
networking capabilities, they become more susceptible to cyber 
attack.  They  are  designed  for  long  life  without  updates.  
Unfortunately, this means that once an exploit is discovered for 
a controller, it may be vulnerable for life.  These components are 
not  designed  to  manage  their  own  security  and  they  simply 
accept and run any command or firmware update they receive.  
Thus,  attackers  can 
re-image  devices.  
Discovering  this  duplicity  and  repairing  the  damage  it  causes 
can be an extremely complex matter.  

surreptitiously 

Cyber-physical systems at XYZ include HVAC and building 
control  and  automation  for  lab  spaces,  air  flow  handlers, 
scientific instruments, and more.  There are an estimated 20,000 
addressable networked devices at XYZ Corp. involved in cyber-
physical systems, but the breakdown into classes is unknown.  
Perhaps one-quarter (5,000 addresses) belong to actual physical 
devices and to associated research equipment.  Several of XYZ’s 
newest  buildings  publish  sensor  information  to  the  corporate 
network as to help bring operational CPS data to researchers. 

Every  control  system  is  a  unique  combination  of  sensors, 
actuators, controllers, and computers connected by excessively 
many  semi-interoperable  proprietary  protocols.    OT  staff 
specialize in knowing the idiosyncrasies of these highly diverse 
systems  and  their  protocols.  Today's  OT  systems  are  process-
based; they do not do detection based on the information content 
of the network traffic, and there is little commercial impetus to 
do  so.    Frequent  errors  are  generally  tolerated  if  they  do  not 
produce downtime.  Error that do not produce downtime are sel-
dom investigated, and no logs of commands sent to devices are 
kept.  None of these systems are deemed critical from an IT per-
spective, so logging seems to be an unnecessary expense. 

Little  or  no  security  is  included  in  OT  protocols.    For 
instance, Modbus protocol simply provides a way to write to and 
read  from  devices  without  any  notion  of  authentication, 
confidentiality,  integrity,  or  authorization.    Encryption  and 
authentication  protocols  require  costly  key  management 
processes, and it is more cost effective to simply cordon these 
systems off on a secured network.  This is efficiency, not bad 
design.    But  newer  devices  on  facilities  networks  may  have 
uncontrolled cellular connectivity to the Internet. When control 
systems are unintentionally exposed to the broader threat-space 
of the internet, problems may arise.  

Generally, OT devices that have serial-only connections are 
grouped  into  a  “field  bus”  network  under  a  Network  Area 
Controller (NAC) device connected to an Ethernet network via 
TCP/IP.  Native-protocol commands for the devices on the field 
bus  are  tunneled  though  TCP/IP  and  passed  on  to  the  proper 
device  by  the  NAC.    Typically,  no  syntactic  or  semantic 
validation  or  stateful  inspection  of  the  tunneled  commands  is 
done because this would require expensive emulation of all the 
types  of  devices  on  the  NAC.    At  XYZ,  the  NAC's  primary 

 
security  control  is  its  isolation  of  the  facilities  network.    The 
NAC uses a firewall that logs and controls its access from the 
XYZ network. 

Some 

cyber-physical 

systems  use  Windows-based 
controllers,  and  many  of  these  systems  at  XYZ  Corp.  have 
Windows  Logging  Service  (WLS)  installed.    WLS  takes 
information  from  the  native  Microsoft  Windows  log  events, 
correlates  security  and  resource  usage  information  to  it,  and 
repackages it in XML in a key/value format like what the Unix 
syslog  facility  provides.    WLS  data  would  provide  the  most 
comprehensive  set  of  host-based  data  for  the  traditional  IT 
systems  found  within  OT  networks.    However,  the  actual 
controllers (PLCs/RTUs/etc.) do not run Windows.  Instead they 
may  run  some  completely  custom  application  without  an 
operating system as is done on Application-Specific Integrated 
Circuits (ASICs). For them, security software is not an option. 

Some XYZ buildings are leased facilities where the cyber-
physical building systems are on a private network, owned and 
secured  by  the  building  owner.    Physical  and  cyber  security 
controls  in  leased  buildings  on  campus  are  not  mandated  by 
XYZ and may be less rigorous.  No cyber intrusions have yet 
interfered with cyber-physical systems in the leased building's 
network.  However, there have been reports of research systems 
attached to one leased building's network being exposed to cyber 
attack.  Although these buildings may control HVAC for large 
XYZ  operational  computing  systems,  because  XYZ  does  not 
manage their networks, it considers them untrusted facilities and 
does  not  allow  any  physical  connection  between  the  leased 
buildings’ networks and the XYZ facilities network. 

benefit  may  not  be  applied  to  the  standard  IT  systems  (like 
Windows  servers)  operating  within  the  OT  facilities  network.  
Although  both  sides  believe  dialogue  would  be  beneficial,  no 
formal arrangement exists at XYZ Corp. yet.     

When OT staff or researchers at XYZ add a new TCP/IP ca-
pable device, IT cyber security personnel must be notified. But 
otherwise, each team is a black box to the other.  As IT and OT 
systems  have  converged,  and  many  cyber-physical  devices 
became  web-based,  there  is  growing  interest  and  pressure  to 
collaborate. 

The OT staff would find it useful to know what cyber threats 
are being aimed at their systems.  They want to understand what 
kind  of  attacks  have  happened  in  the  past  so  they  can  learn 
lessons and understand potential risks.  The expectation is that if 
an anomalous cyber event happens directed at OT systems, the 
IT  cybersecurity  staff  would  notify  the  OT  staff.    The 
cybersecurity staff at XYZ do not yet regularly provide threat 
information to OT staff, but they do monitor the average traffic 
destined for each cyber-physical device.  They send a list of IP 
addresses and amounts of traffic to OT operators weekly.  OT 
staff review this list to see if there are dramatic (>10% to 20%) 
changes.  Most of the anomalies they discover in this way arise 
from  researchers  making  changes  to  their  data-collection 
devices  residing  in  the  OT  network. 
  Occasionally,  a 
misconfigured device is discovered in this way.  

OT staff we interviewed related several classes of threat re-
lated to cyber attack and outlined their potential consequences. 
This information is shown in TABLE I.  

III.  APPROACH TO A SOLUTION 

TABLE I.  

THREATS OF CONCERN TO XYZ'S OT STAFF 

We interviewed OT operations personnel, cyber defenders, 
and  researchers  who  work  with  cyber-physical  systems  to 
understand  the  security  needs  in  this  space.    We  sought  to 
understand  whether  cyber  incidents  had  ever  been  known  to 
cause  problems  in  a  cyber-physical  system  and  the  proximate 
causes of any such incidents.  In this section, we will examine 
the  findings  of  our  interviews  from  three  perspectives:  the 
owner/operators  of  physical  systems  that  have  become  cyber-
physical systems, the cyber defenders, and the researchers. 

A.  Physical Systems (OT) Perspective 

We interviewed building managers, physical plant operators, 
and control-systems engineers to understand their perspective on 
how  to  improve  the  security  of  cyber-physical  systems.    For 
most of the half century IT has existed, IT and OT groups have 
not  had  much  reason  to  interact.    Frequently,  IT  groups  are 
unfamiliar  with  the  function  of  OT  systems  and  have  little 
interest  in  them.    From  the  OT  side,  as  long  as  there  was  no 
credible threat from the network, OT staff saw no reason to open 
regular dialogue with cyber defenders.  Nobody on the OT side 
watches the operational cyber side on a day-to-day basis.  OT 
staff  are  frequently  unaware  of  the  tools  techniques  and 
procedures used to secure the IT networks.  OT staff are not part 
of the discussion when cyber security policy is changed and little 
thought is given to understanding how changes affects the cyber-
physical systems in control systems networks.  This means that 
policies,  updates,  and  procedures  that  could  be  of  security 

Threat 

Unauthorized access 

Consequence 

Loss  of  accountability  and  control;  down 
time; equipment damage 

Loss  or  manipulation  of 
data 

Intellectual property loss, scientific progress 
hampered, system malfunction 

Laboratory  vent  hoods  or 
taken 
systems 
safety 
offline by an attack 

Injury  or  loss  of  life;  deleterious  physical 
effects;  release  of  potentially  harmful  or 
deadly gasses 

Server 
degraded or offline 

room 

chillers 

Computer systems could sustain significant 
damage 

Negative pressure facilities 
compromised 

Chemical,  biological, 
contamination of environment and staff 

and 

radioactive 

Overpressurization 
water lines 

of 

Physical damage; monetary loss 

Uninterruptible 
supply compromise 

power 

Inability to bring computer systems down in 
an orderly fashion in an emergency 

Alteration  of  set  points  in 
critical HVAC systems 

Damage,  degradation,  or  loss  of  computer 
systems 

B.  Cyber Security Perspective 

We interviewed several cyber security professionals at XYZ 
who  are  familiar  with  cyber-physical  systems  and  the  unique 
defensive  challenges  they  represent.    We  noted  that  cyber 
security staff also lament the lack of communication with OT 
staff.  There is no organizationally prioritized channel of formal 
communication between the IT and OT teams.  Problems on the 

 
OT  side  are  seldom  if  ever  reported  to  cyber  staff.    Cyber 
security personnel pass warnings on to OT personnel but they 
suspect OT staff may not understand or act upon the warnings 
effectively.    Cyber  analysts  believe  that  OT  staff  who  find 
malware on their systems will simply remove the malware files 
and  reboot  the  systems  without  considering  how  to  prevent 
future infections.  Many OT systems have no possibility of host-
based protection. 

Cyber  analysts  know  which  IP  address  ranges  generally 
belong  to  cyber-physical  systems,  but  only  the  OT  staff 
understand  the  protocols,  capabilities,  and  proper  function  of 
control  systems.    Cyber  analysts  often  do  not  understand  the 
underlying  physical  system  well  enough  to  act  or  notify  the 
system  owners  of  something  suspicious.  Cyber  analysts 
frequently cannot even be certain whether these systems need to 
be patched because active scanning frequently causes failures. 
An infamous incident at XYZ Corp. happened when cyber as-
sessors tried to scan an IT network that, unknown to them, was 
connected to an OT network.  When they started a Nessus scan, 
it activated sprinklers in a server room causing millions of dol-
lars in damage.   

Lack of visibility into the proper workings of cyber-physical 
systems is the gravest concern of cyber analysts.  The threat and 
business  risk  are  not  even  roughly  quantified  for  what  would 
happen if a given CPS failed in specific ways.  Existing security 
plans 
focus  on  documenting  connectivity  and 
quantifying risk from a purely IT perspective. 

instead 

Although  most  OT  systems  are  listed  as  noncritical,  most 
cyber staff recognize that failures in the physical plant could be 
exceptionally  costly.    Although  this  would  tend  to  make  one 
consider these systems high-value assets, cyber security staff are 
already  tasked  with  more  priorities  than  can  be  addressed.  
Listing them as critical would not help unless more resources 
were available to handle the workload [7].  Thus, these systems 
remain listed as non-critical. 

C.  Research Perspective 

PNNL  has  developed  several  tools  for  monitoring  cyber-
physical  infrastructure  to  improve  performance  and  security.  
Among them, we cover two that will serve as data sources for 
our proposed solution: VOLTTRON™ and SerialTap. 

1)  VOLTTRON™ 
VOLTTRON™  is  an  open-source,  secure,  extensible,  and 
modular building-management technology that enables mobile 
and stationary software agents to perform information gathering, 
  VOLTTRON  can 
processing,  and  control  actions. 
independently  manage  a  wide  range  of  applications,  such  as 
HVAC systems, electric vehicles, distributed energy or whole-
building loads, leading to improved operational efficiency and 
energy  and  cost  savings.  Our  researchers  have  gained 
permission  to  place  VOLTTRON  data-collection  agents  on 
XYZ’s  facilities  network  and  on  the  networks  of  its  leased 
buildings and remote facilities (Fig. 2).  Each instance forwards 
data to the XYZ corporate network via a special access agent 
located in the XYZ network DMZ.  There are 12 VOLTTRON 
servers  running  in  each  of  12  buildings.    Instances  of 
VOLTTRON  communicate  via  VOLTTRON  Information 
Protocol (VIP), a message passing protocol based on ZeroMQ 

(http://zeromq.org).  Building systems data from VOLTTRON 
agents  is  made  available  to  researchers  for  energy-related 
objectives  and  also  for  advanced  cyber  detection  research  in 
cyber-physical systems.   

No  outbound  access  is  available  directly  from  sensors.  
Instead  they  forward  data  to  the  “Management  Central” 
VOLTTRON instance in the XYZ network. Commands may be 
sent to the building management system (BMS) on the facilities 
network  from  authorized  devices  only.    The  BMS  commands 
these OT systems via field bus protocols tunneled under IP.  The 
12  VOLTTRON  systems  on  the  facilities  network  query  the 
BMS  to  obtain  their  information.    These  systems  relay  status 
information to the VOLTTRON Management Central system.  
XYZ OT data is made available to certain external collaborators 
via  the  VOLTTRON  Passthrough  instance  in  the  XYZ  DMZ.  
Other access to this information is available via a web portal that 
passes through a traffic scanner for security. 

Fig. 2.  Architecture of building-controls sensors at XYZ. 

Although there has never been an OT fault that was known 
to be correlated with a cyber incident, it is quite possible to self-
induce  a  denial  of  service  by  doing  too  many  simultaneous 
queries  on  the  VOLTTRON  instances  because  these  in-turn 
query the sensors causing them to do extra work.  This happened 
once  when  researchers  were  setting  up  a  demonstration 
simultaneously showing all the information that can be gained 
from the many VOLTTRON sensors.  If attackers could subvert 
a  VOLTTRON  node  they  could  gain  read-only  access  to  see 
field  bus  protocol  commands.    While  this  may  facilitate  an 
attacker's  reconnaissance  during  the  discovery  and  control 
phases,  VOLTTRON  would  be  much  harder  to  subvert  than 
most components on the facilities network because it is security 
hardened. 

2)  SerialTap 
SerialTap is another PNNL tool that enables enterprise cyber 
security tools to monitor communications on serial field busses 
by tapping into the serial bus and tunneling the traffic it finds 
there via Ethernet packets to the enterprise LAN for analysis by 
cyber  analysts  and  their  tools.    The  visibility  VOLTTRON 
provides  to  OT  TCP/IP  networks  SerialTap  affords  for  serial 
networks with physical media like RS-232 cabling. SerialTap is 
designed to fail closed to avoid obstructing communications if 
the SerialTap device fails.  SerialTap is very inexpensive so that 
it could be placed on multiple network segments economically. 

  
The  cost  of  segment-wise  monitoring  depends  on  the 
topology of the field bus.  In a bus topology, a single monitor 
anywhere on the bus can see the traffic from the entire segment 
because all traffic is broadcasted to every node.  In contrast, star 
topologies have only point-to-point serial connections between 
the  PLC/RTU  and  each  controlled/monitored  device,  so 
monitors must be placed inline as pass-throughs on each spoke 
of the network.  Ring topologies are also sometimes used, and, 
depending on the protocols used, every station on the ring may 
still  see  every  command.    But  if  each  device  consumes  the 
commands sent to it, pass-through monitors must be placed at 
every network segment to capture traffic.  The more monitors 
required, the greater the expense of implementation. 

SerialTap and VOLTTRON can provide important sources 
of  OT  data  to  the  cyber  analyst  and  enable  better  situational 
awareness  decision  support.    Additionally,  they  will  expose 
hidden attacks and allow preservation of transient data that may 
contain clues about an intruder's purpose and methods. 

D.  Lessons learned from the interviews 

From  our  interviews  of  staff  on  both  sides  it  seems  each 
group has competence in its own area but fears that the other 
group does not have sufficient competence in that area to help.  
On  the  physical  side  staff  care  about  availability  of  services 
without  concern  for  failure  analysis.    From  the  cyber  security 
side, root-cause analysis is critical to prevent reoccurrence of the 
same failure. 

A major problem in XYZ Corp. and elsewhere is the lack of 
communication  between  IT/cyber  and  OT/physical  subject 
matter experts.  In most organizations, it would be unusual for 
the IT and OT groups to meet regularly.  The two groups have 
operational specialties and vocabularies that differ significantly, 
and communication is often ad hoc.  OT devices are complex, 
not well understood, and insufficiently monitored for security.  
Ideally IT and OT staff would always be aware of the issues on 
OT networks: cyber threats, performance benchmarks, noisy or 
malfunctioning  devices,  etc.    OT  staff  should  communicate 
these issues back to IT, and IT staff must learn to communicate 
clearly to the OT operators. 

the  OT  networks  using  something 

While analysts typically want to have all the data, all cyber 
defenders really need to know about OT systems is the degree 
of anomaly they are experiencing.  This would require collection 
of  data  on 
like 
SerialTap/VOLTTRON and requires automatic data analysis to 
determine  quickly  the  level  of  anomaly  and  potential  threat.  
Employing  these  technologies  on  the  OT  networks  allows 
operators to query the status of the system and intervene directly 
where necessary, bringing nearly as much visibility to the OT 
side as is available to cyber defenders on the IT side. 

The gap identified by our interviews outlines the shape of a 
communications tool to enable both cyber security analysts and 
control  systems  operators  to  react  in  near  real  time  to  cyber 
attack.    Additionally,  the  tool  would  act  as  a  general 
communication solution between the two groups.  The reason 
such a tool does not yet exist is that both cyber and OT data are 
difficult to gather in one place for analysis and analysis. 

IV.  PROPOSED SOLUTION 
The problems to be solved are lack of collaboration between IT 
and OT staff and difficulty understanding the state of the cyber-
physical infrastructure as a whole. To solve the first problem, we 
propose  a  visual  interface  that  could  be  used  equally  well  by 
both groups as a conversation starter. This visualization would 
be driven by the solution to the second problem: a data-driven 
deep-learning model that ingests cyber-physical data from the 
enterprise and correlates performance impact to prior suspicious 
cyber activity.  The proposed model will learn a representation 
of normal behavior, evaluate variations and excursions from au-
tomatically  discovered  normal  operating  bounds,  and  present 
them  using  the  visualization.    The  technology  is  designed  to 
recognize  distributed  threats  across  the  interwoven  layers  of 
OT/IT  architecture  over  long  time  periods  and  provide 
measurable improvement to current state-of-the-art technologies 
for OT/IT intrusion detection. 

A.  Visualization Prototype 

The visualization prototype is designed to present the degree 
of anomaly in OT systems in a way that is easily understandable 
to  both  cyber  analysts  and  to  control  systems  operators.  The 
visualization will help human analysts to communicate and to 
locate  the  most  anomalous  parts  of  the  system  to  prioritize 
investigate at a high level. The cyber analyst only needs to know 
how anomalous the cyber-physical system is, not what exactly 
is wrong with it. For the control systems specialist, the level of 
anomaly shown will indicate that further investigation is needed. 
The  resulting  trend  visualization  concept  (Fig.  3)  reduces  the 
anomaly measure of an entire system to a set of bars that each 
represent a dimension of abnormality and whether it is increas-
ing or decreasing.  

Fig. 3.  CyPhyEye anomaly visualization concept based on the SEQUESTOR 

concept. 

Each bar indicates the composite anomaly level of a single 
cyber-physical  system,  such  as  an  instrument.  Solid  bars 
indicate  the  actual  level  of  anomaly,  while  thinner  lines 
represent the expected near future based on the observed rate of 
change.  Arrows  on  the  ends  of  the  thin  lines  indicate  the 
observed change velocity. Bar color indicates the raw level of 
anomaly concern for each system, and vertical lines represent 
the stage of action required.  

A  further  visualization  concept  (Fig.  4)  shows  the  relative 
amounts  of  message  traffic  that  system  components  send  and 

  
receive. The network visualization concept presents a physical 
map of the facility or area of operation with two circles for each 
communicating entity. The size of the solid circle represents the 
amount  of  sent  traffic  and  the  outline  circle  represents  the 
amount  of  received  traffic.  The  point-to-point  connectors  also 
show the relative amounts of traffic sent and received.  

Fig. 4.  CyPhyEye geographical communication visualization concept. 

A final visualization concept for the user experience is the 
pathway visualization (Fig. 5). When a user selects a node on 
the  communication  visualization  or  a  bar  on  the  anomaly 
visualization,  he  or  she  may  drill  down  to  the  pathway 
visualization,  which  shows  the  communication  partners  of  a 
given cyber-physical system component and the relative amount 
of  communication  for  each.  Analysts  may  annotate  the 
component with notes about its behavior, etc. This visualization 
will  help  both  OT  and 
the 
communication  patterns  within  the  control  system  and  isolate 
potential problems related to network traffic, errors, etc. 

IT  analysts  understand 

Fig. 5.  Pathway visualization. 

B.  Analytics Prototype 

The anomaly metrics required by the visualization approach 
must  be  derived  computationally  in  real  time.  We  propose  a 
deep-learning-based  approach  that  can  handle  the  massive 
streams  of  data  from  OT  systems  and  alerts  that  cyber  tools 
produce and rapidly identify what is normal and how anomalous 
event streams are. 

Two kinds of communications data are available fro estima-
tion of anomaly in OT systems: (1) communications within the 
field bus and (2) communications between field bus devices and 
external  networks.  Both  sources  provide  an  indication  of  the 
anomaly level of the OT systems. We plan to create three deep 
learning neural networks to monitor and control the OT system 
(Fig. 6). 

Fig. 6.  Deep learning system to monitor anomaly levels in OT networks. 

The first network will process network flow data and Snort 
alerts in the IT network, specifically looking for flows that con-
tain  OT  protocols.  This  recurrent  neural  network  (RNN)  log 
classifier  will  be  patterned  on  the  work  of  [8],  which  makes 
heavy use of long short-term memory (LSTM) [9] deep neural 
network connected in series and analysis of textual log entries 
as  both  tokenized  word  vectors  and  character  vectors.  Their 
work is an unsupervised approach to detecting anomalous be-
havior in computer and network logs that is largely domain-ag-
nostic. The model treats system logs as threads of interleaved 
“sentences” (event log lines) to train online unsupervised neural 
network  language  models  using  standard  and  bidirectional 
RNNs over network log data. They have created a tiered recur-
rent  architecture,  which  provides  context  by  modeling  se-
quences of actions over time. The model has produced superior 
performance  and  fine-grained  anomaly  detection  on  open  vo-
cabulary  logging  sources.  analytics  engine  was  architected  to 
compute anomaly metrics from field bus transactions, which are 
cyclic and repetitive, consisting of simple transactions. The net-
work would be trained to classify network transactions as either 
low or high risk, initially based on their similarity to alerts from 
Snort, but later based on feedback from the other components. 
Additionally, this component produces a stream of network con-
text data that contains flows that involve systems within the OT 
system being monitored. 

The second component is planned to be a deep reinforcement 
learning (DRL) network whose job is to learn how to control the 
OT network in a manner similar to a BMS or NAC. This ICS 
DRL controller has an action set of enabling or disabling com-
mand/status information to/from the field bus, and its rewards 
come from producing the least anomalous behavior from the OT 
system.  Essentially,  this  system  consists  of  an  autoencoder 
trained on stable field bus behaviors. The inputs to the model are 
the status messages on the field bus (the feedback), the high-risk 
behaviors detected by the first component, and the network con-
text it provides. It produces control streams for the components 
of the field bus and a behavioral anomaly metric. The greater the 
distance metric between the feedback and the autoencoded re-
sults, the higher the behavioral anomaly metrics is produced.  

 
 
 
The third component is planned to be another DRL network 
that takes the output of the RNN Log Classifier and the behav-
ioral anomaly score from the ICS DRL controller and decides 
whether firewall rules should be adjusted to temporarily quaran-
tine access between OT systems and the rest of the network. This 
approach  is  based  on  our  prior  work  in  [10].  The  behavioral 
anomaly score forms the basis for the reward function for the 
DRL component. Additionally, over time, there will be an in-
creasing reward for re-opening communication. We assume that 
allowed communication pathways are at least generally desira-
ble, even if they sometimes produce undesirable results.  

The behavioral anomaly metric, the raw flow and Snort data, 
and the classifications derived by the deep learning system will 
feed  the  visualization  and  enable  humans  to  work  together  to 
maintain cyber safety in OT neworks.  

V.  CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 

Concern  over  cyber-attacks  has  led  to  the  thoughtless 
proliferation  of  tools  focused  on  addressing  pressing  cyber-
security needs in OT systems without long-term consideration 
of their utility.  Much of what has been developed originates in 
the IT sector and has been inherited with little customization by 
the  control  systems  world.    As  a  result,  control-systems 
professionals,  who  have  not  been  traditionally  responsible  for 
security, now have a role in cyber security of computerized OT 
systems, and they lack tools customized to their environment.  
The data deluge presents difficulty while not solving the essen-
tial problem of lack of communication between IT and OT. 

We have proposed a toolset that would perform much of the 
required  analysis  for  the  user  and  present  only  relevant 
information  in  a  consistent  way.    The  proposed  situational 
awareness  toolset  will  fuse  information  from  ICS  with  cyber 
security data and present a common visualization.  It will enable 
cross validation of automated warnings and enhance the quality 
of  information  that  is  presented  to  both  IT  and  OT  defenders 
through correlation of multiple data sources. 

We  plan  to  take  these  and  other  concepts  back  to  the 
operators who helped us understand their needs to see how well 
the concept would work. Because the concept is driven by data 
that is available only in limited quantity in current systems, we 
plan to work with building owners and use our installed base of 
sensors to obtain the needed data to train our prototype.  

Full definition of the architectures of the deep learning ele-
ments remains the largest area of future work. Given the data 
sources available and our access to both cyber security and OT 
operators we plan to use user-centric design methods to produce 
a usable prototype. Success of the prototype will be measured 
by  how  well  defenders  and  operators  are  able  to  monitor  and 

control their systems with and without our designs. We plan fu-
ture papers to report on our findings. 

VI.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Interviews and visualizations were funded by the Integrated 
Cyber-Physical  Assessment  and  Response  project  of  the  U.S. 
Integrated  Joint  Cybersecurity 
Department  of  Energy’s 
Coordination  Center 
(iJC3)  Cyber  R&D  Enterprise 
Cybersecurity Capability. This work was funded in part by the 
Deep Learning for Scientific Discovery investment at the Pacific 
Northwest  National  Laboratory.  This  paper  corresponds  to 
PNNL report PNNL-SA-138585. 

[1]  Alexander, LTG Keith, Address to the RSA Security Conference in San 
at: 

  Transcript 

available 

Francisco,  CA,  21  April  2009. 
https://www.nsa.gov/news-features/speeches-
testimonies/speeches/21apr09-dir.shtml 

[2]  Department  of  Homeland  Security  Alert  (IR-ALERT-H-16-056-01) 
Cyber-Attack  Against  Ukrainian  Critical  Infrastructure  (2-25-16) 
(available at https://ics-cert.us-cert.gov/alerts/IR-ALERT-H-16-056-01 ).  
Accessed 25 Sept 2017. 

[3]  U.S.  CERT  (2018).  VPNFilter  Destructive  Malware.  Released  23  May 
https://www.us-cert.gov/ncas/current-

2018. 
activity/2018/05/23/VPNFilter-Destructive-Malware 

[4]  NSTAC, 2014.  The President's National Security Telecommunications 
Advisory Committee (NSTAC) report to the President on the Internet of 
Things. 
at: 
http://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/NSTAC%20Report%
20to%20the%20President%20on%20the%20Internet%20of%20Things
%20Nov%202014%20%28updat%20%20%20.pdf 

Available 

[5]  Department of Homeland Security (2014a), “Primary Stuxnet Advisory”, 
ISC-CERT  Advisory  (ICSA-10-272-01),  Original  release:  Sept.    29, 
2010,  revised:  Jan. 
  21,  2014,  available  at:  https://ics-cert.us-
cert.gov/advisories/ICSA-10-272-01 

[6]  Krotofil, Marina, “Rocking the pocket book: Hacking chemical plants for 
competition and extortion.” Black Hat White Paper, August 2015. 
[7]  Silvers,  Robert,  “Rethinking  FISMA  and  Federal  Information  Security 
Policy,” New York University Law Review, vol.  81, November, 2006 , 
pp. 
from 
http://www.nyulawreview.org/sites/default/files/pdf/NYULawReview-
81-5-Silvers.pdf . 

1844–1874. 

Available 

[8]  Tuor, Aaron, Ryan Baerwolf, Nicolas Knowles, Brian Hutchinson, Nicole 
Nichols,  Rob  Jasper  (2018).  “Recurrent  Neural  Network  Language 
Models for Open Vocabulary Event-Level Cyber Anomaly Detection” in 
Proceedings  of  Artificial  Intelligence  in  Cyber  Security  Workshop; 
AAAI-2018 

[9]  Hochreiter,  Sepp  and  Jürgen  Schmidhuber  (1997).  ”Long  short-term 
memory”. Neural Computation. 9 (8): 1735–1780. PMID 9377276. 
[10]  Oehmen CS, Carroll TE, Paulson PC, Best DM, Noonan CF, Thompson 
SR,  Jensen  JL,  Fink  GA,  and  Peterson  ES,  2015.  “Behavior-dependent 
Routing:  Responding 
to  Anomalies  with  Automated  Low-cost 
Measures.” In Proceedings of the 2015 Workshop on Automated Decision 
Making  for  Active  Cyber  Defense  (SafeConfig  '15).  ACM,  New  York, 
NY, USA, 55-58. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
