On the Cost of Cyber Security in Smart Business 

Igor Ivkic, Stephan Wolfauer, Thomas Oberhofer, Markus G. Tauber 
University of Applied Sciences Burgenland 
Eisenstadt, Austria 
e-mail: {igor.ivkic,stephan.wolfauer,thomas.oberhofer,markus.tauber}@fh-burgenland.at 

Abstract—In a world, as complex and constantly changing as ours 
cloud computing is a driving force for shaping the IT landscape 
and  changing  the  way  we  do  business.  Current  trends  show  a 
world  of  people,  things  and  services  all  digitally  interconnected 
via the Internet of Things (IoT). This applies in particular to an 
industrial  environment  where  smart  devices  and  intelligent 
services  pave  the  way  for  smart  factories  and  smart  businesses. 
This paper investigates in a use case driven study the potential of 
making  use  of  smart  devices  to  enable  direct,  automated  and 
voice-controlled  smart  businesses.  Furthermore,  the  paper 
presents  an  initial  investigation  on  methodologies  for  measuring 
costs of cyber security controls for cloud services. 

Keywords—cloud-services; security controls; cost estimation  

I. 

 INTRODUCTION 

The internet boom in the late 90s opened the gates to a new 
era of the information age [1]. In this era software applications 
were shaped in world-wide connectivity, look and feel and the 
time to market [2] decreased significantly. On top of the world 
wide web, mobile devices along with app stores expanded the 
boundaries of personal computers (PC). Instead of being bound 
to  the  stationary  PCs  at  home,  these  devices  enabled  users  to 
operate  globally.  In  addition  to  that  the  app  stores  invited 
everybody  with  a  computer  to  professionally  develop  and  sell 
apps.  The  latest  “game  changer”  in  information  technology 
(IT)  transformed  the  landscape  of  infrastructure  by  declaring 
on  premise  installations  as  obsolete  in  a  nearby  future.  Cloud 
computing,  as  Armbrust  et  al.  [3]  stated,  offers  a  diverse 
variety  of  services,  allocates  the  necessary  infrastructure 
resources and charges in a pay-as-you-go manner. As a result, 
many  of  today’s  big  companies  were  built  on  good  ideas 
implemented as apps or services and operated in the cloud.  

Besides  cloud  computing  the  IoT  and  Industry  4.0  were 
among the latest IT trends [4]. IoT in combination with cloud 
computing  promises  to  turn  our  computers  and  automated 
machines  into  Cyber  Physical  Systems  (CPS)  [5]  which  leads 
to Industry 4.0 [4]. In an Industry 4.0 “smart factory“ [6], CPS 
are communicating with other CPS and with human beings in 
real time over the IoT. Even though these two trends are very 
promising there are a lot of challenges to overcome before an 
Industry  4.0  becomes  reality.  One  of  them  is  to  guarantee  a 
secure communication in CPS [7] and to measure the effort it 
takes (cost) in order to do so. Another challenge is the simple 
lack  of  prototypes  to  demonstrate  a  functioning  IoT  based, 
secure and cost-efficient “smart business”.  

In this paper, we evaluate whether a smart device could be 
introduced to a company to communicate via a cloud services 
and to automate manually performed tasks. Building on this we 
present  a  business-model  and  its  architectural  design  in  a  use 
case  driven  study  including  security  considerations.  In  a  final 
step, we apply security controls suggested by ISO 27017 [8] in 

combination with Six Sigma [9] to first, eliminate security risks 
in  the  presented  use  cases  and  to  second,  measure  additional 
expenses  resulting  from  them.  Our  contribution  in  this  paper 
towards applying an established security standard and a quality 
management method in a use case driven study is twofold:  

• 

• 

firstly,  we  derive  its  business  need  and  the  required 
technical design including security considerations and  
secondly,  we  present  an  initial  approach  to  eliminate 
security risks and measure the effort it takes to do so. 

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows:  Section  II 
summarizes  the  related  work  in  the  field,  followed  by  the 
presentation  of  a  use  case  study  in  Section  III.  Finally,  in 
Section IV we introduce a high-level process flow based on Six 
Sigma  for  identifying,  categorizing,  analyzing,  eliminating 
security risks and measuring the resulting costs. 

II.  RELATED WORK 

Guaranteeing security and measuring the resulting costs of 
cloud  services  faces  considerable  difficulties.  Related  work  in 
[10]  and  [11]  has  developed  research  results  about  improving 
the service quality using Six Sigma. In contrast to that the work 
in  [12]  presented  a  management  process  for  “Security  Policy 
Management”  within  the  Six  Sigma  framework.  In  [13]  Chen 
& Sion present solutions of how to protect data and guarantee 
security  in  the  public  cloud.  However,  none  of  these  works 
presented  solutions  of  how  to  apply  ISO  27017  controls  to 
secure cloud services and how to measure the effort it takes to 
guarantee  security  of  a  cloud  service.  This  paper  presents  an 
approach for applying an established standard to secure a cloud 
service  and  to  use  an  established  quality  management  method 
to measure resulting costs. In this regard, this papers approach 
offers a method for guaranteeing security of cloud services and 
quantifying the implementation expenses. 

III.  BUSINESS-MODEL & USE CASE 

Amazon Echo and the Amazon Web Services (AWS) meet 
all  requirements  needed  in  the  following  business-model  and 
Use  Cases  I  and  II.  Figure  1  shows  the  basic  concept  of 
Amazon  Echo  communicating  with  the  AWS  via  Amazon 
Voice  Service  (AVS)  including  the  processing  of  the  user 
commands  via  Alexa 
the  Spoken  Language 
service, 
Understanding (SLU) and the Amazon Skill Kit (ASK) [14]: 

Figure 1.   Amazon Echo & AWS Technology. (adapted from Soper, 2016) 

 
 
 
We  use  Amazon  Echo  and  AWS  to  develop  a  smart-business 
case for a fictive company with branches in two cities (City-A 
and  City-B).  The  company’s  core  business  is  delivering 
packages to customers. At first, an ordered package is delivered 
to  one  of  the  two  branches  and  then  transported  by  delivery 
trucks  to  the  customers.  Usually,  the  truck  is  loaded  in  the 
morning  in  City-A  before  the  driver  departs  to  City-B 
delivering packets on the way. Typically, on the following day, 
the  same  truck  departs  in  City-B  and  heads  back  to  City-A 
supplying customers on its way, and so on. The key to success 
for 
the  organization  and  direct 
communication  between  the  two  branches  and  their  delivery 
truck  drivers.  To  save  time  and  costs,  voice  controlled 
messaging  (active  and  passive)  is  considered  for  automated 
routine  jobs  via  Amazon  Echo.  Three  deployed  devices  use 
AWS  for  computation  (i.e.:  convert  natural  language  in 
computer  understandable  language,  vice  versa)  and  as  a 
dispatching service (i.e.: sending voice mails). For the use case 
(Figure 2) we also consider ISO 27017 and Six Sigma. 

the  business  model 

is 

Figure 2.   Use Case – Architecture, based on use case description below 

A.  Use Case I 
The  finance  manager  in  City-A  is  planning  to  improve  some 
accounting  tasks,  especially  the  accounting  process  at  the  end 
of a month. Usually, each employee is committed to daily time 
recording which must be released at the end of the month. Only 
when  the  time  recordings  of  an  employee  have  been  released 
the  employees  of  the  finance  department  can  start  with  the 
accounting  process.  Unfortunately,  it  repeatedly  happens,  that 
employees forget to release their time recordings in time. This 
mistake leads to a delay of accounting which means increased 
costs  of  administration  and  effort  to  finally  finish  the 
accounting process. The following sequence diagram shows the 
Use Case I as described in the next paragraphs: 

Figure 3.   Use Case I – Automated “End-of-Month” Reminder. 

So,  to  fix  this  issue  once  and  for  all  the  finance  manager 
dictates  a  voice  message  to  Alexa  with  the  condition  that  his 
message should be played to the Chief of Department in City-B 
at  the  end  of  each  month.  The  dictated  message  is  meant  to 
remember  the  colleague  from  the  other  branch  to  remind  the 
employees to release their time recordings in time. 

Use  Case  I  in  Figure  3  shows  the  entire  “Reminder 
Process”  starting  with  the  message  dictated  by  the  Finance 
Manager  to  the  message  being  played  to  the  Chief  of 
Department in City-B. The Use Case I does not show, that the 
process above is created one time and then repeatedly executed 
at  the  end  of  every  month.  All  the  commands  necessary  to 
understand  and  execute  the  Finance  Managers  requests  are 
provided by the AWS. 

B.  Use Case II 

The  Chief  of  Department  in  City-B  plans  to  invite  the 
Finance Manager and a Truck Driver to talk about a customer 
complaint.  Instead  of  using  his  email  client  and  wasting  time 
on searching for a date where all three attendees were free, he 
decides  to  ask  Alexa  for  help.  He  uses  the  key  word  “Alexa 
Calendar” to organize an appointment on the next possible date 
for  all  attendees.  Alexa  sends  the  request  to  the  AWS  which 
combs  through  all  calendars  until  a  date  is  found  and  finally 
sends  an  invitation  to  all  attendees.  The  following  sequence 
diagram shows the described Use Case II: 

Figure 4.   Use Case II – Automated Appointment Scheduling. 

Figure 4 shows how the additional features of the business-
model  can  be  used  to  combine  the  AWS  with  i.e.:  a  mail 
server. In this scenario manually performed tasks like “creating 
a  new  appointment”,  “searching  for  free  dates  in  calendars” 
and “sending an invitation to a meeting” become obsolete. It is 
another nice example of how simple it is to use cloud services 
as a building block system to improve working routines or even 
entire processes. 

IV.  EVALUATION 

After  presenting  the  business-model  architecture  and  the 
two  use  cases  in  the  previous  chapter,  the  evaluation  in  the 
following  is  three-fold.  First,  the  Open  Web  Application 
Security  Project  (OWASP)  top  ten  cloud  security  risks  are 
categorized  by  their  importance  to  the  presented  use  cases 
(Section A). Based on that ranking, the ISO 27017 is used then 
to  eliminate  the  top  three  risks  (Section  B).  In  this  step,  it  is 
demonstrated how the security controls as proposed by the ISO 

 
 
 
standard  are  applied  to  eliminate  the  risks  in  the  use  cases. 
Finally,  an  adapted  version  of  the  Six  Sigma  method,  is 
identify,  categorize,  analyze,  eliminate  and 
proposed 
measure security risks (Section C). 

to 

A.  Cloud Security Risks 

The OWASP is a non-profit organization operating world-
wide  with  the  main  goal  to  improve  the  security  of  software. 
This organization is on a mission to point out security risks to 
individuals  and  organizations  to  create  a  base  for  informed 
decision  making  about  security.  In  order  to  achieve  this  goal, 
the  OWASP  community  started  many  projects  focusing  on 
different issues. One of these projects is the “OWASP Cloud – 
10  Project”  with  the  goal  to  maintain  a  list  of  top  10  security 
risks faced with cloud computing. The following list shows the 
top  10  cloud  computing  risks  according  to  OWASP  (detailed 
description of risks in [15]): 

•  R1 – Accountability and Data Ownership 

•  R2 – User Identity Federation 

•  R3 – Regulatory Compliance 

•  R4 – Business Continuity and Resiliency 

•  R5 – User Privacy and Secondary Usage of Data 

•  R6 – Service and Data Integration 

•  R7 – Multi Tenancy and Physical Security 

•  R8 – Incidence Analysis and Forensic Support 

•  R9 – Infrastructure Security 

•  R10 – Non-Production Environment Exposure 

Generally,  all  ten  risks  should  be  analyzed  and  eliminated 
to  guarantee  maximum  security 
for  a  cloud  service. 
Unfortunately,  that  would  be  beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper. 
Therefore,  a  risk  analysis  [16]  [17]  [18]  was  carried  out  to 
categorize the top ten risks by their relevance to the use cases 
and  their  severity  of  consequences.  Figure  5  shows  a  risk 
matrix including the results of the risk analysis:  

Figure 5.   Risk Analysis of OWASP Top 10. 

In  the  presented  use  cases  the  smart  devices  (Amazon 
Echo) and cloud services (AWS) are mainly used to automate 
tasks  which  are  usually  performed  manually.  So,  the  cloud 
service  uses  input  (voice  commands)  to  either  inform/remind 
other  users  or  create  appointments  automatically.  Because  all 
these  tasks  could  be  performed  manually  by  the  user  without 
creating additional risks (caused by cloud computing) R1 & R5 

were  categorized  as  “very  low”  (relevance)  /  “high”  (severity 
of consequences). R2 can be left out of the discussion, because 
only one cloud provider (AWS) was used in the use cases. The 
next three risks (R3, R7 and R8) would have been significant if 
almost all cloud providers did not enable the option to choose 
the  location  of  your  data.  But,  they  are  still  very  serious  risks 
which should not be handled carelessly. Just as much prudence 
is  needed  with  R10,  because  security  is  as  much  important  to 
productivity  systems  as  it  is  to  development  environments. 
Although,  in  the  presented  use  cases,  there  is  no  need  to 
constantly redevelop the services. So, R10 is an important risk, 
but not the most important one in the given use cases. 

The most important issues in Use Case I and II are R4, R6 
and R9. The highest ranked issue is R6, because all information 
transferred  from  smart  device  to  smart  device  (Amazon  Echo 
to  Amazon  Echo,  end-to-end)  via  cloud  services  (AWS)  must 
be  encrypted.  Next  on  the  list  is  infrastructure  security  (R9) 
which  means  that  the  smart  devices  need  to  be  physically 
secured from theft and/or misuse. Finally, the business must go 
on no matter what. This does not mean that the cloud services 
need  extra  treatment.  It  means  that  it  is  important  to  have 
backup  devices  in  case  of  dysfunction  to  keep  the  users  (and 
therefore the business) non-stop available. 

B. 

ISO 27017 
The  ISO  27017  is  a  code  of  practice  for  information 
security controls for cloud services based on the standards ISO 
27001 and ISO 27002 [19]. In this regard, ISO 27017 provides 
guidance  on  information  security  aspects  of  cloud  computing, 
recommending and assisting with the implementation of cloud-
specific  information  security  controls  [19].  The  standard  was 
published  in  2015  [19]  and  provides  cloud-based  guidance  on 
37  of  the  controls  in  ISO  27002  [20].  In  addition  to  that  it 
addresses the following seven cloud controls [20]:  

•  WHO is responsible FOR WHAT (customer/provider) 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

removal/return of assets on terminated contracts  

protection  and  separation  of  the  customer’s  virtual 
environment 

virtual machine configuration 

administrative  operations  and  procedures  associated 
with the cloud environment 

cloud customer monitoring of activity (in the cloud) 

 virtual and cloud network environment alignment  

When  using  ISO  27017  in  combination  with  ISO  27001 
both the cloud service provider and the cloud service customer 
benefit of the standards. For instance, when looking at section 
A.9.4.1  of  ISO  27001  in  regard  of  restricting  access,  the 
guidance suggests the following controls [19]:  

•  The cloud service customer should ensure that access 
to information in the cloud service can be restricted in 
accordance  with  its  access  control  policy  and  that 
such restrictions are realized.   

 
 
 
•  The  cloud  service  provider  should  provide  access 
controls  that  allow  the  cloud  service  customer  to 
restrict  access  to  its  cloud  services,  its  cloud  service 
functions  and 
the  cloud  service  customer  data 
maintained in the service.  

The  following  table  shows  the  suggested  changes  by  ISO 

27017 to the established standards ISO 27001 / 27002 [21]:   

TABLE I.  

COMPARISON OF CHANGES IN ISO STANDARDS  (ADVISERA, 

2015) 

Section 

ISO 27001 / ISO 27002 
Control Section 

S5 

S6 

S7 

S8 

S9 

S10 

S11 

S12 

S13 

S14 

S15 

S16 

S17 

S18 

Information Security Policy 
Organization of Information 
Security 
Human Resource Security 

Asset Management 

Access Control 

Cryptography 
Physical and Environmental 
Security 
Operations Security 

Communications Security 
System Acquisition, Development 
and Maintenance 
Supplier Relationships 
Information Security Incident 
Management 
Information Security Aspects of 
Business Continuity 
Compliance 

Level of Change in  
ISO 27017 
MODERATE 

MODERATE 

LOW-MODERATE 

LOW-MODERATE 

HIGH 

MODERATE 

LOW-MODERATE 

MODERATE-HIGH 

MODERATE-HIGH 

MODERATE 

MODERATE-HIGH 

MODERATE 

LOW 

MODERATE-HIGH 

To eliminate the risks R4, R6 and R9 the following security 

controls as suggested by ISO 27017 should be applied: 

•  S17  –  Information  Security  Aspects  of  Business 

Continuity (to eliminate R4) 

•  S10 – Cryptography (to eliminate R6) 

•  S9 – Access Control (to eliminate R9) 

There  are  two  security  controls  in  the  ISO  standard  to 
eliminate R4. To implement the first, control the continuity of 
information  security  must  be  planned,  implemented  and 
reviewed.  This  control  is  realized  by  the  proposed  Six  Sigma 
process  in  section  C.  The  second  control  suggests  having 
sufficient  redundancies  to  satisfy  availability  requirements.  In 
both  use  cases  the  availability  of  the  cloud  services  is 
guaranteed by the fault tolerance and high availability of AWS 
[22]. But, it is also important to have enough hardware reserves 
in case of smart device failure. So, the delivery trucks and the 
two offices should each at least have one backup smart device 
(Amazon Echo) and a process to order a replacement. 

To  guarantee  service  and  data  integration  (R6)  in  cloud 
services the ISO standard suggests implementing cryptographic 
controls.  These  controls  take  care  of  secure  data  transferring 

and  authentication,  so  that  the  messages  can  neither  be 
intercepted  nor  sent/received  by  unauthorized  users/devices. 
Especially  the  control  to  ensure  that  the  person  who  uses  the 
smart  device  is  really  who  she/he  claims  to  be  is  a  major 
requirement  for  both  use  cases.  Although,  user  biometric 
authentication  can  be  achieved  by  available  products  like 
ArmorVox [23], they go hand in hand with high expenses. 

The last risk (R9) can be eliminated by the access controls. 
As  suggested  by  the  ISO  standard  the  smart  devices  need 
physical security controls, as well as authentication controls for 
the voice control functionality. To ensure physical security the 
devices  should  be  locked  with  i.e.:  Kensington  desk  mount 
cables.  This  control  provides  security  against  theft  in  the 
offices and/or the delivery trucks. Additionally, it is important 
to  implement  user  management  processes  to  take  care  of 
creation of users and password policies, as well as allocation of 
access  rights  and  special  restrictions  for  privileged  access 
rights. The process must include regular reviews and updates of 
access  rights  to  continuously  verify  and  improve  access 
controls. Furthermore, the implemented access controls should 
take effect each time the smart device is used. In this regard, it 
is important to prohibit the usage of a smart device (especially 
with  the  AWS  skill  to  access  user  mail  and  calendar  data) 
without an authorized user and a password. So, before a user is 
permitted  to  use  the  smart  device  she/he  must  authenticate 
herself/himself  with  a  code  or  a  password  or  i.e.:  the  finger 
scan sensor on a mobile phone. 

C.  Six Sigma 

that 

Six  Sigma  was  developed  in  1986  by  Motorola  and  is  a 
method  providing  tools  for  organizations  to  improve  their 
business processes. The idea behind Six Sigma was to remove 
causes of errors when detected before they lead to defects in a 
product  or  service.  This  is  accomplished  by  setting  up  a 
management  system 
identifies  errors  and  provides 
methods  for  eliminating  them.  There  are  two  methodologies 
used  within  Six  Sigma.  First  the  DMAIC  (Define,  Measure, 
Analyze,  Improve,  and  Control)  method,  which  is  used  for 
improving  existing  business  processes  and  second 
the 
DMADV  (Define,  Measure,  Analyze,  Design,  and  Verify) 
method for create new processes and new products or services. 
There  are  also  many  different  management  tools  used  within 
Six  Sigma  [23].  For  the  sake  of  completeness,  the  DMADV 
method  is  mentioned  here,  but  will  not  be  discussed  in  the 
proposed Six Sigma process.  

In 

the  following  proposal, 

the  established  and  well 
documented  DMAIC  method  is  adapted  to  create  a  new 
process. This process includes steps to identify cloud security 
risks,  categorize  them,  search  for  a  solution,  create  an 
implementation  plan  and  finally  measure  how  much  effort  it 
would  take  to  apply  the  elaborated  security  controls.  The 
DMAIC  methodology  perfectly  suits  the  task,  because  of  its 
problem-solving nature and its process-step structure. Figure 6 
shows  the  proposed  high-level  process  flow  of  the  DMAIC 
method through its five steps [24]. 

 
 
 
Figure 6.   High-Level DMAIC Process Flow. (adapted from Hambleton, 2007)

As  previously  mentioned  the  proposed  process  in  Figure  6 
makes use of the DMAIC steps which are adapted to serve the 
purpose of this paper. The entire process, which is designed to 
take care of security risks from identifying them to preparing a 
solution  including  a  cost  measurement,  is  a  never-ending 
process.  This  process  should  be  executed  at  regular  intervals 
to  guarantee  that  security  risks  are  identified  as  early  as 
possible.  The  following  list  describes  the  proposed  process 
steps in detail: 

1)  Define:  the  process  starts  by  identifying  and  defining 
security  risks  for  a  cloud  service.  This  can  be  achieved  either 
by  implementing  a  monitoring  system  [25]  or  by  using  any 
other  method  to  identify  security  issues.  In  our  use  case  the 
OWASP  top  10  cloud  security  risks  list  was  used  and 
categorized  by  relevance  and  severity  of  consequences.  Even 
though  this  paper  only  examined  the  top  three  risks  (R4,  R6 
and R9) this method can be used to identify all risks as listed 
by the OWASP. 

2)  Measure:  if  the  risks  from  the  define  phase  are  still 
present in the current cloud service, the next step would be to 
categorize them and check whether there were existing security 
controls to fix the issues. The categorization could be done by a 
risk analysis as described in Section A and shown in Figure 5. 
The  output  of  this  step  is  a  list  of  risks  grouped  by  their 
relevance  to  the  current  cloud  service  /  process  and  the 
resulting  damage,  if  the  issue  is  not  resolved.  If  there  are 
existing  security  controls  which  could  be  applied  the  Analyze 
step can be skipped.  

3)  Analyze: in this step, the main goal is to find solutions to 
eliminate  all  identified  and  categorized  security  risks  which 
cannot be solved with current security controls. As described in 
Section  B,  we  used  security  controls  (S17,  S10  and  S9)  as 
proposed  by  an  established  standard  (ISO  27017)  to  solve  the 
top three issues (R4, R6 and R9) identified and categorized in 
the  previous  Section  A.  The  output  of  the  Analyze  phase  is  a 
list of security controls, which can be applied to eliminate the 
identified issues. 

4) 

Improve: so far, we found out WHAT the security risks 
are,  IN  WHAT  ORDER  they  need  to  be  solved  and  WHAT 
controls could be used to do so. Based on that, the next step is 
to  create  a  security  control  implementation  plan  and  to  verify 
whether  the  control  eliminates  the  risks  or  not.  The  plan 
includes  the  implementation  steps  and  a  list  of  all  resources 

(i.e.:  all  expenses  like  personnel,  software,  hardware,  etc.) 
required.  Next,  these  steps  are  prioritized  and  tested  to  see  if 
the solutions resolve the problem.  

5)  Control:  in  the  final  step  a  comparative  cost  analysis 
shows  how  much  it  would  cost  to  implement  the  security 
controls (S17, S10 and S9) to eliminate the risks (R4, R6 and 
R9).  In  the  following  cost  analysis  software-,  hardware-, 
process-, and operational-factors are considered to calculate the 
implementation  expenses.  These  factors  are  based  on  the 
presented  use  cases,  the  resulting  security  risks  and  security 
controls.  Software-  and  hardware-costs  are  represented  by 
monetary  costs,  while  process-  and  operational-costs  are 
measured by man-days (MD). In this regard, an MD is defined 
as an eight-hour day with an assumed hourly rate of EUR 100. 
This simplified cost metric will be enhanced in future work by 
investigating  more  generic  cost  metrics.  The  following  table 
shows the cost analysis measuring the resulting implementation 
costs: 

TABLE II.  

  COST ANALYSIS 

Costs 

Software, 
Cloud Service 

Hardware 

Process 

Operation 

Security Controls / Risks 

S17 / R4 

a

17 €

b

360 €

c

c

400 €

400 €

S10 / R6 
a + 230 €

17 €

d 

- 

c

c

800 €

800 €

S9 / R9 

a 

17 €

+ 230 €

d 

e 

90 €

+ 570 €

f 

c

c

800 €

800 €

monthly 

1.177 € 

1.847 € 

2.507 € 

a. Amazon Lambda Pricing. (AWS: Development & Compute Time) 

b. Amazon Echo Pricing. (3 x Amazon Echo + 3 x Amazon Echo reserves) 

c. Process-/Operation-Costs. (1 MD = 8 hours * 100 € = 800 €) 

d. Voice Biometrics. (VoiceIt: 10.000 API Calls per Month) 

e. Kensington Desktop Lock for Amazon Echo. (3 x Desktop Lock) 

f. Motorola G5 with Finger Scan Sensor. (3 x Mobile Phone) 

V.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

In this paper, we introduced a use case of for smart business 
by  using  smart  devices  and  cloud  services.  We  explored  the 
technical  specifications  and  services  of  Amazon  Echo  and 
explained  the  ASK.  In  this  regard,  we  pointed  out  that  the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
built-in  skills  of  Alexa  could  be  extended  by  custom  built 
skills. Furthermore, we have proposed an architectural design 
to illustrate two points. First, to show how simple it is today to 
use smart devices and cloud services to build powerful smart 
businesses  with  little  effort.  Second,  we  have  illustrated  that 
IoT  can  have  a  big  impact  both  on  your  business  and  on 
security. In the end of section III we presented two use cases 
showing  how  Amazon  Echo  and  Alexa  can  be  combined  to 
enable  direct,  automated  and  voice-based  communication  to 
automate routine tasks.  

Finally,  in  Section  IV  we  proposed  a  high-level  DMAIC 
process  to  identify  and  categorize  security  risks,  analyse  and 
prepare security controls, plan their implementation and in the 
end,  measure  the  cost  involved  when  implementing  them.  In 
this  regard,  we  first  presented  a  method  to  identify  (Define: 
OWASP)  the  top  ten  security  risks  and  label  them  by  their 
relevance to the use cases and the impact they would have, if 
the risks were not eliminated (Measure: Risk Analysis). Next, 
we  presented  an  established  standard  (ISO  27017)  which 
provides  security  controls  for  securing  cloud  services.  Then, 
we  presented  solutions  according  to  ISO  27017  to  the  top  3 
security  risks  from  the  risk  analysis  (Analyze).  In  addition  to 
that  we  presented  how  these  security  controls  could  be 
implemented  and  what  resources  would  be  needed  to  do  so 
(Improve). In the last step, we evaluated the resulting expenses 
when  applying  the  presented  security  controls  to  eliminated 
the analysed security risks (Control: Cost Analysis). 

In summary, we explored the possibilities of smart devices 
and  cloud  services  to  enable  smart  businesses.  In  addition  to 
that  we  proposed  methods  to  identify  and  categorize  security 
risks,  to  analyze  solutions,  plan  implementation  steps  and  to 
measure the costs to do so. The main contribution of this paper 
is the initial investigation on an approach for how to measure 
the cost of security in smart business by a combination of the 
above  methods in  a  simple  process.  This  will  be  enhanced  in 
future work by considering multiple other use cases and hence 
more  security  requirements  including  a  more  generic  metric 
for  cost  calculation.  We  will  furthermore  also  investigate 
alternatives to the OWASP, the ISO standard and Six Sigma to 
verify a broader application of our work. 

VI.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

Research leading to these results has received funding from 
the  EU  ECSEL  Joint  Undertaking  under  grant  agreement  n° 
737459 (project Productive4.0) and from the partners national 
funding authorities FFG on behalf of the Federal Ministry for 
Transport, Innovation and Technology (bmvit)and the Federal 
Ministry of Science, Research and Economy (BMWFW). 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Castells,  M.,  "The  power  of  identity:  The  information  Age:  Economy, 

[2] 

society and culture, Volume II (The information age)," 2003. 
Iansiti,  M.  and  MacCormack,  A.,  "Developing  products  on  Internet 
time," Harvard business review 75.5, 1996, pp. 108-117. 

[3]  Armbrust,  M.  et  al.,  "Above  the  clouds:  a  Berkeley  view  of  cloud," 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California 
at Berkeley, 2009. 

[4]  Hermann,  M.,  Pentek,  T.  and  Otto,  B.,  "Design  principles  for  industrie 
(HICSS),  2016  49th  Hawaii 

4.0  scenarios,"  System  Sciences 
International Conference on, IEEE, 2016. 

[5]  Lee,  E.  A.,  "Cyber  physical  systems:  Design  challenges,"  Object 
Oriented  Real-Time  Distributed  Computing  (ISORC),  2008  11th  IEEE 
International Symposium on, IEEE, 2008. 

[6]  Zuehlke,  D.,  "SmartFactory—Towards  a  factory-of-things,"  Annual 

Reviews in Control 34.1, 2010, pp. 129-138. 

[7]  Banerjee,  A.  et  al.,  "Ensuring  safety,  security,  and  sustainability  of 
mission-critical  cyber–physical  systems,"  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE 
100.1, 2012, pp. 283-299. 
IEC, ISO Std. "ISO 27017." Information technology-Security techniques 
(DRAFT), 2012. 

[8] 

[9]  Pyzdek, T. and Keller, P. A., “The six sigma handbook”, McGraw-Hill 

Education, 2014.  

[10]  Oktadini,  Nabiła  Rizky,  and  Kridanto  Surendro,  "SLA  in  cloud 
computing: Improving SLA's life cycle applying six sigma," Information 
Technology  Systems  and  Innovation  (ICITSI),  2014  International 
Conference on. IEEE, 2014. 

[11]  Antony,  Jiju,  "Six  sigma  for  service  processes,"  Business  Process 

Management Journal 12.2, 2006, pp. 234-248. 

[12]  Anand,  V.,  Saniie,  J.,  and  Oruklu,  E.,  "Security  policy  management 

process within Six Sigma framework," 2011. 

[13]  Singh, Shri RK Bigensana, and Lakshmi Prasad Saikia, "Present Trends 
of  Data  Protection  Policies  in  Cloud  Computing,"  International  Journal 
of Science, Engineering and Computer Technology 5.10, 2015, pp. 347. 
[14]  Soper,  T.,  “Amazon  recruiting  heavily  for  Echo  and  Alexa  engineers, 
hosts  big  invite-only  event  to  find  talent”,  GeekWire,  Retrieved  March 
7,  2017,  [Online],  Available:  https://www.geekwire.com/2016/amazon- 
ramps-up-recruiting-efforts-for-engineers/. 

[15]  OWASP, “OWASP Cloud – 10/Initial Pre-Alpha List of OWASP Cloud 
Top  10  Security  Risks”,  Retrieved  May  8,  2017,  [Online],  Available: 
https://www.owasp.org/index.php/OWASP_Cloud_ ‐ _10/Initial_Pre-
Alpha_List_of_OWASP_Cloud_Top_10_Security_Risks 

[16]  ISO,  ISO31000,  "31000:  2009  Risk  management–Principles  and 
guidelines," International  Organization  for  Standardization,  Geneva, 
Switzerland,  2009. 

[17]  Ashley,  D.B.,  Diekmann,  J.E.,  Molenaar,  K.R., “Risk  Assessment  and 
Allocation  for  Highway  Construction  Management,”  Federal  Highway 
Administration,  US  Department  of  Transportation:  Washington,  DC, 
USA, 2006. 

[18]  Treasury  Board  Secretariat  of  Canada,  “Guide  to  Corporate  Risk 
Profiles,”  Retrieved  May  8,  2017,  [Online],  Available:  http://www.tbs-
sct.gc.ca/tbs-sct/rm-gr/guides/gcrp-gepropr-eng.asp?format=print. 

[19]  IsecT,  ”ISO/IEC  27017:2015 

Information 
technology  —  Security  techniques  —  Code  of  practice  for  information 
security controls based on ISO/IEC 27002 for cloud services,” Retrieved 
May  3,  2017,  [Online],  Available:  http://www.iso27001security.com 
/html/27017.html.  

ITU-T  X.1631  — 

/ 

[20]  BSI  Group,  “ISO/IEC  27017,”  Retrieved  May  3,  2017,  [Online], 
https://www.bsigroup.com/en-GB/Security-controls-for- 

Available: 
cloud-services-ISO-IEC27017/.  

[21]  Kosutic, D., “ISO 27001 vs. ISO 27017 – Information security controls 
for  cloud  services,”  Retrieved  May  3,  2017,  [Online],  Available: 
https://advisera.com/27001academy/blog/2015/11/30/iso-27001-vs-iso-
27017-information-security-controls-for-cloud-services/.  

[22]  Amazon  Web  Services,  “Fault  Tolarance  &  High  Availability,” 
Retrieved 
Available: 
https://media.amazonwebservices.com/architecturecenter/AWS_ac_ra_ft
ha_04.pdf. 

[Online], 

2017, 

May 

8, 

[23]  Graves,  A.,  “What  Is  Six  Sigma?”,  Retrieved  April  5,  2017,  [Online], 

Available: http://www.sixsigmadaily.com/what-is-six-sigma/.  

[24]  Hambleton,  L.,  “Treasure  Chest  of  Six  Sigma  Growth  Methods,  Tools, 

and Best Practices,“ Pearson Education, 2007. 

[25]  Bicaku A., Tauber M., Balaban S., Hudic A, Mauthe A., Hutchison D., 
"Harmonized  Monitoring  for  High  Assurance  Clouds,"  in  CLaw:  IEEE 
2nd Workshop on Legal and Technical Issues in Cloud Computing and 
Cloud-Supported Internet of Things, 2016.  

