Putting Together the Pieces: 
A Concept for Holistic Industrial Intrusion Detection1 

Simon Duque Antón and Hans Dieter Schotten 
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence, Kaiserslautern, Germany 
Simon.Duque_Anton@dfki.de 
Hans_Dieter.Schotten@dfki.de 

Abstract: The fourth industrial revolution, resulting in Industry 4.0, provides a variety of novel business cases. 
These business cases provide benefits with respect to cost, effort, customer satisfaction  and production time. 
Progress  in  production  can  be  monitored  in  real-time  by  the  customer,  maintenance  can  be  performed  in  a 
remote fashion, time- and cost-efficient production of customer specific products is enabled. These business 
cases are founded on characteristics of digitisation, namely an increase in intercommunication and embedded 
computational capacities. Besides the advantages derived from the ever present communication properties, it 
increases the attack surface of a network as well. As industrial protocols and systems were not designed with 
security  in  mind,  spectacular  attacks  on  industrial  systems  occurred  over  the  last  years.  Most  industrial 
communication protocols do not provide means to ensure authentication or encryption. This means attackers 
with  access  to  a  network  can  read  and  write  information.  Originally  not  meant  to  be  connected  to  public 
networks, the use cases of Industry 4.0 require interconnectivity, often through insecure public networks. This 
lead  to  an  increasing  interest  in  information  security  products  for  industrial  applications.  In  this  work,  the 
concept for holistic intrusion detection methods in an industrial context is presented. It is based on different 
works considering several aspects of industrial environments and their capabilities to identify intrusions as an 
anomaly  in  network  or  process  data.  These  capabilities  are  based  on  preceding  experiments  on  real  and 
synthetic data. In order to justify the concept, an overview of potential and actual attack vectors and attacks on 
industrial systems is provided. It is shown that different aspects of industrial facilities, e.g. office IT, shop floor 
OT,  firewalled  connections  to  customers  and  partners  are  analysed  as  well  as  the  different  layers  of  the 
automation pyramid require different methods to detect attacks. Additionally, the singular steps of an attack on 
industrial  applications  are  characterised.  Finally,  a  resulting  concept  for  integration  of  these  methods  is 
proposed, providing the means to detect the different stages of an attack by different means 

Keywords:  Industrial  (Information)  Security,  Intrusion  Detection,  Attack  Vectors,  Hybrid  Approach,  Machine 
Learning 

1.  Introduction 

The  fourth  digital  revolution,  creating  Industry  4.0,  enables  a  plethora  of  novel  use  and  business  cases  for 
industrial  applications.  Founded  on  the  development  in  communication  and  computation  technology,  the 
Industry 4.0 use cases employ the increase of intercommunication and embedded intelligence, e.g. the digital 
factory  (Stef et  al.  2013). These novel business cases can decrease cost, time to production and effort. They 
enable customer individual production, direct information about the state of production, remote maintenance 
and operation. Since they rely heavily on communication, connection through network boundaries is essential. 
However, industrial communication protocols have not been designed with security in mind. Most protocols, 
such  as  Modbus  (Modbus  2012;  Modbus-IDA  2006)  or  Profinet  (PROFIBUS  2017)  do  not  contain  methods  to 
authenticate  entities  or  encrypt  communication.  Originally,  industrial  control  systems,  commonly  known  as 
Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition (SCADA) or Operation Technology (OT)–Systems were meant to be 
physically separated from public networks. Additionally, highly application specific devices and configurations 
were considered to make it exceedingly difficult for an attacker to exploit the systems (Igure et al. 2006). These 
assumptions,  however,  have  proven  to  be  wrong.  A  spectacular  series  of  successful  attacks  on  industrial 

1 This is the preprint of a work submitted to and accepted at the proceedings 2019 European Conference on 
Cyber Warfare and Security. Please cite as follows: 
Duque Anton, S. and Schotten H. D.: “Putting Together the Pieces: A Concept for Holistic Industrial Intrusion 
Detection.” In Proceedings of the 2019 European Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security (ECCWS), Academic 
Conferences International Limited, 2019. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                 
companies and systems shows that industry has become a target of cyber criminals and state-sponsored actors 
alike (Duque Anton et al. 2017a). Commercial Off The Shelf (COTS)–products make integration and configuration 
of new devices easier for operators. On the other hand, they allow attackers to analyse and develop exploits 
against  the  devices.  Furthermore,  the  network  layout  of industry  is  based  on  well-established  protocols  and 
network segmentation techniques. The application of common techniques makes it easy for attackers to reuse 
attack  techniques.  The  incentive  for  attackers  is  manifold.  Attacks  on  industrial  and  critical  infrastructure 
facilities can originate in a political agenda, even though attribution is difficult. Different industrial attacks in the 
past, e.g. the Ukrainian blackout in December 2015 and Stuxnet, are rumoured to be part of a political plan. 
Additionally, cybercrime has become a profitable business. In 2015, the revenue of cyber attacks has surpassed 
the global profit in drug trafficking for the first time (Leyden 2018). The potential of cybercrime in industry, e.g. 
by sabotage and espionage, is deemed high. 

Industrial applications are characterised by unique properties. They commonly contain a network segment of 
classic office Information Technology (IT) that is used for communication with customers and partners as well 
as  raw  material  and  product  configuration,  so-called  Enterprise  Resource  Planning  (ERP)  and  Manufacturing 
Execution  Systems  (MESs).  Additionally,  there  is  an  OT  network  segment  used  for  control  of  the  production 
machines. The networks are usually separated by data diodes or De-Militarized Zones (DMZs). Cyber attacks aim 
on  both  of  these  network  segments,  depending  on  their  goal.  However,  these  kinds  of  networks  are  vastly 
different in terms of connected devices, protocol and usage behaviour. Thus, detecting and preventing attacks 
on industrial facilities is strongly application- and attack-specific. A thorough understanding of the domain and 
possible attacks is required, as well as an understanding of promising methods to detect attacks in the individual 
domains. In this work, an overview of possible attacks on  industry is provided, including original vectors and 
methods  for  lateral  movement.  Based  on  this,  promising  intrusion  detection  methods  are  proposed.  Their 
applicability is derived from prior experiments. Due to the specific nature of industrial environments, different 
parts of the network and different attack vectors need different methods to detect them. Thus, the concept for 
a hybrid model integrating different methods required for detecting typical attacks along their path is proposed. 

The remainder of this work is structured as follows. In Section 2, an overview of related work is provided. A 
discussion  of  attacks  on  industrial  systems  can  be  found  in  Section  3.  Approaches  to  detect  such  attacks  at 
different  points  of  the  system  are  introduced  in  Section  4.  A  hybrid  industrial  intrusion  detection  approach, 
consisting  of  a  combination  of  the  introduced  methods,  is  presented  in  Section  5.  This  work  closes  with  a 
discussion provided in Section 6. 

2.  Related Work 

In this section, works addressing attacks on industrial settings are discussed at first. After that, works discussing 
industrial intrusion detection are presented and categorised according to aim and method of detection. 

There is a variety of scientific discussions on risks and threats in SCADA-systems, e.g. Zhu et al. (2011) and (Igure 
et al. 2006). In their work, they discuss the inherent weaknesses of SCADA systems, such as lack in authentication 
and encryption. Virvillis and Gritzalis address the effects of Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) on industry using 
the examples of four widely discussed industrial malwares: Stuxnet, Duqu, Flame and Red Ocotber (Virvilis and 
Gritzalis  2013).  Positive  Technologies  provide  an  exhaustive  analysis  of  the  state  of  industrial  and  corporate 
network security as well as risks and threats on industry (Positive Technologies 2018). Additionally, the individual 
attacks  have  been  discussed:  Langner  provides  a  thorough  analysis  of  the  Stuxnet  attacks  (Langner  2013). 
Lindsay discusses Stuxnet while putting it in the context of cyber warfare and describing its limits (Lindsay 2013). 
Lee et al, Cherepanov and Dragos discuss the industrial malware Industroyer, also known as Crashoverride (Lee 
et al. 2016; Cherepanov 2017; Dragos 2016). It is responsible for the successful attacks on the Ukrainian power 
grid in December  2015. Shamir analyses a new version of  BlackEnergy that is linked to cyber attacks on the 
Ukrainian government as well as the aforementioned blackouts (Shamir 2016). 

In order to address these issues and to protect industrial networks from attacks, a variety of research has been 
conducted. Due to their periodic, repetitive nature, state information can be used to detect anomalies. This is 
done by Khalili and Sami (2015). Caselli et al. focus on sequences in a way that intrusion detection systems are 
able to understand the step in a process chain they are currently in (Caselli et al. 2015). Thus, attacks based on 
reaching unwanted, but generally allowed states, can be detected. The same approach is chosen by Fovino et al. 
with a focus on Modbus and DNP3 (Fovino et al. 2010). The determinism found in industrial applications is made 

 
 
 
 
 
 
use of by Hadeli et al. (Hadeli et al.). A similar approach is chosen by Morris et al., they present a system that 
can be used to detect anomalies in Modbus RTU and ASCII-systems in a retrofit fashion (Morris et al. 2012). Gao 
and Morris discuss potential attacks on industrial systems and intrusion detection-based countermeasures for 
Modbus-based  communication  (Gao  and  Morris  2014).  Ponomarev  and  Atkison  made  use  of  telemetry 
information to obtain insights about threats and attacks (Ponomarev and Atkison 2016). 

The increase in computational power allows more complex algorithms, such as methods of Artificial Intelligence 
(AI) or Machine Learning (ML), to work in a time-efficient manner. An overview of the challenges is provided by 
Mantere et al. (2012). Borges Hink et al. aim at differentiating between disturbances based on natural deviations 
and attacks in power grids in order to support human decision making (Borges Hink et al.). Beaver et al. evaluate 
ML-based methods for detecting malicious SCADA communication (Beaver et al. 2013). Furthermore, One-Class 
Support Vector Machine (SVM) as well as Ant  Colony Optimisation  are used to detect anomalies in industrial 
networks (Shang et al. 2015; Tsang and Kwong). 

Wireless technologies are getting used in an increasing fashion for industrial applications. They are easy and 
quick  in  set  up  and  operation.  This  motivates  research  on  securing  wireless  channels,  e.g.  Mobile  Ad  hoc 
NETworks (MANETs) (Shakshuki et al. 2013), Wireless Sensor Networks (Shin et al. 2010) and wireless industrial 
networks (Wei and Kim 2012). 

3.  Attacks on Industry – An Overview 

Attacks on industrial environments are different from attacks on classic home- and office-IT systems. Industrial 
companies employ IT as well as OT networks. An exemplary network structure found in industrial environments 
is shown in Figure 1. 

Figure 1: Typical Structure of Industrial Networks 

It can be seen that an office-IT network is connected to the public Internet. This is used for customer contact, 
company representation and other tasks.  However, this network is also used for configuration, creation and 
modification of OT-level applications, e.g. code for Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs). If an attacker aims at 
sabotaging applications, this is the point to execute the payload. If the network where a PLC control is created 
is connected to a public network, no air gap is in action, allowing for an attacker to compromise OT devices as 
soon as the IT-perimeter is broken. According to Positive Technologies, an attacker could have penetrated the 
network  and  accessed  the  corporate  information  system  in  73  %  of  the  cases  they  evaluated  (Positive 
Technologies 2018). Many attacks on industrial applications were possible due to phishing, an exemplary set of 
attacks is shown in Figure 2. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Overview of Industrial Phishing Attacks 
Operation Aurora targeted Google and other software companies (McClure et al. 2010). Night Dragon, Greek Oil 
and New Year’s campaign targeted the energy sector, especially petrol processing facilities (Wueest 2014), while 
Nitro targeted chemical processing facilities (Chien  and O’Gorman 2011).  Black  Vine targeted aerospace and 
healthcare  companies  (DiMaggio  2015).  Dragonfly  (Symantec  Corporation  2014)  and  Black  Energy  were 
specifically aimed at Industrial Control Systems (ICSs), with  Black Energy (Lee et al. 2016) being linked to the 
Ukrainian power grid failure in December 2015. The Unnamed campaign was used to extract information from 
ICS systems, making it a corporate espionage tool (Kaspersky Lab 2017). 

Apart from spear phishing, any means to break the perimeter allows an attacker leverage to move laterally inside 
the network. USB flash drive- or SD memory card-based attacks for bridging air gaps have been established, e.g. 
by the Stuxnet attack (Langner 2013). Detecting attacks once the malware has moved to the OT is difficult for 
several reasons, they are listed in Table 1. 

Property 
Operation times 
Cost of interruption 

Table 1: Comparison of IT and OT 
IT 
Commonly around 3 to 5 years 
Medium 

Placement & Management 
Upgrade capabilities 
Software properties 

Central, in similar location 
Upgrades possible 
Similar, compatible solutions 

Cost 
Effects 

Moderate 
Only digital domain 

OT 
2 to 4 decades 
High, hundreds of thousands per 
hour 
Spatially distributed 
Upgrades difficult 
Proprietary, vendor-specific 
solutions 
High 
Physical world 

This  table  shows  the  difficulty  in  securing  industrial  facilities.  Their  cost  and  operation  time  makes  add-on 
solutions for security necessary. However, they need to cope with difficulties to be distributed and upgraded 
due to software management and distribution of machines. Furthermore, a plethora of proprietary protocols 
needs to be addressed while downtimes are not acceptable. 

4.  Industrial Intrusion Detection Approaches 

A generic example of a typical industrial network structure was presented in Section 3, pictured in Figure 1. This 
structure indicates possible places in the system to detect attacks at different stages. In this section, all of those 
places  are  discussed.  At  first,  detection  is  possible  when  the  outer  perimeter  is  broken.  After  that,  lateral 
movement within the industrial IT network is the goal. Once the malware reached the OT network, it can be 
detected either by suspicious network traffic or by anomalous process behaviour. 

4.1  Detecting Perimeter Breaks 

The task to detect breaches of the perimeter is located in the area of classical IT security, it is not in the scope 
of this work. It should be noted, however, that the human factor is considered to be the  most significant risk 
with respect to breaches of the perimeter. Phishing and other forms of social engineering have proven to create 
a significant effect on employees. If a single employee falls for a scam e-mail, attackers can obtain a foothold 
within the network. For tricking certain, usually high privileged, employees, more targeted methods, such as 
spear  phishing  with  plausible  information  or  water  holing  attacks,  offer  promising  results.  Unfortunately, 
technical  means  can  only  provide  a  minor  amount  of  protection  against  social  engineering.  Awareness  and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
training  of  responsible  personnel  is  necessary,  in  combination  with  a  sound  but  useable  security  concept 
(Surveillance Self-Defense 2018). 

4.2  Detecting Lateral Movement 

Similar to the detection of perimeter breaches, lateral movement in the IT-network need to be detected by well-
established  IT-security  tools,  such  as  Network-  and  Host-based  Intrusion  Detection  and  Prevention  Systems 
(NIDS, HIDS, NIPS, HIPS). Such tools, e.g. firewalls, detect and mitigate the propagation of malware, often with 
the  aid  of  sophisticated  heuristics  or  Deep  Packet  Investigation  (DPI).  Furthermore,  the  usage  of  Security 
Information  and  Event  Management  (SIEM)  systems  can  be  useful  for  detecting  attacks.  Such  systems,  e.g. 
Splunk (2019) often provide means for the integration of process and OT data as well, allowing industrial IT-
security personnel to obtain holistic information about the security status of a network or system. 

4.3  Detecting Suspicious OT Traffic 

In  contrast  to  IT-networks,  traffic  in  OT-networks  is  usually  using  proprietary  protocols  that  do  not  consider 
security objectives. However, the traffic is much more periodic and repetitive than in IT networks. This property 
can be used to detect attacks in forms of anomalies. Most commercial industrial intrusion detection systems 
employ a baselining-algorithm that monitors the network for a certain amount of time as a training. After that, 
deviations from the baseline are flagged as anomalous. Additionally, scientific approaches have been evaluated 
in  order  to  find  anomalies.  Matrix  Profiles,  as  presented  by  Yeh  et  al.  (2016),  have  proven  to  be  efficient  in 
detecting anomalies in OT-network traffic (Duque Anton et al. 2018a). This property is shown in Figure 3. 

Figure 3: Example of Matrix Profiles to Detect Malicious OT traffic 

Matrix Profiles are calculated based on a distance metric, e.g. the z-Normlized Euclidean distance as follows: 

𝑑(𝑥̂, 𝑦̂) =   √2𝑚(1 −  

𝑚
∑ 𝑥𝑖
𝑖=1

𝑦𝑖 − 𝑚𝜇𝑥𝜇𝑦
𝑚𝜎𝑥𝜎𝑦

) 

 The black dots indicate the attacks, the grey line indicates the minimal distance, and the black line indicates the 
minimum threshold recognising all attacks. Matrix Profiles are a windowed approach where for each sequence 
of length m the minimal distance to all other sequences of length m is calculated. M is the only hyper parameter 
that needs to be set by the user. Furthermore, Matrix Profiles do not need training as such, as they are applied 
directly to the data. If the minimal distance of a given sequence to all other sequences is small, it is a common 
motif, meaning it occurs often, indicating normal behaviour. If the minimal distance is high, however, the motif 
is a singularity which indicates an outlier as well as a potential attack. The evaluation in Figure 3 is based on an 
industrial data set introduced by Lemay and Fernandez (2016). They created an emulation of an electric circuit 
breaker system communicating via Modbus, consisting of three to twelve Remote Terminal Units (RTUs) and one 

 
 
 
 
 
to two Master Terminal Units (MTUs). In doing so, several data sets were monitored, some containing simulated 
human interaction as well as periodic polling. After that, different kinds of attacks were introduced to a set of 
the data sets. The attacks are based on TCP/IP, e.g. scanning the network, extracting information or uploading 
malicious  files.  The  data  set  under  analysis  is  called  “CnC_uploading_exe_modbus_6RTU_with_operate”.  As 
features, the numbers of packets, IP- and port-pairs were used. They provide valid indicators of intrusions. 

In addition to the time series analysis of the OT network traffic, packet-based analysis can be used to produce 
promising results as well. Random Forests, Support Vector Machines (SVM), k-means clustering and k nearest 
neighbours have been evaluated on three of the data sets provided by Lemay and Fernandez (Duque Anton et 
al. 2018c). Since SVM and Random Forests provide promising results, the application of both of them on the data 
sets “Moving_two_files_Modbus_6RTU” (DS1), “Send_a_fake_command_Modbus_6RTU_with_operate” (DS2) 
and a combination of data sets with and without attacks (DS3). This shows packet-based analysis is a promising 
approach as well. The concepts of SVM and Random Forest are shown in Figure 4. 

Figure 4: Random Forest and SVM 

Random Forests consist of a group of decision trees of which the majority decision is used as the classification. 
SVM is a  large-margin  classifier, it aims at separating clusters such that the distance of each entity from the 
separator is maximal. 

Table 2: Performance of SVM and Random Forest on OT Network Traffic 

SVM 

F1-score 
1.0 
1.0 
0.999968 

Accuracy 
1.0 
1.0 
0.999936 

Random Forest 

F1-score 
1.0 
0.999851 
0.999986 

Accuracy 
1.0 
0.999701 
0.999973 

Data Set 
DS1 
DS2 
DS3 

4.4  Detecting Suspicious Process Behaviour 

In addition to meta-information, time series approaches such as Matrix Profiles, can also be applied to process 
information, as shown in Figure 5. In the first and third line, the water flow and water tank level of an industrial 
batch process are shown, as explained in (Duque Anton et al. 2019b) and (Duque Anton et al. 2019a). The second 
and fourth row describe the according minimal distance. Attacks are introduced at a packet count of 4,000 and 
6,500 as analysed and explained by (Duque Anton et al. 2019b). This corresponds to the notable increases in 
minimal distance, successfully detecting the disruptions of the process as an anomaly. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.  A Hybrid Concept for Industrial Intrusion Detection 

In order to detect the attacks as described in Section  3 as thoroughly as possible, the methods presented in 
Section 4 need to be combined in an intelligent matter. On the one hand, strong IT-security is required to detect 
and mitigate intrusions in and lateral movement  through the IT network. Additionally, a  combination of OT-
network  and  process-based  intrusion  detection  can  be  used  to  detect  and  attribute  attacks.  If  host-based 
information, e.g. from HMIs, is combined with OT-network data, a dashboard as exemplarily shown in Figure 6 
can aid a human operator in detecting attacks, obtaining an overview of the network state and being able to 
place attacks at their points of origin and destination, thus helping to provide efficient Incident Response (IR). 
Especially in the OT-domain, time series-based anomaly detection has shown potential, making it a plausible 
candidate for an intrusion detection mechanism (Duque Anton et al. 2018a). 

Figure 5: Example of Matrix Profiles to Detect Malicious Process Behaviour 

Figure 6: Concept for a Hybrid Industrial IDS 

Combining IT-, OT- and process information has the potential to detect attacks during at least one stage. First, 
the IT-network has to be breached and traversed. If this happens successfully, OT- or process information can 
still be used to detect artefacts or effects of an attack, thus increasing the probability of noting an attack. 

Additionally  to  the  singular  information  sources,  combining  information  sources  and  considering  contextual 
information can provide crucial insights into the security status (Duque Anton et al. 2017b; Duque Anton et al. 
2018b). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.  Conclusion and Outlook 

In this work, an overview of industrial attack vectors was provided. The stages an attacker needs to overcome 
in order to successfully penetrate an industrial network, i.e. breaking the perimeter, moving laterally, exploiting 
industrial hardware, executing the attack, becoming permanent, have been discussed. After that, possible places 
in  the  networks  commonly  found  in  an  industrial  environment  are  presented.  It  shows  that  time  series  are 
especially promising for the OT and process domain. Finally, the combination of these approaches is expected 
to address an attack throughout the complete attack cycle, providing a holistic view and aiding the detection. 

7.  Acknowledgements 

This work has been supported by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) of the Federal Republic 
of Germany within the project IUNO Insec (KIS4ITS0001). The authors alone are responsible for the content of 
the paper. 

8.  Literaturverzeichnis 

Beaver, Justin M.; Borges-Hink, Raymond C.; Buckner, Mark A. (2013): An Evaluation of Machine Learning 
Methods to Detect Malicious SCADA Communications. In: Moamar Sayed-Mouchaweh and M. Arif Wani (Hg.): 
12th International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA). Miami, FL, USA, 4/12/2013 - 
7/12/2013. IEEE Computer Society. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE, S. 54–59. 

Borges Hink, Raymond C.; Beaver, Justin M.; Buckner, Mark A.; Morris, Tommy; Adhikari, Uttam; Pan, Shengyi: 
Machine learning for power system disturbance and cyber-attack discrimination. In: 7th International 
Symposium on Resilient Control Systems, S. 1–8. 

Caselli, Marco; Zambon, Emmanuele; Kargl, Frank (2015): Sequence-aware Intrusion Detection in Industrial 
Control Systems. In: Jianying Zhou and Douglas Jones (Hg.): CPSS'15. Proceedings of the 1st ACM Workshop on 
Cyber-Physical System Security. Singapore, Republic of Singapore, April 14. New York, New York: Association 
for Computing Machinery, S. 13–24. 

Cherepanov, Anton (2017): Win32/Industroyer - A new threat for industrial control systems. ESET. 

Chien, Eric; O’Gorman, Gavin (2011): The Nitro Attacks, Stealing Secrets from the Chemical Industry. Symantec 
Corporation. 

DiMaggio, Jon (2015): The Black Vine Cyberespionage Group. Symantec Corporation. Available online 
http://www.symantec.com/content/en/us/enterprise/media/security_response/whitepapers/the-black-vine-
cyberespionage-group.pdf. 

Dragos (2016): Chrashoverride - Analysis of the Threat to Electric Grid Operations. Dragos Inc (2.20170613). 

Duque Anton, Simon; Ahrens, Lia; Fraunholz, Daniel; Schotten, Hans Dieter (2018a): Time is of the Essence. 
Machine Learning-Based Intrusion Detection in Industrial Time Series Data. In:. 2018 IEEE International 
Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW). Singapore, Singapore: IEEE, S. 1–6. 

Duque Anton, Simon; Fraunholz, Daniel; Lipps, Christoph; Alam, Khurshid; Schotten, Hans Dieter (2018b): 
Putting Things in Context. Securing Industrial Authentication with Context Information. In: IJCSA 3 (1), S. 98–
120. DOI: 10.22619/IJCSA.2018.100122. 

Duque Anton, Simon; Fraunholz, Daniel; Lipps, Christoph; Pohl, Frederic; Zimmermann, Marc; Schotten, Hans 
Dieter (2017a): Two Decades of SCADA Exploitation. A Brief History. In: IEEE Conference on Applications, 
Information and Network Security (AINS). Miri, Sarawak, Malaysia, November 13-14. IEEE Computer Science 
Chapter Malaysia: IEEE Press. 

Duque Anton, Simon; Fraunholz, Daniel; Teuber, Stephan; Schotten, Hans Dieter (2017b): A Question of 
Context. Enhancing Intrusion Detection by Providing Context Information. In: 13th Conference of 
Telecommunication, Media and Internet Techno-Economics (CTTE-17). Aalborg University Copenhagen: IEEE. 

Duque Anton, Simon; Gundall, Michael; Fraunholz, Daniel; Schotten, Hans Dieter (2019a): Implementing 
SCADA Scenarios and Introducing Attacks to Obtain Training Data for Intrusion Detection Methods. In: 
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Cyber Warfare and Security (ICCWS-2019). Stellenbosch, 
South Africa. ACPI: ACPI. 

 
 
Duque Anton, Simon; Hafner, Alexander; Schotten, Hans Dieter (2019b): Devil in the Detail. Attack Scenarios in 
Industrial Applications. In: Proceedings of the 40th IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW). 

Duque Anton, Simon; Kanoor, Suneetha; Fraunholz, Daniel; Schotten, Hans Dieter (2018c): Evaluation of 
Machine Learning-based Anomaly Detection Algorithms on an Industrial Modbus/TCP Data Set. In: Proceedings 
of the 13th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES). Hamburg, Germany, 
August 29 - 30. New York: ACM, S. 1–9. 

Fovino, Igor Nai; Carcano, Andrea; Murel, Thibault De Lacheze; Trombetta, Alberto; Masera, Marcelo (2010): 
Modbus/DNP3 State-Based Intrusion Detection System. In: Elizabeth Chang (Hg.): 24th IEEE International 
Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications (AINA). Perth, Australia, 20 - 23 April. IEEE 
Computer Society. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE, S. 729–736. 

Gao, Wei; Morris, Thomas (2014): On Cyber Attacks and Signature Based Intrusion Detection for Modbus 
Based Industrial Control Systems. In: JDFSL. DOI: 10.15394/jdfsl.2014.1162. 

Hadeli, Hadeli; Schierholz, Ragnar; Braendle, Markus; Tuduce, Cristian: Leveraging determinism in industrial 
control systems for advanced anomaly detection and reliable security configuration. In: IEEEConference on 
Emerging Technologies & Factory Automation, S. 1–8. 

Igure, Vinay M.; Laughter, Sean A.; Williams, Ronald D. (2006): Security issues in SCADA networks. In: 
Computers & Security 25 (7), S. 498–506. DOI: 10.1016/j.cose.2006.03.001. 

Kaspersky Lab (2017): Threat Landscape for Industrial Automation Systems in the Second Half of 2016. 
Available online https://ics-cert.kaspersky.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/6/2017/03/KL-ICS-CERT_H2-
2016_report_FINAL_EN.pdf, zuletzt geprüft am 26.06.2017. 

Khalili, Abdullah; Sami, Ashkan (2015): SysDetect. A systematic approach to critical state determination for 
Industrial Intrusion Detection Systems using Apriori algorithm. In: Journal of Process Control 32, S. 154–160. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.jprocont.2015.04.005. 

Langner, Ralph (2013): To Kill a Centrifuge. The Langner Group. 

Lee, Robert M.; Assante, Michael J.; Conway, Tim (2016): Analysis of the cyber attack on the Ukrainian power 
grid. In: Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E-ISAC). 

Lemay, Antoine; Fernandez, Jose M. (2016): Providing SCADA Network Data Sets for Intrusion Detection 
Research. In: 9th Workshop on Cyber Security Experimentation and Test (CSET 16). Austin, TX: USENIX 
Association. Available online https://www.usenix.org/conference/cset16/workshop-
program/presentation/lemay. 

Leyden, John (2018): Cybercrime: The $1.5 Trillion Problem. Hg. v. Experian Information Solutions. Available 
online https://www.experian.com/blogs/ask-experian/cybercrime-the-1-5-trillion-problem/, last updated on 
09.05.2018, zuletzt geprüft am 14.08.2018. 

Lindsay, Jon R. (2013): Stuxnet and the Limits of Cyber Warfare. In: Security Studies 22 (3), S. 365–404. DOI: 
10.1080/09636412.2013.816122. 

Mantere, Matti; Uusitalo, Ilkka; Sailio, Mirko; Noponen, Sami (2012): Challenges of Machine Learning Based 
Monitoring for Industrial Control System Networks. In: Leonard Barolli (Hg.): 26th International Conference on 
Advanced Information Networking and Applications workshops (WAINA). Fukuoka, Japan. IEEE Computer 
Society. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE, S. 968–972. 

McClure, Stuart; Gupta, Shanit; Dooley, Carric; Zaytsev, Vitaly; Chen, Xiao Bo; Kaspersky, Kris et al. (2010): 
Protecting Your Critical Assets - Lessons Learned from “Operation Aurora”. McAfee Inc. Available online 
https://www.wired.com/images_blogs/threatlevel/2010/03/operationaurora_wp_0310_fnl.pdf. 

Modbus (2012): MODBUS APPLICATION PROTOCOL SPECIFICATION V1.1b3, zuletzt geprüft am 21.06.2017. 

Modbus-IDA (2006): MODBUS MESSAGING ON TCP/IP IMPLEMENTATION GUIDE V1.0b. Available online 
http://www.modbus.org/docs/Modbus_Messaging_Implementation_Guide_V1_0b.pdf, zuletzt geprüft am 
21.06.2017. 

Morris, Thomas; Vaughn, Rayford; Dandass, Yoginder (2012): A Retrofit Network Intrusion Detection System 
for MODBUS RTU and ASCII Industrial Control Systems. In: Ralph H. Sprague (Hg.): 2012 45th Hawaii 

 
 
International Conference on System Science (HICSS). Maui, HI, USA, 4/1/2012 - 7/1/2012. IEEE Computer 
Society. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE, S. 2338–2345. 

Ponomarev, Stanislav; Atkison, Travis (2016): Industrial Control System Network Intrusion Detection by 
Telemetry Analysis. In: IEEE Trans. Dependable and Secure Comput. 13 (2), S. 252–260. DOI: 
10.1109/TDSC.2015.2443793. 

Positive Technologies (2018): Industrial Companies - Attack Vectors. Positive Technologies. 

PROFIBUS (2017): PROFINET Specification. Available online 
http://www.profibus.com/nc/download/specifications-standards/downloads/profinet-io-
specification/display/, zuletzt geprüft am 21.06.2017. 

Shakshuki, Elhadi M.; Kang, Nan; Sheltami, Tarek R. (2013): EAACK—A Secure Intrusion-Detection System for 
MANETs. In: IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 60 (3), S. 1089–1098. DOI: 10.1109/TIE.2012.2196010. 

Shamir, Udi (2016): Analyzing a New Variant of BlackEnergy 3. Likely Insider-Based Execution. In: 
SentinelOne Whitepaper. 

Shang, Wenli; Li, Lin; Wan, Ming; Zeng, Peng (2015): Industrial communication intrusion detection algorithm 
based on improved one-class SVM. In: 2015 World Congress on Industrial Control Systems Security (WCICSS). 
London, United Kingdom. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE, S. 21–25. 

Shin, Sooyeon; Kwon, Taekyoung; Jo, Gil-Yong; Park, Youngman; Rhy, Haekyu (2010): An Experimental Study of 
Hierarchical Intrusion Detection for Wireless Industrial Sensor Networks. In: IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 6 (4), S. 744–
757. DOI: 10.1109/TII.2010.2051556. 

Splunk (2019): Any Question. Any Data. One Splunk. Unter Mitarbeit von Splunk. Hg. v. Splunk. Available online 
https://www.splunk.com/, zuletzt geprüft am 28.03.2019. 

Stef, Ioan Dorian; Draghici, George; Draghici, Anca (2013): Product Design Process Model in the Digital Factory 
Context. In: Procedia Technology 9, S. 451–462. 

Surveillance Self-Defense (2018): How to: Avoid Phishing Attacks. Hg. v. Surveillance Self-Defense. Available 
online https://ssd.eff.org/en/module/how-avoid-phishing-attacks, last updated on 26.11.2018, zuletzt geprüft 
am 28.03.2019. 

Symantec Corporation (2014): Dragonfly. Cyberespionage Attacks Against Energy Suppliers. Available online 
https://www.symantec.com/content/en/us/enterprise/media/security_response/whitepapers/Dragonfly_Thr
eat_Against_Western_Energy_Suppliers.pdf, zuletzt geprüft am 27.06.2017. 

Tsang, Chi-Ho; Kwong, Sam: Multi-Agent Intrusion Detection System in Industrial Network using Ant Colony 
Clustering Approach and Unsupervised Feature Extraction. In: IEEE International Conference on Industrial 
Technology 2002, S. 51–56. 

Virvilis, Nikos; Gritzalis, Dimitris (2013): The Big Four - What We Did Wrong in Advanced Persistent Threat 
Detection? In: Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES). 
Regensburg, Germany, 02.09.2013 - 06.09.2013: IEEE, S. 248–254. 

Wei, Min; Kim, Keecheon (2012): Intrusion detection scheme using traffic prediction for wireless industrial 
networks. In: J. Commun. Netw. 14 (3), S. 310–318. DOI: 10.1109/JCN.2012.6253092. 

Wueest, Candid (2014): Targeted Attacks Against the Energy Sector. Symantec Corporation. Available online 
http://www.symantec.com/content/en/us/enterprise/media/security_response/whitepapers/targeted_attack
s_against_the_energy_sector.pdf. 

Yeh, Chin-Chia Michael; Zhu, Yan; Ulanova, Liudmila; Begum, Nurjahan; Ding, Yifei; Dau, Hoang Anh et al. 
(2016): Matrix Profile I. All Pairs Similarity Joins for Time Series: A Unifying View That Includes Motifs, Discords 
and Shapelets. In: 16th IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM). Barcelona, Spain, December 12-
15. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE, S. 1317–1322. 

Zhu, Bonnie; Joseph, Anthony; Sastry, Shankar (2011): A Taxonomy of Cyber Attacks on SCADA Systems. In: 
Proceedings of the 2011 International Conference on Internet of Things and 4th International Conference on 
Cyber, Physical and Social Computing. Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society (ITHINGSCPSCOM), S. 380–
388. 

 
 
 
 
 
