Putting Things in Context: 

Securing Industrial Authentication 

with Context Information1 
Simon Duque Anton1, Daniel Fraunholz1, Christoph Lipps1, 
Khurshid Alam1, and Hans Dieter Schotten1, 2 

1: German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence, Germany 
2: University of Kaiserslautern, Germany 

ABSTRACT 
The development in the area of wireless communication, mobile and 
embedded computing leads to significant changes in the application of 
devices. Over the last years, embedded devices were brought into the 
consumer area creating the Internet of Things. Furthermore, industrial 
applications  increasingly  rely  on  communication  through  trust 
boundaries. Networking is cheap and easily applicable while providing 
the possibility to make everyday life more easy and comfortable and 
industry  more  efficient  and  less  time-consuming.  One  of  the  crucial 
parts of this interconnected world is sound and secure authentication of 
entities. Only entities with valid authorisation should be enabled to act 
on a resource according to an access control scheme. An overview of 
challenges and practices of authentication is provided in this work, with 
a special focus on context information as part of security solutions. It 
can  be  used  for  authentication  and  security  solutions  in  industrial 
applications. Additional information about events in networks can aid 
intrusion  detection,  especially 
in  combination  with  security 
information and event management systems. Finally, an authentication 
and  access  control  approach,  based  on  context  information  and  - 

1  This is the preprint of a work published in the Intl. Journal on Cyber Situational 
Awareness. Please cite as follows: 
Duque Anton, S., Fraunholz, D.; Lipps, C., Alam, K., Schotten, H. D. (2018). 
Putting Things in Context: Securing Industrial Authentication and Intrusion 
Detection with Context Information. International Journal on Cyber Situational 
Awareness, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 98 – 120. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
2 

depending  on  the  scenario  -  multiple  factors  is  presented.  The 
combination  of  multiple  factors  with  context  information  makes  it 
secure  and  at  the  same  time  case  adaptive,  so  that  the  effort  always 
matches, but  never exceeds, the security demand. This  is  a  common 
issue of standard cyber security, entities having to obey strict, inflexible 
and unhandy policies. This approach has been implemented exemplary 
based on RADIUS. Different scenarios were considered, showing that 
this approach is capable of providing flexible and scalable security for 
authentication processes. 

Keyword: Authentication, Context awareness, Industrial Internet of Things, 
Multi-factor authentication, Computer network 

Introduction 

1 
Interconnectivity,  characterised  by  ad-hoc  access  to  computing 
systems,  is  a  property  of  the  Industrial  Internet  of  Things  (IIoT). 
Network-  and  cloud-based  resources,  in  addition  to  mobile  and 
handheld computing, motivate a paradigm shift in authentication and 
access  control.  In  the  consumer  area,  users  want  to  access  the  same 
resource  from  different  devices  in  different  places  with  connections 
that  break  trust  boundaries.  Furthermore,  access  rights  should  be 
transferred between different devices. In the industrial area, users want 
to  access  different  production  entities  and  networks  without  re-
authentication.  Access  rights  should  be  traversed  as  well,  from  one 
accessed device in a certain network to another. These requirements are 
easy  to  fulfill  with  standard  means.  However,  with  the  increase  in 
interconnected devices, network-based crime has drastically increased 
as well. Several recent and not-so-recent botnets aimed at IoT-devices, 
like  the  infamous  Mirai-botnet  (Antonkakis  et  al.  2017),  or  its 
successor,  the  Satori-botnet  (Paganini  2018).  In  addition  to  that,  the 
industrial landscape is becoming more and more of a target for cyber 
attacks (Duque Anton et al. 2017a). Cyber crime has a greater revenue 
than drug trafficking since 2009 (Dethlefs 2015; Symantec 2009). This 
trend creates demand for strong authentication and access control, as it 
is the foundation of any further interaction and needs to be fulfilled in 

 
 
 
 
 
3 

order  to  meet  any  other  security  objectives  (Schaefer  2016).  At  the 
same time, typing a strong user name and password-combination on a 
cell phone, for example, is bothersome and inflexible. Authentication 
should  be  easy  to  use  and  at  the  same  time  secure.  Additionally, 
connectivity  through  trust  boundaries  and  heterogeneous  networks 
demand  for  novel  kinds  of  intrusion  detection.  Many  industrial 
protocols  do  not  contain  means  for  encryption  or  authentication  by 
default. 

The  contribution  of  this  work  consists  of  two  parts:  First,  providing 
information  about 
sound  and  secure  authentication,  based  on 
circumstances,  so-called  situational  awareness  is  addressed  in  this 
work in Section 3. Current research areas, challenges and solutions for 
authentication  are  evaluated  in  Section  5.  Second,  an  exemplary 
is 
implementation  of  a  context-based  authentication  system 
implemented and evaluated, derived of a use case that fits both classic 
home and office networks, as well as industrial applications. 

The remainder of this work is structured as follows: A short overview 
of existing authentication methods is provided in Section 2. Section 3 
provides  a  concept  for  integration  of  situational  awareness  into 
authentication. The proposed approach is  presented in  Section 4 and 
evaluated  with  three  scenarios.  In  Section  5,  an  overview  of  current 
research in the field of multi-factor and context-based authentication 
and authorization is given. Future research directions are presented in 
Section 6, this work is concluded in Section 7. 

2  Authentication in a Nutshell 
The process of authentication can be divided into three steps:  

– 
Identification,  
–  Authentication and  
–  Authorisation.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
4 

In the first step, identification, an entity makes an assertion about who 
it  claims  to  be.  In  the  next  step,  authentication2,  this  assertion  is 
evaluated.  Lastly,  after  establishing  the  identity,  access  rights  are 
granted accordingly in the authorisation phase. These three steps are 
summarised  in  this  section.  First,  identification  is  discussed  in 
Subsection 3.1. There are several well-established and commonly used 
authentication mechanisms. According to Turner, they can be divided 
into  three  different  kinds  of  authentication  factors,  as  described  in 
Subsection  3.2  and  four  different  types  of  authentication  procedures 
(Turner  2016),  as  presented  in  Subsection  3.3.  The  authentication 
mechanisms presented here are used for authentication of human users. 
In  contrast  to  human  users,  machines  and  services  can  be  users  that 
need authentication in IIoT scenarios as well. Finally, authorisation is 
discussed in Subsection 3.5 

Identification Process 

2.1 
The  identification  of  an  entity  is  the  first  step  of  the  authentication 
process.  Only  if  an  authentication  provider  knows  the  identity  of  a 
given entity, the according access rights can be assigned. Access rights 
of a given entity must only be granted to this entity (Schneier 2000). In 
order to do so, an identity is first requested. The entity makes a claim 
about its identity. In order to evaluate this claim, the entity has to be 
known to  the authentication provider beforehand. Otherwise, it must 
register. Methods to make a claim about an identity are usernames, but 
can  also  be  extended  to  barcodes,  Radio  Frequency  Identification 
(RFID)  token  or  Hardware  Security  Modules  (HSMs)  and  Trusted 
Platform Modules (TPMs) that are integral to smartcards (International 
Organization  for  Standardization  2011).  Furthermore,  there  are  use 
cases where it is necessary to authenticate entities that have not been 
previously known to the authentication provider, called Plug & Trust 
(Ambekar et al. 2012) or Trust On First Use (TOFU) (Gultsch 2016). 
The identification and authentication methods  for such use cases are 
based on properties that can be verified without prior knowledge of the 
specific entity. 

2 Authentication is used ambiguously in this work, describing the process of proving 
an identity as well as the whole process 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
5 

2.2   Authentication Factors 
The different authentication factors can be grouped as follows: 

–  Knowledge factors, 
–  Possession factors and 
– 
Inherence factors. 

This  differentiation  is  used  to  categorise  authentication  factors  of 
human  entities.  In  the  context  of  IIoT,  machines  often  need  to 
authenticate to services or other machines. The differentiation between 
these factors, however, is different than that of humans. Concepts, such 
as knowledge and possession, do not work for machines. 

Knowledge factors are most commonly used in form of passwords or 
Personal Identification Numbers (PINs). They prove the identity of a 
user  by  providing  knowledge  that,  by  default,  only  the  given  user 
should  have.  They  are  usually  easy  to  change  in  case  they  are 
compromised. Given the handling is done in a secure manner by the 
service provider requesting the passwords, they are relatively secure. 
Good  handling  includes  storage  as  salted  hashes  only  and  encrypted 
transmission.  On  the  downside,  remembering  passwords  is  tedious, 
especially  if  a  user  has  to  remember  many  of  them.  So-called  key-
managers  for  mobile-  and  desktop-systems,  such  as  LastPass 
(LogMeIn 2018), increase the usability. 

Possession factors are used to prove the identity of a user with a certain 
item only the user should have. Common examples are RSA SecureID 
(RSA Security LLC 2018) or ID cards, for example by Siemens (2013). 
One Time Passwords (OTPs) (Haller et al. 1998) can be considered a 
combination of knowledge and possession factor. They contain a secret 
that  cannot  be  extracted  by  an  attacker  and  are  usually  very  secure. 
Furthermore, their loss is easily detected, so a compromise of security 
can be detected in a timely manner. In contrast to that, if a password 
has been cracked, the user has no way of knowing. 

Inherence  factors  are  usually  associated  with  biometric  information, 
such as finger prints or retina scans. This kind of factor is meant to be 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 

used to unambiguously identify a user. It is a characteristic that cannot 
be changed. The most prevalent disadvantage lies in the fact that, once 
compromised, this factor can never be used again, as it is fixed for the 
lifetime of a user. That means, once the biometric factor of a person is 
publicly  available,  forgeries  can  be  made  with  sufficient  effort. 
Prominent examples are the forgery of German chancellor Dr. Angela 
Merkel’s retina scan and German Secretary of Defense, Dr. Ursula von 
der  Leyen’s  finger  prints  (Krempl  2014).  Both  replicas  were  made 
solely  from  pictures  that  were  published  in  press  releases.  This 
impressively shows the dangers of inherence factors. 

2.3   Types of Authentication 
According  to  Turner,  four  different  types  of  authentication  can  be 
distinguished  (Turner 2016).  In contrast  to  the authentication factors 
describing  how  authentication  is  performed,  authentication  types 
describe the combination of different factors. They are listed below in 
order of increasing security: 

–  Single-factor authentication 
–  Two-factor authentication 
–  Multi-factor authentication 
–  Strong authentication 

Single-factor authentication is based on one authentication factor, e.g. 
a  password  or  PIN.  If  this  factor  is  flawed,  the  approach  does  not 
provide  security.  Two-factor  authentication  takes  two  authentication 
factors in order to determine the identity of a user. It is harder to break, 
as two factors need to be compromised. However, if the required input 
is based on the same factor, e.g. a possession factor like an Identifier 
(ID) badge, this approach is only as secure as the given factor. Multi-
factor  authentication  is  based  on  a  multitude  of  factors,  but  at  least 
three. As with  two-factor authentication, if the input is  based on the 
same factor, the mechanism is only as secure as the given factor. Strong 
authentication is two- or multi-factor authentication, but with so-called 
strong factors. Strong factors must not depend on other factors used by 
the  authentication  process.  Furthermore,  they  must  be  designed  in  a 
fashion that they cannot be generated by an attacker with knowledge of 
the authentication process.  

 
 
 
 
7 

2.4   Context as a Factor 
Context information can be considered as an authentication factor. It 
provides information about the status of an entity, therefore it can be 
used  as  a  factor  or  increase  the  measure  of  trust  (Bhatti  et  al.  2004; 
Hulsebosch  et  al.  2005;  Lenzini  2009).  Location  information  can  be 
used to determine whether a user is within a perimeter. If not it is less 
likely that the user is affiliated with the company owning the perimeter. 
In  the  same  way  time  can  be  a  factor.  Enterprises  have  common 
working hours during which access requests to resources are common. 
If a request occurs outside those hours, the credibility of the requesting 
entity is lower. Another application of context is access control based 
on necessity and emergency. One possible application of access control 
is  granting  entry  to  locked  doors  for  emergency  systems  only  if  an 
alarm was triggered. Choi et al. consider context for risk-based access 
to sensitive medical information (Choi et al. 2015). 

2.5   Authorisation Schemes 
Authorisation and access control describe the process of granting rights 
to entities, once their identities have been confirmed. Depending on the 
access  control  policies, different  users or types of users have certain 
permissions in a network. Access control and authorisation inherently 
only  works  with  secure  and  strong  authentication.  If  there  is  no 
possibility to reliably determine the identity of a user, access control 
and authentication are of no value. According to Musa, there are four 
general types of access control (Musa 2014): 
–  Mandatory Access Control (MAC) 
–  Discretionary Access Control (DAC) 
–  Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) 
–  Rule-Based Access Control 

MAC grants access rights and permissions based on strict schemes that 
arise  from  user  level  and  the  classification  of  data.  DAC  allows  the 
owner of the data to specifically grant rights for each individual user. 
RBAC distributes access rights and permissions based on the role of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
8 

user.  Each  user  is  assigned  one  role,  which  has  different  rights  for 
different  types  of  data  and  different  permissions  for  several  actions. 
Rule-Based Access Control allows granting permissions based on some 
rules that can also relate to environment and context information. 

Concept for Context Integration  

3 
The  main  changes  brought  to  industry  in  the  course  of  the  IIoT  are 
based  on  an  increase  of  connectivity  and  the  distribution  of 
computations.  In  the  beginning  of  Supervisory  Control  And  Data 
Acquisition  (SCADA)  systems,  industrial  networks  were  physically 
separated from public networks access to devices had to be obtained 
either locally or by using dedicated control terminals. Now, operators 
often switch between machines  and tasks often, sometimes access  is 
requested from remote locations. Due to the availability of resources 
over public networks, strong authentication is required. On the other 
hand, strong authentication is often tedious to use for human operators. 
Common authentication mechanisms are presented in Section 2. The 
concept  proposed  in  this  work  is  based  on  two  aspects.  First,  the 
strength of authentication is dependent on the action that is requested. 
E.g.  if  an  operator  aims  to  perform  security  critical  tasks,  such  as 
reconfiguration of a device, a stronger authentication is required than 
if  the  operator  only  requests  to  read  status  information.  Second, 
situational  awareness  is  taken  into  account  to  evaluate  the  risk  of  a 
request.  In  practice,  local  access  can  be  deemed  safer  than  remote 
access, as local access requires physical presence that is enforced by 
physical  security.  In  addition  to  that,  time  of  the  request  provides 
information of its soundness. Requests during working hours are very 
probable  while  requests  during  off  time  are  less  likely,  but  still 
possible. In taking this into account, the strength of authentication can 
be adapted dynamically. The scheme is pictured in Figure 1. Context 
variables describe the circumstance of a request, providing situational 
awareness. The authentication methods are inherent to a requester. A 
validator decides upon the strength of authentication required based on 
the  situation  and  the  requested  action  or  resource.  An  exemplary 
implementation of this system is presented in the subsequent section. 

 
 
 
 
9 

4  A Dynamic Model 
In  this  section,  the  use  case  is  described  in  the  Subsection  4.1.  The 
architecture is presented in Subsection 4.2, followed by the evaluation 
in Subsection 4.3 and a discussion in Subsection 4.4. 

FIGURE 1: AUTHENTICATION CONCEPT 

 Use Case 

4.1 
The  use  case  evaluated  in  this  work  is  exemplary  for  existing 
requirements in industrial and office network requirements. It focusses 
on user access to resources under different circumstances with requests 
to perform a set of actions. The action can either be a request for default 
or for root access to a resource. The situational awareness is derived 
from information about time and location, where location is obtained 
from the IP address. This means a user can either be inside a trusted 
network, or not. The time can either be during common working hours 
or not. If a user requests any action, default or root, outside the trusted 
network or outside common working hours, high security is required. 
High security means two factors in the course of the implementation 
presented in this work. If a user requests default access during normal 
working  hours  and  from  inside  a  trusted  network,  the  situation  is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
10 

deemed secure so that low security is sufficient. Low security means 
only  one  authentication  method  is  required.  If  a  user  requests  root 
access to the resource, high security is required as this kind of access 
motivates a high level of security. 

The  combinations  of  circumstances,  requested  actions  and  resulting 
authentication factors is listed in Table 1. The access control is a Rule-
Based approach, as described in Section 3.2.  

TABLE 1: REQUIRED SECURITY LEVEL FOR COMBINATIONS OF CONTEXT AND 
ACTION 

Context 
Normal 
working hours 
and 
on site 
Normal 
working hours 
and 
on site 
Outside 
working hours 
or 
off site 
Outside 
working hours 
or 
off site 

Request 

Low Sec. 

High Sec. 

default access 

root access 

default access 

root access 

4.2   Architecture 
The  proposed  authentication  scheme  is  described  by  a  flow  diagram 
shown  in  Figure  2.  First,  the  system  checks  if  the  user  is  already 
authenticated  either  with  default  or  with  root  access.  If  the  user  is 
neither, one factor is requested by the system. For our proof of concept 
implementation, we decided on a username-password combination that 
needs  to  be  provided  by  the  user.  If  the  provided  credentials  are 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 

incorrect,  the  authentication  request  is  denied.  Else,  the  context 
provided is  checked.  For the implementation  presented in this work, 
location, based on IP and time, based on the authentication server time, 
are employed. If those context variables are during common working 
hours,  or  the  location  is  outside  the  office  area,  a  second  factor, 
implemented as an OTP, is requested. If the context is plausible, but 
the user is requesting root permissions, an OTP is requested as a second 
factor as well. Furthermore, it is possible for a user with default access 
rights to request root permission after some time, if need be. The  

FIGURE 2: AUTHENTICATION MODEL ARCHITECTURE 

algorithm then requests the second factor only at that time and allows 
for an update of access rights. 

 
 
 
 
 
12 

4.3   Evaluation 
In  this  section,  the  exemplary  implementation  of  the  considered 
scenarios  is  presented.  First,  the  used  software  components  are 
explained in Subsection 4.3.1. After that, the behaviour of the presented 
implementation when faced with different conditions and scenarios is 
described in Subsection 4.3.2.  

4.3.1  Implementation 
The  exemplary  implementation  has  been  done  based  on  Remote 
Authentication Dial-In User Service (RADIUS) (Rigney et al. 2000). 
RADIUS  is  an open-source protocol  used for authentication users in 
networks. There are implementations publicly available, making it easy 
to  adapt.  The  libraries  for  user  name-password-combinations  are 
publicly  available.  For  user  name  and  password  combination,  the 
Password Authentication Protocol (PAP)-library was used. In case an 
OTP was needed, the Short Message Service OTP (SMSOTP) module 
was used. The structure of the authentication engine can be found in 
Figure 3. 

FIGURE 3: STRUCTURE OF THE AUTHENTICATION ENGINE 

RADIUS provides encryption for the transmission of passwords using 
PAP and SMSOTP. The algorithm, described in depth by Hill (2001), 
is  based  on  a  shared  secret  S.  It  is  summarised  in  the  following 
equation: 

𝑐1 =   𝑝1 ⨁ 𝑀𝐷5(𝑆 + 𝑅𝐴) 
𝑐2 =   𝑝2 ⨁ 𝑀𝐷5(𝑆 + 𝑐1) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
13 

… 
𝑐𝑛 =   𝑝𝑛 ⨁ 𝑀𝐷5(𝑆 + 𝑐𝑛−1) 

The  cypher  text  blocks  𝑐𝑥  for  x  ∈  {1,  ...,  n}  are  concatenated  and 
transmitted to  the RADIUS server  as the password-attribute.  Cypher 
text block 𝑐𝑖  depends on  cypher text  block 𝑐𝑖−1, the first  block  𝑐1  is 
initialised with  a Request  Authenticator  RA, as described in the first 
line of Equation 1. The 𝑝𝑥  for x ∈ {1, ..., n} are 16-octet blocks of the 
user password. MD5 is a hashing algorithm. The presented RADIUS-
modules have been extended with modules that get the context on the 
server-side  in  order  to  determine  the  required  security  level. 
Furthermore, a module has been written that re-requests authentication 
if  high  security  is  demanded.  This  request  demands  a  OTP.  The 
resource  to  be  authenticated  to  is  an  apache  web-server  (Apache 
Foundation 2018) that hosts documents. Default and root permissions 
can be granted to a user. 

4.3.2  Scenarios 
In order to evaluate the implementation, three different scenarios were 
considered. In the first scenario, low security access is considered. The 
authentication  framework  only  requests  user  name  and  password.  In 
the second and third scenario, high security is considered. The second 
scenario describes a user requesting root access to the resource, while 
the third scenario describes a user requesting default access, but with 
context  information  that  requires  an  additional  authentication  factor. 
The information flow for standard and root authentication can be found 
in  Figure  3.  As  the  procedure  remains  the  same,  whether  the  user 
demands  root  access  right  away  or  demands  it  after  some  time,  no 
specific scenario where the access rights are increased after some time 
is considered. 

First scenario: The user is prompted with a request for user name and 
password.  After  providing  these,  default  access  to  the  resource  is 
granted. This flow can be seen in Figure 4 by omitting the part marked 
as “root access”. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 

Second scenario: The user is prompted with a request for user name 
and password. After providing these, the system figures that root access 
was  requested  that  demands  for  high  security.  Therefore,  a  second 
factor is requested. After providing it, the user is granted root access to 
the resource. This is described as the full flow in Figure 4. 

FIGURE 4: AUTHENTICATION SEQUENCE 

Third scenario: The user is prompted with a request for user name and 
password.  After  providing  these,  the  system  checks  the  context 
variables and determines that high security is required. A second factor 
is requested. After providing it, the user is granted default access to the 
resource. This, as well, is described as the full flow in Figure 4. 

4.4   Discussion 
In  this  section,  a  model  for  context-based  was  introduced  and 
evaluated.  The  extend  is  relatively  simple,  containing  only  two 
authorisation levels, namely standard and root, as well as two context 
factors, namely IP-based location and time. The implementation of this 
model shows the feasibility of the concept. There are advantages to the 

 
 
 
 
 
15 

proposed  solution,  as  well  as  challenges  that  have  not  yet  been 
addressed. First, RADIUS-based solutions are easy to implement and 
integrate, as it is a well-established tool for authentication with open 
source  code,  providing  the  possibility  for  extensions.  Second,  the 
context variables that have been employed are easily collected, keeping 
the additional effort small. No further sensors are needed to gather all 
information, as they are readily available.  

On the other hand, there are more novel  solutions  for  authentication 
and authorisation available, addressing challenges that did not play a 
major role in the development of RADIUS, such as roaming in WLAN 
networks and authentication in untrusted networks. Furthermore, the context 
information can be spoofed with medium effort. IPSec and protocols can be 
used to secure the location factor. Additional information, such as hardware 
security  tokens  provide  more  flexibility  and  a  high  level  of  security  as  a 
second 
require  additional  hardware  and 
implementation effort. Finally, the context variables that have been used are 
limited, there is an abundance of possible context that can be integrated into 
authentication solutions. Possible context information is discussed in Section 
5. 

factor.  However, 

they 

From the authorisation point of view, a scenario with two roles, default and 
admin, is common for office, and sometimes home, use.  However, to meet 
requirements  of  current  industrial  requirements,  more  roles  are  required. 
Furthermore,  timing  constraints  and  time-based  access  is  important  for 
actions that are scheduled in a predefined time. Categories of context factors, 
examples and factors that have been used in this work are listed in Table 2. 

TABLE 2: CONTEXT FACTORS 

Context Category 

Example 

Used in this work 

Time 

NTP-based, 

server-

Server-based 

based, host-based 

Location 

GPS,  IP,  Proximity, 

IP 

Wireless 

(WLAN, 

Bluetooth, …)  

Event 

Emergency, Condition 

- 

 
 
 
 
 
16 

Entity-based 

Histroy,  Chain 

of 

- 

Trust, 

Biometric/physical 

properties 

Related Work 

5 
In this section, related work in authentication is presented. Apart from 
the well-established classic authentication mechanisms as described in 
Section 3, there is ongoing research in the field  of sound and secure 
authentication.  Several  works  address  the  aspect  of  trust  and 
computation of a trust level in authentication and access control. Bhatti 
et al. present a trust-based context-aware access control model for web-
services that address shortcomings of classic approaches (Bhatti et al. 
2004). Lima et al. compute trust, based on recommendations in mobile 
and pervasive environments to provide algorithms that meet demands 
in  dynamic  and  security  for  mobile  computation  (Lima  et  al.  2011). 
Rene and Gellersen present a method to pair devices based on shaking 
them  (Mayrhofer  and  Gellersen  2007).  Furthermore,  Mayrhofer 
worked  on  context-based  authentication  for  spontaneous  and 
ubiquitous  devices  (Mayrhofer  2006).  In  addition  to  single-factor 
authentication  schemes,  multi-factor  authentication  is  a  widely 
regarded  topic  in  research,  e.g.  the  work  of  Dasgputa  et  al.  (2017). 
They  provide  an  exhaustive  overview  over  authentication  processes 
and an extensive insight into the advances in this field. There are multi-
factor  authentication  schemes  with  certain  policies,  like  the  privacy-
preserving biometric authentication as presented by Bhargav-Spantzel 
et al. (2017). Many multi-factor authentication mechanisms address the 
issue of mobile and distributed devices and the resulting necessity of 
secure authentication. Glynos et al. present an approach for Mobile Ad 
Hoc  Networks  (MANETs)  to  prevent  spoofing  and  impersonation 
attacks (Glynos et al. 2005). The importance of trust in MANETs as 
well  as  the  difficulties  in  computing  it  is  described  in  the  work  of 
Govindan and Mohaparta (2012). Huang et al. work on multi-factor 
authentication  for  fragile  communications,  e.g.  when  authentication 
servers  are  often  unavailable  (Huang  et  al.  2014).  They  address  the 
problem  of  slow  or  unavailable  remote  authentication  servers  and 

 
 
17 

present  an  authentication  protocol  that  speeds  the  authentication 
process  with  a  remote  entity  up.  The  specific  dangers  of  cloud 
computing  are  considered  by  Banyal  et  al.  (2013).  A  framework 
consisting  of  authentication  mechanisms  that  are  compatible  with 
established schemes and methods for access management is proposed. 
Aloul  et  al.  present  an  approach  that  increased  the  level  of 
authentication  by  using  mobile  phones,  for  applications  such  as 
banking (Aloul et al. 2009). Furthermore, as authentication and access 
control  is  employed  in  a  variety  of  fields,  from  online  banking  to 
accessing  one’s  cell  phone,  some  authentication  processes  are  more 
critical  than  others.  Jae-Jung  and  Seng-Phil  present  a  method  of 
assessing  the  risk and trustworthiness of  authentication methods and 
provide insight as to when they provide a sufficient amount of security 
(Jae-Jung and Seng-Phil 2011). 

In addition to that, context-based authentication and access control is a 
widely regarded topic. It is addressed by Hulsebosch et al. (2005). They 
investigate the possibilities of access control based only on situational 
information.  Furthermore,  they  explore  the  possibilities  of  providing 
anonymous  services  due  to  the  obtained  information.  Kindberg  and 
Zhang  look  into  context  authentication  over  constrained  channels 
(Kindberg and Zhang 2001). They propose an algorithm to determine 
the position of a user based on physical channel information. Kinberg 
et  al.  present  a  model  that  derives  context  information  about  the 
location  based  on  characteristics  of  the  communication  channel 
(Kindberg et al. 2002). Proximity awareness as a means of context is 
considered by Lenzini (2009) and Bardram et al. (2003). Bardram et 
al. focus explicitly on pervasive computing as a modern day challenge. 
They propose context awareness to determine a user’s location in order 
to grant or deny access.  Primo et al. propose a framework for context-
aware authentication based on the position a user holds the smartphone 
by extracting position information of the accelerometer  (Primo et al. 
2014).  Lenzini  introduces  a  system  that  is  aware  of  users  in  its 
proximity  and  able 
these  users. 
Furthermore,  a  level  of  trust  that  the  user  is  actually  at  the  assumed 
position is calculated. Hayashi et al. propose a solution similar to the 
one implemented in this work. They use context information about the 
user, such as location, in order to determine security factors and select 

identify  and  authenticate 

to 

 
 
 
18 

the  authentication  scheme  accordingly  (Hayashi  et  al.  2013).  A 
privacy-enhanced    access  control  scheme  that  optionally  integrates 
context  in  pervasive  environments  is  developed  by  Ren  and  Lou 
(2007).  Hohlbein  and  Teufel  address  the  issue  of  authorised  persons 
misusing the system by introducing a role-based access control scheme 
that uses a need-to-know basis (Holbein and Teufel 1995). In addition 
to that, context information can be used to determine the security level 
of a network, as proposed by Duque Anton et al. (2017b), or to perform 
attribution  of  attacker  types,  as  presented  by  Fraunholz  et  al. 
(Fraunholz et al. 2017a; Fraunholz et al. 2017c). 

The  challenges  faced  by  authentication  and  authorisation,  as  well  as 
solutions proposed by works presented above are listed in Table 3. 

TABLE 3: CHALLENGES IN AUTHENTICATION AND AUTHORISATION 

Challenges 
Trust computation 

Authentication for 
critical services 
Multi-factor 
authentication for 
MANETs 
Privacy-preserving 
multi-factor 
authentication 
Multi-factor 
authentication for 
pervasive 
environments 
Multi-factor 
authentication for 
fragile communication 

Addressed 

(Bhatti et al. 2004; Lima et al. 2011; 
Govindan and Mohapatra 2012) 
(Aloul et al. 2009) 

(Glynos et al. 2005; Govindan and 

Mohapatra 2012) 

(Bhargav-Spantzel et al. 2017) 

(Ren and Lou 2007; Mayrhofer 2006; 

Mayrhofer and Gellersen 2007; Banyal 

et al. 2013) 

(Huang et al. 2014) 

 
 
 
 
19 

Risk assessment of 

(Jae-Jung and Seng-Phil 2011) 

authentication methods 

Context-aware 

(Holbein and Teufel 1995; Bardram et 

authentication and 

al. 2003; Kindberg et al. 2002; 

authorisation 

Hulsebosch et al. 2005; Mayrhofer and 

Gellersen 2007; Ren and Lou 2007; 

Lenzini 2009; Hayashi et al. 2013; 

Primo et al. 2014) 

Authorisation over 

(Kindberg and Zhang 2001; Kindberg et 

constrained channels 

al. 2002) 

Survey 

(Dasgupta et al. 2017) 

Context-aided intrusion 

(Fraunholz et al. 2017a; Fraunholz et al. 

detection 

2017b; Fraunholz et al. 2017c; Duque 

Anton et al. 2017b) 

Future Research Directions 

6 
As  a  next  step  towards  the  integration  of  situational  awareness  into 
authentication solutions, different types of authentication factors will 
be  evaluated.  Especially  interesting  are  factors  that  provide  strong 
authentication, while needing no user interaction whatsoever. A worker 
in a factory, for example, that carries a tablet PC in order to wirelessly 
control devices, could be identified by a RFID-tag around his neck. If 
strong security is needed, the tabled PC could automatically scan his 
iris to get a second factor. Furthermore, physical attributes of devices 
or wireless channels can be used for strong, automated authentication 
and encryption (Lipps et al. 2018; Weinand et al. 2017). Furthermore, 
Integrating  context  into  an  aggregation  model  can  aid  in  intrusion 
detection, especially for heterogeneous networks (Duque Anton et al. 
2017c). 

 
 
 
 
20 

Conclusion 

7 
The  presented  context-based  multi-factor  authentication  approach 
provides  an  additional  level  of  security  in  comparison  to  standard 
authentication  mechanisms  as  discussed  in  Section  3.  For  the 
exemplary  implementation  well-established  authentication  factors 
have been used. They could easily be extended or replaced in order to 
obtain  on-demand  security  with  strong  authentication.  The  crucial 
point of the proposed framework is the flexibility and adaptability to 
different security standards. For less security critical tasks, one factor 
authentication is used, while more critical tasks require two factors. In 
the proposed framework, context information is considered in order to 
decide whether a task is critical or not, as the criticality also depends 
on the circumstances of the task. Especially the dynamic increase of 
access rights after providing a second factor makes this approach well 
suited for a dynamic environment. The principle of least needed access 
rights applies, so that the second factor is only necessary if the policy 
demands it. Several existing technologies were combined in order to 
keep  the  system  easy-to-use,  while  still  capable  to  adapt  to  the 
environment. 

Acknowledgements This work has been supported by the Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research of the Federal Republic of 
Germany (Foerderkennzeichen KIS4ITS0001, IUNO). The authors 
alone are responsible for the content of the paper. 

References 

8 
AG, Siemens (2013): PKI Smart Card Usage for Business-Partners 
Features and Requirements. Available online 
https://www.siemens.com/corp/pool/pki/pki_self_services_internet_fe
atures_and_requirements.pdf, last checked 19.01.2018. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 

Aloul, Fadi; Zahidi, Syed; El-Hajj, Wasim (2009): Multi Factor 
Authentication Using Mobile Phones. In: International Journal of 
Mathematics and Computer Science, Bd. 4, S. 65–80. 

Ambekar, Abhijit; Kuruvatti, N.; Schotten, Hans D. (2012): Improved 
Method of Secret Key Generation Based on Variations in Wireless 
Challen. In: Proceedings of International Conference on Systems, 
Signals and Image Processing (IWSSIP). 

Antonkakis, Manos; April, Tim; Bailey, Michael; Bernhard, Matt; 
Bursztein, Elie; Chochran, Jamie et al. (2017): Understanding the 
Mirai Botnet. In: 26th USENIX Security Symposium: USENIX 
Association. 

Banyal, R. K.; Jain, P.; Jain, V. K. (2013): Multi-factor 
Authentication Framework for Cloud Computing. In: Fifth 
International Conference on Computational Intelligence, Modelling 
and Simulation, S. 105–110. 

Bardram, Jakob E.; Kjaer, Rasmus E.; O, Pederson Michael (2003,doi 
= 1007/978-3-540-39653-6_8): Context-Aware User Authentication. 
Supporting Proximity-Based Login in Pervasive Computing. In: 
Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp), Bd. 2864. Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer. 

Bhargav-Spantzel, Abhilasha; Squicciarini, Anna C.; Bertino, Elisa; 
Modi, Shimon; Young, Matthew; Elliot, Stephan (2017): Privacy 
Preserving Multi-factor Authentication with Biometrics. Hewlett-
Packard. West Lafayette, IN 47907-2086. 

Bhatti, Rafae; Bertino, Elisa; Ghafoor, Arif (2004): A Trust-based 
Context-Aware Access Control Model for Web-Services. In: IEEE 
International Conference on Web Services: IEEE (ICWS’04). 

Choi, Donghee; Kim, Dohoon; Park, Seog (2015): A Framework for 
Context Sensitive Risk-Based Access Control in Medical Information 
Systems. In: Computational and Mathematical Methods in Medicine, 
Bd. 2015. 

Dasgupta, Dipankar; Roy, Arunava; Nag, Abhijit (2017): Multi-
Factor Authentication. In: Advances in User Authentication: Springer 
International Publishing, S. 185–233. 

 
 
22 

Dethlefs, Robert (2015): How cyber attacks became more profitable 
than the drug trade. In: Fortune. 

Duque Anton, Simon; Fraunholz, Daniel; Lipps, Christoph; Pohl, 
Frederic; Zimmermann, Marc; Schotten, Hans Dieter (2017a): Two 
Decades of SCADA Exploitation. A Brief History. In: IEEE 
Conference on Applications, Information and Network Security 
(AINS). IEEE Computer Science Chapter Malaysia: IEEE Press. 

Duque Anton, Simon; Fraunholz, Daniel; Teuber, Stephan; Schotten, 
Hans Dieter (2017b): A Question of Context. Enhancing Intrusion 
Detection by Providing Context Information. In: 13th Conference of 
Telecommunication, Media and Internet Techno-Economics (CTTE). 
Conference of Telecommunication, Media and Internet Techno-
Economics (CTTE-17), 13th, located at Joint CTTE and CMI, 
November 23-24, Copenhagen, Denmark. Aalborg University 
Copenhagen. Frederikskaj 12,2450 København SV, Denmark: IEEE. 

Duque Anton, Simon; Fraunholz, Daniel; Zemitis, Janis; Pohl, 
Frederic; Schotten, Hans Dieter (2017c): Highly Scalable and 
Flexible Model for Effective Aggregation of Context-based Data in 
Generic IIoT Scenarios. In: 9th Central European Workshop on 
Services and their Composition. Central European Workshop on 
Services and their Composition (ZEUS-2017), February 13-14, 
Lugano, Switzerland, S. 51–58. 

Foundation, The Apache Software (2018): Apache - HTTP Server 
Project. Available online https://httpd.apache.org/, last checked 
31.01.2018. 

Fraunholz, Daniel; Duque Anton, Simon; Schotten, Hans Dieter 
(2017a): Introducing GAMfIS. A Generic Attacker Model for 
Information Security. 

Fraunholz, Daniel; Krohmer, Daniel; Duque Anton, Simon; Schotten, 
Hans Dieter (2017b): Investigation of Cyber Crime Conducted by 
Abusing Weak or Default Passwords with a Medium Interaction 
Honeypot. In: International Conference On Cyber Security And 
Protection Of Digital Services (Cyber Security-17) London, United 
Kingdom: IEEE. 

 
 
23 

Fraunholz, Daniel; Krohmer, Daniel; Duque Anton, Simon; Schotten, 
Hans Dieter; Onwubiko, Cyril (2017c): YAAS - On the Attribution of 
Honeypot Data. In: International Journal on Cyber Situational 
Awareness (IJCSA) 2 (1), S. 21–39. 

Glynos, D.; Kotzanikolaou, P.; Douligeris, C. (2005): Preventing 
impersonation attacks in MANET with multi-factor authentication. In: 
Third International Symposium on Modeling and Optimization in 
Mobile, Ad Hoc, and Wireless Networks (WiOpt’05), S. 59–64. 

Govindan, K.; Mohapatra, P. (2012): Trust Computations and Trust 
Dynamics in Mobile Adhoc Networks. A Survey. In: IEEE 
Communications Surveys Tutorials 14 (2), S. 279–298. DOI: 
10.1109/SURV.2011.042711.00083. 

Gultsch, Daniel: Blind Trust Before Verification. Available online 
https://gultsch.de/trust.html, last checked 22.08.2018. 

Haller, N.; Metz, C.; Nesser, P.; Straw, M. (1998): A One-Time 
Password System: RFC Editor (2289). 

Hayashi, Eiji; Das, Sauvik; Amini, Shahriyar; Hong, Jason; Oakley, 
Ian (2013): CASA: context-aware scalable authentication. In: Lorrie 
Faith Cranor (Hg.): Proceedings of the Ninth Symposium on Usable 
Privacy and Security. the Ninth Symposium. Newcastle, United 
Kingdom. ACM Special Interest Group on Computer-Human 
Interaction. New York, NY: ACM, S. 1. 

Hill, Joshua (2001): An Analysis of the RADIUS Authentication 
Protocol. Available online 
http://www.untruth.org/ josh/security/radius/radius-auth.html, last 
checked 02.02.2018. 

Holbein, Ralph; Teufel, Stephanie (1995): A Context Authentication 
Service for Role Based Access Control in Distributed Systems - 
CARDS. In: Jan H. P. Eloff and Sebastiaan H. von Solms (Hg.): 
Information Security - the Next Decade. Proceedings of the IFIP 
TC11 eleventh international conference on information security, 
IFIP/Sec ’95. Boston, MA, s.l.: Springer US (IFIP Advances in 
Information and Communication Technology), S. 270–285. 

Huang, X.; Xiang, Y.; Bertino, E.; Zhou, J.; Xu, L. (2014): Robust 
Multi-Factor Authentication for Fragile Communications. In: IEEE 

 
 
24 

Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing 11 (6), S. 568–
581. DOI: 10.1109/TDSC.2013.2297110. 

Hulsebosch, R. J.; Salden, A. H.; Bargh, M. S.; Ebben, P. W. G.; 
Reitsma, J. (2005): Context Sensitive Access Control. In: Proceedings 
of the Tenth ACM Symposium on Access Control Models and 
Technologies. New York, NY, USA: ACM (SACMAT ’05), S. 111–
119. 

International Organization for Standardization (2011): Identification 
Cards - Integrated Circuit Cards. ISO/IEC 7816:2003. 

Jae-Jung, Kim; Seng-Phil, Hong (2011): A Method of Risk 
Assessment for Multi-Factor Authentication. In: Journal of 
Information Processing Systems 7 (1), S. 187–198. DOI: 
10.3745/JIPS.2011.7.1.187. 

Kindberg, T.; Zhang, K.; Shankar, N. (2002): Context authentication 
using constrained channels. In: Fourth IEEE Workshop on Mobile 
Computing Systems and Applications. Proceedings : 20-21 June, 
2002, Callicoon, New York. Fourth IEEE Workshop on Mobile 
Computing Systems and Applications. Callicoon, NY, USA, 20-21 
June 2002. IEEE Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and 
Applications; ACM SIGMOBILE; IEEE Computer Society; USENIX 
Association. Los Alamitos, Calif: IEEE Computer Society Press, S. 
14–21. 

Kindberg, Tim; Zhang, Kan (2001): Context Authentication Using 
Constrained Channels. In:. Center for Education and Research in 
Information Assurance and Security (CERIAS), Purdue University. 
HP Laboratories Palo Alto. 

Krempl, Stefan (2014): 31C3. CCC-Tueftler hackt Merkels Iris and 
von der Leyens Fingerabdruck. Available online 
https://www.heise.de/security/meldung/31C3-CCC-Tueftler-hackt-
Merkels-Iris-und-von-der-Leyens-Fingerabdruck-2506929.html, last 
checked 19.01.2018. 

Lenzini, Gabriele (2009): Design of Architectures for Proximity-
aware Services. Experiments in Context-based Authentication with 
Subjective Logic. In: Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer 
Science 236, S. 47–64. DOI: 10.1016/j.entcs.2009.03.014. 

 
 
25 

Lima, Joao Carlos D.; Rocha, Cristiano C.; Augustin, Iara; R, Dantas 
M’rio A. (2011): A Context-Aware Recommendation System to 
Behavioral Based Authentication in Mobile and Pervasive 
Environment. In: 2011 IFIP 9th International Conference on 
Embedded and Ubiquitous Computing, S. 312–319. 

Lipps, Christoph; Weinand, Andreas; Krummacker, Dennis; Fischer, 
Christoph; Schotten, Hans Dieter (2018): Proof of Concept for IoT 
Device Authentication based on SRAM PUFs using ATMEGA 2560-
MCU. In: 1st International Conference on Data Intelligence and 
Security. International Conference on Data Intelligence and Security 
(ICDIS-2018), South Padre Island,, Texas, USA: IEEE. 

LLC, R. SecurityS.A. (2018): RSA SecureID Suite. Available online 
https://www.rsa.com/en-us/products/rsa-securid-suite, last checked 
31.01.2018. 

LogMeIn, Inc. (2018): Simplify your life. Available online 
https://www.lastpass.com/, last checked 19.01.2018. 

Mayrhofer, Rene (2006): A context authentication proxy for IPSec 
using spatial reference. In: 1st International Workshop on 
Trustworthy Ubiquitous Computing, S. 449–462. 

Mayrhofer, Rene; Gellersen, Hans (2007): Shake well before use: two 
implementations for implicit context authentication. In: Adjunct Proc. 
Ubicomp. 

Musa, Sam (2014): Cybersecurity. Access Control. Available online 
https://evolllution.com/opinions/cybersecurity-access-control/, last 
checked 19.01.2018. 

Paganini, Pierluigi (2018): Satori botnet is back again, experts 
observed a surge in port scan activity associated with it. Hg. v. 
Security Affairs. Available online 
https://securityaffairs.co/wordpress/73599/malware/satori-botnet-
resurrection.html, zuletzt aktualisiert am 17.06.2018, last checked 
04.09.2018. 

Primo, Abena; Phoha, Vir V.; Kumar, Rajesh; Serwadda, Abdul 
(2014): Context-Aware Active Authentication Using Smartphone 
Accelerometer Measurements. In: The IEEE Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops, S. 98–105. 

 
 
26 

Ren, Kui; Lou, Wenjing (2007): Privacy-enhanced, Attack-resilient 
Access Control in Pervasive Computing Environments with Optional 
Context Authentication Capability. In: Mobile Netw Appl 12 (1), S. 
79–92. DOI: 10.1007/s11036-006-0008-7. 

Rigney, C.; Willens, S.; Rubens, A.; Simpson, W. (2000): Remote 
Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS). RFC. In: (Keine 
Angabe) (2865). Available online http://www.rfc-
editor.org/rfc/rfc2865.txt. 

Schaefer, Guenter (2016): Security in Fixed and Wireless Networks. 
2nd ed.: Wiley. 

Schneier, Bruce (2000): Secrets & Lies: Digital Security in a 
Networked World: John Wiley & SOns Inc. 

Symantec (2009): Cyber Crime has Surpassed Illegal Drug 
Trafficking as a Criminal Moneymaker; 1 in 5 will become a Victim. 
Available online https://www.symantec.com/about/newsroom/press-
releases/2009/symantec_0910_01, last checked 19.01.2018. 

Turner, Dawn M. (2016): Digital Authentication - the basics. 
Available online https://www.cryptomathic.com/news-
events/blog/digital-authentication-the-basics, last checked 
19.01.2018. 

Weinand, Andreas; Karrenbauer, Michael; Lianghai, Ji; Schotten, 
Hans Dieter (2017): Physical Layer Authentication for Mission 
Critical Machine Type Communication using Gaussian Mixture 
Model based Clustering. In: Proceedings of Vehicular Technology 
Conference (VTC-Spring 2017). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27 

KEY TERMS 

  Context: Information about the conditions and current status of an 

environment 
 
Identification: The claim an entity makes about its identity 
  Authentication: The process of proving an identity towards a 

system 

  Multi-factor Authentication: The process of using different 

mechanisms at once to prove identity towards a system with a 
higher security  

  Strong Authentication: The process of proving the identity towards 

a system by using independent authentication mechanisms 

  Authorisation: The process of providing access rights to a resource 

 

by an authority based on a set of rules. 
Industrial Internet of Things: A concept that builds on 
interconnectivity and distributed computation to increase flexibility 
and productivity of industrial applications and to reduce cost and 
maintenance 

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 

Simon Duque Anton obtained his Diploma in Information Technologies 
in  2015  at  the  University  of  Kaiserslautern.  Born  in  Hamburg, 
Germany in 1989, he started working at the German Research Center 
for Artificial Intelligence in Kaiserslautern after that, where he pursues 
a Ph.D. in the field of machine learning and artificial intelligence. His 
research  covers  the  application  of  machine  learning  methods  on 
industrial intrusion detection and network security. 

Daniel Fraunholz is a Researcher and Ph.D. candidate at the 
Intelligent Networks Research Group at the German Research Center 
for Artificial Intelligence in Kaiserslautern since 2015. Born in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 

Stuttgart, Germany in 1992, he received his Bachelor and Master 
degree from Heilbronn University of Applied Sciences in Electronic 
Systems Engineering in 2014, respectively 2015. His major research 
interests are network security, intrusion detection and deception 
systems. 

Christoph Lipps graduated in Electrical and Computer Engineering at 
the University of Kaiserslautern. He received his Master degree in 
Communication Systems in 2016. Born in Pirmasens, Germany in 
1986, he started working as a Researcher and Ph.D. candidate at the 
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence in Kaiserslautern. 
His research focuses on Physical Layer Security, Physically 
Unclonable Functions and entity authentication. 

Khurshid Alam obtained his Master's degree in Applied Computer 
Science in 2018 at the University of Kaiserslautern and started 
working at Intelligent Networks Research Group of the German 
Research Center for Artificial Intelligence since then. His research 
area covers industrial wireless communication and network security. 

Hans Dieter Schotten is a full professor and head of the chair for 
Wireless Communications and Navigation at the University of 
Kaiserslautern. In addition to that, he is Scientific Director of the 
Intelligent Networks Research Group of the German Research Center 
for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI). He received his Ph.D. in Electrical 
Engineering from the RWTH Aachen in 1997. He was a research 
group leader there before changing into industry. At Ericsson, he held 
the position of Senior Researcher, after that he held the position of 
Director of Technical Standards at Qualcomm. His topics of interest 
are wireless communication and 5G. 

REFERENCE 

Reference  to  this  paper  should  be  made  as  follows:  Duque  Anton,  S., 
Fraunholz, D.; Lipps, C., Alam, K., Schotten, H. D. (2018). Putting Things in 
Context:  Securing  Industrial  Authentication  and  Intrusion  Detection  with 
Context Information. International Journal on Cyber Situational Awareness, 
Vol. 3, No. 1, ppxx-yy 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 

 
 
 
