On the Cost of Security Compliance in Information Systems 

David Hofbauer1, Igor Ivkic1,2, Silia Maksuti3,4, Andreas Aldrian5, Markus Tauber3 
1Forschung Burgenland, Eisenstadt, Austria 
2Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK 
3University of Applied Sciences Burgenland, Eisenstadt, Austria 
4Luleå University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden 
5AVL LIST GmbH 

ABSTRACT 

in 

the  moment,  machines 

The  onward  development  of  information  and  communication 
technology has led to a new industrial revolution called Industry 
4.0. This revolution involves Cyber-Physical Production Systems 
(CPPS), which consist of intelligent Cyber-Physical Systems that 
may be able to adapt themselves autonomously in a production 
industrial 
environment.  At 
environments are often not connected to the internet, which thus 
needs  a  point-to-point  connection  to  access  the  device  if 
necessary.  Through  Industry  4.0,  these  devices  should  enable 
remote access for smart maintenance through a connection to the 
outside  world.  However,  this  connection  opens  the  gate  for 
possible  cyber-attacks  and  thus  raises  the  question  about 
providing security for these environments. Therefore, this paper 
used  an  adapted  approach  based  on  SixSigma  to  solve  this 
security  problem  by  investigating  security  standards.  Security 
requirements  were  gathered  and  mapped  to  controls  from  well 
known  security  standards,  formed  into  a  catalog.  This  catalog 
includes assessment information to  check how secure a solution 
for a use case is and also includes a link to an estimation method 
for implementation cost. Thus this paper’s outcome shows how 
to  make  Industry  4.0  use  cases  secure  by  fulfilling  security 
standard  controls  and  how 
resulting 
implementation costs.  

to  estimate 

the 

Keywords:  Industry  4.0,  cyber-physical  systems,  requirements 
engineering, standard compliance, security, remote access, costs 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

Through  the  fourth  industrial  revolution,  called  Industry  4.0, 
which  involves  Cyber-Physical  Production  Systems  (CPPS), 
boundaries of companies deteriorate. This is caused by the use of 
embedded systems and their exchange of data across the entire 
value  chain  [1].  Industrial  Control  Systems  (ICS),  for  example 
machines with sensors for monitoring manufacturing and process 
automation  within  a  production  company  serve  as  one  of  the 
basics for Industry 4.0. These machines have been traditionally 
built as stand-alone systems, not connected to the outside world 
and  only  accessible  via  point-to-point  connection.  Thus, 
maintaining  these  machines  might  cause  an  overhead,  since  it 
often  includes  to  physically  move  them  in  order  to  be  able  to 
establish  a  connection.  To  improve  the  maintenance,  process  a 
transformation  to  Industry  4.0  [2]  could  enable  remote  access, 
which allows servicing the machine from outside. 
However,  by  no  longer  isolating  ICS,  the  gates  for  numerous 
cyber-attacks are opened and thus organizations must understand 
the potential risks for that. Before opening such a system to the 
outside world, it is important to know i) what to do in order to be 
secure  and  ii)  how  much  it  costs  to  do  so.  Thus,  being  able  to 
provide  a  secure  remote  access  is  as  important  as  providing  a 
secure end-to-end communication in Industry 4.0. Since for the 
latter a lot of research work is done (e.g. in [3], [4], [5], [6]) this 
paper provides an approach how to make a use case secure for 

Industry 4.0 environments based on security standards and what 
costs for this security implementation can be estimated.  
To achieve this, the approach adapted in this paper is based on 
SixSigma.  Therefore,  requirements  are  gathered  and  security 
standards are used to find appropriate controls addressing these 
requirements.  Afterwards  these  outcomes  are  mapped  into  a 
includes 
requirements  and  controls  catalog,  which  also 
the 
for 
assessment  of  controls  and  cost  estimation 
implementation of controls. Through an experimental evaluation 
the  usage  of  this  approach’s  outcome  is  done  to  show  it’s 
applicability  and  implementation  options.  The  method  was 
adapted  with  other  use  cases  in  mind,  which  can  be  used  for 
future work. The contributions of this paper are thus twofold:  
• 

Firstly, an approach of how to design a secure Industry 4.0 
application by fulfilling security standard controls and  
secondly,  an  approach  for  estimating  the  implementation 
costs to build such an application 

• 

Both  should  help  building  and  implementing  a  cost  aware  and 
secure application for Industry 4.0. The remainder of the paper is 
structured as follows: Section 2 shows related work concerning 
the most important topics regarding this paper’s method and how 
this work can be used or enhanced. Next, section 3 describes the 
methodology  by  explaining  in  detail  each  step  of  the  used 
SixSigma approach. Based on that, section 4 shows in a step by 
step  evaluation  how  the  presented  approach  can  be  used  to 
provide security and estimate the resulting costs for an industrial 
use  case.  Finally,  in  section  5  we  summarize  the  approach 
including the evaluation results and give an outline for possible 
future work. 

2.  RELATED WORK 

the 

topics 

Brettel  et  al.  [1]  have  investigated  the  topic  Industry  4.0  in 
general.  They  have  analyzed  8  different  research  journals 
concerning 
individual  production,  end-to-end 
engineering in a virtual process chain and production networks 
through cluster analysis and also held face to face interviews with 
industry  managers.  Their  results  showed  from  a  managerial 
viewpoint  why  companies  adapt  or  refuse  Industry  4.0 
technologies. Their outputs should also help decision makers to 
assess if transformation to Industry 4.0 within their companies is 
needed.  Further  general  work  [7]  has  also  investigated  general 
Industry  4.0  aspects,  more  precisely  design  principles  for 
Industry  4.0  scenarios.  Through  a  quantitative  and  qualitative 
text  and  literature  analysis  and  review,  their  outcome  was  the 
provision of design principles to create a common understanding 
of the term Industry 4.0 for reasonable scientific discussion and 
also through a case study the paper can help identify potential use 
cases for Industry 4.0. Both papers are used to explain basics of 
Industry 4.0 and also to help identifying important general topics. 
Our work will also include general explanation for Industry 4.0 
and enhance it by prensting an actual Industry 4.0 use case.  
Bicaku  et  al.  [3]  have  proposed  a  solution  to  investigate 
automated standard compliance to assure that individual Industry 
4.0 components are secured to interoperate. The basis of that are 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
given  sets  of  security  and  safety  requirements  from  which 
measurable  indicator  points  are  derived.  An  initial  approach  to 
automate such assessment when components are inter-operating 
with  each  other  is  done  by  using  a  monitoring  and  standard 
compliance  verification  framework.  Our  work  builds  on  this 
effort of checking security standard compliance and extends it by 
evaluating a use case scenario for Industry 4.0 by investigating 
corresponding requirements and thus deriving standards, controls 
and costs for implementing secure Industry 4.0 applications. 
Schmittner et al. [8] have investigated the combination of safety 
and security for trustworthy cyber-physical systems and explain 
that in the past safety and security were handled as separate issues 
but now with Industry 4.0 and the interconnection of each device, 
they must be handled as one part. This combination needs new 
concepts,  techniques  and  tools,  which  this  special  issue 
addresses. This paper considers this relation in mind and focuses 
on addressing such security issues.  
The  papers  of  the  BMWi  [5],  [6]  aim  to  define  a  simple  and 
overall  position  about  basic  requirements,  security  challenges 
and diverse approaches for secure communication in Industry 4.0 
environments. They also give a deeper look at the C-I-A triangle 
(Confidentiality-Integrity-Availability) 
in  Industry  4.0  and 
authenticity. Our work makes use of these results, especially of 
CIA  and  authenticity  for  deriving  requirements  and  thus 
standards, controls and costs.  
In our previous work [9] we have introduced a new method of 
measuring  the  costs  of  cyber  security  in  smart  business.  It 
presents an initial evaluation of the costs of cyber security using 
a high-level process flow based on Six Sigma. The limitations of 
this work were that a fictional use case was used, the cost analysis 
was  performed  only  during  design  time  and  it  used  only  a 
monetary cost metric (Euro). Therefore, this work extends these 
methodologies of measuring costs of security by evaluating and 
adapting  the  approach  to  the  remote  access  requirements  and 
controls  evaluation  taxonomy.  Furthermore,  the  derivation  of 
costs can also be considered and adapted to the costs in this work. 
In  [10],  Yee  provides  a  summary  of  related  work  regarding 
security metrics by establishing the argument that many security 
controls and metrics exist, but most of them are not effective or 
necessary. Afterwards, a definition of possible and not possible 
controls  is  provided  and  furthermore  described  what  the 
difference  between  conventional  and  scientifically/reliably- 
based security controls is. The procedure of this work can serve 
for the identification of controls for this paper and extends it by 
finding usable possible “good” controls for the catalog. 
Strobl et al. [11] have identified threats, vulnerabilities and their 
impact of connected cars in their paper. The aim of the paper was 
to identify blocks of established technologies in a connected car 
and  to  consolidate  the  corresponding  threat  and  vulnerability 
catalogs  relevant  for  the  individual  constituent  components. 
These findings are used to estimate the impact on specific system 
components  and  subsystems  to  identify  the  most  crucial 
components  and  threats  including  cloud  computing.  Our  paper 
was also motivated by this approach of gathering controls for the 
collection of controls for the requirements and controls catalog 
including costs. Although the topics vary in our work, the build-
up  of  the  catalog  can  be  used  as  a  possible  example  for  the 
requirements and controls catalog and extends it by adding new 
approaches. 
Specifying security requirements is an important task to develop 
critical  information  systems.  Several  standards  help  to  handle 
security  requirements.  Thus,  Mellado  et  al.  [12]  present  a 
common criteria centered and reuse-based process dealing with 
security  requirements  at  an  early  stage  of  e.g.  software 
development  in  a  systematic  and  new  way.  This  is  done  by 

providing security resource repository and by integrating them in 
the  early  stages  of  the  software  lifecycle,  unifying  concepts  of 
requirements  engineering  and  security  engineering.  So,  they 
show  a  standard-based  process  that  deals  with  the  security 
requirements at early stages of software development but do not 
concern security and cost in Industry 4.0. In contrast to this work 
this  paper  shows  an  approach  of  standard-based  security 
requirements  engineering  actually  providing  a  catalog  with 
requirements adapted to a use case with an intuitive way, so it 
could be reused and also integrating a cost estimation method. 
In  this  work  [13]  a  systematic  review  of  security  requirements 
engineering is performed, which is done by a systematic review 
requirements 
of  existing 
engineering.  This  review  was  used  to  show  that  there  are  too     
less  of  these  important  reviews  and  to  provide  a  framework/ 
background,  in  which  to  appropriately  position  new  research 
activities.  Therefore,  this  reference  provides  a  summary  of  all 
existing  information  about  security  requirements  in  a  thorough 
and unbiased manner. Their main contribution includes precision 
and reliability of the information and the results obtained. This 
paper  will  examine  such  security  requirements  engineering 
sources and will provide a way based on SixSigma to come to 
security requirements and concerning costs through the help of 
standards. 

literature  concerning 

security 

3.  RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 

This paper focuses on fulfilling security standard controls as well 
as  on  the  cost  for  implementing  these.  For  this,  the  most 
important requirements and security standard controls for a use 
case are evaluated and based on that the needed implementation 
costs  are  estimated.  An  approach  on  how  to  derive  these 
necessary requirements and controls was formed by asking the 
questions:  
1.  What does security in Industry 4.0 mean? – Based on our 
experience, it means to be compliant to security standards. 
Thus, requirements are necessary to define what needs to be 
secured.  

2.  How  can  requirements  be  fulfilled?  –  By  using  controls 
from security standards (= measures, which can be used to 
assess if something, in this case, is secure). 

The  outcome  should  be  a  requirements  and  controls  catalog, 
which  should  present  the  information  about  security  standard 
controls in such a way that the costs for implementing them can 
be derived. For this catalog and cost derivation, a taxonomy is 
needed  to  develop  a  method,  which  can  be  easily  reused.  A 
simple taxonomy can be derived from Six Sigma. The Six Sigma 
approach was developed by Motorola in the 1980s and is one of 
the  foremost  methodical  practices  for  improving  customer 
satisfaction  and  business  processes.  The  idea  behind  the 
approach was to remove causes of errors when detected before 
they lead to defects in a product or service, which leads to more 
cost-efficiency.  This  is  achieved  by  the  Six  Sigma  DMAIC 
approach, which stands for Define, Measure, Analyze, Improve, 
Control.  This  approach  can  be  used  for  many  use  cases,  e.g. 
identifying cloud security risks [9] or in this case for gathering 
security controls. Thus, the steps for this approach are shown in 
Figure 1, in which the numbers in brackets () are used to describe 
exactly what every step means below the figure. 

 
 
 
 
two basic goals: (i) providing an alternative way of accessing the 
device,  and  (ii)  enabling  quick  and  qualified  support  and 
maintenance from outside the company. Through the application 
of this remote access from outside, new security challenges arise, 
which this paper addresses through adding a check for standard 
controls implementation and its cost estimation. 

Figure 2: Use Case setup 

Figure  2  shows  the  setup  of  the  use  case.  On  the  left,  there  is 
Location A where the measurement device is in place. The right 
side  of  the  picture  represents  another  “outside”  Location  B, 
where  the  remote  access  to  the  device  is  needed.  The  whole 
solution  is  based  on  a  message  broker  where  location  A  is  the 
publisher  and  location  B  is  the  subscriber.  In  Location  A,  the 
measurement  device  is  only  accessible  through  the  customer’s 
local  area  network  therefore  a  remote  access  through  an  IoT 
Gateway  is  needed.  The  IoT  Gateway  can  be  seen  as  a 
programmed, intelligent switch, which can connect to the internet 
and  establish  an  encrypted  connection  to  a  message  broker  in 
another  location.  A  remote  access  server  with  a  remote  access 
web portal acts as a subscriber to the topic of the IoT Gateway, 
through which Location B can now directly access the device. 

Define 
The  first  step  of  the  DMAIC  approach  is  now  used  to  identify 
requirements.  Therefore,  requirements  were  gathered  based  on 
CIA  (Confidentiality,  Integrity,  Availability)  [5]  and  extended 
with  necessary  requirements  based  on  a  use  case  and  industry 
(which we call CIA extension) but also held on a general level 
with  other  use  cases  in  mind.  The  six  identified  requirements 
were: Identification & Authentication [IA], Data Integrity [DI], 
Data Confidentiality [DC], Encryption [EC], Availability [AV] 
and Communication Channels [CC].  

Measure 
The next step was to identify controls from appropriate standards 
based on the requirements and the use case. These can of course 
vary from use case to use case or company. For the catalog, more 
than 5 Standards were found most appropriate. These standards 
have a high international reputation and therefore fit perfectly for 
the catalog. For the described Industry 4.0 remote access use case 
the following standards were used (split up in three parts caused 
by  same  controls  specification):  IEC  62443-3-3  [14],  ISO/IEC 
27000 series (27001 [15], 27002 [16], 27017 [17], 27018 [18]) 
and  NIST  SP  (800-53  [19],  800-82  [20]).  Based  on  these 
standards,  controls  related  to  the  remote  access  use  case  were 
extracted. 

Analyze 
In this phase, requirements, controls and standards were mapped 
into a catalog and grouped in control groups that contain similar 
controls. Figure 3 shows the build up of the catalog: gathering 
requirements  by  the  use  of  the  in  section  3  explained  CIA 
extension and mapping controls of standards to them. The look 
of the catalog will be shown in Table 1 in the Improve phase. 
f 

Figure 1: Methodology based on SixSigma 

The goal of this methodology is to put an Industry 4.0 security 
use  case  through  a  hopper  to  start  the  DMAIC  approach  (1). 
Afterwards  the  application  wanders  through  every  step  of  the 
approach: 
Define (2): Identification of the requirements. 
Measure (3): Based on the requirements, finding security controls 
from existing security standards. 
Analyze (4): Mapping of requirements to controls and including 
it in a catalog. A set of controls, addressing a specific requirement, 
is  extracted  from  each  standard,  e.g.  to  address  requirement  1, 
control  1  and  2  must  be  implemented.  Furthermore,  similar 
controls per requirement are summarized to control groups. For 
instance,  for  guaranteeing  a  secure  connection,  two  different 
standards might suggest using a specific encryption algorithm as 
a  security  control.  The  catalog  combines  these  similar  controls 
from the standards in one group. 
Improve (5): To improve the catalog from the previous step, this 
phase  provides  guidance  for  how  to  assess  implementing  these 
security  controls  also  including  an  equation  for  measuring  the 
resulting costs. 
Control (6): Finally, the control phase uses the requirements and 
controls  catalog  to  find  possible  solutions  for  the  presented  use 
case. The goal here is to show i) how well the solutions support 
the security controls from the used standards and ii) how much it 
costs to implement missing security controls. 
After finishing these steps, the outcome is a rating of importance 
for  security  requirements  as  well  as  a  cost  implementation 
estimation  and  thus  a  secure  and  cost  aware  solution  (7).  If, 
during  the  Control  phase  no  appropriate  solutions  were  found, 
the DMAIC approach can be done again (1), which is explained 
in detail in the Control part of section 4. In this paper only one 
iteration is done because appropriate solutions were found during 
the Control phase. To show the described methodology in action, 
the  next  section  presents  a  remote-access  use  case  concerning 
Industry  4.0  and  its  iteration  through  the  defined  SixSigma 
approach. 

4.  EVALUATION 

In the last section, we presented an approach for evaluating a use 
case through the help of defined taxonomy based on SixSigma to 
check if it fulfills security controls and also to estimate possible 
implementation costs. In this chapter, we will apply the defined 
methodology step by step, by first introducing the use case and 
then put it through each DMAIC step. 

Use Case 
In  the  following  section,  we  demonstrate  the  first  step  of  our 
approach  through  an  industrial  use  case.  The  use  case  at  the 
moment concerns measurement devices, which are connected to 
the company’s local network with strict access rights. Currently, 
if a measurement device needs maintenance, it has to be serviced 
by accessing it via a point-to-point connection, which is a long 
lasting and unnecessarily complex process. Thus, the company 
decides  to  add  to  their  measurement  devices  a  remote  access 
functionality. The new remote access use case has the following 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Req. 
IA 
(Req. n) 

Figure 3: Buildup of the requirements and controls catalog 

Assessment 
Account  &  access  management, 
including  rights,  duties, 
least 
privilege  and  access  control.  To 
address  these  controls  following 
must  be  implemented  in  the  use 
case to be in accordance with the 
standards: 
-Unified policies 
-Passwords,  tokens,  biometrics, 
etc. 
-General  account  management 
enabled 
least 
privilege...) 

(grouping, 

ID  Control IDs 
1 

[IEC-1]  [IEC-2] 
[IEC-3]  [IEC-4] 
[IEC-6]  [IEC-8] 
[ISO-02-4] 
[ISO-02-5] 
[ISO-02-6] 
[ISO-02-8] 
[ISO-02-10] 
[NIST-53-1] 
[NIST-53-2] 
[NIST-53-4] 
[NIST-53-5] 
[NIST-53-18] 
[NIST-53-22] 
[NIST-53-23] 
[NIST-53-31] 
[17 controls] 
[5 controls] 

IA 
IA 
Table 1: Extract from requirements and controls catalog 

2 
3 

Figure 4: Controls identified per requirement and standard 

the  distribution  of  controls  within 

Figure  4  shows 
the 
requirements  and  controls  catalog  across  the  standards.  The 
figure  shows  the  number  of  controls  for  each  requirement  and 
standard. Through this figure we can identify that e.g. the NIST 
standards have the highest number of controls concerning [IA] 
(thin grey line 0-35) whereas for [EC] all standards have a very 
low number of controls. Nevertheless, [IA] heavily depends on 
[EC]  so  dependabilities  also  need  to  be  considered  when 
implementing  controls.  But  overall  it  is  possible  to  say  that 
identification  &  authentication  have 
the  most  controls. 
Therefore, the most important requirement and controls that need 
to be considered for the whole remote access, also in combination 
with the underlying infrastructure and every part of it is [IA] and 
thus needs to be well considered before implementation. It also 
shows that NIST standards have the highest number of controls 
on most requirements. This Figure 4 is an important output of the 
paper  because  it  shows  a  company  what  is  most  important  for 
security, in this case, for the remote access use case. 

Improve 
The  following  Table  1  shows  the  build-up  of  the  requirements 
and  controls  catalog,  which  also  includes  the  mapping  of 
requirements and controls from the Analyze phase. Moreover, it 
adds the assessment column and afterwards in equation (1) to (3) 
it  shows  the  cost  estimation  method.  The  original  catalog 
includes over 120 controls and spans over more than 20 pages, 
which can thus be not included in the paper. Nevertheless, Table 
1  should  give  an  overview  of  how  the  catalog  looks  like  by 
showing the control groups for one requirement, Identification & 
Authentication. The controls for each requirement are grouped to 
control groups (column ID), which have the same/similar content 
(column Control IDs shows which controls are in this group). The 
assessment column then explains what these controls are about 
and how to assess if a used technology/application to solve a use 
case  implements  these  security  standards  controls  or  not.  The 
build-up of the table is as follows: 
•  Requirement (Req.) 
• 
ID within the catalog (ID) = Control group ID 
• 
concerning Controls IDs (Control IDs) 
•  Assessment information (Assessment) 

Through  the  assessment  column  the  requirements  and  controls 
catalog can thus serve as a controls fulfilment checklist as well 
as implementation recommendation guide. When assessing use 
case solutions with the catalog, a point system per control group 
should be used: Fully applicable gives 1 point, partly applicable 
0,5  points  and  not  applicable  0  points.  The  Control  phase  will 
show this assessment in detail. 
Next, the challenge was to extend Table 1 with a column for an 
estimation of possible implementation cost. Therefore, the steps 
for the cost estimation are shown in equations (1), (2) and (3). 

𝑐𝑡 = 	

𝑐%

									𝑐%	 ∈ 1  

%&’

𝑐𝑡𝑀𝑎𝑥 = 𝑚𝑎𝑥({𝑐𝑡’, 𝑐𝑡1, … , 𝑐𝑡3}) 

IE = 

67

6789:

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

ct 
𝑐% 
ctMax 

IE 

count = number of controls per control group 
control 
count maximum = highest number of controls over all 
control groups of one requirement 
Implementation Effort, result of equation 

The following example Table 2 shows the steps how to come to 
the estimation of the implementation effort with the example of 
control group 1, 2 and 3 from requirement [IA] (see Table 1): 

1 

2 

3 

Control group 1 

Control group 2 

Control group 3 

𝑐𝑡’ = 	

1

= 19	 

𝑐𝑡1 = 	

1

= 17 

𝑐𝑡1 = 	

1

= 5 

%&’

%&’
𝑐𝑡𝑀𝑎𝑥 = 𝑚𝑎𝑥 {19, 17, 5} = 	19 
’?

%&’

IE2 = 

=0,89 

@

IE3 = 

= 0,26  

’>

IE1= 

=1  

’>

’>
Table 2: Cost estimation evaluation example 

’>

Req.  Control 

[IA] 

group ID 
1 
2 
3 

Nr.  of  controls  per 
group (ct) 
19 
17 
5 

Implementation 
Effort (IE) 
1 
0,89 
0,26 

Table 3: Cost estimation results 

To illustrate the cost derivation method results, Table 3 shows all 
control groups for one requirement, which is in this case again 
Identification & Authentication. The build-up of this table is thus 
almost the same as Table 1 but instead of every Control ID it is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the number of Control IDs (ct) and instead of the assessment it 
contains the implementation effort (IE). Equation (1), (2) and (3) 
above  show  how  the  implementation  effort  is  derived.  Table  2 
shows how the equations are used: Every number of controls per 
control  group  (𝑐𝑡)  is  divided  through  the  highest  number  of 
controls over all three groups (ctMax), which is in this case 19 
from control group 1, which leads to the implementation effort 
column of Table 3. Control group 3 in this case has the lowest 
implementation costs with 0,26, whereas control group 1 and 2 
have high implementation costs with its implementation effort 1 
and  0,89.  The  definition  of  high  or  low  has  to  be  done  by  the 
person or company itself that examines a certain use case because 
implementation  effort  can  vary  a  lot.  This  method  was  used 
because  implementing  more  controls  means  more  e.g.  time  or 
working hours, which lead to higher costs. The method does not 
bring  an  exact  cost  estimation  for  implementation  costs  but  it 
should  give  an  overview  and  a  feeling  of  how  high  or  low  the 
implementation  of  certain  controls  will  be.  This  estimation  of 
costs  can  be  done  with  every  requirement  from  the  catalog. 
Figure  4  shows  on  an  overall  scale  that  Identification  & 
Authentication  has  the  most  controls,  which  has  through  this 
approach the highest implementation costs because like Table 3 
shows: more controls = higher cost based on the  assumption that 
the costs for implementing the controls are the same. 

Control 
In  this  section,  the  Control  phase  of  the  SixSigma  DMAIC 
approach is shown. It was done by evaluating possible platforms 
for the implementation of the remote access use case by the help 
of the requirements and controls catalog to show its applicability 
and  to  get  the  best  security  standard  controls  implemented 
solution.  Based  on  the  remote  access  use  case  and  gathered 
requirements, 5 possible platforms as solution for it were found 
by using a research taxonomy: The platforms (i) should have at 
least  one  security  certification,  (ii)  should  already  be  used  in 
Industry 4.0 use cases (two or more references), (iii) must already 
include  on  the  website  information  regarding  authentication, 
encryption  &  user  management,  which  are  key  parts  of  the 
requirements and (iv) search keywords must include at least 2 of 
these keywords: remote access, IoT, Industry 4.0. 

Figure 5: Overall platform evaluation results 

just  with 

non-implementation 

level 
these  solutions.  Figure  5  shows 

At  first  these  platforms  were  assessed  against  the  catalog  on  a 
the 
superficial, 
the 
documentation  for 
applicability  of  the  solutions  for  the  use  case  per  requirement 
(done with the point assessment from explained in the Improve 
phase).  Next  to  the  other  found  solutions  (Secomea  [21], 
Teamviewer  [22]  IoT,  Prima  Power  Remote  Care  [23]  and 
Endian  [24]),  Eclipse  IoT  [25]  was  the  only  fully  applicable 
solution,  which  met 
then 
experimentally evaluated in detail. 

requirements  and  was 

the 

Figure 6: Requirements applicability on Eclipse IoT from 0-1 

is  according 

to  Figure  4 

Eclipse IoT’s solution (Kapua and Kura applications for remote 
access)  were  then  implemented  and  again  in  detail  evaluated 
against the requirements and controls catalog. The main outcome 
should then show that the overall evaluation must have rather the 
same  outcome  than  the  detailed  one  concerning  one  specific 
platform. The point evaluation for Figure 6 is the same as the one 
used for Figure 5. But here the control groups itself have been 
investigated  in  more  detail  through  a  setup,  therefore  the  data 
ranges  more.  The  most  important  security  requirement  of  the 
platform 
Identification  & 
Authentication,  which  Eclipse  IoT  nearly  fulfills  except  the 
policies, which need to be established by the company itself in 
advance,  thus  not  part  of  this  evaluation.  Also,  Encryption  is 
well-included  in  Eclipse  IoT,  which  is  a  very  important 
requirement  because  it  is  also  a  part  of  all  other  gathered 
requirements. All 6 requirements are partly or fully fulfilled and 
have about 5 out of 6 achievable points, which is nearly the same 
outcome  of 
the 
applicability  of  the  requirements  and  controls  catalog  as  a 
checklist. However, if the goal is to fulfill all requirements, the 
outcome  of 
three 
implementation possibilities: (i) if the missing parts have to be 
developed,  the  resulting  costs  could  be  estimated  by  using  the 
presented  method  from  the  Improve  phase;  (ii)  two  or  more 
the 
solutions,  which  by 
requirements,  might  fulfill  all  requirements  when  being 
combined; (iii) in case (i) and (ii) do not apply, another iteration 
of the DMAIC process (including other standards) could provide 
additional solutions. 

the  overall  evaluation  and 

themselves  only  partly 

this  phase  provides 

thus  shows 

following 

fulfill 

the 

Results 
The  main  contribution  of  the  paper  is  the  approach  shown  in 
Figure 1. Based on this general approach, Industry 4.0 use cases 
can  be  assessed,  security  controls  found  and  resulting 
implementation  cost  evaluated.  In  this  regard  the  approach 
provides the following two main outcomes: (i) Figure 4 could be 
used  to  rate  the  requirements  by  their  importance,  where  more 
controls are considered more important than less. (ii) This rating 
further leads to equations (1), (2) and (3), which allow to estimate 
the costs for implementing the identified security controls. 
Further  results  include  Table  1,  which  shows  the  catalog  for 
checking  if  an  application  fulfills  certain  controls.  Also,  the 
Control phase shows results by presenting the applicability of the 
catalog  on  applications  and  also  by  showing  appropriate 
solutions for the remote access use case implementation. 

5.  CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK 

This paper focuses on an approach on how to build secure and 
cost aware Industry 4.0 application. The first focus for achieving 
this  was  on  investigating  security.  Based  on  the  SixSigma 
DMAIC  approach,  security  requirements  were  defined  and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
controls  in  standards,  which  show  how  to  achieve  these,  were 
gathered. Then a requirements and controls catalog regarding an 
Industry  4.0  remote  access  use  case  was  formed.  This  catalog 
should help implement secure Industry 4.0 applications through 
the check if solutions fulfill controls and how much controls need 
to be implemented to be secure. Results included the rating of the 
most important requirements.  
The second focus of the paper was on costs for implementing the 
most  needed  controls.  Therefore,  an  approach  of  deriving 
implementation  costs  based  on  controls  identified  per  control 
group  within  the  catalog  was  presented.  This  result  gives  an 
implementation cost estimation to get an overview of what it will 
appropriately  cost  when  implementing  these.  To  show  the 
applicability  of  the  catalog  and  thus  the  Control  phase  of 
DMAIC, an evaluation was done with remote access applications 
to check on an overall and detailed level the applicability of this 
derived  catalog.  The  outcome  was  a  platform  for  the  use  case, 
which is the most secure one according to the catalog check. 
Future work in general includes the adaptation of the catalog to 
different  scenarios  by  expanding  it  or  adding  more  standards. 
Further  future  work  would  be  an  automatic  assessment  of 
solutions with the requirements and controls  catalog to expand 
e.g.  existing  work,  which  investigates  automated  standard 
compliance for monitoring [3]. It would also be interesting to do 
a more detailed implementation of the solutions with appropriate 
underlying infrastructure in a real Industry 4.0 environment. 

6. AKNOWLEDGMENT 

Research leading to these results has received funding from the 
EU  ECSEL  Joint  Undertaking  under  grant  agreement  n737459 
(Productive4.0) and from the partners national programs/funding 
authorities  and  the  project  MIT  4.0  (FE02),  funded  by  IWB-
EFRE 2014 - 2020 coordinated by Forschung Burgenland GmbH 

7.  REFERENCES 

[1]   M. Brettel, N. Friederichsen, M. Keller and M. Rosenberg, 
"How  virtualization,  decentralization  and  network 
building  change  the  manufacturing  landscape:  An 
Industry  4.0  Perspective,"  International  Journal  of 
Mechanical, Industrial Science and Engineering, 2014. 

[2]  R.  Drath  and  A.  Horch,  "Industrie  4.0:  Hit  or  hype?," 
IEEE industrial electronics magazine, vol. 8.2, 2014. 
[3]  A.  Bicaku,  C.  Schmittner,  M.  Tauber  and  J.  Delsing, 
"Monitoring Industry 4.0 Applications for Security and 
Safety Standard Compliance," in 1st IEEE International 
Conference  on  Industrial  Cyber-Physical  Systems  (ICPS 
2018), 2018. 

[4]  Z.  Ma,  A.  Hudic,  A.  Shaaban  and  S.  Plosz,  "Security 
Viewpoint  in  a  Reference  Architecture  Model  for 
Cyber-Physical  Production  Systems,"  in  Security  and 
Privacy  Workshops  (EuroS&PW),  2017  IEEE  European 
Symposium on, 2017. 

[5]  Federal  Ministry  for  Economic  Affairs  and  Energy 
(BMWi), "Working Paper: Technical Overview: Secure 
cross-company communication," Platform Industrie 4.0, 
Berlin, 2016. 

[6]  Federal  Ministry  for  Economic  Affairs  and  Energy 
(BMWi), "Working Paper: Technical Overview: Secure 
Identities," Platform Industrie 4.0, Berlin, 2016. 

[7]  M.  Hermann,  T.  Pentek  and  B.  Otto,  "Design  principles 
for  industrie  4.0  scenarios,"  in  49th  IEEE  Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, 2016. 
[8]  C. Schmittner, Z. Ma and T. Gruber, "Combining Safety 
and  Security  Engineering  for  Trustworthy  Cyber-

[9] 

Physical  Systems,"  ERCIM  NEWS  Special 
theme: 
Trustworthy  Systems  of  Systems  -  Safety  &  Security  Co-
engineerig, vol. 102, pp. 19-20, 2015. 
I. Ivkic, S. Wolfauer, T. Oberhofer and M. Tauber, "On the 
Cost  of  Cyber  Security  in  Smart  Business,"  in  12th 
International  Conference  for  Internet  Technology  and 
Secured Transactions (ICITST 2017), 2017. 

[10]  G.  O.  Yee,  "Security  metrics:  an  introduction  and 
literature  review,"  Computer  and  Information  Security 
Handbook, vol. 2, pp. 553-566, 2013. 

[11]  S.  Strobl,  D.  Hofbauer,  C.  Schmittner,  S.  Maksuti,  M. 
Tauber  and  J.  Delsing,  "Connected  Cars  -  Threats, 
IEEE 
their 
Vulnerabilities 
International  Conference  on  Industrial  Cyber-Physical 
Systems (ICPS 2018), 2018. 

Impact," 

and 

1st 

[12]  D.  Mellado,  E.  Fernández-Medina  and  M.  Piattini,  "A 
common 
requirements 
engineering  process  for  the  development  of  secure 
information systems," Computer standards & interfaces,  
pp. 244-253, 2007. 

criteria  based 

security 

[13]  D. Mellado, C. Blanco, L. E. Sánchez and E. Fernández-
Medina, "A systematic review of security requirements 
engineering," Computer Standards & Interfaces, 2010. 

[14]  International  Electrotechnical  Commission,  "IEC  62443-
3-3 Industrial communication networks – Network and 
system 
security 
security  –  Part  3-3:  System 
requirements and security levels," 2013. 

[15]  International  Organization  for  Standardization,  "ISO/IEC 
27001  -  Information  technology  —  Security  techniques  - 
Information 
- 
security  management 
Requirements," 2013. 

systems 

[16]  International Organization for Standardization, "ISO/IEC 
27002 - Information technology - Security techniques - 
Code  of  practice  for  information  security  controls," 
2013. 

[17]  International Organization for Standardization, "ISO/IEC 
27017 - Information technology - Security techniques - 
Code  of  practice  for  information  security  controls 
based on ISO/IEC 27002 for cloud services," 2015. 
[18]  International Organization for Standardization, "ISO/IEC 
27018 - Information technology - Security techniques - 
for  proctection  of  personally 
Code  of  practice 
identifiable information (PII) in public clouds acting as 
PII processors," 2014. 

[19]  National Institute of Standards and Technology, "NIST SP 
800-53  Security  and  Privacy  Controls  for  Federal 
Information Systems and Organizations," 2013. 
[20]  National Institute of Standards and Technology, "NIST SP 
800-82  Guide  to  Industrial  Control  Systems  (ICS) 
Security," 2015. 

[21]  Secomea, 

"Secomea,"  2018. 
www.secomea.com. [Accessed 11 08 2018]. 

[Online].  Available: 

[22]  TeamViewer,  "TeamViewer  IoT,"  2018. 

[Online]. 
Available: www.teamviewer.com/de/iot/. [Accessed 12 08 
2018]. 

[23]  PrimaPower,  "Remote  Care  -  Industry  4.0,"  2018. 
[Online].  Available:  www.primapower.com/us/remote-
care/. [Accessed 12 08 2018]. 

[24]  Endian,  "Secure  Remote  Connectivity,"  2018.  [Online]. 
Available: www.endian.com/products/connect/. [Accessed 
12 08 2018]. 

[25]  Eclipse  IoT  Working  Group,  "Open  Source  for  IoT," 
2018. [Online]. Available: www.iot.eclipse.org. [Accessed 
12 08 2018]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
