Use of Artificial Intelligence Techniques / 
Applications in Cyber Defense 

Ensar Şeker 
NATO CCD COE 
Tallinn, Estonia 
ensar.seker@ccdcoe.org 

Abstract–Nowadays, considering the speed of the processes and 
the amount of data used in cyber defense, it cannot be expected to 
have an effective defense by using only human power without the 
help  of  automation  systems.  However,  for  the  effective  defense 
against dynamically evolving attacks on networks, it is difficult to 
develop software with conventional fixed algorithms. This can be 
achieved  by  using  artificial  intelligence  methods  that  provide 
flexibility  and  learning  capability.  The  likelihood  of  developing 
cyber  defense  capabilities  through  increased  intelligence  of 
defense systems is quite high. Given the problems associated with 
cyber  defense  in  real  life,  it  is  clear  that  many  cyber  defense 
problems  can  be  successfully  solved  only  when  artificial 
intelligence methods are used. In this article, the current artificial 
intelligence  practices  and  techniques  are  reviewed  and  the  use 
and importance of artificial intelligence in cyber defense systems 
is  mentioned.  The  aim  of  this  article  is  to  be  able  to  explain  the 
use  of  these  methods  in  the  field  of  cyber  defense  with  current 
examples  by  considering  and  analyzing  the  artificial  intelligence 
that  are  currently  being 
technologies  and  methodologies 
developed  and  integrating  them  with  the  role  and  adaptation  of 
the technology and methodology in the defense of cyberspace. 

Key  Words—Artificial  Intelligence,  cyber  defense,  early 

warning systems, intrusion detection and prevention systems.  

I. INTRODUCTION 

the  cyber  security  experts  with  new 

Nowadays,  the  cyber  area  has  reached  the  zettabyte  age 
together with all the data. The emergence of new technologies 
and services, as well as trillions of devices and zettabytes, have 
left 
threats  and 
weaknesses,  as  well  as  addressing  old  threats  and  security 
vulnerabilities. 
threats  with 
technological  developments  and  advances  in  cyber,  created 
new cyber defense requirements for more rational solutions to 
occur. 

the  complex 

In  addition, 

The  advent  of  new  technologies  in  cyber  defense  systems 
has  become  critical  at  the  expense  of  the  technological 
escalation  of  threats  to  these systems.  Increasing  emphasis on 
artificial  intelligence  in  cybernetic  defense  amongst  new 
technologies  contributes  to  the  earlier  response  of  cyber-
attacks. 

The  basic  problem  to  be  addressed  in  the  use  of  artificial 
intelligence  in  the  cyber  defense  area  is  how  artificial 
intelligence methodologies should be developed and adhered to 
in order to reduce the human factor, which is considered to be 
the  weakest 
the  cyber  defense,  while  existing 
link  of 
technologies are not in the desired level. 

In this study, first of all, artificial intelligence is discussed, 
what is meant by this concept, the distinctions, the difficulties 
in developing this technology are mentioned. In later chapters, 
it  was  attempted  to  explain  how  the  developed  artificial 
intelligence  techniques  and  methods  that  are  used  are  used  in 
cyber  defense  systems,  which  constitute  of  the  main  topic  of 
this  article.  The  use  of  artificial  intelligence  is  especially 
important in early warning, intrusion detection and prevention 
systems.  Again,  examine  the  existing  artificial  intelligence 
applications that are used for cyber defense, will contribute in 
increasingly greater prominence to scientific studies.   

II. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI) 

Artificial intelligence is a computer science that deals with 
the  development  of  systems  and  software  that  are  intelligent, 
capable of performing tasks that are normally done by humans 
-  equally  or  sometimes  better.  Many  developed  cognitive 
artificial  intelligence  methods  (pattern  recognition,  cognitive 
intelligence,  neural  networks,  intelligent  agents,  artificial 
immune  systems,  machine  learning,  data  mining,  fuzzy  logic, 
heuristics, etc.) are actively used in the cyber field. 

Artificial  intelligence  based  on  how  to  think  like  how  a 
human thinks besides solitary thinking is called weak artificial 
intelligence [1], although artificial intelligence, which is called 
strong  artificial  intelligence,  may  exhibit  movements  like  a 
human  being.  This  distinction  can  also  be  made  in  some 
sources  (thinking  /  acting,  human  /  logical)  [13].  Artificial 
Intelligence with real simulations (strong artificial intelligence) 
or systems that rely on the question of how a AI can thinks like 
a human being are not yet available. It is known that it is a very 
difficult  problem  to  solve  such  an  artificial  intelligence  that 
perceives events as a human being and reacts to them. The best 
example of weak artificial intelligence is Deep Blue, developed 
for  chess  games.  Despite,  being  a  good  chess  player,  Deep 
Blue cannot pretend to be a human being. Apart from these two 

 
 
 
 
 
categories, 
intelligence 
there  are  examples  of  artificial 
developed between weak and strong as a third category. While 
these systems can be used as a guide for reasoning as a human 
being,  they  cannot  be  guided  by  an  excellent  modeling  goal. 
One  of  the  best  examples  of  such  a  system  is  IBM  Watson, 
which  was  developed  by  IBM.  Watson  is  a  question-and-
answer computer system that can responds natural questions. It 
has  the  ability  to  recognize  patterns  in  the  text  and  combine 
matching  patterns  based  on  evidence  [2,  3].  Another  example 
related to the subject is the Google Brain developed by Google. 
Google Brain is an artificial intelligence research project based 
on  deep  learning.  Google  Brain's  work  structure  has  a  brain-
like work structure because it is inspired by the real structure of 
the  brain.  Deep  learning  systems  based  on  the  behavior  of 
neurons function with learning layers for tasks such as painting 
and speech recognition [4]. 

Another  distinction  for  artificial  intelligence  is  general 
artificial intelligence and narrow artificial intelligence. General 
AI  is  designed  for  a  general  purpose  is  called  and  has  no 
specific  task,  whereas  artificial  intelligence  designed  for  a 
special purpose uses narrow artificial intelligence [13]. 

III. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN CYBER DEFENCE 

Cyber  defense 

is  defending  network  of 

the  critical 
infrastructure,  the  information  security  of  the  institutions  and 
organizations,  the  government  and  the  State  departments, 
together with all other networks evaluated within the scope of 
national security, to eliminate possible threats of cyber-attacks 
and threats, and to reduce damage and losses caused by them, 
as a part of defense mechanisms. The cyber defense focuses on 
preventing infestation and / or threats from being detected and 
prevented in time, thus not altering infrastructure and / or data. 
With  the  complexity  of  the  cyber-attacks  as  well  as  their 
advanced  technologies,  cyber  defense  is  essential  for  most 
institutions  and  organizations  to  ensure  the  protection  of 
sensitive  information,  data  and  assets.  It  also  includes  issues 
such as sensitive data about aggressors and degradation of the 
environment  in  which  the  assets  are  located,  critical  locations 
and  assessing  and  understanding  information,  increasing  the 
capacity  of  attack  detection  and  reaction  and  response,  and 
recognizing  the  ways,  methods  and  areas  that  attackers  can 
attack  by  technical  analysis.  In  addition  to  the  cyber  security 
contributions, the cyber defense advocacy has also contributed 
to the development of security strategies, the most effective use 
of  resources  and,  in  particular,  the  effectiveness  of  security-
related resources and expenditure at critical points. 

As  mentioned,  avoiding  cyber-attacks  and  avoiding  cyber 
threats are the cornerstone of cyber defense. However, it is not 
possible to completely eliminate these attacks and threats. It is 
crucial to give the fastest response to these attacks and threats 
and  to  reduce  the  most  possible  damages.  Existing  security 
software databases and algorithms have a limited capacity and 
capability  and  often  fail  to  cope  with  the  rapid  evolution  and 
change of new threat vectors. Artificial intelligence algorithms 
designed in an intelligent security system have the potential to 
identify and respond to threats, even changing threats. 

learning 

Nowadays,  information  security  solutions  are  usually 
divided  into  two  categories:  analyst  oriented  or  uncontrolled 
focused.  Using  uncontrolled  machine 
machine 
learning  to  detect  rare  or  abnormal  patterns  can  increase  the 
detection  of  new  attacks.  However,  more  false  positives  and 
warnings  may  also  trigger. This  requires a  significant  amount 
of analysis effort first to investigate the accuracy of these false 
positives.  Such  faulty  alarms  can  cause  alarm  fatigue  and 
insecurity,  and  over  time,  they  may  return  to  analytically 
focused solutions and lead to weaknesses associated with them 
why  could  it  be.  The  IT  security  industry  faces  three  major 
challenges,  each  of  which  can  be  addressed  by  machine 
learning solutions [5]: 

  Lack  of  tagged  data:  Many  organizations  lack  the 
ability to use tagged examples of pre-existing attacks 
and controlled learning models. 

  Constantly  evolving  attacks:  While 

supervised 
learning  models  are  possible,  attackers  can  override 
models by constantly changing their behavior. 

  Limited  Time  and  Budget 

for  Research  or 
Investigation  Applying  to  investigate  attacks  on 
analysts is a costly and time consuming process. 
Solutions  that  can  overcome  these  difficulties  should  help 
the  early  stages  of  new  and  evolving  attacks  that  will  help 
analysts to use their time effectively, and to reduce the reaction 
times  between  attack  detection  and  attack  prevention,  with 
extremely  low  false  positive  rates.  A  cyber  security  platform, 
developed by MIT based on Artificial Intelligence, called AI2, 
can provide these solutions [5]. Figure 1 shows about the AI2.  

Figure 1. AI2 [5] 

A. Early Warning, Intrusion Detection & Prevention Systems 

in Cyber Defence  
Possible cyber defense system should provide at least three 
levels of cyber security. First level, identity and authentication, 
cryptographic  protection,  access  control,  auditing,  network 
filtering,  etc.  as  well  as  traditional  static  cyber  defense 
mechanisms.  The  second  level  includes  proactive  cyber 
defense  mechanisms  such  as  information  gathering,  security 
assessment,  network  status  monitoring,  and  attack.  The  third 
level refers to the holistic assessment of the network situation, 
the management of the cyber defense that fulfills the adaptation 

 
 
 
of  the  appropriate  or  optimal  defense  mechanisms  and  their 
adaptation [6]. 

analyzing  attacks  and  developing  counter  attacks  [9].  FIDeS 
system architecture is shown on Figure 3.  

Early warning, intrusion detection and prevention systems, 
which  also  contain artificial  intelligence  technologies, play  an 
important role in the provision of such cyber security levels. 

Early  warning  systems  (EWS)  are  used  to  protect  against 
cyber attacks and to respond as soon as possible. However, due 
to the new cyber threat level developed with new technologies, 
EWS  based  on  traditional  and  pure  packet  inspection  is  also 
imroved. New EWS architecture that can collects, analyzes and 
correlates  data.  At  the  same  time,  it  almost  instantaneously 
perceives, analyzes and responds to threat models in real time . 
This need is evidenced by the development of virtual sensors, 
the  sophisticated  correlation  of  data,  new  logic  models  for 
network  behavior  analysis, 
the 
development of new approaches and concepts that can provide 
scalability,  reliability  and  resilience,  especially 
in  IPv6 
networks  [7].  Figure  2  shows  typical  intrusion  detection  and 
prevention system. 

learning  algorithms  and 

 Figure 3 – FIDeS System Architecture [9] 

It  is  expected  that  the  intrusion  detection  and  prevention 
system  will  have  certain  features  for  effective  cyber  defense 
against serious cyber-attacks. Some of these features are [10]; 

  To  be  able  to  perform  real-time  intrusion  detection 
while  the  cyber-attack  is  ongoing  or  immediately 
afterwards, 

  To minimize false positive alarms, 
  To  minimize  human 
continuity of operations, 

surveillance  and  ensure 

  To  provide  recoverability  of  the  system  against  loss 
which  may  occur  in  the  system  due  to  accident  or 
attack, 

  Having  the  ability  to  self-control  for  the detection of 

attempts by attackers to make changes in the system, 

  To comply with the security policies of the monitored 

system and 

  To  ensure  compatibility  with  system  changes  over 

time and user behavior. 

B. Artificial Intelligence Applications for Cyber Defence 

Traditional  hard-wired  logic  is  ineffective  to  combat 
dynamically  evolving  cyber  attacks.  Therefore,  more 
innovative approaches are needed, such as the use of artificial 
methods  and  practices  that  provide  flexibility  and  learning 
skills, especially in cyber defense [11, 12]. 

The  general  problem  of  being  able  to  simulate  the 
intelligence  has  been  simplified  by  identifying  the  sub-
problems  that  have  certain  characteristics  or  abilities  that  an 
intelligent system should exhibit. Some of these sub-problems 
are; [13, 14]: 

I. Inference,  logic,  problem  solving  (embedded  agents, 
neural networks, statistical approaches to artificial 
intelligence ); 

II. Information presentation (ontology); 

Figure 2 – Typical Intrusion Detection and Prevention 

Systems [8] 

The  purpose  of  using  AI  in  early  warning  and  intrusion 
detection  is  to  develop  an  intelligent  assist  system  to  detect 
attacks from the Internet as early as possible on both local area 
networks  and  wide  area  networks.  Within  this  framework, 
commonly  used  Internet  protocols  such  as  FTP,  SMTP  and 
HTTP should be considered, as well as newer protocols such as 
SOAP.  One  of  the  projects  developed  in  this  regard  is  the 
FIDeS project. The  FIDeS project  focuses  on  more assistance 
(such  as  concrete  instructions  in  case  of  an  attack)  instead  of 
just  intrusion  detection.  For  this  purpose,  various  Artificial 
Intelligence-based  methods  are  used,  such  as  declarative 
information representation, statement generation and cognitive 
aids.  It  is  designed  to  support  the  system  security  expert  in 

 
 
 
 
III. Planning (multiple agent planning and collaboration); 
IV. Learning (machine learning); 
V. Natural Language Processing (information acquisition 

- text review, machine translation); 
and  Manipulation 

VI. Movement 

(navigation, 

localization, mapping, motion planning); 
VII. Perception  (speech  recognition,  face  recognition, 

object recognition); 

VIII. Social Intelligence (empathy simulation); 

IX. Creativity  (artificial  intuition,  artificial  imagination); 

and 

X. General Intelligence (Strong Artificial Intelligence ). 

Considering 

the  cyber  defense,  existing  Artificial 
Intelligence methods and architectures can be divided into the 
following categories; 

1)  Neural Nets: Neural nets have a long history that began 
with  the  discovery  of  "perceptron"  by  Frank  Rosenblatt  in 
1957.  In  machine  learning,  perceptron  is  an  algorithm 
developed  for  supervisory  learning  of  binary  classifiers 
(functions  that  determine  whether  the  input  represented  by 
vector numbers belongs to a particular class). One of the most 
popular elements of these neural networks is artificial neurons 
[15, 16]. A small number of perceptron that work together can 
learn to solve problems. But neural nets can consist of a large 
number of artificial neurons. Neural nets consisting of a large 
number  of  artificial  neurons  can  provide  massive  parallel 
functionality.  The  most 
learning  and  decision-making 
prominent feature of these networks is their operational speed. 
They  are  well  suited  for  pattern  recognition,  learning, 
classification,  and  attack  response.  Both  hardware  and 
software can be applied [17].  

Neural  nets  are  also  suitable  for  intrusion  detection  and 
prevention [18, 19, 20, 21 ]. Scientific studies and suggestions 
have  been  made  to  use  these  nets  in  DoS  detection  [22], 
computer  worm  detection  [23],  spam  detection  [24],  zombie 
detection  [25],  malware  classification  [26]  and  forensic 
investigations [27]. 

One reason why neural nets are popular in cyber defense is 
the high speeds that can be implemented in hardware and used 
in  graphics  processors.  Third  generation  neural  net  - 
applications  of  spiking  neural  nets  that  mimic  biological 
neurons  -  more  realistically  are  among  the  new  developments 
in  neural  net 
technology.  Systems  provided  by  Field 
Programmable  Gate  Arrays  (FPGAs),  which  allow  rapid 
development  of  neural  nets  and  adapt  to  changing  threats, 
provide significant contributions to cyber defense [12]. 

2)  Expert Systems: Artificial Intelligence expert systems are 
the most used tools. An expert system is software that is used 
to find answers to questions posed by a user or other software 
in  the  activity  areas  in  some  applications.  They  can  be  used 
directly to support decisions in areas such as finance, medical 
diagnostics  or  cyberspace.  There  are  a  variety  of  expert 
systems  ranging  from  small  technical  diagnostic  systems  to 
complex, very large and sophisticated hybrid systems to solve 
includes  a 
problems.  Conceptually,  an  expert  system 

knowledge base in which expert knowledge about a particular 
application  domain  is  stored.  In  addition  to  this  information 
substructure,  it  also  has  an  inference  engine  and  additional 
information  about  the  situation  to  get  answers  based  on  this 
knowledge.  The  empty  information  base  and  the  extraction 
engine are collectively called the expert system shell - must be 
filled  with  information  so  that  it  can  be  used.  The  expert 
system  shell  can  be  supported  by  the  software  to  add 
information to the knowledge base and must be extensible for 
user interactions and other programs that can be used in hybrid 
expert  systems.  Developing  an  expert  system  means  firstly 
choosing  an  expert  system  shell  and  adaptation.  Secondly 
filling 
in  expert  knowledge  and  knowledge  base  with 
information. The second step is much more complicated than 
the first step and takes much more time than originally.  

An  example,  for  expert  systems  that  can  be  used  in 
cyber defense, is safety planning [28]. An expert system using 
this  area  greatly  simplifies  the  task  of  selecting  security 
measures  and  provides  guidance  on  how  best  to  use  limited 
resources.  In  addition,  the  use  of  expert  systems  in  attack 
detection is used longstanding [29, 30]. 

3)  Intelligent  Agents: 

Intelligent  agents  are  software 
components  that  have  some  characteristics  with  intelligent 
behaviors  makes  (proactivity,  agent  communication,  language 
understanding  and  response)  them  special.  These  software 
components  have  planning,  variability  and  deep  thought 
capabilities. Software agents have been adopted as a concept in 
software engineering where they are thought of as objects that 
use  proactive  and  agent  communication  language.  However, 
when  agents and objects are compared,  they  can be  shown  as 
differences in which objects can be passive and do not require 
any  language  to  speak  (although  they  accept  the  well-defined 
syntax) [12].   

  There  are  studies  simulating  how  intelligent  agents  are 
effective against DDoS attacks in the use of cyber defense [31, 
32]. In some of these studies stated that it is possible to develop 
a  "cyber  police"  consisting  of  mobile  intelligent  agents  after 
solving  some  legal  and  commercial  problems  [33].  There  are 
also  hybrid  multi-agent  and  neural  network-based  intrusion 
detection  systems  [34]  and  agent-based  distributed  intrusion 
detection systems [35]. 

4)  Search:  Search  is  found  in  almost  every  intelligent 
program in a variety of shapes and formats, and its efficiency is 
usually  critical  for  the  performance  of  the  entire  program.  If 
additional  information  is  available  to  guide  the  search,  while 
fulfilling the requirements for a solution, the search activity can 
be significantly improved. Artificial Intelligence has developed 
many search methods. Although it is used in many software, it 
is  generally  not  seen  as  the  use  of  Artificial  Intelligence.  For 
example,  in  dynamic  programming  [36,  37]  that  is  used  to 
solve optimal security problems, search software is embedded 
and does not appear to be an Artificial Intelligence application. 
Andor  trees,  αβ-search,  minimax  search  and  stochastic  search 
are  widely  used  in  game  software  and  are  useful  for  decision 
making  for  cyber defense. The  αβ-search  algorithm  originally 
developed for computer chess games that is very successful in 

 
 
problem solving and especially in evaluating and determining 
the  best  possible  actions  of  the  two  attacks.  This  algorithm, 
which  uses  estimates  of  least  winning  and  losing  most, 
accelerates the search by ignoring a large number of choices. 

iv. 

v. 

5)  Learning:  Learning  improves  an  information  system  by 
expanding or reorganizing its knowledge base or by improving 
the  inference  engine  [38].  Machine  learning  involves  new 
methods  of  calculating  information  to  obtain  new  ways  of 
organizing new knowledge, new skills and existing knowledge. 
Learning  problems  vary  greatly  from  simple  parametric 
learning  (learning  the  values  of  certain  parameters  and  the 
complex  forms  of  symbolic  learning  such  as  learning  of 
concepts,  language  constructs,  functions,  and  even  behavior 
learning).  

learning 

Artificial  Intelligence  offers  both  supervised 

learning 
(teacher  learning)  and  methods  for  uncoordinated  learning. 
Uncontrolled 
large 
amounts of data are available, and this method is widespread in 
cyber  defense  where  large  diaries  can  be  collected.  Data 
mining  was  originally  from  Artificial  Intelligence  untrained 
learning [18, 39]. 

is  particularly  useful  when 

An  elite  class  of  learning  has  been  created  by  parallel 
learning  algorithms  that  are  suitable  for  execution  on  parallel 
hardware.  These  learning  methods  are  represented  by  genetic 
algorithms and neural networks. Genetic algorithms and fuzzy 
logic methods have been used in cyber defense, for example, in 
threat detection systems [40]. 

is  a 
[41] 

6)  Constraint  Solving:  Constraint  solving  or  constraint 
technique  developed  using  Artificial 
satisfaction 
Intelligence 
(logical 
to  solve  problems  presented 
expressions,  tables,  equations,  inequalities)  by  giving  a  set  of 
constraints  on  the  solution.  The  solution  to  a  problem  is  a 
collection  of  values  that  satisfy  all  constraints  (a  set).  In  fact, 
there  are  many  different  constraint-resolution  techniques 
depending  on  the  nature  of  the  constraints  (eg  constraints  on 
the  final  sets,  functional  constraints,  rational  trees).  At  a  very 
abstract  level,  almost  any  problem  can  be  presented  as  a 
constraint  saturation  problem.  The  solution  of  these  problems 
is  generally  very  difficult  because  of  the  need  for  many 
searches.  Constraint  solving  can  be  used  in  logic  analysis  as 
well as in state analysis and decision support [42, 43]. 

IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

The  US  Department  of  Defense  has  issued  five  pillars  for 
the cyber warfare environment in its published cyber strategy 
document. These are the pillars [44]; 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

The  cyber  area  carries  elements  similar  to  other 
battlefields  as  a  new  field  of  activity  and  should 
therefore  be  adopted  as  a  new  battlefield  after  air, 
land, sea and space.  
Passive  proactive  defenses  should  be  substituted  for 
defense.  
(CIP)  concept 
Critical 
should  be  adhered  to  ensure  the  protection  of 
infrastructure.  

Infrastructure  Protection 

Early  threat  detection  systems  for  providing  the 
ability  to  identify  should  be  part  of  defensive 
structures for joint defence. 
Advantages  of  technological  change  have  to  be 
preserved, 
technologies 
(especially  artificial  intelligence)  have  been  adapted 
to the cyber defense systems.  

developed 

new 

and 

speed  of 

The  fifth  pillar  from  these  five  basic  principles  is 
particularly  important.  In  cyber  space,  the  data  values  has 
reached  that  can  not  be  categorized  and  managed  by  people, 
the 
technological  developments  and  more 
complicated  and  sophisticated  cyber  threats  that  come  along 
with  these  developments.  It  is  critically  important  and 
necessary to detect and prevent as early as possible to reduce 
the damages of these threats may cause. Artificial intelligence 
became  an  indispensable  element  of  cyber  defence.  That’s 
why  understanding  and  adapting  AI  solutions  for  cyber 
defence draws serious attention, especially for researchers. 

Future  work  will  focus  on  AI  applications  and  solutions 
for critical infrustructure. Another future  work  will be  on  the 
integration  and  use  of  artificial  echoes  that  are  desired  to  be 
used  for  defending  against  cyber  attacks  on  cyber  defense 
exercises. 

V. REFERENCES 

[1]  S.  Dilek,  H.  Çakır,  M.  Aydın,  “Applications  of 
Artificial Intelligence Techniques to Combating Cyber Crimes: 
A Review”, 2015. 

[2]  R.  High,  “The  Era  of  Cognitive  Systems:  An  Inside 

Look at IBM Watson and How it Works”, IBM, 2012. 

[3]  J.  E.  Kelly,  “Computing,  Cognition  and  the  Future  of 

Knowing”, IBM, 2015.  

[4]  J.  Dean,  “Large-Scale  Deep  Learning  for  Intelligent 

Computer Systems”, 2016. 

[5]  K.  Veeramachaneni,  I.  Arnaldo,  A.  Cuesta-Infante,  V. 
Korrapati,  C.  Bassias,  K.  Li,  “AI2:  Training  a  Big  Data 
Machine  to  Defend”,  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Big 
Data Security in New York City, 2016. 

[6]  I.  Kotenko,  “Multi-agent  Modelling  and  Simulation  of 
Cyber-Attacks  and  Cyber-Defense  for  Homeland  Security”, 
IEEE  International  Workshop  on  Intelligent  Data  Acquisition 
and  Advanced  Computing  Systems:  Technology  and 
Applications, 2007.  

[7] M. Golling, B. Stelte, “Requirements for a Future EWS 
–  Cyber  Defence  in 
the  Future”,  3rd 
the  Internet  of 
International Conference on Cyber Conflict, CCD COE, 2011. 
[8] A. Patel, M. Taghavi, K. Bakhtiyari, J. Celestino Junior, 
“An  Intrusion  Detection  and  Prevention  System  in  Cloud 
Computing:  A  Systematic  Review”,  Journal  of  Network  and 
Computer Applications, Elsevier, 2013. 

[9] S. Edelkamp, C. Elfers, M. Horstmann, M. S. Schröder, 
K.  Sohr,  T.  Wagner,  “Early  Warning  and  Intrusion  Detection 
based on Combined AI Methods”, 2009. 

[10]  A. Patel, Q Qassim, Z. Shukor, J. Nogueira, J Júnior, 
C.  Wills,  “Autonomic  Agent-Based  Self-Managed  Intrusion 
Detection  and  Prevention  System,  Proceedings  of  the  South 

 
 
African 
Elizabeth, South Africa, 2010. 

Information  Security  Multi-Conference”,  Port 

[11] J. Helano, M. Nogueira, “Mobile Intelligent Agents to 
Fight  Cyber  Intrusions”,  the  International  Journal  of  Forensic 
Computer Science, 2006. 

[12]  E.  Tyugu,  “Artificial  Intelligence  in  Cyber  Defense”, 

3rd International Conference on Cyber Conflict, 2011. 

[13]  J.  S.  Russell,  P.  Norvig,  “Artificial  Intelligence:  A 
Modern Approach”, 2nd edition, Upper Saddle River, Prentice 
Hall, New Jersey, USA, 2003. 

[14]  G.  Luger,  W.  Stubblefield,  “Artificial  Intelligence: 
Structures  and  Strategies  for  Complex  Problem  Solving”, 
Addison Wesley. 2004. 

[15]  F.  Rosenblatt.  “The  Perceptron  -  A  Perceiving  and 
Recognizing  Automaton”,  Cornell  Aeronautical  Laboratory, 
1957. 

[16]  Y.  A.  Freund,  R.  E.  Schapire,  “Large  Margin 
the  Perceptron  Algorithm,  Machine 

Classification  Using 
Learning”, 37(3):277-296, 1999. 

[17]  G.  Klein,  A.  Ojamaa,  P.  Grigorenko,  M.  Jahnke,  E. 
Tyugu,  “Enhancing  Response  Selection  in  Impact  Estimation 
Approaches”,  Military  Communications  and  Information 
Systems Conference (MCC), Wroclaw, Poland, 2010. 

[18]  J.  Bai,  Y.  Wu,  G.  Wang,  S.  X.  Yang,  W.  Qiu,  “A 
Novel  Intrusion  Detection  Model  Based  on  Multilayer  Self-
organizing Maps and Principal Component Analysis, Advances 
in Neural Networks”, ISNN Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006.  
[19]  F.  Barika,  K.  Hadjar,  N.  El-Kadhi,  “Artificial  Neural 
Network for Mobile IDS Solution”, Security and Management, 
2009. 

[20]  D.  A.  Bitter,  T.  Elizondo,  “Application  of  Artificial 
to  Intrusion 
IEEE  World  Congress  on  Computational 

Neural  Networks  and  Related  Techniques 
Detection”, 
Intelligence, CCIB, Barcelona, Spain, 2010. 

[21]  R.  I.  Chang,  L.  B.  Lai,  W.  D.  Su,  J.  C.  Wang,  J.  S.  
Kouh,  “Intrusion  Detection  by  Backpropagation  Neural 
and  Attribute-query”, 
Networks  with 
International  Journal  of  Computational  Intelligence  Research, 
2007. 

Sample-query 

[22] B. Iftikhar, A. S. Alghamdi, “Application of Artificial 
Neural Network in Detection of DOS Attacks”, Proceedings of 
the  2nd  international  Conference  on  Security  of  Information 
and Networks. New York, NY, 2009. 

[23] D. Stopel, Z. Boger, R. Moskovitch, Y. Shahar, and Y. 
Elovici, 
“Application  of  Artificial  Neural  Networks 
Techniques to Computer Worm Detection”, International Joint 
Conference on Neural Networks, 2006. 

[24]  C.  H.  Wu,  “Behavior-based  Spam  Detection  Using  a 
Hybrid  Method  of  Rule-based  Techniques  and  Neural 
Networks”, Expert Systems with Applications, 2009. 

[25] P. Salvador, et al., “Framework for Zombie Detection 
Using  Neural  Networks”,  Fourth  International  Conference  on 
Internet Monitoring and Protection, 2009. 

[26]  M.  Shankarapani,  K.  Kancherla,  S.  Ramammoorthy, 
R.  Movva,  S.  Mukkamala,  “Kernel  Machines  for  Malware 
Classification and Similarity Analysis”, IEEE World Congress 
on Computational Intelligence. Barcelona, Spain, 2010. 

[27] B. Fei, J. Eloff, M. S. Olivier, H. Venter, “The Use of 
Self-organizing  Maps  of  Anomalous  Behavior  Detection  in  a 
Digital Investigation”, Forensic Science International, 2006. 

[28]  J.  Kivimaa,  A.  Ojamaa,  E.  Tyugu,  “Graded  Security 

Expert System”, Springer, 2009. 

[29] D. Anderson, T. Frivold, A. Valdes, “Next-generation 
(NIDES)”,  SRI 

Intrusion  Detection  Expert  System 
International, Computer Science Lab, 1995. 

[30]  T.  F.  Lunt,  R.  Jagannathan,  “A  Prototype  Real-Time 
Intrusion-Detection  Expert  System”,  IEEE  Symposium  on 
Security and Privacy, 1988. 

[31]  I.  Kotenko,  A.  Ulanov,  “Multi-Agent  Framework  for 
Simulation  of  Adaptive  Cooperative  Defense  Against  Internet 
Attacks”,  International  Workshop  on  Autonomous  Intelligent 
Systems: Agents and Data Mining, Springer. 

[32]  I.  Kotenko,  A.  Konovalov,  A.  Shorov,  “Agent-Based 
Modeling  and  Simulation  of  Botnets  and  Botnet  Defence”, 
Conference  on  Cyber  Conflict,  CCD  COE  Publications, 
Tallinn, Estonia, 2010. 

[33] B. Stahl, D. Elizondo, M. Carroll-Mayer, Y. Zheng, K. 
Wakunuma,  “Ethical  and  Legal  Issues  of 
the  Use  of 
Computational  Intelligence  Techniques  in  Computer  Security 
and  Computer  Forensics”, 
IEEE  World  Congress  on 
Computational Intelligence, Barcelona, Spain, 2010. 

[34]  E.  Herrero,  M.  Corchado,  A.  Pellicer,  A.  Abraham, 
“Hybrid Multi Agent-neural Network Intrusion Detection with 
Mobile  Visualization”,  Innovations 
in  Hybrid  Intelligent 
Systems, 2007. 

[35] V. Chatzigiannakis, G. Androulidakis, B. Maglaris, “A 
Distributed  Intrusion  Detection  Prototype  Using  Security 
Agents”. HP OpenView University Association, 2004. 

[36]  J.  Kivimaa,  A.  Ojamaa,  E.  Tyugu,  “Pareto-Optimal 
Situation  Analysis  for  Selection  of  Security  Measures”, 
MilCom, 2008. 

[37]  J.  Kivimaa,  A.  Ojamaa,  E.  Tyugu,  “Managing 

Evolving Security Situations”, MilCom, 2009.  

[38] P. Norvig, S. Russell, “Artificial Intelligence: Modern 

Approach”, Prentice Hall, 2000. 

 [39]  V.  K.  Pachghare,  P.  Kulkarni,  D.  M.  Nikam, 
“Intrusion  Detection  System  using  Self  Organizing  Maps”, 
International  Conference  on  Intelligent  Agent  &  Multimedia 
Agent Systems, 2009. 

[40]  R.  Hosseini, J.  Dehmeshki,  S. Barman,  M. Mazinani, 
S. Qanadli, “A Genetic Type-2 Fuzzy Logic System for Pattern 
Recognition  in  Computer  Aided  Detection  Systems”,  IEEE 
World  Congress  on  Computational  Intelligence.  Barcelona, 
Spain, 2010. 

[41]  B.  Mayoh,  E.  Tyugu,  J.  Penjam,  “Constraint 

Programming”, NATO ASI Series, Springer Verlag. 1994. 

[42]  I.  Bratko,  “PROLOG  Programming  for  Artificial 

Intelligence”, Addison-Wesley, 2001. 

[43]  X. Ou, “A Logic-programming Approach to Network 

Security Analysis”, PhD Thesis, Princeton University, 2005. 

[44]  “US  Department  of  Defense  Cyber  Strategy”,  US 
2015.

April 

DoD, 

