Risk Analysis Study of Fully
Autonomous Vehicle

Chuka Oham
School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of New South Wales
New South Wales, Australia
CSIRO, Data 61

Raja Jurdak
CSIRO, Data 61
Brisbane, Queensland
Australia
IEEE Senior Member

Sanjay Jha
School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of New South Wales
New South Wales, Australia
IEEE Senior Member

9
1
0
2

y
a
M
7
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
1
9
0
1
.
5
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Fully autonomous vehicles are emerging vehicular
technologies that have gained signiﬁcant attention in todays
research endeavours. Even though it promises to optimize road
safety, the proliferation of wireless and sensor technologies makes
it susceptible to cyber threats thus dawdling its adoption. The
identiﬁcation of threats and design of apposite security solutions
is therefore pertinent to expedite its adoption. In this paper, we
analyse the security risks of the communication infrastructure
for the fully autonomous vehicle using a subset of the TVRA
methodology by ETSI. We described the model of communication
infrastructure. This model clariﬁes the potential communication
possibilities of the vehicle. Then we deﬁned the security objectives
and identiﬁed threats. Furthermore, we classiﬁed risks and
propose countermeasures to facilitate the design of security
solutions. We ﬁnd that all identiﬁed high impact threats emanates
from a particular source and required encryption mechanisms
as countermeasures. Finally, we discovered that all threats due
to an interaction with humans are of serious consequences.
Index Terms—Risk analysis; Autonomous vehicle; TVRA

autonomous vehicle and then create apposite security solutions
to mitigate threats. In this paper, we develop a model for the
communication infrastructure to envisage likely threats to the
autonomous vehicle and their origin. Then we identiﬁed the
threats, conduct a risk analysis study to classify risks so as
to understand the degree of seriousness of a particular threat
and we proposed countermeasures for identify threats using
the TVRA methodology by ETSI [5].
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: section II
presents the communication infrastructure of the autonomous
vehicle. In section III, we present our risk analysis study;
we introduce the security environments, security objectives,
identiﬁed threats, classify risks and propose countermeasures.
Section IV concludes this paper.

I. INTRODUCTION

II. MODEL OF COMMUNICATION INFRASTRUCTURE

Autonomous vehicles are vehicular technologies with the
ability to make independent driving decisions. They are
cooperative systems which aim at the optimization of the
road transport systems and road safety [2] and are based
on the following vehicular interactions; vehicle-to-vehicles
(v2v), vehicle-to-infrastructure (v2i) and vehicle-to-other con-
necting technologies (v2x). Research into autonomous vehicle
technology has received signiﬁcant attention from academia
and automotive industry and also received support from the
government due to its potential beneﬁts [1, 3].
NHTSA [4] deﬁnes 5 levels of autonomy to reﬂect the degree
to which a driver is required to control and monitor road
operations. Levels 0-2 require the driver to absolutely monitor
the roadway situation. Level 3 requires the driver to maintain
alertness to know when to take back control of the vehicle
while in level 4, the driver cedes absolute control of critical
driving functions and road monitoring.
The generation of valuable data and exposure to external
communications makes it susceptible to cyber threats with
life threatening outcomes upon the successful execution of
a malicious threat. Therefore, to expedite the adoption of
this technology,
it must be able to maximally guarantee
the security of the driver and passenger. To achieve this,
it is pertinent to identify the likely potential threats to the

We present a model of the communication infrastructure for
autonomous vehicle in this section. The model encompasses all
potential interactions between the vehicle and other connecting
entities.
P. Kleberger [6] described a communication infrastructure for
a connected car. They divided their model into 2 distinct
domains; the managed infrastructure and the vehicular com-
munication. The managed infrastructure shows all networks
the autonomous vehicle is likely to be connected to while
the vehicle communication shows the communication links
between the vehicle and other entities. Their model describes
the likely connections of an autonomous vehicle therefore we
adapt to their model and include only speciﬁc connections.
Fig.1. describes our communication infrastructure model.
In our model, the managed infrastructure includes all networks
the vehicle will be connected to and other ancillary services
that can be provided for the autonomous vehicle. Vehicle
communications shows all form of connections the vehicle
will be exposed to using the DSRC wireless communication
technology [7]. For example, connection to other vehicles
(v2v), to roadside infrastructures (v2i) and other connecting
technologies (v2x) like connecting the vehicle to the network
of a diagnostic repair shop.

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Model of the Communication Infrastructure

III. RISK ANALYSIS

Having described the model of communication infrastruc-
ture for the autonomous vehicles, we analyse the threats and
vulnerabilities due to automation of critical vehicle functions
and in the communication exchanges between entities in the
communication infrastructure model using the TVRA method-
ology developed by ETSI [5]. Most precisely, we focus on
the basic interactions of the autonomous vehicle as it travels;
the interactions between the vehicle and other vehicles, the
interactions between the vehicle and the road side units and
with the internet domain.

A. TVRA Methodology

TVRA uses the product estimation of the likelihood of
attack and its impact to identify risk due to a particular threat.
We employ a subset of the TVRA methodology in our risk
analysis study for the autonomous vehicle. Fig.2. speciﬁes
the steps we adopted in this study. Furthermore, we modiﬁed
the TVRA process to include speciﬁc objectives for identiﬁed
threats.

1) Target of Evaluation (ToE):

the target of evaluation
includes the description of our security environment
threat agents and the
which depends on the assets,

assumptions made. We identify 3 potential targets of
evaluation for the purpose of our risk analysis;
the
autonomous vehicle, the passenger in the vehicle, and
the road side infrastructures (RSI).

• Assumptions: 1.) There exist a passenger

in
the vehicle; 2.) the passenger has at
least one
connecting device; 3.) communications within the
target of evaluation boundaries are considered
secured; and 4.) the internet is secured from any
form of direct attack [5].

• System assets: From the communication architec-
ture, we categorise the system assets as: physical,
logical and human. The physical assets include
but not limited to the autonomous vehicle, human
machine interface (HMI), road side units (RSU),
on-board sensor monitor, and the in-vehicle pas-
sengers connecting devices. Logical assets include:
communication protocols, sensor data, vehicle sys-
tem controls and ancillary applications such as the
applications from the automotive company [2, 5].
The human asset considered in this work is the in-
vehicle passenger. While no known work includes

Fig. 2. TVRA Methodology

this consideration, we argue that human assets could
be exploited and used as a means to attack other
valid communicating entities.

• Threat agents: we introduce a threat reference model
to make obvious the source of threat and identify
threat agents. The letters A, B and E in Fig.3 denote
access interfaces. These interfaces are points by
which an adversary can gain entry into the security
environment and compromise a functional entity.
The reference point Ai means that in the vehicle,
there exist a passenger(s) with connecting devices
ranging from (i=1 to n) where n represents the total
number of connecting devices the passenger has
in the vehicle. The threat agents could be internal
or external adversaries who seek an opportunity to
compromise the communication infrastructure via a
valid ToE.

2) Security Objectives We classify the security objectives
as general and speciﬁc. General objectives are deﬁned to
specify what security measures needs to exist to assure
security of the evaluated entities while the speciﬁc
objectives are deﬁned for speciﬁc threats identiﬁed so
as to be able to obtain a counter measure that will
mitigate threats to the autonomous and connecting
system. Speciﬁc objectives will be listed in tandem
with identiﬁed threats.

• General objectives: 1.) communication between ve-
hicle and other communication entities in the secu-
rity environment should be secured; and 2.) during
major operating processes (booting and storage), the
ToE platforms should be secured [2].

To achieve the objectives, we consider the following
security services to allow for a secure communication
[2, 5];

• Conﬁdentiality: This requires only legitimate access

to broadcasted messages.

Fig. 3. Threat Reference Model

• Availability: This requires that at all time, autho-
rized entities should never be denied access to
requisite services.

• Privacy: This requires that the personal information
of all human assets are protected from unauthorized
access.

• Authentication: This requires that communicating

entities can be conﬁrmed as authentic.

• Authorization: This requires that only entities with
necessary privileges have access to certain informa-
tion.

• Plausibility: This ensures the veracity of data.
• Non-repudiation: This requires the implementation
of an audit trail to keep track of executed transac-
tions.

3) Threats We categorize the threats identiﬁed in this study
as data, logical and human threats. Data threats are
directed towards the identiﬁcation of the asset and its
location in a ToE environment. Logical threats are a
compromise to the logical assets and directed towards
the exploitation of a device, item or application. Human
threats are threats carried out by authorized entities
or directed to them. Table I summarizes the identiﬁed
threats.

4) Risk analysis We obtain the risks for identiﬁed threats
using an estimation value of likelihood that an attack
will occur and the impact of the threats to the system.

Risk = Likelihood * Impact

(1)

• Integrity: This requires that message exchange

among authorized entities cannot be altered.

To obtain the likelihood of an attack, we give an attack
potential based on time it will take to plan and launch the

of

Type of Threat

Action of Attacker

Attack Interface

Speciﬁc Objectives

TABLE I
THREATS

Category
Threat
Data Threat

Logical Threat

Eavesdropping and Trafﬁc
analysis.
Location Tracking

1) Alter data to reveal identify vehicle. 2)
Alter data to reveal identity of passenger.
Alter data to reveal location of vehicle

Message Injection

Sensor spooﬁng

Replay

Timing Attack

Illusion Attack.
Masquerade.

Denial of service.

RF-Fingerprinting.

Sybil Attack

Message suppression.

Malware.
Repudiation.

1) Generate and sends false information on
a message.
1) Alter data to change the location of
the vehicle. 2) Malicious use of sensors to
generate faulty data
Resend old or expired message to obtain
network access.
Delay sending safety and time critical mes-
sage.
Alter sensors to deliver fake messages
1) Obtain sensitive information by acting
as a legitimate entity 2) Introduce fake
messages into the network by posing as an
authorized entity.
1) Flooding: Overload the network with
spurious information. 2) Spamming:
In-
crease transmission latency and use up net-
work bandwidth by sending high volume of
messages intentionally. 3)Blackhole: Drop
re-routing and misdirecting messages in the
network. 4) Jamming: Cause message loss
by intentionally creating interference.
identify source and location of radio trans-
mission
Deliver fake messages by claiming to be
multiple nodes with different identities
Information loss due to intentional message
deletion
Flash ECU to execute malicious software
Deny received or sent transmissions

A, B

A, B

A, B

A, B

A, B

Deny access of legitimate trafﬁc to unauthorized
entities.
Ensure security of network trafﬁc to deny access to
unauthorized entities.
Deny access to unauthorized entities.

Deny access to unauthorized entities
communication channels.

and secure

Veriﬁcation of incoming messages.

A, B, B on behalf
of E
A, B
A, B

Ensure data cannot be altered during transmission.

Validation of sensor data.
1) Enforce strict security policies on authentication.
2) For message reliability, ensure its integrity.

A, B, B on behalf
of E

Deny illegitimate network entry.

A, B

A, B

A, B

A, B
A, B

Ensure that it is very difﬁcult to identify a functional
entity.
Validation of sensor data

Allow access to authorized entities alone and imple-
ment an audit trail to keep track of actions.
Secure update of ﬁrmware patches.
Maintain an audit trail to keep track of executed
actions.
Detection and prevention of misbehaving users.

Security policies/standards for external device usage
in-vehicle.

Human Threat

Social Engineering At-
tacks (Phishing).
Intrusion attacks.

Compromise mobile devices of in-vehicle
passenger
Installation of a compromised device into
the vehicle by the in-vehicle passenger

Ai, A, B and B
on behalf of K
Ai, A

attack, the expertise of the attacker, knowledge, opportu-
nity and the equipment needed to conduct the attack. The
derived value is then mapped to the TVRA vulnerability
rating to determine likelihood of occurrence [8, 9].
The impact reveals the likely consequences to the ToE.

TABLE II
VULNERABILITY RATING AND LIKELIHOOD

Vulnerability
Rating
Beyond High
High
Moderate
Basic
No-rating

Likelihood

Values

Unlikely

Possible
Likely

1

2
3

is classiﬁed as high (3):

Impact
threat has serious
consequences. Medium (2): threat cannot be neglected;
and Low (1): likely damage due to threat is low [3].
Risks are classiﬁed as minor (1,2,3) meaning the attack
is unlikely, major (4) meaning the attack is likely but
consequence is likely not fatal and critical (6,9) meaning

the risk is should be treated as urgent and appropriate
countermeasures must be developed for them [2, 9]. Fig.
4 details the risk classiﬁcation of the identiﬁed threats.

In Fig. 4, all high impact threats have been classiﬁed as
critical risks. These threats are also means by which
other attacks could be mounted on the exposed ToE
interfaces. For example, Illusion attack gives an attacker
an advantage on the road. The attacker suppresses, alters
messages and also communicates false sensor readings
to deceive neighbouring vehicles. With sensor spooﬁng
an attacker can cause a holistic dysfunction of the
communication infrastructure. GPS time for example is
used for time stamping and synchronizing messages.
However with GPS spooﬁng, an attacker can impact on
message timing by means of replay attack [2]. Sybil
attack allows for the consumption of network bandwidth
thereby leading to a denial of service attack. The serious
impact of these attacks calls for the development of
urgent and priority countermeasures to mitigate these
threats.
Reference points A, B represent a signiﬁcant entry point
for malicious users. High impact threats and major risks

Fig. 4. Risk Analysis

also emanate from reference points A, B therefore, we
conclude that the security of devices in the ToE exposed
to reference points A, B would guarantee the overall
security of the autonomous vehicle.
Reference points Ai and A represents a signiﬁcant entry
point for malicious users. Threats from these reference
points are critical. This shows that a successful exploita-
tion by a human asset has serious consequences on
the communication infrastructure. Reference point Ai
represents the attack interface for the in-vehicle passen-
ger who via spooﬁng and intrusion attacks compromise
or could be used to compromise the communication
infrastructure.

5) Countermeasure: The

countermeasures

to speciﬁc

threats have been identiﬁed in Table III.
The inﬂuence of human assets over the communication
infrastructure must
and
appropriate countermeasures built around intrusion
detection, prevention and encryption mechanisms as
well as strong security policies must be ensured to
prevent and mitigate threats.

considered

critically

be

IV. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have described a communication
model
for autonomous vehicles and identiﬁed threats to
the security of the full autonomous vehicle communication
infrastructure. We conducted a risk analysis study using
the TVRA methodology developed by ETSI and proposed
countermeasures for identiﬁed threats. In analysing the risk
to the communication infrastructure, we considered human
assets as a means of exploitation and discovered that the
impacts of the threat from humans are critical to the security
of the communication infrastructure. The classiﬁcation of

TABLE III
POTENTIAL COUNTERMEASURES TO THREATS

Threats
Eavesdropping and Trafﬁc
analysis

Risk
Major

Message Injection
Spooﬁng
Replay

Major
Critical
Critical

Flooding and Spamming

Major

Blackhole

Jamming

Illusion

Phishing
Network Intrusion
Sybil

Critical

Critical

Critical

Critical
Critical
Critical

Message suppression

Major

Malware

Masquerade

Timing

Backdoor

Critical

Major

Critical

Critical

Repudiation

Low

Countermeasure
1) Secure transmission of personal and private data via en-
cryption. 2) Implement pseudonyms so that driver, passenger
or vehicle are uniquely unidentiﬁable.
Thorough validation of input.
1) Packet inspection. 2) Encryption of transmission medium.
The use of a pseudo-random session token and time-stamp
by means of a secured time synchronization protocol.
1) Implement an intrusion detection system. 2) Use packet
ﬁlters to block unwanted trafﬁc.
1) Implement an intrusion detection and prevention system.
2) Use trust based routing protocols.
1) Channel switching 2) Track jammers and block them using
a jamming detection device.
Implement a plausibility validation mechanism for sensor data
veriﬁcation
User identity veriﬁcation via a 2-step authentication procedure
Use intrusion detection and prevention mechanisms
1) Implement a position veriﬁcation protocol 2) Use digital
signatures and certiﬁcate authorities and ensure each network
device has one digital signature and certiﬁcate authority
Ensure that communication channels are encrypted as well as
data transmitted.
a Use intrusion detection and prevention mechanisms (packet
ﬁlters)
1) Ensure that vehicles have unique and veriﬁable public keys
(scenario I). 2) Plausibility checks on incoming messages.
Veriﬁcation of data integrity via cryptographic means to
secure hardware, protect and store data.
Use audit-trails to keep track of actions. 2.) if backdoor is
on a hardware device requiring physical access, implement
physical access control and non-repudiation policies.
Auditing and Logging.

risks for threats identiﬁed represents an upper-bound risk
to the autonomous vehicle. The challenge now is expedite
development of apposite security mechanisms to mitigate
threats to facilitate the adoption of the autonomous vehicle
technology.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Matar, M. Ashraf and S. Nouh, VANETs and autonomous driving.,

2014.

[2] R. Moalla,H. Labiod, B. Lonc and N. Simoni, Risk Analysis Study of ITS
Communication Architecture, Network of the Future (NOF), 2012 Third
International Conference.

[3] Accenture Research, The New Road to the Future: the beneﬁts of

autonomous vehicles in Australia., 2016.

[4] NHTSA, Preliminary Statement of Policy Concerning Automated Vehi-

cles. 2010

[5] ETSI, Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Security: Threat, Vulnerability
and Risk Analysis (TVRA) Technical Report ETSI TR 102 893 V1.1.1
(2010-03).

[6] P. Kleberger,A. Javaheri, T. Olovsson and E. Jonsson, A Framework
for Assessing the Security of the Connected Car Infrastructure. ICSNC
2011: The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks
Communications.

[7] Steve Sill, DSRC: The Future of Safer Driving Intelligent Transport

Systems Joint Program Ofﬁce.

[8] ETSI, Telecommunications and Internet converged Services and Protocols
for Advanced Networking (TISPAN); Methods and protocols;Part 1:
Method and proforma for Threat, Risk, Vulnerability Analysis ETSI TS
102 165-1 V4.2.3 (2011-03) Technical Speciﬁcation, 2011

[9] Sophia Antipolis TVRA Workshop World Class Standards 2009 TVRA

Workshop 23 March 2009.

