The Concept of Cyber Defence Exercises (CDX): 
Planning, Execution, Evaluation 

Ensar Seker 
NATO CCD COE 
Tallinn, Estonia 
ensar.seker@ccdcoe.org 

Abstract  -  This  paper  discusses  the  concept  of  cyber  defence 
exercises  (CDX)  that  are  very  important  tool  when  it  comes  to 
enhancing  the  safety  awareness  of  cyberspace,  testing  an 
organization’s  ability  to  put  up  resistance  and  respond  to 
different  cyber  events  to  establish  the  secure  environment, 
gathering  empirical  data  related  to  security,  and  looking  at  the 
practical  training  of  experts  on  this  subject.  The  exercises  can 
give  ideas  to  the  decision  makers  about  the  precautions  in  the 
cybersecurity area and to the officials, institutions, organizations, 
and staff who are responsible on the cyber tools, techniques, and 
procedures  that  can  be  developed  for  this  field.  In  the  cyber 
defense  exercises,  the  scenarios  that  are  simulated  closest  to 
reality which provides very important contributions by bringing 
together  the  necessity  of  making  the  best  decisions  and 
management  capabilities  under  the  cyber  crisis  by  handling 
stress and coordinated movement as a team. The objective of this 
paper  is  to  address  the  issue  from  a  scientific  point  of  view  by 
setting  out 
implementation,  and 
evaluation of these exercises, taking into account and comparing 
international firefighting exercises. Another aim of the work is to 
be able to reveal the necessary processes that are required for all 
kind  of  cyber  exercises,  regardless  of  the  type,  although  the 
processes  involved  vary  according  to  the  target  mass  of  the 
planned exercise. 

the  stages  of  planning, 

Index  Terms—  Cyber  defense,  security  exercises,  cyber 
resilience,  cyber  threat,  cyber  security,  cyber-attack  mitigation, 
cyber crisis management. 

I. RELATED WORK 

CDX  have  been  identified  as  an  efficient  mechanism  to 
practice  IT  security  awareness  training  [1,  2]  but  are  also  an 
ultimate tool to reveal and define the different security needs of 
every organization [3]. It provides an excellent opportunity and 
ultimate learning experience [4, 5] for the students to improve 
their skills in protecting and defending information systems are 
assessed in the context of realistic, true-to-life scenario [6]. On 
the  other  side,  as  discussed  by  Vigna  [7]  and  Mink  [8],  the 
offensive  security  training  is  also  an  effective  way  to  learn 
information security. The previous works in this area examined 
the structure [9] and how to use of cyber defence competitions, 
overall  effectiveness  of  live-attack  exercises  in  teaching 
information  security  [10],  curriculum  and  course  format  at 
CDX in which teams design, implement, manage and defend a 
network  of  computers  [11-15].  Other  literature  has  examined 
the benefit of conducting cyber defense competitions at the K-

12  level  [16,  17].  The  architecture  of  a  cyber  defense 
competition  [18]  and  different  tools  and  techniques  used  and 
how  they  fit  into  an  active  learning  approach  and  how  it 
focuses  on  the  operational  aspect  of  managing  and  protecting 
an existing network infrastructure were described by Green et 
al [19].  

Patriciu and Furtuna [20] presented a number of steps and 
guidelines 
that  should  be  followed  when  designing  a 
cybersecurity  exercise.  One  another  approach  of  such  live-
attack exercises presented by White [21], lessons learned from 
illustrative examples of such exercises, as well as suggestions 
to  help  organizations  conduct  their  own  exercise.  Other 
literature examined how to offer cyber defense competitions in 
the private sector, using a service provider model [22].  

Existing  literature  has  examined  the  potential  benefits  of 
cyber defense exercises. One another benefit of cyber defense 
exercise  that  can  be  instrumented  to  generate  scientifically 
valuable  modern  labeled  datasets  for  future  security  research 
[23,  24]  and  help  uncover  gaps  in  IT  Security  policies,  plans 
and  procedures  [25].  It  was  claimed  that  [26]  cyber  exercises 
can  be  developed  with  a  focus  on  measuring  performance 
against  specific  standards.  In  cyber  defense  exercises,  to 
measure  team  effectiveness  and  gain  knowledge  how  to  do 
that,  the  role  of  behavioral  assessment  techniques  was 
investigated  as  a  complement  to  task-based  performance 
measurement [27]. 

In the literature, The RINSE simulator that is the real-time 
immersive  network  simulation  environment  for  network 
security  exercises  was  presented  as  a  realistic  rendering  of 
network behavior [28]. In addition to that to execute real-time 
security  exercises  on  a 
routing 
experiment  platform  was  presented  in  the  past  [29].  A 
developed method for Job Performance Modeling (JPM) which 
uses vignettes for improving cybersecurity talent management 
through  cyber  defense  competition  design  was  described  by 
Tobey [30]. 

inter-domain 

realistic 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II. INTRODUCTION 

Since the cyberspace was recognized as the fifth battlefield 
after  land,  sea,  air,  and  space,  it  has  begun  to  be  of  critical 
importance,  especially  in  terms  of  national  security.  These 
attacks  have  become  more  popular  in  recent  times,  as  cyber-
attacks  can  be  performed  anonymously,  declassified,  and 
relatively  inexpensive  to  perform  in  other  areas.  Therefore, 
countries  have  begun  to  use  and  develop  cyberweapons  at  a 
sophisticated level of technology and sophisticated technology. 

In order to safeguard the digital security of the public and 
the society, which is becoming an integral part of the national 
security,  against  cyber-attacks,  states  accept  the  idea  that  it  is 
necessary to establish and disseminate authorities such as cyber 
defence  commands,  national  cyber  incident  response  teams, 
computer  emergency  readiness  teams,  and  other  information 
security  centers.  They  also  have  begun  to  develop  national 
cybersecurity strategies and put into practice. 

In  terms  of  cyber  defense,  cyber  exercises  have  been 
playing  a  very  important  role  in  testing  the  technical  cyber 
capacity of nations or organizations, cyber training, and cyber 
awareness  raising  that’s  why  they  have  started  to  become 
widespread all  over  the  world.  Among  the  main  objectives of 
the cyber defense exercises, they can increase [31, 32, 33, 34]; 

cyber defense exercises have been carried out in Europe, as can 
be seen in Figure 1 [5]. 

Figure 1 - Cyber Defence Exercises (Worldwide 

Distribution)  

Another actor, at least as important as Europe, in the field, 
is North America, especially the United States. North America 
is  followed  by  Asia,  mostly  Japan,  Malaysia,  India,  and 
Singapore. Australia comes right after Asia. 

  The  ability 

to 

test  and  develop  common  and 
coordinated  technical  and  strategic  mobility  against 
the cyberattacks that may occur on a national basis. 

  The  Ability 

to 

test  and  develop  common  and 
coordinated  technical  and  strategic  mobility  against 
cyber  attacks,  which  may  occur  on  an  international 
basis. 

  Ability  to  test  and  develop  continuity  and  improving 
continuity processes with cybersecurity capabilities. 
  Strengthening  cooperation  and  coordination  between 

public and private sectors in the cyberspace. 

  Gathering  empirical  data  related  to  cybersecurity 

research. 

  The maturity level of legal and regulatory compliance. 

In  the  following  sections,  the  worldwide  cyber  defense 
exercises,  and  processes,  types,  and  contributions  of  these 
exercises was examined with examples. 

From  the  planning  stage  through  to  the  implementation, 
execution  and  finally  to  the  evaluation  stage,  cyber  defense 
exercises  can  provide  important  contributions  to  both  the 
exercise  planners  and  their  participants.  These  processes  of 
exercises  also  can  give  an  idea  to  a  developer  who  develops 
mechanisms for the cyber defense. 

III. CYBER DEFENCE EXERCISES AROUND THE WORLD 

Europe is at the forefront of the biggest players in the field 
of cyber defense exercises. In the past, 42 percent of the global 

Figure 2 - Cyber Defence Exercises (Asia Distribution) 

Cyber  defense  exercises  that  were  executed  in  Asia  is  as 
shown  in  Figure  2  [35].  It  is  noteworthy  that  Malaysia  has 
moved up to second place just right after Japan, especially with 
investments  that  Malaysia  has  made  in  recent  years  to  this 
field. Even though Japan’s and Malaysia’s number are close to 
each other, it is clear that Japan has much more experience in 
cyber defense exercises than in Malaysia.  

Locked  Shields,  Cyber  Coalition,  Cyber  Europe  can  be 
given as examples of a few cyber defense exercises carried out 
on an international scale. 

Locked  Shields:  Locked  Shields  is  organized  annually  by 
the  NATO  Cooperative  Cyber  Defence  Centre  of  Excellence 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(NATO  CCD  COE)  in  Tallinn,  Estonia.  It’s  accepted  by  the 
authorities  that  Locked  Shields  is  the  world's  largest,  most 
complex and technologically advanced cyber defense exercise. 
More  than  900  cybersecurity  experts  from  around  the  world 
have  been  involved  in  the  2017  Locked  Shields  exercise  and 
the national teams of 20 countries have contributed. More than 
2,500  attacks on  the  national teams  (blue  teams)  were carried 
out  by  the  red  team  in  the  exercise  where  more  than  3,000 
virtual systems were involved. Locked Shields exercises follow 
a successful route to adopting information technologies. As an 
example, the smart grid systems, air-to-air fueling systems, and 
drone  control  systems  were  added  to  exercise  environment  in 
2017 [36].  

Cyber Coalition: Cyber Coalition is organized annually by 
NATO. It’s a three-day event and participation are from NATO 
members and alliance countries. In December 2016, more than 
700  cyber  defense  and  legal  experts,  government  officials, 
officers, academics and industry representatives were involved 
in  this  exercise.  In  the  exercise,  there  was  also  cyber  defense 
personnel  from  the  European  Union  and  representatives  of 
non-NATO  countries  such  as  Algeria,  Austria,  Finland, 
Ireland, Japan and Sweden [37]. 

Cyber Europe: It is organized by ENISA (European Union 
Agency  for  Network  and  Information  Security),  every  two 
years  for  members  of  the  European  Union.  Unlike  military-
based exercises such as Locked Shields and Cyber Coalition, It 
is  organized  by  a  civilian authority. The  exercise,  which  took 
place in 2016, was included of the 28 European Union member 
states  and  2  member  countries  of  the  European  Free  Trade 
Association  (EFTA),  although  those  countries  are  not  a 
member of EU [38]. 

IV. CYBER DEFENCE EXERCISES TAXONOMY 

Cyber  defense  exercises  can  be  carried  out  in  various 
forms. According to the data set to be obtained, these types of 
exercises  differ.  However,  the  differences  are  based  on 
parameters  from  ISO  22398,  an  international  standard.  It  is 
possible to categorize cyber defense exercise into the following 
four groups for their objectives [39]: 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

Improvement  and  test  of  national/international  cyber 
incident response cooperation. 
Evaluation/Competition  of  the  cybersecurity  skills, 
incident  preparedness  of  individuals,  organizations, 
and systems. 
Assessing 
endurance and/or technical capacity. 
Training  participants  in  real-world  scenarios  that 
provide  the  opportunity  to  gain  knowledge,  insight, 
experience  by  developing  their  skills  and  resilience 
before an incident. 

information, 

capability, 

readiness, 

Figure 3 – CDX by Type [40] 

Despite  all  the  different  types  of  exercises  that  can  be 
created  such  as  capture  the  flag,  discussion-based  game, 
simulation,  workshop, drills, seminar,  cyber  defense exercises 
can basically be divided into three categories [41]; 

2. 

1.  Table  Top  Exercises:  All  scenarios  /  sub-scenarios, 
injections,  and  red  team  attacks  are  written  and 
prepared  before  the  exercise.  In  most  cases,  exercise 
planners  and  actors  sit  on  a  table  and  perform 
exercises,  so  such  exercises  are  called  table-top 
exercises.  Table-top  exercises  should  have  a  fairly 
limited number of training units and very well defined 
objectives  [42].  The  application  process  is  relatively 
easy as it can be planned faster and in a shorter time 
than other types of exercises. 
(Hybrid) Exercises: Exercise scenario / sub-scenarios 
and  injections  are  pre-written,  but  the  red  team 
performs  and  attacks 
the  exercise. 
Exercise  planners  perform  exercises  with  a  red  team 
that  applies  real  events  according  to  pre-determined 
targets [43]. 
Full Live Exercises: In such exercises, while the main 
scenario  and  some  sub-scenarios  have  already  been 
prepared,  there  are  instant  scenarios  and  injections 
which  are  developed  by  the  white  teams  (usually) 
according  to  the  blue  team's  progress  and  strategies. 
The  red  team  also  develops  new  attack  strategies 
based on the defensive capacity and status of the blue 
team.  When  compared  with  cyber  defense  exercises 
types,  the  planning  process  for  full  live  exercises  is 
much longer and more realistic [44]. 

live  during 

3. 

V. CYBER DEFENCE EXERCISES LIFE-CYCLE 

In  general,  cyber  defense  exercises  life-cycle  has  four 

major parts as follow [45]; 

Identifying:  Includes  topics  such  as  recognizing  and  creating 
participants  profile,  determining  the  type  and  size  of  the 
exercise, evaluating current scenario options. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Planning:  Includes  topics  such  as  Informing  and  training  the 
people and teams involved in the exercise, setting up the media 
policy,  inviting  observers  and  media  members,  providing 
financial  resources,  setting  the  schedule  and  location  of  the 
exercise,  distributing  roles  and  creating  a  realistic  scenario, 
preparing the exercise materials. 

in 

frame  and 

the  most  appropriate 

Conducting:  Includes  topics  such  as  Implementation  of  the 
exercise 
rules, 
implementation of the scenarios and injections according to the 
determined sequence, resolution of the problems and faults that 
can  occur  during  the  exercise  in  the  shortest  and  quickest 
manner,  observation  of  participants  and  taking  notes  of 
decisions and activities of participants, and the management of 
the  questionnaire  and  surveys  for  participants  in  order  to 
support them. 

the 

results, 

collection 

Evaluating:  Includes  the  creation  of  a  group  evaluating  the 
exercises’ 
evaluation  of 
questionnaires  and  surveys  answered  by  the  participants,  the 
collection of necessary information from the participants in the 
exercise,  the  preparation  of  documents  to  be  submitted  to  the 
media,  and  the  preparation  of  reports  to  be  shared  with  the 
evaluators. 

and 

Figure 4 - CDX Life Cycle [43] 

VI. PLANNING 

A. Determination of Objectives 

A  cyber  exercise can be  organized  as  an  individual  acting 
on an isolated network or as a broader training application on 
an  operational  network.  Planning  processes  are  similar.  The 
exercise planning process begins with the determination of the 
purpose  of  the  exercise  and  its  desired  outcome.  Without 
explicit targets, planners cannot design a meaningful exercise. 
These goals allow participants to clearly configure scenarios in 
practice to determine whether they have the necessary skills in 
a 
threats.  Different 
organizations  have  different  guiding  principles,  tools,  tactics, 
and procedures that make it important to create a starting point 
for each exercise. 

cyber-environment 

against 

cyber 

  The  determination  of  the  effectiveness  of  the 
cyber  training  provided  to  participants  before  the 
exercise started, 
  Evaluation  of 

the  effectiveness  of  exercise 
incident reports and preparation of analysis guides 
to  address  the  deficiencies  identified  through  the 
exercise, 

  Evaluation of the ability of participants’ necessary 
response against harmful activities and assess, 

 

Identifying  the  operational  impacts  of  cyber-
attacks  and  assessing  the  ability  to  implement 
recovery  and  recovery  procedures  required  for 
these attacks, 

  Determining the success of scenario planning and 

implementation, 

  The  elimination  and  correction  of  weaknesses  in 

cybersecurity systems, 

  Removal and correction of weaknesses in policies 

and procedures related to cyberspace, 

  To  maintain  an 

information  system  and 

to 
determine  what  equipment  or  capabilities  are 
required  to  carry  out  the  necessary  activities  in  a 
cyber-environment  where  harmful  attacks  are 
carried out, 

  Determining  whether  the  injections  meet  the 

 

objectives of the exercise, 
Increasing  cyber  awareness, 
coordination against cyber-attacks, 

readiness  and 

  Development of emergency preparedness plans for 
minimum damage, prevention by taking necessary 
precautions  and  protecting 
information 
systems against cyber-attacks, 

the 

are  common  targets  set  for  all  cyber  defense  exercises  in 

general. 

B. Planning Process 

Figure 5 - Planning Process [40] 

1)  Initial Planning Meeting/Conference;  

Covers topics such as; 

  Determination of requirements and conditions, 
  Determination of scenario variables and draft scenario 

proposals, 

  Collection of required information and distribution of 

tasks between execution planners, 

It takes place approximately 6, 7 months before the exercises. 

II)  Main Planning Meeting/Conference;  

Covers topics such as; 

  Reconciliation  of 

logistical  and  organizational 
problems  such  as  personnel,  scenario  and  time 
administrative 
schedule 
requirements, 

development 

and 

  Examining,  evaluating  and  finalizing  all  the  draft 

documents to be used in the exercise, 

  Examination  and  development  of  the  injections  prior 

to the final planning stage, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Reviewing  of  the  duties,  conditions,  and  standards 

determined for the purpose of the exercise, 
It takes place approximately 3, 4 months before the exercise. 

III)  Final Planning Meeting/Conference;  

The  final  planning  conference  is  the  final  meeting  to 
oversee  the  implementation  processes  and  procedures.  After 
this meeting, no major changes should be made to the design or 
coverage  of  the  exercise  or  its  supporting  documentation.  It 
takes place approximately 3, 4 weeks before the exercise. 

IV) 

Test-Run; 

Test-Run  is  the  final  preparation  phase  for  testing  and 
evaluating  the  technical  infrastructure  of  the  cyber  defense 
exercises.  In  test-run,  it  is  aimed  to  establish  all  the  sub-
structures  to be  used  for  the  exercise  in  the  selected place  for 
the  exercise  and  to  test  these  sub-structures  as  if  the  exercise 
process  is  working  normally  and  to  observe  the  possible 
problems  before  the  exercise.  Participation  from  all  teams 
except  the  blue  teams  takes  place  in  test-run.  Thus,  all  teams 
will have the chance to review their final situation and practice 
process before the exercise. Test-run takes place approximately 
one week before the exercise. 

VII. EXECUTION 

A. Teams 

I)  Blue Team (Defensive); 
Blue  team  is  responsible  for  ensuring  and  defending  the 
security of a company's or organization’s information systems 
against  virtual  attackers  (red  team)  in  a  virtual  environment 
created  within  the  scope  of  practice.  In  international  cyber 
defense  exercises,  blue  teams  represent  the  national  teams  of 
each participating country. Against the simulated attacks, blue 
team should defend its network; 

 
 
 

over a given period of time, 
a defense based and operational context, 
following the exercise’s rules. 

Blue  team  also  should  identify  and  prevent  any  data 
leakage  on  their  system  The  team  also  responsible  for  the 
protection of privacy, integrity, and usability of their network. 

Since  the  cyber  defense  has  been  a  part  of  national  and 
international  law  and  politics,  media  and  national  security 
strategies in recent times, the cyber defense exercises have also 
begun  to  be  designed  in  this  context.  Only  the  technical 
defense by  the blue  team  has begun to be  seen as  insufficient 
within  the  scope  of  cyber  defenses.  For  this  reason,  legal, 
policy,  strategy,  and  media  scenarios  have  begun  to  be 
included  in  addition  to  technical  scenarios,  especially  for 
international cyber defense exercises, so the responsibilities of 
the blue team have been increased. 

The  responsibilities  of  the  Blue  Team  must  always  be 
observed within the framework of the rules of engagement [31, 

taken  by 

32, 33, 34], the applicable laws and regulations, and any illegal 
action  was 
is  deemed 
unacceptable. Therefore, it is very important that all the actions 
and  decisions  taken  by  the  blue  team,  even  in  the  simulation 
environment, be performed without ignoring the existing laws 
and regulations. 

team  members 

the 

Another  clear  rule  in  the  rules  of  engagement  is  that  the 
blue  team  cannot  attack  the  exercise  infrastructure,  other blue 
teams, the red team and the virtual systems. 

Blue  team  members  must  provide  the  right  information, 

which will not harm their operational safety when requested. 

Blue teams are able to communicate the green team that is 
responsible  for  exercises  infrastructure,  through  the  web  page 
designed  for  them  by  submitting  notifications  and  requests 
related 
the  exercise 
environment. The green team is responsible for resolving these 
technical problems within reasonable time.  

technical  problems  about 

the 

to 

It is important that all reports created by the team are made 
through  the  command  chain  within  the  team.  Blue  teams  are 
allowed  to  use  their  own  tools  and  software  products,  but  all 
responsibility  for  the  licensed  copy  of  these  products  belongs 
to this team. 

Within  the  white  team,  there  is  a  group  of  people  called 
‘blonde user’ who are a response to occupy blue teams’ users’ 
services and systems. These users represent unconscious users 
and  they  may  open  harmful  emails  and  files  by  clicking 
malicious  links  unconscıously.  It  is  against  the  rules  for  the 
blue  teams  to  deny  these  users'  services  and  systems  used  by 
these users. It is also expected that the blue teams will be able 
to  resolve  the  requests  submitted  by  these  users  regarding 
technical problems related to the systems they are using, within 
a limited time. 

In  order  to  transfer  preliminary  information  about  the 
systems to be used with the exercise environment, blue teams 
are informed through webinars before the exercises. 

II)  Red Team (Offensive); 
The aim of the red team is to achieve cyber-attacks equally 
to  all  the  blue  teams  participating  in  the  exercise.  For  this 
purpose, the red team follows a predefined scenario and has the 
permission  to  use  security  vulnerabilities  that  are  already 
created  in  the  blue  team's  systems.  Successful  attacks  by  the 
red  team  lead  to  a  negative  score  for  the blue  teams. The  red 
team and the white team  must work closely together. The red 
team  must  always  follow  the  instructions  given  by  the  white 
team.  It  is  strictly  forbidden  for  the  red  team  to  attack  the 
services  and  infrastructure  used  by  the  green  team.  It  is 
imperative that all attacks carried out by the Red Team remain 
includes  social 
within 
engineering. 

the  exercise  environment.  This 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III)  Green Team; 
Green  team  is  responsible  for  preparing  and  maintaining 
exercise  systems  and  infrastructure.  These  infrastructures 
include systems that design, set up, and manage administrative 
computer  nodes,  virtualization  platforms,  storage,  and  core 
networking,  as  well  as  systems  that  blue  teams  must  defend 
during  the  exercise.  In  order  to  ensure  that  these  systems  are 
functioning  properly  during  the  exercise,  it  is  expected  from 
the  green  team  that  they  will  be  able  to  solve  the  technical 
problems  submitted  by  the  blue  teams  within  a  reasonable 
period of time. 

IV)  Yellow Team; 
The  role  of  the  yellow  team  is  to  provide  situational 
awareness during the exercise first for the white team and then 
for  all  participants  in  the  exercise.  The  main  sources  of 
information  for  the  yellow  team  are  the  interim  reports 
provided by the blue teams, the reports of the attack campaigns 
from  the  red  team  members,  and  the  reports  provided  by  the 
system.  The  yellow  team  provides  regular  updates  to  white 
team leaders and blue teams. 

V)  White Team; 
The  white  team  is  responsible  for  organizing  the  exercise 
and  checking  it  during  the  execution.  The  white  team 
determines the exercise objectives, the scenario, the high-level 
objectives  for  the  red  team,  legal  injections,  rules,  media 
preparations  and  communication  plans.  During  the  execution, 
the white team provides control of the exercise by determining 
when to start different stages, controlling the execution of the 
red team's campaign, and scoring issues. Management, blonde 
users, injections,  scoring  and media  simulation  are among  the 
responsibilities of the white team. 

B. Scenario 

to  demonstrate 

The  desired  outcomes  of  the  exercise  vary  from  one 
exercise  to  another,  but  these  outputs  always  revolve  around 
presenting  realistic  scenarios 
the  cyber-
threatening  methods  of  participation  and  to  evaluate  the 
success  of  the  exercise  programs.  Exercise  outcomes  should 
aim to raise awareness of various cyber threats and to give an 
idea  to  make  a plan  to prevent  them.  An  example  scenario  of 
an  international  cyber  defense  exercise  in  the  past  years  as 
follows; Country X is an island republic located in the western 
part of Africa and is a member of an international organization. 
There  is  a  coalition  force  of  this  organization  in  the  country. 
While the size of the island is comparable to that of Ireland, the 
climate and landscape are closer to Morocco. The Republic of 
X is a poor country, and especially sanitation, communication, 
medical  services  and  education  are  quite  inadequate.  For 
example, the country has an insecure internet connection with 
the  rest  of  the  world,  and  the  bandwidth  of  the  connection  is 
low.  There  are  no  law  enforcement  agencies  or  CERT  to 
protect  the  country’s  information  systems.  This  forces  most 
international  actors  in  the  county  to  install  and  use  expensive 
satellite communications or locally operated systems. 

The  Republic  of  X  is  in  diplomatic  conflicts  with  the 
Country  of  Y  (a  neighbor),  which  has  been  criticized  by  the 
international  community  for  having  a  vigilant  anti-democratic 
government. For a long time, the Republic of X is exposed to 
the  cyber-attack,  which  is  predicted  to  originate  from  the 
Country of Y. Immediately following the last diplomatic crisis 
between the Republic of X and the Country of Y, cyber-attacks 
started to take place at the Air Force base of the Republic of X 
and a number of confidential information and documents were 
stolen. As part of the international coalition, the mission of the 
blue  team  is  to  take  necessary  precautions  at  the  Air  Force 
base,  analyzing  IT  devices,  preventing  ongoing  and  possible 
future attacks, and reporting to the HQ.  

The Blue Team should try to fulfill the duties assigned to it 
in an unfamiliar system. They need to take in consideration the 
rules,  media  and  strategy-based  sub-scenarios  and  injections 
that will be included later throughout the exercise. 

C. Scoring 

Scoring  is  one  of  the  most  troubling  issues  for  cyber 
defense  exercises.  Even  if  the  scoring  systems  that  are  made 
are tried to be standardized, it is highly probable that objections 
always  arise  from  the  blue  teams  because  scoring  is  usually 
made based on the initiative of the white team. For this reason, 
many  cyber  defense  exercises,  especially  the  ones  that  are 
organized at the international level, opposed the scoring system 
by  arguing  that  scoring  isn’t  the  main  purpose  of  the  cyber 
defense exercises. Creating competition environment to build a 
better  cyber  defense  is  the  main  reason  for  score  supporters. 
One  of  the  examples  of  exercises  that  do  not  use  the  scoring 
system  is  Cyber  Europe  organized  by  ENISA.  However,  the 
use  of  the  scoring  system  in  such  exercises  was  seen  as  a 
motivation  tool  for  participants,  and  the  positive  competition 
between participants was a greater impetus for achieving more 
successful outcomes. Locked Shields, which was organized by 
NATO  CCD  COE,  has  been  using  scoring  systems  at  the 
exercise. 

D. Monitoring 

Monitoring and logging is the basis for the scoring system 
and it helps identifying and responding to incidents during the 
exercise  at  an  early  stage.  Cyber  defence  exercises  are 
performed in a limited time and too many attacks and network 
activity  occurs  via  exercise  team  members  in  this  period  that 
makes difficult for organizators to monitor corporate data being 
created  across  multiple  networks  and  nodes.  Therefore, 
monitoring  provides  a  good  understanding  and  in-depth 
analysis  of  fields  in  event  logs  and  alerts  created  via  Syslog, 
Nagios,  DPI,  NetFlow,  etc.  It  is  believed  that  controlling  and 
scoring  is  one  of  the  primary  and  critical  asset  in  CDX  that 
helps  understanding  real-time  situation  and  performance  of 
teams  throughout  the  exercise  and  provides  fine-grained 
control over network links and hosts. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Media Activity Simulator 

The media simulator allows the actors to view and interact 
with the media and social media as if they were in real life. All 
players have their own passwords for social media use. Live to 
broadcast  on  all  media  and  social  platforms  such  as  Twitter, 
Facebook,  TV,  radio,  online  news  and  newspapers  are 
available  through  the  simulator.  With  this  simulation,  web 
pages for the institutions and organizations of the host country 
are also available based on the scenario. While blue teams are 
busy taking the necessary precautions against attacks from red 
teams,  they  have  to  take  the  necessary  steps  in  the  media 
dimension as well like in real life. 

F. Injections 

Injections  can  be  divided  into  4  categories  as;  scenario 

injections, media games, legal games, and forensics. 

1. 

scenario  injections;  scenario  injections  prepared  by 
the  white  team  that  includes  taking  necessary  precautions 
against  cyber  threat  and  vulnerabilities,  following  the  news, 
evaluating  intelligence,  gathering  information  about  cyber-
attacks and preparing reports. 

2.  Media scenario; As mentioned before, the purpose of 
the  media  simulation  is  to  bring  the  media  environment  to 
exercise  environment  so  to  challenge  the  blue  teams  even 
further.  The  stories  in  the  news  include  information  about 
events  that  occurred  on  ongoing  cyber  events,  negative 
comments  for  the  current  cyber-attacks  as  well  as  fabricated 
news about them. 

3.  Legal  games;  The  ability  of  the  blue  team  to  answer 
questions from the chain of command depends on having deep 
legal  knowledge.  To  deal  with  complicated  legal  issues,  to 
refute false statements and interpretations, and to communicate 
with the media in order to make the legal explanations related 
to 
the  general  public 
understandable to those who are not experts and to respond in 
legal  context  to  the  news  and  analyzes  that  the  media  has 
published, are among the requirements of the game. 

the  cyber-attacks 

intriguing 

to 

4. 

Forensic;  Forensic  aims  to  answer  the  questions 
related  to  current  cyber-attacks  such  as  who  did  it?  what 
happened, when happened, how happened and why happened? 

VIII. EXECUTION 

One  of  the  most  important  outputs  of  the  cyber  defense 
exercises  is  the  After  Action  Report.  At  this  report,  it  is 
mentioned the detailed performance of each blue team after the 
exercise.  Addition  to  that  the  scenario  and  sub-scenarios, 
injections,  exercise  purposes,  participants,  scoring,  technical 
infrastructure,  red  team  attacks  (client-side,  web,  network), 
defences  made  by  the  blue  team,  defects  in  these  defences, 
general  mistakes  made,  observations  from  all  teams  and  sub-
teams, recommendations and evaluations are also covered.  

includes  analysis,  evaluation,  weaknesses  and  weak  points, 
recommendations and recommendations during the practice. 

IX. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

The  importance  of  defense  exercises  is  increasing  day  by 
day.  It  would  be  possible  for  countries  to  be  involved  in  the 
global  cyber  defence  exercises  in  the  international  arena, 
spreading  the  development  and  implementation  of  their  own 
cyber  defence  exercise  platforms  on  a  national  basis,  and 
allocating  higher  budget 
the  planning  and 
development  of  these  exercises  could  contribute  to  achieving 
beneficial  outcomes  in  the  future  to  create  stronger  cyber 
defence  systems.  The  emphasis  on  these  exercises  on  the 
national and international scene will provide benefits in terms 
of uncovering the vulnerabilities in the area of the cyberspace, 
as  well  as  the  revitalization  of  the  cyber  defense  awareness, 
and  also  the  integrated  technologies  that  can  be  followed  in 
exercises related to the cyber defense. 

figures 

to 

As mentioned earlier for future studies, a technical tool will 
be  developed  on  the  scoring  system,  which  is  a  problematic 
issue for cyber defense exercises, and on the standardization of 
this  system  and  the  development  of  a  fairer  system.  As 
mentioned, the integration of new technologies such as power 
grid  systems  and  drone  control  systems  into  cyber  defense 
exercises is a critical issue. With the integration of these special 
systems  into  the  exercises,  the  existing  problems  and  the 
methods  to  be  followed  are  another  work  to  be  done  in  the 
future. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Schweitzer, D., Gibson, D., and Collins, M. "Active Learning in 
the Security Classroom," 42nd Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences, Honolulu, Hawaii, 2009, pp. 1-8. " 

Cyber 

Security 

[2]  Furtunǎ,  A.,  Patriciu,  V,.  Bica,  I.,  "A  Structured  Approach  for 
Implementing 
IEEE 
Communications (COMM), 8th International Conference (2010) 
[3]  Gurnani,  R.,  Pandey,  K.,  Kant  Rai,  S.,  "A  scalable  model  for 
implementing  Cyber  Security  Exercises",  Computing  for 
Sustainable  Global  Development 
2014 
International Conference on, pp. 680-684, 2014. 

(INDIACom) 

Exercises", 

[4]  Augustine T., Dodge, R. C., “Cyber Defense Exercise: Meeting 
Learning  Objectives  thru  Competition”,  IEEE  Security  and 
Privacy, Volume 5, Issue 5, 2007. 

[5]  Hoffman,  L.  J.,  Rosenberg,  T.,  Dodge,  R.,  and  Ragsdale  D., 
"Exploring a National Cybersecurity Exercise for Universities", 
IEEE  Security  &  Privacy  Magazine,  vol.  3,  issue  5,  pp.27-33, 
2015. 

[6]  Dodge,  R.  C.,  Ragsdale,  D.  J.,  and  Reynolds,  C.  "Organization 
and Training of a Cybersecurity Team", in IEEE Conference on 
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, vol. 5, pp. 4311-4316, 2003. 
[7]  Vigna,  G.,  "Teaching  Network  Security  Through  Live 
Exercises",  Proc.  3rd  Ann.  World  Conf.  Information  Security 
Education, pp. 3-18, 2003. 

In  addition, another  private report  is  shared  with  each blue 
team  separately  about  their  specific  performance  team  that 

[8]  Mink  M.,  and  Freiling,  F.  C.  “Is  Attack  Better  Than  Defense? 
Teaching Information Security the Right Way”, Proceedings of 

 
 
 
 
 
the  3rd  annual  conference  on  Information  security  curriculum 
development, Kennesaw, Georgia, 2006  

[9]  Schepens,  W.,  Ragsdale,  D.,  Surdu,  J.  R.,  "The  Cyber  Defense 
Exercise:  An  Evaluation  of  the  Effectiveness  of  Information 
Assurance  Education",  J.  Information  Security,  vol.  1,  no.  2, 
2002. 

[10] Dodge,  R.  C.,  Ragsdale,  D.  J.,  "Organized  CyberDefense 
Competitions", in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference 
on Advanced LearningTechnologies, pp.768-770. 2004. 

[11] Adams, W. J., et al., “Collective Views of the NSA/CSS Cyber 
Defense Exercise on Curricula and Learning Objectives,” Proc. 
Usenix  2nd  Workshop  Cyber  Security  Experimentation  and 
Test, Usenix Assoc., 2009; 

[12] Mullins,  B.E.,  Lacey,  T.H.,  Mills,  R.F.,  Trechter,  J.M.,  and 
Bass,  S.D.  "How  the  Cyber  Defense  Exercise  Shaped  an 
Information-Assurance  Curriculum,"  IEEE  Security  &  Privacy 
Magazine (5:5), pp 40-49, 2007. 

[13] Mullins,  B.,  Lacey,  T.,  Mills,  R.,  Trechter,  J.,  Bass,  S.,  "The 
Impact  of  the  NSA  Cyber  Defense  Exercise  on  the  Curriculum 
at  the  Air  Force  Institute  of  Technology",  40th  Annual  Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), pp.271b, 
2007. 

[14] Conklin,  A.  "Cyber  Defense  Competitions  and  Information 
Security Education: An Active Learning Solution for a Capstone 
Course,"  39th  Annual  Hawaii  International  Conference  on 
System Sciences, Honolulu, Hawaii, pp. 1-6, 2006. 

[15] Conklin,  A.  "The  Use  of  a  Collegiate  Cyber  Defense 
Competition in Information Security Education" in: 2nd Annual 
Conference  on  Information  Security  Curriculum  Development, 
Association  of  Computing  Machinery,  Kennesaw,  Georgia,  pp. 
16-18, 2005. 

[16] Rursch,  J.A.,  Luse,  A.,  and  Jacobson,  D.  "IT-Adventures:  A 
Program  to  Spark  IT  Interest  in  High  School  Students  Using 
Inquiry-Based Learning With Cyber Defense, Game Design, and 
Robotics,"  IEEE  Transactions  on  Education  (53:1),  pp  71-79, 
2010. 

[17] White, G.B., Williams, D., and Harrison, K. "The CyberPatriot 
National  High  School  Cyber  Defense  Competition,"  IEEE 
Security & Privacy Magazine (8:5), pp 59-61, 2010. 

[18] Schepens,  W.J.,  and  James,  J.R.  "Architecture  of  a  Cyber 
Defense  Competition,"  IEEE  International  Conference  on 
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, IEEE, pp. 4300-4305, 2003. 
[19] Green  et  al.  Competitions  in  Academia:  Do  Cyber  Defense 
Competitions  Work?  Proceedings  of  the  Nineteenth  Americas 
Conference  on  Information  Systems,  Chicago,  Illinois,  August 
15-17, 2013. 

[20] Patriciu,  V.  V.,  Furtuna,  A.  C.,  “Guide  for  designing  cyber 
security 
exercises”,  Proceedings  of 
the  8th  WSEAS 
information 
International  Conference  on  E-Activities  and 
security and privacy, p.172-177, December 14-16, Puerto De La 
Cruz, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain, 2009. 

[21] White, G., G. Dietrich, and T. Goles, "Cyber Security Exercises: 
Testing  an  Organization's  Ability  to  Prevent,  Detect,  and 
Respond to Cyber Security Events", in Proceedings of the 37th 
Hawaii International Conference on Systems Science, 2004. 
[22] Mattson,  J.A.  "Cyber  Defense  Exercise:  A  Service  Provider 
Model,"  in:  Fifth  World  Conference  on  Information  Security 
Education, L. Futcher and R. Dodge (eds.), Springer, pp. 81-86, 
2007. 

[23] Sangster,  B.,  O’Connor,  T.,  Cook,  T.,  Fanelli,  R.,  Dean,  E., 
Adams,  W., Morrell, C., and Conti, G., "Toward instrumenting 
network  warfare  competitions  to  generate  labeled  datasets", 
Proceedings  of  the  Second  Conference  on  Cyber  Security 
Experimentation and Test, p. 9, 2009. 

[24] Sommestad,  T.,  Hallberg,  J.,  “Cyber  security  exercises  and 
competitions  as  a  platform  for  cyber  security  experiments”, 
Proceedings  of  the  17th  Nordic  conference  on  Secure  IT 
Systems, Karlskrona, Sweden, 2012. 

[25] Samejima,  M.,  Yajima,  H.,  "IT  Risk  Management  Framework 
for  Business  Continuity  by  Change  Analysis  of    Information 
System", IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man,  and 
Cybernetics, Korea, 2012. 

[26] Dodge,  R.,  Hay,  B.,  Nance,  K.,  "Standards-Based  Cyber 
Exercises",  Availability  Reliability  and  Security  2009.  ARES 
'09. International Conference on, pp. 738-743, 2009. 

[27] Granåsen, M., Andersson, C., “Measuring team effectiveness in 
cyber-defense  exercises:  a  cross-disciplinary  case  study”, 
Cognition, Technology and Work, v.18 n.1, p.121-143, February 
2016. 

[28] Liljenstam, M., Liu, J., Nicol, D., Yuan, Y., Yan G., and Grier, 
C.,  “RINSE:  The  real-time  immersive  network  simulation 
environment for network security exercises (extended version)”, 
Simulation, vol. 82(1), pp. 43–59, 2006. 

[29] Li, Y., Liljenstam, M., and Liu, J., “Real-time security exercises 
interdomain  routing  experiment  platform”, 
on  a  realistic 
Proceedings  of  the  Twenty-Third  Workshop  on  Principles  of 
Advanced and Distributed Simulation, pp. 54–63, 2009. 

[30] Tobey,  D.  H.,  “A  vignette-based  method  for 

improving 
through  cyber  defense 
cybersecurity 
competition  design.  In Proceedings  of  the  2015  ACM  SIGMIS 
Conference on Computers and People Research, 31–39, 2015. 
[31] Cyber  Defence  Exercise  Locked  Shields  2013  –  After  Action 

talent  management 

Report, NATO CCD COE, Tallinn, 2013. 

[32] Cyber  Defence  Exercise  Locked  Shields  2014  –  After  Action 

Report, NATO CCD COE, Tallinn, 2014. 

[33] Cyber  Defence  Exercise  Locked  Shields  2015  –  After  Action 

Report, NATO CCD COE, Tallinn, 2015. 

[34] Cyber  Defence  Exercise  Locked  Shields  2016  –  After  Action 

Report, NATO CCD COE, Tallinn, 2016. 

[35] The  2015  Report  on  National  and  International  Cyber  Security 

Exercises, ENISA, 2015. 

[36] Locked  Shields  2017,  NATO  CCD  COE,  Retrieved  from: 

https://ccdcoe.org/locked-shields-2017.html, 2017. 

[37] Cyber  Coalition  16:  NATOs  Largest  Cyber  Defence  Exercise, 
from: 

NATO 
https://www.shape.nato.int/2016/cyber-coalition-16-ends-natos-
largest-cyber-defence-exercise, 2017. 

Retrieved 

SHAPE, 

[38] Cyber 

Europe 

2016, 

Retrieved 

from: 

https://www.enisa.europa.eu/topics/cyber-exercises/cyber-
europe-programme/ce-2016, 2017. 

[39] Cyber  Defense  Exercises  –  Participant  Information  Package, 

ENISA, 2013. 

[40] Introduction  to  Cyber  Exercises,  National  Cyber  Security, 

Division Cyber Exercise Program, DHS, 2003. 

[41] N.  Wilhelmson,  T.  Svensson,  “Handbook  for  Planning, 
Running,  and  Evaluating  Information  Technology  and  Cyber 
Security Exercises”, CATS, 2013. 

[42] C.  A.  M.  Forero,  Tabletop  Exercise  For  Cybersecurity 
And 

Theoretical 

Grounding 

Educational 
Development, Master’s Thesis, 2016. 

Training; 

[43] J. Kick, “Cyber Exercise Playbook”, The MITRE Corp., 2014. 

[44] Cyber-Exercises Analysis Report, ENISA. 2016. 
[45] Good Practice Guide on National Exercises, ENISA, 2009. 

 
 
 
