A Systemic IoT-Fog-Cloud Architecture for 
Big-Data Analytics and Cyber Security Systems: A 
Review of Fog Computing 

Nour Moustafa 
School of Engineering and Information Technology 
University of New South Wales-Canberra @ ADFA 
Canberra, Australia 

nour.moustafa@unsw.edu.au 

Abstract—With  the  rapid  growth  of  the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT), 
current Cloud systems face various drawbacks such as lack of mobility 
support, location-awareness, geo-distribution, high latency, as well as 
cyber threats. Fog/Edge computing has been proposed for addressing 
some  of  the  drawbacks,  as  it  enables  computing  resources  at  the 
network’s  edges  and  it  locally  offers  big-data  analytics  rather  than 
transmitting  them  to  the  Cloud.  The  Fog  is  defined  as  a  Cloud-like 
system  having  similar  functions,  including  software-,  platform-  and 
infrastructure-as services. The deployment of Fog applications faces 
various security issues related to virtualisation, network monitoring, 
data protection and attack detection. This paper proposes a systemic 
IoT-Fog-Cloud architecture that clarifies the interactions between the 
three layers of IoT, Fog and Cloud for effectively implementing big-
data analytics and cyber security applications. It also reviews security 
challenges,  solutions  and 
in  the 
architecture. 

future  research  directions 

Index Terms—Fog/Edge Computing, Cloud Computing, Internet of 

Things (IoT), Cyber-attacks, Challenges, Solutions 

I. INTRODUCTION 

The  Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  has  emerged  to  digitalise  our 
daily  tasks  in  various  systems,  for  example,  smart  homes, 
smart cities, smart factories, smart grids and smart healthcare 
[1].  Since  Cloud 
systems  offer  high  computational 
infrastructure,  power,  bandwidth,  software,  platforms  and 
storage, IoT applications integrate with Cloud systems across 
network  systems 
the 
communications  of  sensors,  actuators  and  services,  which 
require  high  computing  resources  for  executing  big-data 
analytics and cyber security applications. They still suffer from 
the  drawbacks  of  scalability  and  operability,  where 
heterogeneous data sources are collected and analysed from 
the three layers of IoT, Fog and Cloud systems [1], [4], [5]. 

IoT  networks 

include 

[3]. 

[2], 

Cloud  systems, 

in  forms  of  software,  platforms  and 
infrastructure, would address the challenges of scalability and 
operability  by  providing  services  to  users  and  organisations. 
However, Cloud systems suffer from lack of mobility support, 
latency, location-awareness and geo-distribution [1], [6]. The 
Fog/Edge  paradigms  have  been  proposed  to  tackle  the 
demerits of Cloud systems and enable big-data analytics at the 
network’s edge [4]. The term ‘Fog computing’ was coined by 
the OpenFog Consortium [1], [5], which is an architecture that 
extends the main functions of the Cloud to provide services at 

the  edge  of  a  network,  and  is  an  extremely  virtualised 
architecture of the resource pool. The Fog is a decentralised 
infrastructure, where data is logged and analysed between the 
clients and Cloud data centers. It is well-located to apply real-
time  and  big-data  analysis  techniques,  which  considerably 
supports  distributed  data  management  systems  [1],  [3],  [4], 
[6]. 

Current  research  studies  [4]–[9]  proposed  that  the  Fog 
technology will be designed in the future to offer an enhanced 
and trustworthy architecture for handling the ever increase of 
interconnected appliances and services. The authors in [1], [3], 
[4], [6], [10], [11] suggested different methods for deploying 
involving  encryption,  access  control, 
security  solutions, 
intrusion  detection  and 
firewall,  authentication  and 
prevention systems, at the Fog layer. Since the Fog depends 
on  distributed  architectures  which  connect  IoT  and  Cloud 
systems, Advanced Persistent Threats (APT) [12] could exploit 
Fog appliances and services if security systems are not  well-
designed to effectively monitor and protect the Fog nodes [1], 
[5]. 

to  handle 

fog  computing  scheme 

Azam  et  al.  [13]  developed  a  technique  for  connecting  a 
smart  communication  and  pre-processing  data  module  in 
Cloud-IoT  networks.  The  technique 
integrated  a  smart 
gateway  with  a  Fog  computing  technique  to  reduce  the 
computation overhead at the Cloud side. Alrawais et al. [14] 
the 
proposed  a 
authentication  issues  in  IoT  networks.  The  Fog  computing 
device  acts  as  a  gateway  of  IoT  devices  for  allocating  the 
certificate  revocation.  Almadhor  [15]  used  a  Fog  computing 
paradigm  to  secure  Cloud-IoT  platforms.  Yassen  et  al.  [16] 
utilised  some  fog  computing  capabilities  to  develop  an 
intrusion  detection  system  for  recognising  cyber-attacks  in 
wireless sensor networks. Dsouza et al. [17] proposed a policy-
and 
based  management 
interoperability  between  various  customer  requirements  in 
the  Fog  nodes.  In  [18],  the  authors  proposed  a  physical 
security  framework  for  integrating  the  functions  of  IoT,  Fog 
and Cloud systems. Sandhu et al. [19] proposed a framework 
to identify malicious activities from network edges. 

collaboration 

protect 

to 

In  this  paper,  a  systemic  IoT-Fog-Cloud  architecture  is 
proposed  for  improving  the  execution  of  big-data  analytics 
and  cyber  security  applications.  Security  threats,  challenges, 
existing  security  solutions,  and  future  research  directions  in 
the Fog paradigm, is also discussed. The description of the Fog 
architecture  is  described  in  Section  II.  Section  III  explains 
security challenges and threats in the Fog. Security challenges 
and future directions of research are introduced in Section IV. 
Finally, the paper is summarised in Section V. 

II. FOG COMPUTING SYSTEMS 

A. Description of Fog 

The Fog paradigm was initially proposed by Cisco to become 
an  extension  architecture  of  Cloud  systems  that  provide 
computation,  storage  and  communication  services  between 
Cloud  servers  and  client  systems  [1],  [5],  [10].  It  enables 
computations and data processing at the network edge. This 
means that the Fog is a complementing layer of Cloud systems, 
which  offers  the  design  of  a  distributed  architecture.  The 
architecture  can  handle  heterogeneous  data  sources  of  IoT 
wireless  access  networks.  Big-data  analytics  can  be 
implemented at the network edges faster than the centralised 
Cloud systems [1], 
[17]. 

an  Open-Machine-to-Machine 

The  OpenFog  Consortium  started  in  2016  for  designing 
standardised  open  Fog  computing  frameworks  [20].  For 
(OpenM2M) 
instance, 
framework was suggested for linking the Fog and IoT devices 
and services [21]. In the framework, Fog nodes were deployed 
at edge infrastructures with several M2M applications. In [22], 
another  Fog  architecture  was  proposed,  where  a  set  of 
application  interfaces  were  designed  for  enabling  virtual 
machines  to  gain  access  for  gathering  information  at  Fog 
nodes. 

infrastructure.  The 

Sang  et  al.  [23]  proposed  a  Fog  framework,  which  is  a 
framework  supports 
context-aware 
different  edge  technologies, 
including  Wi-Fi,  LTE  and 
Bluetooth  capabilities,  which  support  Software  Defined 
Networks (SDN) and virtualisation tools. It is also suggested to 
deploy  Airborne  Fog  systems,  where  air  devices  like  drones 
can perform as Fog nodes for facilitating various applications 
and services to end-users [24]. 

B. Characteristics of Fog 

Fog  computing 

is  relatively  similar  to  Mobile-Edge 
Computing  (MEC)  and  Mobile  Cloud  Computing  (MCC)  [4], 
[25],  [26].  The  MEC  concentrates  on  Fog  servers  such  as 
cloudlets that implement at the edge of mobile networks [26], 
whilst  the  MCC  is  an  infrastructure  in  which  both  data 
processing  and  storage  are  executed  outside  of  the  mobile 
appliances [25]. The Fog has several properties that allow its 
integration with IoT and Cloud systems [4], [25], [26], as listed 
in the following: 

•  It  locates  at  the  network’s  edge  and  handles  location 
awareness  and  low  latency,  as  Fog  nodes  offer  a 
localisation (i.e., a single hop from the device to fog node) 
and support end-points with rich services at the edge of a 
network; 

•  It  enables  dense  and  sparse  geographical  distribution, 
require 
the  Fog  services  and  application 

where 
distributed deployments; 

Fog/Cloud 
services 
SaaS 

PaaS 

IaaS 

TABLE I 
SERVICES PROVIDED BY FOG/CLOUD SYSTEMS 

Description 

offers to a user or organisation on-demand applications 
and software services via a cloud infrastructure, 
excluding the cost of buying and maintaining these 
applications. Currently, Google, Amazon and Salesforce 
companies are the dominators of cloud service 
delivers to a user or organisation an application 
development and host client applications using libraries, 
services, and tools, which are supported by a PaaS 
provider’s infrastructure 
offers storage, processing units, network capabilities, 
and other fundamental computing resources via virtual 
machines (VMs) to service subscribers 

•  It can use large-scale sensor networks to monitor Cloud 

and IoT systems; 

•  It  has  a  large  number  of  nodes  for  demonstrating  its 

capability of large-scale geographical distribution; 

•  It facilitates the mobility use which assists Fog’s users to 
access information for improving the quality of services; 
•  It  enables  real-time  interaction  for  handling  important 

Fog applications; 

•  It supports the M2M wireless connectivity that consumes 

low power for supporting scalability and mobility; 

•  It handles different dynamic and heterogeneous sources 

at various levels of the network hierarchy; 

•  It provides flexible, inexpensive and portable deployment 

of hardware and software; and 

•  It  can  easily  integrate  IoT  and  Cloud  applications  for 

online big-data analytics. 

C. Systemic Architecture of IoT-Fog-Cloud 

Fog  computing  is  mainly  a  virtualisation  technology  that 
offers  storage,  computing  and  communication  services 
between  end  devices  and  Cloud  data  centers  [24],  [27].  In 
Figure  1,  a  systemic  architecture  is  proposed  to  show  the 
connections  of  IoT,  Fog  and  Cloud  layers.  An  example  of 
integrating IoT smart cities and smart factories, along with the 
Fog and Cloud elements, is presented. A set of IoT devices and 
sensors, such as green gas IoT and industrial IoT actuators, is 
connected to Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) 
gateways to publish and subscribe to various topics, such as 
measuring temperature and humidity. As, in the near future, 
smart  cities could be linked with smart factories to measure 
green gas emissions via IoT hubs. Therefore, it is expected that 

message services between various topics will be available to 
serve the community. 

This  architecture  allows  monitoring,  filtering,  inspecting, 
aggregating and exchanging data, resulting in saving time and 
computation  resources  for  deploying  and  running  bigdata 
analytics  and  cyber  security  applications  [1].  Fog  offers 
Software-as-a-Service  (SaaS),  Platform-as-a-Service  (PaaS), 
Infrastructure-as-a-Service  (IaaS) 
like  cloud  systems,  as 
defined in Table I, to end-user appliances [3], [4]. In the Fog, 

PaaS or SaaS, the Cisco DSX was designed to establish a bridge 
between  SaaS  and  different 
IoT  devices  for  managing 
applications. This enables processing big-data at the Fog and 
Cloud  layers  for  improving  the  computational  resources  of 
bigdata  analytics  and  cyber  security  applications  such  as 
firewalls,  intrusion  detection  and  prevention  systems  and 
access control systems [1], [6]. 

Although  the  distributed  architecture  of  the  Fog  can 
improve the computational resources of big-data analytics and 

Fig. 1. Architecture of fog computing and its interaction with cloud and IoT 

network edge infrastructures, such as routers, access points, 
set-top-boxes  and  switches,  should  have  high  capabilities  of 
CPU  and  GPU  processors  and  storage  [1],  [3],  [6].  Such 
infrastructures can offer computing resources as services near 
to customers, named fog nodes. Edge devices are considered 
as  fog  nodes,  as  they  have  computing,  storage  and  network 
communications. The nodes are connected by a master-slave 
architecture, clustering or Peer-to-Peer networks [1], [4], such 
as the Cloudlet [6]. 

An example of the technical Fog architecture was proposed 
by Cisco is shown in Figure 2 [1] to design the fog architecture 
as IaaS. The Cisco IOx platform operates by hosting programs 
in an operating system that runs a hypervisor on a grid router. 
The  IOx  APIs  allow  the  Fog  to  connect  with  IoT  and  Cloud 
systems by a user-identified protocol. For designing the Fog as 

cyber  security  applications,  the  architecture  could  be 
breached by 

Fig. 2. Cisco’s Fog technical architecture 

 
 
 
    
    
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sophisticated  cyber-attacks,  such  as  Distributed  Denial  of 
Service (DDoS) and ransomware, because the Fog nodes could 
be connected with unsecured and non-standard IoT sensors-
based  IP  addresses.  Therefore,  different  security  systems 
should  be  deployed  at  the  Fog  nodes  to  mitigate  the  risk 
impacts of cyber threats. 
D. Applications of IoT, Fog and Cloud Systems 

The advantages of the Fog can be applied to different IoT 
and Cloud systems [4], [26]. This demonstrates how the Fog 
paradigms  can  be  implemented  in  real-time  and  large-scale 
systems, as explained in the following applications: 

•  Smart  grid: 

includes  smart  meters  and  micro-grids 
implemented  at  the  edge  of  a  network  as  energy  load 
balancing services. The Fog can support processing smart 
grid nodes at the network edges. Data generated from IoT 
networks  are  stored  at  Fog  nodes  for  running  big-data 
analytics and cyber security applications [28]. 

•  Software  Defined  Networks  (SDN): 

is  a  promising 
computing  and  network  architecture.  The  Fog  can  be 
used  for  designing  a  SDN  architecture  to  manage  and 
control the SDN communication layers. The control unit is 
executed at a centralised server, where the nodes of SDN 
can execute a communication path specified by a server 
which requires distributed executions [26]. 

•  Linked vehicles and smart  traffic systems:  are improved 
by the connection with the Fog nodes, such as a vehicle 
to access points or vice versa. The smart traffic systems 
interact  with  different  sensors  at  the  network  edge  to 
send  warning  lights  to  the  coming  cars  for  avoiding 
possible accidents. Connecting these smart grids with the 
Fog  could  address  the  drawbacks  of  low  latency,  low 
mobility support and geographical distributions [4], [13]. 
•  Wireless  sensor  and  actuator  networks:  are  used  for 
sensing and tracking different IoT applications, with the 
dependency  on  actuators  to  control  physical  systems. 
When  actuators  operate  as  Fog  appliances,  they  can 
easily manage the performance of systems [16]. 

•  Industry  4.0  and  Industrial  IoT  systems:  Industry  4.0 
systems 
include  the  applications  of  cyber-physical 
systems,  Industrial  IoT  (IIoT)  and  IoT.  The  aim  of  these 
systems  is  to  link  physical  devices  to  the  Internet  and 
Cloud  systems.  These  systems  can  be  used  for  rapidly 
processing  and  storing  different  heterogeneous  sources 
at the network edges and improving security issues [29], 
[30]. 

III. CYBER SECURITY CHALLENGES 

Since  Fog  devices  are  connected  with  the  Cloud  and  IoT 
systems, IoT networks could be exploited using different cyber 
threats. This is because the devices are deployed at unsecured 
locations which are not accurately monitored and protected. 
The  open  architecture  of  the  Fog  leads  to  loopholes  and 

vulnerabilities  that  allow  attackers  to  compromise  the  Fog 
devices and services, in addition to threaten the privacy of its 
big-data [35]. Different security issues could face the Fog-IoT-
Cloud architecture, as discussed below. 

• Authentication  and  authorisation  -  Fog  devices  could  be 
connected  with  the  Cloud  servers  via  a  distributing 
authentication  system,  but  this  connection  is  relatively 
slow in smart grids [28]. The execution of authentication 

ATTACK TYPES THAT COULD EXPLOIT ELEMENTS OF IOT-FOG-CLOUD 

ARCHITECTURE 

TABLE II 

Attack types 
Insider 
intruders 

Attacks on 
Virtual 
Machines 
(VM) or 
hypervisor 
Flooding 
attacks 

Service abuses 

Advanced 
persistent 
threats (APTs) 
Port scanning 

Backdoor 
attacks 

User to Root 
(U2R) attacks 

Description 
refer to authorised cloud users who attempt to gain 
unauthorized rights, penetrating cloud resources 
with no privileges 
when the virtual layer of hypervisor is compromised 
using zero-day attacks, attackers can control the 
installed VMs and physical hosts 

An attacker attempts to flood a victim by sending a 
lot of packets via DoS and DDoS from a computer 
host in a network (i.e., zombie) to breach VMs 
can be hijacked by malicious activities, for example, 
using cloud/fog computing resources to violate an 
encryption key to launch an attack 
penetrate systems to launch a footprint attack, then 
stealthily infiltrate data and intellectual property 
continually 
finds a list of all open ports, closed ports and 
filtered ports in a network. Attackers searching for 
finding open ports to get access to a particular 
system 
are passive attacks in which an hacker bypasses a 
stealthy normal authentication mechanism to 
protect unauthorised remote access to a device. an 
attacker could control victim’s resources and make 
it as a zombie to initiate DoS/DDoS attacks 
an attacker gains an access to legitimate user’s 
account by sniffing password. This leads to breach 
exposures for gaining the root level access to 
victim’s device, e.g., Buffer overflows 

protocols,  for  example,  directory  access  and  remote 
authentication,  are  improper  due  to  the  limitation  of 
connections.  Moreover,  using  Cloud 
for 
authentication  is  not  a  right  solution  as  they  would  be 
penetrated by bruteforce and dictionary attacks for stealing 
user credentials 
[4]. 

servers 

•  Advanced  Persistent  threats-  Fog  systems  face  various 
such  as  botnets  and 
sophisticated  attack 
types, 
ransomware, inherited from Cloud and IoT systems. These 
cyber  attacks  would  expose  Fog  nodes,  due  to 
its 
distributed architecture [1], [4], [5], [13], as summarised in 
Table II. 

•  Suspicious  Fog  nodes-  since  Fog  nodes  handle  big-data 
collected from IoT devices, dividing workloads between the 

nodes  is  often  heavy.  In  this  sense, 
if  an  attacker 
compromises  any  of  the  nodes,  it  is  hard  to  assert  data 
integrity  and  privacy.  Trust  mechanisms  should  be 
deployed to ensure data transfer between Fog and Cloud 
systems [32]. 

•  Fog data management- since Fog nodes are geographically 
distributed,  it  is  difficult  to  know  the  location  of  data 
gathered from Cloud systems. It is hard for customers to 
identify either the node offers the same service or not [36]. 
Some Fog nodes often contain duplicated data with other 
nodes that consume resources, and it is possible that attack 
events  are  injected  to  this  data  using  data  poisoning 
techniques. 

Fog-Cloud architecture. Each security tool can be utilised for 
handling a specific security challenge, described in Table III and 
explained in the following: 

•  Authentication  technique-  is  the  process  of  identifying 
users  with  different  methods.  Fog  computing  should 
involves  face, 
include  biometric  authentication  that 
fingerprint,  balm, 
touch-based  or  keystroke-based 
methods.  They  are  promising  solutions  compared  with 
traditional  methods, 
password-based 
such 
authentication [31]. In [4], the authors stated that one of 
the  key  security  challenges  for  Fog  computing 
is 
authentication mechanisms at various levels of Fog nodes 

as 

TABLE III 

Solutions 
Authentication 
techniques [31] 

Access control 
systems [32] 

Intrusion detection 
systems [33], [34] 

Privacy and encryption 
techniques [32] 

enhance customer 

are capable of achieving 

are easy to use and reduce 

birthday, sniffer, spoofing 
and phishing attacks 

Threats 
insider attacks, including 
brute force and dictionary 
attacks 

THREATS, ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGE OF EXISTING SECURITY SOLUTIONS 
Advantages 
- 
operational costs 
- 
experience 
- 
accessibility and optimal control using 
several options like biometrics and 
federated identify keys 
- 
are easy to integrate with 
other security controls and mange 
their database 
- 
particular 
content in a network for boosting the 
efficiency 
- 
with regulation 
- improve security, as private keys do 
not transmit over networks - can 
offer a mechanism for digital 
signatures 

insider attacks, flooding, 
VM attacks, APTs, U2R 
attacks, backdoor and 
port scanning attacks 

flooding attacks and 
service abuses 

make it easier to continue 

can be adapted to a 

Disadvantages 
- cannot be reset once exploited 
- demand integration with different 
Fog devices 

are expensive to install, as 

- 
they include an upfront financial 
investment 
- 
reduce the chances of hacking 

demand regular updates to 

- do not process encrypted packets 
and handle header packets only - 
produce high false alarm rates 

•  Privacy 

issues 

-  deal  with  concealing  confidential 
information, such as what device were used in a particular 
time while enabling data summarisations to be exchanged 
between  fog  nodes.  Privacy  preservation  techniques 
should  hide  details  of  sensitive  information  about  Fog 
devices and services, for example, what devices are used at 
a certain time. Existing Fog appliances cannot encrypt and 
decrypt  the  readings  of  smart  meters.  Therefore,  those 
appliances  could  expose  sensitive 
information  while 
transmitting  and  receiving  data  flows  across  network 
nodes [4], [37]. 

IV. SECURITY SOLUTIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 

Various  security  solutions  have  been  employed,  for 
example, authentication, access control, encryption, firewall, 
as  well  as  intrusion  detection  and  prevention  systems,  for 
addressing different security and privacy challenges at the IoT-

- when attackers collect enough 
information, they can violate keys 
- the key methods have to be 
regularly updated 
using  public  key  techniques.  In  [32],  [38],  the  trusted 
execution  mechanism  should  have  its  potential  in  Fog 
computing  in  order  to  decrease  the  complexity  of 
authentication. 

•  Access  control-  is  a  trustworthy  mechanism  installed  at 
IoT and Cloud devices that guarantee authentication and 
authorisation to end-users and workstations, along with 
servers [32]. In Fog , a policy-based control was proposed 
to  protect  the  cooperation  between  heterogeneous 
sources [39]. There is still a challenge of how to design an 
effective access control system for clients in IoT networks 
to protect systems at different levels. 

•  Intrusion detection system (IDS) - can be installed in the 
Fog  layer  to  recognise  suspicious  events  by  inspecting 
audit traces of the client side. It can also be installed at 
the  fog  side  to  identify  suspicious  attacks  by  analysing 
network traffic [33], [34] . In [40], the authors suggested 
a cloudlet mesh based on a security framework that can 

 
identify  attacks  from  Cloud  and  Fog  systems.  There  are 
still the challenges of implementing scalable and adaptive 
intrusion  detection  at  the  fog  layer  to  achieve  the 
lowlatency requirements [32]. 

•  Privacy  and  encryption  techniques-  protecting  user 
information is one the biggest issues in IoT, Fog and Cloud 
systems.  Various  privacy-preserving  mechanisms  have 
been  suggested  in  the  Cloud,  smart  grids  and  wireless 
networks.  These  mechanisms  could  be  implemented 
between the Cloud and Fog layers to prohibit tampering 
big-data transmitted between the two layers. Encryption 
techniques should be applied to obfuscate data exchange 
between different network nodes [32]. However, because 
of the distributions of network nodes, privacy techniques 
sensitive 
further 
need 
information of users. 

for  protecting 

research 

V. CONCLUSION 

locations.  However, 

In  this  paper,  an  architecture  has  been  proposed  to 
illustrate  the  interactions  of  IoT,  Cloud  and  Fog  layers  for 
effectively  running  big-data  anaytics  and  cyber  security 
applications. Since the devices and services in the three layers 
generate heterogeneous data sources, the Cloud systems have 
been  used  to  process,  compute  and  store  such  data  at 
centralised 
the  mobility-support, 
location-awareness, low latency and geographical location are 
still the key challenges in the Cloud layer that could be tackled 
using the Fog paradigms by processing computational tasks at 
the edge of the network. The use of fog technology still faces 
security  and  privacy  challenges  that  originate  from  the 
connection  with  the  open  architecture  of  IoT  and  Cloud 
systems. The security problems in existing security tools and 
future  research  directions  are  introduced  to  improve  the 
security of the IoTFog-Cloud architecture. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  S. Khan, S. Parkinson, and Y. Qin, “Fog computing security: a review of 
current applications and security solutions,” Journal of Cloud Computing, 
vol. 6, no. 1, p. 19, 2017. 

[2]  N. Moustafa, K.-K. R. Choo, I. Radwan, and S. Camtepe, “Outlier dirichlet 
mixture  mechanism:  Adversarial  statistical 
learning  for  anomaly 
detection  in  the  fog,”  IEEE  Transactions  on  Information  Forensics  and 
Security, 2019. 

[3]  A. V. Dastjerdi, H. Gupta, R. N. Calheiros, S. K. Ghosh, and R. Buyya, “Fog 
computing:  Principles,  architectures,  and  applications,”  arXiv  preprint 
arXiv:1601.02752, 2016. 
I. Stojmenovic and S. Wen, “The fog computing paradigm: Scenarios and 
security issues,” in Computer Science and Information Systems (FedCSIS), 
2014 Federated Conference on. IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–8. 

[4] 

[5]  G.  Kurikala,  K.  G.  Gupta,  and  A.  Swapna,  “Fog  computing: 
Implementation of security and privacy to comprehensive approach for 
avoiding  knowledge  thieving  attack  exploitation  decoy  technology,” 
2017. 

[6]  S. Yi, C. Li, and Q. Li, “A survey of fog computing: concepts, applications 
and issues,” in Proceedings of the 2015 Workshop on Mobile Big Data. 
ACM, 2015, pp. 37–42. 

[7]  M.  Chiang,  S.  Ha,  I.  Chih-Lin,  F.  Risso,  and  T.  Zhang,  “Clarifying  fog 
computing  and  networking:  10  questions  and  answers,” 
IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 18–20, 2017. 

[8]  Y. Guan, J. Shao, G. Wei, and M. Xie, “Data security and privacy in fog 

computing,” IEEE Network, 2018. 

[9]  G. Premsankar, M. Di Francesco, and T. Taleb, “Edge computing for the 
internet of things: A case study,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2018. 
[10]  R. Roman, J. Lopez, and M. Mambo, “Mobile edge computing, fog et al.: 
A  survey  and  analysis  of  security  threats  and  challenges,”  Future 
Generation Computer Systems, 2016. 

[11]  K.-K. R. Choo, R. Lu, L. Chen, and X. Yi, “A foggy research future: Advances 

and future opportunities in fog computing research,” 2018. 

[12]  N. Moustafa, G. Misra, and J. Slay, “Generalized outlier gaussian mixture 
technique based on automated association features for simulating and 
detecting  web  application  attacks,”  IEEE  Transactions  on  Sustainable 
Computing, 2018. 

[13]  M.  Aazam  and  E.-N.  Huh,  “Fog  computing  and  smart  gateway  based 
communication  for  cloud  of  things,”  in  Future  Internet  of  Things  and 
Cloud (FiCloud), 2014 International Conference on. IEEE, 2014, pp. 464–
470. 

[14]  A. Alrawais, A. Alhothaily, C. Hu, and X. Cheng, “Fog computing for the 
internet of things: Security and privacy issues,” IEEE Internet Computing, 
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 34–42, 2017. 

[15]  F. Y. Okay and S. Ozdemir, “A fog computing based smart grid model,” in 
Networks, Computers and Communications (ISNCC), 2016 International 
Symposium on. IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–6. 

[16]  Q. Yaseen, F. AlBalas, Y. Jararweh, and M. Al-Ayyoub, “A fog computing 
based  system  for  selective  forwarding  detection  in  mobile  wireless 
sensor networks,” in Foundations and Applications of Self* Systems, IEEE 
International Workshops on. IEEE, 2016, pp. 256–262. 

[17]  N. I. M. Enzai and M. Tang, “A taxonomy of computation offloading in 
mobile  cloud  computing,”  in  Mobile  Cloud  Computing,  Services,  and 
Engineering (MobileCloud), 2014 2nd IEEE International Conference on. 
IEEE, 2014, pp. 19–28. 

[18]  V.  K.  Sehgal,  A.  Patrick,  A.  Soni,  and L.  Rajput,  “Smart  human  security 
framework  using  internet  of  things,  cloud  and  fog  computing,”  in 
Intelligent distributed computing. Springer, 2015, pp. 251–263. 

[19]  R. Sandhu, A. S. Sohal, and S. K. Sood, “Identification of malicious edge 
devices in fog computing environments,” Information Security Journal: 
A Global Perspective, pp. 1–16, 2017. 
fog 

2018.
consortium,” 
[Online].  Available: http://www.openfogconsortium.org/, 

[20]  “Open 

Aug. 

[21]  S.  K.  Datta,  C.  Bonnet,  and  J.  Haerri,  “Fog  computing  architecture  to 
enable  consumer  centric  internet  of  things  services,”  in  Consumer 
Electronics (ISCE), 2015 IEEE International Symposium on. IEEE, 2015, pp. 
1–2. 

[22]  M. Zhanikeev, “A cloud 19 platform to facilitate cloud federation and fog 

computing,” Computer, vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 80–83, 2015. 

[23]  W. S. Chin, H.-s. Kim, Y. J. Heo, and J. W. Jang, “A context-based future 
network infrastructure for iot services,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 
56, pp. 266–270, 2015. 

[24]  S. Yi, C. Li, and Q. Li, “A survey of fog computing: concepts, applications 
and issues,” in Proceedings of the 2015 Workshop on Mobile Big Data. 
ACM, 2015, pp. 37–42. 

[25]  H.  T.  Dinh,  C.  Lee,  D.  Niyato,  and  P.  Wang,  “A  survey  of  mobile  cloud 
computing:  architecture,  applications,  and  approaches,”  Wireless 
communications and mobile computing, vol. 13, no. 18, pp. 1587–1611, 
2013. 

[26]  “Etsi: Mobile-edge 

computing,” 

2014. 

[Online].

Available: http://goo.gl/7NwTLE 

[27]  M.  Mukherjee,  R.  Matam,  L.  Shu,  L.  Maglaras,  M.  A.  Ferrag,  N. 
Choudhury,  and  V.  Kumar,  “Security  and  privacy  in  fog  computing: 
Challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 19293–19304, 2017. 

[28]  “Nist. guidelines for smart grid cyber security (nist 7628),,” Aug. 2018. 

[Online]. Available: Http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/ PubsNISTIRs.html 

[29]  G. Peralta, M. Iglesias-Urkia, M. Barcelo, R. Gomez, A. Moran, and 

 
 
J.  Bilbao,  “Fog  computing  based  efficient  iot  scheme  for  the  industry 
4.0,” in Electronics, Control, Measurement, Signals and their Application 
to Mechatronics (ECMSM), 2017 IEEE International Workshop of. IEEE, 
2017, pp. 1–6. 

[30]  N.  Moustafa,  E.  Adi,  B. Turnbull,  and J.  Hu,  “A  new  threat  intelligence 
scheme for safeguarding industry 4.0 systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 
32910–32924, 2018. 

[31]  F. Bonomi, R. Milito, J. Zhu, and S. Addepalli, “Fog computing and its role 
in the internet of things,” in Proceedings of the first edition of the MCC 
workshop on Mobile cloud computing. ACM, 2012, pp. 13–16. 

[32]  K. Lee, D. Kim, D. Ha, U. Rajput, and H. Oh, “On security and privacy issues 
of fog computing supported internet of things environment,” in Network 
of  the  Future  (NOF),  2015  6th  International  Conference  on  the.  IEEE, 
2015, pp. 1–3. 

[33]  N.  Moustafa,  J.  Slay,  and  G.  Creech,  “Novel  geometric  area  analysis 
technique  for  anomaly  detection using  trapezoidal  area estimation on 
large-scale networks,” IEEE Transactions on Big Data, 2017. 

[34]  N.  Moustafa,  G.  Creech,  and  J.  Slay,  “Big  data  analytics  for  intrusion 
detection  system:  Statistical  decision-making  using  finite  dirichlet 
mixture  models,” 
for 
Cybersecurity. Springer, 2017, pp. 127–156. 

in  Data  Analytics  and  Decision  Support 

[35]  H. Dubey, J. Yang, N. Constant, A. M. Amiri, Q. Yang, and K. Makodiya, 
“Fog  data:  Enhancing  telehealth  big  data  through  fog  computing,”  in 
Proceedings of the ASE BigData & SocialInformatics 2015. ACM, 2015, p. 
14. 

[36]  A.  Sinaeepourfard,  J.  Garcia,  X.  Masip-Bruin,  and E.  Marin-Tordera,  “A 
novel architecture for efficient fog to cloud data management in smart 
cities,”  in  Distributed  Computing  Systems  (ICDCS),  2017  IEEE  37th 
International Conference on. IEEE, 2017, pp. 2622–2623. 

[37]  M. Keshk, E. Sitnikova, N. Moustafa, J. Hu, and I. Khalil, “An integrated 
framework  for  privacy-preserving  based  anomaly  detection 
for 
cyberphysical  systems,”  IEEE  Transactions  on  Sustainable  Computing, 
2019. 

[38]  C. Chen, H. Raj, S. Saroiu, and A. Wolman, “ctpm: A cloud tpm for cross-

device trusted applications.” in NSDI, 2014, pp. 187–201. 

[39]  C.  Dsouza,  G.-J.  Ahn,  and  M.  Taguinod,  “Policy-driven  security 
management  for  fog  computing:  Preliminary  framework  and  a  case 
study,”  in  Information  Reuse  and  Integration  (IRI),  2014  IEEE  15th 
International Conference on. IEEE, 2014, pp. 16–23. 

[40]  C. Modi, D. Patel, B. Borisaniya, H. Patel, A. Patel, and M. Rajarajan, “A 
survey of intrusion detection techniques in cloud,”  Journal of Network 
and Computer Applications, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 42–57, 2013. 

