International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.11, No.1, February 2019 

NEED FOR CRITICAL CYBER DEFENCE, SECURITY 
STRATEGY AND PRIVACY POLICY IN BANGLADESH - 
HYPE OR REALITY? 

AKM Bahalul Haque 

Depart of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
North South University, Dhaka, Bangladesh 

ABSTRACT 

Cyber security is one of the burning issues in modern world. Increased IT infrastructure has given rise to 
enormous chances of security breach. Bangladesh being a relatively new member of cyber security arena 
has  its  own  demand  and  appeal.  Digitalization  is  happening  in  Bangladesh  for  last  few  years  at  an 
appreciable  rate.  People are being  connected  to  the  worldwide  web  community  with  their  smart  devices. 
These devices have their own vulnerability issues as well as the data shared over the internet has a very 
good  chances  of  getting  breached.  Common  vulnerability  issues  like  infecting  the  device  with  malware, 
Trojan, virus are on the rise. Moreover, a lack of proper cyber security policy and strategy might make the 
existing situation at the vulnerable edge of tipping point. Hence the upcoming new infrastructures will be at 
a  greater  risk  if  the  issues  are  not  dealt  with  at  an  early  age.  In  this  paper  common  vulnerability  issues 
including  their  recent  attacks  on  cyber  space  of  Bangladesh,  cyber  security  strategy  and  need  for  data 
privacy policy is discussed and analysed briefly. 

KEYWORDS 

CyberSecurity, Cyberdefence, Security Policy, Vulnerability, Cyber Threat, Security Strategy 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Bangladesh  has  one  of  the  fastest  growing  internet  users  in  the  world.  The  number  of  internet 
users  is  increasing  day  by  day  very  rapidly.  In  Bangladesh,  a  lot  of  people  uses  a  smartphone. 
Mobile  operators  have  taken  this  opportunity  and  used  it  as  their  touchstone.  The  operators 
worked  on  making  the  internet  available  to  all  the  users  at  an  affordable  condition.  Hence  the 
flourish of mobile internet has given rise to the number of internet users.  The number of Internet 
Service provider is also on the rise. They provide the users with high-speed internet all over the 
country. Almost all the universities are equipped with Wireless internet throughout the campus. 
Even there are a few public Wi-Fi hotspots. 

All the factors have facilitated towards the number of increased internet users in our country.  A 
study  shows  that  till  December  2018  almost  91  million  people  of  Bangladesh  are  internet 
subscribers.   Among  them,  86  million  are  mobile  internet  users  [1].  So,  it  is  very  much 
imaginable, mobile internet has created a boom in online service usage. According to Wikipedia, 
there are almost 90 million smartphone users in Bangladesh. This smartphone consumes a huge 
amount  of  data  and  people  are  constantly  using  a  lot  of  services  like  photo  sharing,  social 
networking,  file  sharing  etc.  Mobile  banking  has  also  become  very  common.  Banks  are  also 
providing their services over the internet to their customers through mobile applications. People 
are using ride-sharing application, online shopping etc and all other types of activities.  

The usage of online activities is producing events and logs. These events are producing data. The 
online activity is making user’s identity and signature open to the internet. The task that we are 

DOI : 10.5121/ijmit.2019.11103                                                                                                                     37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.11, No.1, February 2019 
doing, the file that we are sharing as long as it is over the internet they can be breached. If there is 
data breach on a massive scale due to the lack of cyber security infrastructure that would bring in 
some very catastrophic consequences.        

In  this  study,  the  present  condition  of  Bangladesh  with  respect  to  cyber  infrastructure,  internet 
users, data breach, cyber security strategy and possible solutions will be discussed. 

2.  CYBER  THREAT 
BANGLADESH 

(COMMON  VULNERABILITIES)  ANALYSIS 

IN 

As  the  number  of  internet  user  increases,  the  threats  towards  the  cyberspace  increases  with  it. 
According to the security report of Kaspersky in 2015, it is seen that Bangladesh places second 
among all the other countries in the field of malicious infection. The number of unique users who 
are  prone  to  cyber-attack  is  69.55%.  For  the  most  part,  these  attacks  are  spam  attacks.  Almost 
80% of them are spam attacks says Trend Micro Global Spam map. Moreover, a recent study by 
Bangladesh  Computer  Council  showed  that  a  huge  number  of  unique  IP  addresses  which  were 
infected  belongs  to  the  popular  mobile  network  operators.  The  number  of  IP  address  is 
approximately 34552. [2] 

Figure 1 depicts a comparative scenario of CCM in Bangladesh and the rest of the world during 
the year 2015. CCM elaborates as Computers Cleaned per Mile. This is an infection metrics. It 
defines how many computers are cleaned per 1000 unique computers through MSRT tool. MSRT 
which  refers  to  Malicious  software  removal  tool  is  a  free  tool  provided  by  Microsoft  which 
removes  potentially  malicious  software  from  the  computer.  It  is  seen  that  the  encounter  rate  is 
significantly larger than that of the whole world.   

Figure 1: CCM Encounter Comparison between Bangladesh and the rest of the World 

In the following figure (Figure 2), it is seen that most common malware in Bangladesh during the 
year  2015  was  Virus,  Trojan,  and  worm.   All  of  them  increased  from  3rd  to  4th  quarter  of  the 
same year. The percentage of worm infected computers increased from 21.1 to 29.6 percent, the 
percentage  increased  from  19.4  to  22.9  in  case  of  trojan  and  finally  the  percentage  of  virus-
infected computers increased from 6.3 to 9 percentage during 3rd and 4th quarter respectively. 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.11, No.1, February 2019 

Figure 2: Malware Categories and infected computers 

Figure 3 depicts another graph showing the malware families encountered during 4Q15 . In this 
diagram we can see that Win32/Ippedo and   Win32/Gamarue were most common in Worm and 
infected  a  large  number  of  computers.  In  case  of  Virus  it  was  Win32/Ramnit  and  in  Trojan 
category it was Win32/Skeeyah.  

Figure 3: Most common Malware categories detected in 4Q15 

While  considering  the  category  of  potentially  unwanted  software,  browser  modifiers,  and 
software  bundlers  were  most  significant  and  alarming.  In  the  following  table  (Table  1)  the 
percentage of computers infected by browser modifiers and software bundlers are shown during 
4Q15. 

Table 1: Statistics of Unwanted Software Threats in 4Q15 

Family 

Most 
Category 

Significant 

% 
of 
computers 

reporting 

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.11, No.1, February 2019 

Win32/ Diplugem  Browser Modifiers 

6.00% 

Win32/ SupTab  Browser Modifiers 

6.00% 

Win32/Dowadmin  Software Bundlers 

5.70% 

Win32/OutBrowse  Software Bundlers 

3.50% 

Win32/Mizenota  Software Bundlers 

3.40% 

3. CYBER THREATS IN THE FINANCIAL SECTOR AND MILITARY DOMAIN 

There has been a conflicting situation a rising in the military domain due to the advancement of 
internet  and  computer  technology.  Due  to  this  rapid  advancement  of  cyber  technologies,  large 
organizations and corporations have turned into a potential target for cyber-attacks, losing billions 
of important piece of information and confidential data raising doubts about the nation’s stability. 
[3] 

Cyber-attacks  have  been  a  recurring  occurrence  making  the  news  headline  in  the  recent  time. 
These attacks take place when an adversary intends to intervene an electronic infrastructure with 
the financial motive of gaining benefit from them and thus attempts to read, alter, delete or even 
add information from an electronic infrastructure. There has been an indication of many nations 
supplying cyber facilities to military entities negotiating over specific benefits in exchange that is 
to  overtake  particular  regions.  The  widespread  Internet  access  has  facilitated  the  terrorist 
organizations to communicate over an ample number of platforms. 

Thus it has become a vital issue of concern for the government to ensure and implement proper 
security strategies throughout the nation to protect the nation from all kinds of approaching cyber-
attacks and take measures accordingly by stabilizing the nation’s security and military tactics. 

Bangladesh has encountered quite a few security challenges in the recent time, and the trend is 
continuing  due  to  the  escalation  of  cyber  technologies.  There  have  been  multiple  incidents  of 
state-sponsored cyber-attacks in the Bangladesh National Defense College and Bangladesh Bank 
which has stirred and questioned the credibility and reliability of the military organization of the 
nation  creating  a  big  hollow  in  the  country’s  safety.  State-affiliated  adversaries  often  involve 
many targeted objectives taking an interest either in the political or military system of the country. 
Due to cyber theft, Bangladesh Bank had to face a loss of almost millions of dollars and was left 
susceptible to further attacks by the same nation.  The network breaches relating to criminal and 
terrorist  organizations  have  adopted  the  means  best  suited  to  their  intention.  They  have  got  in 
hand  many  cheap  and  accessible  software  as  an  effective  means  to  take  down  the  security 
protocols and hamper the credibility of our military administrations. 

The UN charter, however, stated to the incident of Burmese hackers taking over the NDC website 
that Bangladesh should have counter attacked as self-defense towards this digital armed attack but 
instead  they  have  shown constant self-restraint  to such  incitement  and  gained  some  noteworthy 
praise  from  the  international  community.  This,  however,  also  demonstrates  to  some  extent  the 
ignorance and incapability of Bangladesh militaries. 

Cyberspace goes far beyond geographical locations, and potential adversaries are widely spread 
for cyber-attacks starting from a mere hacker to a well-organized state-sponsored cyber-attacks. 
State-affiliated  attacks  often  have  the  objectives  of  gaining  Intel  about  political,  commercial  or 
military  organizations  of the  targeted  nations. To identify  an  intruder  in the  cyberspace, it  may 
require exhaustive forensic research. 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.11, No.1, February 2019 

Bangladesh being a developing country, is yet to go a long way to understand the intensity of a 
country’s  cybersecurity  system  and  the  lack  of  awareness  can  have  detrimental  impacts  on  the 
national  security  system  of  Bangladesh.  The  incident  of  Holy  Artisan  Bakery  in  2016  is  a 
nightmare that still terrorizes the whole nation.  That incident can be an apparent demonstration of 
the  fact  that  the  Bangladesh  military  and  security  intelligence  was  oblivious  of  the 
communication terms of the attackers, even though on the internet there were deliberate entrails 
of  their  activities  through  fund  transfer  from  Canada  and  UK.  Unfortunately,  this  shows  how 
feeble our security  intelligence teams  were  regarding  identifying  the attackers  and  preventing  a 
terrorist attack taking place beforehand. 

This indeed is a high time for Bangladesh armed forces to take strict initiatives of strengthening 
and  ensuring  the  proper  placement  of  national  security  systems.  As  can  be  seen,  cyber-attacks 
have risen to a level surpassing any physical attacks, we should take in consideration of any and 
every factor necessary for the establishment of the national security defense system that could be 
improved  to  fill  up  the  void  in  cyberspace.  Being  able  to  detect  potential  threats  and  cyber 
vulnerabilities beforehand and ensuring the successful execution of military mission and proper 
establishment of expeditionary force should be the primary concern for Bangladesh.  This can be 
accomplished  through  the  approach  of  appropriate  strategic  planning  and  abiding  by  specific 
policies relating to cybersecurity. 

Bangladesh  military  holding  to  its  national  objective  of  the  defense  of  country  is  dependent on 
countries like China for equipment support such as computer and network related components is 
mostly  imported  from  China  which  automatically  pose  a  threat  to  the  nation  since  the 
manufacturer  country  is  well  aware  of  their  components  and  thus  have  an  upper  hand  on  the 
military defense system of our country. 

Thus to safeguard our nation’s security, we should be able to acknowledge the rapid increase of 
cyber threats and come up with possible approaches to retaliate as it is said prevention is always 
better than cure. Our knowledge is the dominant key that must be utilized to its level best for the 
better perception of our cyber-security. A useful framework for cyberspace would include cyber 
defense,  cyber  intelligence,  and  cyber  counter-offensive.   This  leads  to  the  conclusion  that 
Bangladesh  should  develop  specific  strategies  and  concepts  for  the  recruitment  process  and the 
means of spreading awareness through training and education should be tactical to not leave any 
vulnerable strings behind. Bangladesh has made allies with the militarily developed countries like 
Australia  and  has  signed  an  MOU  on  December  24,  2008,  to  share  Intel  and  intelligence  on 
counter-terrorism and later on 2015 and MOU on police to police cooperation. 

4.  SURVEY  RESULT  ANALYSIS  OF  CYBER  DEFENCE  STRATEGY  IN 
BANGLADESH  

A  survey  was  prepared  among  the  internet  users  of  Bangladesh.  The  respondents  were  people 
from various kinds of profession. They were the day to day internet users. They were asked a few 
questions regarding the cyber defense situation, cyber defense strategy of Bangladesh. The result 
of the study is given below – 

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.11, No.1, February 2019 

Figure 4: Survey of Cyber Defense situation of Bangladesh 

Common people using various internet services in their day to day life think that the present cyber 
defense situation is not up to the mark. 78.4 % of them opines that the condition is poor. Only less 
than  2%  people  think  the  condition  is  very  good.  It  might  be  due  to  the  recent  event  of 
Bangladesh Bank or the attack on NDC. Nowadays social media has significance in our life and 
people’s opinion and awareness vary a lot since the social networking sites have flourished and 
internet has become available. These sites spread news faster than any other news media around 
us  and  let  people  think  and  analyse  the  situation.  Common  people  are  becoming  more  aware 
about themselves and the media they are using.   

Figure 5 : Survey of People's’ Awareness level of  Cyber Security 

Opinion about the awareness level of the internet users have varied. It is seen in Figure 5, most of 
the respondents  (37.9%)  think  that their  awareness  level  is  satisfactory  and  almost 31.9% think 
that  they  have  poor  awareness  level  about  cyber  security.  22.4%  and  7.8%  of  the  respondents 
have opined that their awareness level is “Good” and “Very Good” respectively. In case of this 
people's  understanding,  it  is  assumed  that  the  sense  of  “  thinking  we  know  everything  “  might 
have affected the study a bit , but still a very good number of respondents do not have enough 
knowledge about the cyber security which is a very sensitive issue as Bangladesh is entering an 
era of digital age. 

42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.11, No.1, February 2019 

Figure 6: Survey on Recommendation about making common people aware about cyber-attacks. 

Figure 6 depicts users’ opinion about making the common mass aware about cyber security. As 
we know that, awareness rings change to the society, community and to the country. In light of 
this, awareness about security infrastructure and about the usage of internet can go a long way to 
protect users while surfing the internet for day to day purpose. 

Figure 7 : Survey Result of the Demand of Cyber Defense Strategy in Bangladesh 

To  protect  the  cyberspace  of  any  country  it  needs  to  have  proper  policy  management  and 
implementation.  The  online  activities  make  people  exposed  to  the  outside  world.  While  using 
internet the infrastructure on which the cyberspace is built on should be well shielded for the sake 
of protecting privacy. Moreover, if the infrastructure is weak, the national security is also at stake. 
The survey shows (Figure 7) that, 88.8% of the total respondents think that, Bangladesh should 
have a strong Cyber Defense Strategy immediately. 
. 
5.  RECOMMENDATIONS  FOR 
BANGLADESH 

IMPROVING  CYBER  DEFENSE  OF 

The  way  the  adversaries  are  taking  place  it  shows  us  how  sophistically  equipped  the  cyber 
attackers are to drastically disrupt the cyber world if we are to perceive the broader picture, we 
get  the  idea  of  the  cyber  attackers  getting  powerful  every  day  with  very  little  successful 
counterattacks. This indeed is creating havoc throughout the nation. 

So the defense authorities of a nation must take the appropriate measures to combat all kinds of 
cyber-attacks adopting proper strategies, plans and policies to deter cyber-attacks at every level 
starting from the Strategic and Operational level. Establish cyber infrastructure for the militaries 

43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.11, No.1, February 2019 
to  oversee  and  manage  proper  security  protocols.  Acquiring  sufficient  knowledge  and 
sophisticated  equipment  to  increase  the  capabilities  of  cyber  security  intelligence  and  security 
defense  organizations.  Execution  of  critical  missions  should  be  facilitated  by  proper  terms  and 
conditions with several other agencies. 

A  blockchain  is  a  distributed  peer  to  peer  networks  transaction  which  heavily  relies  on  the 
transparency of communication to safeguard data.[4] A distributed network makes it much more 
difficult for cyber-attacks to take place since the networks is publicly visible and is witnessed by 
everyone. Thus making a network almost impossible to hack by cyber attackers. 

In  cryptography  and  security,  blockchain  has  quite  made  its  foundation  through  decades  of 
research  [5].  The  concept  is  being  used  for  the  enhancement  of  cyber  security  against  cyber-
attacks.  To  sustain  against  the  streams  of  cyber  threats  and  attacks,  block  chain  could  be  an 
effective  solution  since  it  is  a  decentralized  structure  there  is  no  single  point  of  attack  thus  it 
would never allow excessive requests to pass through making it impossible for the infrastructure 
to  fail.  Blockchain  has  the  infrastructure  of  a  bitcoin  crypto  currency.  Blockchain  being  a 
centralized structure can prevent data manipulation and fraud since it is immutable in nature.[6] 
Decentralization and immutability are the most important characteristics of Bitcoin which makes 
the network secure from cyber-attacks [7].  

6. NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF BANGLADESH 

According  to  the  gadget  published  from  Information  Technology  Division,  Ministry  of  Posts 
Telecommunications  and  Information  Technology,  Bangladesh  in  March  2014,  The  National 
Cyber  Security  Strategy  of  Bangladesh  has  been  aligned  with  the  ITU  (International 
Telecommunication  Union)  [8].  This  strategy  is  a  long  term  process.  It  aims  to  address  and 
remove  the  threats  risks  and  mitigation  strategies  in  legal,  technical  and  organizational  level. 
Bangladesh has entered the digital era now. The government has been trying its best to digitize 
the  country  in  every  sector.  Now,  there  is  a  central  database  of  all  the  citizens  of  our  country 
including the fingerprint and retinal scan. Mobile operators are collecting user data including the 
NID  (National  Identification)  and  fingerprint.  Banks  are  also  given  access  to  the  APIs  for  data 
processing. All the factors have given rise to the fact that protecting the cyberspace of Bangladesh 
has  been  more  important  than  ever  now.  According  to  the  aforementioned  gadget,  apart  from 
breaching  confidentiality,  integrity  and  authenticity  of  regular  communication  the  cyber  threats 
towards  the  cyber  defense  of  our  country  are  the  usage  of  political  and  industrial  espionage  to 
obtain  illicit  information,  insecurity  towards  the  government  due  to  borderless  anonymous 
communication,  manipulation  of  smart  grid  technologies,  disclosing  information  which  is  of 
importance to the National Security etc. 

Priorities of National Cyber Security Strategy should have three national priorities:  

• Legal Measures;  

• Technical and Procedural Measures; and  

• Organizational Structures. 

6.1. Priority One - Legal Measures 

Legal  measures  have  two  actions,  respectively  Cybercrime  Legislation  and  Government  Legal 
Authority.  A  legislative  committee  has  to  be  formed  regarding  the  cyber  security  strategy.  The 
cybercrime  law  has  to  be  set  up  in  line  with  the  ITU  Policy.  The  law  will  be  overseen  and 
analyzed  by  the  Ministry  and  the  legislative  committee.  Anyone  with  other  groups  and 
organizations  from  private  sectors  can  take  part  in  this  process  so  that  the  law  can  be  better 
equipped with both the public and private sectors. Cyber security being a global concern, calls for 
the need of unified correlation between the national and regional cybercrime legislation in order 

44 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.11, No.1, February 2019 
to scrutinize the possible cybercrimes. The government will have the legal authority to ensure the 
security  of  the  cyberspace  for  mass  people.  To  protect  the  cyberspace  and  to  protect  the  cyber 
infrastructure  of  the  country  the  government  can  make  cyber  security  division,  cyber  security 
response  team  and  supervise  these  teams.  Moreover,  they  should  also  promote  awareness  and 
training for people. The government will solicit plans, negotiate with other parties to solve and 
plan long term security solutions to alleviate the cyber infrastructure of our country. 

Technical  and  Organizational  Measures  includes  structuring  of  cyber  security  framework  at 
national and regional level. The cyber security framework of our country should define strong and 
efficient policies at the organizational level to ensure the goals of  the strategy are met correctly. 
The goals of the strategy include assurance and security of information, proper risk management, 
managing organizational assets and ensuring both environmental and physical safety.  

6.2. Priority Two - Technical and Procedural Measures 

Bangladesh National Cyber security framework focus on the compulsory security standards that 
all the stakeholders of an organization or corporation should maintain in order to have compliance 
with  the  minimum  level  of  law  enforcement  required  for  the  state.  The  goals  of  the  strategy 
include  assurance  and  security  of  information,  proper  risk  management,  scrutinizing  employees 
while  recruiting,  managing  organizational  assets  and  ensuring  both  environmental  and  physical 
safety. 
Protection of critical information infrastructure is of utmost importance to the government which 
can  be  done  through  spreading  awareness  and  adopting  appropriate  security  measures  through 
several  amendments in the  official service  contract  beforehand to  uphold  a  secured  cyberspace. 
The  government  should  further  classify  sensitive  data  and  ensure  proper  cybersecurity  risk 
management schemes in the cyber systems. The capacity, capability, and jurisdiction of the law 
enforcement  agencies  have  to  be  increased  to  better  protect  the  cyberspace  of  our  country.. 
Increasing  capability  and  capacity  can  be  achieved  through  proper  research  and  development 
activities. Universities and other public and private research organizations can play a vital role in 
participating in the research and development activities. 

Weak  infrastructure  is  what  creates  the  basis  for  the  strong  awareness  of  cyber  security.  Thus 
identify  vulnerabilities  and  threats  in  the  system  is  very  important  to  preserve  the  integrity  of 
confidential  information  and  avoid  the  exploitation  of  sensitive  data  from  cyber-attacks.  The 
necessary  actions  that  must  be  taken  for  reducing  this  threats  include  a  means  of  system 
assessment  to  comprehend  the  potential  risks  of  data  breaching  and  the  corresponding 
consequences that follows. The sensitive infrastructure must be protected through schemes such 
that to get hold to the system a penetration test must be obligatory. 

6.3. Priority Three - Organizational Structures 

Organizational Structures include the cyber security role of government, National Cyber Security 
Council,  National  Incident  Management  Capacity,  Public-Private  Partnerships,  Cyber  security 
Skills and Training and National Culture of Cyber security. 

In  order  to  combat  cyber-attacks,  contribution  and  cooperation  from  every  citizen  is  important. 
Government  plays  the  core  responsibility  of  security  for  the  betterment  of  national  citizens. 
Enhancement  of  cyber  security  schemes  requires  the  government  to  reinforce  its  own  national 
infrastructure so that it can help the public with the required services. A National Cyber Security 
coordinator is often addressed who has direct contact with the Head of Government and thus have 
access to all the necessary resources to carry out major inter-government activities to safeguard 
the 
level. 
National Security Council is the central point for both the public and private sector coordination 
and interaction on cyber threats. The roles carried out by the council includes a thorough plan to 

infrastructure 

information 

strategic 

national 

security 

the 

at 

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.11, No.1, February 2019 
protect the critical infrastructure and provide ample guidance to the organizations holding critical 
infrastructures such as banking, telecommunication etc.  At times of severe national cyber-attacks 
on security infrastructures, the council’s capacity to response is also measured. Consequently the 
council  further  works  hand  in  hand  with  the  government  and  intelligence  agencies  to  detect 
security  vulnerabilities  and  the  possible  counterattacks.  For  further  assistance  they  engage  in 
several  research  and  development  work  for  the  escalation  of  cyber  security  technologies.  The 
National  Security  Council  have  also  aligned  in  collaboration  with  the  International  Multilateral 
Partnership against Cyber Threats (ITMPAC). 

In  order  to  respond  immediately  at  critical  cyber-attack  incidents,  government  should  have  a 
continuous evaluation of the cyber security events along with its strategic solutions which can be 
effectively achieved through association with the private-public organizations both nationally and 
globally. 

Private sectors owns the critical infrastructures and have better expertise and knowledge on this 
aspect of cyber security development and maintenance. Thus, government must comply with the 
private sectors to alleviate the national security issues by the procurement of adept professionals. 
This enables the government a strategic gain of international cooperation in the necessary areas. 

Along  with  spreading  awareness,  a  crucial  initiative  is  to  properly  train  and  educate  the  cyber 
security  professionals  at  several  different  levels.  It  will  make  them  capable  of  identifying 
vulnerabilities  at  the  critical  infrastructures  and  take  appropriate  measures  to  prevent  cyber-
attacks. Thus proper  collaboration  with  global partners  through  research  and  training  should  be 
maintained to better protect the cyberspace. 

Since the world is now ruled by technologies, there’s always multiple alternatives to a potential 
cyber attacker. A lack of consciousness from either the administrators or the end users can imply 
serious impacts on the overall security infrastructure. So it is important for the government and 
the stakeholders to be vigilant and responsive at all time and take incentives through education, 
research, development and training. 

7. NEED FOR DATA PROTECTION AND PRIVACY POLICY IN BANGLADESH 

Privacy  and  data  protection  is  one  of  the  most  important  issues  nowadays.  Due  to  the 
advancement  of  modern  technologies  and  internet,  the  presence  of  users  over  the  internet  has 
increased more than ever. Increased number  of internet users share huge amount of data during 
day to day life while surfing the internet. Within this huge data there are personal data of the user 
also.  Personal  data  refers  to  any  identifiable  that  can  identify  a  person  physically  or  over  the 
internet. It might include location history, interest hobbies, telephone number, bank information, 
email  information  etc.  [9].  Then  there  comes  the  sensitive  personal  data  which  needs  to  be 
processed with special care and extra security. According to GDPR, sensitive personal data is any 
data that reveals information regarding anyone’s  

racial or ethnic origin,  

 
  political opinions,  
religious or philosophical beliefs,  
 
trade union membership,  
 
  genetic data, biometric data,  
  data concerning health 
  Data concerning a natural person's sex life or sexual orientation. 

According to data protection Act (DPA, 1998) sensitive personal data consists of  

the racial or ethnic origin of the data subject, 

 
  political opinions, 

46 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.11, No.1, February 2019 

religious beliefs or other beliefs of a similar nature, 
 
  whether the data subject is a member of a trade union, 
  physical or mental health or condition, 
 
 
  Any  proceedings  for  any  offence  committed  or  alleged  to  have  been  committed  by  the 
data  subject,  the  disposal  of  such  proceedings  or  the  sentence  of  any  court  in  such 
proceedings [10]. 

about sexual life, 
the commission or alleged commission by the data subject of any offence, 

Data privacy and protection is like a new member in the club. People still are not aware of their 
data  being  taken  away  or  data  theft.  There  is  no  explicit  data  privacy  and  protection  law  of 
Bangladesh. In the constitution of Bangladesh there is a mention about the citizens’ right to their 
own data though there is no explicit mention of “data privacy or data protection”. In Part 3, Under 
the  Fundamental  Rights  Section,  Article  43,  of  the  Constitution  of  the  People’s  Republic  of 
Bangladesh  it  written  that  “Every  citizen  shall  have  the  right,  subject  to  any  reasonable 
restrictions  imposed  by  law  in  the  interests  of  the  security  of  the  State,  public  order,  public 
morality or public health – (a) to be secured in his home against entry, search and seizure; and (b) 
to the privacy of his correspondence and other means of communication.”  In 2006, ICT Act and 
later recently Digital Security act 2018 was enacted in October, 2018 in the parliament. Digital 
Security Act, 2018 is more acute towards the criminals according to the several articles in the act. 
This act only deals with the crime happening with digital documents and data. It does not comply 
with  any  kind  of  activities  done  in  case  of  any  files  and  or  records  in  paper  format.  The 
punishment  is  also  severe  for  the  criminals  [11].  According  to  Official  Secret  Act  1923,  any 
person who assists in cybercrimes without getting physically involved is equally hold guilty and 
will be punished accordingly. Hacking or intruding in the digital infrastructure and alteration and 
exploitation of information is considered to be a serious offence [12]. 

These are the only acts which are implemented in Bangladesh. These acts are for punishing the 
criminals who commit cybercrimes in the eyes of the law enforcement agencies on the basis of 
this law. The important issues, that has been taken into account is the Data Protection and Privacy 
Policy  for  our  country.  European  Union  has  already  implemented  the  General  Data  Protection 
Regulation (GDPR) in May, 2018 which is a historical achievement for the region. The citizens of 
that region are given control over their data, whether it is processed by home or abroad .As long 
as  the  citizen  is  from  the  European  Union  member  countries,  the  data  has  to  be  collected, 
processed and analyzed according to the GDPR[13]. This outstanding privacy policy can be taken 
as  an  example  and  our  citizens  can  be  given  a  lot  of  control  over  their  data  and  moreover,  the 
government can utilize their data to better analyses the current situation of the country. There are 
quite a few organizations which have explicitly shown information online. They provide all kinds 
of  necessary  information  like  name,  address,  phone  number,  parents’  names,  educational 
institution  etc.  Here,  in  Figure  8,  the  information  that  has  been  shown  is  mine.  I  was  involved 
with this         

47 

 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.11, No.1, February 2019 

Figure 8 : Services revealing sensitive personal data 

specific organizations for almost 4 years, still the information can be retrieved from their website 
with a simple google search. Moreover, the information about other colleagues of mine can also 
be retrieved from this website very easily. These are one of the many examples of data leakage. 
This  sensitive  data  can  be  used  for  identity  theft  as  all  the  authentic  information  are  shown 
publicly  and  anyone  with  a  simple  knowledge  of  internet  browsing  can  have  access  to  this 
information.  Considering  these  acts,  Bangladesh  is  in  dire  need  of  a  strong  data  protection  and 
privacy  policy  where  everything  regarding  data  collection,  processing  and  storage  will  be  well 
defined and the users should have better control over their data.  

8. INITIATIVES OF BANGLADESH GOVERNMENT 

Bangladesh  is  racing  towards  the  infrastructural  development.  Moreover,  due  to  the  recent 
advancement of information and communication technology sector, the modern day web tracking 
and  surveillance  is  also  possible.  There  are  a  lot  of  tracking  mechanisms  [14].  Illegal  web 
tracking can make the user vulnerable to a lot risks. Information can be easily get into the wrong 
hand.  To  prevent  all  these  things  government  is  trying  to  implement  strong  cyber  security 
infrastructure and incident response team. Government has started initiative like Cyber Incident 
Response Team [14]. The task of this team is to  

1.  Protect the cyber security infrastructure of e-governance of Bangladesh 

2.  Respond to incidents as early as possible to improve the incident response management 

capability in case of any kind of security breach or event. 

3.  To promote the cyber security awareness and environment among the common people. 

4.  Provide security solutions to the national cyber infrastructures like data centers. 

8.1. Improvised Initiatives 

Government can consider establishing high tech specialized organization that is solely dedicated 
to cybercrime investigations. High end collaboration with international cyber defense agencies for 
maintaining an effective security framework. Systematic development of training and education 
for producing a skilled security workforce thus minimizing the gap between demand and supply 
of  performing  effective  cyber  security  roles.  Development  of  a  scientific  research  center  to 
support skilled people with necessary resources and also to gather new and innovative ideas for 
the  effective  implementation  in  the  cyber  domain.  This  would  increase  the  participation  of  the 
people to fill up the gap of a lack of cyber and security knowledge. Every common citizen can 

48 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.11, No.1, February 2019 
have  a  clear  vision  of  the  fundamental  cyber  security  knowledge  and  its  importance  to  combat 
against potential cyber threats. 

9. CONCLUSIONS 

Cyber-space of Bangladesh has expanded over time with the advent of new technologies. People 
of  all  walks  of  life  has  their  footsteps  on  the  cyber  arena  which  has  significantly  increased  the 
importance  of  cyber  security.  The  information  we  produce  and  share  over  the  internet  is 
vulnerable  due  to  the lack of  strong  cyber  defense infrastructure.  Personal  data  is  not  protected 
and  users  do  not  have  enough  control  over  their  own  data.  So,  a  strong  cyber  defense 
infrastructure and proper data protection regulation is a critical need for Bangladesh. Only then 
Bangladesh can take a step towards being a developed country and can be considered as a secured 
digital Bangladesh  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

I would like to thank my friend and colleague Ms. Omanisha who has helped me throughout the 
journey of this research by motivating me.  

REFERENCES 

[1]  “Internet  Subscribers 

[Online].  Available: 
http://www.btrc.gov.bd/content/internet-subscribers-bangladesh-december-2018.  [Accessed:  25-Nov-
2018]. 

in  Bangladesh  December,  2018. 

|  BTRC.” 

[2]    C. Team, “Common Vulnerabilities in Cyber Space of Bangladesh,” BGD e-GOV CIRT | Bangladesh 

e-Government Computer Incident Response Team.  

[3] 

  “Cyber  warfare:  Our  Achilles’  heel?,”  Dhaka  Tribune,  17-Dec-2017.  [Online].  Available: 
[Accessed: 
https://www.dhakatribune.com/opinion/op-ed/2017/12/17/cyber-warfare-achilles-heel/. 
23-Nov-2019]. 

[4]  B.  Dickson, 

“What 

is 

blockchain?,”  TechTalks, 

07-Sep-2016. 

[Online].  Available: 

https://bdtechtalks.com/2016/09/07/what-is-blockchain/. [Accessed: 3-Jan-2019]. 

[5]    B.  Dickson,  “How  blockchain  can  improve  cybersecurity,”  TechTalks,  11-Jan-2017.  [Online]. 
https://bdtechtalks.com/2017/01/11/how-blockchain-can-improve-cybersecurity/. 

Available: 
[Accessed: 3-Dec-2019].  
[6]  “How  blockchain  can  help 

[Online].  Available: 
https://techcrunch.com/2016/12/05/how-blockchain-can-help-fight-cyberattacks/.  [Accessed:  3-Jan-
2019]. 

fight  cyber  attacks 

|  TechCrunch.” 

[7]    “What  is  Blockchain  Technology?  A  Step-by-Step  Guide  For  Beginners.”  [Online].  Available: 

https://blockgeeks.com/guides/what-is-blockchain-technology/. [Accessed: 23-Jan-2019]. 

[8]      “  National  Cyber  Security  Strategy”  ,  ICT  Division,  Govt.  of  People’s  Republic  of  Bangladesh. 

Available:   http://www.dpp.gov.bd/upload_file/gazettes/10041_41196.pdf . [Accessed: 2-Jan-2019]  

[9]    “ Personal Data,” General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).  

[10]  “GDPR  Personal  Data  and  Sensitive  Personal  Data.”  [Online].  Available:  https://www.burges-
salmon.com:443/news-and-insight/legal-updates/gdpr-personal-data-and-sensitive-personal-data/. 
[Accessed: 10-Jan-2019]. 

[11]  “Digital Security Act” Act No 46 of the Year 2018, Govt. of People republic of Bangladesh. 

              Available: 

 https://www.cirt.gov.bd/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Digital-Security-Act-2018-English-

version.pdf . [Accessed: 20-Dec-2019]. 

49 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.11, No.1, February 2019 

[12] 

“Official  Secrets  Act, 

1923 

(Act  No.  XIX 

of 

1923).” 

[Online].  Available:   

http://bdlaws.minlaw.gov.bd/pdf_part.php?id=132. [Accessed: 23-Nov-2019]. 

[13]  “General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) – Final text neatly arranged,” General Data Protection 

Regulation (GDPR). [Online]. Available: https://gdpr-info.eu/. [Accessed: 20-Dec-2019]. 

[14]    “(Haque,  A  K  M  Bahalul.  (2019).  Big-Brother-In-1984-The-Modern-Era-Surveillance.  International 

Journal of Scientific & Technology Research. 8. 186-190.  

[15]  “BGD  e-GOV  CIRT  |  Bangladesh  e-Government  Computer  Incident  Response  Team  |.”  [Online]. 

Available: https://www.cirt.gov.bd/. [Accessed: 05-Feb-2019]. 

AUTHORS  

AKM  Bahalul  Haque  is  currently  working  a  Lecturer  of  Department  of  ECE,  North 
South  University,  Bashundhara,  and  Dhaka  1229.  He  has  achieved  is  M.Sc.  In 
Information Technology  from Fachhochschule Kiel, Germany, 2018. He  achieved his 
Bachelor  of  Science  (Engineering)  in  Computer  Science  and  telecommunication 
engineering  in  2014.  Has  published  two  of  his  papers  in  International  Journal.  He 
specializes in Cyber Security, Cloud Computing, Data Privacy and protection. He has 
one-year  experience  as  Security  Engineer  and  one-year  experience  as  Vulnerability 
Detection Consultant in Cyber Security Division. 

50 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
