0
2
0
2

v
o
N
6
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

3
v
2
3
5
7
0
.
6
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Cyber-Risks in Paper Voting

David M. Sommer
ETH Zurich

Moritz Schneider
ETH Zurich

Jannik Gut
ETH Zurich

Srdjan ˇCapkun
ETH Zurich

October 2020

Abstract

Paper ballot voting with its fully-reviewable paper-trail is usually con-
sidered as more secure than their e-voting counterparts, given the large
number of recent incidents. In this work, we explore the security of paper
voting and show that paper voting, as it is implemented today, is surpris-
ingly vulnerable to cyber-attacks. In particular, the aggregation methods
of preliminary voting results of various countries rely on insecure commu-
nication channels like telephone, fax or non-secure e-mail. Furthermore,
regulations typically do not mandate the use of secure channels for the
transmission of preliminary results. We illustrate that preliminary re-
sults, despite their temporary nature, may have a severe impact on real-
world decisions during the 3 to 30 days window until the ﬁnal results
are declared. An attacker exploiting this discrepancy can, e.g., beneﬁt
from stock market manipulation or call into question the legitimacy of
the elections. This work investigates the cyber-risks in paper voting in
a systematic manner by reviewing procedures in several countries (Es-
tonia, France, Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States of
America) and through a comprehensive case-study of Switzerland. We
examine the transmission systems currently in use through inquires from
election oﬃcials. Moreover, we illustrate the feasibility of attacks by ana-
lyzing the frequent historical discrepancies between preliminary and ﬁnal
results. Considering our results and recent reports about easily modiﬁ-
able preliminary results in Germany and the Netherlands, we conjecture
similar weaknesses in other countries as well.

1

Introduction

In most modern nations, the democratic process of electing representatives and
deciding on critical matters directly is essential. Some countries only conduct
elections, while others hold regular referendums as well. The usually employed
paper-based voting schemes, where voters cast their paper ballots at local vot-
ing stations, produce a veriﬁable paper-trail — and are therefore commonly

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
perceived as secure. The validity and integrity of paper voting has been studied
extensively [2, 30, 37, 59, 49]. As the procedure from printing ballots, to collect-
ing and counting, and ﬁnally, to the transmission of results is slow, cumbersome
and prone to errors [31], and with the increasing complexity of ballot propo-
sitions, interest has shifted to voting machines and internet-voting. However,
the security of e-voting systems has been continuously challenged [3, 27, 28].
Most eﬀective attacks allowed modiﬁcation of votes and compromise of the vote-
counting process. The classic paper ballot voting, while being much slower, is
therefore still seen as a reliable alternative and perceived as more trustworthy
than its electronic counterparts.

Paper voting has been conducted for multiple decades, and robust systems
have been established, mostly based on a decentralized vote casting and count-
ing infrastructure. Usually, a local result is determined at a local voting oﬃce,
followed by a paper report containing the exact counts that is hand-signed by
the responsible oﬃcial(s). These local results are then sent to the central of-
ﬁce, where the ﬁnal results are calculated. The communication of local results
and/or ballots to the central oﬃce (typically via mail or dedicated transport),
subsequent counting, and result validation can be slow and can take, depending
on the country between 3 and 30 days. Due to this time-consuming process,
most countries also allow preliminary results to be published, typically by trans-
mitting local results using faster and unauthenticated communication channels
(e.g., telephone, fax, email).

Recent reports in Germany [40] and the Netherlands [38] highlight negligent
security engineering in widely used vote counting and aggregation software for
preliminary results. We add to this discussion by systematically reviewing the
paper voting process across several countries and investigating the problems that
arise at the intersection of paper voting and digital transmission of its result. We
show that, in several countries, the aggregation of preliminary results heavily
depend on common computer technologies and is therefore exposed to a wide
range of cyberattacks, possibly as much as e-voting.

Interestingly, the regulations in the countries considered in this work do not
require that authenticity or integrity of preliminary voting results is protected
(e.g., [13, 36, 39, 56]). We examine these issues in Switzerland because it pro-
vides a vibrant democracy [8] with around ten referendums per year, where the
citizens decide directly about constitutional changes and controversial laws. In
Switzerland, oﬃcial preliminary results are published the same day the polls
close, whereas the ﬁnal results follow around 10 days later. Our study shows
that the binary outcome of close national decisions can be ﬂipped by changing
the outcome of only a few municipalities, and that the normal error-ﬂuctuations
in vote-counting are suﬃciently large to facilitate ﬂipping-attacks.

In addition to naively tampering with the preliminary reports sent by voting
stations, we introduce two new attacks: delaying reports and front-running real
reports with fraudulent ones. The impact of these attack vectors may be smaller
than report modiﬁcation, but they are harder to mitigate.

It might seem that attacks on preliminary results are not so severe since
these modiﬁcations will be corrected when the ﬁnal results are published (i.e.,

2

when the correct results arrive via dedicated physical channels). We show,
however, that this integrity time-gap between incorrect preliminary and correct
ﬁnal results can be damaging. It can be used for stock market manipulation,
fraud, reduce the conﬁdence in the government and democratic processes, or to
delegitimize elected governments and referendum results. Most people are not
aware of the oﬃcial but much slower paper-trail and perceive the preliminary
results as the ﬁnal ones.

The immediate decay of the British Pound after the ﬁrst interim result of
the Brexit referendum [57] or the risky German federal election in 2017 (see
Section 5.2) highlights the severe impact that preliminary results have on trade
markets and political decisions. Therefore, our work shows the necessity to pro-
tect not only the ﬁnal results but also the electronically transmitted preliminary
results in today’s fast-paced world.

Contributions.

• This work reviews typical paper voting mechanisms, focusing on the ag-
gregation of votes in several countries: Estonia, France, Germany, the
United Kingdom, and the United States of America.

• We introduce two new attack vectors to tamper with preliminary results,

front-running and delaying reports, and illustrate their feasibility.

• In the case study about Switzerland, we present an exhaustive survey on
the transmission systems in use, acquired from the responsible chancel-
leries by interview. We compare preliminary results published in news-
articles to the oﬃcial ﬁnal results over a ten years period, and show fre-
quent accumulation discrepancies that are suﬃciently large to hide our
proposed attacks.

• We show the real world impact of fraudulent preliminary results with, e.g.,

the pound exchange rate after Brexit.

2 Understanding Paper Voting

Paper voting is the dominant voting mechanism used throughout most demo-
cratic countries. As its name indicates, paper voting relies on paper ballots,
submitted by the voters either at the polling station or via mail. The counting
and the transmission of results are then entirely performed on paper. The ad-
vantages are apparent: the results can be conﬁrmed by verifying the physical
paper trail. We review typical procedures based on laws and regulations from
Estonia, France, Germany, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, the United
States of America, and Switzerland.

There are usually four stages of a vote that result in the ﬁnal decision of the
voters: the voting (ballot casting), counting, transmission, and accumulation.
In the following, we will elaborate on these steps in a typical democracy.

3

Figure 1: Simpliﬁed vote aggregation infrastructure with Swiss hierarchical lev-
els (districts are called ’cantons’ in Switzerland). Similar accumulation struc-
tures are used in most countries.

Voting. Voting in a paper-based voting scheme is usually conducted by ﬁlling
out a paper ballot. Some ballots provide only simple options, e.g., yes and
no, while others oﬀer many choices and even write-ins to specify the name
of the preferred candidate. The procedure of handing in ballots can widely
diﬀer between voting schemes. There are countries like France where any voter
needs to physically go to a voting station, ﬁll out the voting card, and drop
it into a ballot box [39], while other countries like the United Kingdom [56],
Germany [13], and some states in the US additionally also allow postal voting.
Recently some nations have started to use machine voting, where the vote is
entered into a machine that produces a count in the end. Some variants of
machine voting do not provide any paper trail, and therefore, do not allow for a
manual recount. However, many voting machines produce a paper trail as well
as a receipt to the voter to verify their vote was cast correctly. Nevertheless,
these machines have been continuously proven to be insecure [27, 3, 28], allowing
the attackers to modify the vote counts.

Counting. In a paper ballot system, the votes must be manually counted
by oﬃcials. Before opening the ballot boxes, unused ballots must usually be
removed from the premise to reduce possible mistakes. Only then the ballot
boxes are opened. Typically, the ballots are ﬁrst ordered to the respective
decision, e.g., into yes and no piles, and then counted manually (in some cases
more than once). In the end, the counts are validated, e.g., by summing all votes
and comparing it to the total number of ballots in the ballot box. Finally, all
counts of the various ballot boxes of one voting station are accumulated, and a
report with the results is compiled. The report, with all irregularities attached,
is hand-signed by the supervising oﬃcial(s).

Transmission. After the counting, the report must be transmitted to the su-
perior instance as shown in Figure 1. Every oﬃce waits until it has received all
results from its subordinates until it will issue another report summarizing all
the results. This procedure continues until the highest oﬃce is reached – na-
tional in some cases, regional in others. Note that this is a lengthy process since

4

FederalOﬃceDistricts(Cantons)MunicipalitiesVotingStationsa single straggler can cause signiﬁcant delays. In today’s interconnected world,
however, people want much faster results, which are transmitted electronically
(cf. Section 2.2).

Accumulation. Once all the reports have reached the ﬁnal oﬃce, the sig-
natures are veriﬁed, and the results are accumulated. After that, the results
are published, but they are not oﬃcial yet; some time is typically allowed for
objections and requests for recounts before the decision is ﬁnal.

2.1 Elections vs. Referendums

Most countries support two kinds of popular votes: elections to select repre-
sentatives and referendums to decide on critical issues. Elections usually have
multiple candidates to choose and sometimes also allow write-ins, to vote for a
person that does not appear on the ballot. A referendum, on the other hand,
usually only allows two answers: yes and no. There are some countries where
additional choices are also available, but mostly referendums require clear binary
decisions for critical issues (e.g., Brexit [57]).

Referendums and elections can be held for all levels of the hierarchy shown
in Figure 1, e.g., for the election of the city council, the national parliament, or
a referendum on joining the European Union. Depending on the hierarchy level,
more votes must be transmitted and accumulated over more levels, leading to
larger delays before the result is ﬁnal. As representatives are usually elected for
and within a district, there is no need for the federal oﬃce to accumulate all
counts, while for a referendum it is – indicated by the dashed lines in Figure 1.
An exception is, for example, the nation-wide elected president of France, who
is elected by popular majority across all eligible voters in France.

2.2 Cyber in Paper Voting

Paper voting promises purely paper-based procedures. However, recent demand
for faster notiﬁcation has led to several electronic component-replacements. In
most reviewed countries, the results from voting stations are transmitted not
only via postal mail but also using electronic communication channels (e.g., E-
Mail, telephone, or specialized software). The results from such an electronic
channel are not regarded as ﬁnal; nevertheless, they are forwarded and accumu-
lated to form oﬃcial preliminary results. Compared to ﬁnal results, counting
oﬃcials do not await all results of their subordinates before sending them on
to the next oﬃce. After only basic feasibility checks, preliminary results are
immediately forwarded and published by the highest oﬃces (e.g., by the voting
commission). News agencies use this information just hours after the polls close.
Exit polls provide even earlier projections: voters are asked for their decision
after they have cast their vote. Exit polls cannot provide accurate estimations
of the outcome since voters can refuse to participate in the survey leading to
statistical uncertainty. However, the results of exit polls can be used for fore-
casts before the polls close. Similarly to preliminary results, exit polling data

5

is usually transmitted electronically to a central entity that accumulates the
results and publishes projections. Exit polls are typically conducted by private
companies, in contrast to the oﬃcial preliminary results.

Unlike exit polls, which tend to be unreliable, preliminary (complete) re-
sults are typically accepted and perceived as ﬁnal by the public. Adversarial
modiﬁcation of the preliminary results can therefore have a signiﬁcant impact.

2.3 Regulations on Accumulation of Preliminary Results

The regulations on the transmission of (preliminary) results vary widely across
the reviewed countries.
In Germany, Switzerland, and Austria, the election
laws stipulate how preliminary results must be collected and transmitted as
fast as possible [13, 18]. However, they do not require any integrity or authen-
ticity guarantee for the transmitted report. France, Estonia, and the United
Kingdom do not deﬁne preliminary results in their laws at all. There, the lo-
cal results must be publicly proclaimed in the voting station after the count
is ﬁnished [39, 56, 36], where private companies collect the results and provide
the public with preliminary results and projections. In the United States, the
individual states deploy diﬀerent mechanisms; some specify the transmission
of preliminary results while others rely on private companies. In general, no
election law (that we studied) requires any guarantee regarding the integrity
or authenticity of electronically transmitted results. Recently, some agencies
have started publishing guidelines for electronic communication in paper voting
systems, e.g., in the United States of America [58]. However, our inquiries to
various election oﬃces indicate that said recommendations are far from being
implemented.

3 Attacks on Preliminary Results

In this section, we investigate the regulations on the transmission of prelimi-
nary results in paper voting and highlight various attack vectors on the inse-
cure communication channels. We stress that once the paper trail arrives, the
fraudulent preliminary results will be corrected. Nevertheless, preliminary re-
sults can exhibit a lot of inﬂuence on the world. While many countries have
strong regulations on the paper-trail of an election to prevent tampering with
the ﬁnal result, preliminary results are often not as strictly governed. How-
ever, preliminary results are becoming increasingly signiﬁcant, and they lead to
extensive political and economic consequences. We stress that the problem of
authenticity has been mitigated for many years with secure channels [16, 32],
but in practice, many countries are still vulnerable to attacks on their digital
communication of election results.

Recent reports in Germany [40] and the Netherlands [38] highlight the vul-
nerable systems in place today. In the Netherlands, all results were transmitted
entirely electronically without a paper trail unless someone objects the result.
In Germany, only the preliminary results could be manipulated since the paper

6

trail is always sent via paper mail. However, the Chaos Computer Club demon-
strated how preliminary results for roughly half of the electors of Germany could
have been manipulated due to grossly negligent software practices [40].

3.1 Attack Vectors

In this work, we only investigate attacks on preliminary results. While ﬁnal
results may be inﬂuenced by, e.g., bribing oﬃcials, we do not consider such
attacks. We assume that election oﬃcials count and transmit votes correctly.
Therefore, the ﬁnal result based on the paper-trail is trusted. Exit polls and pre-
liminary results, however, are transmitted over electronic channels (e.g., VoIP
or email) that can be manipulated. There are various types of communication
channels used around the world, and we will discuss several attack vectors that
might or might not apply to the respectively chosen channel. In certain cases,
only a single municipality that still relies on insecure communication, if altered,
can change close preliminary results of a national election or referendum (cf.
Section 5). Note that these manipulations must be performed blindly, i.e., an
adversary does not know how close an election or a referendum will be or even
what the ﬁnal outcome will be. Nevertheless, blind attacks could still lead to
manipulated preliminary results.

Tampering with Reports. Modifying the in-ﬂight preliminary results is the
most naive attack vector. Converting a few percents of votes in the report
of a single municipality can easily lead to a swing in the national preliminary
result. For example, swapping the yes and no vote-counts in the preliminary
report will lead to an incorrect total preliminary result. The modiﬁcation will
be discovered as soon as the paper trail is processed (or an oﬃcial notices the
mistakes), but until then, the public will accept the fraudulent result. The
adoption of an authenticated and integrity protected communication channel
would prevent any modiﬁcation. However, our case study in Section 4 shows that
many constituencies use traditional communication means, such as telephone
and email, and do not employ appropriate security mechanisms.

Delaying Reports. Any attacker that controls any critical part of the com-
munication channel (e.g., mail server, internet router, etc.) can delay any trans-
mission of a preliminary report. The delaying attack becomes even stronger if
the adversary is able to learn the delayed results and abuses this knowledge for
individual proﬁt. Even without knowing the result, one can delay results from
a constituency where there is a strong expectation for a speciﬁc outcome. As an
example, an adversary learns from polls that cities are strongly against a speciﬁc
proposal while rural areas support it. Delaying the results from cities change
the preliminary totals to dip temporarily in a chosen direction. Analysts will
potentially warn that the results from cities did not arrive yet, but the public
perception might already be aﬀected. We stress that the delaying attack works
for various communication channels, and even secure channels are vulnerable.

7

Front-Running with Fake Reports. While a speciﬁc voting oﬃce is still
counting, a real-looking but maliciously forged preliminary report could be sent
to the accumulating oﬃce before the actual report. If it is accepted as valid,
the central accumulating oﬃce will take the fraudulent preliminary results and
forward them to the next higher instance. When the real preliminary results
arrive, the error will most likely be detected and corrected, but the damage is
already inﬂicted. The time during which the fraudulent results are considered
as correct might be minimal, but the attacker knows that these results are fake,
and can, therefore, adjust his strategy to proﬁt from the incident (cf. Section 5).
Note that the communication channel must allow arbitrarily forged messages for
the front-running attack to work.

3.2 Feasibility of Attacks

The feasibility of attacks depends signiﬁcantly on the infrastructure and pro-
tocols in use. Nonetheless, a single, not explicitly involved person is usually
in complete control of the communication infrastructure, and could potentially
tamper with the accumulation process. If, for example, the preliminary results
are transmitted via common email, an operator of any email server involved can
drop and forge messages arbitrarily. The same is valid for telephone or Internet
providers. A simple denial of service attack can facilitate a delaying attack:
Delaying the reports by shutting down the communication channels for a few
minutes might be enough to leverage ﬁnancial gain. Front-running does not
even require the ability to tamper with the communication channels. Knowl-
edge about the format of vote-count reports and simple spooﬁng techniques are
suﬃcient to preempt real reports.

Many more sophisticated solutions suﬀer similar weaknesses [11]. What-
sApp [60], for example, is end-to-end encrypted, meaning its servers cannot read
user-exchanged messages. In the case of a man-in-the-middle impersonation at-
tack, users only see an innocent “security code has changed” message [29, 25].
However, the same message is also displayed for legitimate reasons, e.g., when a
user re-installs WhatsApp or buys a new phone. To rule out an impersonation
attack and reestablish conﬁdentiality, electoral oﬃcials would once more need to
compare their encryption-keys via an out-of-band channel. Such an imperson-
ation attack could, for example, be run by a suﬃciently privileged WhatsApp
employee.

Avoiding such attacks is non-trivial. While tampering with multiple com-
munication channels parallel increases the diﬃculty, it usually boils down to
run the before-mentioned attacks simultaneously. Moreover, next to a technical
solution, electoral oﬃcials also require specialized training to detect and handle
a potentially malicious actor.

8

4 Case Study: Switzerland

We have chosen Switzerland for our case study, a direct democracy where the
people decide on policies directly with 5.3M citizens eligible to vote [50], as
it has a ﬂexible election and referendum mechanism with around ten distinct
referendums per year. The constitution can only be changed if the majority
of the eligible voters accept the change in a nation-wide referendum, called
people’s initiative. Similar mechanisms are in place to object laws passed by the
two legislative chambers of Switzerland. In this study, both cases are subsumed
under the term referendum.

Politically, the Swiss federation consists out of 26 states, so-called cantons.
These are politically autonomous, and the organization of elections and referen-
dums lies within their sovereignty. Each canton has its own way of conducting
and transmitting voting results, and there is no signiﬁcant eﬀort to unify these
systems. Table 1a summarizes the cantons of Switzerland, including the number
of eligible voters.

In federal elections, voters elect representatives for every canton individu-
ally. As there is no need for an accumulation of votes on a federal level, the
impact of manipulated preliminary results of elections is limited to the canton’s
representatives. Nation-wide referendums, however, are aggregated on the fed-
eral level, and a tiny change in the outcome of one canton can ﬂip the result of
close referendums completely. Any change in the federal constitution requires
two majorities to pass: the popular majority of all votes of every participating
citizen, and the majority of the cantons. The latter is composed of a vote per
canton, 23 votes in total1, where each vote is cast by the popular majority in
each canton. A referendum may win the popular majority due to an advantage
in the highly populated cantons but fail to reach cantonal majority as many
smaller cantons reject the referendum. With country-side cantons usually hav-
ing fewer inhabitants, this leads to a balance between the densely populated
urban cantons and more sparsely populated rural areas.

4.1 Transmission Systems

The ﬁnal results of the vote are obtained by written paper-protocols that are
signed by multiple members of each voting station, usually members of several
political parties, and then sent by postal services to the next instance. The
ﬁrst accumulation of the paper report results usually takes 3-5 days, at most
13 days, followed by an objection period of 3 days [15]. Simultaneous to these
ﬁnal results, there is an oﬃcial accumulation of preliminary results, which are
usually published on the day the vote takes place.

On a federal level, current laws and regulations only specify that prelim-
inary results must be published and that the transmission method must be

1Due to historic reasons, there are 6 cantons with only half a vote, casting together 3 of

these 23 votes.

9

either fax, phone, or teleprinter [18, 19]2. As the law dates back to 1997, it
does not consider the Internet appropriately; nevertheless, Internet-based com-
munication methods (e.g., email) are used in practice as well. In accordance,
the cantonal regulations mostly follow the federal ones except for some small
adjustments: For example, the cantons of Appenzell-Innerrhoden and Glarus
require the transmission of the results over an additional channel [23, 34], and
the canton of Graub¨unden limits the communication to phone only [24].

In practice, every canton provides its own solution to transmit and collect the
preliminary vote-counts after the counting is ﬁnished. The involved technolo-
gies were inquired from each of the chancelleries individually by mail, phone, or
personal interview, and in a few cases online-resources [6, 22], and are presented
in Table 1b.
In essence, the preliminary results are often transmitted using
several known-to-be-weak transmission methods like email, telephone, and fax,
which in their common form do not provide message authentication or integrity
mechanisms. Many cantons apply individual dedicated software for voting re-
sults transmission, which have not passed a public security review. Given that
8 diﬀerent dedicated software solutions are in use throughout Switzerland, the
potential attack surface is rather large. Following the preliminary publication
of our report, the chancellery of canton St. Gallen conducted their own survey
on cantonal transmission systems, conﬁrming our results [44].

4.2 Historic Discrepancies

We analyzed historical discrepancies in all 84 referendums of Switzerland in the
last ten years, from 27th Sept. 2009 until 19th May 2019 (from referendum No.
543 to No. 626). We collected preliminary results from newspaper articles from
the next day, and the ﬁnal results from the oﬃcial report by the federal oﬃce of
statistics. Remarkably, not a single preliminary result was without deviations.
However, we believe all of these inconsistencies originate from human errors and
not from attacks.

The maximum relative deviation of each canton for a single referendum is
shown in Table 1c. Note that the entries in Table 1c are not correlated: the
referendum with the maximum discrepancy for the canton Jura might be a
diﬀerent referendum than the one for Bern. Single cantons show a deviation of
up to 2.72%: The canton of Vaud erred once in 3974 counts. While the federal
average discrepancy over the ten years is 0.03%, the average over the maximum
cantonal discrepancy per referendum is 0.43%. These deviations are already
larger than yes-no gaps of several close referendums. Additionally, we noted
that discrepancies usually balance themselves, e.g., canton of Jura might make
a mistake in one direction and canton of Bern in the other. However, if these
mistakes coincide, there might even be a more signiﬁcant discrepancy on the
federal level.

In one case, the referendum from 22nd Nov. 2013 on the objection to the
new law on epidemics, the ﬁnal results in the canton of Geneva deviated by

2Since the ﬁrst publication of this work, this law has been updated to transmit preliminary

results in electronic form (valid in law since July 2019).

10

Canton

Eligible Voters
in 2019 [50]

Aargau
Appenzell Ausserrhoden
Appenzell Innerrhoden
Basel-Landschaft
Basel-Stadt
Bern
Fribourg
Gen`eve
Glarus
Graub¨unden
Jura
Luzern
Neuchˆatel
Nidwalden
Obwalden
Schaﬀhausen
Schwyz
Solothurn
St. Gallen
Thurgau
Ticino
Uri
Valais
Vaud
Zug
Z¨urich

414 745
38 498
11 565
187 863
113 717
729 203
196 027
248 915
26 268
137 126
51 936
271 143
111 304
30 810
26 244
51 036
102 145
177 292
317 969
206 118
218 580
31 928
216 041
428 569
74 803
907 623

Transmission

Largest Discrepancy

Election

Referendum

Sitrox[48]
(cid:66) and (cid:118)
(cid:66) or (cid:84)
(cid:66)
(cid:66)
Bewas[4]
SyGEV[55]
(cid:84)
Sesam[47]
Sesam[47]
(cid:84)
(cid:84)
SyGEV[55]
Sesam[47]
Sesam[47]
(cid:66) or (cid:84) or (cid:118)
Wabsti[1]
Wabsti[1]
Wabsti[1]
Wabsti[1]
Votel[35]

Sitrox[48]
(cid:66) and (cid:118)
(cid:66) or (cid:84)
(cid:84)
(cid:66)
Bewas[4]
SyGEV[55]
(cid:84)
(cid:66) and (cid:84)
Sesam[47]
(cid:84)
Sesam[47]
SyGEV[55]
Sesam[47]
Sesam[47]
(cid:66) or (cid:84) or (cid:118)
Wabsti[1]
Wabsti[1]
Wabsti[1]
Wabsti[1]
Votel[35]

(cid:84) and Sesam[47] (cid:84) and Sesam[47]
AdminVotel[17]
AdminVotel[17]
Votelec[10]
Votelec[10]
(cid:66)
Wabsti[1]
Wabsti[1]
Wabsti[1]

Votes

1 090
0
0
206
2
1 605
1 230
142
19
690
548
276
891
100
0
50
0
1 076
1 012
570
886
104
1 232
3 974
0
1 400

Total

Percent

131 179
16 466
3 800
81 622
53 918
316 539
82 176
108 651
9 040
58 784
20 178
112 269
46 970
10 915
9 661
26 625
37 313
92 400
162 996
71 626
84 892
9 583
118 091
177 616
34 444
498 786

0.83%
0.00%
0.00%
0.25%
0.00%
0.51%
1.50%
0.13%
0.21%
1.17%
2.72%
0.25%
1.90%
0.92%
0.00%
0.19%
0.00%
1.16%
0.62%
0.80%
1.04%
1.09%
1.04%
2.24%
0.00%
0.28%

Switzerland

5 283 556

Sedex[22]

Sedex[22]

3 843

2 039 548

0.19%

(c)

(a)

(b)

(a) The diﬀerent cantons of Switzerland with the number of eligible
Table 1:
voters in 2019, extended by the total of Switzerland in the last row. (b) The
voting transmission mechanisms for preliminary results from municipalities to
cantons in Switzerland as of January 2019. The last row indicates the trans-
mission mechanism which is used from the cantonal chancelleries to the federal
chancellery. Note that there are 11 diﬀerent transmission systems leading to
a large attack surface. (c) The largest discrepancy of counted votes between
the preliminary and ﬁnal results compared to the total number of votes per
canton for referendums held from Sept. 2009 to May 2019, 84 referendums in
total. Note that the maximal discrepancies of each canton might have occurred
in diﬀerent referendums. Legend: Fax ((cid:118)), Email ((cid:66)), Telephone ((cid:84)), either
one (or), or both simultaneously (and).

11

41% (44’821 of 109’433 totally cast votes) from the preliminary results. Eight
months after, the ﬁnal result was corrected, ﬁnally only diﬀering by 18 votes
from the initial preliminary results [41]. The overall outcome, however, did not
change; neither in the canton of Geneva nor on the federal level.

4.3 Examples of Vulnerable Referendums

As illustrated previously, maliciously manipulating the result from a few munic-
ipalities by a few negligible percentage points is feasible. This section presents
two historical examples of nation-wide referendums which were close enough to
ﬂip the outcome. We stress that the proposed attacks on these referendums are
ﬁctional and, to the best of our knowledge, did not occur. Note that in these
scenarios we consider an all-knowing attacker who already knows the outcome
before the referendum. Therefore, the manipulations can be hand-tailored to
change to ﬁnal decision. In reality, the adversary would have to mount such at-
tacks blindly and would potentially have to overshoot with the manipulations.
Although there are severe security risks in the transmission infrastructure, we
do not consider the system in Switzerland to be at imminent risk of large ma-
nipulations. For close referendums however, attacks stay feasible.

Attack on Popular Majority. This attack takes place during the vote on
the “Bundesgesetzes ¨uber Radio und Fernsehen (RTVG)” (law on radio and
television) from 26th September 2014 [43].
It was accepted by the popular
majority with 1,128,522 to 1,124,873 votes. Since this referendum only proposed
changes in the law but not the constitution, the majority of cantons was not
required. To ﬂip the vote to acceptance, an attacker would need to change
only 1825 votes. We change those votes in the canton Basel-Landschaft (BL)
since it is relatively large and uses e-mail to transmit preliminary voting results.
Without an attacker’s action, the referendum in BL was rejected with 54.2%
no-votes.
In the case of manipulation, the vote would have been rejected as
well, but now with 56.5%. With these minor shifts, the outcome of the federal
referendum would have been ﬂipped.

Attack on Cantonal Majority. The second attack aims to ﬂip the cantonal
majority. We target the referendum on family support from 3rd March 2013 [42].
The popular majority was achieved with a 54.3% yes votes on the federal level.
However, only 10 out of 23 cantons voted to accept the referendum. To swing the
result, the decision of two cantons would be needed to ﬂip. We choose to attack
the cantons Graub¨unden and Zug. In the canton of Graub¨unden the referendum
was rejected with 36,130 against 37,920 and in Zug with 17,703 against 19,570.
In total, an attacker would have needed to ﬂip half of the diﬀerence in each
canton, 895 in Graub¨unden and 687 in Zug, totaling to 1582 votes.

4.4 Methodology

The various transmission methods used throughout Switzerland were inquired
from each of the chancelleries individually by mail, phone, or personal interview,

12

and in a few cases online-resources [6, 22]. The historic preliminary results were
gathered from newspaper articles on the day after, namely Tagesanzeiger and
Neue Z¨urcher Zeitung which get their data from Keystone-SDA. The historic
ﬁnal results come from the oﬃcial reports by the federal oﬃce of statistics.

5

Impact of Preliminary Results

During our investigations, many state oﬃcials claimed that a modiﬁcation at-
tack on preliminary voting results does not matter — arguing that only the
oﬃcial accumulation of the hand-signed paper reports count. However, we con-
jecture that the public perceives this diﬀerently: In many cases, the preliminary
results are regarded as ﬁnal, usually due to ignorance or out of experience that
there was never any signiﬁcant discrepancy. While from a formal-law viewpoint
negligible, there are extensive decisions taken based on these preliminary re-
sults – for example, reacting stock markets or foreign currency exchange rates,
induced long-term political decisions that are taken before the results are ﬁnal,
or high-frequency trading that reacts immediately on very recent information.
In the case of tampered preliminary results, signiﬁcant harm may already have
occurred, even if the fraud will be detected one or two days later. Moreover, the
conﬁdence in the voting process might suﬀer, which can lead to lowered trust
in the democracy in general. Financial decisions based on false knowledge may
bring signiﬁcant loss, and far-reaching decisions might require a revocation. We
will highlight three examples where preliminary results correlated signiﬁcantly
with economic reactions and political events hours or days before the ﬁnal results
were published.

5.1 Market Insecurity after Brexit

Our ﬁrst example is the decay of the exchange rate of British pounds to US-
Dollar in the night of the 23rd to 24th June 2016. On that day, the ballots were
counted on the referendum whether the United Kingdom shall invoke article
50 of the Treaty of the European Union – which would start a lengthy process
towards UK’s exit from the European Union [57] – commonly referred to as
Brexit. The referendum was ﬁnally accepted with a majority of 51.9% [53].

While the impact of the referendum on the British Pound was discussed
the days before the Brexit referendum, in the night the votes were counted
and the preliminary results were piece-wise published, the GBP/USD exchange
rate fell to a historic low. Figure 2 illustrates the development. The polls
closed at 22:00 followed by a slight raise of the exchange rate. After the ﬁrst
election oﬃce (Sunderland) announced its result (EU leave), the exchange rate
fell immediately, eventually reaching the lowest point since 1985. The next
morning, 8:15am at 24th June 2016, the prime minister of the United Kingdom
spoke to the public announcing the ﬁnal results[54]. The market stabilized again,
but the exchange rate was still over 8% lower than the day before. Another ﬁst
publication might have impacted the marktet diﬀerently.

13

Figure 2: The currency exchange rate of British Pounds vs. US-Dollar around
the Brexit-referendum vote. (Source: dukascopy)

5.2 Federal Elections in Germany 2017

In Germany, there exist oﬃcial preliminary results that are publicly announced
usually the day the polls close. The ﬁnal results are provided 10 to 30 days
later by the Bundeswahlleiter (federal election director). On the 24th September
2017, the 2017 federal parliament election of Germany took place, a few weeks
after the discovery of severe vulnerabilities in the vote transmission software (cf.
Section 3). Preliminary results were available the same day, and the identical
ﬁnal result was approved 19 days later, on the 12th October 2017.

According to the preliminary results, the social democratic party of Germany
(SPD) lost a signiﬁcant number of seats to the new right-wing party Alternative
f¨ur Deutschland. The SPD lost its previous advantage for the participation in
the parliament’s major governing alliance. Therefore, they announced party-
internal changes and stated to go into opposition already on the 24th Septem-
ber [45], not a day after the preliminary results were published. The next day,
insecurities in the stock markets followed due to the recent change in the coun-
try’s power structure [46]. Four days after the preliminary results, the president
of the United States of America, Donald J. Trump, congratulated the German
Chancellor Angela Merkel for her reelection [9]. Finally, on the 9th October
2017, still several days before the results were ﬁnal, the newly formed govern-
ment coalition ﬁxed the date they planned to start the negotiations about their
future coalition [52].

While none of these actions were irreversible, they were all taken before
the election results were ﬁnal, and during the ongoing public discussion about
insecure voting result transmission software (cf. Section 3). If, and this was
not unlikely at that time [40], the preliminary result would have been tampered
with, such an error could have left a lasting negative impression among the
people of Germany.

14

00:0006:0012:0018:0000:0006:0012:0018:0000:0006:0012:0018:0022June201623June201624June20161.3251.3501.3751.4001.4251.4501.4751.500GBP/USDpollsclosedﬁrstresults(Sunderland,EUleave)historiclowsince1985PMannouncesresultsource:dukascopyBritishPoundExchangeRateafterBrexitFigure 3: The price of a troy ounce of gold in US-Dollar. The market is closed on
weekends (gray underlays). The price has fallen signiﬁcantly over the weekend
where the gold referendum of Switzerland took place, indicated by the red line.
The preliminary outcome was conﬁrmed by the ﬁnal result several days later.

5.3 Vote on Gold Reserves in Switzerland

In 2014, Switzerland held a referendum whether the Swiss National Bank (SNB)
is obligated to store 20% of its foreign-exchange reserves in gold. At that time,
the SNB retained only 7.5% of its foreign-exchange reserves in gold and, in case
of acceptance of the referendum, would have been forced to buy around 1500
metric tons of Gold (worth around 60 Billion US-Dollar) within the next three
years [51]. The referendum was rejected on 30th November 2014 by a large
majority; the ﬁnal result followed several days later.

This referendum became a major talking point internationally. Several News
outlets discussed the referendum and showed its impact on the international
gold price [5]. Figure 3 pictures the exchange rate of a troy ounce of gold
against US-Dollar. The exchange is closed on the weekends, hinted by the
grey underlays in the ﬁgure. Usually, the exchange market opens on Mondays
with roughly at the same price as it has closed the Friday before, indicated by
the horizontal green lines. In the weekend where the referendum took place,
however, the markets opened with a signiﬁcantly lower price, indicated by the
red line. Experts attribute this decrease to the rejection of the referendum [14]
whose preliminary result was published Sunday evening, days before the ﬁnal
one.
In the case of adversarial tampering of the preliminary outcome, false
investments would have followed, the gold market could have seen increased
insecurity and instability, and the trust into the Swiss democracy might have
suﬀered.

6 Recommendations

The primary issue in all attacks on preliminary voting reports is the missing
authenticity and integrity of the reports transmitted; the broadly used email
or telephone do not provide these properties in their common form.
In this
section, we show how simple already existing technology can be used to mitigate
the previously mentioned attacks. First, all communication channels need to

15

06-Oct13-Oct20-Oct27-Oct03-Nov10-Nov17-Nov24-Nov01-Dec08-Dec15-Dec22-Dec2014(year)11400116001180012000122001240012600XAU/USDReferendumsource:dukascopyGoldPrice2014guarantee authenticity and integrity, and second, keys must be handled securely,
e.g., with smartcards.

For the transmission of preliminary voting results, signing the report to allow
for subsequent veriﬁcation must be mandatory. Moreover, each preliminary
report needs to be uniquely attributed to a speciﬁc election and, in the case
of intermediate result publications, contain a monotonic counted number to
avoid replay attacks. Existing systems such as PGP [21] already satisfy these
requirements and are widely adopted.

Such technologies rely on asymmetric encryption to verify the origin of mes-
sages based on a public key. If every vote-counting and aggregation entity holds
an individual private key to sign its voting-reports, then the validity of any
report can be veriﬁed using the corresponding public certiﬁcate. However, the
distribution of such trusted certiﬁcates is not trivial. Public Key Infrastructure
(PKI) [12] is a perfect ﬁt for the hierarchical structures in a typical country:
The federal oﬃce could provide the root certiﬁcate and sign the certiﬁcates of
the subordinate districts, who would then, in turn, sign the certiﬁcates of their
municipalities. As long as the report is signed by a key belonging to the correct
certiﬁcate, its authenticity can be validated via the chain of certiﬁcates, even-
tually reaching the trusted root certiﬁcate of the federal oﬃce. Many countries
have already rolled out a PKI to secure their internal communication [7, 20].

The private keys belonging to the certiﬁcates are critical, as they allow an
adversary to forge signatures on fraudulent reports. Additionally, any lost or
compromised key must be revoked as soon as possible. In order to protect the
private keys from leaking, a country could make use of technologies such as
smartcards [33], which encapsulate a private key in a credit-card like physical
device and thereby making key extraction diﬃcult [26]. The adversary needs
to steal the smartcard to sign fraudulent reports, and a missing smartcard is
detected quickly. Moreover, manipulating an election or referendum on a large
scale would require several cards.

7 Conclusion

This work examines the non-negligible time-gap between preliminary and ﬁnal
In most
results of paper-based voting mechanisms across several countries.
countries, the ﬁnal results of elections and referendums are determined based
on written and hand-signed paper-reports of the local results of each individual
voting oﬃce, which are sent (by postal services) to the next higher aggregation
oﬃce up to the topmost level that publishes the ﬁnal result. As this process
usually takes several days, faster aggregation systems for preliminary results
have emerged, which use insuﬃciently secured digital transmission systems for
preliminary voting results. As a result, the preliminary outcome of elections
and referendums can be modiﬁed by an adversary. While such tampering is
unlikely to succeed for one-sided referendums or elections, very close decisions
can be ﬂipped by a small distortion of a regional result. Our case-study of
Switzerland highlights several potentially vulnerable referendums, and given the

16

reports about the software vulnerabilities of aggregation systems in Germany
and the Netherlands, we conjecture similar issues in many other countries as
well. While tampering with preliminary results should be discovered at the
latest when aggregating the ﬁnal results, we have investigated the substantial
impact of modiﬁed preliminary results with several examples. In the case of the
marginal Brexit referendum – 51.9% voted for leaving the EU – the value of the
British Pound crashed after the publication of the ﬁrst preliminary result. In
contrast, the market might have reacted diﬀerently if the ﬁrst result would have
proclaimed “EU stay.”

References

[1] abraxas Informatik AG. Wahlen – L¨osung f¨ur Wahlen und Abstim-
https://www.abraxas.ch/de/loesungen/fachanwendungen/

mungen.
wahlen, 2019.

[2] Diego F Aranha, Helder Ribeiro, and Andr´e Luis Ogando Paraense. Crowd-
sourced integrity veriﬁcation of election results. Annals of Telecommunica-
tions, 71(7-8):287–297, 2016.

[3] Jonathan Bannet, David W Price, Algis Rudys, Justin Singer, and Dan S
Wallach. Hack-a-vote: Security issues with electronic voting systems. IEEE
Security & Privacy, 2(1):32–37, 2004.

[4] Bedag Informatik AG. Bedag-Wahll¨osung BEWAS erfolgreich in den
Gemeinden gestartet. https://www.bedag.ch/wAssets/docs/Aktuell/
Medienmitteilungen/Medienmitteilung_17.12.2018_BEWAS.pdf, 2018.

[5] Mike Bird. The Swiss Gold Referendum Was Just a Storm in a Teacup.

Kitco, December 2014.

[6] Bundesamt fuer Statistik. sedex, 2019.

[7] Bundesamt f¨ur Informatik und Telekommunikation BIT. Swiss Government
PKI. Technical report, Bundesamt f¨ur Informatik und Telekommunikation
BIT, 2016.

[8] Bundesamt f¨ur Statistik (Switzerland).

Eidgen¨ossische Volksabstim-
mungen: detaillierte Ergebnisse. https://www.bfs.admin.ch/bfs/de/
home/statistiken/politik/abstimmungen.assetdetail.8126483.
html, may 2019.

[9] Bundeskanzlei.

Trump gratuliert Merkel zum Ergebnis der Bun-

destagswahl. Die Zeit, September 2017.

[10] Canton de Vaud. VoteElec. https://www.elections.vd.ch/votelec/

MainFRAMESET.htm, 2012.

17

[11] Dylan Clarke and Syed Taha Ali. End to end security is not enough.
In Frank Stajano, Jonathan Anderson, Bruce Christianson, and Vashek
Maty´aˇs, editors, Security Protocols XXV, pages 260–267, Cham, 2017.
Springer International Publishing.

[12] David Cooper, Stefan Santesson, Stephen Farrell, Sharon Boeyen, Rus-
sell Housley, and William Polk. Internet X. 509 public key infrastructure
certiﬁcate and certiﬁcate revocation list (CRL) proﬁle, 2008.

[13] Deutschland. Bundeswahlordnung, June 2017.

[14] Mona Dhole. Gold price drops as swiss vote no. InvestmentEurope, De-

cember 2014.

[15] Die Bundesversammlung der Schweizerischen Eidgenossenschaft. Bundes-

gesetz ¨uber die politischen Rechte, 2015.

[16] Whitﬁeld Diﬃe and Martin Hellman. New directions in cryptography.

IEEE transactions on Information Theory, 22(6):644–654, 1976.

[17] Etat du Valais. Login adminVotel. https://adminvotel.vs.ch, 2019.

[18] Federal Assembly of the Swiss Confederation. Federal Act on Political

Rights, 2015.

[19] Federal Council (of Switzerland). Verordnung ¨uber die politischen Rechte,

1997.

[20] Federal Oﬃce of Information Security, Germany. Public Key Infrastructres
https://www.bsi.bund.de/EN/Topics/ElectrIDDocuments/

(PKIs).
securPKI/pki_node.html.

[21] Simson Garﬁnkel. PGP: pretty good privacy. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1995.

[22] Michel Gentile. sedex Betriebs-/Integrationshandbuch. sedex.

[23] Grosser Rat des Kantons AI. Verordnung ¨uber die Urnenabstimmung, 2017.

[24] Grosser Rat des Kantons GR. Verordnung ueber die politischen Rechte,

2005.

[25] The Guardian. Whatsapp design feature means some encrypted messages

could be read by third party, 2017.

[26] Paul Kocher, Joshua Jaﬀe, and Benjamin Jun. Diﬀerential power analysis.
In Annual International Cryptology Conference, pages 388–397. Springer,
1999.

[27] Sanjay Kumar and Ekta Walia. Analysis of electronic voting system in
various countries. International Journal on Computer Science and Engi-
neering, 3(5):1825–1830, 2011.

18

[28] Leontine Loeber and Dutch Electoral Council. E-voting in the Netherlands;
from general acceptance to general doubt in two years. Electronic voting,
131:21–30, 2008.

[29] Natasha Lomas. Encrypted messaging platform whatsapp denies “back-

door” claim, 2017.

[30] Isbelia Mart´ın. 2004 Venezuelan Presidential Recall Referendum (2004
PRR): A Statistical Analysis from the Point of View of Electronic Voting
Data Transmissions. Statist. Sci., 26(4):528–542, 2011.

[31] Walter R. Mebane. The Wrong Man is President! Overvotes in the 2000
Presidential Election in Florida. Perspectives on Politics, 2(3):525–535,
2004.

[32] Ralph C Merkle. Secure communications over insecure channels. Commu-

nications of the ACM, 21(4):294–299, 1978.

[33] Wolfgang Rankl and Wolfgang Eﬃng. Smart card handbook. John Wiley

& Sons, 2004.

[34] Regierungsrat (of GL). Verordnung ¨uber die politischen Rechte, 2017.

[35] Republica e Cantone Ticino. Login per applicativo Votel. https://www.

votel.ti.ch, 2019.

[36] Riigikogu. Riigikogu Election Act, June 2002.

[37] Susan King Roth. Disenfranchised by design: voting systems and the elec-

tion process. Information Design Journal, 9(1):29–38, 1998.

[38] Sijmen Ruwhof. How to hack the upcoming Dutch elections – and how
hackers could have hacked all Dutch elections since 2009. https://sijmen.
ruwhof.net/weblog/1166-h, January 2017.

[39] R´epublique fran¸caise. Code ´electoral, April 2019.

[40] Thorsten Schr¨oder, Linus Neumann, and Martin Tschirsich. Analyse
einer Wahlsoftware. Technical report, Chaos Computer Club Deutschland,
September 2017.

[41] Schweizer Bundeskanzlei BK. BBl 2014 6129 - Bundesratsbeschluss ¨uber
das Ergebnis der Volksabstimmung vom 22. September 2013. https://
www.admin.ch/opc/de/federal-gazette/2014/6129.pdf, 2019.

[42] Schweizer Bundesrat.

Bundesratsbeschluss ¨uber das ergebnis der
volksabstimmung vom 3. m¨arz 2013. https://www.admin.ch/opc/de/
federal-gazette/2013/3129.pdf, 2013.

[43] Schweizer Bundesrat.

Bundesratsbeschluss ¨uber das ergebnis der
volksabstimmung vom 14. juni 2015. https://www.admin.ch/opc/de/
federal-gazette/2015/6313.pdf, 2015.

19

[44] Schweizerische Staatsschreiberkonferenz.
tronische Ergebnisermittlungssysteme.
umfrage-bezuglich-elektronische-ergebnisermittlungssysteme.

Umfrage bez¨uglich elek-
https://www.cce-ssk.ch/de/

[45] Manuela Schwesig. Die SPD geht in die Opposition – Schulz bleibt Parte-

ichef. Die Zeit, September 2017.

[46] Markus Sch¨on. Deutschlands Trump-Moment verunsichert B¨orsianer. Man-

ager Magazin, September 2017.

[47] Sesam AG. Sesam Wahlen. https://www.sesam-ag.ch/wahlen/, 2019.

[48] Sitrox AG. Welcome to Sitrox. https://www.sitrox.com/public/en,

2019.

[49] P. B. Stark and D. Wagner. Evidence-based elections.

IEEE Security

Privacy, 10(5):33–41, 2012.

[50] Switzerland,

Bundesamt

f¨ur

Statistik.

Wahlberechtigte, W¨ahlende, Wahlbeteiligung nach Kanton;
17.02.02.04.01, January 2016.

Nationalratswahlen:
je-d-

[51] Tagesanzeiger. Die Nationalbank m¨usste f¨ur 60 Milliarden Franken Gold

kaufen. Tagesanzeiger, October 2014.

[52] Tagesspiegel. Jamaika-Sondierungen starten am 18. Oktober. Tagesspiegel,

September 2017.

[53] The Electoral Comission.

https:
//www.electoralcommission.org.uk/find-information-by-subject/
elections-and-referendums/past-elections-and-referendums/
eu-referendum/electorate-and-count-information, June 2016.

EU Referendum Results.

[54] The Government

of

the

United Kingdom.

outcome:

erendum
electoralcommission.org.uk/find-information-by-subject/
elections-and-referendums/past-elections-and-referendums/
eu-referendum/electorate-and-count-information, June 2016.

statement.

PM

EU

ref-
https://www.

[55] Unisys, Chancellerie de Fribourg, SITel Fribourg.

SyGEV - guide
d’utilisation pour les communes. https://www.fr.ch/sites/default/
files/contens/cha/_www/files/pdf98/guide_utilisation_commune_
complementaire_ce_fr.pdf, 2018.

[56] United Kingdom. Representation of the People Act 1983, February 1983.

[57] United Kingdom Legislation. European Union Referendum Act 2015 (c.

36) , 2015.

[58] US Election Assistance Commission. Voluntary voting system guidelines.

Technical report, US Election Assistance Commission, 2015.

20

[59] Hans A. von Spakovsky. Protecting the integrity of the election process.
Election Law Journal: Rules, Politics, and Policy, 11(1):90–96, 2012.

[60] WhatsApp. Whatsapp encryption overview, technical white paper, 2017.

21

