Autonomous CPS mobility securely designed 

David Hofbauer1, Christoph Schmittner2, Manuela Brandstetter3, Markus Tauber3 
1Forschung Burgenland, Eisenstadt, Austria 
2Austrian Institute of Technology, Vienna, Austria 
3University of Applied Sciences Burgenland, Eisenstadt, Austria 

Abstract—In the last years the interconnection and ongoing 
development of physical systems combined with cyber resources 
has  led  to  increasing  automation.  Through  this  progress  in 
technology, autonomous vehicles, especially autonomous trains 
are getting more attention from industry and are already under 
test.  The  use  of  autonomous  trains  is  known  for  increasing 
operation  efficiency  and  reduction  of  personnel  and 
infrastructure costs, which is mostly considered for main tracks. 
However, for less-used secondary lines, autonomous trains and 
their  underlying  sensor  infrastructure  are  not  yet  considered. 
Thus, a system needs to be developed, which is less expensive for 
installation  and  operation  of  these  trains  and  underlying 
infrastructure  for  secondary  lines.  Therefore,  this  position 
paper describes the process of how to derive an approach to help 
develop a digital interlocking system at design time for the use 
with  secondary  railway  lines.  In  this  work,  we  motivate  the 
necessary research by investigating gaps in existing work as well 
as presenting a possible solution for this problem, a meta-model. 
The model considers safety, security as well as interoperability 
like  5G  and  socio-technical  aspects  to  provide  a  holistic 
modeling  approach  for  the  development  of  the  interlocking 
system for industrial secondary line use cases. 

Keywords—autonomous  train,  security,  safety,  meta-model, 

interoperability, interlocking system 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

Significant  progress  has  been  made  in  the  field  of 
automated and autonomous train services in recent years and 
the first autonomous trains are already under test [1]. One of 
the main motivations for increasing automation of train traffic 
is the associated increase in maximum capacity utilization. A 
digital  and  communication-based  moving  block  system,  in 
contrast  to  the  classic  fixed-block  system  defined  by 
infrastructure,  can  enable  a  significantly  higher  number  of 
trains without a physical expansion of the track infrastructure 
[2]. Based on this motivation, known systems, for instance the 
European Train Control System (ETCS Level 3), are primarily 
designed for the use on main tracks. Such modern rail control 
and management systems are currently in delayed or reduced 
development  on  secondary  railway  lines,  compared to  main 
lines. Secondary  (branch) lines, which are used e.g. in rural 
areas or also for industrial purposes, are mostly still controlled 
by  classic  train  protection  and  control  systems.  To  improve 
these,  in  addition  to  increasing  the  efficiency  of  operations, 
in  personnel  and 
cost  savings 
infrastructure costs are a potential advantage of autonomous 
train services for secondary lines. This requires systems that 
are  less  expensive  to  install  and  to  operate.  In  the  urban 
railway  sector,  communication-based  train  control  (CBTC) 
systems  show  that  automation  and  increase  in  efficiency  is 
feasible.  Such  systems  take  advantage  of  the  restricted  and 
controlled environment by using for example WLAN instead 
of GSM/LTE based communication [3].  

through  a 

reduction 

By taking advantage of the lower speeds and train numbers 
on  secondary  lines,  European  Rail  Traffic  Management 
System (ERTMS) compatible systems based on commercially 

autonomous 

available  hardware  and by  utilizing  existing  communication 
infrastructure  must  be  developed.  When  investigating  this 
development  of 
services,  many 
interconnected components need to be taken into account and 
addressed  to  avoid  certain  threats  and  vulnerabilities.  This 
interconnectivity of components in combination with security, 
safety and interoperability (e.g. concerning external interfaces 
and socio-technical factors) needs to be considered.   

train 

To  address  these  issues,  an  interlocking  system  for 
autonomous  trains  on  secondary  lines  will  be  developed. 
Interlocking systems serve as the basis for autonomous trains 
and enable the interaction and control with the railway. This 
will be based on an existing interlocking system for industrial 
railways,  which  is  already  using  industrial  off  the  shelf 
components. This explains the practical use case, which will 
be  developed  in  the  context  of  the  acknowledged  future 
research  project.  However,  to  support  the  development  and 
design  of  the  above-mentioned  interlocking  system,  by 
considering security, safety as well as interoperability aspects 
based  on  actual  industrial  use  cases,  a  meta-model  will  be 
developed. Thus, risk analysis, security & safety concepts as 
well  as  external  interfaces  must  be  evaluated  and  adapted. 
This  is  also  motivated  by  the  potential  usage  of  wireless 
communication like 5G and when incorporating 3rd party and 
end  user  devices,  for  which  human  socio-technical  factors 
must also be considered. The interlocking system, combined 
with a newly developed management system, can be used as a 
basis  for  further  automation  towards  fully  autonomous 
systems.  Particular  emphasis  is  placed  on  what  we  call 
Railway  Operation  as  a  Service  (ROaaS),  a  service  for 
managing the sensor data and derive appropriate actions in a 
logical central and scalable place e.g. a cloud, as well as end 
user  aspects  such  as  human-machine 
interaction  and 
communication  with  external  systems  and  their  impact  on 
hazards and risks, as well as user behavior in relation to the 
system. 

Therefore,  the  overall  research  issues  addressed  by  our 
work  beyond  this  position  paper  focus  on  providing  an 
approach to support the design of a digital interlocking system 
by integrating security and safety as well as  interoperability 
(external  devices,  5G,  socio-technical)  aspects  for  the 
autonomous  railway  domain.  This  should  help  to  identify 
threats and vulnerabilities at design time  and thus to build a 
secure system. Our proposed solution for this approach will be 
a  meta-model  for  autonomous  trains,  which  includes  all  the 
above-mentioned  aspects,  that  should be  easy  to  understand 
and  to  reuse  for  further  use  cases  in  this  industry.  It  will 
include  all  mentioned  aspects  by  dividing  components  into 
different component perspectives (e.g. safety, security, etc.), 
which will be described through modeling languages in detail. 
Use cases can then be checked with this model, to see, which 
components need to be addressed in the design phase of the 
system.  This  contribution  should  help  improve  operation 
efficiency and reduction of costs on less-used secondary lines. 
However, the purpose of this position paper is to investigate 
the need of this research by providing an  outline of gaps in 

 
existing work. Further the potential of the meta-model should 
be described by showing our process of how to develop one. 
To summarize, the position paper investigates a meta-model 
based approach for supporting the safe and secure design of 
such  a  cyber-physical  system  (CPS)  for  controlling  and 
managing autonomous railway systems. 

The  remainder  of  the  paper  is  structured  as  follows: 
Section 2 shows related work concerning the most important 
topics of our paper and how our work will enhance and use 
this existing literature. Next, section 3 will describe the work 
towards  the  development  of  the  meta-model.  It  will  discuss 
interoperability, 
use 
information 
background  information  about  available  technology  and 
approaches as well as the actual model derivation. Finally, in 
section  4  we  summarize  the  approach  and  how  our  work 
beyond this position paper will go on. 

concerning 

cases, 

II.  RELATED WORK 

Related  work  includes  research  concerning  autonomous 
vehicles,  meta-modeling,  consolidation  of 
threat  and 
vulnerability  catalogs  as  well  as  security,  safety  and 
interoperability  aspects,  which  should  show  the  gaps  in 
existing work and how we will enhance it. 

Zafar  et  al  [2]  examined  railway  interlocking  systems 
concerning safety. They conducted a formal analysis of safety 
properties of moving block systems to prevent collision and 
derailing of trains at critical components of train systems. By 
using graph theory and Z notation, a step-by-step procedure 
was  done  to  reduce  the  complexity  of  these  systems.  They 
formalized  the  abstract  safety  properties  and  afterwards 
redefined  them  by  applying  it  to  the  moving  block  system. 
Also, computer-based controls for monitoring trains and state 
space  was  done.  Our  work  could  investigate  the  use  of  this 
approach for modeling safety aspects. Nevertheless, they did 
not  investigate  interoperability  and  dependencies  to  other 
aspects, e.g. security, which we will examine in our work by 
creating a meta-model, which also includes security, external 
factors as well as their dependencies. 

Strobl  et  al  [4]  investigated  threats  and  vulnerabilities 
regarding  autonomous  cars.  Based  on  component  and  data 
flow modeling, security threats and vulnerabilities concerning 
each  component  were  gathered  by  investigating  related 
literature. A catalog was derived, which lists all found threats 
and  vulnerabilities  per  system  component.  These  findings 
were in the end used to find the most crucial component of a 
connected  car  with  hindsight  to  security.  This  process  of 
component modeling and the derivation of the catalog can also 
be used for the development of the meta-model, which also 
has  to  include  threats  that  need  to  be  addressed  when 
developing a secure interlocking system. But in contrast to this 
work  we  will  investigate  autonomous  trains  on  secondary 
lines in combination with safety aspects. 

In  [5]  Schmittner  et  al.  investigated  so-called  cyber-
physical  systems  (CPS),  which  combine  physical  machines 
with computational components. This correlation posed new 
challenges in terms of security and safety. Previously, these 
were  treated  separately,  but  through  this  combination,  new 
holistic approaches for safety and security analyses are needed 
to identify safety failures and security threats as well as their 
interoperability.  Thus,  they  investigated  two  promising 
methods for this identification through the help of a use case 
concerning  connected,  intelligent  vehicles.  The  outcome 
showed  that  both  used  methods  have  the  problem  that 

interoperability  between  safety  and  security  was  integrated 
insufficiently  and  needs  improvement.  Our  work  will  make 
use  of  such  identification  methods  but  extends  them  by 
integrating  the  needed  interoperability  in  a  meta-model  for 
autonomous trains. 

Concerning meta-modeling, Bicaku et. al [6] investigated 
how to ensure trustworthy communication from edge devices 
to the backend infrastructure in Industry 4.0. Therefore, they 
developed  a  meta-model  based  on  existing  ones,  e.g. 
RAMI4.0, to describe end-to-end communication for Industry 
4.0  use  cases.  They  also  addressed  dependencies,  interfaces 
and  security  challenges  in  their  developed  model.  This 
outcome can now be used as a tool to identify dependencies 
between  Cyber  Physical  Production  Systems 
(CPPS) 
components  to  help  define  clear  monitoring  points  for  a 
system.  In  contrast  to  this  work,  our  paper  focuses  on 
developing 
trains. 
Nevertheless,  their  approach of deriving a  model  as  well  as 
including  dependencies  can  also  help  developing  our  meta-
model, especially concerning the security part. 

a  meta-model 

autonomous 

for 

Bless  et  al.  [7]  investigated  the  deployment  of  critical 
infrastructure  to  the  cloud  caused  by  its  rapid  and  flexible 
service deployment possibility. However, this raised questions 
concerning privacy, security and resilience, which are stricter 
in this sector than in the general consumer market. Based on 
legal  regulations,  they  investigated  salutations  for  fault 
identification  and  localization.  But  to  understand  such  a 
complex system, a meta-model needed to be developed. Thus, 
they  derived  an  architectural  model  for  critical  cloud 
infrastructure 
in  cloud  computing.  Further 
investigation concerning moving critical services to the cloud 
was done in [8], in which a risk assessment method for this 
critical  infrastructure  shift  was  presented  for  which  they 
risk 
extended  well  established 
assessment methods. Our work can use and build on this meta-
model derivation as well as risk assessment methods because 
it also concerns critical infrastructure. But in contrast to their 
work,  we  will  assess risks and develop a  model  concerning 
autonomous train secondary line use cases. 

information 

services 

security 

In this work [9] an approach was investigated of how to 
derive  requirements  and  controls  from  important  known 
security  standards.  A  catalog  was  formed  as  a  security 
checklist for secure use cases in the Industry 4.0 domain. One 
outcome showed, which requirements in an industrial security 
use  case  need  to  be  investigated  the  most  caused  by  its 
importance and thus shows how controls from standards can 
be fulfilled to achieve higher security. Our work can make use 
of this investigation approach for the modeling of autonomous 
train components to find the ones, which are more important 
than  others.  Also,  the  controls  derivation  method  could  be 
used in our work. But in contrast to this paper, we focus on 
developing  a  meta-model  and  including  standards  for 
autonomous trains, which should include next to security also 
safety standards. 

implementation  of 

Brandstetter  et  al.  [10]  researched  major  impulses  for 
technological  impact  assessment  in  general  as  well  as  in 
specific  security  matters.  In preliminary  studies (e.  g. about 
the 
in 
organizations),  knowledge-sociological  hermeneutics  in  a 
participatory  design  was  used  to  investigate  the  need  for 
discretion of  users, employees, experts,  researchers and  key 
decision-makers.  They  found  out,  that  shared  responsibility 
and  trust  as  well  as  good  information  concerning  new 

steganographic  methods 

technologies are the major conditions for a proper function of 
the  technology  itself.  Via  simulating  highly  sensitive  issues 
and scenarios, the technology evaluation is carried out in this 
project  too.  Social  and  legal  impact  of  the  meta-model  is 
directy linked to a solid confidence-building programme. This 
work can be used as basis for our socio-technological aspects 
investigation  and  integration  into  the  meta-model  and  will 
thus  be  enhanced  by  social  aspects  concerning  autonomous 
trains. 

III.   META-MODEL DEVELOPMENT 

In this section, we present our intended research approach 
to develop a meta-model, which will be divided in three sub-
sections: (A) Use Case: Description of the use case, for which 
the meta-model will be derived; (B) Interoperability: Aspects, 
which  must be investigated and included in the meta-model 
will be listed in order to understand the meta-model build-up; 
and (C) Modeling, which presents our first modeling ideas and 
approaches. 

A.  Use Case 

Through  the  growing  interconnection  of  components 
within  trains  and  the  usage  of  Internet-of-Things  (IoT) 
technologies and sensors, trains get increasingly complex but 
also increasingly autonomous. To develop these autonomous 
trains, which are thus so-called CPS [5], new approaches and 
tools  are  needed,  which  concern 
the  components’ 
dependencies  and  interoperability  (e.g.  safety  and  security). 
We  will  develop  such  a  tool,  which  will  support  the  cost-
efficient design and development of a digital train interlocking 
system. 

Our work is based on use cases, which will be investigated 
in detail and with the help of industry partners, to derive the 
meta-model.  More  precisely,  we  will  examine  autonomous 
trains  on  secondary  branch  lines.  Especially  for  secondary 
lines, autonomous trains can achieve higher mobility for e.g. 
rural areas.  Furthermore,  autonomous  systems  can lead  to  a 
cost  reduction  using  cheaper  new  infrastructure  (e.g.  IoT 
sensors)  and  partly  already  used  infrastructure  instead  of 
building everything from scratch. The use cases for secondary 
lines will be identified by the help of industry partners and will 
in  the  end  be  evaluated  with  the  meta-model  to  identify 
everything, which needs to be considered in order to design 
and develop a secure digital interlocking system. 

B.  Interoperability Aspects 

To develop reliable and resilient systems, it is important to 
identify security and safety relevant aspects prior to the actual 
development. This topic is a very complex one in the railway 
sector. Safety has always been part of reliability availability, 
maintainability and safety (RAMS), which is regulated within 
standards  [11],  [12].  It  has  been  addressed  by  the  use  of  a 
safety  case  regulated  by  these  standards,  security  elements 
were only addressed concerning access protection to railway 
controls  systems.  Therefore,  a  holistic  approach  is  needed, 
which must combine safety as well as security. Security and 
safety  relevant  attributes  of  system  components  will  be  an 
essential part of the meta-model, also considering threats and 
vulnerabilities  for  each  component.  Through  the  help  of 
certain security and safety standard controls [9] as well as the 
usage of fundamental safety and security analysis tools (e.g. 
STRIDE,  DREAD,  FMEA),  components  as  well  as  their 
threats and vulnerabilities can be identified and addressed. 

Previous work on meta-models often addressed industrial 
plants [6], which have overlapping with the railway domain 
systems  are 
but  also  distinct  differences.  Railway 
geographically  much  more  distributed  than  industrial  plants 
and instead of building an own communication infrastructure, 
an external common infrastructure can be used (e.g. 5G in the 
near  future).  When  using  wireless  communication,  another 
important  factor,  which  needs  to  be  considered  concerns 
external  3rd  party  components,  for  instance  end-user  or  IoT 
devices.  For  this,  also  socio-technical  questions  need  to  be 
investigated to get an overall view of the autonomous railway 
system,  which  must  include  every  tiny  important  aspect. 
Therefore, our  meta-model  will  address  this  interoperability 
by integrating, next to security and safety, dependencies of 5G 
technology and socio-technical aspects as well as concerning 
end-user devices and 3rd party components connected with the 
railway system.  

In  general,  interoperability  is  an  important  issue  in  the 
railway  domain:  on  the  one  hand  rolling  stock  and 
infrastructure  need  to  be  compatible,  which  is  provided  by 
different manufacturers and all have different lifecycles. On 
the other, infrastructure is widely stationary but rolling stock 
is in motion. For this, the system must work reliable and all 
components need to cooperate with each other in a secure way. 
Thus,  our  meta-model  will  include  this  topic  by  also 
investigating  railway  interoperability  frameworks,  e.g.  [13], 
but  will  extend  them  by  integrating  3rd  party  devices,  5G, 
socio-technical  aspects,  security  as  well  as  safety.  The  next 
section  explains  in  detail  the  derivation  of  a  meta-model 
including all these aspects. 

C.  Modeling 

An  important  tool  to  design  and  document  complex 
systems is an adaptable meta-model. In the railway domain, 
the Euro-Interlocking Project of the UIC tried to develop such 
a model but no official solution has yet been published. Thus, 
at 
interlocking  systems  are  adapted  by 
proprietary  projection  tools  or  manually  to  laws  and 
regulations  in  different  countries,  which  is  one  of  the  main 
factors for high costs of these systems [14]. 

the  moment, 

Caused  by  this,  meta-models  from  other  industrial 
domains  need  to  be  investigated  to  find  an  appropriate 
modeling solution for the railway domain. These can serve as 
motivation and basis for the development of the railway meta-
model.  One  promising  reference  model  is  the  reference 
architectural  model  Industry  4.0  (RAMI4.0)  [15],  which 
serves as a guidance for Industry 4.0. It describes key elements 
of  objects  or  assets  based  on  the  usage  of  a  layer  model, 
composed of three axes: (i) architectural axis (decomposition 
of a machine into its properties structured layer by layer), (ii) 
process axis (life cycle & value streams) and (iii) hierarchical 
included  an 
axis 
“administrative shell”, that shows a virtual representation of 
real assets and provides information about status of assets and 
data during its lifecycle. 

(IT  &  control  systems). 

It  also 

A  further  meta-model  was  derived  based  on  RAMI4.0, 
which should support the understanding of complex systems, 
cyber-physical  production  systems  (CPPS).  It  was  used  to 
describe  autonomous  systems  and  is  an  example  usage  of 
RAMI4.0. This CPPS meta-model can thus be used as a tool 
to describe different CPPS use cases for Industry 4.0 [6].  

Another  example  is  the  Internet  Reference  Architecture 
(IIRA)  [16],  which  is  an  open  standard  architecture  for  the 

design of Industrial Internet Systems (IIS). Based on ISO/IEC 
42010 standard specifications for complex systems consisting 
of multiple components and interconnected systems, the IIRA 
defines  the  most  important  components  of  the  industrial 
internet architecture categorized in: Implementation, function, 
usage and business viewpoint. 

To represent physical things in the digital world, to model 
and describe them, a so-called “Digital Twin” can be used. A 
“Digital  Twin”  consists  of  a  physical  product,  a  virtual 
product  and  connected  data  that  tie  the  physical  and  virtual 
product [17]. It can be seen as a “shell” that, depending on the 
application, further consists of sub-models. There are already 
sub-models  that  concern  security  and  safety  as  well  as 
depending  standards  but  they  are  considered  as  static 
information  and  do  not  concern 
interoperability  or 
autonomous vehicles. 

The  above-mentioned  meta-models  are  a  good  basis  for 
our  planned  modeling  approach  but  are  too  general  for  the 
concrete use case. Also, currently there are many development 
approaches  concerning  the  railway  domain,  which  offer  a 
broad  perspective:  (i)  The  RailTopoModel  [18]  offers  a 
common language for railway infrastructure data, which could 
be use in every area of the railway domain; (ii) Planpro [19], 
developed by the “Deutsche Bahn”, was developed to support 
the  planning  and  construction  of  control  systems  in  general 
and  electronic  interlocking  systems;  (iii)    the  so-called 
infrastructure data management for transportation companies 
(IDMVU)  [20]  serves  as  the  basis  for  a  logical  data  model 
based  on  infrastructure  assets  for  transportation  companies; 
(iv) lastly, the outcome of the international project IFC-RAIL 
[21] will provide a global standard for the planning, drafting, 
constructing as well as maintenance for railway systems. But 
none of these mentioned approaches concern the digitalization 
of  interlocking  systems  for  secondary  lines  or  a  holistic 
approach  by  including  e.g.  safety,  security  and  other 
mentioned aspects and thus can just be used as the basis for 
our meta-model for autonomous trains. 

However, for the design and documentation of use cases 
in the autonomous railway domain, it is important to provide 
such  a  structured  modeling  tool  for  the  definition  and 
explanation of all components. Especially, to comprehend and 
document  the  dependencies  between  security  and  safety 
is  necessary. 
aspects  of  components, 
Furthermore, interoperability concerning new communication 
technologies (5G) as well as corresponding 3rd party devices 
and thus socio-technical aspects needs to be addressed in this 
domain.  For  this,  typical components  concerning  automated 
railway control systems will be consolidated, cataloged and its 
dependencies  will  be  integrated  in  a  meta-model.  The 
outcome  should support the development of a secure digital 
interlocking system at design time. 

the  meta-model 

To  create  a  meta-model,  a  specific  modeling  language 
must be  used. UML (unified modeling language) or SysML 
(systems  modeling  language)  are  known  languages.  Since 
UML  was  adopted,  it  became  more  and  more  popular  for 
software engineers [22]. This software focus has discouraged 
systems engineers at first but has been adapted to the systems 
engineer domain over the years. This led to the development 
of  SysML,  a  standard  modeling  language  for  systems 
engineering,  which  should  support  the  modeling  of  a  broad 
range  of  systems  through  adapting  UML  and  adding  better 
terminology.  Nevertheless,  both  modeling  languages  are 
appropriate for the autonomous railway meta-model and will 

be  used.  For  the  creation  of  the  meta-model  itself,  ADOxx 
[23]  or  the  Eclipse  Modeling  Framework  [24]  are  possible 
modeling software solutions. 

Figure 1 shows an example of how a possible meta-model 
could  look  like.  In  general,  a  meta-model  is  based  on 
perspectives [25], which for our use case, designing a digital 
interlocking system for secondary lines, could be e.g. safety, 
security,  social  as  well  as  needed  hardware  and  software. 
Within perspectives, components can be added, for example 
hardware components can be the mentioned external devices 
or  certain  cables,  which  connect  components,  whereas 
software  can  be  a  specific  app  to  control  hardware  or  to 
monitor certain safety aspects. Security could be a protocol or 
an encryption algorithm, socio technical aspects could include 
passengers  (using  mobile  phones)  and  safety  could  include 
e.g.  the  locking  of  train  doors.  All  autonomous  railway 
components  could  easily  be  integrated.  Dependencies  and 
interoperability  are  shown  by  so-called  connectors,  which 
connect every necessary component and thus perspective with 
each other, which is a goal of our meta-model. This approach 
of Figure 1 only shows one possible progress and buildup of 
the meta-model and is not a final version. However, it should 
give a first idea of how it will look like. The aspects within 
each  perspective  (Device,  App,  etc.)  are  just  examples.  All 
real aspects will be listed, described and evaluated in detail in 
the future meta-model.  

Figure 1: High level meta-model approach for ROoaS 

The next step would be the description of the model. XML 
would be a possible solution to achieve this. In a high-level 
XML code, Figure 1 could look like this: 

<Class> 
    ID 
    Safety < Component 1, C2, Cn > 
    Security < C1, C2, Cn > 
    Social < C1, C2, Cn > 
    Hardware < C1, C2, Cn > 
    Software < C1, C2, Cn > 
</Class> 

<C1> 
    CID 
    Type< CloudSec, Tracks, IoT, 3rdParty > 
    Threat<T1, T2, Tn> 
    Vulnerability<V1, V2, Vn> 
    Dependency<D1, D2, Dn> 
</C1> 

The class (<Class>) describes the modeling approach in 
general. All perspectives (in this case: safety, security, social, 
hardware, software) are included and within perspectives the 

 
 
 
components  are  described.  To  explain  further,  an  example 
subclass  of  a  component  is  shown  (<C1>),  which  has  to 
include the component’s ID, the type (e.g. Track, IoT Devices, 
etc.), threats, vulnerabilities as well as dependencies to other 
components. By using XML, every component, perspective, 
threat,  dependency,  etc.  can  be  described  in  their  own 
subclass,  which  creates  a  simple  yet  hierarchical  build-up 
structure.  Figure  2  thus  shows  this  structure  with  safety  as 
example tree. Again, as explained above, this is just a first idea 
to show a possible approach and will be evaluated in detail in 
our future work beyond this position paper. 

Figure 2: Hierarchical structure of possible modeling approach 

Through such a simple approach, the build-up of a meta-
model  would  be  well-described  and  easy  for  everyone  to 
understand. This is very important to support the design of the 
digital interlocking system as well as to reuse the meta-model 
for future autonomous railway domain purposes. 

Figure 3: Overview of the meta-model components 

Figure  3  shows  a  final  overview  concerning  this  modeling 
section. The meta-model will be based on these four “pillars”, 
which  will  all  influence  the  setup  of  the  model  and  thus 
summarize our approach: 
•  Component Catalog: This catalog  will be used to build 
the meta-model from scratch. Security as well as safety 
related standards, threat and vulnerability catalogs, etc. 
concerning  autonomous  trains  need  to  be  investigated 
and developed to get an overview of all components that 
need to be secured. 

•  Modeling  Concepts:  Caused  by  the  fact  that  no  usable 
meta-models concerning our topic have been produced 
until now, we have to investigate already in use models 
and  approaches  (also  from  other  domains)  to  get  ideas 
and  develop  a  steady  meta-model  concerning  all 
components. 

• 

•  Use  Case:  A  use  case  for  autonomous  trains  on 
secondary  (branch)  lines  will  be  investigated.  The 
potential advantage of this is the increasing efficiency of 
operations as well as cost savings through reduction in 
personnel and infrastructure. 
Interoperability:  A  main  aspect,  which  enhances  our 
work in contrast to others is the interoperability factor. 
Often this is not addressed when working with topics like 
security  and  safety.  In  addition,  we  will  include  and 
investigate  these  in  combination  with  new  possible 
common communication channels (5G) and thus socio-
technical aspects concerning 3rd party devices (e.g. end-
user devices, IoT). 

IV.  CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK 

In  this position  paper,  a  meta-model based  approach  for 
supporting  the  safe and  secure design of cps  for controlling 
and managing autonomous railwail system is investigated. A 
use  case  in  the  railway  domain  was  presented.  Less-used 
secondary  (branch)  railway  lines  can  benefit  from  a  current 
topic,  the  autonomous  railway.  More  and  more  lines  are 
closed because operation costs cannot be covered but through 
the  help  of  such  cyber-physical  systems,  autonomous 
vehicles,  higher  efficiency  of  operations  and  cost  reduction 
through  personnel  reduction  can  be  achieved.  For  this,  less 
expensive systems to install and operate are needed and new 
approaches have to be developed. Thus, a digital interlocking 
system for autonomous trains on secondary lines, which we 
call Railway operation as a Service, should be developed. But 
to accordingly design and build this, a tool is needed to support 
this development already at design time. A possible way to do 
this, is to create a meta-model, which can help model the use 
case and provide a holistic approach of how the system should 
look  like  and  to  show,  which  important  aspects  need  to  be 
considered.  

When looking at related work, separate topics concerning 
this  system  have  been  investigated  but  none  of  these 
approaches  have  been  combined  or  adjusted  to  the  railway 
domain: Digital interlocking systems have been designed but 
not adopted to autonomous trains and secondary lines; many 
meta-models  were  produced  but  not  for the  railway  domain 
for  autonomous  trains  for  this  use  case;  security  and  safety 
were often investigated but never efficiently combined for this 
domain in an appropriate way. Although none of this related 
research  has  addressed  our  topic  appropriately,  all  these 
approaches have to be investigated to see if they could also fit 
for the development of our meta-model. 

Therefore, the future meta-model for the use case should 
include many specific aspects as well as their interoperability 
and  dependencies.  By  creating  a  component  catalog  and 
adding  threats  and  vulnerabilities  to  it,  an  overview  of  the 
railway should be defined. By using already established meta-
model approaches from other domains as basis ideas, a new 
meta-model  should  then  be  formed  by  also  integrating  the 
catalog.  The  model  should  especially  be  focused  on  the 
following aspects: Security, safety and interoperability, which 
includes  new  communication  channels  for  the  autonomous 
train  (5G  technology)  as  well  as  3rd  party  devices  (mobile 
devices, IoT) for which also socio-technical dependencies will 
be investigated and included. 

The approach presented in this position paper should be a 
first  possible  projection  of  the  meta-model  derivation. 

 
 
[8]   T. Hecht, P. Smith and M. Schöller, "Critical Services in the Cloud: 
Understanding  Security  and  Resiliene  Risks," 
IEEE  6th 
International Workshop on Reliable Networks Design and Modeling 
(RNDM), 2014.  

in 

[9]   D. Hofbauer, I. Ivkic, S. Maksuti, A. Aldrian and M. Tauber, "On the 
Cost  of  Security  Compliance  in  Information  Systems,"  in  10th 
International  Multi-Conference  on  Complexity,  Informatics  and 
Cybernetics (IMCIC 2019), 2019.  

[10]  M.  Brandstetter,  S.  Sommer  and  M.  Schmidberger,  Die  Funktion 
verdeckter 
eine 
Technikfolgenabschätzung zur Steganographie, Wien/München: LIT-
Verlag, 2010.  

Kommunikation. 

Impulse 

für 

[11]  DIN  EN  50126,  "Railway  Applications  -  The  Specification  and 
Demonstration  of  Reliability,  Availability,  Maintainability  And 
Safety (RAMS) - Part 1: Generic Rams Process," 2000. 

[12]  DIN EN 50128, "Railway Applications - Communication, Signalling 
And  Processing  Systems  -  Software  for  Railway  Control  and 
Protection Systems," 2012. 

[13]  European  Union  Agency  for  Railways,  "Progress  with  railway 
interoperability  in  the  European  Union,"  Publications  Office  of  the 
European Union, Luxembourg, 2016. 

[14]  N.  König  and  C.  de  Courcey-Bayley,  "EURO-INTERLOCKING  - 

Project Declaration," 1999. 

[15]  M.  Hankel  and  B.  Rexroth,  "The  reference  architectural  model 

industrie 4.0 (rami 4.0)," ZVEI, 2015. 

[16]  S.  Lin,  B.  Miller,  J.  Durand,  R.  Joshi,  P.  Didier  and  A.  Chigani, 
internet  reference  architecture,"  Industrial  Internet 

"Industrial 
Consortium (IIC), Tech. Rep., 2015. 

[17]  F. Tao, J. Cheng, Q. Qi, M. Zhang, H. Zhang and F. Sui, "Digital twin-
driven product design, manufacturing and service with big data," The 
International  Journal  of  Advanced  Manufacturing  Technology,  vol. 
94, no. 9-12, 2018.  

[18]  International  Union  of  Railways,  "RTM  -  RailTopoModel,"  2019. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.railtopomodel.org/en/. [Accessed 25 
02 2019]. 

[19]  Deutsche Bahn AG, "DB Netze PlanPro," 2017. [Online]. Available: 

https://fahrweg.dbnetze.com/fahrweg-
de/unternehmen/dienstleister/PlanPro. [Accessed 25 02 2019]. 

[20]  S. von der Ruhren and B. Weidner, "IDMVU Schlussbericht," 2014. 

[21]  IFC  Infrastructure,  "IFC  Infra(structure),"  [Online].  Available: 

http://ifcinfra.com/. [Accessed 18 09 2018]. 

[22]  M.  Hause,  "The  SysML  modelling  language,"  Fifteenth  European 

Systems Engineering Conference, vol. 9, pp. 1-12, 2006.  

[23]  BOC  Asset  Management  GmbH,  "ADOxx,"  [Online].  Available: 

https://www.adoxx.org/live/home. [Accessed 26 02 2019]. 

[24]  Eclipse  Foundation,  "Eclipse  Modeling  Framerowrk  (EMF)," 
https://www.eclipse.org/modeling/emf/. 

Available: 
[Online]. 
[Accessed 26 02 2019]. 

[25]  S. Maksuti, A. Bicaku, M. Tauber, S. Palkovits-Rauter, S. Haas and J. 
Delsing, "Towards Flexible and Secure End-to-End Communication 
in Industry 4.0," in 15th IEEE International Conference on Industrial 
Informatics (INDIN), 2017.  

Therefore, a setup of perspectives (Figure 1), which include 
the focus aspects, is presented for the meta-model. This can be 
easily described in XML and can also be  modeled by using 
notations  e.g.  UML  or  SysML.  Through  this  setup,  a 
hierarchical structure could be derived (Figure 2), which has 
the advantage of being easy to understand and to reproduce, 
which  is  important  for  possible  further  use  cases  in  this 
domain.  Figure  3  shows  the  meta-model  approach  again  in 
general, which includes every important aspect that needs to 
be considered during the development of the model. 

Thus, the current situation of the secondary line use case 
will be improved by the development of this meta-model. No 
approach concerning this use case and all mentioned aspects 
has been developed or used until now. Therefore, a holistic, 
overall  view  specifically  addressing  this  sector  will  be 
provided by our future meta-model. 

The future work beyond this position paper comprises the 
development  of  the  meta-model  with  all  its  interoperability 
aspects. The next steps include the exact definition of the use 
case  in  conjunction  with  a  requirements  catalog.  Based  on 
that, components should be derived, cataloged and threats as 
well as vulnerabilities gathered. During this phase the safety, 
security and interoperability aspects for the use case and meta-
model are also investigated and integrated. After finishing the 
meta-model,  the  applicability  of  it  should  be  evaluated  in  a 
real scenario, where the development of a digital interlocking 
system for Railway operation as a Service should be supported 
at design time using the meta-model. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

Research  leading  to  these  results  has  received  funding 
from the project BESTE-AB, funded by the Austrian Research 
Promotion  Agency  (FFG),  coordinated  by  the  Austrian 
Institute of Technology. 

REFERENCES 

[1]   Railway  Gazette,  "Rio  Tinto  operates  first  fully-autonomous  test 
Available: 

train," 
https://www.railwaygazette.com/news/single-view/view/rio-tinto-
operates-first-fully-autonomous-test-train.html.  [Accessed  05  02 
2019]. 

[Online]. 

2017 

02. 

10 

[2]   N. A. Zafar, S. A. Khan and K. Araki, "Towards the safety properties 
of moving block railway interlocking system," International Journal 
of Innovative Computing Information and Control,  vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 
5677-5690, 2012.  

[3]   B. Chen, C. Schmittner, Z. Ma, W. G. Temple, X. Dong, D. Jones and 
W. H. Sanders, "Security analysis of urban railway systems: the need 
for  a  cyber-physical  perspective,"  in  International  Conference  on 
Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security, 2014.  

[4]   S. Strobl, D. Hofbauer, C. Schmittner, S. Maksuti, M. Tauber and J. 
Delsing, "Connected Cars - Threats, Vulnerabilities and their Impact," 
in  1st  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Industrial  Cyber-Physical 
Systems (ICPS 2018), 2018.  

[5]   C. Schmittner, Z. Ma, E. Schoitsch and T. Gruber, "A case study of 
FMVEA and CHASSIS as safety and security co-analysis method for 
automotive cyber-physical systems," in 1st ACM Workshop on Cyber-
Physical System Security, 2015.  

[6]   A. Bicaku, S. Maksuti, S. Palkovits-Rauter, M. Tauber, R. Matischek, 
C.  Schmittner,  G.  Mantas,  M.  Thron  and  J.  Delsing,  "Towards 
Trustworthy  End-to-end  Communication  in  Industry  4.0,"  in  15th 
IEEE  International  Conference  on  Industrial  Informatics  (INDIN 
2017), 2017.  

[7]   R.  Bless,  D.  Hutchison,  M.  Schnöller,  P.  Smith  and  M.  Tauber, 
"SECCRIT: Secure Cloud Computing for High Assurance Services," 
ERCIM News, no. 95, 2013.  

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
