CYBER SECURITY INSIGHTS INTO SELF-
PROCLAIMED VIRTUAL WORLD HACKERS 

Nicholas Patterson, Michael Hobbs, Frank Jiang  
and Lei Pan 

School of Information Technology, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia 

ABSTRACT 

Virtual worlds have become highly popular in recent years with reports of over a billion people 
accessing  these  environments  and  the  virtual  goods  market  growing  to  near  50  billion  US 
dollars. An undesirable outcome to this popularity and market value is thriving criminal activity 
in these worlds.  The most profitable cyber security problem in virtual worlds is named Virtual 
Property Theft.  The aim of this study is to use an online survey to gain insight into how hackers 
(n=100) in these synthetic worlds conduct their criminal activity. This survey is the first to report 
an insight into the criminal mind of hackers (virtual thieves).  Results showed a clear-cut profile 
of a virtual property thief, they appear to be mainly aged 20-24 years of age, live in the United 
States of America, while using virtual worlds for 5-7 hours a day. These and the other key results 
of this  study  will  provide  a pathway  for  designing  an effective anti-theft  framework  capable  of 
abolishing this cyber security issue. 

KEYWORDS 

Virtual  world  environments,  virtual  property  theft,  cyber  security,  hackers,  massively 
multiplayer online games 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

The  problem  related  to  cyber  security  is  becoming  increasingly  challenging  due  to  escalating 
security attacks on networks [1] as evident by recent attacks by the  hacking group ‘Anonymous’ 
[2]  and  the  director  of  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation  stating  that  cybercrime  will  eclipse 
terrorism [3]. The issues involving cyber security brings with it many dilemmas; does cybercrime 
denote the emergence of a new form of crime or criminality? The major issue with cyber security 
offences like hacking is whether crime follows opportunity, specifically the criminal exploitation 
of internet technologies such as online payments, auctions, gaming, social networking sites [4] and 
in the case of this paper virtual worlds. 

There  is  an  ever-increasing  popularity  with  second  generation  internet-based  services  which 
encourage  online  collaboration  and  sharing  among  users,  for  example  Web  2.0  and  virtual 
communities [4] such as the virtual world Second Life [5]. Virtual Worlds Environments (VWEs) 
are essentially computer based simulated environments whereby users can create an avatar (digital 
character) to represent themselves and then  enter into  the ‘virtual world’ and  interact with  other 
users (or their avatars) in real time, they can participate in games, discussions and professions, as 
well as an economy based on the trading of  virtual world currency and  goods.  In this paper we 
define VWEs as an online persistent social space, which aims to simulate the real world as much 
as possible to create an effect of immersion.  

As  mentioned users engage in an economy based  on virtual property items and virtual currency; 
these  items  play  a  key  role  in  improving  the  ability  or  visual appearance  of  avatars,  due  to  this 
effect they can take a combination of time and effort to gather.  This requirement of time and effort 
Natarajan Meghanathan et al. (Eds) : CSITEC, CMCA, SP, NECOM, ADCO - 2019 
pp. 73-87, 2019. © CS & IT-CSCP 2019                                                          DOI: 10.5121/csit.2019.91107 

 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74                                    Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 

has  brought  forth  many  users  who  are  more  than  willing  to  pay  ‘real  money’  to  buy  virtual 
property so that they can upgrade their avatars [6] and increase their status in the virtual world [4]. 
The  fact  that  users  are  purchasing  these  items  has  led  to  detrimental  effects  on  VWEs  such  as 
increases in online cheating, theft, robbery and much more [6]. The most common cyber security 
issue that is occurring in VWEs and the highlight of this paper is the offence of Virtual Property 
Theft  (VPT);  this  entails  the  online  digital  theft  of  another  user’s  virtual  property  items  from 
within  a  VWE.    This  theft  can  originate  from  such  acts  as  hacking,  deception  or  trickery  and 
sometimes  even robbery. The population of  VWEs has increased  dramatically  over the past few 
years, Watters [7] announced that registered users of virtual worlds reached one billion worldwide. 
With  regards  to  the  market  value  of  virtual  property  sales,  virtual  world’s  expert  Marcus 
Eikenberry estimated it to be between 10 and 50 billion US dollars [8]. Many users of VWEs have 
invested large amounts of real money to gain virtual property in their virtual accounts and VPT is 
not just costing the users in terms of loss of virtual property but also in terms of real money. Taken 
together, the growth in VWE users, growing virtual property value and increasing cases of theft, 
there is a need for a deeper understanding of VPT and the development of adequate intervention. 

To provide evidence that the crime of VPT is making its mark on both the virtual world and the 
‘real world’ we present some relevant cases below which not only resulted in financial problems 
for  the  stakeholders  involved  (developers,  publishers  and  users),  but  even  resulted  in  physical 
assaults being perpetrated against the users. In a recent case of robbery revolving around  VWEs 
was  in  the  Netherlands  [9],  a  teen  was  sentenced  for  stealing  virtual  property  items.    This  case 
involved a teenage boy beating (kicking the head and body and trying to strangle) another teenager 
in  the  victim’s  own  room  and  then  proceeding  to  steal  his  virtual  property  items.  The  theft 
occurred after the victim had been beaten, when the attacker threatened the victim with death if he 
did not agree to log into his virtual world account in order to transfer all his virtual currency and 
virtual  property  items  to  his  assailants  account.  The  Netherlands  judge  in  this  case  stated  that 
“Goods don’t have to be  material for the law to consider them stolen” and that “Stealing  virtual 
goods is a crime” [9]. The judge sentenced the offender to 160 hours of unpaid work or jail time of 
80 days [9]. 

Another  case  of  virtual  offences  resulting  in  criminal  charges  was  in  2008,  when  a  43-year-old 
woman hacked into the computer of a man she married from within a VWE, and then proceeded to 
erase his avatar that he had spent a lot of time and effort creating [10]. She did this because their 
online relationship and marriage had ended, and she was not happy about it. The offender in this 
case faces the charge of using her victim’s username and password to illegally access the victim’s 
computer, the charge carries a maximum of five years in prison or a fine of approximately 4,165 
US dollars [10]. 

Surveying of self-confessed  offenders as well as reporting of cybercrimes  has been  examined  in 
the past [11] [12-14]; this work primarily has been focused on offenders of traditional or physical 
act crimes such as youth violence, burglary, assault and sex offences. To our knowledge, there are 
no  self-reporting  offender  surveys  of  hackers  or  cyber  criminals;  the  closest  was  a  study  [15] 
which  examined  the  differences  between  individuals  self-reporting  computer-related  deviant 
behaviour and those reporting no computer-related deviant behaviours. This related work will be 
covered in the discussion section. 

2.  METHODOLOGY 

In order to address the problem of VPT in VWEs, this study will provide a mixture of quantitative 
and qualitative methods to gather and analyse data obtained from a survey completed by VPT self-
proclaimed offenders (n=100).   

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                      75 

A  survey  consisting  of  multiple  sections  was  designed  for  this  research  study  to  determine 
individual factors on how VPT occurs from an offender’s point of view. Participants were sought 
from a variety of online virtual world community groups (forums/message boards) as this provided 
a way to reach a large audience of virtual world users and potentially virtual property thieves. This 
is not an uncommon approach with the following study collecting cyber threat intelligence from 
hacker forums  [16] and a cross-community analysis of 12 hacking forums  [17]. The survey  was 
conducted  in two stages; an initial pilot study was run to validate the  questions, which  was then 
followed by the  live survey. The survey  link  was sent out to  many popular online  virtual world 
community  groups  around  the  world.  The  survey  was  completely  anonymous  and  survey 
respondents were asked to complete the survey voluntarily with no incentives or rewards.  Ethics 
approval was obtained under Deakin University, ethics ID: 2011-166. 

2.1  SURVEY 

The process used in this study involved receiving input from a number of respondents (n=100) and 
was focused towards virtual property thief offenders, to gain an understanding and gather views on 
their experiences regarding the act of conducting VPT.  The  delivery method for the survey was 
the internet; this allowed the survey to reach a greater audience spanning many different countries 
other than Australia.  

The  survey  instrument  was  7  pages  of  multiple  choice  questions  that  were  divided  into  sections 
that gather information  on  virtual world profile analysis, thief profiling, theft practices, recovery 
and  detection,  and  security  analysis.  We  provided  them  with  a  brief  description  indicating  what 
virtual property and VPT was. This description is provided below “Virtual property theft is the act 
of breaking into virtual world user’s account and stealing virtual property goods/items and virtual 
currency (gold); often to be sold on black markets for real money. Essentially the theft and sale of 
stolen digital objects for real world money.” 

An ethics plain language statement was presented at the beginning of the survey for participants to 
view before commencing. 

3.  SURVEY RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 

This section provides the results and analysis of the survey from the respondents. A total sample 
size of one hundred (n=100) respondents were used in this study. Results are presented in the form 
of  graphs  and  tables.  Graphed  and  tabulated  results  are  expressed  as  a  frequency  digit  of  the 
number of respondents.  In certain graphs where an option is shown as ‘other’ indicates that this 
result  is  a  grouping  of  a  multiple  choices,  a  collection  of  results  that  represented  a  very  small 
minority from the total response group. 

3.1  VIRTUAL WORLD PROFILE ANALYSIS 

This  section  presents  analysis  of  the  responses  from  the  first  set  of  questions  related  to  the 
demographics of offenders and their choices in relation to which VWEs they use and  how  often 
they use them. Questions covered in this section include: the age of respondents; the region of the 
world  respondents  are  from  and  how  long  they  have  been  using  VWEs  for  (in  terms  of 
months/years and daily usage). 

3.1.1   Age of offenders 

Figure 1 shows the results of the age of respondents who participated in this survey. Each response 
is listed as a frequency digit that represents the age of the respondents.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76                                    Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 

Figure 1.  The age of respondents who are self proclaimed offenders. (n=100).  

It  was  an  important  aspect  of  this  study  to  discover  what  the  average  age  of  offenders  and 
determine if it matches with the average age of video game players or is it totally different. To gain 
an understanding of video game players, the results of a  2016 Digital Australia Report [20] were 
used, the results of this study relate to Australian video game players only but still provides us with 
a  sample  view  into  the  population.    It  shows  that  the  average  age  of  an  Australian  video  game 
player was  33 years and 7 out of 10 are male. The age of  VPT offenders presented in the graph 
show  a  high  response  rate  between  the  ages  20-24  being  the  most  dominant  at  37  responses, 
followed by 17-19 years of age at 20 responses As the age result from  our survey  does not  link 
closely with this study of [20], this suggests that virtual property thieves may not fit the profile of 
an average video game user.  

3.1.2   Offenders region of the world 

Figure 2 shows the geographical location of the respondents of the survey. The response from each 
respondent is listed as a frequency digit that represents the region of the world they are from.  

Figure 2. Regions of the world respondents who are self proclaimed offenders are from. (n=100).   

The region of the world in which VPT offenders originate from is presented in the graph (Figure 
2); shows that out of the 100 respondents, the dominant response was United States of America 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                      77 

(USA)  at  35  responses,  followed  by  Oceanic  regions  at  23  and  Europe  at  21.  These  results 
indicate that respondents who originate from USA may be considered the most likely offenders of 
VPT by a  vast amount  compared to  other regions presented in the results.  There  is a 12 point 
margin between USA and the next highest region being Oceanic.  From these results there may be 
increased  focus  on  targeted  analysis  of  users  from  USA,  by  means  of  greater  analysis  of 
authentication and activity data from this region.  

3.2  THEFT PRACTICES 

The  next section  of  questions  is related to theft practices and activities  employed by  offenders.  
Questions included: what the reason was, when and why offenders chose specific times of the day 
or night to conduct VPT, the amount of virtual property and virtual currency stolen, which items 
these  offenders  stole  first  after  breaking  in  and  if  all  the  virtual  property  was  stolen  in  one  or 
multiple break ins.  

3.2.1   Age of offenders 

There was a wide variation of times chosen to conduct VPT with a few popular times indicated in 
the graph. The most dominant choice from respondents in response to the reason for choosing a 
particular  time  to  conduct  VPT  was  6PM-10PM  with  19  responses,  followed  by  10AM-12PM 
with 15 and 3PM-6PM with 14.  These results can indicate two factors, the first is that thieves are 
not  distinctly  choosing  any  particular  time  to  conduct  VPT,  which  may  indicate  it’s  random  or 
just whenever the  offender  has free time to perform the  offence. The second indication  may be 
that the chosen times indicate that offenders of VPT are choosing what could be considered ‘peak 
times’ for VWE usage; therefore, it may also indicate that offenders are not attempting trying to 
avoid  the  potential  for  the  owners  of  the  account  (being  broken  into)  to  be  logged  in  and 
conducting their normal activities.  

3.2.2   Why time for theft was chosen? 

The  aim  here  was  to  discover  if  there  was  in  fact  any  reasoning  towards  choosing  the  time 
offenders conduct VPT or was it in fact totally random as suggested.  The reason for choosing this 
time  is  listed  as a  frequency  digit  that represents  the  choice  of  respondents. The  most  dominant 
choice presented by respondents with relation to why they chose particular times to conduct VPT 
was that it’s ‘the only time I have free’ with 51 responses. This demonstrates that offenders are not 
concerned about interacting with the owners of these accounts they break into, and will pursue the 
act of VPT regardless. It can also be shown that offenders may in fact be no different than normal 
users and will use VWEs at the same times as everyone else, just with a different purpose, being 
that of theft of virtual property items. 

3.2.3   Amount of virtual property stolen 

We directed a question to respondents on how many virtual property items they had stolen over the 
course of their VPT activities.  The amount of virtual property stolen is listed as a frequency digit 
that  represents  the  choice  of  respondents.  The  goal  of  this  question  was  to  find  out  how  many 
virtual  property  items  are  stolen  in  general  and  with  comparison  to  virtual  currency.  The  most 
dominant choice from respondents was ‘1000s of items’ at 26 responses. The lowest response was 
from offenders who indicated they had stolen ‘5 items or less’ at 2; it could be seen that these may 
be  first  time  offenders.    These  results  indicate  a  high  rate  of  item  theft  by  offenders,  they  are 
simply not going in and stealing a couple of virtual property items, but appears as though they are 
stealing vast quantities of what may be valuable virtual property items. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78                                    Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 

3.2.4   Amount of virtual currency stolen 

We  wanted  to  determine  how  much  virtual  currency  had  respondents  stolen  over  the  course  or 
lifetime of their virtual world activities, this is not how much was stolen in one instance.  When it 
comes  to  virtual  currency,  it  is  the  most  important  item  that  can  effect  revenue  and  there  are  2 
types:  one  is  a  paid  virtual  currency  (PVC)  obtained  by  billing  and  the  other  is  a  free  virtual 
currency (FVC) which is freely distributed through accomplishment of tasks [21]. 

The  amount  of  virtual  currency  is  listed  as  a  frequency  digit  that  represents  the  choice  of 
respondents.    The  goal  of  this  question  was  to  show  a  relationship  with  responses  from  the 
previous  question  which  asked  respondents  what  the amount  of  virtual  property  they  had  stolen 
was. This way a view can be given to see what the comparison is between virtual property items 
stolen and virtual currency stolen. There was a wide variation of responses for this question, which 
indicates many varying amounts of virtual currency stolen.  It  is common in VWEs to start new 
users  off  with  a  small  amount  of  currency  that  is  just  enough  to  get  them  started  in  the  virtual 
world. This provides a motivation to ‘play’ and to further progress with their in-world character. 
This  is  why  there  is  such  a  large  market  for  the  sale  of  virtual  currency  within  online  markets, 
purchasable with real  world  money; it essentially allows player to skip or avoid the spending  of 
time and effort to collate virtual currency.  

The  amount  of  virtual  currency  stolen  is  substantially  more  than  virtual  property  items  stolen. 
There was a high grouping of respondents being 19 who had stolen ‘over 30,000’ units of virtual 
currency, followed by 15 with a substantial increase of ‘over 1,000,000’ virtual currency units.  

These results indicate that offenders vastly prioritize stealing virtual currency over virtual property.  
This difference is due to a to a number of possible reasons such as virtual currency generally being 
a  more abundant commodity. This is because virtual currency is fundamental in all VWEs and is 
used for buying and selling  virtual property items and used as a reward from  in-world activities 
such as quests or missions. 

3.3  Sale of stolen virtual property 

This section analyses the responses from the questions related how respondents sold stolen virtual 
property  items  and  how  much  they  have  made  in  terms  of  profit.    The  questions  posed  in  this 
section  ask  offenders  if  they  have  they  sold  stolen  virtual  property  items  on  primary  markets  or 
secondary markets and how much money have they made through these sales. 

3.3.1   Stolen virtual property sold on primary markets? 

This section relates to results from the question that asked respondents, have you sold stolen virtual 
property items on primary markets (which are most often used for legitimate sales, due to  much 
more stringent security procedures).  Their ability to sell  on these primary markets is listed as a 
frequency  digit  that  represents  the  choice  of  respondents.  In  this  question  and  the  following 
question, the aim was to determine what markets respondents were selling stolen virtual property 
items on and as a result answer a number  of  questions such as; are offenders able to sell stolen 
items  on legitimate  markets or more so just on secondary markets (where stolen items are  much 
easier to sell due to less stringent security procedures).     

There were 51 respondents which claimed ‘yes’ they have sold stolen virtual property on primary 
markets owned/operated by Habbo Hotel, Second Life, Gaia Online, Sony Station Exchange and 
Entropia  Universe.    These  primary  markets  are  more  stringent  with  their  security  and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                      79 

identification  measures,  often  involving  the  buyer/seller  registering  their  license  or  credit  card 
with the system and using a legitimate account linked to the VWE or utilizing a form of escrow 
system (where the money is held by a middle man until the transfer is confirmed by both parties).  
It  seems  offenders  of  VPT  can  and  are  using  these  markets  for  selling  stolen  virtual  property 
items, demonstrating that they are finding avenues to avoid this extra security or identity checks. 

3.3.2   Stolen Virtual Property Sold on Secondary Markets? 

Here  we  asked  respondents  ‘have  you  sold  stolen  virtual  property  items  on  secondary  markets’ 
which  are  most  often  used  by  buyers/sellers  of  virtual  property  items  not  requiring  a  need  for 
stringent security and identification procedures.  The reason for this is that the primary markets due 
to providing better security and identity check measures, take a significant percentage of the sale 
price, these secondary markets often either don’t take a cut of the sale price or it is very low.  The 
ability to sell on these secondary markets is listed as a frequency digit that represents the choice of 
respondents. This question is a follow on from the previous question; however here the aim was to 
discover  how  many  offenders  are  selling  stolen  virtual  property  items  on  secondary  markets  or 
what  are  often  referred  to  as  black  markets  in  the  RMT  (Real  Money  Trading)  market.    These 
markets include some of the following: PlayerAuctions, IGE, YahooAuctions and in the past eBay 
(before they banned the sale of virtual property in 2007).  In these markets it is much easier for an 
offender to sell stolen items due to more lax security and identification measures or the ability to 
bypass those measures. 

There  are  76  offenders  who  claim  to  have  sold  or  are  selling  stolen  virtual  property  on  these 
secondary  markets, as little as 24 say they  have  not.  These results were  expected as  mentioned 
previously  in the  introduction to this; it is much  easier for offenders to sell stolen  items without 
being identified or discovering that the items being sold are indeed stolen as no link to the actual 
VWE is active. 

3.3.3   Real Money Trading of Stolen Virtual Property 

Figure 3 shows the results from the question that asked respondents, how much ‘real world’ money 
(USD$) have you  made from selling stolen  virtual property items.  The amount of  money  made 
from sales is listed as a frequency digit that represents the choice of respondents. This aim of this 
question was to determine how much real world money has been made by offenders of VPT.  This 
helps  to  determine  factors  such  as  the  extent  of  the  RMT  market  and  if  offenders  of  VPT  are 
selling stolen items or using them for themselves or given to associates. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80                                    Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 

Figure 3. How much real world money is made by offenders (n=100) from the sale of stolen virtual 

property items.  

As  shown  in  Figure  3  the  RMT  (real  money  trading)  market  is  quite  large,  the  most  dominant 
response  was  23  respondent’s  stated  they  have  made  over  50,000  US  dollars.    There  was  a 
grouping of 21 respondents who claim they have made under 0 to 1000 US dollars, this grouping 
are  believed  to  be  first  time  offenders,  first  time  sellers  or  newly  started  offenders.    The  total 
amount  of  money  made  from  all  respondents  was  5,221,000  US  dollars  (this  was  calculated  by 
adding up the total amount values given by each response) or in rudimentary terms upwards of 5 
million US dollars. 

There have been certain cases…for example in the largest online sale of virtual property, a virtual 
nightclub named ‘Club Neverdie’ in the VWE Entropia Universe sold for 635,000 US dollars [22].  
Another  example  demonstrated  virtual  property  worth  in  the  real  world,  where  a  high  school 
student and his mother made 35,000 US dollars by creating, farming and selling virtual weapons 
and animal skins within VWE Entropia Universe in 2006 [22, 23]. 

3.4  Recovery and detection 

This section relates to recovery and detection; to be more specific when a virtual property item is 
stolen occasionally it can be recovered by specialist staff employed by the virtual world company 
running the VWE, this can be a difficult task as virtual property items and currency can change 
hands very fast and a victim may not realise they have had items stolen until days after.  Detection 
however  relates  to  the  ability  for  virtual  world  operators  (often  referred  to  as  administrators  or 
game  masters)  or  the  VWE  software  itself  to  detect  virtual  property  thieves  and  intruders. This 
section analyses responses from the questions related to theft, recovery and detection of VPT. The 
goal  of  these  questions  is  to  identify  the  issues,  activities  and  measures  taken  with  relation  to 
recovery and detection that are directly related to VPT among the respondents. 

3.4.1   The ability to detect theft of virtual property 

This section discusses the results from the question that asked respondents, ‘do you ever get caught 
while conducting theft of other user’s virtual property items’. The ability to detect theft of virtual 
property  items  is  listed  as  a  frequency  digit  that  represents  the  choice  of  respondents.  In  this 
question  the  aim  was  to  know  if  the  offenders  had  been  detected  whilst  conducting  the  theft  of 
virtual  property  items  specifically.    This  detection  would  occur  when  the  offenders  are  trading 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                      81 

virtual  currency  and  or  virtual  property  items  to  an  account  the  offender  owns  to  store  stolen 
virtual property items. 

The  most  dominant  response  was  that  92  offenders  are  not  being  detected  or  caught  whilst 
conducting theft of another user’s virtual property items. These results demonstrate offenders for 
the most part are not being detected when conducting VPT, so they can perform this offence while 
running a very low risk of being caught and may lead to a high profit as a result. 

3.4.2   Recovery and return of stolen virtual property 

This section highlights the results from the question that asked participants, do the virtual property 
items you steal ever get returned to the original owner.  The rate of return of stolen virtual property 
items  is listed as a frequency  digit that represents the  choice  of participants. In this question the 
aim was to discover if offenders have found that once they have stolen virtual property items from 
a victim, if the virtual world operators have detected the theft and then reversed the unauthorised 
trades and return the virtual property items back to the victim.  

The  most dominant response being 50 offenders have  stated ‘no’ to  virtual property items being 
returned  to  the  victim  after  theft.  These  results  demonstrate  that  stolen  items  are  very  rarely 
returned to the victim, which means when they are stolen they will remain stolen and often resold 
onto what may be unassuming consumers in virtual property markets. 

3.5  Security Analysis 

This section will analyse the responses from the questions related to ownership of virtual property 
items  and  currency  from  a  thief’s  perspective.    Questions  will  cover:  the  most  useful  hacking 
method  offenders  use  to  conduct  VPT,  self-proclaimed  ability  to  conduct  VPT,  effectiveness  of 
virtual world operators to stop VPT from an offenders point of view, the effectiveness of security 
measures available to users to protect themselves against VPT, what kind of computer and internet 
configuration offenders use while conducting VPT and self-reported ability to break into victims 
accounts. Each will present results in either text, Figure or a Table, and analysis will follow. 

3.5.1   Most popular method to gain access 

Table I shows the results from the question that asked participants, what they believe is the most 
successful method for breaking  into victims accounts based  on their experience.  The amount of 
success  of  breaking  into  victim  accounts  with  the  chosen  tool  is  listed  as  a  frequency  digit  that 
represents the choice of participants.  Respondents were allowed to choose more than one response 
in this question. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82                                    Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 

Table 1. Listing of most useful hacking methods used to break into virtual world accounts or stealing 

virtual property items by offenders (n=100). 

Hacking Method / Tool 
Trojan virus on user's computer 

Frequency 
of Use 
33 

Hacked user's email account 

Publishing a link on a web forum which 
downloads a virus to the victim’s 
computer 
Hacked the virtual world server 

Vulnerabilities in the virtual world 
software 

Guessing or brute forcing a user's 
password 

Social engineering or tricking user's into 
giving their account info 

Virtual property trade scam 

Killing and looting avatars in the virtual 
world 
Man in the middle attack 
Guess user's security questions 
Physically watch a user enter in their 
login/password 
Other (please specify) 

36 

28 

10 

37 

37 

49 

46 

16 

18 
33 

14 

9 

In this question the aim was to discover from offenders what their most effective hacking method 
or tool for breaking into victims virtual world accounts was.   We used the following cybercrime 
offences  study  [24]  which  provides  three  separate  and  complementary  views  to  achieve  a 
comprehensive  perspective  on  cybercrime  offences  and  responses.  As  seen  in  Table  I  the  most 
dominant  response  in  was  ‘social  engineering  or  tricking  user’s  into  giving  their  account 
information’  at  49  responses,  followed  by  ‘virtual  property  trade  scam’  with  46.    These  two 
options seem to be the most effective for offenders, one being a more technical hacking attack and 
one  seen  to  be  a  more  social  engineering  technique.  The  results  shown  here  demonstrate  that 
offenders are utilizing a wide array of exploits, tools and techniques to break into user’s accounts 
in order to steal virtual property items.  

3.6 Discussion 

In this section we discuss how our results compare and contrast with related studies. This assists in 
determining things such as the scale of VPT in comparison to other crimes,  if cybercrimes and are 
self-reporting  offender  surveys  are  a  valid  research  tool  and  can  finally  if  results  gained  from 
studies of this nature be useful for prevention or cyber security incidents. 

The following study [13] focused on analysing the cybercrime which is occurring in Indonesia, this 
occurred specifically through a literature survey of  existing results from various sources. Results 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                      83 

show that Indonesia has jumped up by 545 cases of cybercrime in 2011 and growing more in 2012 
by 600 cases. The 5 most common cybercrime attacks detailed in the study are malware/spam, data 
theft, ID theft, phishing and botnets. Comparing the results with our study in Table I we can see 
that the 4 most common type of hacking methods used to conduct VPT were (from most frequent 
to  least)  social  engineering,  virtual  property  trade  scam,  guessing  or  brute  forcing  a  user's 
password  and  discovering  vulnerabilities  in  the  platform’s  software  itself.  So  common  linkages 
between Indonesia’s cybercrime results and our results are related to data theft, ID theft and some 
of our more lesser frequent methods in malware. This study gives a concise view of the cybercrime 
incidents which are occurring in Indonesia and provides benefit towards seeing where the types of 
hacking  methods  used  by  hackers  in  VWEs  correlate  to  the  cybercrimes  commonly  reported  in 
Indonesia. 

A  study  to  examine  the  differences  between  individuals  self-reporting  computer  related  deviant 
behaviours and those reporting no computer related deviant behaviours was conducted by Rogers 
et al. [15].  In this study they put focus on what they  call the ‘Big-5’ personality characteristics, 
moral decision making and exploitive manipulative amoral dishonesty characteristics [15].  They 
discovered  in  their  results  that  computer  deviants  scored  low  on  social  moral  choice  and  were 
significantly exploitive and manipulative [15]. Compared with the results of this study, we could 
determine  that  offenders  of  VPT  have  significant  disregard  for  victims;  breaking  into  accounts 
during  peak  periods  (when  the  victim  may  be  active)  and  stealing  not  only  all  the  rare  or  most 
expensive  property  but  also  all  the  virtual  currency  the  victim  owns.  They  also  appear  to  be 
extremely deceiving and manipulative with a high majority of offenders using social engineering, 
trickery  or  scams  to  conduct  VPT.  This  study  provided  some  good  empirical  knowledge  into 
deviant  computer  behaviour  but  was  more  focused  from  a  psychology  aspect  and  not  related  to 
actions and behaviours which occur in cybercrimes such as VPT. 

Kumar  [14]  conducted  a  study  which  reviews  the  growth  of  cybercrimes  in  India  and  measures 
taken by the government of India to combat cybercrime and details the cybercrimes registered as 
well as persons arrested under the Information Technology Act, 2000. Their results show that there 
has been a large increase in cybercrime attacks over recent years. However, this increase in attacks 
has not led to a significant increase in arrests. While there were 4356 cases registered under the IT 
act, the  number of people arrested  was under 50% with  only 2098 reported arrests. In the study 
they also discovered that offenders of the cybercrimes reported were mostly from the age group of 
18-30 years of age, with the next most common being the 30-45-year-old age group. The top three 
cybercrimes came under the following categories: forgery, criminal breach and fraud (currency or 
stamps). To compare with the results in our study, offenders ages who were most prevalent with 
conducting  VPT  were  20-24  years  of  age  (n=37).  Then  also  the  act  of  VPT  tends  to  correlate 
strongly with the act of criminal breach (hacking into a user account and stealing virtual property 
goods). This study while focused on India and the acts of cybercrime encountered there, provides a 
good comparative analysis especially when it comes to the age of offenders. 

Farrington  [25]  released  a  report  which  summarises  what  has  been  learned  from  the  process  of 
self-reporting criminal careers and the causes of offending. They discovered that most knowledge 
about  criminal  careers  has  been  solely  based  on  official  records  of  arrests  or  convictions. 
Farrington  [25]  argues  that  self-reports  provide  a  more  accurate  picture  of  the  true  number  of 
offences committed,  giving a  more accurate  view than official records and  denotes  it as his  key 
hypothesis in this report, although he understands there are still some doubts about the validity of 
self-reports of offending due to obvious reasons such as concealing information or exaggerating or 
simply forgetting the details.  In relation to our study we had no official records or arrest data to 
compare to, in order to discover how accurate our findings were but we discovered that self-reports 
provide  a  crucial  and  possibly  highly  accurate  view  into  the  offence  of  VPT and  possible  other 
cybercrimes.  With this data we can get an insight into a species of criminal which has never been 

 
 
 
 
 
84                                    Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 

documented  before,  however  we  still  understand  the  doubts  that  Farrington  [25]  states  about 
offenders concealing of information or exaggerating certain answers however in our expert opinion 
we believe  our data to be free from these  limits  with  little  or no  outliers in the responses.  This 
study  provided  much  benefit  to  the  research  methodology  we  used  for  our  study  but  it  did  not 
focus  on  self-reporting  of  cyber-criminals  specifically,  more  over  a  focus  on  physical  act  and 
traditional crimes such as burglary. 

3.7 Conclusion 

One of the  main advantages of the internet is the ability and ease in which users can access and 
share content electronically, but unfortunately it has become one of its weaknesses [4] creating a 
serious cyber security issue especially when it comes to VWEs and virtual property items.  With 
the popularity of the internet, new  ways have been conceived to  conduct traditional crime  in an 
electronic fashion, which has opened up a whole new wave of criminal activities such as VPT; the 
merging of burglary and VWEs. 

This study gave results from a survey study on virtual property thieves.  This survey examined the 
crime  of  VPT  from  an  offenders  point  of  view,  our sample  size  for  this  study  was  one  hundred 
(n=100) self-proclaimed offenders of VPT.  

There  were a number of limitations of this study  which consisted  of:  any time  when conducting 
survey  studies  that  are  anonymous  in  nature  and  respondents  are  of  questionable  character  (the 
respondent  group  were  self-proclaimed  offenders  of  a  cybercrime  (however  not  recognized 
globally), results may be received which are not totally truthful or inconsistent; this is a factor in 
this study; however we benefited from very little ‘unusual’ or outlier responses which may indicate 
a truthfulness to the responses.   

This survey study  examined how offenders of VPT conduct the offence and related activities; in 
terms of virtual world profile analysis, thief profiling, theft practices, recovery and detection and 
security analysis.  The results provide an  insightful and concise  view  on how  offenders conduct 
VPT as well as providing clarity to the VWE community of users as well as developers, publishers 
and  operators.  Users can view these results and  view how  offenders are breaking into accounts 
and conducting theft of virtual property items, and as a result become  more aware with possibly 
attempting to secure themselves against any of these threats. Developers, publishers and operators 
can view these results and determine that this in indeed a problem for the VWEs they operate and 
look  into  how  offenders  are  conducting  the  act  of  VPT  and  possibly  spend  time  developing 
techniques to protect against the more popular methods used to conduct VPT as shown in Table I. 

A surprising trend discovered from the results showed a clear cut profile of a virtual property thief.  
They appear to be mainly aged 20-24 years of age (n=37), living in the United States of America 
(n=35),  they  use  VWEs  for  5-7  hours  a  day  (n=38)  and  have  used  VWEs  for  2  years  or  more 
(n=42). The  thieves  appear  to  be  young  individuals, with  a  lot  of  free  time  on  their  hands,  who 
have a lot of experience with VWEs. 

When  it  came  to  analysing  the  sale  of  stolen  virtual  property  items  it  was  discovered  from  the 
results, offenders are stealing or have stolen for the most part 1000s of items over the lifetime of 
their  activities  (n=26)  and  unexpectedly  these  stolen  items  are  being  sold  on  primary  markets 
(n=51) nearly as much as secondary markets (n=76), which shows that none of these markets are 
secure or have the ability to stop the sale of stolen items.  This study discovered that the amount of 
real  world  money  made  from  the  sale  of  stolen  virtual  property  showed  that  23  offenders  have 
made over 50,000 US dollars and the total offenders (n=100) in the study have accumulated over 5 
million US dollars. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                      85 

The  results  and  analysis  in  this  study  takes  a  step  towards  proving  that  VPT  offenders  are 
conducting  this  offence  at  a  substantial  rate  and  making  large  amounts  of  real  world  money, 
however they appear to be lacking expert knowledge when it comes to conducting these hacking 
activities (ability to break into VWE accounts with  n=63 low-medium self-rated ability and n=76 
use the same computer and internet setup for each account they break into).  The need to develop 
some kind of security measure or technique to stop these offenders is paramount in stopping this 
offence and providing a safe, secure and enjoyable environment for the VWE community. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  N.  Naik  and  P.  Jenkins,  "Discovering  Hackers  by  Stealth:  Predicting  Fingerprinting  Attacks  on 
Honeypot Systems," in 2018 IEEE International Systems Engineering Symposium (ISSE), 2018, pp. 
1-8. 

[2]  P.  Chiaramonte  and  J.  Winter.  (2011).  Hacker  Group  Anonymous  Threatens  to  Attack  Stock 
Exchange.  Available:  https://www.foxnews.com/tech/hacker-group-anonymous-threatens-to-attack-
stock-exchange 

[3]  S.  Cowley. 

(2012).  FBI  Director:  Cybercrime  will 
https://money.cnn.com/2012/03/02/technology/fbi_cybersecurity/ 

eclipse 

terrorism.  Available: 

[4]  K.-K.  Choo  and  R.  Smith,  "Criminal Exploitation  of  Online  Systems  by  Organised  Crime  Groups," 

Asian Journal of Criminology, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 37-59, 2008. 

[5]  Linden.Research.Inc. (1999). Second Life Official Site. Available: http://lindenlab.com/ 

[6]  Y.-C. Chen, J.-J. Hwang, R. Song, G. Yee, and L. Korba, "Online Gaming Crime and Security Issue - 
Cases  and  Countermeasures  from  Taiwan,"  presented  at  the  Proceedings  of  the  International 
Conference on Information Technology: Coding and Computing (ITCC'05) - Volume I - Volume 01, 
2005.  Available:  https://nrc-publications.canada.ca/eng/view/object/?id=a4a70b1a-332b-4161-bab5-
e690de966a6b 

[7]  A. Watters. (2010). Number of Virtual World Users Breaks 1 Billion, Roughly Half  Under Age 15. 

Available: https://readwrite.com/2010/10/01/number_of_virtual_world_users_breaks_the_1_billion/ 

[8]  M.  Eikenberry.  (2011).  Real  Money  Trade  is  a  Billions  Dollar  a  year  Industry.  Available: 

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rtZY3fVwlgw 

[9]  E.  Feldmann.  (2008).  Netherlands  Teen  Sentenced  for  Stealing  Virtual  Goods.  Available: 
http://www.pcworld.com/article/152673/netherlands_teen_sentenced_for_stealing_virtual_goods.html 

[10]  D.  McNeill. 

(2008).  Virtual  killer 

faces 

real 

jail  after  murder  by  mouse  Available: 

http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/gadgets-and-tech/news/virtual-killer-faces-real-jail-after-
murder-by-mouse-972680.html 

[11]  J.  Graham  and  B.  Bowling,  "Young  People  and  Crime,"  in  "Home  Office  Research  Study  145," 

London: HMSO1995. 

[12]  A.  E.  Hernandez,  "Self-reported  contact  sexual  offenses  by  participants  in  the  Federal  Bureau  of 
Prisons'sex offender treatment program: Implications for internet sex offenders," presented at the 19th 
Research and treatment conference of the association for the treatment of sexual abusers, San Diego, 
CA, 2000.  

[13]  R. W. Saputra, "A survey of cyber crime in Indonesia," in 2016 International Conference on ICT For 

Smart Society (ICISS), 2016, pp. 1-5. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
86                                    Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT) 

[14]  P.  N.  V.  Kumar,  "Growing  cyber  crimes  in  India:  A  survey,"  in  2016  International  Conference  on 

Data Mining and Advanced Computing (SAPIENCE), 2016, pp. 246-251. 

[15]  M.  Rogers,  N.  D.  Smoak,  and  J.  Liu,  "Self-reported  Deviant  Computer  Behavior:  A  Big-5,  Moral 
Choice, and Manipulative Exploitive Behavior Analysis," Deviant Behavior, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 245-
268, 2006/07/01 2006. 

[16]  I. Deliu, C. Leichter, and K. Franke, "Collecting Cyber Threat Intelligence from Hacker Forums via a 
Two-Stage, Hybrid Process using Support Vector Machines and Latent Dirichlet Allocation," in 2018 
IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), 2018, pp. 5008-5013. 

[17]  R. Frank, M. Thomson, A. Mikhaylov, and A. J. Park, "Putting all eggs in a single basket: A cross-
community  analysis  of  12  hacking  forums,"  in  2018  IEEE International  Conference  on  Intelligence 
and Security Informatics (ISI), 2018, pp. 136-141. 

[18]  D.  F.  Criswell  and  M.  L.  Parchman,  "Handheld  Computer  Use  in  U.S.  Family  Practice  Residency 
Programs,"  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Informatics  Association,  vol.  9,  no.  1,  pp.  80-86, 
January 1, 2002 2002. 

[19]  D. Rogers, G. Regehr, K. A Yeh, and T. Howdieshell, Computer-assisted Learning versus a Lecture 

and Feedback Seminar for Teaching a Basic Surgical Technical Skill. 1998, pp. 508-10. 

[20]  J.  Brand 

and  S.  Todhunter. 

(2015).  Digital  Australia  Report 

2016.  Available: 

https://www.igea.net/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/Digital-Australia-2016-DA16-Final.pdf 

[21]  Y. Kaneko, K. Yada, W. Ihara, and R. Odagiri, "How Game Users Consume Virtual Currency: The 
Relationship Between Consumed Quantity, Inventory, and Elapsed Time Since Last Consumption in 
the  Mobile  Game  World,"  in  2018  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Data  Mining  Workshops 
(ICDMW), 2018, pp. 848-855. 

[22]  D.  Bates.  (2010).  Internet  estate  agent  sells  virtual  nightclub  on  an  asteroid  in  online  game  for 
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-1330552/Jon-Jacobs-sells-

£400,000.  Available: 
virtual-nightclub-Club-Neverdie-online-Entropia-game-400k.html 

[23]  J.  W.  Mullins  and  R.  Komisar,  Getting  to  plan  B:  breaking  through  to  a  better  business  model. 

Harvard Business Press, 2009. 

[24]  G.  Tsakalidis,  K.  Vergidis, and  M.  Madas,  "Cybercrime  Offences:  Identification,  Classification  and 
Adaptive  Response,"  in  2018  5th  International  Conference  on  Control,  Decision  and  Information 
Technologies (CoDIT), 2018, pp. 470-475. 

[25]  D. P. Farrington, What Has Been Learned from Self-Reports About Criminal Careers And the Causes 

of Offending? London Home Office Online Report, 2001. 

Authors 

Dr  Nicholas  Patterson  is  a  Senior  IT  Lecturer  at  Deakin  University  with 
publications  in  Cyber  Security,  Blockchain  and  EdTech.  He  also  runs  his  own 
consulting  company,  that  brings  advanced  research  into  industry  to  increase 
capability and outcomes. His expertise is underpinned by a PhD which earned him 
the  Alfred  Deakin  medal  and  a  range  of  advanced  micro-credentials  in  Critical 
Thinking,  Problem  Solving,  Communication,  Teamwork,  Data  Analytics, 
Innovation, Digital Literacy and Digital Learning. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Computer Science & Information Technology (CS & IT)                                      87 

Dr Michael Hobbs is a Senior Lecturer at Deakin University, Australia. Dr. Hobbs 
was a researcher at Hewlett Packard labs from the years 2000 to 2002 and currently 
is the director of the Games Design and Development course at Deakin University. 
Dr.  Hobbs  research  interests  revolve  around  cloud  computing,  networking  and 
security.  He  has  been  on  the  editorial  board  for  many  local  and  international 
conferences, as well as giving research presentations at conferences all around the 
world  and  has  published  more  than  40  research  articles  in  refereed  international 
conferences  and  journals.  Dr.  Hobbs  has  been  a  successful  mentor  at  Deakin 
University supervising many PhD students to completion from 2008 to 2013.   

Dr.  Lei  Pan  received  his  PhD  in  Computer  Forensics  from  Deakin  University, 
Australia, in 2008. He is currently a Senior Lecturer with the School of Information 
Technology,  Deakin  University.  His  research  interests are cyber  security  and  IoT. 
He  has  authored  50+  research  papers  in  refereed  international  journals  and 
conferences. 

Dr Frank Jiang received his Ph.D. degree in the University of Technology Sydney 
in 2008. He also received the master's degree in computer science and gained the 3.5 
years  of  postdoctoral  research  experience  at  the  University  of  New  South  Wales 
(UNSW). His main research interests include Data-driven cyber security, Predictive 
analytics,  biologically  inspired  learning  mechanism  and  its  application  in  the 
complex  information  security  system,  he  has  published  over  90  highly  reputated 
referred SCI/EI indexed journals and conferences articles. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
