AIRPORT CYBER SECURITY & CYBER 
RESILIENCE CONTROLS 

Alex Mathew1  

1Department of Computer Science & Cyber Security, Bethany College, WV, USA. 
amathew@bethanywv.edu 

ABSTRACT 

Cyber  Security  scares  are  the  main  areas  of  demerits  associated  with  the  advent  and 
widespread  of  internet  technology.  While  the  internet  has  improved  life  and  business 
processes, the levels of security threats have been increasing proportionally. As such, the 
web  and  the  related  cyber  systems  have  exposed  the  world  to  the  state  of  continuous 
vigilance because of the existential threats of attacks. Criminals are in the constant state 
of  attempting  cybersecurity  defense  of  various  infrastructures  and  businesses.  Airports 
are  some  of  the  areas  where  cybersecurity  means  a  lot  of  things.  The  reason  for  the 
criticality  of  cybersecurity  in  airports  concerns  the  high  integration  of  internet  and 
computer systems in the operations of airports. This paper is about airport cybersecurity 
and  resilience  controls.  At  the  start  of  the  article  is  a  comprehensive  introduction  that 
provides  a  preview  of  the  entire  content.    In  the  paper,  there  are  discussions  of  airport 
intelligence  classification,  cybersecurity  malicious  threats  analysis,  and  research 
methodology.  A concise conclusion marks the end of the article.  

KEYWORDS 

Cyber Security ,IOT, Resilience Controls..  

1. INTRODUCTION 

Since the 9/11  incident  and the increasing  interests of terrorists in  aircraft  and points of 
entry  and  departures,  airports  have  become  critical  security  areas.  After  9/11,  many 
people  internalized  airport  and  flight  security  as serious  matters.  The  global  community 
has  increased  the  level  of  airport  and  aircraft  vigilances.  Besides  the  physical  threats, 
cyber systems of airports have become critical targets for attackers. As such, airports have 
had to increase their levels of cybersecurity alertness and resilience to prevent breaches.  
Internet of things (IoT) 

is 

the 

Internet  of 

things  (IoT) 

the 
interconnectivity  of  smart  devices  and  tools  that  communicate  regularly.  Almost  every 
electronic manufactured today has capabilities for connecting to the IoT architecture [10]. 
IoT  has  become  a  necessary  technology  in  airports,  as  it  helps  in  facilitating 
communication among  various intelligent devices and systems.  IoT solutions  in  airports 
have  created the opportunities for visualization of safety,  hyper-personalized  experience 

technical  architecture 

involves 

that 

 
 
 
 
 
for  customers,  and  efficient  operations  [4].  IoTs  have  built  the  most  revolutionary 
airports. IoTs in airports expedite airport operations through smart sensors, analytics, and 
connected  devices.  IoT  has  helped  in  enhancing  cyber  resilience  and  operational 
efficiencies. Airports have benefitted from the application of electronic sensors and tags 
to  trace  and  track  baggage  and  addressing  the  problem  of  luggage  thefts.  Facial 
recognition innovations streamline security checks and cut queues. The integration of IoT 
in  airports  has  also  created  new  opportunities  for  revenue  generation  [9].  Despite  the 
various  benefits  of  IoT  integration  in  airports,  the  interconnectivity  of  multiple  devices 
and systems complicate cybersecurity because of many points of possible attacks.  

Figure 1: Information value loop describing the architecture of IoT 

Image retrieved from [6] 

II.  AIRPORT INTELLIGENCE CLASSIFICATION 

Airport intelligence classification attributed to good technical practices is a high level of 
security issue. The good technical practice involves cautious and preventive measures like 
the  installation  and  regular  updating  of  anti-malware  software.  It  also  consists  of  the 
education  and  training  of  employees  on  responsible  behaviors  while  interacting  with  IT 
resources  [10].  Such  training  and  education  can  involve  accountable  password 
management and communication with outsiders. Regular data backup also constitutes an 
excellent technical practice. The culture of regular data backup safeguards airports from 
total closure in the event of data and system attack.  

Policies  and  safety  standards  aspect  of  airport  intelligence  classification  is  an  essential 
security issue that concerns the authoring and communication of clear policies and safety 
measures. Good practices require that organizations develop clear and attenable strategies 
as  well  as  safety  regulations  that  reflect  the  current  and  future  cybersecurity  needs  [7].  
Wrong  policies  and  safety  standards  or  poor  communication  of  the  rules  threaten  the 
stability of a cyber-system and exposes it to attacks.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  proper  organizational  practice  of  airport  intelligence  classification  concerns  the 
efforts  made  by  individual  institutions  to  enhance  cybersecurity  resilience.  Such  efforts 
include investment plans in cybersecurity tools and structures. The proper organizational 
practice also  involves partnering with  other industry actors  and regulatory authorities to 
explore  potential  threats  and  preventive  strategies  [1].  The  implementation  of  industry 
standards  is  another  aspect  of  good  organizational  practice.  Organizations  that  are 
sensitive  about  cyber  threats  ought  to  implement  the  set  industry  standards  designed  to 
enhance resilience against breaches.  

III. CYBERSECURITY MALICIOUS THREATS ANALYSIS 

Airports  are  susceptible  to  various  malicious  threats  that  can  disrupt  and  compromise 
operations. Malicious threats are a category of cybersecurity scares that anti-virus cannot 
tackle.  Most  common  malicious  threats  include  sniffing,  spear  phishing,  execution  of 
remote  codes,  pharming,  man-in-the-middle,  and  denial-of-Service-DoS  [7].  The 
increasing  integration  of  the  internet  of  things  (IoT)  in  the  airports  is  increasing  the 
vulnerabilities  of  networks  to  attacks.  The  malicious  threats  that  face  smartest  airport 
because of the IoT infrastructure divide into “malicious software, misuse of authorization, 
social  and  phishing  attacks,  network  and  communication  attacks,  and  tampering  with 
airport smart devices” [5].  

IV.  RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 

The study on airport  cybersecurity and cyber resilience will employ qualitative research 
approach.  Various  reasons  inform  the  choice  for  the  qualitative  technique.  One  of  the 
reasons  is  that  the  qualitative  approach  allows  for  a  detailed  evaluation  of  materials  to 
glean  more  in-depth  information  on  a  given  subject  or  topic  [8].  The  exploration  of 
cybersecurity in airports cannot be substantive and detailed with other methods aside from 
qualitative  techniques.  Another  benefit  inspiring  the  choice  of  qualitative  technique 
attributes to its reliance on human observations and experiences. Airport IT personnel are 
the  best  positioned  to  comment  on  their  experiences  with  cybersecurity  issues.  The 
testimonies by IT personnel in airports can give a more in-depth view of the situation that 
can  be  instrumental  in  predicting  the  future  of  cyber-security  [4].  Finally,  the  data 
collected through qualitative means have predictive qualities. Researchers can observe the 
trend of responses and deduce predictions about a situation.  

The  preferred  data  collection  approaches  will  be  interview  and  document  review.  The 
researchers  will  interview  IT  officials  of  various  airports.  The  reason  for  choosing  the 
interview  method  attributes  to  its  ability  to  produce  detailed  facts  and  views  about  the 
subject  of  airport  cybersecurity  —  another  purpose  for  selecting  interviewing  concerns 
time-saving capability. Interviews are easy to conduct and consume the least time [3]. The 
originality of the data gathered through interviews is another reason for its preference to 
other  techniques  of  data  collection.  Besides  the  interviews,  document  analysis  provides 
access  to  a  wide  variety  of  data.  The  review  of  documents  can  offer  researchers  the 
opportunity to access information that is difficult to find through interviews [2]. The data 
collected  through  document  analysis  also  provide  materials  for  comparison  with  the 
responses of interviewees. As such, it becomes possible to verify every information.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
The methods of data recording will include note-taking, audio recording, and videos. All 
three ways have the shared benefit of cost-effectiveness and long life. Notes, adios, and 
videos  require  a  small  budget  for  a  pen,  notebook,  and  a  recording  device  that  be 
researchers’  smartphone.  The  data  can  also  last  for  a  long  time  and  serve  as  reference 
points for future needs [2].  

V.  CONCLUSION  

Cyber  and  internet  control  most  of  the  life  activities  in  the  contemporary  world.  The 
situation  means  that  the  world  is  susceptible  to  the  consequences  of  the  increasing 
dependency  on  the  internet  and  related  systems.  Cyber  threats  and  attacks  are  the  main 
dangerous consequences of dependence on  the internet. The attacks and threats occur in 
multiple ways. All sectors using the cyber system and the internet to run operation have 
experienced  some  forms  of  attacks  and  threats.  The  aviation  sector  has  had  various 
cybersecurity  scare  on  airports.  It  is  worth  noting  that  airports  are  increasingly  become 
smart because of the enhanced connectivity of systems and processes. Internet of things 
(IoT)  is  the  best  way  to  describe  the  connectivity  of  devices  in  modern  airports.  This 
sophisticated connectivity of devices and systems has created many loopholes that have 
exposed airports to cyber-attacks. While some airports have suffered attacks, the industry 
is continually evolving and improving its cybersecurity strategies. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  C. Robert and S. Hakim, Cyber-physical Security: Protecting Critical Infrastructure at the State and 

Local Level. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2017. 

[2]  F. Nollaig, Qualitative Research Methods in Psychology: Combining Core Approaches. Maidenhead, 

Berkshire, England: Open University Press/McGraw Hill, 2011.  

[3]  H. David and A. R. Thompson. Qualitative Research Methods in Mental Health and Psychotherapy: 

A Guide for Students and Practitioners. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 2011.  

[4]  L. Stephen D, M. T. Quartaroli, and F. J. Riemer, Qualitative Research: An Introduction to Methods 

and Designs. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2012. 

[5]  L. G. Anagnostopoulou and D. Gritzalis, “Smart Airport Cybersecurity: Threat Mitigation and Cyber 

Resilience Controls,” Sensors (Basel), vol. 19, no.1 (2018); 19. 

[6]  M. Joe, K. Elizabeth, Z. Johanna, S. Rana, and M. Matt.  Flying smarter: The smart airport and the 
Internet of Things. Deloitte, 15. Jul. 2019, https://www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/industry/public-
sector/iot-in-smart-airports.html. Accessed 25 Jul. 2019.  

[7]  M.  Martellini, Cyber  Security:  Deterrence  and  It  Protection  for  Critical  Infrastructures.  Cham: 

Springer, 2013. Internet resource. 

[8]  R. Shidur, The Advantages and Disadvantages of Using Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches and 
Methods  in  Language  “Testing  and  Assessment”  Research:  A  Literature  Review,”  Journal  of 
Education and Learning,vol. 6, no. 1 (2017); 102-103. 

[9]  S.  Kelly,  Buckle  Up:  A  Closer  Look  at  Airline  Security  Breaches.  26  Nov.  2018, 

https://www.darkreading.com/threat-intelligence/buckle-up-a-closer-look-at-airline-security-
breaches/d/d-id/1333336. accessed 25 Jul. 2019.  

[10]  P.  W.  Singer  and  A.  Friedman, Cybersecurity  and  Cyberwar:  What  Everyone  Needs  to  Know. 

Oxford; New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2014. 

Authors 

Alex Mathew Ph.D., CISSP, CEH, CHFI, 
ECSA, MCSE, CCNA. Security+ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
