W4IPS: A Web-based Interactive Power System Simulation Environment
For Power System Security Analysis

Zeyu Mao
Texas A&M University
zeyumao2@tamu.edu

Hao Huang
Texas A&M University
hao huang@tamu.edu

Katherine Davis
Texas A&M University
katedavis@tamu.edu

Abstract

that

feature

systems

Modern power systems are increasingly evolving
cyber-physical
close
(CPS)
interaction between information and communication
technology (ICT), physical and electrical devices,
The interactivity and security
and human factors.
of CPS are the essential building blocks for the
reliability, stability and economic operation of power
systems. This paper presents a web-based interactive
multi-user power system simulation environment and
open source toolset (W4IPS) whose main features
are a publish/subscribe structure, a real-time data
sharing capability, role-based multi-user visualizations,
distributed multi-user interactive controls, an easy
to use and deploy web interface, and ﬂexible and
extensible support for communication protocols. The
paper demonstrates the use of W4IPS features as
an ideal platform for contingency response training
and cyber security analysis, with an emphasis on
In particular, we
interactivity and expandability.
present the use cases and the results of W4IPS in power
system operation education and security analysis.

1.

Introduction

The emergence of intelligent electronic devices
(IEDs) and smart grid technologies has been a catalyst
the past decades
for power grids to evolve over
from a predominately physical
infrastructure into a
more complicated cyber-physical system (CPS) whose
efﬁciency,
reliability and controllability have been
greatly improved. The trend is toward more generic
interoperable architectures for system-based wide area
monitoring, protection and control (WAMPAC), where
various applications, including capturing and analyzing
dynamic event data, determining real-time system
for wide-area
state, designing protection systems
disturbances, etc., are described in [1].
These
applications support
improved operational reliability
(previously called security) of the power system against
physical outages. While these changes should increase
power grid resilience,
the technologies heavily rely
on cyber components and networks. Cyber network

compromise can lead to hazards in the power grid that
adversely affect the daily lives of citizens,
like the
Ukraine power grid cyber attack which affected up to
225,000 customers in three different distribution-level
service territories [2]. Thus, it is an urgent task to
analyze power system security from all aspects.

It

The importance of situational awareness (SA) for
power systems is presented in [3], where Panteli and
Kirschen also present the difﬁculties in quantifying SA,
including the size of the grid,
the volume of data,
and the complexity of operations in modern power
grids that prevent sufﬁcient SA to operators. Cyber
security is an important concern for SA since the data
shown must be available and trustworthy. At the same
time, SA is a necessary precursor for making both
is thus
physical and cyber operating decisions.
important to visualize cyber-physical power systems
vividly and reﬂect key status information in a real-time,
easy-to-comprehend manner. Human factors are widely
recognized as important, but remain a largely ignored
element for power system security analysis. Examples
that impact power grid security through SA include the
following: (1) What if the operator, through error or
lack of experience, issues a wrong command? (2) What
if there is an insider in the control room or control
system who intentionally sabotages the system? As
discussed in [4], operator decision making should be
considered in the design phase to evaluate potential
new applications and visualizations used in power
systems operations. Therefore, introducing a scientiﬁc
mechanism for incorporating human factors into the
visualization tools and the associated power system
security studies is signiﬁcant.
In [5], Pienta et al.

introduce a spatio-temporal
visualization using time-varing geospatial point data
with a linear power systems representation to provide
users a quick and easy way to understand a power
network’s behavior over
Mohapatra and
Overbye present dynamic mode decomposition based
visualization for large-scale power systems, whose
main beneﬁt is fast computation, enabling automated
processing and tracking of transient contingency results
present
in an on-line mode [6].
the visualization of large-scale electric grid oscillation
modes for improved understanding of power system

Idehen et al.

time.

they do not

dynamics in [7]. While these methodologies present
innovative visualizations for power systems studies
introduce human factors
and analysis,
into the power system analysis.
To automatically
assess and incorporate human factors, and translate
those into improved grid decision-making, a special
environment with interactive communication among the
power system simulation, visualizations, and users is
required.

Ciraci et al.

introduce a framework for power
system and communication networks co-simulation,
FNCS, in [8].
incorporate the
In [9], Huang et al.
dynamic simulation with FNCS through a decoupled
simulation approach to link with existing dynamic
simulators. However, the FNCS focuses more on the
interaction between transmission and distribution, and
the synchronization between communication networks
and power system simulation, but not the interactive
actions between human operators and power systems.
in [10] presents an interactive
Overbye et al.
power system dynamic simulator for the PMU time
frame.
This interactive transient stability server
enables the agnostic use of third-party computational
clients, algorithms, and humans to directly impact the
dynamically simulated grid behavior. This innovation
also enables the introduction of human factors into
power system studies for
real-time
simulation. Based on this dynamic simulation server,
we introduce a web-based interactive power system
simulation environment (W4IPS) that can be used with
transient and steady-state simulations. Key features
of W4IPS include its publish/subscribe architecture,
real-time data push and visualizations,
interactive
controls, multi-user interaction, web interface access,
and ﬂexible and extensible communication protocols.

the period of

1. The

publish/subscribe

structure
data

allows
delivery,
push-based
instantaneous,
eliminating the need for data consumers to
periodically check or poll for new data and
updates. This structure improves the efﬁciency,
performance,
reliability and scalability of the
underlying communication system.

2. Web

do

not

and

interfaces

require
environments,

installing
dependencies
it
thus
minimizes the time for deploying the environment
for multiple PCs and it can be run in different
operation systems.

extensible

and
enable W4IPS to

communication
5. Flexible
communicate
protocols
with Internet-of-Thing (IoT) devices in the power
grid.

the paper presents

With these features,

two
applications based on W4IPS, including a lab course
for teaching undergraduate students about power system
operation and a contingency scenario for a Geomagnetic
Disturbance (GMD) event in power systems.We also
discuss how the W4IPS could be used for cyber-physical
security analysis and how the interactivity between
human and the grid could be introduced with W4IPS.

The rest of this paper is organized as following. The
architecture and methodology of W4IPS is introduced
in Section 2. Applications of W4IPS are discussed in
Section 3. More discussions of the W4IPS future work
is presented in Section 4.

Figure 1. Architecture of W4IPS: Client Layer is for
users to monitor and control the devices in the
simulated grid; Broker layer is to route messages;
Server layer serves as a protocol gateway between the
PowerWorld DS/c37.118.2 and MQTT protocol

3. Multi-user

interactive control allows multiple
users to access the W4IPS and control the devices,
which can be used to test different attack and
defense strategies in W4IPS.

4. Real-time data visualization and event alert
enables users to respond in time under different
contingencies.

2. W4IPS

W4IPS is an open source extensible web-based tool
whose design enables distributed multi-user simulation
interactions and visualizations. The architecture, data
sources, and interfaces of W4IPS are presented below.

2.1. Data Source

A signiﬁcant data source for W4IPS is a power
system model with interactive simulation capability.
For the transient stability time frame, W4IPS interacts
with PowerWorld Dynamics Studio (PW-DS)
[10]
[11], which is an interactive simulation environment
that allows users create events during a simulation.
All changes can be stored for later playback of the
simulation [10].

(PMU)
The PW-DS can represent

PW-DS is commercial software for time-domain,
positive sequence power system simulation with Phase
time frame or uniform
Measurement Unit
frequency model.
the
various power system dynamic models,
import and
export case models in industry standard formats, and
efﬁciently solve large power system cases to provide
power system dynamic data [11]. It can be run either
in a stand-alone mode for real time visualization or
in a server mode for different clients using different
communication protocol.
For the steady state time
frame, W4IPS interacts with PowerWorld Simulator via
the SimAuto, which is a callable interface that supports
external commands [12].

2.2. Communication System

To transmit the signiﬁcant amount of real-time data
among the data source and multiple users, two major
factors are taken into serious consideration:

1. Latency. The interaction needs low latency to give
users enough time to respond when there is an
event happening in the simulation.

2. Bandwidth usage. The bandwidth usage has to be
low to leave enough bandwidth for simultaneous
data streams.

According to the factors above, Message Queuing
Telemetry Transport (MQTT) [13] [14], a lightweight
publish/subscribe messaging transport protocol,
is
selected to serve as the core of the communication
the system
Three features makes it ﬁt
system.
requirements:

1. A small

transport overhead and protocol

exchanges minimized to reduce network trafﬁc.

2. Use of the publish/subscribe message pattern
which provides one-to-many message distribution
and decoupling of applications.

3. The protocol runs over TCP/IP, or over other
network protocols that provide ordered, lossless,
bi-directional connections.

4. Same message structure with different

topic
headers to distinguish the message types. The
topic ”data” is used for state and variable sharing,

the topic ”command” is for user actions, and the
topic ”notif” is for system-wide notiﬁcation/event
broadcasting.

Compared to the commonly used web interaction
method, Representational State Transfer (REST), which
is built upon HTTP, the MQTT message is 2.5 times
smaller on average and the latency is only 1/4 of the level
of REST [15]. By tweaking the parameters in the broker
and gateway,
scenarios considering communication
delays and failures could also be achieved. With the
support from the MQTT, the real-time multi-user data
sharing mechanism can be achieved in the simulation
environment.

2.3. Architecture

A key aspect of W4IPS is its focus on the capability
to have multiple users operating the power grid with
the real-time data stream. Under a limited bandwidth,
the trafﬁc congestion can be a problem when involving
a real-time multi-user scenario, especially when the
simulation case grows from a few nodes to thousands
of nodes,
the transportation of a single data stream
can take a signiﬁcant time and thus the connection
consistency is hard to guarantee for multiple users.
Figure 1.
in order to be capable and
scalable for this multi-user simulation, instead of using
the traditional end-to-end client/server protocol, W4IPS
uses a lightweight publish and subscribe messaging
exchange protocol
for the internal communication,
which is used in many real-time applications like online
chat/message systems. Each data message in W4IPS
has a topic header which decides the routing path of the
message.

shows that

As shown in Figure 1., according to the usage of
the component, W4IPS can be divided into three layers.
The client layer consists of multiple web clients, which
can be used by operators for power system monitoring
and interactive control actions. Normally they are
the subscribers of the “data” topic, and only when
the operator issues a command, a message with the
“command” topic will be published by the web client.
Based on the user’s role in the scenario, the data that the
user has no privilege to view will be ﬁltered. The server
layer has a gateway that translates the PowerWorld
Dynamics Studio protocol/c37.118.2 into the MQTT
protocol and vice versa. When needed, the gateway
can be used to connect SimAuto and the MQTT client
for the steady state simulation, and is extendable for
other protocols. It also has an access controller which
determines whether the user has the privilege to execute
the attempted control action based on the user’s role,
e.g.
a load shedding command from a user who is
responsible for reactive power support will be ignored
and tagged as an invalid and suspicious action. There
is another layer in the middle, where a broker ﬁlters
published messages based on topic, and then distribute

Figure 2. The web interface screenshots. The left one shows an evaluation report popup on top of the
transformer table and map. The right one shows a real-time GIC ﬁeld contour on the map. On the top of both
screenshots there are notiﬁcations that will show up on each user’s screen when someone issues a command.

them to subscribers, transferring real-time data, control
commands and notiﬁcations between clients and DS.

2.4. User Interface

the data based on the query,

Compared to the traditional polling method where
web clients periodically send requests for data and
DS sends out
this
publish/subscribe structure largely reduces the number
of query, which promotes faster response time, increase
the number of concurrent users and reduces the delivery
latency that can be particularly problematic in a
real-time monitor and control system. As a result,
W4IPS has the capability to have 16 users operating a
2000 bus case at the same time. Theoretically, it will
have larger capability when working with smaller cases.

One common problem for the multi-user simulation
is the interaction convergence. When multiple clients
exchange information with the main simulation in the
server layers, the values of the variables/states may need
to be updated.
In the simulation process, this means
there is always 1-step mismatch between the present
simulation with old variables and the true simulation
with true variables. However, in W4IPS, the states are
synchronized across all clients by only accepting the
data stream from the simulation engine. The simulation
engine will not accept the state changes until it solves the
next time step based on the changes. For instance, when
one client changes the terminal voltage of a generator,
the command will be sent to the simulation engine
through the communication system. If the command is
valid, then the simulation engine will solve the system
based on the new state. Then all clients will update both
the state and variables according to the latest values.

Another feature of the W4IPS is the web-based
interface that allows users to use any browser to get
access to the system, without installing dependencies,
which also minimizes the time cost for deploying a
multi-user environment. The interface has customized
dashboards for different roles where operators adjust the
generation, the status of the shunts in the system, or use a
holistic view of the system to make high level decisions
for other collaborators. As shown in Figure 2., the
interface can be switched by clicking the button in the
left panel. Based on the application, the interface may
have some additional dashboards:

1. Security Analysis: This dashboard includes
different power system security analysis, such as
power system state estimation [16], cyber security
analysis and visualization [17], power system
equipment risk assessment [18, 19], etc. This
dashboard can provide a comprehensive power
system security analysis for operators.

2. Cyber Battleﬁeld: This dashboard provides a
platform for a Hacker who tries to compromise
the system through unexpected actions [2] or
bad data injection [20] and Defender who tries
to save the system from the adversaries without
sacriﬁcing electricity reliability [21]. The purpose
of this dashboard is to provide attacker-defender
scenarios for operators’ and engineers’ training.

3. GIC: A dashboard to show the geomagnetically
(GIC) ﬁeld intensity and
An
transformers.

induced current
the temperature data for

alert/warning system will be enabled if
time-varying GIC electric ﬁeld is available.

the

As an example, Figure 3.

shows the homepage
which has an updating interactive oneline diagram of the
south area of the synthetic Texas grid [22, 23],real-time
area data that has the total generation, the total load,
the average frequency, the exported real power, and a
table for bus voltage violations and a strip-chart, which
is scaled to show one minute of voltage magnitude data
for some key buses in the system. Each web interface
has a MQTT client inside for the real-time data stream
communication. By subscribing to the same topic, data
received by multiple clients with different roles are
synchronized, which can be seen in Figure 2. where
notiﬁcations pop up at the same time on both operator’s
dashboards.

2.5. User Interaction

The web interface supports 21 types of interactive
control action on devices in the simulated grids, which
includes adjusting the voltage setpoint for the exciter,
adjustable load shedding and changing reactive power
support. The control action can be triggered at once,
or be triggered at a speciﬁc time point, or in some
applications, users are able to execute an action for an
accurate time duration, for example opening a breaker
for 3 cycles. Based on the roles, the operator may have
limited but different operation controllability over the
grid. To support the operator’s decision, in addition to
multiple tabular displays of the real-time measurements,
the interface also has some real-time visualization to
give the operator more situational awareness, as shown
in Figure 2. where the GIC ﬁeld contour shows the
spatial distribution of geomagnetic impact on the grid,
and the blue and green scatters show the intensity and
the polarity of the GICs. A substation combobox
can be triggered by clicking the substation symbols
in the map to show the detailed substation data along
with the substation oneline diagram to provide a ﬁner
observation and control over the grid. As shown in
Figure 4., operators are able to issue commands in
the substation combo-box. Commands like toggling
devices or changing MW setpoint can also be done
in the tables where switches or editable cells are
available, as shown in Figure 7.. Based on the role’s
responsibility, users may have the full capabilities to
curtail loads, generations, change schedules, switch
shunts and change transformer taps by clicking the
buttons in the combo-box and in the tables.

Another useful feature is that after the simulation
is ﬁnished, data and action records are available to
download in the report page. This allows later playback
by uploading the record ﬁle to the interface, which can
be utilized for detailed analysis of operations. We can
check whether the operator or the defense algorithm
does the optimal/appropriate response regarding to the

Figure 3. The main dashboard shows the area data
on the top, a large interactive map that has a
one-line diagram with real-time substation and branch
data, a strip-chart on the right to show the voltage
magnitudes for key buses and a table that shows the
buses with voltage violations.

contingency.

2.6. Extendibility

W4IPS can be used to not only simulate the current
power grid, but also has the possibility to simulate
the future power system where a huge amount of IoTs
based power electronic interfaces and devices (grid-iot)
running in the system. Building on top of the MQTT
protocol, the real-time data pipeline ensures W4IPS has
the capability to include the grid-iot devices. Though
W4IPS is designed to be an interactive simulation
environment, with the real-time data stream from ﬁeld
devices instead of DS, it can also work as an online
platform for power system visualization and analysis.
In addition to the transmission-level simulators that are
currently used in W4IPS, it also has the capability to
be used with the distribution system simulator, e.g.
OpenDSS [24] and GridLAB-D [25]. The integration
of the co-simulation engine HELICS [26] is also in
the future development plan. Moreover, different
data sources, such as real-time weather information,
LMP, etc., can also be included for provide a realistic
environment for power system studies and analyses.

3. Application of W4IPS

With the features and structure mentioned before,
W4IPS has the capability for the operator training and
multi-operator collaboration.
In this part, we present
how W4IPS can be used to help students gain experience
and insights on large power system operations by
exploring the inter-related operational tasks and how the
W4IPS is used to train grid operators to handle GMD

of loads. As shown in Figure 5., which shows the
percentage of generation for each online generator at
8:00 AM and 11:50 AM, each block stands for an online
generator where the size of the block represents the
capacity of the generator.
If the generator is running
in ”low-load”, the block will be green; if the real power
output is about or exceeds its capacity, the block will
be red. In Figure 5., it is clear that the system needs
more generation and capacity, so students need to close
other ofﬂine generators and adjust the power output to
reduce the number of overloaded lines caused by the
limited generation resources. The lack of online reactive
power support and the low generator terminal voltage
may result in a voltage collapse or blackout, which is
also a common issue that students will face.

Figure 5. Percentage of generation for each online
generator at diﬀerent time: 8:00 AM (top) vs 11:50
AM (bottom). The green color stands for a low
percentage of generation, while the red color
represents that the generator is close or reaches its
capacity.

Figure 4. The generator data and the available
control actions. Users are able to switch to other
buses in the substation with the tabs on the top.

events.

3.1. Educational Tool for Power System

Analysis

In the ﬁnal lab of the senior undergraduate course
“Power System Operation and Control” at Texas A&M
University, students work in teams of three to control
the South Texas area of the 2000-bus synthetic Texas
grid. This is a brand new experience for students to
collaboratively work together to operate a power grid,
whereas prior labs in the course did not present the
opportunity to do so [27]. The scenario runs for 10
minutes at 60 times real time, simulating peak load on
a hot Texas summer day from 10:00 AM to 8:00 PM.
Students interact with W4IPS to control the transmission
network, generation ﬂeet, shunt capacitor banks and
if necessary,
loads. Throughout the simulated day,
W4IPS will report both the cost of operation in dollars
and a reliability score, so each team needs to work
collaboratively to operate the control area as reliably and
cost-effectively as possible.

To achieve this goal, students normally will break
this into three speciﬁc goals based on the roles they
choose:

1. Keep the area control error (ACE) as close to zero

as possible;

According to our observation, students tend to have

different roles when facing the simulation:

2. Eliminate line overﬂows, bus over-voltage and

under-voltage violations;

3. Dynamically adjust generator outputs according
to the marginal cost to decrease the total cost.

In the scenario, the AGCs are off in the South Texas
area so that students have to manually adjust the power
output of generators by changing the MW setpoint.
Once the simulation starts, the online capacity will run
out within about 200 seconds due to the rapid increase

1. One student will focus on the overview page as
shown in Figure 3. which has a dynamic chart
of the load prediction for the day and the current
load. The student will actively track the trend
In the same page there
of the change of loads.
is also a geographic one-line diagram which will
highlight an overﬂowed line.

2. One student will focus on the generator page as
shown in Figure 7. which has a real-time pie chart
for the current generation and capacity and has

all operation data from generators. The student
is normally busy adjusting the generator terminal
voltage and the real power setpoint to match the
changing load and eliminate the line overﬂows.

3. The last student will mainly focus on the shunt
page which has a table to show the bus voltage
violation. The student needs to change the shunt
operation status to keep the bus voltages in a range
of [0.95,1.05].

Most of the time students are able to work individually,
however, when the severe situation happen, e.g. multiple
line overﬂows and bus voltage violations occur in a short
period, they will need to work together to minimize the
impact. They are able to evaluate their decisions during
the simulation by checking whether the reliability index
improves after the actions.

Once the simulation ﬁnishes, a report with the
reliability score, measurement data, total cost, violations
and action records will pop up which can be used by
students to evaluate their strategies or collected by an
instructor for further research. Then students need to
discuss among their team about what happened during
this shift which helps them coordinate their tasks and
get closer to the goal in the next round. The reliability
score is calculated based on the numbers of the violated
bus voltages and the overload branches, and Figure 6.
shows the typical scores for the ﬁrst round and fourth
round. Most students will normally experience voltage
collapse due to the shortage of reactive power support
and the lack of online generation capacity in the ﬁrst
and second rounds, however they will have a better
understanding for the impact of the control actions and
become more sensitive to the voltage violations and
power ﬂow violations in the last few rounds.

3.2. Online GMD Mitigation

GMDs have the potential

to severely disrupt
operations of the electric grid by inducing quasi-dc GICs
in the power grid, which may increase the reactive
power losses and temperatures of transformers [28].
Thus, we create a scenario, which simulates an extreme
geomagnetic storm event impacting the South Texas
area, to give operators an immersive experience of how
GMDs will affect the grid and what actions are needed
to mitigate the impact.

In this scenario, an extreme geomagnetic storm
alarm is received by the control center at 16:28:00,
which followed by a ten-minute varying GIC electric
ﬁeld superimposed on the grid. As shown in the
Figure 2., the operator is able to closely monitor the
intensity of the GIC electric ﬁeld from the contour,
which is generated dynamically based on the GIC
electric ﬁeld measurements in the substations, and keep
an eye on the temperatures and the GIC neutral currents
of transformers. The size of the scatter represents the
intensity of the GIC neutral current at that transformer,

Figure 6. The typical reliability index curves for the
ﬁrst round (top) and the last round (bottom), where
blue triangle means at that time instant there is a
control action issued by the student.

while the green and blue color stand for the positiveness
and the negativeness of the current.

Based on these GIC-related data and other data in the
generator, load, shunt and transmission line dashboards,
the operators are required to handle the voltage drop and
the over-heating of transformers, which may need them
to adjust the reactive power supply, change the generator
output, change the grid topology by opening/closing the
branches or shed loads according to the severeness of
the impact.

4. Future Work with W4IPS

For power

system security studies, with its
cyber-physical nature,
it is necessary to include the
set of control, communication, and physical system
The pure power system simulation
components.
can provide SA from power system perspective, but
lacks the information from the cyber perspective
it
and the device level.
testbeds has been
proposed for the analysis of cyber-physical security in
power systems with the integration of power system
simulation, communication network emulation, physical
device and real-time data in [29–32]. However, an
important element of power system security is the
human factor, which is hard to quantify and test in CPS.
shows the framework of integrating
(HIL)

Hardware-In-the-Loop

Figure 8.

Several

W4IPS

with

a

Figure 7. Generator operator’s display in W4IPS. On
the top there are two charts showing the current cost
and the average cost. A table shows the real power
and the terminal voltages, with functions to change
the real power setpoint and the voltage setpoint. On
the right there is area generation data, a power
import option and a pie chart that shows the online
capacity, the oﬄine capacity and the current
generation.

Figure 8. Future application with W4IPS in the
HHIL testbed

other side, attackers may try to compromise the devices,
inject bad data to the simulation, or mis-operate critical
elements to sabotage the whole system. With the
multi-user feature and web interface, users can join the
testbed remotely and play different roles simultaneously
to have a real-world power system attacker-defender
competition.

to

into

factors

human

introduce

testbed
the
power system cyber security analysis, making it a
Human-Hardware-In-the-Loop (HHIL) testbed. The
interactive action between operators and simulation
allows the test and veriﬁcation of operators SA,
judgement and experience to different contingencies.
The hardware allows a speciﬁc focus on the operation
and function of the target device. With the analyses
from both cyber and physical perspectives as in [18,19],
it will inform operators how important that device is and
how to secure the device. Based on the real-time power
system data from W4IPS, power system security can
be analyzed from the compromised devices, malicious
operations in power systems, operators’ SA and
reactions to contingencies, etc. With a complete view of
power grid, targeted device, and operators response to
contingencies, the HHIL testbed can be used for power
system security analysis, training and test.

functionality,

Whenever there is a cyber induced physical hazard
in a device or adversaries in a power system simulation,
it can be observed in W4IPS. With the interactive
control
the devices can be directly
controlled by different operators. This feature makes the
W4IPS-integrated HHIL testbed an ideal platform to test
the defense and attacker algorithms for power system
cyber-physical security studies, as shown in Figure 9..
On one side, defenders need to ensure the stability
and reliability of power systems under attacks from
adversaries by shedding loads, adjusting the output of
generators, or islanding speciﬁc areas to avoid cascading
outages and ensuring overall power supply. On the

Figure 9. The proposed environment is capable of
running the cyber competition between defenders and
attackers.

Like the lab mentioned previously, operators SA
can also be expressed through the W4IPS through
their judgments of a power system status. Different
operators may choose different contingency response
strategies to a contingency at different timing. The
following power system status of their operation can
inform them whether they make the optimal decision
or what
to make
information they need the most
the decision at the early stage. Thus, W4IPS can
for
be utilized as a training and evaluating tool
operators to test whether they are aware of potential
threats in their power systems and they can make

W4IPSDigital Data/Analog Data ConverterSubstation Devicesthe right decision to save the system in a real-time
manner. Moreover, the synthetic power system topology
information, cyber-physical architecture information,
and network trafﬁc data can also be transmitted to
the W4IPS with its extendibility, which makes the
W4IPS a centralized location for all power system
Such information can be utilized for
information.
various security analyses. The combination of W4IPS
and other security analysis platforms,
like CyPSA
[18], can provide a comprehensive understanding of
power systems security analysis with the real-time
visualization and cyber-physical security assessment.

other applications. For the education and GMD use
cases, users do not need to install any dependencies
and are able to experience the system by browsing
our website directly. To modify the system to have
other functionailities or use it with other simulation
engines,
install
the user could clone the repository,
the dependencies and then modify the code based on
the needs. The simulation engine in this paper is not
included in the license, however users are able to request
a demo version through their website [35].

6. Conclusion

This paper has presented a web-based interactive
power system dynamics simulation environment for
power system security analysis, which is capable of
visualizing the real-time data, performing dynamic
simulations, and introducing human factors with the
multi-user interactivity. The web-based interface allows
people from different areas to collaboratively operate on
the same grid to control the devices in the system.

The applications of W4IPS shows its ability to
provide a comprehensive understanding of power
systems and how operators’ decision can affect the
system. The real-time visualization provides a better
understanding of power systems.
The interactive
control functionality makes W4IPS a platform suitable
for the response operation under different contingency
the W4IPS can
scenarios.
be connected with different
further
cyber-physical security studies for power systems. With
other cyber-physical security analysis toolsets,
the
W4IPS can provide a comprehensive security analysis
and validation. The W4IPS can also be extended to
use at IoT-embedded grid studies and power system AI
development.

For the future work,

testbeds

for

Acknowledgment

The authors would like to thank the US Department
of Energy Cybersecurity for Energy Delivery Systems
program under award DE-OE0000895 and National
Science Foundation under Grant 1520864.

References

[1] V. Terzija, G. Valverde, D. Cai, P. Regulski, V. Madani,
J. Fitch, S. Skok, M. M. Begovic, and A. Phadke,
“Wide-area monitoring, protection, and control of future
electric power networks,” Proceedings of
the IEEE,
vol. 99, no. 1, pp. 80–93, 2011.

[2] D. U. Case, “Analysis of the cyber attack on the
ukrainian power grid,” Electricity Information Sharing
and Analysis Center (E-ISAC), 2016.

[3] M. Panteli and D. S. Kirschen, “Situation awareness in
power systems: Theory, challenges and applications,”
Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 122, pp. 140–151,
2015.

[4] R. Podmore and M. R. Robinson, “The role of simulators
for smart grid development,” IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 205–212, 2010.

Figure 10. The proposed framework integrates the
IOT devices into the HHIL testbed.

Other applications with hardware involved can also
be done based on W4IPS. For example, W4IPS can
be easily used for simulating the future grids with the
integration of IoT devices in distribution and user level,
because W4IPS and most IoT devices share the same
MQTT-based communication protocol and structure.
The distribution system can be modeled in a different
platform with more details,
like feeder information,
household information, etc [24,25]. As shown in Figure
10., the source-grid-load interactivity can be simulated
in the extended HHIL environment. Ultimately, the
impact of this grid-controllable devices [33] and the
vulnerabilities of the underlying cyber network can
be further analyzed. With large amounts of data
and large-scale systems, W4IPS can also be utilized
to provide a platform for developing multi-agent
using deep reinforcement learning to operate the grid
with human operators through different data sets for
corresponding contingency, power grid status and
operators’ response.

5. Source Code of W4IPS

The W4IPS is an open source project with the MIT
license [34], thus it can be utilized to do the similar
tasks as mentioned in the use case, or modiﬁed for

[5] R. Pienta, L. Xiong, S. Grijalva, D. H. P. Chau, and
M. Kahng, “Steps: A spatio-temporal electric power
systems visualization,” in Companion Publication of
the 21st International Conference on Intelligent User
Interfaces. ACM, 2016, pp. 32–35.

[6] S. Mohapatra and T.

“Fast modal
identiﬁcation, monitoring,
for
systems using dynamic mode
large-scale power
decomposition,” in 2016 Power Systems Computation
Conference (PSCC).

J. Overbye,
and

IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–7.

visualization

[7] I. Idehen, B. Wang, K. Shetye, T. Overbye, and J. Weber,
“Visualization of large-scale electric grid oscillation
modes,” in 2018 North American Power Symposium
(NAPS).

IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.

[8] S. Ciraci, J. Daily, J. Fuller, A. Fisher, L. Marinovici,
and K. Agarwal, “Fncs:
a framework for power
system and communication networks co-simulation,” in
Proceedings of the symposium on theory of modeling &
simulation-DEVS integrative.
Society for Computer
Simulation International, 2014, p. 36.

[9] R. Huang, R. Fan, J. Daily, A. Fisher, and J. Fuller,
“Open-source framework for power system transmission
IET
and
Generation, Transmission & Distribution, vol. 11,
no. 12, pp. 3152–3162, 2017.

co-simulation,”

distribution

dynamics

[10] T. J. Overbye, Z. Mao, A. Birchﬁeld, J. D. Weber, and
M. Davis, “An interactive, stand-alone and multi-user
power system simulator for the pmu time frame,” in 2019
IEEE Texas Power and Energy Conference (TPEC), Feb
2019, pp. 1–6.

[11] T. J. Overbye, Z. Mao, K. S. Shetye, and J. D. Weber, “An
interactive, extensible environment for power system
simulation on the pmu time frame with a cyber security
application,” in 2017 IEEE Texas Power and Energy
Conference (TPEC), Feb 2017, pp. 1–6.

[12] “PowerWorld Simulator,” 2018. [Online]. Available:

https://www.powerworld.com/

[13] A. Banks and R. Gupta, “Mqtt version 3.1. 1,” OASIS

standard, vol. 29, p. 89, 2014.

[14] M. OASIS, “Version 5.0.[(accessed on 5 january 2019)];
2018 may 15; oasis committee speciﬁcation 02.”

[15] T. Yokotani and Y. Sasaki, “Comparison with http
and mqtt on required network resources for iot,” in
2016 International Conference on Control, Electronics,
Renewable Energy and Communications (ICCEREC),
Sep. 2016, pp. 1–6.

[16] A. Abur and A. G. Exposito, Power system state
CRC press,

estimation: theory and implementation.
2004.

[17] “NP-View,”

np-view/.

https://www.network-perception.com/

[18] K. Davis, R. Berthier, S. Zonouz, G. Weaver, R. Bobba,
E. Rogers, P. Sauer, and D. Nicol, “Cyber-physical
security assessment (cypsa) for electric power systems,”
IEEE-HKN: THE BRIDGE, 2016.

[19] H. Huang and K. Davis, “Power system equipment
cyber-physical risk assessment based on architecture
IEEE
in
and
critical
Communications,
International
Control,
for Smart
Grids (SmartGridComm).

and Computing Technologies

clearing
Conference

IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.

time,”
on

2018

[20] A. Sahu, H. K. Tippanaboyana, L. Hefton,

and
A. Goulart, “Detection of rogue nodes in ami networks,”
in 2017 19th International Conference on Intelligent
System Application to Power Systems (ISAP), Sept 2017,
pp. 1–6.

[21] C. Coffrin, R. Bent, B. Tasseff, K. Sundar, and
S. Backhaus, “Relaxations of ac maximal load delivery
for severe contingency analysis,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 1450–1458, 2018.
[22] A. B. Birchﬁeld, T. Xu, K. M. Gegner, K. S. Shetye,
and T. J. Overbye, “Grid structural characteristics
as validation criteria for synthetic networks,” IEEE
Transactions on power systems, vol. 32, no. 4, pp.
3258–3265, 2017.

[23] T. Xu, A. B. Birchﬁeld, and T. J. Overbye, “Modeling,
tuning and validating system dynamics in synthetic
electric grids,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
2018.

[24] R. C. Dugan, “Reference guide: The open distribution
system simulator (opendss),” Electric Power Research
Institute, Inc, vol. 7, p. 29, 2012.

[25] D. P. Chassin, K. Schneider, and C. Gerkensmeyer,
“Gridlab-d: An open-source power systems modeling
in 2008 IEEE/PES
and simulation environment,”
Transmission
and
Exposition.

and Distribution Conference

IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–5.

J.

Palmintier,
Smith,

D. Krishnamurthy,

[26] B.
S.
“Design
transmission-distribution-communication-market
in 2017 Workshop on
co-simulation framework,”
Modeling and Simulation of Cyber-Physical Energy
Systems (MSCPES), April 2017, pp. 1–6.

Top,
Fuller,
high-performance

Daily,

helics

and

the

of

P.

J.

[27] A. B. Birchﬁeld, T. J. Overbye, and K. R. Davis,
“Educational applications of
large synthetic power
grids,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 34,
no. 1, pp. 765–772, 2018.

[28] M. Kazerooni, H. Zhu, and T. J. Overbye, “Mitigation
of geomagnetically induced currents using corrective
line switching,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 2563–2571, 2018.

[29] R. Liu, C. Vellaithurai, S. S. Biswas, T. T. Gamage, and
A. K. Srivastava, “Analyzing the cyber-physical impact
of cyber events on the power grid,” IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 2444–2453, 2015.
[30] S. Poudel, Z. Ni, and N. Malla, “Real-time cyber
physical system testbed for power system security and
control,” International Journal of Electrical Power &
Energy Systems, vol. 90, pp. 124–133, 2017.

[31] U. Adhikari, T. Morris,

“Wams
cyber-physical test bed for power system, cybersecurity
study, and data mining,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 2744–2753, 2017.

and S. Pan,

[32] M. Kezunovic, A. Esmailian, M. Govindarasu, and
A. Mehrizi-Sani, “The use of system in the loop,
hardware in the loop, and co-modeling of cyber-physical
in developing and evaluating new smart
systems
grid solutions,” in Proceedings of
the 50th Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, 2017.
[33] Y. Xiang, X. Lu, Z. Yu, D. Shi, H. Li, and Z. Wang, “Iot
and edge computing based direct load control for fast
adaptive frequency regulation,” in IEEE PES General
Meeting, 2019.

[34] Z. Mao. (2019) W4IPS repository. [Online]. Available:

https://github.com/mzy2240/W4IPS

[35] (2019) PowerWorld Dynamics Studio 1.0 beta demo.
https://www.powerworld.com/

[Online]. Available:
gloveroverbyesarma

