Towards Models for Availability and Security
Evaluation of Cloud Computing with Moving
Target Defense

Matheus Torquato
Student
CISUC, Department of Informatics Engineering
University of Coimbra
Coimbra, Portugal
mdmelo@dei.uc.pt

Marco Vieira
Advisor
CISUC, Department of Informatics Engineering
University of Coimbra
Coimbra, Portugal
mvieira@dei.uc.pt

Abstract—Security is one of the most relevant concerns in
cloud computing. With the evolution of cyber-security threats,
developing innovative techniques to thwart attacks is of utmost
importance. One recent method to improve cloud computing
security is Moving Target Defense (MTD). MTD makes use of
dynamic reconﬁguration in virtualized environments to ”confuse”
attackers or to nullify their knowledge about the system state.
However, there is still no consolidated mechanism to evaluate the
trade-offs between availability and security when using MTD
on cloud computing. The evaluation through measurements is
complex as one needs to deal with unexpected events as failures
and attacks. To overcome this challenge, we intend to propose
a set of models to evaluate the availability and security of
MTD in cloud computing environments. The expected results
include the quantiﬁcation of availability and security levels under
different conditions (e.g., different software aging rates, varying
workloads, different attack intensities).

Index Terms—Moving Target Defense, Security, Availability,

cloud computing

I. INTRODUCTION
Previous works show cloud computing security as a sig-
niﬁcant research challenge [1] [2]. One of the root problems
for cloud security is the intrinsic advantage of attackers over
defenders. Attackers can perform a series of actions (e.g.,
they achieve
repeated attacks, vulnerability analysis) until
their goal. So,
the attackers can try to explore a speciﬁc
system vulnerability while the defenders have to protect all
the possible attack venues [3]. Besides that, the generally static
nature of data centers facilitates the attacker to obtain enough
information to improve the chance of attack success.

MTD is a ﬂexible technique for system security improve-
ment. Previous papers showed the effectiveness of MTD
in environments like the Internet of Things
deployment
(IoT) [4], Virtualized Containers [5], Software Deﬁned Net-
works (SDN) [6], and cloud computing [7]. In the cloud
computing context, MTD techniques can be used to thwart
or reduce the impact of security attacks as co-residency
attacks [8] and Distributed Denial of Service attacks [9].

Matheus Torquato is also with Federal Institute of Alagoas (IFAL), Ara-

piraca, Brazil.

The United States Department of Homeland Security deﬁnes
MTD as ”the concept of controlling change across multiple
system dimensions to increase uncertainty and apparent com-
plexity for attackers, reduce their window of opportunity and
increase the costs of their probing and attack efforts.” [10].

Besides the security concern, cloud-hosted applications also
need high availability levels. There are several strategies to
achieve this goal as failover techniques, redundancy, and soft-
ware rejuvenation. But, the problem is to evaluate the possible
availability and security impacts of applying Moving Target
Defense along with availability improvement techniques.

Usually, there is a trade-off between security and availability
in cloud computing systems when applying Moving Target
Defense. For example, a common technique of MTD on cloud
computing is Virtual Machine Migration. VM migration moves
a VM from one physical machine to another. This remap-
ping can, for example, avoid co-residency attack. However,
each VM migration (even in Live Migration mode) has an
associated downtime [11]. So, if we decide to perform too
frequent VM migrations, we may achieve higher levels of
system security, but lower availability levels. Otherwise, if the
system manager decides to deploy less frequent migrations, the
system may reach higher availability levels but jeopardizes the
system security.

Our research aims to propose a set of models to evaluate the
trade-offs between security and availability of cloud comput-
ing MTD based on different policies of VM placement. From
the models’ results, we will select speciﬁc policies to reach
the desired levels of security and availability.

Our models will be mainly based on Stochastic Reward
Nets (SRN) that are extensively used for cloud computing
availability evaluation [12]. SRNs are also suitable for security
evaluation [13].

The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section II presents
the details of our research goals. Section III contains our
research methodology. Section IV presents the related works.
Section V highlights our current work. Finally, Section VI
contains ﬁnal remarks.

II. GOALS

The main research question (RQ) of this work is: What
are the trade-offs between cloud computing availability and
security when applying speciﬁc policies of MTD based on
VM placement techniques? This work aims to propose a set
of models for availability and security evaluation of Moving
Target Defense on cloud computing, aiming to answer this
question.

The following RQs will drive the design of the models to

be proposed:

1) What is the availability level of cloud computing archi-
tectures? The ﬁrst step is to design a scalable model for
availability evaluation of different cloud architectures.
2) What is the security level of a given cloud deployment
architecture? The second step is to propose a model for
cloud security evaluation. In this step, we will also select
the considered threat models (i.e., security threats as
Denial of Service, Man-in-the-middle, and Side-channel
attacks). Our goal is to cover the Denial of Service (DoS)
and Man-in-the-Middle attacks.

3) What are the side-effects of MTD based on Virtual
Machine (VM) placement on the system availability?
Using the model from the ﬁrst step, our goal is to expand
the model including MTD based on VM placement.
4) What are the cloud computing security levels achieved
by MTD techniques? Using the model from previous
steps, we aim to add the behavior related to MTD based
on VM placement techniques.

Finally, we aim to merge the models obtained from the
research questions mentioned above. The ﬁnal model will
allow evaluating the trade-offs between cloud availability and
tech-
security, considering MTD based on VM placement
niques. In the future, we also intend to answer the following
research questions:

1) What are the actual levels of availability and security of
MTD based on VM placement when considering aspects
of software aging and rejuvenation?

2) What

is the cloud computing performance overhead

caused by MTD based on VM placement?

3) Is there any cloud computing reliability improvement due

to MTD based on VM placement?

III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

Figure 1 presents the intended workﬂow and expected
contributions from our research work. In the following text, we
present our planned step-by-step for conducting the proposed
research.

Step #1 - Design a baseline availability model for cloud
computing. Firstly, we aim to design an availability model for
general cloud computing architectures. Our previous papers
[12] and [14] have the obtained results from this ﬁrst step.
We are now working on expanding their contribution to more
complex cloud computing architectures.

Step #2 - Design a baseline security model for cloud
computing. We aim to add the security aspect in our modeling

Fig. 1. Research workﬂow and expected contributions

framework. Our main focus in the security aspect
is the
security risk focusing on the probability of attack success.
We consider adding realistic scenarios in the modeling process.
One interesting example is proposed by the TPCx-V bench-
mark1, which is based on the architecture of a brokerage ﬁrm.
Step #3 - Include MTD behavior in the models. Our goal
is to cover the two main approaches of MTD deployments:
1) MTD based on VM migration scheduling and 2) MTD
based on creation and deletion of VMs. Those behaviors will
be incorporated into the models obtained from the previous
steps. From these models, we will be able to conduct a trade-
off analysis between cloud computing security and availability
while using MTD based on VM placement policies.

Step #4 - Cover other relevant aspects of MTD on cloud as
software aging and rejuvenation and performance impacts
caused by applying MTD techniques.

1http://www.tpc.org/tpcx-v/default.asp

startendStep	#1Design	a	baselineavailability	modelfor	CloudComputingAvailability	model	for	Cloud	Step	#2Design	a	baselinesecurity	modelfor	CloudComputingStep	#3Inclusion	of	theMoving	TargetDefense	behaviorin	the	models.	Step	#4Inclusion	of	otherrelevant	aspectsas	software	agingand	performance	Security	models	or	an	approach	forsecurity	evalution	usingdependability	modelsModel	for	dependability	andsecurity	evaluation	of	MTD	onCloudA	Holistic	Model	for	CloudComputing	performability	andsecurity	evaluation	when	usingMTDWorkflowExpected	ContributionsIV. RELATED WORKS

Alavizadeh et al. [15] provide a comprehensive security
assessment of MTD on cloud computing. The evaluation is
based on modeling and analysis of MTD techniques. The
authors evaluate four security metrics: system risk, attack cost,
return on attack, and availability. The assessment uses on
Hierarchical Attack Representation Model (HARM) models
for combined MTD techniques. The main contribution of the
paper is an approach to evaluate the effectiveness of combined
MTD. This paper provides relevant insights for our idea of
availability and security modeling of MTD deployment on
cloud computing. We aim to tackle the limitations observed
in the paper as: modeling the co-residency attacks, taking
account of the cost of MTD on cloud computing availability
and security, and including other relevant aspects on the
analysis (e.g., software aging and rejuvenation, and hardware
and software failure and repair).

Thebeau et al. [16] provides a theoretical point-of-view of
how to measure resiliency of a cloud which applies Software
Based Encryption (SBE) MTD. SBE uses software diversity
to improve system security, survivability, and resilience. The
paper describes some of the essential concepts of security
evaluation as integrity, availability, survivability, and conﬁ-
dentiality. Finally, the paper proposes a model for resiliency
quantiﬁcation in scenarios with SBE-based MTD. We also
aim to deliver models covering different MTD deployments
on Cloud Computing. Such deployments are based on shufﬂe
techniques as VM Migration and remap of the VM placement.
Ahmed and Bhargava [17] propose Mayﬂies MTD frame-
work for distributed systems. Mayﬂies use a speciﬁc policy
of VM placement as MTD. The idea is to perform VM
substitution through creation and deletion cycles, obeying
certain time intervals. Every cycle of substitution changes
a VM characteristic. In Mayﬂies, VMs are created to use a
different operating system from the previous deleted VM. The
strategy avoids attack progress or the spread of an undetected
attack. The authors evaluate their proposed framework through
experiments in a real testbed. However, different from our
intended approach,
the paper does not present a security
analysis of the proposed technique.

Chung et. al. [18] proposes SeReNe, a platform to deliver
Network-Security-as-a-Service (NSaaS) for multi-tenant data
center environments. SeReNe plans to apply MTD using
diversity techniques to mitigate software vulnerabilities as
Bohrbugs, Mandelbugs, and aging-related bugs. However,
SeReNe is still in a conceptual phase, and the paper lacks
its practical implementation and evaluation. We also intend to
include the effects of MTD deployments on software aging
and rejuvenation. But, different from SeReNe, our approach
is focused on shufﬂing VM placement techniques.

The majority of the papers in the area neglects the evalu-
ation of trade-offs between availability and security of MTD
deployments on cloud computing. Different from the papers
mentioned earlier, we aim to design an evaluation approach
able to provide security and availability results to support the

Fig. 2. Availability and Security Model

decision-making process.

V. CURRENT WORK

We are now working on the second step of our workﬂow.
The papers [12] and [14] present the obtained results from the
ﬁrst step of our research.

Figure 2 presents the current version of our model. This
model covers a simple virtualized environment with one Main
Node, one Standby Node, and one Virtual Machine. This
model also covers software aging and rejuvenation aspects.
In this model, we consider software aging effects in the
Virtual Machine Monitor (VMM) software component [19].
VMM software rejuvenation is supported by VM migration
scheduling.

Speciﬁcally in the model,

the places Clock and
Schedule in conjunction with the transitions Trigger and
ResetClock represent the behavior of a system clock for
VM migration submission in the environment. The places
LM, DW_Mig and SN_W with the transitions StartLM, PC,
LM_dwt and Rej represent the behavior of the VM migration.
The Erlang sub-net2 represent the software aging accumulation
process. The remainder places and transitions are related with
the failure and repair behavior of the architectural components.
The model consists of an SRN model. In the SRN models,
we can represent the failure and repair behavior for each
component of the virtualized environment. As the SRN models
are already extensively used for availability evaluation, one of
the major challenges is to extract security measures from the
availability model.

So, besides extracting availability measures, we also com-
pute a security measure named RISKSCORE3 from the pro-
posed availability model. Figure 3 presents the obtained re-
sults. Our obtained results include system unavailability and
the RISKSCORE related to Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) and
Denial of Service (DoS) threats. MITM attacks have high

2Places AgingHigh, Accumulation and DW2 with the transitions

Aging, AgingPhase, AgingFailure and ClearAging(2)

3RISKSCORE is obtained through the steady-state probability of the system

being in a risky state (from a security perspective).

[2] R. Buyya, S. N. Srirama, G. Casale, R. Calheiros, Y. Simmhan,
B. Varghese, E. Gelenbe, B. Javadi, L. M. Vaquero, M. A. Netto et al.,
“A manifesto for future generation cloud computing: Research directions
for the next decade,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 51, no. 5,
p. 105, 2018.

[3] G.-l. Cai, B.-s. Wang, W. Hu, and T.-z. Wang, “Moving target defense:
state of the art and characteristics,” Frontiers of Information Technology
& Electronic Engineering, vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 1122–1153, 2016.
[4] M. Kahla, M. Azab, and A. Mansour, “Secure, resilient, and self-
conﬁguring fog architecture for untrustworthy iot environments,” in 2018
17th IEEE International Conference On Trust, Security And Privacy In
Computing And Communications/12th IEEE International Conference
On Big Data Science And Engineering (TrustCom/BigDataSE).
IEEE,
2018, pp. 49–54.

[5] M. Azab, B. M. Mokhtar, A. S. Abed, and M. Eltoweissy, “Smart
moving target defense for linux container resiliency,” in Collaboration
and Internet Computing (CIC), 2016 IEEE 2nd International Conference
on.

IEEE, 2016, pp. 122–130.

[6] A. Chowdhary, A. Alshamrani, D. Huang, and H. Liang, “Mtd analysis
and evaluation framework in software deﬁned network (mason),” in
Proceedings of the 2018 ACM International Workshop on Security in
Software Deﬁned Networks & Network Function Virtualization. ACM,
2018, pp. 43–48.

[7] M. Villarreal-Vasquez, B. Bhargava, P. Angin, N. Ahmed, D. Goodwin,
K. Brin, and J. Kobes, “An mtd-based self-adaptive resilience approach
for cloud systems,” in Cloud Computing (CLOUD), 2017 IEEE 10th
International Conference on.

IEEE, 2017, pp. 723–726.

[8] M. S. Kashkoush, M. Azab, G. Attiya, and A. S. Abed, “Online
smart disguise: real-time diversiﬁcation evading coresidency-based cloud
attacks,” Cluster Computing, pp. 1–16, 2018.

[9] Q. Jia, H. Wang, D. Fleck, F. Li, A. Stavrou, and W. Powell, “Catch me if
you can: A cloud-enabled ddos defense,” in 2014 44th Annual IEEE/IFIP
International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN).
IEEE, 2014, pp. 264–275.

[10] “Moving

target

defense,”

https://www.dhs.gov/science-and-

technology/csd-mtd, accessed: 2018-12-09.

[11] C. Clark, K. Fraser, S. Hand, J. G. Hansen, E. Jul, C. Limpach, I. Pratt,
and A. Warﬁeld, “Live migration of virtual machines,” in Proceedings
of the 2nd conference on Symposium on Networked Systems Design &
Implementation-Volume 2. USENIX Association, 2005, pp. 273–286.
[12] M. Torquato and M. Vieira, “Interacting srn models for availability
evaluation of vm migration as rejuvenation on a system under varying
workload,” in 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Software Relia-
bility Engineering Workshops (ISSREW).

IEEE, 2018, pp. 300–307.

[13] Y. Wang, J. Li, K. Meng, C. Lin, and X. Cheng, “Modeling and security
analysis of enterprise network using attack–defense stochastic game petri
nets,” Security and Communication Networks, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 89–99,
2013.

[14] M. Torquato, E. Guedes, P. Maciel, and M. Vieira, “A hierarchical model
for virtualized data center availability evaluation,” in 15th European
Dependable Computing Conference, 2019.

[15] H. Alavizadeh, J. B. Hong, J. Jang-Jaccard, and D. S. Kim, “Compre-
hensive security assessment of combined mtd techniques for the cloud,”
in Proceedings of the 5th ACM Workshop on Moving Target Defense.
ACM, 2018, pp. 11–20.

[16] D. Thebeau II, B. Reidy, R. Valerdi, A. Gudagi, H. Kurra, Y. Al-
Nashif, S. Hariri, and F. Sheldon, “Improving cyber resiliency of cloud
application services by applying software behavior encryption (sbe),”
Procedia Computer Science, vol. 28, pp. 62–70, 2014.

[17] N. O. Ahmed and B. Bhargava, “Mayﬂies: A moving target defense
framework for distributed systems,” in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM
Workshop on Moving Target Defense. ACM, 2016, pp. 59–64.
[18] C.-J. Chung, T. Xing, D. Huang, D. Medhi, and K. Trivedi, “Serene:
on establishing secure and resilient networking services for an sdn-
based multi-tenant datacenter environment,” in Dependable Systems and
Networks Workshops (DSN-W), 2015 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 4–11.

[19] M. Torquato, P. Maciel, J. Araujo, and I. Umesh, “An approach to
investigate aging symptoms and rejuvenation effectiveness on software
systems,” in 2017 12th Iberian Conference on Information Systems and
Technologies (CISTI).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.

Fig. 3. Obtained results

severity and can harm system conﬁdentiality. DoS attacks are
among the most relevant threats for cloud computing high
availability. The X-Axis represents the considered software
rejuvenation policies. Rej. Trigger means the adopted
time interval between VM migrations.

From the obtained results it is possible to notice that there
is a speciﬁc VM migration policy which minimizes system
there are other VM migration
unavailability. Besides that,
policies which minimize the RISKSCORE related to Denial
of Service or Man-In-The-Middle attacks. Therefore, the VM
migration policy selection will depend on the assigned weight
for the considered metrics.

We aim to expand the model in two ways: i) adopting
larger architectures with more nodes and VMs; ii) to cover
more realistic scenarios like what is presented in the TPC-xV
architecture and iii) to consider other security threats.

VI. FINAL REMARKS

This paper presented the work-in-progress of our research.
This research tackles the cloud security problem from a
different perspective, aiming not only on security improvement
but also in the possible availability impact due to security
mechanisms adoption. In the context of this research, we focus
only on the Moving Target Defense technique.

Our research is on the initial stage, and we are working
to improve our proposed model to more realistic scenarios.
However, our research effort so far produced results published
in two research papers [12] and [14].

Our next step is to proceed with the submission of the
model’s current version and results to validate our security
evaluation approach. We aim to deal with the state-explosion
problem using interacting models approach.

The expected contributions of our research will advance the
state of the art, providing a holistic model for performability
and security evaluation of a cloud computing environment with
Moving Target Defense.

REFERENCES

[1] K. Ren, C. Wang, and Q. Wang, “Security challenges for the public
cloud,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 69–73, 2012.

 0 0.0005 0.001 0.0015 0.002 0.0025 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4UnavailabilityRiskScoreRej. Trigger (h)UnavailabilityMITMDoS