1

BlendSM-DDM: BLockchain-ENabled Secure
Microservices for Decentralized Data Marketplaces

Ronghua Xua, Gowri Sankar Ramachandranb, Yu Chena, Bhaskar Krishnamacharib
aDept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Binghamton University, SUNY, Binghamton, NY 13902, USA
bDept. of Electrical Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 91801, USA
{rxu22, ychen}@binghamton.edu, {gsramach, bkrishna}@usc.edu

9
1
0
2

p
e
S
1
2

]

C
D
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
8
8
0
1
.
9
0
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—To promote the beneﬁts of the Internet of Things
(IoT) in smart communities and smart cities, a real-time data
marketplace middleware platform, called the Intelligent IoT
Integrator (I3), has been recently proposed. While facilitating
the easy exchanges of real-time IoT data streams between device
owners and third-party applications through the marketplace,
I3 is presently a monolithic, centralized platform for a single
community. Although the service oriented architecture (SOA)
has been widely adopted in the IoT and cyber-physical systems
(CPS), it is difﬁcult for a monolithic architecture to provide
scalable, inter-operable and extensible services for large numbers
of distributed IoT devices and different application vendors.
Traditional security solutions rely on a centralized authority,
which can be a performance bottleneck or susceptible to a
single point of failure. Inspired by containerized microservices
and blockchain technology, this paper proposed a BLockchain-
ENabled Secure Microservices for Decentralized Data Mar-
ketplaces (BlendSM-DDM). Within a permissioned blockchain
network, a microservices based security mechanism is introduced
to secure data exchange and payment among participants in
the marketplace. BlendSM-DDM is able to offer a decentralized,
scalable and auditable data exchanges for the data marketplace.

Index Terms—Intelligent IoT Integrator (I3), IoT Data Mar-
ketplace, Blockchain, Smart Contract, Container, Microservices.

I. INTRODUCTION

The proliferation of the Internet of Things (IoT) technology
allows the concept of Smart Cities become feasible, and these
IoT based applications have greatly improved the lives of
residents through enhancing health, safety, and convenience.
However, the ﬁrst generation of IoT deployment (IoT 1.0) for
smart city has come across several challenges that prevent
wider adoption of the IoT in smart communities and smart
cities [14]. To enhance the adoption of the IoT in smart
communities and smart cities, a marketplace architecture and
middleware platform, called the Intelligent IoT Integrator (I3),
is proposed to address key problems in IoT marketplace [6]. To
build smart communities, I3 is aimed to build a ”data rivers”
that allow data streams from different entities to be merged
together and analyzed, processed, and acted upon as needed
to support a diverse set of applications [6]. In a commercial
aspect, I3 tries to build a marketplace that allows a large
volume of devices owners to sell data streams, while different
applications can buy one or more data streams used for their
data analytic services.

While the I3 system facilitates the easy exchange of real-
time IoT data streams between devices owners and third-

party applications through marketplace, it also brings new
concerns on architecture and security issues. The I3 system is
deployed in a distributed network environment that includes
a large number of IoT devices with high heterogeneity and
dynamics and different application vendors using non-standard
development technology. It requires a scalable, ﬂexible and
lightweight system architecture that supports fast development
and easy deployment among participants. In addition, a fun-
damental principle embodied in the vision of I3 is that device
and data owners should have the right to decide when they
will share their data (or access to their devices, in case of
actuators), with whom, and at what price [6]. Thus, ﬂows
of data are mediated through end-to-end agreements between
devices owners and application developers, which means that
enforcing a centralized management policy on I3 becomes
difﬁcult and inefﬁcient. Furthermore, a scalable, ﬂexible and
ﬁne-grained data sharing and access control mechanism is
needed to protect data exchange and payment among entities.
An earlier work has explored how a decentralized data
marketplace (DDM) could be created using blockchain and
other distributed ledger technologies [15]. The possible bene-
ﬁts of such a decentralized architecture are highlighted and the
preliminary work shows how key elements of such a decentral-
ized marketplace could be implemented using smart contracts.
Other marketplaces in this space include Ocean Protocol [11]
and IOTA Data Marketplace [5]. One of the challenges in
implementing an efﬁcient DDM lies in the management of
system complexity. With many possible moving parts and
components, the decentralized marketplace system could get
fragmented or hard to scale. On the other hand, keeping too
rigid a framework could also hurt scalability.

In this position paper, a BLockchain-ENabled Secure Mi-
croservices for DDM (BlendSM-DDM) is proposed to secure
data exchange among different devices owner and applica-
tion developers. Leveraging the ﬁne-granularity and loose-
coupling features of the microservices architecture [1], [2], the
BlendSM-DDM decouples the DDM applications and security
functionality into multiple containerized microservices that are
computationally affordable to each individual devices. The
security mechanism is implemented as separated microservices
that are built on the smart contract. The distributed microser-
vices could cooperate with each other as a service pool to
perform complicated data analytical missions and security
enforcement without hurting the ﬂexibility and scalability.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section

 
 
 
 
 
 
II provides the background knowledge and reviews the state
of the arts research in blockchain and microservice for IoT-
based system. Section III illustrates the details of core security
features introduced by the proposed BlendSM-DDM. Section
IV concludes this paper with our ongoing work.

II. RELATED WORKS

A. Microservices in IoT

A service-oriented architecture (SOA) is widely adopted in
the development of application software in an IoT environment
[1]. The traditional SOA utilizes a monolithic architecture
that constitutes different software features in a single in-
terconnected and interdependent application and database.
Owing to the tightly coupled dependence among functions
and components, such a monolithic framework is difﬁcult to
adapt to new requirements in an IoT-enabled system, such
as scalability, service extensibility, data privacy, and cross-
platform interoperability [2]. The microservices architecture
allows functional units of an application to work indepen-
dently with a loose coupling though encapsulating a minimal
functional software module as a microservice, which can be
individually developed and deployed. ﬁnally, multiple decen-
tralized individual microservices cooperatively perform the
functions of complex systems. The ﬂexibility of microservices
enables continuous, efﬁcient, and independent deployment of
application function units. As two most signiﬁcant features
of the microservices architecture, ﬁne granularity means each
of the microservices can be developed in different frameworks
and with minimal development resources, while loose coupling
implies that functions of microservices and its components are
independent of each other’s deployment and development [25].
Thanks to the ﬁne-granularity and loose-coupling properties,
the microservices architecture has been investigated in many
smart solutions to enhance the scalability and security of
IoT-based applications. The IoT systems are advancing from
“things”-oriented ecosystem to a widely and ﬁnely distributed
microservices-oriented-ecosystem [2]. An Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems (ITS) that incorporates and combines the
IoT approaches using the serverless microservices architecture
has been designed and implemented to help the transportation
planning for the Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) systems [4]. To
enable a more scalable and decentralized solution for advanced
video stream analysis for large volumes of distributed edge
devices, a system design of a robust smart surveillance sys-
tems was proposed based on microservices architecture and
blockchain technology [7], [9], [24]. It aims at offering a
scalable, decentralized and ﬁne-grained access control solution
for smart public safety.

B. Blockchain and Smart Contract

As a fundamental technology of Bitcoin [8], blockchain
initially was used to promote a new cryptocurrency that
performs commercial transactions among independent entities
without relying on a centralized authority, like banks or gov-
ernment agencies. Essentially, the blockchain is a public ledger
based on consensus rules to provide a veriﬁable, append-
only chained data structure of transactions. Thanks to the

2

decentralized architecture that does not rely on a centralized
authority, blockchain allows the data to be stored and updated
distributively. The transactions are approved by miners and
recorded in the time-stamped blocks, where each block is iden-
tiﬁed by a cryptographic hash and chained to preceding blocks
in a chronological order. In a blockchain network, a consensus
mechanism is enforced on a large amount of distributed nodes
called miners to maintain the sanctity of the data recorded on
the blocks. Thanks to the trustless proof mechanism running
on miners across the network, users can trust
the system
of the public ledger stored worldwide on many different
decentralized nodes maintained by ”miner-accountants”, as
opposed to having to establish and maintain trust with a
transaction counter-party or a third-party intermediary [17].
Thus, blockchain is an ideal decentralized architecture to
ensure distributed transactions among all participants in a
trustless environment, like edge-based IoT networks.

Emerging from the intelligent property, a smart contract
allows users to achieve agreements among parties through
a blockchain network. By using cryptographic and security
mechanisms, a smart contract combines protocols with user
interfaces to formalize and secure relationships over computer
networks [18]. A smart contract includes a collection of pre-
deﬁned instructions and data that have been saved at a speciﬁc
address of blockchain as a Merkle hash tree, which is a
constructed bottom-to-up binary tree data structure. Through
exposing public functions or application binary interfaces
interacts with users to offer the
(ABIs), a smart contract
predeﬁned business logic or contract agreement.

Other distributed data sharing platforms in this space in-
cludes Trinity [16], which is a distributed pub-sub data broker
with support for blockchain-based immutable data storage,
Pub-Pay-Sub Protocol
[13], which is a publish-subscribe
broker with built-in support for micropayments, and SDPP
[12], which is a peer-to-peer streaming data protocol with
micropayments support.

The blockchain and smart contract enabled security mech-
anism for applications has been a hot topic and some efforts
have been reported recently, for example, smart surveillance
system [7], [10], [24], social credit system [23], space sit-
uation awareness [22], biomedical imaging data processing
[19], identiﬁcation authentication [3] and access control [20],
[21]. Blockchain and smart contract together are promising to
provide a solution to enable a secured data sharing and access
authorization in decentralized IoT systems.

III. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE OF BLENDSM-DDM

In the vision of I3, the system is oriented for device owners
and data users, and the data exchanged payment are mainly
between sellers and buyers. To improve the economically self-
sustaining business ecosystem, blockchain is a very promis-
ing solution that will enrich the I3 system by providing a
trusted sharing service, where data is reliable, immutable and
auditable. The virtualization technology, like virtual machines
(VMs) or containers, is platform independent and could pro-
vide resource abstraction and isolation features, they are ideal
for system architecture design to address the heterogeneity

3

blockchain and perform blockchain-based services, such as
mining block, sending transactions and deploying smart con-
tracts. The upper part of Fig. 1 illustrates the identity authenti-
cation process to enroll a new participant in the permissioned
blockchain network. Given computation capacity of host de-
vices and management policy, all participants are categorized
as validator (miner) or node (non-miner). The validators
are able to cooperatively executing consensus algorithm to
maintain the integrity and immutability of distributed ledger.
While nodes are only capable of launching transactions to
synchronize data with the blockchain.

To join the permissioned blockchain network, the partici-
pants must send joining requests to an oracle for registration
and identity authentication. The administrator of DDM system
could work as such oracle, and maintain a global identity pro-
ﬁle and authorization policies for the permissioned blockchain
network management. After approved by the oracle, the new
entity’s node information will be added to a global static
node record, and will be broadcasted to all certiﬁcated par-
ticipants in the permissioned blockchain network accordingly.
The membership revocation occurs when an entity explicitly
launches a leaving request or the oracle implicitly rule out any
misbehaved nodes.

Compared to a public blockchain network that suffers from
performance and security issues, such as low throughput, poor
privacy and lack of governance, the permissioned blockchain
can enforce a more efﬁcient but lightweight consensus mecha-
nism to improve the transaction rate and data storage capacity.
Furthermore, through limiting participants with clearly deﬁned
privacy policies, the sensitive data could be only visible to the
authorized participants but not to the public. Therefore, the
permissioned blockchain network also enable a more strict
privacy policy than a public blockchain network does.

B. Blockchain-enabled Security Services

The blockchain-enabled security services layer, as shown
in lower part of Fig. 1, acts as a fundamental microservices
oriented infrastructure to support business logic functions of
the DDM system as well as security mechanism. The key
elements and operations are described below.
1. Data Pub-sub Payment: The seller and buyer use their
blockchain addresses as unique IDs to join the data exchange
and payment activities. The cryptocurrency based micro-
payments protocol is designed to collect data in exchange for
payment or other incentives. The key transaction records, such
as invoices and receipts, are stored in a distributed ledger, so
that all participants could verify the transactions.
2. Identity Veriﬁcation: Since each blockchain account
is
uniquely indexed by its address that is derived from his/her
own public key, the DDM administrator could deploy smart
contract enabled microservices, which expose RESTful API
to other microservices-enabled providers for referring identity
veriﬁcation results.
3. Participants Rating: To evaluate the quality of the data
product provided by a given seller and reliability of payment
by a buyer, rating smart contract based microservices are
developed and deployed by trusted agents of the DDM system

Fig. 1.

Illustration of BlendSM-DDM System Architecture.

challenge in IoT system. Compared to VMs, containers are
more lightweight and ﬂexible with OS-level isolation, so that
is an ideal selection for edge computing.

Inspired by blockchain and containerized microservices
technology, BlendSM-DDM is proposed as a decentralized
security services architecture for DDM system, which is
shown in Fig. 1. Trinity [16] distributes the pub-sub bro-
ker using the blockchain technology to prevent byzantine
faults. A similar approach could be adopted to distribute
the microservices among consensus nodes. A permissioned
blockchain infrastructure running on a decentralized peer-to-
peer network is managed by DDM administrators, and it could
provide a reliable, traceable and immutable distributed ledger
for trusted data sharing services in DDM system. Utilizing
the containerized microservices architecture, the key elements
and security features of DDM system are decoupled into
multiple microservices and deployed on distributed computing
hosts. Each microservice exposes REST APIs to accept ser-
vice requests, and API gateway could be managed by either
DDM administrator or service providers. Those decentralized
microservices work as a blockchain-enabled services pool to
offer a scalable, ﬂexible and lightweight security and privacy
protection mechanism for data marketplace.

A. Permissioned Blockchain Network

The permissioned blockchain network in the BlendSM-
DDM requires that only registered entities are authorized
they can interact with the
access to the network, so that

to allow buyers and sellers to rate each other. Owing to data
transparency and immutability in the distributed ledger, the
rating records stored in the blockchain network cannot be
falsiﬁed or tampered with. The rating information would be
used as recommended references for future potential buyers
and sellers.
4. Data Integrity: Data integrity technologies are mainly to
ensure data access at the same time avoid storing a huge
amount of data in the blockchain. The data integrity microser-
vices provides the dynamic data synchronization and efﬁcient
veriﬁcation through a hashed index authentication process.
The data publishers just simply interact with authorized ABI
functions of the smart contract to save the hashed index of
data to blockchain. In the hashed index veriﬁcation process,
data subscribers just query a hashed key-value index from the
blockchain and compares it with calculated hash values of the
received data.
5. Access Control: The data owners could transcode access
control models and policies into a smart contract-based access
control (AC) microservice. The AC microservices allows those
service providers to control their data and resource without
relying on a centralized third party authority, and it provides
a decentralized access control solution to the DDM system.
6. Privacy Policies: The privacy microservices is mainly
for privacy-sensitive data management, so that the privacy-
sensitive data is not
linked or accessed by unauthorized
entities. Secure communications using encryption and saving
sensitive data as a hash value mapping to actual data are
efﬁcient solutions to protect privacy. Furthermore, properly
designing access control policies could effectively prevent
unauthorized access to sensitive data.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, BlendSM-DDM, a blockchain-enabled de-
centralized security microservices framework is proposed to
ensure data exchanges and payments in DDM systems like the
Intelligent IoT Integrator (I3). The comprehensive overview
of the system architecture is introduced and key elements are
illustrated. The BlendSM-DDM could offer a scalable, ﬂexible
and lightweight security and privacy protection mechanism for
business operations in DDM system. In ongoing work, we are
designing the various elements presented in the architecture,
and implementing a prototype running on current DDM system
to verify the feasibility of the proposed solutions.

REFERENCES

[1] B. Butzin, F. Golatowski, and D. Timmermann, “Microservices approach
for the internet of things,” in Emerging Technologies and Factory Au-
tomation (ETFA), 2016 IEEE 21st International Conference on.
IEEE,
2016, pp. 1–6.

[2] S. K. Datta and C. Bonnet, “Next-generation, data centric and end-to-
end iot architecture based on microservices,” in 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Consumer Electronics-Asia (ICCE-Asia).
IEEE, 2018,
pp. 206–212.

[3] M. T. Hammi, B. Hammi, P. Bellot, and A. Serhrouchni, “Bubbles of
trust: A decentralized blockchain-based authentication system for iot,”
Computers & Security, vol. 78, pp. 126–142, 2018.

[4] L. F. Herrera-Quintero, J. C. Vega-Alfonso, K. B. A. Banse, and E. C.
Zambrano, “Smart its sensor for the transportation planning based on
iot approaches using serverless and microservices architecture,” IEEE
Intelligent Transportation Systems Magazine, vol. 10, no. 2, 2018.

4

[5] IOTA Foundation.2019, “IOTA Data Marketplace,” [Online]. Available:

https://data.iota.org, accessed on September 2019.

[6] B. Krishnamachari, J. Power, S. H. Kim, and C. Shahabi, “I3: An iot
marketplace for smart communities,” in Proceedings of the 16th Annual
International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services.
ACM, 2018, pp. 498–499.

[7] D. Nagothu, R. Xu, S. Y. Nikouei, and Y. Chen, “A microservice-enabled
architecture for smart surveillance using blockchain technology,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1807.07487, 2018.

[8] S. Nakamoto et al., “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,”

2008.

[9] S. Y. Nikouei, R. Xu, Y. Chen, A. Aved, and E. Blasch, “Decentral-
ized smart surveillance through microservices platform,” in 2019 SPIE
Defense + Commercial Sensing. SPIE, 2019.

[10] S. Y. Nikouei, R. Xu, D. Nagothu, Y. Chen, A. Aved, and E. Blasch,
“Real-time index authentication for event-oriented surveillance video
query using blockchain,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.06179, 2018.
[11] Ocean Protocol Foundation, “Ocean Protocol: A Decentralized Substrate
for AI Data and Services,” [Online]. Available: https://oceanprotocol.
com/, bigchainDB GmbH and DEX Pte. Ltd, Tech. Rep., March 2018.
[12] R. Radhakrishnan and B. Krishnamachari, “Streaming data payment
protocol (sdpp) for the internet of things,” in 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing
and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social
Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData). IEEE, 2018,
pp. 1679–1684.

[13] G. S. Ramachandran, S. L. Contreras, B. Krishnamachari, U. C. Kozat,
and Y. Ye, “Publish-pay-subscribe protocol for payment-driven edge
computing,” in 2nd {USENIX} Workshop on Hot Topics in Edge
Computing (HotEdge 19), 2019.

[14] G. S. Ramachandran and B. Krishnamachari, “Towards a large scale iot
through partnership, incentive, and services: A vision, architecture, and
future directions,” Open Journal of Internet Of Things (OJIOT), vol. 5,
no. 1, pp. 80–92, 2019.

[15] G. S. Ramachandran, R. Radhakrishnan, and B. Krishnamachari, “To-
wards a decentralized data marketplace for smart cities,” in 2018 IEEE
International Smart Cities Conference (ISC2).

IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–8.

[16] G. S. Ramachandran, K.-L. Wright, L. Zheng, P. Navaney, M. Naveed,
B. Krishnamachari, and J. Dhaliwal, “Trinity: A byzantine fault-tolerant
distributed publish-subscribe system with immutable blockchain-based
persistence,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain and
Cryptocurrency (ICBC).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 227–235.

[17] M. Swan, Blockchain: Blueprint for a new economy. ” O’Reilly Media,

Inc.”, 2015.

[18] N. Szabo, “Formalizing and securing relationships on public networks,”

First Monday, vol. 2, no. 9, 1997.

[19] R. Xu, S. Chen, L. Yang, Y. Chen, and G. Chen, “Decentralized
autonomous imaging data processing using blockchain,” in Multimodal
Biomedical Imaging XIV, vol. 10871.
International Society for Optics
and Photonics, 2019, p. 108710U.

[20] R. Xu, Y. Chen, E. Blasch, and G. Chen, “Blendcac: A blockchain-
enabled decentralized capability-based access control for iots,” in The
2018 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain-2018).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–8.

[21] R. Xu., Y. Chen, E. Blasch, and G. Chen, “Blendcac: A smart contract
enabled decentralized capability-based access control mechanism for the
iot,” Computers, vol. 7, no. 3, p. 39, 2018.

[22] R. Xu, Y. Chen, E. Blasch, and G. Chen, “Exploration of blockchain-
enabled decentralized capability-based access control strategy for space
situation awareness,” Optical Engineering, vol. 58, pp. 58 – 58 – 16,
2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1117/1.OE.58.4.041609
[23] R. Xu, X. Lin, Q. Dong, and Y. Chen, “Constructing trustworthy and
safe communities on a blockchain-enabled social credits system,” in
Proceedings of the 15th EAI International Conference on Mobile and
Ubiquitous Systems: Computing, Networking and Services. ACM, 2018,
pp. 449–453.

[24] R. Xu, S. Y. Nikouei, Y. Chen, E. Blasch, and A. Aved, “Blendmas: A
blockchain-enabled decentralized microservices architecture for smart
public safety,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10567, 2019.

[25] D. Yu, Y. Jin, Y. Zhang, and X. Zheng, “A survey on security issues
in services communication of microservices-enabled fog applications,”
Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, p. e4436,
2018.

