A Strategic Cyber Crime and Security 
Awareness Information System using a 
Dedicated Portal 

Moses Adah Agana1, Bassey I.Ele2 

1mosesagana@unical.edu.ng, +2347036673324, 2mydays2020@yahoo.com, 
+2348064451381 

1,2Department of Computer Science, University of Calabar 

Abstract: A real time portal (www.ganamoscybersecure.org) to enlighten people on 
how  to  protect  their  data  in  the  web,  the  strategies  adopted  by  cyber  criminals  to 
succeed  in  exploiting  their  victims  as  well  as  the  mistakes  made  by  people  and 
organizations that make them prone to the menace of cyber crime has been designed 
in this paper. Critical observations were made over time on the degree of awareness 
and attitudes of people and organizations in some parts of South Africa and Nigeria 
towards 
Interviews  were  conducted  using  structured 
questionnaire  to  elicit  information.  The  outcome  showed  that  most  individuals  and 
organizations lack adequate awareness on strategies adopted by cyber criminals, and 
pay  little  attention  to  securing  their  online  data.  The  application  of  the  services 
provided  by  the  portal  designed  would  be  a  sine  qua  non  for  contending  with  the 
menace of cyber crime. 

information  security. 

Keywords: Cyber, Crime, Hackers, Security, Authentication, Awareness  

1 

 
 
 
1. Introduction 

Information security is really about business continuity while taking precautionary measures 
against natural disasters, criminal attack, and errors committed by users or caused by system 
failure. The Internet and related technologies are prone to a variety of crimes orchestrated by 
a  variety  of  persons  or  groups  [1].  The  increasing  dependence  of  businesses  on  computer 
systems  and  the  Internet  has  made  many  more  organizations  vulnerable  to  the  impact  of 
cyber crime. Indeed, more companies are worried about the risk of cyber crime than they are 
about product liability, fraud and theft. 

Automated tools became inevitable for protecting information  and data because of 
the  ubiquitous  and  virtual  use  of  the  computer  for  processing,  storing  and  communicating 
data  and  information.  The  non-physical  nature  of  automated  tools  used  in  information 
security  has  created  opportunities  for  criminals  to  anonymously  misuse  information 
especially  on  the      Internet  [2].    Any  crime  committed  using  a  computer  and  a  network  of 
telecommunication devices is termed cyber crime. The computer may be the target or it may 
be used in committing the crime [3]. 

Cyber crimes can threaten a nation’s security and financial health. Computer system 
vulnerabilities  persist  worldwide,  and  initiators  of  the  random  cyber  attacks  that  plague 
computers  on  the  Internet  remain  largely  unknown.  Conventional  crimes  such  as  armed 
robbery, rape, stealing, cultism, etc. are easy to detect and the culprits can be prosecuted by 
law enforcement agents because of their physical nature [4]. This is not the case with cyber 
crime due to the fact that the cyberspace is quite wide and is a virtual reality. The cyberspace 
has become an environment where the most lucrative and safest crime thrives. This is partly 
due  to  lack  of  adequate  awareness  by  Internet  users,  inadequate  security  restrictions  to 
Internet access, lack of proper cyber user identification/detection techniques and loose cyber 
regulations on prosecution of the culprits.  

Most  organizations  and  individuals  are  oblivious  of  the  tricks  adopted  by  cyber 
criminals  to  exploit  them,  and  equally  seem  to  pay  less  attention  to  strategies  of  securing 
their  online  data  from  cyber  attacks.  A  major  step  to  overcome  this  growing  trend  of 
insecurity in the cyberspace is to develop a strategy to educate individuals and organizations 
on the risks of information insecurity and how to avoid falling prey to the cyber criminals. 

1.1 Scenarios of Insecurity in Data Transmission 

Some common scenarios of insecurity in data transmission across communications networks 
abound at all times.  They include the following [2] [5]: 

i.  User A transmits a file containing sensitive information (like a bank deposit) to user B 
that  needs  to  be  kept  secret,  but  user  C  who  has  no  authorization  to  read  the  file 
monitors  and  captures  a  copy  of  the  file  during  transmission.  He  could  divulge  the 
information or use it for something else. 

ii.  A network manager X transmits a message to a computer Y under its management so 
that the computer (Y) can update a file authorizing the inclusion of the identities of a 
given  number  of  new  users  who  are  to  be  granted  access  to  the  computer.  A  certain 
user  Z  intercepts  the  message  and  alters  its  contents  to  add  or  delete  entries  before 
forwarding  the  message  to  computer  Y.  Computer  Y  will  ignorantly  accept  the 
message  as  originating  directly  from  X  and  act  on  it  without  knowing  that  it  was 
modified by Z on transmission.   

iii.  A variant of (ii) above could be a situation whereby user C will create a message in the 
name of manager X and send it to Z; and Z will act on it, unknowing that it was C that 
impersonated manager X. 

2 

 
iv.  In  another  instance,  an  employee  is  fired  without  warning  for  misdemeanor  and  the 
personnel  manager  sends  a  message  to  a  network  server  to  disable  the  employee’s 
account  and  post  a  notice  to  the  employee’s  file  as  a  confirmation  of  action  after 
successfully  disabling  the  account.  The  employee  is  however  able  to  intercept  the 
message, delay it sufficiently enough to enable him access the server and retrieve some 
vital information which he may use to mar the organization after he has been sacked. 
v.  The  recipient  of  a  message  could  deny  receiving  the  message  or  the  sender  of  a 

message could deny sending the message (repudiation).  
An  inexhaustible  list  of  such  scenarios  abounds  as  cases  of  information  security  and 
cyber crime today. The above scenarios involve the use of codes to attack information on 
networks, and are more difficult to detect and manage than physical attacks that involve the 
use  of  certain  weapons  such  as  knife,  fire,  bombs,  and  hammer  to  destroy  computer 
installations and networks. 

1.3 Strategies adopted by Cyber Criminals 

Any  mission,  whether  authorized  or  unauthorized  cannot  succeed  without  careful  planning 
and  execution.  Cyber  criminals  plan  over  a  long  time  in  other  to  succeed;  and  they  use 
hacking techniques which the Internet itself provides. Five main steps are adopted by cyber 
criminals  to  hack  into  and  access  their  victim’s  computer,  take  control  and  achieve  their 
objectives [4] [6] [7] [8]. These steps can be summarized as follows: 

i.  The  hackers  first  spy  their  target,  and  possibly  trick  them  to  reveal  some  confidential 
information  about  their  organization.  This  is  termed  Reconnaissance  and  Pre-operative 
Surveillance. 
ii.  The  second  step  is  that  the  hacker  further  spies  the  victim’s  computer  or  network  for 
possible  loose  ends  to  gain  access  without  security  restrictions.  This  can  be  achieved  by 
"war dialling” (continuously dialing the victim’s line until he responds, then he gets him) or 
“war driving” (driving around the victim’s network until an opening is located for entering 
to commit crime).   
iii. The third step is gaining access, which the attacker achieves by using a password he has 
guessed  or  stolen  to  create  a  phony  account,  or  he  exploits  a  vulnerable  point  to  let  him 
install some malware to use for further attacks in the network.  
iv.  The  fourth  step  is  that  the  attacker  maintains  access  after  successfully  gaining 
unauthorized  access;  by  installing  some  malware  to  enable  him  completely  take  over  the 
network  as  the  administrator.  He  can  thus  block  other  hackers  from  hacking  into  the 
network by installing software patches that can close the previous security vulnerabilities. 
v. The fifth step is covering of tracks. In order to maintain control, the hackers after taking 
over a network cover all tracts that may provide access to other hackers and try to secure all 
vulnerabilities  with  the  existing  system.  The  Internet  provides  new  "anti-forensics  tools" 
that hackers can use to conceal their actions from cyber crime investigators. 

1.4 Reasons why People fall Prey to Cyber Attacks 

A  good  number  of  reasons  account  for  why  people  and  organizations  fall  prey  to  cyber 
attacks,  prominent  among  these  is  the  increasing  dependence  on  computer  networks. 
Operating an unsecured or inadequately secured computer network can expose a business to 
a number of risks [9]. When networks are poorly secured, possibilities exist for criminals to 
exploit.  The  open  source  nature  of  the  Internet  makes  it  easy  for  anyone  to  easily  access 
some  confidential  records  of  an  organization.  A  business  opponent  who  has  a  clue  to  such 
useful records of the other can use the information to threaten the success of the rival.  

3 

 
Vulnerable unidentified weakness in the two-step authentication/verification process 
as used by most banks  whereby  customers receive changing codes by mobile phone to  use 
with their passwords can also expose users to the risk of cyber crime. The attackers exploit 
this  vulnerability  to  hijack  the  legitimate  user’s  session  and  break  into  his  bank  account  to 
swiftly  transfer  funds  to  their  own  accounts  unnoticed.  An  instance  of  this  scenario  was 
identified by Kaspersky, the Russian cyber security company where more  than 100 banks - 
mainly in Eastern Europe were raided by cyber criminals as a result of the vulnerability [10].  
In  a  related  development,  it  has  been  reported  that  hackers  are  exploiting  the 
Signaling  System  7  (SS7)  to  hijack  sessions  of  bank  customers  and  sweep  their  funds 
unnoticed  [11].  SS7  is  an  international  telecommunications  standard  (the  backbone  of 
worldwide mobile communication) that specifies how cell phone networks connect with each 
other and allows cell phone users to roam on networks anywhere else in the world if they are 
out of their country of operations of local telecommunication services. With SS7, users can 
make and receive calls, as well as text messages across networks even if out of their country. 
Once  the  hackers  have  gained  access  to  the  SS7  network,  they  can  impersonate  a  phone’s 
location, read or redirect messages, and even listen to calls and this is a vulnerable security 
situation [11]. Even the network-initiated Unstructured Supplementary Service Data (USSD) 
that  is  used  for  authenticating  transactions  in  the  scheme  can  still  be  illegally  hijacked  or 
redirected just like calls because it also depends on the handset’s SIM card. 

The inability of individuals and organizations to understand social engineering can 
also make them susceptible to cyber attacks. Social engineering is concerned with the tricks 
adopted  by  hackers  to  create  a  near  replica  of  a  system  to  convince  innocent  users  of  the 
Internet  to  divulge  their  confidential  information  like  passwords,  personal  identification 
numbers (PINs), bank account numbers, etc. to them. As an instance, most criminals put up 
phone  calls  to  an  innocent  person,  may  be  a  company’s  representative  claiming  to  be  an 
agent  or  customer  representative  of  a  certain  company  that  offers  Internet  services, 
convincing him to release some sensitive information like his password without checking the 
genuineness  of  the  call.  The  dubious  caller  uses  the  information  to  exploit  the  person’s  or 
organization’s web resources. 

Russian  cyber  criminals  have  been  reported  to  have  utilized  social  engineering  to 
exploit vulnerability in Telegram’s desktop instant messaging client for Windows to deliver 
malware to users from March 2017 using the advantage of the fact that the Telegram app for 
Windows  accepts  and  uses  a  specific  character  [12].  The  criminals  were  said  to  have 
prepared the malware (a JavaScript file) and gave it a name and icon quite similar to what the 
users know without raising suspicion.  

Failure  to  update  an  operating  system  to  a  current  version  with  enhanced  security 
can  also  expose  a  system  to  the  risk  of  cyber  attack.  Chinese  cyber  criminals  have  been 
reported  to  have  exploited  the  vulnerability  of  Windows  XP  (due  to  its  low  security 
provisions)  using  the  software  called  Rufus  to  access  ATM  cash  dispensers  without  being 
noticed (in some regions of the country -  Odisha, West Bengal, Bihar and Gujarat [13].  

1.5 First-hand Precautions against Cyber Attacks  

Access  control  through  the  use  of  passwords,  personal  identification  numbers,  etc.  is  an 
efficient way of contending with hacking [14]. Cryptography (encryption) of data transmitted 
via  networks  also  secures  them  from  hackers  [15].  Other  strategies  that  can  be  adopted  by 
individuals  and  organizations  to  prevent  their  information  from  falling  prey  to  hackers  are 
business  continuity  and  disaster  recovery  planning  [16],  as  well  as  information  security 
governance and risk management [17].  

As  a  first  and  paramount  step,  individuals  and  organizations  need  to  fortify  their  data 

from cyber attacks if they: 

4 

 
i.  Use strong passwords, do not reveal passwords, do not use the same passwords for 

different accounts and enable 2-factor authentication for their webmail, if possible. 

ii.  Always log out of accounts after session, and apply patches or software updates. 
iii.  Understand where their data and information reside and how to categorize them. 
iv.  Encrypt sensitive data sent across the cloud [18]. 
v.  Understand and apply social engineering. 

To completely  avoid  the  kind  of  eavesdropping  prevalent  in  SS7,  opening  a   
completely  isolated,  end-to-end  encrypted  communications  channel  between  the    mobile 
phone  and  the  servers  that  process  payments  or  store  sensitive  data,  and  to  properly 
authenticate the users of such channel is recommended [11].  

For  business  continuity  and  disaster  recovery  planning  as  well  as  risk  management, 
strategies that individuals and organizations need to adopt to forestall letting their data and 
information prone to cyber attacks include: 

i.  Engaging information technology professionals for periodic system upgrades. 
ii.  Training of employees on information security, reporting suspicious security actions 

and holding them accountable for information security breaches. 

iii.  The use of strong firewalls. 
iv.  When hiring, criminal background checks should be conducted to avoid employing 

people that will become internal threats to the information resources. 

2.  Objectives 

The main aim of the study is to develop a cyber crime and security awareness information 
system to contend with the menace of cyber crime. 
The specific objectives of the study are to: 

1.  Review the strategies adopted by criminals in exploiting their victims 
2.  Determine the level of awareness of individuals and organizations on cyber crime 

strategies and their attitudes towards information security. 

3.  Use the information gathered to develop a real time cyber security wareness portal to 

aid individuals and organizations in avoiding falling prey to cyber criminals. 

3. Methodology 

Two methods were adopted for the system design: 
Method  I:  A  blind  survey  was  conducted  to  elicit  facts  about  the  level  of  awareness  and 
attitudes of people and organizations towards cyber security. Critical observations were also 
made  by  visiting  some  organizations  that  provide  financial  and  related  services  mediated 
over  the  Internet  to  the  public.  The  identities  of  those  interviewed  as  well  as  the 
organizations  contacted  were  not  sought  for  in  order  to  avoid  infringing  on  their  security 
rights to enable freedom of expression without being held liable for divulging some critical 
information.  The  research  was  conducted  in  Harrismith  and  Phuthaditjhaba  in  Free  State, 
South Africa, and in Calabar, Cross River State, Nigeria. 

Two questionnaires requiring YES/NO responses were administered in each of the 
areas;  one  was  to  test  the  degree  of  awareness  of  individuals  and  organizations  on  cyber 
security while the other was to test their attitudes towards the security of their data (whether 
they  show  laxity  or  seriousness).  Each  response  option  with  the  highest  number  of 
respondents  was  considered  as  the  opinion  to  uphold.  The  respondents  were  randomly 
selected. 7 organizations (4 in South Africa and 3 in Nigeria) as well as 50 individuals (30 
in South Africa and 20 in Nigeria) constituted the targeted population.  

Method  II:  The  iterative  method  of  system  analysis  and  design  was  adopted  in  the 
development of the cyber security portal. Requirements were reviewed, designed, tested and    
implemented  and  as  new  requirements  evolved,  the  process  of  analysis  and  design  is 

5 

 
 
reviewed,  followed  by  a  new  system  design,  testing  and  implementation.  The  design  was 
achieved using Personal Homepage Preprocessor (PHP) as the scripting language.  

4. Results/Discussion 

The  results  of  the  study  are  presented  in  two  folds:  first  the  outcome  of  the  interview 
conducted and second, the cyber security awareness portal designed. 

4.1 Interview Results 

to  determine 

the  questionnaire 

From 
the 
organizations on cyber security, representatives of 5 out of the 7 establishments    contacted 
representing 71.4% were unaware of how insecure their data and information are in the cyber 
space due to the way they handle transactions and the activities of cyber criminals while only 
2 out of 7 representing 28.6% were aware.  

level  of  awareness  of 

individuals  and           

Similarly, 33 out of the 50 individuals contacted representing 66.0% were unaware 
of how insecure their data and information are in the cyber space due to the way they handle 
transactions and the activities of cyber criminals while only 17 out of 50 representing 34.0% 
were  aware.  This  implies  that  there  is  a  great  need  to  create  awareness  on  information 
security strategies for the organizations and individuals. The outcome of the responses to this 
questionnaire is summarized in table 1. 

Table 1: Responses showing level of awareness individuals and organizations have about cyber security 

Category 
Organizations 
Individuals 

Percentage aware 
28.6 
34.0 

Percentage unaware 
71.4 
66.0 

Figure  1  shows  the  pie  chart  representing  the  levels  of  cyber  security  awareness  by 
organizations that were examined and figure 2 shows the pie chart representing the levels of 
cyber security awareness by the individuals that were examined. 

    Figure 1: Levels of Cyber Security Awareness                  Figure 2: Levels of Cyber Security Awareness 
    by Organizations  

                      by Individuals 
From  the  questionnaire  to  determine  the  attitudes  of  individuals  and  organizations 
towards  security  of  their  data,  representatives  of  3  out  of  the  7  establishments  contacted 
representing 42.9% proved that they show serious concern for the security of their data while 
only 4 out of 7 representing 57.1% proved that they show little commitment to the security of 
their data in the cyber space. 

Similarly,  only  15  out  of  the  50  individuals  contacted  representing  30.0%  proved 
that  they  show  serious  concern  for  the  security  of  their  data  while  only  35  out  of  50 
representing 70.0% proved that they show little commitment to the security of their data in 
the  cyber  space.  This  implies  that  there  is  a  great  need  to  create  awareness  on  the  need  to 
commit  reasonable  resources  to  information  security  strategies  for  organizations  and 
individuals. The outcome of the responses to this questionnaire is summarized in table 2. 

Table 2: Responses showing attitudes of individuals and organizations towards the security of their data 

Category 

Percentage showing serious commitment  Percentage showing 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Organizations 
Individuals 

42.9 
30.0 

little commitment 
57.1 
70.0 

Figure 3 shows the pie chart representing the levels of commitment of organizations 
towards the security of their data, while figure 4 shows the pie chart representing the levels 
of commitment to data security by individuals. 

.
Figure 3: Levels of Commitment to Data Security           Figure 4: Levels of Commitment to Data Security 
by organizations  

  by organizations 

4.2 Cyber Security Awareness Portal 

The  features  of  the  cyber  security  awareness  portal  developed  are  briefly  presented  in  this 
section. The portal is interactive, offering real time cyber security tips to users. It is launched 
by typing the URL www.ganamoscybersecure.org in the address bar using any web browser. 

Figure  5  shows  the  home  page  of  the  site  from  where  the  user  can  navigate  to    

various pages, while figure 6 shows the contacts page for cyber security services. 

        Figure 5: Home Page of the Cyber Security   
            Awareness Portal   
In  figure  6,  clients  can  contact  information  technology  professionals  through  the 
site.  This  they  can  do  either  through  direct  phone  calls  or  email  messages.  Immediate 
feedbacks are provided once messages are received from clients. 

                        Figure 6: The Contacts Page 

The most fascinating of all the pages is the features page that offers link to various 

tips on how to protect data and avoid falling prey to hackers. This is illustrated in figure 7. 

7 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
    Figure 7: The Features Page with links to Cyber             Figure 8:  Cyber Security Tips Page   
                 Security Tips 
Details  of  one  of  the  links  in  the  features  page  that  highlight  how  to  plan  against  data 
insecurity by managing insider cyber security  policies in an organization are represented in 
figure 8. 

5. Conclusions 

and 

security 

information 

some  data 

tips  online  via 

This  study  has  initiated  a  pioneering  effort  on  real  time  cyber  security  awareness  by 
providing 
the  portal 
www.ganamoscybersecure.org.  A  review  of  the  level  of  awareness  of  individuals  and 
organizations  on  cyber  security  as  well  as  their  attitudes  towards  securing  their  data  in  the 
cloud was made to serve as a pointer to what to  populate in the design. Also the strategies 
adopted by cyber criminals to succeed have been reviewed to provide information on how to 
guide  against falling prey  to  hackers.  It  has been observed that majority  of individuals and 
organizations  are  unaware  of  the  risks  their  data  and  information  are  exposed  to  in 
communication  networks  and  this  also  informs  why  most  of  them  devote  little  attention  to 
adopting data/information security strategies, thus making them prone to cyber attacks. 

Technology alone cannot secure data and information; it has to be complimented by 
education  and  enlightenment  of  users  of  information  technology  resources  and  the 
practitioners  alike.  This  is  why  most  organizations  are  seeking  the  services  of  information 
security  professionals  who  can  create  and  implement  a  coprehensive  information  security 
program as well as provide support to make their employees information security conscious. 
It  is  therefore  recommended  that  the  outcome  of  this  study  and  many  more  related  efforts 
should  be  propagated  to  create  adequate  awareness  on  the  menace  of  cyber  insecurity  and 
offer prevention services. 

References 

 [1] Broadhurst, R., Grabosky, P., Alazab, M. and Chon, S. (2014). Organizations and CyberCrime: An  
      Analysis of the Nature of Groups engaged in Cyber Crime. International Journal of  Cyber Criminology, 
      8(1), 1-20. 
[2] Stallings, W. (1999). Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practice (2nd edn). Upper Saddle 
      River, New Jersey 07458: Prentice  Hall.  
[3] Moore, R. (2005). Cyber Crime: Investigating High-Technology Computer Crime. Cleveland, Mississippi: 
      Anderson   Publishing. Nate, L. (2017). Data Security Experts Reveal the Biggest Mistakes Companies  
      Make with Data & Information Security. DATAINSIDER, Thursday July 27. 
[4] Clay, W. (2005). Computer Attack and Cyber Terrorism: Vulnerabilities and Policy Issues for Congress. 
      Congressional Research Service Report for Congress. Retrieved from 
      http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a444799.pdf 
[5] Tipton, W.H. (ed). (2010). Official (ISC)2 Guide to the CISSP CBK. 2nd edn. London: CRC Press, Taylor 
      and Francis Group. 
[6] Roger, A.G. (2016). Why it’s so hard to prosecute Cyber Criminals. A CSO column Available at 
      https://www.csoonline.com/article/3147398, retrieved on 20/12/2017.  

8 

 
          
 
[7] Skoudis, E. (2002). Counter Hack. New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 
[8] Poulsen, K. (2001). War Driving by the Bay. https://www.securityfocus.com/news/192, last accessed 
      2017/12/14. 
[9] Saita, A. (2003). Anti-forensics: The Looming Arms Race. Information Security,  6(5), 13. 
[10]  Decker,  F.  (2015).  Business  Risks  of  Insecure  Networks.  http://smallbusiness.chron.com/business-risks-
insecure-networks-41202.html, last accessed  2018/02/23. 
[11] Jones, S. and Binham, C.  (2015). Cyber security loophole found at bank. Financial Times, March 3, p 16. 
        https://www.ft.com/content/d71f8664-c103-11e4-88ca-00144feab7de. Accessed on 2018/02/22. 
[12] Bester, N. (2017) The loophole hackers can use to get around South African banks’ SMS verification. 
        Business Tech, 11 August. Retrieved from  
        https://businesstech.co.za/news/mobile/191512/the-loophole-hackers-can-use-to-get-around-south-african-      
banks-sms-verification/ on 2018/02/22. 
[13] Shashank,  S. (2017). Cyber crooks using Chinese malware to hack, steal money from ATMs. Business 
        Today,  June  15.  https://www.businesstoday.in/current/economy-politics/chinese-malware-to-hack-into-
and-steal-money-from-atms/story/254435.html 
[14] Hutchinson, S.E. and Sawyer, S.C. (2000). Computers, Communication and Information: A User’s  
        Introduction. New York: DP Publications.  
[15] Henry, K. and Pasley, K. (2010). Cryptography. In Tipton, W.H. (ed). Official (ISC)2 Guide to the CISSP  
        CBK. 2nd edn. pp309-399. London: CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group. 
[16] Okolita, K. (2010). Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery Planning. In Tipton, W.H. (ed). Official 
        (ISC)2 Guide to the CISSP CBK. 2nd edn. pp261-308. London: CRC Press, Taylor and  Francis Group. 
[17] Fitzgerald, T, Goins, B. and Harold, R. (2010). Information Security Governance and Risk Management. In 
       Tipton, W.H. (ed). Official (ISC)2 Guide to the CISSP CBK. 2nd edn. pp401-502. London: CRC Press, 
       Taylor and Francis Group. 
[18] Zaharia, A. (2015). The Most Common Mistakes These 27 Cyber Security Experts Wish You’d 
        Avoid.HEIMDAL Security, August 25.  
        https://heimdalsecurity.com/blog/most-common-mistakes-27-cyber-security-experts/, 
        Accessed on 2018/02/22. 

9 

 
