Insider threats in Cyber Security: The enemy within the gates. 

Guerrino Mazzarolo, Anca Delia Jurcut 

School of Computer Science, University College Dublin, Ireland 

{guerrino.mazzarolo*, anca.jurcut*} @ucd.ie 

Introduction: 

The Capital One data leakage - as the latest instance of exploitation carried out by the 

actions of an insider threat - “involves the theft of more than 100 million customer records, 

140,000 Social Security numbers and 80,000 linked bank details  of Capital  One customers, 

allegedly  stolen  by  a  single  insider,  according  to  court  filings  in  Seattle”  (Kate  Fazzini,  

CNBC).    Cybercrime  continues  to  exhibit  rising  trends.  According  to  a  study  provided  by 

Ponemon Institute and Accenture, there was an 11% increase in the average annual number of 

security  breaches 

in  2018 

(Ponemon 

Institute  LLC 

and  Accenture,  2019).   

A  data  breach  is  an  incident  in  which  protected  data  has  been  accessed  or  disclosed  in  an 

unauthorized fashion. Those kinds of incidents can be caused by internal or external actors. 

Internal  ones  are  either  malicious  or  careless  users.  The  external  threat  category  includes 

hackers, cybercriminal organizations and state-sponsored actors. The data breaches that appear 

on the news are typically carried out by outsiders. Attacks coming from the outside generally 

expose threats that have been addressed with traditional security measures through a “defense 

in-depth” approach.  The hazards that originate from inside are more difficult to prevent and 

detect because insiders pose a high danger as they are familiar with the organization’s network 

topology, systems, directives, and policies, and they have access to confidential information 

with  relatively  low  restrictions.  When  we  analyze  cybercrime,  often  we  underestimate  the 

dangers of the internal threat. Insiders present a significant risk to organizations and, even if 

they were not the most common source of attacks in past years, they were the most expensive 

and difficult to recover from.  

Definition 

There are two main types of insiders: malicious users (those that intentionally harm the 

institutions, as described above), and unintentional insider users (those that accidentally expose 

 
confidential data, as described below). These activities endanger confidentiality, integrity and 

availability of the business.  

Different definitions of malicious insider threat could be found. The one from CERT 

US provides a comprehensive explanation. “A malicious insider threat, may be either a current 

or former employee, contractor, or business partner who has or  had authorized access to an 

organization's network, system, or data and intentionally exceeded or misused that access in a 

manner  that  negatively  affected  the  confidentiality,  integrity,  or  availability  of  the 

organization's information or information systems” (The Cert Guide to Insider Threats, 2012). 

Motivators behind malicious insiders could include: monetary gain, a disgruntled employee, 

entitlement, ideology, or outside influence with the consequences of fraud, sabotage, espionage 

and theft or loss of confidential information. 

The  official  working  definition  from  the  report  “Unintentional  Insider  Threats:  A 

Foundational  Study”  states  that  an  unintentional  insider  threat  is:  “a  current  or  former 

employee, contractor, or business partner who has or had authorized access to an organization's 

network, system, or data and who, through action or inaction without malicious intent, causes 

harm or substantially increases the probability  of future serious harm to  the confidentiality, 

integrity, or availability of the organization's information or information systems” (The Cert 

Guide to Insider Threats, 2013). 

Insider  threats  could  be  considered  the  biggest  cybersecurity  danger  to  firms, 

organizations  and  government  agencies.  According  to  the  security  company  Clearswift, 

“Organizations report that 42% of IT security incidents occur as a result of their employees’ 

actions” (Clearswift, 2017). 

Current Concerns 

The dangers posed by insiders have multiple variables that must be considered when 

the risk is assessed. The following list provides an outline of the most important tasks that need 

to be addressed in order to be aware of the hazard introduced by internal actors. 

Firstly,  an  insider  can  easily  bypass  existing  physical  and  technological  security 

controls through legitimate rights. Employees, in fact, need to access the organization’s data 

for their daily tasks. Spotting the malicious activity is extremely difficult and time consuming. 

In addition, members of staff with technical knowledge can elude security controls currently 

in place. 

 
 
 
Another  factor  that  needs  to  be  considered  is  that  technology  alone  is  not  enough. 

Controls  can  detect  and  block  malevolent  actions;  however,  if  we  want  to  prevent 

indiscriminate users, we need additional information. Human behaviour has a huge influence 

in comportment and sometimes can provide indications that help to identify a person’s further 

actions. Emerging techniques are focusing on sentiment analysis. Monitoring and identifying 

disgruntled employees could greatly increase chances of isolating promiscuous activity. 

In  order  to  prevent  malevolent  activities,  we  need  data  from  different  controls.  The 

availability of this information is often jeopardized within an entire organization and by being 

available  to  a  different  business  owner.  The  difficulty  is  to  have  the  approval  of  different 

stakeholders in order to have legal access to the data. Once these are aggregated, it is important 

to add correlation rules to the raw data so it can give us significant information  to help our 

Security Operation Center (SOC) to be alerted in case of any infraction or suspicious behaviour. 

Safeguarding the privacy of the data in accordance with the law is mandatory for every 

firm and organisation. It is necessary that insider threat analysts follow laws regarding privacy, 

civil  liberties,  and  legal  guidance,  including  the  General  Data  Protection  Regulation 

(Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council, 2016).  

Preventing data leakage does not stop at the boundary of a firm’s network and it goes 

further beyond. The continued interaction with different business partners exposes systems to 

another threat. It is difficult to control the cyber security standards of affiliates. If not monitored 

properly, dishonest employees could use this as an entry point to an organization’s data and 

system, and misuse it. 

Types of Insider Activities 

A  study  conducted  by  NATO’s  Cooperative  Cyber  Defense  Centre  of  Excellence 

(Kont, Pihelgas, Wojtkowiak, Trinberg, and Osula, 2015) categorizes threats into five mains  

different areas: 

1.  Fraud - consisting of the use of the company’s information and data for personal 

gain.  

2.  IT sabotage – which is a major and unpredictable action against the firm and could 

seriously impact the availability of the overall infrastructure.  

 
 
 
 
3.  Intellectual property theft – which is a remunerative action that permits insiders to 

exfiltrate copyrights, patents, trademarks, and trade secrets without permission.  

4.  Espionage  -  the  practice  of  illegally  obtaining  information  about  the  plans  and 

activities from industrial or international government entities. 

5.  Unintentional – employee that have not malevolent intent, although their actions, 

or behavior, occasionally affect the organization. 

Unintentional actors, as a result of carelessness, also can lead to a major security breach. 

This could cause as much damage as malevolent actions. Disclosure of classified information 

in  the  public  domain  and  social  media,  accidentally  replying  to  phishing  campaigns,  or 

downloading malicious code off the Internet are all examples of negligent activities that could 

have serious consequences for the organisation. A famous example within this category was 

the breach perpetrated on the American security company RSA in 2011. Four employees were 

targeted through a phishing email campaign, one of them clicked on the attachment that used 

a zero-day exploit, targeting a vulnerability. The intruders succeeded in exfiltrating confidential 

information  related  to  the  company’s  SecurID  two-factor  authentication  products  (Zetter, 

2011). 

As technology grows and develops also malicious actors are constantly evolving and 

impacting our society. “Hacktivist” is a new threat category that was reported recently on the 

breaking news. The word “hacktivism” is relatively novel in the cyber domain. It combines the 

word “hacker” and “activist”. It consists of gaining unauthorized access to ICT systems and 

carrying out a variety of disruptive actions as a means of achieving political and social goals. 

In  cases  such  as  those  of  Chelsea  Manning  and  Edward  Snowden,  thousands  of  classified 

documents were leaked, and a large amount of confidential information was revealed. Those 

incidents involve a number of distinct forms of cybercrimes: sabotage, espionage, intellectual 

property theft, and mark the difficulties of preventing a malicious actor from dispersing data 

even if sophisticated controls are in place (Ewen MacAskill, 2017).  

Proposed Remediation Guidelines 

To increase the chances of preventing, detecting and responding to insider threats, the 

overall security of the organisation must be well structured and organised.   

 
Every  project  needs  executive-level  managers  leadership.  In  a  company,  a  chief 

information  security  officer  (CISO)  must  provide  a  long-term  vision,  engage  with  all 

departments, and finally promote and build a strong insider threat program (InTP). An effective 

InTP must include participation from different stakeholders. Mandatory departments that could 

contribute actively to the project are human resources, information assurance, legal, and cyber 

security.  

Best practices for an InTP should take into consideration at least the following areas in 

order to decrease the overall risk: administrative controls, technical controls, physical controls, 

security awareness and incident response.  

1-  Administrative controls such as policies, directives and regulations must be clearly 

documented  and  enforced.  It  is  important  to  show  the  acceptable  use  of  an  organisation’s 

system, network and information. It is relevant to remark what is expected from employees and 

also the possible consequences of violations. This is a valuable deterrence method.  

2 - Technical control is  generally considered the backbone of every InTP. Data loss 

prevention, email monitoring, web proxy, rogue device detection, endpoint analytics, security 

information  and  event  management  (SIEM)  are safeguards that  can detect and prevent  data 

leakage.  In  recent  years,  security  has  developed  a  new  capability  called  User  and  Entity 

Behaviour Analytics (UEBA). This includes a behavioural analysis of entities, other than the 

users, such as routers, servers and endpoints. UEBA is much more effective since it can analyze 

the behaviour across multiple users and ICT devices in order to detect complex attacks. 

3  -  Physical  controls  are  also  well-founded  in  assigning  the  least  privilege  i.e.  only 

enough access to perform the required job and for implementing a segregation of duty when 

more than one person is required to complete a critical function.  Physical controls are also 

used to control and minimise the risk of unauthorised access to physical assets and information 

systems.  

4  -  The  employees  in  a  company  need  to  have  security  awareness  training,  with  A 

specific chapter dedicated to insider threat in order to explain what is expected from them and, 

which threats  they might  be exposed to. Unintentional insider  threat  may  be recruited from 

outside through the social engineering. It is important to make all employees acknowledgeable 

 
 
 
 
 
about such hazards and to train them how to avoid to be the weakness in the organisation’s 

security barrier. 

5  -  Finally,  the  organisations  must  be  ready  to  respond  to  an  incident  involving  a 

malicious or unintentional insider threat. The incident response (IR) workflow should be part 

of an existing plan. However, the process should also include the escalation of the reporting, 

the notification to management, and submission to an investigation officer. 

Figure 1. Proposed Remediation Guidelines. 

Future Challenges 

A new challenge appeared in the recent years. This concerns the adoption of cloud and 

mobile  technology  in  companies,  and  it  transformed  the  IT  infrastructures  considerably. 

Physical boundaries of corporate networks and digital assets become less clearly defined than 

it used to be in the past. Therefore, new challenges are calling for new approaches.  

Since it is difficult to stop an insider threat at the boundary, early detection is the key. 

In modern ICT infrastructure, several technical controls are implemented and could identify 

suspicious  activities such as unauthorised access, violation of organisation  policies, internal 

reconnaissance, abuse of rights, and data loss. However, cyber security should not concern just 

technology.  This  approach can  prevent  and  control the possible damage, but  nowadays  this 

 
 
 
 
 
approach  it  is  not  enough.  It  should  be  integrated  with  an  additional  layer.  Guarding 

information  and  systems  against 

insiders  with 

illegitimate 

intentions 

requires  a 

multidimensional defensive strategy.  

Analyzing user personalities through social media and combining the information with 

the technical domain could represent a dynamic approach to decrease the likelihood of such 

threats.  Marwan  Omar  remarks:  “Organizations  need  to  implement  multi  layered  defensive 

approaches to combat insider risks” (Marwan, 2015, p. 162).  

Nowadays,  technical  controls  are  already  present  in  most  organisations’  security 

programs. However, because of an increasingly threatening landscape, they cannot be solely 

relied  upon.  New  technologies  are  periodically  proposed,  which  potentially  offer  to  the 

malicious  employees  new  opportunities  to  strike.  Using  innovative  know-how  as  a 

countermeasure should be the main priority.  

Technologies  based  on  machine  learning  and  artificial  intelligence  are  to  be 

implemented in order to assist with prevention and detection of insider threats before they are 

causing irreversible damage. The future development chapter of Cyber security has yet to be 

written, particularly with the coming power of quantum computers. 

Conclusion: 

Insider threat employees represent the wolf in sheep's clothing. Daily, real examples, 

clearly show that insider threats create a significant hazard to every company, institution and 

organisation.  A potential malicious insider can cause millions of euro in damage by stealing 

intellectual  property,  sabotaging  facilities  or  disclosing  information  that  can  irreparably 

compromise the organisation. However, an unintentional insider can cause irreversible damage 

as well. 

Enterprises  will  never  be  able  to  fully  make  sure  that  employees  have  no  malicious 

intentions, or that they won't ever fall for phishing email campaigns. Meanwhile, although the 

elimination of all risks is not possible, the overall risks could be reduced and the residual risk 

controlled. Too often, the security strategy is dedicated to the edge security layer and ignores 

that a conspicuous threat might come within the organization.  

To conclude, defending your enterprise from insider threats is a vital part of information 

security best-practices. It is essential that your company’s highly valuable classified data and 

assets are protected from its greatest threat: the enemy within the gates. Every mature cyber 

security program nowadays should contain an insider threat assessment and a comprehensive 

 
 
insider threat program to protect a corporation’s people, facilities, networks, and intellectual 

property. 

References: 

CNBC,  (2019).  The  Capital  One  breach  is  unlike  any  other  major  hack,  with  allegations  of  a  single  engineer 
wreaking  havoc.  Retrieved  from:  https://www.cnbc.com/2019/07/30/capital-one-hack-allegations-describe-a-
rare-insider-threat-case.html. 

Ponemon 

Institute  LLC 

and  Acenture, 

(2019).  The 

cost  of 

cybercrime.  Retrieved 

from: 

https://www.accenture.com/_acnmedia/pdf-96/accenture-2019-cost-of-cybercrime-study-final.pdf. 

Cappelli  D.  M.,  Moore  A.  P.,  Trzeciak  R.  F,  (2012).  CERT  Guide  to  Insider  Threats.  Retrieved  from: 
https://insights.sei.cmu.edu/insider-threat/2017/03/cert-definition-of-insider-threat---updated.html 

CERT  Insider  Threat  Team,  (2013).  Unintentional  Insider  Threats:  A  Foundational  Study.  Retrieved  from: 
http://resources.sei.cmu.edu/library/asset-view.cfm?assetid=58744 

Clearswift,  (2017).  Insider  Threat:  74%  of  security  incidents  come  from  the  extended  enterprise,  not  hacking 

groups.  Retrieved 

from:  https://www.clearswift.com/about-us/pr/press-releases/insider-threat-74-security-

incidents-come-extended-enterprise-not-hacking-groups 

Regulation  (EU)  2016/679  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council,  (2016).  General  Data  Protection 

Regulation.  Retrieved  from:  https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679. 

Kont  M.,  Pihelgas  M.,  Wojtkowiak  J.,  Trinberg  L.,  and  Osula  A.M.,  (2015).  Insider  Threat  Detection  Study.  
Retrieved from: https://ccdcoe.org/uploads/2018/10/Insider_Threat_Study_CCDCOE.pdf 

MacAskill  E.,  (2017).  WikiLeaks  publishes  'biggest  ever  leak  of  secret  CIA  documents'.  Retrieved  at: 
https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/mar/07/wikileaks-publishes-biggest-ever-leak-of-secret-cia-
documents-hacking-surveillance 

Zetter  K.,  (2011).  Researchers  uncover  RSA  phishing  attack,  hiding  in  plain  sight.  Retrieved  from: 

https://www.wired.com/2011/08/how-rsa-got-hacked/ 

Marwan,  O.  (2015).  Insider  threats:  Detecting  and  controlling  malicious  insiders.  In  New  Threats  and 

Countermeasures in Digital Crime and Cyber Terrorism, 162-172. Hershey PA, USA: IGI Global. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
