Cognitive Internet of Vehicles: Motivation, Layered
Architecture and Security Issues

Khondokar Fida Hasan
School of EECS, QUT
Brisbane, Australia

*

Tarandeep Kaur
School of EECS, QUT
Brisbane, Australia

Md. Mhedi Hasan
Dept. of ICT, CoU
Cumilla, Bangladesh

Yanming Feng
School of EECS, QUT
Brisbane, Australia

9
1
0
2

v
o
N
0
2

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
5
3
3
0
.
2
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Over the past few years, we have experienced great
technological advancements in the information and communi-
cation ﬁeld, which has signiﬁcantly contributed to reshaping
the Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) concept. Evolving
from the platform of a collection of sensors aiming to collect
data, the data exchanged paradigm among vehicles is shifted
from the local network to the cloud. With the introduction of
cloud and edge computing along with ubiquitous 5G mobile
network, it is expected to see the role of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI) in data processing and smart decision imminent. So as to
fully understand the future automobile scenario in this verge
of industrial revolution 4.0, it is necessary ﬁrst of all to get a
clear understanding of the cutting-edge technologies that going to
take place in the automotive ecosystem so that the cyber-physical
impact on transportation system can be measured. CIoV, which
is abbreviated from Cognitive Internet of Vehicle, is one of the
recently proposed architectures of the technological evolution in
transportation, and it has amassed great attention. It introduces
intelligence and machine learning into
cloud-based artiﬁcial
transportation system. What are the future expectations of CIoV?
To fully contemplate this architectures future potentials, and
milestones set to achieve,
it is crucial to understand all the
technologies that leaned into it. Also, the security issues to meet
the security requirements of its practical implementation. Aiming
to that, this paper presents the evolution of CIoV along with the
layer abstractions to outline the distinctive functional parts of
the proposed architecture. It also gives an investigation of the
prime security and privacy issues associated with technological
evolution to take measures.

Index Terms—Cognitive Internet of Vehicles, Automotive,
Transportation, Industrial Revolution 4.0, Security, Intelligent
Transportation System

I. INTRODUCTION

The transport sector plays a key role in modern civilisation,
and over the past years,
it has experienced rapid growth.
According to a recent survey; 2019s Motor Vehicle Census,
there is an annual increase rate of 1.7% (average) in Australia,
with 19.5 million registered motor vehicles over a population
of 25 million people [1]. This number for the USA and
the UK stands at 281.3 million [2] and 39.4 million [3]
respectively. In turns, the whole world has over 1.4 billion
registered vehicles and come the year 2040, this ﬁgure is
expected to shoot by double [4]. The critical issue is, as the
number of vehicles on roads increases, trafﬁc-related problems
such as trafﬁc congestion, accident, and road fatalities are
on the rise as well. To counter-attack this, a smart transport

*Corresponding Author Email: k.ﬁdahasan@yahoo.com

and trafﬁc management system was envisioned since the year
1990 by combining different sensors, and different mode
of applications under the technological evolution of Intelli-
gent Transportation System (ITS). At its earlier stage, this
technological endeavour evolved with the integration of co-
employable and assisting correspondence innovation termed as
Co-operative Intelligent Transportation System (CITS), which
basically incorporates the Information and Communication
Technologies (ICT) with transportation infrastructure [5]. The
vehicle is enabled to communicate with other vehicles, road-
side infrastructures and other road entities by creating vehic-
ular ad-hoc networks (VANET). However, both of these two
technological advancements lead the concept of Autonomous
and Connected vehicular technologies in parallel to enrich the
idea of intelligence in the transport sector so as to increase
the user comfort and road safety.

With the evolution of the Internet of Things (IoT), in the
early 2010s, meanwhile, vehicles are being connected to the
Internet, aiming at providing ubiquitous access to information
alike to the drivers and passengers. This leads to another
technological break-through termed as Internet of Vehicle
(IoV).

Even though there has been a noticeable advancement in
terms of automation and connectivity, still, it is not sufﬁcient
to reduce the road causalities to zero. Driving errors, as well as
the drivers misjudgement being the prime reasons associated
with this causalities where a recent research [6] reveals that
90% of road accidents are caused by human factors. Take, for
instance, fatigue while driving, overspreading, blocked line of
sight, etc., are ranked among the most common factors that
cause accidents. This encourages the necessity of applying Ma-
chine Learning (ML), Neural Network (NN), Deep Learning
(DL), and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) that can take control of
wheel which can enable error-free driving, resulting to the idea
of Cognitive Internet of Vehicles (CIoV) shown in Fig.1.

The advancement that the CIoV offers toward the use of
internet and machine intelligence are also associated with new
security risks and privacy issues, realising the transportation
need to address properly. Since different
technologies are
playing a role in different layers, it is vital to understand
the existing vulnerabilities in the generic domain of those
technologies and their application.

This paper aims at giving an overview of the evolution of
Cognitive Internet of Vehicles (CIoV) and its technological

 
 
 
 
 
 
systems. Mostly, all
the Automated vehicles are equipped
with a number of sensors, cameras, Lidar, Radar, etc., that
collects raw data from the external environment. This data
then serves as the input to the sophisticated system software
which is used in vehicles to decide for speciﬁc courses of
actions, such as, lane changing, acceleration and overtaking
other vehicles [9]. In connected vehicular technology, however,
the vehicles communicate with internal and external environ-
ments utilising a different kind of communication technologies
predominantly wireless communication technologies. These
vehicles use wireless networks to create interactions within the
devices built in the vehicle itself that is On-Board sensors and
outside the vehicle; that is Vehicle to Vehicle (V2V) commu-
nications or Vehicle to Infrastructure (V2I) communications
[10]. The concept of connected technologies fundamentally
propelled the evolution of the transportation system to form
the Internet of Vehicles (IoV), thus creating an opportunity
to apply modern technological developments to apply on data
such as machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence, to creates
insights on transportation management and to take measures
on providing better services.

B. Network Communication and Data Acquisition

Layer-2 in CIoV is responsible for network-based com-
munications among different
transportation entities aiming
at the transport-related data acquisition. A wide variety of
communication interaction that
takes place are deﬁned in
this layer. Broadly, all interaction can be classiﬁed as Intra-
vehicular communication and Inter-vehicular communications.
Communication that takes place within the vehicle is termed
as Intra-vehicular communication. Generally, smart vehicles
are equipped with numerous sensors, such as sensors detect
the road condition, drivers fatigue, monitoring of the tire
pressure, and autonomous control sensors, etc. [10]. The
primary objectives of those sensors in vehicles are to monitor
the internal operation of vehicle. Those sensors communicate
with each other and take intelligent decision for the human
driver. Smart vehicles use technologies that allow them to
make decisions for the driver. For example, crash warning
systems, lane changing systems, adaptive cruise control, and
self-parking are some of the examples that operate using the
concept of intra-vehicular sensor-based communications [7].
Inter-vehicular communication, however, can be categorised as
Vehicle to Vehicle (V2V) including Device (V2D), Pedestrian
(V2P), Bicycle (V2B), etc. and Vehicle to Infrastructure (V2I)
including Home (V2H), Smar Grid (V2G), etc. as shown in
the Fig.2.

C. Edge Computing and Data Pre-Processing

This layer forms on top of the vehicular cloud to support all
sorts of computing services at the edge of the network. It aims
at collecting data from lower layers to support storing and
processing. The layer is also responsible for providing real-
time services to the participating agents [11]. Such vehicular
cloud concept helps provide users with answers to location-
based real-time queries faster. For example, a driver dispatches

Fig. 1. Evolution of Cognitive Internet of Vehicles (CIoV).

related reviews. It presents a ﬁve-layer model to envisage the
architecture of future transportation system to identify their
distinctive functional parts. This paper also discusses security
risks, including different threats, attacks, and vulnerabilities
may associate with different layers to understand the measures
required.

II. COGNITIVE INTERNET OF VEHICLES (CIOV) AND
LAYERED ARCHITECTURE

With the advent of the ever-growing vehicular applications,
the de-
the technical challenges are growing too to meet
mands from both communication and computation. Without
persuasive communication and computational support, a good
number of foreseeing vehicular applications and services will
only still stay in the idea phase and cannot be seen into
practice.

A. Sensing and Participation

The Layer-1 of the structure represents all

the techno-
logically evolved entities that are capable of sensing and
communicating and also responsible for interacting within the
transportation system. Such entity includes smart vehicles and
road infrastructure. Smart vehicles are generally considered
to have a certain level of intelligence. With the variety of
technologies, smart vehicles can be categorised into two,
autonomous vehicles and connected vehicles. Autonomous
vehicles are generally referred to as the driverless vehicle.
The involvement of the driver while driving and operating
Autonomous vehicles depends on the levels of automation,
ranges from level 0 to level 4. Level-0 indicates no automation
where the driver controls the vehicle at all the times including
the steering, braking, etc. solely handled by a human being.
Whereas, Level-4 refers to a fully self-driving, self-operated
automobile. In such a level of automation, the vehicle operates
on its own without any human assistance [7], [8]. In between
these two levels, the other three levels show some degree
of automation in their operations but not entirely at all. Au-
tonomous Vehicles are aligned to work on a three-phase design
known as sense-plan-act, which is the base of many robotic

IOVConnected to the Cloud in the form of Internet of ThingsIOVConnected to the Cloud in the form of Internet of ThingsC-IOVCloud-based Advanced Transportation Solution using ML, AI, etc.C-IOVCloud-based Advanced Transportation Solution using ML, AI, etc.Cognitive IoVCognitive IoVC-ITSConnected Vehicular Technology added with Wireless Networking e.g. VANETC-ITSConnected Vehicular Technology added with Wireless Networking e.g. VANETIntelligentTransportation SystemIntelligentTransportation SystemCooperative Intelligent Transportation SystemCooperative Intelligent Transportation SystemITSSmart Transport and Traffic Management System Combining Different Sensors and modes of applicationsITSSmart Transport and Traffic Management System Combining Different Sensors and modes of applications19901990200020002010201020202020YearEvolution of Transportation SystemInception of VANETInception of LTE network Internet of VehiclesInternet of VehiclesInception of Autonomous CarFig. 2. Layered Architecture of Cognitive Internet of Vehicles (CIoV).

the query regarding sudden trafﬁc jam, so the answer to this
query is provided by vehicular cloud. Some of the other real-
time services that can be offered by the vehicular cloud in-
clude; Navigation, Crash warnings system, Trafﬁc Monitoring,
Parking Availability, Autonomous Driving, etc. The vehicular
cloud serves is used with such kind of real-time services. The
main driving force behind the formation of vehicular clouds is
that in the near future, a huge number of vehicles is expected
on the roads, streets and parking lots and these vehicles can
be assisted with computational and communication resources
from the edge units support from the form of fog computing,
that will help to manage the trafﬁc better and reduce the cost
that are incurred in managing roads and trafﬁc with traditional
approaches [12].

D. Cognition and Control

Cognition and Control layer forms in the top of the internet
cloud that fundamentally provides the feature of storing,
computing and processing to the data collected from lower
layers along with decision making support over it. Therefore,
two different sorts of services can be distinctly considered
in this layer; (i) Control service and (ii) Strategic service.
In the strategic services sub-layer a variety of operations
and analysis takes place, for example, driver’s emotion and
behaviour analysis, driver and passenger’s health condition
monitoring, different road condition monitoring, and network
optimization, etc. This is achieved through cloud-based dy-
namic cognition and utilisation of the computing resources by
enabling advanced operations using machine learning, deep
learning, neural networking, and artiﬁcial intelligence which
essentially sort of data cognitive engine process to perform
better analysis of the heterogeneous data. The control sub-
part of Cognition and Control
layer, however, responsible
to determine system performance by providing a verity of
services such as network-wide security, trafﬁc and network op-

timisation, and resource allocation through different resources
management engine concept, for example, Software Deﬁned
Network (SDN), and Network Function Virtualisation (NFV),
etc. [13]–[15]. A list of enabling technologies and functions
according to these two services is presented in Fig.3.

Fig. 3. Enabling Engines and Functions of the Layer Cognition and
Control in CIoV Realisation [13]–[15].

It is also worth to be mentioned that in this architecture
this layer differs from the vehicular cloud as we think the
internet cloud is public and is meant to serve all users of CIoV
whereas the vehicular cloud is relevantly limited in some areas
and serve the purpose of data computing, and storing in that
restricted area.

E. Application Layer

The application layer provides high-level services that are a
type of asynchronous functions can be treated as the end prod-

VVBPVIHGV2VV2IV2PI2INetwork Communication and Data AcquisitionV2VV2IEdge Computing (fog) / Data Pre-Processing Vehicular CloudInternet CloudStrategic ServiceStrategic ServicesStrategic ServiceControl ServicesApplicationsSensing and ParticipationCognition and ControlL1L2L3L4L5Cognition and ControlControl ServiceStrategic ServiceSDNSONNFVOpen FlowNetwork SlicingDriver’s Behaviour and Pattern AnalysisEmotion AnalysisDriver and Passenger’s Health MonitoringNetwork Resource Allocation and OptimizationTraffic Monitoring and OptimizationAIMLDLANNType Based Content DistributionMAC CoordinationData Offloading.. . Etc...  . Etc.ucts of the architecture, help CIoV in fulﬁlling the objective of
Intelligent transportation system in terms of driver assistance
and congestion-free better trafﬁc management. This layer
also involves coordination and collaboration with different
parties involved in transportation system such as automatic and
mobile connected services. Overall, with this paradigm shift,
the Intelligent transportation system is leapt forward [16].

III. SECURITY AND PRIVACY BASED LAYERED
ARCHITECTURE

In this section, security and privacy are studied concerning
the evolved technologies in the functioning of CIoV. Security
is all about the safeguarding of data, and in transportation,
security is a serious issue as it affects the lives of commuters
using the roads directly. For example, due to the lack of
security measures, network intrusion can take place in ve-
hicular network from outside the internet that may result in
hijacking the vehicles by hackers. Privacy, however, is about
safeguarding the user identity which is also equally important
to be maximised by taking the relevant security measures.
Based on the architecture proposed above in Fig.2, security
concerns and threats are investigated into a detailed seven-
layered structure in Fig.4. Generally, the security and privacy
view are presented as security concerns and threats. Threats
are circumstances and events that may harm an information
system through unauthorised access, destruction, disclosure,
modiﬁcation of data, and denial of service. Threats are per-
formed by attackers who compromise systems resources [17].
The following sections focusses on the security, concerns and
threats.

A. Sensing and Participating Entities

As the layer has been deﬁned, the Security and Privacy
Issues of the Layer-1 are related to the security and privacy
contexts of autonomous and connected vehicles. Although
some of them are common, many of them are technology-
speciﬁc, thus presented are separately in the layered diagram.
First of all, in autonomous car technologies, the identiﬁed
security issue is confusing the RADAR and LIDAR sensors
which result in the vision of the machine going blind. This
is caused by the attacks on cameras and sensors in vehicle
and map poisoning, that is, altering the positions provided
by a map of vehicle. The identiﬁed threats in autonomous
technologies are eavesdropping in the in-vehicle sensors, en-
tering of malware in in-vehicle system and GPS spooﬁng.
Among them, GPS spooﬁng is a common threat that confuses
the GPS of the vehicle by sending false strong signals by
using other GPS simulators [18]. In the case of connected
vehicular technology, however, the security issues are related
to the data validity, breaching of privacy of drivers, and
open communication link [19]. The data in connected vehi-
cles includes; in-vehicle data, location data, and aggregated
data. Using the communication links in connected vehicles,
communication between On-board Unit and Roadside unit),
attackers breach the privacy of drivers by getting access to the
drivers private data which include location information, etc.

There are several threats identiﬁed as well in the context of
connected vehicles. According to [18], [19], the speciﬁc threats
in connected vehicles are transferring bogus information to
other drivers, changing the positioning information to ignore
liability, performing a denial of service attacks to break down
the network and tracking other vehicles by identifying them
in-network. Reference [18] has also provided the security and
privacy threats that occur in context of connected vehicles,
these include, eavesdropping the communication between two
parties, fabricating the messages, that is, creating the false
signals and performing the Replay attacks, that is, modifying
the timestamp of message and broadcasting it multiple times
to disturb the trafﬁc.

B. Network Communication and Data Acquisition

that

To understand better the security model of CIoV,

this
layer is presented here into two sub-layers utilising different
communication paradigm and network technologies. While
communication is a concern, the security and privacy issues
along with threats, are identiﬁed by exploring the intra-vehicle
communications and inter-vehicle communications,
is,
V2V and V2I. The common security and privacy issues in
all the communications are Tracking of vehicles locations,
unauthorised access, tampering of hardware, Message alter-
ation and fabrication [20]. The identiﬁed threats are Denial of
service (making network unavailable), Sybil attack, Session
Hijacking (entering the communication session by cheating
with the IP address of the device in vehicle), illusion at-
tack (making vehicles to see false view) and GPS spooﬁng
[16], [20]–[23]. However, under network access domain, the
security and privacy issues identiﬁed include Data Leakage,
Information Modiﬁcation Message Altering, Data corruption.
Threats are also a major concern that exists in the WAVE
technology and these threats include: Eavesdropping, Source
Spooﬁng, Wormhole attack, Denial of service, Replay and
Jamming (attacker creates strong signals to disrupt the com-
munications), are the threats that also occur in the Wi-Fi
technology and cellular networks [21].

C. Edge Computing and Data Pre-Processing

This layer is responsible for providing real-time services to
the participating entities based on the intelligent computation
of data that is collected from communications of participating
vehicles. Thus, for proper outlining, the investigated security
concerns and threats are presented into two different sub-
layers. Firstly, the security issues that occur in vehicular cloud
includes Breaching of conﬁdentiality, which means cheating
with other users identities, valuable data and documents that
are stored in vehicular cloud acquiring locations of vehicles
from vehicular cloud Compromise with integrity, which in-
clude misuse and modiﬁcation of valuable data of users that is
stored in Vehicular cloud [24]. The security and privacy issues
in real-time services, however, are identiﬁed by the reference
[25] in terms of privacy issues, authorisation and authentica-
tion of users. Privacy issues include breaching of privacy of
users by acquiring their valuable data. Data integrity, Privacy

Fig. 4. Security Concerns and Threats model in CIoV layered Architecture.

breaching by insiders, Data delivery delays, Data Modiﬁcation
are the security issues in real-time services, also threats include
eavesdropping, hacking software that provides the services and
change the information that will be provided to end-users and
spyware, in which attackers install software on other vehicles
On-board units to get the positions of vehicle [26].

D. Cognition and Control

In this layer; Cognition and Control

there are a
number of security and privacy issues identiﬁed, which are
mostly related to the security issues and are a threat, to the
Internet Cloud. According to Reference [16], [17], [27], [28],

layer,

some of the security issues that exist in the cloud paradigm
include:

1) Multitenancy: This is the capability of a cloud to run
and operate on multiple machines, which eventually makes it
more vulnerable to attacks on cloud infrastructure.

2) Access: So as to have access to sensitive users data,
attackers may hack the system, thereby having access to the
data store.

3) Availability: The cloud is designed in such a way that
users can access the available data at any time, irrespective
of their geographic location. But what happens if there is a
system failure? This could result in data failure, thus loss in
the systems conﬁdence by some users.

AUTONOMOUS VEHICLESCONNECTED VEHICLESCONCERNSCONCERNSTHREATSTHREATSRADAR, LIDAR Confusing (Use of Smart Material), Machine Vision Blind, Maps PoisoningGPS Spoofing & Jamming, Eavesdropping in Vehicle Sensors (Bluetooth, Tire Pressure), Malware InjectionData Validity, Breaching of Identity and Liability of Vehicles, Privacy of Vehicles and Drivers, Open Communication Link, Driving Behaviour PrivacyEavesdropping, Bogus data in network, Reply Attack, Sybil Attack, Location Privacy Attack, Msg FabricationMODECONCERNSTHREATSV2VV2IIntra-VehicleLocation Tracking, Unauthorized access, Malware in Wireless InterfaceDenial of Service (DOS), Sybil and Illusion  Attack, Malware, SpamUnauthorized Access, Tampering (Hardware/Software), Change in SignalsDenial of Service (DOS), Session Hijacking and SpoofingMessage fabrication and Alteration, Cheat with position and location (GPS Spoofing)Session and Network Jamming, GPS Spoofing, Illusion Attack TECHNOLOGYCONCERNSTHREATSCONCERNSTHREATSCONCERNSTHREATSCONCERNSTHREATSCONCERNSTHREATSWAVE/WLANWi-Fi, 3G/4G/5GData Leakage, Information Modification, Message AlteringEavesdropping, Source Spoofing, ReplaysData Corruption, Delay, Data Leakage, Social Engineering, Ransom wareJamming, Denial of Service, Reply, Session Hijacking, Malware AttackAuthentication, Secure Localization, Secure Vehicular Communications, Data Security, Access ControlDenial of Service (DOS), Identity Spoofing, Data Tampering, Repudiation, Information DisclosureData integrity, Privacy breaching by insiders, Data delivery delays and Modification, Data InteroperabilityEavesdropping, Spyware, Hacking SoftwareMultitenancy, Access, Availability, Trust, Trans border data flow and data proliferation, Dynamic ProvisionData loss and leakage, Service Hijacking, Malicious Insiders, Insecure Interfaces, Identity TheftData integrity,  Data delivery delays, Data Modification, Data Interoperability, and Privacy breaching by insiders,Eavesdropping by outsiders, Spyware, Hacking SoftwarePARTICIPATING ENTITIESCOMMUNICATIONSNETWORK ACCESS TECHNOLOGIESVEHICULAR CLOUD(EDGE, FOG)REAL TIME SERVICESCOGNITION AND CONTROL(INTERNET CLOUD)APPLICATION LAYER SERVICES4) Misuse of Cloud computing: Users have unlimited ac-
cess to network and storage while using cloud. In some cases,
the cloud provider may give free trials, which could result in
its misuse, thus adversely affecting cloud computing.

5) Transborder data ﬂow and data proliferation: The data
stored, can be accessed by selected companies, with or without
the consent of the data owner. In such a case, it would be hard
to ensure that the data in question is not stored or processed
in some unauthorised systems.

6) Trust: Most of the cloud users lack the total trust in it
while storing their highly valued and private data, with the
fear that the systems may collapse, thus losing their data.
The threats are also identiﬁed in the cloud computing layer.
The threats, however,
includes Service hijacking, Identity
theft, Malicious insiders and Data loss, and leakage are some
common threats existing in the cloud domain [29].

E. Application Layer

The security and privacy issues are dependent on all the
lower layers, the main security concern in this layer can be
the delay in reaching of data to the applications or software
that are responsible for providing high-level services such
as reduced rate of accidents and congestions. The second
security concern is Data interoperability, which means that
data coming from different sources from lower layers may be
in an incompatible format for the application and software that
provide end services [19].

IV. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we present a ﬁve-layer based novel transporta-
tion architecture for the future automobile industry. With the
growing technological trend, the proposed structure embeds
internet-based cognitive intelligence and also explains the
functions of all the layer abstractions. This cover outlines this
novels architecture of CIoV, in order to indicate research op-
portunities in a vehicular network. This paper also investigates
and focuses on the security and privacy issues identiﬁed along
with the proposed architecture layer by layer. The concept
along with the investigated result on security and privacy
will help transition to the Cloud-based future transportation,
providing all the security services may be required by the
autonomous vehicles.

REFERENCES

[1] A. B. of Statistics.

(2019, Jan.) Motor vehicle census, australia.
Australian Bureau of Statistics. [Online]. Available: https://www.abs.
gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/9309.0

[3] A.

Service.

Publishing

[2] U. Statistics. US VIO Vehicle Registration Data 2018, Fast
Quote on Car Data. [Online]. Available: https://hedgescompany.com/
automotive-market-research-statistics/auto-mailing-lists-and-marketing/
Licensing
(2019,
https:

Statistics:
//assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
attachment data/ﬁle/800502/vehicle-licensing-statistics-2018.pdf
of
number
2040. Accessed
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/04/

cars worldwide
on.
the-number-of-cars-worldwide-is-set-to-double-by-2040

Vehicle
Available:

[Online]. Available:

Apr.)
[Online].

Forum.
is

(2016,
to

Economic

Annual

[4] W.

double

2018.

Sep.)

The

set

by

[5] A. Sładkowski and W. Pamuła, Intelligent

transportation systems-

problems and perspectives. Springer, 2016, vol. 303.

[6] S. Singh, “Critical reasons for crashes investigated in the national motor

vehicle crash causation survey,” Tech. Rep., 2015.

[7] J. M. Anderson, K. Nidhi, K. D. Stanley, P. Sorensen, C. Samaras,
and O. A. Oluwatola, Autonomous vehicle technology: A guide for
policymakers. Rand Corporation, 2014.

[8] H. Lu, Q. Liu, D. Tian, Y. Li, H. Kim, and S. Serikawa, “The Cognitive
Internet of Vehicles for Autonomous Driving,” IEEE Netw., vol. 33,
no. 3, pp. 65–73, 2019.

[9] S. A. Bagloee, M. Tavana, M. Asadi, and T. Oliver, “Autonomous
Vehicles: Challenges, Opportunities, and Future Implications for Trans-
portation Policies,” Jo. Mod. Trans., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 284–303, 2016.
[10] N. Lu, N. Cheng, N. Zhang, X. Shen, and J. W. Mark, “Connected
vehicles: Solutions and Challenges,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 1,
no. 4, pp. 289–299, 2014.

[11] X. Hou, Y. Li, M. Chen, D. Wu, D. Jin, and S. Chen, “Vehicular fog
computing: A viewpoint of vehicles as the infrastructures,” IEEE T VEH
TECHNOL, vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 3860–3873, 2016.

[12] R. Hussain, J. Son, H. Eun, S. Kim, and H. Oh, “Rethinking Vehicular
Communications: Merging VANET with Cloud Computing,” in 4th IEEE
Inter. Confer. on Cloud Computing Tech. Sci.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 606–609.
[13] O. Kaiwartya, A. H. Abdullah, Y. Cao, A. Altameem, M. Prasad, C.-T.
Lin, and X. Liu, “Internet of vehicles: Motivation, layered architecture,
network model, challenges, and future aspects,” IEEE Access, vol. 4,
pp. 5356–5373, 2016.

[14] M. Chen, Y. Tian, G. Fortino, J. Zhang, and I. Humar, “Cognitive
Internet of Vehicles,” Com Com. J., vol. 120, pp. 58–70, 2018.
[15] J. Bhatia, Y. Modi, S. Tanwar, and M. Bhavsar, “Software deﬁned
vehicular networks: A comprehensive review,” International Journal of
Communication Systems, vol. 32, no. 12, p. e4005, 2019.

[16] M. U. Shankarwar and A. V. Pawar, “Security and Privacy in Cloud
Computing: A Survey,” in Pro. 3rd Interl Conf. on Front. of Intelli.
Com. Theory and App. (FICTA) 2014. Springer, 2015, pp. 1–11.
[17] H. Li, R. Lu, J. Misic, and M. Mahmoud, “Security and Privacy of
Connected Vehicular Cloud Computing,” IEEE Net., vol. 32, no. 3, pp.
4–6, 2018.

[18] K. Jadaan, S. Zeater, and Y. Abukhalil, “Connected Vehicles: An
Innovative Transport Technology,” Procedia Engineering, vol. 187, pp.
641–648, 2017.

[19] L. B. Othmane, H. Weffers, M. M. Mohamad, and M. Wolf, “A survey
of security and privacy in connected vehicles,” in Wireless sensor and
mobile ad-hoc networks. Springer, 2015, pp. 217–247.

[20] Y. Sun, L. Wu, S. Wu, S. Li, T. Zhang, L. Zhang, J. Xu, and Y. Xiong,
“Security and Privacy in the Internet of Vehicles,” in 2015 Inter. Conf.
on Identi., Infor, and Knowl in the Internet of Things (IIKI), Oct 2015,
pp. 116–121.

[21] M. Haus, M. Waqas, A. Y. Ding, Y. Li, S. Tarkoma, and J. Ott, “Security
and Privacy in Device-to-Device (d2d) Communication: A Review,”
IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1054–1079, 2017.
[22] K. F. Hasan, Y. Feng, and Y.-C. Tian, “GNSS Time Synchronization
in Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks: Beneﬁts and Feasibility,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 3915–3924, 2018.

[23] K. F. Hasan, C. Wang, Y. Feng, and Y.-C. Tian, “Time Synchronization
in Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks: A Survey on Theory and Practice,” Veh.
Commun., vol. 14, pp. 39–51, 2018.

[24] G. Yan, D. B. Rawat, and B. B. Bista, “Towards Secure Vehicular
Clouds,” in 2012 Sixth Inter. Conf. on Complex, Intelligent, and Software
Intensive Systems.

IEEE, 2012, pp. 370–375.
[25] J. Wang, J. Cho, S. Lee, and T. Ma, “Real time services for future cloud
computing enabled vehicle networks,” in 2011 Int. conf. on wireless com.
and signal processing (WCSP).

IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–5.

[26] B. Hoh, M. Gruteser, H. Xiong, and A. Alrabady, “Enhancing security
and privacy in trafﬁc-monitoring systems,” IEEE Pervasive Comput.,
vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 38–46, 2006.

[27] H. Takabi, J. B. Joshi, and G.-J. Ahn, “Security and privacy challenges
in cloud computing environments,” IEEE Secur. Priv., vol. 8, no. 6, pp.
24–31, 2010.

[28] J. Joy and M. Gerla, “Internet of vehicles and autonomous connected
car-privacy and security issues,” in 2017 26th Inter. Conf. on Comp.
Commun. and Net. (ICCCN).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–9.

[29] C. Modi, D. Patel, B. Borisaniya, A. Patel, and M. Rajarajan, “A survey
on security issues and solutions at different layers of cloud computing,”
The j supercomputing, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 561–592, 2013.

