SECURITY FRAMEWORK FOR IOT DEVICES 
AGAINST CYBER-ATTACKS 

Aliya Tabassum1 and Wadha Lebda2 

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar 
1atabassum@qu.edu.qa and 2 wadha.lebda@qu.edu.qa 

ABSTRACT 

Internet of Things (IoT) is the interconnection of heterogeneous smart devices through the Internet with 
diverse application areas. The huge number of smart devices and the complexity of networks has made it 
impossible  to  secure  the  data  and  communication  between  devices.  Various  conventional  security 
controls are insufficient to prevent numerous attacks against these information-rich devices. Along with 
enhancing existing approaches, a peripheral defence, Intrusion Detection System (IDS), proved efficient 
in  most  scenarios.  However,  conventional  IDS  approaches  are  unsuitable  to  mitigate  continuously 
emerging  zero-day  attacks.  Intelligent  mechanisms  that  can  detect  unfamiliar  intrusions  seems  a 
prospective  solution.  This  article  explores  popular  attacks  against  IoT  architecture  and  its  relevant 
defence mechanisms to identify an appropriate protective measure for different networking practices and 
attack  categories.  Besides, a security  framework  for  IoT architecture  is provided  with a  list  of  security 
enhancement techniques. 

KEYWORDS 

Attacks, Architecture, Internet of Things (IoT), Intrusion Detection System, Security. 

1. INTRODUCTION 

In recent years, the number of smart IoT devices has increased dramatically. Due to the cheaper 
costs of hardware and open-source software, various companies are manufacturing IoT devices. 
A report published by HP, as a part of the Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP), 
proves  that  manufacturers  ignore  security  aspects  while  developing  these  devices  [1].  Hence, 
IoT  devices  have  become  potentially  vulnerable  targets  for  cybercriminals.  In  addition,  it  has 
become  difficult  for  security  specialists  to  secure  the  huge  amount  of  data  residing  on  the 
devices and the data in transmission in IoT networks. The complexity due to the number of IoT 
devices and networks provide opportunities to hackers to turn simple devices like TVs, cameras, 
DVDs  and  hubs  into  harmful  botnets  to  launch  jeopardizing  cyberattacks  [2].  To  incorporate 
major security solutions such as cryptography in IoT devices there are two major challenges: (1) 
disestablished  architecture,  infrastructure  and  standards  (2)  unsupportive  and  insufficient 
resources.    Applying  appropriate  defence  mechanism  (mitigation)  is  necessary  to  block  the 
adversaries  to  reduce  impact  on  the  devices  and/or  end-users.  Although  the  ever-increasing 
attacks  are  difficult  to  be  mitigated  fully,  real-time  network  monitoring  using  an  Intrusion 
Detection  and/or  Prevention  system  and  adoption  of  strong  access  control  &  authentication 
mechanism can prevent attacks. The goal of our research is to provide detailed analysis of types 
of  existing  defence  mechanisms  for  various  attacks  detection.  So,  that  the  most  appropriate 
approach suitable to the current IoT networking is identified. In this paper, we explore persistent 
attacks against IoT devices and networks. After which, we provide details on current trends of 
security  mechanisms  that  are  being  adopted  to  secure  IoTs  against  such  attacks.  Further,  we 
deduce  the  future  deterministic  metrics  of  IDS  after  a  precise  study  of  various  IDS 
developments in literature. Lastly, from the analysis and review, we suggest a robust framework 
for securing IoT devices. The structure of the paper is as follows: section 2 provides background 
and  overview  on  IoT  devices,  followed  by  the  recurrent  attacks  against  IoT  architecture  and 
various security mechanisms developed by security experts, in section 3. Section 4 elaborates on 

 
the  types  of  significant  security  mechanisms  that  are  potential  in  securing  heterogeneous  IoT 
networks. Later, section 5 recollects the crucial security mechanisms and a security framework. 
Finally, section 6 concludes the work. 

2. BACKGROUND 

IoT is an interconnection of billions of heterogeneous objects through the Internet. The number 
of connected smart IoT devices have surpassed the human population and in 2018, the number 
reached 7 billion. Moreover, researchers predict that in 2025 this number may peak to 22 billion 
with expected economy generated by various application domains is 4 to 11 Trillion Dollars [3] 
[4]. Figure 1 shows various application areas of IoT devices, which includes Smart Grid, Smart 
Retail,  Smart  Supply  Chain,  Smart  Agriculture,  Smart  Industry,  Smart  Transportation,  Smart 
Health,  Smart  Wearables,  Smart  Housing  &  Buildings  and  Smart  City.  From  the  mentioned 
statistics and areas of application, it is clear that IoTs are present in almost every sector and so, 
it has become essential to know how an IoT device works. 

Figure 1.  IoT application areas  

Any  IoT  device  operates  in  3  phases:  Collection  Phase,  Transmission  phase  and  Processing, 
Management, Utilization phase.  

  Collection  Phase:  It  is  the  initial  step  to  collect  data  from  the  physical  environment 
using short-range communication sensing devices and technologies [5]. The devices for 
this phase have less battery power, limited memory and processing power. The design 

 
of the communication protocols is in such a way that it consumes less energy, operates 
on limited data rate, small memory and processing power for short distances. Because 
of the above reasons, these networks are referred to as Low-power and Lossy networks 
(LLNs).  Consequently,  the  security  mechanisms  must  be  adaptable  to  the  resource 
constraints of these devices. 

  Transmission phase: This phase transmits the data collected from the Collection phase 
to the users and applications using  transmission technologies such as Ethernet,  Wi-Fi, 
Bluetooth,  Bluetooth  Low  Energy  (BLE),  Hybrid  Fiber  Coaxial  (HFC)  and  Digital 
Subscriber  Line  (DSL)  [6].  Most  of  these  technologies  are  vulnerable  to  attacks. 
Gateways  integrate  LLN  protocols  employed  in  the  collection  phase  with  the  Internet 
protocols of transmission phase. 

  Processing, Management, Utilization phase: The applications of this phase processes the 
collected  data  to  get  information  about  the  environment.  Sometimes,  the  applications 
have to make decisions based on the collected information [7]. It also has a middle-ware 
to integrate the communication with physical objects and multi-operation applications. 

The above phases of operation need protection to ensure appropriate delivery of services. In 
the next section, we explore recurrent security attacks against IoT architecture.  

3. ATTACKS AGAINST IOT LAYERS 

Although there is no standardized model of IoT architecture, the basic types of architectures that 
are popularly used are 3 layers, 4 layer and 5 layer architectures and the recent advancements 
have  more  abstract  layers  added  to  these  [8].  In  our  article,  we  explore  the  attacks  in  three 
layers, Perception, Transport and Network, shown in Figure 2 as these layers are highly targeted 
by security attacks. 

Figure 2. Attacks against IoT layers. 

 
The types of attacks mentioned in Figure 2 are the ones, which are discussed by authors; there 
are other attacks, which have not been taken into consideration due non-popularity of the attacks 
or due to out of the scope of security mechanisms that are needed for such attacks. 

3.1. Perception Layer 

This is the first layer, which consists of the physical sensors and actuators of the IoT devices to 
sense the environment and collect information. The widespread attack at this layer is jamming 
and  tampering.  In  a  jamming  attack,  an  adversary  disrupts  the  operation  of  the  network  by 
squeezing/jamming  the  communication  using  high radio  frequency  signals  [9].  Sometimes,  an 
adversary  can  attack  any  sensor  node  to  block  the  complete  network  resulting  in  a  Denial  of 
Service (DoS) or Distributed  Denial of Service (DDoS) attack.  Nowadays,  cybercriminals use 
intelligent techniques to launch jamming attacks to evade various defensive measures like IDS/ 
Intrusion Prevention System (IPS). In defence to such attacks, a monitoring system is proposed 
by Liu et al. to distinguish interference and a real transmission where the energy consumed is 
verified  each  time  to  make  sure  it  is  not  an  attack  [10].  This  feature  and  energy  monitoring 
system  can  identify  channel  interference  efficiently  but  fall  short  for  other  attacks.  Another 
model proposed using Monitor-Analyze-Plan-Execute (MAPE), which analysed signal strength 
but  had  similar  drawback  as  of  the  previous  one  [11].  Multi-Agent  Reinforcement  Learning 
(MARL) algorithm is incorporated using Q-Learning to deal with jamming attacks and it gave 
73% of performance. Likewise, an advanced Deep  Learning  (DL)  framework  is developed  by 
researchers  [12]  to  launch  and  mitigate  jamming  attacks.  In  this  work,  the  Jammer  senses  the 
spectrum and if its classifier predicts any transmission to be successful, then the jammer blocks 
the transmission. Whereas, the defender system misleads the jammer decisions by propagating 
error signals. However, the success ratio of this model was very less & the maximum success 
ratio it gave was 69%. In both of these models, improved performance is indeed required to deal 
with real-time jamming attacks. From the discussion, we deduce that intelligent monitoring and 
learning  models  have  the  potential  for  detection  of  jamming  attacks.  Table  1  summarizes  the 
discussed methods for a quick recap of the discussion.  

Table 1.  Perception layer attacks. 

Attack 
WIRELESS 
JAMMING 
ATTACK 

Technique & Implications 
Jamming communication using 
high radio frequency signals [9]. 

Defence Mechanism 
Distributing the usage across the 
spectrum and continuous 
monitoring of cognitive spectrum 
[11]. 

Accessing received signal strength 
by using MAPE architecture [12]. 

Random and sensing-based 
jamming attacks using Deep 
Learning [12].  

Deep Learning framework to divert 
and corrupt the jammer decisions 
[12].    

Complete jam of Wi-Fi signals 
and degradation of network 
performance 

Reinforcement Learning for 
mitigating jamming based on Q-
learning algorithm [13]. 

4.2. Transport Layer 

This layer controls end-to-end links; and it mainly faces two types of attacks, flooding and the 
de-synchronization attacks. In flooding attack (TCP Synchronization / TCP-SYN), the memory 
resources of the devices are drained by propagating a control signal repetitively. Whereas, in the 
de-synchronized attack, the attacker interrupts a fully established communication link between 

 
 
two  genuine  end  nodes  by  re-synchronization  (infinite  cycle)  of  their  transmission.  It  disrupts 
the communication and exhaust resources of the network. Such type of attacks leads to altering 
and draining out the network performance. A mitigation system based on rate-limiting model in 
Contiki Operating System (OS) proves efficient to identify UDP Flood attacks [14] but fails to 
work  well  in  TCP.  Early  detection  modules  of  Flooding  attacks  are  developed  by  using 
Software  Defined  Networking  (SDN)  but  the  model  lacked  practical  testing  in  real-time 
scenarios  [15]  [16].  Table  2  elucidates  other  cyber-attacks  against  this  layer  along  with  the 
security measures. 

1)  Battery  Exhaustion  Attack:  It  occurs  due  to  more  consumption  of  power  while 
processing  the  tasks  such  as  transmitting,  maintaining  and  receiving  data.  An  attacker 
injects  malicious  processing  codes  to  elongate  the  task,  sometimes  making  the  device 
ineffective. This attack is most popular in mobile devices. An IDS is proposed by Nash 
et.al [17] to overcome this attack. The system monitors the battery level of the device 
and  it  estimates  the  power  requirements  for  each  task.  When  the  power  consumed  is 
greater  than  the  threshold  estimated,  it  triggers  an  alert  terminates  the  task  to  avoid 
exhaustion of the battery. However,  IDS designed on one / two features is not able to 
unmask other attacks and requires customization as per the attack. 

2)  Remote  Control  Attack:  In  this  attack,  the  attacker  tries  to  intercept  communication 
between two parties by using botnets or Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) attacks to gain full 
control  of  the  device  [18].  In  some  cases,  the  attacker  may  launch  a  DoS  attack  to 
disrupt  resources  or  the  whole  device.  Such  kind  of  attack  may  cause  devastating 
implications in wearable sensors or Medical IoT devices. Researchers have developed 
approaches  to  protect  against  Remote  control  attack  by  incorporating  Transport  Layer 
Security  (TLS)  and  Datagram  Transport  Layer  Security  (DTLS)  for  Constrained 
Application  Protocol  (CoAP)  based  LLNs  [19].  CoAP  is  the  widely  used  protocol  in 
LLNs. Nevertheless, nowadays, many other protocols emerged for IoT networking such 
as  MQ  Telemetry  Transport  (MQTT),  which  consumes  lesser  energy  of  the  devices. 
Hence, an approach has to be able to adapt to different protocols. Two other approaches 
shown  in  Table  2  are  authentication  and  access  control  based,  which  are  effective  for 
Control  Systems,  Smart  Grid,  Home  Automation  and  centralized  control  systems. 
However, is not effective for decentralized systems. 

3)  Man in the Middle (MITM) Attack: Weak security measures has given a stringent way 
for  attackers  to  hold  and  vanish  the  resources  of  sensor  devices.  The  unencrypted 
communication  path  is  prone  to  attacks.  An  attacker  can  manipulate  or  delete 
information,  violating  the  integrity,  which  may  lead  to  various  attacks:  DoS, 
Eavesdropping, unauthorized access for tampering the data, injecting false information 
(authenticity)  and  Replay,  Resource  depletion  and  Injection  attack  [20].  In 
Eavesdropping, an adversary listens to the communication between the devices to know 
the  capability  and  settings  of  the  device  to  launch  an  attack.  In  a  MITM  attack,  an 
attacker taps between two communicating devices by establishing a communication link 
and assuring them as authorized one by sending information to both and disconnecting 
their original communication link. It allows the intruder to acquire the user's data in an 
unethical way. The effective solutions for such attacks involve authentication and IDS 
system  using  Machine  Learning,  which  give  acceptable  accuracy  to  defend  against 
those attacks [21] [22].  

Table 2.  Transport layer attacks. 

 
 
 
Attack 
Flooding Attack, 
ICMP/ TCP/ UDP/ 
HTTP/ DNS 

Technique & Implications 
A repetitively propagating 
control signal drains memory 
and battery [9].  

May lead to DDoS attack or 
jamming attack. 

Defence Mechanism 
Rate-limiting mechanism in Contiki 
OS [14]. 

SDN based IDS for monitoring 
activity [16]. 

Dynamic Anomaly Detection 
module by learning attack 
behaviour [15]. 

Battery 
Exhaustion Attack 

Malicious codes to elongate the 
tasks & consumes more power, 
sometimes makes the device 
ineffective [17]. 

IDS monitors the power consumed 
for tasks. If greater than the 
threshold estimated, an alert is 
triggered [17]. 

Remote Control 
Attack 

Intercepts communication using 
botnets or MITM attacks [18] to 
gain full control of the device 
and to disrupt resources of the 
whole device.  

Devastating in smart home, 
ICS, smart grid, power and 
energy management systems. 

TLS & DTLS security model for 
CoAP based LLNs [19]. 

Identity monitoring system for ICS 
using cryptography, image 
processing, authentication and 
authorization [23]. 

Multi-path onion IoT gateways, 
hidden IoT nodes using Tor 
services making them accessible to 
only authorized users [24]. 

Man In The 
Middle (MITM) 
Attack 

Attacker taps to manipulate or 
delete information. It can lead 
to DoS, replay, resource 
depletion and injection attack 
[20]. 

Supervised IDS for attack 
classification [21]. 

Client-server model, Authenticating 
server's key with sensor data value 
[22]. 

4.3. Network Layer 

This layer uses various technologies such as Radio Frequency Identification (RFID), Instrument 
flight  rules  (IFR),  3G,  GSM,  BLE,  Universal  Mobile  Telecommunications  System  (UMTS), 
WiFi, ZigBee, etc for communicating with the devices. Communication in IoT devices  occurs 
by routing and it is prone to  various attacks [25]. Routing attacks involves spoofing, selective 
forwarding, altering routing paths or replaying packets, sinkhole, warm-hole etc. These attacks 
may lead to DoS threats. Table 3 shows some of the attacks against network or data link layer 
and its protective measures. While DoS or DDoS can be launched in Transport Layer also. 

1)  Eavesdropping:  During  transmitting  the  data  from  the  sensor  node  to  the  gateway  or 
server, the data is susceptible to hijack. An adversary can listen to the data and alter it 
from  wireless  channel  [26].  An  attacker  detects  information  of  the  user  and  perceives 
the  message-ID,  timestamps;  source  and  destination  address  which  leads  to  a  serious 
threat  to  privacy.  Many  solutions  exist  though,  the  latest  framework  for  Eavesdrop 
resistance  using  Visible  Light  Communication  (VLC)  is  a  promising  solution  for  IoT 
devices security [27]. 

2)  Resource  consuming  attacks:  Various  attacks  such  as  unfairness,  collision  and 
exhaustion  attacks  are  included  in  this  category.  In  an  unfairness  attack,  the  attacker 
tries  to  use  whole  services  and  resources  of  the  application  without  considering  the 

 
 
 
prerequisite  it  has  [9].  Sometimes,  this  affects  the  network  performance  at  the  MAC 
layer.  In  a  Collision  attack,  an  attacker  sends  packets  at  the  same  frequency 
concurrently,  which  leads  to  collision  and  degradation  of  network  performance.  It 
manipulates  frame  header  such  that  the  checksum  mismatch  occurs,  which  leads  to 
discarding  of  the  data  frames  at  the  destination  end.  Exhaustion  attack  occurs  when  a 
channel is continuously active for long time to drain the battery power [9]. This kind of 
attacks  lead  to  the  failure  in  providing  service  and  functionalities  to  end-users.  These 
attacks  can  be  mitigated  using  similar  solutions  of  Battery  Exhaustion  and  Flooding 
attacks in Transport Layer.  

3)  Grey-hole  attack:  In  a  multi-hop  environment,  the  data  transmission  occurs  from  one 
node to another node in multiple steps [28]. In this process, the node forwards packets 
in the next hop to the destination (gateway). Before forwarding the packets, the attacker 
may  misguide  the  route  or  inject  malicious  code  to  broadcast  it  further  and  initiate  a 
routing  loop.  Such  an  activity  is  a  Grey-hole  attack  in  which  the  packets  may  loop 
infinitely  deteriorating  the  performance  of  the  network.  The  security  mechanisms  for 
such attacks [29] [30] [31] are explained in below subsections. 

4)  Sinkhole  attack:  In  this  type,  a  malicious  node  enchants  with  the  neighbour  nodes  to 
create routes via malicious code. Once the attacker compromises the system, this attack 
creates  an  open  door  for  other  attacks  [28].  It  is  very  difficult  to  detect  the  sinkhole, 
selective  forwarding  and  eavesdropping  attacks  in  a  network.  Similar  to  this,  in  Sybil 
attack,  a  falsify  node  is  present  in  the network  with  multiple  fake  identities  deceiving 
the neighbouring nodes. Pretence, Masquerade and Replay attack mean the same. This 
attack  also  takes  place  in  healthcare  IoT  devices,  an  illegitimate  node  behaves  as  a 
genuine  node  in  the  network,  and  it  sends  fake  information  to  the  remote  area 
requesting  treatment  and  an  emergency  team  will  respond  to  the  non-existent  patient 
[32]. This keeps the emergency staff busy, delaying and unattended to the real patients. 
A Denial-of-Service attack can be easily achievable by masquerade node. The captured 
data  of  masquerade  node  cause  replay  threat  to  the  real-time  IoT  device  application. 
Raza  et  al.  [31]  proposed  an  intrusion  detection  system  for  6LoWPAN  protocol 
targeting network routing attacks, sinkhole and selective-forwarding. The proposed IDS 
was developed using Contiki OS for IoT devices. It was successful to expose attacks in 
some situations but was unsuitable to smart home IoT devices.  

5)  Wormhole  attack:  wormhole  attack  is  of  similar  kind  in  which  an  adversary  receives 
packets from one location and then forwards and releases it to other location through a 
tunnel (wormhole). It is nearly impossible to detect or stop  these types of attacks in a 
network using built-in security measures. Pongle et.al proposed an Intrusion Detection 
System  to  detect  wormhole  attacks  in  an  IoT  environment  [30].  Nevertheless,  the 
method is incapable of uncovering undefined cyber-attacks. 

6)  Denial-of-Service attacks: Data and network availability is a major security goal for IoT 
device  applications.  Mostly,  in  healthcare  systems,  threats  of  Denial-of-service  are 
devastating because the devices and network need to be active and running all the time 
to monitor patients and to perform critical tasks [33]. Denial-of-Service and Distributed 
Denial-of-Service can affect the data, network performance and reliability of the whole 
network. There are two types of DoS attacks:  

a)  Reprogramming  Attack:  It  refers  to  changing  or  modifying  the  source  code.    The 
application  becomes  inaccessible  and  sometimes  it  enters  an  infinite  loop  making  the 
service/  resource  unavailable  to  the  requester.  Robust  authentication,  strong  access 
control  mechanism  and  continuous  monitoring  is  a  recommendable  solution  for  such 
attacks [34].  

b)  Path-based  DoS:    Numerous  replay  packets  or  spuriously  injected  packets 
overwhelms the sensor node by long-distance end-to-end communication path [35]. 

Researchers  suggest  a  defensive  approach  based  on  the  maximum  magnitude  of  each  middle-
ware  layer  to  handle  such  type  of  DoS/  DDoS  attacks.  The  system  checks  for  the  number  of 
requests sent to be under the predicted threshold capacity and if it exceeds, it triggers an alert to 
the network administrator [36] and blocks the request. Moreover, recent IDS approaches using 
Machine Learning (ML) and SDN proved efficient in blocking many DoS attacks [37] [38]. 

Table 3.  Network layer attacks. 

Attack 
Eavesdrop 

Technique & Implications 
The attack hijacks data during 
transmission [26] such that an 
adversary can listen or alter the 
data. 

Defence Mechanism(cid:10) 
Innovative visible light 
communication (VLC) method 
based on channel correlation and 
error estimation [27]. 

Resource 
Consuming 
Attacks 

Unfairness, Collision and 
Exhaustion attacks [9]. Failure 
in providing services. 

Symmetric encryption and layered 
security mechanism using TLS 
[39]. 

Modification-type 
attacks (Routing 
attacks) 

Grey hole, Sinkhole, Black hole 
and Wormhole attacks. [28].  

IDS for sinkhole and selective-
forwarding attacks [31]. 

Built-in security measures like 
authentication and access 
control cannot mitigate or detect 
such attacks. 

Sybil attack 

A node with false identity, DoS 
or replay threat [32]. 

Denial-of-Service 
Attack 

DoS, DDoS, Denial of Sleep, 
SYN Flood, DNS Flood, Ping 
Flood, UDP Flood, and ICMP 
Broadcast [41]. 

IDS to detect wormhole attacks in 
an IoT environment [30]. 

Specification-based approach for 
the RPL protocol monitors network 
intrusions and malicious behaviour 
[29]. 
Host-based IDS using SDN blocks 
the victim device. SAAS model 
[40]. 

SDN architecture to identify DDoS, 
worm propagation and port scan 
[37]. IDS coupled provide better 
security. 
Evasion attacks against ML IDS 
can be mitigated using Gradient-
based approach [38]. 

It  is  difficult  to  mitigate  the  attacks  discussed  by  traditional  security  measures  and  needs  up-
gradation. We infer that the usual countermeasures involving basic mechanisms are ineffective. 
In most of the cases strong authentication, access control and monitoring systems are effective 
in identifying, mitigating and halting cyber-attacks. In addition, IDS is capable to detect most of 
the types of attacks in Perception, Transport and Network layer. The below section is elaborates 
and summarizes the potential security practices extracted from the above discussion. 

4. SECURITY MEASURES 

Numerous connected IoTs gives various decentralized ways for attackers or malware to enter. 
The  high-security  measures  create  a  bottleneck  for  adaptability  and  make  the  device  complex 
and in turn invite new security concerns [42]. IoT demands different customization for different 

 
 
purposes. The security incorporation should ensure the adaptability of the device and  must  be 
scalable  with  the  addition  of  more  devices  to  the  network.  The  enhancement  of  the  following 
security practices is required in IoT devices to ensure better protection and to ensure the security 
properties namely authentication, access control, confidentiality, integrity, non-repudiation.  

4.1. Robust authentication mechanism 

IoT  devices  has  the  feature  of  password  authentication  for  accessing  its  services.  Weak  or 
default passwords, botnets, Trojans stealing passwords, dictionary and brute-force attacks are a 
point  of  high  concern  against  authentication  [43].  Nowadays,  security  specialists  recommend 
integration of two methods for stronger authentication. 

1)  Biometric Authentication: Replacement of authentication process from password-based 
authentication  to  biometric  authentication  guarantees  higher  security,  as  it  is  robust 
against usual password cracking attacks. It involves bio-features of the authorized users 
such  as  face  recognition,  fingerprinting,  eye  recognition  etc.  Ruhul  Amin  et  al.  [44] 
proposed a biometric authentication protocol for IoT devices operating in a distributed 
cloud-computing domain to overcome vulnerabilities of cloud multi-server. Of course, 
biometric  authentication  have  some  issues  such  as  cost  and  complexity  of  the 
algorithms used but many solutions exists in the literature for such loopholes. 

2)  Multi-factor Authentication (MFA): It involves multi-step authentication process: 2-step 
or  3-step,  which  includes  a  combination  of  knowledge-based  (passwords),  ownership-
based  (card),  bio-based  (fingerprint)  features.  One-time  authentication  requires  two  or 
three  features  (credentials)  of  the  user,  such  as  PIN  and  OTP  for  confirming  a  bank 
integrated  with  MFA  guarantees  robust 
transaction.  Biometric  authentication 
authenticity  [45]  in  the  current  security  implementations.  As  authentication  is  the 
primary  requirement 
in  smart  devices,  robust  authentication  mechanisms  are 
recommendable for better protection. 

4.2. A robust access control mechanism 

Access  control  and  data  protection  on  low  power  IoT  devices  have  become  the  need  for 
protection against expanding cyberattacks. According to the research, Biometric access control 
is most favourable in IoTs. It takes the biological attribute of the individual for verification and 
identification. In this process, it compares the activities of the individual with the stored patterns 
in  the  system.    This  mechanism  is  vital  to  avoid  host/  Internal-based  attacks.  To  prevent 
unethical  approaches  for  medical  devices,  a  biometric-based  two-level  secure  access  control 
model is developed [46]. In this, the model converts the iris image to iris code. The verification 
of iris code is done by using hamming distance. It stores the master key in the system, employs 
less  computation,  and  has  a  very  small  overhead.  However,  it  involves  a  higher  cost  for 
biometric  processing.  To  overcome  this  problem,  many  researchers  have  proposed  advanced 
methods that minimize the cost of deploying. One such is framework has been developed using 
physical  unclonable  functions  (PUFs)  and  hardware  obfuscation  by  Nima  et.  al  [47].  This 
method  protects  against  access  control  circumvention  and  does  not  require  key  storage.  This 
suggests  that  biometric  or  any  other  robust  access  control  mechanism  with  less  complexity 
guarantee security of IoT devices. 

4.3. Software-defined networking (SDN) 

Software-defined  networking  is  the  trending  network  security  management  in  various 
application  areas  like  business,  smart  homes  and  e-health  systems.  Any  computer  network 
consists of switches and routers as the main components. The important functions of switches/ 
routers  are  control  plane  and  data  plane.  Control  plane  is  responsible  for  where  to  send  the 
traffic,  whereas  data  plane  forwards  the  traffic  to  a  specific  destination.  In  conventional 
networking, data plane and control plane are coupled. In SDN architecture, the control plane is 
separated from the data plane. A software-based entity, called controller, remotely controls the 

tasks  of  control  plane  [49].  The  data  plane  executes  in  the  hardware  and  control  plane  in  the 
software and resides in a logically centralized way. SDN is capable to monitor network traffic 
and detect malicious activities. It identifies and isolates the compromised nodes from the rest of 
the network. Giotis et. al [37] used flow statistics in SDN architectures to spot abnormalities by 
using various ways such as launching a DDoS, worm propagation and port scan. It was efficient 
to  detect  attacks  and  does  not  cause  overhead  to  the  controller,  but  was  not  able  to  diagnose 
other  attacks.  However,  SDN  accompanied  by  an  Intrusion  Detection  System  is  potential  to 
identify or diagnose newer attacks [50] as per the latest research. 

4.4. Intrusion detection system 

Intrusion detection systems (IDS) is a program or algorithm, which tries to recognize malicious 
activities in a network. It also attempts to detect when a computer is under attack or an intruder 
is  trying  to  compromise  it.  Besides,  it  identifies  if  a  legitimate  user  is  trying  to  escalate 
privileges  or  attempting  to  access  unauthorized  data  or  services.  IDS  has  become  an  essential 
element for protecting the ICT infrastructure [50]. Nowadays, every network has IDS or IPS to 
detect and mitigate cyberattacks. According to the deployment model and data analysis, IDS is 
categorized  as  Network-based,  Host-based  or  Application-based.  In  some  contexts,  system-
based  and  application-based  are  considered  as  the  two  cases  of  Host-based  IDS.  Moreover, 
based on the technique / method used, IDS is categorized as Signature-based, Anomaly-based 
and Specification-based [51] [52]. An IDS system must distinguish attacks accurately, quickly 
and efficiently with less false alarms.  Any IDS which  identifies attacks accurately but takes a 
long  time  for  detection  is  not  suitable  for  current  IoT  networks  [8].  Hence,  it  has  become 
imperative  to  investigate  a  method  that  is  capable  to  detect  emerging  attacks  with  less  false 
alarms, which can handle a huge amount of data and take decisions quickly for real-time attack 
detection.  The  Signature-based  system  detects  attacks  based  on  signatures  and  known  attack 
patterns  but  it  is  difficult  to  unmask  known  attack  deviations  or  unknown  attacks  [53].  In 
literature, most of the implementations of IDS are rule-based which are inefficient in detecting 
novel attacks [32]. However, if the attack signatures database is up to date by adding new attack 
signatures  every  time,  then  this  method  is  effective.  Similarly,  specification-based  involves 
defining  of  rules  by  the  administrator.  In  both  these  cases,  the  problem  is  the  burden  on  the 
administrator  to  adapt  to  the  changing  number  of  devices  and  attacks.    Anomaly  Detection 
System detects deviations from a predefined normal behaviour but creates many false alarms for 
legitimate behaviours also when the user profile is complex and unknown.  It is challenging to 
keep  the  IDS  database  up-to-date  because  of  the  heterogeneous  network  and  changing 
environments such as network topology, servers, and several connected devices, communication 
protocols and open ports. To overcome this problem, the researchers are focusing on adaptable 
methods like Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Deep Learning techniques [54].  

4.4.1 Machine Learning IDS 

This  subsection  provides  details  about  the  recent  machine  learning  based  Intrusion  Detection 
Systems  in  IoTs.  Mehdi  et  al.  [40]  proposed  a  host-based  intrusion  detection  and  mitigation 
system using OpenFlow protocol for security of smart home network. The scheme monitors the 
devices in home network to investigate the malicious activities and blocks the intruder to use the 
victim device once an intrusion is detection. The users in a smart home lack expertise in using 
security  mechanisms,  so  Software  Defined  Networking  (SDN)  is  employed  in  this  model, 
providing  Security  as  a  Service  (SaaS),  such  that  a  third  party  security  specialist  can  monitor 
and take necessary actions when required. To avoid overburdening of nodes and communication 
network, host-based approach using filters is recommendable to monitor only suspicious nodes 
or malicious activities. In addition, the framework has the scalability to support heterogeneous 
new devices and technologies. The module consists of a database, which includes all the devices 
present in the smart home, their associated risks, and types of attacks and associated mitigation 
procedures for those. This model is based on Machine  learning techniques which uses learned 
signature patters of known attacks. For this process, a sensor element gathers data traffic from 

suspicious nodes and send it to SDN controller. The captured  traffic is transformed  to service 
provider  for  feature  extraction  and  to  create  predictive  models  of  attacks.  IoT  Intrusion 
Detection  and  Mitigation  (IDM)  model  uses  linear  regression  and  Software  Vector  Machine 
(SVM) to create a classification model, based on which  attack is identified. Once an attack is 
detected, an alarm is raised, the victim node and attacker are identified and/or mitigation is done 
if measures are available in the database. This model was tested on a real IoT device, a smart 
lighting  system  and  was  proved  efficient  to  detect  the  attack.  The  major  disadvantage  of  this 
approach is that, each time a new device is added to the network, it has to be manually updated 
in  the  database.  Only  specific  devices  can  be  monitored  and  this  approach  is  not  feasible  to 
investigate all devices in a home network. Moreover, in current zero-day attacks scenario, this 
approach  is  unsuitable  as  unknown  attacks  are  not  detected  which  may  have  devastating 
implications on the end-users. 

Similarly, Kleber et al. [55] proposed a mechanism to overcome the huge number of IDS alerts, 
which are triggered in a conventional IDS system. This model is based on the fusion of various 
events, security logs and alerts and is not concerned with network traffic. The proposed scheme 
gathers raw data and change it in a standard normalized format. Then these normalized events 
are  clustered  into  meta-sevents,  to  represent  possible  attack  scheme  more  clearly  when 
compared to the disconnected alerts. With this situational awareness, in the final state, the meta-
events are classified using machine learning to categorize it as an attack or false alarm.  SVM, 
Decision Tree and Bayesian Network have validated the classification scheme. This was tested 
using  DARPA  Intrusion  Evaluation  challenge  [56]  and  SotM  from  the  honeynet  and  the 
accuracy was in between 40 - 60% in attack detection with lesser false positive rates and was 
able to detect some of the newer attacks as well. However, this model was not been tested for 
current  zero-day  attacks  and  may  not  be  feasible  to  detect  multi-stage  attacks.  Various 
improvements are necessary in terms of security and complexity of the classification taxonomy 
of the approach. 

Heena  et  al.  [57]  developed  another  machine  learning  approach  for  wireless  sensor  network 
security  based  on  human  immune  system.  This  method  intelligently  detect  anomalies  by 
classifying  the  nodes  into  two  categories:  fraudulent  or  benevolent  nodes.  After  which,  the 
mechanism  create  virtual  antibodies  and  depending  on  that,  the  gateway  takes  a  decision 
whether  or  not  to  attack  the  fraudulent  nodes.  The  model  works  similar  to  human  immune 
system  as  a  second  line  defense  in  the  body.  However,  the  actual  implementation  of  the 
proposed  mechanism  was  not  provided.  Likewise,  Sara  et  al.  [58]  proposed  an  IDS  Machine 
Learning  based  on  feature  selection  and  clustering  algorithm  incorporating  filter  and  wrapper 
methods using linear correlation coefficient (FGLCC) algorithm, cuttlefish algorithm (CFA) and 
Decision Trees for classification. The authors verified the proposed method using KDD Cup 99 
large data sets, which gave 95% detection rate. 

4.4.2 Deep Learning IDS 

Feature extraction and data classification has emerged as efficient techniques for IDS. However, 
most  of  the  proposed  approaches  are  inefficient  when  dataset  is  of  large  size.  Kabir  et  al. 
proposed an Intrusion Detection System using Least Square Support Vector Machine (LS-SVM) 
in  which  the  attack  detection  is  done  in  2  steps.  In  the  first  step,  the  entire  dataset  splits  into 
subgroups such that they represent the whole dataset. In the second step, LS-SVM is applied to 
the  proposed  algorithm  to  determine  intrusions.  Various  experiments  using  KDD  99  database 
proved it an efficient algorithm for intrusion detection [59]. The advantage of this method is that 
it supports static and incremental data also.  

Papamartzivanos et al. [50] proposed an intelligent adaptive misuse Intrusion Detection System 
using Deep Learning. This method can adapt and sustain to various network environments with 
higher rates of attack detection. They used autonomic computing Self-Taught Learning method 
supported by MAPE-K model to assist IDS in new environments. This model is integrated with 

MAPE-K  method  to  create  a  framework  for  the  autonomous  and  adaptive  system.  The  model 
has been evaluated with various environmental changes and was capable to adapt with detection 
rate  of  approximately  73.3  %  by  not  only  detecting  the  attack  but  also  categorizing  it  so  that 
solution  can be  found  easily.  The  benefits  of  deep  learning  methodologies  is  training  the  IDS 
based on the network activity in new environment.  

From the above discussion, we deduce few quantitative metrics in Table 4, for an IDS system to 
determine its effectiveness. 

Metrics  

Coverage 

Table 4. IDS Quantitative Metrics 

Description 

The  number  and  types  of  attacks  that  IDS  can  detect  in  a  realistic 
environment. 

Handling  Traffic 
Bandwidth 

The  Ability  of  the  IDS  to  handle  High  bandwidth  traffic,  block  or  resist 
traffic greater than the bandwidth of the channel. 

Resisting 
against IDS 

attacks 

Few attackers target IDS so that when the IDS is compromised, it becomes 
easier to attack the network and devices. Therefore, IDS must be capable 
to withstand attacks targeted against it. 

Probability 
Detection 

of 

It defines how accurately the system detects an intrusion. The approaches 
discussed  have  shown  the  accuracy  up  to  70  -  90%.  Nevertheless,  real-
time  networking  demands  higher  accuracy  in  the  detection  of  various 
attacks. 

Probability 
False Alarms [8] 

of 

Sometimes  a  non-attack  activity  is  categorized  as  attack,  and  vice  versa. 
These  types  of  decisions  of  IDS  may  cause  fatal  implications.  Latest 
Machine Learning and Deep Learning algorithms use Confusion matrix to 
correctly classify an event. 

Ability  to  Detect 
Unknown  Attacks 
[8] 

Ability  to  Identify 
an Attack 

The concern for Zero-day attacks are growing day by day. A system that is 
not able to detect unfamiliar attacks is inefficient. 

How correctly a system is identifies an attack is important to take further 
actions by the network administrators. If the attack is categorized wrongly, 
for example, Wormhole attack is categorized as Grey hole; it may mislead 
the administrator by the risk level of the attack. 

Ability 
to 
Determine  Attack 
Success 

The system must also be able to determine the status of the attack, such as, 
its success or failure, to what extent it is successful, and to what extent it 
damaged the resources. 

Others 

Other  measurements  include  ease  of  use,  deployment  and  maintenance. 
The  IDS  must  meet  resource  requirements,  performance  and  quality  of 
service. 

4.5. Light-weight encryption 

To  secure  the  data  at  rest  &  data  in  transfer  and  to  maintain  confidentiality  &  integrity, 
encryption is necessary, which encapsulates the data in an unreadable format and it is decrypted 
at the receiver. Most common types of encryption algorithms are symmetric and as symmetric. 
Each of these approaches is capable to protect data against some attacks that another approach 
find it difficult. However, as-symmetric algorithms involve more processing which is unsuitable 
for  IoT  devices  [60].  Currently,  Physically  Unclonable  Function  (PUF)  is  utilized  for  adding 

 
extra security hardware layer to protect against perception or physical layer attacks [61] and for 
end-points  security.  This  method  consumes  lesser  resources  compared  to  other  encryption 
algorithms.  Whereas  for  communication  security  symmetric-key  encryption  is  suitable,  one 
such  lightweight  symmetric  key  encryption  scheme  has  been  developed  [62],  which  provided 
very effective in securely transferring data in IoT networks. 

The  collaboration  of  the  above-mentioned  security  properties  is  capable  to  defend  against  a 
maximum  number  of  cyberattacks.  In  the  below  section,  we  provide  an  appropriate  way  of 
incorporating these security mechanisms in IoT architecture to acquire utmost protection. 

5. SECURE IOT FRAMEWORK 

From the above discussion, we have deduced that few of the security mechanism are significant 
to provide robust security for IoT devices. The summary of the findings from the study is shown 
in  Figure  3,  which  is  a  proposal  of  secure  architecture  for  IoT  devices  to  protect  it  from 
malicious threats.  

Figure 3. Secure IoT framework 

While  manufacturing  the  IoT  devices,  a  standardized  security  layer  needs  to  be  included  to 
provide basic security. The figure is explained from bottom Phases of operation to the topmost 

 
recommended  security  solution.  The  phases  of  operation  and  Layers  of  IoTs  are  already 
discussed  in  section  2.  CoAP,  MQTT  and  HTTP  are  frequently  used  protocols  in  Application 
Layer. Transport Layer consists of TCP and UDP protocols; similarly, the protocols of the other 
two  layers  are  mentioned.  Each  layer  has  low-level  in-built  security,  such  as,  to  access 
application layer utilities the user has to authenticate his identity. At the network layer Internet 
Protocol Security (IPsec) is incorporated for secure communication. Similarly, at the transport 
layer,  DTLS  &  Secure  Software  Layer  (SSL)  provides  security  and  the  perception  layer 
customizes its activities based on the authorization process.  The fundamental security controls 
in IoT architecture lag behind to defend it against current attacks.  

According to this research, we have provided the necessary security mechanism at each layer to 
ensure  optimal  protection against  cyberattacks.  The  security  mechanisms  discussed  are  placed 
appropriately to suit the layer requirements in the IoT architecture.  

1)  Robust  authentication  and  access  control:  The  application  layer  is  protected  against 
various attacks using robust authentication and access control mechanisms provided. 

2)  Symmetric  Encryption  &  Light-weight  cryptography:  Transport  and  Network  layer 
needs  lightweight  encryption  combining  the  features  of  both  symmetric  and  as-
symmetric encryption to secure the ends and the data in transmission. 

3)  Secure authorization, authentication and access control: Every action at different layer 

needs to be checked for its authorization with proper access control. 

4)  Intelligent IDS: For the transport and network layer, regular monitoring can reduce the 
number  of  malicious  intrusions.  The  attacks  at  the  perception  layer  also  can  be 
mitigated by IDS monitoring and key agreement protocols.  

5)  Software  Defined  Networking:  These  days  SDN  architecture  provides  better  security 
compared to other networking practices. Due to programming capability of SDN, secure 
and easily controllable network can be designed.  

5.1. Evaluation of Proposed Framework 

Putchala  et  al.  [63]  proposed  a  distributed  multi-layered  IDS  architecture  for  IoT  devices  to 
ensure  identifying  malicious  intrusions  at  each  layer  efficiently  and  accurately.  The  author 
suggested  placement  of  Deep  Learning  based  IDS  at  each  layer  for  maximum  coverage  and 
better  complexity.  The  implementation  is  tested  and  proved  efficient.  This  suggest  that  IDS 
placed  at  all  layers  of  IoT  architecture  guarantees  better  attack  detection  compared  to  one 
specific  layer  based  IDS.  Therefore,  recommended  security  solution,  IDS  at  all  layers  proved 
efficient. Lightweight encryption and authentication protocol proposed by researchers show that 
the  protocol  is  protected  against  possible  security  threats  [44].  In  similar  way,  a  robust 
cryptographic  technique  can  be  incorporated  and  tested  along  with  the  IDS  system.  The  other 
mechanisms  can  be  tested  solely  or  in  combination  of  all  mechanisms  to  validate  its 
effectiveness. In future, we aim to test all the mechanisms suggested and prove its effectiveness 
in terms of complexity, resource constraint requirements and various features.  

The following are the metrics based on which the proposed framework has to be evaluated.  

1)  Processing  response  time:  Performance  of  IoT  device  in  a  real  environment  after 

implementing all the recommended security mechanisms. 

2)  Resource  consumption:  The  level  of  resources  consumed,  such  as  battery  power, 

processing power and memory used. 

3)  Attacks  mitigation:  The  number  of  attacks  that  are  mitigated  after  implementing  the 

framework, the accuracy of attack detection.  

4)  Scalability:  The  amount  of  data  that  is  easily  being  processing  without  overwhelming 

device. 

Other  metrics  are  also  included  in  future  during  the  implementation  of  the  framework  and 
compare  its  effectiveness  with  the  recently proposed  secure  IoT  architectures.  The  framework 
needs to be tested by launching real-time attacks against the IoT device to ensure its deployment 
in current IoT devices.  

6. CONCLUSION 

With  the  advancement  of  heterogeneous  smart  IoT  devices,  the  concern  for  security  is 
increased.  In  this  paper,  we  have  provided  various  types  of  attacks  against  IoTs  and  their 
protective  measures.  Certainly,  many  other  attacks  are  launched  against  IoT  layers,  but  the 
attacks discussed here are recurrent and devastating. We have learnt that securing the endpoints, 
network monitoring and the protecting data in the transfer is mandatory, to detect and prevent 
malicious  activities  in  IoTs.  Thus,  we  have  proposed  a  framework  incorporating  Robust 
Authentication,  Robust  Access  Control,  Lightweight  cryptography  and  Intrusion  detection 
system, to secure data in transfer, sensitive stored data, settings & privileges. SDN is a trendy 
networking  paradigm  to  securely  control  the  whole  network  using  programming.  Machine 
Learning and Artificial Intelligence (AI) is an emerging field for IDS, which allows a system to 
learn, deduce and decide based on cognitive functions of pattern recognition and computational 
learning  theory  without  any  programming.  In  addition,  the  metrics  used  by  IDS  to  identify 
different  attacks  against  IoT  layers  are  provided.  The  proposed  framework  is  a  valuable 
contribution  to  the  IoT  architecture  due  to  its  holistic  approach  of  combination  of  various 
potential  security  mechanism.  In  future,  this  research  aims  to  implement  the  framework  and 
validate its effectiveness in terms of security, performance and usability.  

REFERENCES 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

Kolias,  Constantinos,  Angelos  Stavrou,  and  Jeffrey  Voas.  "Securely  Making"  Things"  Right." 
Computer 48, no. 9 (2015): 84-88. 

Hilton,  Scott,  Dyn  analysis  summary  of  Friday,  October  21  attack  (2016),  https://dyn. 
Com/blog/Dyn-analysis-summary-of-friday-october-21-attack(cid:10) 

Omanović-Mikličanin,  E.,  Maksimović,  M.,  &  Vujović,  V.  (2015).  The  future  of  healthcare: 
nanomedicine  and  internet  of  nano  things.  Folia  Medica  Facultatis  Medicinae  Universitatis 
Saraeviensis, 50. 

Forecast economic impact of the Internet of Things (IoT) in 2025 (in billion U.S. dollars). 

Borgia,  Eleonora.  "The  Internet  of  Things  vision:  Key  features,  applications  and  open  issues." 
Computer Communications 54 (2014): 1-31. 

Santos, Leonel, Carlos Rabadao, and Ramiro Gonçalves. "Intrusion detection systems in Internet 
of  Things:  A  literature  review."  2018  13th  Iberian  Conference  on  Information  Systems  and 
Technologies (CISTI). IEEE, 2018. 

McDermott, Christopher D., Farzan Majdani, and Andrei V. Petrovski. "Botnet detection in the 
internet  of  things  using  deep  learning  approaches."  2018  International  Joint  Conference  on 
Neural Networks (IJCNN). IEEE, 2018. 

Tabassum,  Aliya,  Aiman  Erbad,  and  Mohsen  Guizani.  "A  Survey  on  Recent  Approaches  in 
Intrusion  Detection  System  in  IoTs."  2019  15th  International  Wireless  Communications  & 
Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC). IEEE, 2019. 

Alaba FA, Othman M, Hashem IA, Alotaibi F. Internet of Things security: A survey. Journal of 
Network and Computer Applications. 2017 Jun 15; 88:10-28. 

Liu,  Wei,  et  al.  "Various  detection  techniques  and  platforms  for  monitoring  interference 
condition  in  a  wireless  testbed."  Measurement  methodology  and  tools.  Springer,  Berlin, 
Heidelberg, 2013. 43-60. 

[11] 

[12] 

[13] 

Ashraf, Qazi Mamoon, and Mohamed Hadi Habaebi. "Autonomic schemes for threat mitigation 
in Internet of Things." Journal of Network and Computer Applications 49 (2015): 112-127. 

Erpek,  Tugba,  Yalin  E.  Sagduyu,  and  Yi  Shi.  "Deep  learning  for  launching  and  mitigating 
wireless  jamming  attacks."  IEEE  Transactions  on  Cognitive  Communications  and  Networking 
5.1 (2018): 2-14. 

Aref,  Mohamed  A.,  Sudharman  K.  Jayaweera,  and  Stephen  Machuzak.  "Multi-agent 
reinforcement  learning-based  cognitive  anti-jamming."  2017  IEEE  Wireless  Communications 
and Networking Conference (WCNC). IEEE, 2017. 

[14]  Malik, Manisha, and Maitreyee Dutta. "Contiki-based mitigation of UDP flooding attacks in the 
Internet  of  things."  2017  International  Conference  on  Computing,  Communication  and 
Automation (ICCCA). IEEE, 2017. 

[15] 

Bhunia, Suman Sankar, and Mohan Gurusamy. "Dynamic attack detection and mitigation in IoT 
using  SDN."  2017  27th  International  Telecommunication  Networks  and  Applications 
Conference (ITNAC). IEEE, 2017. 

[16]  Wani, Azka, and S. Revathi. "Analyzing threats of iot networks using sdn based IDS (sdiot-ids)." 
International  Conference  on  Next  Generation  Computing  Technologies.  2017  Springer, 
Singapore, 2017. 

[17] 

[18] 

[19] 

[20] 

[21] 

[22] 

[23] 

Nash  DC,  Martin  TL,  Ha  DS,  Hsiao  MS.  Towards  an  Intrusion  detection  system  for  battery 
exhaustion  attacks  on  mobile  computing  devices.  InThird  IEEE  international  conference  on 
pervasive computing and communications workshops 2005 Mar 8 (pp. 141-145). IEEE. 

Arias  O,  Wurm  J,  Hoang  K,  Jin  Y.  Privacy  and  security  in  internet  of  things  and  wearable 
devices. IEEE Transactions on Multi-Scale Computing Systems. 2015 Apr 1; 1(2):99-109. 

Brachmann,  Martina,  et  al.  "End-to-end  transport  security  in  the  IP-based  internet  of  things." 
2012  21st  International  Conference  on  Computer  Communications  and  Networks  (ICCCN). 
IEEE, 2012. 

Khan  MA,  Salah  K.  IoT  security:  Review,  blockchain  solutions,  and  open  challenges.  Future 
Generation Computer Systems. 2018 May 1; 82:395-411. 

Anthi,  Eirini,  et  al.  "A  Supervised  Intrusion  Detection  System  for  Smart  Home  IoT  Devices." 
IEEE Internet of Things Journal (2019). 

Kara,  Mustafa,  and  M.  U.  R.  A.  T.  Furat.  "Client-Server  Based  Authentication  against  MITM 
Attack via  Fast Communication  for  IIoT Devices."  Balkan  Journal of  Electrical  and  Computer 
Engineering, 2018, 6.2 (2018): 88-93. 

Condry, Michael W., and Catherine Blackadar Nelson. "Using smart edge IoT devices for safer, 
rapid  response  with  industry  IoT  control  operations."  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  104.5  (2016): 
938-946. 

[24] 

Yang, Lei, et al. "Hide your hackable smart home from remote attacks: The multipath onion IoT 
Gateways." European Symposium on Research in Computer Security. Springer, Cham, 2018. 

[25]  Madakam S, Ramaswamy R, Tripathi S. Internet of Things (IoT): A literature review. Journal of 

Computer and Communications. 2015, May 25; 3(05):164. 

[26]  Mahmoud R, Yousuf T, Aloul F, Zualkernan I. Internet of things (IoT) security: current status, 
challenges  and  prospective  measures.  10  th  International  Conference  for  Internet  Technology 
and Secured Transactions (ICITST) 2015, Dec 14 (pp. 336-341). IEEE. 

[27] 

[28] 

[29] 

Liu, Xiangyu, et al. "SecLight: A New and Practical VLC Eavesdropping-Resilient Framework 
for IoT Devices." 2019, IEEE Access 7 (2019): 19109-19124. 

Airehrour  D,  Gutierrez  J,  Ray  SK.  Secure  routing  for  internet  of  things:  A  survey.  Journal  of 
Network and Computer Applications. 2016 May 1; 66:198-213. 

A. Le, J. Loo, K. K. Chai, and M. Aiash, “A specification-based ids fordetecting attacks on rpl-
based network topology,” Information, 2016, vol. 7, no. 2, p. 25, 2016. 

[30] 

[31] 

[32] 

[33] 

[34] 

[35] 

[36] 

[37] 

[38] 

[39] 

[40] 

Pongle  P,  Chavan  G.  Real  time  intrusion  and  wormhole  attack  detection  in  IoTs.  International 
Journal of Computer Applications. 2015 Jan 1; 121(9). 

Raza S, Wallgren L, Voigt T. SVELTE: Real-time intrusion detection in the Internet of Things. 
Ad hoc networks. 2013, Nov 1; 11(8):2661-74. 

Le  A,  Loo  J,  Lasebae  A,  Aiash  M,  Luo  Y.  6lowpan:  a  study  on  QoS  security  threats  and 
countermeasures  using 
intrusion  detection  system  approach.  International  Journal  of 
Communication Systems. 2012 Sep; 25(9):1189-212. 

Rathore H, Mohamed A, Al-Ali A, Du X, Guizani M. A review of security challenges, attacks 
and resolutions for wireless medical devices. 2017 13th International Wireless Communications 
and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC) 2017 Jun 26 (pp. 1495-1501). IEEE. 

Sonar,  Krushang,  and  Hardik  Upadhyay.  "A  survey:  DDoS  attack  on  Internet  of  Things." 
International Journal of Engineering Research and Development 10, no. 11 (2014): 58-63. 

Deng, Jing, Richard Han, and Shivakant Mishra. "Defending against path-based DoS attacks in 
wireless sensor networks." In Proceedings of the third ACM workshop on Security of ad hoc and 
sensor networks. pp. 89-96. ACM, 2005. 

A. Mishra, K. Nadkarni, and A. Patcha, “Intrusion detection in wireless ad  hoc  networks,”  IEEE 
wireless communications,2004 vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 48– 60, 2004. 

Giotis,  Kostas,  Christos  Argyropoulos,  Georgios  Androulidakis,  Dimitrios  Kalogeras,  and 
Vasilis  Maglaris.  "Combining  OpenFlow  and  sFlow  for  an  effective  and  scalable  anomaly 
detection  and  mitigation  mechanism  on  SDN  environments."  Computer  Networks  62  (2014): 
122-136. 

Biggio,  Battista,  Igino  Corona,  Davide  Maiorca,  Blaine  Nelson,  Nedim  Šrndić,  Pavel  Laskov, 
Giorgio Giacinto, and Fabio Roli. "Evasion attacks against machine learning at test time." 2013  
In  Joint  European  conference  on  machine  learning  and  knowledge  discovery  in  databases,  pp. 
387-402. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013. 

King, James, and Ali Ismail Awad. "A distributed security mechanism for resource-constrained 
IoT devices." Informatica 40.1 (2016). 

Nobakht,  Mehdi,  Vijay  Sivaraman,  and  Roksana  Boreli,  A  host-based  intrusion  detection  and 
mitigation  framework  for  smart  home  IoT  using  OpenFlow,  11th  International  conference  on 
availability, reliability and security (ARES). IEEE2016 

[41]  Montoya,  Maxime,  et  al.  "SWARD:  A  Secure  WAke-up  RaDio  Against  Denial-of-Service  on 
IoT Devices." Proceedings of the 11th ACM Conference on Security & Privacy in Wireless and 
Mobile Networks. ACM, 2018. 

[42] 

[43] 

[44] 

[45] 

[46] 

[47] 

Suo, Hui, Jiafu Wan, Caifeng Zou, and Jianqi Liu. "Security in the internet of things: a review." 
In  2012  international  conference  on  computer  science  and  electronics  engineering,  vol.  3,  pp. 
648-651. IEEE, 2012. 

Hossain,  M.  Shamim,  Ghulam  Muhammad,  Sk  Md  Mizanur  Rahman,  Wadood  Abdul, 
Abdulhameed Alelaiwi, and Atif Alamri. "Toward end-to-end biomet rics-based security for IoT 
infrastructure." IEEE Wireless Communications 23, no. 5 (2016): 44-51. 

Amin,  Ruhul,  et  al.  "A  light  weight  authentication  protocol  for  IoT-enabled  devices  in 
distributed  Cloud  Computing  environment."  Future  Generation  Computer  Systems  78  (2018): 
1005-1019. 

Ometov,  Aleksandr,  et  al.  "Challenges  of  Multi-Factor  Authentication  for  Securing  Advanced 
IoT Applications." IEEE Network 33.2 (2019): 82-88. 

Ali, Bako, and Ali Awad. "Cyber and physical security vulnerability assessment  for IoT-based 
smart homes." Sensors 18, no. 3 (2018): 817. 

Karimian, Nima, et al. "Secure and Reliable Biometric Access Control for Resource-Constrained 
Systems and IoT." arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.09710 (2018). 

[48] 

Catarinucci,  Luca  and  De  Donno,  Danilo  and  Mainetti,  Luca  and  Palano,  Luca  and  Patrono, 
Luigi and Stefanizzi, Maria Laura and Tarricone, Luciano, An IoT-aware architecture for smart 
healthcare systems, IEEE Internet of Things Journal, {515--526},2015. 

[49]   McKeown,  Nick,  Tom  Anderson,  Hari  Balakrishnan,  Guru  Parulkar,  Larry  Peterson,  Jennifer 
Rexford,  Scott  Shenker,  and  Jonathan  Turner.  "OpenFlow:  enabling  innovation  in  campus 
networks." ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 38, no. 2 (2008): 69-74. 

[50] 

Papamartzivanos, Dimitrios and Marmol, Felix Gomez and Kambourakis, Georgios, Introducing 
Deep Learning Self-Adaptive Misuse Network Intrusion Detection Systems, 2019. 

[51]  Mell,  Peter,  Understanding  intrusion  detection  systems,  IS  Management  Handbook,  409--418, 

2003, Auerbach Publications 

[52]  Morin,  Benjamin  and  Me, Ludovic  and Debar, Herve and  Ducasse, Mireille,  M2D2:  A  formal 
data  model  for  IDS  alert  correlation,  International Workshop on  Recent  Advances  in  Intrusion 
Detection, 115--137,2002 

[53] 

[54] 

[55] 

[56] 

Pacheco, Jesus, and Salim Hariri. "IoT security framework for smart cyber infrastructures." 2016 
IEEE 1st International Workshops on Foundations and Applications of Self Systems (FAS W). 
IEEE, 2016. 

Fadlullah,  Zubair  Md,  et  al.  "State-of-the-art  deep  learning:  Evolving  machine  intelligence 
toward tomorrow’s intelligent network traffic control systems." IEEE Communications Surveys 
& Tutorials 19.4 (2017): 2432-2455. 

Stroeh, Kleber, Edmundo Roberto Mauro Madeira, and Siome Klein Goldenstein, An approach 
to  the  correlation  of  security  events  based  on  machine  learning  techniques,  Journal  of  Internet 
Services and Applications 4.1, 2013 

The  1999  DARPA  off-line  intrusion  detection  evaluation,  Lippmann,  Richard  and  Haines, 
Joshua W and Fried, David J and Korba, Jonathan and Das, Kumar, Computer networks, 579--
595, 2000 

[57] 

Rathore, Heena, and Sushmita Jha, Bio-inspired machine learning based wireless sensor network 
security,2013 World Congress on Nature and Biologically Inspired Computing, IEEE, 2013 

[58]  Mohammadi,  Sara  and  Mirvaziri,  Hamid  and  Ghazizadeh-Ahsaee,  Mostafa  and  Karimipour, 
Hadis,  Cyber  intrusion  detection  by  combined  feature  selection  algorithm,    author,  Journal  of 
information security and applications,80-88, 2019  

[59] 

[60] 

[61] 

[62] 

[63] 

Kabir,  Enamul  and  Hu,  Jiankun  and  Wang,  Hua  and  Zhuo,  Guangping,  A  novel  statistical 
technique for intrusion detection systems, Future Generation Computer Systems, 303-318, 2018   

Stergiou,  Christos,  et  al.  "Secure  integration  of  IoT  and  cloud  computing."  Future  Generation 
Computer Systems 78 (2018): 964-975. 

Bolotnyy,  Leonid,  and  Gabriel  Robins.  "Physically  unclonable  function-based  security  and 
privacy in RFID systems." Fifth Annual IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing 
and Communications (PerCom'07). IEEE, 2007. 

Rajesh,  Sreeja,  et  al.  "A  secure  and  efficient  lightweight  symmetric  encryption  scheme  for 
transfer of text files between embedded IoT devices." Symmetry 11.2 (2019): 293. 

Putchala,  Manoj  Kumar.  "Deep  learning  approach  for  intrusion  detection  system  (ids)  in  the 
internet of things (iot) network using gated recurrent neural networks (gru)." (2017). 

 
 
