Visual Feedback for Players of Multi-Level Capture the Flag Games:
Field Usability Study

Radek Oˇslejˇsek*
Masaryk University
Faculty of Informatics

V´ıt Rus ˇn ´ak†
Masaryk University
Institute of Computer Science

Karol´ına Bursk ´a‡
Masaryk University
Faculty of Informatics

Valdemar ˇSv ´abensk´y§
Masaryk University
Faculty of Informatics

Jan Vykopal ¶
Masaryk University
Institute of Computer Science

0
2
0
2

g
u
A
7
2

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

4
v
1
8
7
0
1
.
2
1
9
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Figure 1: CLUSTERING (left) and TIMELINE (right) interactive visualizations provide feedback to players of serious multi-level
cybersecurity games. They offer holistic as well as person-centric perspectives on the score development of one or more players.

ABSTRACT

Capture the Flag games represent a popular method of cybersecurity
training. Providing meaningful insight into the training progress
is essential for increasing learning impact and supporting partici-
pants’ motivation, especially in advanced hands-on courses. In this
paper, we investigate how to provide valuable post-game feedback
to players of serious cybersecurity games through interactive visu-
alizations. In collaboration with domain experts, we formulated
user requirements that cover three cognitive perspectives: gameplay
overview, person-centric view, and comparative feedback. Based
on these requirements, we designed two interactive visualizations
that provide complementary views on game results. They combine a
known clustering and time-based visual approaches to show game
results in a way that is easy to decode for players. The purposeful-
ness of our visual feedback was evaluated in a usability ﬁeld study
with attendees of the Summer School in Cyber Security. The evalu-
ation conﬁrmed the adequacy of the two visualizations for instant
post-game feedback. Despite our initial expectations, there was no
strong preference for neither of the visualizations in solving different
tasks.

Keywords: cybersecurity training, capture the ﬂag games, visual
feedback, trainees

Index Terms: Human-centered computing—Visual analytics;
Human-centered computing—Empirical studies in interaction de-
sign; Human-centered computing—Visualization design and eval-

*e-mail: oslejsek@ﬁ.muni.cz
†e-mail: rusnak@ics.muni.cz
‡e-mail: burska@ﬁ.muni.cz
§e-mail: svabensky@ics.muni.cz
¶e-mail: vykopal@ics.muni.cz

uation methods; Applied computing—Interactive learning environ-
ments

1 INTRODUCTION

As cyber attacks have been on the rise in recent years, security
professionals and students have to be trained in adversary thinking,
which enables them to understand cyber attacks and set up effective
defenses. A popular way of cybersecurity training is through gam-
iﬁcation and serious games [1, 27]. A general shortage of method-
ologies and tools for timely feedback in the ﬁeld of serious games
is emphasized in [2, 3]. This deﬁciency is even more apparent for
cybersecurity serious games, which pose speciﬁc demands on envi-
ronment capabilities [34].

The subject of our research is to provide meaningful insight into
the training progress. In this paper, we investigate how to provide
valuable visual feedback to players of serious cybersecurity games
right after the exercise so that they can immediately learn from their
experience and compare their results with other players. Following
the terminology used in the cybersecurity training domain, players
of serious games are referred to as trainees in this paper.

Serious games are of many types. To reach the goal, we restrict
ourselves to Capture the Flag (CTF) games [5,37,42] that are played
in virtual environments, in which gameplay events can be monitored
and used for providing automated visual feedback to trainees.

This paper deals with a multi-level variant of CTF games. Each
game, regardless of its speciﬁc objectives or content, consists of
well-described tasks divided into consecutive levels. The access to
the next level is conditioned by fulﬁlling tasks from the previous
one. Moreover, players can take hints or skip the entire level. Points
are awarded or deducted for these actions so that the ﬁnal scores of
individual players are mutually comparable and can be used for their
evaluation.

The design and development of our feedback visualizations went
through four stages: (1) understanding of serious multi-level games,
their objectives in cybersecurity domain, and available data, (2)

©2019 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new
collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. Cite this article as follows: R. Oˇslejˇsek, V. Rusˇn´ak, K. Bursk´a, V. ˇSv´abensk´y and J. Vykopal, ”Visual Feedback for
Players of Multi-Level Capture the Flag Games: Field Usability Study,” 2019 IEEE Symposium on Visualization for Cyber Security (VizSec), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2019, pp. 1-11, doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/VizSec48167.2019.9161386.

 
 
 
 
 
 
deﬁning requirements on the visual feedback in accord to the ed-
ucational goals of the games, (3) prototyping, iterative design and
development, and (4) usability study performed at our university and
involving students of our cybersecurity training lessons.

Contributions. The main contributions of the paper are: (a) we
classiﬁed the visual feedback requirements into three categories that
cover trainees’ expectations of the training (personalized feedback,
comparative feedback, and overall results); (b) we applied existing
visualization techniques in the domain of hands-on cybersecurity
training in order to provide better insight into the trainees’ results
right after the training session; (c) we performed a formal evaluation
that conﬁrmed the meaningfulness of the deﬁned requirements and
usefulness of the post-game analysis visualizations for trainees.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
introduces the related work in the area of visual analysis of serious
games, particularly in the cybersecurity domain. Section 3 describes
available data and provides the example of a cybersecurity game. In
Section 4, we formulate requirements posed on visualizations and
corresponding tasks covering three different cognitive perspectives
on game results. We discuss our approach to fast visual feedback
in Section 5. Section 6 describes the usability study and brings
necessary details about the usability testing concerning deﬁned hy-
potheses. Results of the usability study are discussed in Section 7.
We draw our conclusions and look to the future in Section 8.

2 RELATED WORK

Many works published in the ﬁeld of user behavior visual analy-
sis focus on social media. Cao et al. [7], for instance, proposed a
visual analysis tool for anomalous user behavior in online commu-
nication systems and social media platforms. The proposed system
incorporates presentation of user’s communication activities and
interactions. Another analysis-driven approach to user behavior was
introduced by Kumar et al. [23]. They investigated users migration
behaviors among various social media platforms and represented
the ﬁndings via radar charts. Many other works also address the
topic of social media-related user behavior in varied scopes, such
as [6, 35, 43]. A comprehensive survey on visual approaches to the
analysis of anomalous users can be found in [33]. Our solution also
supports behavioral analysis but in a very simpliﬁed way enabling
players of CTF games to learn from their behavior by being aware
of their steps and steps of other players.

The positive effects of visual analytics integration into the learn-
ing process have already been identiﬁed. The outcomes serve for
understanding trainees’ actions or optimization of the learning en-
vironment [25, 36]. As the educational visualization dashboards
have gained considerable attention in the ﬁeld of learning analytics,
reviews concerning this matter emerged as well [4, 32]. The visu-
alizations can monitor trainee’s progress and help to compare the
performance with other peers [16]. They can also increase motiva-
tion and encourage trainees to compete or to collaborate [17]. In this
paper, we focus on automatically generated post-training feedback.
In [10], the authors investigated how students interpret feedback
delivered via learning analytics dashboards in distinct courses. Their
ﬁndings reveal that the majority (83%) of students were able to
identify gaps in their performance.

Various general tools for qualitative feedback or assessment in
education exist, and many studies include a platform, where the
dashboards are employed in multiple ﬁeld of education. They serve
for capturing the behavior of students or provide long term statis-
tics and observations for both students and teachers [12, 21, 24, 26].
An online tool asTTle, for instance, can assess students’ achieve-
ments and progress. It allows creating pen-and-paper tests, and
then continuously analyzing speciﬁed characteristics, which can be
stipulated by teachers. The students’ outcomes are then visualized
in interactive reports that provide rich feedback related to student
performance [19]. Questionmark Perception [29], another example

of a similar system, is used for education in the form of surveys,
tests, or exams and enables the creation of reports from these events.
Govaerts et al. [16, 17] proposed a general-purpose web-based envi-
ronment for the visualization of the students’ progress and results
based on the tracking and evaluation of Twitter hashtags. Their tools
help the students to assess themselves and to get automated feedback
on their achievements throughout an online course.

These works, however, often tend to take a ’one-size-ﬁts-all’
approach to the collection, processing, and reporting of data, over-
looking disciplinary knowledge practices. Furthermore, since they
focus on long-term courses, they are not suitable for our needs as
they require different perspectives on the analysis of the learning
process. While the useful applications of visual analytics in educa-
tion are well known, we lack its use in the cybersecurity training.
Therefore, as there are learning dashboards designed for teaching
speciﬁc disciplines like programming [15, 18], mathematics [20], or
speciﬁc cyber defense exercises [39], we aim at providing learning
feedback in a speciﬁc domain – CTF games.

A comprehensive list of numerous cybersecurity CTF games can
be found at the CTFtime portal [11]. However, most of the listed
platforms provide only limited information about collected data and
their presentation to the users.

CTFd [9] is a platform for creating and hosting CTF challenges.
It visualizes overall score graphs and breakdowns for individual
players. The latter includes percentages of all challenges solved,
distributions of solved challenges into categories, and the evolution
of player score over time. However, user evaluation of the platform
effectiveness is missing.

EDURange [41] allows gathering the command-line history of
a trainee, including command timestamps, their arguments, and
exit statuses. The platform can automatically generate an oriented
graph that visualizes the command history. The vertices of the graph
represent executed commands; the edges represent the sequence of
commands (that is, an edge from a command x to y means that y
was executed after x). Supervisors can use the graphs in real time
to check how the trainees progress and whether they need extra
guidance. A post-game use case would be to compare the graphs to
each other or a previously prepared pattern of a sample solution.

During a Crossed Swords exercise [22], network trafﬁc, logs,
and system activity metrics were collected and analyzed. The goal
was to provide real-time feedback and situational awareness for the
trainees. In a post-game survey, 11 out of 14 participants found
the feedback useful for their learning, and the remaining three were
neutral. The authors raise the question of ﬁnding a balanced amount
of information to provide to participants since 4 of them reported
being distracted by the feedback.

PicoCTF is an online competition that targets high school stu-
dents. The competition comprises a series of challenges in the form
of an interactive storytelling game [44]. An evaluation of the game
design is based on survey responses and user interaction logs [8].
The collected data is not used for assessing the players.

An international iCTF competition provides feedback in the form
of a scoreboard, which is also used during the game to inform
the competitors of the score development and status of their ser-
vices [13].

From the information available, most of the CTF platforms offer
only a simple scoreboard for comparing players’ ﬁnal score. Tech-
niques used in current security training programs do not facilitate any
further summative assessment or feedback for the players regarding
their actions in the game [28, 31].

3 DATASET CHARACTERISTICS AND GAME EXAMPLE

This section describes the data collected during multi-level CTF
events. The introduced game example explains available data in
detail and demonstrates the principles of cybersecurity CTF games.
Moreover, the presented game was selected for our usability study.

3.1 Selected Cybersecurity Game

We chose a cybersecurity game named The Biggest Stock Scam Of
All Time. The game was created by the students of Cyber Attack
Simulation course [38] and was further improved by cybersecurity
experts. In a background story that complements the game, the
trainee takes on a role of a former employee of a global stock trading
company. However, he was ﬁred because of refusing to falsify the
reports of the company’s earnings. When someone else did the job,
he wanted to prove the company’s corrupt intentions, but to gain
evidence, he needs to access the company’s records.

4. Although the server is well-secured, it allows to run tcpdump
as a root user, which allows executing scripts. Thus, the trainee
escalates the privileges on the ﬁle and reads the company’s
dark secrets.

Figure 3 shows the game’s user interface. Completing each level
yields a ﬂag worth a certain number of points that add up to the
trainee’s score. Each level also contains hints, which the trainee can
view in exchange for a scoring penalty. If the trainee is still stuck,
(s)he can display the full solution to the level but will not receive any
points for it. This scaffolding system allows each trainee to progress
individually.

3.2 Data Logging Explanation
We record the interaction with the game interface in the form of
game events. There are eight game events: starting the game, ending
the game, starting a level, ending a level by skipping it, ending a
level by submitting a correct ﬂag, submitting an incorrect ﬂag, taking
a hint, and displaying a solution to the level.

Each game event is logged as one line in a CSV ﬁle2. with the

following ﬁve-part structure:

• player id – a unique numerical ID randomly assigned to

each trainee before the game,

• timestamp – absolute time in the format YYYY-MM-DD

Figure 2: The trainee’s view of the game network topology.

HH:MM:SS,

• logical time – relative time from the start of the level in the

format HH:MM:SS,

• level – the order of the level,
• event – one of the eight game events described above.

An example of a record in the log is:

9003581,2018-08-24 16:57:54,00:03:42,4,Hint 3 taken

4 USER REQUIREMENTS
Content of CTF games differs. It is therefore impossible to predict
and conceptualize content-related questions that trainees would be
interested in as part of the post-game feedback. Instead, we focused
on capturing high-level user requirements that follow the uniﬁed
structure of multi-level CTF games and corresponding data. To elicit
the requirements, we organized discussions with four domain experts
who regularly organize CTF games and who understand educational
aspects of training. These experts are skilled in providing informal
feedback to players right after the training session and then they
have insight into interests of trainees during the post-training debate.
Two of the experts are co-authors of this paper. Based on discussion
with the experts, we deﬁned three high-level requirements for the
visual feedback that helped us to conceptualize views on game data
and to design speciﬁc visualizations:

R1: Provide personalized feedback. Players should be able to
ﬁnd out their results and identify their well-done and problematic
parts of the game. This requirement includes person-centric goals
and questions regardless of other players, e.g., “In which level did I
lose the most points and why?”.

R2: Provide comparative feedback. Players should be able to
identify parts of the game where they were better or worse than
other players. This requirement introduces a competitiveness factor
into the feedback, which enables players to compare themselves
with others and assess their abilities within a group, typically in a
competition.

R3: Provide a brief overview of the overall game results and
features. Players should be able to get a necessary insight into

2Supplementary materials

also

available

at

https://www.

radek-oslejsek.cz/it/supp-materials/

Figure 3: The trainee’s view of the game interface.

Figure 2 shows the game’s network topology. At the beginning
of the game, the trainee receives control of a single attacker virtual
machine in a realistic environment emulated by the KYPO cyber
range [40] The machine runs Kali Linux, a standard distribution
for penetration testing. The learning objective of the game is to
practically exercise cyber attacks. In four consecutive levels, the
trainee must gain access to the company’s web server, which is avail-
able only from an exposed workstation in the company’s internal
network.

1. In the ﬁrst level, the trainee learns about the existence of a
company’s workstation that is accessible from the internet. An
nmap scan reveals that TCP port 22 is open on the workstation,
running the SSH service. Having a list of common usernames
and passwords, the trainee performs a dictionary attack and
accesses the workstation.

2. From the workstation, the trainee can now access the server,
which hosts a WordPress website. Since old versions of plugins
in WordPress websites are known to contain vulnerabilities,
the trainee scans the server using wpscan and reveals a ﬁle
upload vulnerability.

3. The trainee proceeds to exploit the vulnerability using Metas-
ploit penetration testing framework to gain shell access on the
server. However, the trainee does not yet possess the necessary
privileges to read the ﬁle with the stock dealings.

the game difﬁculty and other aspects that enable them to put their
personal and comparative ﬁndings into the context of this particular
game. It is useful mainly in situations when a user plays multiple
games. In such a case, the user might want to know why he or she
was more successful in one game than in the other, for instance.
After group-based training sessions, users are often wondering who
was “the best player” in the group so that they can further explore
his or her tactics and behavior. However, “the best” is not easy to
deﬁne, as seen in tasks T11 and T12 that deal with various views on
“to be the best”.

Requirements R1–R3 delimit the design of interactive visualiza-
tions and provide an initial classiﬁcation for possible interactions.
Additional constraints ensue from the available game data. Alto-
gether, they have been considered during the design process (our
assumptions on datasets are described in detail in Section 3). How-
ever, there is still a variety of options for a suitable solution.

To specify user requirements more precisely, we reﬁned R1–R3
into particular interactive tasks that are summarized in Table 1. We
aimed to cover various aspects of the high-level requirements. To
reach this goal, we built on the analysis of the data available from
previous training sessions and the discussion with domain experts
who iteratively commented on proposed tasks and voted for them.
The resulting list of tasks was, therefore, reached as the consensus
of the four aforementioned domain experts. Real meaningfulness
of the tasks for players was then veriﬁed along with the evaluation
of the designed visualizations, as discussed in Section 6. We are
aware that there can be many other possible tasks associated with
the requirements. However, as the goal of this study was to design
and validate initial tool serving as an automatically generated visual
feedback, we consider the tasks representative.

In addition to supporting user requirements R1–R3, one more
critical feature had to be considered: The visual feedback has to be
intuitive and easy to use since the reﬂection phase following the train-
ing session is often very short (several minutes only), and providing
complex visual analytics systems would be counter-productive. The
balance between providing a complex set of information, relevant to
the trainee and the feedback simpliﬁcation pose a challenging task.

5 VISUAL DESIGN

We designed two complementary visualizations to provide visual
feedback to the trainees of multilevel games. They combine a known
clustering and time-based visual approaches to show the score and
its development over time in the way that is easy to decode. At
present, the visualizations are independent, and each serves for a bit
different purpose, presents the data from a different perspective, and
on a different level of detail. They were designed to cover together
requirements R1–R3.

5.1 CLUSTERING Visualization

The ﬁrst view on the recorded data is presented in the form of a bar
chart visualization combined with a scatter plot, as shown in Figure 1
(left). It exploits a clustering principle to demonstrate achieved score
results and bar chart principles to show time requirements. When
designing this visualization, we emphasized the simplicity so that
trainees can quickly focus on retrieved score and get a fast overview
of their results (R1 ), results of other trainees (R2 ), and the overall
distribution of results in the game (R3 ).

The visualization is split into two parts. The upper part with a
gray bar includes the overall results of the game, while underneath
there are results from individual levels.

The length of each bar expresses the maximum time for the given
level (i.e., the time of the slowest trainee). Bars and timeline on the
x-axis are scaled automatically according to the recorded timestamps
so that the chart ﬁlls the canvas regardless of the game duration. The
brighter shade denotes an average time of the level or the game,
respectively. Trainees whose results appear in the darker part were

faster than the average of all trainees and vice versa. The height of
the bars is ﬁxed, although the scoring span can differ in each level.
Instead, the scoring span is indicated by numbers next to the y-axis.
The ﬁxed height enables users to attract their attention to relevant
results in each level or the whole game.

Results of individual trainees are displayed as small dots. Their
vertical and horizontal position in the bars corresponds to their score
and time. To support the person-centered view, one of the dots
that represents the current trainee is always bulkier than the others.
When the mouse pointer hovers over the dot, the corresponding
dots of the trainee are highlighted too. This helps to keep track
on the individual scores and times of the inspected trainee across
multiple levels. Simultaneously, the exact time and achieved score
are displayed, as portrayed in Figure 4. The visualization implements
a snapping functionality for attracting the mouse pointer towards the
dots to make their selection more comfortable.

Clusters of points can be used to identify the correlation between
time and score visually. Horizontal clusters of points, for instance,
reveal users who obtained similar score while vertical clusters show
users who spent a similar time in the game levels.

Figure 4: CLUSTERING detail with a selected point on the game
overview bar and highlighted corresponding results in level bars.

5.2 TIMELINE Visualization

The second visualization, shown in Figure 1 (right), demonstrates the
progress of trainees throughout the game. It is more time-oriented
than the previous CLUSTERING visualization and also contains more
details from the gameplay, including details about hints and penalties
that can be shown on demand.

On the x-axis, there is a timeline, while the y-axis captures score
values. The horizontal dashed lines indicate a maximal number of
points reachable in the game. In Figure 1, there is at most 16 points
after the ﬁrst level, 38 points after the second level, 64 points after the
third level, and 100 points overall. In contrast to the CLUSTERING
visualization where the bars are based on recorded timestamps from
the game, the striped background of the graph outlines an estimated
time for each level of the game.

Polylines in the visualization, further referred to as scorelines,
represent fundamental graphical elements showing the development
of achieved score of individual trainees. Upon entering a new level,
the score increases with the maximum point value for the level and
then the scoreline signiﬁcantly “jumps up” at this moment. Upon
gaining a penalty for providing a wrong ﬂag, taking hints, or skipping
the level, the scoreline decreases proportionally. Marks of speciﬁc

Table 1: Interactive tasks covering requirements R1–R3.

Find out when you ﬁnished the game.
Find out in which level(s) you reached the lowest score.
Find out your ﬁnal score.
Find out how much time you spent in the 2nd level.
Find out when you advanced from 2ndto 3rd level.
Find out in which level you lost most points in the game.

T1:
T2:
T3:
T4:
T5:
T6:
T7: Characterize your score compared to other players.
T8: Characterize your time spent by playing compared to other players.
T9:
T10:
T11:
T12:

Find out the player who reached the closest score to your score.
Find out how much time was assigned for playing the game.
Is there somebody who reached a high score in signiﬁcantly short time? If so insert his Player ID.
Find out who reached the best score.

R1

R2

R3

events can enrich the scoreline. A pop-up tooltip with event details
raises when the mouse cursor hovers the mark, as shown in Figure 5.
Types of events to be shown are controlled by the selection ﬁlter
next to the main view.

Events in the scoreline can be dense. Therefore, we integrated a
zooming function into the chart. After zooming, the chart under the
main graph provides an overview of zoomed time span and enables
the user to adjust a cutout and shift the time span easily.

To support person-centric tasks, the scoreline of the current
trainee is emphasized. Score lines of individual trainees can be
turned on and off by clicking in the adherent table. They have as-
signed different colors to distinguish score lines of different trainees.
The color mapping is shown in the table (color stripes in rows 70
and 71 in Figure 5, for instance) so that the trainee keeps track of
the relationship between table rows and score lines.

Figure 5: TIMELINE detail: Zoomed score lines of two trainees with
pop-up tooltip of selected event.

The interactive table also helps in a detailed exploration of results.
It provides information about exact scores in individual levels as
well as the total score. Users can also quickly compare results by
sorting rows according to the selected column (level or ﬁnal score).

5.3 Implementation

Both visualizations are implemented as Angular modules using the
D3.js library for drawing. A demo version with test data is available
online at http://kypo-summer.surge.sh/. The visualizations
are adapted for independent testing and evaluation. Although they
contain a dummy dataset (which is different from the data used

for this usability study), it is also possible to upload new game
deﬁnitions (number of game levels, their names, etc.) and corre-
sponding logs capturing the gameplay data of trainees. The game
deﬁnition and event logs used in this usability study are available in
supplementary materials 2.

We are currently integrating the visualizations into our KYPO
Cyber Range [40] – a cyber exercise and research environment that
is used for the organization of hands-on cybersecurity training [38].
When the integration is done, the data will be available at runtime,
and the visualizations will become a part of the learning process.

6 USABILITY STUDY

In this section, we describe the details of the usability study we
held to evaluate the usability of the visual feedback. We decided
to conduct a within-subject user evaluation with the attendees of
Summer School in Cyber Security 2018 to mimic a real-world use
case of the visualizations. The user study was included as a part
of the program. Participants were ﬁnalists of high-school Cyber
Security Competition 2018.

6.1 Hypotheses

We have formulated three hypotheses for the evaluation. They ad-
dress the meaningfulness of our user requirements and related tasks,
the usefulness of the visualizations in solving the tasks, and the
identiﬁcation of strengths and weaknesses of our approach. They
are deﬁned as follows:

H1: Requirements R1–R3 are meaningful and useful for
trainees. User requirements and their corresponding tasks were
distilled from the discussion with domain experts – game designers
and organizers of CTF games. The goal of this hypothesis is to verify
that the requirements are also meaningful and useful for trainees and
that they sufﬁciently cover their interests. To verify this hypothesis,
the players rated the meaningfulness of individual tasks.

H2: The visual feedback is useful in providing insight into
the tasks of R1–R3. This hypothesis should verify our assumption
that the visual feedback provides straightforward and easy to decode
way for seeking relevant information. Veriﬁcation of this hypothesis
was based on the qualitative and quantitative evaluation, during
which the participants solved tasks and rated their difﬁculty.

H3: Some visualizations or their parts are more useful for
speciﬁc tasks of R1–R3 than others. The CLUSTERING and TIME-
LINE visualizations were designed as complementary, providing dif-
ferent views on the data with different level of detail. However, most
tasks T1–T12 can be solved by both of them, in an easier or more
difﬁcult way. The hypothesis H2 should uncover the usefulness of
the visual feedback as a whole, regardless of which visualization
was used to solve the task. On the contrary, this hypothesis aims to
verify whether some views or parts of the visual feedback ﬁt better
to some tasks or user requirements than others. Our goal is not only

to conﬁrm or reject the hypothesis but to identify such tasks and
visualizations. To reveal this type of information, we asked for the
usefulness of individual views for solving particular tasks.

6.2 Participants

Out of 16 attendees of the summer school, 12 senior high-school
students (1 female, 11 male) participated in the study. All of them
were between 16 and 19 years old, with normal or corrected-to-
normal vision. None of them was color blind. All of them were daily
users of smartphones and computers (laptops or desktops). Nine
of them considered themselves as experienced users familiar with
cybersecurity topics, one as a complete newcomer, one as a novice
user, and one as a security professional. Although none of them was
a native English speaker, they were proﬁcient enough to understand
the English questionnaire.

6.3 Environment

The evaluation was conducted on all-in-one computers with FullHD
displays (1920 × 1080 pixels) running Windows 10 and the latest
stable Google Chrome as an internet browser. The browser was max-
imized the whole time. The participants used the same computers as
in the previous activities of Summer School.

We used the LimeSurvey online questionnaire tool for present-
ing the informed consent form, instructions, task assignments and
complementary questions (task meaningfulness, difﬁculty, and visu-
alization preference for each of the two). The tasks were organized
one per screen and accompanied with supplementary questions.

6.4 Procedure

The participants engaged with the CTF game described in Section 3.
They utilized a web interface of the KYPO Cyber Range [40] to play
the game. The feedback visualizations were not available to players
during the game. The rough time assigned for the CTF game was 90
minutes. When the time ran out, the participants who did not ﬁnish
had to terminate the game using the “Skip level” function.

Then, there was a 20-minute refreshment break during which the
operators prepared the LimeSurvey questionnaire, and set up the
feedback visualizations. The latter step included loading real logs
from the CTF game. The questionnaire and the two visualizations
were opened in separate tabs within the Google Chrome browser.
Since CLUSTERING and TIMELINE visualizations were designed as
complementary, the participants could use both to accomplish the
tasks. Therefore, the participants had to switch between tabs when
they solved the tasks. The names of the visualizations were also
displayed in tab labels to avoid unintentional terminology mismatch
between them.

After the break, the operators explained the purpose of the exper-
iment and the user study procedure comprising of three parts. We
explicitly asked the participants not to collaborate among each other.
First, the participants were introduced with the two visualizations,
and they had up to 10 minutes to familiarize with both of them. Next,
the 12 tasks described in Table 1 were assigned to them. To mitigate
the ordering bias, we randomized the order of the questions for each
participant. Last but not least, the participants answered several
demographic questions. In total, we reserved 50 minutes for the user
study. One of the operators was present the whole time to provide
support with technical issues.

6.5 Results

This section presents the result of a quantitative and qualitative evalu-
ation of the data acquired from the usability study. The questionnaire
and collected answers are included in supplementary materials2.

The independent variables included in the study were tasks (12)
and visualizations (2). For these, we measured two dependent vari-
ables: task correctness and ordinal data from 6-point Likert scales
focused on usability of each visualization for a particular task (1 =

Absolutely useless, 6 = Absolutely useful), difﬁculty of the task and
its meaningfulness (both: 1 = Strongly disagree, 6 = Strongly agree),
as discussed in what follows. We obtained 192 trials (12 participants
× (12 tasks + task meaningfulness + task difﬁculty + visualization
preference)) from the usability study.

H1 – Meaningfulness of Requirements
To verify that the design requirements R1 –R3 were chosen rea-
sonably and the tasks T1–T12 reﬂect users interests, we analyzed
answers to the question The task was meaningful that has been asked
after each task. Figure 6 presents the median and mode values. The
overall score provided by participants is positive, however, not signif-
icantly. Median = 4 (= somewhat agree) for all three requirements.
Mode = 5 for R1 and R3, mode = 3 for R2.

Figure 6: Evaluation of the tasks meaningfulness. Question: The task
was meaningful. Higher score is better (1 = strongly disagree, 6 =
strongly agree).

We can notice higher scores in case of R1 and R3 compared to R2.
It means that participants considered tasks in these two categories
more meaningful when reﬂecting their gameplay. Friedman test
reveals no statistical signiﬁcance (α = .05) among the tasks within
the same requirement group: R1 (χ 2 = 4.97, d f = 2, p = 0.42), R2
(χ 2 = 4.96, d f = 2, p = 0.084), and R3 (χ 2 = 1.51, d f = 2, p =
0.459). This observation conﬁrms hypothesis H1 and our assump-
tion that the tasks reﬂect users interests.

H2 – Usefulness of Visualizations
Both CLUSTERING and TIMELINE visualizations were designed as
complementary. Therefore, our goal was not to compare usefulness
head-to-head but evaluate their usefulness for completing the tasks.
First, we analyzed every task individually to determine (in)correct
responses and their ratio. Since the data was produced by partici-
pants while playing the game, thus are not synthetic, some of the
tasks do not have a simple one-value correct solution. Moreover, in
time-related questions, there can be inaccuracy in answers caused by
many reasons, e.g., approximate mouse location on the visualization,
ignoring seconds by the user, etc. Due to these facts, we checked
individual responses and categorized them into three groups: wrong,
correct, and partially correct. This assessment was reached as the
consensus of the authors of the paper.

Figure 7 presents resulting (classiﬁed) responses. The overall
combined success rate (including both correct and partially correct
responses) is 73 % with eight correct responses per task on average.
Therefore, we can conclude that the trainees were successful in
performing tasks in general.

Table 1T1T2T3T4T5T6T7T8T9T10T11T12Mode556554634355Median44,54,555443,533,54,54,5Task MeaningfulnessT1T2T3T4T5T6T7T8T9T10T11T12123456ModeMedianR1R2R3 1to T7 (Characterize your score compared to other players.) and
T8 (Characterize your time spent by playing compared to other
players.). Likewise, there was a statistically signiﬁcant difference in
difﬁculty between T11 (Find out in which level you lost most points
in the game.) and T12 (Find out who reached the best score.) in R3.
Despite these observations, both the median and the mode of these
two tasks is still greater or equal to 4 (= slightly agree). Therefore,
we conclude that the hypothesis H2 was conﬁrmed. The use of
visualizations supports trainees’ understanding and orientation in
the game data.

H3 – Preferences in Using Visualizations

Our last hypothesis focuses on determining preferred visualizations
for individual tasks. Figure 9 presents the complete results obtained
from a pair of questions focused on usefulness evaluation of visu-
alizations with regards to the tasks. Although we ﬁnd only slight
differences between most of them, it does not apply for a subset of
four tasks where we can observe stronger preference either for TIME-
LINE (T3, T5, T12) or CLUSTERING (T4) visualization. To conﬁrm
our assumption on statistical signiﬁcance, we performed one-tail
Wilcoxon Matched Pairs Signed-rank Test. According to our expec-
tations, there is no statistically signiﬁcant preference for tasks T1,
T2, T6–T11. Even T5 is not signiﬁcant (W = 17, p = 0.28). The
three remaining tasks have signiﬁcant preference for TIMELINE visu-
alization: T3 (W = 8), T12 (W = 8); and CLUSTERING visualization:
T4 (W = 7.5).

We conﬁrm hypothesis H3 since there are at least four tasks,
where we observed a statistically signiﬁcant preference for either
of the visualizations. However, only limited conclusions can be
drawn for this hypothesis due to common tied values in our data.
As a result, the sample size was often lowered by up to 5 samples
(e. g., T2, T7). Also, the Wilcoxon test is known to be less sensitive
when the sample size is very low (N < 10) and any difference that is
statistically signiﬁcant will have to be huge. Thus, further inspection
with a larger sample is still needed.

7 DISCUSSION

In this section, we summarize the results of the usability study,
discuss limitations and lessons learned.

7.1 Summary of Evaluation Results

Design requirements are correct, and the tasks reﬂect user inter-
ests. The evaluation conﬁrmed that the user requirements R1 –R3
distilled from interviews with four domain experts are meaningful
and useful for trainees, and related tasks reﬂect user interests. Never-
theless, participants considered tasks of R1 (personalized feedback)
and R3 (a brief overview of the overall game results and features)
more meaningful when reﬂecting their gameplay than R2 (compara-
tive feedback).

Visualizations support trainees in the understanding of results.
In general, trainees were able to complete given tasks correctly
and, according to their response, tasks were easy to solve with
the visual feedback. The evaluation revealed that some tasks were
more difﬁcult to solve than others. We aim to better support tasks
identiﬁed as difﬁcult in further research.

We did not ﬁnd that any of the visualizations would better sup-
port any of the user requirements. On the other hand, we identiﬁed
speciﬁc tasks for which one of the visualizations might be more ap-
propriate. However, the results are uncertain due to data limitations.
Further inspection with a larger sample is still needed to validate
them.

We have received several

improvement.
Trainees are not expected to interact with the feedback tool often.
Therefore, it is important to reﬂect user experience in the design of
the visualization tools so that they get familiar with them easily. We
received particular suggestions and bug reports from the evaluation

suggestions

for

Figure 7: Responses classiﬁcation for each task.

We identiﬁed four occurrences of partially correct responses. The
imprecise answers when the reported time was rounded to the nearest
minute (e.g., 0:15:00 instead of 0:14:59) in T4. In T9 and T12, there
are incomplete answers when participants reported only a subset of
multiple correct answers (e.g., two participants reached the same
best score but only one of them was reported). In T11, it was due
to unclear data when there was no strong evidence with multiple
correct options.

Figure 8: Evaluation of the tasks easiness. Question: The task was
easy to complete (using the visualizations). Higher score is better, (1
= Strongly disagree, 6 = Strongly agree).

Figure 8 depicts the results of the qualitative evaluation of the
Hypothesis H2 presented by the question The task was easy to
complete (using the visualization). Regardless of the actual number
of wrong responses, the overall feedback was that the tasks were easy
to solve with the visualizations (mode = 5, median = 5). Friedman
test does not reveal any statistical signiﬁcance among the tasks of
R1 (p = 0.27). However, the two remaining groups have signiﬁcant
difference among their tasks. R2 (χ 2 = 10.207, d f = 2, p < .05), R3
(χ 2 = 6.5, d f = 2, p < .05). A post-hoc analysis using Conover’s
F test reveals that T9 (Find out the player who reached the closest
score to your score.) is statistically signiﬁcantly difﬁcult opposed

Table 1Correct responsesPartially correct responsesWrong responsesT1903T2903T31200T4624T5804T6903T71002T8507T9822T10705T11516T12930Classification of ResponsesT1T2T3T4T5T6T7T8T9T10T11T12036912Correct responsesPartially correct responsesWrong responsesR1R2R3 1Table 1T1T2T3T4T5T6T7T8T9T10T11T12Mode556556564656Median555,555555454,56Task EasinessT1T2T3T4T5T6T7T8T9T10T11T12123456ModeMedianR1R2R3 1Figure 9: Evaluation of the visualization usefulness with respect to the tasks. Question: Evaluate the usefulness of the [ CLUSTERING — TIMELINE]
visualization for the task.; C = CLUSTERING visualization, T = TIMELINE visualization.

that we will reﬂect in the future development of the visual feedback.
One participant noted that “the marking signiﬁes the last change in
score, but it’s NOT the time I stopped playing”. Three participants
reported inconsistency in data presentation between the visualiza-
tions when the displayed time could vary by up to one second due
to rounding off raw time-stamps. One participant suggested an im-
provement for the TIMELINE visualization: “There should be some
buttons to select or deselect all players at once. Now the user has to
click on each player individually.”

7.2 Usability Study Limitations

Low number of participants. We decided for the ﬁeld usability
study since we wanted to reach as realistic settings as possible,
which would be only hardly achievable in a controlled experiment.
According to Rubin et al. [30], a truly experimental usability test
achieving statistically valid results should be conducted with a mini-
mum of 10 to 12 participants per condition. And although the sample
size of 12 participants is not unusual in similar studies in general,
we are aware of this weakness for claiming a strong conﬁrmation of
our ﬁndings. Since research has shown that a sample size of 4 to 5
participants can expose about 80 % of usability issues [30], and since
the hypotheses were conﬁrmed, and initial outcomes are positive,
we consider the results as promising and entitling us to elaborate the
feedback visualizations further.

Dataset limitations. The dataset used in the evaluation was not
synthetic. Thus some of the tasks deﬁned prior to the experiment do
not have clear “one-value only” answers. There were multiple cor-
rect solutions or data was unclear. As a result, some of the tasks were
more difﬁcult to solve, or the solution was not straightforward (e.g.,
T9, T11). We also faced three technical issues on the cyber range
infrastructure when some of the game events were not recorded. As
a result, the visualizations did not reﬂect the real-world situation
of three participants, which was confusing for them and probably
affected some of the responses in T8.

Ambiguous responses to visualization preference. We identiﬁed
eight ambiguous responses where, despite the instructions, partici-
pants tick Absolutely useful / I used it exclusively in one visualization
and different option than Absolutely useless / I did not use it in the
other. Three of the responses were from the same participant. Some
of the participants also noted that they use the table (which is, in
fact, a part of the TIMELINE) instead of visualization itself. Since

we plan to repeat the usability study, we are going to revise the way
of presenting the questions to reduce the ambiguity and extract more
qualitative information on the actual use of visualizations.

7.3 Observations and Lessons Learned

Trainees prefer exploration of personal results to the overall game
results and comparison with others. Detailed inspection of the
results revealed that the participants were primarily interested in their
score (tasks of R1 ), followed by the overall awareness of the game
(tasks of R3 ). We assume that the primary objective of a player is to
get insight into his/her gameplay (a score development, the time they
spent playing the game and its parts). Further, they are interested
in the overall game situation without bothering too much with a
detailed comparison with others (tasks of R2 ). We assume that the
comparative perspective is meaningful only in speciﬁc cases – e.g.
when two friends want to compare their scores. Our initial ﬁndings
and conﬁrmation of H1 open a new research topic of determining
the essential information for trainees and their additional support
in post-game feedback visualizations. Since this is far beyond the
scope of this paper, we leave it for our follow-up work.

Easy to decode design is not mandatory. Our preliminary expec-
tations that a much simpler CLUSTERING visualization would be
more useful and used than more complex TIMELINE visualization
have not been conﬁrmed. Even though both visualizations were
designed for a different type of tasks, there is considerable overlap
in their capabilities in answering the same questions. For example,
both of them offer a straightforward way of ﬁnding the ﬁnal score,
and the scores reached in individual levels. However, the study did
not reveal preference of the CLUSTERING to TIMELINE. Data of
only four of the tasks reported the preference for either of them.
Although the intuitiveness of the design is still mandatory due to the
restrictions of the reﬂection phase, the easy to decode design seems
not to be essential, as we expected. The users are willing to use a
more complex variant if they provide more details. There were also
a participant who prefers simple presentation in tabular form from
fancy visualizations.

Trainees tend to perceive time subjectively. The task T8 (Char-
acterize your time spent by playing compared to other players.) was
ranked with ﬁve options from I was one of the slowest players to I
was one of the fastest players. Answers to this question included the
most number of wrong responses (58%). Participants either under-

Table 1T1T2T3T4T5T6T7T8T9T10ClusteringTimelineClusteringTimelineClusteringTimelineClusteringTimelineClusteringTimelineClusteringTimelineClusteringTimelineClusteringTimelineClusteringTimelineClusteringAbsolutely useful / I used it exclusively4242167124152241243Useful4632332024312132513Somewhat useful0101111101232212021Somewhat useless0000100120001211110Useless1001000110000010010Absolutely useless / I did not use it3356622853635526435Visualization UsefulnessNumber of occurences024681012T1T2T3T4T5T6T7T8T9T10T11T12Absolutely useful / I used it exclusivelyUsefulSomewhat usefulSomewhat uselessUselessAbsolutely useless / I did not use itT1C      TC      TC      TC      TC      TC      TC      TC      TC      TC      TC      TC      TT2T3T4T5T6T7T8T9T10T11T12R1: Personalized feedbackR2: Comparative feedbackR3: Game overview 1or overestimated their ﬁnish time compared to others. Unfortunately,
none of them explicitly commented on why. We assume that par-
ticipants reﬂected their impression from real-world time (someones
started playing a little earlier, some later) rather than precise relative
game time represented in visualizations.

Do not mix time spans with a different meaning, even if they are
in separate visualizations and explained by a legend. We noted yet
another confusion with the time-related tasks. Whereas CLUSTER-
ING visualization shows average and total time based on the trainees’
data, TIMELINE visualization displays estimated time for each level
(colored diagonal stripes on the background in Figure 1). T10 (Find
out how much time was assigned for playing the game.) targets the
latter one. All the participants who made a mistake indicated the
maximal time from the CLUSTERING visualization instead.

Users can interpret game results subjectively. Game results con-
sist of a score and time in which the score was reached. In general,
the best players are considered those who achieved the best score.
Nevertheless, also trainees who did not get the absolute best score
but solved the task quickly can be considered as very successful.
The task T11 (Is there somebody who reached a high score in sig-
niﬁcantly short time? If so, insert his Player ID.) was to reveal
such trainees. However, the task has a considerably high number of
wrong responses (50%). From the detailed inspection of the results,
we found out that the biggest issue is unclear data that makes the
task difﬁcult. There was no single recognizable answer in the data.
We (the authors) agreed that the correct response is the player who
ﬁnished as the ﬁrst one. He was also one of the two players with
the highest score. Most of the participants (in ﬁve cases) marked
the same player. One of the participants marked both players with
the highest score (i.e., partially correct response). The rest of the
participants marked different ones, usually those who ﬁnished earlier
but had a rather low score. A solution to this problem could be to
include data storytelling principles so that users immediately see
what is important by providing a “narrative”, as discussed in [14],
for instance.

Figure 10: Clustering weakness – the users tend to select closer
neighbors while omitting the distant ones.

The clustering approach can be confusing in speciﬁc cases Re-
sponses of T9 (Find out the player who reached the closest score
to your score.) revealed one weakness in the design of the CLUS-
TERING visualization. One participant, who used this visualization
solely and provided the wrong player ID, inspected only the closest
neighborhood where he found the wrong answer. The correct one
was placed too far right from his position since this participant was
one of the slowest, as illustrated in Figure 10. In this situation users
tend to prefer closer neighbours to more distant points. A solution
to this problem could be to gradually highlight those who are in,
e.g., 10-25-50 % dispersion around both horizontal and vertical di-
mensions. Additionally, the pop-up tooltip (raised when the mouse
cursor hovers over the dot) could be extended with Top 3 better and
Top 3 worse trainees regarding the observed one.

8 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

The work we presented in this paper focuses on improving post-game
feedback for players (trainees) of serious multi-level cybersecurity

games by using interactive visualizations. The feedback is one of the
critical phases of the learning process. However, the way of present-
ing the results is often limited to plain scoreboards presenting only
the total scores and generalized feedback on the most common is-
sues observed during the gameplay. We improve the user experience
through design and implementation of two interactive visualizations.
The visualizations improve overall situational awareness and insight
into the gameplay. Also, they provide a straightforward way for
comparison of individual trainees. A demo version with test data is
available online at http://kypo-summer.surge.sh/.

We collaborated with four cybersecurity education experts on
deﬁning visualization requirements. Together, we formulated a
set of tasks that address three areas of trainees’ interest: game-
play overview, person-centered feedback, and comparative feedback.
Through the usability study held with participants of Summer School
in Cybersecurity, we evaluated three hypotheses related to (a) mean-
ingfulness of the user requirements and related tasks, (b) usefulness,
and (c) preference of the visualizations regarding the tasks. All three
hypotheses were conﬁrmed, but due to a low sample size (only 12
participants), some of the conclusions will be addressed in our future
work. Usability study also conﬁrmed the practical usefulness of the
visualizations and pointed out several topics worth further investiga-
tion. Namely, deﬁning the set of preferred information for trainees
(such as correct or incorrect attempts) and their additional support
in feedback visualizations. Further, we collected valuable feedback
on the strengths and weaknesses of the visualizations, which we
want to address in the implementation. Although the results are
inconclusive, the usability study also revealed a preference for one
of the visualizations concerning the speciﬁc tasks.

Our work is still in progress. In the future, we intend to further
improve the previously mentioned following aspects. Our overall
goal is to provide, through interactive visualizations, personalized
feedback to increase gained knowledge. Our ongoing work on
integrating both visualizations into the cyber range web portal is
just the ﬁrst step. The integration also implies interconnecting and
extending the interaction capabilities of both visualizations. For
example, selecting a trainee in one visualization will highlight the
same relevant data in the other. We also want to integrate the vi-
sualizations into the gameplay and extend their capabilities toward
personalized post-level feedback. The aim is to provide an instant
user-speciﬁc overview of strengths and weaknesses based on the
user’s actions. Our research will include experimental evaluation to
conﬁrm and strengthen the initial conclusions from the presented
usability study as well as evaluation of new features. Hands-on
cybersecurity training is a part of regular university lectures. There-
fore, we prefer running more extensive ﬁeld study over standard
laboratory evaluation on synthetic data.

The visualizations were designed to provide timely feedback to
trainees. However, there are other users involved in the CTF life
cycle that would beneﬁt from an interactive exploration of CTF
results. The visualizations discussed in this paper enable supervisors
(the educators who oversee the game) to reﬂect the overall results
so that they can assess their interventions during the game sessions.
Similarly, game designers (the authors of the content) can utilize the
visualizations in their workﬂow to evaluate game parameters. We
will address these issues in future research as well.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank the cybersecurity experts for pro-
viding the feedback and invaluable insight into the target domain.
This research was supported by ERDF “CyberSecurity, CyberCrime
and Critical Information Infrastructures Center of Excellence” (No.
CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16 019/0000822). Computational resources
were provided by the European Regional Development Fund Project
CERIT Scientiﬁc Cloud (No. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16 013/0001802).

REFERENCES

[1] C. C. Abt. Serious Games. University Press of America, 1987.
[2] S. Arnab, T. Lim, M. B. Carvalho, F. Bellotti, S. De Freitas, S. Louchart,
N. Suttie, R. Berta, and A. De Gloria. Mapping Learning and Game
Mechanics for Serious Games Analysis. British Journal of Educational
Technology, 46(2):391–411, 2015.

[3] F. Bellotti, B. Kapralos, K. Lee, P. Moreno-Ger, and R. Berta. Assess-
ment in and of Serious Games: An Overview. Adv. in Hum.-Comp. Int.,
2013:1:1–1:1, Jan. 2013. doi: 10.1155/2013/136864

[4] R. Bodily and K. Verbert. Trends and issues in student-facing learning
analytics reporting systems research. In Proceedings of the seventh
international learning analytics & knowledge conference, pp. 309–318.
ACM, 2017.

[5] K. Boopathi, S. Sreejith, and A. Bithin. Learning Cyber Security
Through Gamiﬁcation. Indian Journal of Science and Technology,
8(7):642–649, 2015.

[6] N. Cao, L. Lu, Y.-R. Lin, F. Wang, and Z. Wen. Socialhelix: visual anal-
ysis of sentiment divergence in social media. Journal of Visualization,
18(2):221–235, 2015.

[7] N. Cao, C. Shi, S. Lin, J. Lu, Y. Lin, and C. Lin. Targetvue: Visual
analysis of anomalous user behaviors in online communication sys-
tems. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
22(1):280–289, Jan 2016. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2015.2467196

[8] P. Chapman, J. Burket, and D. Brumley. PicoCTF: A Game-Based
Computer Security Competition for High School Students. In 2014
USENIX Summit on Gaming, Games, and Gamiﬁcation in Security
Education (3GSE 14). USENIX Association, San Diego, CA, 2014.
[9] K. Chung. Live lesson: Lowering the barriers to capture the ﬂag admin-
istration and participation. In 2017 USENIX Workshop on Advances in
Security Education (ASE 17). USENIX Association, Vancouver, BC,
2017.

[10] L. Corrin and P. de Barba. How do students interpret feedback delivered
via dashboards? In Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference
on Learning Analytics And Knowledge, LAK ’15, pp. 430–431. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2723576.2723662

[11] CTFtime team. CTFtime.org / All about CTF (Capture The Flag).

https://ctftime.org/. (Accessed on 2018-06-13).

[12] S. de Freitas, D. Gibson, V. Alvarez, L. Irving, K. Star, S. Charleer,
and K. Verbert. How to use gamiﬁed dashboards and learning analytics
for providing immediate student feedback and performance tracking in
higher education. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference
on World Wide Web Companion, WWW ’17 Companion, pp. 429–
434. International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee,
Republic and Canton of Geneva, Switzerland, 2017. doi: 10.1145/
3041021.3054175

[13] A. Doup´e, M. Egele, B. Caillat, G. Stringhini, G. Yakin, A. Zand,
L. Cavedon, and G. Vigna. Hit ’Em Where It Hurts: A Live Security
Exercise on Cyber Situational Awareness. In Proceedings of the 27th
Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, ACSAC ’11, pp.
51–61. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2011. doi: 10.1145/2076732.
2076740

[14] V. Echeverria, R. Martinez-Maldonado, R. Granda, K. Chiluiza,
C. Conati, and S. B. Shum. Driving data storytelling from learn-
ing design. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Learning Analytics and Knowledge, pp. 131–140. ACM, 2018.
[15] X. Fu, A. Shimada, H. Ogata, Y. Taniguchi, and D. Suehiro. Real-time
learning analytics for c programming language courses. In Proceedings
of the Seventh International Learning Analytics &#38; Knowledge
Conference, LAK ’17, pp. 280–288. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2017.
doi: 10.1145/3027385.3027407

[16] S. Govaerts, K. Verbert, E. Duval, and A. Pardo. The Student Ac-
tivity Meter for Awareness and Self-reﬂection. In CHI ’12 Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI EA ’12, pp.
869–884. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2012. doi: 10.1145/2212776.
2212860

[17] S. Govaerts, K. Verbert, J. Klerkx, and E. Duval. Visualizing Activities
In International Conference on

for Self-reﬂection and Awareness.
Web-based Learning, pp. 91–100. Springer, 2010.

[18] S. Grissom, M. F. McNally, and T. Naps. Algorithm visualization in cs

education: Comparing levels of student engagement. In Proceedings
of the 2003 ACM Symposium on Software Visualization, SoftVis ’03,
pp. 87–94. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2003. doi: 10.1145/774833.
774846

[19] J. A. Hattie, G. T. Brown, L. Ward, S. E. Irving, and P. J. Keegan.
Formative Evaluation of an Educational Assessment Technology In-
novation: Developers’ Insights into Assessment Tools for Teaching
and Learning (asTTle). Journal of Multi-Disciplinary Evaluation,
5(3):1–54, 2006.

[20] K. L. Jacobs.

Investigation of Interactive Online Visual Tools for
the Learning of Mathematics. International Journal of Mathematical
Education in Science and Technology, 36(7):761–768, 2005. doi: 10.
1080/00207390500271149

[21] I. Jivet, M. Scheffel, M. Specht, and H. Drachsler. License to evaluate:
Preparing learning analytics dashboards for educational practice. In
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Learning Analytics
and Knowledge, LAK ’18, pp. 31–40. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2018. doi: 10.1145/3170358.3170421

[22] M. Kont, M. Pihelgas, K. Maennel, B. Blumbergs, and T. Lepik.
Frankenstack: Toward real-time red team feedback. In Military Com-
munications Conference (MILCOM), MILCOM 2017-2017 IEEE, pp.
400–405. IEEE, 2017.

[23] S. Kumar, R. Zafarani, and H. Liu. Understanding user migration
patterns in social media. In Twenty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, 2011.

[24] D. Leony, A. Pardo, L. de la Fuente Valent´ın, D. S. de Castro, and C. D.
Kloos. Glass: A learning analytics visualization tool. In Proceedings
of the 2Nd International Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowl-
edge, LAK ’12, pp. 162–163. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2012. doi:
10.1145/2330601.2330642

[25] C. S. Loh, Y. Sheng, and D. Ifenthaler. Serious Games Analytics:
Methodologies for Performance Measurement, Assessment, and Im-
provement. Advances in Game-Based Learning. Springer International
Publishing, 2015.

[26] W. Matcha, D. Gaˇsevi´c, N. A. Uzir, J. Jovanovi´c, and A. Pardo. Ana-
lytics of learning strategies: Associations with academic performance
and feedback. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Learning Analytics & Knowledge, LAK19, pp. 461–470. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 2019. doi: 10.1145/3303772.3303787

[27] D. R. Michael and S. L. Chen. Serious Games: Games that Educate,

Train, and Inform. Muska & Lipman/Premier-Trade, 2005.

[28] A. Nagarajan, J. M. Allbeck, A. Sood, and T. L. Janssen. Exploring
Game Design for Cybersecurity Training. In Cyber Technology in
Automation, Control, and Intelligent Systems (CYBER), 2012 IEEE
International Conference on, pp. 256–262. IEEE, 2012.

[29] Questionmark Computing Limited. Questionmark perception. https:

//www.questionmark.com. (Accessed on 2018-06-13).

[30] J. Rubin. Handbook of Usability Testing: How to Plan, Design, and
Conduct Effective Tests. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY, USA,
1st ed., 1994.

[31] SANS Institute. NetWars: DFIR Tournament. (Accessed on 2018-06-

13).

[32] B. A. Schwendimann, M. J. Rodrguez-Triana, A. Vozniuk, L. P. Prieto,
M. S. Boroujeni, A. Holzer, D. Gillet, and P. Dillenbourg. Perceiv-
ing learning at a glance: A systematic literature review of learning
dashboard research. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies,
10(1):30–41, Jan 2017. doi: 10.1109/TLT.2016.2599522

[33] Y. Shi, Y. Liu, H. Tong, J. He, G. Yan, and N. Cao. Visual analytics of
anomalous user behaviors: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.06720,
2019.

[34] K. E. Stewart, J. W. Humphries, and T. R. Andel. Developing a Virtu-
alization Platform for Courses in Networking, Systems Administration
and Cyber Security Education. In Proceedings of the 2009 Spring
Simulation Multiconference, p. 65. Society for Computer Simulation
International, 2009.

[35] D. Thom, H. Bosch, S. Koch, M. W¨orner, and T. Ertl. Spatiotempo-
ral anomaly detection through visual analysis of geolocated twitter
messages. In 2012 IEEE Paciﬁc Visualization Symposium, pp. 41–48.
IEEE, 2012.

[36] R. Vatrapu, C. Teplovs, N. Fujita, and S. Bull. Towards Visual Analytics

for Teachers’ Dynamic Diagnostic Pedagogical Decision-making. In
Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Learning Analytics
and Knowledge, LAK ’11, pp. 93–98. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2011. doi: 10.1145/2090116.2090129

[37] V. ˇSv´abensk´y, J. Vykopal, M. Cermak, and M. Laˇstoviˇcka. Enhancing
In Proceedings of
cybersecurity skills by creating serious games.
the 23rd Annual ACM Conference on Innovation and Technology in
Computer Science Education, ITiCSE 2018, pp. 194–199. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 2018. doi: 10.1145/3197091.3197123

[38] V. ˇSv´abensk´y, J. Vykopal, M. ˇcermak, and M. Laˇstoviˇcka. Enhancing
Cybersecurity Skills by Creating Serious Games. In Proceedings of
the 23rd Annual ACM Conference on Innovation and Technology in
Computer Science Education, ITiCSE ’18. ACM, 2018. doi: 10.1145/
3197091.3197123

[39] J. Vykopal, R. Oˇslejˇsek, K. Bursk´a, and K. Z´akopˇcanov´a. Timely
feedback in unstructured cybersecurity exercises. In Proceedings of
the 49th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education,
pp. 173–178. ACM, 2018.

[40] J. Vykopal, R. Oslejsek, P. Celeda, M. Vizvary, and D. Tovarnak.
In Proceedings of
KYPO Cyber Range: Design and Use Cases.
the 12th International Conference on Software Technologies – Vol-
ume 1:
ICSOFT, pp. 310–321. SciTePress, 2017. doi: 10.5220/
0006428203100321

[41] R. Weiss, F. Turbak, J. Mache, and M. E. Locasto. Cybersecurity
IEEE Security & Privacy,

education and assessment in edurange.
15(3):90–95, 2017.

[42] J. Werther, M. Zhivich, T. Leek, and N. Zeldovich. Experiences in
Cyber Security Education: The MIT Lincoln Laboratory Capture-the-
ﬂag Exercise. In Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Cyber Security
Experimentation and Test, CSET’11, pp. 12–12. USENIX Association,
Berkeley, CA, USA, 2011.

[43] Z. Yang, J. Guo, K. Cai, J. Tang, J. Li, L. Zhang, and Z. Su. Under-
standing retweeting behaviors in social networks. In Proceedings of the
19th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management, CIKM ’10, pp. 1633–1636. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2010. doi: 10.1145/1871437.1871691

[44] K. Zhang, S. Dong, G. Zhu, D. Corporon, T. McMullan, and S. Bar-
rera. picoctf 2013-toaster wars: When interactive storytelling game
meets the largest computer security competition. In Games Innova-
tion Conference (IGIC), 2013 IEEE International, pp. 293–299. IEEE,
2013.

