PhD Forum: Enabling Autonomic IoT for Smart
Urban Services
Muhammad Junaid Farooq and Quanyan Zhu
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Tandon School of Engineering,
New York University, Brooklyn, NY 11201, USA, Emails: {mjf514, qz494}@nyu.edu.

9
1
0
2

c
e
D
4
2

]
P
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
1
6
5
1
0
.
1
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The development of autonomous cyber-physical
systems (CPS) and advances towards the ﬁfth generation (5G) of
wireless technology is promising to revolutionize many industry
verticals such as Healthcare, Transportation, Energy, Retail
Services, Building Automation, Education, etc., leading to the
realization of the smart city paradigm. The Internet of Things
(IoT), enables powerful and unprecedented capabilities for
intelligent and autonomous operation. We leverage ideas from
Network Science, Optimization & Decision Theory, Incentive
Mechanism Design, and Data Science/Machine Learning to
achieve key design goals, in IoT-enabled urban systems, such
as efﬁciency, security & resilience, and economics.

Index Terms—Internet of
mission-critical, network science.

things, cyber-physical systems,

I. INTRODUCTION

The cyber-physical integration of devices in the IoT is
enabling the development of a myriad of applications and ser-
vices. At each layer of interaction between the systems, there
are decision problems that arise for achieving various differ-
ent objectives. Effective decision-making at different fronts is
essential to enhance the efﬁciency, economics, security, and
resilience of these systems. This research focuses on develop-
ing cyber-physical decision mechanisms. For instance, at the
device level, it is important to ensure wireless connectivity
and communication. If the communication infrastructure is in
place, there is a need for spectrum allocation and reservation.
However, in case of challenged infrastructure, the connectiv-
ity might be achieved using an overlay network of aerial base
stations [1] [2]. Decisions have to be made on allocation
of spectrum to users and conﬁguration/placement of aerial
base stations to provide adequate coverage and connectivity.
Once the connectivity is achieved, the networks are used for
information dissemination [3]. Furthermore, there is a need
to design security mechanisms against stealthy adversarial
threats that may be using the same communication networks
to inﬁltrate and sabotage network operation. The next frontier
is the use of cloud computing resources by smart devices. It is
important to efﬁciently allocate and price the computational
resources in order to provide a high quality of experience
to the users and to generate high revenues for the cloud/fog
service provider. Finally, at the application front, there are
scenarios where resource provisioning decisions need to be
made for service requests that appear randomly in space and
time as in instance in the case of smart urban environments.

II. CHALLENGES

Dynamic mechanism design traditionally has been focused
on principal-agent type of models with a mechanism designer

Fig. 1: Cross-layer decision-making in the IoT ecosystem.

and participants. In IoT systems,
these mechanisms may
not always be available. The IoT provides new avenues for
designing policies and mechanisms in a dynamic setting at
multiple different levels. For instance, at the physical layer,
there is a need for connectivity mechanisms while at the
higher layers, policy decisions such as allocation and pricing
are required. Cyber-Physical coupling needs to be explored
in the realm of the IoT which is non-existent in traditional
communication and computing systems. Moreover, the IoT
ecosystem is inherently a large-scale, complex, and dynamic.
Therefore, centralized mechanisms are difﬁcult to implement
and are in-feasible. Therefore, more distributed approaches
are required.

III. CONTRIBUTIONS

Autonomous operation of CPS/IoT systems requires an
interdisciplinary and cross-layer approach due to the coupling
between cyber and physical components. The state and
communication at the cyber layer inﬂuences the dynamics
and control at the physical layer and vice versa. An high level
illustration of the system is provided in Fig. 1. The following
subsections provide details on some of the key thrusts of this
research.

A. Autonomic Networked CPS: From Military to Civilian
Applications

Connected CPS networks are used for dissemination of
data and information for enhanced situational awareness and
decision-making. Some example applications are illustrated
in Fig. 2. Of particular interest are the military and tactical
networks with stringent requirements such as support for ex-
treme heterogeneity, rapid re-conﬁgurability, and mosaic war-
fare needs. In this respect, one of the key contributions of our
research is the development of a secure and re-conﬁgurable
network design framework suitable for adversarial environ-
ments such as the Internet of Battleﬁeld Things (IoBT) [4]
[5]. Networks with enhanced data dissemination capabilities

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2: Autonomic CPS/IoT Systems.

Fig. 3: Examples of urban on-demand services.

also open doors for malicious activity and malware. Further-
more, malicious entities such as compromised supply chain
actors may exploit backdoor channels for stealthy takeover
and cause large scale coordinated attacks. To tackle this
security risk posed by wireless connectivity proliferation
in IoT, we developed a mechanism for inspecting devices
based on their wireless neighbourhood that prevents a large
scale coordinated attack while causing minimum operational
interruption [6].

B. Strategic Resource Provisioning for Mission-Critical IoT
Services

At

the communication layer of the IoT,

the spectrum
resources needs to be effectively provisioned to applications
according to their performance requirements and power lim-
itations [7]. Similarly, at the cloud layer, computing nodes
and data processing resources need to be allocated and
priced strategically to ensure maximum revenue for the cloud
service provider. In this regard, we have developed a real-
time resource allocation and pricing framework for cloud-
enabled IoT systems, where the computational complexity of
arriving tasks is evaluated and is accordingly assigned to the
available computing bundles [8]. Similarly, for low latency
applications, a framework is developed to appropriately select
the resources available at one of the fog/edge computing
nodes for real-time tasks [9]. We also extend the allocation
and pricing framework to the case where there is uncertainty
in the spatial domain in addition to the temporal domain [10].

C. Data-Driven Decisions for Urban Service Provisioning

IoT-driven urban services are rapidly emerging in almost
all industry verticals. Companies like Uber, lyft, Via, etc.
have come up with a range of on-demand urban mobility
solutions and are moving towards autonomous microtransit
solutions. Similarly, there is a strong interest in autonomous
vehicle and drone based delivery services. These applications
require intelligent decision-making by autonomous agents.
Emergency response and ﬁrst responder tactical systems are
key to the safety and resilience of smart cities. The use
of sensing capabilities, historical data, and distributed data
processing can not only assist early detection and rapid
response, but can also help in emergency preparedness. For
instance, wildﬁres are natural disasters that pose a signiﬁcant
to the metropolis in terms of life, health, safety,
threat

etc. The use of data from sensors reporting temperatures
along with weather data can help in determining the timing
and location of such incidents. Similarly, timely emergency
response is critical for urban safety and quality of life. Some
example urban services are depicted in Fig. 3.

IV. CONCLUSION
This research is an attempt to lay the theoretical founda-
tions of decision science in IoT network design and oper-
ation. It leverages tools and theories from various different
systems sciences such as mathematical epidemiology, spatial
point processes, stochastic processes, optimal control theory,
and optimization to tackle these challenging problems. It
addresses the challenges and problems at various different
levels across the IoT stack. We hope that this work will form
the basis for the development of a comprehensive science for
decision mechanisms in the IoT networks domain.

REFERENCES

[1] M. J. Farooq and Q. Zhu, “A multi-layer feedback system approach to
resilient connectivity of remotely deployed mobile internet of things,”
IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking,
vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 422–432, June 2018.

[2] ——, “Cognitive connectivity resilience in multi-layer remotely de-
ployed mobile internet of things,” in GLOBECOM 2017 - 2017 IEEE
Global Communications Conference, Dec 2017, pp. 1–6.

[3] M. J. Farooq, H. ElSawy, Q. Zhu, and M. Alouini, “Optimizing mission
critical data dissemination in massive iot networks,” in 2017 15th
International Symposium on Modeling and Optimization in Mobile,
Ad Hoc, and Wireless Networks (WiOpt), May 2017, pp. 1–6.

[4] M. J. Farooq and Q. Zhu, “On the secure and reconﬁgurable multi-
information dissemination in the
layer network design for critical
internet of battleﬁeld things (iobt),” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2618–2632, April 2018.

[5] ——, “Secure and reconﬁgurable network design for critical infor-
mation dissemination in the internet of battleﬁeld things (iobt),” in
2017 15th International Symposium on Modeling and Optimization in
Mobile, Ad Hoc, and Wireless Networks (WiOpt), May 2017, pp. 1–8.
[6] ——, “Modeling, analysis, and mitigation of dynamic botnet formation
in wireless iot networks,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics
and Security, vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 2412–2426, Sep. 2019.

[7] ——, “Optimal dynamic contract for spectrum reservation in mission-
critical unb-iot systems,” in 2018 16th International Symposium on
Modeling and Optimization in Mobile, Ad Hoc, and Wireless Networks
(WiOpt), May 2018, pp. 1–6.

[8] ——, “Adaptive and resilient revenue maximizing dynamic resource
allocation and pricing for cloud-enabled iot systems,” in 2018 Annual
American Control Conference (ACC), June 2018, pp. 5292–5297.
[9] ——, “QoE based revenue maximizing dynamic resource allocation
and pricing for fog-enabled mission-critical iot applications,” under
revision in IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 2019.

[10] ——, “Dynamic spatio-temporal resource provisioning for on-demand
urban services in smart cities,” under revision in IEEE Transactions
on Cognitive Communications and Networking, 2019.

