Research Directions in Cyber Threat Intelligence

Stjepan Groš
Faculty of Electrical and Computing Engineering
University of Zagreb
Unska bb, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia
E-Mail: stjepan.gros@fer.hr

0
2
0
2

n
a
J

8
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
1
6
6
0
.
1
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Cyber threat intelligence is a relatively new
ﬁeld that has grown from two distinct ﬁelds, cyber security
and intelligence. As such, it draws knowledge from and
mixes the two ﬁelds. Yet, looking into current scientiﬁc
research on cyber threat intelligence research, it is rela-
tively scarce, which opens up a lot of opportunities. In this
paper we deﬁne what cyber threat intelligence is, brieﬂy
review some aspects for cyber threat intelligence. Then,
we analyze existing research ﬁelds that are much older
that cyber threat intelligence but related to it. This opens
up an opportunity to draw knowledge and methods from
those older ﬁeld, and in that way advance cyber threat
intelligence much faster than it would by following its own
path. With such an approach we effectively give a research
directions for CTI.

Index Terms—cyber threat intelligence, research, survey,
intelligence, knowledge management, cognitive computing,
information fusion, situational awareness

I. INTRODUCTION

For a long time in human history every state that
wanted to survive had to know who its enemies are, what
are their capabilities, when they intend to do something,
where they will do it, why they want to do it, and how
they intend to do it. These are so called 5W’s [1]. The
enemies, of course, could be the other nation states,
different groups of adversaries, but also country’s own
citizens. For a long time these kinds of activities were
exclusive domain of activity of nation states and was
done by secret services of some kind.

But in the late 20th centry, and especially in 21st cen-
tury, with the proliferation of Internet and ever bigger re-
liance on information technology (IT) companies found
themselves basically in the same situation nation states
ﬁnd themselves for centuries. So, companies started to
try to obtain data about
their threats, and basically,
started to perform tasks performed by secret services
in order to obtain data about its threats, i.e. 5W’s. Yet,
companies are not authorized by law to perform full
range of collection activities performed by secret service,

nor they have resources to do so. Furthermore, cyber
domain has its speciﬁcs with respect to domains secret
services operate in. So, the two domains were fused
thus creating a new intelligence branch, cyber threat
intelligence (CTI).

The goal of this paper is to review several of the
research ﬁelds that the authors identiﬁed to have some
commonalities with the cyber threat intelligence, but in
the same time are much older than CTI, with respect
to the use, experience and the body of research. It is
the idea that the knowledge accumulated in those other
research ﬁelds can be applied to CTI in some way. In
that way we hope to give some guidelines for advancing
cyber threat intelligence much more faster by reusing
ideas, methodologies, experiences and other knowledge
elements from the other, older, research ﬁelds. In that
way we aim to fulﬁll the main objective of this paper, to
give research directions in CTI by connecting it to much
more mature related ﬁelds.

The paper is structured as follows. In the Section II
we deﬁne the necessary terms, the chief among which
is cyber threat intelligence itself. We also give a quick
overview of some basic concepts in the cyber threat
intelligence. Then,
in Section III we brieﬂy review
research related speciﬁcally to CTI and we also review
a related work. The Section IV is about intelligence
already done for some time in today’s organizations, i.e.
business intelligence and competitive intelligence. Then,
in Section V we review some of related ﬁelds of research
that fully or in part could be applied in order to improve
CTI processes and its output. Finally, in Section VI we
give conclusions.

This paper builds on presentation given on the Cyber-
security sympozium organized by Croatian Ministry of
Defense in summer of 2016 on the island of Mali Lošinj.

II. CYBER THREAT INTELLIGENCE

In this section we’ll deﬁne what CTI is and also

describe few important aspects of the CTI.

 
 
 
 
 
 
A. What is CTI?

To know what CTI is, we have to deﬁne it, and we
can start with the deﬁnitions and descriptions of its
constitutive parts contained in the name CTI, i.e. the
terms cyber, threat and intelligence. Then we can try to
answer the question posed in the title of this subsection,
i.e. What is a CTI?.

First, the word cyber denotes domain or environment
in which everything happens. It’s usually not used alone,
i.e. it is used as an adjective. In cases when it’s used
alone it is possible from the context to infer what it refers
to. There are many possible deﬁnitions of the word cyber
all of which in basically say the same, cyber is adjective
that denotes a special environment. Here is one such
deﬁnition [2]:

Its inference usually relates to electronic infor-
mation (data) processing, information technol-
ogy, electronic communications (data transfer)
or information and computer systems. Only the
complete term of the compound word (modi-
ﬁer+head) itself can be considered to possess
actual meaning.

The deﬁnition lists everything that might be consid-
ered "cyber"! So, for example, events within a computer
system is a cyber world, data while being transferred
from source to destination are also in cyber, etc.

Next, the word threat is an umbrella term that in-
cludes anything that can make some harm to something.
Obviously, what is considered to be threat depends on
that something, i.e. who you ask! So, in case of a bank,
there is one set of threats, in case of nation state, there’s
another set of threats, etc. In conclusion, a very general
class of different things can be regarded as a threat, for
example earthquake, or negligent person, or an attacker,
etc. Consequently, there are lot of deﬁnitions of the term
threat, e.g. a simple one [3]:

The potential source of an adverse event.

Finally, there is the key term intelligence. One would
think that for something done for so long there is agreed
upon deﬁnition, but the truth is just the opposite! There
are multiple deﬁnitions, depending whether you look
from the consumer or producer side of the intelligence
[4], and if you look traditional intelligence applied only
for the purpose of the nation state, or the one applied by
other entities like different companies.

One modern deﬁnition we think is very good and in-
cludes not only the intelligence done by governments and
militaries, but also by companies, is given by Breakspear
[5]:

Intelligence is a corporate capability to fore-
cast change in time to do something about it.
The capability involves foresight and insight,
and is intended to identify impending change
which may be positive, representing opportu-
nity, or negative, representing threat.

This deﬁnition places an emphasis on process, rather
then on the outcome of this process. There are, of course,
deﬁnitions that don’t put emphasis on one signel aspect
of intelligence, like aforementioned FBI’s one [4]:

Intelligence is:

• Intelligence is a product that consists of
information that has been reﬁned to meet
the needs of policymakers;

• Intelligence is also a process through
which that information is identiﬁed, col-
lected, and analyzed; and,

• Intelligence refers to both the individual
organizations that shape raw data into a
ﬁnished intelligence product for the beneﬁt
of decision makers and the larger commu-
nity of these organizations.

To ﬁnish with deﬁnitions we can now infer from them
what speciﬁcally CTI is by applying the meaning of
words cyber and threat to the word intelligence:

• It is "traditional" intelligence applied in the realm

of cyber focusing on threats [6].

• It is a product produced by a process done by an
organization, all together called the cyber threat
intelligence.

• It is done by companies but also government or-
ganizations, and potentially many others that have
established process, and produce some product.

It should be also noted that there is a big difference
between information and intelligence. This is empha-
sized in the deﬁnition given by Breakspear who explicitly
states that CTI [product] involves foresight and insight!
To ﬁnish with deﬁnitions, let us just say that in the
literature it is possible to ﬁnd two alternative names
for Cyber threat intelligence (CTI), threat intelligence
[6] and cyber intelligence. Even though not strictly
equivalent if we look through the lenses of deﬁnitions,
usually they are equivalent due to the context in which
they are used, i.e. the context provides for "missing"
word, either cyber or threat. There is also term security
intelligence, but it is a lot more broader that CTI for a
simple reason that the word security means a lot more
than information security and cyber security.

B. CTI Process

CTI, like intelligence in general, follows a certain
process which, as a result, produces output. There are
several models that can be found in the literature, for
example the most basic steps taken from the traditional
intelligence are [7]:

1) Planing and Direction
2) Collection
3) Processing and Exploitation
4) Analysis and Production
5) Dissemination and Integration
The goal of planning and direction is to deﬁne overall
goals of the intelligence process, i.e. intelligence con-
sumers deﬁne what they need. Then in the collection
phase raw data is collected. For the collection of raw
data traditional intelligence uses many different tech-
niques, like open-source intelligence (OSINT), human
intelligence (HUMINT), signals intelligence (SIGINT),
and geospatial intelligence (GEOINT), to name a few.
But not all of those collection disciplines can be used in
CTI by companies or any other entities other than secret
services for the reason they are illegal and/or non-ethical.
So, for CTI the only available collection discipline is
OSINT.

Processing and exploitation transforms raw data into
information, and then analysis and production turns
information into intelligence, the ﬁnal product delivered
to the intelligence user, which is part of the dissemination
and integration steps.

Steps given above are augmented with additional
steps that cover the whole process, like feedback step.
Additionally, the process is drawn like unidirectional,
but
there are backlinks that make the process much
more iterative whith more smaller cycles. There are a
number of works analyzing and searching for the optimal
process, so we’ll not go into details in this paper.

No matter which exact sequence of steps is taken, it
is collectively known as intelligence cycle because steps
are usually drawn on a circle with arrows pointing from
one to the next step and the last step pointing to the ﬁrst
one. The intelligence cycle is not without its issues, and
the collected set of critiques from the literature can be
found in [7].

C. CTI Levels

Usually, CTI is divided into three levels, i.e. strategic,
operational, and tactical. It is important to emphasize
that there is no strict delineation between the three, i.e.
there are overlaps and sometimes it might be hard to
identify for some activity to which level it belongs to.

At the highest level is strategic cyber threat intel-
ligence. It
is closely related to the strategy of the
organization and as such its goal is to support it and
protect from potential threats. The product of the CTI
at this level is for organization’s CEO and the board
that sets overal strategy and executes it. At the next,
lower, level is operational cyber threat intelligence. The
goal of CTI at this level is to identify threats, their
tactics, techniques and procedures. All this allows for
building better defenses and as such the consumers of
this intelligence are CISOs and CIOs [8]. Finally, at the
lowest level is tactical cyber threat intelligence. Today it
is the most frequently associated with CTI in general, i.e.
when people talk about CTI in many cases they actually
talk about tactical level and its artifacts [8]. For example,
indicators of compromise (IoC), different hash values,
description of what malware does and similar are all the
products of tactical level cyber threat intelligence.

Note that it is also possible to ﬁnd four level classiﬁca-
tion in the literature, i.e. strategic, operational, tactical
and technical [6]. Still, the majority of text use three
levels and so we adopted that approach, too.

III. CTI RESEARCH AND RELATED WORK

Research in CTI is currently focused on tactial level,
i.e. analysis of malware, creating indicators of compro-
mise, and sharing them. Sharing is done using the STIX
of OpenIOC formats for describing the intelligence, and
in the case of STIX, TAXII protocol for the exchange of
the information. Much less information is available on
operational level of cyber threat intelligence. And even
less so about strategic intelligence. That doesn’t mean
there is no reports covering all the aspects of cyber
threat
threat reports published
by companies like FireEye, Kaspersky, Sophos, IBM,
etc. contain intelligence on strategic, operational and
tactical levels, but the emphasis is on tactical and less
on operational levels. Furthermore, the information on
how the intelligence was collected, processed, etc. is
unavailable and probably mainly done automatically on
techical level, and manually on all the levels.

intelligence. Different

As for the similar work to the research reported in this
paper, the authors aren’t aware of any. So, this seems
to be a promising direction with a lot of oportunity
for further, and much deeper, research not yet done by
others.

IV. THE THREE INTELLIGENCES

The universe of any company consists of the fol-
lowing stakeholders: (i) customers, (ii) competitors, (iii)

partners, and (iv) attackers. Each one of them interacts
with the company on every level (tactical, operational,
strategic), and thus inﬂuences the state the company
will be in short, medium and long term, respectively.
For that reason companies developed means of tracking
stakeholders and, in a way, predicting what will happen.
Competitors are tracked using competitive intelligence
(CI), customers, the company itself and other data using
business intelligence (BI), and threats/attackers using
cyber threat intelligence, (CTI). Partners, if necessary,
can be tracked using CI or BI, depending on the exact
nature of partnership.

Of the three, CTI is a relative new comer to the
game,
longer
i.e. BI and CI are practiced for a lot
time. This means that the two accumulated a lot more
knowledge in due time, and due to certain similarities,
very likely this knowledge can be applied for CTI as
well, advancing it more rapidly than by going through
all development/research steps BI and CI went over the
years. In the following sections we’ll talk in a bit more
details about CI and BI.

A. Competitive Intelligence

Companies are performing competitive intelligence in
some form for a long time now, at least 30 years now.
The goal of competitive intelligence (CI) is to collect
information about competition, analyze it and present
managers with actionable data [9]. The CI is especially
important today in a highly competitive market where
decision makers have to have actionable data in order
to properly guide companies and where mistakes and
wrong predictions can have disastrous effects. For that
reason many companies have established competitive
intelligence processes. Furthermore, the fact that this
activity exists for a relatively long time, as well as its
importance, means that substantial body of knowledge
has been accumulated with time.

B. Business Intelligence

Business Intelligence is relatively old activity going
back as far as to 1950ties [10] even though the true
renaissance the ﬁeld achieved in 90ties. The goal of BI
is to analyze information present withing the company
and to extract intelligence (knowledge) that can be used
to support decision making by management. The main
difference between BI and CI is that former uses internal
information, while latter uses external information. For a
long time the primary data sources for BI were structured
databases, but lately unstructured text is also used due
to having vast amounts of it available in comparison to

structured data. Furthermore, the advancement of tech-
niques to analyze unstructured data like natural language
processing and machine intelligence also helped in that
respect.

V. RELATED RESEARCH FIELDS

The business intelligence and competitive intelligence
described in the previous section use many methods to
analyze and process data. Some of those are described
here along with some additional tools that might be used
in the CTI. The list is in alphabetical order.

A. Adversarial Reasoning

Adversarial reasoning is subﬁeld of Decision making
and its goal is to model and predict how adversarials will
behave [11]. This in turn allows one to properly respond
to anticipated behaviors. The ﬁeld of adversary reasoning
is relatively old, having ﬁrst papers appeared in 1992
[11], so in the mean time it is obviously accumulated a
lot of knowledge. The main tool of adversarial reasoning
was game theory, but that isn’t the case any more. The
connection with the CTI is obvious, namely, CTI analyst
when analyzing threats has to anticipate threat’s behavior
in medium (operational) and long (strategic) time frame.

B. Cognitive Computing

Cognitive computing is a relatively new ﬁeld but it is a
continuation of an old idea of Artiﬁcial Intelligence [12].
Namely, the original idea of AI was to mimic human
mind in it capacity to comprehend and understand the
world. This turned out to be very hard and with the time
AI fragmented into multiple subﬁelds each with its own
narrow goals. Yet, all of those ﬁelds carry a mark of
AI and thus AI itself is a very overloaded expression.
To avoid all those conotations by using the name AI,
Cognitive Computing term was coined. The idea is to use
multiple methods in parallel (sequentially) and achieve
more complex behaviors than it is possible using only a
single method, like deep learning, etc. Since the ﬁeld
is relatively new it is still confusing, and that is the
most noticeable by comparing scientiﬁc literature like
[12] and commercial like [13]. Commercial ones put an
emphasis on processing natural language, while scientiﬁc
ones take a more broader approach. But, either way,
the biggest success of cognitive computing to date is
IBM Watson [13] which in 2011 managed to beat two
of the best players in Jeopardy quiz show [14]. This
is a signiﬁcant success taking into account how hard is
for computers to understand ambiguous human language,
and to do so quickly. After that success IBM decided

to commercialize IBM Watson and offer it as a cloud
service to the customers.

E. Situational Awareness and Cyber Situational Aware-
ness

CTI would obviously beneﬁt from cognitive com-
puting in general, and IBM Watson like systems in
particular, because they would allow harvesting and
understanding a large amounts of data, something that
is today very expensive and very hard to achieve, if
possible at all.

C. Information Extraction

Information extraction is a research discipline that
tries to solve the problem of automated extraction of
information from unstructured texts,
like documents,
Web pages, forums, etc. It grew up from natural language
processing, and is developed for over 25 years now [15].

D. Data and Information Fusion

The ﬁeld of data and information fusion deals with the
fusion of information coming from different sources and
on a different abstraction levels in such a way to produce
new, more complete and better data, information, or
decisions, at a level of a human understanding then it
would be possible by using the sources separately [16],
[17].

Several points are worth emphasizing that connect DIF
to CTI. First, there are different models proposed for
information fusion which broadly can be grouped by
input and output, i.e. input can be either data, features
or decisions (from lowest to highest level), while the
output can be anything of the same or higher level.
For example, if the inputs are features, then the output
can be features or decisions. The next point worth
emphasizing is the fact that intelligence cycle described
in the Section II-B is only one model proposed for the
purpose of information fusion [16]. Others are OODA
loop, Waterfall model, the Omnibus model, the Ensley
model, and many others. So, the knowledge from DIF
can be applied to the speciﬁc parts of the CTI cycle, or
to the whole cycle in general. Also of interest is that the
emphasis on research in the ﬁeld of DIF is now on high-
level fusion. Since the emphasis of current CTI research
and practice is concentrated on technical/tactical details
it might be inferred that CTI is currently in early stages
of development when compared to DIF.

The use of DIF in computer and network security has
already been suggested. E.g., Corona et. al [17] review
the use of DIF for the purpose of improving intrusion
detection.

The situational awareness (SAW) is the perception
of the elements in the environment within a volume of
time and space, the comprehension of their meaning,
and the projection of their status in the near future [16].
The Cyber Situational Awareness (CSAW) is concerned
with situational awareness in the cyber space. SAW is
dependent on information and DIF so the two are often
interrelated in the literature.

Obviously the goal of CTI is to make decision makers
aware of threats in cyber space, which in other words,
is very similar to cyber situational awareness, though a
bit more narrow.

F. Knowledge Management

Knowledge management (KM) is a discipline that
provides strategy, process, and technology to share and
leverage information and expertise that will increase our
level of understanding to more effectively solve problems
and make decisions [18].

KM is about managing a knowledge, which is deﬁned
in variety of ways, one of which is that it’s actionable
information [18]. This is in line with what CTI produces,
i.e. CTI from data extracts information and from infor-
mation produces knowledge. Thus, it is interesting to
see what knowledge management is, and what can be
(re)used to improve CTI and its processes.

There are a number of reasons businesses use KM
[18]. Almost all of which have application for the pur-
pose of CTI, too. Here are just a few with the justiﬁcation
on why they should be used for CTI:

• measure and track value and ﬂow of information
– this is a very important
issue because when
something is better measured, the easier it is to
manage it. There is no engineering and science
without measurement. This holds for everything,
and thus for CTI, too.

• the need to build highly effective virtual

teams
and reduce cycle times, as well as better customer
relationships – again, something very important for
today’s organizations that helps the organization to
manage and improve its processes, so applicable to
CTI, too.
the need for a better way to share information and
knowledge across organizational boundaries and
the ability to rapidly respond to queries or crisis
– information sharing is a hot topic in information
security in general, and in CTI in particular. As can
be seen, this is a topic with which KM deals in a

•

[6] D. Chismon and M. Ruks, “Threat intelligence: Collecting,
analysing, evaluating,” 2015, MWR Infosecurity, UK Cert,
United Kingdom.

[7] A. Frini and A.-C. Boury-Brisset, “An intelligence process
model based on a collaborative approach,” DTIC Document,
Tech. Rep., 2011.

J. Felker, R. Borum,
levels of

[8] T. Mattern,
“Operational
Journal of
no.
[Online].
702–719,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08850607.2014.924811

and G. Bamford,
International
Intelligence and CounterIntelligence, vol. 27,
Available:
pp.

intelligence,”

2014.

cyber

4,

[9] R. Bose, “Competitive intelligence process and tools for intel-
ligence analysis,” Industrial Management & Data Systems, vol.
108, no. 4, pp. 510–528, 2008.

[10] H. P. Luhn, “A business intelligence system,” IBM Journal of
Research and Development, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 314–319, 1958.
[11] D. A. Pelta and R. R. Yager, “Dynamic vs. static decision
strategies in adversarial reasoning.” in IFSA/EUSFLAT Conf.
Citeseer, 2009, pp. 472–477.

[12] P. Langley, “The cognitive systems paradigm,” Advances in

Cognitive Systems, vol. 1, pp. 3–13, 2012.

[13] R. High, “The era of cognitive systems: An inside look at IBM
Watson and how it works,” IBM Corporation, Redpapers, 2012.
[14] IBM Corporation. (2011) Dave Ferrucci at Computer History
Museum: How it all began and what’s next. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ibm.com/blogs/research/2011/12/dave-ferrucci-at-computer-history-museum-how-it-all-began-and-whats-next/

[15] S. Sarawagi et al., “Information extraction,” Foundations and
Trends R(cid:13) in Databases, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 261–377, 2008.
[16] P. H. Foo and G. W. Ng, “High-level information fusion: An
overview.” Journal of Advances in Information Fusion, vol. 8,
no. 1, pp. 33–72, 2013.

[17] I. Corona, G. Giacinto, C. Mazzariello, F. Roli, and C. Sansone,
“Information fusion for computer security: State of the art and
open issues,” Information Fusion, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 274–284,
2009.

[18] A. Satyadas, U. Harigopal, and N. P. Cassaigne, “Knowledge
management tutorial: an editorial overview,” IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and
Reviews), vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 429–437, 2001.

methodological way, so this makes KM very appli-
cable to CTI and Information security in general!
• the need to retain the knowledge of experts who
are retiring – This is the problem that has every
organization with its workforce. Not only when
experts are retiring, but also if they leave a company
for other job. Keeping their knowledge is very
valuable for the continuity of processes done within
the organization.

There are other business reasons for using KM in
organizations that could be also applied for CTI. But this
much is enough to argue that KM is a very interesting
ﬁeld of research with a lot of potential to improve CTI
and its processes.

VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper we deﬁned CTI and gave a quick
overview of CTI methods and processes. We then re-
viewed related research ﬁelds, starting with business
and competitive intelligence and continuing with other
related ﬁelds. We argued that each research ﬁeld has
something in common with the CTI thus, meaning that
CTI can be advanced much quicker by reusing some
knowledge from those related ﬁelds. If we take into
account that each of the related ﬁelds is much older (in
time frames of information technology) than CTI, then
the potential is really big. In that way we showed the
potential research directions for CTI.

The work in this paper is just a start since there are
much more research topics that has to be done. First,
the relation between research ﬁelds presented in this
paper and CTI can be correlated much deeper, and also
there are other ﬁelds with a potential to be (re)used
in CTI, like knowledge engineering, Ontologies, Uncer-
tainty Analysis/Management, Decision Theory, Critical
Thinking, Uncertainty Theory & Reasoning, Big Data,
and Cognition.

REFERENCES

[1] E. W. Burger, M. D. Goodman, P. Kampanakis, and K. A.
Zhu, “Taxonomy model for cyber threat intelligence information
exchange technologies,” in Proceedings of
the 2014 ACM
Workshop on Information Sharing & Collaborative Security.
ACM, 2014, pp. 51–60.

[2] Secretariat of the Security and Defence Committee, “Finland’s

Cyber security Strategy,” Finland, 2013.

[3] R. Kissel, “Glossary of key information security terms,” NIST

Interagency Reports NIST IR, vol. 7298, no. 3, 2013.

[4] “FBI Intelligence Branch,” https://www.fbi.gov/about/leadership-and-structure/intelligence-branch,

accessed: 2017-02-19.

[5] A. Breakspear, “A new deﬁnition of intelligence,” Intelligence
and National Security, vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 678–693, 2013.

