Secondary Use of Electronic Health Record: Opportunities and Challenges

Shahid Munir Shaha, Rizwan Ahmed Khana,b

aFaculty of IT, Barrett Hodgson University, Karachi, Pakistan
bLIRIS, Universit`e de Lyon, France

Abstract

In present technological era, healthcare providers generate huge amount of clinical data on daily basis. Gener-
ated clinical data is stored digitally in the form of Electronic Health Records (EHR) as a central data repository
of hospitals. Data contained in EHR is not only used for the patients’ primary care but also for various secondary
purposes such as clinical research, automated disease surveillance and clinical audits for quality enhancement.
Using EHR data for secondary purposes without consent or in some cases even with consent creates privacy issues
for individuals. Secondly, EHR data is also made accessible to various stake holders including diﬀerent govern-
ment agencies at various geographical sites through wired or wireless networks. Sharing of EHR across multiples
agencies makes it vulnerable to cyber attacks and also makes it diﬃcult to implement strict privacy laws as in
some cases data is shared with organization that is governed by speciﬁc regional law. Privacy of an individual
could be severely aﬀected when their sensitive private information contained in EHR is leaked or exposed to pub-
lic. Data leak can cause ﬁnancial losses or an individuals may encounter social boycott if their medical condition
is exposed in public. To protect patients personal data from such threats, there exists diﬀerent privacy regula-
tions such as General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) and My Health Record (MHR). However, continually evolving state-of-the-art techniques in machine
learning, data analytics and hacking are making it even more diﬃcult to completely protect individual’s / patient’s
privacy. In this article, we have systematically examined various secondary uses of EHR with the aim to highlight
how these secondary uses eﬀect patients’ privacy. Secondly, we have critically analyzed GDPR and highlighted
possible areas of improvement, considering escalating use of technology and diﬀerent secondary uses of EHR.

Keywords: Electronic Health Records (EHR), General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), Privacy, Secondary
uses of EHR, Ethical concerns

1. Introduction

Clinical data is generated in the form of ongoing patient diagnostic services. These services usually take place
in hospitals, clinics or laboratories through diﬀerent clinical trials (via medical imaging or doctors prescriptions)
or through wireless body area network using wearable sensors [1]. All of these sources produce huge amount of
clinical data world wide and its volume is experiencing an exponential growth. It is estimated that clinical data
will swell up to 2314 Exabytes by 2020 from a ﬁgure of 153 Exabytes in 2013 with an annual growth rate of 48
percent [2].

In most of the countries (especially developing countries), data generated during routine clinical practices is
stored manually in the form of paper based medical records. This procedure is adopted by the medical practitioners
because of ease of handling, lack of understanding or for the purpose of treating more patients in less time.
However, this method of storing patient’s medical information is not useful for the patients and does not guarantee
accurate and timely deliverance of healthcare services.

Some other problems associated with manual recording of clinical / medical data are:

1. Paper based medical records can easily be altered or can be lost and may cause sever consequences.
2. Physicians / clinicians can prescribe wrong medications (due to alteration of paper based medical records)
or cannot advice right medications during follow up visits without properly knowing past medical records of
patients.

3. It is not practical for a person to carry a huge bunch of paper based past medical records during follow up
visits or to describe complete medical history to a physician / clinician in case of change of physician or
hospital.

4. Reviewing and analyzing paper based records poses cumbersome task for new physicians or medical staﬀ

when patients change their physicians or hospital.

Preprint submitted to Elsevier

0
2
0
2

n
a
J

6
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
7
4
9
0
.
1
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
To avoid all of the above described diﬃculties, automated / electronic online patient information system through
which patients’ complete medical record is made available to healthcare professionals is required. Such electronic
system also serves the purpose of storing patients data for longer time without any alterations and makes it acces-
sible through diﬀerent locations to support quick decision making processes [3].

Figure 1: EHR as a clinical data repository

Healthcare organizations are now adopting techniques to digitize medical records to overcome challenges (de-
scribed above) faced by them or by patients while using paper based medical records [4]. With the new technique,
patients’ clinical data is now stored as Electronic Health Records (EHR). EHR are the patients’ computerized
health records that contain patients’ complete information along with their medical history in a format (refer Fig-
ure 1) that can be easily shared among diﬀerent health care providers or can be accessed by them through diﬀerent
linked locations when required [5].

Adoption of EHR provide range of beneﬁts over the traditional paper based medical record systems. For Ex-

ample:

1. EHR are capable of storing structured, coded and electronic patient data all together to form a complete

history of patient’s health [6].

2. Electronic data saved as EHR makes a Decision Support System (DSS) for monitoring health outputs to
improve health care quality [7], where DSS is a tool, usually software based tool, that supports decision
making by providing automated analysis of data [8].

3. EHR system acts as a central database of information for patient documentation and billing, maintaining

quality, and supporting patient related sensitive decisions [9].

4. Data saved in EHRs can be accessed through multiple locations simultaneously and also can be shared with
diﬀerent partner organizations conveniently. Thus, making data accessible to the concerned physicians across
multiple sites to better provide healthcare services.

5. EHR reduce probability of errors related to medical data analysis as it stores complete medical records and

thus lowers overall healthcare cost [10].

With all the above mentioned beneﬁts of using EHR, certain risks factors are also associated with it. The most
important issue is the data security and patient’s privacy. In case, if EHR data is leaked or theft from the database,
it can be misused (by altering dosage of drugs or treatment procedure etc.) and may cause severe complications
or even leads to the patient’s death [11]. It is therefore utmost important to protect patient’s information in central
database from unauthorized wrong hands. Patient’s information may also be theft while it is in transmission to the
other linked services over the network.

Information contained in EHR is also used for diﬀerent secondary purposes (other than patient personal care)
such as clinical research, health promotions, clinical audit and clinical governance, national screening and pre-
ventive campaigns, audits against national standards, national statistics, planning future services, and resource
2

allocations etc. [12] (refer Section 4 for discussion on secondary uses of EHR). For all such uses, patients may
not be willing to share their information because often patient share their private health data for their personal
care and not for the other / secondary uses. Using patient sensitive information for diﬀerent secondary purposes
without their consent seriously eﬀects their privacy.

To safe guard patient privacy or personal data, there exist privacy standards in diﬀerent regions of the world
such as General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in Europe [13, 14], Health Insurance Portability and Ac-
countability Act (HIPAA) in the United States (US) [15, 16] and My Health Record (MHR) in Australia [17, 18].
These standards provide legislation to protect personal data but with fast paced advancement in data analytics and
artiﬁcial intelligence [19, 20] poses new challenges for such standards.

Our contributions in this article are following:

1. In this study we described various secondary uses of EHR with the aim to highlight how these secondary uses

eﬀect patients’ privacy, refer Section 4 for discussion on secondary uses of EHR.

2. In this article we have discussed various issues associated with secondary use of EHR, refer Section 5.

Referred section also elaborates on security and privacy issues of using EHR data (Section 5.4).

3. This article systematically analyzed GDPR (recent privacy standard to protect European citizens data) regu-
lation and enlisted its challenges of ensuring that EHR data to be used only for the purpose agreed upon by
the patient, refer Section 6.

Our contributions in this article are oriented toward understanding ethical concerns when dealing with personal
data in the era of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI). Research domain of our contributions (described above) needs more
collaborative eﬀorts by research community working in the domain of medicine, computing and law to achieve
better insight. Ethical issues arising due to fast proliferation of AI-assisted technologies [21] will raise various
serious concerns, specially related to privacy of individuals. Due to complex nature of this interdisciplinary
research domain it is hard to ﬁnd literature on the topic and thus, our article is novel as it systematically analyzes
uses of sensitive EHR data which, if violated, creates many privacy and ethical concerns.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes EHR along with their diﬀerent standards.
Section 3 describe information sources of EHR. Section 4 describes use of EHR in various secondary purposes.
Section 5 presents challenges of using EHR for secondary purposes. Section 6 describes the systematic analysis
of GDPR in context with the patients privacy and data security with respect to the secondary uses of EHR. Finally,
in section 7 conclusions is presented.

2. Electronic Health Records (EHR): Data Sharing

EHR is a clinical data repository containing basic patient information such as patient’s personal proﬁle, his
/ her complete family history, laboratory reports, physicians and other medical staﬀ notes etc. Along with this
primary information, EHR also contain data form the other hospital information systems such as imaging data
from radiology departments, patients genomics data from genetic departments or endoscopic or colonoscopic data
from Gastroenterology departments etc. Figure 1 illustrates the most important data elements included in the
EHR.

Figure 2: Conceptual overview of EHR system

EHR also provide functionality of generating reminders for routine screenings and disease reporting, generat-
ing graphical trends against various parameters such as blood pressure monitoring, heart beat monitoring, blood
3

glucose level monitoring etc. The same is also shown in Figure 1. Such reporting is highly beneﬁcial for patients
health and safety especially when patients are in critical condition and their strict monitoring is required.

Conceptually EHR system can be divided into two basic parts [22]. Creation part and the access part (refer
Figure 2). Creation part is based on the interaction of patient with the healthcare providers. This part explains,
how the data from the patient is captured, how it is formatted according to the policies and standard and ﬁnally,
how the formatted data is stored in an interoperable database. Access part is based on the access of the data stored
in EHR by the diﬀerent authorized users or organization. This part explains how conﬁdential information from
EHR can be securely accessed by the authorized users via user friendly interfaces.

2.1. EHR standards

For the eﬀective use of data contained in EHR, it must be shared through diﬀerent linked locations such as

clinics, hospitals, radiology departments, pharmacies, laboratories and patient homes [23] (refer Figure 3)

Figure 3: EHR data sharing

Shared data at multiple locations ensures patients solitary care by identifying their basic needs in terms of
care, safety, timeliness, and eﬀective monitoring. It also helps medical staﬀ (physician, nurses etc.) to take right
actions based on patient conditions. The data usefulness can further be increased if the data contained in EHR is
linked with diﬀerent clinical decision support systems (CDSS). CDSS is automated medical data analysis tool that
suggests next steps for treatment and generate alerts by predicting future conditions / trends by analyzing provided
data [24]. By this way, the physicians can take sensitive decisions quickly and eﬀectively [25].

However, without any industry standard for information exchange, it is usually diﬃcult to share and exchange
EHR data across multiple sites. The same diﬃculty was faced by the healthcare organizations to communicate
EHR data with each other and with diﬀerent decisions support systems when there was no industry standard
available for health information exchange. It was the main reason behind the slow adoption of EHR system in
healthcare organizations even if their adoption was highly beneﬁcial for them [26].

2.1.1. Health Level Seven (HL7) standard

The Health Level Seven (HL7) organization was established in US in March 1987 to develop consistent com-
mon standards for Hospital Information System (HIS) [27]. Afterwords this organization deﬁned HL7-Clinical
Document Architecture (HL7 CDA) as EHR messaging standard for easy integration, interchange, sharing and re-
trieval of information across diﬀerent clinical information systems. The HL7 standard allows diﬀerent healthcare
organization to share and exchange patient information via encoded data exchange. It provides a common syntax
of information for diﬀerent clinical information systems to share information (contained in EHR) conveniently
[9].

4

The HL7 CDA Framework 1.0 release, became an American National Standards Institute (ANSI) approved HL7
standard in November 2000 [28]. After release of ﬁrst version, version 2 and version 3 releases were also made
available with some new standards and modiﬁcations [29]. HL7 CDA is a markup for specifying composition
and semantics of data ingredients of EHR such as a discharge report, admission summary, progress and procedure
reports and to exchange them with various stakeholders. It is an absolute object document that may hold clinical
data in various formats such as text, image, sound, or other multimedia content. Extensible Markup Language
(XML) is used to encode the HL7 CDA clinical documents, which then can be exchanged in form of HL7 messages
or using other transport solutions.

An HL7 CDA message consists of a header and a body. Header contains information regarding patient, source
(provider) and the authentication of the message. On the other hand, the body of the message includes orga-
nized clinical reports i.e. lab, radiology, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Computed Tomography (CT) scan,
ultrasound etc.

2.1.2. Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR)

In order to improve inter interoperability and exchange of information, HL7 released diﬀerent version time to
time. In 1988, HL7 version 2 was released to enhance and streamline information exchange mechanisms / proce-
dures, that can be used by diﬀerent departments across hospitals [30]. However, diﬀerent limitations were exposed
in this version such as diﬃcult implementation process, having number of optional segments and above all lack of
proper representation that is capable enough to identify techniques for exchanging messages and interfaces [31].
To overcome the shortcomings of version 2, version 3 was developed in the year 1995 . Although, HL7 version 3
resolved much of the problems of previous version, it could not resolve the incompatibility issue raised because of
variety of sub versions [32]. In order to further improve HL7 standards, another novel interoperability standard i.e.
Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR) was initiated in the year 2011 [33] by HL7 organization. FHIR
standards are very simple to adapt, possess scalability and are robust in nature. These standards have potential
capabilities of supporting work ﬂows in small devices like mobile phones [34]

3. Electronic health record information sources

Adoption of EHR is beneﬁcial both for patients, physicians and healthcare providers.

It improves overall
healthcare quality, omits paperwork, reduce medical errors and increase work eﬃciency as well as reduce overall
healthcare cost [35].

Beside patients personal care, EHR data is also used for diﬀerent secondary purposes(refer section4 fro sec-
ondary uses of EHR). However, functionality of EHR data for secondary uses has been limited because of non
uniform data components across EHR. Non uniformity in data elements exists because of the fact that during
daily clinical practices, EHR data is often recorded in free text and unstructured format. Therefore, EHR contains
structured and unstructured sets of information. Figure 4 elaborates more on the structured and unstructured data
components of EHR. As shown in Figure 4, structured data includes laboratory results, vital signs, prescriptions,
medications and International Classiﬁcation of Diseases (ICD) codes whereas, unstructured data includes narra-
tive information (free text) such as images and graphics, radiology reports, visit notes, discharge summary, chief
complaint etc.

Figure 4 depicts that the major portion of EHR data is consisted of unstructured elements. Such data elements
are not represented in any standard coding scheme such as ICD codes, therefore, their retrieval, reporting and
aggregation is not easy like structured data using commonly available database tools [35]. It is therefore required
to converted unstructured data elements into structured data in order to make it equally useful for secondary uses.
One of the method to convert unstructured data into structured data is manually reviewing EHR by the experts
using text charts or data abstraction methods [36]. However, these methods are time consuming and not reliable
to capture all the structured information. Furthermore, it is beyond the capacity of human being to review clinical
data of EHR in large volume. Natural language processing (NLP) has been found a great help for the researchers
to extract structured clinical data from unstructured data elements [37, 38]. It is an artiﬁcial intelligence domain
of computer science that uses computers to manipulate unstructured data such as narrative text in form of clinical
notes or speech data [39].

Mostly, NLP uses statistical (probabilistic) Machine Learning (ML) models to derive language data from large
volume of free text data. These models use text data to identify common patterns and associations in the data
˙NLP based ML models give meanings to words and phrases in text and converts unstructured data elements of
EHR into structured codes. In short, NLP captures unstructured data elements of EHR, analyze the data elements
with respect to their grammatical structures, obtain meanings from grammatical structures, and ﬁnally summerizes
information to make it useful.

5

Figure 4: Unstructured and structured data elements of EHR

4. Secondary uses of EHR

One of the contribution of this study, as described above, is systematic analysis of various secondary uses of
EHR data with the aim to highlight how these secondary uses eﬀect patient’s privacy. This section discusses
diﬀerent popular secondary uses of EHR data. Section 5 elaborates on challenges associated with the secondary
use of EHR data while, Section 5.4 focuses on privacy and security challenges of EHR data.

4.1. Clinical Research

The basic purpose of clinical research is to use EHR for design and execution of clinical trials for new medicines
[40]. Health related issues are directly proportional to the population. Currently, healthcare organizations, hospi-
tals, laboratories are facing shortage of trained medical staﬀ due to various reasons. One of the possible solution
to tackle diﬀerent medical ailments is to discover new drugs with better results or new techniques and robust
strategies. All such activities require clinical research to be conducted. Thus, clinical research holds pivotal role
in tackling some of the hard pressed medical issues.

Domains of clinical research
Hypothesis Generation
Epidemiology
Drug utilization
Patient recruitment
Health Technology Assessments

Comparative Eﬀectiveness

Pragmatic Trails

Table 1: Diﬀerent Domains of Clinical Research
Examples
To understand the people response on introducing new drugs.
To ﬁnd causes of disease in community of people.
To ﬁgure out the use of medicines and to determine the frequency.
To raise the awareness of clinical trials.
Evaluating large number of research publications on a topic of interest and
generating highly consolidated information for policy makers and health
care providers
Obtaining real world evidences from the analysis of real world data gener-
ated through routine clinical practices to help decision makers for making
eﬀective decisions.
Observing patients’ treatment and their outcomes in real world situations
to provide on ground real information to the decision makers so that they
can make eﬀective decisions for the enhancement pf quality of care.

Some of the other areas where clinical research is required are:

1. Prediction of diseases based on patients present data [41].
2. Study of drug behaviors with diﬀerent diseases or diﬀerent patients i.e. study on antibiotics [42].
3. Developing vaccines for the prevention of diseases before it attack [43].

Other than the areas mentioned above, there exists multiple domains (refer Table 1) where clinical research is
essential to overcome the existing problems of the medical world and to ensure high quality of healthcare delivery
to the patients.

6

In the domain of clinical research, EHR is an essential part because it is a basic information source and a possible
way of exchanging clinical information with diﬀerent stakeholders. Based on this exchange of information, various
health statistics are developed and decisions are made. For example, based on data collected word wide, World
Health Organization (WHO) publishes various reports time to time for public awareness and for the authorities
knowledge to understand the current trends and future needs related to particular diseases [44, 45] .

Table 2 lists possible information sources available in EHR that can help in successfully carrying out clinical

research in diﬀerent domains.

Table 2: Diﬀerent information sources available in EHR that can help in carrying out clinical Research

Data Sources

Explanation

Possible areas of Clinical Research

Demographics

Habits
Behav-

Daily
(Risky
iors)
Facts and Moni-
toring

Laboratory Data

Various Encoun-
ters Data

Special
Procedures

tests &

Imaging

It includes patient’s basic information such
as name, age, gender, date of birth, ad-
dress, contact, allergies, past medical his-
tory and diagnosis
Using tobacco, alcohol, and other sedative
drugs.

Weight, height, blood pressure, blood
sugar, heart beat.

Complete Blood Count, Prothrombin
Time, Basic Metabolic Panel, Comprehen-
sive Metabolic Panel, Lipid Proﬁle, Liver
Functioning Test, Thyroid Stimulating
Hormone, Hemoglobin A1C, Urinalysis,
Microbiological Culture with antibiotic
resistance tests and others
Human population or, hyperlipidemia, dia-
betes, anxiety and obesity, allergies, reﬂux
esophagitis, respiratory problems, depres-
sive disorder, asthma, nail fungus, urinary
tract kidney failure, migraine
Appendectomy, Electrocardiogram, Biop-
sies, Angiographies, Therapies

Imaging, Ultra
Magnetic Resonance
Sound, Computerized Axial Tomography,
Positron Emission Tomography etc.

Data analysis, community based research,
age related research, disease surveillance,
and all other epidemiological human pop-
ulation studies.
Cancer research, chronic drug usage impli-
cations on health, mental illness, psycho-
logical disorders.
Hypertension research, Body Mass Index
(BMI) based research, diabetic research,
early childhood growth studies and cogni-
tive outcomes.
To investigate the origin of disease, study of
communicable and non communicable dis-
eases as well as blood disorders.

Research of all non communicable dis-
eases.

Special investigative tests for the advance
research on non communicable diseases
identiﬁcation and control.
Cancer Research, identiﬁcation and moni-
toring of Congenital anomalies diseases in
unborn babies, bone fractures and tumors,
can be used to monitor response of tumors
to chemotherapy or radiations.

Table 2 shows that EHR contains enough information to carry out clinical research in diﬀerent domains. Suc-
cessful utilization of this information for research purpose requires development of new and emerging research
infrastructures capable of exchanging information based on latest published standards. However, when data is
shared across diﬀerent healthcare organizations it raises diﬀerent security and privacy concerns. These concerns
are discussed in Section 5.4.

4.2. Public Health Surveillance

Another secondary use of EHR is Public Health Surveillance (PHS). PHS is a process of collecting, analyzing
and interpreting data related to a speciﬁc disease for administrating and assessing public health on the whole [46].
PHS particularly investigates those diseases, which harm or may tends to harm a large population and grow in
community like epidemic diseases. Its main functions include collection of facts about a particular disease, risk
factors of its spread and interpretation and analysis of the collected facts for controlling the disease to prevent
public from its severe eﬀects. One of the example of PHS is the surveillance of Dengue outbreak in Pakistan that
has been reported in [47]. Dengue is a viral disease which causes high fever in patients and spreads in people
7

because of the bite of a particular Aedes aegypti mosquito. Recently, it has aﬀected around 40% population of the
world. Pakistan is one of the most aﬀected country from it. There are several other examples of PHS world wide
like reported in [48, 49].

As discussed above, PHS is a common practice word wide but mostly in third world countries it is performed
using manual procedures [50, 51]. In these methods, data about disease for surveillance purpose is collected us-
ing traditional methods. For example, physicians prescription records are gathered either from patients or from
hospitals and clinics or through public surveys [52], similarly data form other departments of the hospitals (labora-
tories, radiology departments, emergency departments etc) is also collected manually by visiting the logs of these
departments’ databases. The collected data is then cross communicated between public health staﬀ and health
protecting agencies via telephonic and fax communication networks. Collected data is stored on papers manually
and manual procedure is used to analyze the stored data [53]. This method of PHS is time consuming, requires
large manpower and needs huge eﬀorts to record, store and analyze the data. It is also not a reliable method as
there are chances of errors due to manual handling of data. Inaccurate and uncertain outcomes are possible based
on the collection and inspection of manually collected and stored data [54]. Such traditional methods are not
suitable for the conﬁrmation of certain disease, understanding its severity, its transmission risks, and the spread of
other linked diseases.

With more eﬀective way, surveillance of diseases can be performed by actively monitoring patients EHR. As
EHR are rich in variety of data, the summary generated by analyzed data is provided to public health agencies
for prevention and control of diseases. Health surveillance by EHR provides the glance of health status of the
community, which promotes the quality of healthcare. It tracks the key diseases, with more eﬀective way than
manual procedures. Use of EHR provides the opportunity to automate the PHS. It is an eﬀective way of preventing
outbreaks by discovering utmost danger cases irrespective of merely reacting to outbreaks [55]. Figure 5 elaborates
the eﬀectiveness of EHR based automated surveillance against the traditional manual surveillance systems.

During traditional surveillance, the most of the time is utilized on manual screenings and reviewing charts and
less time is saved for the actual intervention. On the other hand automated PHS assisted by EHR data is time
eﬃcient in analyzing data. The same is shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5: Traditional v/s automated surveillance

Use of EHR for public health surveillance has proved to be eﬀective in developed countries such as United
Kingdom (UK), United States (US), France, Norway, Canada and Australia [56]. In these countries, local health
departments have diverted their manual surveillance system towards EHR based electronic surveillance system.
This practice has advanced the functionality of PHS [57]. Developing nations have also initiated adoption of
EHRs for PHS to robustly analyze data and take actions, if required [58]. Thus, it is an important need of the
present day automated surveillance systems to use data from EHR. For example, Integrated Disease Surveillance
and Response System (IDSRS) requires data to be obtained from patient medical records [59, 60]. It is therefore
necessary for the hospitals and the other health related agencies to adapt EHR so that automated surveillance can
be done eﬀectively.

4.3. Clinical audit and quality assurance

The aim of clinical audit is to enhance patient care via rigorous analysis of care provided against benchmark
standards [61]. Clinical audit is a systematic way of settling standards, analyzing data based on standards, per-
forming actions to meet settled standards and executing proper monitoring to sustain the standards. Clinical audit
is a cyclic process (refer Figure 6) that contains diﬀerent stages to be followed for the achievement of best practices
in clinical practices.

8

Figure 6: Clinical audit as a cyclic process

Standards settled for the clinical audits require not only to be obeyed by the medical staﬀ (doctors, nurses, mid-
wives, therapists, etc.) but also by the healthcare organizations like hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, ambulatory
surgical centers, autonomous laboratories, radiology units, collection units etc. Clinical audit focuses on broadly
accepted methods to improve over all healthcare quality. For example, organizational development, information
management and statistics evaluation are the key functions of clinical audits.

The role of EHR is very important in clinical audits as it provides detailed and accurate information to the
auditors. Using EHR for clinical audits gives convenience to the auditors to perform the clinical audits as compared
to use of traditional clinical data for audit [62]. Figure 6 shows that the data collection and data analysis are the
important parts of the clinical audit. In order to perform quality clinical audits, the clinical data must be easily
available as well as the available data must be reliable to perform clinical audit. EHR conveniently provide data
to the auditors from multiple access points to perform clinical audits to better provide the quality of the care to the
patients.

5. Challenges associated with secondary use of EHRs

Primarily, EHR data is collected for patient’s individual care and administrative billing purposes. Using this data
for diﬀerent secondary purposes (as elaborated in Section 4) is always challenging [63, 6]. It is because priorities
and settings of primary and secondary uses are diﬀerent. The quality of data collected for the primary purpose
cannot be same as the quality of data collected for secondary uses. For example, data collected for clinical research
needs much more care and attention during collection than the data gathered during routine clinical practices in the
form of EHR. The quality of collected clinical data is a serious concern of the researchers. Due to this reason, with
respect to reuse of clinical data, the authors of [64] suggested that the data must be used for its primary purpose
only.

Following are diﬀerent factors of concern that aﬀect the quality of clinical data collected through EHR.

5.1. Correctness

Correctness refers to the accuracy of the collected data that is directly linked with its initial documentation
(how the data was collected, recorded and stored). EHR data is collected through routine clinical practices during
which the clinicians priority is to collect the patients data according to their own point of interest and according
to diﬀerent administrative needs but not according to their various secondary uses (refer Section 4). The chances
of errors are obvious in this case. According to the study presented in [65], data accuracy collected through EHR
ranges between 44% to 100%.

Errors in EHR may lead to diﬀerent outcomes, if their data is used for various secondary purposes. Errors

include:

1. Inaccurate predictions by clinical researchers
2. Degradation in health standards and statistics as data analyzed was error prone.
3. False health surveillance results that may lead to unforeseen medical emergency.

9

Improvement in accuracy of EHR is essential to make it equally beneﬁcial for primary as well as secondary

uses.

5.2.

Incompleteness

Another factor that eﬀects quality of clinical data is related to the completeness of the EHR. usually, EHR do not
contain complete patient history. It is because patients do not always trust single healthcare organization and may
visit several such organization to get sense of satisfaction. Study conducted in [66] showed that out of 1.1 million
adult patients, 31% visited two or more hospitals, whereas, one percent patients visited ﬁve or more hospitals for
acute care during ﬁve year period of their study.

Patients also miss follow up visits suggested by the physicians or sometime due to the perfunctory of the
concerned medical staﬀ (who records patient related data), incomplete records are stored in EHR. A Study was
conducted at Columbia University on 3068 pancreatic cancer patients out of which only 48% patients had complete
pathology records, while, the rest had incomplete records about the disease [67].

EHR data is also considered incomplete for secondary uses because of the data “locked-up” condition. Locked-
up condition means records have details regarding patient but it is not present in the coded portion of the record or
in other words data present in EHR is structured and unstructured (already described in Section 3). Structured data
is in the format that can be easily processed by the computers. On the other hand unstructured data mostly requires
Natural Language Processing (for hand written prescriptions) technique to be applied to make it structured (detail
is provided in Section 3) and processable by computers [68, 69].

5.3. Inconsistency

EHR data is handled by various individuals and at diﬀerent locations. Multiple persons are involved in entering,
storing and processing the data, therefore, data contains several deﬁnitions. Most of the data is present without
mentioning proper units as units are often remembered by the medical staﬀ and they can understand language
written by each other. On the other hand for the non concerned person (who want to use the data for secondary
purpose), it may be highly diﬃcult to interpret the data without speciﬁed units. Involvement of diﬀerent individuals
in preparation and processing of EHR leads to an inconsistent form of data. It means, data present in EHR is not
uniform. In such non uniform data, it is often diﬃcult to relate assessments of diﬀerent practitioners (because the
assessment of diﬀerent clinicians is often diﬀerent). Secondly, data inconsistency also arises due to the fact that
the data is collected with diﬀerent tools at diﬀerent locations, which may be time varying (data coding regulations
and system abilities may change with time) [63]. Inconsistent data may lead to erroneous data analysis and wrong
results. Therefore, such inconsistent data is not useful for secondary use.

5.4. Security and privacy challenges

EHR based clinical data provides many advantages over manual paper based medical records. It is cost eﬀective,
improves overall healthcare quality and above all can be easily accessed through diﬀerent linked locations. All
such advantages motivate health providing agencies and medical practitioners to adopt EHR based system. How-
ever, adoption of EHR and its data processing introduces several privacy and security issues. Especially, when
this data is used for secondary purposes (refer Section 4 for discussion on secondary uses of EHR). In the next
subsections, security and privacy challenges related to secondary uses of EHR have been separately discussed.

5.4.1. Security challenges

EHR contains patients personal and highly conﬁdential data in the form of physicians’ personal notes, neu-
roimaging data [70, 71], X-rays, ultrasounds as well as lab reports. This data may include lab results of HIV and
other sexually transmitted diseases [72], mental disorders [73], personality disorders [74], contagious diseases as
well as doctors sensitive comments about patient mental illness or personality disorders etc. All such data is stored
in hospital’s local database (each hospital may have its own local electronic database), which is connected across
other hospitals or health providers databases via internet or wireless connections for sharing purposes. Transfer
of such conﬁdential data over the internet creates several security risks. It provides a chance to hackers and other
harmful attackers to access the data and use it for their own purpose and to eﬀect large number of patients [75]. In
case of patients monitored at home, the data from patients is collected through a distributed network of sensors.
Securing such data is another big challenge because there are greater chances of spying and skimming [76].

With the passage of time healthcare technologies are extending and new technologies are being introduced to
provide instant help to the patients and to enhance healthcare quality. For example, diﬀerent smart devices mon-
itor health (with the general purpose devices or wearable sensors) and prescribe medications as well as provide
telemedicine technology for delivering remote care [77]. Patients now can easily access healthcare facilities by
integrating their mobile phones with telemedicine and telehealth services with the help of simple mobile applica-
tions [78]. As the technology in the healthcare is continually evolving, its inter connectivity is also evolving. With
10

the help of interconnected network, patients information is made broadly available to the relevant organizations
and staﬀ to provide quality healthcare. Exchange of patient information over the large inter connected network is
beneﬁcial in many ways but has increased existing security risks.

Cyber security is a technology that safeguards computer networks and information contained in them from
diﬀerent cyber attacks [79]. In case of healthcare data, cyber security technology needs to be robust and strong as
the healthcare sector presents lucrative avenue to cyber criminals to attack and get hold of very sensitive data to
gain large ﬁnancial beneﬁts. Unfortunately, the results from study conducted by Kruse et al. [80] concluded after
analyzing data from thirty one (31) articles that the healthcare industry lags behinds in security as compared to the
organizations working in other domains i.e. education, business sector, entertainment etc.

The prime reason for criminals to target healthcare data is to get ﬁnancial gain. Criminals sell valuable data
taken from EHR to the “darkweb” [81] (darkweb refer to the content on the web that is not indexed by search
engine and thus remains hidden from the general public) and achieve high ﬁnancial gain. For the criminals, EHR
data is more informative than credit cards because it contains various ﬁxed identiﬁers and important ﬁnancial
information that is extremely worthy in black markets. Fixed identiﬁers of of EHR data can not be reset like the
once in credit cards. Such identiﬁers in EHR are best information sources for the criminals to get easy access to
the patients bank accounts for getting loans or to capture their passports and other important documents (property,
insurance etc.) [80]. For example, recent new article published story about theft of EHR data (20,000 record)
from North Carolina-based Catawba Valley Medical Center. Stolen data contained patient names, dates of birth,
medical data, health insurance information and social security numbers [82] .

It is worth mentioning here to explain that the security of the healthcare data is not only today’s concern rather
it was the concern before the emergence of the EHR [83]. Data security was well studied before the EHR came
into existence (paper based patients records were needed to be safeguarded within the premises of a hospital and
not on large scales) but with the adoption of EHR multiple gateways opened for accessing patients’ information
remotely. Furthermore, The patients EHR contains more detailed information all together in a single source as
compared to the previous paper based medical records, which were distributed among diﬀerent departments of the
hospitals. With the adoption of EHR it is now easy for the criminals to attack millions of people at a time and to
stole their valuable information (because EHR are interconnected with numerous networks. In case of paper based
records it was not possible to stole millions of patients records at a time).

In short, adoption of EHR not only provided the range of beneﬁts but also introduced potential risks of cyber
attacks. Healthcare organizations spend more on increasing their integration but do not spend much on their system
protection. In order to gain patients trust and to give them satisfaction regarding their data safety, the healthcare
providers have to think about developing robust practical standards and solutions with particular healthcare / EHR
needs.

5.4.2. Privacy challenges

Privacy is deﬁned as “right to be left alone” or to keep away from public domain [84]. United nations general
assembly (UNGA) declared privacy as a fundamental human right in its universal declaration of human rights.
However, in this digital era the term privacy has become subjective and is interpreted and implemented diﬀerently
by each state or country [85]. Such ambiguities are sometimes exploited for diﬀerent reasons, for example EHR
data is used to gain ﬁnancial beneﬁts [86] or for diﬀerent secondary purposes, refer Section 4 for discussion on
secondary uses of EHR.

As mentioned above, EHR data contains several security risks especially when the information contained in
them is shared with diﬀerent stakeholders over the interconnected networks. Other than security issues, there are
certain privacy concerns linked with exchange and sharing of EHR data. These privacy concerns are usually raised
due to the fact that when the patients data (which was recorded for the purpose of patient individual care) is being
shared or linked without consent or knowledge of particular individual. Usually consent of an individual is neces-
sary for sharing of data but ambiguity arises when diﬀerent healthcare organizations have diﬀerent perspective on
question of “who owns the data?”. Is data belongs to patient, his / her physician, health insurance organization,
healthcare organization, social security agency or is it jointly owned by all [83, 87]?

Breach of data can happen due to various reasons, refer Section 5.4.1, which has many ethical repercussions.
For example, disclosing patient’s sensitive private information such as sexually transmitted diseases or mental
illness in the public domain can negatively impacts individual’s reputation. In extreme cases such individuals can
face social boycott as people start avoiding an individual if they knew that he / she has sexual transmitted disease
like HIV, chlamydia etc [88]. Secondly, person’s status in the society is seriously aﬀected if his / her mental illness
is disclosed to the public [89]. Another dimension to this issue is ﬁnancial impact on individual’s life as medical
insurance companies usually calculates premium / cost of insurance based on medical history and life events. In
such cases insurance companies can increase their premium [90, 91].

The privacy of clinical data has been subject to a lot of research and it has been diﬃcult to determine how much
11

of the data belongs to the patient and how much of it may belong to healthcare organizations and whether the
consent of the owner of data is needed, in case the data is to be used for the research purpose [92, 87, 93]. Privacy
of patients can be aﬀected when his / her data is used for clinical research or secondary use, refer Section 4 for
discussion on secondary uses of EHR. For example, blood sample given by the patient is stored in a laboratory and
after carrying out requested analysis the same sample is analyzed again for the purpose of clinical research. Even
though the sample is returned back to the laboratory without any damage, still it violated data privacy because by
this way the patient control over his / her data was lost [87, 92].

In research conducted by Bovenberg and Almeida [94] referred to a case of patients versus Myriad Genetics,
a molecular diagnostic company. The case was about four US cancer patients who wanted to have full access to
their genomic data. Myriad claimed that patients were provided with all the information that was necessary to be
included in their reports and additional data was not part of the medical record set. Patients, however claimed that
the additional data was acquired from their lab sample, hence they have the right over data and only they should
decide what happens to their data.

In order to protect sensitive data many patients try to conceal their sensitive information. It is because of the
lack of conﬁdence on the system’s security retaining their data. It also shows mistrust of patients’ on medical staﬀ
(doctors, nurses and the others) because patients think that they might disclose their conﬁdential information to
public that may create embarrassment for them in society [95]. Some events have happened in the past because of
which patients have become more sensitive in disclosing their private information. For example, in 2013, one of
the medical technician of a US hospital was found guilty in selling patients medical information [96]. Similarly,
a hospital in the US informed his 34000 patients that their medical information has been lost from their agent
[97]. Due to all such incidents, patient don’t feel conﬁdent in disclosing their information even to the physicians.
Hiding facts and information from the physicians and the medical staﬀ can lead to treatment failure. Thus, such
challenges may have severe consequences for patients, healthcare providers and even for the governments.

It is highly recommended from policy makers, leaders and related authorities to discuss privacy and security
concerns of EHR data (database storage policies or its sharing policies and paradigms) and formulate policies to
address these concerns. There are some existing policies, which need to be revised or reformulated according to
the present day era, an era of data analytics, big data and artiﬁcial intelligence.

6. General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and its challenges

In order to protect patients personal sensitive data from diﬀerent security threats and privacy violations, in
some regions of the world, data protection regulation have been enforced by the authorities. The most popular
data protection regulations are General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [13], Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) [15] and My Health Record (MHR) [18]. In this study we have focused only on
GDPR and have critically analyzed it in terms of how it protects patient privacy and enforces data security.

After years of discussions, drafting, negotiations and eﬀorts, in April 2016 GDPR was passed by European
Union. On 25 May 2018, the European Parliament and Council of the European Union both with their combined
eﬀorts enforced the GDPR 2016/679 [98]. Since then, professionals, citizens and authorities across the Europe
and beyond are strictly bound to the legal regimes imposed by GDPR. It is an exhaustive document of legislation
that addresses challenges of data protection of personal data. The aim of GDPR is to control and improve handling
and processing of personal data particularly of European citizens. It oversee every aspect of citizens personal data
handling and has recommended to impose heavy penalties for non compliance that may include prosecution of
any organization in the world that is found guilty of privacy breach or misusing European citizens data [99].

GDPR is not only beneﬁcial for the citizens but also for the organizations as it gives citizens conﬁdence to
share their data with the organizations when required. It also boosts organizations business and help them in their
smooth running without any hurdle of acquiring citizens data (without trust citizens usually do not share their
data when required by the organizations, refer Section 5.4.2 for discussion on mistrust between data provider and
data handler). Even with all these obvious advantages, organizations in the past were rigid to adapt (at present
they are forced to adapt) privacy regulations imposed by GDPR [100]. This is due to the fact that enterprises and
organizations were facing challenges in implementing these regulations [101]. The organizations were already
complying with the regulations imposed by the European Data Protection Directive (EDPD) of 1995 [102] and
were not prepared for the new changes or possibly there was a lack of awareness for the new requirements raised
by the GDPR. Another issue with the implementation of GDPR was ﬁnancial needs, human resource requirements
as well as proper training of the employees to understand the GDPR regulations [103].

GDPR deﬁnes six main data protection principles (other data protection principles further clarify them or fur-
ther enhance them) that organizations (healthcare organizations) have to comply with when processing European
citizens personal data [104].

Each of these principle is brieﬂy explained below with implications on EHR data.

12

1. Lawfulness, fairness and transparency (Article 5(1)(a)): This article states that citizens personal data must
be processed lawfully, fairly and transparently. Lawful processing of data is further deﬁned in Article 6,
which states that in order to process personal data lawfully, it is necessary for the data controllers to set out /
obey one of the following conditions. In this section the term “data controller” is used multiple times and in
the context of this study this term refers to healthcare organizations which records and stores/hold personal
data.

• “The data subject must be given consent (Article 6(1)(a))”.

• “Processing is necessary for the performance of a contract to which the data subject is party (Article

6(1)(b))”.

• “Processing is necessary for compliance with the law (Article 6(1)(c))”.

• “Processing is necessary to protect vital interest of the data subject (Article 6(1)(d))”.

• “Processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest (Article 6(1)(e)”.

• “Processing is necessary for a legitimate interest of the controller or third party (Article 6(1)(f)”.

In order to process personal data lawfully, all the clauses of the Article 6 (mentioned above) are important
to be followed by the data controllers but the most pertinent clause of the article 6 in the context of EHR
data is 6(1)(a) that relates to the processing of personal data with the consent of the person whose data is
being used. However, based on the employer-employee or physician-patient relationships, where one party
(physician in our case) is in power and processes other partys personal data, consent is not a proper legal
basis to be relayed upon [105]. This is due to the fact that data protection regulation requires consent should
be genuinely free without any pressure / intimidation. It can only be possible if the patients have freedom
in giving their consent or not and have a choice to withdraw their consent at any point of time without any
detriment as easy as they gave it.

2. Purpose limitations (Article 5(1)(b)): Purpose limitations bounds organizations (healthcare organizations)
and individuals to collect personal data only for a speciﬁc, explicit and legitimate purpose and the data must
be used for achieving that purpose only. Data purpose must be clearly deﬁned before its collection and it
should not be further processed in a way that is incompatible with the original deﬁned purpose(s).

3. Data minimization (Article 5(1)(c)): In order to use personal data, it must be limited to its primary purpose

only. It must not be collected more than its need.

4. Accuracy(Article 5(1)(d)): In dealing with the citizens personal data it must be responsibly dealt for exam-
ple, if the data needs updation and inaccurate or incomplete data elements need to be removed, all must be
done with high accuracy.

5. Storage limitations (Article 5(1)(e)): Storage limitations refer to the fact that personal data must be deleted
after it has been used and no longer further needed. It means data should be collected with a proper predeﬁned
time-line and it must be removed after the the time-line is reached.

6. Integrity and Conﬁdentiality (Article 5(1)(f)): It is the entire responsibility of the individuals or organiza-
tions (who want to process citizens personal data) to ensure the safe processing of data and to protect it from
unauthorized use. During processing, data must be safe from any accidental loss, damage or demolition and
it must be protected against any unlawful use.

6.1. Critical analysis of GDPR with reference to EHR data

If analyzed critically, clauses (b-f) of Article 5 have contradictory nature in the context of EHR data concepts.
The regulations mentioned in these clauses (such as data minimization, purpose limitation) limits the quantity of
data collection and enforce its deletion soon after the purpose has been achieved. On the other hand, healthcare
organizations encourages collecting more and more amount of data and to save it for longer period of time for the
purpose of detailed analysis, mining and predictions [106], as discussed in Section 4.

Article 25 further enhances the ideas presented in Article 5 by deﬁning privacy by design i.e. “The controller
must implement appropriate technical and organizational measures for ensuring that, by default, only personal data
which are necessary for each speciﬁc purpose of the processing are processed”. Although, this Article enhances
protection of personal data by demanding privacy by design form the controllers but it is diﬃcult to implement
because of its broader deﬁnition and due to the requirement of additional implementation cost and resources.
Furthermore, privacy by design can show rigid behavior with time (like the other embedded technical solutions)
because of not updating its measures frequently [107].

It has already been described in this study (refer Section 5) that the healthcare data is one of the most vulnerable
data in terms of security threats, therefore needs special attention for protection during processing. Article 9
of GDPR deﬁnes the processing of such especial categories of data, which required additional protections in
13

processing such as genetic data, biometric data, healthcare data etc. Article 9 imposes additional obligations and
provides more restrictive legal basis for processing health related sensitive data. The recommendation of this
article is to obtain explicit consent of collecting and processing sensitive personal data. Although, explicit consent
of data processing is required in processing any type of personal data (Refer article 6(1)(a) mentioned above)
but in case of processing healthcare data, obtaining consent is usually diﬃcult, specially for secondary purpose,
refer Section 4 for secondary uses of EHR data. Obtaining explicit consent for every secondary use is a time
consuming, costly as well as an exhausting process [108]. There has been a great debate on obtaining speciﬁc
consent in literature. The conclusive outcome of all such debates is to shift speciﬁc consent into a broader consent
of data processing that covers range of its future uses (such as secondary uses of EHR) [109].

At present, most of the patients are not aware (or do not want to be aware) about what happens to their data
once it has been taken from them and also they do not know about the data processing procedures undertaken by
the healthcare providers. According to Spiekermann et al. [110], if the individuals knew about today’s health-
care business model and how third parties use personal private data, they would be surprised and feel betrayed.
Obviously, under such circumstances, obtaining broad consent is not logical.

Article 32 of GDPR deﬁnes security of processing of personal data. According to it, to process and maintain
security of personal data pseudonymisation should be performed [13]. Pseudonymisation is a technique to ensure
that individual won’t be identiﬁed through personal data (personal data includes direct and indirect identiﬁers that
can identify a person for example, name , ID number, location, contact information (Article 4)) [13]. The process
is to replace main characteristic of an individual with randomly generated indicators. The information regarding
identiﬁcation must be stored separately [111]. Even if pseudonymisation technique is applied, it is possible to
re-identify individuals by combining diﬀerent data sets [112]. Re-identiﬁcation pull downs the illusion of privacy
policies, which are promised by technologists. Lawmakers should re-evaluate law and consider weakness of
pseudonymisation [113].

Other than the regulations described above, one of the most controversial regulation is the “Right to be Forgot-
ten” (Article 17). This article imposes obligation of erasure of one’s personal data on the controllers. It gives right
to the users to erase their data any time from all the available places from where they want as per their request.
According to concept of healthcare data where decision support and predictive systems are being made by archiv-
ing the patients’ personal data (consider case of public health surveillance or clinical research, refer Section 4),
this article create huge controversy because logically no more backups or archives of data would be applicable by
the organizations.

7. Conclusion

The objective of this research article is to provide overview of EHR and its various secondary uses, how such
uses eﬀect individuals privacy and whether existing privacy regulation i.e. GDPR overcome these privacy chal-
lenges. Article began with overview of EHR, its data sources that contribute in making EHR and advantages of
using it. Then, diﬀerent standards for sharing EHR data i.e. HL7 and FHIR are discussed. Secondly, thorough
analysis of various secondary uses of EHR with the aim to highlight how these secondary uses eﬀect patients’
privacy is presented. In the last article critically examined GDPR and highlighted possible areas of improvement,
considering escalating use of technology and diﬀerent secondary uses of EHR.

Presented article outlined various secondary uses of EHR to give readers an idea that how eﬀectively EHR
data can be used in diﬀerent domains such as clinical research, public health surveillance and clinical audits to
provide eﬀective, timely and quality healthcare facilities to the patients, refer Section 4. In order to use EHR data
for secondary purposes more eﬀectively, challenges associated with the secondary uses of EHR have also been
described to make readers well aware of the EHR data challenges when using it for secondary purposes.

In the present technological era, adoption of EHR has positively impacted healthcare services. With the help
of seamless data sharing an individual can avail instant healthcare services at his / her location of preference.
However, with evolving technology, risks of data security and compromise of privacy have also been signiﬁcantly
increased. EHR data contains highly personal and sensitive information i.e. ID / social security number, bank
details, family information and medical history. Unauthorized access to EHR information can have devastating
ﬁnancial and social impact on individual if such sensitive information is leaked in public sphere. In this article
diﬀerent ethical and privacy issues arising from EHR data leak are discussed with detail in Section 5.4. In the
referred section, data security and patients privacy risks related to the secondary uses of EHR especially when EHR
data is transmitted through network and shared & exchanged with multiple stake holders are critically studied.

There exists privacy regulations such as GDPR, HIPPA and MHR to protect patients privacy and data security
when EHR data is used for secondary purposes and transferred & exchanged with multiple concerned through
diﬀerent linked locations. However, there is a need to critically examine such regulations to analyze them for
calculating their eﬀectiveness in terms of safeguarding personal data as per present era needs. There is also a
14

need to highlight the challenges of such regulations to further improve their eﬀectiveness in safeguarding personal
data from the potential cyber attacks and to cope with the technological advancements of cyber attacks. Study
presented in this article focused only on GDPR. GDPR’s most relevant clauses (related to privacy and clinical data
security) are studied in perspective of secondary use of EHR, refer Section 6. Our purpose is to highlight possible
improvements areas in GDPR regulations to make it more eﬀective in protecting privacy and data security and to
make it robust against escalating AI-assisted techniques in data analytics and cyber attacks.

References

[1] S. Al-Janabi, I. Al-Shourbaji, M. Shojafar, S. Shamshirband, Survey of main challenges (security and privacy) in wireless body area

networks for healthcare applications, Egyptian Informatics Journal 18 (2017) 113–122.

[2] P. K. D. Pramanik, S. Pal, M. Mukhopadhyay, Healthcare big data: A comprehensive overview, in: Intelligent Systems for Healthcare

Management and Delivery, IGI Global, 2019, pp. 72–100.

[3] M. Maghazil, A comparative analysis of data security in computer-based and paper-based patient record systems from the perceptions

of healthcare providers in major hospitals in Saudi Arabia, Ph.D. thesis, The George Washington University, 2004.

[4] O. Ben-Assuli, Electronic health records, adoption, quality of care, legal and privacy issues and their implementation in emergency

departments, Health policy 119 (2015).

[5] C. Spiranovic, A. Matthews, J. Scanlan, K. C. Kirkby, Increasing knowledge of mental illness through secondary research of electronic

health records: opportunities and challenges, Advances in Mental Health 14 (2016) 14–25.

[6] D. F. Lobach, D. E. Detmer, Research challenges for electronic health records, American Journal of Preventive Medicine 32 (2007).
[7] P. J. OConnor, J. M. Sperl-Hillen, W. A. Rush, P. E. Johnson, G. H. Amundson, S. E. Asche, H. L. Ekstrom, T. P. Gilmer, Impact of
electronic health record clinical decision support on diabetes care: a randomized trial, The Annals of Family Medicine 9 (2011) 12–21.
[8] A. Temko, W. Marnane, G. Boylan, G. Lightbody, Clinical implementation of a neonatal seizure detection algorithm, Decision Support

Systems 70 (2015).

[9] T. Seymour, D. Frantsvog, T. Graeber, Electronic health records (EHR), American Journal of Health Sciences (AJHS) 3 (2012)

201–210.

[10] N. Menachemi, T. H. Collum, Beneﬁts and drawbacks of electronic health record systems, Risk management and healthcare policy 4

(2011).

[11] J. Wang, Z. Zhang, K. Xu, Y. Yin, P. Guo, A research on security and privacy issues for patient related data in medical organization

system, International Journal of Security and Its Applications 7 (2013) 287–298.

[12] S. Teasdale, D. Bates, K. Kmetik, J. Suzewits, M. Bainbridge, Secondary uses of clinical data in primary care., Informatics in primary

care 15 (2007).

[13] General Data Protection Regulation, Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on
the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing
Directive 95/46, 2016.

[14] J. P. Albrecht, How the GDPR will change the world, Eur. Data Prot. L. Rev. 2 (2016).
[15] Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), Pub. L. No. 104-191, 110 Stat. 1936, 1996.
[16] I. G. Cohen, M. M. Mello, HIPAA and protecting health information in the 21st Century, Jama 320 (2018) 231–232.
[17] B. Hemsley, S. McCarthy, N. Adams, A. Georgiou, S. Hill, S. Balandin, Legal, ethical, and rights issues in the adoption and use of the
my health record by people with communication disability in australia, Journal of Intellectual & Developmental Disability 43 (2018)
506–514.

[18] S. C. Patrick Cheong-Iao Pang, The twitter adventure of #myhealthrecord: An analysis of diﬀerent user groups during the opt-out

period, Studies in Health Technology and Informatics (2019) 142 – 148.

[19] R. Munir, R. A. Khan, An extensive review on spectral imaging in biometric systems: Challenges & advancements, Journal of Visual

Communication and Image Representation 65 (2019).

[20] R. A. Khan, A. Crenn, A. Meyer, S. Bouakaz, A novel database of children’s spontaneous facial expressions (LIRIS-CSE), Image and

Vision Computing 83-84 (2019) 61 – 69.

[21] M. S. Jaliaawala, R. A. Khan, Can autism be catered with artiﬁcial intelligence-assisted intervention technology? a comprehensive

survey, Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review (2019).

[22] N. A. Latha, B. R. Murthy, U. Sunitha, Electronic health record, International Journal of Engineering 1 (2012) 25–27.
[23] K. H¨ayrinen, K. Saranto, P. Nyk¨anen, Deﬁnition, structure, content, use and impacts of electronic health records: a review of the

research literature, International journal of medical informatics 77 (2008) 291–304.

[24] K. Kawamoto, C. A. Houlihan, E. A. Balas, D. F. Lobach,

Improving clinical practice using clinical decision support systems: a

systematic review of trials to identify features critical to success, British Medical Journal (2005).

[25] C. Castaneda, K. Nalley, C. Mannion, P. Bhattacharyya, P. Blake, A. Pecora, A. Goy, K. S. Suh, Clinical decision support systems for

improving diagnostic accuracy and achieving precision medicine, Journal of clinical bioinformatics 5 (2015).

[26] A. Boonstra, M. Broekhuis, Barriers to the acceptance of electronic medical records by physicians from systematic review to taxonomy

and interventions, BMC health services research 10 (2010).

[27] D. Kalra, D. Ingram, Electronic health records, in: Information technology solutions for healthcare, Springer, 2006, pp. 135–181.
[28] R. H. Dolin, L. Alschuler, C. Beebe, P. V. Biron, S. L. Boyer, D. Essin, E. Kimber, T. Lincoln, J. E. Mattison, The HL7 clinical

document architecture, Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 8 (2001) 552–569.

[29] R. H. Dolin, L. Alschuler, S. Boyer, C. Beebe, F. M. Behlen, P. V. Biron, A. Shabo, HL7 clinical document architecture, release 2,

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 13 (2006) 30–39.

[30] T. Benson, G. Grieve, HL7 version 2, in: Principles of Health Interoperability, Springer, 2016, pp. 223–242.
[31] G. W. Beeler, HL7 Version 3An object-oriented methodology for collaborative standards development, International Journal of Medical

Informatics 48 (1998).

[32] T. Al-Enazi, S. El-Masri, HL7 engine module for healthcare information systems, Journal of medical systems 37 (2013).
[33] D. Bender, K. Sartipi, HL7 FHIR: An Agile and RESTful approach to healthcare information exchange, in: Proceedings of the 26th

IEEE international symposium on computer-based medical systems, pp. 326–331.

[34] M. Sharma, H. Aggarwal, HL7 Based Middleware Standard for Healthcare Information System: FHIR,

in: Proceedings of 2nd

International Conference on Communication, Computing and Networking, Springer, pp. 889–899.

15

[35] A. Atreja, J.-P. Achkar, A. K. Jain, C. M. Harris, B. A. Lashner, Using technology to promote gastrointestinal outcomes research: a

case for electronic health records, The American journal of gastroenterology (2008).

[36] J. Lin, T. Jiao, J. E. Biskupiak, C. McAdam-Marx, Application of electronic medical record data for health outcomes research: a review

of recent literature, Expert review of pharmacoeconomics & outcomes research 13 (2013) 191–200.

[37] K. P. Liao, T. Cai, G. K. Savova, S. N. Murphy, E. W. Karlson, A. N. Ananthakrishnan, V. S. Gainer, S. Y. Shaw, Z. Xia, P. Szolovits,
et al., Development of phenotype algorithms using electronic medical records and incorporating natural language processing, BMJ 350
(2015).

[38] K. Kreimeyer, M. Foster, A. Pandey, N. Arya, G. Halford, S. F. Jones, R. Forshee, M. Walderhaug, T. Botsis, Natural language
Journal of biomedical

processing systems for capturing and standardizing unstructured clinical information: a systematic review,
informatics 73 (2017) 14–29.

[39] A. Wong, J. M. Plasek, S. P. Montecalvo, L. Zhou, Natural language processing and its implications for the future of medication safety:
a narrative review of recent advances and challenges, Pharmacotherapy: The Journal of Human Pharmacology and Drug Therapy 38
(2018) 822–841.

[40] P. Coorevits, M. Sundgren, G. O. Klein, A. Bahr, B. Claerhout, C. Daniel, M. Dugas, D. Dupont, A. Schmidt, P. Singleton, et al.,

Electronic health records: new opportunities for clinical research, Journal of internal medicine 274 (2013) 547–560.

[41] Y. Xiao, J. Wu, Z. Lin, X. Zhao, A deep learning-based multi-model ensemble method for cancer prediction, Computer methods and

programs in biomedicine 153 (2018) 1–9.

[42] C. Willyard, The drug-resistant bacteria that pose the greatest health threats, Nature News 543 (2017).
[43] I. H. Spicknall, K. J. Looker, S. L. Gottlieb, H. W. Chesson, J. T. Schiﬀer, J. Elmes, M.-C. Boily, Review of mathematical models of

hsv-2 vaccination: Implications for vaccine development, Vaccine (2018).

[44] W. H. Organization, Global status report on alcohol and health 2018, World Health Organization, 2019.
[45] W. H. Organization, et al., Global hepatitis report 2017, World Health Organization, 2017.
[46] S. M. Teutsch, R. E. Churchill, Principles and practice of public health surveillance, Oxford University Press, USA, 2000.
[47] S. Ahmad, M. Asif, R. Talib, M. Adeel, M. Yasir, M. H. Chaudary, Surveillance of intensity level and geographical spreading of dengue
outbreak among males and females in punjab, pakistan: A case study of 2011, Journal of infection and public health 11 (2018) 472–485.
[48] A. M. Schwartz, A. F. Hinckley, P. S. Mead, S. A. Hook, K. J. Kugeler, Surveillance for lyme diseaseunited states, 2008–2015, MMWR

Surveillance Summaries 66 (2017).

[49] K. E. Mace, P. M. Arguin, K. R. Tan, Malaria surveillanceUnited States, 2015, MMWR Surveillance Summaries 67 (2018).
[50] E. Khan, J. Siddiqui, S. Shakoor, V. Mehraj, B. Jamil, R. Hasan, Dengue outbreak in karachi, pakistan, 2006: experience at a tertiary

care center, Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 101 (2007) 1114–1119.

[51] A. R. Anvikar, N. Shah, A. C. Dhariwal, G. S. Sonal, M. M. Pradhan, S. K. Ghosh, N. Valecha, Epidemiology of plasmodium vivax

malaria in india, The American journal of tropical medicine and hygiene 95 (2016) 108–120.

[52] B. Shah, P. Mathur, Surveillance of cardiovascular disease risk factors in india: the need & scope, The Indian journal of medical

research 132 (2010).

[53] H. Siswoyo, M. Permana, R. P. Larasati, J. Farid, A. Suryadi, E. R. Sedyaningsih, EWORS: using a syndromic-based surveillance tool

for disease outbreak detection in Indonesia, in: BMC proceedings, volume 2.

[54] M. E. Sips, M. J. Bonten, M. S. van Mourik, Automated surveillance of healthcare-associated infections: state of the art, Current

opinion in infectious diseases 30 (2017) 425–431.

[55] A. Atreja, S. M. Gordon, D. A. Pollock, R. N. Olmsted, P. J. Brennan, Opportunities and challenges in utilizing electronic health

records for infection surveillance, prevention, and control, American journal of infection control 36 (2008).

[56] J. W. Keck, J. T. Redd, J. E. Cheek, L. J. Layne, A. V. Groom, S. Kitka, M. G. Bruce, A. Suryaprasad, N. L. Amerson, T. Cullen, et al.,
Inﬂuenza surveillance using electronic health records in the american indian and alaska native population, Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association 21 (2013) 132–138.

[57] G. S. Birkhead, M. Klompas, N. R. Shah, Uses of electronic health records for public health surveillance to advance public health,

Annual review of public health 36 (2015) 345–359.

[58] W. Odero, J. Rotich, C. T. Yiannoutsos, T. Ouna, W. M. Tierney, Innovative approaches to application of information technology in

disease surveillance and prevention in western kenya, Journal of biomedical informatics 40 (2007) 390–397.

[59] S. A. Abdualah, M. Salman, M. Din, K. Khan, M. Ahamd, F. H. Khan, M. Arif, Dengue outbreaks in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KPK),
Pakistan in 2017: an integrated disease surveillance and response system (IDSRS)-based report, Polish journal of microbiology 68
(2019) 115–119.

[60] P. C. Onyebujoh, A. K. Thirumala, J.-B. Ndihokubwayo,

Integrating laboratory networks, surveillance systems and public health

institutes in africa, African journal of laboratory medicine 5 (2016) 1–4.

[61] R. Burgess, J. Moorhead, New principles of best practice in clinical audit, Radcliﬀe Publishing, 2011.
[62] P. Esposito, A. Dal Canton, Clinical audit, a valuable tool to improve quality of care: General methodology and applications in

nephrology, World journal of nephrology 3 (2014).

[63] K. B. Bayley, T. Belnap, L. Savitz, A. L. Masica, N. Shah, N. S. Fleming, Challenges in using electronic health record data for cer:

experience of 4 learning organizations and solutions applied, Medical care 51 (2013).

[64] J. van der Lei, Use and abuse of computer-stored medical records, Methods of information in medicine 30 (1991) 79–80.
[65] W. R. Hogan, M. M. Wagner, Accuracy of data in computer-based patient records, Journal of the American Medical Informatics

Association 4 (1997) 342–355.

[66] F. C. Bourgeois, K. L. Olson, K. D. Mandl, Patients treated at multiple acute health care facilities: quantifying information fragmenta-

tion, Archives of internal medicine 170 (2010) 1989–1995.

[67] T. Botsis, G. Hartvigsen, F. Chen, C. Weng, Secondary use of EHR: data quality issues and informatics opportunities, Summit on

Translational Bioinformatics 2010 (2010).

[68] A. N. Kho, L. V. Rasmussen, J. J. Connolly, P. L. Peissig, J. Starren, H. Hakonarson, M. G. Hayes, Practical challenges in integrating

genomic data into the electronic health record, Genetics in Medicine 15 (2013).

[69] N. Ramakrishnan, D. Hanauer, B. Keller, Mining electronic health records, Computer 43 (2010) 77–81.
[70] H. Sharif, R. A. Khan, A novel machine learning based framework for detection of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), Arxiv: 2019.
[71] J. N. Giedd, Structural magnetic resonance imaging of the adolescent brain, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1021 (2004)

77–85.

[72] H. Julien, I. Fourie, Reﬂections of aﬀect in studies of information behavior in HIV/AIDS contexts: An exploratory quantitative content

analysis, Library and Information Science Research 37 (2015) 3 – 9.

[73] L. Bellak, The schizophrenic syndrome and attention deﬁcit disorder. Thesis, antithesis, and synthesis?, The American psychologist 49

16

(1994) 25–29.

[74] A. W. Bateman, J. Gunderson, R. Mulder, Treatment of personality disorder, The Lancet (2015) 735 – 743.
[75] J. G. Ronquillo, J. Erik Winterholler, K. Cwikla, R. Szymanski, C. Levy, Health IT, hacking, and cybersecurity: national trends in data

breaches of protected health information, JAMIA Open (2018) 15–19.

[76] M. Meingast, T. Roosta, S. Sastry, Security and privacy issues with health care information technology,

in: 2006 International

Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, pp. 5453–5458.

[77] D. V. Dimitrov, Medical internet of things and big data in healthcare, Healthcare informatics research 22 (2016) 156–163.
[78] R. S. Weinstein, A. M. Lopez, B. A. Joseph, K. A. Erps, M. Holcomb, G. P. Barker, E. A. Krupinski, Telemedicine, Telehealth, and
Mobile Health Applications That Work: Opportunities and Barriers, The American Journal of Medicine 127 (2014) 183 – 187.
[79] A. Nazir, R. A. Khan, Combinatorial optimization based feature selection method: A study on network intrusion detection, Arxiv:2019.
[80] C. S. Kruse, B. Frederick, T. Jacobson, D. K. Monticone, Cybersecurity in healthcare: A systematic review of modern threats and

trends, Technology and Health Care 25 (2017) 1–10.

[81] G. Weimann, Going Dark: Terrorism on the Dark Web, Studies in Conﬂict & Terrorism 39 (2016) 195–206.
[82] J. Davis, 3 phishing hacks breach 20,000 Catawba Valley patient records, https://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/3-phishing-hacks-

breach-20000-catawba-valley-patient-records, 2018.

[83] M. Meingast, T. Roosta, S. Sastry, Security and privacy issues with health care information technology, in: 2006 IEEE Engineering in

Medicine and Biology Society, pp. 5453–5458.

[84] C. o. R. H. D. N. Institute of Medicine, Health Data in the Information Age: Use, Disclosure, and Privacy, National Academies Press,

1994.

[85] M. Kayaalp, Patient Privacy in the Era of Big Data., Balkan medical journal 35 (2018) 8–17.
[86] L. J. Camp, M. E. Johnson, The Economics of Financial and Medical Identity Theft, Springer, 2012.
[87] N. R. Council, Networking Health: Prescriptions for the Internet, The National Academies Press, Washington, DC, 2000.
[88] SNS, Hiv positive couple face social boycott,

https://www.thestatesman.com/world/hiv-positive-couple-face-social-boycott-

83187.html, 2015.

[89] P. W. Corrigan, A. C. Watson, P. Byrne, K. E. Davis, Mental illness stigma: Problem of public health or social justice?, Social Work

(2005).

[90] D. J. Knutson, The Future of Disability in America, The National Academies Press, 2007.
[91] A. Abbas, K. Bilal, L. Zhang, S. U. Khan, A cloud based health insurance plan recommendation system: A user centered approach,

Future Generation Computer Systems 43-44 (2015) 99 – 109.

[92] G. Richter, C. Borzikowsky, W. Lieb, S. Schreiber, M. Krawczak, A. Buyx, Patient views on research use of clinical data without

consent: Legal, but also acceptable?, European Journal of Human Genetics (2019).

[93] D. I. Shalowitz, F. G. Miller, Disclosing Individual Results of Clinical ResearchImplications of Respect for Participants, The Journal

of the American Medical Association (JAMA) 294 (2005) 737–740.

[94] J. A. Bovenberg, M. Almeida, Patients v. Myriad or the GDPR Access Right v. the EU Database Right, European Journal of Human

Genetics 27 (2019) 211–215.

[95] B. Sadan, Patient data conﬁdentiality and patient rights, International Journal of Medical Informatics 62 (2001) 41 – 49.
[96] D. o. C. U.S. Attorney’s Oﬃce, Former howard university hospital employee pleads guilty to selling personal information about pa-
tients, https://archives.fbi.gov/archives/washingtondc/press-releases/2012/former-howard-university-hospital-employee-pleads-guilty-
to-selling-personal-information-about-patients, 2012.

[97] F. F. Ozair, N. Jamshed, A. Sharma, P. Aggarwal, Ethical issues in electronic health records: A general overview, Perspectives in

clinical research 6 (2015).

[98] E. Politou, A. Michota, E. Alepis, M. Pocs, C. Patsakis, Backups and the right to be forgotten in the GDPR: An uneasy relationship,

Computer Law & Security Review 34 (2018) 1247–1257.

[99] S. Sirur, J. R. Nurse, H. Webb, Are we there yet?: Understanding the challenges faced in complying with the general data protection
regulation (GDPR), in: Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Multimedia Privacy and Security, ACM, pp. 88–95.
[100] N. Gruschka, V. Mavroeidis, K. Vishi, M. Jensen, Privacy Issues and Data Protection in Big Data: A Case Study Analysis under GDPR,

in: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), IEEE, pp. 5027–5033.
[101] C. Tankard, What the GDPR means for businesses, Network Security 2016 (2016) 5–8.
[102] Directive1995, Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free

movement of such data, 1995.

[103] C. Tikkinen-Piri, A. Rohunen, J. Markkula, EU General Data Protection Regulation: Changes and implications for personal data

collecting companies, Computer Law & Security Review 34 (2018) 134–153.

[104] M. Goddard, The EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR): European regulation that has a global impact, International Journal

of Market Research 59 (2017) 703–705.

[105] M. J. Taylor, M. Prictor, Insight or intrusion? correlating routinely collected employee data with health risk, Social Sciences 8 (2019).
[106] O. Tene, J. Polonetsky, Big data for all: Privacy and user control in the age of analytics, Nw. J. Tech. & Intell. Prop. 11 (2012).
[107] G. Bincoletto, A data protection by design model for privacy management in electronic health records, in: Annual Privacy Forum.
[108] M. Mostert, A. L. Bredenoord, M. C. Biesaart, J. J. van Delden, Big Data in medical research and EU data protection law: challenges

to the consent or anonymise approach, European Journal of Human Genetics 24 (2016).

[109] C. A. Harle, E. H. Golembiewski, K. P. Rahmanian, B. Brumback, J. L. Krieger, K. W. Goodman, A. G. Mainous III, R. E. Moseley,
Does an interactive trust-enhanced electronic consent improve patient experiences when asked to share their health records for research?
a randomized trial, Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 26 (2019) 620–629.

[110] S. Spiekermann, A. Acquisti, R. B¨ohme, K.-L. Hui, The challenges of personal data markets and privacy, Electronic markets 25 (2015)

161–167.

[111] P. Voigt, A. von dem Bussche, Scope of Application of the GDPR, in: The EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), Springer,

2017, pp. 9–30.

[112] T. Z. Zarsky, Incompatible: The GDPR in the age of big data, Seton Hall L. Rev. 47 (2016).
[113] P. Ohm, Broken promises of privacy: Responding to the surprising failure of anonymization, UCLA l. Rev. 57 (2009).

17

