0
2
0
2

b
e
F
8

]

C
H
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
5
0
3
0
.
2
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Lessons Learned Developing and Extending a Visual
Analytics Solution for Investigative Analysis of
Scamming Activities

Ronak Tanna
rtanna@asu.edu
Arizona State University

Shivam Dhar
sdhar3@asu.edu
Arizona State University

Ashwin Sudhir
asudhir1@asu.edu
Arizona State University

Shreyash Devan
srdevan@asu.edu
Arizona State University

Shubham Verma
sverma41@asu.edu
Arizona State University

1 INTRODUCTION
Cybersecurity analysts work on large communication datasets
to perform investigative analysis by painstakingly going over
thousands of email conversations to find potential scamming
activities and the network of cyber scammers. Traditionally,
experts used email clients, database systems and text editors
to perform this investigation. With the advent of technology,
elaborate tools that summarize data more efficiently by using
cutting edge data visualization techniques have come out.
Beagle [1] is one such tool which visualizes the large commu-
nication data using different panels such that the inspector
has better chances of finding the scam network.

This paper is a report on our work to implement and im-
prove the work done by Jay Koven et al. [1]. The original
paper describes a tool called Beagle, which was developed by
the authors to analyze how e-mail scammers interact with
each other and their victims.

For the creation of this tool, they worked with a secu-
rity company called Agari, who was looking for a tool that
would help them analyse the e-mail scamming activities.
While working with Agari they found that even though ex-
perienced analysts were very proficient at going through
these e-mails using numerous tools to aid them, they could
greatly benefit from a visualization tool. This benefit is in
the form of query reformulation and content summarizing
through visual representation, which should help the ana-
lysts not only be more efficient but allow for new types of
analyses. On top of the ideas presented in the original paper,
we have implemented a few more visualizations that we feel
would help in grouping and analyzing the e-mail data more
efficiently. Lastly, we have also presented a case study that
shows the potential use of our tool in a real-world scenario.

2 VISUALIZATION DESIGN
The visual analytics solution - Beagle, was built for inves-
tigative analysis of scamming activities on communication

datasets consisting of unstructured text, social network in-
formation, and metadata. The system provides capabilities
such as a progressive and reversible data query interface
with similarity to email clients, coordinated views to keep
results in context defining who, what and when, provision to
make queries visible and easy to extend or modify, content re-
duction and extraction methods, content summarizing tech-
niques for email data, and capability of tagging data points
to externalize knowledge via different panels as discussed in
the sections below and shown in figure 1.

Interactive query panel
It provides users with a filtering capability based on metadata
in the dataset such as subject and content. Option to add or
remove the query terms on the fly adds to the usefulness of
the feature. Based on the filtered data, all other panels get
updated.

There are control buttons that help in uploading a dataset
to be analyzed and downloading the sequence of actions
performed by the user. These are marked as 2 in figure 1.

Correspondent panel
This panel displays email ids of the people involved in email
exchanges in the filtered dataset. It also shows the number of
emails received and sent by these correspondents in form of
a pie chart. These statistics help analysts to find out the spam-
mers based on their activity, for example a correspondent
who might be sending a lot of emails could be a potential
spammer.

Contact graph panel
Built as a modal controlled through a button click - refer
btn1 in figure 1, it shows a graphical representation of corre-
spondents involved in the email exchanges for the filtered
dataset, which can be seen in the panel tagged 8 in the figure.
A button to remove edges and nodes is provided to reduce

 
 
 
 
 
 
the density of the network and drill down to a specific sub-
network. Similarly, a button to add edges and nodes based on
the sequence of deletions helps to create the dense network.

Entity tagging panel
Term Frequency - Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF), an
information retrieval technique is used to find interesting
entities from the email subject and content and is shown in
the entities panel, tagged as 4 in figure 1.

t f − id f (t, d, D) = f(t,d ) ∗ loд(|D|/|d ∈ D : t ∈ d |)
Here t is a term in the document, d and D stands for the
collection of documents.

(1)

The words are sorted in the decreasing order of TF-IDF
values represented by the width of the bar. A user can also
add new/existing tags to the entities of interest using the
context menu option. These tags help users to identify the
pattern in the filtered results and also helps in understanding
the commonality of spamming activities across the different
datasets.

Communications panel
The emails that are part of the filtered data are shown here
in a way similar to the email clients, with the option of
expanding the subject header to look through the content,
as shown by the tag 5 in figure 1. The header shows subject
along with datetime if present in the dataset whereas the
content displays the email content in plain text including
receiver and sender information.

Timeline panel
All the emails exchanged between the time period as spec-
ified by the filtered data are shown here in the form of an
interactive plot tagged as 7 in figure 1. A slider option is
provided to zoom in to a specific day, month or year to find
the exact number of email exchanges.

3 EXTENSION
We propose extensions to the system in order to gain more
insights about the data by providing additional capabilities
that could help an analyst to investigate further. We also
make some changes in the user interface to improve the
usability and overall user experience.

Clustering panel
It provides users with an option to form clusters based on
content similarity via btn2 as shown in figure 1. Initially, all
the emails are shown in a packed layout form, and once a
user clicks on clusterize button after selecting the number of
clusters from the drop-down option, the cluster heads are
shown. A click on these cluster heads shows the emails that

2

are part of each cluster. The sequence of actions is shown in
the section tagged as 9 in figure 1.

Tag Distribution panel
The panel displays the number of tags being assigned to the
entities of interest in the form of a color varying histogram.
It allows a tooltip-based interaction and gets dynamically
updated as a user assigns a tag to an entity from the entity
panel. It allows tracking of the tagged knowledge points
across different datasets.

UI Component styling
For improving the overall user experience of the system, we
chose to style the components to make them look aestheti-
cally pleasing.

The correspondent panel was modified to use expansion
panel-based design that allows a user to expand the corre-
spondent header to look for more details such as the pie
chart and email exchanges.

The entity tagging panel was improvised to display the
tags assigned in a more distinctive and compact way. Tagging
functionality doesn’t seem to work as expected in the original
system.

The contact graph panel now renders a fluid graph with a
set of interactions like highlighting an edge and the corre-
sponding nodes connected by the edge, capability of reducing
the graph density by either removing edges or nodes, etc.

The expansion panel was reused for rendering the com-

munications panel to make it more compact and sleek.

Timeline panel has been modified from a histogram to
a scatter plot with a zooming slider functionality for year,
month and day.

4 CASE STUDIES
For privacy reasons, emails of the users are not provided in
the dataset. We synthetically add emails in the datasets from
a pool of selected emails in order to run visualizations on the
dataset. This is also required to present case studies showing
the effectiveness of the tool built.

Dataset I
This section describes a case study on a spam emails dataset,
dataset I [2]. We search for words often seen in spam emails
such as click and link. On searching for click as a content
query term, we could see the email exchanges in the time
panel as a uniform distribution over a period of time - 2000
to 2010 with the maximum of 18 emails/day. On adding link
to the query, the maximum email exchanges came down to
6/day with a distribution shared between 2002 to 2003 and
2009 to 2011. Further, by adding subject query as spam we
could see a huge concentration of email exchanges only in

Figure 1: The different data exploration panels in Beagle.

2009 with shivani@gmail.com as the correspondent with the
largest number of email exchanges.

Dataset II
This section describes a case study on a fraudulent email
corpus, dataset II [3]. The user interacts with the system
through the query interface, where he enters the content
as money. The timeline panel shows the number of email
exchanges as a distribution between 2003-2008. Tags are
assigned to the words such as receipt, goods, company, in-
ventory, officials are assigned a politics tag whereas entities
like urgent, business, dollars, money are assigned a suspicious
tag. Another filter with content as transfer is added, which
reduces the dataset analyzed. The user can see the tags for
the words assigned earlier if found in the entities panel as
subject or content. As filters are added, the dataset under
consideration narrows down further giving a clear idea of

3

a pattern if any in the spam emails. Filters like content as
Nigeria, content as urgent, subject as urgent, content as bank
are added, which makes 2003 and 2007 as the years with
maximum number of email exchanges. The correspondent
panel always shows the person with the maximum number
of email exchanges at the top, this helps in identifying an
anomaly or a spammer out of all the correspondents. The
clustering panel helps in segregating the emails into different
buckets, for instance above query gave two sets of clusters
- one with urgentin the subject and another one with very
urgent in the subject.

The addition of synthetic emails did help in visualizing
the attributes to a great extent but the case studies couldn’t
get a closure due to the lack of correlation between the cor-
respondents and the entities referred in the email content.

5 FUTURE WORK
We envision the project to be extensible in various ways.
The potential directions in which promising future work can
take place include:

• Multi user option with the ability for each user to up-
load and save multiple data sets. This would enable
an investigative analyst to work on multiple cases
at the same time.

• The ability to search the tagged words and to auto-

matically tag emails that contain those words.

• Manually choosing cluster centers around which
the clustering happens. This could mean that given
an email that asks about credit card details as part
of a scam that the user knows about and a normal
communication email, the user, after choosing those
as cluster centers should be able to get all similar
emails in the two respective clusters to be able to
visualize neatly.

• Integration with a live mailbox that gives an inves-
tigative analysis user full fledged power to do every-
thing that he/she does with the mailbox on a daily
basis in a smooth way via the application itself.
We understand that each component’s necessity can only
be determined by a user survey that confirms it; we only list
the most promising extensions to our system and leave it to
future research to drill down on specifics.

6 REFERENCES
[1] Koven J, Felix C, Siadati H, Jakobsson M, Bertini E. 2018.
Lessons Learned Developing a Visual Analytics Solution for
Investigative Analysis of Scamming Activities. IEEE Trans-
actions on Visualization and Computer Graphics ( Volume:
25 , Issue: 1 , Jan. 2019 ). DOI: 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2865023
[2] www.kaggle.com/c/adcg-ss14-challenge-02-spam-mails-
detection
[3] Radev, D. (2008), CLAIR collection of fraud email, ACL
Data and Code Repository, ADCR2008T001, http://aclweb.org/

4

