BLCS: Brain-Like based Distributed Control Security in 

Cyber Physical Systems 

Hui Yang1, *, Kaixuan Zhan1, Michel Kadoch2, Yongshen Liang1, Mohamed Cheriet2 

1: Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, 100876, China.   

2: École de technologie supérieure, Montreal, Canada.   

*Corresponding author e-mail: yanghui@bupt.edu.cn   

Abstract: Cyber-physical system (CPS) has operated, controlled and coordinated the physical systems 
integrated  by  a  computing  and  communication  core  applied  in  industry  4.0.  To  accommodate  CPS 

services, fog radio and optical networks (F-RON) has become an important supporting physical cyber 

infrastructure  taking  advantage  of  both  the  inherent  ubiquity  of  wireless  technology  and  the  large 

capacity of optical networks. However, cyber security is the biggest issue in CPS scenario as there is a 

tradeoff between security control and privacy exposure in F-RON. To deal with this issue, we propose a 

brain-like based distributed control security (BLCS) architecture for F-RON in CPS, by introducing a 

brain-like  security  (BLS)  scheme.  BLCS  can  accomplish  the  secure  cross-domain  control  among 

tripartite controllers verification in the scenario of decentralized F-RON for distributed computing and 

communications, which has no need to disclose the private information of each domain against cyber-

attacks. BLS utilizes parts of information to perform control identification through relation network and 

deep learning of behavior library. The functional modules of BLCS architecture are illustrated including 

various controllers and brain-like knowledge base. The interworking procedures in distributed control 

security  modes based on BLS are described. The overall feasibility and efficiency of architecture  are 

experimentally verified on the software defined network testbed in terms of average mistrust rate, path 

provisioning latency, packet loss probability and blocking probability. The emulation results are obtained 

and dissected based on the testbed. 

Keywords: Brain-like, wireless and optical network, security, fog 

I. Introduction 

Along with the rapid evolution of IoT and  industrial applications, developing 5G systems and then 

evolving  into  beyond  5G  (B5G)  have  become  an  inevitable  trend  which  interconnects  hundreds  of 

terminals  from  physical  environment  with  large  bandwidth  to  address  the  burgeoning  machine-to-

machine communications. In such scenario, as the bridge between physical world and cyber world, the 

cyber-physical system (CPS) has operated, controlled and coordinated the physical systems integrated 

by a computing and communication core, which is successful applied in internet industry or industry 4.0 

[1-3]. In order to accommodate CPS services, the radio and optical networks (RON) has become one of 

the most important supporting physical cyber infrastructures carrying for CPS which can take advantage 

of both the inherent ubiquity of wireless technology and the large capacity of optical networks [4]. RON 

can provide the low latency and high bandwidth communication and rapid calculation for industry system 

control and orchestration [5].   

Not only considering the accessibility of the network, the cyber security has also drawn much attention 

 
 
 
 
from  academia  and  industry  for  CPS  in  all  walks  of  life  [6],  especially  against  the  increasing  cyber-

attacks and their sophisticated behaviors. The centralized control approach in cyber usually  encounter 

with  the  threats  of  collapse  and  information  leakage  disastrously,  resulting  in  poor  scalability,  low 

reliability and high response time. [7]. The distributed fog-RON (F-RON) for multiple domain can avoid 
or reduce the risk compared to centralization which safeguards the privacy of each domain, while much 

lower delay communication should be addressed in F-RON [8]. However, as disposing of the unified 

controller,  distributed  architecture  must  face  the  trusted  issue  among  multiple  controllers  with  the 

information of their own domains. Once one of the controllers is malicious intruded by cyber-attacks, 

the  privacy  information  of  each  other  controller  may  be  exposed  for  distributed  computing  and 

communications [9]. Therefore, there is a tradeoff between security control and privacy exposure in F-

RON for CPS operation. For all we know, trusted control security against cyber-attacks in distributed 

way hasn’t been addressed so far in cyber layer of CPS without private exposure.   

On the other hand, artificial intelligent (AI) technology can deal with an amount of big data that come 

from different  sources of information  to protect  the  CPS from  zero-day  cyber-attacks and  predict the 

future attackers’ misbehavior [10]. However, few researches consider the security issue if the controller 

has been broken through by attacks. Recently, brain-like computation and communication [11, 12] is a 

promising  technology  in  artificial  intelligence  area  as  a  viable  solution  with  associative  recalling  the 

relationship  like  brain’s  central  nervous  system  using  multiple  knowledge  bases.  Therefore,  it  is 

significant to apply brain-like technology to strengthen the distributed cyber security in F-RON for CPS.   

The efficient service accommodation of F-RON based on machine learning has been presented in our 

previous work [13]. In this paper, we propose a novel brain-like based distributed control security (BLCS) 

architecture for F-RON in cyber physical systems, by introducing of a brain-like security (BLS) scheme. 

Instead of disclosing the private information of each domain,  BLCS can accomplish the secure cross-

domain  control  among  tripartite  controllers’  verification  in  the  scenario  of  decentralized  F-RON  for 

distributed  computing  and  communications.  BLS  utilizes  parts  of  information  to  perform  control 

identification  through  deep  learning  of  behavior  library.  The  overall  feasibility  and  efficiency  of 

architecture with BLS are experimentally verified on the software defined network testbed. The rest of 

the article is organized as follows. Functional modules of  BLCS architecture are  illustrated including 

various controllers and CPS platform. Then we discuss the interworking procedures for control security 

in BLCS. BLS scheme is presented based on the architecture. The testbed is established and analyzed 

with numerical results.   

II. Security Challenge in CPS 

In  CPS  system,  distributed  controllers  have  private  data  for  the  entire  network,  such  as  topology 

information. If one of the controllers is compromised, the attacker can obtain the private data of CPS 

system and then use the data to destroy the normal operation of the entire system. In this case, the privacy 

leakage problem aroused is extremely serious. Traditional ways of sharing private data provide multiple 

opportunities for malicious attacker. The zero-day attack provides a clear sample of the attacks.   

To  construct  trusted  connection,  the  controller  cannot  complete  mutual  trust  with  no  private  data. 

Providing all the private data to the authentication will cause a security leak once it is infected. Providing 

partial  information  is  a  promising  solution.  Security  authentication  and  route  provisioning  in  case  of 

privacy protection are challenging in CPS system due to the difficulties in using partial information for 

security authentication. Therefore, new technologies are needed to provide intelligent control over CPS 

for consistent and effective security authentication as well as route provisioning. 

 
III. Brain-Like based Distributed Control Security Architecture 

The  traditional  pattern  of  network  control  is  approved  in  centralized  cyber  center. Though  unified 

control has the characteristics of maintainability, responsiveness and convergence, in case of malicious 

attacks,  the  centralized  control  center  will  face  the  risk  of  collapse  disastrously.  Additionally,  the 

centralized  center  is  difficult  to  prevent  the  intentional  deception  with  peer-peer  relationships  in 

distributed  CPS  networks.  On  the  other  hand,  the  distributed  network  also  may  expose  the  private 

information of other domain for the routing and path provisioning convergence [14]. Note that, there is 

a tradeoff between security control and privacy exposure in F-RON for CPS management. Therefore, we 

present  brain-like  based  distributed  control  security  architecture  to  implement  distributed  trusty  and 
security for cyber control and industry service provisioning in CPS, which is shown in Fig. 1. Instead of 

unified  management  in  network,  the  proposed  architecture  removes  central  control  function  towards 

distributed domain, which splits up the attacked risk and reduces control latency and connection cost to 

enhance  the  CPS’s  service  responsiveness.  Without  revealing  all  the  personal  information,  BLCS 

architecture  can  perform  the  distributed  cross-domain  control  using  brain-like  computing  which  can 

associate the relationship among partly information with knowledge bases to achieve the trust routing 

and control. 

Fig. 1 The architecture of brain-like based distributed control security in F-RON for CPS.   

A. Network Architecture   

BLCS architecture in F-RON for CPS is illustrated in Fig. 1. The physical entities such as robotic arm 

and camera are interconnected with distributed multi-domain fog wireless and optical network, which is 

deployed radio, optical and fog computing resources respectively and called as cyber plane. Here, every 

SC1SC3Optical domainSC2Control PlaneComputing domainPath compute elementParserPacket inSDN ControllerStats replyFlow modFeatures repInter-domainBLCSIntra-domainCross-domain control securityWireless domainStatus baseBehav. baseKnowledge baseBrain-like learningRela. workNNId. baseDatabaseController modelTrust managementCyber PlanePhysical PlaneEval. 
       
domains are software defined by the controllers in a centralized way. Aiming to realize the distributed 

control security, the secure controller in BLCS are interworked with SDN controllers (SC) to constitute 

a distributed control plane deployed with brain-like computing in order that each industrial production 

service in CPS can be accommodated with secure cross-domain mixed communication path efficiently. 

In  such  control  plane,  brain-like  security  scheme  is  addressed  with  relation  network  among  partial 

information to prevent deliberate deception based on the security controller. Each controller (e.g., SC1) 

only manages its own optical domain network (e.g., domain 1) so as to safeguard its private information. 

Meanwhile,  according  to  relation  network  built  by  brain-like  learning,  each  controller  maintains  the 

partial virtual topology and routing behavior of other domain (e.g., domain 3) to verify that the executed 

computation results whether to correct in SC (e.g., SC3). The motivations for secure control has been 

driven  by  two  forces.  Firstly,  the  BLCS  adopts  brain-like  computing  mechanism  in  CPS  in  order  to 

perform the secure anonymous distributed control without private information disclosure addressed by 

relation network speculation, which promotes the cyber control security with high privacy protection and 
saves the network cost effectively. Secondly, once relation network has been integrated, the associate 

relationship will be much clearer using brain-like computing to enhance the network security with the 

increasing of the services, which accommodate the secure CPS service efficiently with rapid response 

and global optimization of optical, wireless and calculation resources.   

B. Functional model for BLCS   

In order to implement the secure distributed control, the SDN controllers are used to cooperate with 

each other and secure controller for trusted cross-domain path provisioning with  wireless, optical and 

computing resources in F-RON. Note that the controllers are extended to support BLCS and setup the 

functional entities are illustrated in Fig. 1.   

In SDN controller, cyber information of its own domain is gathered in physical information module, 

while  other  domain’s  partly  virtual  topology  and  routing  behavior  of  should  be  sustained  in  virtual 

information module to be primed for route verification. The controller model is the core engine of SDN 

controller  such  NOX  and  opendaylight  to  orchestrate  and  manage  the  F-RON  network  in  a  unified 

manner.  Cross-domain  path  calculation  is  executed  in  PCE  base  on  an  integrated  graph  of  F-RON 

networks  with  secure  constraints,  which  including  inter-domain  and  intra-domain  computation  with 

brain-like  credible  identification  in  secure  controller.  Parser  performs  continuous  radio  and  optical 

spectrum allocation and decides the routing path using OpenFlow, which contains the messages of packet 

in, stats reply, flow modification and features reply. It can control the spectrum bandwidth and center 

frequency elastically for CPS services, through setting all the related antennas and optical switches on 

the calculated path or network. 

The  trust  management  is  a  vital  module  in  the  architecture  shown  in  Fig.1.  Trust  management 

mechanism enables the controller capable to sustain trust and mitigate the risk of communication and 

information sharing with malicious controller. The trust management model consists of three modules 

including the knowledge base (KB) module, brain-like learning module, and evaluation module. The KB 

is updated periodically based on the statistics about the state collected from the physical cyber. The BLS 

module  builds  the  identification-status-behavior  relational  network  (ISB-RN)  of  knowledge  bases, 

realizing trust calculation based on partial information. The evaluation module calculates the controller's 

honesty,  reliability,  and  collaboration  through  the  ISB-RN  so  as  to  determine  whether  a  controller  is 

trusted to execute cyber operation. 

The core functional entity is secure controller in trust management model. In secure controller,  the 

 
information  of  network  status  such  as  virtual  topology,  routing  behavior  and  controller  identification 

should be collected as knowledge bases for brain-like computing and verification. The brain-like learning 

module can address the secure controller access control and computation authentication. Initially, all the 

controllers are identified with distributed consensus. They can be in a distributed secure network way as 

the foundation of credible route. The relation network module verifies the trusty and security of inter-

domain path calculation among other controller so as to validate the results dependable with the learning 

from knowledge of partly information. The neural network (NN) can perform the deep learning to help 

the relation network establish.   

IV. Cooperation Procedure for Brain-Like Cross-Domain Security 

In CPS, the SCs are automatically working and cooperating with each other to execute a certain task 

assigned from physical entities. However, the SC is vulnerable to be attacked, so that a malicious SC can 

gain access to private data in the communication channels. Processing and storage of the untrustworthy 

SC result in unpredictable loss or changes to data, thereby compromising other controllers. Therefore, a 

controller  should  be  properly  identified  and  validated  to  be  confirmed  whether  the  controller  is  an 

appropriate correspondent before starting the interaction with it. In our scheme, the SC only needs to 

send  partial  information  that  does  not  involve  private  information  to  the  target  controller  for  trusted 

authentication and secure routing. Based on the partial information, the destination controller associates 

with  the  meaning  represented  by  this  information,  thereby  verifying  the  identity  of  the  sender.  This 

protects the sender from transmitting its private information to the cyber.   

Fig. 2 Illustration of brain-like learning scheme.   

Fig. 2 shows how the scheme works. The controllers are divided into two roles including the leading 

secure controller and the receiver. As the leader of multiple controllers, the secure controller periodically 

synchronizes the network information to realize the consistency among multiple controllers. In addition, 

mutex lock is used to ensure synchronization when updating security controller and distributed controller. 

The scheme is applied to the control plane and transport plane of optical networks shown in Fig.2. 

Here, the transport plane is tightly coupled to the physical layer of the optical network, which includes 

spectrum  contiguity  and  spectrum  continuity  constraints.  The  integrated  information  can  be 

supplemented  based  on  partial  information  under  two  constraints  of  optical  network.  New  spectrum 

information will build the new relation with existing partial information in knowledge base. Then, the 

relational network of established spectrum information can be used for security certification. The specific 

process of security authentication is as follows: SC2 receives the authentication request and the partial 

Path reqPath responeTrusted AuthenticationTrusted Authentication and Then Path Selection Identity baseBehavior  baseStatus baseBrain-like learning:Relation network+NNDNTNAF1SCSCSC1SC2SC3Secure controllerSC: Successful certificationAB: Abnormal behaviorAF: Authentication failureDN: Destination nodeTN: Trusted node        Malicious user        Partial information        Supplementary information        Spectrum contiguity        Spectrum continuity L0L1L2L3S0S1S2S3AuthenticationReq. ISB-RN updated ISB-RN Req. ISB-RN updated ISB-RN Path provisioning23456789Transport planeControl plane 
information (i.e., the situation of occupied spectrum) of SC1. It can be determined that the slots with 

orange color are occupied due to the relation of spectrum contiguity and spectrum continuity in S-RN. 

SC2 can confirm  whether the candidate  resources  from request  have been occupied already and then 

judge whether SC1 is trusted. 

In the control plane, the first step is to provide knowledge bases input for the relation network (RN) 

model,  and  the  RN  builds  the  identification-status-behavior  relational  network  (ISB-RN)  between 

knowledge bases. There is a general undetermined interaction in the knowledge bases. For instance, the 

processes  interact  universally  such  as  control  and  calculation.  Interactions  follow  different  types  of 

relations in different spaces. To obtain the complex relations, RN must be able to reason with the existing 

databases  and  then  learn  to  infer  unknown  relations.  Thus,  we  can  provide  identification,  status  and 

behavior description directly  into RN. We use  tags to  mark these inputs  which indicate their relative 

position in the support set, and process this information independently using the same Long Short-Term 

Memory (LSTM). We notice that such setting invokes minimal prior knowledge like a particular identity 

will be associated with a state or an operation. After processing the input, in the multi-layer perception 

(MLP) of the RN, the layers take relational reasoning to be the process of understanding the ways in 

which information are connected using such understanding to accomplish the construction of the ISB-

RN. In fact, these layers provide an architecture on which the model can learn to partition information 

and learn to calculate the interaction between the partitioned information. For instance, the calculation 

unit calculates the angle at which the motor rotates, while the motor rotates to control the robotic arm. 

Here, the robotic arm adjusts the posture and completes the automobile manufacturing. So calculation 

unit, motor and automobile manufacturing will build a relationship among them.   

After the above process, the SC waiting for verification sends part of the information to the destination 

SC to verify whether it is a trusted object. We process the partial information with LSTM in the way of 

the first step. Then, recalling relations of ISB-RN in associative fashion to confirm whether to trust. The 

relationship lookup is first performed, and the relationship between the partial information sent by the 

controller and each location in the ISB-RN is compared. The relationship recursive search is performed 

in the ISB-RN until the relationship of the partial information is found. Then, the authentication of partial 

information can be verified with associative recall. According to associative recall,  we confirm it as a 

trusted SC if there is no exception. Finally, the untrusted SCs will be detected,  while  we will use the 

result for secure routing. When one physical object sends a  request to establish a trusted route to the 

optical domain and the computing domain, it can avoid untrusted SCs and use the greedy algorithms for 

routing safely in trusted domains.   

In  the  proposed  model,  we  illustrate  the  complex  relationships  required  for  trust  and  routing 

provisioning across domains of the CPS infrastructure and services. Establishment of ISB-RN and trusted 

routing authentication is explained with an example.   

Example: Iidentify={i1, i2, …, in } denotes the identification base, Bbehavior ={ b1, b2, …, bn} is the behavior 

base, and S={s1, s2, …, sn } represents the status base. Each trusted information is defined as combination 

of  Iidentif,  Bbehavior  and  Sstatus,  which  are  constrain  of  ISB-RN.  We  assume  that  SC1,  SC2  are  trusted 

controllers, and SC3 is a malicious SC. When SC1 needs to verify its legal identity to SC3. It has to send 

partial non-sensitive information to SC3, which not only protects the identity of SC1 but also performs 

trusted  authentication.  And  based  on  this  part  of  the  information,  SC3  make  an  associative  recall 

judgment whether SC1 is credible. The flow steps in the distributed control security and trusted routing 

authentication process between SCs shown in Fig. 2 is elaborated as below: 

 
Create ISB-RN of knowledge bases: In light of knowledge bases, the RN model constructs the ISB-

RN as shown in Fig. 3. The relation instance is the result of relational reasoning in RN. For example, i1 

is associated with i2, i3, s1 and b2, just like, under the status of robot i2 and conveyor i3, a motor i1 receives 

the feedback of the computing domain after the request, and adjusts the speed action b2 in state s1. When 

new affairs occur, the ISB-RN will update periodically.   

Send partial information: The verifier sends a small portion of the information that is not private but 

sufficient for verification. For instance, the partial information may be part of event information, part of 

spatial-temporal information, even part of attribute information. Here, we take event information as an 

example. We can define event information Ievent={Pid, t, lloc, atype} in CPS, where Pid is the physical event 

identifier, t, l, atype are the occurrence time, location and affairs type, respectively, the event information 

included in knowledge base suggestively describes whether the SC is trusted. We assume SC1 sent the 

information Isc1={t, lloc, atype} related its identification to make SCs of another domain trust it.   

Carry out associative recall: Recursive association search is performed in ISB-RN in light of received 

partial information Isc1 for trusted verification. When SC3 received Isc1, SC3 processes this information. 

First, according to Isc1, event Ievent is recalled, then the handler of the event is associated, and finally, the 

SC1 is confirmed the credible. At the same way, SC3 sent its information Isc3 to SC1 to verify whether 

SC1  can  trust  SC3.  When  SC1  receives  the  information  from  SC3,  in  the  ISB-RN,  some  abnormal 

behaviors of SC3 are retrieved, which may cause error handling of the sender information. Therefore, 

SC3 is judged to be the malicious controller. Hence, SC1 repeats the process with SC2 and find SC2 

trusted. 

Create the trusted routing connection: When it is verified the trust, create a trusted connection between 

SC1 and SC2. Once locating and avoiding malicious nodes,  we use the greedy algorithm to calculate 

routes in the trusted SC domain as the final routing result, further improving routing security.   

V. Brain-like Security for CPS 

For the first time, we design a cross-domain distributed security scheme based on brain-like learning. 

The model foundation is based on the RN. The design goal behind BLS is to constrain the functional 

form of the neural network such that it can capture the core common attributes of relations and enable 

the formation of associative data structures. It is built upon  the RN model and able to store presented 

relation patterns and recall missing patterns in an associative brain-like fashion. 

Fig. 3 The architecture of relation network model. 

A. Relation Network 

f-MLPIdentification baseStatus baseBehavior baseInputRelation NetworkB1 B2 B3 S1 S2 S3 I1 I2 I3 IdentityBehaviorStatus-MLPg featureI1I3I2B1B2B3S1S2S3Output 
 
Relation extraction is prerequisite for BLS. Therefore, we first need to design the RN model with a 

structure prepared for information relational reasoning. The RN consists of two parts as shown in Fig. 3: 
feature extraction MLP 𝑓∅  and feature relation mapping MLP  𝑔𝜃. The RN architecture has the capacity 
to compute relations, just as  CNNs have the capacity to reason about spatial and the  recurrent neural 

networks have the capacity to reason about sequential dependencies. We applied the RN to information 

authentication  control  which  hinges  on  relational  reasoning.  The  learning  model  differs  from  the 

traditional neural network in the way that it can train the model without labeling, address the evolution 

in network structure, and infer the indirect relationship between the data. To ensure that the relationship 

is correctly extracted, we utilize multi existing knowledge bases to heuristically align with information.   

The simplest form of the RN model is the following composite function. In Equation (1), the functional 

form indicates that BLS considers the underlying relationship between knowledge bases. It means that 

BLS does not necessarily know which relation actually exists, nor the actual implication of any specific 

relation. Hence, BLS has to learn to reason the existence and implication of relations.   

BLS(R) = 𝑓∅(∑ 𝑔𝜃

(𝑖𝑚, 𝑏𝑝, 𝑠𝑘)) 

𝑖,𝑗

(1) 

Here the input is sets of identification base I={i1, i2,  𝑖𝑚…, in }, behavior base B={ b1, b2, bp…, bn}, and 
status  base  S={s1,  s2,  sk…,  sn  }.  In  Equation  (1),  𝑓∅   and  𝑔𝜃   are  MLPs  with  parameters  ∅  and  θ, 
respectively,  and  the  parameters  are  learnable  synaptic  weights  such  that  RN  can  be  end  to  end 

differentiable. We also use LSTM with 32 units to process I, S, B as input. The output of  𝑔𝜃  is referred 
to as a “relation”; therefore, the mission of RN is to infer the ways in which im, bp, sk are relational. RN 

uses  𝑔𝜃  to compute relations of information. This can be deemed to as a single function operating on a 
batch of im, bp, sk pairs, where each batch is a particular Identification-Behavior-Status pair. 

B. Associative Recall 

Retrieving all information from a small amount of information according to ISB-RN in an associative 

brain-like fashion, thereby preventing the risk of privacy information leakage [15]. A two-layer memory 

network is constructed to realize our goal, including the input layer and the relation memory layer. The 

input layer is used to input relation vector of the RN. The relation memory layer is used as storage of 

information from the input layer, relation vector information can be stored in this layer. 

  In the relation memory layer, different sub-networks are used to store the different sets of relation 

groups, and neural nodes are used to indicate the distribution of data’s relation. The input relations are 

stored in the weight of such nodes. The relation vector with a relation group label is input into the system. 

According to the label, the model addresses the corresponding sub-network in the relation memory layer, 

and incrementally learns to add the new input to corresponding sub-network. If the input relation vector 

does not pertain to any group existing in the relation memory layer, the new input vector will be turned 

into the first node of a new relation group which will be added to the relation memory layer.   

For retrieving all relations, the relation memory is supposed to recall relation vector stored in model 

so  that  incomplete  information  input  can  be  recognized.  When  presenting  partial  information,  if  the 

relation of the partial information is available, then we will find the corresponding node in the memory 

layer. If the information’s relation is unavailable, the k-nearest neighbor rule will be used to determine 

which relation vector belongs to. At test time, one is given partial information, which is used to iteratively 

address and read from the memory looking for relational information to retrieve all  relations. At each 

step, the collected information from the memory is cumulatively added to the original query to build the 

 
context for the next round. At the last iteration, the final retrieved information and the most recent query 

are combined as the final result. 

VI. Performance Analysis and Results Discussion 

The efficiency of the proposed BLCS architecture is evaluated on our SDN testbed, which consists of 

30 physical objects, wireless domain, optical domain and computing domain, which communicate with 

distributed controllers to access various service. This scenario is emulated and established on our testbed 

which has a multi-core server with 8 physical 2.20GHz CPU cores and 2 NVIDIA GTX TITAN XP GPU 

cores,  and  the  code  is  based  on TensorFlow  1.13.1  in  Ubuntu  18.04.2. To  train  the  proposed  model, 

routing  trusted  authentication  requests  from  physical  objects  with  discrete  event  simulation  are 

considered for accessing services. All these routing trusted authentication requests along with knowledge 

bases are given as input to the proposed RN model for security path provisioning. The RN model is run 

for 2000 epochs using the feature set mentioned above. Once the security route is decided, the proposed 

scheme is evaluated on the basis of performance metrics such as average mistrust rate, path provisioning 

latency, packet loss probability, and blocking probability.   

Impact on Average Mistrust Rate: To prove the robustness of our algorithm, the average mistrust rate 

is emulated under the condition of a high proportion of malicious controllers. Fig. 4(a) shows that BLCS 

can  maintain  a  low  average  mistrust  rate,  even  though  a  collusion  situation  occurs  in  such  case.  The 

variations in average mistrust rate with respect to the ratio of malicious controllers are shown in Fig. 4(a). 

As seen in this figure, the scheme without BLCS is much higher than the proposed scheme, and it rises 

faster as the ratio of malicious controller increases. This is because establishing a connection directly 

without  performing  trusted  authentication  increases  the  probability  of  connecting  to  a  malicious 

controller, as opposed to the proposed scheme. 

Impact on Path Provisioning Latency: Fig. 4(b) shows the impact on path provisioning latency with 

increasing  traffic  load.  As  can  be  seen  from  the  figure,  the  proposed  scheme  decreases  the  path 

provisioning latency. This is because the continuously updated ISB-RN becomes clearer as the network 

load increases, and the trusted authentication and path provisioning can be performed more quickly. This 

means that the controller can directly determine which specific domain to authenticate and route in line 

with ISB-RN when processing the request. It is not blindly interacting with other controllers and maintain 

trust with highly reliable controllers, thus reducing path provisioning latency. 

Fig. 4 (a) Average mistrust rate, (b) path provisioning latency, under different traffic load. 

Impact  on  Packet  Loss  Probability:  Fig.  5(a)  shows  the  impact  on  packet  loss  probability  with 

increasing traffic load in the CPS. It can be inferred from Fig. 5(a) that the packet loss probability for the 

proposed  scheme  is  minimal  compared  to  the  scenario  without  the  proposed  scheme.  The  proposed 

scheme assigns the routes using the BLCS in such a way it decreases the packet loss probability, further 

improving the distributed control security, which proves the efficiency of our scheme. 

(a) 
 
Impact on Blocking Probability: Fig. 4(d) shows the variations of the overall blocking probability with 

respect  to  the  traffic  load.  This  figure  shows  that  the  proposed  scheme  also  reduces  the  blocking 

probability compared to the scheme without BLCS. It can be inferred from Fig. 4(a), Fig. 4(b) and Fig. 

5(b)  that  the  proposed  scheme  selects  trusted  controllers  as  well  as  perform  faster  path  provisioning 

during the requests processing, resulting in the reduction of blocking probability. 

Fig. 5 (a) Packet loss probability and (b) blocking probability under different traffic load. 

VII. Conclusion and Future work 

This article presents a novel brain-like based distributed control security architecture in fog radio and 

optical networks for CPS, which can solve the cyber security issue without the privacy exposure. The 

functional entities of the architecture and interworking procedure in secure control mode are presented 

and investigated. The performances are demonstrated on the testbed for secure distributed control. We 

also assess its performances in the scenario with heavy traffic load and compare it with the other scheme. 

Numerical results show that BLS scheme can  locate malicious controllers and security routing, while 

reduce  the  average  mistrust  rate,  path  provisioning  latency,  packet  loss  probability  and  blocking 

probability.  In  the  future,  we  will  research  more  sophisticated  optimization  techniques  along  with 

unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning based BLCS. These can further enhance the security, 

reliability, and accuracy of rapidly growing CPS architectures. 

Acknowledgement 

This work has been supported in part by NSFC project (61871056), Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship 

Program by CAST (YESS) (2018QNRC001), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities 

(2018XKJC06,  2019PTB-009)  and  Open  Fund  of  SKL  of  IPOC  (BUPT)  (IPOC2018A001),  SKL  of 

IPOC (BUPT).   

References   

[1]  D. Ding et al., “A survey on security control and attack detection for industrial cyber-physical systems.” Neurocomputing, 

vol. 275, 2018, pp. 1674-1683.   

[2]  D. Shi et al., “On Finite-State Stochastic Modeling and Secure Estimation of Cyber-Physical Systems,” IEEE T. Automat. 

Contr., vol. 62, no. 1, 2017, pp. 65-80. 

[3]  M. Möstl et al., “Platform-Centric Self-Awareness as a Key Enabler for Controlling Changes in CPS,” P. IEEE, vol. 106, no. 

9, 2018, pp. 1543-1567.   

[4]  H. Kazemi et al., “A Wireless Optical Backhaul Solution for Optical Attocell Networks,” IEEE T. Wirel. Commun., vol. 18, 

no. 2, 2019, pp. 807-823.   

[5]  H. Yang et al., “C-RoFN: multi-stratum resources optimization for cloud-based radio over optical fiber networks,” IEEE 

Commun. Mag., vol. 54, no. 8, Aug. 2016, pp. 118-125.   

(a)(b) 
 
[6]  A. O. Sá et al., “Covert Attacks in Cyber-Physical Control Systems,” IEEE T. Ind. Inform., vol. 13, no. 4, 2017, pp. 1641-

1651.   

[7]  S. Ali et al., “Distributed control systems security for CPS”. Cyber Security for Cyber Physical Systems. Springer, Cham, 

2018, pp. 141-160. 

[8]  H. Yang et al., “Experimental demonstration of multi-dimensional resources integration for service provisioning in cloud 

radio over fiber network,” Sci. Rep., vol. 6, 2016, pp. 30678.   

[9]  L. Fawcett et al., “Tennison: A Distributed SDN Framework for Scalable Network Security,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas 

in Communications, vol. 36, no. 12, 2018, pp. 2805-2818. 

[10]  A. Jindal et al., “SeDaTiVe: SDN-Enabled Deep Learning Architecture for Network Traffic Control in Vehicular Cyber-

Physical Systems,” IEEE Network, vol. 32, no. 6, 2018, pp. 66-73.   

[11]  S. Gu et al., “Controllability of structural brain networks,” Nat. Commun., vol. 6, 2015, pp. 8414.   

[12]  A. Avena-Koenigsberger et al., “Communication dynamics in complex brain networks,” Nat. Rev. Neurosci., vol. 19, 2018, 

pp. 17-33.   

[13]  H.  Yang  et al.,  “Resource  Assignment  based  on  Dynamic  Fuzzy  Clustering  in Elastic  Optical  Networks  with Multi-core 

Fibers,” IEEE T. Commun., vol. 67, no. 5, May 2019, pp. 3457-3469.   

[14]  H. Yang et al. “Distributed Blockchain-based Trusted Control with Multi-Controller Collaboration for Software Defined Data 

Center Optical Networks in 5G and Beyond” Proc. of OFC 2019, Th1G. 2. 

[15]  F. Shen et al. “An associative memory system for incremental learning and temporal sequence” Proc. of IJCNN2010, pp. 1-

8.   

 
 
 
