Cybersecurity for Industrial Control Systems: A Survey 
Deval BhamareΩ, Maede Zolanvariφ, Aiman ErbadҰ, Raj Jainφ, Khaled KhanҰ, Nader Meskin£
ΩDepartment of Mathematics and Computer Science, Karlstad University, Sweden 
ҰDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar 
φDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, USA 
£Department of Electrical Engineering, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar 
deval.bhamare@kau.se, maede.zolanvari@wustl.edu, aerbad@qu.edu.qa, jain@wustl.edu, k.khan@qu.edu.qa, 
nader.meskin@qu.edu.qa 

Abstract:  Industrial  Control  System  (ICS)  is  a  general 
term  that  includes  supervisory  control  &  data  acquisition 
(SCADA)  systems,  distributed  control  systems  (DCS),  and 
other control system configurations such as programmable 
logic  controllers  (PLC).  ICSs  are  often  found  in  the 
industrial  sectors  and  critical  infrastructures,  such  as 
nuclear  and  thermal  plants,  water  treatment  facilities, 
power  generation,  heavy 
industries,  and  distribution 
systems. Though ICSs were kept isolated from the Internet 
for  so  long,  significant  achievable  business  benefits  are 
driving  a  convergence  between  ICSs  and  the  Internet  as 
well as information technology (IT) environments, such as 
cloud  computing.  As  a  result,  ICSs  have  been  exposed  to 
the  attack  vectors  used  in  the  majority  of  cyber-attacks. 
However,  ICS  devices  are  inherently  much  less  secure 
against  such  advanced  attack  scenarios.  A  compromise  to 
ICS can lead to enormous physical damage and danger to 
human lives. In this work, we have a close look at the shift 
of  the  ICS  from  stand-alone  systems  to  cloud-based 
environments.  Then  we  discuss  the  major  works,  from 
industry  and  academia  towards  the  development  of  the 
secure  ICSs,  especially  applicability  of  the  machine 
learning  techniques  for  the  ICS  cyber-security.  The  work 
may  help  to  address  the  challenges  of  securing  industrial 
processes,  particularly  while  migrating  them  to  the  cloud 
environments. 

Keywords  —  Industrial  control  system,  cloud  computing, 
intrusion  detection 
cybersecurity,  machine 
system. 

learning, 

I.  INTRODUCTION 
Industrial control systems (ICSs) are often found in 
the  industrial  sectors  and  critical  infrastructures, 
such as nuclear and thermal plants, water treatment 
facilities,  power  generation,  heavy  industries,  and 
distribution  systems.  Formally,  ICS  is  a  term  that 
covers  numerous 
including 
control 
supervisory  control  and  data  acquisition  (SCADA) 
systems,  distributed  control  systems  (DCS),  and 
other  control  system  configurations  such  as 
programmable logic controllers (PLC). An ICS is a 

systems, 

combination  of  wireless  and  control  components 
(e.g.,  electrical,  mechanical,  hydraulic,  pneumatic), 
which  achieve  various  industrial  objectives  (e.g., 
manufacturing,  transportation  of  matter  or  energy). 
A  typical  ICS  consists  of  numerous  control  loops, 
interfaces  (HMIs),  and  remote 
human-machine 
diagnostics  and  maintenance  tools  built  using  an 
array of network protocols [1, 2]. From now on, we 
will  be  using  the  term  “ICS”  to  represent  all  of  its 
aforementioned components. 

the 

industrial 

facility  operation 

SCADA  systems  monitor  and  control  different 
industrial  control  system  components  by  collecting 
data  from  and  issuing  commands  to  geographically 
remote field stations. SCADA systems and DCS are 
often  networked  together  to  operate  in  tandem. 
Although 
is 
controlled  by  a  DCS,  the  DCS  must  communicate 
with  the  SCADA  system  to  coordinate  production 
output  with  transmission  and  distribution  demands 
(Fig.  1).  For  a  long  time,  until  very  recently,  ICSs 
Internet. 
were  kept  disconnected 
Communication 
components 
happened over private networks and some specially 
designed  protocols,  for  example,  Modbus  RTU, 
Modbus TCP, or various wireless technologies such 
as  Wi-Fi,  Z-Wave,  Zigbee,  and  others.  Other 
protocols  also  exist,  such  as  common  industrial 
protocol  (CIP),  Actuator-sensor  interface  (AC-i), 
DeviceNet,  Highway  Addressable 
Remote 
Transducer  Protocol  (HART)  protocols  for  end-to-
end  automation.  However,  recently,  industries  are 
realizing  the  benefits  that  may  be  derived  from  the 
Internet  as  well  as  Information  Technology  (IT) 
environment, such as cloud computing [2]. 

from 
remote 

among 

the 

Infrastructure  as  a  service  (IaaS)  is  a  service 
offered  by  cloud  providers,  which 
is  gaining 
significant  attention  recently.  Industries  can  benefit 

ePrint
Computers and Security, Elseveir, Accepted November 2019

industries.  However, 

from  such  cloud-based  services.  Instances  of 
SCADA  systems  and  PLC  controllers  can  be 
implemented  as  a  service  using  the  infrastructure 
provided  by  the  clouds,  through  IaaS.  This  might 
save significant hardware and infrastructure cost for 
the 
ICS 
components  to  the  cloud  and  the  Internet  exposes 
ICSs  to  the  majority  of  cyber-attack  scenarios. 
Moreover,  ICS  devices  are  inherently  less  secured 
against  such  advanced  attacks  compared  to  the 
traditional  ICS  attacks  (e.g.,  catastrophic  human 
error  or  insider  sabotage).  This  is  due  to  their 
different characteristics and thread complexity. 

connecting 

Fig. 1. Components of an ICS. 

Examples  of  potential 

ICS-related 

threats 

include [61]:  

•  Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) 
•  Unintended  spillover  of  corporate  network 

compromises 

•  Disruption of voice & data network services 
•  Coordinated physical & cyber-attack 
•  Hacktivist attacks 
•  Supply chain disruption or compromise 
•  Distributed Denial of Service (DDOS) 
Moving  towards  cloud-computing  for  ICSs  has 
several  advantages,  such  as  scalability,  cost-
efficiency,  flexibility.  However,  while  moving 
towards  the  cloud,  ICSs  may  get  exposed  to  new 
threats and vulnerabilities [88], [89]. 

• 

ICS managers have limited security controls 
over the data. Therefore, loss of data privacy 

and  opening  up  an  easy  point  of  illegal 
access to the assets. 

the 

•  Loss  of  connection  with 

remote 
components  from  the  local  devices  or  vice 
versa.  Therefore,  a  threat  of  loss  of  data, 
delays 
process, 
propagating  error  and  negatively  impacting 
other related sections, etc. 

production 

the 

in 

•  Abusing  the  current  flaws  in  the  local 
security  controls  by  other  remote  cloud 
users. Therefore, a threat of data breach, data 
theft,  data  manipulation,  data  exploitation, 
etc. 

•  Lack  of  security  standardization  for  cloud-
based ICSs. All the components must follow 
the  same  security  framework  to  provide 
consistency in operation. 

Existing  defenses  such  as  firewalls  and  VPNs 
have  repeatedly  proven  inadequate  on  their  own, 
especially  with  the  increasing  usage  of  cloud 
platforms  for  the  ICSs.  In  general,  data  encryption 
technologies  to  secure  data  transmission  over  the 
network  have  been  proposed.  Various  encryption 
algorithms have been adopted in the literature, such 
as  Data  Encryption  Standards  (DES),  Triple  DES, 
Advanced  Encryption  standards  (AES),  Blowfish, 
and  others.  A  general  scheme  of  the  performance 
comparison for such algorithms is provided in [52]. 
Other advanced techniques such as digital signature 
have  been  proposed  in  the  literature  and  used  in 
cloud  computing  for  additional  security,  which  can 
be  applied  to  the  ICSs  as  well  [53].  A  significant 
amount of work has already been done in academia 
to build secure cloud-platforms for control systems. 
Secure  and  scalable  access  control  for  cloud 
computing  has  been  proposed  in  [54].  Authors  of 
[54]  achieve  this  goal  by  exploiting  and  uniquely 
combining  techniques  of  attribute-based  encryption 
(ABE), proxy re-encryption, and lazy re-encryption. 
On  the  other  hand,  various  research  works  have 
argued and demonstrated that data encryption alone 
is not sufficient for network security [55]. Recently 
there has been a trend in the applications of machine 
learning  techniques  in  developing  the  intrusion 
detection systems (IDS) for ICS. 

 
In  this  work,  we  focus  on  securing  cloud 
platforms for ICSs to detect any malice or abnormal 
behavior. In other words, we study about building a 
secure ICS and advanced intrusion detection system 
(IDS)  for  ICS  against  the  cyber-attacks.  It  is 
imperative  that  first,  we  have  a  closer  look  at  the 
cloudification  of  the  ICSs  and  recent  works,  which 
address  the  cyber-security  issues  in  the  ICSs.  Our 
major  focus  in  this  work  has  been  applicability  of 
the  machine  learning  techniques  for  anomaly  and 
intrusion detection in the ICS and SCADA systems. 
In  addition,  we  propose  a  simulation  testbed  to 
collect  the  data  traces  for  ICS  operations  to  build 
rigorous machine learning models. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In 
Section  II,  we  critically  analyze  the  survey  work 
available in the field of ICS security. In Section III, 
we  discuss  the  major  research  works  in  academia 
and industry on the application of cloud computing 
in  ICSs,  the  cloud-related  security  issues,  and  the 
proposed  solutions.  Section  IV  lists  the  machine 
learning  approaches  for  the  cyber-security  of  the 
ICSs. In Section V, we present several case studies 
while  in  Section  VI  we  argue  for  the  need  of  a 
testbed to collect the data traces for ICS systems to 
aid  building  rigorous  machine  learning  models.  In 
Section  VI,  we  also  discuss  future  research 
directions.  Finally,  we  conclude  the  paper.  Table  1 
summarizes the related work critically while the list 
of acronyms used in the paper is given in Table 2 at 
the end. 

II.  AVAILABLE SURVEYS 
In  this  section,  we  critically  analyze  the  major 
surveys  in  the  field  of  industrial  control  systems 
(ICSs)  and  their  security  and  justify  the  need  for 
further  research.  Kriaa  et  al.  [84]  have  provided  an 
extensive  survey  in  the  field  of  safety  and  security 
of 
industrial  control  systems.  The  borderline 
between these two concepts (safety and security for 
ICSs) has been clearly defined. Different approaches 
proposed  in  the  literature  for  these  issues  are  also 
categorized  as  either  generic  or  non-generic. 
Cherdantseva  et  al.  [77]  review  state  of  the  art  in 
risk  assessment  of  Supervisory 
cybersecurity 

Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems as 
well. However, both these works lack the survey of 
cloud-based  approaches  and  machine 
learning 
techniques for ICS security, which is the main focus 
of research currently.  
Knowles et al. [85] have surveyed the cyber-security 
of ICSs and the risk management aspects of it. The 
related  standard  in  this  domain  are  discussed  and 
how  the  current  systems  lack  built-in  security 
considerations.  Sajid  et  al.  [78]  have  provided  a 
review focusing on the security challenges of cloud-
based  ICS  systems.  Remarks  such  as  additional 
challenges  after  cloud  integration  along  with  the 
general  security  shortcoming  of  SCADA  systems 
are  mentioned.  However,  a  more  in-depth  security 
analysis  is  required,  especially  the  applicability  of 
the machine learning approaches. 

Ding  et  al.  [86]  have  provided  a  survey  on  the 
developed  mathematical  approaches  for  distributed 
filtering  and  control  of  ICSs.  The  main  focus  is  on 
the  differential  dynamic  models,  while  a  small 
section  is  dedicated  to  security  controls.  There  is  a 
need  to  develop  model-based  approaches  for  the 
security  of  these  systems.  Molina  and  Jacob  [87] 
have  surveyed  the  current  techniques  based  on 
software-defined networking solutions for the cyber-
security  of  industrial  settings.  However,  their  focus 
is on the general concept of cyber-physical systems 
and not specific on ICSs. Zeng and Zhou [90] have 
intrusion 
the  available  approaches  for 
studied 
detection  systems  (IDSs)  deployed  in  ICSs.  A 
taxonomy  of  the  relevant  vulnerabilities  in  these 
systems  is  also  brought  up.  They  discuss  machine 
learning-based  solutions  along  with  other  types  of 
IDSs.  However,  none  of  the  mentioned  techniques 
are  cloud-specific,  and  more  detailed  work 
regarding  the  available  machine  learning  solutions 
for  multi-cloud  scenarios  is  required.  In  the  next 
section  we  focus  on  the  related  work  in  the 
literature,  more  specific  to  multi-cloud  deployment 
of the industrial control systems.  

III. RELATED WORK 

towards 

the  cloud-based  environments 
Moving 
benefits  both  the  control  system  providers  and  the 
the  cost  and 
users  significantly  by  reducing 

 
the 

throughput.  In  addition,  higher 
increasing 
reliability  and  enhanced  functionality  will  be 
achieved  by  embracing  cloud-based  approaches  for 
ICSs.  In  addition  to  eliminating  the  expenses  and 
complexities  associated  with  the  hardware  layer  of 
the ICS infrastructure, a cloud-based control system 
allows  connectivity  among  the  remote  components 
as  well  as  enabling  the  users  to  utilize  the  system 
remotely  [63].  SCADA,  PLC  and  DCS  systems, 
with their reliance on proprietary network protocols 
and equipment, have long been considered immune 
to the network attacks that have emerged recently in 
the  networking  paradigm.  However,  recent  studies 
prove that this assumption is not correct. 

Recently,  standards  such  as  Ethernet,  TCP/IP, 
and  web  technologies  have  been  compromised  to 
attack  the  ICSs.  Works  presented  in  [2]  and  [40] 
demonstrate  that  there  is  a  definite  shift  in  the 
the  ICSs.  Threats 
source  of  cyber-attacks  on 
originating  from  outside  the  organization  are  likely 
to  have  very  different  attack  characteristics 
compared  to  the  internal  threats.  Regarding  the 
studies  by  the  industry,  such  as  IBM,  attacks 
targeting  the  ICSs  are  already  up  by  110  percent 
[64]. Specifically, the spike in malicious ICS traffic 
was  related  to  SCADA  brute-force  attacks,  which 
uses  automation  to  attack  the  system.  Once  the 
system  is  breached,  attackers  can  remotely  monitor 
or  control  the  connected  SCADA  devices.  Some 
recent notable ICS attacks include the cyber-attacks 
on the European Energy Company, New York dam 
attack, Russian cyber-attack on the Ukrainian power 
grid [64]. 

The associated costs of security breaches in real-
time  industrial  platforms  could  be  very  high.  They 
result in the loss of sensitive data, loss of revenues, 
environmental  impacts,  production,  and  financial 
loss, and even human injury. Hence, companies and 
industries  are  mandated  to  reassess  their  security 
risk  models  and  their  assumptions.  It  has  become 
imperative  to  have  a  closer  look  at  the  state  of  the 
art  of  the  security  options  for  ICSs.  This  helps  to 
better  understand  the  current  risks  associated  with 
the  enhancements  offered  by  the  novel  cloud 
technologies  and  the  available  solutions.  In  this 
section, we investigate the major works in academia 

and industry on the cloud computing applications in 
ICSs as well as the cloud-related security issues and 
available  solutions.  Such  research  works  might 
encourage  the  industries  to  shift  from  the  standard 
to 
hardware  systems 
leverage their advantages.  

to  cloud-based  platforms 

from 

ICS  system 

the  standard 

As mentioned before, there have been significant 
efforts  in  the  industry  as  well  as  academia  towards 
shifting 
the 
monolithic  hardware  to  the  cloud-based  platforms. 
Pollet  [9]  has  discussed  the  security  strategies  for 
SCADA  in  his  work.  The  author  describes  specific 
threats  to  SCADA  systems  and  some  sample 
hacking  scenarios  and  then  ranks  these  threats  in  a 
security matrix. Igure et al. [7] highlight some major 
threats  and  vulnerabilities  in  the  SCADA  systems. 
The  authors  also  provide  a  brief  overview  of  some 
of  the  ongoing  works  in  this  field  along  with 
should  be 
ongoing 
addressed 
the  overall  security  of 
SCADA  networks.  Nicholson  et  al.  [8]  identify  the 
security  issues  related  to  SCADA  from  the  cyber-
security perspectives. Attack mitigations, standards, 
and  forums  related  to  SCADA  systems  are  also 
discussed. 

technical  problems 
improve 
to 

that 

Chandia  et  al.  [10]  propose  two  practical 
strategies  for  the  security  of  the  SCADA  systems. 
The first strategy utilizes a security service suite that 
minimizes  the  impact  on  time-critical  industrial 
processes while adhering to industry standards. The 
second strategy implements a sophisticated forensic 
system  for  collecting  and  analyzing  the  SCADA 
network traffic. Recent attacks on SCADA systems 
highlight  the  need  for  a  SCADA  security  testbed, 
which  can be used to model a real SCADA system 
and study the effects of attacks on them. Queiroz et 
al.  [11]  propose  an  architecture  for  a  modular 
SCADA testbed and describe a tool, which mimics a 
SCADA network, monitors and controls the sensors 
and  actuators  using  Modbus/TCP  protocol.  Bowen 
et al. [12] discuss the next-generation security issues 
in the SCADA systems and discuss best practices to 
avoid the attacks on the SCADA systems. 

Wang  et  al.  [14]  confirm 

that  simulation 
experiments are a potential means of analyzing and 
systems. 
assessing 

security  of  SCADA 

the 

However,  existing  simulation  environments  have 
flexibility and extensibility limitations. In that work, 
the  authors  establish  abstract  models  of  a  SCADA 
system based on the industry standards and propose 
a  reference  architecture  of  the  SCADA  simulation 
environment. Some experiments on attack scenarios 
have  been  conducted  in  the  proposed  simulation 
they  have  analyzed  and 
environment.  Finally, 
assessed the system’s security status, and the results 
to  demonstrate  the  effectiveness  and  practicability 
of  the  simulation  environment  [6].  Shahzad  et  al. 
to 
[15]  propose  cryptography-based  solutions 
protect  SCADA  protocols  and  communications. 
Attack  (abnormal)  scenarios  have  been  created 
within  the  testbed  implementation  (cryptography 
testbed),  and  the  level  of  security  is  measured  and 
compared  based  on  the  attack  detection  level  and 
attack impact level.  Qin  et  al. [16] design  a  neuron 
model, which combines reasoning machine based on 
the  cloud  generator  with  the  factor  neural  network 
theory. The authors claim that the  proposed system 
demonstrates 
flexibility,  mobility, 
scalability  and  other  features  across  multiple 
platforms with distributed characteristics. 

substantial 

Zhang et al. [17] propose a fuzzy Petri network-
for  SACADA 
based  security  defense  model 
systems.  The  authors  also  demonstrate 
the 
effectiveness  of  the  proposed  method  with  their 
results.  The  authors  in  [18]  propose  the  need  to 
extend  the  existing  power-grid  security  models  to 
secure  the  distributed  smart  grids.  Colombo  et  al. 
[19]  discuss  the  cloud-based  cyber-physical  ICSs. 
Similarly,  the  authors  in  [20]  present  a  testbed 
platform for the implementation of cloud computing 
in  SCADA  systems  for  electrical  power  systems. 
The  authors  demonstrate  the  operations  of  the 
the  cloud 
traditional  SCADA 
computing  platforms  and 
the  main 
application modules of SCADA for electrical power 
metering on the cloud platforms. Different types of 
along  with  physical 
control 
networking solutions of the cloud platforms are also 
visualized. Similar work has been presented in [22] 
on  implementing  the  SCADA  systems  over  the 
cloud  platforms.  These  are  some  of  the  pioneering 
works demonstrating the usability and advantages of 

systems  over 
integrate 

servers 

center 

the  cloud  platforms  for  the  ICSs.  Simmhan  et  al. 
[21] propose a cloud-based software system for big 
data  analytics  in  the  smart  grids.  The  authors 
highlight  the  feasibility  and  effectiveness  of  such 
systems.  

There  are  several  works  that  investigate  the 
security issues of cloud-based SCADA systems. For 
example,  authors  in  [23]  propose  a  secure  cloud-
based platform for SCADA systems considering the 
use case of the water supply networks. The authors 
present  a  proof  of  concept  for  a  cloud-based  water 
supply  network  monitoring  (WSNM)  application, 
called  RiskBuster  (RB).  The  proposed  platform 
ensures  the  confidentiality  and  integrity  of  the 
SCADA system while monitoring and collecting the 
data  from  dam  sensors  and  storing  in  the  cloud  by 
using the innovative Intel Software Guard eXtension 
(SGX)  technology.  Sajid  et  al.  [24]  highlight  the 
security  challenges  in  the  cloud-based  SCADA 
systems.  Authors  also  provide  the  existing  best 
practices  and  recommendations  for  improving  and 
maintaining security  along with future  directions to 
secure the cyber-physical systems. 

in 

[26] 

through 

identify 

Shahzad et al. [25] have implemented a SCADA 
system  within  a  cloud  computing  environment  to 
minimize the costs related to real-time infrastructure 
for  SCADA 
cloud 
implementation 
computing.  Cardenas  et  al.  [62]  have  performed  a 
risk  assessment  for  SCADA  systems  and  discussed 
various  attack  models  with  experiments.  Authors 
have  categorized  the  attacks  in  various  groups  and 
discussed the response schemes to such attacks. The 
the  service-oriented 
authors 
architecture  paradigm  empowered  by  resource 
virtualization  as  a  lighthouse  for  cloud-based  ICSs. 
The  proposed  framework  has  the  potential  of 
empowering the seamless integration and interaction 
among the heterogeneous stakeholders in the future 
industrial  automation  domain.  They  have  fulfilled 
this  concept  by  integrating  web  services,  Internet 
technologies,  cloud  systems,  and  the  power  of  the 
Internet  of  Things.  A  similar  security-oriented 
cloud-based  SOA  platform  for  ICSs  has  been 
proposed by Baker et al. in [27]. Qui and Gooi [42] 
propose  a  web-based  SCADA  display  system 
through which users can view as well as control the 

threats 

operations  of  the  sub-stations  at  the  server  sides. 
The  authors  in  [2]  identify  various  sources  of 
possible 
i.e.,  adversarial, 
accidental,  structural,  and  environmental.  Such 
risk 
source  categorizing  helps 
management  strategy 
the  system 
against possible threats. 

to  create  a 

that  protects 

the  ICSs, 

to 

Recently, 

there  has  been  a 
learning 

towards 
trend 
implementing  machine 
techniques  for 
anomaly  detection  and  prevention  in  the  networks 
[5].  Karnouskos  et  al.  [28]  discuss  trends  and 
challenges for cloud-based industrial cyber-physical 
systems. The authors identify machine learning as a 
key  trend  in  the  security  implementation  for  the 
cloud-based  ICSs.  It  has  been  shown  that  machine 
learning  methods  are  indeed  able  to  provide  useful 
security  information  for  various  physical  problems 
and  practical  contexts.  Thames  and  Schaefer  [79] 
have investigated the integration of software-defined 
networks  (SDN)  in  ICSs.  Their  proposed  cloud-
based  workflow  is  called  Software-Defined  Cloud 
Manufacturing  (SDCM).  Utilizing  the  abstraction, 
provided  through  SDN  architecture,  provides  low 
latency  and  efficiency  in  updating  the  security 
solutions and hardware designs. All these outcomes 
are  promising  in  improving  the  manufacturing 
processes. 

and 

then 

control 

There  has  been  a  great  effort  in  identifying  the 
threats and attack vectors specific to ICSs. Rubio et 
al. [80] first discuss the common threats exposed to 
industrial 
the 
systems, 
corresponding  potential  defense  mechanisms  are 
highlighted.  In  this  paper,  a  threat  analysis  specific 
to cloud-based computing in these systems has been 
conducted. Zhou et al. [81] have studied one of the 
most  relevant  attacks  against  these  systems,  DDoS. 
They  have  utilized  a  fog-based  computation  to  run 
real-time 
latency 
communication  with  the  cloud  center  for  proper 
mitigations. As per the studies in [5], authors argue 
that  automatic  machine  learning  approaches  are 
more  systematic,  easier  to  handle  and  master,  and 
therefore,  more  reliable  and  robust 
the 
traditional  security  measures  such  as  firewalls. 
These  possibilities  open  up  new  perspectives  to 
respond to the challenges of planning and operating 

traffic  monitoring  and 

than 

low 

future industrial systems with an acceptable level of 
security.  In  the  next  section,  we  will  have  a  closer 
look  at  the  security  measures  for  the  ICSs  using 
machine learning approaches. 

IV. MACHINE LEARNING APPROACHES FOR ICS 
SECURITY 

targeting 

With  the  discovery  of  the  Stuxnet  attack, 
increasing  attention  is  being  paid  to  the  potential 
malware 
the  PLCs.  Contemporary 
advanced  malware  may  infer  the  structure  of  the 
physical  plant  and  can  use  this  information  to 
construct  a  dynamic  payload 
to  achieve  an 
adversary’s  end  goal,  such  as  Stuxnet  [56,  57].  To 
counter  such  situations,  recently,  there  has  been  a 
trend 
implementation  of  machine 
learning  techniques  for  anomaly  detection  and 
prevention in the networks of the ICSs [58-60].  

towards 

the 

ICSs,  specifically  SCADA  systems. 

ICSs,  such  as  SCADA  systems,  have  very 
regular  communication  patterns.  Often  the  same 
limited set of read and write commands are repeated 
in  a  loop.  For  example,  the  gas  pipeline  system 
presented by Zhang et al. [17] repeats the same two 
commands in a loop. First, it writes the contents of 
all  registers  and  coils  used  for  control.  Next,  a 
Modbus read command is used to read the measured 
state of the system. Modbus protocol is often used in 
many 
It 
implements  a  master/slave  configuration  in  which 
the slave does not request the data. It only receives 
commands from the master. Data is transmitted over 
serial  lines  (Modbus  RTU/ASCII)  or  Ethernet 
(Modbus  TCP).  These  two  commands  are  followed 
by a set of two responses. Such regularity leads to a 
set  of  commands  in  which  all  device  addresses  are 
constant, and each of the four packets has the same 
length.  This  lack  of  variation  is  expected.  These 
regular  patterns  can  be  exploited  by  machine 
learning  algorithms,  which  can  be  used  to  build 
models  of  normal  behavior  and  detect  abnormal 
deviations [1]. 

As  per  the  studies  in  [5],  it  has  been  observed 
that  machine  learning  methods  are  indeed  able  to 
provide  important  security  information  for  various 
physical  problems  and  practical  contexts.  Authors 
argue  that  automatic  machine  learning  approaches 

of 

SCADA 

are  more  systematic,  easier  to  handle,  and  master. 
These  possibilities  open  up  new  perspectives  to 
respond  to  the  challenge  of  planning  and  operating 
future industrial systems with an acceptable level of 
security.  Brundle  and  Naedele  [3]  discuss  the 
importance  of  securing  the  ICSs  by  listing  the 
challenges 
security.  Recently, 
researchers have started studying intrusion detection 
systems  using  SCADA  network  traffic  traces.  With 
the  advent  of  the  novel  multi-cloud  networking 
paradigm,  subsets  of  ICSs  may  be  shifted  to  the 
clouds  leveraging  the  advantages  of  the  IaaS 
platform offered by various cloud service providers 
[63,  67].  However,  security  issues  in  such  novel 
platforms  need  to  be  addressed  before  this  major 
shift. To achieve this, more attention must be paid to 
studying machine learning applications for anomaly 
detection in multi-cloud environments. 

Contemporary 

IDSs  use  machine 

learning 
algorithms  for  pattern  recognition  to  detect  threat 
activities that are anomalous for a particular system. 
There  are  other  IDSs,  which  use  signature-based 
systems  to  compare  the  activities  to  a  database  of 
known threats [29-31]. These functionalities can be 
combined together for a robust detection system and 
will  provide  a  sufficient  layer  of  protection  for 
various  attack  scenarios.  Despite  the  popularity  of 
the  machine  learning  techniques,  IDS  researcher 
groups  lack  standard  datasets  to  train  and  test  the 
algorithms.  This  results  in  an  inability  to  develop 
robust  ML  models  to  detect  anomalies  in  the  ICSs 
[1].  Many  of  the  datasets,  especially  in  the  context 
of  the  ICSs,  used  by  researchers  do  not  contain  all 
types  of  attacks,  hence  gauging  the  performance  of 
the  IDS  is  hard  when  all  patterns  of  attack  are  not 
considered, for instance, work presented in [4]. 

The authors in [1] develop a standard dataset to 
provide  third-party  validation  of  the  IDS  solutions. 
The dataset created from this research was purposed 
to  fill  the  void  in  this  area.  However,  a  significant 
amount  of  future  research  is  still  required  in  this 
domain.  Authors  in  [29]  propose  an  IDS  for 
SCADA  protection  based  on  machine  learning 
approaches.  Specifically,  the  authors  compare  rule-
based 
(Artificial  Neural 
Networks),  HMM  (Hidden  Markov  Model)  and 

approaches,  ANN 

SVM (Support Vector Machines). Similarly, authors 
in  [30]  propose  an  OCSVM  (One-Class  SVM) 
intrusion  detection  mechanism,  which  is  based  on 
unsupervised  machine  learning  methods,  that  does 
not  need  any  labeled  data  for  training  or  any 
information  about  the  anomaly.  Dua  and  Du  [31] 
propose  data  mining-based  machine 
learning 
techniques for cybersecurity in SCADA systems. 

In  [1],  the  authors  argue  that  IDS  researchers 
lack  a  common  framework  to  train  and  test  the 
proposed  algorithms.  The  authors  try  to  bridge  the 
gap by documenting two approaches of data sharing 
for the IDSs of the ICS research community. In their 
work, first, a network traffic data log captured from 
a gas pipeline is presented. The log was captured in 
a  laboratory  and  included  artifacts  of  normal 
operation and cyber-attacks. Second, an expandable 
virtual  gas  pipeline  is  presented  which  includes  an 
HMI,  PLC,  Modbus/TCP  communication,  and  a 
Simulink based gas pipeline model. The virtual gas 
pipeline  provides  the  ability  to  model  the  cyber-
attacks  and  normal  behavior.  In  total  35  cyber-
attacks  were  used  in  the  creation  of  the  data  log. 
Also,  the  data  log  contains  records  from  214,580 
Modbus  network  packets  with  60,048  packets 
associated with cyber-attacks. In the data logs, each 
packet is labeled with the attack number or the label 
0  for  packets  associated  with  normal  events  (no 
attack)  [1].  Different  models  using  the  simulation 
tools  can  be  prepared  to  represent  the  traffic  in  the 
related  ICSs,  which  can  then  be  used  to  train  the 
machine learning models. 

techniques.  A 

Hink  et  al.  [33]  have  demonstrated  the  use  of 
machine  learning  techniques  for  power  system 
disturbance  and  cyber-attack  discrimination.  The 
authors  in  [32]  focus  on  the  detection  of  cyber-
attacks in water distribution systems using machine 
learning 
one-class 
classification  approach  in  the  feature  space  is 
proposed.  The  tests  are conducted  on  a  real  dataset 
from  the  primary  water  distribution  system  in 
France, and the proposed approach is compared with 
other  well-known  one-class  approaches.  Similarly, 
authors in [34] propose the use of machine learning 
techniques  by  considering  the  diagnosis  of  wind 
turbine  faults.  The  authors  have  demonstrated  the 

simple 

use of classification  techniques to predict  the faults 
in advance. Beaver et al. [35] compare and evaluate 
various  machine  learning  algorithms  for  anomaly 
detection  in  SCADA  communication  channel.  Erez 
and  Wool  [36]  describe  a  novel  domain-aware 
anomaly  detection  system  that  detects  irregular 
changes  in  Modbus/TCP  SCADA  control  register 
values.  The  research  focuses  on  discovering  the 
presence  of 
three  classes  of  registers  (sensor 
registers,  counter  registers,  and  constant  registers) 
using 
classifier. 
Additionally,  parameterized  behavior  models  are 
developed for each class. 

automatic 

proposed 

the 

Zhang  et  al.  [37]  propose  a  SCADA  intrusion 
detection  system  based  on  self-learning  semi-
supervised  OCSVM  (S2  OCSVM).  The  authors 
demonstrate that S2 OCSVM can improve detection 
accuracy.  The  authors  in  [38]  propose  anomaly 
in  electrical  substation  circuits  via 
detection 
unsupervised  machine 
learning  methods.  The 
authors present preliminary results of characterizing 
normal, faulty, and attack states in smart distribution 
substations.  However,  further  investigation  for  the 
broader  applicability  of  the  proposed  methods  is 
needed. The authors in [39] propose an architecture 
of an anomaly detection system based on the Hidden 
Markov  Model  (HMM)  algorithm  for  intrusion 
detection  in  ICSs,  especially  in  SCADA  systems 
interconnected using TCP/IP.  
Table  1  summarizes 

research  works 
performed  in  the  context  of  cloud-based  industrial 
systems and approaches for the cyber-security of the 
ICSs.  Besides  academia,  various  industries  have 
taken  the  initiative  for  the  security  of  the  ICSs.  In 
the  remainder  of  this  section,  we  describe  some  of 
the  important  industry  efforts  in  the  field  of 
cybersecurity  for  the  ICSs.  Cisco  Systems  Inc.  has 
developed an open-source Linux-based ﬁrewall that 
is capable of ﬁltering Modbus packets. The ﬁrewall 
adds  Modbus  functionality  to  Linux’s  Netﬁlter  tool 
that  addresses  the  SCADA  protocol.  Authors  at 
Cisco  have  proposed  to  detect  malicious  behavior 
based  on  the  analysis  of  network  proxy  logs  using 
weak  supervision  methods  [47].  In  another  paper, 
[48],  the  same  authors  claim  that  weak  supervision 
can be adopted on the level of properly deﬁned bags 

the 

of  proxy  logs  by  leveraging  the  Internet  domain 
blacklists, security reports, and sandboxing analysis. 
The  authors  focus  on  training  the  detectors  to 
identify  the  malicious  URLs  in  the  network  traffic 
by  using  the  proxy  logs  of  HTTP  requests.  They 
have  utilized  a  classification  system  that  uses 
statistical  feature  representation  computed  from  the 
network  trafﬁc  and  learn  to  recognize  malicious 
behavior. 

Table 1: Summary of approaches for ICS/SCADA cyber-security 

in 

[5]  

and 

tree 

[30] 

[31] 

[62] 

[33] 

evaluate 

[29] 
[35] 

Description 

various 
for 
SCADA 

learning  algorithms 
detection 

Work 
Category: Implementation of Machine learning 
Algorithms, Academia 
Use  of  decision 
induction, 
multilayer  perceptron  and  nearest 
neighbor  classiﬁers  for  power  system 
security assessment 
Attack  categorization  and  IDS  for 
SCADA security. 
Data  mining-based  machine  learning 
techniques for cybersecurity 
IDS using ANN, HMM and SVM 
Compare 
machine 
anomaly 
communication channel 
IDS  using  One-Class  Support  Vector 
Machine 
Demonstrate 
the  use  of  machine 
learning  techniques  for  power  system 
disturbance 
cyber-attack 
and 
discrimination 
Self-learning  semi-supervised  one-
class  Support  Vector  Machine  (S2 
OCSVM) 
intrusion 
system 
detection in SCADA 
anomaly  detection 
Domain-aware 
system  to  detect  irregular  changes  in 
Modbus/TCP SCADA control register 
values 
Weak  supervision  techniques  on  the 
network 
traffic 
security 
Detection  of  cyber-attacks  in  water 
distribution  systems  using  machine 
learning techniques 
Use of classification machine learning 
techniques  for  the  diagnosis  of  wind 
turbine faults in advance. 
electrical 
Anomaly  detection 
substation  circuits  via  unsupervised 
machine learning methods. 

for  network 

[34] 

[47] 

[32] 

[38] 

[36] 

[37] 

logs 

for 

in 

[39] 

[48] 

The  architecture  of  an  anomaly 
detection system based on the Hidden 
Markov  Model  (HMM)  for  intrusion 
detection in ICS 
A  classification  system  that  uses  the 
statistical feature based on SVM 

for 

the 

[12] 

[13] 

[42] 

[14] 

[11] 

[10] 

[8], [9] 

Category: SCADA system architecture, protocols, 
and security, Academia 
Identification  of  the  security-related 
issues  for  SCADA  from  the  cyber-
security perspective 
A  web-based  SCADA  display  system 
is  proposed  through  which  users  can 
view as well as control the operations 
of the sub-stations at the server sides 
Next-generation  security  issues  in  the 
SCADA systems are discussed 
Two  practical  strategies 
security of the SCADA systems 
The 
a  modular 
architecture  of 
SCADA  testbed  and  a  tool,  which 
mimics  a  SCADA  network,  monitors 
and controls real sensors and actuators 
using  Modbus/TCP  protocol has been 
described 
The  PowerCyber  testbed  has  been 
to  resemble  power  grid 
designed 
communication  utilizing  actual  field 
devices and SCADA software 
A  reference  architecture  of  SCADA 
system simulation environment 
A cloud-based software system for the 
big data analytics in the smart grids 
Cryptography  based 
to 
protect  the  SCADA  protocols  and 
communications 
A 
cloud-based 
industrial control system 
Implemented a SCADA system within 
a  cloud  computing  environment,  to 
minimize  the  cost  that  is  related  to 
real-time  infrastructure  or  SCADA 
implementation 
service-oriented 
the 
Identify 
architecture  paradigm  empowered  by 
virtualization  of 
resources  as  a 
lighthouse for cloud-based ICSs 
Discuss  trends  and  challenges  for 
Cloud-based  industrial  cyber-physical 
systems. 
identify  machine 
learning as a key trend in the security 
implementation  for  the  cloud-based 
industrial control systems 
A  security-oriented  cloud-based  SOA 
platform for ICSs has been proposed. 

cyber-physical 

solutions 

  Also, 

[28] 

[26] 

[27] 

[19] 

[21] 

[25] 

[15] 

[17] 

[24] 

[23] 

[20] 

improving 

A  fuzzy  Petri  network-based  security 
defense model for SACADA systems 
Best  practices  and  recommendations 
for 
and  maintaining 
security  along  with  future  directions 
to  secure  the  cyber-physical  systems 
are discussed 
Use 
of 
eXtension 
confidentiality 
SCADA monitoring data. 
A 
the 
platform 
implementation  of  Cloud  Computing 
in  SCADA  systems  for  Electrical 
Power Systems 

Intel  Software  Guard 
for 
(SGX) 
of 

technology 
integrity 

testbed 

and 

for 

Category: Implementation and Standardization, 
Industry 

[43] 

[44] 

[45] 

[47] 

[48] 

and 

risk 

security 

Information 
assessment for the ICSs by PSCC 
21  steps  by  Department  of  Energy, 
USA,  to  make  the  SCADA  systems 
secure  
the  data 
Standards  for  managing 
access,  alarms,  event  management, 
and  even  Web  access  to  the  SCADA 
network devices by OPC foundation 
An  open-source  Linux-based  ﬁrewall 
that  is  capable  of  ﬁltering  Modbus 
packets by CISCO 
Training  the  detectors  to  identify  the 
malicious URLs in the network traffic 
by  using  the  proxy  logs  of  HTTP 
requests by CISCO 

Category: Dataset generation to train machine 
learning algorithms, Academia 

[73] 

[68] 
[76] 

[74] 

[1] 
[75] 

[49] 

[50] 

[65] 

Lawrence  Berkeley  National  Lab 
(LBNL) dataset 
ISOT dataset 
Information  Security  Center 
Excellence (ISCX) 
UNSW  (University  of  New  South 
Wales) dataset 
Setup for dataset generation 
next-generation  IDS  dataset  (NGIDS-
DS) 

of 

Category: IEEE Standardization 

IEEE standard for security systems for 
nuclear power generating stations 
IEEE  Guide 
for  electric  power 
substation  physical  and  electronic 
security 
for  Security  aspects 
IEEE  guide 
regarding 
access,  operation, 
configuration,  and  data  retrieval  from 
IEDs 

the 

Department  of  Energy,  USA,  has  identified  21 
steps to make the SCADA systems secure [44]. The 
is  also  another  organization 
OPC  Foundation 
working 
the  development  of  security 
towards 
standards for regulating the client-server access and 
open  connectivity  in  industrial  automation.  OPC 
Foundation  started  as  OLE  (object  linking  and 
embedding)  for  Process  Control.  It  has  developed 
standards  for  managing  data  access,  alarms,  event 
management,  and  even  Web  access  to  the  SCADA 
network devices [45].  

IEEE  Power  Engineering  Society  (PES)  Power 
System  Communications  Committee  (PSCC)  has 
also  done  significant  work  in  the  domain  of 
information  security  and  risk  assessment  for  the 
ICSs  [43].  An  instance  is  the  IEEE  standard  for 
security  systems  for  nuclear  power  generating 
stations [49]. This standard addresses the equipment 
for  security-related  detection,  surveillance,  access 
control, communication, data acquisition, and threat 
assessment.  Security  issues  related  to  the  human 
intrusion upon electric power supply substations are 
identified  and  discussed  in  E7.1402  -  the  IEEE 
Guide  for  electric  power  substation  physical  and 
electronic  security  [50].  Security  aspects  regarding 
access,  operation,  configuration,  firmware  revision 
and data retrieval from intelligent electronic devices 
(IEDs) are addressed in IEEE  1686 [65]. 

IEEE  Power  Engineering  Power  System 
Communications  and  Cybersecurity  (PE/PSCC) 
Working  Group  C1  has  developed  a  standard  for 
cybersecurity  requirements  in  control  systems  [51]. 
Cybersecurity  measures  require  that  a  balance  be 
achieved  between  the  technical  feasibility  and  the 
economic feasibility and that this balance addresses 
the  risks  expected  to  be  present  at  a  substation. 
Further,  cybersecurity  measures  must  be  designed 
and  implemented  in  such  a  manner  that  access  and 
operation  to  legitimate  activities  are  not  impeded, 
emergency  or 
particularly  during 
restoration  activity.  IEEE  presents  a  balance  of  the 
above factors in this standard. 

times  of 

ISA/IEC 

standardization  bodies  with 

the 
ISA99/IEC  62443  have  taken  an  initiative  towards 
the security of ICSs even though some industries in 
few  countries  have  taken  more  focused  initiatives, 

such  as  API  (American  Petrol  Institute),  AGA 
(American Gas Association) or IAEA (International 
Atomic  Energy  Agency)  for  nuclear  technology 
[45]. France has even developed protection profiles 
(a  concept  drawn  from  ISO  15408  evaluation 
criteria  for  IT  security)  for  ICS  components. 
Numerous security solutions such as data diodes and 
industrial  firewalls  exist,  but  they  usually  address 
the upper part of an ICS classical architecture (ISA 
95  model).  Security  solutions,  in  the  context  of 
communications  between 
the 
(in 
actuators/sensors, 
particular, if they are related to internal threats) have 
yet to be developed and deployed.  

the  PLCs  and 
installed  by  an  exploit 

in 

International 

Security  products  providers  such  as  FireEye, 
included  machine 
Darktrace,  and  Cisco  have 
learning 
their  security-related  products  and 
services [61, 66]. Similarly, other organizations such 
as  North  American  Electric  Reliability  Corporation 
(NERC), 
for 
Standardization  (ISO),  International  Society  of 
Automation (ISA) have also contributed towards the 
development  of  the  standards  for  the  cybersecurity 
of  the  SCADA  and  PLC  systems.  In  the  next 
section,  we  discuss  four  different  case  studies 
presented in four different research works available 
in the literature. 

Organization 

of 

ICSs 

V.  CASE STUDY EXAMPLES 
In this section we discuss four specific case studies 
for  multi-cloud 
and 
deployment 
applicability of machine learning techniques for ICS 
security,  which  are:  (1)  Cyber  risk  assessments 
based  on  machine  learning  for  the  ICSs  [82],  (2) 
Cloud-based computing in these systems and how it 
improves the attack mitigation [81], (3) Comparison 
of  several  machine  learning  methods  to  detect 
malicious  SCADA  communications  [35]  and  (4) 
Thorough  step  by  step  cloud  mitigation  of  the 
SCADA systems [91]. 

in 

The 

threats 

relevant 

ICSs  have  been 
investigated  comprehensively  in  [82]  with  a  case 
study.  Challenges  in  the  way  of  utilizing  machine 
learning and how it can help in defense mechanisms 
are  also  discussed.  Nine  different  prevalent  attacks 
along with reasons whether machine-learning-based 

approaches  are  useful  or  not  are  discussed.  One  of 
the main obstacles in utilizing a learning model for 
real-world  industrial  setups  is  imbalanced  datasets 
[83].  An  imbalanced  dataset  simply  means  the 
number  of  instances  in  one  class  is  significantly 
lower  than  the  other  class.  If  the  machine  learning 
model  does  not  train  with  enough  samples  from  a 
particular class, it fails in real-time detection of that 
particular class, and it would misclassify them. This 
is  a  bottleneck  in  ICSs  since  most  of  the  time,  the 
number  of  attack  samples  is  relatively  very  low 
compared  to  the  massive  amount  of  normal  traffic 
flowing  in  the  network.  Utilizing  common  and 
traditional machine  learning  models  will  result  in  a 
large  number  of  false  negatives  (attack  traffic 
classified  as  normal).  Based  on  the  results  in  [82], 
machine  learning  is  useful  when  the  traffic  flow  is 
somehow  manipulated. 
in 
confidentiality  attacks,  where  the  intruder  just 
eavesdrops on the network traffic, machine learning 
might  not  be  the  best  tool  to  detect  that  sort  of 
breach. 

instance, 

For 

actuators,  RTUs) 

A  cloud-based  framework  for  ICSs  for  DDoS 
mitigation  is  discussed  in  [81].  Mitigation  simply 
means the attack is discovered, and then appropriate 
countermeasures  are  applied.  The  authors  have 
worked on a case study of integrating fog computing 
into  cloud  computing  for  faster  results.  A  testbed 
has been simulated to demonstrate the performance. 
All  parts  of  an  ICS  (the  field  devices,  e.g.,  sensors 
and 
simulated.  Fog 
environment  and  cloud  environment  using  a  cloud 
server  are  also  simulated  to  run  the  experiments. 
The  effectiveness  of  the  scheme  is  tested  against 
two  different  DDoS  attacks.  A  flooding  technique, 
TCP  SYN,  and  exploitation  of  the  Modbus’s 
vulnerability with forged command data are the two 
types  of  deployed  DDoS  attacks.  The  proposed 
scheme shows an improvement of average 8.98% in 
the 
good 
improvement in the performance. 

demonstrating 

detection 

rate, 

are 

a 

Six  Different 

types  of  machine 

learning 
approaches  for  IDS  of  SCADA  systems  are 
evaluated  in  [35].  These  techniques  include  Naive 
Bayes,  random  forests  (RF),  OneR,  J48,  NNge 
SVM 
(Non-Nested  Generalized  Exemplars), 

(support  vector  machines).  In  this  specific  case 
study, the authors have used labeled RTU telemetry 
data from a gas pipeline system in Mississippi State 
University’s  Critical 
Infrastructure  Protection 
Center.  Attack  traffic  is  simulated  to  test  the 
machine  learning  performance  and  is  generated 
from  two  types  of  code  injection  sets  including 
injection 
injection  attacks,  and  data 
command 
attacks.  Seven  different  variants  of  data  injection 
attacks  were  tried  to  change  the  pipeline  pressure 
values,  and  four  different  variants  of  command 
injection  attacks  to  manipulate  the  commands  that 
control  the  gas  pipeline.  Two  performance  metrics, 
precision  and  recall  have  been  used  for  evaluation. 
The  imbalanced  ratio  of  the  proposed  dataset  is 
about 17%. 

the  machine 

The  performance  of 

learning 
techniques is evaluated for the two types of attacks 
separately. The results of their case study show that 
for data injection attacks, NNge, and random forest 
have  the  highest  score  for  both  metrics.  However, 
for  the  command  injection,  all  the  models  show 
consistent  and  almost  the  same  performance.  The 
authors  have  declared  that  this  is  due  to  the 
simplicity  of 
injection  attacks 
compared to data injection attacks. 

the  command 

In  the  fourth  case  study  [91],  the  authors  have 
done  an  excellent  analysis  by  presenting  how  a 
SCADA 
system  can  be  deployed  over  an 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) cloud setting. They 
have  utilized  EclipseSCADA  as  the  open-source 
base system and the cloud server providing the IaaS 
is  NeCTAR.  Comprehensive  comparison  among 
different  available  open-source  SCADA  platforms 
has  also  been  conducted.  They  have  compared 
different  aspects  such  as  architecture  and  feature, 
code  manageability,  and  adoption.  Therefore, 
EclipseSCADA  was  chosen  as  it  provides  enough 
flexibility for cloud infrastructure. This platform and 
its  components  have  been  explained  with  details. 
However,  the  field  devices  (sensors  and  actuators) 
have been simulated. 
In 
the  evaluation  setup,  a  complete  set  of 
performance  metrics  are  investigated.  Since  in  an 
ICS  environment,  real-time  monitoring  is  crucial, 
they have used metrics such as the effect of the size 

a 

to 

out 

and 

tested 

provide 

components, 

of  the  monitored  field  and  delays,  the  effect  of  the 
location  of  SCADA 
the 
relationship  between  the  processing  time  and  the 
communication  time.  Various  experimental  settings 
thorough 
were 
recommendation  list  for  moving  to  the  cloud  in  a 
real-world scenario. For instance, centralizing all the 
functionalities  is  not  useful  even  though  it  sounds 
promising.  Moreover,  to  lower  the  network  load, 
event-driven  communication  protocols  must  be 
utilized.  It 
the  protocol 
conversion close to the field devices, and a lot more 
that can be further studied in the paper. In the next 
section,  we  propose  a  simulation  testbed  to  collect 
industrial  control  system 
the  data 
operations 
learning 
models and discuss future research directions. 

traces  for 
to  build  rigorous  machine 

is  suggested 

to  do 

VI. RESEARCH CHALLENGES 
In  this  section,  we  describe  some  of  our  initial 
the 
research  related 
challenges that we plan to address in the near future. 

to  SCADA  security  and 

learning  methods 

A.  Our Preliminary work: In our preliminary work 
[41,  46],  we  have  demonstrated  that  machine 
learning  techniques  need  significant  rework  to 
perform  satisfactorily  in  the  context  of  anomaly 
detection  in  ICSs.  The  major  challenge  in  the 
is 
application  of  machine 
obtaining  real-time  and  unbiased  datasets.  Many 
datasets  are  internal  and  cannot  be  shared  due  to 
confidentiality  and  user  privacy  restrictions  or  may 
lack  specific  statistical  characteristics.  Industry 
settings  usually  avoid  sharing 
their  protected 
network  data  information  because  of  these  issues. 
Therefore, researchers prefer to generate datasets for 
training  and  testing  purposes  in  the  simulated  or 
closed  experimental  environments  that  may  lack 
comprehensiveness.  Machine 
learning  models 
trained with such a single dataset generally result in 
a semantic gap between results and their application. 
As  demonstrated  in  [41],  we  have  obtained 
satisfactory results with UNSW (University of New 
South  Wales)  training and  testing  datasets  [74]  and 
supervised machine learning algorithms (Fig. 2) for 

the security of cloud platforms. However, we argue 
that  the  supervised  machine  learning  models  that 
perform  well  with  a  particular  dataset  may  or  may 
not  perform  suitably  with  completely  different 
datasets  generated  with  different  simulation  or 
experimental  conditions.  To  demonstrate  this,  we 
have  tested  the  above  models  with  a  different 
dataset  (ISOT  [68])  and  observed  much-degraded 
performance as shown in Fig. 3. 

Fig. 2: Overall accuracy with UNSW Dataset. 

Fig. 3: True positive and true negative rates with the ISOT dataset.  

The  same  issue  applies  to  the  application  of 
machine  learning  methods  to  the  cybersecurity  of 
ICS  as  well.  There  is  a  dearth  of  research  work, 
which  demonstrates  the  effectiveness  of  machine 
learning models across multiple datasets obtained in 
different environments. There is a dearth of research 
work, which demonstrates the effectiveness of these 
models across multiple datasets obtained in different 
environments.  We  argue  that  it  is  necessary  to  test 
the  robustness  of  the  machine  learning  models, 
especially in diversified operating conditions, which 
in  cloud-based  control  system 
are  prevalent 
scenarios. Our results highlight the need for an ICS 
security  testbed,  which  can  be  used  to  model  real 

 
 
 
 
ICSs  and  study  the  effects  of  attacks  on  them.  The 
testbed  would  provide  an  innovative  environment 
where  researchers  can  explore  cyber-attacks  and 
defense  mechanisms  while  evaluating  their  impact 
on control systems. 

B.  Future  Work:  As  future  work,  we  believe  it  is 
important  to  prepare  a  hybrid  dataset  using  various 
major  datasets,  which  are  available  online  and  the 
datasets  obtained  through  the  testbed  simulation 
setup or at the industry campuses. We aim to extend 
our preliminary work in the context of the ICSs with 
the  hybrid  datasets  including  the  one  presented  in 
[1]  to  test  the  accuracy  of  the  machine  learning 
techniques in the contest of ICSs. 
  As  a  part  of  our  future  research,  we  aim  to 
prepare  hybrid  datasets  using  multiple  publicly 
available  datasets  such  as  UNSW  (University  of 
New  South  Wales)  dataset  [74],  ISOT  dataset  [68], 
Lawrence  Berkeley  National  Lab  (LBNL)  dataset 
[73],  Information  Security  Center  of  Excellence 
(ISCX)  [76],  next-generation  IDS  dataset  (NGIDS-
DS) [75] and other relevant datasets. 

indicated 

captured at an industry campus. A possible setup at 
the  industry  premise  is  shown  in  Fig.  4,  where 
connectivity  among  the  remote  sensors,  actuators 
through PLC and SCADA over the Internet, using a 
cloud  platform  is  shown.  As  shown  in  Fig,  4,  we 
will  collect  the  traffic  dumps  before  and  after  the 
firewall  as 
the  diagram.  After 
in 
comparing  the  two  dumps,  malicious  and  normal 
flows  can  be  labeled  and  used  for  the  training 
purpose.  Such  dataset  can  be  mixed  with  already 
available datasets, such as in [1] to obtain the hybrid 
datasets. In addition, to augment the real-time traces 
to prepare more robust training models, a simulation 
testbed for ICS may be built. A sample lab setup is 
shown  in  Fig.  5,  demonstrating  the  interaction 
between  PLC,  SCADA,  and  the  sensors  as  well  as 
the actuators. 

Fig. 4: Setup at an industrial premise to collect real-time  
traffic traces. 

To achieve this, we propose to extract a common 
set  of  features  from  the  raw  TCP  dumps  of  these 
datasets. This will provide the required robustness to 
the  hybrid  datasets  for  multi-cloud  scenarios.  A 
point  to  be  noted  here  is  that  the  datasets  obtained 
through 
cloud 
environments  may  not  represent  the  real-time  data 
traffic  in  actual  industrial  control  system  scenarios. 
Therefore,  in  addition  to  preparing  the  hybrid 
dataset with the online datasets, we aim to augment 
the  existing  datasets  using  the  real-time  data  traces 

lab-setups  or 

simulated 

the 

Fig. 5: Simulation testbed with the lab setup. 

A  sample  cloud-based  setup,  with  a  possible 
attack scenario, is shown in Fig. 6, where a cloud is 
introduced 
for  communication  among  various 
components  such  as  remote  sensors  and  actuators. 
Towards  this  goal,  the  Tennessee  Eastman  (TE) 
control  process  system,  which  is  a  well-known 
industrial  process  control  system  benchmark  with 
well-understood  dynamical  behavior,  can  be 
considered. 
The  open-loop  TE  system  is  a  complex,  highly 
nonlinear unstable system, and hence it represents a 
real-world  vulnerable  system  where  cyber-attack 
can  lead  to  unstable  operations  leading  to  human, 
environmental,  and  economic  consequences.  It 

 
 
 
 
 
should  be  mentioned  that  TE  benchmark  has  been 
recently considered from cyber-security perspective 
[69-72]  with  the  main  focus  on  evaluating  the 
behavior of the system under cyber-attack. 

industries  would  benefit  from 

the  cloud 
the 
platforms; however, lack of proper security in novel 
multi-cloud  platforms  may  cause  high  costs 
associated with the security breaches in the real-time 
industry  platforms.  The  sophistication  of  new 
malware attacking control systems, such as zero-day 
attacks  and  rootkits,  has  made  it  very  difficult  to 
prevent  and  detect  attacks  at  the  ICS  component 
level. Therefore, there is a need for new schemes of 
intrusion  detection  for  ICS  systems  at  the  process 
control  level.  Applicability  of  the  machine learning 
techniques  has  proven  to  be  very  useful  for  this 
matter. 

Fig. 6: Simulation testbed with cloud and infected traffic. 

in 

the 

investigated 

However,  intrusion  detection  has  not  been 
thoroughly 
literature. 
Consequently, it can serve as the perfect benchmark 
to test and validate the developed ML algorithms in 
future  works.  The  effects  of  attacks  in  the  process 
control domain can be analyzed using the simplified 
model  of  the  TE  process,  which  is  mentioned  in 
[69].  An  ICS  simulation  testbed,  we  believe,  can 
serve the following purpose: 
1.  Be a prototype of a common technical platform 
aimed  at  facilitating  the  creation  of  future  ICS 
cybersecurity test centers.  

2.  Provide  industries  with  a  cost-effective  test 
platform that reduces the costs of simulation and 
testing and delivers more significant results than 
a traditional testbed approach. 

3.  Perform cyber-attacks on a hybrid model of real 

ICS configuration. 

4.  Create  a  testbed  that  is  easy  to  deploy,  more 
realistic than simulation and less expensive. 
5.  Prepare  hybrid  datasets  to  train  the  machine 
intrusion 

to  build 

robust 

learning  models 
detection systems for ICSs. 

VII.  CONCLUDING REMARKS 

Despite  the  recent  popularity  of  employing  big 
data  analytics  and  cloud  computing  for  ICSs,  their 
security  is  still  an  open  issue.  ICSs  and  eventually, 

the  secure  cloud-based 

In  this  work,  first,  we  took  a  close  look  at  the 
shift of the ICS from stand-alone systems to cloud-
based  environments.  Then  we  discussed  the  major 
works,  from  industry  and  academia  towards  the 
development  of 
ICS 
leveraging the advancements in the field of machine 
learning  techniques.  In  addition,  we  believe  that  a 
testbed  may  help 
the  challenges 
associated  with  securing  an  industrial  process, 
providing  more  insights  into  the  knowledge  about 
how the process is actually being managed with the 
help  of  actuators  and  control 
laws,  and  an 
understanding  of  the  security  requirements  specific 
to process control using cloud platforms. 

to  address 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This  publication  was  made  possible  by  the  NPRP 
10-0206-170360  from  the  Qatar  National  Research 
Fund  (a  member  of  The  Qatar  Foundation).  The 
statements made herein are solely the responsibility 
of the author[s]. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  T.  Morris,  Z.  Thornton,  I.  Turnipseed,  “Industrial  Control 
System  Simulation  and  Data  Logging  for  Intrusion  Detection 
System  Research,”  7th  Annual  Southeastern  Cyber  Security 
Summit, Huntsville, AL. June 3 - 4, 2015. 

[2]  NIST Special Publication 800-82, Revision 2 Initial Public Draft, 
“Guide  to  Industrial  Control  Systems  (ICS)  Security,”  May 
2014. 

[3]  M.  Brundle,  M.  Naedele  “Security  for  process  control  systems: 
An  overview,”  IEEE  Security  Privacy,  vol.  6,  no.  6,  pp.24  -29, 
2008. 

[4]  J.M. Moya, A. Araujo, Z. Banković, J.-M. De Goyeneche, J. C. 
Vallejo,  P.  Malagón,  D.  Villanueva,  D.  Fraga,  E.  Romero,  J. 
Blesa,  “Improving  Security  for  SCADA  Sensor  Networks  with 

 
 
Reputation  Systems  and  Self-Organizing  Maps,”  Sensors, 
September 2009, 9380-9397. 

[5]   L.  Wehenkel,  “Machine-learning  approaches  to  power-system 

security assessment." IEEE Expert 12.5, pp. 60-72, 1997. 

[6]  K.  Mathioudakis,  N.  Frangiadakis,  A.  Merentitis,  V.  Gazis, 
“Towards  Generic  SCADA  Simulators:  A  Survey  of  Existing 
Multi-Purpose  Co-Simulation  Platforms,  Best  Practices,  and 
Use-Cases,”  [Online].  Available:  http://conf-scoop.org/ACE-
2013/6_Kostas_ACE.pdf [Accessed September 2019] 

[7]  V. M. Igure, S. A. Laughter, R. D. Williams, “Security Issues in 
SCADA  Networks,”  Computers  &  Security, 25(7),  498-506, 
2006. 

[8]  A. Nicholson, S. Webber, S. Dyer, T. Patel, H. Janicke, SCADA 
the  Light  of  Cyber-Warfare,”  Computers  & 

Security 
Security, 31(4), 418-436, 2012. 

in 

[9]  J.  Pollet,  “Developing  a  Solid  SCADA  Security  Strategy,”  In 
2nd  ISA/IEEE  Sensors  for  Industry  Conference,  pp.  148-156, 
November 2002. 

[10] R.  Chandia,  J.  Gonzalez,  T.  Kilpatrick,  M.  Papa,  S.  Shenoi, 
“Security  Strategies  for  SCADA  Networks,”  In  International 
Conference  on  Critical  Infrastructure  Protection,  Springer  US, 
pp. 117-131, March 2007. 

[11] C.  Queiroz,  A.  Mahmood,  J.  Hu,  Z.  Tari,  X.  Yu,  “Building  a 
SCADA  Security  Testbed,”  In  Third  International  Conference 
on  Network  and  System  Security,  NSS'09,  pp.  357-364,  October 
2009. 

[12] C.  L.  Bowen,  T.  K.  Buennemeyer,  R.  W.  Thomas,  “Next 
Generation  SCADA  Security:  Best  Practices  and  Client 
Puzzles,”  in  Proceedings  from  the  Sixth  Annual  IEEE  SMC 
Information Assurance Workshop, pp. 426-427, June 2005. 
[13] A. Hahn, B. Kregel, M. Govindarasu, J. Fitzpatrick, R. Adnan, S. 
Sridhar, M. Higdon, “Development of the Power Cyber SCADA 
Security Testbed,” In Proceedings of the Sixth Annual Workshop 
on Cyber Security and Information Intelligence Research, ACM, 
p. 21, April 2010. 

[14] C.  Wang,  L.  Fang,  Y.  Dai,  “A  Simulation  Environment  for 
SCADA  Security  Analysis  and  Assessment,” 
in  2010 
International  Conference  on  Measuring  Technology  and 
Mechatronics Automation, vol. 1, pp. 342-347, March 2010. 
[15] A. Shahzad, S. Musa, A. Adulaziz, M. Irfan, “Industrial Control 
Systems  (ICSs)  Vulnerabilities  Analysis  and  SCADA  Security 
Enhancement Using Testbed Encryption,” in Proceedings of the 
8th 
Information 
Management and Communication, ACM, 2014. 

International  Conference  on  Ubiquitous 

[16] Y.  Qin,  X.  Cao,  P.  Liang,  Q.  Hu,  W.  Zhang,  “Research  on  the 
Analytic Factor Neuron Model Based on Cloud Generator and Its 
Application  in  Oil  &  Gas  SCADA  Security  Defense,”  in 
Proceedings  of  2014  IEEE  3rd  International  Conference  on 
Cloud Computing and Intelligence Systems, 2014. 

[17] W. W. Zhang, X. D. Cao, Q. C. Hu, P. Liang, Y. Qin, “Research 
on FPN-Based Security Defense Model of Oil and Gas SCADA 
Network,”  in  Proceedings  of  Computational  Intelligence  in 
Industrial  Application:  the  2014  Pacific-Asia  Workshop  on 
Computer  Science 
in  Industrial  Application  (CIIA  2014), 
Singapore, p. 31, CRC Press, July 2015. 

[18] J.  J.  Chromik,  A.  K.  Remke,  B.  R.  Haverkort,  “Improving 
SCADA Security of a Local Process with a Power Grid Model,” 
in  Proceedings  of  the  4th  International  Symposium  for  ICS  & 
SCADA Cyber Security Research, 2016. 

[19] A.  W.  Colombo,  T.  Bangemann,  S.  Karnouskos,  J.  Delsing,  P. 
Stluka, R. Harrison, J. L. Lastra, “Industrial Cloud-Based Cyber-
Physical Systems, The IMC-AESOP Approach, 2014. 

[20] D.  Grozev,  G.  Spasov,  M.  Shopov,  N.  Kakanakov,  G.  Petrova, 
“Experimental  Study  of  Cloud  Computing  Based  SCADA  in 
Electrical  Power  Systems,” 
in  Proceedings  of  Scientific 
Conference  Electronics  (ET),  International,  pp.  1-4,  September 
2016. 

[21] Y.  Simmhan,  S.  Aman,  A.  Kumbhare,  R.  Liu,  S.  Stevens,  Q. 
Zhou,  V.  Prasanna,  “Cloud-Based  Software  Platform  for  Big 
Data  Analytics  in  Smart  Grids,”  Computing  in  Science  & 
Engineering, 15(4), 38-47, 2013. 

[22] S.  Shahzad,  S.  Musa,  A.  Aborujilah,  M.  N.  Ismail,  M.  Irfan, 
“Conceptual  Model  of  Real  Time  Infrastructure  Within  Cloud 
Computing  Environment,”  International  Journal  of  Computer 
Networks (IJCN), vol. 5, pp. 18-24, 2013. 

[23] G. Cerullo, G. Mazzeo, G. Papale, L. Sgaglione, R. Cristaldi, “A 
Secure  Cloud-Based  SCADA  Application:  The  Use  Case  of  a 
Water  Supply  Network,”  in  Proceedings  of  the  Fifteenth 
SoMeT_16,  New  Trends  in  Software  Methodologies,  Tools  and 
Techniques, pp. 286, 291, 2016. 

[24] A.  Sajid,  H.  Abbas,  K.  Saleem,  “Cloud-Assisted  IoT-Based 
SCADA Systems Security: A Review of the State of the Art and 
Future Challenges,” IEEE Access 4, pp. 1375-1384, 2016. 
[25] A.  Shahzad,  S.  Musa,  A.  Aborujilah,  M.  Irfan,  “A  New  Cloud 
Based Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition Implementation 
to  Enhance  the  Level  of  Security  Using  Testbed,”  Journal  of 
Computer Science, 10(4), 652, 2014. 

[26] S.  Karnouskos,  A.  W.  Colombo,  T.  Bangemann,  K.  Manninen, 
R. Camp, M. Tilly, P. Nappey, “The IMC-AESOP Architecture 
for  Cloud-Based 
in 
Industrial  Cloud-Based  Cyber-Physical  Systems,  pp.  49-88, 
Springer International Publishing, May 2014. 

Industrial  Cyber-Physical  Systems,” 

[27] T.  Baker,  M.  Mackay,  A.  Shaheed,  B.  Aldawsari,  “Security-
Oriented  Cloud  Platform  for  SOA-Based  SCADA,”  In  15th 
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid 
Computing (CCGrid), pp. 961-970, May 2015. 

[28] S.  Karnouskos,  A.  W.  Colombo,  T.  Bangemann,  “Trends  and 
Challenges for Cloud-Based Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems,” 
in Industrial Cloud-Based Cyber-Physical Systems, pp. 231-240, 
Springer International Publishing, 2014. 

[29] S.  L.  P.  Yasakethu,  J.  Jiang,  “Intrusion  Detection  via  Machine 
Learning for SCADA System Protection,” in Proceedings of the 
1st  International  Symposium  on  ICS  &  SCADA  Cyber  Security 
Research, pp. 101-105, September 2013. 

[30] L.  A.  Maglaras,  J.  Jiang,  “Intrusion  Detection  in  SCADA 
Systems  Using  Machine  Learning  Techniques,”  Science  and 
Information Conference (SAI), London, pp. 626-631, 2014. 
[31] S.  Dua,  X.  Du,  “Data  Mining  and  Machine  Learning  in 

Cybersecurity,” Auerbach Publications, Boston, 2011. 

[32] P. Nader, P. Honeine, P. Beauseroy, “Detection of Cyber Attacks 
in  a  Water  Distribution  System  Using  Machine  Learning 
Techniques,”  in  Sixth  International  Conference  on  Digital 
Information Processing and Communications (ICDIPC), pp. 25-
30, April 2016. 

[33] R.  C.  B.  Hink,  J.  M.  Beaver,  M.  A.  Buckner,  T.  Morris,  U. 
Adhikari,  S.  Pan,  “Machine  Learning  for  Power  System 
Disturbance  and  Cyber-Attack  Discrimination,”  in  Proceedings 
of the 7th International Symposium on Resilient Control Systems 
(ISRCS), pp. 1-8, August 2014. 

[34] K.  Leahy,  R.  L.  Hu,  I.  C.  Konstantakopoulos,  C.  J.  Spanos,  A. 
M.  Agogino,  “Diagnosing  Wind  Turbine  Faults  Using  Machine 
Learning  Techniques  Applied  to  Operational  Data,”  in  IEEE 
International  Conference 
and  Health 
Management (ICPHM), pp. 1-8, June 2016. 

on  Prognostics 

[35] J.  M.  Beaver,  R.  C.  Borges-Hink,  M.  A.  Buckner,  “An 
Evaluation  of  Machine  Learning  Methods  to  Detect  Malicious 
SCADA Communications,” in 12th International Conference on 
Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), vol. 2, pp. 54-59, 
December 2013. 

[36] N.  Erez,  A.  Wool,  “Control  Variable  Classification,  Modeling 
and  Anomaly  Detection  in  Modbus/TCP  SCADA  Systems,” 
International  Journal  of  Critical  Infrastructure  Protection,  vol. 
10, 59-70, 2015. 

[37] Y.  G.  Zhang,  W.  Zhang,  X.  R.  Xue,  X.  J.  Yang,  “SCADA 
Intrusion  Detection  System  Based  on  Self-Learning  Semi-
Supervised  One-Class  Support  Vector  Machine,”  Metallurgical 
Industry Automation, vol. 37(2), pp. 1-5, 2013. 

[38] A.  Valdes,  R.  Macwan,  M.  Backes,  “Anomaly  Detection  in 
Electrical  Substation  Circuits  via  Unsupervised  Machine 
Learning,”  in  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  17th  International 
Conference on Information Reuse and Integration (IRI), pp. 500-
505, July 2016. 

[39] K.  Stefanidis,  A.  G.  Voyiatzis,  “An  HMM-Based  Anomaly 
Detection Approach for SCADA Systems,” in IFIP International 
Conference  on  Information  Security  Theory  and  Practice,  pp. 
85-99, Springer International Publishing, September 2016. 
 [40] E. Byres, J. Lowe, “The Myths and Facts Behind Cyber Security 
Risks  for  Industrial  Control  Systems,”  in  Proceedings  of  the 
VDE Kongress, vol. 116, 2004. 

[41] D.  Bhamare,  T.  Salman,  M.  Samaka,  A.  Erbad,  R.  Jain, 
“Feasibility  of  Supervised  Machine  Learning 
for  Cloud 
Security,”  in  3rd  International  Conference  on  Information 
Science and Security (ICISS2016), Thailand, December 2016. 
[42] B.  Qiu,  H.  B.  Gooi,  “Web-Based  SCADA  Display  Systems 
(WSDS)  for  Access  via  Internet,”  in  IEEE  Transactions  on 
Power Systems, vol. 15(2), 681-686, 2000. 

[43] IEEE  PES, 

[Online].  Available:  https://www.ieee-pes.org, 

[Accessed September 2019] 

[44] Department of Energy, “21 Steps to Improve Cyber Security of 
SCADA 
Available: 
https://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/oeprod/DocumentsandMedia/2
1_Steps_-_SCADA.pdf [Accessed September 2019] 

Networks,” 

[Online]. 

[45] J.  Gilsinn,  “Cyber  &  Process  Attack  Scenarios  for  ICS,” 
https://opcfoundation.org/wp-
[Online]. 
content/uploads/2014/08/9_Cyber_and_Process_Attack_Scenari
os_v4.pdf [Accessed September 2019] 

Available: 

[46] T.  Salman,  D.  Bhamare,  A.  Erbad,  R.  Jain,  M.  Samaka, 
“Machine Learning for Anomaly Detection and Categorization in 
Multi-cloud  Environments,”  in  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  4th 
International  Conference  on  Cyber  Security  and  Cloud 
Computing (CSCloud), pp. 97-103, June 2017. 

[47] V. Franc, M. Sofka, K. Bartos, “Learning detector of Malicious 
Network  Traffic  from  Weak  Labels,”  in  Joint  European 
Conference  on  Machine  Learning  and  Knowledge  Discovery  in 
Databases,  pp.  85-99,  Springer 
International  Publishing, 
September 2015. 

[48] K.  Bartos,  M.  Sofka,  V.  Franc,  “Optimized 

Invariant 
Representation  of  Network  Traffic  for  Detecting  Unseen 
Malware  Variants,”  in  J25th  USENIX  Security  Symposium 
(USENIX Security 16), 2016. 

[49] IEEE 692-2013, IEEE Standard for Criteria for Security Systems 
for  Nuclear  Power  Generating  Stations,  [Online].  Available: 
[Accessed 
https://standards.ieee.org/standard/692-2013.html 
September 2019] 

[50] IEEE  1402-2000,  IEEE  Guide  for  Electric  Power  Substation 
[Online].  Available: 

and  Electronic  Security, 

Physical 

https://standards.ieee.org/standard/1402-2000.html 
September 2019] 

[Accessed 

[51] IEEE 

C37.240-2014, 

Cybersecurity 
IEEE 
Requirements  for  Substation  Automation,  Protection,  and 
Control 
Available: 
https://standards.ieee.org/standard/C37_240-2014.html 
[Accessed September 2019] 

[Online]. 

Systems, 

Standard 

[52] A.  Nadeem,  M.  Y.  Javed,  “A  performance  comparison  of  Data 
Encryption  Algorithms,”  in  Proceedings  of  the  International 
Conference  on  Information  and  Communication  Technologies, 
pp. 84-89, August 2005. 

[53] P.  Rewagad,  Y.  Pawar,  “Use  of  Digital  Signature  with  Diffie 
Hellman  key  Exchange  and  AES  Encryption  Algorithm  to 
Enhance Data Security in Cloud Computing,” in Proceedings of 
the  International  Conference  on  Communication  Systems  and 
Network Technologies (CSNT), pp. 437-439, April 2013. 

[54] S.  Yu,  C.  Wang,  K.  Ren,  W.  Lou,  “Achieving  secure,  scalable, 
and  fine-grained  data  access  control  in  cloud  computing,”  in 
Proceedings of the IEEE Infocom, pp. 1-9, March 2010. 

[55] D. Chen, H. Zhao, “Data Security and Privacy Protection Issues 
in  Cloud  Computing,”  in  Proceedings  of  the  International 
Conference  on  Computer  Science  and  Electronics  Engineering 
(ICCSEE), vol. 1, pp. 647-651, March 2012. 

[56] S.  E.  McLaughlin,  “On  Dynamic  Malware  Payloads  Aimed  at 
Programmable Logic Controllers,” in HotSec, August 2011. 
[57] S.  Kriaa,  M.  Bouissou,  L.  Piètre-Cambacédès,  “Modeling  the 
Stuxnet  Attack  with  BDMP:  Towards  More  Formal  Risk 
Assessments,”  in  7th  International  Conference  on  Risks  and 
Security  of  Internet  and  Systems  (CRiSIS),  pp.  1-8,  October 
2012. 

[58] C.  Modi,  D.  Patel,  B.  Borisaniya,  H.  Patel,  A.  Patel,  M. 
Rajarajan,  "A  Survey  of  Intrusion  Detection  Techniques  in 
Cloud,"  Journal  of  Network  and  Computer  Applications,  vol. 
36.1, pp. 42-57, 2013. 

[59] M.  Zhou,  R.  Zhang,  W.  Xie,  W.  Qian,  A.  Zhou,  “Security  and 
Privacy  in  Cloud  Computing:  A  Survey,”  in  IEEE  Sixth 
International  Conference  on  Semantics  Knowledge  and  Grid 
(SKG), pp. 105-112, 2010. 

[60] Y.  You,  M.  Zulkerine,  A.  Haque,  “A  Distributed  Defense 
Framework  for  Flooding-Based  DDOS  Attack,”  in  Proceedings 
of  the  Third  International  Conference  on  Availability  and 
Security, pp. 245-252, 2008. 

[61] Darktrace  Whitepaper,  “Cyber  Security  for  Corporate  and 
Industrial  Control  Systems,”  2015, 
[Online].  Available: 
http://www.ipexponordic.com/content/download/7793/93180/file
/ICS_WhitePaper_Darktrace.pdf [Accessed September 2019] 
[62] A. A. Cardenas, S. Amin, Z. S. Lin, Y. L. Huang, C. Y. Huang, 
S.  Sastry,  “Attacks  Against  Process  Control  Systems:  Risk 
Assessment, Detection, and Response,” in Proceedings of the 6th 
and 
on 
ACM 
Communications Security, pp. 355-366, March 2011. 

Information, 

Symposium 

Computer 

[63] D.  Bhamare,  R.  Jain,  M.  Samaka,  A.  Erbad,  L.  Gupta,  H.  A. 
Chan,  “Optimal  Virtual  Network  Function  Placement  and 
Resource  Allocation  in  Multi-Cloud  Service  Function  Chaining 
Architecture,” in Computer Communications, 2017. 

Up 

110 

[64] D.  McMillen,  “Attacks  Targeting  Industrial  Control  Systems 
Available: 

(ICS) 
https://securityintelligence.com/attacks-targeting-industrial-
control-systems-ics-up-110-percent/ [Accessed September 2019] 
[65] IEEE  1686-2013,  IEEE  standard  for  Substation  Intelligent 
Electronic Devices (IEDs) Cyber Security Capabilities, [Online]. 

Percent,” 

[Online]. 

Available: 
2007.html [Accessed September 2019] 
[66] Cisco,  Advanced  Malware  Protection 

http://standards.ieee.org/findstds/standard/1686-

(AMP), 

[Online]. 

Available: 
http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/security/advanced-
malware-protection/index.html [Accessed September 2019] 
[67] D.  Bhamare,  R.  Jain,  M.  Samaka,  A.  Erbad,  “A  Survey  on 
in  Journal  of  Network  and 

Service  Function  Chaining,” 
Computer Applications, pp. 138-155, 2016. 

[68] S. Sherif, I. Traore, A. Ghorbani, B. Sayed, D. Zhao, W. Lu, J. 
Felix,  P.  Hakimian,  “Detecting  P2P  Botnets  Through  Network 
Behavior Analysis and Machine Learning,” in Proceedings of the 
9th  Annual  Conference  on  Privacy,  Security  and  Trust 
(PST2011), pp. 174-180, 2011. 

[69] M.  Krotofil,  A.  A.  Cardenas,  “Resilience  of  Process  Control 
Systems  to  Cyber-  Physical  Attacks,”  in  Secure  IT  Systems,  pp 
166-182, 2013. 

[70] I. Kiss, P. Haller, A. Bereş, “Denial of Service Attack Detection 
in Case of Tennessee Eastman Challenge Process,” in Procedia 
Technology, vol. 19, pp. 835-841, 2015. 

[71] R. Chabukswar, B. Sinopoli, G. Karsai, A. Giani, H. Neema, A. 
Davis, “Simulation of Network Attacks on SCADA Systems,” in 
the First Workshop on Secure Control Systems, 2010. 

“Understanding 

[72] Y. L. Huang, A. A. Cardenas, S. Amin, S. Z. Lin, H. Y. Tsai, S. 
Sastry, 
and  Economic 
the 
in 
Consequences  of  Attacks  Against  Control  Systems,” 
International  Journal  of  Critical  Infrastructure  Protection,  vol. 
2(3), pp. 72–83, October 2009. 

Physical 

[73] LBNL  Enterprise  Trace  Repository. 
http://www.icir.org/enterprise-tracing. 
2019] 

2005, 

[Online] 
[Accessed  September 

[74] M.  Nour,  J.  Slay,  “UNSW-NB15:  a  comprehensive  data  set  for 
network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data 
set),”  Military  Communications  and  Information  Systems 
Conference (MilCIS), IEEE, 2015. 

[75] W. Haider et al., "Generating realistic intrusion detection system 
dataset based on fuzzy qualitative modeling," JNCA, Volume 87, 
1 June 2017, Pages 185-192. 

[76] A.  Shiravi,  H.  Shiravi,  M.  Tavallaee,  A.  Ghorbani,  “Toward 
developing  a  systematic  approach  to  generate  benchmark 
datasets  for  intrusion  detection,” computers  &  security, 31(3), 
357-374. 

[77]  Y.  Cherdantseva,  P.  Burnap,  A.  Blyth,  P.  Eden,  K.  Jones,  H. 
Soulsby,  K.  Stoddart,  “A  review  of  cyber  security  risk 
assessment  methods  for  SCADA  systems,” Computers  & 
security, 56, 1-27. 

[78]  A.  Sajid,  H.  Abbas  and  K.  Saleem,  "Cloud-Assisted  IoT-Based 
SCADA Systems Security: A Review of the State of the Art and 
Future Challenges," IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 1375-1384, 2016. 

[79] L. Thames and D. Schaefer, “Software-defined cloud 

manufacturing for industry 4.0,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 52, pp. 
12-17, 2016. 

[80]  J.  E.  Rubio,  C.  Alcaraz,  R.  Roman,  and  J.  Lopez,  “Current 
Cyber-Defense  Trends 
Industrial  Control  Systems,” 
in 
Computers & Security Journal, vol. 87, pp. 101561, 2019. 
[81]  L.  Zhou,  H.  Guo,  and  G.  Deng,  “A  fog  computing  based 
approach  to  DDoS  mitigation  in  IIoT  systems,”  Computers  & 
Security Journal, vol. 85, pp 51-62, 2019. 

[82]  M.  Zolanvari,  M.  Teixeira,  L.  Gupta,  K.  M.  Khan,  R.  Jain, 
“Machine  Learning  Based  Network  Vulnerability  Analysis  of 
Industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 
April 2019. 

[83]  M.  Zolanvari,  M.  Teixeira,  R.  Jain,  “Effect  of  Imbalanced 
Datasets  on  Security  of  Industrial  IoT  Using  Machine 
Learning,”  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  ISI  (Intelligence  and 
Security Informatics), November 2018. 

[84]  S. Kriaaa, L. Pietre-Cambacedes, M. Bouissou,Y. Halgand, “A 
Survey  of  Approaches  Combining  Safety  and  Security  for 
Industrial  Control  Systems,”  Reliability  Engineering  &  System 
Safety, vol. 139, pp. 156-178, 2015. 

[85]  W. Knowles, D. Prince, D. Hutchison, J. F. Pagna Disso, and K. 
Jones,  “A  Survey  of  Cyber  Security  Management  in  Industrial 
of  Critical 
Control  Systems,” 
Infrastructure Protection, vol. 9, pp. 52-80, 2015. 

International 

Journal 

[86]  D. Ding, Q. L. Han, Z. Wang, and X. Ge, “A Survey on Model-
based  Distributed  Control  and  Filtering  for  Industrial  Cyber-
Physical  Systems,” 
Industrial 
Informatics, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 2483-2499, May 2019. 

IEEE  Transactions  on 

[87]  E.  Molina,  E.  Jacob,  “Software-Defined  Networking  in  Cyber-
Physical  Systems:  A  Survey,”  Computers  &  Electrical 
Engineering, vol. 66, pp. 407-419, February 2018. 

[88] Federal  Office  for  Information  Security,  “Industrial  Control 
System  Security:  Top  10  Threats  and  Countermeasures  2019,” 
2019, 
https://www.allianz-fuer-
cybersicherheit.de/ACS/DE/_/downloads/BSI-
CS_005E.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=3 
September 2019] 

Available: 

[Accessed 

[Online]. 

[89]  H. Ahmed, “Cloud Computing Security threats and Introduction 
Countermeasures,” International Journal of Scientific & 
Engineering Research, vol. 5, pp. 206-215, July 2014. 

[90]  P. Zeng and P Zhou, “Intrusion Detection in SCADA System: A 

Survey,” Springer Singapore, pp. 342-351, 2018. 
[91]  P. Church, H. Mueller, C. Ryan, S. V. Gogouvitis, A. 

Goscinski, and Z. Tari, “Migration of a SCADA system to IaaS 
clouds – a case study,” Journal of Cloud Computing, vol. 6, pp. 
11, 2017. 

Table 2: List of Acronyms 

Acronym 
ABE 
AC-i 
AES 
AGA 
API 
APT 
ASP 
CIP 
DCS 
DDoS 
DES 
DoS 

HART 

HMM 
HTTP 
IaaS 
IAEA 
ICS 

Description 
Attribute-based encryption 
Actuator-sensor interface 
Advanced encryption standards 
American gas association 
American petrol institute 
Advanced persistent threats 
Application service provider 
Common industrial protocol 
Distributed control systems 
Distributed denial of service 
Data encryption standards 
Denial of service 
Highway  addressable  remote 
protocol 
Hidden Markov Model 
Hypertext Transfer Protocol 
Infrastructure as a service 
International atomic energy agency 
Industrial control system 

transducer 

 
 
IDS 
IEC 
IED 
ISA 

ISO 

IT 
ML 

NERC 

NIDS 
OCSVM 
PES 
PLC 
PSCC 
RTU 
SCADA 
SGX 
SOA 
SVM 
TCP 
TE 
UNSW 
URL 
WSNM 

for 

reliability 

electric 

Intrusion detection system 
International Electrotechnical commission 
Intelligent electronic device 
International society of automation 
organization 
International 
standardization 
Information Technology 
Machine learning  
North  American 
corporation 
Network intrusion detection system 
One-class support vector machine 
Power engineering society 
Programmable logic controllers 
Power system communications committee 
Remote terminal unit 
Supervisory control & data acquisition 
Software guard extension 
Service-oriented architecture  
Support vector machine 
Transmission control protocol 
Tennessee Eastman 
University of New South Wales 
Uniform Resource Locator 
Water supply network monitoring 

 
