Cyber Security Incident Handling, Warning and 
Response System for the European Critical Information 
Infrastructures (CyberSANE) 

Spyridon Papastergiou1, Haralambos Mouratidis2 and Eleni-Maria Kalogeraki1 

1 Department of Informatics, University of Piraeus, 80 Karaoli and Dimitriou Str.,  
18534 Piraeus, Greece 
paps@unipi.gr, elmaklg@unipi.gr 

2 School of Computing, Engineering and Mathematics, University of Brighton,  
Brighton BN2 4GJ, UK 
H.Mouratidis@brighton.ac.uk 

Abstract.  This  paper  aims  to  enhance  the  security  and  resilience  of  Critical 
Information  Infrastructures  (CIIs)  by  providing  a  dynamic  collaborative, 
warning  and  response  system  (CyberSANE  system)  supporting  and  guiding 
security  officers  and  operators  (e.g.  Incident  Response  professionals)  to 
recognize,  identify,  dynamically  analyse,  forecast,  treat  and  respond  to  their 
threats and risks and handle their daily cyber incidents. The proposed solution 
provides a first of a kind approach for handling cyber security incidents in the 
digital environments with highly interconnected, complex and diverse nature. 

Keywords: Incident handling, Web mining, Data Fusion and Risk Assessment. 

1   Introduction 

In  the  digital  era,  Critical  Infrastructures  (CIs)  are  operating  under  the  premise  of 
robust  and  reliable  ICT  components,  complex  ICT  infrastructures  and  emerging 
technologies  (e.g.  IoT,  Cloud  Computing)  and  are transforming  into  Critical 
Information  Infrastructures  (CIIs)  that  can  offer  a  high  degree  of  flexibility  and 
efficiency in the communication and coordination of advanced services. The increased 
usage of information technology in modern CIIs means that they are becoming more 
vulnerable to the activities of hackers and other perpetrators of cyber-related crime.  

Over  the  last  few  years,  it  is  a  common  phenomenon  to  see  daily  headlines 
describing  major  cyber-attacks  or  some  new  strain  of  malware  or  insidious  social 
engineering  technique  being  used  to  attack  ICT  infrastructures.  In  particular,  CIIs 
have  become  lately  targets  for  cyberattacks  attracting  the  attention  of  security 
researchers,  cyber-criminals, hacktivists  (e.g.  Anonymous,  LulzSec)  and  other  such 
role-players  (e.g.  cyber-spies).  These  cyber  actors have  significantly  evolved  their 
tactics,  techniques  and  procedures  to  include  next-generation  malware  toolkits 
available in various locations on the internet (e.g. deep web, dark web) and new data 

exfiltration methods that give them an asymmetric quantum leap in capability. In the 
past  years,  there  have  been  a  number  of  cybersecurity  meltdowns  and  high-profile 
breaches  affecting  critical  infrastructures,  such  as  the  recent  ransomware  attacks, 
WannaCry  and  WanaCrypt0r  2.0,  which  affected  more  than  230,000  computers  in 
over  150  countries,  In  most  cases,  the  adversaries  targeted  the  organizations’ 
interconnected  infrastructures  as  a  means  of  spreading  their  harmful  malware  to  a 
broaderaudience. Obviously, the impact of a compromised CII can extend far beyond 
the  corporate  boundaries,  putting  not  just  individual  organizations  but  also  their 
dependent entities at risk. 

In 2016, the Commission introduced the E.U. Directive NIS 2016 that enforces all 
CIIs to report to an appropriate Computer Security Incident Response Team (CSIRT) 
any  incident  having  a  substantial  impact  on  the  provision  of  their  services. 
Unfortunately,  these  efforts  mostly  focused  on  providing  just  the  legal  basis  and 
creating an assurance framework for boosting the cyber security culture across sectors 
which are vital for the EU economy and society and moreover  rely heavily on ICTs. 
Nevertheless, there has been a lack of innovation to capture and correlate events and 
information  associated  with  cyber-attacks  in  CIIs  as  well  as  lack  of  appropriate 
approaches that support and facilitate effective cooperation among the CIIs entities in 
terms of exchanging specific cybersecurity risk and threats information. 

The paper proposes a state of the art solution, the CyberSANE system, which aims 
to  improve  the  detection  and  analysis  of  cyber-attacks  and  threats  on  CIIs  and 
increases  the  knowledge  of  the  current  cyber  threat  landscape.  In  particular,  the 
CyberSANE system helps the organizations to raise their preparedness, improve their 
cooperation  with  each  other,  and  adopt  appropriate  steps  to  manage  security  risks, 
report  and  handle  security  incidents.  The  rest  of  the  paper  is  structured  as  follows. 
Section 2 and 3 present the related work and the main aspects of the proposed incident 
handling  approach  respectively.  Section  4  describes  the  CyberSANE  system  and  its 
key  components.  Section  5  illustrates  the  components  data  flows  and  the  overall 
system operation; and finally Section 6 draws the conclusions. 

2   Current Efforts of Incident Handling in Critical Information 

Infrastructures 

The main goal of the security incident handling and response process is to define the 
main  aspects  and  principles  for  coordinating  the  effort  that  should  be  applied  in 
managing  a  security  breach/incident/event  [1,2].  In  principle,  choosing  the  right 
approach for incident handling proves to be complicated. In recent years, a number of 
security incident response approaches and frameworks [3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14] 
have  been  introduced  by  the  research  and  industrial  communities  as  well  various 
standardization bodies. Although, many of these approaches provide specific technical 
guidelines,  aiming  to  enhance  the  security  incident  response  capabilities  of  the 
organizations, they present significant limitations. In particular, Grimes (2007) argues 
that most of the existing incident response approaches  follow a linear process that is 
outdated and does not support the highly efficient capability that is required to handle 

and manage today’s incidents. Therefore, a progression flaw exists in these processes, 
since if one phase in the linear process is not completed, the entire process cycle may 
stop midstream. [15] notes that current incident response processes are too focused on 
the  containment,  eradication,  and  recovery-related  activities  and  usually  ignore,  skip 
or  do  not  emphasize  on  other  important  steps  of  incident  management,  such  as 
investigations  actions.  [16]  proposal  gives  emphasis  on  proactive  preparation  and 
reactive  learning  to  encourage  security  incident  learning.  [17,18,19]  argue  that  the 
existing  incident  handling  approaches  do  not  provide  adequate  guidance  on  how  to 
conduct effective forensic investigations. Hence, current methods’ limitation to assist 
and guide the investigators in forensic evidence analysis, undermines the value of the 
evidence and fails to promote incident resolution.  

In addition, the available security information and event management solutions lack 
significant reactive and post-incident capabilities for managing incidents and events in 
the  scope  of  the  ICT-based  CIIs  providing  inadequate  technical  guidance  to  the 
incident  response  professionals  on  how  to  detect,  investigate  and  reproduce  attacks. 
As  such,  and  despite  the  socioeconomic  importance  of  tools  and  techniques  for 
handling  incidents  there  is  still  no  easy,  structured,  standardized  and  trusted  way  to 
manage  and  forecast  interrelated,  cybersecurity  incidents  in  a  way  that  takes  into 
account  the  heterogeneity  and  complexity  of  the  CIIs  and  the  increasingly 
sophisticated  types  of  attacks.  Therefore, there is a pressing need for devising novel 
systems  for  efficient  CIIs  incident  handling  and  support  thorough  and  common 
understanding of cyber-attack situations in a timely manner. 

In  a  nutshell,  the  main  limitations  [20,21,22]  of  the  existing  approaches  are  the 
following: (i) the traditional linear incident response models are too slow, ineffective 
and  do  not  support  the  highly  efficient  capability  that  is  required  to  handle  and 
manage  today’s  incidents;  (ii)  focus  mostly  on  the  proactive  element  (i.e.  provide 
assistance  and  information  to  help  prepare,  protect,  and  secure)  of  the  incident 
management;  (iii)    current  approaches  do  not  provide  enough  insight  into  the 
underlying  causes  of  the  incident;  (iv)  poor  provisions  for  incident  planning;  (v) 
undermine  the  value  of  forensic  evidence  possibly  required  for  subsequent  legal 
action; (vi) do not take into account the risk-related results produced by existing risk 
assessment methodologies. 

3   CyberSANE Incident Handling Approach 

The  proposed  incident  handling  approach  aims  to  address  the  aforementioned 
limitations  of  these  existing  methodologies  and  tools,  providing  a  step-by-step 
guidance to manage incidents and breaches on CIIs occurred due to cyber attacks. On 
this  account,  CyberSANE  pursues  to  combine  active  approaches  that  are  used  to 
detect and analyse anomaly activities and attacks in real-time with reactive approaches 
that  deals  with  the  analysis  of  the  underlying  infrastructure  to  assess  an  incident  in 
order to provide a more holistic and integrated approach to incident handling. In this 
vein,  CyberSANE  aims  to  enhance  the  incident  detection  capabilities of the existing 
methods described in the previous section with a  more efficient,  elastic and scalable 

reasoning  approach.  The  main  characteristics  of  the  proposed  approach  are  the 
following:  (i)  learning  from  unstructured  data  without  the  need  to  understand  the 
content;  (ii)  identification  of  unusual  activities  that  match  the  structural  patterns  of 
possible intrusions (instead of predefined rules); and (iii) automatic identification and 
adaption to a change of the underlying infrastructure.  

CyberSANE  treats  the  handling  of  a  cyber  incident  as  a  dynamic  experimental 
environment that can be optimized involving all relevant CIIs’ operators and security 
experts.  CyberSANE’s  approach  is  based  on  simulations  to  facilitate  the  evaluation 
and  analysis  of  an  identified  incident  and  support  the  investigation  decision  making 
process  in  a  rigorous  manner.  The  pursuit  of  CyberSANE  is  to  support  incident 
handling  process  with  advanced  correlation  capabilities  in  terms of  accuracy  and 
efficiency  strengthening  the  rational  analysis.  In  this  context,  CyberSANE  relies  on 
pioneering  mathematical  models  (e.g.  machine  learning,  deep  learning  and  Global 
Artificial  Intelligence  (AI)  techniques)  for  analysing,  compiling,  combining  and 
correlating all incident-related information and data from different levels and contexts 
(e.g. taking into consideration information, data and opinions collected and  analysed 
from  existing  risk  assessment  frameworks  (including  the  CYSM,  MEDUSA, 
MITIGATE  and  SAURON  approaches  [23,24,25],  knowledge  and  information 
acquired  from  previous  incident  investigations  as  well  as  evidential  data  extracted 
from the compromised cyber systems). Thus, these techniques will be able to identify, 
extract  and  analyse  the  most  relevant  parts  of  the  information  related  to  the  initial 
incident  in  order  to find the relationships between the  compromised devices/systems 
and these evidences.  

Moreover,  efficient  simulation  experiments  for  generating  multi-order  evidence 
dependencies  have  been  used  to  generate  and  construct  secure,  reliable  and  valid 
chains of evidence anticipating how the attack is progressing. Additionally, taking into 
account the effects of a security incident,  real-time insights, alerts and warnings will 
be produced to increase situation awareness, inform the  CIIs’ stakeholders about the 
effects of the events and guide them how to react. 

The  main  contribution  of  the  current  approach  that  differentiates  it  from  the 
aforementioned  related  incident  handling  proposals  is  that  it  combines  existing 
machine learning techniques, such as clustering and hidden Markov models, with deep 
learning  and  Global  Artificial  Intelligence  (AI)  to  develop  an  innovative  way  that 
optimizes the automatic analysis of huge amounts of events, information and evidence. 
To  identify  malicious  actions  in  the  cyber  assets,  such  as  abnormal  behaviours,  it 
combines  both  structured  data  (e.g.  logs  and  network  traffic)  and  unstructured  data 
(e.g.  data  coming  from  social  networks  and  dark  web)  in  a  privacy-aware  manner. 
Furthermore,  it  adopts  deep  semantic  analysis  techniques  together  with  Natural 
Language  Processing  (NLP)  methods  (e.g.  Named  Entity  Recognition  and  Word 
Sense  Disambiguation)  to  extract  important  information  from  multilingual  security-
related contexts, facilitating  multilingual data generation and exploitation within the 
networked ecosystem. 

4   CyberSANE Incident Handling system 

CyberSANE  is  an  advanced,  configurable  and  adaptable,  Security  and  Privacy 
Incident  Handling  system  (CyberSANE  system),  towards  effective  security  incident 
detection and handling. The main goal of the proposed system is to improve, intensify 
and coordinate the overall security efforts for the effective and efficient identification; 
investigation, mitigation and reporting of realistic multi-dimensional attacks within the 
interconnected  web  of  cyber  assets  in  the  CIIs  and  security  events.  The  proposed 
approach  takes  into  consideration  and  addresses  both  technical  and  cognitive 
challenges.  

Fig. 1. CyberSANE Incident Handling system 

From technical perspective, the system aims at collecting, compiling, processing and 
fusing all individual incident-related information ensuring their integrity and validity 
following  the  generic  phases  of  ISO/IEC  27035:2016.  In  contrast,  from  cognitive 
point of view, the decision makers should be able to understand the technical aspects 
of an attack and draw conclusions on how to respond. In order to realize this vision, 
the CyberSANE system will be composed of five main components: 

  The  Live  Security  Monitoring  and  Analysis  (LiveNet)  component  which  is 
able  to  monitor,  analyze,  and  visualize  organizations’  internal  live  network 
traffic  in  real  time.  This  environment  aggregates  and  visualizes  traffic 
flowing  through  live  networks  as  well  as  alerts  given  out  by  security 
appliances installed at critical points in the network with an overemphasis on 
threat prevention solutions. 

  The  Deep  and  Dark  Web  mining  and  intelligence  (DarkNet)  component 
which monitors the Dark and Deep Web in order to grasp and analyse the big 
picture of global malware/ cybersecurity activities. 

  The  Data  Fusion,  Risk  Evaluation  and  Event  Management  (HybridNet) 
component  that  receives  security  related  information  on  potential  cyber 

 
threats from both LiveNet and Darknet respectively in order to  analyze and 
evaluate the security situation inside an organization. 

  The  Intelligence  and Information  Sharing  and  Dissemination  (ShareNet) 
component  disseminates  and  shares  information  of  useful  incident-related 
information with relevant parties (e.g. industry cooperation groups, Computer 
Security Incident Response Teams - CSIRTs) about the effects and danger of 
incidents characterized diffusing threats. 

  The Privacy & Data Protection (PrivacyNet) Orchestrator which provides a 
set  of  privacy  (anonymization,  pseudonymization,  obfuscation),  data 
protection orchestration and consistency capabilities. 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  proposed  solution  and  the  incorporating  techniques  is 
able to operate in heterogeneous, large-scale, cross-border CIIs that are characterized 
by  the  following  features:  (i)  complex,  highly  distributed,  and  large-scale  cyber 
systems  (including  IoT  and  cyber-physical)  with  respect  to  the  number  of  entities 
involved;  (ii)  heterogeneity  of  the  underlying  networks  interconnecting  the  physical-
cyber systems; and (iii) different levels of exposure to attacks. The following Sections 
provide a detailed description of the each component. 

4.1   Live Security Monitoring and Analysis (LiveNet) component 

The  LiveNet  is  an  advanced  and  scalable  Live  Security  Monitoring  and  Analysis 
component  capable  of  preventing  and  detecting  threats  and,  in  case  of  a  declared 
attack, capable of mitigating the effects of an infection/intrusion. The main objective 
of this component is to implement the Identification, Extraction, Transformation, and 
Load process for collecting and preparing all the relevant information, serving as the 
interface between the underlying CIIs and the CyberSANE system. It includes proper 
cyber  security  monitoring  sensors  with  network-based  Intrusion  Detection  Systems 
(IDS),  innovative  Anomaly  detection  modules  and  endpoint  protection  solutions  for 
accessing and extracting information, on a real-time basis, in order to detect complex 
and  large-scale  attacks  (e.g.  Advanced  Persistent  Threats).  The  incident-related 
information  that  reside  in  different  and  heterogeneous  cyber  systems  may  include 
various types of data, such as: active (unpatched) vulnerabilities in the technological 
infrastructure; misuse detection in the network or in the systems, including both host-
based  and  network-based  IDS  deployment  and  integration;  anomaly  detection  in  the 
network or in the systems; system availability signals; network usage and bandwidth 
monitoring; industry proprietary protocol anomalies; SCADA vulnerabilities, etc. 

LiveNet incorporates appropriate data management and reasoning capabilities for: 
near real-time identification of anomalies, threats, risks and faults and the appropriate 
reactions;  (ii)  proactive  reaction  to  threats  and  attacks;  and  (iii)  dynamic  decision 
making  in  micro,  macro  and  global  level  according  to  the  end  user's  needs  and  the 
identified  incidents/threats.  These  capabilities  are  empowered  with  more  innovative 
algorithms  based  on  techniques such as machine learning, deep learning and AI that 
identify  previously  unknown  attacks.  This  component  provides  an  abstraction  of  the 
collected  information  to  the  Data  Fusion,  Risk  Evaluation  and  Event  Management 
(HybridNet)  component  of  the  CyberSANE  system.  Moreover,  all  incidents-related 
information captured from LiveNet will be parsed, filtered, harmonized and enriched 

 
to  ensure  that  only  the  data  necessary  for  the  multivariate and  multidimensional 
analysis  are  available  to  the  other  components  (e.g.  HybridNet).  Thus,  LiveNet 
contributes  as  follows:  (i)  preventing  a  flood  of  irrelevant  or  repeated  information 
from  cluttering  the  HybridNet  processing  component;  and  (ii)  consolidating  the 
different data contents and formats towards a uniform perspective in order to provide 
the upper components a unified and convenient way to handle the information. 

4.2   Deep and Dark Web mining and intelligence (DarkNet) component 

The Deep and Dark Web mining and intelligence (DarkNet) component provides the 
appropriate Social Information Mining capabilities that will allow the exploitation and 
analysis of security, risks and threats related information embedded in user-generated 
content  (UGC).  This  is  achieved  via  the  analysis  of  both  the  textual  and  meta-data 
content available from such streams. Textual information is processed to extract data 
from  otherwise  disparate  and  distributed  sources  that  may  offer  unique  insights  on 
possible  cyber  threats.  Examples  include  the  identification  of  situations  that  can 
become  a  threat  for  the  CIIs  with  significant  legal,  regulatory  and  technical 
considerations.  Such  situations  are:  organization  of  hacktivist  activities 
in 
underground forums or IRC channels; external situations that can become a potential 
threat  to  the  CIIs  (e.g.  relevant  geopolitical  changes);  disclosure  of  zero  day 
vulnerabilities; sockpuppets impersonating real profiles in social networks etc. Entities 
(e.g., events, places) and security-realated information will be uniquely extracted from 
textual content using advanced Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques, such 
as sentiment analysis. 

4.3  Data  Fusion,  Risk  Evaluation  and  Event  Management  (HybridNet) 

component 

The  Data  Fusion,  Risk  Evaluation  and  Event  Management  (HybridNet)  component 
provides  the  intelligence  needed  to  perform  effective  and  efficient  analysis  of  a 
security  event  based  on:  (i)  information  derived  and  acquired  by  the  LiveNet  and 
DarkNet components; and (ii) information and data produced and extracted from this 
component.  In  particular,  HybridNet  component  retrieves  incidents-related  data  via 
the  LiveNet  component  from  the  underlying  CIIs  and  data  from  unstructured  and 
structured  sources  (e.g.  from  Deep  and  Dark  Web)  consolidated  in  a  unified 
longitudinal  view  which  are  linked,  analyzed  and  correlated  ,in  order  to  achieve 
semantic  meaning  and  provide  a  more  comprehensive  and  detailed  view  of  the 
incident.  In  CyberSANE,  a  formal  and  uniform  representation  of  digital  evidence 
along with their relationships has been used to encapsulate all concepts of the forensic 
field and provide a common understanding of the structure of all information linking 
to evidence among the CIIs’ operators and the forensics investigators. The main goal 
of the analysis process is to continuously carry out the assessment (e.g. identification 
of on-going attacks and related information, such as what is the stage of the attack and 
where is the attacker) and prediction (i.e. identification of possible scenarios of future 
attacks through forecasting models). HybridNet incorporates fusion models based on 
existing mathematical models (e.g. data  mining,  AI, deep learning, machine learning 

 
 
and  visualization  techniques).  These  models  will  support  and  provide  reasoning 
capabilities  for  the  near  real-time  identification  of  anomalies,  threats  and  attacks, 
assessing  any  possible  malicious  actions  in  the  cyber  assets  such  as  abnormal 
behaviors  or  malicious  connections  to  identify  unusual  activities  that  match  the 
structural  patterns  of  possible  intrusions.  Once  an  attack  is  detected  or  predicted  a 
simulation will be performed to form the full representation of the attack. In particular, 
a  Security  Incident/Attack  Simulation  Environment  undertakes  to  generate  and 
construct  all  secure,  reliable  and  valid  chains  of  evidence  allowing:  i)  the 
identification  of  the  attacker’s  behavior  so  far;  ii)  the  identification  of  the attacker’s 
goals  and  strategies  and  prediction  of  their  next  actions;  and  (iii)  the  accurate 
assessment of the impact of an incident on the CII and the damage caused so far. 

The  Security  Incident/Attack  Simulation  Environment  of  the  CyberSANE  system 
comprises a set of novel mathematical instruments, including mathematical models for 
simulating,  analyzing,  optimizing,  validating,  monitoring  simulation  data  and 
optimizing security incident handling process. Specifically, these instruments include: 
(i) a buddle of novel process/attack analysis and simulation techniques for designing, 
executing, analyzing and optimizing threat and attack simulation experiments that will 
produce  appropriate  evidence  and  information  that  facilitate  the  identification, 
assessment  and  mitigation  of  the  CII-related  risks;  (ii)  graph  theory  to  implement 
attack  graph  generation,  to  perform  security  incident  analysis  and  to  strengthen  the 
prognosis  of  future  malefactor  steps;  (iii)  pioneering  mathematical  techniques  for 
analyzing,  compiling  and  combining  information  and  evidences  about  security 
incidents and attacks/threats patterns and paths in order to find relationships between 
the recovered forensic artefacts and piecing the evidential data together to develop a 
set of useful chain of evidence (linked evidence) associated with a specific incident; 
(iv)  innovative  simulation  techniques  which  will  optimize  the  automatic  analysis  of 
diverse data; (v) innovative techniques in order to link optimization and simulation. In 
this context, this simulation environment is fed with information about an incident and 
proceeds  to  calculate  and  generate  a  number  of  possible  attack  graphs  (routes  of 
possible attacks) and graphs of linked evidence (chains of evidence) and also compute 
probabilities  for  a  sequence  of  events  on  top  of  these  graphs.  The  resulting 
probabilistic estimate for the compromised CIIs’ assets will be used to identify, model 
and  represent  the  course  of  an  attack  as  it  propagates  across  the  CIIs.  It  should  be 
noted  the  HybridNet  component  continuously  updates  the  simulation  engine  with 
information  collected  and  piece  of information, thereby enabling both understanding 
which assets might have been compromised, as well as gain more accurate estimates 
on the likelihood that other assets might be compromised in the future. 

4.4 Intelligence and Information Sharing and Dissemination (ShareNet) 

component 

The  ShareNet  component  provides  the  necessary  threat  intelligence  and  information 
sharing capabilities within the CIIs and with relevant parties (e.g. industry cooperation 
groups,  CSIRTs).  It  is  responsible  for  the  instantiation  of  the  adopted  intelligence 
model; in particular, ShareNet undertakes the identification and dissemination of, the 

 
right  and  sanitized  information  that  have  to  be  shared  in  a  usable  format  and  in  a 
timely  manner.  This  environment  produces  and  circulates  notifications  containing 
critical  information,  enhancing  the  perception of the  current situation and improving 
the projection into the future. It should be noted that all potential evidence from the 
systems  that  are  suspected  to  be  part  of  the  infrastructure  being  investigated  are 
forensically captured, stored and exchanged in a way that their integrity is maintained 
using the security and data protection methods of the PrivacyNet Orchestrator. 

To  this  end,  ShareNet  follows  a  trusted  and  distributed  intelligence  and  incident 
sharing  approach to facilitate  and promote  the collaboration and secure and privacy-
aware  information  sharing  of  the  CIIs’  operators  with  relevant  parties  (e.g.  industry 
cooperation groups, CSIRTs), in order to exchange risk incident-related information, 
through  specific  standards  and/or  formats  (STIX),  improving  overall  cyber  risk 
understanding and reduction. Privacy preserving is another important issue considered 
at  every  phase  of sharing,  applying  methods  such  as  anonymization  or  pseudo 
anonymization  and  encryption  techniques  incorporated  in  and  made  available  from 
PrivacyNet  Orchestrator.  This  brings  forward  a  mixture  of  several  cryptographic 
techniques that holds certain security guarantees. 

4.5 Privacy & Data Protection (PrivacyNet) Orchestrator  

Through  the  specific  “Privacy  &  Data  Protection  Orchestrator”  (PrivacyNet),  it  is 
possible to coordinate the abovementioned components of the CyberSANE system in 
order  to  ensure  desired-levels  of  data  protection  for  sensitive  incident-related 
information,  enabling  the  possibility  to  apply  such  protection  in  all  phases  of  cyber 
security  incident  handling  flow.  The  main  purpose  the  PrivacyNet  is  to  manage  and 
orchestrate  the  application  of  the  innovative  privacy  mechanisms  and  maximize 
achievable  levels  of  confidentiality  and  data  protection towards compliance with the 
highly-demanding  provisions  in  the  GDPR  in  the  context  of  protecting  sensitive 
incident-related information within and outside CIIs. To this end, PrivacyNet sets up 
the  security  and  data  “protection  configurations”  allowing  security  experts  and 
members of the incident response team to specify all the protection steps that have to 
be  performed  and  the  required  conditions  to  execute  them,  which can be referred to 
GDPR-based  rules  (and  to  other  guidance  for  its  application  by  the  European  Data 
Protection Board, formerly Art. 29 Data Protection Working Party).  

location  privacy,  obfuscation,  pseudonymization, 

In  addition,  the  orchestration  approach  of  the  CyberSANE  allows  applying  the 
most  appropriate  security  and  data  protection  methods  depending  on  the  user’s 
including 
privacy  requirements,  which  cover  a  wide  range  of 
anonymization, 
searchable 
encryption, multi-party computation and verifiable computation, in order to meet the 
highly  demanding  regulatory  compliance  obligations,  for  example  in  relation  to 
towards  data  protection  supervisory  authorities,  for  adequate 
accountability 
management of informed consent etc. For this reason, novel techniques and processes 
for  enhancing  the  secure  distribution  and  storage  of  all  forensic  artifacts  in  order  to 
protect  them  from  unauthorized  deletion,  tampering  revision  and  sharing  (e.g. 
Attribute-based Encryption (ABE) and block-chain technologies) have be combined. 

techniques 

 
5   CyberSANE Components Data Flow and System Operation 

The  abovementioned  CyberSANE  components  communicate  to  carry  out  13 
operational  data  flows  as  illustrated  in  Figure  2  and  outlines  below.  Through,  those 
data flows and the overall operation, the CyberSANE system assists all the phases of 
security assessment and reduction of cyber risks on relevant operational scenarios. 

Fig. 2. CyberSANE System’s & Components’ Operation 

The operational data flows supported by the CyberSANE system are the following: (1) 
Detected  cyber  attack  visualized  in  the  LiveNet  Component;  (2)  Determine  whether 
their  organization  has  fallen  victim  to  a  cyber-attack;  (3)  Discovery,  extraction  and 
collection of raw data from various sources (e.g. servers, logs) and in different format 
(4)  Extraction,  harmonization  and  processing  data  from  distributed  sources  (Dark 
Web,  Social  Media)  that  offer  unique  insights  on  the  cyber  threats  and  provide 
information  about  latest  mechanisms  of  cyber-attacks;  (5)  Collected  data  is 
normalized,  cleansed  to  remove  redundant  information  and  transformed  into  a 
common  representation  format;  (6)  All  relevant  information  extracted  are  analyzed 
and correlated to provide a more comprehensive and detailed view of the incident; (7) 
Dependency  evidence  chains  are  generated;  (8)  Identification  of  on-going  attacks 
(Identification of the attacker’s behavior, prediction of next actions); (9) Evaluate the 
risks;  Assess  the  impact  and  the  assessment  and  cascading  effects;  and  Formulate 
mitigation  plan;  (10)  Prediction  of  possible  scenarios  of  future  attacks;  (11) 
Visualization  of  incident  related  information  enabling  deep  understanding  of  the 
situation  and  decision  making  (Notifications);  (12)  Secure  and  privacy  aware 
managing  and  storing  of  incident-related  information;  and  (13)  Information  sharing 
and dissemination of useful incident-related information. 

6   Conclusions  

The  paper  aims  to  leverage  collected  security  information  to  find  new  ways  of 
protection  for  technology  assets,  enabling  the  entity  at  risk  to  evaluate  the  risk  and 
invest  to  limit  that  risk  in  an  optimal  way.  Providing  a  way  to  securely  collect  both 
structured data (e.g. logs and network traffic) and unstructured data (e.g. data coming 

 
from  social  networks  and  dark  web)  and  making  them  available  for  analysis  fosters 
new innovations that will only unravel after having access to such data, harnessing its 
full potential. CyberSANE’s has a twofold aim; to minimize the exposure to security 
risks/threats and help CIIs’ operators to respond successfully to relevant incidents.  

The  ground-breaking  nature  of  the  proposed  incident  handling  approach  is  based 
on:  i)  the  identification  of  attacks  and  incidents  using  innovative  approaches  and 
algorithms  of  unobserved  components  techniques  and  linear  state-space  models 
producing  meaningful  information  from  cyber  systems,  ii)  the  combination  of  active 
incident  handling  approaches  with  reactive  approaches  producing  real-time  insights, 
alerts  and  warnings  about  cyber  events,  iii)  innovative  normalization  process  that 
unifies all relevant incident-related information gathered from heterogeneous CIIs, iv) 
novel  attacks’  scenarios  and  evidence  representation  with  simulation  techniques  and 
visualization tools that increase the efficiency of investigation results, v) hybridization 
forms  of  mathematical  models  and  combinations  of  data  mining,  Global  artificial 
intelligence, machine learning that optimize evidential data from different sources. 

The  proposed  CyberSANE  System  meets  its  objectives  embedding  core  security 
features  allowing 
faster  and  better  operation  of  advanced  cyber  security 
functionalities. These aspects comprise an innovative, knowledge based, collaborative 
security  and  response  dynamic  system  which increase  the  agility of the  investigators 
and encourage continuous learning throughout the incident life cycle. 

Acknowledgements 

The  authors  would  like  to  thank  the  University  of  Piraeus  Research  Centre  for  its 
continuous support. 

References 

1.  West-Brown,  M.  J.,  Stikvoort,  D.,  Kossakowski,  K.  P.,  Killcrece,  G.,  &  Ruefle,  R. 
(2003a). Handbook for computer security incident response teams (csirts) (No. CMU/SEI-
2003-HB-002). Carnegie-mellon univ pittsburgh pa software engineering inst. 

2. Wiik, J., & Kossakowski, K. P. (2005). Dynamics of Incident Response. In 17th Annual 

FIRST Conference on Computer Security Incident Handling. Singapore. 

3.  British  Standards  Institution.  (2011).  Bs  Iso/Iec  27035:2011  -  Information  Technology. 

Security Techniques. Information Security Incident Management. 

4.  Cichonski  P,  Scarfone  K.  (2012a)  Computer  security  incident  handling  guide 
recommendations  of  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  (NIST). 
Gaithersburg: NIST; 
ENISA 

Available 
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/topics/csirts-in-europe/csirt-inventory/certs-by-country-
interactive-map 

Country-Interactive 

CSIRTs 

Map. 

by 

5. 

at 

6. Northcutt, S. (2003). Computer Security Incident Handling Version 2.3.1 
7.  Vangelos,  M.  (2011).  "Incident  Response:  Managing,"  in  Encyclopedia  of  Information 

Assurance. Taylor & Francis, pp 1442-1449. 

8.  Werlinger,  R.,  Muldner,  K.,  Hawkey,  K.,  and  Beznosov,  K.  (2010).  "Preparation, 
Detection,  and  Analysis:  The  Diagnostic  Work  of  It  Security  Incident  Response," 
Information Management & Computer Security (18:1), pp. 26-42.  

9.  Khurana  H,  Basney  J,  Bakht  M,  Freemon  M,  Welch  V,  Butler  R.  Palantir.  (2009).  A 
framework for collaborative incident response and investigation. In: Proceedings of the 8th 
symposium on identity and trust on the internet. p. 38e51. 

10. Grobauer B, Schreck T. (2010). Towards incident handling in the cloud. In: Proceedings 
of the 2010 ACM workshop on cloud computing security workshop (CCSW 10). p. 77-85. 
11. Monfared, A., & Jaatun, M. G. (2012). Handling compromised components in an IaaS 
cloud installation. Journal of Cloud Computing:Advances, Systems and Applications 1,16. 
12.  Line,  M.  B.  (2013).  A  case  study:  preparing  for  the  smart  grids-identifying  current 
practice  for  information  security  incident  management  in  the  power  industry.  In  IT 
Security  Incident  Management  and  IT Forensics (IMF), 2013  7 International Conference 
on IT security incident management and IT forensics (pp. 26-32). IEEE. 

13.  Cusick,  J.  J.,  &  Ma,  G.  (2010).  Creating  an  ITIL  inspired  Incident  Management 
approach:  Roots,  response,  and  results.  In  Network  Operations  and  Management 
Symposium Workshops (NOMS Wksps), 2010 IEEE/IFIP (pp. 142-148). IEEE. 

14.  Connell  A,  Palko  T,  Yasar  H.  Cerebro.  (2013).  A  platform  for  collaborative  incident 
response  and  investigation.  In:  2013  IEEE  international  conference  on  technologies  for 
homeland security (HST). 

15.  Ahmad,  A.,  Hadgkiss,  J.,  and  Ruighaver,  A.B.  (2012).  Incident  Response  Teams–
Challenges  in  Supporting  the  Organisational  Security  Function.  Computers  &  Security 
(31:5), pp. 643-652. 

16.  Shedden,  P.,  Ahmad,  A.,  and  Ruighaver,  A.B.  (2011).  Informal  Learning  in  Security 

Incident Response Teams, in: 2011 Australasian Conference on Information Systems. 

17. Casey, E. (2006). Investigating Sophisticated Security Breaches. Communications of the 

ACM (49:2), pp. 48-55. 

18. Nnoli, H., Lindskog, D., Zavarsky, P., Aghili, S., and Ruhl, R. (2012). The Governance 
of Corporate Forensics Using Cobit, Nist and Increased Automated Forensic Approaches, 
in: 2012 International Conference on Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust. IEEE. 

19. Tan, T., Ruighaver, T., and Ahmad, A. (2003). Incident Handling: Where the Need for 
Planning  Is  Often  Not Recognised, in: 1st Australian Computer, Network & Information 
Forensics Conference. 

20. FireEye. (2013). The Need for Speed: 2013 Incident Response Survey.  
21. Grispos, G., Glisson, W. B., & Storer, T. (2014). Rethinking security incident response: 

The integration of agile principles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1408.2431. 

22. Ab Rahman, N. H., & Choo, K. K. R. (2015). A survey of information security incident 

handling in the cloud. Computers & Security, 49, 45-69. 

23. Papastergiou, S., & Polemi, D. (2017). Securing maritime logistics and supply chain: the 
medusa  and  mitigate  approaches  in  proceedings  of  2nd  nmiotic  conference  on  cyber 
security. Maritime Interdiction Operations Journal, 14(1), 42–48. ISSN: 2242-441X. 

24. Papastergiou, S., & Polemi, N. (2018). MITIGATE: A dynamic supply chain cyber risk 
assessment  methodology.  In  X.  S.  Yang,  A.  Nagar,  &  A.  Joshi  (eds),  Smart  trends  in 
systems,  security  and  sustainability.  Lecture  notes  in  networks  and  systems  18:  1–9. 
Springer. 

25.  Kalogeraki,  E.-M.,  Papastergiou,  S.,  Polemi  N.  “SAURON  Real-life  Use 
Cases: Terrorists attack a Cruise Ship berthed at a Port Facility” the 9th NMIOTC Annual 
Conference  “Fostering  Projection  of  Stability  through  Maritime  Security:  Achieving 
Enhanced Capabilities and Operational Effectiveness” June 5-7 2018. 

