Buchholz et al. / TRA2020, Helsinki, Finland, April 27-30, 2020 

Proceedings of 8th Transport Research Arena TRA 2020, April 27-30, 2020, Helsinki, Finland 

Enabling automated driving by ICT infrastructure: A reference 
architecture  

Michael Buchholza*, Jan Strohbecka, Anna-Maria Adaktylosb, Friedrich Voglb,  
Gottfried Allmerb, Sergio Cabrero Barrosc, Yassine Lassouedc, Markus Wimmerd, 
Birger Hättyd, Guillemette Massote, Christophe Ponchele, Maxime Bretine,  
Vasilis Sourlasf, Angelos Amditisf 

a Universität Ulm, Institut für Mess-, Regel- und Mikrotechnik, Albert-Einstein-Allee 41, D-89081 Ulm, Germany  
b Autobahnen- und Schnellstraßen-Finanzierungs-Aktiengesellschafft (ASFINAG), Rotenturmstraße 5-9, Wien 1011, Austria  
c IBM Ireland Limited, IBM House, Shelbourne Road, Ballsbridge Dublin 4, Ireland 
d NOKIA Solutions and Networks GmbH, Werinherstraße 91, D-81541 München, Germany  
e Airbus CyberSecurity SAS (AIRBUS), Boulevard Jean Moulin 1 ZAC de la clef Saint Pierre, Elancourt 78990, France  
f Institute of Communication and Computer Systems (ICCS), Patission Str. 42, Athens 10682, Greece 

Abstract 

Information  and  communication  technology  (ICT)  is  an  enabler  for  establishing  automated  vehicles  (AVs)  in 
today’s traffic systems. By providing complementary and/or redundant information via radio communication to 
the AV’s perception by on-board sensors, higher levels of automated driving become more comfortable, safer, or 
even  possible  without  interaction  by  the  driver,  especially  in  complex  scenarios.  Additionally,  communication 
between vehicles and/or a central service can improve the efficiency of traffic flow. This paper presents a reference 
architecture for such an infrastructure-based support of AVs. The architecture combines innovative concepts and 
technologies from different technological fields like communication, IT environment and data flows, and cyber-
security and privacy. Being the basis for the EU-funded project ICT4CART, exemplary implementations of this 
architecture will show its power for a variety of use cases on highways and in urban areas in test sites in Austria, 
Germany, and Italy, including cross-border interoperability. 

Keywords: Cooperative  Automated  Driving; Infrastructure Services; MEC Server and Hybrid Communication; 
System Architecture; IT environment; Cyber-security and Privacy. 

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +49-731-50-27003; 
E-mail address: michael.buchholz@uni-ulm.de 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
Buchholz et al. / TRA2020, Helsinki, Finland, April 27-30, 2020 

1. Introduction 

The automation of road transport is one of the major trends in mobility. Therefore, numerous initiatives, research 
projects and development initiatives are working on tomorrow’s vehicles with automation level 3 and higher, e.g. 
[1], [2], [3]. However, the ability of a single vehicle to perceive its environment is limited by the available sensor 
technologies,  leading  to  incomplete  information  of  the  automated  vehicle’s  (AV’s)  environment,  especially  in 
complex scenarios. To overcome this issue, using information and communication technology (ICT) is an already 
established means to support AVs by external information, e.g., from other connected vehicles, from infrastructure 
like traffic lights or sensors, or from the cloud [4]. Therefore, ICT is an important enabler to establish automated 
driving, which will result in mixed traffic  with manually driven vehicles for a long time. With the information 
provided by ICT, automated driving becomes more comfortable, safer, or even possible without interaction by the 
driver, especially in complex scenarios [5]. Additionally, communication between vehicles and/or a central service 
can improve the efficiency of traffic flow [5].  

There are still many ICT-related challenges to overcome, in particular those related to the connectivity required 
for advanced levels of road vehicle automation and the architecture of such a connected  ICT infrastructure. In 
addition, due to the external interfaces, cyber-security as well as privacy become inevitable to be investigated and 
integrated in such a system. One main challenge is to create ICT with a degree of harmonization between countries 
that will allow automated vehicles to traverse European borders freely. Harmonization of ICT functionalities and 
interfaces would also seem key for benchmarking and optimizing issues such as costs (investment, operation and 
maintenance) and requirements for latency, throughput, congestion strategies, data verification and data integrity.  

The project “ICT Infrastructure for Connected and Automated Road Transport” (ICT4CART) [3] aims to develop 
and  implement  a  respective  ICT  infrastructure  to  support  and  enable  automated  driving  on  higher  levels.  The 
project brings together key players from automotive, telecom, and IT  industries to shape the ICT landscape for 
Connected and Automated Road Transport (CART) and to boost the EU competitiveness and innovation in this 
area. ICT4CART aims to provide concrete, evidence-based input feeding and standardisation processes (notably 
supporting interoperability and cyber security) and policy decisions (e.g. for spectrum policy). The project  uses 
high-value  use cases (urban and highway), to demonstrate  and validate  the harmonization concepts in real-life 
conditions at the test sites in Austria, Germany and Italy [6]. Significant effort will also be put on cross-border 
interoperability, setting up a separate test site at the Italian-Austrian border. 

ICT4CART’s ICT infrastructure considers the “Extended Vehicle” concept (ISO standards 20077 & 20078), where 
the horizontal integration of a cloud platform to enable this interconnected environment plays a central role and 
the cloud [7] and the free flow of data [8] initiatives launched by the EC are duly considered. ICT4CART also 
adopts the EC’s common security and certificate policy† for all certificate authorities, which is originating from 
the  work  carried  out  in  the  C-ITS  platform  [9],  [10];  and  is  based  on Public  Key  Infrastructure  (PKI)  and  the 
European C-ITS Trust model. 

1.1. Related work 

In  the  European  ecosystem,  several  EU  funded  research  projects  enable  ICT  as  a  means  to  support  AV’s. 
Indicatively, 5G-MOBIX, 5GCroCo and 5G-CARMEN are three automotive projects which have been selected 
by the  EC in response to the 5G-PPP ICT-18-2018 Call. The 5G Infrastructure  Public Private  Partnership (5G 
PPP) is a joint initiative between the European Commission and European ICT industry with the aim to deliver 
solutions, architectures, technologies and standards for the  next generation communication infrastructures. 5G-
MOBIX [11] will develop and test automated vehicle functionalities using 5G core technological innovations along 
multiple cross-border corridors (one between Spain and Portugal and one between Turkey and Greece) and urban 
trial  sites,  under  conditions  of  vehicular  traffic,  network  coverage,  service  demand,  as  well  as  considering  the 
inherently  distinct  legal,  business  and  social  local  aspects.  Several  automated  mobility  use  cases  are  potential 
candidates to benefit from 5G such as cooperative overtake, highway lane merging, truck platooning, valet parking, 
urban environment driving, road user detection, vehicle remote control, see through, HD map update, media & 

† Directive 95/46/EC applied until 24 May 2018. It has been repealed by Regulation (EU) 2016/679  - General Data Protection Regulation, 
applicable on 25 May 2018. Directive 2002/58/EC of 12 July 2002 concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in 
the electronic communications sector is currently under a REFIT exercise by the Commission. 

 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
Buchholz et al. / TRA2020, Helsinki, Finland, April 27-30, 2020 

entertainment. Similar to 5G-MOBIX, 5GCroCο [12] will trial 5G technologies in the cross-border corridor along 
France, Germany and Luxembourg. The objective is to validate advanced 5G features, such as New Radio, MEC-
enabled distributed computing, Predictive QoS, Network Slicing, and improved positioning systems, all combined 
together, to enable innovative use cases for CCAM. In the same direction, 5G-CARMEN [13] builds a 5G-enabled 
corridor from Bologna, Italy to Munich, Germany to conduct cross-border trials of 5G technologies in four major 
use  cases:  cooperative  manoeuvring,  situation  awareness,  video  streaming,  and  green  driving.  ICT4CART  is 
moving on the same path with the aforementioned initiatives, with the exception that ICT4CART aims firstly to 
define a common architecture that can be adapted to the needs of each site and use case and additionally combines 
5G  with  the  LTE  network  capabilities  as  well  as  the  ad-hoc  capabilities  of  the  ETSI  ITS-G5  communication 
paradigm. Finally, two other activities that share the same objectives with ICT4CART, without the integration of 
5G  capabilities,  are  the  CONCORDA  project  and  the  C-ROADS  platform.  The  CONCORDA  [14]  project 
contributes to the preparation of European motorways for automated driving and high density truck platooning 
with adequate connected services and technologies, whereas the C-ROADS [15] platform is a joint initiative of 
European Member States and road operators for testing and implementing C-ITS services in light of cross-border 
harmonization  and  interoperability.  Nationally  funded  projects  accompany  these  European  initiatives,  e.g.  the 
German project MEC-View [1], which works on environmental modelling on MEC servers based on infrastructure 
sensors in urban areas. 

1.2. Contribution and structure of the paper 

One of the first steps in ICT4CART was the development of an innovative and generic  architecture that can be 
deployed all over Europe [16]. It supports a seamless operation with different communication technologies, i.e. 
ad-hoc  networks  (ETSI  ITS-G5)  and  cellular  networks  (LTE/5G),  referred  to  as  hybrid  communication,  and 
considers multi-access edge computing (MEC) in cellular networks or similar functionality in ad-hoc networks to 
allow for low-latency services. It embraces these upcoming technologies and presents a unified architecture for 
ICT systems, thereby enabling high-value use-cases for automated driving like smart parking, intersection crossing 
in urban environments, lane-merging in highway scenarios and cross-border interoperability. This architecture is 
presented in detail in this paper, including a high-level overview as well as, in more detail, the functional view, 
the IT environment and data view, the communication view, and the cyber-security and privacy view. 

2. High-level architecture 

In Fig. 1, the general architecture is visualized. It shows which basic components are involved in the ICT4CART 
system and how they can interact with each other. The main components are the vehicles, infrastructure (sensors 
and  processing  units)  and  IT  services  (such  as  an  OEM  backend  or  other  service  providers).  The  basic 
communication technologies that are used are LTE/5G (cellular) and ITS-G5 (ad-hoc). When using 5G, slicing 
may be used to provide a Quality of Service (QoS) required for the kind of information to be transported, which 
is represented by the dashed lines in Fig. 1. There can be slices, e.g. for low-latency communication (short dashes 
in the figure) or high-throughput communication (lines with longer dashes in the figure). As slicing is a 5G feature, 
it is not available when using LTE or ITS-G5. For further details on the communication, see Section 5.  

Hybrid connectivity, i.e. using ITS-G5 and LTE/5G in parallel, is also depicted in Fig. 1, as the infrastructure can 
provide  the  information  via  both  communication  channels.  Also,  vehicles  can  retrieve  information  over  the 
different communication paths, either from the same source or from different sources. The vehicles in Fig. 1 are 
either  not  connected,  connected  with  ITS-G5  (G5),  with  LTE/5G  (5G),  or  with  both  (5G+G5).  A  car-to-car 
connection is possible via ITS-G5. The road is equipped with Road Side Units (RSUs), connected sensors, and 
connected traffic lights. LTE/5G base stations receive and transmit data via cellular network (green lines). ITS-G5 
RSUs receive and transmit data via ITS-G5 (blue lines). Sensors and traffic lights are connected either via fibre 
cables (orange lines), cellular network, or via ITS-G5. 

The figure also indicates the concept of Multi-Access Edge Computing (MEC) servers. MEC servers are situated 
close to a base station of a cellular network, providing computation closer to end devices (in the ICT4CART use 
cases: vehicles) and thereby avoiding time-consuming data transmission via the Internet. This concept decreases 
latency, especially for mission-critical data, when compared to using a cloud server anywhere in the network.  

 
 
 
 
 
Buchholz et al. / TRA2020, Helsinki, Finland, April 27-30, 2020 

Fig. 1 ICT4CART High-Level Overview 

Similar  functionality  like  MEC  servers  can  be  provided  by  processing  capabilities  of  road  infrastructure  like 
sensors  in  combination  with  RSUs.  This  is  shown  in  the  left  part  of  the  figure.  For  simplicity  reasons,  these 
processing units are also denoted as MEC here. An RSU is an ITS-G5 communication unit on infrastructure side. 
Such MEC servers in combination with RSUs can run ICT4CART applications or services in close proximity with 
lower delays than cloud services. Information from the OEM Backend, Service Providers, and other cloud services 
("…" cloud in Fig. 1) can be received via the internet. 

3. Functional view 

The ICT4CART architecture consists of a collection of functional blocks. The functional view, depicted in Fig. 2, 
organizes the functional blocks into groups according to their common purpose: Supporting Services, Sensors and 
Actuators,  Applications,  Core  Services,  Hybrid  Wireless  Network,  Cooperative  Automated  Vehicle  (CAV), 
Security and Privacy. Please refer to [16] for more details on the functional view. 

The Supporting Services group includes functional modules that are directly or indirectly related to navigation, 
i.e. providing information on free parking spots or charging stations via the Service Provider Gateway (SPG). The 
Traffic  Control  Centre  (TCC)  provides  the  relevant  data  (e.g.,  speed  limits,  location  of  works  zones,  current 
weather)  from  the  road  infrastructure  operator.  Toll  Stations  provide  data  regarding  operational  lanes,  their 
occupancy  rate,  and  available  payment  methods.  Map  Services  provide  an  HD  map  with  highly  accurate 
information on traffic lanes, the locations of pedestrian crossings, etc. 

The Sensors and Actuators group contains functions in the infrastructure to gather information about the traffic 
on  roads  as  well  as  to  manage  the  traffic.  Traffic  Sensors,  like  video  cameras,  magnetic  coils,  and/or  LiDAR 
sensors, provide information regarding the current traffic in the surveyed area, e.g. to the TCC and/or directly to 
vehicles by an Environment Perception Model on a MEC server or RSU.  Connected Traffic Lights are used to 
adaptively control the traffic and possibly provide information on the status.  

Functions that make use of data and services from several other different groups to add business value build the 
Applications group. ICT4CART investigates some of them exemplarily: The Automation Level Road Clearance 
application  can  utilise  static  (e.g.  legal  regulations,  road  topology)  and  dynamic  (e.g.  traffic  density,  weather) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Buchholz et al. / TRA2020, Helsinki, Finland, April 27-30, 2020 

Fig. 2 Functions required for ICT4CART use cases 

information to determine a clearance for a road section and a specific automation level or the decision of a human 
traffic manager. The Fleet Management application keeps track of all managed vehicles and their statuses, and can 
make use of parking or charging station data if required for vehicles from the fleet. The Smart Parking application 
makes use of the parking data by assigning a parking spot and routing the requesting vehicle there. 

The Core Services group consists of several services that are crucial to make ICT infrastructure a key enabler for 
a  safe  and  efficient  deployment  of  HAD  on  European  roads.  This  includes  C-ITS  Services  such  as  Common 
Awareness,  Decentralized  Environmental  Notification,  Traffic  Light  Manoeuvre  or  Infrastructure-to-Vehicle 
Information, which are used to manage the generation, transmission and reception of C-ITS messages. Data from 
vehicles  and/or  infrastructure  are  received  and  then  processed  in  the  Environment  Perception  Model  (EPM) 
Building and Fusion  function, providing  an EPM  of the  surveyed area to the road users. The  Service  Provider 
Gateway (SPG) collects the data from various different vendors and provides a single downstream interface to the 
communication infrastructure. The Geo Service determines the relevance radius for ITS messages, the group of 
wireless stations that transmit these ITS messages and the CAVs that are in the relevance radius. To allow precise 
positioning of the CAV, the  Location Correction Data function provides correction data for Global Navigation 
Satellite Systems (GNSS) data by using either physical reference stations or network-based ones. The Message 
Broker is part of the hybrid C-ITS approach and will be used by CAVs to subscribe for messages of interest based 
on geographical location. There will be at least one Message Broker per country. Analytics Services refine data 
by  using  algorithms  in  order  to  prepare  them  for  other  services,  e.g.  making  predictions  for  parking  space 
availability in a specific area and time frame. 

The Hybrid Wireless Network consists of the combination of the wireless ad-hoc ITS-G5 network and cellular 
networks such as LTE and 5G. This is described in detail in Section 5. 

The  Cooperative  Automated  Vehicle  group  describes  the  vehicle  part.  Vehicles  equipped  with  both  wireless 
communication  technologies  (ITS-G5  and  LTE/5G)  make  use  of  both  the  ad-hoc  information  and  the  mobile 
information (hybrid communication). The on-board Sensors are a major source of information on which the CAV 
bases its automated driving decisions. The Vehicle ITS Station (V-ITS-S) is used for the ITS-G5 ad-hoc Wi-Fi 
communication with other vehicles and C-ITS infrastructure components. The LTE/5G Modem is used for the 
mobile connection to the radio access network (RAN) of the cellular network. The Highly Automated Driving 
(HAD) Module  summarizes all functionality to implement  automated driving using the  data  from its on-board 
sensors as well as cooperative information. 

The Security and Privacy group contains the Identity and Access Management, Cyber Security Supervision and 
Data  Privacy  functions.  Together,  they  ensure  that  all  data  exchanges  are  safe  and  secure  while  personal  data 
privacy is preserved, as described in more detail in Section 6.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Buchholz et al. / TRA2020, Helsinki, Finland, April 27-30, 2020 

4. Data / IT environment view  

The Data / IT environment view of the high-level architecture comprises the high-level data flows as well as the 
data  types.  This section  defines the components that  deal with these data  flows and specifies the relevant data 
types. See [17] for a more detailed discussion. 

4.1. IT Environment 

A high-level component viewpoint of the ICT4CART IT environment architecture is shown in Fig. 3. As can be 
seen, the IT environment is distributed over two types of platforms: cloud and MEC. Services required with low 
latency or limited geospatial extent (≤ 50 milli seconds) should be deployed on MEC servers, others should be 
deployed  on  the  cloud.  Vehicles  should  communicate  with  MEC  services  directly  since  MEC  services  and 
applications require low latency. However, they may communicate with cloud services using off-board access, 
which centralises access to these services depending on context. Please note that the vehicle is not considered as 
part  of  the  IT  environment.  Rather,  it  is  considered  as  a  client.  The  main  components  of  the  ICT4CART  IT 
environment architecture are introduced below: 
  Off-Board Access: Acts as an intermediary between the vehicle and the external world, providing secure and 

privacy-preserving data exchanges. This is aligned with ISO’s Extended Vehicle Concept. 

  Semantic Framework: Provides reference vocabularies across the IT environment. In our current proposal, 
the core component of this framework is a common ontology base, which may be stored in an appropriate 
repository such as a triple store. A semantic server or query engine may be used to query the ontologies. 
  Geo Service: Provides functionality to facilitate the handover of a vehicle from one MEC server to another 

as the vehicle is moving from one MEC area to another. 

  Parking  and  Charging  Station  Service  Gateway:  Provides  unified  access  to  parking  and  charging  station 
availability information, including predictions and  recommendations, based on data from multiple service 
providers. 

  Risk Maps for Automation Level Adaptation: Provide common access to context data required by the AD 
vehicle to assess the risk pertaining to driving in a given automation level. Data required  to build the risk 
maps may be provided by various data sources, such as traffic control centres, MEC services, RSUs, etc. 
  Collective  Perception  Service:  Provides  environment  perception  models  (EPMs)  to  vehicles.  Such  EPMs 
provide information describing the physical environment (vehicles, pedestrians, objects) at a given location. 
  Environmental  Notification  Service:  Provides  environmental  notifications  to  vehicles.  This  component 
complements  the  information  made  available  by  the  Collective  Perception  Service  with  notifications  of 
events or situations in the surroundings that require low latency. 

4.2. Data types 

Based on the use case specifications, the following data will be exchanged throughout the ICT architecture. Data 
types are split into two categories: those provided by the IT environment to the vehicles, and those consumed by 
the IT environment. The data standards and use cases pertaining to each data type are listed in Table 1. 

Fig. 3 ICT4CART IT Environment Architecture – Component Viewpoint 

 
 
 
Buchholz et al. / TRA2020, Helsinki, Finland, April 27-30, 2020 

Table 1. Data Types Used in ICT4CART and Relevant Standards 

Data Type 

Relevant Standards 

Environment  perception  models  (EPMs)  for  use  by  the 
automated driving (AD) vehicles 

Intersection map and topology 
Traffic light data 
Situations and events (e.g., accident, road closure, etc.) 
Real-time parking spot and charging station availability 

E
n
v
i
r
o
n
m
e
n
t

P
r
o
v
i
d
e
d
b
y
t
h
e

I
T

Extracted or aggregated information and predictions, such 
as parking predictions, traffic jams, etc. 
Correction data for GNSS-based localisation 
HD Maps 

E
n
v
i
r
o
n
m
e
n
t

C
o
n
s
u
m
e
d
b
y
t
h
e

I
T

EPMs, or data required to build EPMs, from RSUs and road 
signs and sensors 
Data  directly  received  from  road  signs  and  sensors  in  the 
absence of RSUs 
Data received from traffic and parking services 
Data  received  from  vehicles  either  directly  or  indirectly 
through RSUs 

5. Communication view 

CPM as will be specified in ETSI TS 103 324 [18] 

MAPEM as specified by ETSI TS 103 301 [19] 
SPATEM as specified by ETSI TS 103 301[19] 
DENM [20], DATEX II [21] 
DATEX  II,  Open  Mobility  Vocabulary  (MobiVoc) 
[22] 
To be defined depending on the type of output data 

ETSI TS 103 301 [19] 
To be defined 

CPM, CAM as specified by ETSI EN 302 672-2 [23] 

CPM, DENM 

DATEX II 
CPM, CAM 

In the following, the Communication View of the high-level architecture is presented. After a short overview of 
the ITS message handling, the following subsections describe the wireless ad-hoc communication and the cellular 
communication. Finally, the hybrid communication based on the combination of both communication channels is 
sketched. For a more detailed discussion, please refer to [24]. 

5.1. ITS message handling 

An  ITS  Station  interacts  with  one  or  multiple  ITS  Stations  to  provide  and/or  consume  transportation  and 
infrastructure  services.  An  ITS  Station  generates  and  transmits  service-specific  ITS  messages,  receives  ITS 
messages  from  other  ITS  Stations,  processes  incoming  ITS  messages,  and  stores  received,  generated,  and/or 
transmitted information. ITS messages, such as CAM, DENM, SPATEM, MAPEM, and CPM, represent user data 
to be exchanged between peer entities of used wireless communication technologies. 

5.2. Wireless ad-hoc communication 

Wireless ad-hoc networks such as Wi-Fi or LTE Sidelink (SL) provide decentralized communication, which allows 
end-user  devices  to  exchange  user  data  directly  with  each  other.  ITS  Stations  can  use  wireless  ad-hoc 
communication systems to broadcast ITS messages to any other ITS Station within their proximity. An unlicensed 
frequency spectrum is typically used. Factors such as the used wireless ad-hoc technology and the surrounding 
geographical  topology  determine  the  proximity  within  which  the  ITS  message  can  be  received.  The 
communication range is restricted to several 100m. For instance, 802.11p is used as basis for ITS-G5 in Europe. 

5.3. Cellular communication 

Cellular  networks  such  as  LTE  and  5G  combine  a  centralized  communication  network  with  a  wireless  access 
technology.  The  transport  and  connectivity  services  of  a  cellular  network  can  be  either  accessed  with  mobiles 
phones  (UE,  User  Equipment)  or  P-GWs  (PDN  Gateways).  The  mobile  phone  provides  a  wireless  link  to  the 
communication  network.  P-GWs  provide  connectivity  to  external  Packet  Data  Networks  (PDNs),  such  as  the 
Internet or corporate intranets.  

ITS Stations using a cellular communication system typically do not broadcast ITS messages directly to other ITS 
Stations  in  their  geographical  proximity.  Instead,  an  ITS  Station  connected  to  a  mobile  phone  sends  the  ITS 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Buchholz et al. / TRA2020, Helsinki, Finland, April 27-30, 2020 

message to a central ITS Station. The central ITS Station, located in a PDN, may provide ITS message forwarding 
as a service. It may provide a range of additional services such as message fusing. For ITS message forwarding, 
the central ITS Station operates geo-location function, which stores e.g. the latest known location of ITS Stations 
based incoming ITS messages such as CAM. With the help of the geo-location function, the central ITS Station 
can determine the group of ITS Stations that are currently located in the proximity of the sender of the ITS message, 
and then forward this ITS message to this group of ITS Stations using the cellular network infrastructure.  

Being  a  centralized  communication  network,  and  using  licensed  frequency  spectra,  the  radio  and  transmission 
resources for an ITS Station or a group of ITS Stations are managed. This allows the mobile network operator to 
provide Quality of Service (QoS) between the network’s edge nodes (the mobile phone and the P-GW). The key 
QoS attributes are latency, i.e. the transmission delay between mobile phone and PDN GW; and reliability, i.e. the 
packet error loss rate between mobile phone and PDN GW. If an ITS service for connected automated driving 
(L3/L4) requires very low total latency, the transmission delay between the ITS Station and the intermediate ITS 
Station needs to be minimized. This can be achieved, e.g., by operating central ITS Stations in close proximity to 
(vehicle) ITS Stations. A central ITS Station can e.g. be hosted on a MEC Server placed within or next to radio 
access network (RAN) of the cellular network, thus minimizing the number of hops through with the user data/ITS 
message has to be routed between the ITS-Station connected to a mobile phone and the central ITS Station.  

Users  and  applications  can  have  very  specific  requirements  with  respect  to  transport  QoS  and  ITS  service 
processing  and  storage  capabilities.  Network  slicing  allows  providing  dedicated  virtual  networks  with 
functionalities  specifically  selected  to  meet  the  service  or  customer  requirements.  LTE  provides  rudimentary 
network slicing options with features such as DCN (3GPP Dedicated Core Network). Only in 5G, network slicing 
becomes fully available.  

5.4. Hybrid communication 

Hybrid communication deploys multiple communication networks to extend network coverage for ITS Stations 
and to improve ITS service availability. It allows an ITS Station to send ITS messages via one or several radio 
technologies, and to receive ITS messages via multiple radio technologies. The ITS Station may choose a radio 
technology for data transmission and reception based on QoS factors such as its reliability or the delay sensitivity 
of the data. 

6. Cyber-Security & Privacy View 

As in any connected contexts, cyber-attacks are a major concern. In the context of Intelligent Transport Systems 
(ITS),  a  special  attention  is  paid  on  those  attacks  leading  to  privacy  violations  and  traffic  disturbance.  The 
ICT4CART architecture proposes an approach combining secured communications compliant with the latest EU 
standards, as presented in [25], and monitoring of cyber-security events to make stakeholders aware of the cyber-
security situation. Concretely speaking, Cyber-Security and Privacy view of the high-level architecture comprises 
a Cyber-Security Supervision service, an Identity and Access Management service, both including Data Privacy 
mechanisms. They are sketched here and detailed in [25]. 

6.1.  Cyber-Security Supervision service 

The role of the Cyber-Security Supervision service is to analyze  cyber-security events collected from vehicles, 
RSUs, MEC servers and cloud services in order to detect cyber-security incidents that require to be considered by 
road operators, cities, carmakers, OEMs and service providers. It also assesses vulnerability against known flaws 
and  exploits,  complemented  with  threat  knowledge.  Periodic  cyber-security  activity  and  situation  reports  are 
relevant  to  get  the  big  picture  of  the  cyber-security  health  of  a  vehicle  fleet,  road  infrastructure  and  parking 
management services for instance. 

The  Supervision service  consists  of the  functionalities  depicted  in Fig. 4 and briefly described above. Data, as 
security events from embedded or network sensors or ITS messages such as CAM, DENM, etc. are first collecting 
real-time  from  data  sources.  Then  they  are  processed  by  a  rule-based  correlation  engine  and  by  an  anomaly 
detection engine based on artificial intelligence in order to detect anomalies and raise alerts. These one could be 
directly reported in dashboards and reports, or could be also further investigate by cyber-security experts, who can 
fill in incidents reports by gathering relevant information. Some countermeasures could be put in place through 

 
 
 
 
 
Buchholz et al. / TRA2020, Helsinki, Finland, April 27-30, 2020 

Fig. 4 Functional architecture of the cyber-security supervision service 

the  reaction  enforcement  capacity  to  mitigate  a  detected  incident.  Linkability  is  a  Data  Privacy  mechanism, 
described more deeply in Section 6.3. 

6.2. Identity and Access Management Service 

The  role of the Identity and  Access Management (IAM)  service  is to provide authentication and authorization 
functionalities to ITS-S and Users in compliance with European standards, and integrates innovative mechanisms 
to grant respect for privacy.  

The IAM service described through consists of the following functionalities: 
  Public  Key  Infrastructure  (PKI):  The  PKI’s  architecture  proposed  integrates  Root  Certificate  Authority, 
Enrolment  Authority,  that  delivers  enrolment  credential  to  authenticate  and  grant  access  to  ITS 
communications;  and  Authorization  Authority,  that  delivers  authorization  tickets  to  authorize  the  use  of 
specific ITS services. 

  Users  Access  module:  This  module  includes  the  authentication  module  that  receives  identity  information 
validates them and generates access token; and the authorization module that offers access control and web 
request filtering capabilities based on rights contained in the token. 
IAM Directory: Is the identities and rights referential. All users, ITS-S and their rights are stored into this 
directory. 

 

  Administration Application: Provides an application to manage users, devices and right models. From this 

application, an administrator can activate or deactivate a device, and revoke a certificate. 

  Linkability Manager: This module ensures privacy and confidentiality for ITS-S, is detailed in Section 6.3. 

6.3. Data privacy mechanism 

Linkability  is  the  Authority  issuing  pseudonymous  credentials  for  users  and  devices  to  be  able  to  issue 
pseudonymous signatures that can be linked. For example, in the case of the Supervision service, linkability is 
used within the event correlation process to detect collected events referring to the same vehicle, even if the vehicle 
identification has been pseudonymised. 

Fig. 5 Functional architecture of the IAM service 

 
 
 
  
  
Buchholz et al. / TRA2020, Helsinki, Finland, April 27-30, 2020 

7. Conclusion 

In  this  paper,  a  high-level  architecture  was  presented,  showing  the  basic  components  that  are  involved  in  the 
ICT4CART system and how they can interact with each other. This  was followed by a functional view on the 
architecture, which explained the functional components in more details. The outlined communication architecture 
incorporates  upcoming  technologies  such  as  MEC,  ITS-G5,  5G  and  network  slicing.  We  also  introduced  new 
services to address challenges in Cyber-Security, Data Privacy and Communication, e.g., the Identity and Access 
Management  Service  and  the  Supervision  Service.  The  aim  of  this  architecture  is  to  cover  all  of  the  different 
ICT4CART use cases and to offer the ability for deployment in all test sites and beyond by being generic enough 
to be deployed for automated driving in general and to allow more use cases to be integrated. 

Acknowledgements 

The ICT4CART project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research & innovation 
programme  under  grant  agreement  No.  768953.  The  content  reflects  only  the  authors’  view  and  the  European 
Commission is not responsible for any use that may be made of the information it contains. 

References 

[1]  MEC-View, “Mobile Edge Computing basierte Objekterkennung für hoch- und vollautomatisiertes Fahren,” 2019. [Online]. 

Available: http://www.mec-view.de. 

[2]  AUTOPILOT, “Homepage,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.autopilot-project.eu. 
[3] 
[4]  M. Buchholz, M. Herrmann, J. C. Müller, V. Belagiannis, P. Pavlov, B. Hätty, S. Schulz, and R. W. Henn, “A digital mirror: A mobile 

ICT4CART, “A connected future for automated driving,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://ict4cart.eu. 

[5] 

[6] 

edge computing service based on infrastructure sensors,” presented at the 25th ITS World Congr. Copenhagen, 2018. 
J. Rios-Torres and A. A. Malikopoulos, "A survey on the coordination of connected and automated vehicles at intersections and 
merging at highway on-ramps," in IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 1066-1077, May 2017. 
doi: 10.1109/TITS.2016.26005 
ICT4CART. “D2.1: Specification of Use Cases”, [Online]. Available: 
https://ict4cart.eu/assets/deliverables/ICT4CART_D2.1_Specification-of-Use-Cases_v1.0_final.pdf 

[7]  European Union, “The European Cloud Initiative,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-

market/en/%20european-cloud-initiative.  

[8]  European Union, “Digital Single Market - Free Flow of Data Initiative,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-

market/en/news/digital-single-market-free-flow-data-initiative 

[9]  European Union, “C-ITS platform, Final report,” January 2016. [Online]. Available: 

http://ec.europa.eu/transport/sites/transport/files/themes/its/doc/c-its-platform-final-report-january-2016.pdf. 

[10]  European Union, “C-ITS platform, Phase II Report,” September 2017. [Online]. Available: 

https://ec.europa.eu/transport/sites/transport/files/2017-09-c-its-platform-final-report.pdf. 

[11]  5G-MOBIX project, [Online]. Available: https://www.5g-mobix.com 
[12]  5GCroCo project, [Online]. Avaliable: https://5gcroco.eu/ 
[13]  5G-CARMEN project, [Online]. Avaliable: https://www.5gcarmen.eu/ 
[14]  CONCORDA project, [Online]. Available: https://connectedautomateddriving.eu/project/concorda/ 
[15]  C-ROADS platform, [Online]. Avaliable: https://www.c-roads.eu/platform.html 
[16] 

ICT4CART, “D3.1: ICT4CART Reference Architecture”, [Online]. Available: 
https://ict4cart.eu/assets/deliverables/ICT4CART_D3.1_ICT4CART-Reference-Architecture_v1.0_final.pdf  
ICT4CART. “D3.3: IT Environment Specifications and Architecture”, [Online]. Available: 
https://ict4cart.eu/assets/deliverables/ICT4CART_D3.3_IT-Environment-Specification-and-Architecture_v1.0_final.pdf  

[17] 

[18]  ETSI TS 103 324 (under development): “Intelligent Transport System (ITS); Vehicular Communications; Basic Set of Applications; 

Specification of the Collective Perception Service”. 

[19]  ETSI TS 103 301 V1.2.1 (2018-08): “Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Vehicular Communications; Basic Set of Applications; 

Facilities layer protocols and communication requirements for infrastructure services”.  

[20]  ETSI EN 302 637-3 V1.3.0 V1.3.0 (2018-08): “Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Vehicular Communications; Basic Set of 

Applications; Part 3: Specifications of Decentralized Environmental Notification Basic Service”. 

[21]  DATEX II Specification. [Online]. Available: https://datex2.eu/support/downloads 
[22]  Open Mobility Vocabulary (MobiVoc). [Online]. Available: https://www.mobivoc.org 
[23]  ETSI EN 302 672-2 V1.3.1: “Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Vehicular Communications; Basic Set of Applications; Part 2: 

[24] 

[25] 

Specifications of Cooperative Awareness Basic Services”. 
ICT4CART. “D3.2: Flexible Network Specification and Architecture”, [Online]. Available: 
https://ict4cart.eu/assets/deliverables/ICT4CART_D3.2_Flexible-Networks-Specifications-and-Architecture_v1.0_final.pdf  
ICT4CART. “D3.4: Cyber-security and data privacy Specifications and Architecture”, [Online]. Available: https://ict4cart.eu/assets/ 
deliverables/ICT4CART_D3.4_Cyber-Security-and-Data-Privacy-Specifications-and-Architecture_v1.0_final.pdf 

 
 
