Advanced Persistent Threat: Detection and Defence 

Mohammad Bilal Khan 
Faculty of Engineering & Informatics 
University of Bradford  
Bradford, UK 
M.B.Khan6@bradford.ac.uk 

Abstract—The  critical  assessment  presented  within  this 
paper  explores  existing  research  pertaining  to  the  Advanced 
Persistent Threat (APT) branch of cyber security, applying the 
knowledge extracted from this research to discuss, evaluate and 
opinionate  upon  the  areas  of  discussion  as  well  as  involving 
personal  experiences  and  knowledge  within  this  field.  The 
synthesis of current literature delves into detection capabilities 
and techniques as well as defensive solutions for organisations 
with  respect  to  APTs.  Higher-tier  detection  and  defensive 
strategies  bear  greater  importance  with  larger  organisations; 
especially  government  departments  or  organisations  whose 
work impacts the public on a large scale. Successful APT attacks 
can  result  in  the  exfiltration  of  sensitive  data,  network  down 
time and the infection of machines which allow for remote access 
from Command-and-control (C2) servers. This paper presents 
a  well-rounded  analysis  of  the  Advanced  Persistent  Threat 
problem  and  provides  well-reasoned  conclusions  of  how  to 
mitigate the security risk.        

Keywords—Advanced  Persistent  Threat,  Cyber  security, 

Command-and-control server, MITRE ATT&CK Framework. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

As defined by the National Cyber Security Centre of the 
United Kingdom, an Advanced Persistent Threat or APT is a 
“targeted cyber-attack where a hacker accesses a system and 
remains undetected for a long time” [3]. From this definition 
alone, the high likeliness of malicious actors using a variety of 
infiltration techniques to compromise targets can be deduced, 
many  of  which  will  be  mapped  out  within  the  MITRE 
ATT&CK Framework. With the advancement of modern-day 
detection techniques, it can be understood that the complexity 
and  sophistication  of  code  produced  for  these  attacks  to 
remain undetected must be high. As the APT are well funded, 
organized  groups,  the  production  of  flawless  code  for 
delivering payloads come as no issue to these groups [9].  

To  understand  defensive  solutions,  a  good  understanding of 
the motivation empowering APT groups and their attacks is 
required.  Within  the  IEEE  Security  &  Privacy  journal,  it  is 
described how frequently, the primary objective behind these 
attacks is money and the secondary objectives include national 
and industrial espionage [2, 21]. A very famous example of 
national espionage is that of  APT28 whereby, spear-phishing 
attachments were  used to compromise the email accounts of 
government officials during the 2016 United States Election. 
The  compromise  of  Hilary  Clinton’s  campaign  following 
leaked emails are said to have impacted the results within the 
election [11].  

Industry-recognized  security  expert,  Dr,  Eric  Cole 
explains  how  organisations  understand 
traditional 
defensive  strategies  when  such  as  firewalls.  However,  these 
traditional approaches experience no success when met with 
an  APT  attack  due  to  these  attacks  being  a  completely 

the 

different  problem  [4,  9].    From  this,  it  can  be  argued  that 
organisations are struggling to keep up with changes  within 
the cyber-industry with respect to the nature of attacks that are 
present.  Greater  education  and  emphasis  on  emerging 
vulnerabilities are things organisations should bear in mind. 
Implementing detective and defensive solutions to specifically 
deal  with  APT  attacks  as  well  as  ensuring  staff  working  in 
cyber analyst positions understand what an APT is and how 
the  organisations  defensive  strategies  are  structured  in  the 
event they are targeted by an APT group [6]. 

Fig. 1: The APT Life Cycle 

Saurabh Singh [19] describes the five crucial stages to the 
life  cycle  of  an  APT  attack.  The  first  step  being 
reconnaissance.  This  is  where  research  pertaining  to  the 
organisation and its employees. Social networking sites such 
as LinkedIn help to provide the attackers with the information 
they require. The second step is breach. This is where we see 
malware, SQL injections, zero-day vulnerabilities as well as 
other  methodologies  being  used  to  gain  a  foothold  into  the 
network  and  breach  defence  systems  [8].  The  third  step  is 
infiltration. Now we see the attacker searching for confidential 
data and company documents. They will  move horizontally 
within the network to identify servers and user data. This is 
done with the help of  powerful software tools. Moving to step 
4, exfiltration will take place. The APT group will take control 
of  the  network  and  thus,  leak  confidential  company  data, 
including intellectual property rights. Data will be transferred 
from  the  company’s  network  to  an  external  location,  most 
likely  a  Command-and-Control  centre  in  which  the  actor(s) 
will control. In the final stage of an APT attack, we tend to see 
stealth  persistence  being  achieved.  Providing 
the 
exfiltration  of  data  was  silent,  attackers  many  choose  to 
remain  inside  the  network  which  will  allow  them  to  obtain 
further confidential documents  from  the organisation over a 
period [10]. 

that 

the  discussion,  references 

Throughout 
the  MITRE 
ATT&CK Framework have been made and will continue to 
be made. This framework breaks down the stages of an attack, 
from initial access up till exfiltration and impact. During the 

to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discussion of detective and defensive solutions, references to 
the corresponding part of the framework will be made to show 
which  stage  of  an  attack  that  solution  tackles.  The  MITRE 
Corporation  describes  the  framework  as  a  foundation  for 
developing specific threat models and methodologies within 
the cybersecurity product and service community [11].  

II.  DETECTION/DEFENSE TECHNIQUE – 
ANOMALY BASED INTRUSION DETECTION 
SYSTEMS 

A.  OUTLINING ANOMALIES 

What needs to be considered when discussing APT attacks 
is  that  these  attacks  are  unique  and  tailored.  Traditional 
security methods are bypassed as a result. Anomaly detection 
can be defined as the problem of discovering patterns within 
data that do not conform to what would normally be expected 
[5]. Thus, the ability for anomaly detection within  intrusion 
detection  systems  would  contribute  to  greater  success  in 
scalping  APT  attacks.  It  would  provide  the  opportunity  to 
analyse irregular behaviour in the form of abnormal patterns 
within data. Ivo Freidberg [12] describes how anomalies can 
be categorised into three categories. 

1) Point anomalies whereby a single event is identified as 

anomalous with respect to how normality is viewed.  

2)  Contextual  anomalies  whereby  a  single  event  is 
identified  as  anomalous  with  respect  to  the  context  it  was 
identified within. 

3)  Collective  anomalies  whereby  the  relation  formed 
collectively between a series of events places them within an 
anomalous bracket. 

B.  DETECTING ANOMALIES 

Now  that  a  base  understanding  for  anomalies  has  been 
adopted, the discussion of how to detect these anomalies can 
be  brought  up.  There  are  various  anomaly  detection 
algorithms  that  exist,  many  of  which  are  predominantly 
known and many of which have been mentioned in journals 
and articles, developed by specialists within the computational 
geometry and cyber-security field.  

An  example  of  one  of  these  algorithms  is  Classification 
based anomaly detection. This technique uses a classifier  or 
model to study a labelled training data set. The learned model 
then  classifies  a  test  instance  into  a  class,  that  being  either 
normal  or  anomalous  through  using  the  classifier  [5].  The 
general assumption for this algorithm describes the ability for 
a  classifier  to  distinguish  between  normal  and  anomalous 
instances of data [12]. 

witnessed.  In  the  words  of  Min  and  Qin  themselves,  these 
results prove the viability of an anomaly-based IDS. 

 The  major  drawbacks  which  comes  with 
the 
implementation  of  an  anomaly-based  IDS  is  the  number  of 
false-positives. Any data instance that doesn’t perfectly align 
with the normal class gets categorised as anomalous. Within a 
cyber-security  working  environment  whereby  workload  is 
often very busy, having to deal with a large instance of false 
positives daily wastes valuable time. As somebody who has 
worked in cyber security for the government for a year as part 
of  an  industrial  placement,  I  myself  have  witnessed  the 
number of false positives from different sensors that have to 
be dealt with. Introducing an anomaly-based IDS which will 
add on top of the current situation, even more false-positives 
will create a  heavier workload for cyber analysts. However, 
looking at this, it could be argued that this could help to create 
and enforce more jobs within firms [13, 14].  

Timothy Shimeall [17] argues that the lack of granularity 
is  an  issue.  The  system  picks  up  what  it  believes  to  be 
anomalous  however,  it  is  not  for  definite.  This  ties  into  the 
point  made  in  the  paragraph  above  which  is  the  high 
production of false-positives. Furthermore, we can tie in how 
the  success  of  the  intrusion  detection  system  is  heavily 
dependent  upon  the  surroundings  in  which  it  learns  to 
categorise what normal is. If this stage is rushed or not done 
correctly, false-positive rates could be even higher.  

that 

they 

systems 

are  clever 

To  conclude  on  anomaly-based 

intrusion  detection 
systems, 
implement 
computational  geometry  methods and techniques  to  identify 
outliers within data instances and report this back to the cyber 
team  of  a  company  [16].  As  APT  attacks  are  unique  and 
tailored to companies, the implementation of this system will 
definitely help to detect these attacks and at least make cyber 
teams aware of what is happening, which could help them to 
fight against the stealth persistence stage of the APT cycle in 
the  worst-case  scenario  that  confidential  documents  are 
exfiltrated. Looking at the MITRE ATT&CK Framework, the 
success of an  anomaly-based IDS  will  aid companies  at the 
Initial Access stage of the framework, meaning the first stage. 
The Initial  Access  stage can be  said  to  be  equivalent to  the 
breach stage of the APT life cycle. This system would be very 
valuable to companies for this very reason. The downside to 
this  system  is  the  high  false  alarm  rate  [18].  Time  is  so 
valuable  to  cyber  analysts  and  increasing  their  workload  to 
deal with a handful of false positives daily may not be the best 
idea. It completely depends upon the nature of the company, 
the size, the financial capabilities and staffing capabilities.  

III. DETECTION/DEFENCE TECHNIQUE – USER 
AWARENESS OF SPEAR-PHISHING EMAILS 

C.  VIABILITY OF AN ANOMALY BASED INTRUSION 

DETECTION SYSTEM FOR APT ATTACKS 
A controlled test conducted by Min Qin and Kai Hwang 
[15]  from  the  University  of  Southern  California  using  an 
anomaly-based  intrusion  detection  system  showed  that  the 
system  was  able  to  find  unknown  attacks  embedded  within 
telnet, http, ftp and smtp as well as other TCP, UDP or ICMP 
connections.  A  detection  success  rate  of  47%  for  denial  of 
service  attacks,  remote-to-local  and  probe  attacks  was 

A.  OUTLINING SPEAR-PHISHING 

APT groups have learned that servers are harder to break 
into due to being locked down. What is more effective is to 
target the users who have access to this information [9]. It is 
not hard for malicious actors to  obtain personal information 
about several high-level employees within a firm. This is due 
to  the  amount  of  information  we  reveal  about  ourselves  on 
social  media,  specifically  LinkedIn  and  Facebook.  As 
mentioned earlier, I worked for the British government within 

 
 
 
 
 
cyber security. Many  reconnaissance emails were witnessed 
daily  whereby users who had revealed personal information 
about themselves on LinkedIn were being targeted with blank 
emails. You might ask, why would a malicious actor send a 
blank  email?  Sometimes,  it  is  hard  for  actors  to  obtain  the 
exact email address whereby you receive your business emails 
[20].  However,  so  long  as  they  know  your  name  and  the 
company you work for, they can discover the email domain 
and  predict  the  start  of  your  email  address.  They  then  send 
reconnaissance  emails  which  is  a  blank  email  from  a  non-
suspicious  looking  address.  Many  users,  being  oblivious  to 
spear-phishing, reply to these emails asking whether this email 
was meant for them. Once the malicious actor receives a reply, 
they know they have an active address for their target.  

Symantec, a well-known cyber security software company 
reported  that  spear-phishing  attacks  in  the  form  of  business 
emails are being favoured by malicious actors. Looking at this, 
it can be deduced that one of the underlying causes will be the 
simple fact that humans are easier to compromise than security 
systems. Through social engineering, even the most security 
savvy employee can be fooled [1].  

B.  CONTROLLING OUR PERSONAL INFORMATION 

Fig. 5: APT Spear-phishing Model 

to  collate  any  background 

Figure 5 above demonstrates the APT life cycle within the 
context of a spear-phishing attack. What needs to be focused 
on  is  stages  one  and  two.    By  diminishing  the  ability  for 
information  on 
attackers 
employees,  the  company  becomes  a  harder  challenge  to 
malicious  actors  who  may  even  reconsider  targeting  that 
company. This can be done through a variety of techniques. 
As  somebody  who  has  worked  for  the  government,  the 
following advice is coming from personal experience working 
in a highly controversial organisation. The best strategy would 
be  to  enforce  strict  company  policies.  The  type  of  policies 
which bear disciplinary actions. The first policy should be the 
non-usage  of  company  email  addresses  for  personal  usage. 
Using a company email address to sign up to non-work-related 
sites  should  be  banned.  Within  today’s  day  and  age, 
everybody should have access to a personal address they can 
use for their own activities online. Work matters and personal 
matters should not mix [22, 23]. The second policy that should 
be  enforced  really  depends  upon  the  type  of  company  you 
work for. Although you are aware that I worked for the British 
government,  you  are  not  aware  which  exact  government 
department I was a part of. High profile companies who have 
great political impact or who make decisions that may cause 
controversy  should  make  it  obligatory  on  employees  to  not 
disclose  their  exact  employment  details  online  such  as  on 

Facebook and LinkedIn. However, more general employment 
details  can  be  disclosed  such  as  their  experience  within  the 
manufacturing industry.  

C.  EDUCATING EMPLOYEES ON THE ISSUE 

Unfortunately,  spear-phishing  attacks  still  take  the  prize 
for being the most successful attack vector on enterprises [24]. 
Dr  Eric  Cole  [5]  explains  how  the  number  one  reason  for 
organisations  becoming  compromised  today  is  lack  of  user 
awareness. Due to this, they open attachments that they should 
not. APT groups take advantage of this.  

Looking at this, it can be seen how more focus needs to be 
placed  on  making  users  aware  of  what  spear-phishing  is. 
When was the last time you worked for a company and was 
given advice on dealing with spear-phishing? Never, right?  If 
users are unaware of the issue, how can it be expected of them 
to deal with it in the correct manner.  

As part of the industrial placement within the government, 
I  took  part  in  Learning  at  Work  days  whereby  I  taught  and 
presented to new employees the issue of spear-phishing. This 
is  a  key  point.  The  interaction  between  cyber  analysts  and 
other  teams  needs  to  be  established.  Within  organisations, 
what tends to happen is you stay within the bubble which is 
your team and you don’t really get to learn about what other 
teams  do  and  the  importance of  their  work.  More  emphasis 
needs to be placed on the work cyber analysts do. It should be 
well-known to all staff the hard work cyber-analysts commit 
to in order to protect the organisation. One of the  ways this 
can be done is through creating that connection between the 
cyber  team  and  other  teams  within  the  organisation.  The 
ability to pass on critical information such as being mindful of 
opening attachments and enabling macros within spreadsheet 
files  is  what  could  save  an  organisation  from  being 
compromised by an APT attack. 

The second thing that was taken away from the placement 
which  could  benefit  other  organisations  is  sending  out  test 
phishing emails. Think about it. You can describe a phishing 
email  and  all  the  signs  to  look  out  for  as  best  as  you  can, 
however,  until  an  employee  sees  a  real  phishing  email,  this 
will  decipher  whether  user-education  and  awareness  is 
spreading  throughout  the  organisation.  Several  of  these  test 
emails would be sent to users throughout the year, mimicking 
hotel booking companies, florists, clothing retailers. If the user 
clicked on the URL, they would be taken to a site informing 
them about what they have just done and how the URL they 
clicked on could have been malicious. This is usually enough 
to make employees vigilant about what they click on and open 
within emails. If the user forwarded the email to the phishing 
team within the cyber security department, they would receive 
a thank you email explaining to them how their vigilance helps 
to make our organisation a safer environment.  

Looking at the MITRE ATT&CK Framework, the success 
of strict policies and user education will aid companies at the 
Initial Access stage of the framework. Looking at the APT life 
cycle, implementing these defence strategies successfully will 
protect against the reconnaissance and breach stages. 

IV.  CONCLSION 

Through  the  research  and  personal  experience  working 
with these defence strategies, both techniques bear significant 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and  critical  importance.  The  anomaly-based  IDS  gives  the 
company the ability to pick up where unusual activities occur 
within their infrastructure. Obtaining the IDS logs within the 
SIEM  tool,  analysts  can  reduce  data  instances  to  more 
readable  formats  as  well  as  pin-point  monitoring  on  certain 
data instances. It can give companies that confidence knowing 
they  have  a  system  in  place  for  picking  up  behaviour  that 
doesn’t correlate to what they would expect. This technique 
focus purely on network monitoring, placing IDS sensors on 
servers, outlining normal behaviour and creating classes based 
on this knowledge. The strategy is very technical. 

On  the  contrary,  the  implementation  of  strict  company 
policies  and  user-education  focuses  solely  on  human 
psychology. The ability to give the workforce what they need 
to  not  fall  victim  to  social  engineering.  This  strategy  is  not 
technical  but  rather,  it  deals  with  the  issue  of  APT  attacks 
being able to take advantage of the blind-trust humans have of 
emails with embedded URLs and attachments.  

Both defence strategies take two separate routes to tackle 
the same problem, which referring to the MITRE ATT&CK 
Framework, is the Initial Access stage. Being able to prevent 
APT groups gaining a foothold into the network infrastructure 
and move laterally. As mentioned earlier, both are critical for 
preventing  successful  APT  attacks.  To  choose  between 
financial investment between the two would be a hard task for 
any security manager. However, as Dr Eric Cole [9] said, APT 
attacks have become the primary focus for organisations but 
the traditional threat remains. Focus should not be placed on 
protecting  against  the  APT  attack  to  the  point  where  other 
vulnerabilities and indicators of compromise are neglected. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  Alshamrani, A., Myneni, S., Chowdhary, A. and Huang, D. (2019) A 
Survey  on  Advanced  Persistent  Threats:  Techniques,  Solutions, 
Challenges,  and  Research  Opportunities.  IEEE  Communications 
Surveys & Tutorials 21 (2), 1851-1877. 
I.  Ghafir  and  V.  Prenosil.  “Proposed  Approach  for  Targeted  Attacks 
Detection,”  Advanced  Computer  and  Communication  Engineering 
Technology, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering. Phuket: Springer 
International Publishing, vol. 362, pp. 73-80, 9, 2016. 

[2] 

[3]  Centre, N. C. S. (2019) APT. National Cyber Security Centre. 
[4] 

I. Ghafir, V. Prenosil, M. Hammoudeh and U. Raza, “Malicious SSL 
Certificate  Detection:  A  Step  Towards  Advanced  Persistent  Threat 
Defence,” 
International  Conference  on  Future  Networks  and 
Distributed Systems. Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2017. 

[5]  Chandola, V., Banerjee, A. and Kumar, V. (2009) Anomaly detection: 

[6] 

A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 41 (3), 1-58. 
I. Ghafir, J. Svoboda, V. Prenosil, “A Survey on Botnet Command and 
Control  Traffic  Detection,”  International  Journal  of  Advances  in 
Computer  Networks  and  Its  Security  (IJCNS),  vol.  5(2),  pp.  75-80, 
2015. 

[7]  Chen,  J.,  Su,  C.,  Yeh,  K.-H.  and  Yung,  M.  (2018)  Special  Issue  on 
Advanced Persistent Threat. Future Generation Computer Systems 79, 
243-246.  
I.  Ghafir  and  V.  Prenosil,  “Advanced  Persistent  Threat  and  Spear 
Phishing  Emails.”  International  Conference  Distance  Learning, 
Simulation  and  Communication.  Brno,  Czech  Republic,  pp.  34-41, 
2015. 

[8] 

[9]  Cole, E. (2012) Advanced Persistent Threat. 1 edition. Syngress. 
[10]  U. Raza, J. Lomax, I. Ghafir, R. Kharel and B. Whiteside, “An IoT and 
Business Processes Based Approach for the Monitoring and Control of 
High  Value-Added  Manufacturing  Processes,” 
International 
Conference on Future Networks and Distributed Systems. Cambridge, 
United Kingdom, 2017. 

[11]  Corporation, T. M. (2019) Groups | MITRE ATT&CK™.  The MITRE 
Corporation. https://attack.mitre.org/groups/ Accessed 17/11/2019. 
[12]  Friedberg, I., Skopik, F., Settanni, G. and Fiedler, R. (2015) Combating 
advanced persistent threats: From network event correlation to incident 
detection. Computers & Security 48, 35-57. 

[13]  I.  Ghafir,  J.  Svoboda  and  V.  Prenosil,  “Tor-based  malware  and  Tor 
connection  detection,”  International  Conference  on  Frontiers  of 
Communications,  Networks  and  Applications.  Kuala  Lumpur, 
Malaysia, pp. 1-6, 2014. 

[14]  I. Ghafir, M. Husak and V. Prenosil, “A Survey on Intrusion Detection 
and  Prevention  Systems,”  IEEE/UREL  conference,  Zvule,  Czech 
Republic, pp. 10-14, 2014. 

[15]  Qin,  M  and  Hwang,  K.  (2003)  Anomaly-based  Intrusion  Detection 

from Traffic Datamining on Internet Connections. 

[16]  I.  Ghafir,  V.  Prenosil,  M.  Hammoudeh,  F.  J.  Aparicio-Navarro,  K. 
Rabie and A. Jabban, “Disguised Executable Files in Spear-Phishing 
Emails: Detecting the Point of Entry in Advanced Persistent Threat.” 
International Conference on Future Networks and Distributed Systems. 
Amman, Jordan, 2018.  

[17]  Shimeall,  T.  J.  (2014)  Anomaly-Based  Detection.  Introduction  to 

Information Security: Elsevier Inc. 

[18]  I. Ghafir and V. Prenosil, “Malicious File Hash Detection and Drive-
by  Download  Attacks,”  International  Conference  on  Computer  and 
Communication Technologies, series Advances in Intelligent Systems 
and Computing. Hyderabad: Springer, vol. 379, pp. 661-669, 2016. 
[19]  Singh, S., Sharma, P. K., Moon, S. Y., Moon, D. and Park, J. H. (2019) 
A comprehensive study on APT attacks and countermeasures for future 
networks and communications: challenges and solutions. The Journal 
of Supercomputing 75 (8), 4543-4574. 

[20]  I.  Ghafir,  V.  Prenosil,  and  M.  Hammoudeh,  “Botnet  Command  and 
Control Traffic Detection Challenges: A Correlation-based Solution.” 
International  Journal  of  Advances  in  Computer  Networks  and  Its 
Security (IJCNS), vol. 7(2), pp. 27-31, 2017. 

[21]  Sood,  A.  K.  and  Enbody,  R.  J.  (2013)  Targeted  Cyberattacks:  A 
Superset of Advanced Persistent Threats. IEEE Security & Privacy 11 
(1), 54-61. 

[22]  J. Svoboda, I. Ghafir, V. Prenosil, “Network Monitoring Approaches: 
An  Overview,”  International  Journal  of  Advances  in  Computer 
Networks and Its Security (IJCNS), vol. 5(2), pp. 88-93, 2015. 
[23]  I.  Ghafir  and  V.  Prenosil,  “DNS  query  failure  and  algorithmically 
generated  domain-flux  detection,”  International  Conference  on 
Frontiers  of  Communications,  Networks  and  Applications.  Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia, pp. 1-5, 2014. 

[24]  Steer,  J.  (2014)  The  gaping hole  in our  security  defences.  Computer 

Fraud & Security 2014 (1), 17-20. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
