An overview of Intrusion Detection and Prevention 
Systems 

Keturahlee Coulibaly  
Faculty of Engineerimg and Informatics 
Bradford University 
Bradford, UK 
Kcouliba@bradford.ac.uk 

Abstract—Cyber  threats  are  increasing  not  only  in  their 
volume but also in their sophistication and difficulty to detect. 
Attacks  have  become  a  national/global  threat  as  they  have 
targeted private and public, as well as government sectors over 
the years. This is a growing issue and organisations are taking 
steps to reduce, detect and prevent threats. To do this they need 
to  use  systems  that  are  equipped  with  the  capabilities  to  do 
either of those steps and develop them for the type of networks 
they use, for instance wired or wireless. One of these systems are 
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), which can be used as the first 
defense  mechanism  or  a  secondary  defense  mechanism  of  a 
threat or an attack. There are different types of attacks that can 
occur in a network, such as Denial of service (DoS)/Distributed 
Denial  of  Service 
(DDoS),  port  scanning,  malware  or 
ransomware  and  so  forth  that  IDSs  have  a  capability  of 
detecting. Assisting in the mitigation of such attacks, there are 
also  Intrusion  Prevention  Systems  (IPS)  whose  role  has  a 
different purpose than that of IDSs. Unlike IDSs they not only 
detect  threats  but  prevent  them  from  disrupting  the  network, 
IPSs  can  be  used  in  conjunction  with  IDSs  to  double  the 
defenses.  This  paper  provides  an  overview  of  IDS  and  their 
classifications  and  IPS.  It  will  detail  typical  benefits  and 
limitations  to  using  IDSs,  IPSs  and  the  hybrids  (such  as 
Intrusions  Detection  Prevention  Systems  (IDPSs  and  more)) 
which will be discussed further. It will also outline developments 
in  the  making  using  ML  and  how  it  is  used  to  improve  these 
systems  and  the  dilemmas  they  produce  and  possible  ways  to 
counter act them. 

Keywords—Intrusion detection systems, Intrusions prevention 

systems, cyber-attacks, machine learning, network security. 

I.  INTRODUCTION  

Different  sectors  of  organisations  have  become  victims  of 
targeted cyber-attacks and thus far, attacks are on the rise and 
are being more advanced. Organisations are becoming more 
aware of the dangers and damages these security attacks can 
cause  their  businesses  and  infrastructure  [1].  When  they 
grow, they accumulate more data and sensitive information 
about  others-  such  as  clients  or  individuals  and  even 
government  organisations.  These  can  have  devastating 
consequences  and  impacts  on  a  company  or  organisations, 
this  can  be  in  the  form  of  financial  loss.  Though  “cyber-
attacks are persistent” companies are identifying the attacks 
and or breaches less than before. On the other hand, those that 
can identify the threats and breaches are experiencing more 
attacks [2,9]. This infers that organisations who do not have 
the capabilities of identifying attacks as successfully as others 
may  still  be  experiencing  attacks  or  being  part  of  a  botnet 
[18,26].  Furthermore,  with 
without 

their  knowledge 

Advanced Persistent Threat (APT), the attack campaign can 
last  for  months  or  years  exfiltrating  the  data  without  being 
detected [15,21,24]. Meaning that the attack frequency may 
be on par with organisations who are able to detect the high 
frequency  of  attacks.  Statistics  show  that  there  has  been  a 
60%  increase  in  breaches  or  attacks  in  ‘medium  sized 
businesses, 61% in larger businesses and 52% high-income 
charities’  than  that  of  previous  years,  32%  of  business  and 
22% of charities that would experience attacks [1]. However, 
what we know now about the failed detections these numbers 
could  potentially  be  higher.  This  leads  us  to  the  topic  of 
intrusion detection systems. What they are and how they can 
be  used  to  help  detect  unwanted  cyber-attacks.  The  topics 
remaining are as follows: Section two defines IDSs and the 
growing  threats  of  cyber-attacks  on  Organisations.  Section 
three will outline the various classifications of IDSs and their 
uses. Section four will examine the developments of Machine 
Learning  (ML)  in  IDSs.  Section  five  defines  IPS  and  uses 
with IDSs. 

II.  INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS 

Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) can assist organisations 
by  preventing  cyber-attacks  and  breaches  from  gaining 
access  or  further  access  into  their  network  systems.  An 
intrusion  itself  compromise  and  bypass  the  confidentiality, 
integrity  and  availability  CIA  of  systems.  With  devices 
becoming widely accessible from the wireless connectivity, 
threats are likely to occur as wireless devices connected to the 
Internet  of  Things  (IoTs)  are  easier  to  breach  than  wired 
network [3].  It is also said that the security and privacy of 
information are issues within IoTs, which further elaborates 
that  the  there  is  demand  and  need  for  IDSs,  specifically  in 
IoTs environments to mitigate attacks that happen to exploit 
vulnerabilities [10,4]. Organisations install security defenses 
to  guarantee  their  network  security,  by  installing  systems 
such  as  IDSs,  antivirus  software,  firewalls  and  so  forth. 
However,  these  systems  have 
limitations  as  well  as 
drawbacks.  For  instance,  firewalls  protect  against  the 
unauthorised access, accessing private networks, they do not 
protect against viruses and or malware. Even IDSs have some 
drawbacks  such  the  inability  to  process  encrypted  packets 
[13,5].  

Intrusion detection systems do not have to be a stand-alone 
system. In fact, it can be used with other devices or even as a 
secondary  defense  mechanism  with  other  devices  like 
firewalls. For instance, if the firewalls dense is breached then 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
the IDS can further defend the system  by raising an alert to 
system administrators. Taking it a step further if and IDS was 
set  up  to  be  in  conjunction  with  an  Intrusion  Prevention 
System (IPS) then the IPS can be alerted by the IDS and begin 
to  mitigate  the  threat.  Overall  due  to  threats  increasing, 
whether  that’s  in  the  form  of  emails,  or  web  attacks  to 
ransomware  “there  is  a  need  for  strong,  fast  and  reliable 
IDSs” [13]. 

IDSs typically, are used for detection of possible malicious 
threats. Acting as a “packet sniffer” by analyzing intercepted 
packets captured through “various communication mediums” 
(by different protocols between sender and receiver such as 
TCP/IP) [14]. There are  many  kinds of IDS that have been 
created  which  come  with  their  many  benefits.  You  can 
compare IDSs from their success rates in accurately detecting 
attacks, although IDSs have the capability to adapt as part of 
its  feature  if  the  developers  wish  to  enhance  the  system  if 
needs  be.  This  leads  to  the  next  topic  of  discussion  about 
IDSs. 

A.  Intrussion Detection Systems Classifications 

There  are  various  kinds  of  IDSs  which  detect  threats  in 
different ways, there are Host-Based Intrusion Detection 
Systems (HIDS) and Network-Based Intrusion Detection 
Systems  (NIDS).  HIDSs  are  for  single  computers 
monitoring  internal  and  external  cyber-attacks  [13]. 
Internal  attacks  refer  to  when  systems  identify  when  a 
security  breach  occurs,  where  programs  access  which 
resources  by  anyone  or  device  within  the  organisation. 
External  attacks  on  the  other  hand  refer  to  when  HIDS 
“analyses  packets  to  and  from  a  network”,  logging  in 
activity and alerting administrators as well as alerting them 
to attacks  that  were  successful  or  not.  A  passive  system 
that  waits  for  a  possible  threat  to  be  an  indicator  for  an 
attack about to occur before alerting administrators- it is 
not active in preventing the attack from happening. With 
HIDS  security  applications  are  installed  on  the  system 
which monitors security, such as anti-virus and spyware, 
an  example  of  an  HIDS  would  be  PortSentry  [10]. 
However, due to the HIDS being installed on that single 
computer/host  then  they  can  only  detect  attacks  that  are 
not in another part of the network and have a high false 
positive rate [13].  

NIDS can be strategically placed from the entry point and 
exit point of data coming and going through the network. 
In a network to detect malicious attacks capturing all the 
data going through the network. Raising an alert if a threat 
is  indicated  or  when  abnormal  behaviour  of  network 
appears, an alert will also be sent [10]. 

B.  Intrusion Detection Techniques 

In a NIDS there are two different types of techniques in 
indicating a threat, briefly mentioned previously, there are 
anomaly-based detections and signature based. Anomaly-
based is where the information collected from traffic in the 
system  comparing  it  to  the  gold  standard  for  normal 
traffic/system  behaviour  [10].  When  the  system  shows 
abnormal  signs  of  behaviour  it  triggers  an  alert.  Its 
advantage  is  that  its  capable  of  detecting  intrusions  that 
where  unknown  to  the  system  previously-therefore,  in  a 
way  detecting  new  attack  patterns.  However,  due  to  the 
system  been alerted to every  irregularity, there  are large 

amounts of false alarms in using this technique, it is also 
possible  for  some  attacks  to  fall  in  normal  behavioural 
standards to go undetected [14]. 

anomaly-based  detections, 

 Unlike 
signature-based 
detections  base  its  alerts  on  known  attack  pattern 
signatures before alerting administrators, there are various 
algorithms  used  for  the  detection  of  attacks  that  can  be 
used to yield better results, some of the popular NIDSs are 
SecureNet,  Real  Secure  and  Snort  [10,11].  However,  a 
drawback  is  that  not  all  signatures  of  attacks  may  be 
established within this IDS, therefore, when attacks that do 
not fit within the pre-defined signatures occur, they will go 
undetected creating a vulnerability. Indicating that there is 
demand and need for IDSs to be  able to detect new and 
unfamiliar attack signatures [16]. On the other hand, you 
can  use  both  anomaly  and  signature-based  techniques 
creating  what  is  know  as  a  hybrid;  this  increases  the 
detection rate of the known signature attacks and decreases 
the  false  positive  rate  of  unknown  attacks.  Creating 
hybrids  allow  for  better  accuracy  rates  overall  and 
therefore,  it  is  common  for  ML  and/or  Deep  Learning 
models to use hybrids to improve [17,29].  

III.  MACHINE LEARNING IN IDS 

limitations  and  drawbacks 

Companies  are  investing  in  studies  to  find  ways  in 
optimising  the  detection of  attacks  in  networks  in  IDSs.  As 
stated before, IDSs both anomaly and signature-based NIDSs 
in  finding  unknown 
have 
signatures or anomalies of attacks or attacks that fall in in the 
baseline  of  normal  behaviour  that  they  go  undetected.  For 
instance, the IoTs have a higher risk of breaches from attacks, 
there has been development in using intelligent techniques and 
then  comparing  them  with  the  one  with  the  greater  rate  of 
accuracy, using machine learning [19].  

A.  K-means Algorithm 
There  have  been  many  developments  of  different  types  of 
algorithms  to  find  which  have  better  accuracy  in  detecting 
threats- such as k-means algorithm. It has been tested with the 
k-means algorithm with an anomaly-based IDS, by separating 
normal behavioural samples into clusters, then for the IDS to 
determine  the  difference  between  normal  and  abnormal 
“according  to  their  distance  from  the  clusters”  of  centroids 
using a “validated dataset a threshold value that is created”. 
Indicating that any data received which are far from the cluster 
of  centroids  are  identified  as  an  abnormal  [20].  Having  a 
threshold  where  the  normal  sample  stops  and  become 
abnormal can increase the accuracy of the IDS- in identifying 
some attacks that appear to be at the baseline of normal but in 
fact are not [12].  

B.  Decision Trees 
Another way ML can be used in NIDS is using a decision tree, 
using training and testing data sets to use- the training data is 
used to make the decision tree model and each leaf signifies 
any possibly outcomes. Classification models developed use 
the  training  data  against  the  test  data  to  classify  malicious 
attacks in the data to measure the classifier against later/future 
data and not of past data, is an important aspect to its future 
accuracy. Observed it can be 99.9% accurate of true-positive 
account  and  false-positive  at  0.1%  using  the  latest  datasets, 
showing great strides in development using ML. These are just 
a  few  of  the  various  ways  ML  can  be  used  to  improve  the 

 
 
 
accuracy of IDSs, particularly for NIDSs techniques such as 
anomaly-based IDS in reducing the high false positives [22]. 

IV.  INTRUSION PREVENTION SYSTEMS (IPSS) 

With the increased number of cyber-attacks IDSs are not 
the only systems in development to combat these threats. IPS 
have also been development, however their role is different to 
that of an IDS. While companies emphasise the use of IDSs, 
they are unable to prevent all threats, therefore it is known for 
companies  to  use  IDSs  alongside  firewalls  and/or  antivirus 
software as previously discussed. On the other hand, as also 
previously  discussed,  these  other  systems  have  their  own 
limitations  and  drawbacks-  ultimately  they  must  be  optimal 
configuration  with  IDSs  in  order  to  operate  at  joint 
functionality  eliminating  any  negative  effects  of  joining 
implementations,  such  as  conflicts  and  time  delays  with 
linkage [23].  

instance  create 

in  controls,  which  for 

Whereas  IPSs  provide  popular  detection  and  prevention 
the 
flexibility 
opportunity to resolve time delays which IDSs can incur with 
other security systems. Implying it “having the capabilities of 
IDSs” as it can also  not only detect intrusions but also take 
counter  measures  to  prevent/mitigate  them,  this  can  be  for 
instance with attack pattern recognition [23]. Therefore, this 
system  can  also  be  called  Intrusions  Detection  Prevention 
Systems  (IDPSs).  When  working  with  wireless  networks  a 
wireless-based IDPS can analyse the traffic and “detects any 
unauthorised  wireless  local  area  network  use  and  takes  the 
necessary steps to counter them”. However, it is not capable 
of detecting suspicious behaviour in application and transport 
layers or protocol activities, it is placed in a range where it can 
be monitored in the wireless network [25]. In the same way 
NIDPSs like NIDSs monitored network traffic, searching for 
malicious activity but could not prevent unfamiliar attacks. On 
the  other  hand,  host-based  IDPSs  monitors  a  single  hosts 
system  and  “can  prevent  system  level  attacks  and  detect 
attacks  that  the  NIDPS  are  incapable  of  detecting-  such  as 
identifying unusual traffic, like Distributed Denial of Service 
attacks (DDoS), malware (e.g. Worms), even policy violations 
[25].  

The  overall  purpose  of  IDPSs  is  to  monitor  systems  and 
protect the network against intruders, then provide a report to 
administrators  if  there  are  attacks  that  occurred  in  the 
networks  environment.  While  IDS  typically  protect  against 
outsider attacks, it makes it harder for them to detect insider 
attacks,  this  is  due  to  Intrusions  Preventions  Systems  (IPS) 
being placed at the edge of networks and the concerns are that 
attacks can still occur from the inside before reaching the IPS. 
Therefore, further development to revolve that dilemma still 
need  improvement-potentially  by  integrating  other  systems 
with IPS that can communicate to achieve solutions to  such 
dilemmas. However, IPSs have more capabilities overall than 
IDSs alone, they are considered to be an enhancement [27,28]. 

A.  IPS effectivness 
For IPSs to detect and prevent, there are various measures to 
compare and measure the effectiveness of IPSs and because 
IPS are important aspects of security, the choices it makes are 
crucial  and  can  be  on  the  bases  of  the  IPSs  characteristics 
which  would  be  “the  distributive  property,  autonomy 
communication, 
and 
responsiveness 
cooperation, 
adaptability, measuring the effectiveness” by [28]:     

1)  Testing the rate of false positives and false negatives. 
2)  response time in an overloaded network environment. 
3)  The possible capabilities  of updating the database of 

signatures or even to modify the signatures. 

4)  Having a need for majority of audit data. 

Since IPSs mainly consist of a single block that will handle 
an entire analysis on the network, it still has constraints, such 
as,  to  name  a  few  having  difficulty  updating  and  a 
consumption  of  system  resources.  In  overcoming  these 
drawbacks new design strategies are taking place to revolve 
them.  One  of  the  current  strategies  are  to  have  a  model 
composed  of  four  blocks  instead  of  one-  “source  of 
information,  sensor,  analyser  and  manager  this  is  the 
development  of  the  Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects 
Agency  (DARPA)  committee  and  is  generally  used  as  a 
standard in a majority of new current IPS [28].  

requirements, 

The  study  of  IDSs  has  provided  a  realization  of  the 
importance of the position played by IPS, the Host Based IPS 
and  the  Network-Based  IPS  in  security.  IPSs  must  meet 
specific 
the  characteristics  “should  be 
primarily  chosen  typically  by  the  need  and  the  security 
hardware and software constraints”. The types of IPSs in use 
can be determined by the “location of the IPS, frequency of 
use, the method of detection and the response of the IPS”.  A 
hybrid  of  IPSs  using  HIPSs  and  NIPSs  can  also  be  used  if 
considering those  factors  and characteristics as they can  be 
distributed  on  several  machines  analyzing  data  from  the 
different  sources  and  assessing  the  “information  from  two 
sources  and  immune  system”.  Therefore,  a  ‘clonal  theory’ 
could  potentially  generate  more  detectors  from  an  attack 
pattern and recognise not only the attack but its variants too, 
including  other  similar  attacks,  this  is  one  of  the  ideal 
scenarios which is still in development [28,30]. 

V.  CONCLUSION 

Overall in this overview  we have seen the  benefits of IDSs 
and  IPSs  and  their  general  benefits  to  organisations  in 
preventing cyber-attacks in their systems. However, there has 
been some insight into their limitations and drawbacks as a 
standalone system, which can cause organisations to source 
further  resources,  however,  this  may  provide  room  for 
developments.  On  the  other  hand,  some  of  the  studies 
demonstrate the use of hybrid systems like the IDPSs used as 
a  counter  measure  for  the  drawbacks  of  their  standalone 
systems,  like  IDS  and  IPS,  which  are  promising  and  they 
counter acted some of the flaws each system had when used 
on  their  own.  As  the  development  of  ML  are  used  to 
incorporate  into  these  systems  hybrid  or  not,  they  have 
increased accuracy of detections of attacks in systems, with 
different  algorithms  for  different  in-house  systems  which 
yielded  promising  results  in  those  studies.  In  conclusion 
using  hybrid  systems  and  integrating  ML  into  them  has 
reduced the amount of false alarms in IDSs, IPSs and IDPSs 
overall.  Whether  there  will  be  an  optimal  system  with  0% 
false alarms and 100% detection of threats, whether abnormal 
behavior of attacks or different variants of attack signatures, 
are still in development and potentially ML will be one of the 
key  factors  in  making  that  a  reality  if  the  idea  is  at  all 

 
 
 
 
plausible. This this because each adaptation of an IDS, IPS or 
IDPS there has still been limitations in the system that cause 
for vulnerability therefore, there are still various theories in 
development into improving those dilemmas. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Department  for  digital,  Culture,  Media  and  Sport  (2019)  “Cyber 

[2] 

Security Breaches Surcey Statistical release”  
I.  Ghafir  and  V.  Prenosil.  “Proposed  Approach  for  Targeted  Attacks 
Detection,”  Advanced  Computer  and  Communication  Engineering 
Technology, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering. Phuket: Springer 
International Publishing, vol. 362, pp. 73-80, 9, 2016. 

[3]  Liao  HJ,  Lin  CH,  Lin  YC,  Tung  KY.  Intrusion  detection  system:  A 
Journal  of  Network  and  Computer 

comprehensive 
Applications. 2013 Jan 1;36(1):16-24. 

review. 

[4]  U. Raza, J. Lomax, I. Ghafir, R. Kharel and B. Whiteside, “An IoT and 
Business Processes Based Approach for the Monitoring and Control of 
High  Value-Added  Manufacturing  Processes,” 
International 
Conference on Future Networks and Distributed Systems. Cambridge, 
United Kingdom, 2017. 
I. Ghafir, M. Husak and V. Prenosil, “A Survey on Intrusion Detection 
and  Prevention  Systems,”  IEEE/UREL  conference,  Zvule,  Czech 
Republic, pp. 10-14, 2014. 

[5] 

[6]  Elrawy MF, Awad AI, Hamed HF. Intrusion detection systems for IoT-
based  smart  environments:  a  survey.  Journal  of  Cloud  Computing. 
2018 Dec 1;7(1):21.  

[8] 

[7]  AlYousef  MY,  Abdelmajeed  NT.  Dynamically  Detecting  Security 
Threats and Updating a Signature-Based Intrusion Detection System’s 
Database. Procedia Computer Science. 2019 Jan 1;159:1507-16. 
Innella P. The evolution of intrusion detection systems. SecurityFocus, 
November. 2001 Nov 16;16. 
I.  Ghafir  and  V.  Prenosil,  “Advanced  Persistent  Threat  and  Spear 
Phishing  Emails.”  International  Conference  Distance  Learning, 
Simulation  and  Communication.  Brno,  Czech  Republic,  pp.  34-41, 
2015. 

[9] 

[10]  Pharate A, Bhat H, Shilimkar V, Mhetre N. Classification of Intrusion 
Detection  System.  International  Journal  of  Computer  Applications. 
2015 Jan 1;118(7). 

[11]  J. Svoboda, I. Ghafir, V. Prenosil, “Network Monitoring Approaches: 
An  Overview,”  International  Journal  of  Advances  in  Computer 
Networks and Its Security (IJCNS), vol. 5(2), pp. 88-93, 2015. 
[12]  I.  Ghafir  and  V.  Prenosil,  “DNS  query  failure  and  algorithmically 
generated  domain-flux  detection,”  International  Conference  on 
Frontiers  of  Communications,  Networks  and  Applications.  Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia, pp. 1-5, 2014. 

[13]  Mehmood  T,  Rais  HB.  Machine  learning  algorithms  in  context  of 
intrusion detection. In2016 3rd International Conference on Computer 
and  Information  Sciences  (ICCOINS)  2016  Aug  15  (pp.  369-373). 
IEEE. 

[14]  Jyothsna V, Prasad KM. Anomaly-Based Intrusion Detection System. 

InComputer and Network Security 2019 Jun 11. IntechOpen. 

[15]  I. Ghafir, V. Prenosil, M. Hammoudeh and U. Raza, “Malicious SSL 
Certificate  Detection:  A  Step  Towards  Advanced  Persistent  Threat 
Defence,” 
International  Conference  on  Future  Networks  and 
Distributed Systems. Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2017. 

[16]  Bronte  R,  Shahriar  H,  Haddad  HM.  A  signature-based  intrusion     

detection  system  for  web  applications  based  on  genetic  algorithm. 
InProceedings  of  the  9th  International  Conference  on  Security  of 
Information and Networks 2016 Jul 20 (pp. 32-39). ACM. 

[17]  Jamadar  R,  Ingale  S,  Panhalkar  A,  Kakade  A,  Shinde  M.  Survey  of 
Deep Learning Based Intrusion Detection Systems for Cyber Security. 
[18]  I.  Ghafir,  V.  Prenosil,  and  M.  Hammoudeh,  “Botnet  Command  and 
Control Traffic Detection Challenges: A Correlation-based Solution.” 
International  Journal  of  Advances  in  Computer  Networks  and  Its 
Security (IJCNS), vol. 7(2), pp. 27-31, 2017. 

[19]  da  Costa  KA,  Papa  JP,  Lisboa  CO,  Munoz  R,  de  Albuquerque  VH. 
Internet  of  Things:  A  survey  on  machine  learning-based  intrusion 
detection approaches. Computer Networks. 2019 Mar 14;151:147-57. 
[20]  KarsligЕl ME, Yavuz AG, Güvensan MA, Hanifi K, Bank H. Network 
learning  anomaly  detection 
intrusion  detection  using  machine 
algorithms.  In2017  25th  Signal  Processing  and  Communications 
Applications Conference (SIU) 2017 May 15 (pp. 1-4). IEEE. 
[21]  I. Ghafir and V. Prenosil, “Malicious File Hash Detection and Drive-
by  Download  Attacks,”  International  Conference  on  Computer  and 
Communication Technologies, series Advances in Intelligent Systems 
and Computing. Hyderabad: Springer, vol. 379, pp. 661-669, 2016. 
[22]  Jamadar,  Riyazahmes  A.  Network  intrusion  detection  system  using 

machine learning. 2018 Dec 01 11(48): 1-6 

[23]  Cai C, Mei S, Zhong W. Configuration of intrusion prevention systems 
based on a legal user: the case for using intrusion prevention systems 
instead  of  intrusion  detection  systems.  Information  Technology  and 
Management. 2019:1-7. 

[24]  I.  Ghafir,  J.  Svoboda  and  V.  Prenosil,  “Tor-based  malware  and  Tor 
connection  detection,”  International  Conference  on  Frontiers  of 
Communications,  Networks  and  Applications.  Kuala  Lumpur, 
Malaysia, pp. 1-6, 2014. 

[25]  Tasneem  A,  Kumar  A,  Sharma  S.  Intrusion  Detection  Prevention 
Journal  of  Computer 

International 

System  using  SNORT. 
Applications.;975:8887. 

[26]  I. Ghafir, J. Svoboda, V. Prenosil, “A Survey on Botnet Command and 
Control  Traffic  Detection,”  International  Journal  of  Advances  in 
Computer  Networks  and  Its  Security  (IJCNS),  vol.  5(2),  pp.  75-80, 
2015. 

[27]  Putra AS, Surantha N. Internal Threat Defense using Network Access 

Control and Intrusion Prevention System. 

[28]  Farhaoui  Y.  How  to  secure  web  servers  by  the  intrusion  prevention 
system (IPS)?. International Journal of Advanced Computer Research. 
2016 Mar 1;6(23):65. 

[29]  I.  Ghafir,  V.  Prenosil,  M.  Hammoudeh,  F.  J.  Aparicio-Navarro,  K. 
Rabie and A. Jabban, “Disguised Executable Files in Spear-Phishing 
Emails: Detecting the Point of Entry in Advanced Persistent Threat.” 
International Conference on Future Networks and Distributed Systems. 
Amman, Jordan, 2018. 

[30]  Parthasarathy K. Clonal selection method for immunity-based intrusion 

detection system. Project Report. 2014:1-9. 

 
 
