Phishing Attacks: Detection And Prevention 

Mario Ciprian Birlea                                     

Faculty of Engineering and Informatics 
University of Bradford  
Bradford, UK 
M.C.Birlea@bradford.ac.uk 

Abstract—This  paper  aims  to  provide  an  understanding  of 
what  a  phishing  attack  is,  the  types  of  phishing  attacks  and 
methods  employed  by  cyber  criminals.  This  journal  will  also 
provide an understanding on where phishing attacks are carried 
via  various  technologies  and  provide  an  understanding  of 
working actively to detect and proactively to prevent.  As we are 
continuously  developing  the  technology  the  chance  of  cyber-
attacks  will  proportionally  increase.  Consequently,  this  paper 
will  help  the  readers  understand  what  studies  have  been 
conducted,  analyzed  and  results  provided  pinpointed  the 
essence of phishing attacks. 

Keywords—cybercrime,  cyber  security,  social  engineering, 

information security, security awareness. 

I.  INTRODUCTION  

Phishing is a type of identity theft when a cybercriminal 
impersonates another person or organisation with the purpose 
of  retrieving  through  illegal  purposes  sensitive  information 
such as account details, login password, credit card numbers 
details.  Phishing has been shown that originated somewhere 
around 1995, over 24 years ago stated by AOL [2,3].  The term 
of  phishing  is  an  alternative  of  the  term  ‘fishing’  and  in  a 
similar way the attacker is launching a ‘bait’ to the victim and 
tricks it while gathering the information required.  

Over the past years the AWPG from 2017 has published 
that the phishing attacks have increased over a period of 12 
years with an average monthly increase of 5753% [2].  The 
authorities reported to engage and educate the general public. 
To better understand the way a cyber criminal operates there 
is  a  need  to  take  a  closer  look  at  understanding  different 
methods, detecting this anomaly and understanding the types 
and preventions of this malicious activity [6].  

II.  INSINDE CYBER CRIMINAL’S MIND  

This  type of  cyber-attack  started  as a  social  engineering 
scam  back  in  1995.  The  cyber  criminal  is  impersonating  a 
company or a specific person targeting sensitive information 
that  has  a  potential  to  bring  financial  gain  and  sensitive 
information.  It  has  been  identified  that  one  of  the  primary 
channels  when  this  method  has  occurred  has  been  seen 
through  instant  messaging  (IMs)  clients  that  were  very 
popular  through  1990’s  such  as  Yahoo,  MSM.  To  better 
understand the methods employed by cybercriminals below it 
is  being  described  what  are  the  phishing  stages  performed 
before,  during  and  after  an  attack.    Are  the  steps  presented 
below are equally important and interdependent for the attack 
to  be  carried  successfully.  Furthermore,  Phishing  attacks 
might  be  the  step  to  get  the  point  of  entry  in  Advanced 
Persistent Threat (APT) [14, 16]. 

A.  Attack preparation & planning 

During  this  initial  step  the  attacker  decides  on  the  best 
media  channel  to  attack  its  victim.  Even  though  the  instant 
messaging has been as the primary channel in 1990s the most 

common communication channel is email but not only. There 
are  social  media  applications,  phone  applications  and  many 
others. 

In addition, after selection of the channel, the attacker is 
selecting the device, the attack technique and starts to prepare 
the necessary materials to carry the attack. This attack can be 
performed  manually  or  automated  tools.  Kali  Linux  has 
incorporated  a  ‘social  engineering 
tool 
empowers  the  user  to  clone  a  specific  website  such  as: 
Facebook, Yahoo, Google and others. In the screenshot below 
Kali social engineering toolkit is being presented along with 
the 1st step and cloning technique used for Facebook, social 
media webpage. The method presented represents only one of 
the possible methods a cybercriminal could use to prepare its 
materials and clone a social medial website. 

toolkit’.  This 

Figure 1 – Cloning a website using Kali Linux – Social Engineering 
tool [13] 

Figure  2  –  Website  clone  results.  Phishing  attacks  and  its 
countermeasures [13] 

B.  Attack execution 
This  second  step  in  the  process  consist  of  three  other  sub-
steps such as: 

  Attack material distribution. Attacker considers the 
amount of people he has targeted and their devices 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considering the end scope. This factor of materials 
distribution heavily relies on the user’s device type 
[17]. 

  Target data collection. This process starts as soon as 
the victim responds to the phisher’s materials.  

  Target 

resource  penetration.  Attackers  may 
compromise  system  by  injecting  a  website  with 
client-side  script  to  collect  user  information.  This 
last step is optional in the process as it depends on 
the  end  scope  of  the  attack  and  the  way  the 
cybercriminal operates [8].  

C.  Attack results explotation  
The  last  step  of  the  attack  after  acquiring  victims  desire 
information  are  usually  to  impersonate  them,  therefore 
closing  the  phishing  lifecycle  [17].  Please  find  below 
illustrated  in  Figure  3-  Lifecycle  of  the  phishing  attack  the 
lifecycle of phishing attacks.  

Figure 3 – Lifecycle of the phishing attack 

III.  TYPES OF PSHISHING ATTACKS  

The term of “detection” is often associated with the action 
of  a  detective,  to  investigate  a  crime  with  the  purpose  of 
finding the responsible person.  Like the detective, using the 
right tools and specific steps could lead to mitigation of the 
problem. It is important to differentiate the attack types and 
correct process to uncover the phishing attack [12, 20].  

According to a survey from 2 years ago [13] around 10.2% 
of the Phishing emails get through the protection software and 
5%  of  those  are  being  opened.  Even  though  that  numbers 
sounds somewhat small, the truth is that out of the 156 million 
phishing emails, 8 million infected mails are opened. This can 
be compared to the size of the capital of United Kingdom. If 
we consider the identify theft and economic opportunities, it 
gives us a clearer view. Therefore, let’s investigate what type 
of  attacks  are,  how  to  detect  and  prevent  them  (please  see 
section IV). Besides, the compromised machines can be used 
as part of a botnet [11, 18]. 

A.  Deceptive Phising 

This  method  if  often  used  by  cyber  criminals  to 
impersonate  a  legitimate  company  and  steal  victim  login 
credentials. After the attacker has been successful, he will use 
the information he could steal after impersonating the user as 
leverage and will manipulate/blackmail to obtain further gain.  

B.  Spear Phishing  

The FBI has highlighted that the art of deception and the 
criminal  organisations  have  employed  more  sophisticated 
methods. Spear-phishing being one of the 3 top online tools 
used by cybercriminal masterminds and do billions of dollars 
and affects all organisations from well-known corporations to 
non-profit,  even  churches  and  schools  [13].  To  understand 
spear  phishing  attack,  there  are  three  questions  to  have  in 
mind: what is it? What software? What opportunity? 

  Spear finishing is a cyber attack carried via suspicious 

activities targeting an individual  

  There  is  no  such  a  thing  as  a  perfect  protection 
software.  Wireless 
(intrusion  detection 
IDPS 
prevention  system)  is  analysing  the  traffic  of  the 
network protocol activities, detects unauthorised LAN 
(local area network) is use [6].  

  Finally, this gives the cybercriminal the opportunity to 
find  vulnerabilities  and  infiltrate  in  the  application 
layer, transport or protocol activities.  

C.  Whaling  

The term of “whaling” refers to the victim as being highly 
ranked or important like comparing the size and importance to 
the whale, as a trophy. Like spear phishing, whaling method 
targets a specific individual that is a very powerful person, or 
a very wealthy person. Here, the main scope for the attacker is 
to  gain  control  over  different  accounts  of  the  victim  and 
especially  expose  sensitive  information  to  social  media  or 
black mail the victim for different gains [6].  

D.  Phishing by malwayre software 

The  major  organisations  that  manipulate  very  sensitive 
user  data  (bank  cards,  personal  details  etc.)  are  usually 
investing highly in different software applications to protect 
themselves against malware attacks. Although this process is 
efficient  to  some  extent,  there  is  a  human  component  that 
cannot be neglected. Phishing also called “social engineering” 
vis the use of technology and it has been proven many times 
to be very efficient.  

Early in 2016, Target organisation (USA) was the victim 
of major data breach. The cyber criminals behind this attack, 
targeted  a  trusted  machine  within  Target  infrastructure, 
instead of directly attacking the system. After stealing credit 
card details, they remove their tracks by bouncing back this 
attack  on  different  malware  infected  machines  around  the 
globe [13].   

Another  example  of  this  types  of  attack  can  occur  with 
providing  malicious  attachments  such  as  a  “keylogger”  to 
collect  user  credentials  and  expose  them  to  the  hacker.    To 
prevent the keyloggers there are different software we can use 
such as Key Scrambler and Spy Shelter [13]. 

E.  Search engine phishing  

Another  example  of  phishing  attack  is  search  engine 
phishing.  Through  this  method,  cybercriminals  are  creating 
appealing  websites that  offer products or  services  under the 
market  price  and  lure  the  users  to  purchase  them  while 
appearing to legal. The reality is that websites are fake, and 
their  creator  is  taking  the  user  details  and  uses  them  for 
malicious purposes [13].   

A  good  example  can  be  provided  by  a  hotel  booking 
website, this can appear genuine but during the payment the 

  
 
 
“https:/”  will  not  appear  and  the  padlock  icon  would  be 
missing [15]. Those are only 2 giveaways that the website is 
not  genuine.  What  will  happen  next  is  the  cybercriminals 
could  clone  the  card  details  make  different  payments  and 
quickly clearing the funds. In 2015 more than 2.5 million users 
have  been  impacted,  please  Figure  4  from  below  for  more 
details. 

details,  private  information  etc.),  filters  and  saves  what  he 
considers a leverage [13].   

A good example can be provided of a hacker that identified 
ongoing  conversation  between  a  remote  employee  and 
organisation.  The  HR  department  could  request  for  the 
updated credit card details via email from another employee. 
In this scenario the cyber criminal can stop the traffic, update 
the email before and release to HR with another credit card 
details.  

G.  Voice phishing  

The  cyber  criminals  could  use  their  social  engineering 
skills via the telephone system to obtain private and financial 
information [19].   

Some  of  the  cyber  criminals  try  to  fraud  the  victims 
mentioning scams. A car accident would be a good example. 
The  attacker  tries  to  pretend  that  a  family  member  of  the 
victim was involved in a car crash and they can claim a very 
high  compensation.  During  this  call  the  cybercriminal  is 
asking for the credit details and/or personal information. The 
government of Australia created a specific page and section 
with more details to support victims of the attack [17]. 

IV.  DETECTION AND PREVENTION OF PHISHING  

The  section  presented  above  a  detailed  view  of  the 
different types of phishing attacks with relevant examples. In 
this section there are presented detection methods and advice 
to prevent these specific attacks. 

A.   Phishing emails 

The  attackers  could  use  various  phishing  methods 
incorporated  in  the  email  (i.e.  deceptive,  spear  phishing, 
whaling). To be able to recognise a fake email as an attempt 
of phishing, it is critical to look at the details such as:   

  Email address: this needs to be correctly spelled 
and  concise.  A  possible  giveaway  is  an  email 
where number ‘0’ is used instead of letter ‘o’ 

  Greetings:  the  big  organisations  will  rarely 
address  their  customers  with  a  generic  ‘Dear 
Customer’ 

  Grammar  mistakes:  proofread  the  whole  email 
text  and  check  for  spelling  mistakes,  there  is  a 
small  chance  that  emails  received  with  high 
importance containing typos  

  Asking 

for  urgent  action:  some  of 

the 
cybercriminals that work on stealing information 
alert  their  victims  that  their  account  will  be 
disabled.  

Figure 4 – Search engine phishing, hotel scams [15] 

F.  Man-in-the-middle phishing  

Man-in-the-middle  phishing  attack  is  defined  when  the 
cybercriminal  places  himself  between  a  user  and  a  legal 
website or system. The framework of their method is that the 
hacker  is  reading  the  traffic  data  in  between  (email,  card 

Considering  the  above  the  best  prevention  method  is  to 
proofread the emails that we are receiving and especially high 
importance and the ones asking for personal details.  

Do  not  click  or  download  attachments  from  unknown 
senders and if they look suspicious report the specific emails.  
If  you  receive  suspicions  emails  with  requests  that  do  not 
match company policy rules, report the email [19]. 

Big technology  companies provide  their employees  user 
training  for  have  special  teams  assigned  to  carry  phishing 
attacks  and  assure  their  employees  take  the  appropriate 
actions, this way they tackle this  working both actively and 
proactively.  

 
 
 
 
 
B.  Social Engineering  

Cybercriminals  try  to  trick  their  victims  in  any  ways 
possible and this method brings the combination of tenacity, 
inter-personal  skills  and  technology.  The  social  engineering 
technique could be carried via any technology channel (email, 
phone,  websites,  media  etc.).  This  is  where  usually  the 
attackers  impersonate  someone  such  as  a  bank  employee, 
manager or even relative [19].  

In  all  possible  environments,  thus  it  is  advised  that 
personal details could be provided via phone, there is a need 
to  be  assertive  and  if  there  is  any  suspicion  regarding  the 
sender, an investigation should be carried out (mobile number, 
email  address  or  website).  The  social  engineering  attacks 
carried  via  web  are  hard to detect  as  your  machine  will  not 
notify you that it has been compromised, but it is good to keep 
an  eye  for  website  warning  before  providing  any  personal 
information [5].  

As  mentioned  in  III  (G)  the  government  would  usually 
identify  and  provide  information  on  scams  such  as  car 
accident  claim  calls  performed  by  cybercriminals.  They 
government  of  Australia  advises  citizens  to  ask  for  caller 
name,  organisation  details,  department,  carry  individual 
investigation  such  as  web  search  with  blacklisted  phone 
numbers and empower them to call a government support line 
number for further advice [17].  

C.  Man-in-the-middle prevention  

This  type  of  attack  as  understood  above  (III  –  F),  the 
cybercriminal  is  positioning  between  two  parties  by  DNS 
spoofing, ARP positioning or even email phishing. There are 
multiple organisations that lost millions of dollars due to this 
phishing method and as they had no clue their communication 
via  network  are  being  intercepted  [13].  Table  1  illustrates 
three prevention methods. 

D.  Security awarneess and training 

All organisations should have in place a basic and regular 
training. This should provide an understanding of what a good 
email  and  phishing  attacks  looks  like,  manage  them  and 
provide prevention methods for different types of attack. The 
overall  benefit  of  the  proactive  action  is  to  avoid  passive 
situation,  reduce  success  of  attacks  and  ensure  security  and 
management will respond accordingly [13].  

V.  IMPACT ON ORGANISATIONS 

After numerous attacks have been carried over the year, 
organisations  from  various  sensitive  information  via  data 
breaches.  

1)  A complex survey has been developed by Lee Neely 
(2017)  part  of  SANS  Institute.  This  survey  has  been 
sponsored  by  different  software  and  anti-virus  firms 
(Cylance, FireEye, McAfee, Qualys) and involved over 263 
IT  professionals.  Moreover,  it  has  been  remarkable  that 
organisations  with  all  sizes  (100-100,000  employees)  from 
various  industries  have  participated  in  this  survey  and 
provided  their  input.  Figure  5  –  SANS  participants  by 
industry,  provides  a  more  detailed  look  of  what  were  the 
major participants. 

The results from the survey has pinpointed that almost a 
quarter (74%) of the participants in the survey have chosen the 
email attachment or link to dominate the entry point of cyber 

threats [19]. Figure 6 – Top directions of entry [19] provides 
a more detailed look of the following breaches directions. 

Technology 
used 

VPN 

Proxy Server 
with Data 
encryption 

Secure Shell 
Tunelling 

Software 
used 

Depends on 
the 
organization 
provider 

OpenVPN, 
Tor Browser, 
I2P Hide my 
IP 

WinSCP 

How does it work? 

Broadens the private 
netwrok across public 
network 
Hides the IP address from 
public websites 
Protects data and creates 
encrypted connection 

Encrypts the transmission 
using a realiable and 
secure proxy server 

Logging into a remote 
machine and execute 
commands 
A tunnul is being created 
and data encrypted via 
secure shell protocol 
3 cryptographic techniques 
used are: symetrical, 
asimetrical and hashing 
Supports TCP/X11 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 1 – Man-in-the-middle prevention [13] 

Figure 5 – SANS participants by industry [19]  

Another look at the granularity of the data has shown that 
phishing,  spear  phishing,  and  whaling  were  the  top  threats 
entering  in  the  organisations  with  an  impressive  40%.  In 
addition,  it  has  been  reported  that  the  top”  malware-less” 
threats are credential compromise (22%) [19].  

2)  Karsperky released a publication in 2017 providing a 
deeper view into the malware and other security threats. This 
article  is  providing  details  of  the  worring  increase  of  the 
dominant finacial threat – phishing.  They have detected an 
increase  of  almost  19%  from  2014  to  2016  in  financial 
phishing attacks. Furthemore the finance and banking indutry 
are posing a risk as finanicla pshishing attacks are increasing 
to an average rate of approx. 9.37% year by year [21]. Please 
reffer  to  Figure  7  –  Percentage  of  financial  phishing  2014-
2016  [21]  for  more  details.  The  aricle  coveres  in  detail 
malware and also andoid attacks.  

VI.  CONCLUSION 

There  are  many  ways  that  a  phishing  attack  that  can  be 
launched.  Along  with  the  technology  development,  the 
cybercriminals  assets  and  methods  are  expanding  too.  
Therefore,  the  matter  is  in  our  hands  and  thus  there  are  a 
variety of tools, it is key for us to stay a step ahead and protect 
our  systems  and  private  information.  Various  types  of 
phishing attacks have been studied, presented and identified. 
Another element of the success of protection is to anticipate, 

 
 
keep an eye open for future threats that are coming, keep our 
systems up to date and share the information. 

[3] 

I. Ghafir, V. Prenosil, M. Hammoudeh and U. Raza, “Malicious SSL 
Certificate  Detection:  A  Step  Towards  Advanced  Persistent  Threat 
Defence,”  International  Conference  on  Future  Networks  and 
Distributed Systems. Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2017. 

[4]  FBI News, Stories: “Business E-mail Compromise,” in Cyber-Enabled 
Financial  Fraud  on  the  Rise  Globally,  2017.  Website  avilable  at: 
https://www.fbi.gov/news/stories/business-e-mail-compromise-on-
the-rise (accessed on 1st December 2019). 

[5]  U. Raza, J. Lomax, I. Ghafir, R. Kharel and B. Whiteside, “An IoT and 
Business Processes Based Approach for the Monitoring and Control of 
High  Value-Added  Manufacturing  Processes,” 
International 
Conference on Future Networks and Distributed Systems. Cambridge, 
United Kingdom, 2017. 
I.  Ghafir  and  V.  Prenosil,  “Advanced  Persistent  Threat  and  Spear 
Phishing  Emails.”  International  Conference  Distance  Learning, 
Simulation  and  Communication.  Brno,  Czech  Republic,  pp.  34-41, 
2015. 

[6] 

[7]  Arpan  C.,  Prashand  K.,  Dinesh  K.  Y.,  “Phishing  attacks  and  its 
countermeasurs,”  International  Journals  of  Advanced  Research  in 
Computer Science and Software Engineering,   vol. 7, 2017, pp. 245-
253. 
I. Ghafir and V. Prenosil, “Malicious File Hash Detection and Drive-
by  Download  Attacks,”  International  Conference  on  Computer  and 
Communication Technologies, series Advances in Intelligent Systems 
and Computing. Hyderabad: Springer, vol. 379, pp. 661-669, 2016. 

[8] 

[9]  Ahmed  A.,  Lina  Z.  ,  “Phishing  environments,  techniques,  and 
countermeasures: A survey,” Computers & Security, vol. 68, Elsevier, 
2017, pp.160–196. 

[10]  Bhavsar  V,  Kadlak  A.,  and  Sharma  S.  Oka,  “Study  of  Phishing 
Attacks”,    International  Journal  of  Computer  Applications,  vol.  182, 
33, 2018, pp. 27–29. 

[11]  I. Ghafir, J. Svoboda, V. Prenosil, “A Survey on Botnet Command and 
Control  Traffic  Detection,”  International  Journal  of  Advances  in 
Computer  Networks  and  Its  Security  (IJCNS),  vol.  5(2),  pp.  75-80, 
2015. 

[12]  J. Svoboda, I. Ghafir, V. Prenosil, “Network Monitoring Approaches: 
An  Overview,”  International  Journal  of  Advances  in  Computer 
Networks and Its Security (IJCNS), vol. 5(2), pp. 88-93, 2015. 
[13]  Storagepipe - Online Backup and Disaster Recovery. (2016) Phishing 

- Why Malware Happens. [Video] 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PdTfofLhlfg Accessed 29th  
November 2019. 

[14]  I.  Ghafir  and  V.  Prenosil.  “Proposed  Approach  for  Targeted  Attacks 
Detection,”  Advanced  Computer  and  Communication  Engineering 
Technology, Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering. Phuket: Springer 
International Publishing, vol. 362, pp. 73-80, 9, 2016.  

[15]  Att Internet Service, Resources: “Beware: Fake Hotel Booking Sites”,  

2015. Website avilable at: 
https://www.attinternetservice.com/resources/fake-hotel-sites/  
(accessed on 5th December 2019) 

[16]  I. Ghafir and V. Prenosil, “DNS query failure and algorithmically 

generated domain-flux detection,” International Conference on 
Frontiers of Communications, Networks and Applications. Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia, pp. 1-5, 2014. 

[17]  Government of Australia, Scam Types:“Car Crash Componsation 

Phone Scam”. (2019). Avilalbe at: 
https://www.scamnet.wa.gov.au/scamnet/Scam_types-
Attempts_to_gain_your_personal_information-Phishing-
Car_Crash_Compensation_Phone_Scam.htm (accesed on 29th 
November 2019) 

[18]  I. Ghafir, V. Prenosil, and M. Hammoudeh, “Botnet Command and 

Control Traffic Detection Challenges: A Correlation-based Solution.” 
International Journal of Advances in Computer Networks and Its 
Security (IJCNS), vol. 7(2), pp. 27-31, 2017. 

[19]  Lee N., SANS Institute, Information Security Reading Room: “2017 

Threat Landscape Survey: Users on the Front Line” ,  2019. 
[20]  I. Ghafir, M. Husak and V. Prenosil, “A Survey on Intrusion 

Detection and Prevention Systems,” IEEE/UREL conference, Zvule, 
Czech Republic, pp. 10-14, 2014. 

[21]  Karspersky., Secure List, Financial cyberthreats in 2016: “Big fish 
bring big rewards for cybercriminals in 2016 but that doesn’t mean 
small fish are safe” ,  2017.

Figure 6 – Top directions of entry [6] 

Figure 7 – Percentage of financial phishing 2014-2016 [21] 

It is recommended that we stay alerted when surfing on the 
internet and be careful when sharing information. The public 
institutions and governments are also corroborating different 
laws  to  ensure  we  as  citizens,  are  protected  as  much  as 
possible. Some of the changes are creating difficult times for 
companies but improving the overall security of data.  General 
Data  Protection  Regulation  (GDPR)  released  in  April  2016 
constituted a major step forward for the European Economic 
Area (EEA) and provided users full control and transparency 
over the data.   

Phishing  will  continue  to  pose  a  threat  even  if  the  law 
enforcements are doing their best to protect users and victims 
of  the  attack.  Compared  to  other  disciplines,  cybersecurity 
will always be on high demand and  attacks will constitute a 
problem that can never be fully solved.  

REFERENCES 

[1]  Jason I. Hong, “The State of Phishing Attacks” Communications of the 

ACM, vol. 55, pp. 74-81, January 2012.  

[2]  Kang L. C.,Kelvin S. C. Y., Choon L. T, “A survey of pshising attacks: 
Their  types,  vectors  and  technical  approaches”  Expert  Systems  with 
Applications , vol. 106. Elsevier, 2018, pp.1–20. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
