0
2
0
2

p
e
S
2
1

]
I

N
.
s
c
[

3
v
4
3
8
2
1
.
5
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Blockchain and Fog Computing for
Cyber-Physical Systems: The Case of Smart
Industry

Ouns Bouachir, Member, IEEE, Moayad Aloqaily, Member, IEEE, Lewis Tseng, Member, IEEE, and
Azzedine Boukerche, Fellow, IEEE

1

(cid:70)

Abstract—Blockchain has revolutionized how transactions are con-
ducted by ensuring secure and auditable peer-to-peer coordination. This
is due to both the development of decentralization, and the promotion of
trust among peers. Blockchain and fog computing are currently being
evaluated as potential support for software and a wide spectrum of
applications, ranging from banking practices and digital transactions
to cyber-physical systems. These systems are designed to work in
highly complex, sometimes even adversarial, environments, and to syn-
chronize heterogeneous machines and manufacturing facilities in cyber
computational space, and address critical challenges such as com-
putational complexity, security, trust, and data management. Coupling
blockchain with fog computing technologies has the potential to identify
and overcome these issues. Thus, this paper presents the knowledge
of blockchain and fog computing required to improve cyber-physical
systems in terms of quality-of-service, data storage, computing and
security.

Index Terms—Blockchain, Fog Computing, Cyber-Physical, Smart In-
dustry, IIoT.

1 INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in electronic and wireless communication
have transformed the Internet-of-Things (IoT) through the
development of miniature devices that can use and manage
the collection and exchange of data. These advantages have
enabled the development of small, cost-effective, and low
power multi-functional sensing platforms capable of mon-
itoring and communicating diverse information in various
sectors, such as vehicular, healthcare, industry and many
more.

The IoT approach is now combined with innovative
algorithm-based machine learning (ML) and artiﬁcial in-
telligence (AI) to extract a piece of valuable information
that can be useful by other physical devices creating a
cyber-physical system (CPS). CPS consists of a physical part

• O. Bouachir is with College of Technological Innovation, Zayed Univer-

sity, UAE. E-mail: ouns.bouachir@zu.ac.ae

• M. Aloqaily is with Al Ain University, UAE. E-mail: malo-

•

qaily@xanalytics.ca
L. Tesng is with Boston College, Boston, MA, USA. E-mail:
lewis.tseng@bc.edu

• A. Boukerche is with University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada. E-mail:

boukerch@uottawa.ca

and a cyber part connected via a communication network.
The physical part mainly consists of sensors and actuators
are used to collect data and to perform tasks based on
the gathered information. The collected data is then sent,
through the network to the cyber part where it is stored
and processed using advanced algorithms-based ML and
AI to extract valuable insights that can be translated into
actions performed by the physical part. This system is
highly relevant to the industry, and other ﬁelds like med-
ical and healthcare. CPS is now being applied throughout
a variety of industries, including manufacturing (Indus-
try 4.0), logistics, oil/gas, transportation, energy/services,
mining, metallurgy and aviation, and several sensors are
used to manufacture and form Industrial CPS (ICPS) that
can transform how industries function [1]. ICPS can create
autonomous self-servicing/healing machines and enhance
inventory management through ML. Based on industrial IoT
(IIoT), ICPS can collect data about transactions and send
it over the network to cloud servers, where it is analyzed
and stored so it is available when required. Due to the
rapid growth and diversity of devices connected to the IIoT,
traditional centralized network architecture must address
new service requirements and challenges, and efﬁciently
identify and provide large volumes of data regarding, se-
curity, integrity and privacy and other areas.

Fog/Edge computing has been used to meet these chal-
lenges and achieve better quality of service (QoS) and expe-
rience (QoE) by conducting data storage and processing op-
erations physically close to the data source in a distributed
infrastructure [2][3]. Blockchain is another method that can
complement IIoT systems by providing functionality for
secure and reliable systems to store and process data [4][5].
This paper proposes creation of an ICPS based on both
the blockchain and Fog/Edge approaches to overcome chal-
lenges with regard to security, QoS and data storage. It also
discusses the advantages and challenges of the proposed
ecosystem and potential future research areas. The paper is
organized as follows: It ﬁrst introduces ICPS and explains
the challenges in Section 2, then provides an overview of
two paradigm pillars (blockchain and fog) in Section 3.
The advantages and challenges of combining ICPS with the
mentioned paradigms are detailed in Section 4, and Section

 
 
 
 
 
 
5 explains the beneﬁts of ICPS-based blockchain and Fog
computing and discusses the challenges and related future
research. Section 6 concludes the paper.

of IIoT is to capture accurate data in real-time, and then pro-
vide rapid and relevant responses that deliver the required
performance [1][6]. The main challenges of IIoT are:

2

2 INDUSTRIAL CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEM (ICPS)

This section introduces ICPS and details the challenges.

2.1 Overview

Today, due to several innovations that enhance manufac-
turing (e.g., sensors, actuators), industrial practices can be
signiﬁcantly improved by monitoring performance quality.
ICPS, based on IIoT that connects machines and industrial
entities such as vehicles, power generators and others, en-
ables the collection, exchange, storage and analysis of data
to communicate valuable information and insights that al-
low quick decisions to be made accurately. Thus, it improves
the performance and productivity of industrial processes
[6][7].

ICPS combines the power of these smart physical ma-
chines with real-time data analysis to achieve higher system
efﬁciency and faster reactions which result in beneﬁts such
as saved time and money, better quality control and energy
management, asset monitoring, maintenance prediction and
decreased waste. Smart industry (Figure 1) is based on a
combination of various domains, including, IIoT, robotics,
AI, ML and communications, to provide greater efﬁciency,
precision and accuracy. It has also an impact on employee
security and health.

Fig. 1. Industrial Cyber-Physical System

2.2 Challenges

Typical IoT and IIoT applications are based on wireless
sensor network communications that collect and transfer
data to a storage center for processing, analysis and storage.
These applications, which are deployed in many hetero-
geneous devices, are continuously producing, exchanging
and consuming data through the network, resulting in a
signiﬁcant increase of generated data. The main requirement

• C1: Data Storage and manipulation IIoT devices are
equipped with sensors that have minimal computing
capabilities and small storage capacity. The collected
data is sent, stored and processed in remote clouds.
Scaling large numbers of devices and rapidly pro-
cessing huge volumes of generated data are challeng-
ing issues for the current centralized cloud models
that are used in the majority of IoT solutions. New
solutions require adequate, highly efﬁcient comput-
ing power to take advantage of advanced analysis
tools and mechanisms that process and store enor-
mous volumes of data and execute extensive appli-
cations. Existing centralized cloud paradigms are not
suitable to effectively meet many new and future
service requirements, such as system availability and
efﬁciency, latency and security in scalable networks.
• C2: Quality of Service (QoS) IIoT applications in-
volve various types of data, including emergency
responses, real-time video surveillance, computer vi-
sion and self-driving, and all of these have QoS re-
quirements that can change over time, such as delay,
throughput and reliability. IIoT must be capable of
adapting to these variations, and providing every
device with the required service.

• C3: Security and Privacy In an IIoT application, the
network information that is exchanged can be conﬁ-
dential, sensitive, and require protection and provide
restricted and controlled access to the data. Most IoT
devices are vulnerable, since they have limited secu-
rity capabilities and can be compromised by hackers
relatively easily by accessing stored information or
sending incorrect data to clouds. Securing an IIoT
system is crucial, and should be guaranteed at both
the network and storage system levels.

3 BLOCKCHAIN AND FOG/EDGE COMPUTING
Generally speaking, blockchain is a distributed and tamper
resistant ledger that does not rely on a centralized authority
to establish trust, with a core layer mechanism for decentral-
ized trust management [8]. Blockchain mechanisms ensure
the system is tamper-proof, since an adversary cannot per-
suade correct participants to switch to an incorrect branch
of the blockchain. This is also how blockchain intuitively
establishes decentralized trust.

Blockchain is suitable for IIoT applications as it employs
factors such as decentralization, fault-tolerance, immutabil-
ity and auditability for the operations of cyberphysical
systems [9][10]. Since it was not designed speciﬁcally for
IoT applications several challenges need to be addressed, in-
cluding the energy consumption of consensus mechanisms,
communication complexity of veriﬁcation, storage costs and
transaction speed/throughput [11][12]. These are discussed
in more detail in Section 4.1.

Fog and Edge computing are more recent data storing
architectures that enable moving some sub-processes from
centralized to distributed systems[2], [3]. Since the number
of connected devices is continually increasing, the number

SensorsStorageDataProcessingAnalysingMachineLearningArtificial IntelligenceActuatorsCommunication NetworkCyber PartPhysical​ Part3

of exchanges to be handled by Clouds increases accordingly.
Moreover, some applications are latency-sensitive; that is,
they need fast responses, (particularly data transferring and
processing) since delays can lead to serious problems. Thus,
cloud network capacity must be increased, and Edge/Fog
computing has achieved better QoS and QoE by providing
more storage, computing and intelligence resources to de-
vices, as well as various beneﬁts such as the capability to
manage huge volumes of data and faster analysis. Table 1
summarizes the differences between these two approaches.

TABLE 1
Comparison Cloud and Fog computing

Geographical Distribution
Location of the Service

Fog Com-
puting

Cloud
Comput-
ing
Centralized Distributed Distributed
the
Within the
Internet

Edge
Comput-
ing

Distance to end-devices

Number of server nodes

Through
multiple
hops (Far)
Few

the

the

At
edge
of
network
Single
to
few hops
(Near)
Many

the

At
edge
of
network
Single
hop (very
near)
Local stor-
age, with-
ing the de-
vice
None,
WLAN
Low
Low

Communication system

Latency
Storage Capacity

IP
Network
High
High

WLAN,
3G, 4G, IP
Low
Very high
(Multiple)

Fog and Edge computing seem highly similar due to
several key factors, as shown in Table 1. Both are based on
situating data storage, processing and analysis close to data
generators (e.g. sensors, motors). With Edge computing,
data is either stored and processed locally on the device
or sensor itself without being transferred, or on the clos-
est gateway device to the sensors, disregarding the aspect
of integration that keeps it discrete. This system can be
overwhelmed quickly because of the many small devices,
processing and storage capacity. With Fog computing, data
is processed by Fog nodes (servers) connected to a LAN or
on LAN hardware itself, and the data gathered from several
devices can be handled efﬁciently in real-time. Fog and
Edge computing can be combined, as Fog can be considered
the standard that deﬁnes how to use Edge computing to
facilitate and enhance computing and storage operations.

Fog computing involves a set of high-performance phys-
ical machines called Fog nodes, linked together in a dis-
tributed infrastructure and considered to be a single logical
entity. The Fog nodes are located at the edge of the network
close to the data source, and they can collect, analyze and
process data locally. This results in signiﬁcant trafﬁc mitiga-
tion in the core, and faster processing of data services. These
nodes can also interact with the Cloud for long term storage
when required.

Fog computing can be considered an extension of the
Cloud computing paradigm presented in a layered service
structure, as shown in Figure 2. It allows more local real-
time monitoring and optimization for IoT applications,

Fig. 2. Fog computing architecture

while the Cloud provides global optimization and other
advanced services.

Fog Architecture consists of three layers:

•

• End-Device Layer: This includes IoT end-user de-
vices that manage data generation. Their main task
is to sense surrounding objects and events and for-
ward the data to the upper layers for storage and
processing.
Fog Layer: As the middle layer, this has a consid-
erable number of Fog nodes (e.g. servers, routers,
switches) that are situated at the edge of the network
and widely distributed geographically. All these de-
vices are linked together, and they collaborate to
store, compute, and exchange sensed data. The con-
nection between fog nodes and end-device layer is
through wireless technologies (e.g. WiFi, 4G, Blue-
tooth), and each node is connected to the Cloud
through an IP internet network. Fog nodes analyse
and store received data and send only those deemed
valuable to the Cloud server for storage or next
processing.

• Cloud Layer: This includes powerful storage and
computing capabilities for substantial computation
analysis and permanent storage of major volumes of
data. For optimal efﬁciency, not all computing and
storage tasks go through the cloud layer.

4 HOW TO ENHANCE ICPS PERFORMANCE?

The best way to overcome ICPS challenges and provide
high system efﬁciency is to create an ecosystem that in-
cludes modern technologies and paradigms for IIoT sys-
tems. Distributed data storage and management are promis-
ing solutions to data storage and QoS issues such as Edge
and Fog computing mechanisms, and blockchain is also a
potential remedy that can be used with these distributed
systems to enhance security and privacy. The combination of
these paradigms enables ICPS to overcome challenges and
achieve higher system performance.

The advantages and challenges of this alliance follow.

4.1 ICPS based Blockchain

Blockchain is a promising concept that will be of beneﬁt to
IIoT systems [4][13][14], since it can provide more secure
and reliable data systems (C3).

Deploying blockchain in IIoT systems has several advan-

tages, including:

•

Security based on cryptographical design;
Immutable data structure;

•
• Transactions and/or data veriﬁed by the system;
• A total ordering of transactions (or blocks);
• Distributed nature (no single point of failure) and

•

P2P interaction, and.
Fault-tolerance due to the use of distributed consen-
sus and gossip-based communication protocol.

A typical blockchain setup requires powerful machines
to support heavy crypto primitives and communications,
which is not feasible for IIoT. Moreover, IIoT applications
utilize different types of devices (e.g. heterogeneity), and
if we apply the same blockchain design on heterogeneous
devices the reliability and performance properties will vary.
Traditional Blockchain, especially the consensus protocol,
may require prohibitive expensive resources from ICPS
small devices. For example, many Proof of Work (PoW)
and Proof of Stake (PoS) protocols use cryptographic hash
functions that have high energy consumption, and Byzan-
tine Fault Tolerance (BFT) based protocols, e.g., practical
BFT, incur high message complexity. Fortunately, several
blockchain proposed recently can be used with ICPS such
as Plasma Chain or Multi-chains that may ensure better
privacy and scalability than the traditional one.

Challenges: The main challenges of using blockchain
for IIoT is that it is not designed to be compatible with het-
erogeneous small devices with limited computation, com-
munication and storage capabilities [15].

• Resource: Most

IoT devices come with limited
battery, computational and storage capabilities to
optimise cost and size, whereas most popular
blockchains require powerful machines to support
heavy crypto primitives and computation to achieve
coordination and provide security. For example, Bit-
coin uses PoW, Etherum is adopting PoS and Hy-
perledger uses PBFT and Raft; all very expensive
protocols that require O(N 2) communication com-
plexity, where N is the number of nodes. Addition-
ally, all these protocols require that each node stores
an entire copy of the blockchain, which consumes
an enormous amount of storage space. Plus, they
require public key cryptography to ensure security,
another expensive operation. Hence, it is very difﬁ-
cult to apply vanilla blockchain functionality to IIoT
applications.

• Heterogeneity: Most blockchain protocols were de-
signed to be P2P based; that is, each node has ap-
proximately the same responsibilities and all have
the same power. Though this is useful in most cases,
such as ﬁnancial networks, such a P2P design is not
adequate for IIoT devices due to cost constraints, as
many devices are fragile and should not be required
to do anything but push data to others. Moreover,

4

gossip protocol is not the most efﬁcient way to prop-
agate important messages, since IIoT devices could
be in sleep mode (to save energy) which would make
it less efﬁcient. A ﬁnal issue is that IIoT scenarios, de-
vices or nodes could move around, thereby making
the network dynamic. Typical blockchains perform
poorly in dynamic networks.

4.2 ICPS based Edge/Fog Computing

Due to the rapid growth and diversity of devices connected
to the IIoT (C1), centralized traditional network architecture
is facing new challenges to meet present and future service
requirements (C2). Fog/Edge computing have been intro-
duced to IoT systems to cope with these challenges, and
improve QoS and QoE [6][16].

IIoT based Fog computing system has several advan-

tages:

• Adequate computing power to store and process
massive volumes of data, and run substantial appli-
cations suitable for scalable networks;

• Achieving higher latency efﬁciency with many Fog
nodes located close to the IIoT devices in different
areas of the network, thereby providing fast, high
quality localized services with minimal latency to
meet the demand of latency-sensitive applications;
System capability since tasks are distributed over
several high performing Fog level entities;

•

• Better network ﬂexibility and availability due to
distributed Fog systems in which all Fog nodes are
connected and collaborate; this will also maintain
normal service if some Fog nodes fail; and,

• Optimal data trafﬁc and overhead at the core of the
network, since the number of re-transmissions in one
direction (to the same Cloud server) decreases due to
the many receivers located in different areas of the
network.

Challenges: Though Fog/Edge computing provides many
advantages for IIoT systems,there are also challenges to
consider when designing a Fog/Edge based IIoT system,
such as the heterogeneity of used Fog nodes; indeed, het-
erogeneous computing nodes can be used to cause a Fog
system to manipulate various databases[17]. This should not
be allowed to affect the performance of the applications and
communication between Fog nodes and IIoT devices (Fog-
Fog and Fog device), which should be optimal, anytime
and anywhere. Moreover, securing collected data is another
important challenge of a Fog system.To provide better Fog
system performance, three important issues should be taken
into consideration:

1) How to trust the multiple nodes used as data man-

aging entities?

2) How to guarantee data integrity in a multi-layered

processing system; and,

3) How to protect the stored data and avoid malicious

attacks.

The answers to these questions are based on resolving the
following issues:

• Authentication and Data Integrity: Fog systems con-
sist of several nodes that communicate with various

entities within multiple layers, such as Fog-to-Fog,
Fog-to-Cloud and Fog-to-IIoT devices. Fog architec-
ture must ensure secure collaboration and intractabil-
ity between heterogeneous devices. Authentication
can be challenging in such systems, since unlike
the unique central authentication server in a Cloud
paradigm, the nodes communicate and provide ser-
vice for various heterogeneous fog devices. Similarly,
data integrity is also important since the data is
processed by several Fog and Cloud devices, and
must be distributed securely without changing it.
• Malicious Attacks: Fog nodes are positioned close
to IIoT devices where protection and surveillance are
relatively weak, and this makes the system vulner-
able to diverse malicious attacks that do not occur
with Cloud computing, such as denial of services and
man-in-the-middle attacks.

–

denial of services (DOS): This occurs when an at-
tacker repeatedly requests inﬁnite processing
and storage services from Fog nodes, thereby
blocking access to the layer. This can be done
at various levels, including at the end device
where the attacker could spoof the IP ad-
dress of the IIoT devices and send multiple
fake requests. An attacker could also disable
communication with the Fog infrastructure by
jamming the wireless channel.

– man-in-the-middle: This type of attack occurs
when an intruder interrupts or senses commu-
nication between Fog nodes and replaces the
Fog devices.

Efﬁcient and secure deployment of Fog infrastructure is
required for smooth communication between Fog nodes and
IIoT devices, and this remains an open issue since existing
security strategies are more suitable for centralized systems
rather than distributed and open infrastructures like Fog
computing. Though managing databases in a distributed
manner, such as with Fog systems, solves issues such as
delay, it also introduces other potential problems related to
authenticating and trusting the data management entities.
Blockchain is one of the most interesting solutions for cop-
ing with such requirements.

5 ICPS BASED FOG/EDGE AND BLOCKCHAIN
5.1 Advantages

To improve IIoT performance and cope with the afore-
mentioned challenges, we propose an ecosystem based on
both blockchain and Fog computing that leverages the ad-
vantages of each. Deploying blockchain for IIoT networks
provides the distribution feature of Edge/Fog units while
maintaining security, trust and privacy, and helps solve se-
curity and reliability problems related to IIoT patterns. The
advantages and challenges of using each paradigm alone
with ICPS are summarized in Table 2, which shows that
the main advantages provided by blockchain (i.e. security,
privacy and trust) are the principal issues faced by ICPS
based Fog/Edge computing, while the main advantages
provided by Fog/Edge systems (i.e. storage and computing
capabilities) are the challenges with ICPS based blockchain.

5

Thus, combining these two approaches creates a balance by
mixing all the advantages to improve system performance.

TABLE 2
ICPS based Blockchain and ICPS based fog computing comparison

Cyber-physical
Systems

Advantages
–Better system perfor-
mance
–High autonomy level
–Efﬁcient data utiliza-
tion

ICPS based
Blockchain

–Security
–Privacy and trust

ICPS based
Fog Computing

–QoS and scalability
–Data storage and ma-
nipulation

Challenges
–Data storage and ma-
nipulation
–QoS and scalability
–Security, privacy and
trust
–Heterogeneity
–Scalability
–Data storage and ma-
nipulation
–Privacy and trust
–Heterogeneity

The idea of integrating blockchain with IIoT systems
raises important questions about the location of the inter-
action, and the role of Fog computing to facilitate it. The
distributed resources of Fog computing are potentially in a
location where the mining of IIoT initiatives could occur,
which means blockchain can be hosted by the fog and cloud
nodes, as shown in Figure 3.

In our design, a transaction is requested by a IIoT device,
whose meta-data then be integrated to a block. The block
is veriﬁed and then added to the integrated blockchain.
Finally, the transaction is completed after it is stored on
the cloud layer. Security and data integrity come from the
veriﬁed transaction meta-data stored on blockchain. For
example, if the transaction is tampered, then it will not pass
the veriﬁcation since the meta-data (e.g., a hashed value of
the transaction) does not match. Privacy issue such as GDPR
compliance can be addressed by using properly designed
meta-data. For example, transaction can be removed from
the cloud as long as the meta-data does not reveal infor-
mation, then our system provides GDPR-complied privacy.
The QoS and scalability guarantee from the computing and
storage capabilities of the fog nodes.

Ecosystem-based blockchain and Edge/Fog computing
with IIoT combines all the advantages discussed in Section
4, and solves many challenges with new beneﬁts, including:

• Better management of the distributed feature of
blockchain due to the decentralized computing re-
sources of Fog, which provides an improved level of
scalability and system availability; and

• Better system security that ensures privacy, trust,
reliability and immunity against malicious attacks.
For example, the integrated blockchain can be used
for verifying data integrity and mitigate malicious
attacks.

5.2 Challenges and future research

The combination of blockchain and Fog computing ad-
dresses many issues inherent in IIoT systems. We are de-
veloping a benchmarking platform that can be used to
evaluate blockchain’s performance under varying network
constraints. We plan to use the developed tool to test our
system. Below, we list some other interesting unsolved
challenges:

6

5.2.3 Energy Consumption
Solutions like energy aware communication protocols or
energy harvesting sensor platforms can complement the
proposed platform to decrease the energy consumption in
such a system.

5.2.4 Advanced Algorithms
ICPS based Fog and blockchain is highly innovative au-
tomatic system that combines several ﬁelds,
including
robotics, ML and AI able to create smarter cyberphysical
system based on context-aware with reasoning capabilities
providing autonomous features such as self-monitoring and
self-conﬁguration. It requires novel algorithms, applications
and interfaces developed using the platform resources to
establish new business models.

5.2.5 Regulation and standards
This ecosystem requires new regulation models. The plat-
form is based on data that could be related to users and can
be exchanged between different entities. Thus regulations,
standards and social guidelines must be developed to spec-
ify how the platform can be used legally and fairly.

6 CONCLUSION
This paper discussed the creation of a blockchain and fog
computing-based ecosystem in IIoT that can manage and
enhance IIoT quality-of-service, data storage and comput-
ing and security requirements. Fog/Edge systems transfer
computing resources and capacity at the edge of each local
network, close to the end-user devices. The main advantages
are reduced latency particularly for applications with real-
time requirements (e.g. video-surveillance), and increased
availability by helping prevent single point of failure issues.
IoT-based fog and blockchain systems can handle critical
challenges in terms of security, privacy and integrity of col-
lected data. Blockchain provides an important level of secu-
rity for added data. Though IIoT-based blockchain and Fog
computing leverages the advantages of both technologies,
there are other challenges that will require more research
to reveal new opportunities, including the development
of algorithms and infrastructures suitable for such highly
innovative automatic platforms.

REFERENCES

[1] L. D. Xu, W. He, and S. Li, “Internet of things in industries: A
survey,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 10, no. 4,
pp. 2233–2243, Nov 2014.

[2] P. Hu, S. Dhelim, H. Ning, and T. Qiu, “Survey on fog computing:
Architecture, key technologies, applications and open issues,”
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 98, 09 2017.
I. A. Ridhawi, M. Aloqaily, and A. Boukerche, “Comparing fog
solutions for energy efﬁciency in wireless networks: Challenges
and opportunities,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 6,
pp. 80–86, December 2019.

[3]

[4] N. Teslya and I. Ryabchikov, “Blockchain-based platform architec-
ture for industrial iot,” in 2017 21st Conference of Open Innovations
Association (FRUCT), Nov 2017, pp. 321–329.

[5] L. Tseng, L. Wong, S. Otoum, M. Aloqaily, and J. B. Othman,
“Blockchain for managing heterogeneous internet of things: A
perspective architecture,” IEEE Network, Jan. 2020.

[6] R. Basir, S. Qaisar, M. Ali, M. Aldwairi, M. I. Ashraf, A. Mahmood,
, and M. Gidlund, “Fog computing enabling industrial internet
of things: State-of-the-art and research challenges,” sensors, Nov.
2019.

Fig. 3. Blockchain for Fog and IIoT

5.2.1 Scalability and storage capacity issues

Storage capacity and scalability are prominent issues with
IIoT and blockchain, since IIoT devices can generate giga-
bytes (GBs) of data in real-time, which makes this challenge
much greater through the utilization of Edge/Fog storage
resources. Most current blockchains can only process a
limited number of transactions simultaneously, and are not
designed to store large volumes of data; attempting to do
so increases high latency which is an important barrier
and challenge for IIoT. A detailed description of expected
network throughput and network scalability is required
to design new techniques allow to simplify real-time pro-
cessing and storage, including data compression and data
lightening.

5.2.2 Security and data integrity issues

Data security and protection from cybersecurity attacks
are important functions of IIoT systems. In this new in-
dustrial evolution, techniques and tools must be devel-
oped to counter attacks and provide optimal data security.
Though introducing blockchain to IIoT based Fog com-
puting enhances data security and ﬂexibility, it may also
impact functions regarding reliability and collected data
integrity. Blockchain validates the data generator identity,
and ensures the data it is immutable and able to detect
any modiﬁcation of the information. However, the system
is limited when data that is already corrupted arrives at
the blockchain; it is possible that such corruption is not
identiﬁed and it remains corrupted. In addition, corrupted
data is not only due to malicious attacks, but by other means
related the surrounding environment and device failure.

A transaction is requested .A Block  is created based on the transaction and broadcasted to all the participants to be verified and validated.12The transaction is complete.4Once verified, the block is added to the existing blockchain by all the participants.3BlockCloud LayerBlockBlockFog Layer[7] P. O’Donovan, K. Bruton, C. Gallagher, and D. O’Sullivan, “A fog
computing industrial cyber-physical system for embedded low-
latency machine learning industry 4.0 applications,” Manufactur-
ing Letters, vol. 15, 2018.

[8] A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, R. Jurdak, and P. Gauravaram, “Lsb: A
lightweight scalable blockchain for iot security and anonymity,”
Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 2019.

[9] F. Ali, M. Aloqaily, O. Alfandi, and O. Ozkasap, “Cyberphysical
blockchain-enabled peer-to-peer energy trading,” Computer, 2020.
[10] M. Aloqaily, A. Boukerche, O. Bouachir, F. Khalid, and S. Jangsher,
“An energy trade framework using smartcontracts: Overview and
challenges,” IEEE Network, 2020.

[11] A. Pal and K. Kant, “Using blockchain for provenance and trace-
ability in internet of things-integrated food logistics,” Computer,
vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 94–98, Dec 2019.

[12] H. Lei, C. Qiu, H. Yao, and S. Guo, “When blockchain-enabled
internet of things meets cloud computing,” Computer, vol. 52,
no. 12, pp. 16–17, Dec 2019.

[13] I. Makhdoom, M. Abolhasan, H. Abbas, and W. Ni, “Blockchain’s
adoption in iot: The challenges, and a way forward,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 125, pp. 251–279, 01 2019.
[14] R. Singh, A. Dwivedi, G. Srivastava, A. Wiszniewska-Matyszkiel,
and X. Cheng, “A game theoretic analysis of resource mining in
blockchain,” Cluster Computing, 01 2020.

[15] T. M. Fern´andez-Caram´es and P. Fraga-Lamas, “A review on the
application of blockchain to the next generation of cybersecure
industry 4.0 smart factories,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 45 201–45 218,
2019.

[16] M. Aazam, S. Zeadally, and K. A. Harras, “Deploying fog com-
puting in industrial internet of things and industry 4.0,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 14, no. 10, pp. 4674–4682,
Oct 2018.

[17] M. Mukherjee, R. Matam, L. Shu, L. Maglaras, M. A. Ferrag,
N. Choudhury, and V. Kumar, “Security and privacy in fog com-
puting: Challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 19 293–19 304, 2017.

7

Ouns Bouachir (M’18) is an assistant professor of com-
puter engineering in the College of Technological Innova-
tion, Zayed University, UAE and a researcher in the ﬁeld of
communications and autonomous systems. She has a Ph.D.
degree in computer engineering from the French University
for Civil Aviation(ENAC), Toulouse, France in 2014.

Moayad Aloqaily (S’12, M’17) received the Ph.D. degree
in Electrical and Computer Engineering from the University
of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada in 2016. He is the managing
director of xAnalytics Inc., Ottawa, ON, Canada. His current
research interests include AI and ML, Connected Vehicles,
Blockchain Solutions, and Sustainable Energy and Data
Management.

Lewis Tseng is an assistant professor with Boston Col-
lege, USA. He has a Ph.D. in Computer Science at Univer-
sity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. His research interest
includes distributed computing/systems, blockchain-based
systems.

Azzedine Boukerche (F’15) is a Distinguished University
Professor and holds a Canada Research Chair Tier-1 position
at the University of Ottawa, Canada. He is a Fellow of the
Engineering Institute of Canada, a Fellow of the Canadian
Academy of Engineering, and a Fellow of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science.

