Scalable and Secure Architecture for Distributed
IoT Systems

Najmeddine Dhieb1, Hakim Ghazzai1, Hichem Besbes2, and Yehia Massoud1
1School of Systems & Enterprises, Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, NJ, USA
Email: {ndhieb, hghazzai, ymassoud}@stevens.edu
2University of Carthage, Higher School of Communications of Tunis, Tunisia
Email: hichem.besbes@supcom.tn

0
2
0
2

r
p
A
0
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
5
4
2
0
.
5
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Internet-of-things (IoT) is perpetually revolution-
izing our daily life and rapidly transforming physical objects
into an ubiquitous connected ecosystem. Due to their massive
deployment and moderate security levels, those devices face
a lot of security, management, and control challenges. Their
classical centralized architecture is still cloaking vulnerabilities
and anomalies that can be exploited by hackers for spying,
eavesdropping, and taking control of the network. In this paper,
we propose to improve the IoT architecture with additional
security features using Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and blockchain
technology. We propose a novel architecture based on per-
missioned blockchain technology in order to build a scalable
and decentralized end-to-end secure IoT system. Furthermore,
we enhance the IoT system security with an AI-component at
the gateway level to detect and classify suspected activities,
malware, and cyber-attacks using machine learning techniques.
Simulations and practical implementation show that the proposed
architecture delivers high performance against cyber-attacks.

Index Terms—Internet-of-Things, Blockchain, Cyber Security,

Machine Learning.

I. INTRODUCTION

Internet-of-Things (IoT) technology has become highly aus-
picious to enhance automation, efﬁciency, and comfort level
for users. Indeed,
the number of IoT devices has widely
is expected to exceed 8.4 billion devices in
increased. It
2020 and reach 20.4 billion devices in 2022 engendering
a tremendous amount of trafﬁc and data sharing among
data providers and consumers [1]. Although IoT technology
proved its efﬁciency in different ﬁelds and became essential
in many applications such as healthcare, remote monitoring,
smart homes, and smart agriculture [2]–[5], it remains under
continuous upgrades and does not reach its maturity yet.
The IoT environment is indeed still vulnerable and can be
controlled by hackers who can use moderate security levels of
hardware as well as ﬁrmware vulnerabilities to control those
devices for espionage and eavesdropping. Often, data leakage
takes place during transmission, share, or storage of data,
which may entail serious problems for the IoT owners and

This paper is accepted for publication in IEEE Technology & Engineering

Management Conference (TEMSCON20), Detroit, USA, jun. 2020.
is permitted. Permission from IEEE must
Personal use of this material
be obtained for all other uses,
in any current or future media,including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes,
creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists,
or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

users. Indeed, usually, IoT devices acquire basic security and
authentication levels. From this perspective, some researchers
suggested blockchain-based solutions so as to reinforce the
authentication and identiﬁcation processes [6] as well as data
encryption and sharing [7], [8]. However, those suggestions
are not immune against hackers cyber-attacks who execute
malware and exploit device vulnerabilities to achieve their
goals. Moreover,
the connected devices can be used and
monitored by hackers and cybercriminals to create sophisti-
cated cyber-attacks which may lead to dangerous and fatal
consequences. Recently, Mirai malware used IoT devices and
targeted Domain Name Service (DNS) servers in order to
generate a sophisticated Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
attacks which affected the internet service for a large number
of users such as Netﬂix, GitHub, and Reddit and causes huge
losses for those companies [9], [10].

One of the most effective means to secure IoT devices and
services is providing an end-to-end secure IoT architecture
and uncircumventable access control for IoT devices. Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI) has been widely used in many industrial
domains for its efﬁciency in upgrading IoT devices with
sophisticated smart features [11]. In this context, we propose
a novel architecture for IoT devices combining blockchain
and AI technologies not only in order to decentralize data
storage and protect shared data into the IoT network but also
to enhance its performance and efﬁciency against malware and
cyber-attacks. This work investigates the power of machine
learning techniques as well as the efﬁciency of blockchain
technology in order to improve privacy, data sharing, and
security for IoT devices and smart city infrastructure which are
vulnerable and can be used for sinful activities. We advocate
the use of the permissioned blockchain to share and store
the IoT devices data for its compatibility in IoT distributed
architecture, where unlike some suggested approaches [8],
[12], the connected devices do not participate in the mining
process and decision-making due to their limited computation
power. Then, we apply machine and deep learning algorithms
such as Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN), XGBoost, decision
tree, and naive bayes for malware detection and classiﬁcation,
running on nodes participating in the blockchain network to
control and detect suspicious activities. Our simulation results
illustrate the efﬁciency of the proposed architecture for IoT
privacy, data sharing, and malware detection into the proposed

 
 
 
 
 
 
blockchain network.

II. RELATED WORK

In this section, we discuss some of the state-of-art tech-
niques and technologies applied to IoT systems while high-
to existing
lighting the novelty of this work with respect
studies.

A system integrating blockchain, Service-oriented Archi-
tecture (SoA), and Key Performance Indicator (KPI) was
suggested by W. Viriyasitavat et al. to ensure data validity
and deal with the heterogeneity, uncertainties, and mobility of
devices [13]. Blockchain was also applied in [14] for data shar-
ing into multiple distributed parties in industrial IoT. Federated
learning was integrated in consensus process of the blockchain
to build data models and share them into the blockchain
network. Liu et al. developed a shared data architecture based
on blockchain technology and deep reinforcement learning
for Industrial IoT devices [15]. A decentralized architecture
based on permissioned blockchain was suggested in [16] in
order to share and secure the circulating data in smart city
infrastructure. Hyperledger Sawtooth was utilized to overcome
the infrastructural challenges for the smart city deployment.
In addition, a supplemental module was developed to auto-
mate and reduce the blockchain deployment processes. The
previous solutions may provide a generic architecture for
IoT services and integrate different cutting-edge technologies.
the IoT environment
However,
and the blockchain network from hackers who may control
the network by bypassing the moderate hardware security
and exploit vulnerabilities in IoT ﬁrmware to achieve their
atrocious activities.

they are unable to protect

In order to emulate IoT services, a machine learning ap-
proach was suggested by M. Pahl et al. based on inter-
service communication observations [17]. They developed an
inter-service communication model for micro-services analysis
between different IoT devices. In addition, they suggested
a continuous correlation algorithm for different observations
within the IoT devices. Trust list model was suggested by
K. Kataoka et al. to automate the veriﬁcation and trusting
of IoT devices and services [6]. In this context, a trust list
presenting a distributed trust between the different IoT-related
stakeholders is developed. In this architecture, blockchain and
software-deﬁned network (SDN) were integrated to automate
and enforce the IoT authentication processes as well as circu-
lating the trusted IoT services and devices along the different
stakeholders presented in the network. An IoT malware detec-
tor for large-scale networks was proposed in [18]. A machine
learning algorithm is executed on the user access gateway in
order to detect the suspicious activities based on patterns scan-
ning trafﬁc. Additionally, a policy module was developed to
determine the needed actions for malicious packets. Moreover,
a database was applied to store the scanned patterns in order
to update or receive them when needed. A malware detection
architecture was developed in [19] for android IoT devices. In
this architecture, machine learning techniques were applied to
extract malware information received from an android device

and store them into a blockchain network. The blockchain
stores the malware features and share them into the distributed
ledger. M. Shen et al. suggested Paillier public-key crypto
system in order to encrypt and protect the data provided from
IoT devices [20]. In addition, they implemented the support
vector machine (SVM) algorithm to train the machine learning
model directly from the blockchain network. Data provided
from the IoT device is encrypted then saved and distributed
on different distributed ledgers.

Although the previous studies suggested some malware
detection approaches based on intelligent systems and ma-
chine learning techniques, they were unable to guarantee the
authenticity and the integrity of data transmitted from the
IoT devices into the IoT network. In fact, the architecture of
typical IoT environments relies on brokered communication
models, which have limited scalability and are exposed to
multiple vulnerabilities due to the centralized authority for
identiﬁcation, authentication, and storage.

III. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE

The proposed architecture is essentially built on the idea
of exploiting AI and blockchain advantages to design a more
robust and resilient system ensuring high-level of security and
scalability.

Typical public blockchain solution presents multiple draw-
backs which keep it far away of being used for generic IoT
platforms due to the limited resources and computation power
of IoT devices. In fact, this limitation prevents those devices
from being effective miners in the blockchain network. Also,
due to the massive deployment of those devices and their basic
security levels, the blockchain network can be manipulated if
more than half of these nodes were accessed by unauthorized
entities. For those reasons, we propose to employ a novel
permissioned blockchain network architecture combined with
AI technologies as illustrated in Fig. 1.

In traditional

IoT environment, hackers may exploit
ﬁrmware and hardware vulnerabilities present in gateways,
servers, and IoT devices such that they can manipulate them
and use their amassed power to achieve different cyber-
attacks such as DDos which may lead to temporary denial of
service in the network. However, in the proposed architecture,
AI modules integrated in the IoT environment can detect
suspicious and abnormal activities occurring in the network
as well as protect those devices from different cyber-attacks.
IoT devices submit their data to gateways which are also
considered as nodes participating in the blockchain network
with other servers and nodes sharing the same IoT network.
Submitted information are veriﬁed, validated, and integrated
into the network by authorized nodes. Also, the proposed
solution ensures a blockchain based architecture for all devices
and nodes participating into an IoT environment as well as the
ability to extend and connect this network to other blockchain
or any external network. The proposed architecture ensures
decentralization, high scalability, and good performance thanks
to the permissioned blockchain features as well as sufﬁcient
security levels, malware, and cyber-attacks detection ensured

Fig. 1: Artiﬁcial intelligence and blockchain based architecture for heterogeneous IoT systems. The solid lines refer to connection and
communication links between nodes participating into the blockchain. The dashed line reﬂects the communication links between IoT devices
and edge nodes. Red lines (solid and dashed) represent vulnerable connections and suspected IoT communications.

by the efﬁcient AI modules implemented into all blockchain
nodes. The malware detection module is performed on IoT
gateways and nodes participating into the blockchain network.
This assumption ensures early and real-time detection as
well as reduces the risk to any cyber-attack attempt for the
blockchain network or any malware execution from the IoT
devices or between the network nodes.

IV. PERMISSIONED BLOCKCHAIN FOR IOT NETWORK
A blockchain is a growing, distributed, and immutable
time-stamped data records that are linked using cryptography,
managed, and distributed over different nodes participating in
that network. Originally, blockchain was designed to record
transactions for cryptocurrency systems. However, the use of
this technology has been widely extended and used in many
other ﬁelds such as industry and healthcare [21], [22]. In
literature, there are two major types of blockchain architecture:
permissioned and permission-less blockchain networks, based
on the application scenario, transactions types, and access
rules. Also, different blockchain platforms were developed
such as Ethereum, Ripple, and Hyperledger to emulate the
blockchain architecture, mining process, and the access re-
strictions for users [23].

In permission-less blockchain, aka public blockchain, any-
transactions,
one can join the blockchain network, submit
participate in the mining process, and leave the network
without any restriction or permission needed in advance.
This type of architecture ensures an open and decentralized
data sharing network between all nodes participating into the
blockchain. Moreover, all submitted transactions should be
veriﬁed and validated before creating the block and being
integrated into the blockchain. This process is ensured by a
consensus protocols. Usually, in public blockchain, the Proof-
Of-Work (PoW) consensus mechanism is used to validate
transactions and create new blocks to the chain.

For permissioned blockchains, sets of rules are deﬁned and
shared between all nodes participating into the blockchain

network in order to control access and manage this network.
In fact, this type of blockchains is considered more secure
and restricted compared to the public one. Commands and
management rules are not authorized for all nodes participating
into the network, but they are assigned to certain set of trusted
nodes which have these authorities. Miners are also authorized
nodes in the network and they are the only entities that have the
authority to create, validate, and integrate new blocks into the
blockchain. Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT) [24] is
the commune consensus protocol for this type of blockchain.
The PBFT algorithm is an improvement of the BFT, which
has the ability to be run in asynchronous environment and
also ensures high-speed transaction processing while solving
the Byzantine general problems.

For privacy and efﬁciency concerns, we advocate the use
of a permissioned blockchain, more precisely, the hyperledger
fabric which is an implementation of distributed ledger tech-
nology that ensures high level of security, scalability, and
performance [25]. This type of permissioned system ensures
strong identity management between different IoT nodes,
distinguishes between users and validators, and affects each
user its exact role into the network. In fact, hyperledger fabric
provides a membership identity service that controls member
IDs and authenticates users participating into the blockchain
network. Access and permission rules provide an additional se-
curity layer for the proposed IoT network, where these devices
can participate into the blockchain network with restricted
authorities and control to minimize data leakage from the
IoT devices. In addition, thanks to its modular design, this
system presents better performance and scalability, where data
submission requires less validation time while maintaining
decentralized storage and better security and privacy levels.
Nevertheless, this architecture is not sufﬁcient to protect the
network from malware and cyber-attacks especially the ones
initiated through IoT devices. Therefore, we add another layer
of security based on AI and machine learning to cope with

Fig. 2: Correlation heat-map matrix for the selected features.

those problems unsolved by permissioned blockchain.

V. MACHINE LEARNING FOR MALWARE DETECTION AND
CLASSIFICATION

In this section, we investigate the application of AI and
machine learning algorithms into the blockchain network in
order to enhance system security and its effectiveness against
malware and cyber-attacks. The proposed approach relies
on implementing efﬁcient and sophisticated AI modules to
automatically detect specious activities and protect all nodes
participating into the blockchain network.

We introduce the proposed methodology for data cleaning
and mining as well as the feature engineering and model
building processes so as to build an efﬁcient and robust AI
module. This solution cannot only detect malware and cyber-
attack but also classify them into different categories in real-
time and can prevent hackers from reaching their sinful goals.
Usually, numerical datasets have corrupted information or
missing values which may affect the quality as well as the
machine learning model accuracy. In this case, data cleaning
and processing techniques are applied for the dataset in order
to deal with this problem which can be caused during data
insertion, transport, or storage of information into the database.
During this process, we identify incomplete submissions, in-
correct values, and missing features. Then, we correct, replace,
or remove inaccurate records from the dataset so as to reduce
training time, enhance data quality, and improve the machine
learning model efﬁciency.

After cleaning the data, we explore and analyze its features.
In fact, in order to get robust and accurate detection model, we
have to train and validate the machine learning algorithm with
relevant features from the dataset. In this context, we analyze
the dataset, summarize its information, and extract the most
important features using visualization and statistics methods
such as feature correlation. Fig. 2 presents the features corre-
lation matrix used in this work to analyze the dataset features.

The higher the correlation between the different features is the
lower the information that we can get from these features are.
As a result, we eliminate redundant and weak features such
as ’Flow ID’, ’PSH Flags’, ’URG Flags’, and ’Bulk Rate’.

Before we build the detection model, we prepare the cleaned
data for machine learning. Most of the machine learning
algorithms do not support different types of data such as text
and structural entities during training phase, as a result we
carefully prepare and adapt those features so that we transform
them into other formats while preventing the creation of any
additional numerical relationship between different values.

We convert the malware and cyber-attacks detection into a
machine learning classiﬁcation problem. With this assumption,
we categorize different
types of malware and attack into
different classes. To this end, we adopt a multi-class categor-
ical classiﬁcation technique and investigate relevant machine
learning algorithms to solve this problem.

VI. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION AND IMPLEMENTATION

In this section, we simulate,

implement, and evaluate
the performance of the proposed IoT architecture based on
blockchain technology and AI. For the malware detection,
we use a real dataset from the Canadian Institute of Cyber-
security [26]. The datasets contain more than three million
samples of different data trafﬁc cyber-attacks during ﬁve
days. After merging, cleaning, and processing the data, we
obtain a dataset with more than two million and 8 hun-
dred thousand instances spanning ﬁfteen different cyber-attack
classes. Table I describes the data and different attacks used
to train the machine learning model. We deﬁne by benign the
normal trafﬁc coming from the IoT devices and malicious all
suspected trafﬁc that includes malware or unusual behavior
from the devices connected to that node. The proposed model
can recognize normal and suspected trafﬁc as well as detect
and distinguish fourteen cyber-attack categories.

Fig. 3: XGBoost normalized confusion matrix.

Fig. 4: Very fast decision tree normalized confusion matrix.

Trafﬁc category Attack type
Normal trafﬁc
Botnet

TABLE I: Dataset overview

Benign
Bot
FTP Patator
SSH Patator
DDos
Dos GoldenEye
Dos Hulk
Dos slowhttptest
Dos slowloris
Heartbleed
Inﬁltration
PortScan
Brute Force
SQL Injection
XSS

Samples number Total

2272688
1966
7938
5897
128027
10293
230124
5499
5796
11
36
158930
1507
21
652

2272688
1966

13835

379750

36
158930

2180

Brute force

Dos/DDos

Inﬁltration
PortScan

Web attack

To train the AI module, we use different classiﬁcation ma-
chine learning algorithms such as XGBoost, Decision tree, and
Gaussian Naive Bayes. Also, we implement a deep learning-
based solution to detect malware and suspected trafﬁc. In
order to evaluate the performance of these algorithms and
methodologies, we measure the accuracy, precision, recall,
and F1-score as shown in Table II. Accuracy shows a high
performance for the decision tree algorithm. XGBoost algo-
rithm achieves a close accuracy compared to the decision tree.
However, it shows better performance for the other evaluation
metrics. The notable performance of the decision tree and
XGBoost algorithms are validated by the confusion matrices
given in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 which highlight
the malware
detection efﬁciency of those algorithms for all cyber-attack
types existing in the testing dataset.

For the blockchain architecture, we present and simulate
the permissioned blockchain network using hyperledger fab-

TABLE II: Performance of the malware detection module
(macro average)
Classiﬁer
ANN
Decision Tree
Naive Bayes
XGBoost

Accuracy (%) Precision Recall F1-Score
0.96
0.92
0.50
0.96

98.84
99.97
37.68
99.96

0.85
0.95
0.57
0.93

0.90
0.92
0.39
0.94

ric [27] where roles, authorities, and identities of members
are known to all participants. In this network, we take all
gateways, servers, and nodes participating into the IoT envi-
ronment as participants. Also, we deﬁne the IoT devices as
assets participating into the network. Moreover, we assume
that each IoT device sends the information to the gateway by
submitting a transaction to the edge node which receives data
from this device then veriﬁes and stores it into the blockchain
network.

All the blockchain simulations and applications are devel-
oped using hyperledger composer playground module of the
hyperledger fabric framework. Fig. 5 presents the graphical
application interface for the blockchain network, where IoT
devices, that might enclose multiple sensors, submit transac-
tions to update their reported measures. As illustrated in the
ﬁgure, each sensor has its own ID and is associated to one IoT
device, which is also identiﬁed by its unique ID. For example,
the sensor 1437 is attached to the IoT device 7609 and its last
value equal to 23. After each measure taken by the sensor, the
IoT device submits a transaction to the edge node in order to
update the sensor values and save them into the blockchain. In
Fig. 6, we illustrate an example of a transaction made by the
sensor with ID 1 to update its value to 11 into the blockchain.

Fig. 5: Edge node interface.

Fig. 6: IoT device transaction.

VII. CONCLUSION

In this study, we introduced a novel architecture for IoT net-
works based on blockchain and AI technologies to decentralize
authorities, enhance data sharing, and protect them from cyber-
attacks. Due its compatibility with the distributed nature of
IoT systems, we employed permissioned blockchain to share
and store the IoT devices data. Then, we supported edge
and back-end entities with AI modules where machine and
deep learning algorithms such as ANN and decision tree-based
algorithms are implemented to detect and classify suspicious
activities in the blockchain network. Through implementation
and simulations, we evaluate the efﬁciency of the proposed
architecture in detecting and classifying cyber-attacks using
practical and real-world datasets where decision tree based
models show better performance compared to other state-of-
the-art algorithms. As a future work, we aim to strengthen the
proposed architecture by other AI modules capable of not only
detecting and classifying cyber-attacks but also automatically
recovering and helping make cyber-attack response decisions.

REFERENCES

[1] V. Hassija, V. Chamola, V. Saxena, D. Jain, P. Goyal, and B. Sikdar, “A
survey on IoT security: Application areas, security threats, and solution
architectures,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 82 721–82 743, June 2019.
[2] A. Bader, H. Ghazzai, A. Kadri, and M. Alouini, “Front-end intelligence
for large-scale application-oriented Internet-of-Things,” IEEE Access,
vol. 4, pp. 3257–3272, 2016.

[3] Y. Jin, M. Tomoishi, K. Fujikawa, and V. P. Kaﬂe, “A lightweight
and secure IoT remote monitoring mechanism using DNS with privacy
preservation,” in IEEE Annual Consumer Communications Networking
Conference (CCNC’19), Las Vegas, NV, USA, January 2019.

[4] T. Ahram, A. Sargolzaei, S. Sargolzaei, J. Daniels, and B. Amaba,
“Blockchain technology innovations,” in IEEE Technology Engineering
Management Conference (TEMSCON’17), Santa Clara, CA, USA, June
2017.

[5] R. Dagar, S. Som, and S. K. Khatri, “Smart farming IoT in agriculture,”
in IEEE International Conference on Inventive Research in Computing
Applications (ICIRCA’18), Coimbatore, India , July 2018.

[6] K. Kataoka, S. Gangwar, and P. Podili, “Trust list: Internet-wide and
distributed IoT trafﬁc management using blockchain and SDN,” in IEEE
World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT’18), Singapore, Singapore,
February 2018.

[7] R. Wang, W. Tsai, J. He, C. Liu, Q. Li, and E. Deng, “A video surveil-
lance system based on permissioned blockchains and edge computing,”
in IEEE International Conference on Big Data and Smart Computing
(BigComp’19), Kyoto, Japan, February 2019.

[8] M. Singh and S. Kim, “Trust bit: Reward-based intelligent vehicle
commination using blockchain paper,” in IEEE World Forum on Internet
of Things (WF-IoT’18), Singapore, Singapore, February 2018.

[9] C. Kolias, G. Kambourakis, A. Stavrou, and J. Voas, “DDoS in the IoT:
Mirai and other botnets,” Computer, vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 80–84, July 2017.
[10] L. Chan, I. Morgan, H. Simon, F. Alshabanat, D. Ober, J. Gentry,
D. Min, and R. Cao, “Survey of ai in cybersecurity for information
technology management,” in IEEE Technology Engineering Management
Conference (TEMSCON’19), Atlanta, GA, USA, June 2019.

[11] M. Muslih, Somantri, D. Supardi, E. Multipi, Y. M. Nyaman, A. Ris-
mawan, and Gunawansyah, “Developing smart workspace based IoT
with artiﬁcial intelligence using telegram chatbot,” in IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Computing, Engineering, and Design (ICCED’18),
Bangkok, Thailand, September 2018.

[12] S. Huh, S. Cho, and S. Kim, “Managing IoT devices using blockchain
platform,” in IEEE International Conference on Advanced Communica-
tion Technology (ICACT’17), Bongpyeong, South Korea, February 2017.
[13] W. Viriyasitavat, L. Da Xu, Z. Bi, and A. Sapsomboon, “New
blockchain-based architecture for service interoperations in internet of
things,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems, vol. 6,
no. 4, pp. 739–748, August 2019.

[14] Y. Lu, X. Huang, Y. Dai, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain and
federated learning for privacy-preserved data sharing in industrial IoT,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, pp. 1–1, September 2019.
[15] C. H. Liu, Q. Lin, and S. Wen, “Blockchain-enabled data collection
and sharing for industrial IoT with deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 3516–3526,
June 2019.

[16] A. A. Malik, D. K. Tosh, and U. Ghosh, “Non-intrusive deployment
of blockchain in establishing cyber-infrastructure for smart city,” in
Annual IEEE International Conference on Sensing, Communication, and
Networking (SECON’19), Boston, MA, USA, June 2019.

[17] M. Pahl and F. Aubet, “All eyes on you: Distributed multi-dimensional
IoT microservice anomaly detection,” in International Conference on
Network and Service Management (CNSM’18), Rome, Italy, November
2018.

[18] A. Kumar and T. J. Lim, “EDIMA: Early detection of IoT malware
network activity using machine learning techniques,” in 2019 IEEE 5th
World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), April 2019.

[19] R. Kumar, X. Zhang, W. Wang, R. U. Khan, J. Kumar, and A. Sharif, “A
multimodal malware detection technique for android IoT devices using
various features,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 64 411–64 430, May 2019.

[20] M. Shen, X. Tang, L. Zhu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Privacy-preserving
support vector machine training over blockchain-based encrypted IoT
data in smart cities,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp.
7702–7712, October 2019.

[21] X. Liu, Z. Wang, C. Jin, F. Li, and G. Li, “A blockchain-based medical
data sharing and protection scheme,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 118 943–
118 953, August 2019.

[22] N. Dhieb, H. Ghazzai, H. Besbes, and Y. Massoud, “A secure ai-driven
architecture for automated insurance systems: Fraud detection and risk
measurement,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 58 546–58 558, 2020.

[23] J. White and C. Daniels, “Continuous cybersecurity management
through blockchain technology,” in IEEE Technology Engineering Man-
agement Conference (TEMSCON’19), Atlanta, GA, USA, June 2019.

[24] M. Castro and B. Liskov, “Practical byzantine fault

tolerance and
proactive recovery,” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS),
vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 398–461, 2002.

[25] E. Androulaki, A. Barger, V. Bortnikov, C. Cachin, K. Christidis,
A. De Caro, D. Enyeart, C. Ferris, G. Laventman, Y. Manevich et al.,

“Hyperledger fabric: a distributed operating system for permissioned
blockchains,” in Proceedings of the Thirteenth EuroSys Conference,
2018.

[26] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion trafﬁc characterization.”
in ICISSP, 2018, pp. 108–116.

[27] H. Sukhwani, J. M. Martnez, X. Chang, K. S. Trivedi, and A. Rindos,
“Performance modeling of PBFT consensus process for permissioned
blockchain network (hyperledger fabric),” in IEEE Symposium on Re-
liable Distributed Systems (SRDS’17), Hong Kong, China, September
2017.

