Wireless Networks
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11276-018-1883-0 (0123456789().,-volV)(0123456789().,-volV)

A framework of blockchain-based secure and privacy-preserving
E-government system

Noe Elisa1

• Longzhi Yang1

• Fei Chao2

• Yi Cao3

(cid:2) The Author(s) 2018

Abstract
Electronic government (e-government) uses information and communication technologies to deliver public services to
individuals and organisations effectively, efﬁciently and transparently. E-government is one of the most complex systems
which needs to be distributed, secured and privacy-preserved, and the failure of these can be very costly both economically
and socially. Most of the existing e-government systems such as websites and electronic identity management systems
(eIDs) are centralized at duplicated servers and databases. A centralized management and validation system may suffer
from a single point of failure and make the system a target to cyber attacks such as malware, denial of service attacks
(DoS), and distributed denial of service attacks (DDoS). The blockchain technology enables the implementation of highly
secure and privacy-preserving decentralized systems where transactions are not under the control of any third party
organizations. Using the blockchain technology, exiting data and new data are stored in a sealed compartment of blocks
(i.e., ledger) distributed across the network in a veriﬁable and immutable way. Information security and privacy are
enhanced by the blockchain technology in which data are encrypted and distributed across the entire network. This paper
proposes a framework of a decentralized e-government peer-to-peer (p2p) system using the blockchain technology, which
can ensure both information security and privacy while simultaneously increasing the trust of the public sectors. In
addition, a prototype of the proposed system is presented, with the support of a theoretical and qualitative analysis of the
security and privacy implications of such system.

Keywords E-government systems (cid:2) Blockchain technology (cid:2) Cybersecurity (cid:2) Privacy (cid:2) Decentralized systems

1 Introduction

The wide availability of internet has motivated different
countries around the world to exploit technologies as a
means of communication and services exchange between
citizens and other afﬁliates. E-government users enjoy the
online services without leaving their comfortable homes,

& Longzhi Yang

longzhi.yang@northumbria.ac.uk

Noe Elisa
noe.nnko@northumbria.ac.uk

1 Department of Computer and Information Sciences,

Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 8ST, UK

2 Cognitive Science Department, Xiamen University, Xiamen,

People’s Republic of China

3

Technology Department of Nanjing Customs District,
Nanjing, People’s Republic of China

them are connected for

evading long queues in public ofﬁces whilst saving time
and transportation costs, and at the same time the service
providers can deliver services more effectively and efﬁ-
ciently. Generally speaking, government networks can
communicate to each other better than business networks,
because most of
transferring
information to the public without competition. In the
future, the number of devices using e-government services
will increase dramatically due to the fast evolution of smart
homes, internet of things (IOT), smart cities, and other
interconnected networks [1, 2]. According to the United
Nation e-government survey, 2014 [3], almost every gov-
ernment around the world is currently providing its citizens
and other stakeholders e-services via websites and mobile
applications.

E-government systems collect, store and process a sig-
niﬁcant amount of conﬁdential information about citizens,
researches, ﬁnancial
employees, customers, products,

123

status amongst others, using electronic computers. The
compromise of such information usually leads to the loss of
users’ trust and conﬁdence, opportunities, and ﬁnancial
advantages, etc [4]. It has been found that more than 80%
of e-government web sites around the globe were vulner-
able to cross-site scripting (XSS) and structured query
(SQL) injection due to the lack of proper authentication
mechanism applied to input data from users [5]. Recently,
many nations around the world have experienced a great
threat from denial of service attacks (DoS) and malware
targeting their networks [6]. For instance, the U.S. gov-
ernment suffered one of the largest e-government attacks in
2015, causing the leak of over 4 million government
including security
employees’ conﬁdential
clearance information, social security numbers, identities
and passwords [7]. According to the report in [8], in 2016,
the Tanzania government was hit by cyber-terrorists,
technology spies, hackers and digital fraudsters leading a
loss around 85 millions US dollars. In addition, more than
1500 user accounts in Singapore were hacked in the gov-
ernment platform in 2014, where hackers gained access to
creating new businesses and apply for work permits [7].

information,

It is therefore of signiﬁcant importance to ensure the
security, privacy, conﬁdentiality, integrity and availability
of e-government systems. The existing e-government sys-
tems, such as e-government websites and eIDs manage-
ment systems [9, 10], are centralized where one or
duplicated central servers and databases store and provide
information to users. The centralized management and
validation system is likely to suffer from a single point of
failure and makes the system a target to cyber attacks such
as DDoS, DoS and malware. Any e-government system
will remain vulnerable to privacy and security breaches if
better security technology and countermeasures are not
developed and available to combat these threats in the
future.

The blockchain technology has appeared to be one good
solution to provide a secure decentralized environment for
information exchange [11, 12]. Although it was originally
introduced for exchanging digital currency as its underly-
ing technology, it has found security and privacy applica-
tions in many other areas, such as Internet of Things (IoTs)
[13], smart home [14], smart city [1], educational systems
[15], and healthcare [16]. While governments around the
world have not fully adopted the blockchain technology in
the public sectors, many countries have initiated block-
chain projects to explore the potential of blockchain tech-
nology in offering public services to individuals [17]. Each
of these projects usually focuses on a particular service, for
example e-residency, e-health, land registry etc; they are
still in their early stages and no common framework has
been proposed for blockchain technology integration
within the e-government systems [17]. In addtion, each of

123

Wireless Networks

these countries is developing their own blockchain frame-
work. Different blockchain systems from different coun-
tries lead to difﬁculties to communicate out of their
network for international information exchange.

This paper presents a framework and prototype of
blockchain-based secure and privacy-preserving e-govern-
ment system, which can be adopted by any government for
the purpose of ensuring both security and privacy while
simultaneously increasing trust in the public sector. The
system is made of a peer to peer network of e-government
devices (nodes) and user’s devices. Brieﬂy, any new
e-government device or individual device joining the sys-
tem will be reviewed by the existing peers of the network
and one of the peer is elected to set up a network node and
blockchain address of a new device. When a new user
attempts to register with the system through a device or one
of the government departments, the user is assigned with a
user ID and a blockchain wallet for collecting and storing
his/her transaction. By doing so, e-government users can
submit and access their
records from anywhere and
everywhere, using their IDs and blockchain addresses. This
paper has also analysed and evaluated the security and
privacy implications of the proposed system in public
sectors using theoretical and qualitative analysis.

The reminder of the paper is structured as follows.
Section 2 briefs the background technologies on the
blockchain and e-government systems. Section 3 intro-
duces the proposed e-government framework and proto-
type. Section 4 discusses
the security and privacy
implications of the proposed system, and Sect. 5 concludes
the paper and outlines the future research directions.

2 Background

The background technologies on the blockchain and
e-government systems are reviewed in this section.

2.1 Blockchain technology

Blockchain is a peer to peer (p2p) distributed database (i.e.,
ledger) maintaining a list of continuously growing records
called blocks that are linked and secured usually using
public key cryptography [11]. By the blockchain technol-
ogy, new information is added to a block and becomes
available to all nodes in a distributed network, rather than
adding to the centralized database in the traditional cen-
tralized system. Each block in a blockchain is identiﬁed by
a hash value generated by usually using the secure hash
cryptographic algorithm-256bits (SHA256) [11]. The hash
value of a current block header (parent) is linked and stored
in the next block (child) as depicted in Fig. 1 [18]; there-
fore, if there is an alteration in any block’s content, its hash

Wireless Networks

Fig. 1 An example ledger with details of blocks

will also be changed accordingly and this change will be
propagated throughout the network to invalidate that block
[11]. Based on this mechanism, the blockchain technology
does not require an intermediary or trusted third party as it
is decentralized and distributed. The blockchain partici-
pants have private keys assigned to them to digitally sign
and validate the transactions they make.

As shown in Fig. 1, a block is composed of a header
containing the meta data, and a long list of transactions
performed in that block. The block header typically con-
tains the timestamp, nonce, version and proof of difﬁculty.
The timestamp indicates the time that the block was cre-
ated; the nonce is a random number generated by the
consensus algorithm to compute the hash value of a block;
the version indicates the version number of the blockchain;
and the proof of difﬁculty is a generated hash value which
must be less than the current target hash value.

The ﬁrst block, known as a genesis block, is hardcoded
by embedding some random data into the blockchain
application [11]. Although each block has only one parent
and one child, a valid block may have two or more children
temporarily created when two or more nodes (network
peers) are added to a block at the same time leading to two
or multiple branches from the same parent [18]. This sit-
uation is usually called ‘fork’ and is eliminated by taking
the chain whichever becomes longer than the others as a
valid blockchain, and making all other shorter ones invalid
(orphan), with a two-branch situation demonstrated in
Fig. 2. It is possible that the formed branches have the same
length; in this situation, the process of adding new blocks
continue for all the to-be-validated chains until one branch
becomes longer than the others thus valid.

Within a block, all the transactions are linked together
using a merkle tree [11]. A merkle tree is an upside down
binary tree used by the blockchain technology to sum-
marise all the transaction in a block. To construct a merkle
tree, a pair of transactions are hashed recursively until they

form only one root node at the top of the tree termed as the
merkle root [11], as shown in Fig. 3. More precisely, a
merkle root is the hash of all the transactions that make up
a block in a blockchain network. Any tiny modiﬁcation of
the data will change the merkle root hash leading to an
invalid record. The most common cryptographic hash
algorithm used to construct a merkle tree is the secure hash
algorithm 256-bits (SHA256). If there is an odd number of
transactions, the last transaction hash is duplicated to create
an even number of transactions thus ending up with a
balanced tree.

Nodes in the blockchain network run a consensus
algorithm to validate transactions. There are several con-
sensus algorithms (protocols) available for the blockchain
technology, such as proof of work (PoW), proof of stake
(PoS), delegated proof of stake (DPoS), and proof of dif-
ﬁculty (PoD) [18, 19]. For instance, Bitcoin employs the
PoW while Ethereum and Bitshare implement PoS and
DPoS, respectively [19]. In PoW, miner nodes which want
to add (mine) a new block to the blockchain network must
ﬁrst solve a difﬁcult mathematical puzzle which requires
great computational power. The miner who solves the
puzzle adds a new block and gets rewards in bitcoins [18].
Unlike the PoW, with the PoS, a node which creates a
new block is chosen deterministically depending on its
stake (wealth) [19]. PoS saves energy that is required in
PoW to solve the mathematical puzzle, and only the wealth
of a node (validator) is required to validate the new
transactions and blocks. The DPoS attempts to solve the
consensus problem using delegates [19]. DPoS uses a real
time voting and reputation system to create a panel of
limited trusted delegates who will witness and validate the
blocks. The witnesses have the rights to create blocks and
add them to the blockchain network, in addition to prohibit
malicious nodes from participating in adding blocks.
Principally, in PoS and DPoS, stakeholders of the network
shares are not expected to deliberately make bad decisions
for the network.

Blockchain network can be permissioned or permis-
sionless [20]. A permissionless network or public block-
chain allows any user to create a personal address, join the

Fig. 2 Blockchain validation for the fork situation

Fig. 3 An illustration of the merkle tree

123

network, and participate in consensus, whilst a permis-
sioned or private network only allows a number of
restricted nodes to join.

2.2 E-government systems

E-government services can typically be categorized into 3
groups: government to government (G2G), government to
citizen (G2C), and government to business (G2B) [21].
G2G offers an online interaction between government
departments, authorities, organisations and other govern-
ments to disseminate information among themselves using
the internet. G2C and G2B allow citizens and businesses to
interact with the government to get online services such as
ﬁling property tax, ﬁling income tax, extending/renewal of
visa, passport and licenses, online voting, e-procurement
application, etc.

Every e-government department ensures

that only
authorized users can get access to individual’s conﬁdential
information. In additional to security and privacy, another
important factor to consider during e-government imple-
mentation is to build a trustable system that users can rely
on [22]. Security and privacy assurance in e-government
systems plays a critical role in increasing trustness between
different departments within the government as it guaran-
integrity, and privileged access of
tees conﬁdentiality,
sensitive information. Typical attacks that e-government
system faces include packet sniffers, probes, malware,
DDoS, phishing etc [23, 24]. Due to cyber warfare, there
are other new motivations for attacks such as political
differences, extortion, cyber terrorism, and even contests
for the supremacy which can occur within a nation or
between different nations [6].

Different non-technical e-government security maturity
models have been proposed for guiding and benchmarking
the security implementation of the e-government system.
For instance, a comprehensive e-government information
security maturity model for guiding the inclusion of secu-
rity in e-government systems was reported in the work of
[21]. This model focuses only on the organisation’s secu-
rity mechanisms setting, security evaluation, security pol-
icy setting and information security awareness to users, but
it
lacks guidance for built-in security that can ensure
e-service security and privacy.

Commonly, the security and privacy of e-government
systems are provided using ﬁrewalls, intrusion detections
systems (IDSs), public key infrastructure (PKI) and anti-
virus mechanisms [2]. Various artiﬁcial intelligence tech-
niques have been employed in the implementation of IDSs
that can also be used by e-government systems [25–30]. In
addition to these common solutions, one hardware solution
to e-government security issues is the use of eID system
[31] for identiﬁcation, authentication, conﬁdentiality and

123

Wireless Networks

integrity of users’ information. An eID system uses a smart
card which includes a chip to store cardholder’s personal
data including date of birth, civil status, parenthood, cur-
rent and past addresses, etc, in additional to certiﬁcate for
authentication and digital signature [32]. An eID system
provides a means for distinguishing between different cit-
izens and businesses uniquely in order to access electronic
services. eID cards are offered by migration boards and
national identity register in most countries. The same eID
can be used in multiple sectors (e.g. taxation, social secu-
rity, education, telephony services, banking services) while
fulﬁlling different roles (e.g. a civil servant or a business-
man) depending on the context. The existing eID man-
agement systems are not interoperable and lacks security as
a result of having single centralized system for keeping
records [32].

Another technical solution for security and privacy
is an authentication framework
issues in e-government
proposed in [33]. This framework utilises different regis-
tration and authentication procedures based on a single
central citizen portal interfaced with ministerial depart-
ments. The framework consists of two parts namely Iden-
tity Provider (IdP) and the Service Provider (SP). Users
have to register with IdP at a central portal of an e-gov-
ernment system to obtain unique identities that will be used
to access services from the service providers. Whenever a
user wants to access a service, SP must authenticate his/her
identity with the IdP at the central portal to obtain a Single
Sign On (SSO) password that can be used to access dif-
ferent SPs.

3 Blockchain-based E-government system

The proposed blockchain-based e-government framework
is illustrated in Fig. 4. In this ﬁgure, a double direction
arrow G2G shows an interaction taking place between
government departments and organizations, allowing a

Fig. 4 The proposed blockchain-based e-government network

Wireless Networks

peer to peer (p2p) exchange (broadcast) and validation of
data being submitted by individuals. A G2C double
direction arrow represents information sharing between
citizens and the government such as ﬁlling forms for tax,
marriage certiﬁcates, business permits, birth certiﬁcates,
visa or passport. A G2B double direction arrow expresses
information exchange such as electronic procurement, tax
and insurance clearance forms and electronic auctions
between public and business organizations (enterprises) as
the main source of economic growth.

The joining of any new e-government (G) node or user
node (C or B) to the blockchain network is reviewed by
peers in the network, and e-government tokens are assigned
for setting up its network node, leading to a permissioned
(private) blockchain. The number of e-government tokens
is equivalent to the total number of records stored by a
node in the blockchain network. Each user has a dedicated
e-government blockchain wallet to collect his/her tokens.
Once a record is submitted, the record will be transferred in
terms of stake to his/her blockchain address. Using a DPoS
protocol, any node will be able to register with the network
as a delegate as described in Sect. 3.2. In order to add a
new block to the blockchain, the departments that jointly
make up the e-government system vote for a delegate who
will validate the transactions and seal
the block. This
approach is appropriate for security requirement, since
random nodes cannot
join the network, generate new
tokens and set up a network node unless the rest e-gov-
ernment nodes approve it. The permissioned blockchain
system ensures that the stored records are trustworthy,
auditable and transparent.

3.1 Network nodes

There are two types of nodes in blockchain terminology,
which are full nodes and lightweight nodes [18]. A full
node downloads a full copy of the blockchain when it joins
the blockchain network, which allows it to fully validate
transactions and blocks. A lightweight node does not
download a complete copy of the blockchain when it joins
the network, but it downloads only the block headers to
validate the authenticity of transactions. To be able to
transfer their transactions to the network and receive
notiﬁcations when transactions affect
their blockchain
wallets, lightweight nodes usually refer to a copy of a
trusted full node of the blockchain.

In the proposed system, e-government department nodes
serve as full nodes while user’s devices (C and B) serve as
lightweight nodes, although any business node is allowed
to download a complete copy of the blockchain. The p2p
network connectivity in the proposed network can be
provided by using wireless broadband, thanks to the fact
that many countries across the world are trying to

incorporate a city-wide wireless broadband network across
the city using the Wi-Fi technology [34].

3.2 Delegates and witnesses voting

Peers need to agree on a state of the block’s transactions
and the process of sealing the blocks into the blockchain, in
order for the network to remain functional. The DPoS is
adopted here as the consensus algorithm due to its com-
putational efﬁciency in adding transactions and sealing a
block [19]. Brieﬂy, the DPoS can be viewed as a repre-
sentative democracy where the e-government nodes utilize
their stake (records) in order to elect delegates (other
nodes) to join the network. Delegates are responsible for
securing the network and voting for witnesses among them
who will validate transactions and seal the blocks.

in delegates with relatively small

To elect the witnesses, votes are weighed according to
the size of the tokens of each delegate or voting node. A
delegate does not need to have a large token to get selected
as a witness, but votes from delegates with large tokens can
result
tokens being
elected as witnesses. E-government nodes will store its
individual’s records, allowing them to have higher tokens
to participate and vote for witnesses which increases the
security of the proposed system. In DPoS, nodes are
allowed to delegate their voting power to other nodes,
whom they trust to vote for witnesses on their behalf. Any
delegate which appears to misbehave will be removed from
the set of participating delegates and its votes is assigned to
a new node joining the network or any existing node in
order to ensure security and trust within the network.

The choice of the underlying blockchain technology for
the prototype implementation mainly relies on the avail-
ability and efﬁciency of the DPoS implementation. In the
meantime, the computational energy required for validat-
ing transactions must be affordable while the security of
the established network must be guaranteed. For instance,
Ethereum platform implements DPoS and smart contract
protocol to simulate real contracts such as tax and insur-
ance contracts, employment contracts, and land registry
[35]. It provides an important alternative in e-government
to store citizens’ sensitive records, due to its ability to
facilitate contract negotiation, simplify contract
terms,
implement contract execution, and verify contract fulﬁll-
ment state.

3.3 New node creation

The process of registering a new node to the proposed
e-government network is summarised in ‘‘Algorithm 1’’.
Any e-government department can join the blockchain net-
work by setting up a full network node while other users can
only set up lightweight nodes. Once a new node join the

123

Wireless Networks

3.4 User registration

Users make their registrations using their network devices
or physically visiting one of the government departments,
with the process summarised in ‘‘Algorithm 2’’. As
described in lines 2 and 3 in this algorithm, an ID for a user
is issued and a new blockchain address is generated for the
user containing public and private keys, allowing the
identiﬁcation of the owner. A Blockchain wallet for this
new user is created and broadcasted (lines 5–8) so that each
node can store it in its blockchain address. The created
blockchain wallet is then used to send and receive trans-
actions related to the user’s account. User IDs and private
keys will be stored safely in the wallet ﬁle or the database
of the user’s device. Users can conveniently view their
records and the new transaction available in their block-
chain addresses through the wallet interface.

network, a functional node will generate its blockchain
wallet and address containing public and private keys as
shown in lines 7 and 8 in ‘‘Algorithm 1’’. The private key is
used by each node to sign and validate transactions therefore
it must be kept safely (line 9). After generating the address, a
node will contact delegates in the blockchain network to send
its registration request, and one of the delegates will verify its
registration and transfer some e-government tokens (regis-
tration record) in its blockchain address.

Thereafter, a new node is added to the network, and its
registration is broadcasted to the network peers by the
assigned delegate (line 12–14), allowing other network peers
to receive its wallet information for sending transactions in
the next cycle. Additionally, a new node receives instruc-
tions for a network node setup so that it can be elected as a
delegate to validate transactions in the next cycle. Subse-
quently, the new node sets up the network node according to
the instruction provided. In particular, the instruction con-
sists of the size of initial token, the blockchain address of a
node, and the public and private keys for signing and vali-
dating transactions before adding a block.

The process of adding a new node is completed when a
network node is successfully set up and broadcasted to the
network by a delegate. Information security is enhanced by
using encrypted data distributed across the network.
Therefore, even if a malicious node is registered as a
department node, it cannot alter the data as every partici-
pating peer in the network is able to detect the alteration
and invalidate the change.

When a user submits a record to a delegate, the trans-
action is authenticated and initialized. From this, the block
is updated to a new version which is broadcasted across the
network for validation and then transferred to his/her
blockchain address in all network peers. The transferred
record is stored in the blockchain address of the user with
the following data content: (1) the ID of the user, (2) the
record value such as property registration, and (3) the
record identiﬁcation such as tax registration number. Each
data instance in a blockchain represents an asset.

When a third party organization (e.g., business) requests
to access a user’s information for any ofﬁcial issues, the
user needs to provide his/her blockchain address for veri-
ﬁcation. The organisation can then use the blockchain web
API to access the blockchain data stored in the user’s
address. All e-government users are required to backup
their private keys and keep them safe. If any user lost his/
her private key, (s)he will be required to create a new
blockchain address and request one of the e-government

123

Wireless Networks

department node to transfer his/her information from the
old blockchain address to a newly created blockchain
address.

The user’s device and identity will be validated and
authenticated, when a registered user wants to access the
network. This helps to minimise human errors which have
always been considered as a main contribution of failure
and a weak link to access information stored in information
systems [36]. As a result, government information will ﬂow
securely and seemingly to the right individuals at the right
time and right place. Typical human errors in cyber secu-
rity include sending sensitive data to the wrong recipient
and unintentionally exposing login credentials such as
username and passwords. According to [37], human error
remain as one of the main causes for cyber security breach
in the public and private organisations.

3.5 New block generation

Every block is created by one active witness who is
selected at random by the majority of peers from the list of
active delegates. If a witness misses a block, another wit-
ness is tasked to create and validate the block to join the
blockchain network. In DPoS, a ﬁxed period of time is set
for block creation, often ﬁve seconds [19]. ‘‘Algorithm 3’’
highlights the fundamental steps involved in the process of
generating and adding a block to the blockchain using the
DPoS consensus algorithm.

A block is added in a regular interval of time, Tc. Within
this interval, the block undergoes the following phases of
activities. First, an empty set of transactions R is initial-
ized; and one witness from a group of delegates is elected
to create and validate the transactions for the blockchain.
Secondly, all the transactions are sent to the elected wit-
ness. This process continues until
the witness stops
accepting any new transactions for the block. Thirdly, the
witness assembles the new block and distributes it to the
network delegates for review and veriﬁcation. This allows
those nodes that elected the witness to digitally sign the
block to prove its correctness. The signed block is returned
to the witness and added to its local blockchain while
simultaneously distributing the new block to the network.
The witness cannot mine its own transaction and hence in
lines 4 and 9, b (witness) is excluded from the set of nodes
N. At the end of the algorithm, the blockchain is distributed
to all government nodes in the network.

4 Security and privacy analysis

Every e-government system must guarantee the conﬁden-
tiality, integrity and availability of the services. Conﬁ-
dentiality is achieved when information is not disclosed to
unauthorised users;
integrity is achieved by protecting
information from any form of modiﬁcation, whilst avail-
ability means information is available when needed and is
free from DoS or DDoS or other similar service disruption.
This section provides a theoretical qualitative analysis on
the security and privacy performance of the blockchain-
based e-government system.

The records stored in the proposed system are secured
through the public key cryptography that protects against
adversarial attempts to alteration and/or unauthorised
access, whilst network users are assigned with private keys
for validating and signing transactions. Encryption and
digital signature are used in the network to ensure security,
privacy and access control to the stored records. Moreover,
most of the blockchain consensus algorithms (in this case
DPoS) require an attacker to control at least 51% of the
network peers in order to alter a record [20], which is
generally impossible to achieve. More precisely, in order to
change any block in the blockchain, an attacker has to
modify every copy of that block in the network and then
convince most of the nodes that the new block is the valid
one. Also, to increase the privacy of the data stored in the
proposed network, all user’s blocks are hashed and an
incomprehensible hashes of the transactions are stored in
the blockchain.

The proposed system is a decentralized p2p system
where the user’s data are stored in different nodes which

123

Table 1 Security services and common measures

Security service

Countermeasure (s)

Authentication

Blockchain address and digital signature

Access control

Digital Signature and encryption

Conﬁdentiality

Encryption

Integrity

Encryption and digital signature

Non-repudiation

Encryption and digital signature

Availability

Distributed/decentralised

Trust

Decentralized, encryption and digital signature

Table 2 Comparison between RSA and ECC key lengths in bits

RSA key length

ECC key length

Approx. ratio (RSA:ECC)

1024

2048

3072

7680

15360

160

224

256

348

512

6:1

9:1

12:1

20:1

30:1

guarantees the availability of the system by avoiding any
single point of failure. Using DPoS, it is difﬁcult for any
adversary to launch DDoS or DoS attacks against
the
system as registration is required for a node to start sharing
information with the rest of the network peers. Any
transactions received from the network node are validated
by the witnesses making it difﬁcult for malicious nodes to
initiate malicious connections.

Table 3 Features of blockchain-based e-government system

Feature

Justiﬁcation

Wireless Networks

The security services and corresponding common mea-
sures provided by the proposed framework is summarised
in Table 1, which ensure adequate privacy and security of
the transactions. For computational efﬁciency, user’s
devices will run lightweight client to store the transactions
rather than the complete copy of the blockchain which is
expensive in terms of storage. E-government devices are
expected to be computationally powerful with enough
storage capacity to store and process user’s records efﬁ-
ciently. The network is able to offer the performances
provided by the blockchain technology and DPoS con-
sensus protocol such as scalability, speed, interoperability,
and transparency, and it can handle a large number of
transactions.

The elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) approach is
adopted for implementing encryption and digital signature
in the proposed framework, which is a common practice for
most of the existing blockchain technologies such as Bit-
coin and Ethereum. Note that
the ECC and the RSA
(Rivest-Shamir-Adleman) offers a similar level of security
but ECC consumes far less number of bits [38]. For
instance, a 256-bit key in ECC offers the same level of
security as that provided by the RSA using a 3072-bit key.
Shorter key usually means low CPU consumption, low
memory usage and fast key generation. These advantages
are also beneﬁcial to the proposed framework in facilitating
fast creation of the transactions and sealing the blocks. A
summary of key length study between the RSA and ECC is
provided in Table 2 [38]. 256-bit ECC keys are widely in

Reduced human errors

User devices and identities are authenticated in advance before gaining access to the network

Increased public trust

Individuals have direct control of their information and all network participants are authenticated

Greater scalability

The system can easily scale up as it allows new devices and users to be added to the network automatically following

the consensus mechanism

Improved reliability

Data are stored in multiple servers/locations. The consensus protocol ensures that data can only be altered when all

participants agree so

Increased resiliency

Single point of failures are avoided and the system hence resilient to malware, DoS and DDoS attacks

Improved auditability

It is easy to trace back the history of all transactions since they remain unchanged in the network

Greater veriﬁability

All new transactions are validated by all participating peers in the network before being added to the blockchain

Information ownership

Individuals are responsible to authorise who will access their information

Improved access to

Information is stored at multiple locations which enhances easy and speed access

information

Increased data quality

All transactions and records stored in the system are validated in advance making the stored information authentic

with the required quality

Greater transparency

All nodes in the network share the same copy of the blockchain and new transactions are added based on the

consensus mechanism

Reduced operational

There is no third party organisation needed to process transactions

costs

Improved efﬁciency and

Anyone in the network are able to access to all records subject to the accessibility privilege and new records are

speed

distributed to all participating nodes

123

Wireless Networks

blockchain technology as they can provide the required
level of security for the majority of applications.

Apart from security and privacy preserving, the block-
chain-based e-government system also provides a number
of other beneﬁts as summarised in Table 3. These features
make blockchain technology as a perspective trend in the
implementation of an e-government system, which is able
to provide a convenient, safe and fault tolerant communi-
cation channel between the public sectors and citizens. The
indirect beneﬁts brought by the blockchain technologies,
such as bureaucracy reduction, paper usage exclusion,
transaction costs reduction, and corruption control, can
change the governace ecosystem with higher degree of
trust from citizens.

5 Conclusion and future work

This paper proposed an e-government framework that can
enforce security and privacy in the public sectors by
employing the blockchain technology. The theoretical and
qualitative analysis on security and privacy of the frame-
work shows that, cryptography,
immutability and the
decentralized management and control offered by the
blockchain technology can provide the required security
and privacy in e-government systems. The proposed sys-
tem also has the potential of solving the interoperability
issues between governance departments which is one of the
limitations of existing e-government systems. As this work
is limited at the framework and theoretical discussion level,
the active future work is to implement such framework and
then further explore its full potential in a real-world envi-
ronment. Note that, the blockchain technology such as
Ethereum is still at its early stages of development and
therefore another piece of future work would be the
application of the appropriate version of blockchain tech-
nology in public sectors to meet and increase the security
and privacy of individual’s data.

Acknowledgements This work has been supported by the Common-
wealth
and
Scholarship Commission
University of Northumbria at Newcastle, UK.

(CSC-TZCS-2017-717)

Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creative
commons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, dis-
tribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were
made.

References

1. Biswas, K., & Muthukkumarasamy, V. (2016). Securing smart
cities using blockchain technology. In 2016 IEEE 18th interna-
tional conference on high performance computing and commu-
nications; IEEE 14th international conference on smart city;
IEEE 2nd international conference on data science and systems
(HPCC/SmartCity/DSS) (pp. 1392–1393). IEEE.

2. Yang, L., Elisa, N., & Eliot, N. (2018). Privacy and security
aspects of E-government in smart cities. New York: Elsevier
Press.

3. UN. (2016). E-Government survey 2014. E-Government in sup-
port of sustainable development/UN Department of Economic
and Social Affairs.

4. Lambrinoudakis, C., Gritzalis, S., Dridi, F., & Pernul, G. (2003).
Security requirements for e-government services: a method-
ological approach for developing a common pki-based security
policy. Computer Communications, 26(16), 1873–1883.

5. Moen, V., Klingsheim, A. N., Simonsen, K. I. F., & Hole, K. J.
(2007). Vulnerabilities in e-governments. International Journal
of Electronic Security and Digital Forensics, 1(1), 89–100.
6. Pau, L.-F. (2010). Business and social evaluation of denial of
service attacks of communications networks in view of scaling
economic counter-measures. In 2010 IEEE/IFIP network opera-
tions and management symposium workshops (NOMS Wksps)
(pp. 126–133). IEEE.

7. Cryptomathic.

(2015). A key component

for e-government
https://www.cryptomathic.com/news-events/blog/key-
security.
for-egovernment-security-central-signing-authentication/. Acces-
sed 22 May 2018.

8. IPPMEDIA. (2016). How Tanzania lost Tanzanian shillings
187billions to cyber criminals in 2016. https://www.ippmedia.
com/en/business/how-tanzania-lost-187bn-cyber-criminals-2016/
. Accessed 22 May 2018.

9. Seltsikas, P., & O’keefe, R. M. (2010). Expectations and out-
comes in electronic identity management: The role of trust and
public value. European Journal of Information Systems, 19(1),
93–103.

10. Ali, O., Soar, J., & Yong, J. (2014). Impact of cloud computing
technology on e-government. In International conference on
information and software technologies (pp. 272–290). Springer.
11. Nakamoto, S. (2008). Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash

system. https://www.bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

12. Mukhopadhyay, U., Skjellum, A., Hambolu, O., Oakley, J., Yu,
L., & Brooks, R. (2016). A brief survey of cryptocurrency sys-
tems. In 2016 14th annual conference on privacy, security and
trust (PST) (pp. 745–752). IEEE.

13. Huh, S., Cho, S., & Kim, S. (2017). Managing iot devices using
blockchain platform. In 2017 19th international conference on
advanced communication technology (ICACT) (pp. 464–467).
IEEE.

14. Dorri, A., Kanhere, S. S., Jurdak, R., & Gauravaram, P. (2017).
Blockchain for iot security and privacy: The case study of a smart
home. In 2017 IEEE international conference on pervasive
computing and communications workshops (PerCom workshops)
(pp. 618–623). IEEE.

15. Turkanovic´, M., Ho¨lbl, M., Kosˇicˇ, K., Hericˇko, M., & Kamisˇalic´,
A. (2018). Eductx: A blockchain-based higher education credit
platform. IEEE Access, 6, 5112–5127.

16. Peterson, K., Deeduvanu, R., Kanjamala, P., & Boles, K. (2016).
A blockchain-based approach to health information exchange
networks. In Proceedings of NIST workshop blockchain health-
care (Vol. 1, pp. 1–10).

123

Wireless Networks

36. Luiijf, E. (2012). Understanding cyber threats and vulnerabilities.
In J. Lopez, R. Setola, & S. D. Wolthusen (Eds.), Critical
infrastructure protection (pp. 52–67). Berlin: Springer.

37. Evans, M., Maglaras, L. A., He, Y., & Janicke, H. (2016). Human
behaviour as an aspect of cybersecurity assurance. Security and
Communication Networks, 9(17), 4667–4679.

38. SEC S. (2000). 2: Recommended elliptic curve domain parame-
ters. Mississauga: Standards for efﬁcient cryptography group,
Certicom Corp.

Noe Elisa is currently a PhD
in the Department of
student
Computer and Information Sci-
ences at Northumbria Univer-
sponsored by the
sity, UK,
Scholarship
Commonwealth
He
TZCS-2017-717).
(No.
received his M.Tech degree in
Computer Networks and Infor-
mation Security from Jawahar-
lal
Technological
University, India, in 2014. Prior
to that, he received a B.SC.
degree in Telecommunication
Engineering from the University
of Dar es salaam, Tanzania in 2010. He has more than seven years of
teaching experience with the University of Dodoma, Tanzania, where
he worked as an assistant lecturer. His research interests include
information security, privacy assurance, e-government systems and
smart cities, blockchain technology, computational
intelligence,
machine learning, human computer interaction and cloud computing.

Nehru

of

(Reader)
Learning

Longzhi
Yang
(MBCS,
SMIEEE, FHEA), is an Associ-
and
ate Professor
Director
and
Teaching in the Department of
Computer and Information Sci-
ences at Northumbria Univer-
interests
sity. His
research
include
intelligence,
machine learning and the appli-
cations of such techniques in
real-world uncertain environ-
ments such as robotics, cyber-
security, computer visions, and
smart manufacturing. He is the
chair of IEEE Special Interest Group of Big Data for Cyber Security
and Privacy. He and his principally supervised students were the
recipients of three best paper awards and several IEEE Computational
Intelligence Society outstanding student paper travel grants.

artiﬁcial

17. Jun, M. (2018). Blockchain government-a next form of infras-
tructure for the twenty-ﬁrst century. Journal of Open Innovation:
Technology, Market, and Complexity, 4(1), 7.

18. Antonopoulos, A. M. (2014). Mastering bitcoin: Unlocking dig-

ital cryptocurrencies. Newton: O’Reilly Media, Inc.

19. Zheng, Z., Xie, S., Dai, H., Chen, X., & Wang, H. (2017). An
overview of blockchain technology: Architecture, consensus, and
future trends. In 2017 IEEE international congress on big data
(BigData congress) (pp. 557–564). IEEE.

20. Swan, M. (2015). Blockchain: Blueprint for a new economy.

Newton: O’Reilly Media, Inc.

21. Karokola, G. R. (2012). A framework for securing e-government
thesis, Department of

services: The case of
Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University.

tanzania. Ph.D.

22. Alshehri, M., & Drew, S. (2010). E-government fundamentals. In
IADIS international conference ICT, society and human beings.
23. Singh, S., & Karaulia, D. S. (2011). E-governance: Information
security issues. In Proceedings of the international conference on
computer science and information technology (pp. 120–124).
24. Noe, E. (2017). Usability, accessibility and web security assess-
ment of e-government websites in tanzania. International Journal
of Computer Applications, 164(5), 42–48.

25. Yang, L., Li, J., Fehringer, G., Barraclough, P., Sexton, G., &
Cao, Y. (2017). Intrusion detection system by fuzzy interpolation.
In 2017 IEEE international conference on fuzzy systems (FUZZ-
IEEE) (pp. 1–6). IEEE.

26. Elisa, N., Li, J., Zuo, Z., & Yang, L. (2018). Dendritic cell
algorithm with fuzzy inference system for input signal genera-
intelligence (pp.
tion.
203–214). Springer.

In UK workshop on computational

27. Elisa, N., Yang, L., Naik, N. (2018). Dendritic cell algorithm with
optimised parameters using genetic algorithm. In IEEE world
congress on computational intelligence (pp. 1–8). IEEE.

28. Zuo, Z., Li, J., Yang, L., Anderson, P., & Naik, N. (2018).
Grooming detection using fuzzy-rough feature selection and text
classiﬁcation. In IEEE world congress on computational intelli-
gence (pp. 1–8). IEEE.

29. Elisa, N., Yang, L., Qu, Y., & Chao, F. (2018). A revised den-
dritic cell algorithm using k-means clustering. In IEEE interna-
tional conference on data science and systems (pp. 1–8).

30. Li, J., Yang, L., Qu, Y., & Sexton, G. (2018). An extended
Takagi–Sugeno–Kang inference system (tsk?) with fuzzy inter-
polation and its rule base generation. Soft Computing, 22(10),
3155–3170.

31. Stefanova, K., Kabakchieva, D., & Borthwick, L. (2006). Inno-
vative approach to identity management solution development for
e-government at eu level. Journal of Telecommunications and
Information Technology, 2, 24–31.

32. Fioravanti, F., & Nardelli, E. (2008). Identity management for
e-government services. In H. Chen, L. Brandt, V. Gregg, R.
Traunmueller, S. Dawes, E. Hovy, A. Macintosh, & C. A. Larson
(Eds.), Digital government (pp. 331–352). Berlin: Springer.
33. Drogkaris, P., Geneiatakis, D., Gritzalis, S., Lambrinoudakis, C.,
& Mitrou, L.
(2008). Towards an enhanced authentication
framework for e-goverment services: The Greek case. In The 7th
International Conference on Electronic Government, Torino,
Italy (pp. 189–196).

34. Wballiance. (2016). Wireless broadband alliance launches city
roaming project. https://www.wballiance.com/wireless-

Wi-Fi
broadband-alliance-launches-city-wi-ﬁ-roaming-project///.
Accessed 08 Jun 2018.

35. Vujicic, D., Jagodic, D., Randjic, S. (2018). Blockchain tech-
nology, bitcoin, and ethereum: A brief overview. In 2018 17th
international symposium INFOTEH-JAHORINA (INFOTEH) (pp.
1–6). IEEE.

123

Wireless Networks

in 2004,

Fei Chao received the BSc
degree in mechanical engineer-
ing from Fuzhou University,
Fuzhou, China,
the
MSc (Hons.) degree in com-
puter science from the Univer-
sity of Wales, Aberystwyth,
in 2005, and the PhD
U.K.,
degree
from
robotics
Aberystwyth University, Wales,
a
U.K.,
Research
with
Aberystwyth University from
2009 to 2010, under the super-
vision of Prof. M. H. Lee. He is
currently an Associate Professor with the Cognitive Science Depart-
ment, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China. He has authored over 30
peer-reviewed journal and conference papers. His current research
interests include developmental
robotics, machine learning, and
optimization algorithms. He is also the Vice Chair of the IEEE

in 2009. He was
Associate

in

Computer Intelligence Society Xiamen Chapter. He is a member of
the China Computer Federation.

of

Science
has

Yi Cao received his bachelor’s
degree in Computer Science and
from Nanjing
Technology
and
University
been
Technology. He
involved
software
in many
development projects, special-
ising
system
application
architecture design. His research
interests include system archi-
tecture,
software engineering,
and cybersecurity.

in

123

