0
2
0
2

n
u
J

1
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
2
9
1
1
.
6
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Cyber Security in the Age of COVID-19: A
Timeline and Analysis of Cyber-Crime and
Cyber-Attacks during the Pandemic

Harjinder Singh Lallie1, Lynsay A. Shepherd2, Jason R. C. Nurse3, Arnau Erola4, Gregory Epiphaniou1,
Carsten Maple1, and Xavier Bellekens5

1WMG, University of Warwick, {HL, CM, gregory.epiphaniou}@warwick.ac.uk
2School of Design and Informatics, Abertay University, lynsay.shepherd@abertay.ac.uk
3School of Computing, University of Kent, j.r.c.nurse@kent.ac.uk
4Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, arnau.erola@cs.ox.ac.uk
5Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University of Strathclyde, xavier.bellekens@strath.ac.uk

Abstract—The COVID-19 pandemic was a remarkable
unprecedented event which altered the lives of billions of
citizens globally resulting in what became commonly re-
ferred to as the new-normal in terms of societal norms and
the way we live and work. Aside from the extraordinary
impact on society and business as a whole, the pandemic
generated a set of unique cyber-crime related circumstances
which also affected society and business. The increased
anxiety caused by the pandemic heightened the likelihood
of cyber-attacks succeeding corresponding with an increase
in the number and range of cyber-attacks.

This paper analyses the COVID-19 pandemic from a
cyber-crime perspective and highlights the range of cyber-
attacks experienced globally during the pandemic. Cyber-
attacks are analysed and considered within the context of
key global events to reveal the modus-operandi of cyber-
attack campaigns. The analysis shows how following what
appeared to be large gaps between the initial outbreak
of the pandemic in China and the ﬁrst COVID-19 related
cyber-attack, attacks steadily became much more prevalent
to the point that on some days, 3 or 4 unique cyber-attacks
were being reported. The analysis proceeds to utilise the
UK as a case study to demonstrate how cyber-criminals
leveraged key events and governmental announcements to
carefully craft and design cyber-crime campaigns.

Coronavirus; COVID-19; cyber security; cyber-attack;

cyber-crime; attack timeline; home working;

I. INTRODUCTION

The coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19) which started
in 2019 quickly became a global crisis event, resulting
in the mass quarantine of 100s of millions of citizens
across numerous countries around the world. At
the
time of writing, the World Health Organisation (WHO)
Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard reported
over 7.5 million conﬁrmed cases and in excess of
430,241 deaths[1] globally. As COVID-19 spread across

the globe, it also led to a secondary signiﬁcant threat to a
technology-driven society; i.e., a series of indiscriminate,
and also a set of targeted, cyber-attacks and cyber-crime
campaigns. Since the outbreak, there have been reports
of scams impersonating public authorities (e.g., WHO)
and organisations (e.g., supermarkets, airlines)[2, 3], tar-
geting support platforms[4, 5], conducting Personal Pro-
tection Equipment (PPE) fraud[6] and offering COVID-
19 cures[7, 8]. These scams target members of the
public generally, as well as the millions of individuals
working from home. Working at home en-masse has
realised a level of cyber security concerns and challenges
never faced before by industry and citizenry. cyber-
criminals have used this opportunity to expand upon their
attacks, using traditional trickery (e.g., [9]) which also
prays on the heightened stress, anxiety and worry facing
individuals. In addition, the experiences of working at
home revealed the general level of unpreparedness by
software vendors, particularly as far as the security of
their products was concerned.

Cyber-attacks have also targeted critical infrastructure
such as healthcare services[10]. In response to this, on
April 8th 2020, the United Kingdom’s National Cyber
Security Centre (NCSC) and the United States Depart-
ment of Homeland Security (DHS) Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) published a joint
advisory on how cyber-criminal and advanced persistent
threat (APT) groups were exploiting the current COVID-
19 pandemic[11]. This advisory discussed issues such as
phishing, malware and communications platform (e.g.,
Zoom, Microsoft Teams) compromise. What is arguably
lacking here and in research, however,
is a broader
assessment of the wide range of attacks related to the
is extremely
pandemic. The current state of the art

 
 
 
 
 
 
dispersed, with attacks being reported from governments,
the media, security organisations and incident teams. It
is therefore extremely challenging for organisations to
develop appropriate protection and response measures
given the dynamic environment.

In this paper we aim to support ongoing research
by proposing a novel timeline of attacks related to the
COVID-19 pandemic. This timeline and the subsequent
analysis can assist in understanding those attacks and
how they are crafted, and as a result, to better prepare
to confront them if ever seen again. Our timeline maps
key cyber-attacks across the world against the spread of
the virus, and also measures such as when lockdowns
were put in place. The timeline reveals a pattern which
highlights cyber-attacks and campaigns which typically
follow events such as announcements of policy. This
allows us to track how quickly cyber-attacks and crimes
were witnessed as compared to when the ﬁrst pandemic
cases were reported in the area; or, indeed, if attacks
preempted any of these events. We expand the timeline
to focus on how speciﬁc attacks unfolded, how they were
crafted and their impact on the UK. To complement these
analyses, we reﬂect more broadly on the range of attacks
reported, how they have impacted the workforce and
how the workforce may still be at risk. In many ways
this timeline analysis also forms a key contribution of
our work both in terms of the chronological sequencing
of attacks and the representation of campaigns using
an accepted attack taxonomy. This therefore provides a
platform which aligns with current literature and also
provides the foundation which other research can easily
build on.

This paper is structured as follows. Section II reﬂects
on relevant cyber-attack and cyber-crime literature, and
considers how opportunistic attacks have emerged in the
past due to real-life crises/incidents. We then present our
COVID-19-related cyber-attack timeline in Section III
as well as a dedicated focus on the United Kingdom
as a case study of key-cyber-criminal activity. This is
followed by a broader reﬂection on the attacks (those
within and outside of the timeline). In Section IV we
discuss the impact of attacks on those working from
home and wider technology risk. Section V concludes
the paper and outlines directions for future work.

II. LITERATURE REVIEW

With the broad adoption of digital technologies many
facets of society have moved online, from shopping and
social interactions to business, industry, and unfortu-
nately, also crime. The latest reports establish that cyber-
crime is growing in frequency and severity[12], with
a prediction to reach $6 trillion by 2021 (up from $3
trillion in 2015)[13] and even take on traditional crime in
number and cost[14, 15]. Due to its lucrative nature[16]

2

and low risk level (as cyber-criminals can launch attacks
from anywhere across the globe), it is clear that cyber-
crime is here to stay.

cyber-crime, as traditional crime, is often described by
the crime triangle[17], which speciﬁes that for a cyber-
crime to occur, three factors have to exist: a victim, a
motive and an opportunity. The victim is the target of
the attack, the motive is the aspect driving the criminal
to commit the attack, and the opportunity is a chance
for the crime to be committed (e.g., it can be an innate
vulnerability in the system or an unprotected device).
Other models in criminology, such as Routine Activity
Theory (RAT)[18] and the fraud triangle[19] use similar
factors to describe crimes, with some replacing the
victim by the means of the attacker, which it can be
considered otherwise as part of the opportunity.

While attacks today have become more sophisticated
and targeted to speciﬁc victims depending on attacker’s
motivation, for example for ﬁnancial gain, espionage,
coercion or revenge; opportunistic untargeted attacks are
also very prevalent. We deﬁne “opportunistic attacks” as
attacks that select the victims based on their susceptibil-
ity to be attacked[20]. Opportunistic attackers pick-up
victims that have speciﬁc vulnerabilities or use hooks,
usually in the form of social engineering, to create those
vulnerabilities. Thus, we deﬁne as hook any mechanism
used to mislead a victim into falling prey of an attack.
These hooks take advantage of distraction, time con-
straints, panic and other human factors to make them
work[21, 9]. When victims are distracted by what grabs
their interest/attention or when they are panicked, they
are more susceptible to be deceived. Similarly,
time
constraints put victims under more pressure which can
lead to mistakes and an increased likelihood to fall victim
to scams and attacks. Other examples include work
pressure, personal change of situation, medical issues, or
events that cause deep and traumatic impact in the whole
society in general such as fatalities and catastrophes.

Opportunistic attackers always seek to maximise their
gain, and therefore, will wait for the best time to launch
an attack where conditions ﬁt those mentioned above. A
natural disaster, ongoing crisis or signiﬁcant public event
are perfect cases of these conditions[22]. In the past,
several opportunistic attacks have been observed that
took advantage of speciﬁc incidents; below, we provide
few examples:

• Natural disasters: In 2005 Hurricane Katrina caused
massive destruction in the city of New Orleans
and surrounding areas in the USA[23]. Not long
after,
thousands of fraudulent websites appeared
appealing for humanitarian donations, and local
citizens received scam emails soliciting personal
information to receive possible payouts or govern-
ment relief efforts. Similar scams and attacks have

been witnessed in countless natural disasters since,
such as the earthquakes in Japan and Ecuador in
2016[24], Hurricane Harvey in 2017[25], or the
bush ﬁres in Australia in 2020[26].

• Notable incidents or events: On 25th June 2009,
the tragic death of Michael Jackson dominated
news around the world. Only 8 hours after his
demise, spam emails claiming knowing the de-
tails of the incident were circulating online[27].
Waves of illegitimate emails echoing the fatality
appeared soon after, containing links promising
access to unpublished videos and pictures or Jack-
son’s merchandise, that in reality were linked to
malicious websites, or emails with malware in-
fected attachments[28]. Noteworthy public events
also attract a range of cyber-crime activities. During
the FIFA World Cup in 2018 for instance, there
were various attempts to lure individuals with free
tickets and giveaways[29]. These were,
in fact,
scams leading to fraud.

• Security incidents: In 2012, 164 million of email ad-
dresses and passwords were exposed in a LinkedIn
data breach[30]. This data was not disclosed until
4 years later, 2016, when it appeared for sale
in the dark market. Soon after that, opportunistic
attackers began to launch a series of attacks. Many
users experienced scams, such as blackmail and
phishing, and some compromised accounts that had
not changed their passwords since the breach, were
used to send phishing links via private message and
InMail[31].

Considering the variety of scams and cyber-attacks
occurring around the events above, it is unsurprising
that similar attacks have emerged during the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic. The outbreak has caused mass
disruption worldwide, with people having to adapt their
daily routines to a new reality: working from home,
interactions and physical activity, and
lack of social
fear of not being prepared[32, 33]. These situations can
overwhelm many, and cause stress and anxiety that can
increase the chances to be victim of an attack. Also,
the sudden change of working contexts, has meant that
companies have had to improvise new working struc-
tures, potentially leaving corporate assets less protected
than before for the sake of interoperability.

Since the COVID-19 started, the numbers of scams
and malware attacks have signiﬁcantly risen[34], with
phishing being reported to have increased by 600% in
March 2020[35]. During April 2020, Google reportedly
blocked 18 million malware and phishing emails related
to the virus daily[36]. To increase likelihood of success,
these attacks target sale of goods in high demand (e.g.,
Personal Protection Equipment (PPE) and coronavirus
testing kits and drugs), potentially highly proﬁtable in-

3

vestments in stocks related to COVID-19, and imperson-
ations of representatives of public authorities like WHO
and aid scams[6, 37].

Brute force attacks on the Microsoft Remote Desktop
Protocol (RDP) systems have increased as well[38],
signaling attacks also on technology, not only on human
aspects. It is clear then that attackers are trying the make
the most of the disruption caused by pandemic, partic-
ularly given it continues to persist. As a consequence,
several guidelines and recommendations have also been
published to protect against attacks[39, 40, 41]. These
guidelines are imperative for mitigating the increasing
threat, but to strengthen their basis, there ﬁrst needs
to be a core understanding of the cyber-attacks being
launched. This paper seeks to address this gap in research
and practice by deﬁning a timeline of cyber-attacks
and consideration of how they impact citizens and the
workforce.

III. TIMELINE OF COVID-19 RELATED
CYBER-ATTACKS

The cyber-crime incidents erupting from the COVID-
19 pandemic pose serious threats to the safety and
global economy of the world-wide population, hence
understanding their mechanisms, as well as the propa-
gation and reach of these threats is essential. Numer-
ous solutions have been proposed in the literature to
analyse how such events unfold ranging from formal
deﬁnitions to systemic approaches reviewing the nature
of threats[42, 43, 44]. While these approaches enable
the categorisation of the attack,
they often lack the
ability to map larger, distributed events such as the ones
presented in this manuscript, where numerous events
stem from the pandemic are, however, unrelated. To this
end, we opted for temporal visualisation, enabling us
to map events without compromising the narrative[45].
Furthermore, this type of visualisation is used across
the cyber-security domain to represent consequent cyber-
attacks[46, 47, 48].

A. Approach to timeline creation

In this section, we outline the methodology used
to create the timeline. We explain the search terms
used to gather relevant COVID-19 cyber-attack data, the
data sources (search engines) utilised, the sources of
information we chose to focus on, and types of attack.
We also acknowledge the potential limitations of the
work.

1) Nomenclature: We explore a range of cyber-
attacks which have occurred during the COVID-19 pan-
demic. The novel coronavirus has been referred to by
several different terms in the English-speaking world, in-
cluding Coronavirus, Covid19, COVID-19, 2019-nCoV,

and SARS-CoV-2. We use the term COVID-19 to refer
to the virus, which falls in line with terminology used
by the World Health Organization [49].

2) Construction of the timeline: To aid in the con-
struction of the timeline, we initially conducted a number
of searches to identify cyber-attacks associated with
the pandemic. These cyber-attacks were categorised by
attack type, delivery method, and were ordered by date.
The information gathered has been collated and is pre-
sented in Figure 2 which serves as a baseline for the
construction of Table I.

Information presented in the timeline includes the date
China alerted the WHO about the virus, the date the pan-
demic was ofﬁcially declared, and cyber-attacks which
speciﬁcally relate to hospitals or medicine. Additionally,
key countries involved in the pandemic were identiﬁed,
and for those, we present the ﬁrst identiﬁed case, the date
lockdown was implemented, and the ﬁrst cyber-attack
they suffered. The table seeks to examine a sub-set of
the information from the timeline.

Furthermore, we have chosen to include a number
of sources offering reports of attacks. The sources are
a mixture of reputable news outlets (such as Reuters,
and the BBC), blog articles, security company reports,
and social media posts. Though blog articles and social
media posts are not considered to be an academic source,
in the context of this research where we are examining
an emerging threat, they offer important insights into
trends of cyber-attacks. It is also important to note that
cyber-attacks may ﬁrst be presented in these domains,
before being highlighted by mainstream media outlets.
With regards to the inclusion of news reports in the
table of attacks and subsequent timeline, it should be
these attacks are being presented
acknowledged that
through a journalistic lens, and as such may be written
in an attempt
these
reported cyber-attacks still pose a tangible threat to the
general public during the COVID-19 pandemic. The
timeline seeks to provide an overview of attacks which
have occurred.

to grab headlines. Nevertheless,

The state-of-the-art review of reports was performed
from mid-March to mid-May 2020. The timeline limits
cyber-attacks to those experienced by 31st March. This is
because we reached what we believed to be a saturation
point comprising a sufﬁcient number of cyber-attacks to
be representative. Following the conclusion of the search,
the earliest reported attack was on 6th January 2020 [51],
whilst the most recently listed attack in the timeline was
31st March 2020 [52]. The most recently listed attack in
the table was 13th May 2020 [53]. The table progresses
the time period a bit further as it intends to provide more
detail in regards to cyber-attacks experienced during this
time. Sources were gathered from a number of locations.
The criteria used to locate reports have been deﬁned

4

below and are presented in a similar way to existing
reviews in cyber security literature[54, 55]. The structure
of the timeline is described in further detail in Section
III-B.

Search engines: Several search engines were used
in the creation of the table and timeline. These were-
Google1 (US-based and dominates the search engine
market share), Baidu2 (Chinese-based search provider),
Qwant3 (French-based search engine with a focus on
privacy), and DuckDuckGo4 (US-based search engine
with a focus on privacy).

Keywords used: A variety of keywords were used
when collating reports of cyber-attacks. Non-English
terms were translated using the Google Translate service
[56] and additional independent sources were used as a
means of validating the translation. When focussing on
the virus itself, the following key words were used: sars-
cov-2, Covid, Covid19, Coronavirus, 冠状病毒(Chinese
translation for Coronavirus, conﬁrmed by the World
Health Organization[57]), コ ロ ナ ウ イ ル ス(Japanese
translation for Coronavirus, conﬁrmed by the Japanese
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare[58]).

When searching for cyber-attacks, the following key
phrases were used: 网络攻击(Chinese translation means
Network Attack[59] or Cyber Attack[60]), サ イ バ
攻 (Japanese translation for Cyber Attack or Hacking
Attack [61]), Attaque Informatique (French translation
for Computer Attack [62]), Attacco Informatico (Italian
translation for Cyber Attack [63]).

Time range: We attempted to ﬁnd the earliest reported
cyber-attack which was associated with the COVID-19
pandemic. To allow for development of the timeline, and
analysis of ﬁndings, mid-May 2020 was deﬁned as a cut-
off point, with the most recent news article being dated
13th May 2020[5].

Exclusion criteria: Although we have created a com-
prehensive table and timeline, a number of results were
excluded from the research. These included results which
a) were behind a paywall, b) required account creation
before full article was displayed, c) were duplicates of
existing news reports, and d) could not be translated.

3) Types of cyber-attacks : To guide our analysis and
the creation of a timeline of COVID-19-related cyber-
attacks, we decided to deﬁne attacks based on their
types. This allowed us to examine the prominence in
certain types of attacks. Although there exist numerous
taxonomies relating to attacks and cyber-crimes (e.g.,
[64, 9, 65, 66]), there exists no universally accepted
model[67]. In this work therefore, we relied on the
UK’s Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) categorisation of

1www.google.com
2www.baidu.com
3www.qwant.com
4www.duckduckgo.com

5

technical capabilities. Financial fraud generally involves
deceiving individuals or organisations using technology
for some ﬁnancial gain to the attacker or criminal.
Extortion refers to actions that force, threaten or coerce
individuals to perform some actions, most commonly,
releasing ﬁnances.

Hacking, Malware and Denial of Service (DoS) at-
tacks are forms of crime that are often favoured by more
technical attackers. Hacking involves compromising the
conﬁdentiality or integrity of a system, and requires
a reasonable about of skill; its techniques can involve
exploiting system vulnerabilities to break into systems.
Malware refers to malicious software and can be used for
disrupting services, extracting data and a range of other
attacks. Ransomware is one of the most common type
of malware today[72, 73], and combines malware with
extortion attempts. DoS attacks target system availability
and work by ﬂooding key services with illegitimate
requests. The goal here is to consume the bandwidth
used for legitimate server requests, and eventually force
the server ofﬂine.

These types of attack provide the foundation for
our analysis in the timeline and how we approach our
discussion in later part of this research.

4) Limitations of

the table: Within Table I,

two
columns referring to dates are provided. The ﬁrst column
“Article Date” refers to the date the reference was
initially published. We acknowledge that in some cases,
the web pages linked to the references continued to be
updated with information following its inclusion with
the paper. The table has been ordered by “Article Date”
to provide a consistent chronological representation of
events.

We have also provided a second column,“Attack
Date”. When examining each reference, if a speciﬁc date
was provided as to when the attack was executed, it was
included. The rational behind including the attack date
and report date is that an attack may not surface until
several days after it has been carried out.

5) Limitations of the timeline: Two types of cyber-
attack reports are considered within this manuscript,
those which describe cyber-attacks without providing

Fig. 1. Cyber-dependent and cyber-enabled crimes[50]

cyber-crime. This deﬁnition includes cyber security by
default and has inspired many international deﬁnitions
of cyber-crime.

The CPS guidelines categorise cyber-crime into two
broad categories: cyber-dependent and cyber-enabled
crimes[50]. A cyber-dependent crime is an offence, “that
can only be committed using a computer, computer
networks or other form of information communications
technology (ICT)”[68]. Cyber-enabled crimes are, “tra-
ditional crimes, which can be increased in their scale
or reach by use of computers, computer networks or
other forms of information communications technology
(ICT)”[69]. These categories as well as examples of
their subcategories can be seen in Figure 1. Some of
the elements described by CPS are often interlinked in
a cyber-attack. For instance, a phishing email or text
message (e.g., SMS or WhatsApp) might be used to lure
a victim to a fraudulent website. The website then may
gather personal data which is used to commit ﬁnancial
fraud, or it may install malware (more speciﬁcally,
ransomware) which is then used to commit extortion.
This notion of cyber-attack sequences is explained in
further detail in Section III-B.

Similarly Denial of Service (DoS) attacks are in-
creasingly used by cyber-criminals to distract
(or,
act as ‘smokescreens’ for) businesses during hacking
attempts[70, 71]. In what follows, we consider the types
of these attacks and reﬂect on how they have been
launched, including any human factors or technical as-
pects (e.g., vulnerabilities) they attempt to exploit.
in-
Phishing, or Social Engineering more broadly,
cludes attempts by illegitimate parties to convince indi-
viduals to perform an action (e.g., share information or
visit a website) under the pretence that they are engaging
with a legitimate party. Quite often email messages
are used, occasionally SMS or WhatsApp messages are
used (referred to as smishing). Pharming is similar to
phishing but
instead of deceiving users into visiting
malicious sites, attackers rely on compromising systems
(e.g.,
the user’s device or DNS servers) to redirect
individuals to illegitimate sites. This type of attack is
less common in general, as it requires more access or

the date of the attack and those which describe cyber-
attacks and include the date of the perpetration. When
the date of the attack is not included, the date provided
in the timeline refers to the date of the publication. The
rationale behind the inclusion of both types of reports
is based on providing a chronological representation
of events. Furthermore, while the table provides an
extensive overview of the threat landscape, it is by no
means an exhaustive list of all the attacks carried out in
relation to the pandemic, as gathering such information
would not be possible in this context due to the lack and
quality of reporting, the number of targeted incidents,
the number of incidents targeted at the general public,
the global coverage of the pandemic and the number of
malicious actors carrying out these attacks.

However, despite these limitations we have explored
all resources available to depict the threat landscape as
accurately as possible.

B. The timeline

In this section, we examine the cyber-attacks in
further detail. Figure 2 provides a detailed temporal
representation of the chain of key cyber-attacks in-
duced by the COVID-19 pandemic. The timeline in-
cludes the ﬁrst reported cases in China, Japan, Ger-
many, Singapore, Spain, UK, France, Italy, and Portu-
gal and then the subsequent lockdown announcements.
The timeline presents 43 cyber-attacks categorised using
the CPS taxonomy described in Section III-A3 and
abbreviated as: P:phishing (or smishing), M:malware.
Ph:pharming, E:extortion, H:hacking, D:denial of ser-
vice and F:ﬁnancial fraud. The events related to the crisis
were validated against WHO timeline of events to ensure
an accurate temporal reproduction.

Table I describes a number of cyber-attacks in fur-
ther detail. Within the table, cyber-attacks have been
organised by attack date. If the attack date was not
available within the reference, then the article date has
been used. The target-country of each cyber-attack has
been listed, alongside a brief description of the methods
involved. Finally, the attack type has also been classiﬁed
in accordance with the CPS taxonomy described earlier
where it has been mentioned within the reference.

Both the ﬁgure and the table present speciﬁc cyber-
attacks and incidents and exclude: general advisories
(e.g. from governmental departments), general discus-
sions and summaries of attacks, and detailed expla-
nations of techniques and approaches utilised by the
attackers.

C. COVID-19 cyber-attacks in the United Kingdom

The extent of the cyber-security related problems
faced in the UK was quite exceptional, and in this section

6

we use the UK as a case study to analyse COVID-19
related cyber-crime. The discussion herein demonstrates
that as expected and outlined above, there was a loose
correlation between policy/news announcements and as-
sociated cyber-crime campaigns. The analysis presented
herein focuses only on cyber-crime events speciﬁc to
the UK. So for example, although many of the incidents
identiﬁed in the previous section and particularly in
the discussion herein
[102] are global cyber-attacks,
ignores these. Consequently, numerous announcements
purportedly coming from reputed organisations such as
WHO and a plethora of malware which reached UK
citizens is ignored as these were not UK speciﬁc issues.
Indications of the extent of the UK cyber-crime in-
cident problem experienced during the pandemic are
provided by the reported level of suspect emails and
fraud reported. By early May (07-05-20), more than
160,000 ‘suspect’ emails had been reported to the Na-
tional Cyber Security Centre [103] and by the end of
May (29-05-20), £4.6m had been lost
to COVID-19
related scams with around 11,206 victims of phishing
and / or smishing campaigns [104]. In response, the
National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) took down 471
fake online shops [105] and HMRC (Her Majesty’s
Revenue and Customs) took down 292 fake websites
[106].

The timeline in Figure 3 shows a series of UK speciﬁc
events and cyber-crime incidents. The timeline indicates
a direct and inverse correlation between announcements
and incidents.

Direct correlations are instances where perpetrators
appear to follow announcements or events, they may
have drawn on these events and carefully conﬁgured
cyber-attacks around policy context. These are shown
in the ﬁgure with a solid coloured connecting arrow.

Inverse correlations are instances where an incident
has no clear correlation with an event or announce-
ment. Although inverse correlations do not appear to
have a direct correlation,
these may exist because a
number of events were being actively highlighted in the
media. For example, the issue of personal protective
equipment (PPE) was in active discussion well before
the UK government gave this priority consideration.
Similarly, the likelihood of a tax rebate scheme was in
active consideration in early March before the budget
announcement on 11-03-20. The ﬁrst tax rebate phishing
campaigns were in active circulation before the budget
announcement. In both cases, we should emphasise that
these are loose correlations and more work needs to be
done in terms of whether a predictive model can be built
using this data and data around the world as examples.
On 11th March 2020, the UK government made a
number of important budgetary announcements [107]
which included: a £5bn emergency response fund to

7

c
i
m
e
d
n
a
P

I

9
1
-
D
V
O
C

e
h
t

d
n
a

s
k
c
a
t
t

A

-
r
e
b
y
C

o
t

d
e
t
a
l
e
R

s
t
n
e
v
E

y
e
K

f
o

e
n
i
l
e
m
T

i

.
2

.
g
i
F

8

e
n
i
l
e
m
T
K
U

i

.
3

.
g
i
F

ID

Ref.

Country

1

2
3

4
5
6
7
8

9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

21
22
23
24

25

26

27
28

29

30
31

32
33
34
35
36

[51]

China

[74]
[75]

[76]
[77]
[78]
[79]
[77]

[80]
[80]
[81]
[82]
[76]
[83]
[84]
[84]
[76]
[85]
[76]
[86]

[76]
[87]
[88]
[89]

Global
China,
Mongolia
Phillipines
Singapore
Japan
China
USA

China
China
World
China
Vietnam
China
China
China
Italy
Global
USA
USA

Spain
Czech
USA
Libya

[90]

World

[91]

Global

[92]
[93]

Spain
USA

[94]

UK

[95]
[96]

[52]
[97]
[98]
[99]
[100]

UK
World

Global
World
UK
UK
Global

Attack
Type
P.M

P.M
P.M

P.M.F
P
P.M.F
P.M.F
P

H
P
P.M.F
P.M
P.M
P.Ph
P.M.E
P.M.E
P.M
P.M.F
P.M
M

P.M
H
H
P.M

P.M

P.E

P.M
P.M

P.M

P.Ph.F
M.F

P
P.Ph.M.F
M
P.M
M

TABLE I
DESCRIPTIONS OF COVID-19 RELATED CYBER-ATTACKS

Description

Vietnam accused of launching a METALJACK phishing campaign against the Wuhan
district ofﬁces
International reports that both phishing and smishing campaigns are taking place
Chinese hackers accused of distributing the Vicious Panda malware to Mongolia through
emails purporting to come from the Mongolian ministry of affairs
REMCOS malware distributed to Phillipino citizens
Phishing campaign steals email log-in credentials
Safety measures phishing campaign distributes Emotet malware
’Safety measure’ email from a ’Singaporian specialist’ distributes Emotet malware
Email purporting list of COVID-19 cases in victim’s city takes user to website which
steals credentials
DoS on epidemic prevention units
Phishing campaign steals email log-in credentials
First cases of AZORult a data theft malware
Email purporting specialist safety measures from WHO prompts malware download
LOKIBOT malware spread through email purporting incorrect invoice payment
Phishing attack on medical groups in China (from India)
Distribution of CXK-NMSL ransomware through COVID-19 themed emails
Distribution of Dharma/Crysis ransomware through COVID-19 themed emails
Trickbot malware distributed through email
MBR wiper malware disguised as contact tracing information
FORMBOOK malware distributed through email purporting parcel shipment advice
Health systems in Champaign Urbana Public Health District (Illinois) affected by the
netwalker ransomware
Email purports COVID-19 remedy as mooted by Israeli scientists days in advance
Cyber-attack on Czech hospital
Denial of Service on U.S. Health Agency
Corona live 1.1 is the SpyMax malware which in this case is a trojanised app which
exﬁltrates user data
Corona mask offer installs what appears to be a harmless malware which distributes an
SMS to all contacts. Presumably an update to the app will mobilise the malware
Extortion campaign threatens to infect the recipient with COVID-19 unless a $4,000 bitcoin
payment is made
Netwalker ransomware attack disguised as an email advising on restroom use
SMS asks recipient to take a mandatory COVID-19 ‘preparation’ test, points to website
which downloads malware
SMS informs recipient to stay at home with a link for more information. Link directs
recipient to a malware ridden website
Free school meal SMS directs recipient to website which steals payment credentials
Ginp Trojan distributed in an Android app. App charges e0.75 for information on infected
persons in the recipients region. In actual fact, it steals the payment information
Skype credentials stolen through a crafted phishing campaign
Free Netﬂix offer directs users to a malware ridden website
Fake NHS website gathers user credentials
Email purports to offer job retention payment as per the UK governmental announcement
Coronalocker locks a computer and appears to cause rather more annoyance than any real
damage
Docusign recipients directed to fake website offering COVID-19 information
Recipients are directed to a fake track and trace website which collects user credentials

[101]
[5]

37
38
key: P:Phishing (or smishing); Ph:Pharming; E:Extortion; M:Malware; F:Financial fraud; H:Hacking

Global
UK

P.M
P.M

9

Article
Date
22/04

Attack
Date
06/01

19/01
12/03

13/03
28/01
28/01
06/02
11/02

09/02
09/02
10/02
12/02
13/03
06/02
18/02
18/02
13/03
04/03
13/03
12/03

13/03
14/03
16/03
18/03

-
20/01

23/01
-
28/01
29/01
31/01

02/02
02/02
-
-
03/02
06/02
09/02
13/02
02/03
-
08/03
10/03

10/03
14/03
-
-

19/03

-

17/04

20/03

24/03
24/03

-
24/03

24/03

-

25/03
25/03

23/04
27/03
28/04
30/04
21/04

08/05
13/05

24-03
-

31/03
-
-
19/04
-

-
-

support the NHS and other public services in England; an
entitlement to statutory sick pay for individuals advised
to self-isolate; a contributory Employment Support Al-
lowance for self-employed workers; a £500m hardship
fund for councils to help the most vulnerable in their
areas; a COVID-19 Business Interruption Loan Scheme
for small ﬁrms; and the abolishment of business rates
for certain companies.

nouncements to support
the citizenry and economy.
These announcements included: a scheme to support
children entitled to receive free school meals (19-03-
20); a hardship fund (24-03-20); help for supermarkets
to target vulnerable people (25-03-20);
the potential
availability of home test kits (25-03-20); a job retention
scheme (17-04-20); and the launch of the much awaited
track and trace app (04-05-20).

Soon after, the government continued to make an-

Events such as these increase the likelihood of a

10

TABLE II
SELECTED CORRELATIONS BETWEEN EVENTS AND CYBER-CRIMINAL CAMPAIGNS

Event date

Event

21-02-20,
09-03-20
11-03-20

Doctors warn GPs are running out of PPE;
Hospitals running out of PPE
Government announces a range of ﬁnancial
assistance packages in the budget

19-03-20

23-03-20

24-03-20

25-03-20

Government announces a scheme which entitles
children who qualify for a free school meal to
a food voucher or alternatives if they are not
able to continue attending school.
Lockdown announced. £60 contravention ﬁne,
later (10-05-20) increased to £100
COVID-19 hardship fund enables councils to
reduce council tax bills by £150 for residents
of working age and who have had their bill
reduced by an award of council tax reduction
Government announce intention to make home
testing kits available

17-04-20

Government announces job retention scheme

Incident date &
type
17-04-20 p,ph,f
27-05-20 p,ph,f
20-03-20 p,ph,f

24-03-20 p,ph,f

27-03-20 p,e

Incident

Fake PPE offers through email. Link to URLs
which capture credit card and other details
Smishing campaign promising a COVID-19
ﬁnancial relief payment. Respondents are di-
rected to a fake gov.uk website which requests
credit/debit card details
A smishing campaign which targeted parents
with a promise of help with their free school
meals in return for banking details. Banking
details are defrauded
Lockdown contravention SMS

15-05-20 p,ph,f

Council tax rebate scam

31-03-20 p,f,
17-04-20 p,f,
27-05-20 p,f
19-04-20 p,f

Phishing campaigns in England and Scotland
direct victims to fake websites which claim to
sell PPE equipment
Fake job retention scheme phishing campaign.

positive response to a cyber-criminal campaign and per-
petrators are very likely to hook onto events. Although
there appears to be a link between some of the events
and incidents, a number of scams cannot easily be traced
to a single event or announcement. Examples of this
include a goodwill payment of £250 (21-03-20), an
NHS ﬁnancial donation request (02-04-20), vouchers for
UK supermarkets (02-04-20, 15-04-20, 28-04-20), and a
charitable donation to the recipient. None of these events
have associated governmental announcements or even
general public speculation.

Examples supporting our notion of a correlation be-
tween events and cyber-security campaigns are provided
in Table II and illustrated in Figure 3. These examples
indicate a loose correlation between events and cyber-
criminal campaigns. Many of the cases outlined in Table
II and Figure 3, were very simple. Potential victims were
provided URLs through email, SMS, or Whatsapp. An
example of this is provided in Figure 4. In this case,
the URL pointed to a fake institutional website which
requests credit/debit card details. Although there are
elements of this process which are obviously suspicious
to a more experienced computer user, for example,
spelling errors (relieve instead of relief in the COVID-19
relief scam), suspect reply email addresses and clearly
incorrect URLs, these are not immediately obvious to
many users.

D. Analysis of cyber-attacks and associated risks

The timeline shown in Figure 2 and the UK case
study above creates an ideal platform through which
to analyse the cyber-attacks that have occurred in light

that

of the pandemic. From the point
the ﬁrst case
was announced in China (08-12-19), the ﬁrst reported
COVID-19 inspired cyber-attack took 30 days. The next
reported cyber-attack was 14 days (19-01-20). From this
point onwards, it is clear that the timeframe between
events and cyber-attacks reduces dramatically.

The 43 cyber-attacks presented in the timeline can be

further categorised as follows:

• 37 (86%) involved phishing and / or smishing
• 2 (5%) involved hacking
• 2 (5%) involved denial of service
• 28 (65%) involved malware

Fig. 4. The COVID-19-relieve scam[108]

• 15 (34%) involved ﬁnancial fraud
• 6 (13%) involved pharming
• 6 (15%) involved extortion
Whilst this analysis is useful, the sequence of events
in the complete attack can also provide key attack
insights. The timeline reveals these sequences and shows
the complete campaign comprising of, for instance, the
distribution of malware (m) through phishing (p) which
steals payment credentials which are used for ﬁnancial
fraud (f ). We can describe this cyber-attack sequence as
p,m,f. Analysing cyber-attacks in this way is important
because this indicates multiple points in a cyber-attack
where protections could be applied. The timeline reveals
the following cyber-attack sequences:

• p,m: n=8, 19%
• p,m,f: n=10, 23%
• ph,m: n=1, 2%
• p,ph: n=1, 2%
• p.m.e: n=5, 12%
• p,ph,m: n=2, 5%
• p,ph,f: n=1, 2%
• p,e: n=1, 2%
• p,ph,m,f: n=1, 2%
This analysis does not include the sequence of events
that
took place in the two hacking and two denial
of service incidents. It should be noted that although
ﬁnancial fraud is the most likely goal in most of the
cyber-attacks described in the timeline, ﬁnancial fraud
was only recorded in the timeline where reports have
clearly indicated that this was the outcome of a cyber-
attack. In reality, the p,m,f and p,ph,f cases are
likely to be higher.

Figure 5 provides a summary of the countries that
were the target of early cyber-attacks during the pan-
demic, organised by attack date. As shown, China and
the USA account for 39% of the attacks reported. It
is also clear from Table I that both of these countries
were primary target from the start of the pandemic. The
attacks then spread to the United Kingdom and more
other countries. By March 2020 however, a vast majority
of the attacks are targeted at the whole world, with a
reminder of attacks speciﬁcally focused at events in a
single country, such as tax rebates due to COVID-19, or
contact tracing phishing messages.

It is useful to consider this in the context of UK
speciﬁc cyber-attacks. This examination reveals that
phishing was a component of all (n=17) the cyber-
attacks analysed. 1 involved extortion as the ﬁnal goal,
the remaining 16 involved ﬁnancial fraud. 9 cyber-
attacks comprised the sequence: p,ph,f, 7 comprised
the sequence p,f, the remaining 1 comprised of p,e.
is notable that although an NHS malware dis-
tribution website was discovered and removed on 23-
04, none of the cyber-attacks we analysed appeared to

It

11

involve malware in the same way that the global analysis
reveals. There may be a number of reasons for this.
Launching a malware connected campaign requires more
sophistication and time. There may be less opportunity to
directly connect it to a speciﬁc event or announcement.
The time delay between some of the announcements
and the associated campaigns was remarkably short.
For instance, the time delay between the lockdown an-
nouncement (23-03-20) and the ‘lockdown contravention
ﬁne’ (25-03-20) was 2 days, and the time delay between
the job retention scheme announcement (17-04-20) and
the job retention scam (19-04-20) was also 2 days.

To reﬂect more generally on the cyber-attacks dis-
covered, we can see that phishing (including smishing)
were, by far, the most common based on our analysis.
In total, it was involved in 86% of the global attacks.
This is however, unsurprising, as phishing attempts are
low in cost and have reasonable success rates. In the
case of COVID-19, these included attempts at imper-
sonating government organisations, the WHO, the UK’s
National Health Service (NHS), airlines, supermarkets
and communication technology providers. The speciﬁc
context of the attacks can be slightly different however
the underlying techniques, and the end goal is identical.
For instance, in one email impersonating the WHO,
attackers attach a zip ﬁle which they claim contains an e-
book that provides, “the complete research/origin of the
corona-virus and the recommended guide to follow to
protect yourselves and others”[109][2]. Moreover, they
state: “You are now receiving this email because your
life count as everyone lives count”. Here, attackers are
using the branding of WHO, posing as helpful (the

Fig. 5. Cyber-attack distribution across countries examined

remainder of the email contains legitimate guidance),
and appealing to people’s emotions in crafting their
attack email[110, 9]. Similar techniques can be seen in a
fake NHS website created by criminals detected online,
which possesses identical branding but is riddled with
malware[111], and a malicious website containing mal-
ware which also presents the legitimate Johns Hopkins
University COVID-19 dashboard[4]. It is notable that the
fake WHO email contains spelling/grammatical errors.
The discussion in Section III-C provides further speciﬁc
examples of this.

To further increase the likely success of phishing
attacks cyber-criminals have been identiﬁed register-
ing large numbers of website domains containing the
words ‘covid’ and ‘coronavirus’[112]. Such domains
are likely to be believable, and therefore accessed,
especially if paired with reputable wording such as
WHO or Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion (CDC) or key words (e.g., Corona-virusapps.com,
anticovid19-pharmacy.com, which have been highlighted
as in use[113]). Communications platforms, such as
Zoom, Microsoft and Google, have also been imper-
sonated, both through emails and domain names[112].
This is noteworthy given the fact
these are the
primary technologies used by millions across the world
to communicate, both for work and pleasure. These
facts, in combination with convincing social engineering
emails, text messages and links, provide several notable
avenues for criminals to attack. Pharming attacks were
much less common but did occur in 13% of cases. As
can be seen Table I, these often occur alongside other
attacks.

that

COVID-19-inspired fraud has leveraged governmen-
tal/scientiﬁc announcements to exploit the anxieties of
users and seek ﬁnancial beneﬁt. From our analysis, fraud
was typically committed through phishing and email
attacks—we also can see this in our sequencing above. In
one case, criminals posed as the CDC in an email and
politely requested donations to develop a vaccine, and
also that any payments be made in Bitcoin[105]. Typical
phishing techniques were used, but on this occasion these
included requests for money: “Funding of the above
project is quite a huge cost and we plead for your good
will donation, nothing is too small”. A notable point
about this particular attack is that it also ask recipients to
share the message with as many people as possible. This
is concerning given that people are more likely to trust
emails they believe have been vetted by close ones[9].
There were a range of other fraud attempts, largely
based on threats or appeals. For instance, our analysis
identiﬁed offers of investment in companies claiming
to prevent, detect or cure COVID-19, and investment
in schemes/trading options which enable users to take
advantage of a possible COVID-19 driven economic

12

downturn [114]. There were offers of cures, vaccines,
and advice on effective treatments for the virus. The
Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) issued 16 warn-
ing letters between 6th March and 1st April 2020 to
companies “for selling fraudulent products with claims
to prevent, treat, mitigate, diagnose or cure” COVID-
19[115, 116]. The European Anti-Fraud Ofﬁce (OLAF)
has responded to the ﬂood of fake products online by
opening an enquiry concerning imports of fake products
due to COVID-19 pandemic[117], and in the UK, the
Medical and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency
(MHRA) has began investigating bogus or unlicensed
medical devices currently being traded through unautho-
rised and unregulated websites[118].

Extortion attacks were witnessed in our analysis but
were less prevalent (appearing in only 13% of cases)
compared to the others above. The most prominent
case of this attack was an extortion email threatening
to infect the recipient and their family members with
COVID-19 unless a Bitcoin payment is made[119]. To
increase the believability of the message, it included
the name of the individual and one of their passwords
(likely gathered from a previous password breach). After
demanding money, the message goes on to state: “If
I do not get the payment, I will infect every member
of your family with coronavirus”. This attempts to use
fear to motivate individuals to pay, and uses passwords
(i.e., items that are personal) to build conﬁdence in the
criminal’s message.

Malware related to COVID-19 increased in promi-
nence during the pandemic and impacted individuals
and organisations across the world. As shown above,
it was the second largest cyber-attack type, appearing
in 65% of cases. Vicious panda and MBR Loader
were the only new malware discovered in this pe-
riod. The remaining malware attacks were variants
of existing malware and included Metaljack, REM-
COS, Emotet, LOKIBOT, CXK-NMSL, Dharma-Crysis,
Netwalker, Mespinoza/Pysa, SpyMax (disguised as the
Corona live 1.1 app) GuLoader, Hawkeye, FORMBOOK,
Trickbot and Ginp. Ransomware, in particular, was a
notable threat and an example of such was COVIDLock,
an Android app disguised as a heat map which acted as
ransomware; essentially locking the user’s screen unless
a ransom was paid[120].

At the organisational level, ransomware has signiﬁ-
cantly impacted healthcare services—arguably the most
fragile component of a country’s critical national in-
frastructure at
this time. Attacks have been reported
in the United States, France, Spain and the Czech
Republic[121, 10], and using ransomware such as Net-
walker. Such attacks ﬁt a criminal modus operandi if
we assume that malicious actors will target areas where
they believe they stand to capitalise on their attacks; i.e.,

health organisations may be more likely to pay ransoms
to avoid loss of patient lives. Interestingly there have
since been promises from leading cyber-crime gangs that
they will not (or stop) targeting healthcare services. In
one report, operators behind CLOP Ransomware, Dop-
pelPaymer Ransomware, Maze Ransomware and Neﬁlim
Ransomware stressed that they did not (normally) target
hospitals, or that they would pause all activity against
healthcare services until the virus stabilises[122].

Other notable malware examples during the pandemic
include: Trickbot, a trojan that is typically used as a
platform to install other malware on victims’ devices—
according to Microsoft, Trickbot
is the most proliﬁc
malware operation that makes use of COVID-19 themed
lures for its attacks[123]; a Master Boot Record (MBR)
rewriter malware that wipes a device’s disks and over-
writes the MBR to make them no longer usable[124];
and Corona Live 1.1, an app that leveraged a legitimate
COVID-19 tracker released by John Hopkins University
and accessed device photos, videos, location data and
the camera[53]. As the pandemic continues, there are
likely to be more strains of malware, targeting various
types of harm, e.g., physical, ﬁnancial, psychological,
reputational (for businesses) and societal[125].

During the COVID-19 pandemic our analysis only
identiﬁed a very small amount (5%) of DoS attacks,
but there were several reports of hacking. These reports
suggested that hacking was not indiscriminate but in-
stead, targeted towards institutions involved in research
on coronavirus.

In one report, FBI Deputy Assistant Director stated,
“We certainly have seen reconnaissance activity, and
some intrusions, into some of those institutions, espe-
cially those that have publicly identiﬁed themselves as
working on COVID-related research”[126]. This was
further supported by a joint security advisory a month
later from the UK’s NCSC and USA’s CISA[127]. In this
advisory, Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) groups—
some of which may align with nation states—were
identiﬁed as targeting pharmaceutical companies, med-
ical research organisations, and universities involved in
COVID-19 response. The goal was not necessarily to
disrupt their activities (as with the ransomware case),
but instead to steal sensitive research data or intellectual
property (e.g., on vaccines, treatments).

While a detailed analysis of these attacks has not
yet surfaced, password spraying (a brute-force attack
which applying commonly-used passwords in attempting
to login to accounts) and exploiting vulnerabilities in
Virtual Private Network (VPN) have been ﬂagged[127].
Attribution is another important consideration during
such attacks. Determining the true origin of cyber-attacks
has always been difﬁcult, however, in response to these
the US openly named the
COVID-19-related threats,

13

People’s Republic of China (PRC) as a perpetrator in
a joint FBI/CISA announcement[128].

IV. IMPACT ON WORKFORCE

The effects of the pandemic, the mass quarantine of
staff and the measures put in place to facilitate remote
working and resilience of existing cyber-infrastructures,
against the attacks and timelines previously described,
had a profound effect on the workforce – the people
engaged in or available for work. The pandemic also had
an effect on the resilience of technology, socio-economic
structures and threatened, to a certain degree, the way
people live and communicate. Figure 6 illustrates the
COVID-19 impact on the workforce across eight differ-
ent categories. All categories seemingly integrate with
cyber-enabled assets and tools and different categories
may be impacted differently. The pandemic created risk
conﬂicts, for example, strict compliance with security
standards which discourage data sharing, could be more
harmful than sharing the data. So, whilst there may be
strict requirements for patient data not to be accessed at
home by GPs (general practitioners), this causes a greater
harm during quarantine than enabling GPs to access pa-
tient data. Also, the way conﬁdential patient information
is processed requires a data protection impact assessment
(DPIA) to enable further NHS support where needed.
This can have an impact in terms of the timely delivery
of medical interventions in response to COVID-19.

In traditional risk classiﬁcation, elements like asset
registration and valuation, threat frequency and vulnera-
bility probability are at greater risk of cyber threat. We,
therefore, anticipate changes on the way the workforce
accesses those information assets and how strategic,
tactical and operational tasks are executed to generate
socio-economical outputs. These changes can be cap-
tured by the development and testing of risk statements
capturing 1) threat agents, 2) vulnerabilities, 3) Pol-
icy/process violation and 4) overall asset exposure on
all emerging threat landscapes as illustrated in Figure 6.
These changes unavoidably cascade further changes to
the threat landscapes associated with remote workforce
activities and the increasing frequency of weaponised
attack vectors related to the coronavirus spreading. Given
the current climate, it is difﬁcult to predict whether these
changes will have a long-lasting effect on the work-
force, but their signiﬁcance is already recorded [129].
Therefore, it is increasingly important that the control
of information (storage, processing, transmission) has an
elevated importance given the increase of cyber-attacks
on important infrastructures.

Governments, private and public sectors throughout
Europe currently consider measures to contain and
mitigate COVID-19 impact on existing data structures
and information governance frameworks (for example,

14

Fig. 6. COVID-19 Impact on Workforce

[130]). Particular emphasis is placed upon the impli-
cations of the pandemic in the processing of personal
data. The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
legislation in the UK dictates that personal data must
be processed only for the speciﬁc and explicit purposes
for which it has been obtained [131]. In addition, data
subjects should always receive explicit and transparent
information with regard to the processing activities un-
dertaken, including that of features and nature of the
activity, retention period and purpose of processing.
There are challenges related to the governance legal
and regulatory compliance landscape in terms of con-
formance versus rapid access and processing of data by
different entities. This is quite apparent in cases where
public authorities seek to obtain PII to reduce the spread
of COVID-19. Typical examples also include contact
tracing applications and platforms in which the data
is aggregated online for post-processing [132]. Speciﬁc
legislative measures have to be re-deployed or introduced
to safeguard public security while maintaining privacy at
scale, while legal and regulatory principles continue to
upheld [133].

With the rapid increase of COVID-19 symptoms,

governments had to derive a plan that would enable them
to understand epidemiological data further and identify
positive interventions to contain and mitigate the impact
of the pandemic. Research shows a high correlation be-
tween the use of big data that includes private identiﬁable
information in the effectiveness of these epidemiological
investigations [134]. That meant that in most cases, citi-
zens had to provide this information voluntarily and that
quickly resulted in discussions and debates on the trade-
offs between public safety versus personal privacy [135].
The information has also been obtained through internet
communication technology. Medical testing equipment
and coronavirus testing at a large-scale were used as
instruments for data collection in the ﬁght to reduce
mortality rates. The legal and regulatory compliance
thus, managing
frameworks differ between countries;
personal information was subject to different privacy
protection measures.

The de-identiﬁcation of personal information was an-
other component that governments had to exercise to
satisfy personal privacy requirements and increase the
trust of human participants during the epidemiological
investigations. The process of collecting and process-

COVID-19 Workforce ImpactInformation GovernanceHealth & HealthcareDigital and Circular EconomySupply chain & TransportAdvanced ManufacturingEmployment Rules and PoliciesPublic Finance and civil protectionInformation AssetsLifestyleRequire Access to:Strategic, Tactical and Operational TasksSocio-economic Impact(s)For the execution of:In order to generate:Evolving Threat LandscapeEvolving Threat LandscapeEvolving Threat LandscapeRisk Statement(s) - Administrative, Physical and TechnicalThreat SourcesVulnerabilitiesPolicy / Process ViolationExposureing personal information by applying de-identiﬁcation
technologies raised technical challenges with regards
to accuracy and consent, safe and legally defensive
data disposal and robustness of associated policies of
data processing and management for epidemiological
research. The urgency of the situation and the speed at
which the data had to be acquired and processed, created
a sense of distrust amongst citizens and challenged
the efﬁcacy of the existing processes in place [135].
The extensive lockdown periods introduced in many
countries (described in Section III) have also tested their
ability to deploy strategies for business recovery after
these periods. These strategies had to ensure smooth and
phased out recovery within an ongoing pandemic, which
has proved to be a challenging task. However, there is
an unprecedented speed and scale on the R&D activities
in response to the COVID-19 outbreak forcing cross-
organizational multilateral collaborations [136, 137].

There is currently a challenge across Europe to or-
chestrate information sharing in a timely and accurate
manner as even mainstream media sources seem to
have propagated false information [138]. The increase
on both frequency and impact of these attacks will test
further our existing monitoring and auditing capabilities,
logical and physical access controls, authentication and
veriﬁcation schemes currently deployed. Also, as part
of the current enterprise risk management approaches
the way organisations sanitise incident reporting, media
disposal and data destruction and sharing processes will
also be tested alongside to traditional defence-in-depth
principles currently established as de-facto. The ﬁnance
sector is also affected as the predicted ﬁnancial recession
will leverage the sophistication and scale of targeted
attacks as threat actors grow their capabilities [139].

V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

The COVID-19 pandemic has generated remarkable
and unique societal and economic circumstances lever-
aged by cyber-criminals. Our analysis of events such
as announcements and media stories has shown what
appears to be a loose correlation between the announce-
ment and a corresponding cyber-attack campaign which
utilises the event as a hook thereby increasing the
likelihood of success.

The COVID-19 pandemic, and the increased rate of
cyber-attacks it has invoked have wider implications,
which stretch beyond the targets of such attacks. Changes
to working practises and socialization, mean people
are now spending increased periods of time online.
In addition to this, rates of unemployment have also
increased, meaning more people are sitting at home
online- it is likely that some of these people will turn to
cyber-crime to support themselves. The combination of
increased levels of cyber-attacks and cyber-crime means

15

there may be implications for policing around the World-
law enforcement must ensure it has the capacity to deal
with cyber-crime [140].

The analysis presented in this paper has highlighted a
common modus-operandi of many cyber-attacks during
this period. Many cyber-attacks begin with a phishing
campaign which directs victims to download a ﬁle or
access a URL. The ﬁle or the URL act as the carrier
of malware which, when installed, acts as the vehicle
for ﬁnancial fraud. The analysis has also shown that to
increase the likelihood of success, the phishing campaign
leverages media and governmental announcements.

Although this analysis is not necessarily novel, we
believe this is the ﬁrst time that this has been supported
with a context of actual live events. This analysis gives
rise to the recommendation that governments, the media
and other institutions should be aware that announce-
ments and the publication of stories are likely to give
rise to the perpetration of associated cyber-attack cam-
paigns which leverage these events. The events should
be accompanied by a note / disclaimer outlining how in-
formation relating to the announcement will be relayed.
Our research presents opportunity for further research.
This research has shown what can best be described as a
loose direct and inverse correlation between events and
cyber-attacks. Further research should investigate this
phenomenon and outline whether a predictive model can
be used to conﬁrm this relationship. There is an abundant
supply of cyber-attack case studies relating to countries
around the world and a wider analysis of the problem
can help in afﬁrming this phenomenon.

REFERENCES

[1] W. H. O. (WHO), “Who coronavirus disease (covid-19)
dashboard,” 2020, thttps://covid19.who.int/, (Accessed
15 June 2020.
[2] MalwareBytes,

impersonate World
Health Organization to distribute fake coronavirus
e-book,” 2020, https://blog.malwarebytes.com/social-
engineering/2020/03/cybercriminals-impersonate-world-
health-organization-to-distribute-fake-coronavirus-e-
book/, (Accessed 15 June 2020).

“Cybercriminals

airlines
2020,

scams,”

coronavirus

impersonate

Times,
Tesco

“Fraudsters
in

[3] The
and
https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/fraudsters-
impersonate-airlines-and-tesco-in-coronavirus-scams-
5wdwhxq7p, (Accessed 15 June 2020).
“Live
Spread Malware,”

Map
https://krebsonsecurity.com/2020/03/live-coronavirus-
map-used-to-spread-malware/
2020).

Security,
to

on
Used

[4] Krebs

(Accessed

15

Coronavirus
2020,

June

[5] R.

“Fraudsters
Smithers,
contact-tracing
in
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/may/13/
fraudsters-use-bogus-nhs-contact-tracing-app-in-
phishing-scam (Accessed 30 May 2020).

use
phishing

bogus
scam,”

app

nhs
2020,

16

How
2020,

201819720.html (Accessed 9 May 2020).

[23] FBI,

“Hurricane

katrina

fraud,”

2016,

https://www.fbi.gov/history/famous-cases/hurricane-
katrina-fraud (Accessed 9 May 2020).

“Pandemic

[6] Europol,
Criminals
https://www.europol.europa.eu/publications-
documents/pandemic-proﬁteering-how-criminals-
exploit-covid-19-crisis (Accessed 15 June 2020).

Proﬁteering:

COVID-19

Crisis,”

Exploit

“Coronavirus

Phishing
Protect Against COVID-19

[7] Norton,
to
https://us.norton.com/internetsecurity-online-scams-
coronavirus-phishing-scams.html
2020).

Emails:
Scams,”

(Accessed 15 June

How
2020,

[8] The Guardian, “US Authorities Battle Surge in Coron-
avirus Scams, From Phishing to Fake Treatments,” 2020,
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/19/
coronavirus-scams-phishing-fake-treatments
15 June 2020).

(Accessed

[9] J. R. C. Nurse, “Cybercrime and You: How Criminals
Attack and the Human Factors That They Seek to
Exploit,” in The Oxford Handbook of Cyberpsychology.
OUP, 2019.

“Hackers

[10] Wired,
tals
https://www.wired.co.uk/article/coronavirus-hackers-
cybercrime-phishing (Accessed 15 June 2020).

Targeting
Coronavirus,”

Crippled

Are

by

Hospi-
2020,

[11] UK’s National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) and the
US’ Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Cyber-
security and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA),
“Advisory: COVID-19 Exploited by Malicious Cyber
Actors,” 2020, https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/news/covid-19-
exploited-by-cyber-actors-advisory (Accessed 15 June
2020).

[12] Hiscox, “The hiscox cyber readiness report 2019,” 2019,
(Accessed 9

https://www.hiscox.co.uk/cyberreadiness
May 2020).

[13] Cybersecurity

Ventures,
cybercrime

“2019
report,”

ofﬁ-
2019,

annual

cial
https://www.herjavecgroup.com/the-2019-ofﬁcial-
annual-cybercrime-report (Accessed 17 June 2020).

Netherlands,
cybercrime,”

[14] CBS
more
gb/news/2020/10/less-traditional-crime-more-
cybercrime (Accessed 9 May 2020).

“Less
2020,

traditional

crime,
https://www.cbs.nl/en-

[15] R. Anderson, C. Barton, R. B¨olme, R. Clayton,
C. Gan´an, T. Grasso, M. Levi, T. Moore, and M. Vasek,
“Measuring the changing cost of cybercrime,” Workshop
on the Economics of Information Security (WEIS), 2019.
[16] M. McGuire, Understanding the Growth of Cybercrime

Economy. Bromium, 2018.

[17] M. Cross and D. L. Shinder, Scene of the cybercrime.

Syngress Pub., 2008.

[18] M. Yar, “The novelty of ’cybercrime’ an assessment in
light of routine activity theory,” European Journal of
Criminology, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 407–427, 2005.

[19] D. R. Cressey, Other people’s money; a study of the
social psychology of embezzlement. Free Press, 1953.
[20] N. Dhanjani, B. Rios, and B. Hardin, Hacking: The Next
O’Reilly Media,

Generation: The Next Generation.
Inc., 2009.

[21] F. Stajano and P. Wilson, “Understanding scam victims:
seven principles for systems security,” Communications
of the ACM, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 70–75, 2011.
cybercriminals
“How
disasters,”

[22] K.
on
https://www.journalofaccountancy.com/news/2018/
sep/cyber-criminals-prey-on-natural-disaster-victims-

Tysiac,
victims

prey
2018,

natural

of

jack-
2009,

[24] FTC,

“How
in

to
Ecuador

help

the

victims
https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/blog/2016/04/how-
help-earthquake-victims-ecuador-and-japan
15 June 2020).

Japan,”

and

earthquake
2016,

(Accessed

[25] CNET, “Watch Out For Hurricane Harvey Phishing
Scams,” 2017, https://www.cnet.com/news/hurricane-
harvey-charity-donations-scam-phishing-attack/
(Accessed 15 June 2020).

[26] E. Elsworthy, “Hundreds of bushﬁre donation scams
circulating,” 2020, https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-
02-07/australia-ﬁres-sees-spike-in-fraudster-
behaviour/11923174 (Accessed 15 June 2020).

[27] Naked

Security,

“Michael

death

sparks

son’s
https://nakedsecurity.sophos.com/2009/06/26/michael-
jackson-harvesting-email-addresses (Accessed 9 May
2020).

spam,”

off

[28] S. Hoffman, “Michael

jackson’s death spurs spam,
malware campaigns,” 2009, https://www.crn.com/blogs-
op-ed/the-channel-wire/218101623/michael-jacksons-
death-spurs-spam-malware-campaigns.htm (Accessed 9
May 2020).

[29] ESET, “You Have NOT Won! A Look at Fake FIFA
World Cup-themed Lotteries and Giveaways,” 2018,
https://www.welivesecurity.com/2018/06/06/fake-ﬁfa-
world-cup-themed-lotteries-giveaways/
June 2020).
Jansson,

leaks,”
2018,
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/blackmailing-
passwords-leaks-thomas-jansson (Accessed 17 June
2020).

“Blackmailing and passwords

(Accessed 15

[30] T.

[31] J. Segura, “Compromised linkedin accounts used
to send phishing links via private message and
inmail,”
https://blog.malwarebytes.com/threat-
analysis/2017/09/compromised-linkedin-accounts-used-
to-send-phishing-links-via-private-message-and-inmail
(Accessed 9 May 2020).

2017,

[32] WHO,

2020,
“#healthyathome,”
https://www.who.int/news-room/campaigns/connecting-
the-world-to-combat-coronavirus/healthyathome
(Accessed 9 May 2020).

[33] NHS, “10 tips to help if you are worried about coro-
navirus,” 2020, https://www.nhs.uk/oneyou/every-mind-
matters/coronavirus-covid-19-anxiety-tips (Accessed 9
May 2020).

[34] S.

Gallagher

and

down
19,”
us/2020/04/14/covidmalware (Accessed 9 May 2020).

the myriad
2020,

“Facing
covid-
https://news.sophos.com/en-

Brandt,
tied

A.
threats

to

[35] F. Shi, “Threat spotlight: Coronavirus-related phishing,”
https://blog.barracuda.com/2020/03/26/threat-
2020,
spotlight-coronavirus-related-phishing (Accessed 9 May
2020).

[36] N. Kumaran and S. Lugani, “Protecting businesses
against cyber threats during covid-19 and beyond,”
https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/identity-
2020,
security/protecting-against-cyber-threats-during-covid-
19-and-beyond (Accessed 17 June 2020).
scams

[37] T. L. O’Brien,

“Covid

dodgy

and

aid

have

could

deals
https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2020-
05-01/coronavirus-trillions-in-aid-draws-scams-and-
dodgy-deals (Accessed 9 May 2020).

avoided,”

been

2020,

17

espionage,” 2020, https://www.ﬁreeye.com/blog/threat-
research/2020/04/apt32-targeting-chinese-government-
in-covid-19-related-espionage.html (Accessed 17 June
2020).

[38] D. Galov, “Remote spring: the rise of rdp bruteforce
attacks,” 2020, https://securelist.com/remote-spring-the-
rise-of-rdp-bruteforce-attacks/96820 (Accessed 9 May
2020).
[39] NCSC,

“Home
organisation

working:
and

your
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/home-working
(Accessed 9 May 2020).

staff,”

preparing
2020,

[40] NIST, “Security for enterprise telework, remote access,
and bring your own device (byod) solutions,” 2020,
https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Publications/Shared/
documents/itl-bulletin/itlbul2020-03.pdf
May 2020).

(Accessed 9

[41] FTC,

“Online

security

tips

working
https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/blog/2020/03/online-
security-tips-working-home (Accessed 9 May 2020).

home,”

from

for
2020,

[42] G. Tsakalidis and K. Vergidis, “A systematic approach
toward description and classiﬁcation of cybercrime in-
cidents,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cy-
bernetics: Systems, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 710–729, 2017.
[43] I. Kotenko and A. Chechulin, “A cyber attack modeling
and impact assessment framework,” in 2013 5th Inter-
national Conference on Cyber Conﬂict (CYCON 2013).
IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–24.

[44] H. Hindy, D. Brosset, E. Bayne, A. Seeam, C. Tachtatzis,
R. Atkinson, and X. Bellekens, “A taxonomy and survey
of intrusion detection system design techniques, network
threats and datasets,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.03517,
2018.

[45] O. Kolomiyets, S. Bethard, and M.-F. Moens, “Extract-
ing narrative timelines as temporal dependency struc-
tures,” in Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Long
Papers-Volume 1. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, 2012, pp. 88–97.

[46] R. Van Heerden, S. Von Soms, and R. Mooi, “Classiﬁca-
tion of cyber attacks in south africa,” in 2016 IST-Africa
Week Conference.

IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–16.

[47] N. Horton and A. DeSimone, “Sony’s nightmare before
christmas: The 2014 north korean cyber attack on sony
and lessons for us government actions in cyberspace,”
JHUAPL Laurel United States, Tech. Rep., 2018.
[48] N. Falliere, L. O. Murchu, and E. Chien, “W32. stuxnet
dossier,” White paper, Security Response, vol. 5, no. 6,
p. 29, 2011.

[49] World Health Organisation (WHO), “Naming the coron-
avirus disease (COVID-19) and the virus that causes it,”
2020, https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-
coronavirus-2019/technical-guidance/naming-the-
coronavirus-disease-(covid-2019)-and-the-virus-that-
causes-it (Accessed 15 June 2020).

[50] CPS,

“Cybercrime

- prosecution guidance,” The
Crown Prosecution Service (CPS), Tech. Rep., 2019,
https://www.cps.gov.uk/legal-guidance/cybercrime-
prosecution-guidance (Accessed 17 June 2020).
[51] S. Henderson, G. Roncone, S. Jones, J. Hultquist, and
B. Read, “Vietnamese threat actors apt32 targeting
wuhan government and chinese ministry of emergency
in latest example of covid-19 related
management

Apps
2020,

[52] L.

O’Donnell,
remote

“Skype
workers’
targets
https://threatpost.com/skype-phishing-attack-targets-
remote-workers-passwords/155068/ (Accessed 30 May
2020).
[53] CNET,

phishing
passwords,”

attack
2020,

Coronavirus

Tracking

“Fake

Are Really Malware That Stalks You,”
https://www.cnet.com/news/fake-coronavirus-tracking-
apps-are-really-malware-that-stalks-its-users/ (Accessed
15 June 2020).

Translate,”
(Accessed

2020,
30 May

[54] L. Shepherd and K. Renaud, “How to design browser
security and privacy alerts,” in AISB 2018.
Society
for the Study of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Simulation
for Behaviour (AISB), Apr. 2018, pp. 21–28, 2018
AISB Convention : Symposium on Digital Behaviour
Intervention for Cyber Security.

[55] S. Chockalingam, W. Pieters, A. Teixeira, and P. van
Gelder, “Bayesian network models in cyber security: a
systematic review,” in Nordic Conference on Secure IT
Systems. Springer, 2017, pp. 105–122.
“Google

[56] Google,

https://translate.google.co.uk/
2020).
Organisation
[57] World
avirus
(COVID-19)
https://www.who.int/zh/emergencies/diseases/novel-
coronavirus-2019 (Accessed 18 June 2020).

(WHO),
pandemic,”

Health
disease

“Coron-
2020,

[58] The Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, “Latest
information on Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).”
2020, https://www.mhlw.go.jp/stf/seisakunitsuite/bunya/
0000164708 00001.html (Accessed 30 May 2020).
[59] G.-y. Wang, H.-m. Wang, Z.-j. Chen, and M. Xian,
“Research on computer network attack modeling based
on attack graph [j],” Journal of National University of
Defense Technology, vol. 4, 2009.

[60] World Health Organisation (WHO), “Who reports
ﬁvefold increase in cyber attacks, urges vigilance,”
2020, https://www.who.int/zh/news-room/detail/23-04-
2020-who-reports-ﬁvefold-increase-in-cyber-attacks-
urges-vigilance (Accessed 18 June 2020).

[61] Jisho, “Cyber attack,” 2020, https://jisho.org/search (Ac-

[62] Le

cessed 30 May 2020).
Parisien,
the

at

“Municipal:“massive”

computer
2020,

hall

town

of marseille,”

attack
http://www.leparisien.fr/elections/municipales/municipales-
attaque-informatique-massive-a-la-mairie-de-marseille-
15-03-2020-8280114.php (Accessed 30 May 2020).
[63] la Repubblica, “Cyber attack on easyjet, compromised
2020,
nine million

the
https://www.repubblica.it/tecnologia/sicurezza/2020/05/19/
news/attacco informatico a easyjet
compromessi i dati di nove milioni di clienti-
257099879/ (Accessed 30 May 2020).

customers,”

data

of

[64] S. ´O. Ciardhu´ain, “An extended model of cybercrime in-
vestigations,” International Journal of Digital Evidence,
vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–22, 2004.

[65] J. L. Cebula and L. R. Young, “A taxonomy of opera-
tional cyber security risks,” Carnegie Mellon University,
Software Engineering Institute, Tech. Rep., 2010.
[66] A. Nicholson, T. Watson, P. Norris, A. Duffy, and R. Is-

bell, “A taxonomy of technical attribution techniques for
cyber attacks,” in European Conference on Information
Warfare and Security. Academic Conferences Interna-
tional Limited, 2012, p. 188.

[67] H. Hindy, D. Brosset, E. Bayne, A. Seeam, C. Tach-
tatzis, R. Atkinson, and X. Bellekens, “A taxonomy
of network threats and the effect of current datasets
on intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Access, pp. 1–1,
2020.

[68] M. McGuire and S. Dowling, “Chapter 1: Cyber-
dependent crimes,” Home Ofﬁce, Tech. Rep., 2013,
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government
/uploads/system/uploads/attachment data/
ﬁle/246751/horr75-chap1.pdf
(Accessed
2020).

June

18

[69] ——, “Chapter 2: Cyber-enabled crimes

-

theft,” Home Ofﬁce, Tech. Rep.,

and
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads
/system/uploads/attachment data/ﬁle
/248621/horr75-chap2.pdf (Accessed 18 June 2020).

fraud
2013,

“Research
Cybercriminals

Hacker
Reveals
as
Use
for Other Attacks
on Business,”
https://www.kaspersky.com/about/press-

[70] Kaspersky,
Tactics:
Smokescreen
2016,
releases/2016 research-reveals-hacker-tactics-
cybercriminals-use-ddos-as-smokescreen-for-other-
attacks-on-business (Accessed 15 June 2020).

DDoS

[71] X. Bellekens, G. Jayasekara, H. Hindy, M. Bures,
D. Brosset, C. Tachtatzis, and R. Atkinson, “From cyber-
security deception to manipulation and gratiﬁcation
through gamiﬁcation,” in International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction. Springer, 2019, pp. 99–
114.

[72] J.

Fruhlinger,
the

“Recent
malware’s

ransomware
age,”
new

attacks
2020,

deﬁne
https://www.csoonline.com/article/3212260/recent-
ransomware-attacks-deﬁne-the-malwares-new-age.html
(Accessed 30 May 2020).

[73] Malwarebytes, “2020 state of malware report,” 2020,
https://resources.malwarebytes.com/ﬁles/2020/02
/2020 State-of-Malware-Report.pdf (Accessed 30 May
2020).

[74] AON, “Social engineering attacks and covid-19,” 2020,

https://www.aon.com/cyber-solutions/thinking/social-
engineering-attacks-and-covid-19/
2020).

(Accessed 17 June

[75] Forbes, “Chinese hackers ‘weaponize’ coronavirus data
they did,” 2020,

for new cyber attack: Here’s what
https://www.forbes.com/sites/zakdoffman/2020/03/12/
chinese-hackers-weaponized-coronavirus-data-
to-launch-this-new-cyber-attack/#196851b03861
(Accessed 30 May 2020).
“Coronavirus

[76] F-Secure,
as
secure.com/coronavirus-email-attacks-evolving-as-
outbreak-spreads/ (Accessed 30 May 2020).
phishing,”
“Coronavirus
https://www.kaspersky.com/blog/coronavirus-
phishing/32395/ (Accessed 30 May 2020).

[77] Kaspersky,

evolving
https://blog.f-

spreads,”

outbreak

attacks

2020,

2020,

email

18

[79] smzdm.com, “Hackers are using the ”coronavirus” fear
for phishing, please pay attention to prevention!” 2020,
https://post.smzdm.com/p/a07ol5x0/ (Accessed 30 May
2020).
[80] CSDN,

ﬁre!

the

“Take
is

advantage
bait”

of
cyber

epidemic
https://blog.csdn.net/weixin 43634380/article/details/
104237121 (Accessed 30 May 2020).

attack,”

a

“the
2020,

“Global

[81] TechRepublic,
attacked
by
https://www.techrepublic.com/article/global-shipping-
industry-attacked-by-coronavirus-themed-malware/
(Accessed 30 May 2020).

coronavirus-themed malware,”

shipping

industry
2020,

[82] cqgbxa.com, “Fighting the spread of coronaviruses
2020,
(Accessed

who
cybersecurity
severe
www.cqgbxa.com/newshy/67936.html
30 May 2020).

threats,”

faces

[83] S. Patranobis, “Indian Hackers Targeting Chinese
Medical Institutes Amid Coronavirus Outbreak, Says
Report,” 2020, https://www.hindustantimes.com/world-
news/indian-hackers-targetting-chinese-medical-
institutes-amid-coronavirus-outbreak-says-report/story-
piDHQeY4UfTVy8BWa2GG3O.html, (Accessed on 12
June 2020).
[84] freebuf.com,
several
during
period,”
information/227585.html (Accessed 30 May 2020).

on
threats
control
https://www.freebuf.com/company-

suggestions
security
and

“Analysis
of
epidemic

and
network

types
the

prevention

2020,

“Coronavirus

[85] Stoneﬂy,
infection
https://stoneﬂy.com/blog/coronavirus-ransomware-
infection-whats-the-connection
2020).

and
connection?”

(Accessed

what’s

the

12

-

ransomware
2020,

June

[87] R. Millman,

[86] The Register,
health

for

great

taken

“Fresh
agency

virus misery
down
scumbags,”

illinois:
by... web
2020,

timing,

Public
ransomware.
https://www.theregister.co.uk/2020/03/12/
ransomware illinois health/ (Accessed 30 May 2020).
delayed
2020,

“Coronavirus
on
by
https://www.scmagazineuk.com/coronavirus-
test-results-delayed-cyber-attack-czech-
hospital/article/1677194 (Accessed 30 May 2020).
Jacobs,

results
hospital,”

cyber-attack

czech

test

amid

agency

health
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-03-
16/u-s-health-agency-suffers-cyber-attack-during-covid-
19-response (Accessed 30 May 2020).

covid-19

“Cyber-attack hits u.s.
2020,
outbreak,”

[88] S. Stein and J.

[89] K. D. Rosso, “New threat discovery shows commercial
to exploit covid-
https://blog.lookout.com/commercial-

surveillanceware operators
19,”
surveillanceware-operators-latest-to-take-advantage-of-
covid-19 (Accessed 30 May 2020).

2020,

latest

[90] S. Desai,

“New android app offers
delivers
safety mask
https://www.zscaler.com/blogs/research/new-android-
app-offers-coronavirus-safety-mask-delivers-sms-trojan
(Accessed 30 May 2020).

coronavirus
2020,

trojan,”

sms

but

[78] J. Walter, “Threat

Intel:Cyber Attacks Leveraging
2020,

Pandemic,”

COVID-19/CoronaVirus

the
https://labs.sentinelone.com/threat-intel-update-cyber-
attacks-leveraging-the-covid-19-coronavirus-pandemic/,
(Accessed 10 June 2020).

[91] N. FitzGerald, “Scams, lies, and coronavirus,” 2020,
https://www.welivesecurity.com/2020/04/17/scams-lies-
coronavirus/ (Accessed 30 May 2020).

[92] Murica
spanish

Today,
hospital

“Cyber-attack

computer

systems,”

threatens
2020,

https://murciatoday.com/cyber attack threatens spanish

hospital computer systems 1367723-a.html

magazine.com/news/hmrc-covid19-phishing-scams/,
(Accessed 10 June 2020).

19

(Accessed 30 May 2020).

[107] U.

[93] B. Koenig, “Covid sms phishing attempt,” 2020,

https://twitter.com/BigBenKoenig/status/
1242503232527589376 (Accessed 30 May 2020).
[94] Glos Safe Cyber, “Our @glospolice fcr have had calls
asking if covid-19 texts like the below are genuine,”
2020, https://twitter.com/GlosSaferCyber/status
/1242525105508532225 (Accessed 30 May 2020).
[95] J. Rodger, “The school meals coronavirus text scam
which could trick parents out of thousands,” 2020,
https://www.birminghammail.co.uk/news/midlands-
news/school-meals-coronavirus-text-scam-17975311
(Accessed 30 May 2020).
Muncaster,
for

payment
https://www.infosecurity-magazine.com/news/android-
malware-payment/ (Accessed 30 May 2020).

ﬁnder’ map,”

’coronavirus

takes
2020,

“Android

malware

[96] P.

[97] G.

Strawbridge,

“Warning
scam,”

over
2020,

netﬂix

coronavirus
https://www.metacompliance.com/blog/warning-over-
coronavirus-netﬂix-scam/ (Accessed 30 May 2020).
[98] J. Chadwick, “Cyber criminals create a spoof copy of
the nhs website in the midst of the coronavirus pandemic
to trick users into downloading dangerous malware
that can steal their passwords and credit card data,”
2020,
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-
8250737/Kaspersky-detects-fake-NHS-site-steals-credit-
card-data.html (Accessed 30 May 2020).

[99] D. C. R. Magazine, “Hackers exploit hmrc coronavirus
job retention scheme with phishing email
scam,”
2020, https://datacentrereview.com/news/1680-hackers-
exploit-hmrc-coronavirus-job-retention-scheme-with-
phishing-email-scam (Accessed 30 May 2020).

[100] L.

“New

coronavirus

Abrams,
is

screenlocker
malware
2020,
https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/new-
coronavirus-screenlocker-malware-is-extremely-
annoying/ (Accessed 30 May 2020).

annoying,”

extremely

“Docusign

Reading,
uses

[101] Dark
paign
https://www.darkreading.com/attacks-
breaches/docusign-phishing-campaign-uses-covid-
19-as-bait/d/d-id/1337776 (Accessed 30 May 2020).

phishing
bait,”

covid-19

as

cam-
2020,

[102] Mimecast,

“New

Threat
port:100
of
https://www.mimecast.com/blog/2020/05/100-days-
of-coronavirus/, (Accessed 15 June 2020).

Coronavirus,”

Intelligence

Days

Re-
2020,

[103] NCSC, “NCSC Shines Light on Scams Being Foiled
2020,
via Pioneering New Reporting Service,”
https://www.actionfraud.police.uk/news/cyber-experts-
shine-light-on-online-scams-as-british-public-ﬂag-over-
160000-suspect-emails, (Accessed 7 May 2020).
[104] Sky News, “Coronavirus: Fraud victims have lost
more than £4.6m to virus-related scams,” 2020,
https://news.sky.com/story/coronavirus-fraud-victims-
have-lost-more-than-4-6m-to-virus-related-scams-
11996721, (Accessed 10 June 2020).

[105] J. Tidy, “Coronavirus: Israel enables emergency spy
powers,” 2020, https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-
51930681 (Accessed 30 May 2020).

[106] M. Hill, “HMRC Shuts Down Almost 300 COVID19
Phishing Scam Sites,” 2020, https://www.infosecurity-

Government,
Need
You

“Budget

What
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/budget-2020-
what-you-need-to-know, (Accessed 10 June 2020).

Know,”

to

2020:
2020,

[108] Swansea Council,

“Coronavirus

Scams,”

2020,

https://www.swansea.gov.uk/coronavirusscam,
(Accessed 10 June 2020).

[109] X. Bellekens, A. Hamilton, P. Seeam, K. Nieradzinska,
Q. Franssen, and A. Seeam, “Pervasive ehealth services
a security and privacy risk awareness survey,” in 2016
International Conference On Cyber Situational Aware-
ness, Data Analytics And Assessment (CyberSA).
IEEE,
2016, pp. 1–4.

[110] C. Iuga, J. R. C. Nurse, and A. Erola, “Baiting the hook:
factors impacting susceptibility to phishing attacks,”
Human-centric Computing and Information Sciences,
vol. 6, no. 1, p. 8, 2016.

of

the NHS Website

“Cyber Criminals Create

a Spoof
[111] Daily Mail,
of
Copy
the Coronavirus Pandemic
Into
Downloading Dangerous Malware That Can Steal
Their Passwords
and Credit Card Data,” 2020,
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-
8250737/Kaspersky-detects-fake-NHS-site-steals-
credit-card-data.html (Accessed 15 June 2020).

to Trick Users

the Midst

in

[112] Check

Point,
Beware

“Coronavirus
Update:
of
https://blog.checkpoint.com/2020/05/12/coronavirus-
cyber-attacks-update-beware-of-the-phish/ (Accessed 17
May 2020).

Cyber-attacks
2020,

Phish,”

the

[113] Forbes, “There Are Now More Than 40,000 ’High-
Risk’ COVID-19 Threats On The Web,” 2020,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/thomasbrewster/2020/04/22/
there-are-now-more-than-40000-high-risk-covid-19–
threats-on-the-web/ (Accessed 17 May 2020).

[114] US Department of Justice (DOJ), “Covid-19 fraud,”
https://www.justice.gov/usao-edky/covid-19-

2020,
fraud-1 (Accessed 15 June 2020).

[115] X.

J. Bellekens, K. Nieradzinska, A. Bellekens,
P. Seeam, A. W. Hamilton, and A. Seeam, “A study on
situational awareness security and privacy of wearable
health monitoring devices.” IJCSA, vol. 1, no. 1, pp.
74–96, 2016.

[116] Food and Drugs Administration (FDA), “Fraudulent
products,”
https://www.fda.gov/consumers/health-fraud-

coronavirus
2020,
scams/fraudulent-coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19-
products (Accessed 15 June 2020).

(covid-19)

disease

2019

[117] European Anti-Fraud Ofﬁce (OLAF), “OLAF Launches
Enquiry into Fake COVID-19 Related Products,” 2020,
https://ec.europa.eu/anti-fraud/media-corner/news/20-
03-2020/olaf-launches-enquiry-fake-covid-19-related-
products en (Accessed 17 May 2020).
and Medical
“UK Medicines
[118] UK Government,
Devices Regulator
Investigating 14 Cases of Fake
or Unlicensed COVID-19 Medical Products,” 2020,
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-medicines-
and-medical-devices-regulator-investigating-14-cases-
of-fake-or-unlicensed-covid-19-medical-products
(Accessed 17 May 2020).
little
threatens to give your

email
extortion
family coronavirus,” 2020,

[119] Sophos,

“Dirty

secret

[132] A.

(Accessed 19 June 2020).
Downey,
short

“NHS
data

of

contact-tracing
law’,”

‘falls
https://www.digitalhealth.net/2020/05/nhs-contact-
tracing-app-falls-short-of-data-protection-law/
(Accessed on 20 June 2020).

protection

20

app
2020,

[133] NHSXIG

Team,
advice

“Covid-19
ig

information
2020,

for

governance
https://www.nhsx.nhs.uk/covid-19-response/data-and-
information-governance/information-governance/covid-
19-information-governance-advice-ig-professionals/
(Accessed 18 June 2020).

professionals,”

[134] W. Price and I. Cohen, “Privacy in the age of medical

big data,” Nature Medicine, vol. 25, 01 2019.

[135] N.-Y. Ahn, J. E. Park, D. H. Lee, and P. C. Hong,
“Balancing personal privacy and public safety in covid-
19: Case of korea and france,” 2020.

[136] AstraZeneca, “AstraZeneca Advances Response to
Global COVID-19 Challenge as
it Receives First
Commitments for Oxford’s Potential New Vaccine,”
2020, https://www.astrazeneca.com/media-centre/press-
releases/2020/astrazeneca-advances-response-to-global-
covid-19-challenge-as-it-receives-ﬁrst-commitments-
for-oxfords-potential-new-vaccine.html
20 June 2020).

(Accessed on

[137] A. Downey, “COVID-19: Collaboration is the Engine of
Global Science – Especially for Developing Countries,”
2020, https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/05/global-
science-collaboration-open-source-covid-19/
(Accessed
on 20 June 2020).

[138] M. Gagne,

“The

danger

of mainstream media
information,”
https://alibi.com/news/60740/The-Danger-of-
(Accessed

infections with
2020,
Mainstream-Media-Infections-with-Vir.html
18 June 2020).

viral

fake

and

[139] A.

Cook,
at

“Covid-19:
for

risk

verticals
https://www.digitalshadows.com/blog-and-
research/covid-19-companies-and-verticals-at-risk-
for-cyber-attacks/ (Accessed 17 June 2020).

cyber

Companies
attacks,”

and
2020,

[140] B. Collier, S. Horgan, R. Jones, and L. Shepherd, The
implications of the COVID-19 pandemic for cybercrime
policing in Scotland: a rapid review of the evidence
and future considerations, ser. Research Evidence in
Policing: Pandemics.
Scottish Institute for Policing
Research, May 2020, no. 1.

https://nakedsecurity.sophos.com/2020/03/19/dirty-
little-secret-extortion-email-threatens-to-give-your-
family-coronavirus/ (Accessed 15 June 2020).

coronavirus

[120] Domain Tools, “Covidlock update: Deeper analysis
of
2020,
android
https://www.domaintools.com/resources/blog/covidlock-
update-coronavirus-ransomware
(Accessed 15 June
2020).

ransomware,”

[121] Incisive Media: Computing,

“Spanish Hospitals
Phishing
Coronavirus-themed
in Netwalker Ransomware Attacks,” 2020,

Targeted With
Lures
https://www.computing.co.uk/news/4012969/hospitals-
coronavirus-ransomware (Accessed 15 June 2020).

[122] BleepingComputer,

“Ransomware Gangs

to Stop
Attacking Health Orgs During Pandemic,” 2020,
https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security
/ransomware-gangs-to-stop-attacking-health-orgs-
during-pandemic/ (Accessed 15 June 2020).
“Trickbot Named Most

Proliﬁc
#COVID19 Malware,” 2020, https://www.infosecurity-
magazine.com/news/trickbot-named-most-proliﬁc/
(Accessed 15 June 2020).

[123] InfoSecurity,

Trojan
[124] SonicWall,
Overwriting
2020,
https://securitynews.sonicwall.com/xmlpost/coronavirus-
trojan-overwriting-the-mbr/ (Accessed 15 June 2020).

“Coronavirus

MBR,”

The

[125] I. Agraﬁotis, J. R. C. Nurse, M. Goldsmith, S. Creese,
and D. Upton, “A Taxonomy of Cyber-harms: Deﬁning
the Impacts of Cyber-attacks and Understanding How
They Propagate,” Journal of Cybersecurity, vol. 4, no. 1,
2018.

[126] Reuters,

says

“FBI
targeted

ofﬁcial
have
COVID-19
https://uk.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-
cyber/foreign-state-hackers-target-u-s-coronavirus-
treatment-research-fbi-ofﬁcial-idUKKBN21Y3GL
(Accessed 15 June 2020).

foreign
research,”

hackers
2020,

[127] UK’s National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) and the
US’ Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Cyberse-
curity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), “Ad-
visory: APT groups target healthcare and essential ser-
vices,” 2020, https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/news/apt-groups-
target-healthcare-essential-services-advisory (Accessed
15 June 2020).
Federal
“People’s Republic
of
2020,
releases/peoples-republic-of-china-prc-targeting-of-
covid-19-research-organizations
2020).

(FBI),
(PRC) Targeting
Organizations,”
https://www.fbi.gov/news/pressrel/press-

of
of China
Research

(Accessed 15 June

Investigation

COVID-19

[128] The

Bureau

[129] A. Pipikaite and N. Davis, “Why cybersecurity matters
more than ever during the coronavirus pandemic,” 2020,
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/03/coronavirus-
pandemic-cybersecurity/ (Accessed 18 June 2020).
[130] Data Protection Commission, “Data Protection and
COVID-19,”
https://dataprotection.ie/en/news-
media/blogs/data-protection-and-covid-19 (Accessed on
20 June 2020).

2020,

[131] The Information Commissioner’s Ofﬁce, “General data
protection regulation (gdpr): Principle (b): Purpose lim-
itation,” 2020, https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-
to-data-protection/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-
regulation-gdpr/principles/purpose-limitation/

