Elisa,  N.,  Yang,  L.,  Li,  H.,  Chao,  F.  &  Naik,  N.  (2019). 
Consortium blockchain for security and privacy-preserving in 
e-government  systems. 
In  Proceedings  of  The  19th 
International  Conference  on  Electronic  Business  (pp.  99-
107). ICEB, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, December 8-12. 

Elisa, Yang, Li, Chao & Naik

Consortium Blockchain for Security and Privacy-Preserving in E-government 
Systems 
(Full Paper) 
Noe Elisa, Northumbria University, noe.nnko@northumbria.ac.uk 
Longzhi Yang*, Northumbria University, longzhi.yang@northumbria.ac.uk 
Honglei Li, Northumbria University, honglei.li@northumbria.ac.uk 
Fei Chao, Department of Computer Science, Aberystwyth University, fec10@aber.ac.uk 
Nitin Naik, Defence School of Communications of Information Systems, Ministry of Defense, UK, 
nitin.naik100@mod.gov.uk 

ABSTRACT 
Since its inception as a solution for secure cryptocurrencies sharing in 2008, the blockchain technology has now become one of 
the core technologies for secure data sharing and storage over trustless and decentralised peer-to-peer systems. E-government 
is amongst the systems that stores sensitive information about citizens, businesses and other affiliates, and therefore becomes 
the target of cyber attackers. The existing e-government systems are centralised and thus subject to single point of failure. This 
paper proposes a secure and decentralised e-government system based on the consortium blockchain technology, which is a 
semi-public  and  decentralised  blockchain  system  consisting  of  a  group  of  pre-selected  entities  or  organisations  in  charge  of 
consensus and decisions making for the benefit of the whole network of peers. In addition, a number of e-government nodes 
are  pre-selected  to  perform  the  tasks  of  user  and  transaction  validation  before  being  added  to  the  blockchain  network. 
Accordingly,  e-government  users  of  the  consortium  blockchain  network  are  given  the  rights  to  create,  submit,  access,  and 
review transactions. Performance evaluation on single transaction time and transactions processed per second demonstrate the 
practicability of the proposed consortium blockchain-based e-government system for secure information sharing amongst all 
stakeholders. 

Keywords:  E-government systems, Consortium blockchain, Validators, Security, Privacy, Decentralised systems. 
_____________________ 
*Corresponding author 

INTRODUCTION 
The rapid advancement of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) has made it possible to store and access vast 
amount  of  information  effectively  and  efficiently  in  networked  systems.  E-government  is  one  such  system  that  uses  ICT  to 
deliver  public  services  to  citizens,  businesses  and  other  stakeholders.  The  transformation  of  government  systems  from 
traditional  paper-based  information  sharing  to  its  electronic  counterpart  increases  the  transparency,  accountability, 
participatory,  effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  services  delivered  by  government  agencies,  resulting  into  a  better  government 
system  (UN,  2018).  In  the  future,  the  number  of  devices  using  e-government  systems  will  increase  dramatically  due  to  the 
proliferation  of  technologies  such  as  smart  cities,  internet  of  things  (IoTs),  cloud  computing  and  interconnected  networks 
(Yang et al., 2019; Elisa et al., 2018b). Commonly, as the number of devices using e-government systems rises, the number of 
malicious nodes trying to access and abuse unauthorised and sensitive information grows accordingly (Yang et al., 2019). The 
goal of an e-government system is to ensure that information security goals including integrity, confidentiality, availability and 
trust are met for its users. Thus, for the successful adoption of e-government systems, cyber security provision is of paramount 
importance (Lambrinoudakis et al., 2003; Elisa, 2017). 

Data  breaches  in  e-government  systems  have  been  significantly  increasing  in  recent  years  based  on  various  sources.  For 
instance, according to the 2019 Cyber Security Breaches Survey by the UK government, around 32% of businesses and 22% of 
charities reported facing cyber security breaches or attacks in 2019, such as phishing, viruses, malware including ransomware 
attacks and impersonation of emails (UK Cyber-Attacks, 2019). In the United States of America, more than 5.90 billion data 
have been stolen by cyber criminals so far in 2019 (US Cyber-Attacks, 2019), including social security numbers, credit card 
numbers, names, passwords and addresses. Recently, 364 million Chinese citizens’ sensitive information were leaked online by 
unknown  hackers,  revealing  private  information  like  user  name,  photos,  address  and  identity  card  numbers  (China  Attacks, 
2019). Another recent cyber security breaches in e-government systems happened in Tanzania where the country was hit by 
hackers and cyber-terrorists who caused a loss of around 85 million US dollars (IPP Media, 2018). 

There is a demand for efficient and robust mechanisms to ensure information security and data privacy, due to the centralised 
nature  of  the  existing  e-government  systems.  Blockchain  technology  provides  the  decentralised  environment  for  secure 
transaction processing in trustless systems. It is designed as an immutable and distributed database for protecting privacy and 
security  of  the  shared  transactions  among  its  trustless  participants.  In  fact,  the  blockchain  technology  has  been  successfully 
exploited for security and privacy provision in supply chain (Tian, 2016), healthcare system (Peterson et al., 2016), Internet of 
Things  (IoT)  (Dorri  et  al.,  2017),  land  registry  (Ramya  et  al.,  2018),  smart  cities  (Biswas  and  Muthukkumarasamy,  2016), 

The 19th International Conference on Electronic Business, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, December 8-12, 2019 
99 

 
  
 
 
 
 
Elisa, Yang, Li, Chao & Naik 

educational systems (Turkanovi´c et al., 2018), in addition to the well-known e-currency. The blockchain technology can be 
public  (permissionless),  private  (permissioned)  or  consortium  (semi-public  and  semi-private).  One  type  of  blockchain 
technology  that  is  designed  to  meet  the  need  of  the  enterprise  is  the  consortium  blockchain.  The  consortium  blockchain 
technology  is  a  semi-public  and  decentralised  blockchain  system  which  consists  of  a  group  of  pre-selected  entities  or 
organisations responsible for consensus and decisions making for the benefit of the whole network of peers. 

This study proposes a secure and decentralised e-government system based on the consortium blockchain technology. Briefly, 
the  proposed  consortium  blockchain-based  e-government  system  consists  of  four  layers  namely  the  services  access  layer, 
consortium  blockchain  layer,  network  layer  and  ledger  storage  layer.  The  service  access  layer  provides  services  to  e-
government users by connecting their devices to the consortium blockchain-based e-government system. The consortium layer 
includes  a  number  of  pre-selected  e-government  nodes  for  validating  users  and  transactions  before  being  added  to  the 
blockchain network. The network layer ensures the connectivity between different entities of the proposed systems. The ledger 
storage  layer  stores off-chain  (sideDB)  data  such  as  images,  PDFs, DOCs,  contracts, and  other  files  that  are  too  large  to be 
stored in the blockchain or that are required to be deleted or changed in the future. The performance evaluation based on the 
number  of  transactions  processed  per  second  and  on  the  time  for  processing  a  single  transaction  by  varying  the  number  of 
validators  in  the  consortium  blockchain  network  have  proved  that,  the  proposed  system  is  suitable  for  security  and  privacy 
assurance in e-government systems. 

The  remainder  of  this  paper is  organised  into  four  sections  namely  background,  consortium  blockchain-based  e-government 
system, performance evaluation and finally conclusion and future direction as follows.   

This section details the background on the blockchain technology and e-government systems. 

BACKGROUND 

Blockchain Technology 
The blockchain technology is a decentralised peer to peer (P2P) network that maintains a list of continuously growing shared 
database (ledger) running on the Internet. The transactions are chained together to form a “block” of records, thus named as 
blockchain.  Each  participant  of  the  blockchain  network  has  a  pair  of  private  and  public  key  for  signing  and  verifying 
transactions  (Nakamoto,  2008).  SHA-256  Cryptographic  Hash  Algorithm  (Wolrich  et  al.,  2014)  is  a  commonly  used  to 
generate  the  hash  value  from  the  public  key  of  each  participant,  which  is  then  used  as  the  participant’s  identity.  The 
participants  of  the  blockchain  network  use  the  distributed  consensus  algorithms  such  as  Prof  of  Work  (PoW)  (Nakamoto, 
2008),  Proof  of  Stake  (PoS)  (Mingxiao  et  al.,  2017),  Delegated  PoS  (Mingxiao  et  al.,  2017)  or  Byzantine  Fault  Tolerance 
(Mingxiao et al., 2017), to agree on the validity and the order in which transactions are added to the blockchain network. 

A blockchain ledger in illustrated in Figure 1. The first block known as the genesis is formed by hardcoding and embedding 
random transactions into the blockchain software (Nakamoto, 2008). The upper part of each block contains its header and the 
lower part contains the list of transactions (body). The header includes the cryptographic hashes of the current and previous 
block headers linked together to create a secure chain of blocks. The header also stores the timestamp, a nonce, block version, 
and the root hash of all transactions stored in that block. The timestamp is used to indicate the time  taken (representing the 
difficulty) to mine and add the block. The block version indicates the validation rules followed to create the block. The nonce 
is a 4-byte unique random number which normally starts with 0 and increases for every next transaction. The root hash of the 
transactions is derived from a Merkle tree as shown in the lower part of Figure 1. In a Merkle tree, each leaf node contains a 
hash of a single transaction, and all non-leaf nodes store the hashes of their children. A typical Merkle tree consists of two (2) 
branches,  making  each  node  hold  up  to  two  children.  The  Merkle  root  summarises  all  transactions  in  the  block  so  as  to 
maintain the integrity of data in case of tempering. 

The 19th International Conference on Electronic Business, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, December 8-12, 2019 
100 

  
 
 
 
 
 
Elisa, Yang, Li, Chao & Naik 

Figure1: An example of a detailed blockchain ledger. 

Example applications of blockchain technologies include Bitcoin (support decentralised cryptocurrencies) (Nakamoto, 2008), 
Ethereum (support self-executing digital smart contracts) (Buterin et al., 2014), Hyperledger Fabric (support development of 
general  enterprise  solution)  (Cachin,  2016),  amongst  others.  Typically,  the  blockchain  technology  can  be  either  public 
(permissionless), private (permissioned) or consortium (semi-public and semi-private) as detailed below. 

Public blockchain: In a public blockchain, any individual can view, modify, and audit the blockchain without having a single 
entity  in  charge  of  the  whole  network.  The  consensus  and  decision  making  is  reached  through  a  decentralised  consensus 
manner  such  as  PoW  in  bitcoin  (Nakamoto, 2008).  The  computation power  of  the participants of  the  blockchain network  is 
used to select one participant powerful enough to add new transitions to the distributed ledger. The participants are incentivised 
every  time  when  adding  new  transactions  to  the  blockchain  network,  and  thus  this  motivates  everyone  to  use  more 
computations  to  get  the  chance  of  adding  transaction  to  the  ledger.  In  public  blockchain  network,  the  higher  the  number  of 
users, the more secure the network; as it creates a network of trusted individuals between the participants. 

Private blockchain: The private blockchain is owned by an individual organisation who is responsible for granting access to 
the network for new users. Only few specific individuals in the origanisations have rights to validate transactions and blocks, 
and append them to the blockchain network. It is centralised compared to the public blockchain. 

Consortium blockchain: The consortium blockchain consists of a pre-selected set of nodes or computers that are responsible 
for  controlling  access  to  the  blockchain  network  resources  (Dib  et  al.,  2018).  The  goal  of  the  consortium  blockchain  is  to 
eliminate  the  individual/single  autonomy  of  the  private  blockchain  by  having  multiple  entities  or  organisations  in  charge  of 
consensus and decision making for the benefit of the whole network of peers. Since only pre-selected organisations are allowed 
to  validate  transactions  and  consensus,  incentives  are  not  necessary  in  this  network.  The  pre-selected  set  of  nodes  make  it 
partially private, partially public and semi-decentralised. More precisely, it provides the benefits of public blockchain in terms 
of efficiency and scalability while still permit some degree of central safeguarding and monitoring like in private blockchain. 
The consortium blockchain such as Hyperledger fabric (Cachin, 2016) is designed to meet the needs of the enterprises where a 
group of collaborating agencies exploit the blockchain technology to improve service delivery. All consensus participants of 
the consortium blockchain are known and reputable, therefore, malicious users cannot join the network freely. 

E-government Systems 
E-government systems use ICT to provide friendly services to citizens and businesses across different government departments. 
The use of e-government web portals enables organisations in private and public sectors to interact directly regardless of their 
physical  locations  around  the  world, whilst simultaneously  improving  the  quality,  convenience,  transparency,  efficiency  and 
effectiveness of public services. It is becoming a mandatory for most countries across the world to use digital communication 
between  citizens,  businesses  and  the  government  (UN,  2018).  Additionally,  the  use  of  e-government  makes  public 
administrators and officials more democratic and responsible due to the provided tractability and transparency. 
E-government  systems  are  categorised  into  four  groups  including  Government  to  Citizens  (G2C),  Government  to  Business 
(G2B), Government to its Employees (G2E), and Government to Government (G2G) (Karokola, 2012). G2C is the interaction 
between  citizens  and  government  via  government  web  portals.  G2B  involves  communication  between  the  government  and 
business  partners  or  other  corporate  organisations  to  share  information  such  as  procurements,  company  registration  and 
payment for licenses and taxes. G2E can be referred to as intra-government communication concerned with the sharing of the 
documents  among  employees  of  the  government.  G2G  is  the  interactions  with  other  governments  as  well  as  the  internal 

The 19th International Conference on Electronic Business, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, December 8-12, 2019 
101 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Elisa, Yang, Li, Chao & Naik 

communication  between  government  agencies  or  department  by  following  the  established  rules  governing  public  services 
delivery. 

The existing technologies for delivering e-government services to citizens and other stakeholders include web portals, mobile 
phones (sms and mobile applications), and electronic identity (eID) (Stefanova et al., 2006). E-government web portal is an 
integrated  application  that  serves  as  an  entry  to  government  websites  to  provide  individuals  direct  access  to  online  services 
provided  by  the  government.  Mobile  government  uses  mobile  phones  within  public  administrations  to  deliver  services  to 
individuals.  The  eID  is  the  digital  identity  which  is  assigned  to  citizen  or  an  organisation  to  help  the  government  to 
authenticate  legitimate  users  (Stefanova  et  al.,  2006).  An  individuals  can  use  the  same  eID  to  access  to  different  services 
offered by different public departments. eID solution can also be provided using mobile technologies (Stefanova et al., 2006). 
Common to these technologies is that, information collected from individuals are stored in centralised databases and servers. 
The  centralised  management  systems  can  become  a  single  point  of  failure  or  target  to  malicious  users.  Numerous  artificial 
intelligence  techniques  such  as  (Yang  et  al.,  2017;  Elisa  et  al.,  2018)  have  been  exploited  to  develop  intrusion  detection 
systems (IDSs) that can also be used by e-government systems to enforce security, but they cannot be used to preserve privacy 
neither ensure decentralisation (Elisa et al., 2018b). 

CONSORTIUM BLOCKCHAIN-BASED E-GOVERNMENT SYSTEM 
The  proposed  consortium  blockchain-based  e-government  architecture  is  illustrated  in  Figure  2.  It  consists  of  four  layers 
including services access layer, consortium blockchain layer, network layer and the ledger storage layer. The services access 
layer  comprises  of  e-government  users  and  various  devices  for  providing  access,  computing  resource,  and  storage  of  user’s 
credentials.  The  consortium  blockchain  layer  is  a  P2P  network  of  pre-selected  e-government  validators  responsible  for 
validating  transactions  and  authenticating  e-government  users  before  joining  the  network.  Also,  the  consortium  blockchain 
layer  is  responsible  for  provision  of  various  services  to  users  including  consensus,  P2P  communication,  and  users’  identity 
management. The network layer is for providing the connectivity between users, e-government consortium blockchain network 
and the ledger storage. The ledger storage layer is for storing off-chain (sideDB) data such as images, PDFs, DOCs, contracts, 
and other files that are too large to be stored in the blockchain or that are required to be deleted or changed in the future. The 
requirement of the ledger storage layer is because the blockchain database is append-only and immutable, so there is no chance 
of deletion in the future. Each of these layers is detailed in the following subsections. 

Figure 2: The proposed consortium blockchain e-government system. 

Service Access Layer 
This  layer  consists  of  e-government  user  information  and  various  devices  for  providing  access,  computing  resource,  and 
storage of credential data. User’s devices on this layer can be PCs, laptops, smart phones, tables, through which they can write 
or  read  data  to  the  e-government  consortium  blockchain  network.  The  devices  at  this  layer  will  use  blockchain  interface 
embedded on web browser or mobile application to interact with the blockchain network of government consortium nodes. 

Initially,  when  an  e-government  user  signs  up  for  government  services,  a  private  key,  public  key,  identity  and  the 
corresponding blockchain address will be generated and stored in his/her wallet as illustrated in Algorithm 1. Note that, the 
blockchain wallet will be generated as soon as the user signs up with e-government system. The private key is for signing and 
authorising transactions where verification by other blockchain entities is done by using the corresponding public key. 

The 19th International Conference on Electronic Business, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, December 8-12, 2019 
102 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Once  an  e-government  user  wants  to  access  the  service,  the  request  is  signed  by  the  private  key  and  get  broadcast  to  the 
consortium  blockchain  of  government  peers.  A  copy  of  account  information  and  transactions  history  for  every  user  will  be 
stored in the e-government consortium servers to facilitate account recovery in case the user loses the wallet password.   

Elisa, Yang, Li, Chao & Naik 

Consortium Blockchain Layer 
The  participants  of  this  layer  are  the  pre-selected  government  departments  (validators),  who  are  responsible  for  validating 
transactions and authenticating e-government user’s registration with the consortium blockchain network. The departments that 
meet  the  requirements  for  pre-selected  participants  of  the  consortium  blockchain  network  will  be  registered  by  using 
Algorithm 2. After registration, a node will receive a blockchain address, private and public key pair for signing and verifying 
transactions. 

A  number  of  validators  amongst  the  consortium  peers  are  required  to  validate  any  transaction  before  being  added  to  the 
blockchain  ledger.  For  instance,  the  consensus  could  be  reached  if  a  transaction  is  verified  by  twenty  departments  in  a 
consortium  blockchain  with  fifty  departments  in  total.  Thus,  the  validators  collectively  sign  off  transactions,  grant  or  deny 
access to the shared blockchain ledger. Note that, the ledger in this layer is permissioned since only approved participants of 
the blockchain network have the access privilege. Any change to the blockchain stored in the consortium layer will be reflected 
by all participants in their copies as soon as it is realised. Additionally, the consortium blockchain layer provides e-government 
users the rights to create and submit transactions, access, and review their transactions. 

The process for creating and adding a block to the blockchain by the validators is illustrated in Algorithm 3. 

The 19th International Conference on Electronic Business, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, December 8-12, 2019 
103 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  boundaries  formed  by  the  consortium  layer  of  blockchain  nodes  and  e-government  users  is  illustrated  in  Figure  3.  The 
communication  between  the  consortium  blockchain  network  and  the  services  access  layer  happens  on  demand  when  users 
submit transactions. 

Elisa, Yang, Li, Chao & Naik 

Figure 3: The consortium blockchain-based e-government network. 

Network Layer 
The  main  function  provided  by  the  network  layer  is  the  connectivity  between  e-government  users,  government  consortium 
blockchain layer and the ledger storage servers. There is a wide choice of technologies that can be used on this layer such as 
WiFi,  Ethernet  LAN  or  cellular  network.  The  participants  of  the  consortium  blockchain  will  use  this  layer  to  communicate 
transactions to/from the users and store new blocks in the ledger storage layer. Wireless communication provided by this layer 
will  be  used  to  support  wireless  devices  whilst  interacting  with  the  e-government  consortium  blockchain  network,  because 
many governments around the globe are trying to incorporate wireless broadband networks across different cities using WiFi 
technology due to its great flexibility and convenience (Wireless Broadband, 2018).  

Ledger Storage Layer 
This layer is introduced in order to enable storage and replication of government and users data. This layer will be used to store 
off-chain (sideDB) data such as pictures, contracts, PDFs, and other files that are too large to be stored in the blockchain or that 
are required to be deleted or changed in the future. The blockchain database is append-only and immutable; so they cannot be 
deleted  in  the  future.  This  layer  is  so  critical  in  case  that  data  reuse  is  required  as  the  data  that  are  store  in  the  blockchain 
network are immutable and difficult to be reused. The off-chain storage of data is required for documentation and verification 
in  blockchain  technology  (Cachin,  2016).  A  hash  value  for  the  off-chain  document  will  be  produced  and  stored  in  the 
consortium  blockchain  ledger  whilst  the  real  document  is  stored  in  the  ledger  storage  layer.  Additionally,  the  data  that  are 
processed  by  the  participants  of  the  consortium  blockchain  will  be  replicated  and  stored  in  this  layer  to  allow  more  storage 
spaces for the blockchain network devices. 

PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
A detailed technical analysis on the performance of the consortium blockchain is reported in (Dib et al., 2018), which helps 
organisations to evaluate the system before its adoption. The same performance measures, including the single transaction time 
and  the  number  of  transactions  validated  per  second,  were  also  utilised  in  this  work,  to  evaluate  the  proposed  consortium 
blockchain-based  e-government  system.  All  technical  evaluations  were  performed  by  using  the  Ethermint  protocol  of 
Ethereum blockchain which support smart contracts over consortium network (Dib et al., 2018). 

Performance Based On The Number Of Transactions Per Second  
The  performance  of  the  consortium  blockchain  network  based  on  the  number  of  transactions  processed  per  second  with 
increasing  number  of  validators  in  the  network,  is  illustrated  in  Figure  4.  Note  that,  the  ideal  case  happens  when  all 
transactions  from  the  users  are  validated  in  one  second  or  less.  It  is  clear  from  the  figure  that,  the  number  of  average 
transactions validated per second decreases as the number of validators increases in the consortium blockchain network. This is 
because the communication overhead required to pre-vote for a node will process the transactions, create a block, and append it 
to the ledger. Thus, if a given consortium blockchain system requires a large number of validators, the transaction processing 
speed will decrease. In e-government systems, this may not be the case since all participating department save the same goal of 
proving public services, fewer validators is usually enough and trusted to process and validate transactions. 

The 19th International Conference on Electronic Business, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, December 8-12, 2019 
104 

  
 
 
 
 
Elisa, Yang, Li, Chao & Naik 

Figure 4: The number of transactions per second against validators. 

From this figure, a consortium network with 1, 2, 3 or 4 validators can validate 100 transactions in a few seconds, which is 
close  to  the  ideal  case.  However,  for  a  consortium  network  comprised  of  8,  12,  16  or  20  validators,  the  network  requires 
several seconds to validate 100 transactions, which deviates far from the ideal situation. 

Performance Based On The Validation Time 
More  time  is  required  to valid  a  transaction  as  the  number of  validators  increases  in  the  consortium  blockchain  network,  as 
shown  in  Figure  5.  If  a  consortium  network  contains  one  validator,  the  average  validation  time  is  lower  (less  than  1  sec), 
however, validation time increases to almost 2 minutes when a network contains 20 validators in the experimental environment. 
Apparently, a compromise needs to be made between the desired network performance, the number of transactions sent per 
second, and the number of validating peers in a consortium blockchain network, which should be fully considered during the 
design stage. More specifically, an extra care must be taken to select the appropriate number of validators in the consortium 
network for a balance between security and transaction throughput. 

Figure 5: Validation time against the number of Validators. 

Evaluation On Security And Privacy  
This section presents a qualitative evaluation on how the proposed consortium blockchain-based system can prevent common 
threats to security and privacy in e-government systems. 

Prevention  against  distributed  denial  of  service  (DDoS)  attacks  –  Usually  occur  when  attackers  flood  online  services  with 
massive  traffic  with  fake  requests  in  order  to  render  the  service  unavailable.  Generally,  DDoS  attacks  tend  to  consume  a 
significant amount of bandwidth and resources until the service is down. In the proposed consortium blockchain-based system, 
no  centralised  server  that  can  be  a  direct  target  for  DDoS  attacks.  The  decentralised  nature  of  the  proposed  consortium 
blockchain  will  allocate  data  and  bandwidth  to  the  less  overloaded  peers  in  the  network  to  absorb  DDoS  attacks  when  it 
happens. 

The 19th International Conference on Electronic Business, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, December 8-12, 2019 
105 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Elisa, Yang, Li, Chao & Naik 

Authentication  and  authorisation  attacks  –  This  may  occur  when  the  adversarial  users  try  to  take  control of  the  consortium 
blockchain network so that they can authorise themselves or introduce fake nodes for authorising users whilst taking control of 
the  network.  This  is  impossible  in  the  proposed  system  since  all  peers  of  the  consortium  network  are  pre-selected  by  an 
authorised entities from an e-government agency of a particular government beforehand. 

Threats to anonymity – Anonymity in blockchain-based applications may open the door for criminals to carry out unauthorised 
activities (Elisa et al., 2018b). In the proposed system, the blockchain information is only available to the consortium peers and 
authorised  users.  Therefore,  any  adversary  trying  to  set  up  an  anonymous  connection  will  be  detected  instantly  since  the 
validators verify all users who attempt to access to the information stored in the consortium network. 
The advantages of the proposed e-government consortium blockchain are summarised in Table 1. 

Table 1: Advantages of the consortium blockchain-based e-government network. 

Advantage 
Fast transaction speed 
High scalability 
Low transaction costs 
Low energy consumption 
Low risk of 51% security attack  Random participants are not allowed to join the consortium unlike in public blockchain. 
Participants of the network know their peers within the consortium (more of enterprise).  
High transparency 
Information is maintained in a consistent manner within the consortium network. 
High data integrity 
Different department and agencies will be able to share information on demand. 
High collaboration 

Only a selected group of participants process transactions. 
New participants can be added to a controlled number of consortium nodes when needed. 
The transactions validators process transaction without incentives like in public blockchain. 
A voting mechanism is used to pre-select the validating nodes, no computation is needed. 

Description(s) 

CONCLUSION 
This work proposes a secure and privacy-preserving e-government architecture based on consortium blockchain technology for 
effective information sharing. The performance evaluation on a single transaction time, the number of transactions per second, 
and the number of validators has shown that, the consortium blockchain can be adopted in e-government systems by carefully 
keeping fewer number of validators in the network. Additionally, the proposed architecture can offer advantages such as high 
scalability,  high  transaction  speed,  high  data  integrity,  high  collaboration,  low  risk  of  51%  security  attack,  low  energy 
consumption, low transaction cost and anonymity, whilst simultaneously ensuring the required level of security and privacy in 
e-government  systems.  The  active  future  work  is  to  use  Cyber-Defense  Technology  Experimental  Research  Laboratory 
(DETERLab) test bed environment to evaluate the proposed consortium blockchain-based e-government system for real time 
attacks.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the Commonwealth Scholarship Commission (CSCTZCS-2017-717) and the Royal Academy 
of Engineering (IAPP 1-100077).  

REFERENCES 
Biswas,  K.,  &  Muthukkumarasamy,  V.  (2016).  Securing  smart  cities  using  blockchain  technology.  In  2016  IEEE  18th 
international  conference  on  high  performance  computing  and  communications;  IEEE  14th  international  conference  on 
smart city; IEEE 2nd international conference on data science and systems (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS) (pp. 1392-1393). IEEE. 

Buterin, V. (2014). A next-generation smart contract and decentralized application platform. white paper, 3(37). 
Cachin,  C.  (2016).  Architecture  of  the  hyperledger  blockchain  fabric.  In  Workshop  on  distributed  cryptocurrencies  and 

consensus ledgers , 310, 4. 

Zheping Huang  &  Zen Soo(2019). Data leak exposes 364 million Chinese social media profiles tracked by police surveillance 
programme,security  researcher  says,  South  China  Morning  Post,  Retrieved  from  http://scmp.com/tech/enterprises  
/article/2188662/ data-leak-exposes-364-million-chinese-social-media-profiles-tracked/.( accessed  27 September 2019). 
Dib, O., Brousmiche, K.-L., Durand, A., Thea, E., & Hamida, E. B. (2018). Consortium blockchains: Overview, applications  

and challenges. International Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, 11(1&2). 

Dorri, A., Kanhere, S. S., Jurdak, R., & Gauravaram, P. (2017). Blockchain for IoT security and privacy: The case study of a 
smart  home.  In  2017  IEEE  international  conference  on  pervasive  computing  and  communications  workshops  (PerCom 
workshops) (pp. 618-623). IEEE. 

Elisa,  N.  (2017).  Usability,  accessibility  and  web  security  assessment  of  e-government  websites  in  tanzania.  International

Journal of Computer Applications, 164,42-48. 

Elisa, N., Li, J., Zuo, Z., & Yang, L. (2018a). Dendritic cell algorithm with fuzzy inference system for input signal generation. 

In UK Workshop on Computational Intelligenc ,Springer ,pp. 203–214. 

Elisa,  N.,  Yang,  L.,  Chao,  F.,  &  Cao,  Y.  (2018b).  A  framework  of  blockchainbased  secure  and  privacy-preserving  e-

government system. Wireless Networks, 1–11. 

Elisa, N., Yang, L., Fu, X., & Naik, N. (2019). Dendritic cell algorithm enhancement using fuzzy inference system for network  

intrusion detection. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE), pp 1–6. 

The 19th International Conference on Electronic Business, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, December 8-12, 2019 
106 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Elisa, Yang, Li, Chao & Naik 

Elisa, N., Yang, L., & Naik, N. (2018, July). Dendritic cell algorithm with optimised parameters using genetic algorithm. In 

2018 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC). IEEE. pp. 1-8. 

IPP  Media  (2018).  How  Tanzania  lost  Tanzanian  shillings  187  billions  to  cyber  criminals  in  2016.  Retrieved  from 

https://www.ippmedia.com/en/business/ how-tanzania-lost-187bn-cyber-criminals-2016/ ( accessed  28 May 2018). 
Karokola, G. R. (2012). A framework for securing e-government services: the case of Tanzania. PhD thesis, Department of   

 Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University. 

Lambrinoudakis,  C.,  Gritzalis,  S.,  Dridi,  F.,  and  Pernul,  G.  (2003).  Security  requirements  for  e-government  services:  a 
methodological approach for developing a common pki-based security policy. Computer Communications, 26(16),1873-
1883. 

Mingxiao, D., Xiaofeng, M., Zhe, Z., Xiangwei, W., & Qijun, C. (2017). A review on consensus algorithm of blockchain. In 

2017 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC). IEEE, pp. 2567-2572 

Nakamoto, S. (2008). Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System,pp.1-9.  
Peterson, K., Deeduvanu, R., Kanjamala, P., & Boles, K. (2016). A blockchainbased approach to health information exchange  

networks. In Proc. NIST Workshop Blockchain Healthcare, 1,1-10. 

Ramya, U. M., Sindhuja, P., Atsaya, R. A., Dharani, B. B., & Golla, S. M. V. (2018). Reducing forgery in land registry system 
using blockchain technology. In International Conference on Advanced Informatics for Computing Research ,Springer, pp. 
725-734. 

Stefanova, K., Kabakchieva, D., & Borthwick, L. (2006). Innovative approach to identity management solution development 

for e-government at EU level. Journal of Telecommunications and Information Technology, 24-31. 

Tian,  F. (2016,  June). An  agri-food  supply  chain  traceability  system  for  China  based on  RFID & blockchain  technology.  In 

2016 13th international conference on service systems and service management (ICSSSM), pp. 1-6.. 

Turkanović, M., Hölbl, M., Košič, K., Heričko, M., & Kamišalić, A. (2018). EduCTX: A blockchain-based higher education 

credit platform. IEEE access, 6, 5112-5127.. 

UK Cyber-Attacks (2019). Cyber  Security  Breaches  Survey  2019.  https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/cyber-security-

breaches-survey-2019/. ( accessed 27 September 2019). 

UN,  E.  (2018).  United  nations  e-government  survey  2018:  Gearing  e-government  to  support  transformation  towards 

sustainable and resilient societies. New York, NY: United Nations. 

US  Cyber-Attacks  (2019).  List  of  data  breaches  and  cyber  attacks  in  April  2019  –  1.34  billion  records  leaked. 
https://www.itgovernance.co.uk/blog/list-of-data-breaches-and-cyber-attacks-in-april-2019-1-34-billion-records-leaked/. 
(accessed 22 September 2019). 

Wireless  Broadband  (2018).  Wireless  Broadband  Alliance  Launches  City  Wi-Fi  Roaming  Project.  Retrieved  from 

https://wballiance.com/wireless-broadband-alliance-launches-city-wi-fi-roaming-project/ 

Wolrich, G. M., Yap, K. S., Guilford, J. D., Gopal, V., & Gulley, S. M. (2014). Instruction set for message scheduling of  

sha256 algorithm. US Patent 8,838,997. 

Yang,  L.,  Elisa,  N.,  &  Eliot,  N.  (2019).  Privacy  and  security  aspects  of  E-government  in  smart  cities.  In  Smart  cities 

cybersecurity and privacy. Elsevier, pp. 89-102 

Yang,  L.,  Li,  J.,  Fehringer,  G.,  Barraclough,  P.,  Sexton,  G.,  &  Cao,  Y.  (2017,  July).  Intrusion  detection  system  by  fuzzy 

interpolation. In 2017 IEEE international conference on fuzzy systems (FUZZ-IEEE) pp. 1-6 

The 19th International Conference on Electronic Business, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, December 8-12, 2019 
107 

  
  
 
 
