Analysis of Trending Topics and Text-based
Channels of Information Delivery in Cybersecurity

Tingmin Wu∗†, Wanlun Ma∗, Sheng Wen∗, Xin Xia§, Cecile Paris†, Surya Nepal†, Yang Xiang∗
∗Swinburne University of Technology †CSIRO’s Data61 §Monash University

0
2
0
2

n
u
J

6
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
6
7
4
1
.
6
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Computer users are generally faced with difﬁculties
in making correct security decisions. While an increasingly
fewer number of people are trying or willing to take formal
security training, online sources including news, security blogs,
and websites are continuously making security knowledge more
accessible. Analysis of cybersecurity texts can provide insights
into the trending topics and identify current security issues
as well as how cyber attacks evolve over time. These in turn
can support researchers and practitioners in predicting and
preparing for these attacks. Comparing different sources may
facilitate the learning process for normal users by persisting the
security knowledge gained from different cybersecurity context.
Prior studies neither systematically analysed the wide-range of
digital sources nor provided any standardisation in analysing
the trending topics from recent security texts. Although LDA
has been widely adopted in topic generation,
its generated
topics cannot cover the cybersecurity concepts completely and
considerably overlap. To address this issue, we propose a semi-
automated classiﬁcation method to generate comprehensive se-
curity categories instead of LDA-generated topics. We further
compare the identiﬁed 16 security categories across different
sources based on their popularity and impact. We have revealed
several surprising ﬁndings. (1) The impact reﬂected from cyber-
security texts strongly correlates with the monetary loss caused
by cybercrimes. (2) For most categories, security blogs share the
largest popularity and largest absolute/relative impact over time.
(3) Websites deliver security information without caring about
timeliness much, where one third of the articles do not specify
the date and the rest have a time lag in posting emerging security
issues.

Index Terms—Empirical study, Trend analysis, Cybersecurity

topics, News, Security blogs

I. INTRODUCTION

Humans are playing an indispensable role in cybersecurity,
and, because of that, are especially targeted in cyber attacks
[1], [2]. CybSafe analysis of UK ICO reports that 90% of
data breaches were caused by human mistakes in 2019 [3].
Computer users generally have difﬁculties in making security
decisions due to lack of knowledge, cognitive limitation or
deviations from rationality [4]. However, they have to deal
with sophisticated intrusions when their security software,
such as antivirus or ﬁrewall, become obsolete [5]. To keep
users in the loop is vital as any security measures can leave
users more vulnerable when they lose resistance to unknown
attacks.

End users are expected to learn more about cyber attacks,
security measures and the key techniques that keeps them
informed about cyber risks, and they need to take timely
actions. Domain knowledge, especially in the cybersecurity
ﬁeld, is not easily turned into cognitive abilities without proper

training [6]. Nonetheless, formal security education or training
is time-consuming and requires users’ undivided attention,
and one-size-ﬁts-all trainings hardly keep people engaged as
they might have different learning preferences or background
knowledge [7]. Such unthoughtful schemes can even cause
market losses [8]. Compared to certiﬁcation programs, online
cybersecurity texts give internet users easier access to security
knowledge in order to make correct decisions in the time of
cyber incidents.

We identiﬁed three sources that users often ﬁnd for security
texts from in their daily life: news, security blogs and websites.
News are published by news agencies as the leading media for
general audience. Examples include BBC, USA Today, etc.
Security blogs can be more tailored towards security experts
or individuals (including general users) who are interested
in cybersecurity. These blogs mainly post security articles
consisting of the latest threats, experts’ opinions and security
solutions for both businesses and individuals to use in practice.
Websites include any information provided by authorised
organisations (government, research institutes or industries),
for the purpose of guiding the readers to behave securely
online. These sources provide a range of educational materials
which can beneﬁt different communities.

The majority of existing analyses have failed to consider all
the user-accessible resources in order to provide users with a
large selection for informal security learning. This selection
could include studies on cyber threats [9]–[12] and threat
intelligence [13], [14]. Several studies [15]–[17] analysed the
security knowledge from multiple sources, but
the results
are outdated now. And the data collection was done in a
relatively short period (e.g. from 2011 to 2015 in [15].),
Additionally, the trendlines of different topics show how they
develop and give direction to ongoing studies, but they have
barely been analysed before [16], [17]. Some prior research
focused on producing security information, but their inferences
from information were biased due to lack of timeliness, or
were hard to be adopted in the real world [18]–[21]. For
example, security information sharing informally produces
security incident reports, mainly from websites. However, the
release requires time to verify whether they meet various
standards or not, and might miss the timing of reporting
emerging attacks such as zero-day vulnerability [18]. Lack of
standardisation also hinders the exchange of security informa-
tion. Moreover, current security advice is usually too technical
to understand or not actionable due to their restrictions (e.g.,
“never click on links in emails”) [20], [21]. Prior works used

 
 
 
 
 
 
LDA (Latent Dirichlet Allocation) to cluster security questions
[15], [22], [23]. However, traditional LDA does not perform
well in capturing domain-speciﬁc concepts [24]. The topics it
generates have low granularity and are hard to distinguish.

To address the issue, we propose a semi-automated clas-
siﬁcation method to generate broad topics in cybersecurity
instead of using LDA-generated topics. We ﬁrst divide our
collected security texts into ﬁve datasets according to their
sources. For each dataset, we run LDA separately. We ﬁnd
that the generated topics by LDA do not capture the domain-
speciﬁc concepts and are not distinct to each other. To derive
more meaningful results, we use the term extraction method to
generate a set of terms that summarise the categories for each
LDA-generated topic. We identify 16 security categories which
summarise all those terms. We analyse the popularity and
impact of those categories to analyse different cybersecurity
trends. More speciﬁcally, we compare how the security issues
evolve across categories and sources over the last decade.
This sheds light into the development of security issues in
the past ten years and reveals how challenges emerge, which
in turn can be used in the prediction of unknown threats. The
analyses of security issues and differences between the sources
also generate patterns in delivering security knowledge to the
general public.

Our research focuses on answering three research questions:
RQ1. What are the security issues reported in cybersecurity
texts?

We discovered 16 security categories for cybersecurity texts
from news, security blogs and websites. They can summarise
security issues,
including the types of cyber attacks and
security techniques. We found that information privacy still
remained a dominant topic in the last decade, and this was
largely due to criminal offence (including password attack),
mobile application attack, and network attack. We also noticed
that most articles (83%) discussed multiple security issues
(relevant to up to six security categories).
RQ2. How have the security categories varied and evolved
over the last decade?

Cybercriminal activity has been the most popular and was
discussed in most security articles (65%), followed by the
privacy issue, preventive measures (i.e. cybersecurity software,
service, and program), with similar popularities at 40%; The
increase of the absolute impact of the security categories
indicates security incidents evolution in both amount and
sophistication over the last decade. Security issues in mo-
bile/application and information privacy gained the largest
absolute/relative impact over time. The explosion of ran-
somware (e.g. WannaCry) brought the absolute impact of
malware/virus to its peak and exceeded the values of all the
other categories. The overall absolute impact of all the security
categories strongly correlates with the economic loss caused
by cybercrimes. Election security has gained a sudden increase
in the absolute impact in 2016, which coincides with the U.S.
presidential election campaign.
RQ3. How have the security categories varied and evolved
across different sources on cybersecurity over the last decade?

Almost all the categories are popularly present within the
the categories election security and
three sources, except
false/misleading claim that are only prevalent in news and
webs, respectively. Among the three sources, security blogs
have largest popularity and absolute/relative impact over time
in the majority of categories. The absolute impact of news
and security blogs shows upward trends for all the categories
in the 2010s, while false/misleading claim has a downtrend in
webs. Security issues in mobile/application have been the most
inﬂuential in news and security blogs during the past ten years,
followed by the privacy issue. Threats in IoT show comparable
absolute/relative impact to the privacy issue in news. News
and security blogs report security events for the ﬁrst time at
similar speed on most categories. Websites deliver security
information without caring much about timeliness, with one
third of the articles not specifying the date and the rest having
a time lag in posting emerging security issues.

We list our contributions as follows:

• We build a large collection of cybersecurity texts (187,319
articles) from three online sources: news, security blogs, and
websites.

• We propose a semi-automated classiﬁcation with combining
the term extraction method and the open card sorting to
derive the categories of our texts instead of using LDA-
generated topics. We identify 16 security categories to
analyse the security issues.

• We conduct an empirical study to analyse the comparison
and evolution of the security categories over the last decade
as well as across the sources to shed light on the trends of
security issues.

The rest of our paper is organised as follows. Section II
reviews the related work. Section III introduces our research
questions and methodology. We present our ﬁndings and
results in Section IV. Section V discusses the limitations of our
work. We make conclusions and propose the scope of future
work in Section VI.

II. RELATED WORK

In this section, we review the existing works on users’
selection of security information sources, security decision
making and learning about security.

Selection of security information sources. There is a
proven relationship between security information sources and
users’ online experience about security and privacy [25], [26].
Users are different in their engagement in security protection
scenarios and, thus, have different demands of expertise from
the sources [27]. Redmiles et al. measured the readability
of online security advice and examined its correlation with
user-reported understanding [21]. Reader and Wash identiﬁed
patterns from informal sources of security information that
help users seek useful data in order to behave safely or solve
potential risks [15]. Ion et al. compared the security practices
from different people. They found that experts mainly suggest
regarding security updates and using password managers [28].
In contrast, non-experts mostly suggest clicking only on ofﬁ-
cial websites links and regular password changes. Sauerwein1a

2

et al. compared public sources of security information [16].
Das et al. studied how different users gain different informa-
tion from security news [29]. Shillair and Meng compared
the impact of different sources in changing users’ security
behaviours [17]. Acar et al. analysed informal sources that
provide security guidance in coding for software developers
[30]. Tounsi and Rais extracted a taxonomy of current threat
intelligence types from the literature [13].

Users often seek security information from multiple sources
while considering different factors. Nthala and Flechais per-
formed qualitative studies and showed that people applied
some measures such as professional level, academic standing
and negative experience of the sources [31]. Redmiles et al.
found that users measure the trustworthiness of cybersecurity
information by the sources for digital security advice and by
the content for physical security advice [32]. Nicholson et al.
conducted interviews with elderly people about their choices
for cybersecurity-related sources of information and found that
they preferred social sources over experts’ advice [33].

Security decision making. Wash studied home computer
users’ understanding of security and built eight folk models
to help them make correct decisions [5]. Redmiles et al.
exposed that end users are likely to make optimal decisions
when are faced with higher risks [8]. Faklaris et al. made
a scale to measure users’ security-related attitudes [34]. The
impact of sources on code security was also studied in [35].
In addition, even technically savvy people are challenged
in making security decisions. Krombholz et al. studied the
issue of weak TLS (Transport Layer Security) conﬁgurations
and found that most of the interviewed administrators had
difﬁculties in deploying HTTPS securely [36].

Many factors can affect users’ decisions, such as the cost
of protection, including time, money and the amount of effort
required [37]. Howe et al. found users might underestimate the
chance to be hacked and, as a result, not adopt the security
advice [38]. Wash and Reader also pointed out that some
adults did not take actions because they had weak beliefs
about hackers or viruses [39]. Similarly, Zou et al. collected
a set of users’ perception towards the Equifax breach and
found that they tended to undervalue the chance to become
victims and procrastinated taking actions even though they
recognised the risks [40]. Later they suggested improving
data breach notices in terms of readability, media penetration,
format and risk indication [41], [42]. The tendency to apply
security updates was also studied in [43]. Redmiles et al.
researched the inﬂuence of social community experiences such
as Facebook groups [44]. Mathur and Chetty found that most
users rejected automatic mobile app updates due to their
unpleasant experience in the past [45]. Sawaya et al. explained
the differences in security behaviours and security knowledge
of people with the difference in culture [46]. Fagan and Khan
studied users’ considerations on beneﬁt and risk when they
decide whether to follow the security advice or not [47], [48].
The survey conducted by Acquisti et al. highlighted that both
cognitive hurdles and security tools designed by researchers
could inﬂuence users’ choices [49].

Security learning. Security education or training has at-
tracted a large amount of research. This includes the studies
on phishing attack prevention [50]–[52], browser warnings
[53], [54] and password protection [55]–[57]. Safa and Solms
shed light on how security knowledge can help reduce the
risks of cyber incidents [58]. Some users suffered because
they overestimated their knowledge of security [59]. Abu et
al. developed mental models for users to help them protect
their privacy, e.g. with E2E encryption [60]. Stevens et al.
did threat modelling in different enterprise scenarios and
showed its efﬁcacy in security defence [61]. Chen et al.
[62], similar to [63], designed a desktop game to teach a
series of security practices that users can apply in the real
world. Golla et al. studied users’ understanding of security
warnings and designed password-reuse notiﬁcations based on
their perceptions [64].

Home computer users also adopt security practices from
social learning [31], [65]. Wash and Cooper found that security
training based on facts and advice is more effective by experts
than by peers and it can help users behave securely online
[66]. Das et al. emphasised the importance of social inﬂuence
in users’ change of security behaviours and perceptions [67],
[68]. Rader et al. also indicated that some users learn security
incidents from family and friends [69]. Hayes et al. studied
how people with visual impairments learn security and privacy
from their families, friends, experts or disabled people [70].

While most of the existing works focused on modelling
users’ security behaviours or developing the tools for security
education, there is no recent study analysing the trends of
security topics on a large-scale easily accessible online texts.
Compared to formal security training, the online resources
about cybersecurity (e.g. newspapers, personal stories, online
forums, professional guidelines) are more approachable and di-
verse to seek help and read regularly. The resources resources
deliver important information somehow enable users to make
good security decisions. We need an empirical study to exhaust
the cybersecurity texts and understand what security issues
they report and how they evolve over time as well as difference
between the sources. Such a study can help improve informal
security learning for end users and forecast innovative cyber
attacks.

III. STUDY SETUP

We explain our
methodology in detail.

three research questions and research

A. Research Questions

RQ1. What are the security issues reported in security texts?
Security texts deliver news and articles about cybersecurity
for a range of technology enthusiasts and general users. They
explain the attack techniques and distribute security tips,
guidelines and advice for both businesses and home computer
users. Categorising the security texts can help identify the
security issues. The analysis of the issues sheds light on the
challenges faced by researchers and practitioners to advance
the development of threat intelligence to protect the security

3

and privacy of online users. In addition, the security issues
identiﬁcation caters the needs and concerns of normal users
when seeking security advice online.
RQ2. How have the security categories varied and evolved
over the last decade?

It is critical to update the topic analysis with the most recent
posts. Although there are similar works that have studied secu-
rity topics, their results are not useful anymore since they have
been outdated by at least ﬁve years. The worldwide ﬁnancial
loss caused by cybercriminals are predicted to be $6 billion
per year in 2021, increasing from $3 billion in 2015 [71].
Intrusions become more sophisticated and hackers employ
more advanced techniques. In a recent example, Florida City
suffered a ransomware attack in 2019 and had to pay hackers
$600,000 in Bitcoin, a cybercurrency known for its (partial)
anonymity feature.

In the analysis of the latest

trends and drawing a big
picture for the security issues, we are the ﬁrst to identify
the security categories systematically beyond using LDA. By
doing research on the differences and similarities between
LDA-generated topics and our deﬁned security categories, we
provide more distinct security topics with a more comprehen-
sive analysis.
RQ3. How have the security categories varied and evolved
across different sources on cybersecurity over the last decade?
Different sources can deliver security information in differ-
ent ways. News articles are generally published by authorised
newspapers and report the latest security events. Security blogs
also report the latest news on cybersecurity but might give
more insights into the key techniques used from research or
technical papers. Websites mainly come from organisations
such as universities and banks. They commonly focus on pro-
viding informal security information such as security advice
for educational purposes.

Understanding different topics from distinct sources can
help us cater to the needs of users with different backgrounds.
Users might also be concerned about different attacks or data
breaches to various degrees. For example, employees of tech
companies care about data breaches to comply with the com-
pany reputation under the legislation. Different sources have
different preferences over featured articles and techniques.
How the topics evolve across different sources can help in
informing users where to acquire sufﬁcient security knowledge
from and in detecting the emerging trends over platforms.

B. Research Methodology

To answer the three research questions, we collected real-
world media texts and conducted comparative analyses which
could informally provide end users with security knowledge.
We focused on the topic trends across different security
categories as well as different sources to provide insights into
how security issues evolve.

1) Data Collection: We collected our cybersecurity texts
from three types of sources: news, security blogs, and web-
sites. We mainly focused on the easily accessible online
articles which computer users read to gain security knowledge.

We only collected articles from the year 2000 to the date of
paper writing.

We developed a crawler in Python by leveraging Beautiful
Soup [72] library. We only extracted text contents (including
titles) for topic analysis. We stripped out images, videos, and
meaningless contents (e.g. navigation menu and contact infor-
mation). The publication dates of the articles were extracted
from the search results or taken out of the text contents for
trend analysis.

We selected the sources based on their popularity, impact
and relevance. In the following, we explain how we selected
the articles and search results from each source.

News. We selected the newspapers published in English
with top circulation (> 100, 000) worldwide (e.g.
in US,
Australia and India). We included all the 16 news sources
used in a similar study [15]. In addition, we added three more
news sources which have become more prevalent recently, e.g.
Herald Sun (circulation: 303,140 in 2018), and Tech News
World (Reader purchase >$100 billion per year).

To identify the contents on cybersecurity, we applied 27
keywords as ﬁlters to search for relevant articles only. We in-
cluded the 25 terms used in [15], and added two new keywords
(‘cybersecurity’ and ‘cyber attack’) in the set. According
to Google Trends data, people have searched the keyword
‘cybersecurity’ seven times more frequently in the past few
years. We manually went through the found articles though
most of them were applicable.

During collection, four news sources were removed because
they restricted reading the articles and required subscription or
purchasing membership plans, e.g. The Globe and Mail. We
combined the search results of all the keywords and removed
the duplicates. Altogether, 68,066 articles were collected from
15 newspapers.

Security blogs. We then collected texts from the blogs
on cybersecurity which provided the latest security news
or articles for computer users with various levels of tech
knowledge. The blogs can feature threat intelligence to educate
their audience in taking protective measures against cyber
attacks. We selected the blogs according to their popularity
in social media as well as the number of times recommended
by Google (e.g., The Hacker News have more than 2 million
followers on Facebook). We also included the blogs used in
[73]. 41 blogs remained after removing the ones with non-text
posts, such as commands, attached ﬁles and images. We also
manually veriﬁed the contents to conﬁrm their relevance to
cybersecurity. In total, we collected 109,587 articles from the
blogs.

Webs. We extended the domain of web pages used in the
existing studies to cover all the applicable ones. A similar
study [15] collected the web pages with which organisations
delivered information or instructions on cybersecurity to their
employees in order to help them be aware of risks and behave
safely online. We classiﬁed the organisations that provide
this information into three types: governmental (federal/state
government agencies), industrial (telecommunications com-
panies, social network companies and banks) and academic

4

TABLE I
ARTICLES STATISTICS PER DATASET AFTER SANITISATION.

Dataset

#Articles

#Topics

News
Security blogs
Webs/Governmental
Webs/Industrial
Webs/Academic

51,685
108,354
9,618
16,810
852

18
15
15
10
10

Article length
SD
Mean
873
822
2,248
906
1,533
655
1,475
716
1,514
813

(universities and research agencies). In addition to the web
pages used in [15], we collected more pages from the top-
ranked organisations in our country and divided them into the
above-mentioned classes.

We applied the 45 keywords used for web page search in
a study [15], combined the search results and removed the
duplicates. We also removed the ones that were empty or not
security-related. The ﬁnal collected dataset contained 41,394
articles from 41 webs (17 governmental, 15 industrial and 9
academic).

2) Generation of Topics: To identify what is being dis-
cussed in cybersecurity texts, we applied a topic modelling
algorithm to extract/generate topics from our collected articles.
We employed LDA (Latent Dirichlet allocation) as it was used
in similar prior studies [15], [74]–[76]. LDA is a probabilistic
model that for each document, gives a set of topic probabili-
ties. Each topic is a set of words with different weights [77].
The model considers word occurrences and co-occurrences
within a document as well as across different documents in
the whole corpus.

We used LDA to extract topics from the security texts.
We formed ﬁve datasets from our three sources, as shown in
Table I. We ran LDA on each dataset separately, since LDA is
proven to be biased with large datasets [78]. We implemented
the algorithm in Python by using its ’gensim’ library [79].
We identiﬁed the optimal number of topics based on topic
coherence [80]. The results are depicted in Table I, and optimal
number selection is detailed in Appendix A.

Articles sanitisation. Based on the generated topics, we re-
moved the articles which were not related to security. As each
generated topic was presented as a list of words, we inferred
the conceptually speciﬁc topics by reading and understanding
the combinations. We selected the topics whose all words were
irrelevant to cybersecurity. We then manually read most of the
articles (>70%) from each of those topics and removed the
ones whose contents were irrelevant. The statistics about the
sanitised dataset is demonstrated in Table I. We observed that
the number of published articles per month in the 2000s is far
smaller than the number in the later ten years, as detailed in
Appendix B. Therefore, we mainly focused on the analysis of
trends in the 2010s in our study.

3) Security Categories Identiﬁcation: We carefully exam-
ined each topic generated by LDA and reviewed the texts,
but found the topics were not still satisfactory because they
could not cover the dataset completely and had overlapped
excessively. To solve this issue and provide more in-depth

insights, we further identiﬁed the security categories with
term extraction and did manual category identiﬁcation by card
sorting instead of using topics generated by LDA [81].

Term extraction. We extracted terms from the articles of
each topic separately. We employed TermSuite [82], a toolkit
to identify (multi-word) term variants where the termhood is
measured by the relative frequency in a domain-speciﬁc corpus
as well as a general corpus. We only kept the candidate terms
with measure values higher than 2, a threshold recommended
by [82]. As a result, we have a collection of terms to replace
and represent each topic generated by LDA, with a reasonable
number of terms per topic (M ean : 46, SD : 23).

Category identiﬁcation. We identiﬁed the security cate-
gories of our texts based on the lexical semantics of the
generated terms. After removing the duplicates, we applied
open card sorting [81] to categorise the 810 terms across all
the topics. We randomly selected 100 terms and classiﬁed them
into different categories, and then applied those to the rest and
kept identifying new categories. In total, 16 categories were
identiﬁed whose details are given in Table II. We borrowed
the abbreviation styling method of [15] for the topics.
We further applied the 16 categories to all

the terms,
where each term assigned to a maximum of three categories.
Three researchers from our faculty who had expertise in
cybersecurity performed a manual classiﬁcation. Each term
was classiﬁed following the rule of majority voting [83]. We
used Cohen’s Kappa [84] to measure the agreement between
each pair of labellers. The resultant values (all > 0.93) indicate
strong agreements between the labellers. An expert review
was conducted to ensure the validity of the classiﬁcation. We
recruited two experts in a governmental research lab who had
at least three years of experience in the cybersecurity ﬁeld for
this purpose. For each expert, we generated a 200-term sample
(25%) to review, while our researchers were sitting next to the
expert to respond to any questions based on the think-aloud
protocol [36]. After our explanations, there was only one error
correction, that merely added one term to one more category.
We built a corpus for each category as a set of terms. Each
term was added into the corpus of its assigned categories. We
used the corpus to measure the relevance of each category to
the documents. We identiﬁed the duplicate terms semantically
or syntactically in the corpus and labelled them as term vari-
ants. For instance, ‘infected computer’ is a variant of ‘infected
machine’, just as ‘sensitive data’ is a variant of ‘sensitive
information’. Fig. 11 in Appendix C shows the number of the
terms in each category after extending the deﬁnition of dupli-
cates to accommodate variants. We see that security solutions
or attacks, especially those related to sensitive information
(information privacy, security software/service and security
update/vulnerability) have the largest corpora of terms. In
contrast, political or nationwide threats (election security and
national security) contain fewest terms.

4) Metrics and Analysis: Instead of using the topic prob-
ability computed by LDA, we deﬁne the category relevance
based on our identiﬁed security categories. We obtained a set
of term corpora for K categories as C = {C1, C2, . . . , CK }.

5

TABLE II
THE 16 MANUALLY CLASSIFIED SECURITY CATEGORIES.

Category
CycmnAc

cybercriminal activity

Deﬁnition
The malicious activity where the hacker group
leverages computer techniques for illegal purposes.

CysePrg

cybersecurity program The cybersecurity venue or event hosted by an authorised organisation,

ElecSe

election security

FMClm

IdtFncFrd

InfPry

false/misleading
claim
identity theft
/ﬁnancial fraud
information privacy

IoTThr

IoT threat

MalVr
MbAppSe

NatSe

malware/virus
mobile/application
security
national security

NetAtk

network attack

PwdEnc
SeSwServ

SeUdVnb

SpmPh

password/encryption
security software
/service
security update
/vulnerability
spam/phishing

WbAtk

web-based attack

e.g. awareness training, foundations learning, risk assessment.
The protection of elections and voting infrastructure from cyber attack,
e.g. tampering with or inﬁltration of voting machines and equipment,
election ofﬁce networks and practices, and voter registration databases.
The deceptive advertising claimed by business online,
illegal claims about product quality, condition, or price
Criminals gain unauthorised access
to steal credentials to cause unintended charges.
Actions that harm or protect users’ privacy preferences
and personally identiﬁable information.
Security threats in IoT devices, software
and network connected to the internet.
Malicious software developed to harm computers or networks.
Security solutions or attacks at the software level,
e.g. android apps.
The security and defence of a nation-state,
e.g. its citizens, economy, and institutions,
which is regarded as a duty of government.
Malicious attempts to gain the unauthorised privilege of network
or cause service disruption.
Password/data protection and encryption.
Software or services designed to help users against attacks
e.g. antivirus products, educational services
Security weakness exploited by hackers to perform malicious activity.
Security update ﬁxes the system or application bugs.
Scammers spread unsolicited messages online or in social media
with malicious links to steal sensitive information or infect computers.
Malicious action on web browsers, extensions and content management,
e.g. leveraging third-party plugins to perform code injection.

Example terms
malicious action, hacker,
law enforcement action
cybersecurity conference,
CISO Forum, consumer education
voting security,
election system,
electronic voting machine
deceptive claim/advertising,
online complaint assistant
data breach, ﬁnancial crimes,
credit card fraud
customer privacy/data,
GDPR, privacy protection
ﬁrmware, mobile device,
industrial control systems
spyware, adware, worm, trojan
fake android app, mobile security,
mobile-threat report
cyberespionage,
national cybersecurity,
transnational crime
DDoS attack, zombie bot,
remote code execution
MFA, RSA encryption
antivirus, MalwareBytes, SIEM,
security company,malware ﬁlter
ﬂaw, patch, security bulletin
Microsoft Exploitability Index
scam, identity parameter,
spam, junk/phishing email
SQL injection, web extension,
drive-by download

Category relevance. The category relevance of a document
measures the proportion of terms in each category corpus that
occur in the document. More speciﬁcally, the relevance of a
document to each category is computed as,

γ(di, Ck) =

|ck|
|Ck|

, 1 ≤ k ≤ K

(1)

where |Ck|
is the number of terms in a category corpus, and
c denotes the subset of C whose terms occur in the document
di. A term is counted once whether it or its variants occur in
the document.

Dominant categories. As explained in [85], we deﬁne the

dominant categories of each document as

dc(di) = {Ck}, if γ(di, Ck) > θ(Ck), 1 ≤ k ≤ K (2)

where θ(Ck) is the threshold to determine whether a category
is dominant or not. Each document can have different dom-
inant categories. The concept of dominant categories enables
us to classify the documents based on the values of relevance.
Category popularity. We applied the measures of popular-
ity and impact deﬁned in [85] on the categories. We deﬁne
the popularity for the category Ck within the dataset D as,
{di}(cid:12)
(cid:12)
|D|
The popularity of a category measures the proportion of
documents with the given category as dominant.

popularity(D, Ck) = (cid:12)
(cid:12)

, di ∈ D, Ck ∈ dc(di)

(3)

Category impact. The absolute and relative impact of the

category Ck is deﬁned as,

impactabsolute(D(month), Ck) = X

γ(di, Ck)

di∈D(month)

(4)
impact(D(month), Ck)
D(month)(cid:12)
(cid:12)

(cid:12)
(cid:12)

impactrelative(D(month), Ck) =

(5)
where D(ts) represents a collection of documents posted in
a month. The absolute impact of a category measures the
cumulative relevance to the category of the posted documents
over a month. The absolute impact is inﬂuenced by the number
of posts and their category relevance. The relative impact is
not affected by the number of posts. It measures the average
relevance to the category of the posted documents during a
month.

IV. RESULTS

We exhibit our results following our methodology in this
section. Through data analysis, we try to answer our three
research questions.

A. RQ1. What are the security issues reported in cybersecurity
texts?

We ﬁrst generated 68 topics out of our datasets by using
LDA; 18 from news, 15 from security blogs, and 35 from

6

InfPry

ElecSe

SeSwServ

FMClm

MalVr

SeUdVnb

CycmnAc

NetAtk

IdtFncFrd

PwdEnc

IoTThr

CysePrg

Fig. 2. Proportion of articles with different dominant categories and the CDF
(Cumulative Distribution Function) vs the number of dominant categories (per
article).

SpmPh

WbAtk

MbAppSe

NatSe

Fig. 1. The network graph of co-occurrences between different categories
within an article. The size of the nodes represents the relative occurrences
of each category. Red (thick) lines mean strong relationships (high co-
occurrences) between two nodes, while blue (thin) represent weak relation-
ships.

the three web datasets, as shown in Table I. However, the
LDA-generated topics were not good representatives and were
hard to distinguish too. Therefore, we further studied the terms
from the topics and manually found 16 security categories that
can represent the articles, as demonstrated in Table II. The
table explains each security category with examples in detail.
The categories were identiﬁed based on different perspectives
on cybersecurity, including attack types (e.g. network, web,
IoT, or mobile/application attacks), security techniques (e.g.
encryption and security services as well as updates) and
recently emerged security issues (e.g. election and national
security).

Category validation. We validated the effectiveness of our
16 security categories. We applied the chi-squared (χ2) test on
the consistency of each category prevalence. More speciﬁcally,
we tested if the proportions of the articles were similar with a
given category as the most relevant category. The most relevant
category of a document is the category where it achieves the
highest relevance (Equation 1). Table III in Appendix D shows
the results of χ2 tests for each category across 67 LDA-
generated topics in the ﬁve datasets from the three sources.
As all the p values are smaller than 0.01, the prevalence of
our classiﬁed categories is signiﬁcantly varying across the
LDA-generated topics, datasets and sources. It indicates our
identiﬁed categories are representative and effective because
the differences between them are statistically signiﬁcant.

Category co-occurrences. We explored the relation-
ships between different categories by calculating their co-
occurrences in each document. The co-occurrences show the

associations between different security issues to pinpoint the
challenges faced by researchers and practitioners. Fig. 1
presents the network graph of the co-occurrences, where
larger nodes indicate more frequently occurred categories and
red (thicker) lines show strong relationships. We ﬁnd that
information privacy, password/encryption, mobile/application
security and network attack are strongly correlated. These four
categories have also had high numbers of occurrences in our
dataset. cybercriminal activity exhibits strong relationship with
information privacy. This indicates that information privacy
still remains a dominant topic in the last decade and is largely
due to criminal offence, including password attack (e.g. brute
force attack), mobile application attack (e.g. malicious code
injection exposure), and network attack (e.g. DDoS attack).
Yet, usable authentication methods, mobile security solutions,
and network protection are still challenges in safeguarding the
sensitive data (e.g. credentials) of users and enterprises. In
addition, the strong correlations between spam/phishing and
both network attack and mobile/application security denote
that spam and phishing messages including malicious links
are still spreading rampantly in the internet through email,
SMS or other communications.

Among the 16 categories, election security and national
security occur the least frequently and have the weakest
correlation with the rest of the categories. The articles in
these two categories mainly present nationwide attacks and
espionage at high levels, with a focus on the infrastructure
and attack consequences. They hardly analyse the related
techniques in detail. Since the targets of these threats, such as
governments, are harder to compromise compared to regular
users, the attacks are not frequent. However, they are to be
taken seriously since they can cause signiﬁcant losses such as
political or military information leakage. Compared to these
two categories, false/misleading claim, IoT threat, web attack,
cybersecurity program happen more regularly but have weaker
connections to other categories. Speciﬁc attacks such as web
attack and IoT threat are partly related to a few categories.
For instance, criminals can leverage cross-site scripting (XSS)
(web) attacks to inject malicious codes into web applications
(mobile/application security) and access sensitive information
(information privacy).

7

Categories per article. We empirically found the threshold
per category (Equation 2) to determine the dominant categories
for each article in our dataset. In Fig. 2, we have plotted the
probability distribution of the number of dominant categories
for the articles along with its CDF (Cumulative Distribution
Function). With the increase in the number of dominant cate-
gories, the number of articles gradually decreases. The results
show that 83% of the articles have six dominant categories or
less. This percentage reaches 90% with seven categories. The
results are aligned with our observations. In practice, different
from other ﬁelds, these articles generally include multiple
topics. For example, when an article introduces cyber attacks
and prevention methods, it always explains the techniques and
the related effects in detail. For example, a security update
addresses an exploitable vulnerability through which remote
code execution by hackers is possible. Hackers use this to gain
admin access and run malware on infected computers. In this
scenario, network attack, password/encryption, malware/virus
and security update/vulnerability are discussed. It also indi-
cates that a security article generally discuss multiple security
issues.
• We identiﬁed 16 categories for the security articles from

news, blogs and webs.

• Information privacy still remains a dominant topic in the
last decade and is largely due to criminal offence, including
password attack, mobile application attack, and network
attack.

• Most of the articles (83%) have six dominant categories

or less.

B. RQ2. How have the security categories varied and evolved
over the last decade?

1) Category Popularity: We compared the popularity of
different categories. We empirically found the threshold to
separate dominant categories (Equation 2) and calculated the
category popularity too (Equation 3). Fig. 12 in Appendix E
plots the popularity of the security categories. cybercriminal
activity marks the most substantial category amongst all (with
65% popularity). This category contains the terms indicating
cyber attacks such as ‘hack’. The three categories information
privacy, security software/service, and cybersecurity program
share similar popularities, at around 40%. In contrast, other
categories are discussed less popularly, such as articles in-
troducing speciﬁc threats (e.g. spam/phishing, malware/virus).
election security stands lowest in terms of popularity among
the 16 security categories.

2) Category Absolute Impact: We calculated each category
absolute impact (Equation 4) to analyse the trends. The results
of the last decade analysis are plotted in the upper subplot
of Fig. 3. Fig. 4 demonstrates the comparison between the
trends of absolute impact and relative impact per category.
Overall, there is an upward trend in the absolute impact for
almost all categories since 2009. The impacts of all categories
start from nearly zero in 2009. The increase indicates a
considerable evolution of security incidences in both amount

and sophistication. The explosion of ransomware in 2017
brings the impact of malware/virus to its peak, especially with
the worldwide break out of WannaCry which infected 200,000
computers across 150 countries [86].

We aggregated the overall absolute impact for all
the
categories and compared it to the monetary damage caused by
cybercrimes in the 2010s (data from [87]). We used Spearman
correlation coefﬁcient to measure the correlation between the
overall absolute impact of security articles and the amount
of ﬁnancial loss caused by recorded cybercrimes. The result
showed a strong correlation (corr = 0.85, p = 0.0037). The
increasing impact of security categories reﬂects exponential
economic loss, from $0.3 million in 2015 to $3.5 billion in
2019.

We observe that there was a sharp jump in the absolute
impact at the end of 2015 for most categories, followed by
another steady growth in 2017. Interestingly, almost all the
categories had decreasing trends in absolute impact in 2018,
but climbed to the highest point in 2019. Different from other
categories, election security had a signiﬁcant increase in the
absolute impact in 2016, while it was around zero before
that. This increase coincides with the Russian interference in
2016 U.S. presidential election [88]. national cybersecurity
became popular earlier, with the absolute impact gradually
going up from 2009, before a sudden rise in 2013. National
security, including national cyber attacks and cyber-espionage,
was ﬁrst considered to be more harmful than other threats (e.g.
terrorism) by U.S. ofﬁcials in 2013 [89]. It is worth noting that
absolute impact and relative impact almost overlap for both
election security and national security, as shown in Fig. 4.

3) Category Relative Impact: We additionally computed
category relative impacts (Equation 5) for the sake of com-
parison. Relative impact reﬂects the average impact that each
article has on the security categories during a month. The
results of studying the articles from 2009 to now are depicted
in the lower subplot of Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. Among the 16 cat-
egories, mobile/application security and information privacy
have had the largest relative impacts over time as well as the
largest absolute impacts. Meanwhile, election security shows
the smallest relative impact and absolute impact.

We computed the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient of all
the pairs relative impacts from the security categories. We
found the trends of the relative impacts for seven categories
(i.e. cybercriminal activity, cybersecurity program, informa-
tion privacy, network attack, password/encryption, security
software/service and spam/phishing) are similar to each other
(corr > 0.7, p < 0.01). The relative impacts of them have
progressively risen from 2009 to 2015, and ﬂuctuated around
the peak afterwards.

We further applied the Mann-Kendall trend test [90] to
statistically measure the trends of relative impacts for the
categories. The results suggest that 15 out of our 16 categories
have statistically increasing trends (p < 0.05). Only one
category (false/misleading claim) experiences a downtrend
(p = 1.87e − 11).

8

Fig. 3. The absolute impact and relative impact of 16 security categories from 2009 to date.

Fig. 4. The separate absolute impact and relative impact of 16 security categories over the last decade.

9

• cybercriminal activity has been the most popular and was
discussed in most security articles (65%), followed by
information privacy, security software/service and cyber-
securtiy program, with similar popularities at 40%.

• Almost all the categories show upward trends in both
absolute impact and relative impact over the last decade.
• Security issues in mobile/application and information pri-
vacy gained the largest absolute/relative impact over time.
• The absolute impacts from cybersecurity texts strongly
correlate with the monetary loss caused by cybercrimes.

C. RQ3. How have the security categories varied and evolved
across different sources on cybersecurity over the last decade?

We compared the security categories in terms of their
popularity and impact across different sources of cybersecurity
articles, i.e. news, security blogs and websites. This provides
insights on how categories become popular on different plat-
forms.

1) Category Popularity: Fig. 5 demonstrates the category
popularity of security articles across the three sources. We
ﬁnd that almost all the categories are popularly present within
all the sources except election security and false/misleading
claim. election security only presents its prevalence in news
at a signiﬁcantly lower popularity compared to other cate-
gories. false/misleading claim refers to fake or deceptive online
advertisements designed to mislead customers. This category
is mainly active in web pages, but has shallow popularity in
news. Among the 16 categories, cybercriminal activity has the
highest popularity in all the sources. It is worth noting that
among the three sources, security blogs stand popular in the
majority of categories. This is because security blogs are more
domain-speciﬁc and contain more detailed security knowl-
edge in the content. Interestingly, only four categories (i.e.
identity theft/ﬁnancial
fraud, password/encryption, security
update/vulnerability, and website attack) show considerably
higher popularity in web sites than in news.

2) Category Absolute Impact: The absolute impact for the
security categories at different sources are depicted in the
upper plot of Fig. 6 and Fig. 7(A). Overall,
there is an
the three
increasing trend in the absolute impacts for all
sources. We further used the Mann-Kendall trend test [90] to
check whether the trend is statistically signiﬁcant or not. The
results show that the increasing trends of absolute impacts for
all the categories in news and security blogs are signiﬁcant
(p < 0.05). In webs, two categories (i.e. cybercriminal activity
and identity theft/ﬁnancial fraud) do not have any signiﬁcant
trends (p = 0.06, 0.2), whether increasing or decreasing. Only
false/misleading claim experiences a signiﬁcant downtrend
(p = 0.008) in absolute impact during the 2010s.

From Fig. 6, we observe that the distinction in the absolute
impacts of different categories is less signiﬁcant in webs than
in the other two sources over time. Overall, security blogs
have the largest absolute impact among the three sources. The
high value of absolute impact indicates that security blogs have
been the dominant source of delivering security knowledge in

the last ten years. Compared to the other sources, web sources
have had low absolute impacts ever since 2009, however, the
trend has ended with a dramatic increase in 2019. Among the
security categories, mobile/application security has gained the
highest absolute impact, especially in news and security blogs.
Besides, information privacy has achieved the second highest
absolute impact across all the sources at almost all times. In
news, its absolute impact exceeded IoT threat and moved up to
the second after 2016. In webs, it surpassed mobile/application
security and reached the highest in the ﬁrst half of 2019.

Fig. 7(A) plots the value of absolute impact for each
category separately. In security blogs, we observe that most
categories experience a rapid rise in the absolute impact in
2015. Except for election security and national security, the
trends of the remaining categories are similar; with a steady
increase at different paces. Compared to security blogs, news
and web pages gain considerably lower absolute impacts,
except for election security. Moreover, news absolute impact
is slightly higher than that of web pages.

3) Category Relative Impact: The lower plot of Fig. 6
and Fig. 7(B) demonstrate the relative impacts of the se-
curity categories across the three sources. They show that
mobile/application security has had the largest relative impact
in news and security blogs during the study period. This is
similar to its absolute impact. It is worth noting that IoT
threat almost mirrored the absolute impact and the relative
impact of mobile/application security in news. Interestingly,
malware/virus rarely made a higher relative impact than mo-
bile/application security in security blogs. One can also see
that false/misleading claim, identity theft/ﬁnancial fraud and
cybercriminal activity have had the highest relative impacts in
webs before 2016.

From Fig. 7(B), we ﬁnd that the relative impact of web
pages ﬂuctuates dramatically. While security blogs still took
the dominant place in relative impact for most the categories
during the study period, it was taken over by news and web
pages sometimes. Webs maintained the highest relative impact
in cybercriminal activity, false/misleading claim, and identity
theft/ﬁnancial fraud until 2016. Moreover, news showed to
have a relative impact comparable to security blogs in some
categories, namely information privacy, national security and
spam/phishing. This source took over security blogs in election
security, IoT threat and mobile/application security occasion-
ally. In our collected data, the proportion of web articles with
publication dates is signiﬁcantly smaller than that of news or
security blogs, with percentages around 66.6% compared to
at least 98% for the latter two. This leads to low absolute
impacts in webs,
in contrast to noticeably higher relative
impacts compared to the other two sources.

We further applied the Mann-Kendall trend test [90] to see
whether the trend of relative impact has been statistically sig-
niﬁcant over time or not. The results are reported in Table IV
in Appendix F. Only security blogs showed increasing trends
(p < 0.05) in the relative impact for nearly all the categories,
except false/misleading claim which was the only category that
remained stable. This category showed the same behaviour in

10

Fig. 5. The popularity of our security categories in different sources about cybersecurity.

Fig. 6. Absolute and relative impacts of our security categories for different sources of cybersecurity from 2010 to date.

the other two sources too. News and webs had a few decreas-
ing trends among their categories. The results also suggest
that half of the security categories experienced statistically-
signiﬁcant increasing trends (p < 0.01) in relative impact
across the three sources (i.e. election security, information pri-
vacy, IoT threat, malware/virus, mobile/application security,
network attack, security software/service and spam/phishing).

• For most categories, security blogs have been the most
popular and impactful among the sources in the 2010s.
• Security issues in mobile/application have been the most

impactful in news and security blogs over time.

• IoT threat almost mirrored the absolute impact value of

mobile/application security in news over time.

• Only security blogs experienced statistically increasing
trends in relative impact for nearly all the categories.

Timeliness of different sources. We further measured the
timeliness of different sources in reporting security incidents.
We compared the sources temporally to measure the difference
in information delivery delay. We applied time-lagged cross
correlations (TLCC) [91] to calculate the correlation pro-
gressively with shifting one time series incrementally. TLCC
identiﬁes any temporal (leader-follower) relationship between
two time series. The comparisons between each pair existed
in the sources in the absolute impact per category are plotted
in Fig. 8. Each subplot depicts the dynamic correlation when
we pull the second source backward (negative: −) or forward
(positive: +). Darker colours indicate stronger correlation,
with red representing positives and blue representing negatives
in the spectrum. The peak correlation (dark red) shows where
the two sources are most synchronised in time, either when
the ﬁrst source leads (−) or when the second source leads (+).

11

Fig. 7. The (a) absolute impacts and (b) relative impacts of our 16 security categories across various sources (news, security blogs, webs) over the last decade.

From Fig. 8(B), we clearly observe that ’security blogs’
drove ’webs’ in the study period. A strong correlations is
seen if one moves webs backwards for at least 10 months.
Web pages show a few month delay compared to news in
security information delivery, as shown in Fig. 8(C). Overall,
webs show very weak correlation with news,
in contrast
to the other two pairs. This indicates that websites do not
focus on the timeliness when publishing cybersecurity texts,
which is aligned with their low proportion of articles having
publication dates. Fig. 8(A) suggests that news and security
blogs report security events ﬁrsthand and at almost similar
speeds in most categories. News led in information privacy,
IoT threat, mobile/application security, password/encryption.
Only spam/phishing was an exception and became inﬂuential
in security blogs earlier.

• News and security blogs report security events ﬁrsthand at

similar speeds in most categories.

• Websites deliver security information without caring about
timeliness much, where one third of the articles do not
specify the date and the rest have a time lag in posting
emerging security issues.

V. DISCUSSION

Security education. Home computer users are struggling to
resist the ever increasing cyber threats. While formal security
education designed by certiﬁed experts is essential, it is still
challenging to standardise the training as users might need se-
curity knowledge at different levels. Moreover, different users
may have different backgrounds in dealing with cyber attacks.
That is why informal online sources have become a major

12

process sensitive business data are likely to learn from negative
experiences too [26]. Home computer users also gain security
knowledge from social learning, such as their family, friends
and acquainted experts [67]–[69]. Regardless of the diversity
in security learning methods, it is hard to collect the real-world
information received from communications and convert it into
a standard text format. Thus, in our study, we only considered
the online articles with text content
that could be easily
accessed by end users. Our collected articles from security
blogs and webs somehow contained social communications
too. Note that security experts are likely to share security
stories and tips to safeguard both home computer users and
businesses. People with negative experiences might also post
their personal stories in discussion web forums to seek help
from authorities as well as other online users.

Cyber attack prediction. Criminals are leveraging ad-
vanced technologies to perform sophisticated hackings such
as cryptojacking (cryptomining attacks) based on rapidly
grown cryptocurrencies (e.g. blockchain). By studying the
topic patterns and following the tendencies in existing security
incidents, we can predict the security categories that might be
exploited by hackers and additionally, infer the potential tech-
nologies to be used. Since cybersecurity texts discuss security
issues at different levels of technicality, it is unlikely that one
can create a globally-accepted standard set of security topics.
Traditional classiﬁcations are either too abstract (architecture-
based classiﬁcation, e.g. application layer, endpoint layer) or
too speciﬁc (common cyber attack types). In contrast to these,
our manual classiﬁcation which that uses card sorting [81],
provides a comprehensive set of security categories that cover
considerably different levels of security issues. Each article
is associated with some categories, which is in line with
the observation of real-world data and makes comparison of
articles discussing even similar attacks, possible.

VI. CONCLUSION

In conclusion, we discovered the emerging topics in cyber-
security and preformed an empirical analysis based on our
collected security texts from the sources of news, security
blogs and websites. Since LDA cannot generate speciﬁc and
distinguished topics for cybersecurity texts, we proposed a
novel semi-automated classiﬁcation method for this purpose.
We applied the term extraction method based on the results
generated by LDA. We then identiﬁed 16 security categories
from the terms that could represent the articles statistically as
a probabilistic distribution. We further analysed the evolution
and variation of the collected articles across the security
categories as well as sources over the last decade. We revealed
several interesting ﬁndings, like the absolute impact of cyber-
security texts shows a strong correlation with the ﬁnancial loss
caused by cybercrimes, or websites (of authorised organisa-
tions), in contrast to news and security blogs, tend to publish
general security articles without caring about their timeliness.
Further research can be conducted on this subject, such as
discovering more comprehensive topics for cybersecurity texts
or cyber attack prediction based on our analyses.

Fig. 8. The time lagged cross correlations (TLCC) [91] in the absolute impact
between (A) news vs. security blogs, (B) security blogs vs. webs and (C) news
vs. webs. It plots the correlation between each pair of sources with shifting the
second source (after ‘vs.’) backwards (−) or forwards (+) in months. Darker
red colour represents positively stronger correlation, and the peak correlation
(dark red) indicates the two sources are most synchronised at that time.

platform for users to learn security advice from. Understanding
cybersecurity texts and the difference between sources can
help users with the identiﬁcation of useful information by
themselves. Our analysis can additionally help to improve
current security information sharing systems by capturing the
trending topics with time. In this paper, we only studied three
sources (news, security blogs and websites). There are more
online information sources in the real world, such as technical
reports which are not covered here. However, the three sources
we picked are the best representatives in terms of prevalence,
authority and users’ click rate. They also broadly cover the
security information reported by other sources.

Security advice. Apart from online sources, there exist
other ways for users to get advice and make security decisions.
IT workers, especially those with qualiﬁed internet skills who

13

in
https://www.cybsafe.com/press-releases/human-error-to-blame-for-9-in-10-uk-cyber-data-breaches-in-2019/,
cited Feb 2020.

from your
https://www.infosecinstitute.com/blog/if-your-employees-arent-learning-from-your-security-training-are-you-really-teaching/,
cited Feb 2020.

you

REFERENCES

[1] M. Evans, L. A. Maglaras, Y. He, and H. Janicke, “Human behaviour
as an aspect of cybersecurity assurance,” Security and Communication
Networks, vol. 9, no. 17, pp. 4667–4679, 2016.

[2] L. Hadlington, “Human factors in cybersecurity; examining the link
between internet addiction, impulsivity, attitudes towards cybersecurity,
and risky cybersecurity behaviours,” Heliyon, vol. 3, no. 7, p. e00346,
2017.
[3] CybSafe,
10

“Human
uk

9
2019,”

breaches

blame

cyber

error

data

for

to

in

[4] A. Acquisti and J. Grossklags, “Privacy and rationality in individual
decision making,” IEEE security & privacy, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 26–33,
2005.

[5] R. Wash, “Folk models of home computer security,” in Proceedings of
the Sixth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security, 2010, pp. 1–16.
[6] N. Ben-Asher and C. Gonzalez, “Effects of cyber security knowledge
on attack detection,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 48, pp. 51–61,
2015.

[7] T.

Schultz,

“If
security

your
training,

employees
are

arenâ ˘A ´Zt
really

learning
teaching?”

[8] E. M. Redmiles, M. L. Mazurek, and J. P. Dickerson, “Dancing pigs or
externalities? measuring the rationality of security decisions,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation,
2018, pp. 215–232.

[9] J. Jang-Jaccard and S. Nepal, “A survey of emerging threats in cyber-
security,” Journal of Computer and System Sciences, vol. 80, no. 5, pp.
973–993, 2014.

[10] A. Tripathi and U. K. Singh, “Taxonomic analysis of classiﬁcation
schemes in vulnerability databases,” in 2011 6th International Confer-
ence on Computer Sciences and Convergence Information Technology
(ICCIT).

IEEE, 2011, pp. 686–691.

[11] F. Massacci and V. H. Nguyen, “Which is the right source for vulnerabil-
ity studies? an empirical analysis on mozilla ﬁrefox,” in Proceedings of
the 6th International Workshop on Security Measurements and Metrics,
2010, pp. 1–8.

[12] E. W. Burger, M. D. Goodman, P. Kampanakis, and K. A. Zhu,
“Taxonomy model for cyber threat intelligence information exchange
technologies,” in Proceedings of the 2014 ACM Workshop on Informa-
tion Sharing & Collaborative Security, 2014, pp. 51–60.

[13] W. Tounsi and H. Rais, “A survey on technical threat intelligence in the
age of sophisticated cyber attacks,” Computers & security, vol. 72, pp.
212–233, 2018.

[14] M. S. Abu, S. R. Selamat, A. Arifﬁn, and R. Yusof, “Cyber threat
intelligence–issue and challenges,” Indonesian Journal of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 371–379, 2018.
[15] E. Rader and R. Wash, “Identifying patterns in informal sources of
security information,” Journal of Cybersecurity, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 121–
144, 2015.

[16] C. Sauerwein, I. Pekaric, M. Felderer, and R. Breu, “An analysis and
classiﬁcation of public information security data sources used in research
and practice,” Computers & security, vol. 82, pp. 140–155, 2019.
[17] R. Shillair and J. Meng, “Multiple sources for security: seeking online
safety information and their inﬂuence on coping self-efﬁcacy and pro-
tection behavior habits,” in Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences, 2017.

[18] F. Skopik, G. Settanni, and R. Fiedler, “A problem shared is a problem
halved: A survey on the dimensions of collective cyber defense through
security information sharing,” Computers & Security, vol. 60, pp. 154–
176, 2016.

[19] J. M. Blythe, N. Sombatruang, and S. D. Johnson, “What security
features and crime prevention advice is communicated in consumer iot
device manuals and support pages?” Journal of Cybersecurity, vol. 5,
no. 1, p. tyz005, 2019.

[20] R. W. Reeder, I. Ion, and S. Consolvo, “152 simple steps to stay safe
online: Security advice for non-tech-savvy users,” IEEE Security &
Privacy, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 55–64, 2017.

[21] L. M. R. S. E. L. D. K. Elissa M. Redmiles, Miraida Morales and
M. L. Mazurek, “First steps toward measuring the readability of security
advice,” in Workshop on Technology and Consumer Protection, 2015.

[22] X.-L. Yang, D. Lo, X. Xia, Z.-Y. Wan, and J.-L. Sun, “What security
questions do developers ask? a large-scale study of stack overﬂow posts,”
Journal of Computer Science and Technology, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 910–
924, 2016.

[23] N. Chambers, B. Fry, and J. McMasters, “Detecting denial-of-service
attacks from social media text: Applying nlp to computer security,” in
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), 2018, pp. 1626–1635.

[24] S. Park, W. Lee, and I.-C. Moon, “Efﬁcient extraction of domain speciﬁc
sentiment lexicon with active learning,” Pattern Recognition Letters,
vol. 56, pp. 38–44, 2015.

[25] E. M. Redmiles, S. Kross, and M. L. Mazurek, “Where is the digital di-
vide? a survey of security, privacy, and socioeconomics,” in Proceedings
of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
2017, pp. 931–936.

[26] ——, “How i learned to be secure: a census-representative survey of
security advice sources and behavior,” in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2016,
pp. 666–677.

[27] A. Forget, S. Pearman, J. Thomas, A. Acquisti, N. Christin, L. F. Cranor,
S. Egelman, M. Harbach, and R. Telang, “Do or do not, there is no
try: user engagement may not improve security outcomes,” in Twelfth
Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security ({SOUPS} 2016), 2016, pp.
97–111.

[28] I. Ion, R. Reeder, and S. Consolvo, “â ˘AIJ... no one can hack my
mindâ ˘A˙I: Comparing expert and non-expert security practices,” in
Eleventh Symposium On Usable Privacy and Security ({SOUPS} 2015),
2015, pp. 327–346.

[29] S. Das, J. Lo, L. Dabbish, and J. I. Hong, “Breaking! a typology of
security and privacy news and how it’s shared,” in Proceedings of the
2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2018,
pp. 1–12.

[30] Y. Acar, C. Stransky, D. Wermke, C. Weir, M. L. Mazurek, and S. Fahl,
“Developers need support, too: A survey of security advice for software
developers,” in 2017 IEEE Cybersecurity Development (SecDev).
IEEE,
2017, pp. 22–26.

[31] N. Nthala and I. Flechais, “Informal support networks: an investigation
into home data security practices,” in Fourteenth Symposium on Usable
Privacy and Security ({SOUPS} 2018), 2018, pp. 63–82.

[32] E. M. Redmiles, A. R. Malone, and M. L. Mazurek, “I think they’re
trying to tell me something: Advice sources and selection for digital
security,” in 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 272–288.

[33] J. Nicholson, L. Coventry, and P. Briggs, “" if it’s important it will
be a headline" cybersecurity information seeking in older adults,”
in Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, 2019, pp. 1–11.

[34] C. Faklaris, L. A. Dabbish, and J. I. Hong, “A self-report measure of
end-user security attitudes (sa-6),” in Fifteenth Symposium on Usable
Privacy and Security ({SOUPS} 2019), 2019.

[35] Y. Acar, M. Backes, S. Fahl, D. Kim, M. L. Mazurek, and C. Stransky,
“You get where you’re looking for: The impact of information sources
on code security,” in 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
(SP).

IEEE, 2016, pp. 289–305.

[36] K. Krombholz, W. Mayer, M. Schmiedecker, and E. Weippl, “" i have
no idea what i’m doing"-on the usability of deploying {HTTPS},” in
USENIX Security’17, 2017, pp. 1339–1356.

[37] N. Nthala and I. Flechais, “â ˘AIJif itâ ˘A ´Zs urgent or it is stopping me
from doing something, then i might just go straight at itâ ˘A˙I: a study into
home data security decisions,” in International Conference on Human
Aspects of Information Security, Privacy, and Trust.
Springer, 2017,
pp. 123–142.

[38] A. E. Howe, I. Ray, M. Roberts, M. Urbanska, and Z. Byrne, “The
psychology of security for the home computer user,” in 2012 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy.

IEEE, 2012, pp. 209–223.

[39] R. Wash and E. Rader, “Too much knowledge? security beliefs and
protective behaviors among united states internet users,” in Eleventh
Symposium On Usable Privacy and Security ({SOUPS} 2015), 2015,
pp. 309–325.

[40] Y. Zou, A. H. Mhaidli, A. McCall, and F. Schaub, “" i’ve got nothing
to lose": Consumers’ risk perceptions and protective actions after the
equifax data breach,” in Fourteenth Symposium on Usable Privacy and
Security ({SOUPS} 2018), 2018, pp. 197–216.

14

[41] Y. Zou and F. Schaub, “Beyond mandatory: Making data breach notiﬁ-
cations useful for consumers,” IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 17, no. 2,
pp. 67–72, 2019.

[42] Y. Zou, S. Danino, K. Sun, and F. Schaub, “Youmight’be affected:
An empirical analysis of readability and usability issues in data breach
notiﬁcations,” in Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, 2019, pp. 1–14.

[43] E. M. Redmiles, Z. Zhu, S. Kross, D. Kuchhal, T. Dumitras, and M. L.
Mazurek, “Asking for a friend: Evaluating response biases in security
user studies,” in Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, 2018, pp. 1238–1255.
[44] E. M. Redmiles, J. Bodford, and L. Blackwell, “â ˘AIJi just want to
feel safeâ ˘A˙I: A diary study of safety perceptions on social media,” in
Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social
Media, vol. 13, no. 01, 2019, pp. 405–416.

[45] A. Mathur and M. Chetty, “Impact of user characteristics on attitudes
towards automatic mobile application updates,” in Thirteenth Symposium
on Usable Privacy and Security ({SOUPS} 2017), 2017, pp. 175–193.
[46] Y. Sawaya, M. Sharif, N. Christin, A. Kubota, A. Nakarai, and A. Ya-
mada, “Self-conﬁdence trumps knowledge: A cross-cultural study of
security behavior,” in Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2017, pp. 2202–2214.

[47] M. Fagan and M. M. H. Khan, “To follow or not

to follow: a
study of user motivations around cybersecurity advice,” IEEE Internet
Computing, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 25–34, 2018.

[48] ——, “Why do they do what they do?: A study of what motivates users
to (not) follow computer security advice,” in Twelfth Symposium on
Usable Privacy and Security ({SOUPS} 2016), 2016, pp. 59–75.
[49] A. Acquisti, I. Adjerid, R. Balebako, L. Brandimarte, L. F. Cranor,
S. Komanduri, P. G. Leon, N. Sadeh, F. Schaub, M. Sleeper et al.,
“Nudges for privacy and security: Understanding and assisting usersâ ˘A ´Z
choices online,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 50, no. 3, pp.
1–41, 2017.

[50] J. Petelka, Y. Zou, and F. Schaub, “Put your warning where your link
is: Improving and evaluating email phishing warnings,” in Proceedings
of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
2019, pp. 1–15.

[51] Z. A. Wen, Z. Lin, R. Chen, and E. Andersen, “What. hack: engaging
anti-phishing training through a role-playing phishing simulation game,”
in Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, 2019, pp. 1–12.

[52] H. Hu and G. Wang, “End-to-end measurements of email spooﬁng
attacks,” in 27th {USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security
18), 2018, pp. 1095–1112.

[53] D. Akhawe and A. P. Felt, “Alice in warningland: A large-scale ﬁeld
study of browser security warning effectiveness,” in Presented as part
of the 22nd {USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 13),
2013, pp. 257–272.

[54] J. Sunshine, S. Egelman, H. Almuhimedi, N. Atri, and L. F. Cranor,
“Crying wolf: An empirical study of ssl warning effectiveness.” in
USENIX security symposium. Montreal, Canada, 2009, pp. 399–416.
[55] M. Fujita, M. Yamada, S. Arimura, Y. Ikeya, and M. Nishigaki, “An
attempt to memorize strong passwords while playing games,” in 2015
18th International Conference on Network-Based Information Systems.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 264–268.

[56] S. Schechter and J. Bonneau, “Learning assigned secrets for unlocking
mobile devices,” in Eleventh Symposium On Usable Privacy and Security
({SOUPS} 2015), 2015, pp. 277–295.

[57] C. Fennell and R. Wash, “Do stories help people adopt

two-factor

authentication?” Studies, vol. 1, no. 2, p. 3.

[58] N. S. Safa and R. Von Solms, “An information security knowledge
sharing model in organizations,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 57,
pp. 442–451, 2016.

[59] R. E. Crossler and F. Bélanger, “The mobile privacy-security knowledge
gap model: Understanding behaviors.” Hawaii International Conference
on System Sciences, 2017.

[60] R. Abu-Salma, E. M. Redmiles, B. Ur, and M. Wei, “Exploring user
mental models of end-to-end encrypted communication tools,” in 8th
{USENIX} Workshop on Free and Open Communications on the Internet
({FOCI} 18), 2018.

[61] R. Stevens, D. Votipka, E. M. Redmiles, C. Ahern, P. Sweeney, and M. L.
Mazurek, “The battle for new york: a case study of applied digital threat
modeling at the enterprise level,” in 27th {USENIX} Security Symposium
({USENIX} Security 18), 2018, pp. 621–637.

[62] T. Chen, J. Hammer, and L. Dabbish, “Self-efﬁcacy-based game design
to encourage security behavior online,” in Extended Abstracts of the
2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2019,
pp. 1–6.

[63] E. Trickel, F. Disperati, E. Gustafson, F. Kalantari, M. Mabey, N. Tiwari,
Y. Safaei, A. Doupé, and G. Vigna, “Shell we play a game? ctf-as-
a-service for security education,” in 2017 {USENIX} Workshop on
Advances in Security Education ({ASE} 17), 2017.

[64] M. Golla, M. Wei, J. Hainline, L. Filipe, M. Dürmuth, E. Redmiles,
and B. Ur, “" what was that site doing with my facebook password?"
designing password-reuse notiﬁcations,” in Proceedings of the 2018
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
2018, pp. 1549–1566.

[65] N. Nthala and I. Flechais, “Rethinking home network security,” 2018.
[66] R. Wash and M. M. Cooper, “Who provides phishing training? facts,
stories, and people like me,” in Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2018, pp. 1–12.

[67] S. Das, A. D. Kramer, L. A. Dabbish, and J. I. Hong, “Increasing security
sensitivity with social proof: A large-scale experimental conﬁrmation,”
in Proceedings of the 2014 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and
communications security, 2014, pp. 739–749.

[68] S. Das, T. H.-J. Kim, L. A. Dabbish, and J. I. Hong, “The effect of
social inﬂuence on security sensitivity,” in 10th Symposium On Usable
Privacy and Security ({SOUPS} 2014), 2014, pp. 143–157.

[69] E. Rader, R. Wash, and B. Brooks, “Stories as informal lessons about
security,” in Proceedings of the Eighth Symposium on Usable Privacy
and Security, 2012, pp. 1–17.

[70] J. Hayes, S. Kaushik, C. E. Price, and Y. Wang, “Cooperative privacy and
security: Learning from people with visual impairments and their allies,”
in Fifteenth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security ({SOUPS}
2019), 2019.

[71] C. S. R. C. from Romania CCSIR, “The impact of cybersecurity over
the last 5 years,” https://def.camp/impact-cybersecurity-ﬁve-years/, cited
Feb 2020.

[72] L. Richardson, “Beautiful soup documentation,” April, 2007.
[73] X. Liao, K. Yuan, X. Wang, Z. Li, L. Xing, and R. Beyah, “Acing the ioc
game: Toward automatic discovery and analysis of open-source cyber
threat intelligence,” in CCS’16. ACM, 2016, pp. 755–766.

[74] S. Mei and X. Zhu, “The security of latent dirichlet allocation,” in

Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, 2015, pp. 681–689.

[75] S. Zaman, B. Adams, and A. E. Hassan, “Security versus performance
the 8th working

bugs: a case study on ﬁrefox,” in Proceedings of
conference on mining software repositories, 2011, pp. 93–102.

[76] S. Neuhaus and T. Zimmermann, “Security trend analysis with cve
topic models,” in 2010 IEEE 21st International Symposium on Software
Reliability Engineering.

IEEE, 2010, pp. 111–120.

[77] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan, “Latent dirichlet allocation,”
Journal of machine Learning research, vol. 3, no. Jan, pp. 993–1022,
2003.

[78] J. Hu, X. Sun, D. Lo, and B. Li, “Modeling the evolution of development
topics using dynamic topic models,” in 2015 IEEE 22nd Interna-
tional Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution, and Reengineering
(SANER).

IEEE, 2015, pp. 3–12.

[79] R. ˇReh˚uˇrek and P. Sojka, “Software Framework for Topic Modelling
with Large Corpora,” in Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on
New Challenges for NLP Frameworks. Valletta, Malta: ELRA, May
2010, pp. 45–50, http://is.muni.cz/publication/884893/en.

[80] M. Röder, A. Both, and A. Hinneburg, “Exploring the space of topic
coherence measures,” in WSDMâ ˘A ´Z15. ACM, 2015, pp. 399–408.

[81] D. Spencer, Card sorting: Designing usable categories.

Rosenfeld

Media, 2009.

[82] D. Cram and B. Daille, “Terminology extraction with term variant
detection,” in Proceedings of ACL-2016 System Demonstrations, 2016,
pp. 13–18.

[83] A. Narasimhamurthy, “Theoretical bounds of majority voting perfor-
mance for a binary classiﬁcation problem,” IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 27, no. 12, pp. 1988–
1995, 2005.

[84] J. Cohen, “A coefﬁcient of agreement for nominal scales,” Educational
and psychological measurement, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 37–46, 1960.
[85] Z. Wan, X. Xia, and A. E. Hassan, “What is discussed about blockchain?
a case study on the use of balanced lda and the reference architecture
of a domain to capture online discussions about blockchain platforms

15

across the stack exchange communities,” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, 2019.

[86] H. Belot and A. N. Stephanie Borys, “Ransomware attack still
looms in australia as government warns wannacry threat not over,”
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-05-15/ransomware-attack-to-hit-victims-in-australia-government-says/8526346,
cited May 2020.

APPENDIX B
THE NUMBER OF PUBLISHED ARTICLES IN THE LAST 20
YEARS

[87] F.

I.

C.

C.

Center,

“2019

internet

crime

report,”

https://pdf.ic3.gov/2019_IC3Report.pdf, cited April 2020.

[88] E. N. Missy Ryan and T. W. P. Karen DeYoung, “Obama administration
announces measures to punish russia for 2016 election interference,”
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/obama-administration-announces-measures-to-punish-russia-for-2016-election-interference/2016/12/29/311db9d6-cdde-11e6-a87f-b917067331bb_story.html,
cited May 2020.
T.
A.
threat

“Cyber-attacks
ofﬁcials

DILANIAN,
al

KEN
than

a
say,”

[89] L.

bigger
https://www.latimes.com/world/la-xpm-2013-mar-12-la-fg-worldwide-threats-20130313-story.html,
cited April 2020.

qaeda,

[90] M. Hussain and I. Mahmud, “pymannkendall: a python package for
non parametric mann kendall family of trend tests.” Journal of Open
Source Software, vol. 4, no. 39, p. 1556, 7 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.21105/joss.01556

[91] S. M. Boker, J. L. Rotondo, M. Xu, and K. King, “Windowed cross-
correlation and peak picking for the analysis of variability in the
time series.” Psychological methods,
association between behavioral
vol. 7, no. 3, p. 338, 2002.

APPENDIX A
OPTIMAL NUMBER SELECTION OF TOPICS GENERATED BY
LDA

Fig. 9. The coherence of the models generated with the different number
of topics (5, 10, ..., 50). The optimal number of topics is highlighted with a
circle marker.

To identify the optimal number of the topics generated by
LDA per dataset, we swept the 5 to 50 interval with steps
of 5 and generated separate models accordingly. We used
topic coherence to measure the performance of the models
[80]. Fig. 9 depicts the results of the models. The optimal
one is marketed with a circle in each case. Our rule was to
pick the model with the highest coherence. However, if the
coherence did not increase much (difference ≤0.01) after the
ﬁrst peak, we kept the ﬁrst highest value. For instance, the
coherence for security blogs only rose by 0.01 from 15 to
40 topics, so we took 15 as the optimal topic number. If two
models had similar coherence (e.g. news models with 15 and
20 topics), we manually compared the generated topics and
selected more distinct one (e.g. news model with 20 topics).
We manually read the generated topics and the articles per
topics, and removed two topics in news model since both the
topics and the articles are irrelevant to cybersecurity.

16

Fig. 10. The number of articles published from 2000 to now.

Fig. 10 shows the number of published articles per month in
the ﬁve datasets in the last 20 years. Most of the cybersecurity
texts came to surface after 2010, with a regular posting
afterwards. We see that security blogs account for the majority
of the online resources on security. With around half of the
security blogs in post numbers, news volume shows a dramatic
increase in the last year. Websites form a relative small portion,
with a gentle growth over the time. In 2016 and 2018, two
peaks can be spotted in the industrial websites curve. It has
also jumped since last year. We observed that the number of
published articles per month in the 2000s is far smaller than
the number in the later ten years. Therefore, we mainly focused
on the analysis of trends in the 2010s in our study.

APPENDIX C
THE NUMBER OF TERMS AFTER ACCOMMODATING
VARIANTS.

Fig. 11. The numbers of terms before and after identifying semantically and
syntactically duplicated terms as term variants.

APPENDIX D
SIGNIFICANT TESTS ON THE SECURITY CATEGORIES

APPENDIX F
SIGNIFICANCE TEST ON THE TRENDS OF DIFFERENT
SOURCES

TABLE IV
SIGNIFICANCE TEST ON THE TRENDS OF RELATIVE IMPACT, INCLUDING
INCREASING (↑), DECREASING (↓) AND STABLE(→) TRENDS (p < 0.05).

News
↑
↓
↑
→
↑
↓
↓
→
↓
↑
↓
↑

Category
CycmnAc
CysePrg
ElecSe
FMClm
IdtFncFrd
InfPry
IoTThr
MalVr
MbAppSe
NatSe
NetAtk
PwdEnc
SeSwServ →
SeUdVnb
SpmPh
WbAtk

↓
↑
↓

Security blogs Webs
↑
↑
↑
→
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑
↑

↓
↓
↑
↓
↓
↑
↑
↑
↑
→
↑
→
↑
→
↑
↓

TABLE III

TESTS ON THE PROPORTIONS OF ARTICLES WITH EACH

THREE χ2
CATEGORY AS THE MOST RELEVANT ACROSS THE LDA-GENERATED
TOPICS, DATASETS AND SOURCES SEPARATELY.

Category

CycmnAc
CysePrg
ElecSe
FMClm
IdtFncFrd
InfPry
IoTThr
MalVr
MbAppSe
NatSe
NetAtk
PwdEnc
SeSwServ
SeUdVnb
SpmPh
WbAtk

Across LDA topics
χ2
p
<0.01
7020
<0.01
8715
<0.01
6696
<0.01
72679
<0.01
12393
<0.01
7216
<0.01
14526
<0.01
32297
<0.01
14383
<0.01
26250
<0.01
14529
<0.01
17847
<0.01
1075
<0.01
42059
<0.01
19368
<0.01
13433

Across datasets
χ2
978
1528
418
27129
886
566
3241
3230
1434
2688
1659
2452
43
1992
1105
3158

p
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01

Across sources
χ2
768
1222
366
7796
677
554
3131
2758
1409
2335
1253
2060
25
1773
263
1359

p
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01
<0.01

APPENDIX E
THE POPULARITY OF OUR SECURITY CATEGORIES

Fig. 12. The popularity of our security categories.

17

