ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

1

Blockchain for the Internet of Vehicles towards
Intelligent Transportation Systems: A Survey

Muhammad Baqer Mollah, Member, IEEE, Jun Zhao, Member, IEEE, Dusit Niyato, Fellow, IEEE,
Yong Liang Guan, Senior Member, IEEE, Chau Yuen, Senior Member, IEEE, Sumei Sun, Fellow, IEEE,
Kwok-Yan Lam, Senior Member, IEEE, and Leong Hai Koh, Senior Member, IEEE

0
2
0
2

t
c
O
3

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
2
2
0
6
0
.
7
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Internet of Vehicles (IoV) is an emerging concept
that is believed to help realise the vision of intelligent trans-
portation systems (ITS). IoV has become an important research
area of impactful applications in recent years due to the rapid
advancements in vehicular technologies, high throughput satellite
communication, Internet of Things and cyber-physical systems.
IoV enables the integration of smart vehicles with the Internet
and system components attributing to their environment such
as public infrastructures, sensors, computing nodes, pedestrians
and other vehicles. By allowing the development of a common

The work of J. Zhao is supported by 1) Nanyang Technological University
(NTU) Startup Grant, 2) Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute
(JRI), 3) Ministry of Education Singapore Academic Research Fund Tier 1
RG128/18, Tier 1 RG115/19, Tier 1 RT07/19, Tier 1 RT01/19, RG24/20,
and Tier 2 MOE2019-T2-1-176, 4) NTU-WASP Joint Project, 5) Singapore
National Research Foundation (NRF) under its Strategic Capability Research
Centres Funding Initiative: Strategic Centre for Research in Privacy-Preserving
Technologies & Systems (SCRIPTS), 6) Energy Research Institute @NTU
(ERIAN), 7) Singapore NRF National Satellite of Excellence, Design Science
and Technology for Secure Critical Infrastructure NSoE DeST-SCI2019-
0012, 8) AI Singapore (AISG) 100 Experiments (100E) programme, and
9) NTU Project for Large Vertical Take-Off & Landing (VTOL) Research
Platform. The work of D. Niyato is supported by the National Research
Foundation (NRF), Singapore, under Singapore Energy Market Authority
(EMA), Energy Resilience, NRF2017EWT-EP003-041, Singapore NRF2015-
NRF-ISF001-2277, Singapore NRF National Satellite of Excellence, Design
Science and Technology for Secure Critical Infrastructure NSoE DeST-
SCI2019-0007, A*STAR-NTU-SUTD Joint Research Grant on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence for the Future of Manufacturing RGANS1906, Wallenberg AI,
Autonomous Systems and Software Program and Nanyang Technological
University (WASP/NTU) under grant M4082187 (4080), Singapore Ministry
of Education (MOE) Tier 1 (RG16/20), and NTU-WeBank JRI (NWJ-2020-
004), Alibaba Group through Alibaba Innovative Research (AIR) Program
and Alibaba-NTU Singapore Joint Research Institute (JRI). The work of
Y. L. Guan and C. Yuen is supported by A*STAR under its RIE2020
Advanced Manufacturing and Engineering (AME) Industry Alignment Fund
– Pre Positioning (IAF-PP) (Grant No. A19D6a0053). Any opinions, ﬁndings
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the author(s) and do not reﬂect the views of A*STAR. (Corresponding authors:
Jun Zhao and Muhammad Baqer Mollah)

M. B. Mollah, J. Zhao, D. Niyato, and K. Y. Lam are with the School of
Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Sin-
gapore 639798 (Email: muhd.baqer@ntu.edu.sg; junzhao@ntu.edu.sg; dniy-
ato@ntu.edu.sg; kwokyan.lam@ntu.edu.sg).

Y. L. Guan is with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineer-
ing, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 (Email: eyl-
guan@ntu.edu.sg).

L. H. Koh is with the Energy Research Institute, Nanyang Technological

University, Singapore 639798 (Email: lhkoh@ntu.edu.sg).

C. Yuen is with the Engineering Product Development Pillar, Singapore
University of Technology and Design, Singapore 119613 (Email: yuen-
chau@sutd.edu.sg).

S. Sun is with the Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R), Agency for
Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 138632. She is also
with the Infocomm Technology Cluster, Singapore Institute of Technology,
Singapore 138683 (Email: sunsm@i2r.a-star.edu.sg).

Copyright (c) 20xx IEEE. Personal use of this material

is permitted.
However, permission to use this material for any other purposes must be
obtained from the IEEE by sending a request to pubs-permissions@ieee.org.

information exchange platform between vehicles and heteroge-
neous vehicular networks, this integration aims to create a better
environment and public space to the people as well as to enhance
safety for all road users. Being a participatory data exchange and
storage, the underlying information exchange platform of IoV
needs to be secure, transparent and immutable in order to achieve
the intended objectives of ITS. In this connection, the adoption
of blockchain as a system platform for supporting the infor-
mation exchange needs of IoV has been explored. Due to their
decentralized and immutable nature, IoV applications enabled by
blockchain are believed to have a number of desirable properties
such as decentralization, security, transparency,
immutability,
and automation. In this paper, we present a contemporary survey
on the latest advancement in blockchain for IoV. Particularly, we
highlight the different application scenarios of IoV after carefully
reviewing the recent literatures. We also investigate several key
challenges where blockchain is applied in IoV. Furthermore, we
present the future opportunities and explore further research
directions of IoV as a key enabler of ITS.

Index Terms—Blockchain, Connected Vehicles, Internet of
Things, Internet of Vehicles, Intelligent Transportation System,
Security, Smart Vehicle, Smart Transportation.

I. INTRODUCTION

B LOCKCHAIN was initially introduced as a distributed

ledger of the Bitcoin [1]–[3] system for the purpose of
addressing the double-spending problem of the cryptocurrency.
One of the key features of blockchain is that, thanks to the
immutability of the distributed ledger, it allows transacting
parties and stakeholders to establish trust among untrusted
entities in a decentralized manner. Due to the huge success
of Bitcoin, blockchain has attracted great attention of the
research community as an emerging technology. Although
blockchain originated as an infrastructure for cryptocurrency, it
has become a distributed system technology that inspired and
drove a wave of paradigm shift from centralized to decen-
tralized and dynamic system architecture. Blockchain-based
architecture is decentralized and open as it is implemented by
a number of distributed nodes, each of which contain a replica
of the cryptographically-chained bitcoin transaction records,
organized in blocks, agreed upon by some consensus protocols
among the blockchain nodes. The cryptographic chaining of
the blocks, together with the distributed consensus protocol,
ensure the immutability of blockchain. The opennes and
immutability of blockchain allow anyone to verify the history
of bitcoin transactions, hence defeating any attempt to tamper
the transaction history without being detected. As such, trust
among untrusted entities can be established in a decentralized

 
 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

2

manner. That means, once appended to the chain, the records
cannot be modiﬁed. The decentralized, open, and unmodiﬁed
nature makes the blockchain a transparent, fully distributed,
and publicly veriﬁable architecture as well. Furthermore, as the
records are replicated across the multiple distributed nodes, the
blockchain architecture inherently addressed the single point
of failure problem. As a result, a wide range of applications are
exploring to adopt blockchain technology by taking beneﬁts
of the aforesaid attractive properties.

On the other hand, with increasing advancements of vehic-
ular technologies, satellite communications [4], [5] and cyber-
physical systems (CPS), vehicles are becoming smarter and
more autonomous or semi-autonomous than before [6]–[8].
The Internet of Vehicles (IoV) concept [9]–[11] has emerged
to support the realization of future intelligent transportation
system (ITS), in which a growing number of smart vehicles
are interconnected with the Internet. It is envisioned that ITS
will become a reality in one decade through the adoption of
IoV. To date, a number of initiatives have been launched to
encourage development of ITS, particularly into smart cities,
such as ERTICO - ITS Europe [12] and CityVerve Manchester
[13]. Besides, IoV also enables the seamless interconnection
among smart vehicles, roadside infrastructures and pedestrians
in order to meet the evolving functional requirements of ITS
and to facilitate the vehicle-to-everything (V2X) paradigm.
Moreover, cloud computing, edge computing, artiﬁcial intel-
ligence, and modern vehicular communication technologies
are accelerating the evolution of IoV. The ultimate aim of
IoV is to make a common, seamless and connected platform
to exchange data and resources for smart vehicles. The ca-
pabilities of these data and resources exchanges are driving
a number of vehicular applications such as enhanced road
safety, driving safety,
trafﬁc efﬁciency, smart parking and
entertainment services.

With the rapid development of vehicular applications &
services, the growing number of smart vehicles are expected
to produce and exchange an enormous amount of data, and
the network trafﬁc to be managed will be signiﬁcantly huge.
At the same time, the high mobility, low latency, context
complexity, and heterogeneity characteristics of IoV will also
face substantial difﬁculties when utilizing traditional cloud-
based storage and management directly. Additionally, it is also
difﬁcult to ensure strong interoperability and compatibility
among IoV entities belonging to different service providers.
Hence, the data exchange and storage platform for IoV need
to be decentralized, distributed,
interoperable, ﬂexible and
scalable in order to cater for the future growth of IoV and fully
realize the potential of ITS. Furthermore, being distributed and
decentralization, the platform is inherently more vulnerable to
cyber attacks, hence it is essential to ensure security, privacy,
and trust of the IoV data. Consequently, the blockchain tech-
nology along with modern cryptographic techniques, and edge
computing, have presented great opportunities in a number of
IoV applications already.

Contributions of this Survey: In this survey, we focus on
the role blockchain in IoV, and investigate existing research
works that have been presented in different literature. The
contributions of this survey are summarized below.

• We present a comprehensive survey of the techniques
for integration of blockchain and IoV paradigm towards
building a future ITS, starting with describing the prelim-
inary background including blockchain technology, edge
computing, ITS and IoV.

• We discuss the challenges associated with IoV, highlight
the importance as well as motivations of the convergence
of blockchain and IoV, and point out the speciﬁc chal-
lenges which can be addressed by blockchain.

• We present the state-of-art research efforts and in-depth
discussion on the adoption of blockchain for IoV sce-
narios, with a particular focus on vehicular data security,
vehicle management, and on-demand transportation ser-
vices.

• We highlight a number of blockchain-empowered IoV
architectures,
integration of
including the potential
blockchain, edge computing, vehicular communication
systems, automotive technologies, and privacy preserving
techniques.

• We identify and investigate the key challenges associated
with blockchain integration with IoV, including security
& privacy, performance, IoV-speciﬁc & optimized con-
sensus, and incentive mechanisms.

• We outline a number of open issues and challenges as
future research opportunities in the area of blockchain,
IoV, and vehicular cyber-physical systems.

Related Surveys: A number of recent surveys have presented
some speciﬁc aspects of blockchain in certain IoT and CPS
domains. For example, a literature survey on blockchain-
assisted IoT system with a focus on privacy-preserving tech-
niques and associated research issues is presented in [14].
Meanwhile, the approaches, opportunities, and challenges of
the blockchain-enabled typical IoT and CPS are studied in
[15]–[24]. The applications, beneﬁts, and existing research
advancements of the adoption of blockchain in Industrial IoT
(IIoT) and Industry 4.0 are discussed in [25]–[30]. In order
to improve the performance of cooperative robotics and its
distributed control strategies, the architecture, deﬁnitions, and
applications are presented in [31], [32]. The taxonomy and
comparative analysis of latest solutions, architectures, and
requirements of blockchain with application to smart cities
are discussed in [33]–[38]. A substantial effort has been
highlighted to converge blockchain with smart health system in
[39]–[44]. A comprehensive survey of recent developments in
blockchain for future smart grid scenarios including advanced
metering infrastructure (AMI), electric vehicles (EVs), EVs
charging units management, energy CPS, distributed energy
resources (DERs), and recent industrial initiatives is presented
in [45]. Also, in [46]–[54], the blockchain roles speciﬁcally in
smart grid as well as other energy systems (oil and gas) are
discussed. The blockchain in 5G and beyond 5G/6G enabling
technologies including edge and cloud computing, network
function virtualization software deﬁned networking, network
slicing, device to device communications, and spectrum man-
agement is presented in [55]–[59]. A number of works on
the integration of blockchain and machine learning (ML) are
presented in [60]–[64]. In Table I, a summary of the afore-

ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

3

mentioned blockchain applications is presented. However, to
date, all previous surveys lack a survey of blockchain in the
speciﬁc context of IoV. Hence, our work is distinct from all
aforementioned surveys since we signiﬁcantly present the roles
of blockchain in IoV application scenarios. Moreover, a survey
on blockchain in IoV will open the door for those who are
going to apply the blockchain technology into the area of
intelligent transportation system and its related research ﬁelds.

TABLE I: Summary of the applications of blockchain in other
emerging domains

Application Domains
Internet of Things (IoT) and Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS)
Industrial IoT (IIoT) and Industry 4.0
Cooperative Robotics
Smart city applications
Smart health system
Smart grid and other energy domains
5G and beyond 5G/6G-enabling technologies
Machine Learning

References
[14]–[24]
[25]–[30]
[31], [32]
[33]–[38]
[39]–[44]
[45]–[54]
[55]–[59]
[60]–[64]

Paper Organization: The rest of the paper is structured as
follows. In Section II, we outline the preliminaries of this
survey, which include an overview of blockchain technology,
edge computing, intelligent transportation system (ITS), and
the Internet of Vehicles (IoV). In Section III, we look into
the challenges associated with IoV, and then, we highlight
the motivations of adopting blockchain into IoV domain. In
Section IV, we provide a comprehensive review and in-depth
investigation of the recent works on blockchain-assisted IoV
applications. In Section V, we present a discussion on four
blockchain and IoV integration challenges. In Section VI, we
explore the architectures and frameworks which employed the
blockchain and IoV. In Section VII, we point out the potential
future research opportunities. Finally,
in Section VIII, we
present the concluding remarks of this paper. As such, the key
topics presented in this survey are outlined in Fig. 1. Table II
highlights a list of major acronyms along with their deﬁnitions
used in this paper.

II. PRELIMINARIES OF THIS SURVEY

In this section, we present a brief discussion on the pre-
liminaries of this survey, in where we present the overviews
and recent advances. The preliminaries include blockchain
technology, edge computing, and Intelligent Transportation
System & Internet of Vehicles.

A. Blockchain Technology

Blockchain is a collection of blocks, where the blocks stores
transactions, records, and scripts, and all blocks are linked
together to build a chain based on some cryptographic tech-
niques. The newly generated blocks are continuously afﬁxed
to the chain in a digital ledger, and the ledger is maintained
by all participants in the network. Hence, blockchain is also
called a distributed ledger technology (DLT). As mentioned
in introduction, blockchain enables a platform to do trusted
tasks and transactions in an untrusted environment without
requiring a trusted entity. Generally, the blockchain technology

TABLE II: Summary of Acronyms.

Acronym Their Deﬁnition
IoT
IoV
ITS
CPS
AV
CAV
ECU
OBU
CAN
EDR
LIN
VCS
BSM
V2X
V2V
V2I
V2G
RSU
AI
PUF
PKI
CA
DSRC
ECDSA
EVs

Internet of Things
Internet of Vehicles
Intelligent Transportation System
Cyber-Physical System
Autonomous Vehicle
Connected and Autonomous Vehicle
Electronic Control Units
Onboard Units
Controller Area Network
Event Data Recorders
Local Interconnect Network
Vehicular Communication Systems
Basic Safety Message
Vehicle-to-Everything
Vehicle-to-Vehicle
Vehicle-to-Infrastructure
Vehicle-to-Grid
Roadside Units
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Physical Unclonable Function
Public Key Infrastructure
Certiﬁcate Authority
Dedicated Short Range Communication
Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm
Electric Vehicles

relies on four key techniques such as cryptography, consensus,
structure, and smart contract. A short discussion of these key
techniques is given below.

Consensus Mechanism: Since blockchain technology does
not reply on any trusted entity, consensus mechanisms are used
to establish trust among the untrusted entities. The aim of these
mechanisms is to enable entities to agree on a single version
of valid block to ensure a transparent and consistent outlook,
which ultimately solves forks and conﬂicts within the network.
A number of consensus mechanisms have been proposed
and implemented in different blockchain applications. Each
mechanism has unique rules and algorithms which form the
requirement to be followed by the entities/nodes to include
new blocks to the chain. Some of the notable consensus
mechanisms are Proof of Work (PoW) [1], Proof of Stake
(PoS) [65], and Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT)
[66].

Cryptography: Cryptographic techniques are adopted in
blockchain technology to ensure the security, privacy, and
anonymity. For example, the applications of cryptographic
hash function are quite common in blockchain. Each block
in blockchain contains the hash value of previous block’s
transactions or records which connects each block to the
previous block in order to build a chain. Once the blocks
connect together, they will become immutable as the hash
values are unique. Moreover, another application of hash is
Merkle hash tree [67], which is used to make a summary
of all the previous transactions or records in a block. The
Merkle hash tree is able to decrease the storage overhead, and
lightweight entities can use it to check the integrity quickly
by it. In this way, the hash values ensure integrity, and make
the blockchain tamper-proof.

In addition to the hash, another most commonly used
cryptographic technique in blockchain is the digital signature.

ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

4

Fig. 1: Outline of the key topics of this paper.

The usage of the digital signature is to guarantee authentication
as well as non-repudiation. The Elliptic Curve Digital Signa-
ture Algorithm (ECDSA) scheme is widely applied in many
blockchain applications like Bitcoin. Moreover, ring signature
and multi-signature schemes are also used in some blockchains
to hide the signer’s identity. Besides the hash function and
digital signature, to improve the privacy of the block contents,
the zero-knowledge proof is utilized in blockchain.

Smart Contract: The smart contract are scripts resided
in blocks of blockchain. The scripts are able to execute
automatically once triggered or some pre-deﬁned rules are
met. The smart contract has become popular recently after the
introduction of blockchain. The main aim of implementing the
smart contract in blockchain is to develop a highly autonomous
system which can provide efﬁcient and consistent services
without depending on any trusted entity.

Data Structure and Management: Blockchain became suc-
cessful in Bitcoin and popular among other applications due to
its unique data structure. Although the linear structure is quite

common, another type of structure is also available which is
called DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph). Unlike linear structure,
blocks are connected in a DAG with their previous multiple
blocks. Apart from data structure, there are three types of
data management techniques for blockchain, such as on-chain,
off-chain, and side-chain. In on-chain, the block contents are
recorded in blockchain which is visible to all entities of the
network, whereas in off-chain, some contents are recorded
and processed outside of the network for quick execution
usually by trusted entity. On the other hand, side-chain [68],
is completely independent blockchain which runs in parallel
to the main chain and maintains a link to the main chain. It
allows users to transfer and use their cryptocurrencies or assets
to this supplementary chain, and also, return back to the main
chain.

B. Edge Computing

The edge computing concept is introduced as an extension
of cloud computing to bring its capability to the edge of

  Integration of Blockchain and IoV for future Intelligent Transportation System II. Preliminaries of this Survey  A. Blockchain Technology B. Edge Computing C. Intelligent Transportation System and Internet of Vehicles V. Blockchain for IoV Architectures and Frameworks A. Blockchain-Based IoV Architecture B. Blockchain-Assisted EVs Cloud and Edge Computing C. Blockchain-Centric Automotive System Architecture VII. Future Research Opportunities A. Security of Offloading B. PKI for Blockchain-Enabled IoV C. Deferentially-Privacy Preserving Solutions D. Exploring other Blockchain-Assisted IoV Applications E. Distribution of Economic Profits and Incentives VI. Blockchain & IoV Integration Challenges A. Security and Privacy B. Performance C. IoV-specific and Optimized Consensus D. Incentive Mechanisms III. Motivations of this Survey A. The Challenges Associated with IoV B. Motivations of Using Blockchain in IoV Scenarios IV. Applications of Blockchain-Enabled IoV  A. Data Protection and Management B. Data and Resource Trading C. Resource Sharing D. Vehicle Management E. Ride Sharing F. Contents Broadcasting G. Traffic Control and Management H. Forensics Application ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

5

the network. Different literatures use different names of edge
computing, such as fog computing and cloudlets, but the main
aims of this concept are almost similar.

Instead of depending on the cloud, the computational pro-
cessing and data storage in edge computing are performed near
the data source to handle the data locally which is collected
from the user devices. Edge computing offers location-aware,
low-latency, and real-time applications and services. It can also
save bandwidth of transferring data to the cloud computing
node which is located remotely. Although edge computing
the distributed nature of it
brings a number of beneﬁts,
introduces security and privacy challenges.

Edge computing has become an integral part of IoT and
CPS applications [69]–[74], IoV applications [75]–[78], and
blockchain [79]–[82], to support a massive number of smart
devices by running computational-intensive tasks and storage
data at the edge. Speciﬁcally, in the context of IoV and ITS, to
improve the quality of services while considering the mobility,
the edge computing nodes are distributed frequently alongside
the roads.

C. Intelligent Transportation System and Internet of Vehicles

With the advancements of communications, sensing, and
electronic systems, the conventional embedded systems as well
as controllers are being replaced by an advanced type of sys-
tem which is referred as CPS. This CPS is usually connected to
the Internet technologies to make a bridge between the cyber
and physical worlds.

Recently, CPS has become popular and has been widely im-
plemented from all aspects of our lives to industries. The ITS,
considered as future transportations, is one of the examples of
CPS. The ultimate goal of ITS is to develop more comfortable,
safer, dynamic, and efﬁcient transportation as well as urban
infrastructures.

At the same time, the automobile industries are developing
the
the technologies behind the smart vehicles, and thus,
vehicles are changing the experience and way of travelling.
The smart vehicles as shown in in Fig. 2 (a) are typically
equipped with in-vehicle computational & storage units, EDR,
control units such as ECUs & OBUs, software & ﬁrmware
systems, diverse number of sensors, and multiple wireless
devices. In this context, to take necessary actions, the control
units rely on the data generated from the sensors and cam-
eras, and the communications among all these components
are built on different
types of wired (CAN bus and LIN
bus) and wireless (Bluetooth) technologies. These advanced
technologies might incorporate into traditional vehicles soon.
Moreover, with these advanced technologies, the vehicles are
becoming even autonomous and semi-autonomous, which have
the potential to create a revolution in the ITS.

A new paradigm called IoV is introduced within the ITS
which is driven by the smart vehicles, Internet of Things
(IoT), and AI techniques. In this paradigm, the vehicles are
connected with each other, people, and infrastructures through
communication technologies so that the vehicles are able to
drive safely and intelligently through monitoring and sensing
the neighboring environments. Hence, the IoV ecosystem is
considered nowadays as an extended component of CPS.

Besides the smart vehicles, the IoV ecosystem in ITS also
consists of vehicular communication system, road-side units
(RSU), and cloud platforms as shown in Fig. 2 (b). Here, the
vehicular communication system is often referred to as vehicle
to everything (V2X) which is nothing but a communication
paradigm. V2X enables the communications from one vehicle
to any nodes (i.e., vehicle, infrastructure, grid, pedestrian etc.),
and vice versa. On the other hand, the RSUs usually act as
access points and base stations to support VCS, and also, as
edge computing nodes if they have computational and storage
capabilities.

III. MOTIVATIONS OF THIS SURVEY

In this section, we ﬁrst highlight the challenges associated
with the IoV paradigm. Then, we present the motivations
of blockchain and IoV integration to show which promising
opportunities will be brought by blockchain for IoV.

A. The Challenges Associated with IoV

The developments in the IoV ﬁeld are more rapid than
ever before, due to the advancements of Internet technologies
and vehicle equipment. Basically, this promising IoV ﬁeld
is envisioned to enrich the vehicular services, transportation
infrastructures, and people’s lifestyle, at the same time, en-
hance drivers’ safety in the near future. A massive amount of
data will be introduced and outsourced to the cloud and edge
storages from the vehicles as well as the vehicular services
which will be innovated for IoV. The future vehicles will also
have very good computational and storage resources. In order
to offer a wide range of application services, these data and
resources will be shared each other. Particularly, for artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) related applications, the vehicles reply on
cloud and edge computing nodes to ofﬂoad the tasks, and/or
process tasks locally by sharing the resources with each other
to reduce the latency and bandwidth.

However, the integration with existing Internet technologies
to support IoV paradigm opens up many challenges [83]–[85],
including security, privacy, trust, transparency, connectivity,
and performance. The challenges associated with it will be
increased with the growth of IoV connectivity. In this regard,
many of challenges are inter-related with ITS.

In fact, the IoV ecosystem poses a number of characteristics,
and more speciﬁcally, among these some are unique compared
to other IoT applications. Thus, IoV ecosystem might bring a
number of novel challenges. In the following, such unique
aspects of IoV ecosystem are described elaborately.

High Mobility: Unlike other IoT smart devices,

in IoV
scenarios, both driver-controlled and autonomous vehicles
are considered as highly moving objects which usually run
along the roads. Similarly, the running speeds of the vehicles
may vary from one another which introduce diverse mobil-
ity particularly for manually driving vehicles. Thus, though
vehicles have sufﬁcient energy to deploy computational and
communication resources, when the vehicles will connect with
numerous peers, it will be difﬁcult for vehicles to maintain a
stable communication due to the diverse and high mobility

ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

6

regardless of dedicated channels. Speciﬁcally, high mobility
characteristics possibly bring other challenges.

Complexity in Wireless Networks: The IoV ecosystem is
relied on heterogeneous wireless communication network,
where a number of wireless technologies coexist. And, in this
ecosystem, the vehicles are connected with nearby vehicles,
people as well as ﬁxed road-side units through the wireless
network. Typical technologies include Bluetooth, mmWave,
Dedicated Short Range Communication (DSRC) etc., which
enable various wireless network related services. For instance,
Bluetooth and mmWave are able to provide the coverage
less than 100m and 10m, respectively. Contrary of these two,
DSRC has usually high communication coverage. Moreover,
the vehicles change their network topologies while moving.
Consequently, the impacts of complexity of networks on the
IoV scenarios are signiﬁcant.

Latency-Critical Applications: In many IoV applications,
more efﬁcient network protocols are required to exchange
information to the nearby peers instead of far-away centralized
cloud nodes. Indeed,
those applications are often latency-
sensitive and generally, have short to medium propagation

distances. Thus, the maximum delay from source to destination
should be low as much as possible for them. For example,
emergency and safety related vehicular applications, where it
is highly expected that the communication has to be done
within a stipulated time limit in order to eliminate the possible
unexpected situations like accidents. With this stringent delay
constraint, the potential Internet-assisted technologies to be
added in this IoV paradigm should be free from unnecessary
communication delays in the Internet transmission.

Scalability and Heterogeneity: The vehicles which normally
visit to a wide geographical area have a potentially convenient
option to obtain the scalability through the road-side edge
computing nodes, vehicular ad hoc networks, and wirelessly
connected Internet technologies. Furthermore, the IoV com-
ponents, which exhibit heterogeneous devices, protocols, and
platforms, expect seamless integration with state-of the-art
information and communication technologies by considering
the heterogeneity. Apart from this, this heterogeneity of IoV
components may add one more challenge which is difﬁculty
to achieve interoperability. Indeed, interoperability refers the
capability of IoV components to collaborate with each other

Fig. 2: (a) An overview of the communication structure of a smart vehicle; (b) The basic vehicular communication framework
of ITS mainly contains vehicles, road-side units, smart devices, pedestrians, infrastructure, people, homes, grids as well as
ﬁve types of V2X communications such as vehicle-to-road-side unit (V2R), vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I), vehicle-to-vehicle
(V2V), vehicle-to-pedestrians (V2P), vehicle-to-devices (V2D), vehicle-to-networks (V2N), vehicle-to-grid (V2G), and vehicle-
to-home (V2H)

Cloud ServerV2IV2VV2NV2PV2HV2DV2RPower GridV2GRoad Side UnitsInformation ExchangeLINECUBluetoothOBUCANSeat, Light, Lock, Window, Sensor, EDR, Wheel, BrakeUser DeviceGPS ModuleCommunication Interface with OBU for WiFi, Cellular, DSRC(a)(b)ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

7

in terms of information usages and exchange the information
among the sectors, centers, and systems including both soft-
ware and hardware.

Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI): The application of AI techniques
is going to become a part and parcel to assist the vehicles and
vehicle users in many IoV application scenarios to cope with
the utilization of a wide range of vehicular data. The whole
procedures from data collection to deployment are mainly
dependent on different AI algorithms in order to ensure the
capability of automatic learning from the data as well as
autonomous & optimal decision making. However, since many
AI algorithms are mainly relied on vehicular data to train
the model, the dynamic and heterogeneous natures of IoV
scenarios further add difﬁculties to implement ML techniques.
Nevertheless, most of the aforesaid aspects are almost
common with vehicular ad hoc network scenarios. In such
cases, challenges introduced due to these unique aspects and
how to meet the requirements, at the same time, how to solve
the challenges will be different and unique for IoV application
scenarios.

B. Motivations of Using Blockchain in IoV

Blockchain has the potential to provide a substantial num-
ber of innovative solutions to a majority of IoV application
scenarios. As such, most of the IoV scenarios are real-time
and mobile, and they generate and exchange a large amount
of data. Particularly, many classic techniques are unlikely
to be suitable and effective in IoV scenarios. Moreover, the
increasing connectivity in such scenarios might bring unique
attack vectors for the malicious entities. On the other side,
the integration of blockchain into IoV not only improves
the security, privacy, and trust but also enhances the system
performance and automation. Thus, to accommodate ﬂexibility
and handle massive data, blockchain-like strong technology
should be leveraged. In the following, we present some major
stimulating causes for adopting blockchain in IoV.

First of all, decentralization is one of the main features
of blockchain. Blockchain allows to create decentralized IoV
networks, and it
includes more distributed entities, which
can be RSUs, vehicles, and people. At the same time, these
distributed entities are able to manage their own operations
independently. The working principles of current IoV network
which is mainly based on central decision will be transferred
into decentralized model and become simpliﬁed. Ultimately,
the decentralization will enhance the user experiences of
vehicular services.

Second, blockchain eliminates the dependency of cloud-
like systems for data storage and management. Moreover,
blockchain along with smart contract enables the removal of
third-party entities such as the central service manager, con-
trol center, administrators, and trusted intermediaries. Rather,
the participants in the blockchain network can maintain the
vehicular services and transactions by themselves which will
result in reduced operational costs.

Third, security threats such as interruption, single-point-of-
failure, and availability attacks can be potentially addressed
by adopting blockchain for IoV. This is due to the synchro-
nization and replication of blockchain among all the peer

nodes connected to the network. Thus, the services are able
to run smoothly even if one or more than one nodes are
compromised. On the other hand, the blockchain technology
is relied on modern cryptographic techniques to ensure the
common security and privacy properties. In fact, blockchain
emphasizes the enhanced security and privacy for IoV net-
works by cryptography.

Fourth, blockchain provides high immutability for IoV
services and scenarios since in blockchain the blocks maintain
a chain to connect with each other through the hash values of
each block records. This immutability feature of blockchain
potentially prevents data tampering and modiﬁcation, and
also, helps to audit accurately. Additionally, it enables the
deployment and enforcement of any pre-deﬁned rules or scripts
with the help of smart contract.

Fifth, blockchain offers peer-to-peer (p2p) trading, sharing,
and communications between two entities. By p2p network,
the service requesters and providers can establish direct com-
munications among them. This p2p feature is particularly
useful for IoV scenarios to share data and resources among
vehicles and RSUs securely. Since the entities do not need to
communication with any intermediary in the p2p network, it
ultimately results in low latency applications and services.

Sixth, the IoV connects heterogeneous entities which may
not trust each other. Empowered by novel consensus mech-
anisms, blockchain is able to establish strong trust among
even untrusted entities. Besides consensus mechanisms, the
smart contract can also play an important role to address the
trust issues while making decision without any trusted entity.
Moreover, smart contract also helps to achieve an automated
and independent system by its scripts.

Lastly, the public blockchain is permissionless and is typi-
cally open to all entities. Thus, the use of public blockchain
potentially open the door to full access of the data stored
in blockchain. It also can enhance the transparency of IoV
ecosystem.

IV. APPLICATIONS OF BLOCKCHAIN-ENABLED IOV

After going through the works presented in the literature on
how blockchain technology can be utilized in IoV application
scenarios, we determine that blockchain is anticipated to cope
with a number of IoV applications and services including
vehicular data security, vehicle management, and on-demand
transportation services. In the following, we review and inves-
tigate on the incorporation of blockchain technology and such
IoV application scenarios.

A. Data Protection and Management

With the gradual increase of IoV applications, more vehicles
in IoV network will generate a signiﬁcant amount of data to
enhance the driving safety and improve the vehicular services.
In fact, the vehicles will rely on the edge computing nodes like
RSUs for their generated data storage & sharing, management,
and utilizing of other shared data.

However,

the edge computing nodes are placed in dis-
tributed manner along the roadside which make them vulner-
able to security and privacy attacks. Additionally, since these

ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

8

edge nodes are operated by multiple service providers, it is
difﬁcult to ensure regulation and trust among them. In fact, the
vehicles may not agree to share their data due to the aforesaid
concerns.

Recently, blockchain technology has been adopted in vehic-
ular data management scenarios in order to not only address
the security & privacy concerns, but also to establish trust
among the edge nodes. For instance, the work presented in
[86] utilizes consortium blockchain, where they introduce
a blockchain-based secure and distributed data management
system within the vehicular edge computing networks. The
advantages from the utilization of smart contract in this pro-
posed system are twofold. First, the smart contract is utilized
to achieve secure data sharing and storage within the vehicles
as well as the vehicular edge computing servers such as RSU
as shown in Fig. 3. Secondly, the smart contract also ensures
that the data can’t be shared without authorization. Besides,
a reputation-based data sharing scheme is developed in this
proposed system so that the vehicles are able to choose the
optimal and more reliable data source having high-quality
data. In order to manage the reputation of vehicles rightly and
precisely, a three-weight subjective logic model is employed
by taking into account interaction frequency, event timeliness,
the
and trajectory similarity. With this reputation scheme,
proposed system improves the detection rate of malicious and
abnormal vehicles over traditional reputation schemes. In the
same direction, in [87], the authors propose a blockchain-
based solution for vehicles, named DrivMan, which facilitates
trust management, data provenance, and privacy through smart
contract, physically unclonable function (PUF), and public
key infrastructure (PKI). By the use of blockchain in the
DrivMan solution, the distributed trust management can be
maintained in the non-fully trusted network. Additionally,
DrivMan achieves data provenance since PUF helps to allocate
a unique crypto ﬁngerprint to each vehicles. Furthermore, PKI
is employed to enable registration and assign key pairs to
the vehicles through a certiﬁcate authority (CA). The CA is
able to trace the identities of malicious vehicles, and revoke
the certiﬁcates when necessary. The aim of the PKI is to
ensure the privacy and prevent the real identity leakages to the
attackers by eliminating the linkability between the identities
and respective public keys.

Blockchain is also successfully applied in secure vehicular
data sharing in ITS. For example, a multimedia data sharing
approach based on blockchain and cryptographic techniques
is presented in [88], which can be deployed in vehicular
social networks. The blockchain is adopted in this approach
to leverage its immutability feature to address the challenges
of malicious shared multimedia data tampering. Blockchain
is also used for data tracing to detect the data sent from
malicious users. On the other hand, cryptographic techniques
are utilized to protect the privacy leakages of users, vehi-
cles, and RSUs from attackers during the data sharing. The
privacy leakages include identities of all entities and sharing
habits. Fig. 4 represents the system model of this approach.
Meanwhile, an efﬁcient and security scheme for blockchain-
assisted data sharing among vehicles is introduced in [89].
The main contribution of this proposed security scheme is

Fig. 3: The blockchain-assisted data sharing scheme presented
in [86] for vehicular edge computing networks.

a novel key negotiation scheme which has traceability and
authentication properties. Speciﬁcally, this scheme aims to
effectively address a number of challenges such as shared data
security, monitoring, and trust. The proposed scheme offers
automated key exchanges which is dependent on static or
dynamic scripts in order to enable a fast and automatically
executable key negotiations in vehicular communications. It
also offers conﬁrmability as well as public traceability of
the key negotiation processes with the help of timestamps to
safeguard from decryption failure attack. Moreover, the scripts,
channel availability, and timeliness of negotiation process
ensure defense against the packet dropping attack.

Fig. 4: The system model of blockchain-enabled security and
privacy-preserving multimedia data sharing introduced in [88]
for vehicular social networks.

B. Data and Resource Trading

Data and resource trading in IoV scenarios enables business
opportunities for vehicles and other associated entities. But
data and resource trading may lead to security issues such as
access control enforcement and privacy of users. Furthermore,
considering the mobility of the vehicles and wireless link, the
trading scenarios could be vulnerable to DoS and jamming-like
malicious attacks. In fact, such attacks could be unintentional
as well. Another concern is to eliminate any possible disrup-

RSURSUProof of Work (PoW)Data Block GenerationUploading Sensing DataVehicular Edge Computing and NetworksSmart ContractStorage PoolLocal ControllerData AggregatorTMTMEVDriverRSURSUTrusted AuthorityBlockchain4. Publish1. Registration2. Data Sharing4. Publish4. Publish1. RegistrationDriver3. Control2. Data Sharing2. Data SharingACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

9

referred as D2D-ECN for IoT applications is presented in [92].
This D2D-ECN is a resource trading and task assignment solu-
tion which is based on blockchain, smart contract, edge com-
puting, and device-to-device communications as depicted in
Fig. 7. The D2D-ECN aims to ensure a collaborative platform
where the computational-intensive as well as latency-aware
applications can be implemented. Also, it ensures low-latency
processing of real-time application scenarios by ofﬂoading
the computational
tasks. To make a balanced latency and
decision time, a task assignment approach is developed based
on swarm-intelligence. Moreover, it establishes the trustwor-
thiness among the resource service providers and task holders
while addressing the efﬁciency issue of resource management.
Additionally, a proof-of-reputation consensus mechanism is
introduced instead of PoW for resource-limited devices. In
this mechanism, the entity having the higher reputation value
can only allowed to pack the resource transactions, and the
reputation values are stored in the blockchain. The reputation
values for each entities are calculated by considering both the
present computational performance and previous history. In
this regard, to provide rewards to the participants, a game
theory-based mechanism is developed.

tion due to malicious attacks and also, ensure intermittent as
well as trustworthy trading among the trading parties.

Recent works have shown that blockchain technology has
emerged as a potential enabler to address most of the afore-
mentioned issues and concerns. Speciﬁcally, blockchain could
offer secure, peer-to-peer, and decentralized solutions for data
and resource trading among multiple entities in IoV context.
In particular, blockchain technology has been integrated
with vehicular data trading to facilitate peer-to-peer trading.
As an example, a blockchain-assisted framework for the IoV,
which enables secure and efﬁcient data trading is proposed in
[90]. Here, the blockchain technology is utilized in order to
solve the problems of data trading such as lack of transparency
& traceability and unauthorized data modiﬁcation. The archi-
tecture of blockchain in this framework as depicted in Fig. 5
is considered as consortium based, where a number of local
aggregators form a consortium to do transactions auditing and
veriﬁcation. In addition to this, an iterative double auction
mechanism is adopted in order to optimize the price of data,
maximize social welfare while preserving the privacy of both
the buyers and sellers so that more users will be encouraged
to take part in data trading. Moreover, the data transmission
cost is also considered to enhance the system stability.

In addition, blockchain technology has been incorporated
with vehicular resource sharing. For example, a peer-to-peer
system using blockchain to provide a computing resource
trading platform is presented in [91]. The aim of this proposal
is to address the resource trading problems for edge-cloud-
based systems such as ensuring a truthful bid and allowing
both seller & buyer to engage in trading. To maintain the
trading market, a broker is presented in this proposal. Next,
the allocation problem will be solved by the broker to identify
the amount of traded resources and to model a particular price
rule to encourage traders so that they offer truthful bids. To do
this, this proposal uses an iterative double-sided auction mech-
anism. As a result, it also ensures maximum social welfare and
enables individual rationality as well as balanced budget. Fig. 6
represents the detailed process of the computing resource trad-
ing relied on blockchain. Similarly, a decentralized framework

Fig. 6: The working ﬂows procedures of proposed blockchain-
based computing resource trading platform presented in [91].

C. Resource Sharing

IoV brings opportunities to develop a cooperative resource
sharing platform for both stationary and running vehicles.
This platform is able to bring an opportunity to share their
spare computational and spectrum resources with their nearby
entities. This platform not only assists to implement latency-
sensitive services, but also supports AI applications.

However,

there remains
in spite of such clear beneﬁts,
two issues. One issue is that it is difﬁcult to develop and
maintain such platform since the vehicles may not trust each
other. On the other hand, with blockchain, the trustworthiness
can be ensured while vehicles sharing the resources. Another

Fig. 5: A secure peer to peer data trading architecture utilizing
consortium blockchain proposed in [90].

BlockchainBlock 18. Audit the Blocks4. Send the Data Order to the Seller5. Transmit the Required Data to the Buyer 6. Send the Payment to the SellerSmartContract Seller s WalletBuyer s WalletData SellerData BuyerBrokersBlock 3Block 2Broadcast andVerificationComputing ResourceResource CoinsDouble-side Auction Scheme Operated bya BrokerEdge/CloudBlockchainBlock 1Block 2Block 3Computing ResourceResource CoinsIoT DevicesWalletACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

10

Fig. 7: The working procedures of the resource trading solution
based on blockchain proposed in [92].

issue is to develop proper mechanisms by integrating with the
economic beneﬁts so that the vehicles will be encouraged to
participate in resource sharing.

In particular, blockchain is able to support a decentralized
platform so that the vehicles can share their resources among
others with an aim to increase the efﬁciency and capability.
Indeed, blockchain can address the problems in resource shar-
ing such as establishing trust and at the same time, ensuring
security & privacy of the entities. Such a blockchain-assisted
resource sharing scheme for IoV is presented in [93]. In
this scheme, a reputation-based consensus mechanism which
is light-weight compared to most popular PoW is presented
in order to establish trust and decrease the dependency of
computationally expensive mining process. Here, the reputa-
tion scores are employed to show the trustworthy values of
vehicles. For trust management, the sharing procedure and the
proposed consensus mechanism are incorporated together by
using the reputation scores of vehicles. Moreover, this scheme
replies on RSUs which are responsible for maintaining the
sharing records and blockchain. In addition to these, a smart
contract-based resource pricing mechanism is also presented,
where a deep reinforcement learning technique is employed,
by considering the high mobility characteristics and places
of vehicles to facilitate the demand and supply matching
while sharing the resources. This proposed pricing scheme for
resource sharing is at least 30% superior to the contemporary
uniﬁed pricing schemes. Next, the vehicles engaging in re-
source sharing and block validators are kept separated in this
scheme to preserve the privacy of the vehicles and decrease
the communication delays of publishing new blocks. Fig. 8
depicts how the resources can be shared within the IoV.

Besides, with the help of blockchain, even the non-moving
vehicles are able to share their idle computing and network-
ing resources during parking securely and efﬁciently. The
blockchain is adopted in [94] to develop a permissioned chain
for vehicular network named as Parkingchain. An improved

Fig. 8: The system components and basic workﬂow of the
resource sharing scheme introduced in [93] for IoV.

DBFT consensus mechanism is developed for Parkingchain
which uses a multi-weight subjective logic to calculate the
reputation values of the vehicles accurately. The highly reputed
vehicles will be assigned as consensus entities to verify and
audit the transactions. Moreover, an incentive scheme is also
introduced to provide reward to the vehicles with the help of
contract theory. However, the secured approach and incentive
scheme aim to motivate vehicles ultimately to share their idle
resources in vehicular network.

D. Vehicle Management

Two most popular vehicle management examples are smart
parking and vehicle platooning. The smart parking manage-
ment system allows vehicle users to know about the free
parking space information to book in-advance. This pre-
booking aims to reduce the wasting times of vehicle users
and trafﬁc congestion. On the other hand, the vehicle platoon
idea is a technique to combine a number of vehicles together
who have almost a common interest. Basically, a vehicle with
or without driver leads the other autonomous vehicles, and
all vehicles maintain a short space between each other. The
leading vehicle is called as platoon head, whereas, the others
are considers as platoon members.

With the access and management of a large number of
vehicles, parking lots as well as road-side units, however, the
management system will become more complicated. In fact,
it will be difﬁcult as well to ensure privacy of the users and
large-scale involvements among vehicles, vehicle users, and
parking lot owners if the management is still dependent on
central system.

The introduction of blockchain into vehicle management
systems can essentially address these aforesaid problems.

Resource ProviderResource ProviderLSB-Trusted authorityTask Owner(1)(1)(1)(6)(5)(6)(5)(6)(5)(6)(5)(6)(5)(2)(4)(2)(4)Communication resource tradingComputing resource tradingSignaling interaction Resource coin transfer(1) System Initialization and Credibility Assessment (2) Trigger Smart Contract for Resource Trading(3) Calculate and Update Reputation Score (4) Payment using Resource Coin(5) Broadcast Trading Record and Reputation Score  (6) Perform PoR-based Consensus Process(3)Consensus LayerPhysical Layer(1)Resource Sharing(4)(2)(3)(0)(0)(3)Task ownersBlockchain node (RSU)Spectrum resource providerTransactionComputing resource providerSmart Contract(0) System Initialization(1) Demand and Supply Uploading(2) Smart Contract Triggering(3) Trading of Resources and Offloading(4) Transactions(5)(5) ConsensusACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

11

Speciﬁcally, blockchain can address the current problems of
centralized parking system such as requirement of revealing
the private information during booking while searching free
parking spaces like destination information and having cen-
tralized architecture with possibilities of availability attacks
& data leakages. The authors in [95] introduce a blockchain-
based scheme so that the vehicle drivers are able to search the
available parking spaces to book in-advance in a decentralized
and privacy-preserving way. In this scheme, the blockchain
concept is utilized to eliminate the problems of centralized
system. The parking lot owners form a consortium to maintain
the blockchain such as sending their parking offers along
with information, though they do not trust each other. Next,
these parking offers will be kept on the blockchain as record.
In addition to blockchain, the private information retrieval
(PIR) technique is also used to ensure the location privacy of
vehicle drivers. The PIR technique allows drivers to inquiry
the parking offers in blockchain network without disclosing
their desired destinations. Once retrieved a parking offer from
blockchain network,
the driver uses a short randomizable
signature to conﬁrm the booking directly with the parking
owner in an anonymous way. However, this short random-
izable signature ensures conditional privacy so that the trusted
authority will be able to reveal the real identity of drivers
to take necessary actions in case of any malicious activities.
Furthermore, an anonymous payment system is proposed so
that the drivers can make payment instead of traditional card
payment systems which could disclose sensitive information.
In addition, with the openness, decentralization, and security
natures, blockchain is able to accelerate the vehicle platooning
management. As an example, a model for blockchain-assisted
urban IoV is proposed in [96] so that the autonomous vehicles
(AVs) can establish a group which is referred as vehicle
platoon to expedite the automatic driving and intelligent trans-
portation. The main aim of platooning is for long distance
cargo transportation using trucks, and the advantages is fuel
saving, due to reduced air friction. There is no payment
because the trucks belong to the same delivery company.
However, to create a platoon, this proposed model uses path
information matching to allow only the selected AVs to
have successful matching. The member AVs are driven by
a platoon head which is chosen by calculating the reputation
value. Besides, a scheme is proposed in this model which is
responsible for giving the incentives to the AVs to promote
them to become platoon head and also, keep the updated
records of platoon members. Application of blockchain and
smart contract in this model can solve the problems of false
and malicious payments, and offer secure payment among
platoon head and member vehicles. The members in a platoon
is responsible for paying some fees to the head due to the
services in accordance with the contract. The Fig. 9 illustrates
the basic workﬂows of this model.

E. Ride Sharing

The ride sharing services have become popular through
some prominent service providers like the Uber due to the
convenient usage of travelling. With these services, people

Fig. 9: The components and basic workﬂows of proposed
platooning model introduced in [96].

can share a vehicle to go to the same destination. A number
of people sharing one vehicle ultimately reduces the trafﬁc
congestion particularly in busy hours, the carbon emission
from vehicle, and the number of vehicles in the roads. Con-
sequently, it also improve the mobility of vehicles in urban
area. Moreover, it is expected that future autonomous vehicles
will foster the ride sharing services by becoming a part. This
kind of sharings are often referred as on-demand transportation
services, and with the advancement of smart phones and their
applications, such services becoming more available to reach.
the existing cloud-assisted
ride sharing services have two unsolved challenges. First,
because of the centralized cloud connection, the users may
suffer from unnecessary communication delays. Secondly, the
centralized storage system has introduced the risk of users’
privacy disclosure and privacy management. Thus, in order to
motivate both vehicle users and drivers to share their vehicles,
it is necessary to develop an efﬁcient, secure, and privacy-
preserving ride sharing service.

Despite the obvious beneﬁts,

Recently, blockchain has been already employed in such
context. In [97], the authors address the difﬁculties of im-
plementing the ride-sharing platform for autonomous vehicles
with the integration of traditional centralized architecture. A
blockchain-assisted decentralized ride-sharing framework is
developed so that the autonomous vehicles will be able to
offer themselves in a community-driven ﬂeet independently.
The proposed framework is speciﬁcally developed to serve as
the intermediary platform between the riders and autonomous
vehicles with an increased ﬂexibility concerning the riding
price and proﬁt sharing. This framework takes the advantages
of blockchain which is maintained by a number of owners
of autonomous vehicles who will be working together, where
blockchain will establish trust among non-trusting nodes.
Most importantly, this proposed framework uses Hyperledger
Febric blockchain platform along with chaincode protocol.
The purpose of using the chaincode protocol is to ensure data
security while client applications connect with the blockchain
network. Meanwhile, another new ride-sharing model based

Block i-1Block iBlock i+1Platoon Services CompletedSmart ContractRequest VehiclePlatoon HeadACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

12

on blockchain is presented in [98], which is called “CoRide”.
The proposed service model offers the following beneﬁts:
(i) it introduces a decentralized ride-sharing model based on
blockchain, smart contract, PoS, and RSU; (ii) it enables
various service providers to provide services collaboratively;
(iii) it addresses the limitation of doing privacy-preserving
passenger and vehicle matching in centrally by the service
provider; (iv) it brings all isolated passenger datasets of differ-
ent service providers together; (v) it removes the dependency
of traditional online trusted party; (vii) it is able to ensure
conditional privacy to the passengers, and the identity of a
particular passenger is published once all service providers
are present; and (viii) It is able to defend the false location
attack, malicious RSUs, and possible collision of service
providers. Since CoRide brings a number of service providers
into one platform, it well ﬁts into the consortium blockchain.
In fact, the private proximity test is utilized to authenticate the
locations of passengers, and then, set private keys to match and
negotiate the passengers. Additionally, a privacy-preserving
query processing is also adopted to search the vehicles and
match the destinations. Based on smart contract, the proposed
model can enforce the RSUs to match the passengers and
drivers automatically. Besides these, the recently popular cryp-
tocurrency Zerocash is revised and used to do anonymous
payment among the users, drivers, and service providers.

In addition, blockchain is also integrated with carpooling
system to offer users in order to share a vehicle efﬁciently
while ensuring privacy. For instance, a blockchain and fog-
computing-assisted carpooling system is introduced in [99].
This carpooling scheme is referred as FICA (efﬁcient and
privacy-preserving carpooling). The FICA has ﬁve entities
such as a trusted party, users, vehicle drivers, fog nodes, and
cloud servers. At the beginning, the trusted party initializes the
whole system by generating the public parameters as well as
cryptographic keys for the entities. Then, the user who wants
to share a vehicle with other users send a carpooling request
to nearby fog node. The request consists of mainly a pseudo
ID, a key, and an encrypted get-off location. On the other side,
the driver receives the request from the fog node which has
been sent by the user, and sends a response with free seats
information to that fog node. The response of driver consists
of a pseudo ID, a number of encrypted get-off locations, and
some location proofs. After that, the fog node gathers both
request and response from the user and driver respectively.
Next, it authenticates the user & driver, checks the integrity of
data, helps the user to match with a nearby driver, and ﬁnally,
send the carpooling data to the cloud. The responsibilities of
cloud server are to gather all requests and responses from
different fog nodes, support fog nodes by replying the queries
of vehicle trafﬁcs, and monitor the conditions of trafﬁcs. The
fog nodes are utilized in this scheme to address the limitations
of cloud computing such as request & response time delays
and extra communication overhead since the users usually
search local drivers,
though the fog computing nodes are
connected with cloud platform. In FICA scheme, the users and
drivers are authenticated by using anonymous authentication
technique to ensure privacy from both cloud and fog nodes.
The anonymous authentication also offers conditional privacy

so that the identities of malicious users can be recoverable by
trusted authority. Moreover, FICA scheme also offer one-to-
many matching and destination matching by using a private
proximity test and a range query techniques respectively. in
particular, a private blockchain is developed based on PoS for
this proposed scheme which is maintained by the fog nodes.
The aim of this blockchain is to store carpooling records in
a veriﬁable ledger to ensure data auditability. This private
blockchain along with trusted party enables carpooling records
reliably as well as refrain from any malicious activities by
users.

F. Contents Broadcasting

Contents broadcasting among the Internet connected vehi-
cles aim to improve the in-vehicle services as well as safety
services. These services are able to offer a number of attractive
applications such as advertisement publication, online shop-
ping, promoting commercial products, entertainment services,
and emergency information announcements. Additionally, the
edge computing nodes like RSUs can play an important role
to support the vehicle services by caching popular contents,
broadcasting the contents to nearby vehicles, and reducing the
latency in order to enhance the experiences of vehicle users.
to enable p2p
content sharing and broadcasting among the vehicles through
V2V and V2I communications. Indeed, blockchain-assisted
p2p model can ensure an efﬁcient, in-expensive, and trust-
worthy platform for the IoV. Furthermore, to accelerate the
broadcasting of contents, blockchain enables to develop novel
reward schemes.

However, blockchain has great potential

Recently, blockchain has been incorporated in vehicular
the work in
content broadcasting scenarios. For instance,
[100] focuses on commercial advertisement publishing,
to
allow the users to promote their products in vehicular net-
works through V2V or V2I. A blockchain-based decentral-
ized advertisement publishing scheme is proposed to realize
security, privacy, and fairness. This scheme also utilizes the
smart contract, Merkel tree, and zero-knowledge proof tech-
niques. The smart contract and Merkel tree are responsible
for maintaining the fairness property between the advertiser
and vehicle by achieving the “proof-of-ad-receiving”. The
proof-of-ad-receiving concept is introduced to conﬁrm whether
a vehicle obtains an advertisement without any cheating.
This concept
is introduced to mitigate the possibility of
obtaining rewards without publishing any advertisement by
deceiving the advertiser. Also, this concept allows to detect and
punish any advertisement publisher vehicle who maliciously
claims reward more than once. On the other hand, the zero-
knowledge proof technique is utilized to protect the privacy
of vehicles in terms of anonymity and conditional linkability
while engaging in the process of advertisement publishing.
In particular, this proposed blockchain-assisted decentralized
scheme increase the service availability by protecting against
external DDoS attacks as well as internal single point of
failure/compromise. In the same direction, an event-driven
message (EDM) protocol via blockchain, edge computing, and
5G is proposed in [101] for vehicular application scenarios.

ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

13

The EDMs are different type of traditional messages which
are used for emergency warning announcements only, and
these messages are usually produced during any accident or
emergency time. The application of blockchain in this proposal
serves to ensure distributed storage and auditability of EDMs.
In order to ensure reduced response time, edge computing is
adopted in this proposal to process EDM locally. Moreover,
5G communication is considered to provide scalability and
low latency services to the vehicles. In fact, this proposal
solves the high processing time, security, and access control
challanges by utilizing a lightweight, efﬁcient, and pairing-less
multi-receiver signcryption technique.

G. Trafﬁc Control and Management

Based on vehicle generated information such as trafﬁc data,
accident incidents, and sharing the information with others will
make trafﬁc management related services easier than before.
The utilization of the information can bring a number of oppor-
tunities and advancements for vehicles in smart transportation
system such as dynamic trafﬁc control & management, trafﬁc
conditions monitoring, and trafﬁc congestion mitigation.

However, such use cases expect secure control and manage-
ment. Particularly, the security is a signiﬁcant issue. In fact,
the transfer and storage of vehicular trafﬁc related data from
the moving vehicles to the stationary road side units might
be vulnerable to security attacks including breaking the data
availability, integrity, and privacy. Another challenging issue is
how to develop a autonomous trafﬁc control and management
system.

To cope with the aforesaid issues, blockchain can be a better
solution which can support four aspects, namely, decentralized
management, availability, automaticity, and immutability. As
such, a semi-centralized trafﬁc signal controlling approach
is introduced in [102] which is referred as SCTSC (Semi-
Centralized Trafﬁc Signal Control) system. The aim of this
system is to support automatic trafﬁc signaling which is
an emerging IoV application to enhance the efﬁciency of
trafﬁc controlling. This proposed system collects data from
vehicle sensors and drivers. Compared to currently popular
pretimed mode, the proposed approach aims to offer control-
by-vehicles approach to manage and control the trafﬁc lights
dynamically though the collected data. The attribute based
encryption (ABE) technique and blockchain are utilized in
this system. The ABE technique ensures access control in the
trafﬁc related data where the vehicles are divided into groups
according to their attributes like locations and destinations so
that this system works better than pretimed approach in terms
of efﬁciency and vehicle passing rate. On the other hand,
blockchain enables the vehicles to reach a common agreement
through a voting process where they decide the signal timing.
Next, the agreement and decision will be stored on blockchain.
Here, the vehicles will be anonymous while communicating
with each other, in order to keep their privacy. Meanwhile, to
realize an intelligent trafﬁc system, the work presented in [103]
proposes a system for smart transportation. This proposed
system employs blockchain with IoT connected sensor nodes
deployed in vehicles. A credit-token method is also presented

so that the vehicles will be able to pay the service usages and
misuses. Compared to other systems, blockchain is utilized in
this work to decrease the trafﬁc congestion and enhance the
road safety.

H. Forensics Application

Assisting in digital forensics is one of potential blockchain
applications. The forensic application in IoV includes trafﬁc
accident analysis particularly for autonomous vehicles.

In this context, blockchain can offer autonomy while calcu-
lating the post-accident demurrages through the smart contract,
bring all parties together, and keep all vehicle related data
as a records. A comprehensive vehicular forensic framework
named Block4Forensic using permissioned blockchain and
vehicular public key infrastructure (VPKI) is presented in
[104]. The purpose of this Block4Forensic framework is to
provide forensic service to investigate vehicle accidents. In
this framework, the blockchain brings vehicles, road-side units,
vehicle manufacturers, insurance parties, and police agencies
into a common platform, as illustrated in Fig. 10 where the
evidences and other related data are collected and kept in a
blockchain. Fragmented distributed ledger and shared ledger
techniques are proposed to store the hashed data and detailed
vehicle related data, respectively. The reason behind the shared
ledger is to reduce the storage and processing overheads. On
the other hand, to ensure the membership establishment, VPKI
this framework allows the vehicles
is adopted. Moreover,
to protect their identity from unauthorized users by using
pseudonyms. Another work presented in [105] proposes a new
blockchain, smart contract, and software deﬁned networking
(SDN) based architecture to achieve digital forensics and
data provenance. This proposed architecture aims to address
the limitations of centralized forensic management, such as
integrity and reliability. To enhance the integrity and reliability
of forensic data management, blockchain is utilized to store
and collect the digital evidences. This architecture also consid-
ers cloud computing, where once an evidence is received by
the cloud, the SDN controller records it as a block. Moreover,
this architecture is baed on modern cryptographic techniques.
it not only utilizes secure ring veriﬁcation
For instances,
assisted authentication for ensuring authorized user access,
but also sensitive-aware deep ECC for data conﬁdentiality.
Apart from these, a fuzzy smart contract is implemented in the
blockchain to maintain data provenance by tracing the data.

I. Remarks

In the aforesaid studies, we have presented a number of
blockchain-assisted IoV application scenarios which we have
divided into eight major categories such as (i) data protection
and management, (ii) data and resource trading, (iii) resource
sharing, (iv) vehicle management, (v) ride sharing, (vi) content
broadcasting, (vii) trafﬁc control and management, and (viii)
forensics application. In Fig. 11, these different applications
are highlighted. Although the emergence of IoV offers a wide
range of applications, we have discussed only the blockchain
efforts in IoV. These aforesaid IoV application scenarios are
presented in Table III as a summary in terms of descriptions,

ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

14

TABLE III: Summary of blockchain application scenarios in the IoV

Short Descriptions

How Blockchain Brings Opportunities

Papers

Application
Scenarios

Data
Protection and
Management

Data and Re-
source Trading

Resource
Sharing

Vehicle Man-
agement

Ride Sharing

Content
Broadcasting

- The vehicles share their generated data to their
nearby peers, and also, utilize the stored and
shared data
- The dependencies of distributed RSUs and ve-
hicles for vehicular related services result in the
difﬁculties to ensure security and privacy such
as data integrity, data availability, and privacy of
the vehicles while ensuring the trust among the
RSUs without relying any third party

- The IoV allows vehicles to trade their gener-
ated data as well as own computing and commu-
nication resources through Internet, where the
vehicles desire direct and independent trading
among others

- The cooperative resource sharing among the
vehicles potentially improve the latency-aware
and AI related services - It is challenging to en-
sure direct resource sharing among the vehicles
with security and proper incentives due to the
trust and mobility issues
- Due to the heterogeneity and a large number
of entities involved in the network to provide
smart parking like services, it is challenging to
preserve privacy of users as well as implement
the access control while the system is under
centralized controlled
- The IoV network becomes more complex to
manage
- It is becoming a trend to integrate the vehicles
and users into ride sharing services through
the Internet which are typically based on cloud
platform
- Outsourcing the information of users to the
cloud can compromise the vulnerable privacy of
users
- Content broadcasting is the capability of IoV
system to disseminate both non-safety and safety
contents through vehicles and RSUs which may
be semi-trusted, non-trusted, and attack-prone
- The reliance of the vehicles and RSUs is put
risk of being modiﬁed the contents maliciously

Trafﬁc
Control
Management

and

- The vehicle trafﬁc management system is de-
pendent on data generated by vehicles as well
as RSUs for storage
- This system may be vulnerable to security and
privacy

Forensic
Application

- The vehicles, in particular autonomous vehicles
desire automated while ensuring data integrity
for post-accident forensics

- The works of blockchain-assisted IoV have showed that blockchain
offers decentralization of vehicle data management which eliminates
centralized management and control approaches through replication
and consensus mechanisms
- Blockchain has been utilized in vehicle data protection due to its
immutability and decentralization features to tackle the data integrity
and availability problems
- It has offered much more efﬁcient vehicular data management
compared to traditional database management system while ensuring
security requirements through modern cryptographic techniques
- Blockchain has been utilized to establish peer-to-peer (p2p) data
as well as resource trading among the vehicles where trading and
payment facilities are deployed in decentralized ledger network which
is maintained by only the users like vehicles
- This independent trading has helped to decrease the transaction costs
signiﬁcantly
- To expedite the resource sharing among the vehicles, blockchain
has eliminated the reliance of trusted third parties, brokers, and
intermediaries
- Blockchain offers direct resource sharing between service provider
and user which ultimately results lower latency services and increase
the overall performance of services

- The use of blockchain has been potentially enhanced the vehicle
managements in smart parking and vehicle platooning systems by its
decentralization feature
- Vehicle management over the decentralized network has fostered the
veriﬁcation of the service requests and contributions through the smart
contract

- Blockchain has offered better ride sharing services compared to
cloud-based services in terms of lower communication delay and
quicker data retrieval
- It has offered vehicles and passengers searching and matching locally
through RSUs instead of passing cloud platforms, which simplify the
ride-sharing services

- Blockchain has been adopted to ensure trustworthiness of the contents
- Keeping blockchain that contains the content records in multiple
nodes has facilitated fast publishing of contents
- The immutability feature has made the contents strong resistance
against data integrity attack

- Different from traditional one which often utilizes centralized control
for trafﬁc management, blockchain utilization in trafﬁc system has
showed that blockchain has provided a decentralized management and
control with consensus mechanisms
- The strong immutability and multiple storage features of blockchain
have enhanced the accessibility but still ensured better security pro-
tection against denial of service (DoS) attacks
- Smart contract
implemented in blockchain has been beneﬁcial
to trafﬁc management and control in terms of authentication and
authorization without relying on trusted key generation centers and
autonomous detection of malicious vehicle users
- Blockchain adoption in forensics application has showed a promising
alternative to store the vehicle related records permanently with an aim
to prevent malicious tampering and accurate auditing
- The research works have demonstrated that utilizing blockchain along
with modern cryptographic techniques forensic application systems
enhances traceability and transparency
- The smart contract implemented in blockchain facilitates a decen-
tralized fair agreement among the vehicles, insurance companies, and
other related parties, which provides proper deployment of rules

[86]–[89]

[90]–[92]

[93], [94]

[95], [96]

[97]–[99]

[100],

[101]

[102],

[103]

[104],

[105]

how blockchain brings opportunities to the applications, as
well as related papers.

In fact, blockchain for IoV is attracting more and more
attentions in academic research, at the same time, it is also
attracting from industries and is expected that it will continue.

For instances, according the IBM’s report [106], blockchain
would be utilized for mobility services such as managing
vehicular data and making personalized preferences. Also,
according to report by the Deloitte in [107], blockchain is
one of the accelerating technologies in automotive industries

ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

15

and it has opportunities across the industry covering from
manufacturers to end-consumers.

However, we have assumed that the papers referenced in
TABLE III only cover the potential IoV applications with
blockchain. Different from this section, in the following sec-
tion, we will present some architectures and frameworks where
blockchain and IoV are incorporated successfully.

V. BLOCKCHAIN FOR IOV ARCHITECTURES AND
FRAMEWORKS

Since blockchain offers a number of beneﬁts to IoV appli-
cations, recently some blockchain-assisted architectures and
frameworks have been introduced for IoV ecosystem. In this
sections, we present the most representative architectures and
frameworks that integrate the blockchain technology with IoV
applications.

A. Blockchain-Based IoV Architecture

The authors in [108] present a blockchain-integrated archi-
tecture and network model for Internet of Vehicles (IoV) appli-
cations. The main contribution of this proposed architecture is
to offer distributed big data storage and security management
the data is classiﬁed
by blockchain. In this architecture,
into different types according to the sources and application
functions. It includes monitored driving data, vehicle sensor
data, passenger data, vehicle insurance data, and transactions.
A wide range of vehicles, roadside edge computing units,
toll stations, fuel stations, and insurance authorities are con-
nected with the blockchain networks which are responsible for
collecting the data and maintain blockchain networks. Based
on these variety of data, the blockchain is also divided into ﬁve
different types of chains as presented in Fig. 12. Here, the ﬁve
blockchains are considered as sub-blockchain networks, and
they are independent to each other with different application
purposes. The responsibilities and generation sources of these

Fig. 10: The forensic model presented in [104] for connected
vehicles based on blockchain.

sub-blockchains (SB) are : (i) SB1: Road-side nodes create
blocks which contain data for this SB1, and SB1 is responsible
for sharing the blockchain with the neighbor nodes; (ii)
SB2: Vehicles generate the new blocks, and SB2 shares the
blockchain with road-side units; (iii) SB3: Road-side nodes
also create data block for this SB3, and SB3 is transmitted
among the neighboring road-side nodes; (iv) SB4: Once road-
side units collected data, they will be shared among the nodes
situated a toll stations; and (v) SB5: Different service provider
stations such as fuel ﬁlling, washing, and charging nodes
create the blocks and also, maintain the SB5 by themselves.
Since the vehicles are not stationary, according to the proposal,
the vehicles are either dependent on the surrounding nodes
to transmit their generated new blocks, or use the wireless
network when they cannot ﬁnd any nearby neighbor node.

B. Blockchain-Assisted EVs Cloud and Edge Computing

The authors in [109] present a blockchain-based security
solution architecture for Electric Vehicles (EVs) hybrid Cloud
and Edge Computing (EVCE). This proposed security solution
enables context-aware applications for EVs through energy
and information exchanges. Based on blockchain, two different
coins are introduced named energy coin and data coin for en-
ergy and information interactions respectively. The blockchain
structure of these two coins are represented in Fig. 13. The
coins aim to provide V2E services such as V2G, V2I, and V2V
in order to gain information intelligence and energy sharing
while ensuring improved security protection. The purpose of
using blockchain is to accommodate two of its two features
such as decentralization and distributed consensus into EVCE.
The architecture is hybrid which is different from traditional
one, and it consists of two computing modes such as EV edge
computing and EV cloud computing. The EV edge computing
mode aims to assist the distributed EVs by analyzing and
processing a large amount of data while doing collaborative
operations. This mode utilizes a number of vehicular cloudlets
which are distributed in the network, and focus on the process-
ing of information and energy locally by collaborating with
neighbor nodes. The vehicular cloudlets are mobile cloudlets
formed with the help of vehicular ad hoc networks which are
able to increase the connectivity of network and provide high
quality of services. On the other hand, the cloud computing
mode is responsible for aggregating all vehicular energy and
computational resources in a common pool which are idle to
offer cooperative services. Unlike traditional cloud platform,
this cloud interact with edge nodes such as road-side units
and local aggregators to provide services to the connected and
mobile EVs.

C. Blockchain-Centric Automotive System Architecture

The work in [110] proposes a blockchain-centric archi-
tecture that enables security and privacy of smart vehicle
ecosystem. As shown in Fig. 14, this architecture consists
of three types of entities such as smart vehicles, equipment
manufacturers, and service providers. These entities jointly
develop an overlay network to communication with each other.
Moreover, these entities in the overlay network are also divided

Components of the VehicleForensicDaemonInsuranceCompanyPersonal BackupBSMOutsideCommunicatingDevicesTraffic SignalsRSUBSMBSMBSMLTEWi-FiDSRCBluetoothB4FLaw EnforcementUserDevicesOBUInside the VehicleManufacturerACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

16

Fig. 11: Integration of blockchain and IoV.

into clusters, and each cluster contains cluster head which
has responsibilities to manage the blockchain network under
it, broadcast the transactions, and verify new blocks. Hence,
the cluster heads are considered as overlay block managers
(OBMs). In this way,
the blockchain technology removes
the dependency of centralized control in this architecture. To
ensure privacy, each vehicle has an in-vehicle storage in order
to keep the privacy-sensitive data such as location traces. The
architecture has access control option which allows the vehicle
authority to deﬁne that which data will be shared with others
and which information will be kept in its own in-vehicle
storage. The other security and privacy properties for this
architecture are mainly inherited from blockchain technology.

D. Privacy-Preserving and Decentralized IoV Architecture

The authors in [111] propose a secure, privacy-preserving,
and decentralized IoV architecture using blockchain and del-
egated PoS. This proposed architecture consists of vehicles,
sensors and actuators, RSUs, and cloud computing nodes. The
vehicles basically generate the data and communicate with

other vehicles and RSUs, and are relied on blockchain network
to utilize the blockchain data. The vehicles also provide
feedbacks according to the service quality as a ratings of the
other vehicles and RSUs. The ratings will be broadcasted to
other nodes and considered as trust levels. The sensors and
actuators help to generate data and control the moving parts
of vehicles respectively. Here, the RSUs are considered as
major blockchain storage nodes in this architecture to maintain
the blockchain network by storing the latest blockchain as
well as conﬁrming new blocks. The cloud computing nodes
are responsible for storing the blockchain and other data as a
backup.

A hierarchical data exchange approach is also presented
in the architecture where it contains two different sub-chains
named InterChain and IntraChain to provide access control
ﬂexibility to the users. The InterChain enables to share in-
formation among vehicles, road-side units, and other infras-
tructures through V2R and V2V communications. On the
other hand, IntraChain maintains the communications within
sensors, actuators, and people in the vehicles.

Blockchain NetworkRide SharingData Protection and ManagementData and Resource TradingTraffic Control and ManagementResource SharingVehicle ManagementContent BroadcastingForensics ApplicationACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

17

Fig. 12: Network architecture of the blockchain-based IoV
presented in [108].

This proposal makes the blockchain more lightweight and
efﬁcient for resource-constrained entities through a recon-
ﬁgured and optimized structure which can adapt with the
vehicular network. The delegated PoS is adopted in InterChain
so that the participants are able to reach an agreement on
their exchanged and aggregated data. Additionally, to avoid
internal collusion of participants, the delegated PoS employs
multi-weight reputation technique.

E. Remarks

In this section, we have presented four blockchain and
IoV integrated architectures and frameworks. However, such
contributions will not be made into industrial (product) level as
well as practical usages as long as the throughput (transactions

Fig. 13: The structures of two proposed cryptocurrencies in EV
cloud and edge architecture based on consortium blockchain
presented in [109] for the purpose of asset balancing &
demand response tracking.

Fig. 14: The overlay network of the blockchain-centric ar-
chitecture for automotive security and privacy introduced in
[110].

per seconds) of the introduced works will not be enough to
support the IoV applications and services. Besides, blockchain
technology’s openness and transparency introduce many par-
ticipants for contribution. Thus, novel business models are
necessary for blockchain assisted IoV ecosystem so that all
participants will be treated fairly according their contributions.
In this way, the novel business models will be able to support
on obtaining the full advantages of the resources of contribu-
tors.

Apart from this, since blockchain was introduced in mon-
etary applications initially, adopting blockchain into non-
monetary domain like IoT introduce various challenges due to
having different characteristics. Furthermore, IoV components
have some unique characteristics not present in other IoT
in spite
applications as discussed in section III-A. Thus,
of the functional features that blockchain offers to the IoV
applications, it faces some challenges upon deployment which
need to address before implementation. As such, we proceed
to investigate the challenges in the following section.

VI. BLOCKCHAIN & IOV INTEGRATION CHALLENGES

In this section, we discuss about the main challenges that
need to be addressed when incorporating blockchain into the
IoV scenarios, according to our observation and study. As
such, in each subsection, we will ﬁrst present a short introduc-
tion of these challenges, and then, highlight the related works
which cover the challenges. Note that in this section, we do
discuss about blockchain and smart contract challenges. Based
on the existing literature, we have identiﬁed four challenges.
In the following, we proceed to discuss these four challenges.

MMWashing/Gas StationToll Gate NodeRoadside NodeChange StationVehicle Repair CompanyNetwork Approx, Platform NodesInsurance Company NodesAny Minors/Router Vehicle Management NodesVehicleVehicle Company NodesBlockchain 1Blockchain 2Blockchain 3Blockchain 4Blockchain 5MDRSULAGInformationData coinsConsortium blockchainPrev HashNonceMerkle RootInformation recordsInformation recordsEnergy InteractionsInformation InteractionsBlock 1001010100010101000101010EVm2EVm1DDLAGEnergyEnergy coinsConsortium blockchainEnergy recordsEnergy recordsEVcEVdEEEPrev HashNonceMerkle RootBlock 2OBMOverlayOBMOBMOBMVehicle AssemblyService CenterSoftware ProviderOEMCloud StorageSmart Devices Cluster member to OBM communicationOBM to OBM CommunicationACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

18

A. Security and Privacy

Integrating blockchain into the IoV offers security and
prevention of data manipulations by its ability to guarantee
the data immutability. However, blockchain cannot directly
guarantee the security and privacy, because blockchain is based
techniques. Modern cryptographic techniques,
on different
pseudonyms, and off-chain storages are some of the techniques
which can ensure the security of the contents (transactions or
records) inside the blocks as well as the privacy of the users
and devices.

To address the aforesaid challenges, a number of works
have been introduced to ensure the security and privacy in
blockchain-enabled IoV. For instance, to deal with defending
the spreading of forged messages as well as ensuring the pri-
vacy of vehicles, a work is presented in [112]. To satisfy these
goals, an anonymous reputation system is designed which
helps to establish a privacy-preserving trust management in
to defend the spreading of
vehicular networks. However,
forged messages, this system takes advantages of a reputation
evaluation algorithm, which is able to provide the trustworthi-
ness of messages with the help of assigned reputation values
of the vehicles. These reputation values are calculated by
considering the historical interactions of vehicles as well as
the indirect votes from other vehicles, and these reputation
values will be stored in blockchain. On the other hand, to
ensure privacy and protect against tracking attacks, instead of
the real identities of vehicles, pseudonyms are used in V2I and
V2V communications. The public keys of individual vehicles
are considered as their pseudonyms. However, the pseudonyms
provide conditional privacy so that in case of any disputes,
the real identities will be revealed to the trusted authority to
identify the vehicles. In another related work, a blockchain-
assisted security framework for heterogeneous network of
intelligent transportation system is proposed in [113]. Here,
the blockchain technology is adopted in order to expedite
the distributed key management
in heterogeneous network
to obtain better efﬁciency. This framework consists of two
schemes, namely, blockchain-assisted novel key management
scheme and dynamic transaction collection scheme. In key
management scheme, after eliminating the central manager, a
number of security managers (SMs) are introduced to play
an important role,
to verify and authenticate the key
transfer processes. The processed records will then be stored
in blockchain and shared among the SMs. On the other hand,
a dynamic transaction collection scheme enables the system to
reduce the key transfer time of blockchain network during the
vehicles handover, and the collection period can dynamically
change in accordance with various trafﬁc levels. The other
responsibilities of the SMs are to capture the vehicle departure
information and execute rekeying to the vehicle in the same
network.

i.e,

The limitation of presently available authentication mecha-
nisms which are mainly developed for cloud-based vehicular
networks is discussed in [114]. Basically, in most cases, these
authentication mechanisms fail to guarantee secure & reliable
communications as well as optimal QoS to the highly mo-
bile, latency-sensitive, and decentralized scenarios in vehicular

networks. To address this limitation, the authors introduces
a decentralized authentication and key exchange mechanism
for vehicular fog computing scenarios. This mechanism is
based on blockchain along with elliptic curve cryptography
(ECC). Here, the blockchain is utilized as usual to maintain the
information of networks, whereas the ECC is adopted to ensure
mutual authentication between the vehicles & fog nodes, user
anonymity, and reauthentication to engaging vehicles. Both
blockchain and ECC will enable the vehicles to seamlessly
and securely access the decentralized fog network. Another
work on message authentication scheme is introduced in
[115] for connected vehicles based on blockchain. It ensures
anonymity and decentralization of the broadcasting messages
which are exchanged by the connected vehicles. In particular,
it enables the vehicles to authenticate the messages in efﬁcient
and distributed manner. Here, for authentication, the public
key based cryptography and message authentication code
techniques are employed. With the help of PBFT and PoW
consensus mechanisms, this proposed scheme is able to make
a decentralized network.

To realize remote attestation, a security model referred
as RASM (Remote Attestation Security Model) is presented
in [116] for intelligent vehicles in the V2X network, based
is
on privacy-preserving blockchain. This security model
designed to increase the privacy-preserving security while
traceability, and non-repudiation.
ensuring decentralization,
RASM consists of two main steps. In the ﬁrst step,
the
identity authentication where the vehicles share their credible
identities to the blockchain network as an evidence. In the
next step,
the vehicles will compute and estimate certain
criteria to commit their own decisions. This step also includes
the summarization of records to store in the blockchain by
some pre-selected nodes. Most importantly, a decentralized
searchable encryption scheme for blockchain and cloud-based
vehicular social network applications is introduced in [117]
in order to provide efﬁcient keyword searching ability to the
users. The searchable encryption is a cryptographic primitive
which allows data searching in storage like cloud servers,
while ensuring the user data security. To preserve privacy
of the users, this scheme also offers forward and backward
privacy. Thus, this scheme is referred as BSPEFB. Fig. 15
illustrates the system model and work ﬂow of this proposed
BSPEFB. For decentralization, smart contract is adopted in
the blockchain to address the single point of attack and check
whether the returning result is correct or not.

In order to control the access, a novel and lightweight
policy-driven signature scheme referred as PDS is introduced
in [118] for blockchain-assisted transportation systems. This
PDS is particularly developed for private and permissioned
blockchain systems since these types of transactions generally
have some access rights. A policy set is considered to control
the access to ensure that only signers who met the policy
set are able to take part in certain transactions, as shown in
Fig. 16. The users in the blockchain network should have
signing keys that contain a policy set. Moreover, this scheme
replied on attribute-based signature (ABS) and certiﬁcateless
cryptography. The purpose of this scheme is to offer short
signature size and less computation processing time. Com-

ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

19

Fig. 15: An overview of the system model of the decentralized
searchable cryptographic scheme presented in [117]

pared to traditional ABS schemes, the PDS is more suitable for
blockchain requirements due to the adoption of certiﬁcateless
cryptography which does not require any trusted certiﬁcate
authority. Lastly, a scheme for location privacy protection of
vehicles that use location based services in blockchain-assisted
intelligent transportation systems is presented in [119]. The
aim of this proposed scheme is to address the limitations of
a popular privacy protection technique named distributed k-
anonymity, such as failure to detect malicious vehicles and
sensitive location privacy leakage. This scheme considers
trustworthiness of vehicles, and based on it,
the vehicles
cooperate with each other. To keep the records of trustwor-
thiness publicly available for the vehicles, a data structure is
introduced for blockchain.

B. Performance

Incorporating blockchain into IoV may require the capabil-
ity of handling a large number of data & transactions within
a highly dynamic environment of moving vehicles. This is a
current limitation of blockchain technology to accommodate
directly into IoV. Hence, because of the dependency of massive
data and mobility, the performance metrics of blockchain-
enabled IoV network is as important as its security and
privacy. These performance matrices include latency, energy
consumption, throughput, and scalability.

A few works focus on improving the performance metrics
particularly for blockchain-enabled IoV. For example,
the
authors in [120] address the problem associated with high
energy consumption by the vehicles due to the excessive
amount of transaction-related messages required for updating
the ledger between the vehicles and blockchain network. To
save a maximum amount of energy, a distributed clustering
approach is introduced where the amount of transactions
are controlled optimally. The performance of this proposed

Fig. 16: The system representation of policy-driven signature
scheme presented in [118] for blockchain-assisted transporta-
tion system.

approach is discussed in a quantitative manner by numerical
analysis which results in this approach saving energy by
40.16% and decreasing the amount of transactions by 82.06%
compared with the traditional one. Another work in [121]
presents a performance optimization framework based on the
deep reinforcement learning (DRL) technique for blockchain-
assisted IoV to address the scalability issue and deal with
big data generated by vehicles. The framework focuses on
maximizing the transactional
throughput while considering
three main blockchain properties such as decentralization,
security, and latency. In this framework, at ﬁrst, a quantitative
measurement methodology is presented to evaluate the perfor-
mance of blockchain. Next, the DRL technique is utilized to
enhance the performance by selecting the block producers and
adjusting the block size & the interval time according to the
dynamic distribution of vehicles.

C. IoV-speciﬁc and Optimized Consensus

The most popular and successful consensus mechanisms are
primarily developed for cryptocurrency applications. However,
due to the different nature of IoV, there are some challenging
issues related to utilizing these mechanisms in IoV, such as
block validation, security, reward & penalty schemes, and
energy consumption.

The IoV-speciﬁc and optimized consensus mechanisms
are able to increase the applicability of accommodating the
blockchain into IoV. As an example, an optimized and se-
curity enhanced Delegated Proof-of-Stake (DPoS) consensus
mechanism particularly for blockchain-based IoV application
is presented in [122]. The contribution of this work has
two parts. The ﬁrst part is a reputation-based voting scheme
to select miners effectively which is based on multi-weight
subjective logic model. The reputation concept aims to pre-
vent collusion between rich stakeholders and candidates. The
multi-weight subjective logic model is utilized to compute

1. Keyword Ciphertext2. Data Outsourcing 3. Keyword Search4. Access Data5. Matched DataData OwnerData UserBlockchain PlatformCloud ServerBCUsersBCUsersBCUsersHSysMgerPolicy TablePartialkeyPartialkeyPartialkeyMasterkeyMinersk      pki-2i-2,sk      pki-1i-1,sk    pkii,pki-1PDSingski-2HpkiPDSingski-1Hpki+1PDSingskiACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

20

accurately the reputation of candidate miners. To calculate
the reputation of miner candidates, this scheme considers past
interactions as well as recommendations. However, the high-
reputed candidates will be divided into two categories such as
active candidates and standby candidates. On the other hand,
the second part is provided incentives to the highly-reputed
standby candidates who verify the new blocks after auditing
once more. This veriﬁcation has an aim to reduce the collusion
among active candidates. The contract theory is utilized in this
second part to model the interactions within the active and
standby candidates, where security, delay time, and optimized
utilities of both block manager & veriﬁers are considered.

the beginning,

In an effort to address the problems which IoV are facing
currently due to centralized dependency, such as security,
performance, and communication, the authors in [123] focuses
on developing a consensus algorithm for Internet of Vehicles
(IoV). At
the authors modiﬁed the current
centralized architecture in accordance with the decentralized
blockchain architecture by eliminating the central node, divid-
ing all nodes into Internet connected vehicle nodes & roadside
nodes, and making all these nodes equally necessary. Next,
the authors adopt the Byzantine consensus algorithm so that
all nodes are able to be authenticated without depending on
any centralized authority. Moreover, this algorithm also allows
the nodes to correctly reach a sufﬁcient consensus in spite
of malicious nodes of the network failing or spreading false
data to other nodes. Besides, this proposed algorithm utilizes
time sequence technique and gossip protocol to enhance the
communication and consensus efﬁciencies. In such a context,
an ofﬂoading method is presented in [124] so that the val-
idation process of proof of stake (PoS) can be ofﬂoaded to
edge or cloud computing platforms. This method is referred as
ECbroker which is deﬁned in terms of Satisﬁability Modulo
Theories (SMT). The ofﬂoading of validation process aims
to validate more transactions with high throughput and to
disburden the processing overhead. The theoretical analysis
demonstrates that ECbroker achieves 77.7% more proﬁt, while
consuming 39.2% less energy when the vehicles ofﬂoad their
validation processes. With SMT,
the ECbroker offers the
vehicles to determine whether to validate locally or ofﬂoad
the processes to the edge/cloud. While deciding, the vehicles
also considers their computational resources and mobilities.

D. Incentive Mechanisms

The IoV based on public and consortium blockchains are
usually relied on the contributions of one or more than one
entities. Such contributions include new block veriﬁcation,
validation, related data production, and blockchain storage.
To provide incentives to the contributors will be the key to
expedite blockchain related activities.

Some incentive mechanisms are presented which are in-
troduced for IoV application. For example, with the help of
permissioned blockchain, an incentive mechanism is intro-
duced in [125] for vehicular energy networks which is referred
as BSIS. Fig. 17 depicts the network model of BSIS. This
incentive mechanism is based on the pricing theory to schedule
optimally the charging and discharging process of vehicles in

order to maximize the utilities of vehicles as well as to acquire
the regional energy balance. Moreover, a proof of reputation
(PoR) consensus mechanism is also introduced to support the
BSIS, where the validators are chosen by their reputations.
This reputation technique is employed to enhance the security
of the blockchain network.

Fig. 17: The network model of incentive mechanism presented
in [125].

Meanwhile, another novel incentive scheme is presented in
[126] to improve the security of delegated PoS (DPoS) consen-
sus mechanism for blockchain-assisted vehicle data sharing.
The purpose of this incentive scheme is to address the potential
internal collusion attack while verifying the new blocks. In
this attack, the active validators could collude with other false
results which are generated maliciously to receive rewards.
However, to solve this issue, the new block will be sent to the
standby validators for further auditing and veriﬁcation. Based
on contract theory, the incentive mechanism is designed so
that the active and standby validators can interact with each
other, and the standby validators can get a part of incentives
due to their contributions. The numerical results indicate that
this incentive scheme is able to optimize the utilities of all
validators while enhancing the security of DPoS by protecting
it from collusion attack. Lastly, in [127], an effort to develop
a decentralized reward and penalty mechanism is presented
in the context of blockchain and vehicular network which
is based on RSU. The aim of this mechanism is to ensure
the blockchain-assisted vehicular network more trustworthy.
This mechanism considers trust value which is rating of the
individual vehicle. The responsibility of RSU is to allocate
and manage the trust values. The vehicles in the network
receive penalty and reward according to their activities. For
instance, once a RSU detects a malicious massage sent by
a vehicle, the RSU will produce a negative rating for that
particular vehicle. This negative rating ultimately indicates low
trust value of that particular vehicle, and it will receive penalty.
Moreover, the vehicles having low trust values are not allowed

  Block iPreHashEV ChargingTransactionEnergyNodeEV DischargingTransactionTransactions  Block iPreHashTransactionsCharging PadDischarging PadEnergy StorageElectric Vehicle EnergyPower LineCryptocurrency ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

21

to generate any new messages. By this way, the network will
be able to increase the trustworthiness and efﬁciency among
the connected vehicles.

edge computing and blockchain empowered IoV system to
validate the correctness of blockchain computational processes
done by edge nodes.

E. Remarks

In this section, we have presented the challenges associated
with integration of blockchain with IoV such as security &
privacy, performance, IoV-speciﬁc & optimized consensus, and
incentive mechanisms. Moreover, we have also highlighted the
potential solutions to address these four challenges presented
in different literatures. These works are summarized in Table
IV.

VII. FUTURE RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES

Besides the aforesaid remarks and discussions, there are still
a number of open challenging issues as well as new research
directions which could be considered as future research op-
portunities. In this section, we will present such opportunities
elaborately where we will point out how blockchain along with
other state-of-art technologies has further potentially to aug-
ment the capabilities of IoV to build the future transportation
system.

A. Security of Ofﬂoading

Unlike typical

lightweight IoT smart devices which are
often resource-constrained, the smart vehicles have enough
computational resources such as CPU, memory as well as
energy supplies. Although these resources enable the smart
vehicles to meet the substantial requirements to participate
in computationally expensive new block validation processes,
due the mobility nature, the smart vehicles may go to edge
computing paradigm to facilitate these processes. Meanwhile,
in IoV scenarios, the edge nodes like RSUs are stationary, and
are able to offer a convenient way to perform blockchain com-
putations and storages. In [86], [91], [92], [101], the authors
have presented numerous approaches where they adopted such
scenarios. Particularly, the vehicles may ofﬂoad the validation
processes to the edge nodes like RSUs.

However, the edge nodes being utilized could actually be
third party owned RSUs which are ultimately not in the trust
domains of the vehicles. Hence, it may introduce security
issues within blockchain-assisted IoV applications. Speciﬁ-
cally, one key issue is that the obtained results of blockchain
processing from edge nodes may not be fully trusted and
correct. In order to ensure the trustworthiness of the results,
veriﬁability of the correctness of edge processing should be
ensured. Hence, a notion named veriﬁable computing is intro-
duced to achieve such goals. This veriﬁable computing offers
the relatively lightweight entities to ofﬂoad the computational
tasks of some functions F on various inputs to other more
powerful computing nodes. The powerful computing nodes
may be untrusted; thus, they will need to send back the results
with proofs so that the lightweight entities will be able to
verify that the computations have been performed correctly.
the design of an efﬁcient veriﬁable computing
Therefore,
scheme will be one of the key scopes for future research in

B. PKI for Blockchain-Enabled IoV

For application scenarios in where consortium and private
like permissioned blockchains have been employed, the se-
curity should be relied on PKI. Here, the PKI refers to an
approach which enables the identities of devices, people, and
other relevant entities to be afﬁxed with respective public
keys. The public keys are transferred over the Internet, and
later, used for encryption and digital signature veriﬁcation
purposes. This afﬁxing approach is formed by a method
of certiﬁcate issuance offered by trusted entities named as
certiﬁcate authorities (CA). The CA enables anyone to check if
an individual public key has been assigned to a speciﬁc entity.
Thus, each entity has to be connected with the Internet as well
as CA in order to attain the PKI. Besides this, the PKI has one
another trusted entity called registration authority (RA) which
is responsible for maintaining the assurance of validation and
correctness of registration processes.

In the same connection, to deploy secure communications
the PKI is an
with the public-key encryption techniques,
advantageous option for IoV application scenarios. According
to Section III, in [87], [104], such PKI has been employed to
support various blockchain-assisted IoV cases.

On the other hand, applying the classic PKI directly into
IoV can cause latency, availability, and scalability issues par-
ticularly for the vehicles, since the PKI is relied on certiﬁcate
and registration authorities. Consequently, it is important to
develop some novel approaches so that the aforementioned
issues can be addressed, and the functionalities of PKI can be
fulﬁlled. Speciﬁcally, the authorities should be placed locally
so that the vehicles will be able to realize the services with
to develop such approaches, smart
low latency. As such,
contract can be a suitable and timely candidate to be employed.
The aim of employing smart contract in PKI is to develop
approaches which will be able to resist availability attacks
while maintaining low latency communications. At the same
time, smart contract will be able to ensure trust if the certiﬁcate
issuance and veriﬁcation authorities are placed near to the
vehicles. Thus, there is an immense potential to inquire further
into the area of PKI for IoV research.

C. Deferentially-Privacy Preserving Solutions

In a number of IoV cases, it is required to send the data
generated by the vehicles to the cloud platform, RSUs, and
neighbor vehicles. Also, some vehicles have to share the driv-
ing information along with locations to the peers in order to
enhance driving experience and to take advantage of location-
based services. A number of such IoV applications have been
discussed in Section IV. However, certain privacy concerns
in this area have arisen recently, as malicious users may ﬁnd
out the real location, location history, live location, and real
identity of the vehicles. These aforesaid critical privacy issues
could arise mainly due to the following reasons and occasions:

ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

22

TABLE IV: Summary of literatures on the recent works in blockchain and IoV integration challenges

References Focused Challenges

privacy

Identity

-
of
through tracking attacks
- Forged messages publishing from
internal vehicles

vehicles

- Centralized privacy solution prob-
lems

Approaches
- Anonymous reputation system
- Calculating reputation by historical
interactions as well as opinions
- Pseudonym addresses instead of
real identities

- Remote attestation security scheme

- Lack of decentralization feature in
modern authentication schemes

- Elliptic curve cryptography (ECC)
for mutual authentication

[113]

- Insecure key management

- A proposed novel network topology
- Secure group broadcast

- Lack of decentralized efﬁcient
keyword searching schemes

- Searchable encryption
- Smart contract

- Unlike
blockchain
constraints

public,
users

permissioned
some
have

- Authorization based on assigned
policy
- Attribute-based signature
- Certiﬁcateless cryptography

- Secure authentication and privacy
protection problems

- Message authentication code
- Public-private key pair

- Dirichlet distribution for trust man-
agement
- Storing the trustworthiness by pro-
posed data structure

Outcomes

- The proposed model can build a trust model and also, satisfy
the conditional anonymity, transparency, and robustness

- The proposed model is able to satisfy decentralization, user
anonymity, and traceability
- An authentication and key-exchange scheme having
lightweight, scalability, decentralization, and anonymity fea-
tures
- The proposed framework accomplishes better distributed key
management with reduced key transfer time
- The proposed scheme can effectively increase the privacy
protection by supporting forward and backward privacy
- The centralized searching technique is replaced by smart
contract

- This proposed signature scheme possesses short signature
size as well as low computational overhead

- The proposed authentication scheme ensures that it is secure
from a number of common attacks
- The scheme has two properties such as decentralization and
anonymity

- This proposed scheme is able to defend trust model attacks,
ensure location privacy, and detect malicious vehicles efﬁ-
ciently

- Potentiality of disclosing vehicle
location privacy such as location
tracings and sensitive information
leakage while using location based
services
- The energy and number of trans-
actions burdens while updating the
distributed ledgers and blockchain-
transfer operation

- The scalability issue of blockchain
to manage the massive IoV data

- Security issues in DPoS consensus
mechanism
- Potential collusion among miner
candidates and attacked high-stake
vehicles while choosing miner can-
didates by stake-based voting

- Security and authentication con-
cerns in consensus mechanisms

- Incapability of vehicles to partic-
ipate in competitive PoW and PoS
like consensuses to get rewards due
to limited resources
- Lack of proper incentive scheme
for electric vehicles to contribute in
energy delivery
- Lack of
standby miners
- Lack of penalty schemes for gen-
erating false messages

incentive scheme for

- Controlling the number of transac-
tions optimally by an approach called
distributed clustering

- The proposed model consumes considerably less amount
of energy and requires less number of transactions compared
with the Bitcoin

- Deep reinforcement learning

- The proposed framework is capable of maximizing the
throughput of transactions while ensuring low latency and
decentralization

- Reputation-based miner selection
from candidates
- Two step veriﬁcation and auditing
by active and standby miners
- Contract theory

- The proposed security-enhanced mechanism establishes it
excellencies in terms of defending internal collusion, high
detection rate of compromised candidate vehicles with better
reputation scheme relative to existing schemes, and optimized
the utilities of all participant miners

- Byzantine consensus along with
gossip protocol and time sequence
technique

- The proposed consensus performs better in terms of consen-
sus efﬁciency, communication security, scalability, and fault
tolerance than the traditional mechanism

- Satisﬁability Modulo Theories
- A proposed brokerage method hav-
ing decision making capability

- The proposed approach offers much higher proﬁt and
lesser energy consumption while uploading the mining and
validation processes

- Pricing and reputation theories

- Contract theory

- Managing and imposing trust val-
ues to vehicles

- The proposed scheme not only inspires the vehicles to
participate in blockchain network to make a balanced grid,
but also enables to maximize he utilities of vehicles
- The proposed scheme offers improved and secure data
sharing
- This proposed scheme offers more secure and trustworthy
network while making restriction from sending false messages

[112]

[116]

[114]

[117]

[118]

[115]

[119]

[120]

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]

[125]

[126]

[127]

(i) The RSUs might be maintained by the third-party service
providers and they may offer less privacy than the cloud
service providers, and the vehicle users might not have
control over their own generated data transactions;
(ii) The ofﬂoaded tasks could contain private or sensitive

data;

(iii) While utilizing the data for training the machine learning
models as well as communication the model updates;

(iv) Public storage of blockchain transactions; and
(v) After analyzing the movement and communication behav-
iors of the vehicles as well as the shared data transactions

With the purpose to prevent any information leakage, it is
very important to ensure the privacy requirements. In the same
connection, in order to deal with privacy concerns, classic
blockchain technology offers a privacy-preserving technique
to hide the real identities of the vehicles using pseudonyms.
Besides this, several cryptographic techniques have been em-
ployed as presented in Section V to ensure the privacy of the
transactions in blockchain.

Unfortunately, although cryptographic techniques-based ap-
proaches are considered as a leading strategy, sometimes
such approaches may not be robust. Moreover, it may come

ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

23

with certain limitations like managing cryptographic keys,
require signiﬁcant computational resources, and sacriﬁce the
performance. Meanwhile, it is necessary to explore the state-
of-the art privacy-preserving approaches in order to tackle
future novel
issues that emerged due to having different
data structure, architecture, and key techniques of blockchain
technology. In this regard, differential privacy which is a
privacy-preserving approach could be an option to explore.

In differential privacy, basically a large amount of data like
datasets as well as real-time data can be preserved by adding
a desirable amount of noise while maintaining a good trade-
off between accuracy and privacy. Furthermore, differential
privacy also offers location privacy in real-time within the
IoV scenarios. This is by doing data perturbation of location as
well as identity to ultimately ensure the privacy of the location
and vehicles. Usually, this perturbation method is performed
in many of differential privacy algorithms. In this method,
the amount of noise is computed by employing differential
then this noise will be added to the query data
privacy,
in order to ensure that the data will be secure as well as
indistinguishable to the observers. However, this perturbation
approach will result on the accuracy of the data which has
been reported, and simultaneously, the more perturbed data
will tighten the privacy protection. Here, one advantageous
point is that the users have the ability to control the privacy
level. However, this accuracy and privacy trade-off sometimes
may introduce difﬁculties to certain IoV applications that need
accurate reporting of data after incorporating with blockchain.
In summary, we believe that differential privacy has a lot of
potential to enhance privacy substantially but in different ways.

D. Exploring other Blockchain-Assisted IoV Applications

We have presented in this paper a number of IoV application
scenarios where blockchain has been employed successfully.
However, given the beneﬁts of better decentralization, au-
tonomy, and security, we believe blockchain and/or smart
contract will be able to play an important role in many other
applications as well. In the following, we present diverse types
of such applications where blockchain can also be applicable.
1) Road Safety Applications: Obtaining the data generated
by the vehicles, IoV enables real-time data processing. In case
of any hazardous data, the nearby RSUs and vesicles will be
responsible for keeping the record and inform to all so that
others will be safe from the potential risk by taking necessary
steps in advance. In this scenario, the trust will be an important
aspect. Thus, we believe that after integrating blockchain with
road safety applications, which could be considered as future
works, the vehicles will be able to trust the blockchain network
established by RSUs and other peer vehicles.

2) Vehicular Big Data Auction: In the past few years,
numerous auction theories have been introduced and applied
successfully which have common aim to perform auctions of
different services and products between the two parties such
as sellers and buyers. In the same connection, the auction
theories have also been adopted in vehicular big data market
in order to carry out auctions. The features of such auctions
even having predeﬁned and trusted centralized authorities are

already acceptable to the traders, but on the other hand, several
concerns have been introduced. Such concerns are mainly due
to processing cost and possibility of both insider and outsider
threats. Thus, smart contract in conjunction with blockchain
is will be one of suitable solutions to address the concerns.

3) Content Caching: With the exponential increasing of data
trafﬁc, utilizing storage resources of RSUs and vehicles to
server as a supplement of the cloud for the purpose of caching
popular contents have become gradually popular. In particular,
the applications and services where the data consumptions are
high compared to others have been performed with the support
of content caching. This content caching enables less depen-
dency on backhaul connection while ensuring low latency
communications as well as better user experience. Hence,
how to utilize blockchain technology for efﬁcient, fast, and
economically viable content caching is very important. In IoV
scenarios, blockchain and smart contract would contribute in
two ways. The ﬁrst is the exploitation of blockchain structure
by keeping only the lightweight block headers of the cached
contents, which would able to enforce trustfulness among
the vehicles and cache nodes signiﬁcantly faster than the
classic caching system. The another is developing economic
incentive-friendly smart contract for the cache contributors,
which would lead to encourage the contributors.

E. Distribution of Economic Proﬁts and Incentives

Blockchain technology has been developed for the appli-
cation cases which have stable and stationary network con-
nections. On the other hand, in IoV ecosystem, the vehicles
are mobile, move from one place to another very frequently,
and try to make connection with peers by wirelessly as long
as communication conditions will be allowed. As a result,
making blockchain suitable for such IoV scenarios which may
often suffer from poor and unstable wireless connection is one
of the challenging tasks. Furthermore, with the development
of blockchain, the spectrum, storage, and computational re-
sources can be shared among the peers as discussed in section
IV. Blockchain has made easier to establish peer to peer such
resource sharing. However, recently a number of research
questions have been arisen which could be future research to
be considered. These are discussed shortly as follows.

(i) How to aggregate the resources to utilize collaboratively
by vehicles, & edge nodes, and incorporate the aggregated
resources in blockchain ecosystem;

(ii) How to split and distribute the proﬁts among the edge
devices, service providers, vehicles, brokers, and the
participants who have contributions for aggregation so
that all entities will receive the proﬁts rightly according
to their contributions;

(iii) How to realize the different resources as quantiﬁed val-
ues, use pricing theories, and optimize the proﬁts of all
parties so that they are willing to participate;

(iv) How to develop suitable and practical approaches in
order to make connections with surrounding nodes while
keeping long-term stable link;

(v) How to ensure and maintain the trustworthiness of entities
by using blockchain and/or smart contract while trading
resources;

ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

24

(vi) How to detect malicious and dishonest entities who may
have intention to repudiate the transactions and deny
giving the incentives or agreed resources;

(vii) How to quantify the proﬁts and incentives properly for
the contributors who have dropped out and went ofﬂine
because of the wireless connectivity;

VIII. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have presented a survey on the integration
of blockchain and IoV from the ITS perspective, which
is becoming a key technique which utilizes decentralized
management and stronger security solutions. We have started
our study with some preliminary background, including brief
discussions on blockchain technology, edge computing, Intelli-
gent Transportation System, and Internet of Vehicles. We have
also discussed the motivations of this study by identifying
the challenges associated with IoV and also, the realizations
of decentralization, high immutability, availability, and trust.
Then, we have conducted a systematic and comprehensive
investigation on blockchain in IoV paradigm, in terms of appli-
cation scenarios, how other techniques have been incorporated
along with blockchain, and functionalities. We have further
highlighted four key challenges after utilizing blockchain in
IoV, and also, presented related research works addressing
these challenges, including security & privacy, performance,
and IoV-speciﬁc & optimized consensus as well as incentive
mechanisms. Next, we have discussed a number of blockchain
empowered architecture and frameworks in details. Finally,
we have tried to explore future research opportunities in this
domain brieﬂy. To sum up, it is expected that the blockchain
technology along with IoV will signiﬁcantly include new
functionalities to transportation systems. We hope this paper
will serve as basis to the research community to move forward.

REFERENCES

[1] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,”

Manubot, Tech. Rep., 2019.

[2] F. Tschorsch and B. Scheuermann, “Bitcoin and beyond: A technical
survey on decentralized digital currencies,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 2084–2123, 2016.

[3] M. Belotti, N. Boˇzi´c, G. Pujolle, and S. Secci, “A vademecum on
blockchain technologies: When, which, and how,” IEEE Communica-
tions Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 3796–3838, 2019.
[4] F. Li, K.-Y. Lam, H.-H. Chen, and N. Zhao, “Spectral efﬁciency
enhancement in satellite mobile communications: A game-theoretical
approach,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 200–
205, 2019.

[5] F. Li, K.-Y. Lam, X. Liu, J. Wang, K. Zhao, and L. Wang, “Joint pricing
and power allocation for multibeam satellite systems with dynamic
game model,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 67,
no. 3, pp. 2398–2408, 2017.

[6] R. Hussain and S. Zeadally, “Autonomous cars: Research results,
issues, and future challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tuto-
rials, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1275–1313, 2018.

[7] S. A. Kazmi, T. N. Dang, I. Yaqoob, A. Ndikumana, E. Ahmed,
R. Hussain, and C. S. Hong, “Infotainment enabled smart cars: A joint
communication, caching, and computation approach,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 9, pp. 8408–8420, 2019.

[8] Y. Sun and H. Song, Secure and trustworthy transportation cyber-

physical systems. Springer, 2017.

[9] S. Tanwar, S. Tyagi, I. Budhiraja, and N. Kumar, “Tactile internet for
autonomous vehicles: Latency and reliability analysis,” IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 66–72, 2019.

[10] S. Sharma and B. Kaushik, “A survey on internet of vehicles: Applica-
tions, security issues & solutions,” Vehicular Communications, vol. 20,
p. 100182, 2019.

[11] Y. Dai, D. Xu, S. Maharjan, G. Qiao, and Y. Zhang, “Artiﬁcial
intelligence empowered edge computing and caching for internet of
vehicles,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 12–18,
2019.

[12] “Ertico - its europe,” Accessed: June 2020, available: https://ertico.

com/.

[13] “Cityverve project: Manchester’s smart city demonstrator,” Accessed:

June 2020, available: https://cityverve.org.uk/.

[14] M. U. Hassan, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Chen, “Privacy preservation in
blockchain based iot systems: Integration issues, prospects, challenges,
and future research directions,” Future Generation Computer Systems,
vol. 97, pp. 512–529, 2019.

[15] I. Makhdoom, M. Abolhasan, H. Abbas, and W. Ni, “Blockchain’s
adoption in iot: The challenges, and a way forward,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 125, pp. 251–279, 2019.

[16] B. Cao, Y. Li, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, S. Mumtaz, Z. Zhou, and M. Peng,
“When internet of things meets blockchain: Challenges in distributed
consensus,” IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 133–139, 2019.
[17] W. Viriyasitavat, L. Da Xu, Z. Bi, and D. Hoonsopon, “Blockchain
technology for applications in internet of things—mapping from system
design perspective,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp.
8155–8168, 2019.

[18] H.-N. Dai, Z. Zheng, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain for internet of things:
A survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8076–
8094, 2019.

[19] P. Koshy, S. Babu, and B. Manoj, “Sliding window blockchain archi-
tecture for internet of things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7,
no. 4, pp. 3338–3348, 2020.

[20] L. Tseng, L. Wong, S. Otoum, M. Aloqaily, and J. B. Othman,
“Blockchain for managing heterogeneous internet of things: A per-
spective architecture,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 16–23, 2020.
[21] J. Lockl, V. Schlatt, A. Schweizer, N. Urbach, and N. Harth, “Toward
trust in internet of things ecosystems: Design principles for blockchain-
based iot applications,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Manage-
ment, pp. 1–15, 2020.

[22] P. K. Sharma, N. Kumar, and J. H. Park, “Blockchain technology to-
ward green iot: Opportunities and challenges,” IEEE Network, vol. 34,
no. 4, pp. 263–269, 2020.

[23] H. Rathore, A. Mohamed, and M. Guizani, “A survey of blockchain
enabled cyber-physical systems,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 1, p. 282, 2020.
[24] P. Mehta, R. Gupta, and S. Tanwar, “Blockchain envisioned uav
networks: Challenges, solutions, and comparisons,” Computer Com-
munications, vol. 151, pp. 518–538, 2020.

[25] T. Alladi, V. Chamola, R. M. Parizi, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Blockchain
applications for industry 4.0 and industrial iot: A review,” IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 176 935–176 951, 2019.

[26] M. Shen, H. Liu, L. Zhu, K. Xu, H. Yu, X. Du, and M. Guizani,
“Blockchain-assisted secure device authentication for cross-domain
industrial iot,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 942–954, 2020.

[27] J. Luo, Q. Chen, F. R. Yu, and L. Tang, “Blockchain-enabled software-
deﬁned industrial internet of things with deep reinforcement learning,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 5466–5480, 2020.
[28] M. Li, D. Hu, C. Lal, M. Conti, and Z. Zhang, “Blockchain-enabled
secure energy trading with veriﬁable fairness in industrial internet of
things,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 10,
pp. 6564–6574, 2020.

[29] J. Leng, G. Ruan, P. Jiang, K. Xu, Q. Liu, X. Zhou, and C. Liu,
“Blockchain-empowered sustainable manufacturing and product lifecy-
cle management in industry 4.0: A survey,” Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, vol. 132, p. 110112, 2020.

[30] J. Sengupta, S. Ruj, and S. D. Bit, “A comprehensive survey on attacks,
security issues and blockchain solutions for iot and iiot,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 149, p. 102481, 2020.
[31] V. Lopes and L. A. Alexandre, “An overview of blockchain in-
intelligence,” arXiv preprint

tegration with robotics and artiﬁcial
arXiv:1810.00329, 2018.

[32] Y. Du, J. Cao, J. Yin, and S. Song, “An overview of blockchain-based
swarm robotics system,” in Artiﬁcial Intelligence in China. Springer,
2020, pp. 353–360.

[33] J. Xie, H. Tang, T. Huang, F. R. Yu, R. Xie, J. Liu, and Y. Liu, “A survey
of blockchain technology applied to smart cities: Research issues and
challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 3,
pp. 2794–2830, 2019.

ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

25

[34] S. Hakak, W. Z. Khan, G. A. Gilkar, M. Imran, and N. Guizani,
“Securing smart cities through blockchain technology: Architecture,
requirements, and challenges,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 8–
14, 2020.

[35] E. Nagel and J. Kranz, “Smart city applications on the blockchain: De-
velopment of a multi-layer taxonomy,” in Blockchain and Distributed
Ledger Technology Use Cases. Springer, 2020, pp. 201–226.
[36] W. Zhang, Z. Wu, G. Han, Y. Feng, and L. Shu, “Ldc: A lightweight
dada consensus algorithm based on the blockchain for the industrial
internet of things for smart city applications,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 108, pp. 574–582, 2020.

[37] G. S. Aujla, M. Singh, A. Bose, N. Kumar, G. Han, and R. Buyya,
“Blocksdn: Blockchain-as-a-service for software deﬁned networking in
smart city applications,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 83–91, 2020.
[38] B. Bhushan, A. Khamparia, K. M. Sagayam, S. K. Sharma, M. A.
Ahad, and N. C. Debnath, “Blockchain for smart cities: A review
of architectures,
integration trends and future research directions,”
Sustainable Cities and Society, p. 102360, 2020.

[39] R. Wang, H. Liu, H. Wang, Q. Yang, and D. Wu, “Distributed security
architecture based on blockchain for connected health: Architecture,
challenges, and approaches,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 26,
no. 6, pp. 30–36, 2019.

[40] A. Farouk, A. Alahmadi, S. Ghose, and A. Mashatan, “Blockchain
platform for industrial healthcare: Vision and future opportunities,”
Computer Communications, vol. 154, pp. 223–235, 2020.

[41] F. A. Khan, M. Asif, A. Ahmad, M. Alharbi, and H. Aljuaid,
“Blockchain technology, improvement suggestions, security challenges
on smart grid and its application in healthcare for sustainable develop-
ment,” Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 55, p. 102018, 2020.
[42] E. J. De Aguiar, B. S. Faic¸al, B. Krishnamachari, and J. Ueyama, “A
survey of blockchain-based strategies for healthcare,” ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR), vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 1–27, 2020.

[43] E. Chukwu and L. Garg, “A systematic review of blockchain in health-
care: Frameworks, prototypes, and implementations,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 21 196–21 214, 2020.

[44] A. Hasselgren, K. Kralevska, D. Gligoroski, S. A. Pedersen, and
A. Faxvaag, “Blockchain in healthcare and health sciences—a scoping
review,” International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 134, p.
104040, 2020.

[45] M. B. Mollah, J. Zhao, D. Niyato, K.-Y. Lam, X. Zhang, A. M.
Ghias, L. H. Koh, and L. Yang, “Blockchain for future smart grid:
A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2020.
[46] M. Kuzlu, S. Sarp, M. Pipattanasomporn, and U. Cali, “Realizing the
potential of blockchain technology in smart grid applications,” in 2020
IEEE Power & Energy Society Innovative Smart Grid Technologies
Conference (ISGT).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.
[47] A. Aderibole, A. Aljarwan, M. H. U. Rehman, H. H. Zeineldin,
T. Mezher, K. Salah, E. Damiani, and D. Svetinovic, “Blockchain
technology for smart grids: Decentralized nist conceptual model,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 43 177–43 190, 2020.

[48] P. Zhuang, T. Zamir, and H. Liang, “Blockchain for cyber security in
smart grid: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, pp. 1–1, 2020.

[49] C. Alcaraz, J. E. Rubio, and J. Lopez, “Blockchain-assisted access
for federated smart grid domains: Coupling and features,” Journal of
Parallel and Distributed Computing, vol. 144, pp. 124–135, 2020.
[50] A. Miglani, N. Kumar, V. Chamola, and S. Zeadally, “Blockchain for
internet of energy management: Review, solutions, and challenges,”
Computer Communications, vol. 151, pp. 395–418, 2020.

[51] I. Dimobi, M. Pipattanasomporn, and S. Rahman, “A transactive grid
with microgrids using blockchain for the energy internet,” in 2020
IEEE Power & Energy Society Innovative Smart Grid Technologies
Conference (ISGT).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.
[52] N. U. Hassan, C. Yuen, and D. Niyato, “Blockchain technologies for
smart energy systems: Fundamentals, challenges, and solutions,” IEEE
Industrial Electronics Magazine, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 106–118, 2019.

[53] J. Bao, D. He, M. Luo, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A survey of blockchain
applications in the energy sector,” IEEE Systems Journal, pp. 1–12,
2020.

[54] H. Lu, K. Huang, M. Azimi, and L. Guo, “Blockchain technology
in the oil and gas industry: A review of applications, opportunities,
challenges, and risks,” Ieee Access, vol. 7, pp. 41 426–41 444, 2019.

[55] D. C. Nguyen, P. N. Pathirana, M. Ding, and A. Seneviratne,
“Blockchain for 5g and beyond networks: A state of the art survey,”
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, p. 102693, 2020.

[56] A. Chaer, K. Salah, C. Lima, P. P. Ray, and T. Sheltami, “Blockchain for
5g: opportunities and challenges,” in 2019 IEEE Globecom Workshops
(GC Wkshps).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[57] M. B. Weiss, K. Werbach, D. C. Sicker, and C. E. C. Bastidas,
“On the application of blockchains to spectrum management,” IEEE
Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, vol. 5,
no. 2, pp. 193–205, 2019.

[58] Y. Liu, F. R. Yu, X. Li, H. Ji, and V. C. Leung, “Blockchain and
machine learning for communications and networking systems,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1392–1431,
2020.

[59] T. Hewa, G. G¨ur, A. Kalla, M. Ylianttila, A. Bracken, and M. Liyanage,
“The role of blockchain in 6g: Challenges, opportunities and research
directions,” in 2020 2nd 6G Wireless Summit (6G SUMMIT).
IEEE,
2020, pp. 1–5.

[60] S. Singh, P. K. Sharma, B. Yoon, M. Shojafar, G. H. Cho, and I.-
H. Ra, “Convergence of blockchain and artiﬁcial intelligence in iot
network for the sustainable smart city,” Sustainable Cities and Society,
p. 102364, 2020.

[61] B. K. Mohanta, D. Jena, U. Satapathy, and S. Patnaik, “Survey on
iot security: Challenges and solution using machine learning, artiﬁcial
intelligence and blockchain technology,” Internet of Things, p. 100227,
2020.

[62] R. Gupta, S. Tanwar, F. Al-Turjman, P. Italiya, A. Nauman, and S. W.
Kim, “Smart contract privacy protection using ai in cyber-physical
systems: tools, techniques and challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
24 746–24 772, 2020.

[63] S. K. Singh, S. Rathore, and J. H. Park, “Blockiotintelligence: A
blockchain-enabled intelligent iot architecture with artiﬁcial intelli-
gence,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 110, pp. 721–743,
2020.

[64] S. Tanwar, Q. Bhatia, P. Patel, A. Kumari, P. K. Singh, and W.-C. Hong,
“Machine learning adoption in blockchain-based smart applications:
The challenges, and a way forward,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 474–
488, 2019.

[65] “Proof of stack,” Accessed: June 2020, available: https://en.bitcoin.it/

wiki/Proof of Stake.

[66] M. Castro and B. Liskov, “Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance,” in

OSDI, vol. 99, no. 1999, 1999, pp. 173–186.

[67] R. C. Merkle, “A digital signature based on a conventional encryption
function,” in Conference on the theory and application of cryptographic
techniques. Springer, 1987, pp. 369–378.

[68] A. Back, M. Corallo, L. Dashjr, M. Friedenbach, G. Maxwell,
J. Tim´on, and P. Wuille, “Enabling
A. Miller, A. Poelstra,
blockchain innovations with pegged sidechains,” URL: http://www.
opensciencereview.
com/papers/123/enablingblockchain-innovations-
with-pegged-sidechains, vol. 72, 2014.

[69] J. Ni, X. Lin, and X. S. Shen, “Toward edge-assisted internet of things:
from security and efﬁciency perspectives,” IEEE Network, vol. 33,
no. 2, pp. 50–57, 2019.

[70] A. H. Sodhro, S. Pirbhulal, and V. H. C. de Albuquerque, “Artiﬁcial
intelligence-driven mechanism for edge computing-based industrial
applications,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15,
no. 7, pp. 4235–4243, 2019.

[71] W. Z. Khan, E. Ahmed, S. Hakak, I. Yaqoob, and A. Ahmed, “Edge
computing: A survey,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 97,
pp. 219–235, 2019.

[72] F. Liang, W. Yu, X. Liu, D. Grifﬁth, and N. Golmie, “Towards edge-
based deep learning in industrial internet of things,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 4329–4341, 2020.

[73] F. Li, K.-Y. Lam, X. Li, Z. Sheng, J. Hua, and L. Wang, “Advances
and emerging challenges in cognitive internet-of-things,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 5489–5496, 2019.
[74] H. Song, D. B. Rawat, S. Jeschke, and C. Brecher, Cyber-physical
systems: foundations, principles and applications. Academic Press
Elsevier, 2017.

[75] H. Ji, O. Alfarraj, and A. Tolba, “Artiﬁcial intelligence-empowered
edge of vehicles: Architecture, enabling technologies, and applica-
tions,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 61 020–61 034, 2020.

[76] J. Zhang and K. B. Letaief, “Mobile edge intelligence and computing
for the internet of vehicles,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 108, no. 2,
pp. 246–261, 2019.

[77] Z. Ning, J. Huang, X. Wang, J. J. Rodrigues, and L. Guo, “Mobile
edge computing-enabled internet of vehicles: Toward energy-efﬁcient
scheduling,” IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 198–205, 2019.
[78] Y. Dai, D. Xu, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y. Zhang, “Deep rein-
forcement learning and permissioned blockchain for content caching

ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

26

in vehicular edge computing and networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 4312–4324, 2020.

[79] Z. Xiong, Y. Zhang, D. Niyato, P. Wang, and Z. Han, “When mobile
blockchain meets edge computing,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 33–39, 2018.

[80] K. Gai, Y. Wu, L. Zhu, L. Xu, and Y. Zhang, “Permissioned blockchain
and edge computing empowered privacy-preserving smart grid net-
works,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 7992–8004,
2019.

[81] S. Guo, Y. Dai, S. Guo, X. Qiu, and F. Qi, “Blockchain meets edge
computing stackelberg game and double auction based task ofﬂﬂoading
for mobile blockchain,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 5549–5561, 2020.

[82] R. Yang, F. R. Yu, P. Si, Z. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Integrated blockchain
and edge computing systems: A survey, some research issues and
challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 2,
pp. 1508–1532, 2019.

[83] A. Chattopadhyay, K.-Y. Lam, and Y. Tavva, “Autonomous vehicle:
Security by design,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, pp. 1–15, 2020.

[84] D. A. Hahn, A. Munir, and V. Behzadan, “Security and privacy issues in
intelligent transportation systems: Classiﬁcation and challenges,” IEEE
Intelligent Transportation Systems Magazine, pp. 1–1, 2019.

[85] W. Li and H. Song, “Art: An attack-resistant trust management scheme
for securing vehicular ad hoc networks,” IEEE Transactions on Intel-
ligent Transportation Systems, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 960–969, 2015.
[86] J. Kang, R. Yu, X. Huang, M. Wu, S. Maharjan, S. Xie, and Y. Zhang,
“Blockchain for secure and efﬁcient data sharing in vehicular edge
computing and networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6,
no. 3, pp. 4660–4670, 2019.

[87] U. Javaid, M. N. Aman, and B. Sikdar, “Drivman: Driving trust
management and data sharing in vanets with blockchain and smart
contracts,” in 2019 IEEE 89th Vehicular Technology Conference
(VTC2019-Spring).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–5.
[88] K. Shi, L. Zhu, C. Zhang, L. Xu, and F. Gao, “Blockchain-based mul-
timedia sharing in vehicular social networks with privacy protection,”
Multimedia Tools and Applications, pp. 1–21, 2020.

[89] Y. Chen, X. Hao, W. Ren, and Y. Ren, “Traceable and authenticated
key negotiations via blockchain for vehicular communications,” Mobile
Information Systems, vol. 2019, pp. 1–10, 2019.

[90] C. Chen, J. Wu, H. Lin, W. Chen, and Z. Zheng, “A secure and efﬁcient
blockchain-based data trading approach for internet of vehicles,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 9, pp. 9110–9121,
2019.

[91] Z. Li, Z. Yang, and S. Xie, “Computing resource trading for edge-
cloud-assisted internet of things,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 3661–3669, 2019.

[92] G. Qiao, S. Leng, H. Chai, A. Asadi, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain
empowered resource trading in mobile edge computing and networks,”
in ICC 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Communications
(ICC).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[93] H. Chai, S. Leng, K. Zhang, and S. Mao, “Proof-of-reputation based-
consortium blockchain for trust resource sharing in internet of vehi-
cles,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 175 744–175 757, 2019.

[94] S. Wang, X. Huang, R. Yu, Y. Zhang, and E. Hossain, “Permissioned
blockchain for efﬁcient and secure resource sharing in vehicular edge
computing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.06319, 2019.

[95] W. Al Amiri, M. Baza, K. Banawan, M. Mahmoud, W. Alasmary, and
K. Akkaya, “Privacy-preserving smart parking system using blockchain
and private information retrieval,” in 2019 International Conference
on Smart Applications, Communications and Networking (SmartNets).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[96] T. Xiao, T. Qiu, N. Lv, Q. Pei et al., “Smart-contract based economical
platooning in blockchain enabled urban internet of vehicles,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 2019.

[97] R. M. Shivers, “Toward a secure and decentralized blockchain-based
ride-hailing platform for autonomous vehicles,” Ph.D. dissertation,
Tennessee Technological University, 2019.

[98] M. Li, L. Zhu, and X. Lin, “Coride: A privacy-preserving collaborative-
ride hailing service using blockchain-assisted vehicular fog comput-
ing,” in International Conference on Security and Privacy in Commu-
nication Systems. Springer, 2019, pp. 408–422.

[99] M. Li, L. Zhu, and X. Lin, “Efﬁcient and privacy-preserving carpooling
using blockchain-assisted vehicular fog computing,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4573–4584, 2019.

IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 11, pp.
11 248–11 259, 2019.

[101] L. Nkenyereye, B. Adhi Tama, M. K. Shahzad, and Y.-H. Choi,
“Secure and blockchain-based emergency driven message protocol for
5g enabled vehicular edge computing,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 1, p. 154,
2020.

[102] L. Cheng, J. Liu, G. Xu, Z. Zhang, H. Wang, H.-N. Dai, Y. Wu, and
W. Wang, “Sctsc: A semicentralized trafﬁc signal control mode with
attribute-based blockchain in iovs,” IEEE Transactions on Computa-
tional Social Systems, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1373–1385, 2019.

[103] Q. Ren, K. L. Man, M. Li, B. Gao, and J. Ma, “Intelligent design
and implementation of blockchain and internet of things–based trafﬁc
system,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, vol. 15,
no. 8, p. 1550147719870653, 2019.

[104] M. Cebe, E. Erdin, K. Akkaya, H. Aksu, and S. Uluagac,
“Block4forensic: An integrated lightweight blockchain framework for
forensics applications of connected vehicles,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 50–57, 2018.

[105] M. Pourvahab and G. Ekbatanifard, “Digital forensics architecture
for evidence collection and provenance preservation in iaas cloud
environment using sdn and blockchain technology,” IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 153 349–153 364, 2019.

[106] “Blockchain for mobility services: Personalized mobility through se-
cure data,” Accessed: June 2020, available: https://www.ibm.com/
downloads/cas/M8AOGADZ.
technology
in

[107] “Accelerating
market:
cessed:
content/dam/Deloitte/cn/Documents/consumer-business/
deloitte-cn-consumer-blockchain-in-the-automotive-industry-en-180809.
pdf.

automotive
Ac-
https://www2.deloitte.com/

disruption
the
available:

Blockchain
June

the
industry,”

automotive

2020,

in

[108] T. Jiang, H. Fang, and H. Wang, “Blockchain-based internet of vehicles:
Distributed network architecture and performance analysis,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4640–4649, 2019.
[109] H. Liu, Y. Zhang, and T. Yang, “Blockchain-enabled security in electric
vehicles cloud and edge computing,” IEEE Network, vol. 32, no. 3, pp.
78–83, 2018.

[110] A. Dorri, M. Steger, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak, “Blockchain:
A distributed solution to automotive security and privacy,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 119–125, 2017.
[111] X. Ma, C. Ge, and Z. Liu, “Blockchain-enabled privacy-preserving
internet of vehicles: Decentralized and reputation-based network archi-
tecture,” in International Conference on Network and System Security.
Springer, 2019, pp. 336–351.

[112] Z. Lu, W. Liu, Q. Wang, G. Qu, and Z. Liu, “A privacy-preserving
trust model based on blockchain for vanets,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp.
45 655–45 664, 2018.

[113] A. Lei, H. Cruickshank, Y. Cao, P. Asuquo, C. P. A. Ogah, and Z. Sun,
“Blockchain-based dynamic key management for heterogeneous intel-
ligent transportation systems,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 4,
no. 6, pp. 1832–1843, 2017.

[114] K. Kaur, S. Garg, G. Kaddoum, F. Gagnon, and S. H. Ahmed,
“Blockchain-based lightweight authentication mechanism for vehicular
fog infrastructure,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Com-
munications Workshops (ICC Workshops).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[115] J. Noh, S. Jeon, and S. Cho, “Distributed blockchain-based message
authentication scheme for connected vehicles,” Electronics, vol. 9,
no. 1, p. 74, 2020.

[116] C. Xu, H. Liu, P. Li, and P. Wang, “A remote attestation security model
based on privacy-preserving blockchain for v2x,” IEEE Access, vol. 6,
pp. 67 809–67 818, 2018.

[117] B. Chen, L. Wu, H. Wang, L. Zhou, and D. He, “A blockchain-based
searchable public-key encryption with forward and backward privacy
for cloud-assisted vehicular social networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 5813–5825, 2020.

[118] Y. Mu, F. Rezaeibagha, and K. Huang, “Policy-driven blockchain and
its applications for transport systems,” IEEE Transactions on Services
Computing, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 230–240, 2020.

[119] B. Luo, X. Li, J. Weng, J. Guo, and J. Ma, “Blockchain enabled trust-
based location privacy protection scheme in vanet,” IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 2034–2048, 2020.
[120] V. Sharma, “An energy-efﬁcient transaction model for the blockchain-
enabled internet of vehicles (iov),” IEEE Communications Letters,
vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 246–249, 2018.

[100] M. Li, J. Weng, A. Yang, J.-N. Liu, and X. Lin, “Toward blockchain-
based fair and anonymous ad dissemination in vehicular networks,”

[121] M. Liu, Y. Teng, F. R. Yu, V. C. Leung, and M. Song, “Deep
reinforcement learning based performance optimization in blockchain-

ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

27

enabled internet of vehicle,” in ICC 2019-2019 IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[122] J. Kang, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, D. Ye, D. I. Kim, and J. Zhao, “Toward
secure blockchain-enabled internet of vehicles: Optimizing consensus
management using reputation and contract theory,” IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 2906–2920, 2019.
[123] W. Hu, Y. Hu, W. Yao, and H. Li, “A blockchain-based byzantine
consensus algorithm for information authentication of the internet of
vehicles,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 139 703–139 711, 2019.

[124] V. De Maio, R. Brundo Uriarte, and I. Brandic, “Energy and proﬁt-
aware proof-of-stake ofﬂoading in blockchain-based vanets,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 12th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Utility
and Cloud Computing, 2019, pp. 177–186.

[125] Y. Wang, Z. Su, and N. Zhang, “Bsis: Blockchain-based secure
incentive scheme for energy delivery in vehicular energy network,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 3620–
3631, 2019.

[126] D. Niyato, D. I. Kim, J. Kang, and Z. Xiong, “Incentivizing secure
block veriﬁcation by contract theory in blockchain-enabled vehicular
networks,” in ICC 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Com-
munications (ICC).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–7.
[127] A. Ijaz and N. Javaid, “Reward and penalty based mechanism in
vehicular network using decentralized blockchain technology,” Under
Publication, 2019.

Muhammad Baqer Mollah is currently working
as a Research Associate in the School of Computer
Science and Engineering at Nanyang Technological
University (NTU), Singapore. Before joining NTU,
he was working at Singapore University of Technol-
ogy and Design (SUTD). He is currently involved in
research works on AI and Blockchain applications to
the cyber-physical systems (e.g., smart grid, industry,
transportation). His research interests are mainly
focused on advanced communication, security, and
resource allocation techniques for future wireless
networks and cyber-physical systems. He has a M.Sc. in Computer Science
and B.Sc. in Electrical & Electronic Engineering from Jahangirnagar Uni-
versity, Dhaka and International Islamic University Chittagong, Bangladesh,
respectively.

Dusit Niyato is a Professor in the School of Com-
puter Science and Engineering at Nanyang Techno-
logical University (NTU). He received B.Eng. from
King Mongkut’s Institute of Technology Ladkrabang
(KMITL), Thailand in 1999 and Ph.D. in Electrical
and Computer Engineering from the University of
Manitoba, Canada in 2008. He is a Fellow of IEEE.
He received several best paper awards from well-
known conferences such as IEEE ICC and IEEE
WCNC. He is currently an editor of IEEE Transac-
tions on Communications and IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, and a senior editor of IEEE Wireless Communications
Letter. His research interests are in the area of wireless communications and
networks, game theory, smart grid, edge computing, blockchain technology,
and Internet of Things (IoT).

Yong Liang Guan is currently a Professor with
the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He
received the Ph.D. degree from the Imperial College
of London, U.K., and the B.Eng. degree (Hons.)
from the National University of Singapore. His re-
search interests broadly include modulation, coding
and signal processing for communication systems,
and data storage systems. He is an Associate Editor
of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR
TECHNOLOGY.

Jun Zhao is an Assistant Professor in the School
of Computer Science and Engineering at Nanyang
Technological University (NTU). He received a PhD
degree in Electrical and Computer Engineering from
Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) in the USA
and a Bachelor’s degree from Shanghai Jiao Tong
University in China. Before joining NTU as a faculty
member, he was a postdoctoral research fellow at
NTU with Prof. Xiaokui Xiao. Prior to that, he
was an Arizona Computing PostDoc Best Practices
Fellow at Arizona State University working with
Prof. Junshan Zhang therein and Prof. Vincent Poor at Princeton University.
During the PhD training at CMU, he was advised by Prof. Virgil Gligor
and Prof. Osman Yagan, while also collaborating with Prof. Adrian Perrig
(now at ETH Zurich). His research interests include security/privacy (e.g.,
blockchains), wireless communications (eg., 5G, Beyond 5G/6G), and energy
system (smart grid, Energy Internet, data center). He has over a dozen
journal articles published in IEEE/ACM Transactions as well as over thirty
conference/workshop papers.

Chau Yuen is an Associate Professor with Engineer-
ing Product Development (EPD) Pillar at Singapore
University of Technology and Design (SUTD). He
was a PostDoctoral Fellow at Lucent Technologies
in 2005. He
Bell Labs, Murray Hill, NJ, USA,
was a Visiting Assistant Professor at The Hong
Kong Polytechnic University in 2008. From 2006
to 2010, he was a Senior Research Engineer at
the Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R), Agency
for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR),
Singapore where he was involved in an industrial
project on developing an 802.11n Wireless LAN system, and participated
actively in 3Gpp Long Term Evolution (LTE) and LTE-Advanced (LTE-A)
Standardization. He received the B.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees from Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore, in 2000 and 2004, respectively. He is
a recipient of the Lee Kuan Yew Gold Medal, the Institution of Electrical
Engineers Book Prize, the Institute of Engineering of Singapore Gold Medal,
the Merck Sharp & Dohme Gold Medal, and twice the recipient of the
Hewlett Packard Prize. He received the IEEE Asia-Paciﬁc Outstanding Young
Researcher Award in 2012. He serves as an Editor for the IEEE TRANS-
ACTION ON COMMUNICATIONS and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY and was awarded the Top Associate Editor
from 2009 to 2015.

ACCEPTED AT IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL 2020

28

Sumei Sun is currently Head of the Communica-
tions and Networks Cluster at the Institute for Info-
comm Research (I2R), Agency for Science, Technol-
ogy and Research (A*STAR), Singapore. She is also
a Professor with the Infocomm Technology Cluster,
Singapore Institute of Technology (SIT), Singapore.
She received the B.Sc. degree from Peking Uni-
versity, Beijing, China,
the M.Eng. degree from
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, and
the Ph.D. degree from the National University of
Singapore, Singapore. Her current research interests
are in Industrial Internet of Things and next-generation machine-type commu-
nications. She is a Distinguished Speaker of the IEEE Vehicular Technology
Society 2018-2021, Vice Director of IEEE Communications Society Asia
Paciﬁc Board, and Chapter Coordinator of Asia Paciﬁc Region in the IEEE
Vehicular Technologies Society. She is currently a Editor-in-Chief of IEEE
Open Journal of Vehicular Technology.

Kwok-Yan Lam is currently a Professor at School
of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang
Technological University. Prior to joining NTU, he
has been a Professor of the Tsinghua University,
PR China (2002-2010) and a faculty member of the
National University of Singapore and the University
of London since 1990. He was a visiting scientist
the Isaac Newton Institute of the Cambridge
at
University and a visiting professor at the European
Institute for Systems Security. In 1998, he received
the Singapore Foundation Award from the Japanese
Chamber of Commerce and Industry in recognition of his R&D achievement
in Information Security in Singapore. He received his B.Sc. (First Class Hons.)
in computer science from the University of London in 1987 and his Ph.D. from
the University of Cambridge in 1990. His research interests include Distributed
Systems, IoT Security Infrastructure, Distributed Protocols for Blockchain,
Biometric Cryptography, Homeland Security, and Cybersecurity.

Leong Hai Koh is currently a Senior Scientist
at the Energy Research Institute @NTU (ERIAN),
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He
received the B.Eng. degree (Hons.) and the Ph.D.
degree in electrical engineering from Nanyang Tech-
nological University (NTU). His current research
interests include smart grid, energy information and
management system, hybrid AC/DC microgrid, re-
newable energy and integration, and power system
modeling and simulation.

