Automating the Communication of Cybersecurity 
Knowledge: Multi-Case Study 

Alireza Shojaifar1,2, Samuel A. Fricker1,3, Martin Gwerder1 

1FHNW, IIT and IMVS, 5210 Windisch, Switzerland 
(alireza.shojaifar|samuel.fricker|martin.gwerder)@fhnw.ch 
2Utrecht University, Dept. of Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht, Netherlands 
a.shojaifar@uu.nl 
3Blekinge Institute of Technology, SERL-Sweden, 371 79 Karlskrona, Sweden 
samuel.fricker@bth.se 

Abstract.  Cybersecurity  is  essential  for  the  protection  of  companies  against 
cyber threats. Traditionally, cybersecurity experts assess and improve a compa-
ny's  capabilities.  However,  many  small  and  medium-sized  businesses  (SMBs) 
consider such services not to be affordable. We explore an alternative do-it-your-
self (DIY) approach to bringing cybersecurity to SMBs. Our method and tool, 
CYSEC, implements the Self-Determination Theory (SDT) to guide and moti-
vate SMBs to adopt good cybersecurity practices. CYSEC uses assessment ques-
tions and recommendations to communicate cybersecurity knowledge to the end-
user SMBs and encourage self-motivated change. In this paper, the operationali-
sation of SDT in CYSEC is presented and the results of a multi-case study shown 
that offer insight into how SMBs adopted cybersecurity practices with CYSEC. 
Effective  automated  cybersecurity  communication  depended  on  the  SMB's 
hands-on  skills,  tools  adaptedness,  and  the  users'  willingness  to  documenting 
confidential information. The SMBs wanted to learn in simple, incremental steps, 
allowing them to understand what they do. An SMB's motivation to improve se-
curity  depended  on  the  fitness  of  assessment  questions  and  recommendations 
with the SMB's business model and IT infrastructure. The results of this study 
indicate that automated counselling can help many SMBs in security adoption. 

Keywords: Cybersecurity, Small and Medium-sized Businesses, Capability As-
sessment and Improvement, Do-It-Yourself, Multi-Case Study. 

1 

Introduction  

Small and medium-sized businesses (SMBs) as the foundation of the EU's economy [1] 
are the weakest spot for cyber-attacks [2,3]. SMBs have specific characteristics, and 
these characteristics separate them from large companies and make them highly vul-
nerable to security attacks [4,5,6 ,7]. The lack of financial resources, expertise, written 
formal security policies, and also the common wrong attitude towards security and risks 
are some of these characteristics. Previous studies considered these characteristics and 
their influences on SMBs' resilience to security threats [3,8,9,10].  

2 

Ntouskas  et  al.  [3]  present  a  self-management  security  method  which  provides  a 
consultancy environment for SMBs. Brunner et al. [9] focus on the level of automation 
in information security management and describe a continuous, risk-driven, and con-
text-aware information security management system. Their framework is applicable to 
SMBs [9]. Furnell et al. [10] present a self-paced, flexible, and personalised security 
training software tool. The tool provides employees with the ability to learn some se-
curity countermeasures and desired behaviours. 

In  our  experience  of  working  with  SMBs  that  were  active  in  the  IT  industry,  we 
found out that access to knowledge is not enough for motivating the SMBs to adopt 
appropriate  behaviour. The  SMBs need to understand the severity of threats and  the 
impacts  on  their businesses.  Moreover,  providing  hands-on  skills  that  are  consonant 
with the SMBs' capability motivates them to have security practices. We have not found 
any  approach  that  considers  the  SMBs'  motivation  in  the  adoption  of  cybersecurity 
through self-assessment, learning, and improvement. Technical security measures form 
a large part of information security research [11]. Cybersecurity is more effective if the 
attention goes beyond the technical protecting means to the users, social, and organisa-
tional  environment  [11,12,13].  Human  errors  are  the  main cause  of  security  failures 
[12] and promoting users' self-efficacy, and knowledge in information security can en-
hance organisation security [14]. 

CYSEC is a self-paced SMB-specific training and assessment method that automates 
elements of a counselling dialogue [15] between a security expert and employees in the 
SMB to ward off cyber threats. The interaction and dialogue between employees and 
security  experts  bridge  the  gap  between  them  and  makes  the  information  security 
measures more effective [16]. Since users' resistance to accepting security tools and 
advice  is  one  of  the  main  problems  for  information  security  [17],  the  dialogue  in 
CYSEC is based on theoretical foundations of motivation and the effects of employees' 
psychological needs on cybersecurity adoption.  Persuasion is more effective than ra-
tional training strategies when the level of commitment to change is low [18].  

The current study focuses on CYSEC evaluation to see whether the CYSEC is useful 
and effective as a method of communicating cybersecurity expertise for enabling DIY 
cybersecurity  assessment  and  capability  improvement  for SMBs.  The  study  purpose 
was approached by using an observation strategy based on the  think-aloud protocol. 
While  the  previous  literature  mainly  studies  individuals'  security  behaviour  through 
several interviews [16,19,20], the empirical findings of this study are based on observ-
ing actual usage of the tool to determine those factors which facilitate or control users' 
behaviour. The data was qualitatively analysed based on our theoretical model derived 
from Self-determination Theory (SDT) [21,22]. Our results demonstrate that SDT can 
explain motivational factors for effective counselling communication, and these factors 
influence users' behaviour to adopt cybersecurity recommendations. Unmet psycholog-
ical needs may hamper users' adoption of cybersecurity behaviours. We observed that 
the automated dialogue is more effective when the method offers adapted behaviour, 
users' self-efficacy improvement, and SMBs' confidentiality issues together. 

 The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the theoreti-
cal background. Section 3 describes the CYSEC method. Section 4 describes the design 
of  the  study.  Section  5  presents  the  process  of  data  collection  in  SMBs.  Section  6 

3 

analyses the results and answers the research questions. Section 7 discusses the signif-
icance of the results and the threats to validity. Section 8 summarises and concludes. 

2 

Theoretical Background  

Cybersecurity studies draw on a variety of theories from different disciplines [19,20]. 
Self-Determination Theory (SDT) [21] provides a rigorous theoretical framework for 
studying motivation and has been considered in cybersecurity [19,20]. SDT describes 
and explains people's psychology of being self-motivated for adopting personal behav-
iours [21]. SDT was developed and evaluated with extensive research that resulted in 
an in-depth understanding of the conditions under which people will develop towards 
being a self-motivated in pursuing what they and their community consider as being 
desirable. The results of the research help managers and coaches to bring meaningful 
norms of behaviour into use and support the concerned people in adopting the conduct. 
Self-motivation concerns goal-orientation, energy,  and persistence – all related to 
producing results. If a goal is perceived to be important, the concerned person will start 
adapting his or her behaviour and be persistent to the extent that the behavioural change 
will sustain. According to SDT, a person will be self-motivated if these psychological 
needs have been satisfied: competence, autonomy, and relatedness. A lack of perceived 
competence, or self-efficacy, will lead the person to give up. Autonomy is important as 
the  free  choice  determines  how  convinced  the  person  is  about  the  behaviour  to  be 
adopted. Relatedness to a person who acts as a role model for the behaviour can rein-
force the self-motivation and even offer a template of how to adopt the behaviour. 

Both intrinsic and extrinsic motivation leads to the adoption and internalisation of 
new behaviour. However, the more intrinsic the motivation is, the more effective and 
sustainable the adoption of the behaviour is. For each type of motivation, several forces 
influence how people are moved to act. People can feel motivated because they value 
an activity, e.g., by an abiding interest. People with such intrinsic motivation have in-
terest, excitement, and confidence, which manifests as enhanced performance, persis-
tence, and creativity. People under external coercion, e.g. with a bribe, fear of being 
surveilled, or other external pressure, are risking to be unwilling and unmotivated. Still, 
people can be externally motivated by a stimulating personal commitment to excel and 
offering role models' recognition. Table 1 shows, for the continuum from intrinsic mo-
tivation  to  amotivation,  how  behaviour  may  be  influenced.  Any  method  for  helping 
users to achieve goals should operationalise these factors in the method's design.  

 Table 1 is pointing to the important SDT constructs that should be operationalised 
by a coaching method. It suggests hypotheses that can be used for evaluating whether 
the method supports the effectiveness of the cybersecurity knowledge communication 
for SMBs. The constructs concern attributes of the method user and environment with 
which  the  user  interacts.  The  method  user's  attributes  characterise  the  user's  desired 
behaviour, self-efficacy, and autonomy. The method environment's attributes are relat-
edness,  belonging,  and  connectedness  offered  to  the user, pressure  imposed  through 
rewards, threats, and deadlines, the knowledge provided for helping the user to develop 
self-efficacy, and choice offered for fostering autonomy of the user. 

4 

Table 1. Factors for influencing desired behaviour, based on SDT. 

Motivation 
Intrinsic motivation: a person with inter-
ested and joy in desired behaviour tends to 
seek out novelty and challenges, to explore, 
learn, and exercise one's capacities even in 
the absence of specific rewards. 

Extrinsic motivation: continuum from co-
ercion to stimulating intrinsic motivation: 
A) External regulation is associated with 
control or alienation, and actions are per-
ceived imposed by external regulators 
B) Introjected regulation is not accepted 
as the one's own, but behaviours are per-
formed to maintain a feeling of worth, e.g. 
to avoid guilt or anxiety or attain pride 
C) Regulation through identification: 
conscious valuing and acceptance of rules 
as being personally important 
D) Integrated regulations: fully assimi-
lated as a result of evaluation and brought 
into congruence with one values and needs 
Amotivation: lacking the intention to act 
due to coercion, leading to failed goal 
achievement. 

How Desired Behaviour is Influenced 
Autonomy of choice, perceived competence or 
self-efficacy, and a caring environment with opti-
mal challenges and feedback of how the person's 
actions lead to the outcomes enhance intrinsic 
motivation and performance [23]. Extrinsic re-
wards, threats, deadlines, pressured evaluations, 
and imposed goals diminish intrinsic motivation. 
With prescribed behaviours and values, new be-
haviour is internalised with meaningful ration-
ales, autonomy, and relatedness [23]. External 
regulation is achieved with salient rewards or 
threats. Introjected regulation is achieved with 
the provision of belonging and connectedness, 
e.g. by having significant others to whom people 
feel attached or related prompt, model, endorse, 
or value the desired behaviour. Regulation 
through identification can only be achieved if au-
tonomy of choice is provided. To integrate a reg-
ulation, the rules' meaning must be synthesised 
with respect to the person's goals and values with 
great autonomy in the sense of choice, volition, 
and freedom from excessive external pressure. 

Amotivation is resulting from not valuing an ac-
tivity, not feeling competent to do it, or not ex-
pecting the activity to yield desired outcome. 

3 

CYSEC, a DIY Cybersecurity Improvement Method 

CYSEC  is  a  method  and  tool  allowing  SMBs'  Chief  Information  Security  Officer 
(CISO)  to improve  cybersecurity in a do-it-yourself fashion. The method guides the 
CISO in following Deming's plan-do-check-act (PDCA) [24] cycles of selecting sensi-
ble  security  themes,  implementing  a  recommended  practice,  checking  progress,  and 
adapting based on lessons-learned. The tool offers memory allowing the CISO to con-
tinue the PDCA work where he left off. The tool also includes design elements based 
on SDT that aim at offering motivation for effective results and sustainability of the 
improvements. 

Fig. 1.  shows the two main interfaces offered to the user. A dashboard offers the 
features (1) recommendations for next improvements, (2) access to capability areas for 
PDCA work, (3) summary information about the company progress. Once the PDCA 
work  for  a  given  capability  area  is  started,  e.g.  by  choosing  a  recommendation  or a 
capability area, the user enters the work area that offers the features (4) self-assessment, 
(5)  access  to  expert knowledge,  and  (6)  action  cockpit  for  creating  calendar  entries, 
emails, and reminders. Table 2.  describes how CYSEC operationalises SDT. 

5 

Fig. 1. Main user interfaces of the CYSEC tool and mapping of its features to SDT constructs. 

The content has been organised into five cybersecurity themes (Patch Management, 
Access Control and Audit, Malware Scans, User Training, Back up). These themes al-
low fast ramp-up of security capabilities with minimal effort and large impact on SMBs. 
Recommendations  are  generated  based  on  users'  answers  to  the  self-assessment 
questionnaires for maturity improvement [25]. For the first time, new users will see one 
recommendation to fill out the company coach. As an adaptation rule, the answers to 
the company coach affect the questions asked in the other coaches. After completing 
the company coach, several coaches will be active in the dashboard. The available ca-
pabilities are defined and prioritised based on the cybersecurity expert's propositions 
(third author). When a user selects one coach, s(he) has access to the self-assessment 
questions and relevant capability training content. Providing the content was based on 
the research into the training material [26], technical reports provided by Symantec and 
Ponemon, and meeting with experts. Technical reports provide updated cybersecurity 
solutions and statistics. At the end of each coach, users see summary information and 
are redirected to the dashboard. In the dashboard, they see the progress information, 
achieved scores, and new recommendations for cybersecurity practices and selection of 
the next coach(es). 

User’s MotivationChoiceChoiceKnowledgeRelatednessRewardsRewardsDeadlinesChoiceThreatsBelongingBelonging123456 
6 

Table 2. Operationalisation of SDT Constructs 

SDT Construct  CYSEC Function  Operationalisation 
Relatedness 

Dashboard: recom-
mendations 
Dashboard: progress 
summary 
Work area: steps  

Offline 

Belonging and 
Connectedness 

Work area: action 
cockpit 
Offline 

Rewards, 
threats, and 
deadlines 

Dashboard: progress 
summary 

Knowledge 

Choice 

Work area: expert 
knowledge 
Work area: action 
cockpit 
Dashboard: access 
to capability areas 
Work area: expert 
knowledge 
Dashboard: recom-
mendations 
Dashboard: access 
to capability areas 
Work area: action 
cockpit 

4 

Study Design 

Self-adaptation of recommendations to SMB profile 
and improvement progress. 
Continuous feedback about progress and motivation. 

Self-adaptation of recommended next improvements  

Personal workshops with SMBs for reflecting about 
improvement experience. 
Fostering of personal communication between CISO 
and employees. 
Personal workshops with SMBs for reflecting about 
improvement experience. 
Feedback about the defence strength built and 
knowledge acquired in the company, and persistence in 
working on cybersecurity ("fitness"). 
Information about the importance of improvements, 
e.g. by referring to cyber risks that should be mitigated. 
Setting of calendar entries and emailing reminders to 
employees. 
Access to knowledge and recommendations for build-
ing cybersecurity in the SMB. 
Presentation of knowledge and recommendations for 
building cybersecurity in the SMB. 
Presentation of the three top recommendations, offer-
ing choice about the next important improvements. 
Presentation of capability areas, offering choice about 
the type of cybersecurity to build. 
Choice of deferring improvements with a calendar en-
try or bookmark and of involving employees by email. 

The study aimed at evaluating whether CYSEC is useful and effective as a method 
of communicating cybersecurity expertise for enabling DIY cybersecurity assessment 
and capability improvement for SMBs. To achieve this aim, we designed a deductive 
multi-case study and used observation as the main method for data collection [27]. Case 
studies are common in information systems research and cybersecurity [20].  

For planning the case study, a study protocol was developed and sent to the partici-
pating SMBs. Before conducting the case studies, a pilot workshop was performed for 
a start-up project that involved the second and third researchers and a developer. The 
pilot allowed to identify and resolve initial problems in the study design. The selection 
of the cases was based on the availability of the SMBs. It has been done in two steps. 
At first, data collection was based on four SMBs, and during the study (project life-
time), two more SMBs were included. Based on Yin [27], when using a multiple-case 
design, the number of case replications is essential instead of sampling logic, and the 
model of generalisation is analytic generalisation when we have a developed theory as 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 

a template. The selected SMBs have security resources, working in the software indus-
try, and their CISOs have a level of expertise in security. The CISOs' behaviour was 
the unit of analysis. Table 3 presents our SMBs' demographics. Based on the EU Com-
mission definition, companies with < 50 employees and annual turnover ≤ €10 million 
are small, and those with < 250 employees and annual turnover ≤ €50 million medium. 

4.1  Research Questions and Case Selection 

The following two research questions were analysed. RQ1 related the communication 
method to the user's motivation and adoption of cybersecurity recommendations. RQ2 
reflects users' evaluations of the method and tool after the actual usage. 

RQ1: How do the CYSEC dashboard and work area features influence the effective-
ness of communicating cybersecurity to motivate users' adoption of desired behaviour? 
To  improve  SMBs'  cybersecurity  capability,  they  need  to  adopt  good  cybersecurity 
practices. Since CYSEC provides security experts' recommendations and training con-
tent, we are studying SMBs' security adoption through CYSEC communication. The 
factors of the study are based ont he SDT constructs and CYSEC features in Table 2. 
We evaluate the effectiveness of communication by observing users' behaviour, atten-
tion, comprehension, and theoretical cause-effect relationships [27]. RQ2: Do the SMB 
human end-users perceive CYSEC to be acceptable and useful as a tool assisting DIY 
cybersecurity assessment and improvement? Tool acceptance and perceived usefulness 
are significant for us since a problem for information security is the users' resistance to 
accepting security tools [17]. Therefore, in RQ2, we want to have the users' attitude. 

ID  Step  Size 

Of-
fices 

1  1  Medium  3 

2  1  Medium  3 

3  1 

Small 

4  1 

Small 

5  2 
6  2 

Small 
Small 

2 

1 

1 
1 

Table 3. SMBs Demographics 

Maturity (Some controls imple-
mented) 
Access control., network con-
trols, backup, encryption 
Password mgmt., patch mgmt., 
encryption, (training) security 
best practices for developers 
Password mgmt., Code inspec-
tion 
Access control, patch mgmt.,  

Structure 

CEO, security team, em-
ployees 
CEO, security team, em-
ployees 

CEO, security team, em-
ployees 
Professors, manager, Secu-
rity team, users 

Using a firewall, Access control  CEO, manager, employees 
CEO, managers, developers 
Password mgmt.,  

4.2  Workshop Design and Meeting with Companies 

Each workshop started with an explanation of the study, steps, and relevant objectives. 
To collecting honest responses [28], the researcher emphasised that the collected data 
would be applied anonymously for academic purposes and then obtained the subjects' 
consent. During the workshops, the researcher took notes about how the subjects inter-
acted with the tool and asked them to "think aloud" [29] and explain their expectation. 

8 

The workshops had four parts and four tasks for the CISO in the SMB. In part 1, the 
CISOs characterised their companies. In part 2, and to understand the main user's ca-
pabilities, the CISOs answered three questions about their level of education, experi-
ence in cybersecurity, and their roles. The responses to the questions were used to con-
firm  the  suitability  of  the  selected  case  for  the  study.  In part  3,  the user  applied  the 
CYSEC. In part 4, the observation was supplemented with a post-observation quantita-
tive questionnaire (Table 4). The result section presents the process of the workshops. 

5 

Results 

In this section, we present the process of data collection in the 1-day workshops. 

Company  1:  two  people  (CISO)  participated  in  the  workshop,  which  took  26 
minutes. This workshop took a short time since the users only provided their feedback 
at the end of the workshop. The researcher had the lowest degree of interaction in this 
workshop. It seems they were familiar with the topics and questions, so they refer to 
the training content only two or three times.  

Company 2: Two people from a team of cybersecurity participated. The workshop 
took one hour and forty-three minutes. The users referred to the training content several 
times when they were not able to understand the actual goal of the questions. The users 
stated that the training content for some questions is not completely correct. 

Company 3:  Only one person (CISO) participated. The workshop took two hours 
and thirty-five minutes. The user explained that their SMB had not managed any cy-
bersecurity training courses and security awareness issues are usually sent to the em-
ployees by email. During the workshop, the user experienced several system time-outs. 
So, the user required to log in several times. This issue was due to a bug in the tool, and 
it distracted the user's attention to some extent. So, the researcher needed to interact 
with the user. For this SMB, confidentiality issues were very critical. 

Company  4:  A  team  of  seven  IT  specialist  participated.  The  workshop  took  two 
hours and a half. The users went through the coaches the same as the first workshop. 
The distinctive feature of this workshop was the  discussion about each question be-
tween participants to find suitable answers based on the company's requirements. The 
users applied training content too much to understand the questions. For this SMB dy-
namic, and reliable training material was significant. 

Company 5: Only one person (CISO) participated. The workshop took thirty-four 
minutes. The user stated that their SMB has no chain of management. In this workshop, 
the user emphasised that some of the questions have no suitable options for the answer. 
Company 6: Two people from a team of cybersecurity participated. The workshop 
took  forty  minutes.  People  in  the  workshop  had  a  language  problem,  and  they  used 
Google translate to understand the content. So, the researcher needed to interact with 
the users. The users went through some of the coaches. 

In all workshops, the mechanism of the tool usage was almost the same and the users 
referred to the training content mostly when they had a problem to understand ques-
tions. The meaning of some of the questions was not clear for the CISOs. Also, all of 
them required a summary and recommendation after finishing each coach. 

9 

6 

Analysis 

For answering the research questions, we explain the researcher's observations of the 
tool usage based on SDT- specific features of the CYSEC, which indicated in Table 2. 

6.1  Factors Influencing Cybersecurity Communication (RQ1) 

According to the workshop results, the CYSEC dashboard and work area features af-
fected the users' motivation for the adoption of desired behaviour. These features to-
gether can facilitate security management and inter-organisational connection between 
the CISO and the employees and support self-efficacy and capability improvement in 
the SMBs. The participating SMBs learned about cybersecurity and adopted practices 
and controls when the immediate perceived learning experience was good.  

Available Expert Knowledge (CYSEC Work Area). As suggested by SDT, we 
have  observed  that  improving  self-efficacy  had  a  positive  impact  on  the  users'  self-
motivation. The immediate relevance of the training material provided by the CYSEC 
tool affected the subjects' decision to study the training material. Still, even though the 
participants did not have any systematic cybersecurity course so far, none of them read 
the  full  knowledge  texts  provided  by  CYSEC.  Instead,  the  subjects  studied  training 
material when they did not understand a question or wanted to know more about a topic 
to select suitable answers.  Company 4:  "We need practical instructions and steps to 
help us solve our issues and not general ideas." Company 2: "some materials are not 
relevant to the right topics/questions." When responding to some of the questions, they 
referred to the training content occasionally and only to find a specific issue. For in-
stance, to explore how they can measure the strength of password based on a tool.  

Perceived reliability, expert support, clarity, and local language support of the con-
tent were important in the sense that the lack of these quality attributes hindered partic-
ipants from accepting training input. Company 4: "Parts of the content are not clear 
enough for us, and some materials (statistics) are not reliable since they are not cover-
ing many security experts and SMBs' opinions." Company 2: "Training content needs 
to present the severity of threats clearly." Company 2: "Since the coaches are in Eng-
lish, it might be possible for some SMBs to be unwilling to apply the tool." Company 6: 
"Can you please tell me what actually you mean [even after using Google translate for 
the training content]." The quotes here can demonstrate the users' awareness and atten-
tion to the training content with respect to the effectiveness of the communication. 

Assessment  Questions  for  Next  Step  Improvement  (CYSEC  Work  Area).  As 
suggested by SDT, choice supported autonomy and self-motivation. However, the op-
tions should always be relevant and adapted to the IT infrastructure and operations of 
the company. The participants looked for questions that fit their interest and perceived 
needs. If they could not find such questions, they explained their needs by referring to 
their company's characteristics (assets). Moreover, they wanted the coach to adapt the 
questions to the SMB's characteristics specified with preceding answers. Company 3: 
"here, the tool should provide a lot of questions to cover different operating systems."  
Also, the users wanted each question to be answerable with options for the response 
that explained the situation precisely. The researcher observed that the users did not 
answer some questions or selected an imprecise option due to lack of suitable choices. 

10 

Company  2 about the question  "Do your users use any other authentication method, 
such as fingerprint or 2-factor authentication, to control access to your sensitive sys-
tems:" "for some systems yes, for some systems and users no. I cannot answer properly, 
so I select the answer [Yes, for some systems]." Company 5: "I need an option between 
yes and no." The quality of the questions also influenced the efficiency of the users. 
Some of the questions were perceived to be confusing. When being confronted with 
such questions, the participants looked for training content, searched the Internet for 
the topic, or asked the researcher for clarification. Company 4: "some of the questions 
are confusing and not clear enough for us." Company 2: "I could not understand if the 
question is related to servers or employees' computers." The quotes here can demon-
strate the users' comprehension and their ability to answer the assessment questions. 
Their behaviours and comments refer to the effectiveness of communication. 

Action Cockpit (CYSEC Work Area). As suggested by SDT, we have observed 
that  respect  of  the  belonging within  the  organisation  is  important.  While  the  CISOs 
answered most training and awareness questions, they communicated with their col-
leagues to find the answer for some of the questions. The CISO in Company 2 made a 
call to answer some questions. When he could not find his colleague, he highlighted the 
question for future consideration. Also, in Company 4, the IT specialist had a discussion 
to find the best answers for some questions based on their company requirements.  

Recommendations (CYSEC Dashboard). As suggested by SDT, self-efficacy and 
relatedness had a positive impact on users' autonomous motivation. All SMBs wanted 
to  receive  feedback  after  finishing  a  coach  and  recommendations  for  next  improve-
ments. Company 1: "we need a summary and recommendation after each coach." 

Access to Capability Areas (CYSEC Dashboard). As suggested by SDT, choices 
support users' autonomy and motivation. Still, a recommended order was appreciated 
by the SMBs, even though the order must not be enforced.  Some of the participants 
selected capability areas based on reflected priorities or requirements.  Company 2 on 
which capability do you want to select to answer? "no preference [for the capabilities]. 
we can answer based on the list." Other participants followed different orders, and one 
looked for a specific capability area that was not available in the list of capability areas. 
Progress Summary (CYSEC Dashboard). None of the participants was intrinsi-
cally motivated; SDT's model of introjected regulation was best explaining the partici-
pants' adoption behaviour. The participants wanted feedback about their performance, 
and  it  was  important  that  the  feedback  was  credible.  The  gamification  elements  of 
showing  progress  impacted  the  users'  motivation.  All  the  participated  CISOs  in  this 
study wanted to have a simple summary which indicated their company's progress.  

6.2  Acceptance and Usefulness of CYSEC (RQ2) 

The answer to RQ2 is based on the supplementary data  collected at the end of each 
study about the users' attitudes. Users evaluated the usefulness of the tool by responding 
to a five-level Likert scale questions about the tool usefulness (low [L], rather low [RL], 
medium [M], rather high [RH], high [H]) and justified their evaluation. The follow-up 
questionnaire (Table 4) aimed at understanding users' attitudes about tool acceptance 
and  usefulness.  However,  the  short  survey  and  small  number  of  SMBs  were  not 

11 

statistically significant for analysis. Company 1: “CYSEC is easy to use and useful.” 
Company 2: “the severity of the threats should be more visible in the training content.” 
Also, Company 2 stated “CYSEC needed to be evaluated by our employees.” Company 
3: “I have not referred too much to the training content, so I prefer not to evaluate the 
second  question.”  Moreover, this  company  explained  that  “the  confidentiality  issues 
and the lack of some relevant questions in the specific topics influence our evaluation.” 
Company 4: “although CYSEC is easy to use, the instructions in the training content 
are not easy to implement and practical for us.” Company 5: “CYSEC provides lots of 
training material in one place. However, the gamification elements of showing progress 
need to be more transparent.” Company 6: “the logic behind the questions needs to be 
improved to better support adaptation.” CYSEC usefulness was perceived to be high 
by Company 1, Company 4 and Company 6, rather high by Company 2 and Company 
5, and medium by Company 3. The lowest rank (medium [M]) chosen by Company 3 
put a strong emphasis on a) confidentiality before and during the study and b) the lack 
of relevant questions in specific advanced topics. This result indicates that a tool like 
CYSEC that is based on self-assessment and tailored training modules was accepted as 
a do-it-yourself approach allowing SMBs to manage most capabilities. 

Table 4. Questionnaire for the workshops' part 4. 

Part 4 Questionnaire 
Have you been aware of these threats/vulnerabili-
ties? (Content) 
How do you evaluate the quality of the infor-
mation in the training content? 
Does the training content send a clear message 
about the threat severity or your vulnerability? 
Are the instructions of the training content doable? 

How easy is applying CYSEC (easy to use)? 
How useful is applying CYSEC to improve your 
security awareness and capability? 

ID 1 
RH 

ID 2 
RH 

ID 3 
H 

ID 4 
ID5  ID6 
RH  RH  H 

RH 

RH 

- 

RH  RH  H 

RH  M 

M 

RH  RH  RH 

H 

RH 

H 

RH  M 

- 

M 

RH  M 

M 

H 

H 

H  H 

H  H 

RH  H 

7 

Discussion 

We have presented an approach for allowing SMBs to improve their cybersecurity in a 
DIY fashion. This result allows moving from a bespoke, consultancy-centred advisory 
to an automated model of communicating cybersecurity knowledge that is scalable yet 
individualised, hence allows to serve many SMBs with little effort.  Our approach im-
plements the self-determination theory [21], which describes the motivation for achiev-
ing outcomes and the factors influencing such motivation. SDT is not the only relevant 
theory, however. Protection motivation theory [19] is one of the widely used theories 
and  would  offer  an  alternative  for  method  and  tool  design,  allowing  us  to  focus  on 
motivating the users to protect their assets and company. We have chosen to implement 
SDT first as, in our understanding, the improvement of cybersecurity also concerns the 
creation of new capabilities in the organisation: installing and configuring tools, estab-
lishing policies, and training employees beyond just protecting an asset.  

12 

In a multi-case study, we offered insights on the actual use of our designed method 
and tool in real-world SMB settings. Such validation goes beyond just evaluating in-
tentions as in [19] or theoretical relationship as in the common survey-based studies. 
The  presented  work  is  the  first  step  towards  operationalising  SDT  and  using  it  to 
achieve an impact on practice. As a result, we have discovered issues for future research 
that would not have been discovered otherwise. The findings of the study suggest that 
one challenge of motivating and supporting SMBs is the choice of knowledge that is 
being communicated. The wrong knowledge, extraneous security awareness details, or 
knowledge gaps reduce motivation and influence the adoption of security recommen-
dations. Also, we discovered a potential barrier that should be addressed by future re-
search: confidentiality. While SDT emphasises relatedness, we observed resistance to 
documenting and sharing security-related information both within and among compa-
nies. Alleviating confidentiality worries is crucial for improving the method's success.  
Following Yin [27], our study has the following threats to validity. Construct va-
lidity: are the operational measures for the concepts being studied correct? Our choice 
of constructs is based on SDT (Table 1) that we implemented in the CYSEC tool (Table 
2) and discussed with the study participants. We described how we had implemented 
the  constructs  and  offered  a  chain  of  evidence  between  the  answers  to  the  research 
questions and the data collected in the workshops. To ensure that the results reflect not 
only our subjective impressions, we did member checking. 

Internal validity: can the cause-effect relationships in SDT be distinguished from 
bogus relationships? We used pattern matching and explanation-building for addressing 
internal validity threats. We identified relevant observations and feedback collected in 
the workshops and evaluated which ones spoke for a relationship, respectively against, 
resulting in the reported analysis. We also  asked for what could have influenced the 
assessment, for example, whether the participants had cybersecurity training before the 
workshop to rule out the influence of such expertise. A longitudinal study, e.g., based 
on follow-up surveys, could be a research strategy for evaluating whether and how the 
SMBs change their practices with extended use of the CYSEC tool. 

External validity: can the study be generalised? The participating SMBs were di-
verse but still had similarities: all were active in the digitisation, had a CISO without 
deep expertise in cybersecurity but several years of experience, and did not provide any 
training to their employees. Since they had some knowledge in cybersecurity, they were 
able to answer the questions without continually referring to the training content and 
succeeded to implement some security controls. However, this study has not covered 
a) SMBs with considerable expertise in the cybersecurity b) SMBs that hardly use IT, 
and c) SMBs without any budget and personnel for cybersecurity. The study results 
may  change for  such  SMBs  because  of  different  knowledge  needs  and  relevance  of 
assessment questions and improvement recommendations. 

Reliability: can the study be replicated with the same results? We developed and 
piloted a case study protocol that we applied in the main study. The protocol ensured 
that the operational steps were clear and that each SMB had enough time to use the tool 
without distraction. All the steps were traced in a case study database. To strengthen 
the chain of evidence, we presented our findings to the participating SMBs' subjects 
and cybersecurity experts in a formal meeting for correction (member checking). 

13 

8 

Summary and Conclusions  

The paper has evaluated the actual usage of the CYSEC, a do-it-yourself (DIY) security 
assessment and improvement method for small and medium-sized businesses (SMBs), 
through an explanatory multi-case study. This study followed a deductive approach and 
tested constructs drawn on the Self-Determination Theory to evaluate the impact of the 
method on the effectiveness of cybersecurity communication to the SMBs. We applied 
observation and feedback questionnaires for data collection. 

The results support the influence of the following features on communication effec-
tiveness and users' motivation: expert knowledge, self-adaptating assessment question, 
action cockpit for connectedness in SMBs, self-adaptating recommendations, provided 
capability areas, and progress summary. They empower SMBs in adopting and adher-
ing to cybersecurity. The content, including questionnaires and recommendations, need 
to be presented in an easy-to-understand manner to improve users' competency. The 
assessment questionnaires and recommendations need to adapt to each specific SMB 
to increase autonomy. Also, for users’ acceptance and adherence, CYSEC needs to con-
sider  the  company  confidentiality  seriously.  Users  are  emotionally  connected  to  the 
SMBs' data do not want to share their information, especially about vulnerabilities, with 
the tool or third parties outside the SMB. Thus, confidentiality, trust, and relatedness 
may influence security communication and tool acceptance positively.  

Acknowledgements 

This work was made possible with funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 740787 (SMESEC) and 
the Swiss State Secretariat for Education‚ Research and Innovation (SERI) under con-
tract number 17.00067. The opinions expressed and arguments employed herein do not 
necessarily reflect the official views of these funding bodies. 

References 

1.  Muller, P., Julius, J., Herr, D., Koch, L., Peycheva, V., McKiernan, S., Hope, K.: Annual 
report on European SMEs 2016/2017: Focus on self-employment. European Commission 
(2017). 

2.  Caldwell,  T.:  Securing  small  businesses  –  the  weakest  link in  a  supply  chain?  Computer 

Fraud & Security, 5–10 (2015). 

3.  Ntouskas, T., Papanikas, D., Polemi, N.: A Collaborative System Offering Security Man-
agement  Services  for  SMEs/mEs.  In:  Georgiadis,  C.K.,  Jahankhani,  H.,  Pimenidis,  E., 
Bashroush,  R.,  and  Al-Nemrat, A.  (eds.)  Global  Security,  Safety  and  Sustainability  &  e-
Democracy. pp. 220–228. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg (2012). 

4.  Goucher, W.: Do SMEs have the right attitude to security? Computer Fraud & Security, 18–

20 (2011). 

5.  Gupta, A., Hammond, R.: Information systems security issues and decisions for small busi-
nesses: An empirical examination. Info Mngmnt & Comp Security. 13, 297–310 (2005). 
6.  Mijnhardt, F., Baars, T., Spruit, M.: Organizational characteristics influencing SME infor-
mation security maturity. Journal of Computer Information Systems 56(11), 106-115 (2016). 

14 

7.  Kurpjuhn, T.: The SME security challenge. Computer Fraud & Security, 5–7 (2015). 
8.  Valli,  C.,  Martinus,  I.C.,  Johnstone,  M.N.:  Small  to  Medium  Enterprise  Cyber  Security 

Awareness: an initial survey of Western Australian Business (2014). 

9.  Brunner, M., Sillaber, C., Breu, R.: Towards Automation in Information Security Manage-
ment Systems. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and 
Security (QRS), pp. 160–167. IEEE, Prague, Czech Republic (2017). 

10.  Furnell,  S.M.,  Gennatou,  M.,  Dowland,  P.S.:  A  prototype  tool  for  information  security 

awareness and training. Logistics Information Mngt. 15, 352–357 (2002). 

11.  Dhillon,  G.,  Torkzadeh,  G.:  Value-focused  assessment  of  information  system  security  in 

organizations. Information Systems Journal. 16, 293–314 (2006). 

12.  Cranor, L.F.:A framework for reasoning about the human in the loop. In: UPSEC’08 Pro-

ceedings of the 1st conference on usability, psychology, security, Berkeley, USA (2008). 
13.  Pahnila, S., Siponen, M., Mahmood, A.: Employees’ Behavior towards IS Security Policy 
Compliance.  In:  40th  Annual  Hawaii  International  Conference  on  System  Sciences 
(HICSS’07), pp. 156–166. IEEE, Hawaii, USA (2007). 

14.  Rhee, H.-S., Kim, C., Ryu, Y.U.: Self-efficacy in information security: Its influence on end 
users’ information security practice behavior. Computers & Security. 28, 816–826 (2009). 
15.  Shojaifar, A., Fricker, S.A., Gwerder, M.: Elicitation of SME Requirements for Cybersecu-

rity Solutions by Studying Adherence to Recommendations. REFSQ Workshops (2018). 
16.  Albrechtsen, E., Hovden, J.: The information security digital divide between information 

security managers and users. Computers & Security, 28, 476–490 (2009). 

17.  West, R.: The psychology of security. Communications of the ACM 51(4), 34‐40 (2008). 
18.  Hayes, J.: The theory and practice of change management. Palgrave, New York (2002). 
19.  Menard, P., Bott, G.J., Crossler, R.E.: User Motivations in Protecting Information Security: 
Protection Motivation Theory Versus Self-Determination Theory. Journal of Management 
Information Systems 34(4), 1203–1230 (2017).  

20.  Pham, H.C., Pham, D.D., Brennan, L., Richardson, J.: Information Security and People: A 

Conundrum for Compliance. AJIS 21, 1-16 (2017). 

21.  Ryan, R.M., Deci, E.L.: Self-Determination Theory and the Facilitation of Intrinsic Motiva-
tion, Social Development, and Well-Being. American Psychologist. 55, 68-78 (2000). 
22.  Deci, E.L., Ryan, R.M.: Self-determination theory: A macrotheory of human motivation, 

development, and health. Canadian Psychology 49(3), 182–185 (2008). 

23.  Deci,  E.L.,  Ryan,  R.M.:  The  General  Causality  Orientations  Scale:  Self-determination  in 

personality. Journal of research in personality 19(2), 109-134 (1985). 

24.  Deming, W.E.: Elementary principles of the statistical control of quality. Nippon Kagaku 

Gigutsu Remmei: Japanese Union of Science and Engineering (JUSE) (1951). 

25.  Ozkan, B.Y., Spruit, M.: A questionnaire model for cybersecurity maturity assessment  of 
critical infrastructures. In: Fournaris, A.P., Lampropoulos, K., and Marín Tordera, E. (eds.) 
Information  and  Operational  Technology  Security  Systems.  pp.  49–60.  Springer  Interna-
tional Publishing, Cham (2019). 

26.  Gardner, B., Thomas, V.: Building an Information Security Awareness Program: Defending 
Against Social Engineering and Technical Threats. Elsevier/Syngress, Amsterdam (2014). 
27.  Yin, R.K.:Case study research:design and methods.4th edn.Thousand Oaks,CA: Sage (2009). 
28.  Bennett, R.J., Robinson, S.L.: Development of a measure of workplace deviance. Journal of 

Applied Psychology. 85(3), 349–360 (2000). 

29.  Runeson, P., Höst, M., Rainer, A., Regnell, B.: Case Study Research in Software Engineer-

ing: Guidelines and Examples. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, USA (2012). 

