Actor-based Risk Analysis for Blockchains in Smart Mobility
Forthcoming in the proceedings of CryBlock/MobiCom2020

Ranwa Al Mallah
Ryerson University
Toronto, Ontario
ranwa.almallah@ryerson.ca

Bilal Farooq
Ryerson University
Toronto, Ontario
bilal.farooq@ryerson.ca

0
2
0
2

c
e
D
4

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
8
9
0
9
0
.
7
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Blockchain technology is a crypto-based secure ledger for data
storage and transfer through decentralized, trustless peer-to-peer
systems. Despite its advantages, previous studies have shown that
the technology is not completely secure against cyber attacks. Thus,
it is crucial to perform domain speciﬁc risk analysis to measure
how viable the attacks are on the system, their impact and con-
sequently the risk exposure. Speciﬁcally, in this paper, we carry
out an analysis in terms of quantifying the risk associated to an
operational multi-layered Blockchain framework for Smart Mobil-
ity Data-markets (BSMD). We conduct an actor-based analysis to
determine the impact of the attacks. The analysis identiﬁed ﬁve at-
tack goals and ﬁve types of attackers that violate the security of the
blockchain system. In the case study of the public-permissioned
BSMD, we highlight the highest risk factors according to their im-
pact on the victims in terms of monetary, privacy, integrity and
trust. Four attack goals represent a risk in terms of economic losses
and one attack goal contains many threats that represent a risk that
is either unacceptable or undesirable.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Security and privacy → Database and storage security.

KEYWORDS
blockchain, mobility, security, risk analysis

ACM Reference Format:
Ranwa Al Mallah and Bilal Farooq. 2020. Actor-based Risk Analysis for
Blockchains in Smart Mobility: Forthcoming in the proceedings of Cry-
Block/MobiCom2020. In Proceedings of ACM Conference (Conference’17). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 6 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

1 INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, transportation data are shared across multiple entities
and stored in central servers that are susceptible to cyberattacks.
In the recent years, many cybersecurity breaches have occurred
in transportation systems. In 2015, a group of civic hackers deci-
phered and exposed the unstandardized bus system location data
of Baltimore [13]. The San Francisco transit was hacked to give

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
© 2020 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

free access to commuters for two days [14]. It was recently discov-
ered that Google keeps collecting user location data even if users
explicitly deactivate the tracking system in their mobiles [12].

Blockchain technology creates a distributed consensus, provid-
ing entities with a secure platform that maintains past records of
digital events [4]. In the context of transportation, a multi-layered
Blockchain framework for Smart Mobility Data-market (BSMD)
was recently proposed by López and Farooq [8]. BSMD is a permis-
sioned blockchain and is designed to solve the privacy, security and
management issues related to the sharing of passively as well as
actively solicited large-scale mobility data. In another study, López
and Farooq [9] proposed a distributed tool for mobility choice mod-
elling over BSMD, where participants do not share personal raw
data, while all computations are done locally. Eckert et al. devel-
oped a user-centric emission monitoring and trading system for
multi-modal mobility over the BSMD [2]. Another application in
transportation used BSMD for mode choice inference using feder-
ated learning over blockchain [10].

However, security issues related to blockchain are critical in
terms of cybersecurity. In this sense, security experts need to fully
understand the risk in terms of scope and impact of the security
and privacy challenges related to blockchain before predicting the
potential damage from an attack. Furthermore, verifying whether
the current technology can withstand persistent hacking attempts
is also of utmost importance.

In 2017, Li et al. conducted a comprehensive cybersecurity risk
analysis of blockchain [7]. They systematically studied the security
threats to blockchain and survey the corresponding real attacks by
examining popular blockchain systems. Although they identiﬁed
the threats and their nature, the real scope of the risk that those
threats entail was not described and evaluated. Unlike their work,
we aim at quantifying the risk. We present ordinal values for the
identiﬁed risks. Another diﬀerence is that in our work, we analyze
a real blockchain system developed for transportation application
i.e. Blockchain for Smart Mobility Data-markets.

The aim of our work is more extensive than the traditional risk
assessment. We estimate the risk through an actor-based risk anal-
ysis based on the impact that the exploitation of vulnerabilities
will have on the transportation systems using BSMD. Eﬃcient de-
tection mechanisms are desired in this context to reduce the risk
that various threats entail on the blockchain systems used in trans-
portation domain. Countermeasures to avoid cyberattacks must be
implemented as a security-by-design practice.

This paper is organized as follows. Related work is provided in
Section 2. In Section 3, we present the methodology followed by

 
 
 
 
 
 
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Ranwa Al Mallah and Bilal Farooq

the actor-based risk analysis of a blockchain in transportation do-
main in section 4. Finally, conclusion and future work are outlined
in Section 5.

2 RELATED WORK
In the last decade, several studies have exposed vulnerabilities in
the technologies employed in blockchain. Particularly, for research
in blockchain cybersecurity risk analysis, we summarize the ﬁnd-
ings in Table 1.

Li et al. [7] performed a systematic examination of the risks asso-
ciated with the popular blockchain systems (i.e. Ethereum, Bitcoin,
Monero, RSK, Counterpaty, Stellar, Monax, Lisk), the correspond-
ing real attacks, and the security enhancements. They evaluated
the real attacks on popular blockchain systems from 2009 to 2017
and analyzed the vulnerabilities exploited in these cases.

Rather than popular blockchain systems, Atzei et al. [1] focused
on Ethereum smart contracts. From a security programming per-
spective, their work analyzed the security vulnerabilities of Ethereum
smart contracts, and provided a taxonomy of common program-
ming pitfalls that may lead to vulnerabilities. They show a series
of attacks on smart contracts that exploit these vulnerabilities, al-
lowing an adversary to steal money or cause other damage.

In contrast to previous studies, Homoliak et al. [5] proposed a
security reference architecture based on models that demonstrate
the stacked hierarchy of various threats (similar to the ISO/OSI hi-
erarchy). In order to isolate the various nature of security threats,
the stacked hierarchy consisted of four layers (Network layer, con-
sensus layer, replicated state machine layer and application layer).
They also proposed a threat-risk assessment of the reference archi-
tecture using the ISO/IEC 15408 template. With the stacked model,
diﬀerent threat-agents and threats appear at each layer. They iden-
tiﬁed four threat-agents: service providers, consensus nodes, de-
velopers and users. They are malicious entities whose intention is
to steal assets, break functionalities, or disrupt services.

Although the previous studies identiﬁed the threats and their
nature, the real scope of the risk that those threats entail is not
described. We consider that although there are vulnerabilities in a
system, it is the impact that certain exploitation has on the nodes
of the blockchain network that determines whether the vulnerabil-
ity represents a signiﬁcant risk or not. In this line of thought, we
have carried out an actor-based risk analysis that we applied to the
multi-layered blockchain for smart mobility data-market.

3 METHODOLOGY
The aim of our work is to perform an actor-based risk analysis. It is
more extensive than the traditional risk assessment in the manner
that the methodology enables us to quantify the risk. Quantifying
the risk reﬁnes the analysis and gives an order of magnitude of the
risk exposure. Also, measuring the risk enables to better grasp the
impact of the attacks on large-scale systems or ecosystems where
many technologies are to be evaluated by the risk assessment.

In the following, we deﬁne some cybersecurity and risk assess-

ment terms in order to facilitate the reading of our work.

• Actor: An entity that violates integrity, privacy or conﬁden-

tiality to obtain certain beneﬁt.

• Victim: An entity that is the subject of a cyberattack.

• Attack goal: Final eﬀect desired by the actor aiming on pro-

ducing an impact on the victim.

• Scenario: Set of actions carried out by the actor to achieve

its attack goal.

• Impact: Quantiﬁcation of the attack goal’s eﬀect on the vic-

tim.

• Threat: Often called the actor scenario pair, is the combi-
nation of the entity who commits the act, the actor, and the
way it is committed, the scenario, in order to produce a neg-
ative impact.

• Vulnerability: A ﬂaw that oﬀers the opportunity to dam-

age a system.

The ﬁrst step of the actor-based risk analysis is to identify poten-
tial attackers, i.e. actors who would be interested in the ecosystem
under study. The next step is to determine the attack goals of the
actors. Finally, Table 2 is used to quantify the impact on the victim
of such attack goals according to a four-level scale.

We follow this methodology to determine the impact that re-
sults from attacks on the BSMD ecosystem, a realistic blockchain
system. Speciﬁcally, Lopez and Farooq [8] proposed the Blockchain
for Smart Mobility Data-markets, which is composed of nodes: In-
dividuals, Companies, Universities and Government (transport, cen-
sus, planing and development agencies). The nodes collect their
own data and store it in identiﬁcations. Each node is the sole owner
of their data and can share their information by showing other
nodes their identiﬁcations or parts of it. In the blockchain there
are smart contracts available that the nodes need to sign before
any transaction of information is conducted. An actor-based risk
analysis is conducted on this system.

4 ACTOR-BASED RISK ANALYSIS OF BSMD
The methodology in our work can be applied to any cybersecu-
rity analysis. Here, we describe its application on BSMD, a cyber
physical transportation system, but the risk evaluation methodol-
ogy is not constrained to blockchain and can be applied to other
technologies or generic blockchain systems.

In the ﬁrst step, we need to identify cyber threat sources (poten-
tial attackers) and their attack goals in the context of smart mobil-
ity data-markets.

4.1 Cyber threat sources
Cyber attackers exploit the systems for ﬁnancial gains, obtaining
information, conducting sabotage activities, creating disinforma-
tion, and degrading conﬁdence in the ecosystem. The Industrial
Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team (ICS-CERT) has
characterized a cyber threat source as: “persons who attempt unau-
thorized access to a control system device and/or network using a
data communications pathway [3].” It further classiﬁes these threat
sources into four groups (A1 through A4). The taxonomy of cyber
threat sources was introduced for traditional threats to purely In-
formation Technology (IT) infrastructure. We propose to use the
same taxonomy in the context of cyber threats against the BSMD
ecosystem—since it is composed of both IT elements and of cy-
ber physical systems that have an IT component. In the context of
threats against the BSMD ecosystem, we added a new threat group
that we call “insider threat”. We suppose it is a determined node

Actor-based Risk Analysis for Blockchains in Smart Mobility

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Table 1: Previous studies in blockchain cybersecurity risk analysis.

Studies

Li et al., [7]

Atzei et al., [1]

Homoliak et al., [5]

Methodology
- Systematic examination on security risks for
popular blockchain systems.
- Survey the real attacks on blockchain systems
(Ethereum, Bitcoin, Monero, RSK, Counterpaty,
Stellar, Monax, Lisk).
- Analyze related vulnerabilities exploited.
- Analyzed the security vulnerabilities of
Ethereum smart contracts.
- Show a series of attacks which exploit these
vulnerabilities.
- Stacked hierarchy of four layers.
- Identiﬁed four threat agents.

- Report vulnerabilities at each layer.

Drawbacks
- The real scope of the risk that those
threats entail is not described.
- Do not consider the risk as being a func-
tion of probability and impact.

- Isolated the analysis from a security pro-
gramming perspective only.
- They do not account for the various na-
ture of security threats.
- They don’t quantify the risk.
- Generic architecture was not evaluated
on a realistic blockchain system.

Table 2: Impact levels for mobility data-market adapted from ICS-CERT [3]

Type

Monetary

Privacy

Integrity

Trust

2
3
4
1

1
2
3
4
1

Level Description of the impact
Minor monetary loss
Signiﬁcant monetary loss
Severe monetary loss
Catastrophic monetary loss
Minor impact on the privacy of any of the nodes
in BSMD (Individuals, Companies, Universities
and Government)
Signiﬁcant on the privacy of the nodes in BSMD
Severe on the privacy of the nodes in BSMD
Catastrophic on the privacy of the nodes in BSMD
Minor impact on the integrity of the mobility data,
transactions and integrity of the users
Signiﬁcant impact on the integrity of the mobility
data, transactions and integrity of the users
Severe impact on the integrity of the mobility data,
transactions and integrity of the users
Catastrophic impact on the integrity of the mobility
data, transactions and integrity of the users
Minor impact on the trust of the BSMD network
Signiﬁcant impact on the trust of the BSMD network
Severe impact on the trust of the BSMD network
Catastrophic impact on the trust of the BSMD

1
2
3
4

2

4

3

with elevated economic means and high motives. The details of
various actors are described below:

A1. Cybercriminals: This group includes traditional cybercrim-
inals that use compromised computer systems to commit identity
theft and leverage the blockchain network for a variety of mali-
cious activities, mostly for monetary gain. They may be passive
nodes such as small businesses, individuals, data collectors, or oth-
ers.

A2. Industrial spies: Organizations that compromise the com-
puter systems to illegally acquire intellectual property, know-how,
trade, and commercial secrets, or other kinds of corporate conﬁ-
dential information. This kind of espionage may occur between
competing corporations, for economic reasons.

A3. Foreign Intelligence Agencies: Foreign state-based orga-
nizations that use computer systems to acquire sensitive informa-
tion on opposing states, corporations or individuals, or otherwise
inﬂuence their actions.

A4. Terrorist groups: Organizations seeking to create public
disorder or sow national terror, by committing destructive violent
acts.

A5. Insider threat: The insider threat is a corrupted active
node of the blockchain network (Government, University, Com-
pany or other), or an infrastructure node such as a network opera-
tor, an Internet Service Provider (ISP) that maliciously exploits the
blockchain system.

4.2 Attack goals
We identify ﬁve attack goals and present them in Table 3. We de-
scribe them herein.

G1 - Gain knowledge about the data-market
There is signiﬁcant competition between companies that pro-
duce transportation information. For example, telecommunication
companies generate data that can be used for transportation mod-
eling. Similarly, the logs of available mobile devices registered by
cellphone towers can be used to monitor traﬃc. Companies are in
control of their data. Accordingly, the BSMD ecosystem could be a

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Ranwa Al Mallah and Bilal Farooq

Table 3: Attack goals against the blockchain framework for smart mobility data-markets

Goal
G1 - Gain knowledge about the data-
market
G2 - Access sensitive data on the nodes of
the network

G3 - Manipulate and modify blockchain
information

G4 - Sabotage activities

G5 - Induce participants in the blockchain
network to make errors

Example
In 2015, a group of civic hackers deciphered and exposed the unstan-
dardized bus system location data of Baltimore [13].
It was recently discovered that Google keeps collecting user location
data even if they explicitly deactivate the tracking system in their mo-
biles [12]. In 2016, information of 57 million Uber customers and dri-
vers were leaked [15].
In 2016, criminals manipulated Smart contracts in the Ethereum
blockchain with a DAO hack (Decentralized Autonomous Organiza-
tion), to steal around 60 million dollars [11].
In 2016, the San Francisco transit was hacked to give free access to
commuters for two days [14].
In the Bitcoin network, with a double spending attack on fast pay-
ments, it was shown in [6] that nodes in the networks may not detect
an invalid transactions and add it into the secure ledger. The attacker
thus enjoys a service without paying.

target for industrial spies (A2) aiming to obtain knowledge about
the data-market. Subsequently, such information could be sold to
competing companies. Furthermore, this information is also valu-
able for criminal groups (A1), intelligence services (A3) and ter-
rorist groups (A4) because it allows them to undertake attacks by
maliciously exploiting the knowledge about the data-market.

G2 - Access sensitive data on the nodes of the network
Mobility data is continuously generated by diﬀerent nodes of
the BSMD network. According to the identiﬁcation layer of the
multi-layered blockchain model for smart mobility data market,
transportation data is stored in ﬁles called Identiﬁcation. Each en-
tity contains metadata, static data and dynamic data. Nodes need
consent from the owner to access the static and dynamic data which
can be attractive to many actors.

On the other hand, nodes communicate with each other using
Decentralized Identiﬁers (DID). DIDs are the gates for sharing data
via peer-to-peer connections where the information is transferred
using an asymmetric encryption. DIDs represent sensitive infor-
mation because a given node will have one unique DID per trans-
action. Any leakage of this information enables to correlate DIDs
in the ledger to track single nodes and obtain information on trans-
actions. Intelligence services (A3) and terrorist groups (A4) would
be interested in having this information because it would allow
them to attain their ultimate goal of surveillance, assassination,
etc. Cybercriminal groups (A1) would be interested in this informa-
tion to obtain monetary gain since mobility data is highly valued.
Through unsolicited sharing of information, their clients could be
for example insurance companies (medical or automotive) that may
use information on an individual’s daily activity patterns to assess
the cost of insurance premiums or simply refuse coverage. Indus-
trial spies (A2) may take advantage of the blockchain to ﬁnd cus-
tomers and improve their business.

G3 – Manipulate and modify blockchain information
Blockchains are made to be practically immutable, where, in the-
ory no one can modify the blockchain’s ’distributed ledger’ of all
committed blocks. The blockchain relies on the distributed con-
sensus mechanism to achieve immutability and to establish mutual
trust. Vulnerabilities in the consensus mechanism can be exploited

by attackers to control the blockchain by manipulating and modify-
ing the blockchain information. Criminal groups (A1), intelligence
services (A3) and terrorist groups (A4) may want to reverse, ex-
clude or modify the ordering of transactions. An insider threat (A5)
may hamper normal mining operations of other miners or impede
the conﬁrmation operation of normal transactions.

G4 – Sabotage activities
Cybercriminals (A1) may use the blockchain ecosystem for sab-
otage activities. Since the process is anonymous, it is hard to track
user behaviors, let alone subject to legal sanctions. For example,
criminals can leverage smart contracts for a variety of malicious
activities, which may pose a threat to our daily life. Criminal Smart
Contracts can facilitate the leakage of conﬁdential information,
theft of cryptographic keys, and various real-world crimes.

Sabotage activities may also be conducted by intelligence ser-
vices (A3) and terrorist groups (A4) to disrupt the blockchain net-
work or make victims view of the blockchain ﬁltered. As programs
running in the blockchain, smart contracts may have security vul-
nerabilities caused by program defects. Attackers may exploit the
vulnerabilities to send malware and infect nodes or to initiate De-
nial of Service (DoS) attacks on the nodes of the blockchain. The
attacks may cause a waste of hard disk resources and decreased
node speed. An insider threat (A5) may be a corrupted node who
wants to intercept the network traﬃc of the blockchain to poten-
tially delay network messages. An attacker may want to monopo-
lize all of the victim’s incoming and outgoing connections, which
isolates the victim from the other peers in the network. Then, the
attacker can ﬁlter the victim’s view of the blockchain, or let the
victim cost unnecessary computing power on obsolete views of
the blockchain.

G5 – Induce participants in the blockchain network to

make errors

There are several companies, municipalities and individuals pro-
ducing transportation information which is valuable to govern-
ments, researchers and people. For example, one of the responsabil-
ities of the government is to collect data in order to model, manage
and improve transportation networks. Some malicious actors may
inject the ecosystem with falsiﬁed transportation information via

Actor-based Risk Analysis for Blockchains in Smart Mobility

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

hacked traﬃc detectors, tolls, parking and smartcards. The partici-
pants of the blockchain network would end up making sub-optimal
decision. The attackers may be interested in damaging the reputa-
tion of some company, or they may sow distrust in the government
or any entity of the network. Attackers could include actors A1, A3,
A4 and A5 identiﬁed in the previous section. Thus, inducing partic-
ipants to make errors not only would they be achieving their goal,
but they would also be evading the responsibilities of their actions
by making their interference less detectable.

4.3 Impact of attack goals
Independently of the various actors goals, attacks will have an im-
pact on the victim. The victim may be the individuals, the BSMD
network or any of the active or passive node in the BSMD (data
collectors, Companies, Universities and Government). In order to
account for the various types of consequences that these attacks
could have on them, we measure the impact according to four sep-
arate aspects: Monetary (M), Privacy (P), Integrity (I) and Trust (T).
The impact scale ranges from 1 to 4, with 4 being the highest im-
pact level (most severe). The impact levels are described in Table 2.
The actor-based risk analysis is presented in Table 4. The explana-
tion of the impact analysis by attack goal follows.

G1 (M) Mobility data is very proﬁtable, and competition be-
tween companies that seek to take advantage of the blockchain to
use the data to improve their business is ﬁerce. (P) While conﬁden-
tial, the information disclosed would not have severe consequences
on the individuals. (T) The attack will have a minor impact on the
trust in the BSMD network.

G2 (P) While conﬁdential, the information disclosed would not
have severe consequences (except maybe in terms of insurability)
and is likely to be otherwise available to actors through other more
traditional forms of cyberattacks not related to the BSMD. (M) The
disclosure of this information may be grounds for legal action against
the agency, government bodies and concerned companies. (T) The
attack will have a signiﬁcant impact on the trust and will degrade
conﬁdence in the BSMD network.

G3 (M) In the context of data markets, tampering of a service
can produce losses of millions of dollars to companies. For example
companies that take advantage of the blockchain to ﬁnd customers.
Also, government and transport agencies activities to improve mo-
bility will suﬀer severe monetary losses. (P) Modifying blockchain
information will have a signiﬁcant impact on the privacy of any
of the nodes in BSMD (Individuals, Companies, Universities and
Government). (I) A tampered node’s blockchain account will have
catastrophic impact on the integrity of the mobility data, transac-
tions and integrity of the user. (T) Similarly, the attack will have
catastrophic impact on the trust of the BSMD network because the
nodes will have no belief in the reliability or truth of the transac-
tions in the ledger.

G4 (M) Malicious activities will induce severe monetary loss on
the victim of the attack. For example, network hijacking, crimi-
nal smart contracts and ransomwares will exploit the victim in ex-
change of money. Also, sabotage activities will induce the vendor
to not get rewards for its service. (I) The attacks will have a signiﬁ-
cant impact on the integrity of the mobility data, transactions and

integrity of the users. (T) Finally, disruption of the network will
have severe impact on the trust of the BSMD.

G5 (M) Injecting the ecosystem with falsiﬁed transportation in-
formation will induce signiﬁcant monetary loss on the victim of
the attack. (I) The attack will have a severe impact on the integrity
of the mobility data, transactions and integrity of the users. (T)
Also, if participants relying on the mobility data acquired from
the blockchain make errors in the modeling, management and im-
provement of transportation networks, it will degrade conﬁdence
and have a severe impact on the trust of the BSMD.

4.4 Discussion
This analysis responds to the needs of several groups such as com-
panies, regulators, manufacturers, transportation agencies and even
individuals. Each will be able to identify the riskiest threat, the one
to treat with priority. From the results in Table 4, depending on the
ranking obtained, a speciﬁc given risk management strategy can be
applied. There are many strategies for managing the risk, namely:
refuse, accept, transfer or reduce the risk.

The most drastic one is refusing the risk. It is applied when the
latter is unacceptable because of the catastrophic consequences it
may have on the victims. The victims may be the individuals, uni-
versities, companies, transport agencies or any of the government
nodes of the blockchain network. In this case, vulnerabilities in
the blockchain system that are exploited by attackers should be re-
moved from the system because of the security threat they pose.
The strategy of accepting the risk is applied when the risk is ei-
ther negligible or acceptable. In this case, the beneﬁts that the sys-
tem brings are greater than the potential risk. Transferring the risk
strategy consists in giving the risk management responsibility to
a third party, i.e. insurance companies. Finally, the risk mitigation
strategy consists on reducing the risk as much as possible. This
can be done through diﬀerent means, such as the deployment of
preventive mechanisms, security updates of the systems or stricter
regulations.

In terms of monetary, privacy, integrity and trust, we note that
G1 does not represent a potential risk that needs to be managed.
However, G3 contains many threats that represent a risk that is
either unacceptable or undesirable.

From another angle, in terms of monetary impact, attack goals
G2, G3, G4 and G5 represent a risk in terms of economic losses.
For example, network hijacking, criminal smart contracts and ran-
somwares will exploit the victim in exchange of money. Also, sab-
otage activities will induce the vendor to not get rewards for its
service. This monetary impact may concern certain groups or or-
ganizations more than another. Thus, they would want to manage
the risk by implementing the appropriate security defense mech-
anisms. For example, it is essential to ensure that cryptographic
keys are stored or maintained properly so that the attacker aim-
ing at accessing sensitive data on the nodes of the network do not
exploit improper key protection mechanisms to attain the attack
goal.

On the other hand, in terms of privacy impact, the results reveal
that G2 is the riskiest attack goal. For example, attacks conducted
by A1 may represent an undesirable risk that needs to be man-
aged, i.e. cybercriminals that use compromised computer systems

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA

Ranwa Al Mallah and Bilal Farooq

Table 4: Impact on the victims by attack goal - Monetary (M), Privacy (P), Integrity (I) and Trust (T). Impact scale ranges from
1 to 4, with 4 being the most severe.

Attack goals
G1-Gain knowledge about the data-market
G2-Access sensitive data on the nodes of the network
G3-Manipulate and modify blockchain information
G4-Sabotage activities
G5-Induce participants in the blockchain network to
make errors

M P I T
1
1
2
2
4
3
3
3
3
2

2
3
2
-
-

-
-
4
2
3

to commit identity theft. The compromise could lead to fraudulent
transactions. Vulnerabilities should be eliminated by implement-
ing eﬃcient privacy preservation techniques and adopting more
robust VPN solutions.

In terms of integrity impact, particularly when it comes to the
manipulation and modiﬁcation of blockchain information, we no-
tice from the results that this attack goal represents a major risk in
terms of integrity. Also, this same attack goal has a catastrophic im-
pact on the trust of the blockchain system because the nodes will
have no belief in the reliability or truth of the transactions in the
ledger. Among other solutions, threats should be managed by set-
ting proper identity management (Membership Service Providers).
Finally, when it comes to inducing participants in the blockchain
network to make errors, we notice from the results, that this at-
tack goal represents a major risk in terms of integrity and trust
in the blockchain ecosystem. To manage the risk, solutions should
be implemented speciﬁcally regarding unauthenticated data feeds
producing wrong data.

5 CONCLUSION
We have proposed an actor-based risk assessment for the multi-
layered Blockchain framework for Smart Mobility Data-markets
(BSMD), a public-permissioned blockchain. Traditionally, the aim
of the risk assessment is to evaluate the risk in order to identify
the riskiest threat. The aim of our work is more extensive in that
we propose a risk analysis enabling the quantiﬁcation of the risk
associated not only to the blockchain technology, but also to its
ecosystem. Moreover, we conducted the risk assessment methodol-
ogy on a realistic blockchain for smart mobility data-markets with
analysis of the attacks with regards to their impact at four scales
(economy, privacy, integrity and trust). We quantify the risk by
presenting ordinal values, which gives the decision makers a clear
ranking in terms of prioritization.

This work is the ﬁrst step of a systematic risk assessment frame-
work. We consider that although there are vulnerabilities in a sys-
tem, it is their probability of exploitation and the impact that this
exploitation has that determines whether the vulnerability repre-
sents a signiﬁcant risk or not. In future work, we will extend the
analysis and propose a scenario-based risk assessment followed
by a combined risk assessment. The scenario-based analysis de-
termines the probability of occurrence of each threat. The com-
bined analysis aims at determining which attack outcomes have
the highest risk according to their impact on the victims. We hope
to uncover speciﬁc blockchain technology security vulnerabilities
in the transportation ecosystem by exposing new attack vectors.

The systematic risk analysis can then be used to develop possible
countermeasures against cybersecurity vulnerabilities in the smart
mobility implementations of the blockchain technology.

REFERENCES
[1] Nicola Atzei, Massimo Bartoletti, and Tiziana Cimoli. 2017. A survey of attacks
on ethereum smart contracts (sok). In International conference on principles of
security and trust. Springer, 164–186.

[2] Johannes Eckert, David López, Carlos Lima Azevedo, and Bilal Farooq. 2019.
A blockchain-based user-centric emission monitoring and trading system for
multi-modal mobility. 1–6.
2005.

Descriptions.
https://www.us-cert.gov/ics/content/cyber-threat-source-descriptions [Online;
accessed 20-March-2020].

[3] GAO.

Source

Threat

Cyber

[4] Huru Hasanova, Ui-jun Baek, Mu-gon Shin, Kyunghee Cho, and Myung-Sup
Kim. 2019. A survey on blockchain cybersecurity vulnerabilities and possible
countermeasures.
International Journal of Network Management 29, 2 (2019),
e2060.

[5] Ivan Homoliak, Sarad Venugopalan, Qingze Hum, and Pawel Szalachowski. 2019.
A security reference architecture for blockchains. In 2019 IEEE International Con-
ference on Blockchain (Blockchain). IEEE, 390–397.

[6] Ghassan O Karame, Elli Androulaki, and Srdjan Capkun. 2012. Double-spending
fast payments in bitcoin. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM conference on Computer
and communications security. 906–917.

[7] Xiaoqi Li, Peng Jiang, Ting Chen, Xiapu Luo, and Qiaoyan Wen. 2017. A sur-
vey on the security of blockchain systems. Future Generation Computer Systems
(2017).

[8] David Lopez and Bilal Farooq. 2020. A multi-layered blockchain framework for
smart mobility data-markets. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technolo-
gies 111 (2020), 588–615.

[9] D. López and B. Farooq. 2019. Privacy-Aware Distributed Mobility Choice Mod-
elling over Blockchain. In 2019 IEEE International Smart Cities Conference (ISC2).
187–192.

[10] D. López, A. Yazdizadeh, B. Farooq, and Z. Patterson. 2019. Mode Choice In-
ference using Federated Learning over Blockchain. In 2019 International Choice
Modelling Symposium (ICMC). 1–13.

[11] Muhammad Izhar Mehar, Charles Louis Shier, Alana Giambattista, Elgar Gong,
Gabrielle Fletcher, Ryan Sanayhie, Henry M Kim, and Marek Laskowski. 2019.
Understanding a revolutionary and ﬂawed grand experiment in blockchain: the
DAO attack. Journal of Cases on Information Technology (JCIT) 21, 1 (2019), 19–
32.

[12] Ryan Nakashima. 2018.
like it or not.

ments,
com/828aefab64d4411bac257a07c1af0ecb (2018).

AP News

AP Exclusive: Google tracks your move-
(August 13), https://www. apnews.

[13] K Rector. 2018. MTA real-time bus data’hacked,’oﬀered on private mobile appli-

cation.

[14] Jack Stewart. 2016. SF’S TRANSIT HACK COULD’VE BEEN WAY WORSE-AND

CITIES MUST PREPARE. Wired, Nov (2016).

[15] Julia Carrie Wong. 2017. Uber concealed massive hack that exposed data of 57m

users and drivers. The Guardian 22 (2017).

