0
2
0
2

l
u
J

0
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
5
2
5
0
.
7
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

”Its Not Something We Have Talked to Our
Team About”: Results From a Preliminary
Investigation of Cybersecurity Challenges in
Denmark

Camilla Nadja Fleron, Jonas Kofod Jrgensen, Oksana Kulyk, and Elda Paja

IT University of Copenhagen, Denmark
{cafl,jkoj,okku,elpa}@itu.dk

Abstract. Although Denmark is reportedly one of the most digitised
countries in Europe, IT security in Danish companies has not followed
along. To shed light into the challenges that companies experience with
implementing IT security, we conducted a preliminary study running semi-
structured interviews with four employees from four diﬀerent companies,
asking about their IT security and what they need to reduce risks of
cyber threats. Our results show that companies are lacking fundamental
security protection and are in need of guidance and tools to help them
implementing basic security practices, while raising awareness of cyber
threats. Based on our ﬁndings and with the inspiration of the latest
reports and international security standards, we discuss steps towards
further investigation towards developing a framework targeting SMEs
that want to adopt straightforward and actionable IT security guidance.

1

Introduction

With the rise of internet usage as a means of doing business and gaining access to
large amounts of data, organisations all over the world increasingly depend on IT
systems [1]. This dependence is particularly prominent in countries with high level
of digitisation, which according to the European Commission’s Digital Economy
and Society Index (DESI) of 2019 [2] include Denmark, Sweden, Finland, and
the Netherlands. With the high level of digitisation, however, protecting against
cybersecurity risks becomes of crucial importance.

However, IT security in Danish companies has not followed the high digitisa-
tion degree. According to a survey conducted by Monitor Deloitte in 2018 [3],
22% of Danish small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) do not have even
the most basic IT security implemented (including e.g. setting up a ﬁrewall or
implementing access control measures), 39% of SMEs have an IT security level
that is considered inadequate to their risk proﬁle, while 70% of Danish SMEs
end up outsourcing their IT security. The research suggests that the companies
often do not have the necessary competences in the ﬁeld to be able to establish
and operate the required security measures. While there exist plenty of stan-
dards [4] [5], frameworks [6], badges [7, 8] and internet tools [9], which may assist

 
 
 
 
 
 
with securing one’s organisation, navigating them can be overwhelming. As such,
some of the tools may not ﬁt the risk proﬁle of the SME, and some may be too
complicated for companies with limited resources and security expertise.

The purpose of this work is that of getting a deeper understanding into the
challenges faced by Danish SMEs in establishing and managing security practices.
As such, we conduct exploratory semi-structured interviews, investigating (i) the
current status of cybersecurity in companies, (ii) the company security culture,
and (iii) the kind of help the companies seek to better manage their security. We
report on ﬁndings, and discuss our research plans to tackle the needs identiﬁed
by this preliminary study.

2 Study Methodology

In our study, we explore the following research questions:

– RQ1: What is the level of awareness about security in companies?
– RQ2: What is the companies level of security protection?
– RQ3: What help might the companies need concerning security?

The interview questions are inspired by the work of Beautement et al. [10],
which investigated the relationship between organisational security policies and
employees’ behaviour toward these. The Monitor Deliotte study [3] provided us
already with an indication of SMEs current state of security protection, and at
the same time with examples of interview questions.

Previously to running the interviews, the interview guide was tested in a pilot
study. After it was ﬁnalised, the interview guide was sent to the respondents
before the actual interview in order to make the respondents conﬁdent about
the agenda and what kind of questions they were going to answer. Since the
interview focused on IT security practices of the organisation, which might be
considered conﬁdential information to the company, the participants were also
informed in advance that the ﬁndings will be reported without enabling any link
to the respondent’s identity or their company, and that they would have a chance
to review the interview transcripts before further processing. The interview guide
is provided in the Appendix (translated from Danish).

The study was conducted in respect of participants privacy and anonymity.
To this end, all collected recordings have been destroyed after transcription.
Names of people and companies have been anonymised. To further respect
participants privacy, as promised to the participants before the interview, each
participant was oﬀered to review the transcript. The interviews were recorded
and transcribed immediately after taking place. The transcripts were analysed
via content analysis [11], with regards to the research questions outlined above.

3 Results

We interviewed four people from four diﬀerent companies, whose positions ranged
from part-time worker to CEO. All participants had a university degree and at

2

least one-year working experience1. Due to the corona pandemic we were not
able to conduct all the interviews face-to-face. Hence, two of the interviews took
place in person before the society shut down, while the last two were conducted
remotely. The duration of the interviews ranged between 20 and 30 minutes. We
provide more details of our ﬁndings in the remainder of the section, where we
look at the participants’ answers to the speciﬁc research questions.

3.1 RQ1: Awareness About Security

In order to investigate the awareness about security in participants’ companies,
we look at the following questions: (1) whether they talk about IT security in
their company, (2) whether there is security training in their company, and (3)
whether there is a response plan, i.e. employees are aware of what they need to
do in case of a security incident.

Talking about IT-security. All respondents conﬁrmed that they do not talk
about security in their companies. Such attitude, furthermore, was expressed
by one of the participants being the CEO of the company, hinting at a general
problem with possible lack of involvement from the top-level.

Security Trainings. None of the companies had a formalised approach to the
employees awareness and knowledge in relation to IT security training.

Response Plan. Only one out of four participants knew that there was a
response plan in the company that outlined what should be done in case of an IT-
related incident. However, the participant did not know what the plan entailed,
only that such a plan existed in the company. The participant furthermore
mentioned that the response plan had not been updated recently and that it was
created some years back and might need a revision.

3.2 RQ2: Security Measures

We investigate security measures asking about (1) security policies in the company
in general, (2) password policies speciﬁcally, and (3) history of security breaches
and implemented countermeasures in the company.

Security Policies. When asked about security guidelines in their company, only
one participant was able to recall and describe them in details, mentioning policies
such as locking the screen when one is away from one’s computer, using tools
like hard disk encryption, ﬁrewalls and MFA, as well as guidelines on choosing
strong passwords and securely storing one’s IT equipment. Another participant
mentioned having to sign an IT security policy paper, but was not sure about
the details contained therein. The remaining two interviewed companies had no
security policy in place.

1 We do not report on participants demographics for the sake of anonymity.

3

Password Policies. Password management is a hard discipline to master on the
one hand, while it is crucial, on the other, since passwords provide an essential
layer of protection. In this regard, participants reported diﬃculties in password
management, resulting in workarounds such as using post-its for writing the
passwords down. Further issues with passwords included non-optimal password
policies, such as mandatory password change [13].

Security Breaches. We asked the participants if their company had experienced
a cyber attack. Two of the participants did not know if their company had been
attacked. The other two explained how they experienced cyber attacks, elaborately.
When asked about measures taken after the security breach, the participants,
however, expressed doubt whether breaches could be prevented in the future. In
one of the cases, the company attempted to take additional security measures
after the breach (namely, using 2 Factor Authentication), but the participant
voiced concern that these measures were not followed through.

3.3 RQ3: Helping Improve Security

We asked the participants to think of anything they would need in their work to
be better protected from a security perspective. The question was asked to get
an understanding of the needs SMEs have to tackle the challenges concerning
managing IT security. One participant was not sure about what was needed,
but the other three formulated precise demands. Two of the participants were
mentioning an awareness guide of basic IT security or a brief explanation of com-
mon missing security practices and how to overcome them. Another participant
emphasised the importance for such a guide to be low cost. The participant from
a company which had well-established security culture furthermore touched upon
the need for a practice to regularly revisit the security measures and mentioned a
demand for a yearly plan that allowed to do such check-ups.

4 Discussion and Future Work

Our study emphasizes the lack of security practices and adequate security protec-
tion among Danish SMEs companies, while at the same time our initial results
highlight the need in these companies for having at least some essential basic
security guidance. Additionally, the study ﬁndings suggest that there is a need for
guidance for SMEs so that they can integrate the required basic security essentials
into their business practices. The need for such a guidance is pressing, but any
eﬀorts should consider that SMEs in particular might have scarce resources both
in terms of budget for security and with respect to human expertise. While
plenty of frameworks and standards have been developed, they might nonetheless
be underutilised by companies. Closing this gap would require assessing such
tools and making eﬀorts to improve their usability and ease of use for increasing
adoption, or developing new tools that, in addition to providing guidelines for
eﬀective security management, can actually be used by smaller companies who

4

have limited expertise or resources. Ideally, such a solution reﬁnes existing stan-
dards and solutions to avoid reinventing the wheel. We advocate the need for
following a layered approach to account for the various company budgets and in
house security expertise. In this way, a basic layer would consist of steps that
can be implemented without much diﬃculties by most of the companies, such
as setting up a ﬁrewall or enabling automatic updates of systems. Examples of
such measures can be found within the Cyber Essential badge, claiming that
the proposed measures could prevent up to 80% of all cyberattacks [14]. Further
layers of the framework would include steps that involve more advanced measures,
such as regular training and awareness campaigns for the employees, steps that
can be taken by companies who are ready to dedicate more resources into secu-
rity. As with most of the support tools, a trade-oﬀ between providing succinct,
understandable and actionable guidance, and ensuring that this guidance is com-
prehensive enough, needs to be made. The scope of both basic and more advanced
layers would therefore have to be iteratively reﬁned, involving conversations with
both security and privacy experts and the companies themselves.

Based on the study ﬁndings, our research plan considers future work on (i)
developing a security guide, and (ii) developing a layered security model for
SMEs. Speciﬁcally on (i), we will focus on the ways to put the identiﬁed steps
of the security framework into an understandable guide. For this, coming up
with concrete guidance or instructions would be the next logical development
of this work, making use of the already available resources by the information
security community or oﬃcial governmental agencies. Deciding on the concrete
form of the guide, such as its medium (e.g. implementing it as a website, app or
paper information materials) and the target audience (i.e. whether it should focus
on management or aim to target other employees as well) would be a further
step. Following the human-centered security by design approach, the design and
development of the guide would need to be done in close collaboration with the
companies who would need such support. Involving companies would also be a
crucial component of the evaluation of the guide with practitioners. This could
include designing an approach to test the usability and user experience of the
guide, as well as the eﬀect of using the guide on adoption of secure behaviors.

Point (ii) on the other hand considers future investigation on the extent
to which the guide would need to be personalised. The layered security model
entails a certain degree of personalisation, as it enables companies to decide how
many steps of the framework they would be ready to implement. Depending on
the company proﬁle (e.g., whether it handles a lot of sensitive data, whether
the employees work on-site or remotely, how much technical expertise do the
employees have, etc.), one might need to introduce new dimensions and layers.

References

1. A. Linde, ISO/IEC 27001, 2019, URL: https://www.ds.dk/da/om-standarder/

ledelsesstandarder/iso-27001-informationssikkerhed

2. European Commission, “The Digital Economy and Society Index (DESI)“, 2019,

URL: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/desi

5

3. Monitor Deloitte for Erhvervsstyrelsen, “It-sikkerhed og datahndtering i danske

SMV’er“, April 2018

4. ISMS.online, “The Requirements and Annex A Controls of ISO 27001“, URL:
https://www.isms.online/iso-27001/requirements-controls/ l.a. Jun 2, 2020
5. National Institute of Standards and Technology, “Framework for Improving Criti-
cal Infrastructure Cybersecurity“, Apr 2018, URL: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/
nistpubs/CSWP/NIST.CSWP.04162018.pdf

6. Center

for Cybersikkerhed og Digitaliseringsstyrelsen, “Cyberforsvar der
virker“, Jan 2017, URL: https://fe-ddis.dk/cfcs/publikationer/Documents/
Cyberforsvar%20der%20virker%20-%202017_110117.pdf

7. gov.uk, “Cyber Essentials Scheme: overview“, Jan 2018, https://www.gov.uk/

government/publications/cyber-essentials-scheme-overview

8. Sikkerhedsrdet, “En mrkningsorden for it-sikkerhed“, Dec 2018, https://em.dk/

media/12881/anbefaling-om-et-maerke-for-it-sikkerhed-2.pdf

9. Virk

(Danish Business Authority),

“Sikkerhedstjekket“, URL:https:

//startvaekst.virk.dk/sikkerhedstjekket/testen, l.a. Jun 2, 2020

10. A. Beautement, M. Angela Sasse, and M. Wonham, “The compliance budget:

managing security behaviour in organisations“ Jan 2008

11. B. Hancock, “An Introduction to Qualitative Research“, 1998, URL:
http://faculty.cbu.ca/pmacintyre/course_pages/mba603/mba603_files/
introqualitativeresearch.pdf

12. Erhvervsstyrelsen,

“Digital

sikkerhed

i

danske

SMV’er“, Nov

2019,

https://erhvervsstyrelsen.dk/sites/default/files/2019-11/Analyse%
20af%20digital%20sikkerhed%20blandt%20SMV%27er%202019.pdf

13. L. Cranor,

“Time

to

rethink mandatory password changes“ March
https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/blogs/techftc/2016/03/

2016,
time-rethink-mandatory-password-changes

URL:

14. IT Governance (UK),“The Cyber Essentials Scheme“ URL: https://www.

itgovernance.co.uk/cyber-essentials-scheme, l.a. Jun 2, 2020

15. Canadian Cyber Incident Response Centre, “Top 4 Strategies to Mitigate Targeted
Cyber Intrusions“, November 2015, URL: https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/
ntnl-scrt/cbr-scrt/tp-strtgs-en.aspx

16. National Cyber Security Center, “Cyber security for your organisation starts here“,
URL: https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/cyberessentials/advice#section_1, l.a. Jun
2, 2020

17. Sikkerdigital,

“Invester

i

up“,

back
fem-gode-raad-der-styrker-din-virksomheds-it-sikkerhed/
invester-i-en-it-sikkerhedspakke-med-backup/, l.a. Jun 2, 2020

URL:

en

med
it-sikkerhedspakke
https://sikkerdigital.dk/virksomhed/

18. SANS, “Information Security Policy Templates“, URL: https://www.sans.org/

security-resources/policies/

19. Sikkerdigital,

“Skabeloner

og

vrktjer“,

URL:

https://

sikkerdigital.dk/virksomhed/saadan-beskytter-du-din-virksomhed/
skabeloner-og-vaerktoejer/, l.a. Jun 2, 2020

20. F. Wilson, How to do a SWOT Analysis for Risk Identiﬁcation and Risk
Management, November 2018, URL: https://www.ntaskmanager.com/blog/
how-to-do-a-swot-analysis-for-risk-identification/

6

Appendix

We provide the preliminary information that was sent to the participants before
the interview and the questions asked during the interview below, both translated
from Danish.

4.1 Preliminary information

Interview:

– Concerning the IT-security state in small and medium size businesses
– The interview will take about 20-40 mins.

Why we want to interview you:

– We want to interview you to get an idea of how we could help you and your

company be better protected against cyber-attacks.

– We would like to know how your company are handling IT-security, which

policies and practices they have, and how you go around them.

– Get an idea of which kind of IT-security product that would be beneﬁcial for

your company.

Anonymity:

– Conﬁdentiality is highly prioritized!
– Everything that you say will be 100% anonymous.
– The company you are working in will not be mentioned anywhere.
– We delete the audio records of the interview right after we have made the

transcription.

– The transcription will mention you like this e.g: P4 ”We are using our own

devices at work”

– We will send you the transcription of the interview which you can review

and edit if wanted.

The agenda for the interview:

– About you and your company
– IT-security policies and practices
– The attitudes to the companys security policy
– What kind of IT-security help you might need

7

4.2 Interview questions

Brief explanation before the interview starts:

– Everything that you say will be 100% anonymous
– We will not mention your company anywhere
– The reason why we are doing the interview is to gain information about
IT-security challenges and procedures in order to get an idea of which product
that would suit you and your company.

– You dont have to answer all questions – you can always drop out of the

interview

About you and your company:

– Tell us a little about the company (You don’t have to mention it by name)
– How many employees are you?
– How long has the business been around?
– What responsibilities and tasks do you have?

IT-security issues

– How do you rate your general knowledge of IT security?
– Is IT security something you talk about at work? Why / why not?
– Have you had any IT security course or similar here at the company? Which

ones?

– (Follow up if they don’t understand the issue) ...like phishing training, best

practices for staying protected, privacy or similar?

– Do you have any deﬁned IT security policies in the company?
– (If unsure supply with some of these):

• Passwords: No reuse of codes, no physical storage of codes.
• Access Control: Does everyone have access to everything? 2FA?
• System updates.
• Firewalls/antivirus programs
• Data sharing/data storage: backup and encryption.
• Physical security: How to get into your oﬃce?)

– Are you personally concerned about a cyber-attack? Why / why not?
– Are you worried that your company will be exposed to a cyber-attack? Why

/ why not?

– Do you use your private devices at work or have a work computer and work

mobile?

– Do you have a password on your laptop? (Follow-up: Why?)
– Do you reuse your passwords? Why / why not?
– Do you use passwords to access conﬁdential or sensitive information in the

company?

– Do you think a hacker would be interested in your company? (Why / why

not?)

8

– (Give examples if they feel uncertain about what is meant) Customer informa-
tion, payment information, conﬁdential information, social security numbers,
logins, passwords, money, reputation, web shop, databases

– Has the company faced a cyber-attack? If so, what kind of attack? What was

stolen? Changes made after the trial?

– Does your company have a plan for what you do as a company if you are

attacked?

– What kind of help could you think of that could be of use to make your work

more secure?

– What would you think could help you as a company to be better protected?
– If there was a product that could help you with IT security in the company,

what should it do?

The attitudes to the company’s security policy

– IT security and productivity are always a delicate balance, as more IT security
in most cases lowers productivity. Can you think of a scenario where the
security policies were too cumbersome and by that reduced your productivity,
and you chose not to follow the security policy?

– Do you have any last comments?

9

