An Ising Hamiltonian Solver using Stochastic Phase-Transition Nano-
Oscillators 

S. Dutta1†, A. Khanna1†, A. S. Assoa4, H. Paik3, D. Schlom3, Z. Toroczkai2,  
A. Raychowdhury4 and S. Datta1* 

1Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA 
2Department of Physics, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA 
3Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA 
4School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 
USA 
†These authors contributed equally to this work 
*Corresponding author email: sdatta@nd.edu 

Computationally hard problems, including combinatorial optimization, can be mapped into 
the problem of finding the ground-state of an Ising Hamiltonian. Building physical systems 
with  collective  computational  ability  and  distributed  parallel  processing  capability  can 
accelerate  the  ground-state  search.  Here,  we  present  a  continuous-time  dynamical  system 
(CTDS) approach where the ground-state solution appears as stable points or attractor states 
of  the  CTDS.  We  harness  the  emergent  dynamics  of  a  network  of  phase-transition  nano-
oscillators (PTNO) to build an Ising Hamiltonian solver. The hardware fabric comprises of 
electrically  coupled  injection-locked  stochastic  PTNOs  with  bi-stable  phases  emulating 
artificial  Ising  spins.  We  demonstrate  the  ability  of  the  stochastic  PTNO-CTDS  to 
progressively find more optimal solution by increasing the strength of the injection-locking 
signal  –  akin to  performing  classical  annealing.  We demonstrate  in  silico  that the PTNO-
CTDS prototype solves a benchmark non-deterministic polynomial time (NP)-hard Max-Cut 
problem  with  high  probability  of  success.  Using  experimentally  calibrated  numerical 
simulations  and  incorporating  non-idealities,  we  investigate  the  performance  of  our  Ising 
Hamiltonian solver on dense Max-Cut problems with increasing graph size. We report a high 
energy-efficiency of 1.3x107 solutions/sec/Watt for 100-node dense Max-cut problems which 
translates to a 5x improvement over the recently demonstrated memristor-based Hopfield 
network and several orders of magnitude improvement over other candidates such as CPU 
and GPU, quantum annealer and photonic Ising solver approaches. Such an energy efficient 
hardware  exhibiting  high  solution-throughput/Watt  can  find  applications  in  industrial 
planning  and  manufacturing,  defense  and  cyber-security,  bioinformatics  and  drug 
discovery. 

Combinatorial  optimization  is  ubiquitous  in  various  fields  such  as  artificial  intelligence, 
bioinformatics, drug discovery, cryptography, quantitative finance, operations research, resource 
allocation, trajectory and route planning. Such problems belong to the NP-hard or NP-complete 
complexity class, requiring computational resources (time and/or energy) that scale exponentially 
with the problem size. Interestingly, many combinatorial optimization problems can be translated 
into another fundamental physics problem of finding the ground state of an Ising model (1) (or its 
equivalent Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization (QUBO) problem (2)). The Ising model, 
describing the property of spin glass, was put forward as a tool of statistical physics to explain the 
phenomenon of ferromagnetism. The Ising Hamiltonian with 𝑁 discrete spins 𝜎#$%$& ∈ {−1, +1}& 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
and a symmetric coupling matrix 𝐽 in the absence of an external magnetic field is given by 𝐻 =
&
− ∑ 𝐽%2
%3#

𝜎%𝜎2.  

Finding the ground state of Ising model belongs to the NP-hard complexity class (3) and can be 
extended  to  other  NP-hard  and  NP-complete  problems  including  all  of  Karp's  twenty-one  NP-
complete  problems  through  polynomial time  mapping  (4).  Solving  the  Ising  model  using  exact 
methods such as the branch-and-bound algorithm are often limited to problem sizes of only a few 
hundred variables. Alternatively, approximate algorithms or heuristics  and stochastic approaches 
such as semidefinite program (5), breakout local search (6), metropolis algorithm (7) and simulated 
annealing  (8)  are  widely  used  in  digital  computers  to  find  an  optimal  or  near-optimal  solution. 
Even for moderately sized problem instances, the time to find a near-optimal solution can become 
prohibitively  large.  Hence,  there  is  a  growing  interest  towards  finding  hardware  approaches, 
beyond digital CMOS, that can solve large-scale constrained optimization problems efficiently. 
Recently, various schemes for building annealing-inspired non-von Neumann processors, called 
Ising  machines,  have  been  devised  on  a  variety  of  technology  platforms.  These  include  super-
conducting  qubit-based  adiabatic  quantum  computing  (AQC)  and  quantum  annealing  (9,  10), 
digital and mixed-signal complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) annealers (11–13) 
and coherent networks of degenerate optical parametric oscillators (14, 15). Qubit-based quantum 
annealers incur high cost and complexity arising from operation in cryogenic environment. The 
optical  coherent  Ising  machine  has  shown  competitive  performance  compared  to  the  quantum 
annealer  (16),  but  requires  long  fiber  ring  cavity  for  implementing  Ising  spins  using  temporal 
multiplexing and extremely fast (and power hungry) field-programmable gate array (FPGA) for 
implementing coupling in a measure-and-feedback scheme (15). Digital CMOS annealers (11–13) 
rely on an external source for random number generation for introducing stochasticity and find it 
technologically  challenging  to  maintain  true  randomness  in  CMOS  implementation,    while 
requiring significant post-processing. 

In this work, we propose and demonstrate an electronic phase-transition nano-oscillator (PTNO)-
based  Ising  Hamiltonian  solver  utilizing  the  concept  of  continuous-time  dynamical  system 
(CDTS). Specifically, the “phase” state variable 𝜃(𝑡) is used to represent the Ising spin and the 
coupling between the oscillators mimic the Ising interaction. By carefully choosing the coupling 
matrix,  the  optimization  problem  can  be  encoded  onto  the  PTNO  network  such  that  the  Ising 
energy  is  represented  as  the  internal  “energy”  or  the  Lyapunov  function  𝐸(𝜃)  of  the  PTNO 
network and the stable point (or the attractor state) of the network represents the solution of the 
problem. The continuous-time dynamics of the PTNO network and the evolution of the oscillator 
phases 𝜃(𝑡) will then be determined by the inherent energy minimization property of the network 
. A vast repertoire of such emergent dynamics exhibited 
by dynamical systems has been exploited across a wide range of fields from understanding neural 
activity  (17–19)  to  robotic locomotion  control  (20,  21) to  solving  optimization  problems  using 
discrete-time  Hopfield  networks  (22,  23).  The  main  advantage  provided  by  PTNO-based  Ising 
solver  is  its  inherent  distributed  nature  and  continuous-time  dynamics  that  allows  completely 
synchronous updates of all the Ising spins. This drastically brings down the time for each anneal 
cycle  to  one  oscillation  time  period  and  consequently  the  time-to-solution.  Additionally,  the 
PTNOs  operate  at  room  temperature  and  consume  extremely  low  power  which  translates  to  an 
extremely competitive energy-efficiency. 

and can be described by 

= −

<=(:)

9:(;)

<:

9;

2 

 
 
 
Overview of PTNO-based CTDS as an Ising Hamiltonian solver  
The  combinatorial  optimization  problem  is  reformulated  in  terms  of  the  Ising  Hamiltonian  𝐻 
defined  by  the  spin  vector 𝜎⃗,	  and  the  symmetric  coupling  matrix 𝐽  and  mapped  onto  the Ising 
solver as shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b). Each Ising spin, representing a node in the graph is emulated 
by  an  insulator-to-metal  phase-transition  (IMT)  nano-oscillator.  A  PTNO  comprises  a  two-
terminal phase-transition hysteretic device in series with a transistor as shown in Fig. 1(c). We use 
Vanadium Dioxide (VO2) as a prototypical IMT material in our experiments (24). A false-colored 
SEM image of a two-terminal VO2 of length = 100nm used in our experiments is shown in Fig. 
1(c). The working principle of VO2-based PTNO has been reported earlier elsewhere (20, 25, 26). 
Below  the  phase-transition  temperature  and  under  zero  external  electric  field  or  current,  VO2 
shows insulating behavior. Upon application of an electric field across the two terminals of the 
device that forces current to flow through, the material undergoes an abrupt phase transition from 
insulating  to  metallic  state.  The  hysteretic  phase  transition  is  reflected  as  an  abrupt  hysteretic 
current-voltage  (I-V)  characteristic  of  the  device.  Pairing  a  conventional  n-type  metal–oxide–
semiconductor (NMOS) transistor in series with the VO2 such that the load line passes through the 
unstable region of the I-V curve results in self-sustained oscillations as show in fig. 1(c). We used 
VDD = 2V and a gate voltage VGS = 0.8V in our experiments. We create a highly interconnected 
PTNO-network where the coupling matrix W is derived from the adjacency or coupling matrix 𝐽 
of  the  Ising  model  as  shown  in  Fig.  1(a)  and  (b).  In  this  example  of  Ising  model  with 
antiferromagnetic interactions, the presence of an edge between two nodes is denoted as 𝐽 = −1 
and is represented by a coupling capacitance 𝐶A.  

Fig.1(d)  shows  an  overview  of  the  experimental  setup  of  the  PTNO-based  CTDS.  The  main 
computing  kernel  comprises  eight  PTNOs  connected  using  coupling  capacitance  following  the 
coupling matrix W. The fabricated VO2 device array (labeled as 1-8 in Fig. 1(d)) is connected with 
eight NMOS transistors in series to create eight PTNOs. To emulate artificial Ising spins 𝜎⃗, an 
external injection locking signal 𝑆C&D is applied to all the oscillators using injection capacitances 
𝐶C&D. As explained later, this creates bi-stable oscillator phases	𝜃⃗ that are used as state variables 
for computing. The continuous-time dynamics of the network is dictated by an “energy” or the 
Lyapunov  function 𝐸(𝜃⃗)  that  closely  resembles  the Ising  Hamiltonian 𝐻. The  dynamics  of  the 
network  evolves  continuously  in  time,  so  as  to  naturally  minimize  𝐸(𝜃⃗),  and  in  the  process 
minimizes the Ising Hamiltonian to reach the ground state as shown in Fig. 1(e). Once the network 
reaches an energy minima state, the output of the network is read out in terms of the state variables 
𝜃⃗  and  subsequently  reformulated  to  provide  the  optimal  solution  of  the  original  optimization 
problem.  One  formidable  challenge  in  solving  combinatorial  optimization  problem  is  the 
inevitable increase in the complexity of the energy landscape with the problem size. Specifically, 
the  presence  of  a  large  number  of  local  minima  degrades  the  probability  of  reaching  a  global 
optimum. Stochasticity is a well-known technique utilized in Boltzmann machines and simulated 
annealing, to overcome the issue of getting trapped in local minima. In the latter case, a stochastic 
noise is used to perturb the state of the system and the magnitude of noise is reduced slowly over 
time  (replicated  as  a  change  in  the  temperature  parameter  in  the  algorithm)  as  the  system 
approaches the global optimum. In our system, we exploit the inherent stochasticity present in the 
IMT  material  (27)  to  escape  the  local  minima  as  well  as  introduce  a  novel  way  of  gradually 
reducing  the  temporal  fluctuations  in  the  oscillator  phases  by  increasing  the  strength  of  the 

3 

 
 
 
injection locking signal 𝑆C&D. This allows us to perform classical annealing operation and obtain 
progressively better solutions as illustrated schematically in Fig. 1(e). 

injection 

injection 

locking.  We  apply  a  sinusoidal 

Artificial Ising spin 
The binary degrees of freedom in the phase space of PTNOs arises from the phenomenon of second 
harmonic 
locking  signal  𝑆%E2 =
𝑉%E2𝑠𝑖𝑛(2𝜋𝑓%E2𝑡) with 𝑓%E2 = 2𝑓M as an external input to the oscillators across the capacitor  𝐶%E2 =
20	𝑝𝐹 as shown in Fig. 1(d). When 𝑉%E2 = 0, the oscillator is free running. Fig. 2(a, i) shows the 
voltage  output  waveform  𝑉QR;  measured  over  multiple  runs.  The  corresponding  phase  of  the 
oscillator, measured with respect to a reference sinusoidal signal of same frequency 𝑓M, shows a 
constantly  varying  phase  with  a  uniform  probability  distribution  over  the  entire  phase  space  as 
seen Fig. 2(b, i). In contrast, when the oscillator is perturbed with 𝑆%E2 at the first harmonic, i.e. 
𝑓%E2 ≈ 𝑓M also referred to as first harmonic injection locking (FHIL), 𝑉QR; shows a constant 800 
phase locking configuration with 𝑆%E2 as seen in Fig. 2(a, ii). The probability distribution of the 
phase, measured over multiple runs, shows a single gaussian distribution as shown in Fig. 2(b, ii). 
Interestingly,  when  𝑓%E2 ≈ 2𝑓M,  the  oscillator  waveform  shows  both  in-phase  (400) and  out-of-
phase (2200) injection locking configuration when measured over multiple runs as seen in Fig. 2(a, 
iii). The corresponding probability distribution shown in Fig. 2(b, iii) exhibits a double gaussian 
distribution highlighting an equiprobable and bi-stable phase portrait. This bi-stability provides an 
ideal means to encode the Ising spin in the electrical domain, where phase 400 represents up-spin, 
i.e., = +1 , and phase 2200 represents down-spin, i.e., 𝜎 = −1.  

The continuous-time dynamics of the phase difference 𝜃 between the oscillator and the injection 
locking signal can be described by a generalized version of Adler’s equation (Gen-Adler) given 
by  
                          9:(;)
9;

U ∫ 𝜉(𝜃(𝑡) + 𝜗)	𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝜗)	𝑑𝜗

= −T𝑓%E2 − 𝑛U𝑓QV + 𝐾%E2

                              (1) 

^_
M

U = 	2𝜋𝑛U𝑓Q𝑓%E2𝐶%E2𝑉%E2	. The first 
where 𝑛U is the nth harmonic of the IMT nano-oscillator and 𝐾%E2
term describes the frequency mismatch between 𝑉QR; and 𝑆%E2, which contributes to phase slipping. 
The second term depends on the phase delay incurred due to the perturbation caused by 𝑆%E2 and 
is  described  in  terms  of  the  perturbation-projection-vector  (PPV),  𝜉  (see  Supplementary 
information  section S1  and S3  for  details). The  corresponding  “energy”  function  or  Lyapunov 
function of the oscillator is given by 

                          𝐸(𝜃) = T𝑓%E2 − 𝑛U𝑓MV𝜃 − 𝐾%E2

U ∫ ∫ 𝜉(𝜙 + 𝜗)	𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝜗)	𝑑𝜗

𝑑𝜙                             (2) 

:
M

^_
M

The  first  energy  term  comes  from  the  contribution  of  the  frequency  mismatch  that  creates  an 
overall  bias  in the  energy landscape.  However,  this  being  a  linear  term  does  not  introduce  any 
additional  valleys  or  peaks  in  the  energy  landscape.  The  second  term  describes  the  interaction 
between the injection locking signal and the oscillator. The corresponding probability distribution 
of  the  oscillator’s  phase  can  be  calculated  as  𝑃(𝜃%) = bcdTefV/h
  is  the 
partition  function  and 𝜂  is  analogous  to  the  𝑘𝑇  term in  the  Boltzmann  distribution  and  can  be 
interpreted  as  a  measure  of  the  stochastic  noise  in  the  IMT  oscillator.  Expectedly,  with  zero 

,  where  𝑍 = ∑ 𝑒l=(:f)/m

i

%

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
injection locking, the “energy” function of the oscillator stays flat as shown in Fig. 2(b) indicating 
a uniform distribution over the phase space as is experimentally obtained in Fig. 2(a). For first 
harmonic injection locking (FHIL), as long as the relative frequency difference T𝑓%E2 − 𝑓QV is small 
compared to the second term in equation, 9:(;)
= 0 exhibits one stable point at 𝜃 ≅ 0.4𝜋, i.e. one 
9;
injection-locked equilibrium phase and the calculated 𝐸(𝜃) (assuming zero frequency mismatch) 
displays  a  single  energy  minima.  This  results  in  a  single  gaussian  peak  in  the  probability 
distribution of the oscillator’s phase as verified experimentally. In the case of SHIL, 9:(;)
 exhibits 
9;
two  stable  points  at  𝜃 ≅ 0.2𝜋  and  𝜃 ≅ 1.2𝜋,  i.e.  two  equilibrium  phases.  The  calculated  𝐸(𝜃) 
(assuming zero frequency mismatch) evolves into a double well energy landscape that results in a 
double gaussian distribution in the phase space as reproduced faithfully in the measurements (see 
Supplementary information section S1 and S3 for further details). 

The steady-state analysis of the Gen-Adler equation in the case of SHIL also predicts that, in the 
presence of a frequency mismatch between the oscillator and the injection locking signal, there 
exists a critical amplitude of the injection signal 𝑉%E2 below which no stable solution exists. In our 
experiments, this critical amplitude is close to 1V for a frequency mismatch of 0.1% as observed 
in the measurements. Above this threshold, the bi-stability in the phase space begins to appear. 
Fig. 2(c) shows the measured oscillator phase as a function of the amplitude of the injection signal, 
𝑉%E2. For very low 𝑉%E2 close to the critical value, the phase of the oscillator measured over multiple 
runs shows a wide distribution in the phase space, with the distribution narrowing as 𝑉%E2 increases. 
This behavior can be understood by considering the perturbation in the energy landscape as shown 
in Fig. 2(e) for 𝑉%E2 = 1V, 3V and 5V. For 𝑉%E2 = 1𝑉, the energy barrier 𝐸t separating the two 
stable equilibrium phases is low (around 𝐸t =0.006 calculated from Eq. 3). Hence, in the presence 
of stochastic noise, the oscillator’s phase constantly fluctuates between the two stable phases as 
seen in the Fig. 2(d). An increase in 𝑉%E2	to 3V and 5V increases the barrier height 𝐸t to 0.012 and 
0.02,  respectively.  This  reduces  the  fluctuations  in  the  measured  oscillator’s  phase.  This  is 
reflected in the experimentally measured mean time between each phase flip, referred to as the 
dwell time 𝜏vwbxx (analogous to Neel relaxation time for magnetization) as a function of 𝑉%E2 as 
shown in Fig. 2(f). The increase in 𝜏vwbxx with increasing 𝑉%E2 accurately follows the  Arrhenius’s 

dz
h , where 𝜏M = #
{|

relation 𝜏vwbxx = 𝛼𝜏M𝑒
period of the oscillator), 𝛼 is the fitting parameter and 𝜂 is the stochastic noise in the IMT oscillator. 
This  characteristic  of  reduction  in  the  temporal  fluctuations  of  the  oscillator’s  phase  with 
increasing  amplitude  of  injection  locking  signal  proves  to  be  key  knob  towards  performing 
classical annealing in our hardware. 

 is the characteristic or attempt time (equal to the  time 

Replicating the interaction term in the Ising Hamiltonian  
To  implement  a  PTNO-based  Ising  solver  that  can  replicate  an  artificial  Ising  spin  system,  the 
oscillators  need  to  be  connected  to  one  another  using  coupling  elements  that  emulate  the 
ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic nature of interaction. We first study the nature of interaction 
in a pairwise coupled oscillator system as shown schematically in Fig. 3(a) using capacitance 𝐶A 
as the coupling element. Fig. 3(b) shows the experimentally measured phase distribution of the 
two  oscillators  using  an  injection  locking  capacitance  𝐶%E2 = 20	𝑝𝐹  and  coupling  capacitance 
𝐶A = 56	𝑝𝐹. The oscillators remain out-of-phase with each other and the two configurations: (400, 

5 

 
 
 
2200) and (2200, 400) are two equally probable states. We measured the probability of out-of-phase 
configuration for varying coupling strength as shown in Fig. 3(c). The probability remains close 
to 0.5 for low coupling capacitance, meaning both in-phase and out-of-phase configurations are 
equally probable, and increases close to 1 for stronger coupling. We also compare our experimental 
results with experimentally calibrated PPV-based numerical simulations (methodology described 
in the Materials and Methods section later) as shown in Fig. 3(c) showing excellent agreement. To 
understand the exact nature of capacitive coupling, we compare it with a 2-spin Ising model with 
antiferromagnetic interaction (negative 𝐽) where the individual spins prefer to remain anti-parallel 
with one another. In such a system, the probability of one of the possible configurations- (↑↑, ↓↓, ↑
↓, ↓↑)  is  determined  by  the  Boltzmann  distribution  𝑃(𝜎#, 𝜎^) = 𝑒lU((cid:129)(cid:130),(cid:129)(cid:131))/(cid:132)(cid:133) 𝑍⁄ ,  where  𝑇  is 
temperature  and  𝑍 = ∑
  is  the  partition  function.  With  antiferromagnetic 
interaction  (negative  𝐽),  the  probability  for  anti-parallel  configuration  (↑↓, ↓↑)  increases  upon 
varying the interaction strength from 𝐽 = 0	to −2. Thus, the antiferromagnetic interaction in an 
Ising  Hamiltonian  can  be  faithfully  replicated  using  capacitive  coupling  in  this  IMT  nano-
oscillator-based system.  

𝑒lU((cid:129)(cid:135)(cid:130),(cid:129)(cid:135)(cid:131))/(cid:132)(cid:133)

(cid:129)(cid:135)(cid:130),(cid:129)(cid:135)(cid:131)

Mathematically, the continuous-time dynamics of such a PTNO network can be further described 
by extending Eq. 2 and Eq. 3 to incorporate an additional coupling term and is given by  

&
																																						+𝑓M ∑
23#,2(cid:139)%

9:f(;)
9;

= −T𝑓%E2 − 𝑛U𝑓Q,%V + 𝐾%E2,%
^_
∫ 𝜉%(𝜃(𝑡) + 𝜗)	𝐼Q(cid:137)(cid:138),2	𝑑𝜗
M

^_
M

U ∫ 𝜉%(𝜃%	(𝑡) + 𝜗)	𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝜗)	𝑑𝜗

                   (3) 

9(cid:140)(cid:141)(cid:142)(cid:143),2
9;

where  𝐼Q(cid:137)(cid:138),2 = 𝐶A,2
.  The  additional  third  term  describes  the  coupling  interaction  energy 
between pairs of oscillators. The corresponding “total energy” function or the global Lyapunov 
function of the PTNO-CTDS is then given by  
&

^_

:f

&

𝐸T𝜃⃗V = 	(cid:144)T𝑓%E2 − 𝑛U𝑓MV𝜃%

− 𝐾%E2

U (cid:144) (cid:145) (cid:145) 𝜉%(𝜙 + 𝜗)	𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝜗)	𝑑𝜗

𝑑𝜙

%3#
&
																													−𝑓M ∑
%,23#,%(cid:139)2

M
:f
∫ ∫ 𝜉%(𝜙 + 𝜗)𝐼Q(cid:137)(cid:138),2𝑑𝜗
M

^_
M

M

%3#

𝑑𝜙

                                                 (4) 

We use Eq. 4 to calculate the two-dimensional energy landscape for pairwise capacitively coupled 
IMT nano-oscillators as shown in Fig. 3(b). The calculated energy landscape exhibits four stable 
points or attractor states – two degenerate global minima at the out-of-phase configuration and two 
degenerate  local  minima  at  in-phase  configuration.  By  increasing  the  strength  of  the  capacitive 
coupling, the attractor states for the out-of-phase configuration becomes more prominent.  

A  similar  investigation  is  performed  for  pairwise  resistively  coupled  oscillators  as  shown 
schematically in Fig. 3(d). Contrary to the previous case, the measured oscillator phases as well as 
numerical simulations reveal a higher probability to be in-phase with each other in either (400,400) 
or (2200,2200)  configuration  as  shown  in  Fig.  3(e) for  a  coupling  resistance  of 𝑅A = 40𝑘Ω. To 
establish the nature of resistive coupling, the probability of in-phase configuration is measured as 
a  function  of  varying 𝑅A  and  compared  to  a  2-spin  Ising  model  with ferromagnetic  interaction 
(positive 𝐽). Note that a lower 𝑅A represent a higher coupling strength and hence a higher 𝐽. The 
increase in the probability of in-phase configuration with decreasing 𝑅A, i.e. increasing coupling 

6 

 
 
 
                                                                                           
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
strength, agrees well with the theoretical Ising model that predicts an increase in probability of 
parallel configuration (↑↑, ↓↓) for increasing 𝐽 as shown in Fig. 3(f). We also use Eq. 4 with 𝐼Q(cid:137)(cid:138),2 =
 to calculate the two-dimensional energy landscape as shown in Fig. 3(e), revealing two 
−

(cid:140)(cid:141)(cid:142)(cid:143),(cid:148)
(cid:149)(cid:150),(cid:148)

global and two local energy minima for in-phase and out-of-phase configurations, respectively. 
This establishes that a ferromagnetic interaction can be replicated using resistive coupling in out 
PTNO-CTDS based Ising solver. By increasing the strength of the resistive coupling, the attractor 
states for the in-phase configuration becomes more prominent. 

Experimental Demonstration of Max-Cut and Performance Enhancement with Annealing 
We investigate the performance of the PTNO-CTDS-based Ising Hamiltonian solver on a NP-hard 
graph  problem  of  Max-Cut  for  an  undirected  and  unweighted  graph.  The  Max-Cut  problem 
statement is defined as: Given an undirected graph G = (V, E) with V nodes and E non-negative 
weights on its edges, the problem requires partitioning G into two subsets W and X such that the 
total weight on the edges connecting the two subsets is maximized. The Max-Cut problem can be 
formulated into an equivalent Ising problem using antiferromagnetic interaction (𝐽 = −1) and we 
assume the linear Zeeman term to be zero. The cut size for a given spin configuration 𝜎⃗ has a direct 
mapping  to  the  Ising  Hamiltonian 𝐻(𝜎⃗),  given  by 𝐶(𝜎⃗	) = − #
𝐻(𝜎⃗).  As  such, 
^
minimizing  the  Ising  Hamiltonian  𝐻  maximizes  the  cut-set  𝐶.  We  chose  an  undirected  and 
unweighted  Mobius  Ladder  graph  with  8  nodes  as  shown  in  Fig.  4(a) for  our  experiment.  The 
phases of the oscillators 𝜃⃗ are converted to the Ising spins 𝜎⃗ using discretization windows in the 
phase space (see Methods section for detail). The PTNOs are connected following the adjacency 
(or connectivity) matrix of the given graph G using coupling capacitances of equal magnitude. The 
sinusoidal  injection  locking  signal  at  twice  the  oscillator  frequency  𝑓M  is  applied  across  the 
injection  capacitances.  We  implement  a  linear  annealing  schedule  where  the  amplitude  of  the 
injection locking signal 𝑉%E2 is linearly ramped from zero to a maximum of 10V peak-to-peak over 
an  annealing  time  𝑇(cid:152)EEb(cid:152)x.  This  is  followed  by  a  phase  readout  time  𝑇(cid:153)b(cid:152)9QR;.  Thus,  the  total 
computation  time  𝑇(cid:138)Q(cid:154)(cid:155) = 𝑇(cid:152)EEb(cid:152)x + 𝑇(cid:153)b(cid:152)9QR;.  To  experimentally  investigate  the  efficacy  of 
annealing,  we  vary  the  annealing  time 𝑇(cid:152)EEb(cid:152)x  as  shown  schematically  in  Fig.  4(b). For  all  the 
cases, we keep 𝑇(cid:153)b(cid:152)9QR; fixed at 100 oscillation cycles, while 𝑇(cid:152)EEb(cid:152)x is varied from 0 (representing 
no anneal scenario) to 660 oscillation cycles. 

#$%(cid:151)2$& − #
∑

𝐽%2

^

Fig. 4(c) shows, for a single run, the evolution of the phases of the PTNOs for 𝑇(cid:152)EEb(cid:152)x = 3.7	𝑚𝑠. 
The equivalent number of oscillations is calculated as 𝑁Q(cid:137)(cid:138) = 250	𝑐𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑠. The temporal evolution 
of the Ising energy and the resultant cut set 𝐶 is shown in Fig. 4(d) for the case of no anneal and 
250 cycle anneal. For the case of no anneal, the application of a high 𝑉%E2 immediately binarizes 
the phases of the PTNOs. Hence, the corresponding temporal evolution of the Ising energy shows 
a steep descent. However, as highlighted in Fig. 2(f), the high 𝑉%E2 results in a high dwell time that 
significantly  reduces  the  temporal  fluctuations  in  the  oscillator  phases.  Thus,  with  very  little 
freedom to escape the local minima, the network converges to a sub-optimal solution with a higher 
energy.  On  the  other  hand,  when  we  linearly  increase  𝑉%E2  over  250  cycles,  the  dwell  time 
exponentially increases as highlighted in Fig. 2(f) and the temporal fluctuations in the oscillator 
phases gradually reduce. The network slowly performs energy minimization with more freedom 
to  escape  the  local  minima  and  converges  to  the  optimal  solution  with  a  higher  probability  as 
shown in Fig. 4(d). Thus, we can perform classical annealing in our PTNO-CTDS by controlling 

7 

 
 
 
the temporal fluctuation in the oscillator phases which is very similar to that of simulated annealing 
with  a  decaying  noise  (or  temperature).  To  quantify  the  performance  of  the  PTNO-CTDS  for 
varying  annealing  conditions,  we  run  the  network  multiple  times  to  calculate  the  success 
probability for finding the Max-Cut on this graph instance. The success probability is defined as 
the ratio of the number of trials that returned the true ground-state energy to the total number of 
trials. To  obtain  the   true  ground-state  energy  for  comparison,  we  run  the  same  graph  instance 
using the BiqMac solver that executes an exact algorithm (branch-and-bound) on a digital CPU 
(28) and using a QUBO software called qbsolv (29) developed by D-Wave. Fig. 4(e) shows the 
success probability increasing with the annealing cycles. The scenario of no anneal resulted in a 
success probability of 30% obtained experimentally while increasing 𝑇(cid:152)EEb(cid:152)x to over 600 cycles 
resulted in a success probability of 96%. It is to be noted that the measured performance of our 
Ising  solver  is  limited  by  the  parasitics  introduced  by  the  experimental  setup.  One  major 
contributor is the parasitic coupling capacitances 𝐶A,¡  arising from the breadboard.  The presence 
of a large 𝐶A,¡ (estimated to be around 22pF in our experiment) introduces undesired coupling 
among the oscillators in addition to the intended coupling 𝐶A determined by the adjacency matrix 
and hence lowers the success probability (see supplementary section S8 for details). To compare 
with experimental results, we perform numerical simulations for an 8-oscillator network coupled 
using capacitances as shown in Fig. 4(a). We use a PPV-based framework with experimentally 
calibrated  device  and  circuit  parameters.  The  simulation  details  are  delineated  in  the  Methods 
section and supplementary section S2 and S8. We also introduce the same annealing scheme as 
our experiments. The success probability obtained from the simulations show very good agreement 
with  our  experimental  results  as  shown  in  Fig.  4(e).  Overall,  the  experimental  and  simulation 
results  validate  our  proposed  methodology  of  progressively  obtaining  better  solutions  through 
annealing. The excellent agreement of our numerical simulations with experimental results also 
enables us to use the simulation framework to predict the performance of the PTNO-CTDS for 
larger problem size. 

Scaling with Problem Size 
Next, we use the experimentally calibrated PPV-based numerical simulation framework to explore 
and benchmark the performance of our PTNO-CTDS-based Ising solver for solving Max-Cut with 
increasing  problem  size.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  such  analog  computing  using  CTDS  exhibits  an 
inevitable challenge arising from parasitics and variability as we scale up to larger network size. 
As such, in our simulation framework, we incorporate the non-idealities such as interconnect/wire 
parasitics in terms of line-to-ground capacitance, line-to-line capacitance and frequency variability 
among the oscillators. The coupling capacitance 𝐶A is optimally chosen in our simulations such 
that the parasitic coupling capacitance remains an order or magnitude lower. This ensures that we 
obtain high success probability (see supplementary section S6 and S8). The simulation details are 
highlighted  in  the  Method  section  and  supplementary  sections  S6  and  S7.  We  first  start  by 
investigating the performance of the Ising solver on a 100 node Mobius Ladder graph which is a 
regular cubic graph of degree 3 as shown in Fig. 5(a). We use a linear anneal scheme where the 
amplitude of the SHIL is increased over 500 cycles. Fig. 5(b) shows the temporal evolution of the 
oscillator phases governed by the process of energy minimization. Fig. 5(c) shows the decrease in 
the Ising energy accompanied by an increase in the cut size as the network evolves towards the 
ground state configuration. We run the simulation 100 times to calculate a success probability of 
94%. Next, we extend the investigation to random cubic graphs of degree 3 for different problem 
sizes  ranging  from  10  to  100  nodes.  Fig.  5(d)  shows  the  success  probability  with  increasing 

8 

 
 
problem size. We compare simulation results for three different anneal cycles – 100, 500 and 1000. 
It is seen that, for 100 node problems, the success probability reduces to 15% for a short anneal 
time  of  100  cycles.  Increasing  the  anneal  time  to  500  and  1000  cycles  boosts  the  success 
probability to 44% and 86%, respectively. Fig. 5(e) shows the success probability for dense Max-
Cut problems (connectivity of 50%) as a function of problem size and different anneal cycles. For 
the 100-node graph, the success probability increases from 10% for a short anneal time of 100 
cycles to 27% and 80% for 500 and 1000 cycles, respectively. Overall, we see that for increasing 
problem  size,  it  becomes  difficult  to  find  the  global  optimal  solution.  However,  reducing  the 
reduction in success probability can be mitigated by increasing the number of cycles. Note that, 
here we report the success probability for obtaining the absolute ground state or the optimum Max-
Cut value. Relaxing the solution accuracy to 99% or 95% of the optimum Max-Cut value will incur 
a much higher success probability. This means that the PTNO-CTDS is capable of finding near-
optimal solutions with high probability of success, which has immense implication for tackling 
real-world industrial problems. 

Performance Evaluation of PTNO-based Ising Solver 
A key metric for benchmarking the performance of any Ising solver is the total computation time 
required  to  obtain  at  least  one  ground  state  solution.  The  total  time  to  solution  is  calculated  as 
𝑇(cid:137)QxR;%QE = 𝑇(cid:138)Q(cid:154)(cid:155) × 𝑁(cid:153)RE(cid:137).  The  computation  time  is  given  by  𝑇(cid:138)Q(cid:154)(cid:155) = 𝑇(cid:152)EEb(cid:152)x + 𝑇(cid:153)b(cid:152)9QR;, 
involving both the annealing and readout times.  The annealing time is calculated as 𝑇(cid:152)EEb(cid:152)x =
£ &
𝑇(cid:138)xQ(cid:138)(cid:132)¥ × 𝑁(cid:138)ƒ(cid:138)xb(cid:137). Here, 𝑁 denotes the problem size, 𝑁§ denotes the batch size for updating 
&⁄
the spins and 𝑇(cid:138)xQ(cid:138)(cid:132) is given by the operating frequency. The first term gives the time required to 
run one annealing cycle. To obtain a higher success probability, annealing has to be performed 
over a larger 𝑁(cid:138)ƒ(cid:138)xb(cid:137). Finally, with increasing graph size, the success probability 𝑃(cid:137)R(cid:138)(cid:138)b(cid:137)(cid:137) of a single 
run  decreases  exponentially,  necessitating  the  solver  to  re-run  the  problem  𝑁(cid:153)RE(cid:137)	times  for 
ensuring a 99% cumulative success probability of obtaining at least one ground state solution. We 
calculate  𝑁(cid:153)RE(cid:137) = [log	(1 − 0.99)] [log(1 − 𝑃(cid:137)R(cid:138)(cid:138)b(cid:137)(cid:137))]
.  Since  our  PTNO  network  operates  in 
continuous-time in a dynamical fashion, it allows synchronized updates of all the oscillator phases. 
Thus, effectively we have a batch size of 𝑁§ = 𝑁. In other words, the time for a single annealing 
cycle is not bounded by the batch size, but rather by the operating frequency. In our Ising solver, 
the operating frequency of the PTNOs decrease with increasing problem size due to the impact of 
parasitics  and  coupling  capacitance.  To  incorporate  such  effects,  we  perform  a  detailed  SPICE 
circuit simulation to calculate the slowdown in the operating frequency of the oscillator network. 
By including the parasitic capacitances in the simulation, we estimate an operating frequency of 
around 500MHz for a small network size while the frequency decreases to 87MHz for a 100-node 
oscillator network. Note that the upper limit for the frequency will be bounded by the intrinsic 
switching  capacitance  of  the  VO2  which  is  estimated  to  be  around  41𝑓𝐹/𝑢𝑚  (30)  (see 
supplementary section S6 for details). The number of annealing cycles required on the other hand 
is strictly determined by the energy minimization property of the solver. As shown in Figs. 5(d, e), 
we require 𝑁(cid:138)ƒ(cid:138)xb(cid:137) = 1000 to obtain high success probability for larger problem sizes.  

⁄

Fig. 6(a) shows the total time-to-solution for dense Max-Cut problems with 50% connectivity as a 
function  of  the  problem  size 𝑁  follows  an  exponential  nature (𝑎𝑒§&)  highlighting  the  NP-hard 
complexity  of  the  problem.  The  different  time-to-solution  curves  for  different  anneal  times 
intersect  each  other  for  increasing  problem  size,  thus  highlighting  a  non-trivial  dependence  of 

9 

 
 
 
𝑇(cid:137)QxR;%QE on 𝑇(cid:152)EEb(cid:152)x. Optimizing 𝑇(cid:137)QxR;%QE reveals a tradeoff between the anneal time for a single 
run and the success probability. It is seen that shorter anneal time of 100 cycles is preferred for 
small problems up to 50 nodes where the success probability remains very high and is therefore 
insensitive  to  the  anneal  time.  However,  longer  anneal  of  1000  cycles  is  preferred  for  larger 
problems  where  the  success  probability  dominates.  Thus,  the  optimum  anneal  time  required 
increases with the problem size. 

We also investigate another key metric for benchmarking the performance - the energy-to-solution 
for solving such graph problems. For the PTNO-CTDS, the average power consumption for the 
main  compute  kernel,  i.e.  the  coupled  oscillator  network,  is  estimated  to  be  around  20𝜇𝑊  per 
oscillator as obtained from our circuit simulations. Note that an additional energy overhead will 
arise from the peripheral readout circuit. As such, we propose a CMOS readout circuit consisting 
of an SR-latch, low pass filters and a digital comparator for reading out the phases of the oscillators 
(see  supplementary  section  S9  for  details).  Simulating  the  readout  circuit  in  SPICE  reveals  an 
average power of 5.51uW. The total consumed energy–to-solution is then estimated considering 
the total time-to-solution from Fig. 6(a). Fig. 6(b) shows the energy-to-solution for dense Max-
Cut problems with 50% connectivity for increasing problem size and for different anneal schemes. 
Similar to time-to-solution, we see that shorter anneal times are preferred for small problems where 
the  success  probability  remains  close  to  unity  and  is  therefore  insensitive  to  the  anneal  time. 
However,  longer  anneal  cycles  are  preferred for  larger  problems  where  the  success  probability 
dominates.  

Performance Comparison with Other Approaches  
Table  1  shows  the  performance  of  the  PTNO-CTDS-based  Ising  solver  compared  with  other 
approaches  for  solving  100-node  random  dense  Max-Cut  problems.  We  highlight  the  relevant 
metrices  for  comparison  such  as  time-to-solution,  energy-to-solution,  power  dissipated  and 
energy-efficiency  (calculated  as  solutions  per  second  per  Watt). For  the  comparative  study,  we 
include five different approaches - (a) well-known simulated annealing algorithm (8) running on 
an iMac computer with four 3.5 GHz Intel Core i5 processors, (b) a noisy mean-field annealing 
algorithm running on an NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 Ti GPU (31), (c) D-Wave’s 2000Q quantum 
annealer  containing  2,048  qubits  (16),  (d)  coherent  Ising  machine  (CIM)  based  on  optical 
parametric  oscillator  with  an  FPGA  feedback  loop  (14,  15)  and  (e)  a  discrete-time  memristor-
based hybrid analog-digital accelerator implementing Hopfield neural network (mem-HNN) (23). 
We see an overall similar time-to-solution for both the PTNO-CTDS and the mem-HNN approach. 
This is because the mem-HNN uses a hybrid scheme of updating 10 nodes per clock cycle (clock 
frequency 500MHzz). Since their best time-to-solution scenario utilize only 50 anneal cycles to 
obtain the Max-Cut solution, the total anneal time gets lowered to 1𝜇𝑠. However, with a success 
probability of 15% for 100 nodes, the mem-HNN needs to be re-run at least 25 times, resulting in 
an  overall  time-to-solution  of  25𝜇𝑠.  On  the  other  hand,  the  PTNO-CTDS  operating  at  87MHz 
shows an optimum scenario of utilizing 1000 anneal cycles or 10𝜇𝑠 anneal time that allows us to 
achieve  80%  success  probability  and  needs  to  be  re-run  only  3  times  to  obtain  the  Max-Cut 
solution. This provides an overall time-to-solution of 30𝜇𝑠. In terms of energy-to-solution, we see 
a 5x improvement over mem-HNN due to the low power dissipation of the PTNOs. Overall, we 
obtain an energy-efficiency (measured in terms of solution per second per watt) of 1.3x107 which 
is 5x higher compared to mem-HNN. Compared to D-Wave’s 2000Q quantum annealer, we see a 
orders of magnitude improvement in time-to-solution and energy-to-solution for dense Max-Cut 

10 

 
 
 
problems. Note that the significantly high time-to-solution for D-Wave arises due to the fact that 
the dense problems with more that 61 nodes are not embeddable in the current DW2Q machine 
(16). The huge energy penalty for D-Wave comes from their cryogenic cooling need that requires 
around 25kW of power. We expect this overhead from cooling to be constant with scaling up to 
thousands of nodes. Thus, overall the benefits that might be obtained from D-wave’s potential use 
of  quantum  effects  are  negligible  for  the  problems  considered  in  this  work.  However,  we 
acknowledge that quantum annealers in general might offer speed-ups for tasks such as simulating 
quantum  processes.  The  coherent  Ising  machine (CIM)  based  on  degenerate  optical  parametric 
oscillator (DOPO) requires kilometer long fiber cavity to accommodate the DOPO pulses. This 
incurs a cavity round trip time of microseconds and puts an upper limit on the time-to-solution. 
For 100-node dense Max-Cut problems, we see a 76x improvement in time-to-solution compared 
to CIM. This is because even though the CIM uses a pump repetition frequency of 1GHz, it incurs 
an  additional  overhead  of  around  2.5  due  to  the  delays  from  the  DAC/ADC  feedback  circuits, 
FPGA performing the coupling computation and stabilization of the feedback loop. Thus, the total 
round-trip time is around 2.5𝜇𝑠 × 𝑁, where N is the problem size. For a 100-node dense Max-Cut 
problem, the effective anneal time for CIM can be calculated as 250𝜇𝑠. For around 40% success 
probability, the total time-to-solution becomes around 2.3ms (16). In comparison, we obtain 80% 
success probability for an anneal time of 10𝜇𝑠, which yields a time-to-solution of 30𝜇𝑠. It must 
be  noted  that  although  the  DOPOs  in  CIM  operate  in  continuous-time,  it  is  completely 
asynchronous  in  nature  as  one  pulse  is  updated  per  cycle.  Performing  updates  in  batches  will 
potentially be possible for CIM, but that will drastic increase the system complexity. However, 
despite  of  the  lower  time-to-solution  and  higher  energy  dissipation  of  CIM,  it  must  be 
acknowledged  that  the  CIM  currently  exhibits  scalability  up  to  100k  spins  which  is  yet  to  be 
demonstrated by other technologies. The noisy mean field algorithm running on a GPU allows all 
the nodes to be updated synchronously. Compared to GPU running at 1GHz clock frequency, we 
get a 1.3x improvement in time-to-solution owing to a short annealing time of  12.3𝜇𝑠, similar to 
our  Ising  solver  (31).  However,  the  scaling  of  annealing  time  for  GPU  non-trivial  for  dense 
problems  involving  dense  matrix-vector  multiplications.  As  such,  we  may  expect  a  quadratic 
dependence (23). In terms of energy-to-solution, we get a four-orders of magnitude compared to 
GPU.  Finally,  we  outperform  CPU  which  is  running  the  conventional  simulation  annealing 
algorithm in terms of time-to-solution and energy-to-solution by orders of magnitude.  

Overall,  report  a  high  energy-efficiency  of  1.3x107  solutions/sec/Watt  which  exhibits  a  5x 
improvement  over  the  recently  demonstrated  memristor-based  Hopfield  neural  network  and 
several orders of magnitude improvement over other candidates such as CPU and GPU, D-Wave 
and CIM. Such a performance gain can be attributed to (a) inherent advantage provided by the 
CTDS approach that allows synchronized updates of all the oscillator phases, (b) short annealing 
times  to  obtain  high  success  probability  and  (c)  low-power  dissipation  of  PTNOs.  While  the 
success  probability  obtained  in  this  work  is  by  utilizing  a  linear  annealing  scheme,  we  believe 
further improvement is possible in terms of exploring better annealing methodologies or modifying 
the energy function to avoid non-solution attractor states that trap the system in local minima (32, 
33). Hybrid approaches can also be adopted to improve the quality of solution, such as augmenting 
the search of an Ising solver in the first phase with other metaheuristic local-neighborhood search 
algorithms such as Tabu search (34) in the second phase. While the concept of utilizing coupled 
oscillator-based networks for performing computation such as solving optimization problems have 
been recently explored (35–37), they involve bulky LC oscillators and ring oscillators with latch-

11 

 
 
based coupling. In comparison, we demonstrate a compact hardware using capacitively coupled 
one-transistor and one-resistor (1T-1R) PTNOs which provides marked area and energy benefit 
(see supplementary information section S10 for details). Finally, it is to be noted that, while we 
propose capacitive coupling through a programming transistor to achieve programmable coupling 
scheme for all the N*(N-1)/2 connections (see supplementary information section S6), in practice 
an all-to-all connected oscillator network may not be feasible for a large problem size due to effect 
of parasitics. However, there lies various avenue of research that are currently being undertaken 
to  handle  large-scale  real-life  problems.  These  involve  decomposing  large-scale  problems  into 
smaller  Ising/QUBO  problems  that  are  might  be  tractable  with  practically  achievable  oscillator 
networks (29, 38). 

Conclusion 
The  notion  of  solving  hard  optimization  problems  using  the  continuous-time  dynamics  of  a 
physical  system  reveals  new  avenues  of  exploration  of  dynamical  systems  for  compute 
applications. There is much enthusiasm in building special purpose machines (or accelerators) for 
solving graph problems belonging to the NP-hard and NP-complete complexity class as part of a 
strong  push  towards  a  heterogenous  compute  platform.  There  is  a  rapidly  growing  demand  to 
analyze  and  uncover  hidden  relationships  between  similar  or  diverse  datasets  in  real-time  and 
risk  and  compliance  management, 
service  applications  such  as  customer  analytics, 
recommendation  engines,  route  optimization,  fraud  detection,  asset  allocation  and  risk 
management.  We are witnessing a resurgence in building dedicated optimization processing units 
(such  as  Ising  Hamiltonian  solvers)  that  can  complement  general-purpose  CPU  and  GPU. 
Specialized  hardware  or  accelerators  such  as  Ising  solvers  are  gaining  attraction  in  real-life  as 
many  relevant  NP-hard  and  NP-complete  problems  can  be  reformulated  into  the  problem  of 
finding  the  ground  state  of  an  Ising  model  (4).    Here,  we  showcase  that  exploiting  the  vast 
repertoire of emergent complex dynamics exhibited by CTDS enables us to design special purpose 
hardware  that  are  most  appropriate  for  solving  computationally  hard  optimization  problems 
belonging to the NP-hard or NP-complete complexity class. We believe that the immense benefit 
of  such  a  CTDS  hardware  in  terms  of  operating  speed  and  energy  dissipation  comes  from  the 
inherent  capability  of  the  system  to  perform  collective  computing  in  a  distributed  and  highly 
parallel fashion.  

Methods 
Sample preparation  
10nm think Vanadium dioxide (VO2) is grown on a substrate of (001) TiO2 substrate using Veeco 
Gen10 molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) system. The widths of the two terminals are defined by dry 
etching with CF4. The device length is defined by depositing Pd/Au metal contacts using electron 
beam evaporation. The fabricated VO2 devices varied in length from 100nm to 1um with resulting 
insulator-to-metal transition threshold voltages ranging from 0.7V to 4V. All our experiments have 
been performed on device lengths of 200𝑛𝑚.  

Experimental setup  
Fig.  1(c)  shows  the  schematic  of  a  VO2-based  PTNO  realized  by  connecting  an  n-channel 
MOSFET  (ALD1103)  transistor  in  series  with  the  two-terminal  VO2  device.  A  VDD  of  2V  is 
applied and the amplitude of the relaxation oscillations is ~1.7V. A gate voltage VGS = 0.8V is 
applied to the series transistor that set the oscillation frequency 𝑓M ≈ 100	𝑘𝐻𝑧. Note that when the 

12 

 
 
 
 
PTNOs are capacitively coupled, due to loading effect the frequency gets reduced to around 60 −
70	𝑘𝐻𝑧. A schematic of the full experimental setup for the PTNO-based Ising solver is shown in 
Fig. 1(d). Eight VO2 devices placed in the Keithley 4200-SCS probe station were connected using 
multi-contact  probes.  The  VDD  and  the  analog  gate  voltages  VGS  of  the  8  series  transistors  are 
applied using a multichannel analog voltage card connected to a computer. The injection locking 
signal was applied to the 8 oscillators across injection locking capacitances 𝐶%E2 = 20𝑝𝐹 using an 
external  voltage  generator.  𝐶%E2  was  realized  using  discrete  off-chip  capacitors  connected  on  a 
breadboard. The output voltage waveforms of the oscillators were measured using a multichannel 
digital  oscilloscope.  The  coupling  among  the  oscillators  was  realized  using  discrete  off-chip 
coupling capacitances 𝐶(cid:138) = 56𝑝𝐹 connected on the breadboard.  

Data-processing 
The  output  voltage  waveform  of  the  oscillators  was  measured  using  a  multichannel  digital 
oscilloscope and subsequently analyzed and processed in MATLAB on a digital computer. The 
phase of an oscillator is calculated with reference to a reference sinusoidal signal with the same 
frequency 𝑓M as the oscillator and half of the injection locking signal. The phase is defined as the 
time difference between the minima point of the discharging phase of the IMT oscillator and the 
minima  of  the  sinusoidal  signal  divided  by  the  time  period  of  the  oscillator.  The  measured 
oscillator  phases  𝜃  were  converted  to  Ising  spins 𝜎 using  a  discretization  window  in  the  phase 
space such that if 0M < 𝜃 < 180M, 𝜎 = 1, else 𝜎 = 0. Subsequently, the Ising energy and the cut 
set are calculated. The final energy state of the oscillator network and the corresponding final cut 
set is calculated during the readout phase as mentioned earlier. We readout the oscillator phases 
over 100 oscillation cycles.  

Numerical Simulation of PTNO network 
The numerical simulations for our PTNO network are based on the dynamical system theory as 
explained in the Supplementary Information section S1. We use a PPV-based numerical simulation 
methodology (35). For obtaining the PPV function 𝜉, we use a SPICE compatible macro-model of 
the IMT nano-oscillator (39) to quantitively match the dynamics of the oscillators under injection 
locking conditions, and perform cycle accurate time domain simulations of the PTNO using the 
Cadence Spectre circuit simulation framework (40). The details of PPV calculation are described 
in  the  supplementary  section  S3.  The  stochastic  differential  equations  describing  the  PTNO 
network is numerically solved using the Euler-Maruyama method. In our simulations, we consider 
a scaled VO2 device of 100nm length. The insulator-to-metal transition voltage VIMT is considered 
as 0.7V and a VDD = 1V is used in our simulations. The simulation parameters are listed in Table 
S1 in supplementary section S2. The intrinsic capacitance of VO2 (device to ground) is taken as 
41𝑓𝐹/𝑢𝑚 (30).We use an insulating resistance of 200kΩ and a metallic resistance of 15kΩ. For 
realizing  the  PTNO, the  transistor  in  series  with  the  VO2  is  designed  using  TSMC  28nm  logic 
technology node such that the ON resistance matches closely with the metallic resistance of the 
VO2.  Since  the  charging  of  VO2  happens  through  the  metallic  resistance  while  the  discharging 
happens through the series transistor, it is important to match the two resistances in order to obtain 
a symmetrical voltage waveform and hence a symmetrical PPV without any undesired harmonics 
(see supplementary section S8 for further details). It is interesting to note that the that the success 
probability of our Ising solver for finding the Max-Cut is sensitive to the coupling strength. As 
such, we varied the strength of the capacitive coupling to find an optimal coupling value that can 
maximize the success probability (see supplementary information section S5 for details). For the 

13 

 
 
 
rest of the simulations, we use a coupling capacitance of 𝐶A = 6𝑓𝐹. The oscillator jitter noise is 
taken from our experiments as 0.5%, considering a Gaussian distribution in the time period. We 
also investigate the impact of frequency mismatch among the oscillators on the success probability 
(see  supplementary  information  S7  for  details).  We  consider  a  Gaussian  distribution  of  the 
oscillator frequencies. For the rest of the simulations, we consider a frequency mismatch of 0.1%. 
We  use  an  injection  locking  capacitance  𝐶%E2 = 1𝑓𝐹  in  the  simulations.  We  additionally 
incorporate  the  line-to-ground  and  line-to-line  parasitic  capacitances  as  highlighted  in 
supplementary section S6. Incorporating the parasitic capacitances, we perform detailed SPICE 
circuit  simulation  to  estimate  the  operating  frequency  as  the  network  size  increases    (see 
supplementary section S6 for details).  

Data availability 
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon 
request.  

Code availability 
The custom simulation code written in Matlab and SPICE for this study are available from the 
corresponding author upon request.  

References  
1.  

E. Ising, Beitrag zur theorie des ferromagnetismus. Zeitschrift für Phys. 31, 253–258 
(1925). 

2.   G. Kochenberger, J. K. Hao, F. Glover, M. Lewis, Z. Lü, H. Wang, Y. Wang, The 

unconstrained binary quadratic programming problem: A survey. J. Comb. Optim. (2014), 
doi:10.1007/s10878-014-9734-0. 
F. Barahona, On the computational complexity of ising spin glass models. J. Phys. A. 
Math. Gen. (1982), doi:10.1088/0305-4470/15/10/028. 

3.  

4.   A. Lucas, Ising formulations of many NP problems. Front. Phys. (2014), 

doi:10.3389/fphy.2014.00005. 

5.   M. X. Goemans, D. P. Williamson, Improved Approximation Algorithms for Maximum 
Cut and Satisflability Problems Using Semidefinite Programming. J. ACM (1995), 
doi:10.1145/227683.227684. 

6.   U. Benlic, J. K. Hao, Breakout local search for the max-cutproblem. Eng. Appl. Artif. 

Intell. (2013), doi:10.1016/j.engappai.2012.09.001. 

7.   N. Metropolis, A. W. Rosenbluth, M. N. Rosenbluth, A. H. Teller, E. Teller, Equation of 

state calculations by fast computing machines. J. Chem. Phys. (1953), 
doi:10.1063/1.1699114. 
S. Kirkpatrick, C. D. Gelatt, M. P. Vecchi, Optimization by simulated annealing. Science 
(80-. ). (1983), doi:10.1126/science.220.4598.671. 

8.  

9.   M. W. Johnson, M. H. S. Amin, S. Gildert, T. Lanting, F. Hamze, N. Dickson, R. Harris, 

A. J. Berkley, J. Johansson, P. Bunyk, E. M. Chapple, C. Enderud, J. P. Hilton, K. Karimi, 
E. Ladizinsky, N. Ladizinsky, T. Oh, I. Perminov, C. Rich, M. C. Thom, E. Tolkacheva, 
C. J. S. Truncik, S. Uchaikin, J. Wang, B. Wilson, G. Rose, Quantum annealing with 
manufactured spins. Nature (2011), doi:10.1038/nature10012. 

10.   S. Boixo, T. F. Rønnow, S. V. Isakov, Z. Wang, D. Wecker, D. A. Lidar, J. M. Martinis, 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
M. Troyer, Evidence for quantum annealing with more than one hundred qubits. Nat. 
Phys. (2014), doi:10.1038/nphys2900. 

11.   S. Tsukamoto, M. Takatsu, S. Matsubara, H. Tamura, An accelerator architecture for 

combinatorial optimization problems. Fujitsu Sci. Tech. J. (2017). 

12.   M. Yamaoka, C. Yoshimura, M. Hayashi, T. Okuyama, H. Aoki, H. Mizuno, in Digest of 

Technical Papers - IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (2015). 
13.   T. Takemoto, M. Hayashi, C. Yoshimura, M. Yamaoka, in Digest of Technical Papers - 

IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (2019). 

14.   P. L. McMahon, A. Marandi, Y. Haribara, R. Hamerly, C. Langrock, S. Tamate, T. 

Inagaki, H. Takesue, S. Utsunomiya, K. Aihara, R. L. Byer, M. M. Fejer, H. Mabuchi, Y. 
Yamamoto, A fully programmable 100-spin coherent Ising machine with all-to-all 
connections. Science (80-. ). (2016), doi:10.1126/science.aah5178. 

15.   T. Inagaki, Y. Haribara, K. Igarashi, T. Sonobe, S. Tamate, T. Honjo, A. Marandi, P. L. 
McMahon, T. Umeki, K. Enbutsu, O. Tadanaga, H. Takenouchi, K. Aihara, K. I. 
Kawarabayashi, K. Inoue, S. Utsunomiya, H. Takesue, A coherent Ising machine for 
2000-node optimization problems. Science (80-. ). (2016), doi:10.1126/science.aah4243. 

16.   R. Hamerly, T. Inagaki, P. L. McMahon, D. Venturelli, A. Marandi, T. Onodera, E. Ng, C. 
Langrock, K. Inaba, T. Honjo, K. Enbutsu, T. Umeki, R. Kasahara, S. Utsunomiya, S. 
Kako, K. I. Kawarabayashi, R. L. Byer, M. M. Fejer, H. Mabuchi, D. Englund, E. Rieffel, 
H. Takesue, Y. Yamamoto, Experimental investigation of performance differences 
between coherent Ising machines and a quantum annealer. Sci. Adv. (2019), 
doi:10.1126/sciadv.aau0823. 

17.   D. R. Chialvo, Emergent complex neural dynamics. Nat. Phys. (2010), 

doi:10.1038/nphys1803. 

18.   T. J. Wills, C. Lever, F. Cacucci, N. Burgess, J. O’Keefe, Attractor dynamics in the 
hippocampal representation of the local environment. Science (80-. ). (2005), 
doi:10.1126/science.1108905. 

19.   S. Dutta, A. Khanna, W. Chakraborty, J. Gomez, S. Joshi, S. Datta, in Digest of Technical 

Papers - Symposium on VLSI Technology (2019). 

20.   S. Dutta, A. Parihar, A. Khanna, J. Gomez, W. Chakraborty, M. Jerry, B. Grisafe, A. 

Raychowdhury, S. Datta, Programmable coupled oscillators for synchronized locomotion. 
Nat. Commun. (2019), doi:10.1038/s41467-019-11198-6. 

21.   S. H. Strogatz, I. Stewart, Coupled Oscillators and Biological Synchronization. Sci. Am. 

22.  

269, 102–109 (1993). 
J. J. Hopfield, D. W. Tank, “Neural” computation of decisions in optimization problems. 
Biol. Cybern. (1985), doi:10.1007/BF00339943. 

23.   F. Cai, S. Kumar, T. Van Vaerenbergh, X. Sheng, R. Liu, C. Li, Z. Liu, M. Foltin, S. Yu, 
Q. Xia, J. J. Yang, R. Beausoleil, W. D. Lu, J. P. Strachan, Power-efficient combinatorial 
optimization using intrinsic noise in memristor Hopfield neural networks. Nat. Electron. 
(2020), doi:10.1038/s41928-020-0436-6. 

24.   N. Shukla, A. Parihar, E. Freeman, H. Paik, G. Stone, V. Narayanan, H. Wen, Z. Cai, V. 

Gopalan, R. Engel-Herbert, D. G. Schlom, A. Raychowdhury, S. Datta, Synchronized 
charge oscillations in correlated electron systems. Sci. Rep. 4, 1–6 (2014). 

25.   S. Dutta, A. Khanna, J. Gomez, K. Ni, Z. Toroczkai, S. Datta, in Technical Digest - 

International Electron Devices Meeting, IEDM (2019). 

26.   S. Dutta, A. Khanna, W. Chakraborty, J. Gomez, S. Joshi, S. Datta, in 2019 Symposium on 

15 

 
VLSI Technology (IEEE, 2019), pp. T128–T129. 

27.   A. Parihar, M. Jerry, S. Datta, A. Raychowdhury, Stochastic IMT (Insulator-metal-

transition) Neurons: An interplay of thermal and threshold noise at bifurcation. Front. 
Neurosci. 12, 1–8 (2018). 

28.   A. Wiegele, Biq Mac Library—A collection of Max-Cut and quadratic 0-1 programming 

instances of medium size. Preprint (2007). 

29.   M. Booth, S. P. Reinhardt, A. Roy, Partitioning optimization problems for hybrid 

classical. quantum Exec. Tech. Rep., 1–9 (2017). 

30.   H. Madan, H. T. Zhang, M. Jerry, D. Mukherjee, N. Alem, R. Engel-Herbert, S. Datta, in 

Technical Digest - International Electron Devices Meeting, IEDM (2015). 

31.   A. D. King, W. Bernoudy, J. King, A. J. Berkley, T. Lanting, Emulating the coherent Ising 

machine with a mean-field algorithm. arXiv Prepr. arXiv1806.08422 (2018). 

32.   M. Ercsey-Ravasz, Z. Toroczkai, Optimization hardness as transient chaos in an analog 
approach to constraint satisfaction. Nat. Phys. (2011), doi:10.1038/NPHYS2105. 
33.   B. Molnár, F. Molnár, M. Varga, Z. Toroczkai, M. Ercsey-Ravasz, A continuous-time 

MaxSAT solver with high analog performance. Nat. Commun. (2018), 
doi:10.1038/s41467-018-07327-2. 

34.   F. Glover, Future paths for integer programming and links to artificial intelligence. 

Comput. Oper. Res. (1986), doi:10.1016/0305-0548(86)90048-1. 

35.   T. Wang, J. Roychowdhury, in Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries 

36.  

Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) (2019). 
J. Chou, S. Bramhavar, S. Ghosh, W. Herzog, Analog Coupled Oscillator Based Weighted 
Ising Machine. Sci. Rep. (2019), doi:10.1038/s41598-019-49699-5. 
37.  
I. Ahmed, P.-W. Chiu, C. H. Kim, in Symposia on VLSI Technology and Circuits (2020). 
38.   F. Neukart, G. Compostella, C. Seidel, D. von Dollen, S. Yarkoni, B. Parney, Traffic flow 

optimization using a quantum annealer. Front. ICT (2017), doi:10.3389/fict.2017.00029. 

39.   P. Maffezzoni, L. Daniel, N. Shukla, S. Datta, A. Raychowdhury, Modeling and 

Simulation of Vanadium Dioxide Relaxation Oscillators. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I 
Regul. Pap. 62, 2207–2215 (2015). 

40.   V. S. C. Simulator, Cadence Design Systems. Inc., Available www. cadence. com (2005). 

Acknowledgements 
This work was supported in part by ASCENT, one of six centers in JUMP, sponsored by DARPA 
and the Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC). 

Author contributions  
S. Dutta and S. Datta conceived the idea. S. Dutta and A.K. performed the measurements, analyzed 
the data and performed simulations. A.K. fabricated the devices. H.P. and D.S. did MBE growth 
of the VO2 samples. A.R. and Z.T. participated in useful discussions. S. Dutta, A.K., A.R., Z.T. 
and S. Datta participated in the writing of the manuscript.   

Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests.  

16 

 
  
 
 
 
 
Figure1 

Fig.  1.  Overview  of  PTNO-based  CTDS  as  an  Ising  Hamiltonian  solver.  (a,  b)  The 
combinatorial optimization problem is reformulated in terms of the Ising Hamiltonian 𝐻 defined 
by the spin vector 𝜎⃗,	 and the symmetric coupling matrix 𝐽 and mapped onto the Ising solver. Each 
Ising spin, representing a node in the graph is represented by an insulator-to-metal (IMT) phase-
transition nano-oscillator (PTNO). The PTNOs are coupled to each other using passive elements 
such as capacitances. The coupling matrix W for the PTNO network is derived from the adjacency 
or coupling matrix 𝐽 of the Ising model. (c) Schematic of a PTNO consisting of a two-terminal 
phase-transition hysteretic device (VO2) in series with a transistor. As the load line of the series 
transistor  passes  through  the  unstable  hysteresis  region  of  the  VO2  device,  self-sustained 
oscillations are created. (d) Experimental setup of our PTNO-based CTDS. The main computing 
kernel  comprises  eight  PTNOs  connected  using  coupling  capacitance  following  the  coupling 
matrix  W.  The  phenomenon  of  second  harmonic injection  locking  (SHIL)  is  used  to  create  bi-
stable oscillator phases, emulating artificial Ising spin. (e) The inherent stochasticity present in the 
PTNO  along  with  a  novel  technique  of  gradually  reducing  the  temporal  fluctuations  in  the 
oscillator  phases  by  increasing  the  strength  of  the  injection  locking  signal  𝑆C&D  is  utilized  to 
perform classical annealing and obtain progressively better solutions.  

17 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure2 

Fig.  2.  Creating  artificial  Ising  spin  using  second  harmonic  injection  locking  (SHIL).  (a) 
Three  different  injection  locking  scenarios  are  shown.  No  synchronization  case  refers  to  free 
running  oscillator  with  uniform  of  oscillator  phase  in  the  phase  space.  For  first  harmonic 
synchronization  (FHIL),  the  oscillator  remains  injection  locked  with  input  signal  at  in-phase 
configuration. For second harmonic synchronization (SHIL), the oscillator phase gets binarized 
into in-phase and out-of-phase configuration with equal probability. (b) Measured distribution of 
the  oscillator  phases  for  the  three  scenarios  along  with  the  equivalent  Ising  energy for  a  single 
PTNO is shown depicting zero, one and two energy minima for stable phase locking, respectively. 
(c) Increasing the amplitude (Vinj) of SHIL forces the oscillator into bi-stable phase configuration. 
(d)  The increase in Vinj also reduces the temporal fluctuations between the two stable phases in 
the  presence  of  noise.  (e)  Modulation  of  the  energy  landscape  with  Vinj.  The  three  curves 
correspond to Vinj = 1V, 3V and 5V. Increasing Vinj increases the energy barrier between the two 
bi-stable energy minima states. This tightens the phase distribution as seen in (c). (f) The mean 
dwell time (𝜏vwbxx) spent by an oscillator before hopping between the two phases is plotted against 
m(cid:181) ) 
the applied injection locking amplitude and is found to follow a Arrhenius type law (𝛼𝜏M𝑒
with the inherent stochasticity (𝜂)	playing the role of temperature. 𝜏M = #
 is the characteristic or 
{|
attempt time (equal to the time period of the oscillator) and 𝛼 is the fitting parameter. 

=z

18 

 
 
 
Figure 3 

Fig. 3. Replicating ferromagnetic and anti-ferromagnetic Ising interactions. (a) Schematic of 
pairwise capacitively coupled PTNOs. (b)  Measured distribution of the phases of the two PTNOs, 
highlighting the preference of the oscillators to remain in a stable out-of-phase configuration. The 
calculated energy landscape for capacitive coupling also highlights the presence of global energy 
minima corresponding to the out-of-phase configuration. (c) The measured probability of out-of-
phase configuration as a function of varying capacitive coupling strength establishes the equivalent 
anti-ferromagnetic nature of interaction when compared to a 2-spin Ising model. (d) Schematic of 
pairwise resistively coupled PTNOs. (e) The measured phase distribution for resistive coupling 
along with the calculated energy landscape showing the preference for in-phase configuration. (f) 
The  measured  probability  of  in-phase  configuration  vs  coupling  strength  highlights  the 
ferromagnetic nature of interaction for resistively coupled oscillators.  

19 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 

Fig.  4.  Experimental  demonstration  of  Max-Cut  and  performance  enhancement  with 
annealing. (a) An undirected and unweighted 8-node Mobius Ladder graph used for investigating 
the Max-Cut. The PTNOs are connected following the same adjacency (or connectivity) matrix of 
the  graph  using  coupling  capacitances.  (b)  Schematic  of  the  annealing  schedule  used  in  the 
experiment. A sinusoidal injection locking signal at twice the oscillator frequency 𝑓M is applied 
with  a  linearly  increasing  amplitude  over  the  annealing  time  𝑇(cid:152)EEb(cid:152)xthat  corresponds  a  linear 
annealing schedule. This is followed by a phase readout time 𝑇(cid:153)b(cid:152)9QR;. Thus, the total computation 
time 𝑇(cid:138)Q(cid:154)(cid:155) = 𝑇(cid:152)EEb(cid:152)x + 𝑇(cid:153)b(cid:152)9QR;. The annealing time 𝑇(cid:152)EEb(cid:152)x is varied from zero (corresponding 
to no anneal) to 660 oscillation cycles. (c) Evolution of the phases of the 8 oscillators, settling to 
either  in-phase  or  out-of-phase  with  the  injection  locking  signal.  (d)  The  calculated  temporal 
evolution of the Ising Hamiltonian shows an energy minimization accompanied by an increase in 
the graph cut size. For no annealing scheme, the network converges to a sub-optimal solution with 
a higher energy while annealing over 250 cycles allows the network to converge to the optimal 
solution with a lower Ising energy with a higher probability. Numerical simulations using same 
annealing  schemes  show  very  good  agreement  with  our  experimental  results.  (e)  Experimental 
data  and  numerically  simulation  results  for  the  success  probability  for  different  anneal  times 
showing a steady increase from 30% with no anneal to 96% for over 600 cycles of linear anneal. 

20 

 
 
 
 
Figure 5 

Fig. 5. Scaling with problem size. (a) Schematic of a 100 node Mobius ladder graph used for 
numerical  simulation.  (b)  The  evolution  of  the  phases  of  the  oscillators  for  a  single  run  as  a 
function of oscillation cycles. (c) Increase in the graph cut size accompanied by a decrease in the 
equivalent  Ising  energy  as  the  system  evolves  towards  the  ground  state  configuration.  The 
simulation  was  performed for  100  trials  to  calculate  a  success  probability  of  94%.  (d)  Success 
probability  of  finding  the  Max-Cut  for  random  cubic  graphs  of  varying  size.  We  compare 
simulation results for three different anneal cycles – 100, 500 and 1000. (e) Success probability of 
solving dense Max-Cut problems with 50% connectivity for varying problem size. We consider 
three different anneal cycles – 100, 500 and 1000 for comparison. 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 

Fig. 6. Performance evaluation of PTNO-based Ising solver. (a)  The total time-to-solution for 
solving dense Max-Cut problems with 50% connectivity for different anneal times and increasing 
problem size. A non-trivial dependence of time to solution on the anneal time is seen where shorter 
anneal time is preferred for smaller problems where the success probability remains insensitive to 
the  anneal  time.  Longer  anneal  is  preferred  for  larger  problems  where  the  success  probability 
dominates.  (g)  Energy-to-solution  for  solving  dense  Max-Cut  problems  is  plotted  for  different 
anneal times and for varying problem size showing a similar trade-off is seen. 

22 

 
 
 
 
Table 1. Performance comparison between PTNO-CTDS-based Ising solver and other state-
of-the-art approaches. Comparison done for solving Max-Cut on 100 nodes random cubic 
graphs. 

23 

 
 
 
