Digital Surveillance Systems for Tracing 

COVID-19: Privacy and Security Challenges       

with Recommendations   

Molla Rashied Hussein 
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Engg.  
University of Asia Pacific 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
mrh.cse@uap-bd.edu 

Abdullah Bin Shams 
Dept. of Electrical and Comp. Engg. 
University of Toronto 
Toronto, Canada 
abdullahbinshams@gmail.com  

Ehsanul Hoque Apu  
Dept. of Biomedical Engineering 
Michigan State University  
East Lansing, MI, USA 
hoqueapu@msu.edu 

Khondaker Abdullah Al Mamun 
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Engg.  
United International University  
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
mamun@cse.uiu.ac.bd 

Mohammad Shahriar Rahman 
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Engg. 
University of Liberal Arts Bangladesh 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
shahriar.rahman@ulab.edu.bd 

tracing  applications 

that  are  developed 

Abstract—Coronavirus  disease  2019,  i.e.  COVID-19  has 
imposed the public health measure of keeping social distancing 
transmission  of  COVID-19.  For 
for  preventing  mass 
monitoring  the  social  distancing  and  keeping  the  trace  of 
transmission,  we  are  obligated  to  develop  various  types  of 
digital  surveillance  systems,  which  include  contact  tracing 
systems  and  drone-based  monitoring  systems.  Due  to  the 
inconvenience  of  manual  labor,  traditional  contact  tracing 
systems  are  gradually  replaced  by  the  efficient  automated 
contact 
for 
smartphones.  However,  the  commencement  of  automated 
contact  tracing  applications  introduces  the  inevitable  privacy 
and security challenges. Nevertheless, unawareness and/or lack 
of  smartphone  usage  among  mass  people  lead  to  drone-based 
monitoring  systems.  These  systems  also  invite  unwelcomed 
privacy  and  security  challenges.  This  paper  discusses  the 
recently  designed  and  developed  digital  surveillance  system 
applications with their protocols deployed in several countries 
around  the  world.  Their  privacy  and  security  challenges  are 
discussed  as  well  as  analyzed  from  the  viewpoint  of  privacy 
acts.  Several  recommendations  are  suggested  separately  for 
systems  and  drone-based 
automated 
monitoring  systems,  which  could  further  be  explored  and 
implemented  afterwards  to  prevent  any  possible  privacy 
violation  and  protect  an  unsuspecting  person  from  any 
potential cyber attack. 

contact 

tracing 

Keywords—COVID-19, Digital Surveillance System, Contact 
Security, 

Privacy, 

Tracing,  Drone-based  Monitoring, 
Recommendation.  

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

Coronavirus  Disease  2019  (COVID-19)  has  immensely 
altered the global economy by confining people from daily 
commercial  activities  [1].  With  no  specific  vaccine  or 
medicine  for  preventing  or  curing  [14],  currently,  the  best 
approach  to  avoid  COVID-19  is  not  to  get  ourselves 
exposed  to  it.  Having  close  contact  with  other  persons, 
which 
than  six  feet  [2],  can 
less 
significantly  increase  the  likelihood  of  inhaling  respiratory 
droplets from the infected persons by coughing, sneezing, or 
even  talking  [2].  Social  distancing  has  to  be  preserved 
between  all,  as  recent  studies  [15]  have  shown  that 
asymptomatic  people  could  silently  propagate  the  disease 
without raising any suspicion. 

is  approximately 

This  social  distancing  invokes  public  health  specialists 
and  workers  to  join  with  the  technical  researchers  to 

XXX-X-XXXX-XXXX-X/XX/$XX.00 ©20XX IEEE 

implement  the  digital  surveillance  systems  (DSSs)  to 
monitor people digitally, since the process is quite tedious to 
carry out manually. One of the foremost DSSs is known as 
automated contact tracing (ACT). To detect individuals who 
have  recently  come  close  in  contact  with  COVID-19 
positive  persons,  ACT  systems  automates  the  traditional 
manual  interview  with  the  affected  individuals  which  are 
administered  by  the  health  authorities.  Instead  of  gathering 
the  contacts 
individual  had  with  other 
individuals  for  the  last  2-3  weeks  through  extensive 
interviews, the ACT systems using smartphone applications 
(apps)  can  be  an  excellent  alternative  which  has  been 
introduced, developed, and even deployed in some countries 
[3].  Also,  it  is  quite  challenging  for  people  to  reminisce  of 
their  last  2-3  weeks  precisely  when  they  can  also  affect 
other  unknown  persons  in  public  places.  Moreover,  these 
interviews  need  a  skilled  workforce  with  continuous 
rigorous training, which is sometimes not feasible. 

the  affected 

Along  with  ACT  apps  that  use  smartphones  and  their 
location  tracing  via  global  positioning  system  (GPS), 
wireless-fidelity  (Wi-Fi),  built-in  Bluetooth  interface  to 
communicate  with  and  identify  proximity  with  nearby 
smartphones, also make the privacy and security challenges 
emerging to a certain level of discomfort. The apps could be 
repurposed  to  target  their  users.  collected  data  could  be 
misused,  several  security    issues  such  as  jamming,  storage 
and  power  drain  attacks,  active  and  passive  eavesdroppers, 
hacking security cameras used in ACT apps are just a few of 
them. 

Another  prominent  DSSs  are  drone-based  monitoring 
systems.  Drone  belongs  to  a  class  of  unmanned  aerial 
vehicle  (UAV)  and  it  is  the  most  common  available  UAV 
nowadays. The operational control of a drone can be divided 
into three categories [16], namely, remote pilot control, i.e. 
fully controlled manually by an operator; remote supervised 
control  where  the  drone  can  perform  a  defined  task 
autonomously  but  also  allows  for  a  human  intervention  at 
the  same  time,  if  necessary;  and  autonomous  control  in 
which the drone carries out a defined task on its own. 

However, drone surveillance may cause the violation of 
privacy  if  the  image  or  video  data  is  downloaded  by  an 
intruder, images or videos of an individual get stolen from a 
drone,  Joint  Photographic  Experts  Group  (JPEG)  image 
format that contains location and time information [17] falls 
into  the  wrong  hands.  Moreover,  hijacking,  GPS  signal 

 
 
 
spoofing, control signal hacking, sending too many wireless 
connection  requests  can  affect  drone-based  monitoring 
systems. 

This paper is organized as follows: Section I introduces 
the research topic; after defining the terminologies in section 
II,  the  relevant DSS tracing approaches, i.e. ACT apps and 
protocols  are  discussed  along  with  drone-based  monitoring 
systems  in  section  III;  the  emerging  privacy  and  security 
challenges are discussed and summarized in section IV and 
V  respectively;  merits  and  demerits  of  these  diversified 
approaches  are  also  analyzed  in  those  sections.  Finally, 
various recommendations are suggested to be explored and 
implemented  as  the  future  works  in  section  VI.  The  paper 
concludes with section VII. 

II. 

DEFINITION OF TERMINOLOGIES 

to 

Before  discussing  DSS 

tracing  approaches, 
the  system  architecture 

three 
separate  approaches 
for 
developing  DSS  must  be  briefly  discussed.  First  is  the 
centralized approach, next is the decentralized one, and last 
but  not  least  is  the  hybrid  one  that  comprises  both  the 
centralized as well as the decentralized architecture features.  

In  the  centralized  architecture,  the  user  has  to  sign 
oneself up to a central server. The server then automatically 
creates  a  privacy-preserving  Temporary  ID  (TempID)  for 
each of the registered devices. TempID is encrypted with a 
secret key afterwards and known only to the central server's 
authority.  Then  it  is  sent  back  to  the  device.  Devices 
exchange  these  TempIDs  through  Bluetooth  encounter 
messages  after  coming  in  close  contact  with  one  another. 
Whenever a user has been tested COVID-19 positive, all of 
the  stored  encounter  messages  can  be  voluntarily  uploaded 
to  the  central  server.  The  server  then  maps  the  TempIDs 
from the messages of individuals to detect contacts that may 
be at any probable risk.  

Contrary to the approach of the centralized architecture, 
the  decentralized  architecture  only  involves  servers  as  a 
limited  medium,  more  as  a  bulletin  board  for  the  required 
lookup.  It  ensures  user  privacy  by  creating  anonymous 
identifiers inside the user devices. So, the real user identities 
are kept secret from both the other users and the server. 

The ACT apps can only be successful when the users are 
assured about their privacy and security while using the app. 
A naive ACT approach could be building a privacy-agnostic 
system which is responsible for advertising and exchanging 
the  mobile  phone  numbers  of  the  users  and  registers  their 
location time to time by a centralized server. Such a strategy 
would  definitely 
raise  severe  privacy  and  security 
challenges. The system would most likely be rejected by the 
common users and thus jeopardize the initial intention. 

All  ACT  apps  regardless  of  having  a  basis  on 
centralized,  decentralized,  or  hybrid  architecture  are 
vulnerable to user misuse. Moreover, ACT apps have failed 
to detect whether the mobile phone’s carrier is someone else 
or a pet being tied to and running in the park [3]. 

Prior  to  discussing  privacy  and  security  challenges, 
various  terminologies need to be defined beforehand. First, 
an adversary is defined as a person who may or may not be 
tested  for  COVID-19  and  can  generate  false  fear  to  mass 
people by spreading fake exposure to COVID-19. 

Second,  the  adversary  can  attack  in  several  ways. 
Eavesdropping  is  the  process  of  gathering  data  sent  by 
honest  users.  This  can  be  done  by  hacking  and  controlling 
all mobile phones. Injection is another process by which an 
adversary  is  injecting  messages  by  targeting  some  specific 
users. This one also involves hacking and controlling mobile 
phones.  Relay  attack  is  an  attack  where  instead  of  direct 
attacking,  relaying  received  messages  through  some  other 
controlled  phones  to  victims’  phones.  Replay  attack  or 
attacking  by  replaying  previously  received  messages  to 
victims’ phones is carried out to take advantage of victims’ 
un-mindfulness [8]. 

laws.  The  health 

insurance  portability 

Third, let us take a quick glance towards the privacy acts 
and 
and 
accountability  act  (HIPAA)  was  signed  into  a  privacy  law 
back  on  August  21,  1996,  by  then-president  Clinton  of  the 
United  States.  For  over  the  last  twenty  years,  the  federal 
department  of  health  and  human  services  (HHS)  has 
released various rule sets within HIPAA’s scope and health 
information 
clinical 
for 
(HITECH)  act  which  is  under  the  American  recovery  and 
reinvestment  act  (ARRA),  signed  into  a  law  by  then-
president Obama on February 17, 2009 [12]. 

technology 

economic 

and 

On  the  other  hand,  the  European  Commission  (EC) 
originated the idea for protecting its citizens on January 25, 
2012  regarding  the  personal  data  processing  and  the  free 
movement  of  such  kinds  of  data  all  over  the  internet.  The 
European  Union's  (EU's)  final  General  Data  Protection 
Regulation (GDPR) was released on May 4, 2016, and was 
deployed on May 25, 2018 [12]. More about these acts, their 
applications  and  suggested  recommendations  will  be 
discussed in the upcoming sections. 

in 

this 

Fourth, 

the  drone  mentioned 

literature 
communicates with the ground control over Wi-Fi or a radio 
channel [23]. The Wi-Fi channel is predominantly used for a 
short  distance  communication,  a  few  hundreds  of  meters, 
whereas  the  long  distance  communication,  thousands  of 
meters,  is  done  using  radio  waves.  Multiple  sensors  are 
installed  in  a  drone  to  achieve  an  optimal  performance. 
Usually  a  drone  has  an  on-board  camera  which  is  used  to 
gather  visual  information  in  terms  of  either  videos  or  still 
images. 

Multiple  sensors  are  installed  in  a  drone  to  achieve  an 

optimal performance: 

Motion  Sensors:  Gyroscopes,  Accelerometers,  and 
magnetometers  are  used  for  an  on  flight  auto  stabilization 
and provide nine degrees of freedom to the drone for a wide 
range of movements. 

Global  Positioning  System  (GPS):  GPS  is  a  satellite-
based radio navigation system used by the drone to navigate 
automatically  during  a  flight  and  to  accurately  localize  its 
position. 

Barometer: This device is used by the drone to estimate 

its altitude during a flight. 

Collision Avoidance Sensors: Ultrasonic sensors are the 
most  common  low  cost  sensors  used  to  detect  and  avoid 
obstacles  [26].  A  more  advanced  technique  relies  on 
computer  vision  algorithms  [27].  In  the  latter  method,  data 
is  obtained  from  multiple  on  board  cameras  and  analyzed 
using various image processing tools. 

Camera: Usually a drone has an on-board camera which 
is used to gather visual information in terms of either videos 
or still images. 

III. 

LITERATURE REVIEW 

in 

Governments 

several  countries  have  already 
employed DSS in the form of ACT apps or programs which 
use various devices and data sources. To name a few, ACT 
apps  are  being  implemented  in  (alphabetically)  Bahrain, 
China,  Colombia,  Czech  Republic,  Ghana,  India,  Israel, 
Japan,  North  Macedonia,  Norway,  Singapore,  South  Korea 
and  several  states  in  the  United  States  [6].  However, 
Singapore and Taiwan were prepared for COVID-19 as the 
learning from the 2003 Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome 
(SARS)  outbreak  was  still  a  fresh  memory  to  recall. 
Moreover,  South  Korea  planned  and  organized  well  due  to 
the  2015  Middle  Eastern 
the 
Respiratory  Syndrome  (MERS).  Japan,  on  the  other  hand, 
initially  utilized  the  group  mentality  to  inspire  over  self 
concern to deploy social distancing successfully [11].  

learned 

lesson 

from 

While  China  imposed  their  citizens  on  using  the  ACT 
app  as  compulsory,  Singapore  relaxed  the  usage  as  an 
elective  one.  Hong  Kong  forced  to  put  on  electronic 
wristbands  to  their  COVID-19  positive  persons  for  tracing 
the movement as well as monitoring whether they are going 
to  leave  or  already  leaving  their  homes.  South  Korea  sent 
their regional habitants the government text messages which 
had  included  the  details  of  rising  cases  of  COVID-19 
pandemic  through  a  central  database  having  anonymous 
information.  Taiwan,  along  with  Israel,  utilized  their  cell 
tower  data.  However,  while  Taiwan  used  it  to  employ 
quarantine  geo-fencing,  Israel  used  it  for  the  ACT  systems 
and processes [6]. 

the  associated  protocols.  First, 

Now,  we  focus  on  some  related  works  focusing  on  the 
ACT  apps  and 
the 
TraceTogether  app  is  considered  as  the  pioneer  of  the 
implemented ACT apps for mass people. It was endorsed by 
the  Singaporean  government  back  in  March  2020.  Second, 
CovidSafe  was  deployed  by  the  Australian  government  in 
the  last  week  of  April  2020.  CovidSafe  abides  by  the 
Bluetrace  protocol,  same  as  TraceTogether.  Third,  ROBust 
and  privacy-presERving  proximity  Tracing  protocol, 
popularly known by its acronym ROBERT, is an  ACT app 
protocol for the centralized approach. It is co-developed by 
the  researchers  from  Institut  National  de  Recherche  en 
Informatique  et  en  Automatique  (INRIA)  of  France  and 
Fraunhofer of Germany. The StopCovid app, abiding by the 
ROBERT  protocol,  has  been  released  by  the  French 
government  in  early  June  2020  and  lacks  enough  privacy 
protection for its users [9]. 

Aarogya  Setu 

in  India.  It  relies  on 

is  another  ACT  app  which  was 
the  approach  of 
implemented 
centralized  architecture.  However,  Apple  and  Google  have 
used  the  decentralized  architecture  approach  to  co-build  a 
privacy-preserving  contact  tracing  (PPCT) [3].  The  authors 
[7]  proposed  a  PPCT  app  for  COVID-19  using  a  zero-
knowledge protocol for assuring user privacy protection. No 
user  is  able  to  send  any  fake  message  to  the  system  for 
raiding  with  a  false  positive  attack.  The  ContactChaser  [8] 
app  is  designed  as  such  that  a  health  authority  is  only 
required to issue group private keys to the users for only one 
single time. Frequent updating of keys with authority is not 
necessary.  Therefore,  the  authority  finds  out  the  close 

contacts  of  affected  people  with  minimum  leakage  of 
information. 

BeAware app has been designed and implemented by the 
Kingdom  of  Bahrain  [13].  It  tracks  down  the  COVID-19 
positive  persons by  making them  wear electronic bracelets, 
or  e-bracelets.  It  provides  the  warning  signal  to  the 
government  whenever  it  suspects  any  suspicious  activity  is 
going on. It comprises Bluetooth with GPS for tracking the 
person’s  movement  efficiently.  The  ministry  of  health 
(MOH) 
in  Saudi  Arabia  deployed  an  app,  namely, 
“Tatamman”  to  restrict  COVID-19  transmission  [18].  The 
app not only provides friendly services to the detected cases 
for  follow-up  work  and  test  results  from  laboratories,  but 
also to the users who came close in contact with the affected 
persons [18]. 

Moving  back 

to  drone-based  monitoring  systems, 
Draganfly,  a  Canada-based  advanced  drone  manufacturing 
company, has developed a “Pandemic Drone” that can scan 
a  crowd  and  identify  people  with  higher  temperatures  to 
indicate  fever,  monitor  social  distancing  and  detect 
coughing  by  an  individual  [19].  By  measuring  the  rise  in 
percentages  of  detected  people  with  the  abovementioned 
traits  over  many  days,  an  offset  of  a  pandemic  may  be 
identified.  

Similarly,  a  startup  company  based  in  India,  Indian 
Robotics  Solutions  (IRS),  has  developed  “Thermal  Corona 
Combat  Drone”.  This  drone  can  detect  elevated  body 
temperature,  sanitize  an  area,  carry  a  portable  medical  box 
to  carry  medicines  or  COVID-19  testing  kits  and  uses  a 
loudspeaker to provide instructions [20].  

Moormann proposed an emergency ambulance to deliver 
medical equipment and  medicine supplies  for areas hard to 
reach  [21].  Back  in  2005,  drones  were  deployed  to  assess 
the damages and to check on the state of the survivors post 
hurricane Katrina. 

IV. 

PRIVACY CHALLENGES 

Traditional methods for protecting privacy have shown a 
significant  lack  of  integrity  regarding  privacy  and  security. 
Eliminating personal identity information (PII) only or using 
an anonymous ID is not at all sufficient to assure privacy to 
the  users.  Another  prime  issue  for  assuring  data  privacy  is 
managing  computational  data  used  in  the  cryptographic 
method [10]. 

The  adversary  can  tag  his  mobile  phone  with  the  ACT 
app  to  a  carrier,  namely  a  trained  animal  like  dog,  or  a 
vehicle  or  even  to  a  drone.  This  will  broadcast  false 
proximity to the mass people. The adversary may target any 
specific  person  and  hamper  privacy  as  well.  This  kind  of 
privacy  violation  leads  to  waste  of  expensive  diagnosis 
resources  as  well  as  trust  in  ACT  apps  which  will  be 
devastating [1]. 

Moreover,  the  adversary  can  attempt  to  undermine  the 
system  efficiency  by  deducing  the  sensitive  privacy  of  the 
honest  mobile  phone  users.  To  be  precise,  the  adversary 
tries  to  provide  a  false  report,  i.e.  compel  the  health 
authority  into  falsely  believing  that  a  person  is  a  close 
contact of any affected person. The adversary can also try to 
track  a  person  down  by  following  public  information  and 
mapping 
the  hacked  or  controlled  mobile  phones 
information [8]. 

The original HIPAA clearly defined that one of the three 
classes  for  which  privacy  regulations  were  applicable  was 
health  care  providers  who  collect  and  store  health 
information  in  electronic  form  [12].  Since  then  numerous 
reformations  have  been  applied  on  it.  Usually,  after  any 
major  incident,  HHS  issues  a  press  release.  For  example, 
protected  health  information  (PHI)  of  approximately  3,800 
individuals  was  lost  by  a  workforce  member  of  a  medical 
center  as  the  member’s  device  got  lost  in  an  airport.  The 
device was neither encrypted nor password protected. Same 
occurrence could happen to ACT apps also.   

While  HIPAA  focuses  on  privacy  rules  which  do  not 
specify the concept of authorization, GDPR proposed by the 
EU  specifies  the  idea  of  consent  [12].  Privacy  rules  allow 
the right to revoke, on the other hand GDPR allows right to 
is 
withdrawal  of  consent.  GDPR’s  right 
applicable to ACT apps, i.e. users should  have rights to be 
forgotten.  This  will  prevent  misuse  of  stored  private  data 
after any epidemic/pandemic ends. Privacy rules of HIPAA 
do not provide these rights [12] and lead to potential privacy 
violations in the future. 

to  erasure 

On the other hand, drone surveillance may introduce the 
violation  of  privacy  especially  if  the  data  in  the  form  of 
image or video is downloaded by an alien intruder. Images 
or  videos  of  an  individual  stolen  from  a  drone  during  an 
upload  or  from  the  cloud  server  where  the  drones  store  all 
its  data  may  be  used  in  any  malicious  way  against  the 
individual.  Some  image  formats,  such  as  JPEG  contain 
information about the location and time of the photo in the 
image header files [17]. Therefore with every stolen picture 
extra individual privacy will be violated.  

V. 

SECURITY CHALLENGES 

Along  with  eavesdropping,  injection,  relay  attack  and 
replay  attack,  the  attacks  known  as  power  drain  attack  or 
storage  drain  attack  can  be  executed  as  well  to  make  the 
attacked  device  busy  or  slowing  down  by  sending  a  large 
amount  of  notification.  The  device  drains  its  power  every 
time  it  wakes  up  to  receive  a  notification  and  uses  up  its 
storage  to  store  those  notifications.  The  power  and  storage 
drain  attacks  may  not  appear  as  a  severe  issue,  but  in  the 
long run may lead to opting out of the ACT apps and pose a 
severe threat to the society [1]. 

Also, some strict companies or conservative individuals 
[4] may not allow the CT process running on their premises. 
This  will  block  the  pseudonym  exchange  through  jamming 
the respective channels. 

Eavesdropping, 

especially  passive  or  unnoticed 
eavesdropping  attack  works  well  in  decentralized  systems, 
for example  the  decentralized  privacy  preserving  proximity 
(DP-3T).  As  used  pseudonyms  of  affected 
tracing 
individuals are published without any measure, users can be 
denominated  by  joining  their  successive  pseudonyms  with 
deduction of their day-to-day movements [4]. 

Bluetooth based ACT systems are risky as the adversary 
can  generate  false  alarms  regarding  contacts  with  an 
affected person using a powerful antenna The adversary can 
also disrupt or track the user's contact tracing  [5]. 

In case of drone-based monitoring systems, the operation 
and control of a drone depends on several wireless sensors, 
e.g.  Wi-Fi/Radio  Frequency  (RF)  module,  GPS  etc. 
Therefore,  it  is  vulnerable  to  be  hijacked.  By  spoofing  the 

in 

feeding 

GPS signal [22-23], the GPS signal used by the drone for its 
navigation is overlapped with an artificially generated GPS 
signal. When the simulated signal strength is higher than the 
actual  GPS  signals  from  the  satellite,  the  drone  can  be 
maneuvered  successfully  by 
false  GPS 
coordinates. Through hacking the control signal [22], as the 
radio  signal  used  for  communicating  with  the  drone  is 
generally not encrypted, listening to the RF signals, using a 
RF  receptor,  the  signal  can  then  be  easily  decoded  to  gain 
partial or full control of the drone  and any of the on board 
systems, sensors etc. In case of wireless connection request 
[24], if the drone is targeted  and sent a continuous  flow of 
wireless  connection  requests  within  a  short  time  interval, 
this  overloads  the  central  processing  unit  of  the  drone  and 
results in a shutdown of the entire system. 

Most  of  the  drones  are  imported  or  assembled  using 
components  manufactured  in  a  foreign  country.  So  there  is 
always  a  possibility  that  the  state  sponsored  manufacturing 
company may use their devices for surveillance, to spy, and 
extract sensitive information. Once a drone is compromised 
than  other  devices  or  drones  on  the  same  network  are  also 
exposed to be hijacked. 

VI. 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

  We recommend the following to preserve privacy during 
ACT systems: 

(a)  As  per  GDPR,  the  right  to  be  forgotten  has  to  be 
implemented  to  prevent  app  data  usage  after 
pandemic ends. 

(b)  HIPAA  is  health  specific  only,  whereas  GDPR  is 
applicable  in  a  broad  spectrum.  Still,  we  have  to 
implement the need basis acts for privacy to some 
countries, especially the South Asian ones. 

(c)  Public  concern  surveys  need  to  be  taken  to  raise 

mass awareness.  

(d)  As the app documentation is missing, mass people 
are  in  the  dark  regarding  their  privacy  issues. 
Therefore, proper documentation is needed. 

(e)  The authors [4] of DP-3T proposed the concept of 
beacon secret sharing to reduce and restrict passive 
eavesdropping.  Instead  of  advertising  the  actual 
whole  pseudonyms,  only  fractions  of  pseudonyms 
are  broadcasted.  The  other  side  gathers  a  required 
number of shares to deduce the original pseudonym 
of the sender. This approach makes it quite hard for 
a  publicly  located  BLE  to  gather  meaningful 
pseudonyms from a person who is just passing by. 

  The  following  steps  could  be  taken  to  preserve  privacy 
during drone-based monitoring systems:  

(a)  Drones  can  be  used  for  tracing  in  case  of  lack  of 
awareness  or  inadequate  usage  of  smart  phones 
among the mass people.  
(b)  Upload  compressed  photos. 

is 
compressed  then  most  of  the  information  in  the 
image header file is erased to minimize the size of 
the  file  [23]. This  will  ensure  that  the  information 
of  a  person’s  whereabouts  are  erased  from  an 
image  providing  more  privacy  if  the  image  is 
stolen. 

If  a  photo 

(c)  Add  noise  intentionally  to  distort  the  picture  and 
store it in a  secured network. This  will ensure  full 
privacy of an individual even if the image is stolen 

by some alien user. But if only one type of noise is 
added  then  by  estimating  the  noise  level  variance 
from the noise statistics, most of the original image 
information  can  be  restored  [25].  Therefore  it 
would be wise to superimpose at least two types of 
noise.  If  the  image  information  is  required,  it  can 
be recovered by specific algorithms known only to 
the legal authorities. 

(d)  Ask  consent  form  people  to  allow  the  drones  to 

take pictures if necessary for contact tracing only.  

(e)  If  an  image  of  an  individual  is  taken,  the  person 
can be notified by the authority, via SMS or email, 
about  the  date,  location  and  time  when  the  image 
was taken.  

(f)  An indicator in the form of a red blinking light may 
be activated while the drone is recording or taking 
the image of an individual. 

(g)  A  signboard  can  be  installed  indicating  a  drone 
surveillance  zone.  This  will  make  people  aware 
about  any  drone  that  might  capture  an  image  of 
them for contact tracing. 

  Recommendations for security challenges regarding ACT 
systems: 

(a)  To  prevent  cyber  attack,  raising  awareness  is 
important.  Unsuspecting  person  is  vulnerable  to 
this  attack  more  often;  therefore,  proper  learning 
should be arranged. 

(b)  App  manual  should  cover  the  topic  of  how  to  be 

secured from hackers. 

(c)  Advertisements  or  commercials  could  be  prepared 

to let users know about fraudulent activities. 

(d)  User  misuse  can  create  more  security  threats  than 
to  be 

adversarial  activities,  so  users  have 
responsible while dealing with sensible data. 
the  decentralized  architecture 
threats 
towards  security 

is  more 
susceptible 
the 
[4], 
centralized  or  hybrid  approaches  could  be 
followed. 

(e)  As 

  The  following  recommendations  could  be  explored  for 
regarding  drone-base  monitoring 
security  challenges 
systems: 

(a)  Wireless  charging  stations  must  be  provided  at 
specific  locations.  In  this  way,  the  drones  can 
operate  for  a  longer  time  and  need  not  be  flown 
back  to  the  ground  control  for  recharging  the 
battery.  

(b)  Every  command  given  to  the  drone  must  be 
encrypted and once the command is received by the 
drone  it  should  have  the  algorithm  to  decode  and 
extract the information. This will ensure that when 
a  drone  is  hacked  it  would  not  respond  to 
commands from other alien sources.  

(c)  Before  a  data,  image  or  a  video  is  uploaded  to  a 
security 
to 

designated 
handshake  must  be  successfully  executed 
prevent data theft. 

authorized 

network, 

a 

(d)  The  drones  can  also  have  a  separate  emergency 
channel. In case any foreign user takes control over 
a  drone,  a  signal  may  be  sent  over  the  emergency 
to  stop 
channel  which  will  force 

the  drone 

communicating  over  the  normal  channel  and  will 
follow a protocol to fly back to the ground control. 
(e)  Any  firmware  or  software  must  be  updated 
regularly 
the  chances  of  being 
compromised  and  any  password  to  access  a  drone 
must be changed regularly. 

to  minimize 

VII. 

CONCLUSION 

To conclude, it is safe to say that DSSs should be  used 
properly aligned to privacy acts and security measures. Both 
ACT and drone surveillance could be vulnerable to privacy 
and  security  challenges.  However,  this  paper  not  only 
summarizes  the  challenges,  but  also  provides  several 
recommendations  to  consider.  In  the  near  future,  these 
be 
recommendations 
and 
the  current  situation.  Since 
implemented 
COVID-19  is  staying  for  long  and  recurring,  there  is  no 
other  option  than  staying  safe.  Appropriate  usage  of  DSSs 
can ensure this safety and constant improvements should be 
carried out to make smooth operations.   

could 
to  enhance 

explored 

further 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Y.  Gvili,  “Security  Analysis  of  the  COVID-19  Contact  Tracing 
Specifications  by  Apple  Inc.  and  Google  Inc,” in  Cryptology  ePrint 
Archive:  2020/428, 
for  Cryptologic 
Research (IACR). 

International  Association 

[2]  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (CDC),  United  States, 
“Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), How to Protect Yourself & 
Others,” 
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-
getting-sick/prevention.html  (updated  on:  April  24,  2020  and  last 
accessed on: May 29, 2020). 

[3]  N.  Ahmed  et  al.,  “A  Survey  of  COVID-19  Contact  Tracing 

Apps,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10306v1 (2020). 

[4]  L. Reichert, S. Brack, and B. Scheuermann, “A Survey of Automatic 
in  Cryptology  ePrint  Archive: 
for  Cryptologic  Research 

International  Association 

Contact  Tracing  Approaches,” 
2020/672, 
(IACR). 

[5]  “Privacy  and  Security  Risk  Evaluation  of  Digital  Proximity  Tracing 
Systems,”  The  Decentralized  Privacy  Preserving  Proximity  Tracing 
(DP-3T) Project, 21 April 2020. 

[6]  L.  Simko,  R.  Calo,  F.  Roesner,  and  T.  Kohno.  “COVID-19  Contact 
Tracing  and  Privacy:  Studying  Opinion  and  Preferences,” arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2005.06056 (2020). 

[7]  J. K. Liu et al., “Privacy-Preserving COVID-19 Contact Tracing App: 
A  Zero-Knowledge  Proof  Approach,” in  Cryptology  ePrint  Archive: 
for  Cryptologic  Research 
2020/528, 
(IACR). 

International  Association 

[8]  Z. Wan and X. Liu, “ContactChaser: A Simple yet Effective Contact 
Tracing Scheme with Strong Privacy,” in Cryptology ePrint Archive: 
2020/630, 
for  Cryptologic  Research 
(IACR). 

International  Association 

[9]  L. Baumgärtner et al., “Mind  the GAP: Security & Privacy Risks of 
Contact Tracing Apps,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05914 (2020). 
[10]  K. Sailunaz, M. Alhussein, M. Shahiduzzaman, F. Anowar, and K. A. 
A.  Mamun,  “CMED:  Cloud  based  medical  system  framework  for 
rural  health  monitoring  in  developing  countries,”  Computers  & 
Electrical Engineering 53 (2016): 469-481. 

[11]  N.  Lu,  K.  W.  Cheng,  N.  Qamar,  K.  C.  Huan,  and  J.  A.  Johnson, 
“Weathering  COVID-19  storm:  Successful  control  measures  of  five 
Asian  countries,”  American  journal  of  infection control,  48(7), 851–
852 (2020). 

[12]  S.  A.  Tovino,  “The  HIPAA  Privacy  Rule  and  the  EU  GDPR: 
Illustrative  Comparisons,”  Seton  Hall  law  review,  47(4),  973–993, 
2017. 

[13]  Kingdom  of  Bahrain.  eGovernment  Appstore.  2020.[Online] 
Available  at:  https://apps.bahrain.bh/CMSWebApplication/action/ 
ShowAppDetailsAction?selectedAppID=321&appLanguage=en, 
last 
accessed on May 22, 2020. 

  
 
[14]  C. C. Lai, T. P. Shih, W. C. Ko, H. J. Tang, and P.R. Hsueh, “Severe 
acute  respiratory  syndrome  coronavirus  2  (SARS-CoV-2)  and 
coronavirus  disease-2019  (COVID-19): 
the 
challenges,”  International  journal  of  antimicrobial  agents,  p.105924, 
2020. 

the  epidemic  and 

[15]  X. Yu, and R. Yang, “COVID‐19 transmission through asymptomatic 
carriers  is  a  challenge  to  containment,”  in  Influenza  and  Other 
Respiratory Viruses, Wiley Online Library, 2020. 

[16]  R. Altawy and A. M. Youssef, “Security, Privacy, and Safety Aspects 
of Civilian Drones,” ACM Transactions on Cyber-Physical Systems, 
vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 1–25, 2017. 

[17]  T. Gloe, “Forensic analysis of ordered data structures on the example 
of  JPEG  files,”  2012  IEEE  International  Workshop  on  Information 
Forensics and Security (WIFS), 2012. 

[18]  Ministry  Of  Health  Saudi  Arabia,  2020.  MOH:  «Tatamman»  Smart 
Bracelet  a  Must  for  Citizens  Returning  from  Abroad  [Online]. 
Available 
< 
https://www.moh.gov.sa/en/Ministry/MediaCenter/News/Pages/News
-2020-05-22-002.aspx > [Accessed 23 May 2020]   

at: 

[19]  “Driving  the  future  of  drones  since  the  pre-drone  era,”  Draganfly. 
[Online]. Available: https://draganfly.com/. [Accessed: 30-Jun-2020]. 
[20]  S.  Kashyaap,  “This  drone  startup  is  taking  on  coronavirus  with 
thermal detection headgear,” YourStory.com, 19-May-2020. [Online]. 
https://yourstory.com/2020/05/drone-startup-indian-
Available: 
robotics-solution-coronavirus-thermal-headgear.  [Accessed:  30-Jun-
2020]. 

[21]  Dieter Moormann, “DHL parcelcopter research flight campaign 2014 
for  emergency  delivery  of  medication,”  In  Proceedings  of the  ICAO 
RPAS Symposium, 2015. 

[22]  “Hacking  a  Drone  -  Is  it  Possible?,”  UMV  School,  12-Dec-2019. 
[Online].  Available:  https://umvschool.com/hacking-a-drone-is-it-
possible/.[Accessed: 29-Jun-2020]. 

[23]  Y.  Zhi,  Z.  Fu,  X.  Sun,  and  J.  Yu,  “Security  and  Privacy  Issues  of 
UAV: A Survey,” Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 25, no. 1, 
pp. 95–101, 2019. 

[24]  “Here's how easy it is to hack a drone and crash it,” Futurity, 08-Jun-
2016.  [Online].  Available:  https://www.futurity.org/drones-hackers-
security-1179402-2/. [Accessed: 29-Jun-2020]. 

[25]  R.  C.  Gonzalez  and  R.  E.  Woods,  Digital  image  processing.  New 

York, NY: Pearson, 2018.  

[26]  N.  Gageik,  P.  Benz,  and  S.  Montenegro,  “Obstacle  Detection  and 
Collision  Avoidance  for  a  UAV  With  Complementary  Low-Cost 
Sensors,” IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 599–609, 2015. 

[27]  “Skydio  2:  The  drone  you've  been  waiting  for.,”  Skydio,  Inc. 
[Online].  Available:  https://www.skydio.com/.  [Accessed:  29-Jun-
2020]. 

 
