A Drone-Aided Blockchain-Based Smart Vehicular
Network

Muhammad Asaad Cheema, Muhammad Karam Shehzad,
Hassaan Khaliq Qureshi, Senior Member, IEEE, Syed Ali Hassan, Senior Member, IEEE,
and Haejoon Jung, Member, IEEE

1

0
2
0
2

l
u
J

5
2

]
P
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
2
1
9
2
1
.
7
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—The staggering growth of the number of vehicles
worldwide has become a critical challenge resulting in tragic
incidents, environment pollution, congestion, etc. Therefore, one
of the promising approaches is to design a smart vehicular system
as it is beneﬁcial to drive safely. Present vehicular system lacks
data reliability, security, and easy deployment. Motivated by these
issues, this paper addresses a drone-enabled intelligent vehicular
system, which is secure, easy to deploy and reliable in quality.
Nevertheless, an increase in the number of operating drones in the
communication networks makes them more vulnerable towards
the cyber-attacks, which can completely sabotage the commu-
nication infrastructure. To tackle these problems, we propose
a blockchain-based registration and authentication system for
the entities such as drones, smart vehicles (SVs) and roadside
units (RSUs). This paper is mainly focused on the blockchain-
based secure system design and the optimal placement of drones
to improve the spectral efﬁciency of the overall network. In
particular, we investigate the association of RSUs with the drones
by considering multiple communication-related factors such as
available bandwidth, maximum number of links a drone can
support, and backhaul limitations. We show that the proposed
model can easily be overlaid on the current vehicular network
reaping beneﬁts of secure and reliable communications.

Index Terms—Backhaul network, blockchain, drones, intelli-
gent transportation, roadside units (RSUs), UAVs, unsupervised
learning.

I. INTRODUCTION

increase of Internet

T REMENDOUS increase of global Internet

trafﬁc has
drawn the attention of researchers both from academia
trafﬁc
and industry. This exponential
demands high data rates with low latency, which can be
viewed as a challenging problem in smart vehicular networks.
Considering the evolution of ﬁfth-generation (5G) and beyond-
5G (B5G), and catering the coverage issues to provide reliable
communication, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), drones,
or unmanned balloons (UBs) have emerged as a promising
solution owing to their on-demand deployment, relocation,
autonomy, good line-of-sight (LoS) access to unreachable
areas, and low-cost characteristics [1]–[5].

Due to such advantages, one of the key applications of
trafﬁc system

this technology is in the domain of smart

M. A. Cheema, M. K. Shehzad, H. K. Qureshi, and S. A. Has-
san are with the School of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science
(SEECS), National University of Sciences & Technology (NUST), Islam-
abad, Pakistan. emails: (mshehzad.msee17seecs, mcheema.msee18seecs, has-
saan.khaliq, ali.hassan)@seecs.edu.pk.

H. Jung is with the Department of Information and Telecommunication
Engineering, Incheon National University, Incheon 22012, South Korea. e-
mail: (haejoonjung@inu.ac.kr).

[6]. Statistics indicate that within a short span of time, the
staggering growth of vehicles worldwide resulted in envi-
tragic incidents and fatal
ronmental pollution, congestion,
accidents, which had directly affected the human societies.
Therefore, the concept of vehicular communication has been
introduced to lessen such concerns [7]. However, the current
vehicular communication technology lacks reliable, secure,
and energy-efﬁcient communications to incorporate intelligent
transportation system. Therefore, there is a gap of introducing
novel techniques for secure, reliable and energy-efﬁcient com-
munication technologies for drone-enabled smart vehicular
networks (DESVNs).

Keeping in view the on-demand and cost effectiveness of the
network, drone-enabled wireless technology can play a vital
role. However, lack of the secure connection and mutual trust
between drones makes the drone-enabled wireless networks
vulnerable to different attacks specially, when the drones are
working autonomously and able to make decisions on their
own [8]. In this context, security becomes a critical issue in
the drone-enabled wireless networks. In fact, there are different
types of attacks including unauthorized access to the system,
allocating resources to the malicious users, and disrupting the
availability of resources. Not only do these attacks sabotage
the communication for target infrastructure, but they can also
become a catalyst for bigger attacks [9], [10]. Therefore, it is
important to come up with a secure infrastructure for drone
communication, where drones can communicate with mutual
trust and security. Further, reliability and energy efﬁciency of
such a network should be optimized at the same time.

To provide mutual trust and security to the systems involv-
ing the deployment of drone technologies, various approaches
are proposed in the existing studies. For example, in [11],
the authors suggest the use of artiﬁcial intelligence to predict
behavior of the UAVs. A recurrent neural network is used for
the authentication of the signals by analyzing the previous
security states of a UAV to protect the system. Similarly,
an intrusion detection scheme is proposed in [12], in which
the authors use the concept of support vector machines to
categorize the UAVs as normal or malicious to provide the
security to the network. Moreover, other intrusion detection
techniques in drone environment have also been proposed, as
in [13]. Most of these techniques employ a centralized way of
protecting the system environment involving drones.

On the other hand, with the advent of blockchain technol-
ogy, a great interest has been witnessed recently because of
its integrity and distributed nature, and leverage to provide

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

the blockchain. The mechanism involved here is responsible
for the registration of the entities such as smart vehicles
(SVs), roadside units (RSUs) and drones on the blockchain and
later getting the registration information from the blockchain
to authenticate the available RSUs and drones as well the
requested SVs. From the prospective of drone communication,
energy-efﬁcient communication of drones with the ground
RSUs is addressed. In particular, efﬁcient positioning of drones
is discussed and then association of RSUs with the drones is
evaluated with the objective of maximizing the sum-rate of
the overall network. In addition, optimum power allocation of
drones is taken into account by considering interference as
noise [23], so that the drones can service for a longer period
of time [24], [25].

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we present the architecture of DESVN. Section III discusses
our proposed model for DESVN. In the same section, we
describe security of proposed network, positioning of drones,
and path loss model related to drone-based communication.
Section IV focuses on the objective formulation of drone-based
communication. Also, the association of RSUs with drones
is discussed in the same section. Performance evaluation of
the proposed model is presented and explained in Section V.
Finally, Section VI concludes the paper and addresses future
extensions.

II. DESVN’S ARCHITECTURE
Fig. 1 shows a graphical illustration of the DESVN for a
typical urban area. Mainly, there are four network entities;
SVs, RSUs, ground core-network, and drones. There are two
classes of the drones. Based on their height, the ﬁrst class
of drones is the child-class, which are hovering at an altitude
of hD from ground level. Further, these drones are capable
of communicating (e.g., exchanging control information) with
each other through a free space optical (FSO) communication
link1. Moreover, child-drones are playing the role of access

1FSO-based links are assumed ideal in our work, which means no losses.

Fig. 1. Smart vehicular network scenarios.

reliable communication [14]. Therefore, researchers adopt
blockchain technology and further improve the system ar-
chitecture by resolving various blockchain limitations [15].
Blockchain is a chain of blocks involving cryptographic
algorithms where the block header contains the hash of
the previous block, which adds an extra layer of security
and integrity [16]. Originally, blockchain was designed for
ﬁnancial purposes to exchange digital currency without the
involvement of third party. However, many other applications
are emerging such as healthcare, supply chain, and logistics
that use blockchain, because of its decentralized and audit-
able nature, where every participant in the network can add
reliable data to the blockchain [17]–[19].

it can be a perfect

Due to the distributed nature and cryptographic abilities
ingredient for security,
of blockchain,
which provides the mutual trust between different entities of
the system and handles the authentication of all the entities
in the system. The authors in in [20] propose an intelligent
approach for UAVs by using the concept of blockchain. In
this technique, the authors use the concept of encryption and
decryption exploiting the public/private scheme to protect the
signals from controller to drone. Similarly, the authors in
[21] propose the usage of drones in a secure way as on-
demand nodes for inter-service operability between multiple
vendors by using the concept of blockchain. A blockchain-
based network ﬂying platforms (NFP) are investigated in [22],
where the authors study how to use blockchain to increase the
resilience of NFP.

Different

from the existing studies,

in this paper, a
blockchain-based secure intelligent transportation system is
proposed for the drone-enabled wireless technology. We in-
tegrate the concept of blockchain between different entities
of the network to ensure mutual trust. Also, we propose a
blockchain-based registration and authentication mechanism,
which not only builds the mutual trust between the different
entities of the system but also avoids the single point of
failure and denial of service due to the distributed nature of

          BLOCKCHAIN         PARENT DRONERF LINKRSUCHILD DRONEVEHICLES GROUND CORE NETWORKpoints for the RSUs using radio frequency (RF) signaling.
The other class of drones is classiﬁed as the parent-drone
class, which are ﬂying at an altitude higher than the child-
drones, so that a perfect LoS communication with the ground
core-network and child-drones is possible. Without loss of
generality, there is only one parent-drone considered in this
study to simplify the network2. The communication between
the child-drones and parent-drone is assumed to use another
FSO link. In addition, the parent-drone is communicating with
the ground core-network via an FSO link as well. The idea
of using such an architecture is to reduce the complexity
of the overall network. For instance, with the introduction
of a parent-drone, multiple backhaul
links are eliminated.
Further, the parent-drone is beneﬁcial to make a perfect LoS
communication link with the ground core-network. On the
other hand, the child-drones are responsible for delivering the
collected information of their region to the parent-drone, which
indeed simpliﬁes the task of the parent-drone. Also, the child-
drones are not required to communicate with the core-network,
which reduces the complexity of their communications and
results in eliminating the requirements of the backhaul link.
We believe that such an architecture can play a vital role in
the smart vehicular networks, where the on-spot delivery of
data is of pivotal importance.

RSUs are directly communicating with the SVs on the
road, and they are forwarding the gathered information to the
respective child-drone operating in their regions. We assume
that the blockchain technology is integrated in between RSUs
and drones, maintained and managed by the ground core-
network. The concept of the blockchain is used to register
these two entities alongside with SVs, so that it would be
able to verify and authenticate these entities. This is done to
avoid the malicious entities to get into the system and to build
mutual trust between these entities, so that they can share data
with trust and ease. Also, in the system model, it is assumed
that SVs already contain the latest and veriﬁed copy of the
blockchain. An Ethereum platform is used for interaction with
the blockchain and for the deployment of the smart contract.
In addition, it is also used for the registration of the network
entities. However, in this work, only security-related concerns
of the RSUs and SVs are taken into account. Therefore, the
communication paths between the RSUs and SVs are assumed
to be ideal, which means no losses. Without loss of generality,
we consider a three-dimensional (3D) Cartesian coordinate
system, in which the locations of RSUs are denoted by (xi, yi)
with zero altitude, while the locations of the child-drones as
(xDj, yDj, hDj), where i ∈ {1, 2, ..., U } and j ∈ {1, 2, ..., V }.
Furthermore, the parent-drone is represented by a singleton set
P0. With such an architecture, we will introduce our proposed
model for the DESVN in the following section.

III. PROPOSED MODEL FOR SMART TRAFFIC
ENVIRONMENT

3

Fig. 2. The ﬂow graph of the proposed model.

drones, SVs, and RSUs. The ﬁgure shows that the information
for the registration process should come from the command
and control (C&C). If the information related to entities is
arriving from C&C, it is considered authentic and is mapped
against a unique ID. On the other hand, if the registration re-
quest is not from C&C, then the information will be discarded,
and the registration of the entity is rejected. Further, the ﬂow
chart depicts the authentication mechanism, which involves the
extraction of information from the blockchain to authenticate
the entities in the network. The entities provide their infor-
mation in order to be authenticated. If the entity is registered
by the C&C at the ﬁrst place and the information they are
providing is correct (i.e., the provided information matches
with the information already stored on the blockchain), then
the entities can authenticate themselves. Only those available
entities, which are registered on the blockchain and authen-
ticated by providing credentials, are allowed to take part in
further steps. Therefore, the authenticated RSUs are distributed
in the given area. Later on, only the authenticated drones are
positioned, and the required parameters are calculated, which
are then passed to Algorithm 1 for the association of RSUs
with drones. In the following subsections, we ﬁrst describe the
authentication and registration process, and then we introduce
the positioning of drones and path loss model in detail.

Fig. 2 illustrates a ﬂow chart of our proposed work, i.e., a
blockchain-based registration and authentication system of the

A. Blockchain

2However, multiple parents can be considered as well and we leave this as

future work.

A blockchain network is deployed between the RSUs and
the drones. The blockchain network is maintained and man-

Vehicles Info.Drones Info.RSUs Info.Command & Control (C&C)Request FromC&C?Blockchain Ledger Vehicles Request Are the VehiclesRegistered?Available RSUs andDronesAre the En  esRegistered?Authen cated En  esDistribute RSUs inDeﬁned AreaPosi on Dronesusing Eq. (1)SINR and req. bandwidth calcula onusing Eq. (6) and Eq. (7), respec vely Associate RSUs andDrones usingAlgorithm 1EndYesYesYesNoNo4

them just by taking blockchain address associated with each
vehicle and makes SVs eligible for the use of the resources.
Moreover, the smart contract is designed in such an in-
telligent way that only the C&C can register these entities
by making transactions on the blockchain to update state
variables associated to each unique address. In case that the
transaction is not made by the C&C, the transaction is turned
down without registering any entity on the blockchain. In
addition, the entities connected to the blockchain update their
blockchain storage and permit information, which comes from
the trusted authority. In order to keep the required gas for
each transaction in a speciﬁc limit, we keep the information
associated to each registration request within speciﬁc length
deﬁned by C&C. Hence, the ID attached to each drone can
have maximum 5-character string, and the ﬂying area code
can have string length up to 4-characters. Similarly, RSUs can
have 4-character string for their deployed area information. As
the blockchain has the distributed nature, each entity can get
the registration information connected to the blockchain.

2) Authentication Process: Authentication of drones,
RSUs, and SVs is shown in the second part of the ﬂow
diagram. The SVs request for the authentication by providing
the unique addresses associated to them. If the addresses
is in the list of the registered vehicles addresses, which is
veriﬁed by the blockchain, then they are authenticated and
allowed to use the resources. On the other hand, we have the
available RSUs and drones, before utilization of these entities
to provide the resources to the users, authentication needs
to be done. Available RSUs and drones provide the unique
20 Bytes addresses associated to these entities in a similar
manner as provided by the smart vehicle. These entities get
authenticated, if the addresses associated to them gets a match
with provided registered entities from the blockchain by using
the call function designed in the smart contract for these two
entities. In contrast, if the provided address does not match,
then the blockchain algorithm rejects the request to protect the
system from unauthorized and malicious entities.

C. Distribution of RSUs and Positioning of Drones

We assume that

the RSUs are distributed according to
Matern type-I hard-core process [26] with a density of δ
per meter square, and the minimum distance between the
two RSUs is ζRSU in meters. The positioning of child-
drones is obtained using the K-means clustering algorithm
[5], [27]. The K-means partitions the distributed RSUs into
K clusters, where each RSU belongs to a cluster with the
loss of generality, suppose R =
nearest mean. Without
{R1, R2, R3, ..., RU} be the set of RSUs, where each Ru,
u ∈ {1, 2, 3, ..., U } is a two dimensional vector, which
corresponds to the (x, y) location of the uth RSU. Therefore,
the unsupervised K-means algorithm partitions the U RSUs
into K clusters such that C = {C1, C2, C3, ..., CK} becomes
the set of clusters, where K < U . Mathematically, it can be
expressed as

arg min
C

K
(cid:88)

(cid:88)

l=1

R∈Cl

|| R − Gl ||2,

(1)

Fig. 3. A snapshot of registration mechanism.

aged by the blockchain center, which in this case is considered
to be the part of ground core network. In this system, every
entity, which is part of the blockchain network, contains
a 20 Byte address, through which it can store/retrieve its
information to/from the blockchain. The blockchain network
is used to share the authenticated information of the regis-
tered entities once they get registered by using the following
mechanism as shown in Fig. 3. For the registration purpose,
multiple functions are designed, collecting the information
related to different entities as an input and mapping it against
the blockchain address associated with each entity. Once the
information gets on to the blockchain, each entity, which is
connected to the blockchain, can access this information and
can verify the source of the information.

B. Registration and Authentication Process of RSUs, Drones
and SVs

As we are using the concept of the blockchain for our
registration and authentication process, a smart contract is
needed to interact with the blockchain in a sophisticated
manner. For this reason, a smart contract is designed with
several functions for the registration of SVs, drones, and
RSUs, which involve storing data on the blockchain. It also
includes functions for the authentication, which is required to
get data back from the blockchain.

1) Registration Process: Registration process use three
main functions of the smart contract, which correspond to
the registrations of drones, RSUs, and SVs, respectively. The
reason of designing three different functions separately in
smart contract is that each entity contains different set of
information associated to it. As deﬁned in the system model,
each entity is considered to be the part of the blockchain
network, where each entity has the 20 Bytes unique address
associated with it on the blockchain network.

The function used for the registration of the drones takes the
ID, which is required for the identiﬁcation of the parent-drone
or the child-drones, and allows ﬂying area code of the drone
as an input, which is mapped against the blockchain address
associated to the drone. Similarly, for the RSUs the function
only takes the deployed area of the RSU as an input and
stores this information against the 20 Byte address associated
to RSU. In the case of the SVs, the smart contract registers

Contract Call byAuthorityRegistra on Informa onB1B2B3B4BNB0Ethereum Smart ContractYesNowhere l = {1, 2, 3, ..., K}. Also, Gl represents a two dimen-
sional vector that corresponds to the mean of set of the RSUs
deployed in cluster Cl, and thus it is the (x, y) coordinates of
the cluster. Therefore, (1) iteratively ﬁnds the location of the
centroids. Finally, the child-drones are placed on the obtained
centroids at the altitude of hD. Thus, each child-drone has a
number of candidates (RSUs) in its own cluster.
D. Path Loss Model

Considering the distribution of the child-drones and the
RSUs, the horizontal distance between the ith RSU and the
jth child-drone is represented as

(cid:113)

si,j =

(xi − xDj)2 + (yi − yDj)2 .

(2)

The probability of LoS between the ith RSU and the jth
child-drone is a fundamental factor in the path-loss calculation.
Following [28] and [29], this LoS probability is given by

(cid:37)L
i,j =

1
1 + α · exp (cid:8) − β(θ − α)(cid:9) ,

(3)

where α and β are environment constants, and θ is the angle
(in degrees) between the child-drone and the RSU. Also, the
i,j = 1 − (cid:37)L
probability of non-LoS (NLoS) is (cid:37)N
i,j. Further, the
(cid:16) hDj
(cid:17)
angle of elevation is calculated as θ = arctan
.
si,j

The air-to-ground (ATG) path loss model [28], [29] along
with fading, ψ, for the communication between the ith RSU
and the jth child-drone is presented as

5

IV. OBJECTIVE FORMULATION AND ASSOCIATION OF
RSUS WITH DRONES

In this section, we ﬁrst formulate the optimization problem
for DESVN. Then, the association of RSUs with drones is
explained in detail.

A. Objective Formulation

are

Since

distributed

the RSUs

according to the
Matern type-I hard-core process, the child-drones can be posi-
tioned based on (1). We consider a downlink transmission sce-
nario, in which RSUs are downloading the data from ground
core-network via the child-drones. The ﬁrst communication
path between the child-drones and the RSUs is limited by
a number of constraints including the maximum bandwidth
Wj available at a child-drone to distribute to the RSUs, the
maximum number of requests τj that child-drone can serve,
the maximum power Pmax with which a child-drone transmit
while maximizing energy efﬁciency (deﬁned later in this
section), the minimum SINRmin criteria to satisfy quality-of-
service (QoS) requirement, ﬁnally, a RSU will only be served
by a one child-drone. The second communication path, which
is between the parent-drone and the ground core network, is
limited by a data rate limit, deﬁned as backhaul data rate
BR. Keeping in view the communication-related constraints
discussed above, the objective is to ﬁnd the best possible
association of RSUs with the child-drones such that sum-rate
SR of the overall network can be maximized. Mathematically,
the problem can be formulated as

(cid:36)i,j = F0 + (cid:37)L

i,j · εN − ψ,

(4)

i,j · εL + (cid:37)N
(cid:17)

(cid:16) 4π·di,j
λc

where F0 = 20 log10
is the free-space path loss
(FSPL). Also, εL and εN are the additional losses for the LoS
and NLoS links, respectively. In addition, di,j =
i,j.
Further, ψi,j is expressed as

Dj + s2
h2

(cid:113)

ψi,j[dB] = (cid:37)L

i,j · ξ0 + (cid:37)N

i,j · ξ1,

(5)

where the envelopes of ξ0 and ξ1 follow Nakagami dis-
|ξι| ∼ N akagami(m), where
tributions. In other words,
ι = {0, 1}, and m is the shape parameter, which takes the
value 1 for Rayleigh fading and 4 for Rician fading.

Lastly,

the signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR)
between the ith RSU and the jth child-drone is determined as

SINRi,j =

ϑi,j
σ2
n + I

,

(6)

max
{ci,j }

U
(cid:88)

V
(cid:88)

i=1

j=1

ri,j · ci,j

s.t.

U
(cid:88)

i=1
U
(cid:88)

wi,j.ci,j ≤ Wj,

ci,j ≤ τj,

,

i=1
pi,j ≤ P max
j
ci,j·ζi,j · pi,j ≤ I ,
SINRi,j · ci,j ≥ SINRmin,
V
(cid:88)

ci,j ≤ 1,

j=1

U
(cid:88)

V
(cid:88)

i=1

j=1

ri,j · ci,j ≤ BR,

∀j

∀j

∀j

∀i,j

∀i

(8a)

(8b)

(8c)

(8d)

(8e)

(8f)

(8g)

(8h)

where ϑi,j is the received power at the ith RSU from the jth
child-drone, and σ2
n is the noise power. Also, I represents the
sum of the interference from remaining (V − 1) child-drones.
In addition, the required bandwidth of ith RSU from jth

child-drone is calculated as

wi,j =

ri,j
log2 (1 + SINRi,j)

,

(7)

where the parameter ri,j is the requested data rate of ith RSU
from jth child-drone. Also, ci,j is the optimization parameter,
which takes the value 1 in case the link between ith RSU
with jth child-drone is connected, and zero otherwise. Next,
the objective function represents the sum-rate, that is, SR =
V
U
(cid:80)
(cid:80)
j=1
i=1
constraints.

ri,j. The objective function is subject to the following

where ri,j is the requested data rate of ith RSU from jth
child-drone.

1) Constraint (8b) shows that

the jth child-drone can
distribute the maximum bandwidth of Wj to the RSUs.

2) Constraint (8c) represents that a jth child-drone can

serve up to τj RSUs.

3) Constraint (8d) limits the optimal transmit power, pi,j,
of a jth child-drone for energy efﬁciency. Besides,
constraint (8e) is the interference threshold for the ith
RSU, where ζi,j is the product of the magnitude squared
of the channel gain and the inverse of the path loss
between the ith RSU and jth child-drone.

4) Next constraint, i.e., (8f) ensures that the communication
link between the child-drone and the RSU satisﬁes the
QoS requirement and is considered using the minimum
SINR criterion.

5) Constraint (8g) ensures that an RSU is associated with

only one child-drone.

6) Constraint (8h) implies that the achieved sum-rate of
associated RSUs is within the backhaul data rate limit,
BR, which is the communication link between the
parent-drone and the ground core-network.

It can be observed from the above constraints that, we
considered interference as noise and maximum transmit power
limit
is also applied on a child-drone, which makes the
optimization objective non-convex [23], [30], [31]. Besides,
considering the objective function that maximizes the sum-
rate of overall network, energy efﬁciency of the network in
bits/s/Watt is deﬁned by

EE =

η ·

U
(cid:80)
i=1

V
(cid:80)
j=1

SR

,

(9)

pi,j · ci,j + Λ × Υc
i,j

where η is the inverse of power ampliﬁer efﬁciency. Also, Λ is
the total number of associated RSUs, where Λ ≤ U . Further,
Υc
i,j is the circuit power cost by communication link between
the ith RSU and the jth child-drone.

B. Association of RSUs with Child-drones

Having the distribution of the RSUs and the child-drones,
each RSU calculates the SINR by using (6). Also, each child-
drone calculates the required bandwidth of RSUs using (7)
the calculated
based on their demanded data rates. Next,
parameters,
threshold values, demanded data rates of the
RSUs, and the total number of the RSUs and child-drones are
passed as an input to Algorithm 1, where it performs following
steps to associate the RSUs with the child-drones.

1) Each RSU selects a single child-drone out of U child-
drones, which gives the highest SINR value (Lines 1-
2). Therefore, mathematically, a matrix M contains a
number of ones in each column, in which each entry
represents the connectivity between the ith RSU and
the jth child-drone.

2) At this step (Lines 3-10), each child-drone initializes
two counters, Tτ and TW ,
to zero, which represent
the total number of associated requests and bandwidth
distribution, respectively. Next, each child-drone keeps
on associating the RSUs with itself considering the
availability of bandwidth resource, Wj, and the number
of requests, τj. Here, it is important to note that a
child-drone picks the RSU with the highest spectral

6

efﬁciency ﬁrst
spectral efﬁciency is deﬁned as

in the association process, where the

log2(1 + SINR) =

r
w

.

(10)

The reason for selecting the the RSU with the best
spectral efﬁciency ﬁrst is because the objective of our
problem discussed is Section IV is to maximize the
sum-rate of the overall network. Therefore, having a
higher value of numerator (data rate) and lower value
of the denominator in the above equation will result in
achieving the objective function more quickly.

3) Finally, at the last step, the gathered information of asso-
ciation by all the child-drones is forwarded to the parent-
drone, where the parent-drone considers the backhaul
data rate constraint, BR. If the constraint is satisﬁed,
the association process completes, otherwise the parent-
drone re-performs the steps mentioned in Lines 11-14
of Algorithm 1.

The complete algorithm for the association of RSUs with
child-drones is summarized in Algorithm 1.

V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

In this section, we ﬁrst explain the simulation scenarios in-
cluding system parameters and then present simulation results,
through which the performance of the our proposed system is
evaluated.

A. Simulation Description

Blockchain algorithm is tested and deployed on the personal
Ethereum blockchain by setting the block gas limit up to 6
millions and following Petersburg hard fork. To feed the data
to the smart contract, we use web3 APIs and Python 3. More-
over for the interaction between blockchain and our MATLAB
simulation environment we used the Python 3 interface by
creating TCP/IP ports between Python and MATLAB. Python
3 stores/retrieves the data to/from the blockchain (using web3),
where MATLAB receives and sends data through these ports.
In addition, an urban area of 25 km2 is considered, where
the RSUs are distributed according to Matern type-I hard-core
process with the density of δ = 5 × 10−6 per 1m2, and the
distance between the two RSUs is kept to ζRSU = 200 m.
Next, considering the location of the RSUs, V = 6 drones are
positioned following (1), at the altitude of hD. A snapshot of
this process is shown in Fig. 4, where a two-dimensional (2D)
view of the RSUs and the drones can be seen. In the ﬁgure,
a group of RSUs with the same colors belongs to the same
drones that has the nearest mean value. For instance, the RSUs
indicated by the red circles belong to cluster 1 (i.e., C1), and
the respective drone in that particular cluster is hovering at the
altitude of hD = 200 m.

With the obtained positions of the RSUs and the drones, the
SINR is calculated using the simulation parameters mentioned
in Table I. In addition, random data rate demands are assigned
to all the RSUs from a predeﬁned data rate vector rRSU, which
is given in Table I. Therefore, having the demanded data rates
and the SINR values of each RSU, the required bandwidth by

Algorithm 1: Association of RSUs with child-drones.
Input: U , V , ri,j, wi,j,W , τ , SINRi,j, BR
Output: M
Initialize: M = ø
// Step at each RSU for the selection of

child-drone from which it receives highest
SINR value

1 for i = 1 to U do
2

Select child-drone from which a ith RSU receives
maximum SINRmax

// Step at each child-drone for the association

of RSUs with itself

Parameters
hD
λc

α
β
εN
δ
Wj
P max
j
rRSU

TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS FOR DESVN.

7

Numerical Values
200 m

Numerical Values
1.40 Gbps

0.15 m

9.61
0.16
20 dB
5 × 10−6/m2
400 MHz
1.5 Watt

Parameters
BR
ψmin
σn
εL
Υc
ζRSU
τj
η
{5, 10, 15, 20, 25} Mbps

-10 dB

-125 dB
1 dB
0.1 Watt
200 m
20
0.20

3 for j = 1 to V do
4

Initialize counters: Tτ = 0, TW = 0
jth child-drone selects highest spectral efﬁcient RSU
from its list

while Tτ < τ ∧ TW < W do
if TW + wi,j ≤ W then

Update ci,j = 1, Tτ =Tτ + 1 and TW = TW +
wi,j
else

break

5

6

7

8

9

10

// Step at the parent-drone to consider the

constraint (8h)

Initialize: SR as total sum-rate of associated RSUs

11 while SR > BR do
12

Select child-drone with max. associated RSUs
// This approach of selecting child-drone will

introduce fairness to entire region

Select the RSU with minimum data rate request for
de-association
// Because we want to maximize the sum-rate
De-associate the selected pair and update ci,j = 0,
Tτ = Tτ − 1, SR = SR− ri,j and TW = TW − wi,j

13

14

15

each of the RSUs is calculated using (7). Finally, the obtained
aforementioned values and speciﬁc constraints are given to the
input of Algorithm 1, where the association of the RSUs with
the drones is performed to maximize the objective function
given in (8).

B. Simulation Results and Analysis

Table II shows simulation results in terms of various key
performance metrics such as percentage of associated RSUs,
achieved sum-rate, average bandwidth consumed by the child-
drones, and achieved energy efﬁciency of the overall network.
It is important to note that these results are obtained with the
backhaul data rate limit of 1.40 Gbps. As a result, 71.23%
of the RSUs are associated with the drones. Also, the sum-
rate, which is the objective function, is maximized, while the
average bandwidth consumed by drones is 237.13 × 106 Hz.
Further, the energy efﬁciency of the overall network is 99.2 ×

Fig. 4.
drones by (1).

2D view of distributions of the RSUs and positioning of the child-

106 bits/s/watt. We note that 28.77% of the RSUs are not
associated with drones, which is due to the backhaul data rate
limit; thus, drones cannot serve more requests. We will further
discuss the impact of the backhaul data rate, when we present
the results in Fig. 6.

Table II also provides an insightful look to the authentication
process and the processing time required to authenticate the
requested users, which depends on the system speed. In the
authentication process, the requested user provides its unique
address, and if the address is matched with the list of the
registered addresses, the user is veriﬁed and vice versa. In
Table II, we observe that as the number of the requested users
increases, the time to authenticate these users also increases,
because we have to scan through the whole array of the
registered users which we get from the blockchain. A similar
trend can also be seen for the authentication time of the drones
and the RSUs, as these entities follow the same procedure for
authentication.

Fig. 5 depicts the performance of the objective function
(i.e., sum-rate), when the available bandwidth is increased
from 0 to 400 MHz. Also, a comparison of the consumed
bandwidth versus the available bandwidth is shown in the
ﬁgure. In the ﬁgure, the different curves correspond to the
results with different numbers of the RSUs that a drone can
support (i.e., τ = {5, 10, 15, 20}). It can be observed that

010002000300040005000x (meters)010002000300040005000y (meters)C1C2C3C4C5C6DroneTABLE II
OUTCOME AND AUTHENTICATION TIME WITH DIFFERENT EVALUATION PARAMETERS AND NUMBER OF USERS.

Evaluation Parameter

Output

No. of Users (SVs)

Served RSUs (%age)
Achieved SR (bps)
Avg. W Consumption (Hz)
EE (bps/Watt)
-

71.23
1.39 × 109
237.13 × 106
99.2 × 106
-

10
20
30
40
50

Auth. Time (S) with 10 Reg. SVs
0.161 × 10−3
0.321 × 10−3
0.484 × 10−3
0.647 × 10−3
0.811 × 10−3

Auth. Time (S) with 20 Reg. SVs
0.331 × 10−3
0.639 × 10−3
0.964 × 10−3
1.3 × 10−3
1.7 × 10−3

8

versus the available bandwidth with different backhaul rate
constraints BR. It can be seen that the sum-rate increases with
the increase in the bandwidth. For example, when the backhaul
constraint is limited to 1.5 Gbps, the sum-rate increases from
0 to 1.5 Gbps, as the bandwidth increases. However, for
the bandwidth larger than 200 MHz, the sum-rate saturates,
because of the backhaul constraint BR. However, when the
backhaul constraint is increased to 2 Gbps then sum-rate is also
increased to 2 Gbps. Similarly, the sum-rate further increases
with BR = 2.5 Gbps. It is important to note that, in case
of 2.5 Gbps backhaul constraint, the sum-rate is smaller than
2.5 Gbps even with the bandwidth of 400 MHz, which can
be explained by the fact that the drones cannot serve more
requests, because of its constraint τ .

Fig. 7 reveals the energy efﬁciency and the fraction of
associated RSUs, when the number of child-drones is varied,
while inﬁnite BR is assumed. In the ﬁgures, the different
curves corresponds to the different values of the RSUs density
δ. It can be observed that for each value of δ, the energy
efﬁciency decreases, while the the association ratio increases,
when the number of drones is increased from 1 to 10. The
reason for the increase in the fraction of the associated RSUs
is that the coverage area increases, the number of drones
increases. On the other side, the demanded values of the data
rate of the RSUs are small, which makes the numerator of
(9) decline. Also, with higher number of the serving RSUs,
the network consumes higher power, which means the greater
denominator of (9). As a result, the energy efﬁciency decreases
with the increase in the number of drones. Nevertheless, with
the increase of the RSU density, higher data rate can be
achieved, which gives higher energy efﬁciency.

Fig. 8 shows the impact of the number of drones being used
on the achieved sum-rate changes for inﬁnite BR. In the ﬁgure,
the three different curves indicate the results with different δ,
as in Fig. 7. When δ = 5 × 10−6/m2, we observe that the
sum-rate increases with the increase in the number of drones.
However, after a certain point, the sum-rate does not increase,
because all the RSUs are served, and hence there are no RSUs
left. Also, with higher δ, the sum-rates increases, because more
RSUs are present to associate.

In Fig. 9, we investigate the registration process of the
entities and provide the gas analysis of the transactions, which
can only be made by the C&C for the registration purposes.
The gas used by each transaction function depends on the
complexity of the function and the parameters required for
that function. To get
the gas required for the registration
process of the drones, the smart vehicles, and the RSUs, we
deploy the smart contract on the Ethereum blockchain and
check the gas used by each transaction. It can be observed

Fig. 5. Comparison of the consumed bandwidth and the sum-rate versus the
available bandwidth Wj , when BR= 1.60 Gbps and δ = 5 × 10−6/m2.

Fig. 6.
when δ = 7 × 10−6/m2.

Comparison of the sum-rate versus the available bandwidth Wj ,

as the available bandwidth increases, the objective function
increases. For example, when τ = 5, the sum-rate increases
from 0 to 0.67 Gbps, and is constant onward, because a drone
cannot serve more requests by the constraint of τ . Similarly,
the corresponding curve of the bandwidth consumption in-
creases from 0 to 0.92 MHz, and then drones do not consume
more bandwidth, since they cannot accommodate more RSUs.
However, on the other side, increasing the value of τ results
in higher sum-rate and bandwidth consumption, as expected.
Fig. 6 shows the comparison of the achieved sum-rate

01234Available Bandwidth (Hz)10800.511.52Sum-Rate (bps)109024Consumed Bandwidth (Hz)108Sum-Rate, =20Consumed Bandwidth, =20Sum-Rate, =15Consumed Bandwidth, =15Sum-Rate, =10Consumed Bandwidth, =10Sum-Rate, =5Consumed Bandwidth, =501234Bandwidth (Hz)10800.511.522.5Sum-Rate (bps)109Sum-Rate: Backhaul Rate Limit, BR= 2.5x109Sum-Rate: Backhaul Rate Limit, BR= 2x109Sum-Rate: Backhaul Rate Limit, BR= 1.5x1099

Impacts of the number of the child-drones on the EE and the fraction

Fig. 7.
of the associated RSUs with inﬁnite BR.

Fig. 9. Transactions per block versus block gas limit.

Impact of the number of child-drones on the sum-rate with inﬁnite

Fig. 10. Entities requested for registration versus registered entities.

Fig. 8.
BR.

that only the C&C is able to perform the registrations process
(transactions made by the C&C account register the entities).
Fig. 9 shows the number of transactions a block can accom-
modate during the registration process. We observe that as
block gas limit increases, the number of transactions that can
be accommodated by a single block also increases, because
the number of transactions is directly related to the block
gas limit. The same trend can be seen for the registration of
each entity as each entity requires different parameters for
the registration function. Therefore, we get gas analysis of
each entity separately, and combined them in a single graph
as shown in Fig. 9.

The same trend can also be seen for the registration and
authentication process in Figs. 10 and 11. Fig. 10 shows that
only the C&C is able to register the entities no matter how
many transactions are made by other accounts to register the
entities. Moreover, it can also be seen that only those entities
can get themselves registered, which are allowed by the C&C
irrespective of the number of requests of the entities for the

registration purposes. On the other hand, only the registered
entities can be authenticated by matching the information
provided by the requested entity with the list of registered
entities. In Fig. 11, regardless of the change in the number
of requested, only the entities, which were registered by the
C&C at the ﬁrst stage, can get the authentication.

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

In this paper, we have proposed a drone-aided secure
vehicular network by employing blockchain technology and
by placing the drones optimally in a geographic area. The
blockchain is integrated to build mutual trust between different
entities of the network and to protect the network from external
intruders, who can be malicious. The algorithm also protects
DESVNs by avoiding the single point of failure and centralized
storage of the registered entities information, exploiting the
distributed nature of the blockchain.

In the future, we are planning to analyze the limited storage
the

capacity of the entities, as it has been observed that

246810Number of Drones0.70.80.911.11.21.3Energy Efficiency (bps/Watt)10800.20.40.60.81Fraction of Associated RSUsEnergy Efficiency: RSU Density, =5x10-6Associated RSUs: RSU Density, =5x10-6Energy Efficiency: RSU Density, =6x10-6Associated RSUs: RSU Density, =6x10-6Energy Efficiency: RSU Density, =7x10-6Associated RSUs: RSU Density, =7x10-6246810Number of Drones0123Sum-Rate (bps)109RSU Density, =5x10-6RSU Density, =6x10-6RSU Density, =7x10-6012345678910Block Gas Limit (106)050100150Transactions per Block (max.)For drone registrationFor RSU registrationFor vehicle registration306090120150180210240270300No. of Entities Requested (Registration)051015202530No. of Registered Entities & No. of Transactions10 Approved Entities from C&C20 Approved Entities from C&CNo. of Transantions For 10 EntitiesNo. of Transantions For 20 Entities10

[9] A. Fotouhi, H. Qiang, M. Ding, M. Hassan, L. G. Giordano, A. Garcia-
Rodriguez, and J. Yuan, “Survey on UAV cellular communications:
Practical aspects, standardization advancements, regulation, and security
challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 4,
pp. 3417–3442, 2019.

[10] P. Mehta, R. Gupta, and S. Tanwar, “Blockchain envisioned UAV
networks: Challenges, solutions, and comparisons,” Computer Commu-
nications, 2020.

[11] U. Challita, A. Ferdowsi, M. Chen, and W. Saad, “Machine learning for
wireless connectivity and security of cellular-connected UAVs,” IEEE
Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 28–35, 2019.

[12] H. Sedjelmaci, S. M. Senouci, and N. Ansari, “A hierarchical detection
and response system to enhance security against lethal cyber-attacks in
UAV networks,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics:
Systems, vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 1594–1606, 2018.

[13] R. Altawy and A. M. Youssef, “Security, privacy, and safety aspects
of civilian drones: A survey,” ACM Transactions on Cyber-Physical
Systems, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 1–25, 2016.

[14] V. Sharma, I. You, D. N. K. Jayakody, D. G. Reina, and K.-K. R. Choo,
“Neural-blockchain-based ultrareliable caching for edge-enabled UAV
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no. 10,
pp. 5723–5736, 2019.

[15] V. Hassija, V. Chamola, S. Garg, N. G. K. Dara, G. Kaddoum, and
D. N. K. Jayakody, “A blockchain-based framework for lightweight data
sharing and energy trading in V2G network,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, 2020.

[16] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,

http://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf,” 2008.

[17] H.-T. Wu and C.-W. Tsai, “Toward blockchains for health-care systems:
Applying the bilinear pairing technology to ensure privacy protection
and accuracy in data sharing,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine,
vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 65–71, 2018.

[18] D. Miller, “Blockchain and the internet of things in the industrial sector,”

IT Professional, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 15–18, 2018.

[19] G. Perboli, S. Musso, and M. Rosano, “Blockchain in logistics and
supply chain: A lean approach for designing real-world use cases,” IEEE
Access, vol. 6, pp. 62 018–62 028, 2018.

[20] T. Rana, A. Shankar, M. K. Sultan, R. Patan, and B. Balusamy,
“An intelligent approach for uav and drone privacy security using
blockchain methodology,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on
Cloud Computing, Data Science & Engineering (Conﬂuence), pp. 162–
167, 2019.

[21] V. Sharma, I. You, and G. Kul, “Socializing drones for inter-service
operability in ultra-dense wireless networks using blockchain,” in Proc.
international workshop on managing insider security threats, pp. 81–84.
2017.

[22] H. Ahmadi, G. Fontanesi, K. Katzis, M. Z. Shakir, and A. Zhu, “Re-
silience of airborne networks,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium
on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), pp.
1–2, 2018.

[23] S. Hayashi and Z.-Q. Luo, “Spectrum management for interference-
limited multiuser communication systems, IEEE Transactions on Infor-
mation Theory, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 11531175, 2009.

[24] M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Debbah, “Wireless com-
munication using unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs): Optimal transport
theory for hover time optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 8052–8066, 2017.

[25] N. Nigam, S. Bieniawski, I. Kroo, and J. Vian, “Control of multiple
UAVs for persistent surveillance: Algorithm and ﬂight test results,” IEEE
Transactions on Control Systems Technology, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 1236–
1251, 2011.

[26] B. Mat´ern, “Spatial variation, ser,” Springer Lecture Notes in Statistics.

Springer, vol. 36, 1986.

[27] A. Likas, N. Vlassis, and J. J. Verbeek, “The global k-means clustering
algorithm,” Pattern recognition, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 451–461, 2003.
[28] A. Al-Hourani, S. Kandeepan, and A. Jamalipour, “Modeling air-to-
ground path loss for low altitude platforms in urban environments,” in
Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, pp. 2898–2904, 2014.

[29] A. Al-Hourani, S. Kandeepan, and S. Lardner, “Optimal LAP altitude
for maximum coverage,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 3,
no. 6, pp. 569–572, 2014.

[30] H. Al-Shatri, X. Li, R. S. Ganesan, A. Klein, and T. Weber, “Maximizing
the sum rate in cellular networks using multiconvex optimization, IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 31993211,
2016.

Fig. 11. Requested entities versus authenticated entities.

blockchain size grows with the increase in the number of the
registered entities. Similarly, it can be investigated that how
blockchain integration affects the overall energy of the system.
Moreover, the concept of machine learning can be introduced
to build intrusion detection systems and to tackle the unseen
or zero day attacks as well the signature attacks in the system
for further enhancement fo the system security. In addition, an
effective ﬁrewall can be designed to ﬁlter the request, so that it
is possible to take actions against the malicious requests from
the adversaries once they are detected. Moreover, ﬁnding the
optimal altitudes for different drones is worth investigating for
an ever-increased spectral efﬁciency of the network.

REFERENCES

[1] S. A. R. Naqvi, S. A. Hassan, H. Pervaiz, and Q. Ni, “Drone-aided
communication as a key enabler for 5G and resilient public safety
networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 36–42,
2018.

[2] Q. Wu, Y. Zeng, and R. Zhang, “Joint trajectory and communication
design for multi-UAV enabled wireless networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 2109–2121, 2018.
[3] Y. Zeng, J. Lyu, and R. Zhang, “Cellular-connected UAV: Potential, chal-
lenges, and promising technologies,” IEEE Wireless Communications,
vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 120–127, 2018.

[4] B. Li, Z. Fei, and Y. Zhang, “UAV communications for 5G and beyond:
Recent advances and future trends,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2241–2263, 2018.

[5] M. K. Shehzad, S. A. Hassan, A. Mahmood, and M. Gidlund, “On the
Association of Small Cell Base Stations with UAVs using Unsupervised
Learning ,” in Proc. IEEE Vehicular Tech. Conf. (VTC-Spring), May,
2019.

[6] W. Shi, H. Zhou, J. Li, W. Xu, N. Zhang, and X. Shen, “Drone assisted
vehicular networks: Architecture, challenges and opportunities,” IEEE
Network, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 130–137, 2018.

[7] P. Papadimitratos, A. De La Fortelle, K. Evenssen, R. Brignolo, and
S. Cosenza, “Vehicular communication systems: Enabling technologies,
applications, and future outlook on intelligent transportation,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 84–95, 2009.

[8] E. Barka, C. A. Kerrache, H. Benkraouda, K. Shuaib, F. Ahmad,
and F. Kurugollu, “Towards a trusted unmanned aerial system using
blockchain for the protection of critical infrastructure,” Transactions on
Emerging Telecommunications Technologies, 2019.

306090120150180210240270300No. of Requested Entities051015202530No. of Authenticated Entities 10 Registered Entities20 Registered Entities[31] Z.-Q. Luo and S. Zhang, Dynamic spectrum management: Complexity
and duality, IEEE journal of selected topics in signal processing, vol.
2, no. 1, pp. 5773, 2008.

11

