NERD: Neural Network for Edict of Risky Data Streams

Sandro Passarelli, Cem G¨undogan, Lars Stiemert, Matthias Schopp, and Peter Hillmann
Faculty of Computer Science,
Bundeswehr University Munich,
Werner-Heisenberg-Weg 39, 85577 Neubiberg, Germany
{sandro.passarelli; cem.guendogan; peter.hillmann}@unibw.de;
{lars.stiemert; matthias.schopp}@localos.io

tems [6, 7]. Also AI leads to an improved and simpliﬁed
preparation as well as execution of attacks and supports in-
formation gathering.

Recent trends [2] show an increasing number of attacks,
casualties and damages. However this rising allows the
gathering of valuable experience in the ﬁght against cyber-
crime. The resulting knowledge can be used to develop best
practice approaches [8] through knowledge exchanges be-
tween companies and supported dissemination [9]. This
is important to distinguish between security incidents and
non-security-related disruptions in IT operations.

The intersection between AI and Cybersecurity is illus-

trated by Figure 1.

0
2
0
2

l
u
J

8

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
3
5
7
7
0
.
7
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract

Cyber incidents can have a wide range of cause from a
simple connection loss to an insistent attack. Once a poten-
tial cyber security incidents and system failures have been
identiﬁed, deciding how to proceed is often complex. Es-
pecially, if the real cause is not directly in detail deter-
minable. Therefore, we developed the concept of a Cyber
Incident Handling Support System. The developed system
is enriched with information by multiple sources such as in-
trusion detection systems and monitoring tools. It uses over
twenty key attributes like sync-package ratio to identify po-
tential security incidents and to classify the data into dif-
ferent priority categories. Afterwards, the system uses ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence to support the further decision-making
process and to generate corresponding reports to brief the
Board of Directors. Originating from this information, ap-
propriate and detailed suggestions are made regarding the
causes and troubleshooting measures. Feedback from users
regarding the problem solutions are included into future
decision-making by using labelled ﬂow data as input for
the learning process. The prototype shows that the decision
making can be sustainably improved and the Cyber Incident
Handling process becomes much more effective.

1. Introduction

Computer-aided security-related attacks on IT infras-
tructures are steadily rising despite increasing cyber secu-
rity awareness [1, 2]. The average length of stay from
the ﬁrst signs of attacker activity to detection is over
100 days [3]. Accordingly the human society is still far
from effective IT attack prevention [4]. This is partly due
to the fact that the same technology could be used by the
attacking and defending actors [5].

One example is the increased use of artiﬁcial intelli-
gence (AI) with neural networks in Intrusion Prevention
Systems (IPS) for attack detection of networks and sys-

Figure 1: Intersection between AI and Cybersecurity [10]

Depending on the process, the implementation of the
measures extends over several levels from the technician
to the management. Due to different levels of knowledge
and responsibilities of decision-makers, communication be-
tween organization levels becomes more difﬁcult and can
lead to incorrect decisions [11]. This happens in particu-
lar due to the pressure during an attack. In such situations,
the Computer Security Incident Response Team try to trou-
bleshoot and to contain the attack. At the same time, the
Board of Directors and the management would like to be
briefed with non-technical information. Usually, compa-

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
nies train for such a case for a long time with awareness
games and rescue plans to a obtain smooth and felicitous
process. To support the incident handling, this work pro-
vides an AI based and management level comprehensive
approach against cyber attacks and IT incidents within a
company. This approach goes beyond the standard incident
identiﬁcation and provide the user with concrete and case
adapted measures as well as handling activities.

The concept

is based on the analysis of available
company-internal information from troubleshooting sys-
tems and security solutions. Typical hints comes form intru-
sion detection systems (IDS) to propose adequate solutions
from several best practices. Taking into account the result-
ing beneﬁts, the user can evaluate the solution or add new
suggestions or combinations. This leads in the course of use
to a continuous adaptation to the circumstances of the com-
pany and its network infrastructure. With this approach, we
attend and realize the suggested process of the NIST Com-
puter Security Incident Handling Guide [12] with a digital
support system. The focus is especially on the technical
phase of Containment, Eradication, and Recovery. Further-
more, it helps during the Documentation and Prioritization.
The AI includes the Post-Incident Activity with Lessons
Learned.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Sec-
tion 2 describes in detail the vision of a AI based Cyber
Incident Handling Support System. This includes a typical
scenario combined with a use case and the requirements for
such a support system. Afterwards, Section 3 provides an
overview of other approaches in that application area. The
main part in Section 4 presents in detail the scientiﬁc ap-
proach and method. We explain the concept from an Enter-
prise System Engineer’s point of view to support decision
making during IT incidents with machine learning. It is in-
tegrated in the larger Cyber Incident Response System [13].
Subsequently, we show the evaluation of the running sys-
tem in Section 5. Finally, the last section summarizes our
work and provides and outlook.

2. Scenario and Requirements

The following scenario illustrates the purpose of the ap-
plication. In addition, some scientiﬁc questions are called
to be answered. This results in different requirements for
a decision support system for a Cyber Incident Handling
Support System.

2.1. Scenario

A medium-sized company which uses troubleshooting,
monitoring, and security systems is regarded as an appli-
cation user. Failures and malfunctions of the IT systems
lead to direct implications for the company’s value creation

process. Therefore, a fast recovery to a normal status of op-
eration is highly important. Due to the legal situation e.g.
the obligation to report security-critical incidents [14], the
management is confronted with the topic of IT security.

In context of Enterprise Architecture, the management
wants to be informed about detected incidents and possi-
ble risks as well to be involved in the solution process. In
view of the often narrow ﬁnancial resources for IT secu-
rity, existing systems and information such as IDS should
be used and integrated into the overall concept of the new
AI-based security solution. The resulting data must be pre-
pared and analysed in the overall context so that they even-
tually serve as the basis for best-practice proposed solutions
and can also be explained in an understandable way to peo-
ple with less technical afﬁnity. Since best practices are only
indicative and not applicable to all situations, a way to in-
corporate feedback must be provided.

The following questions arise from these preconditions
with regard to the conceptual design of data classiﬁcation,
pattern recognition, decision support, and the usage of feed-
back:

1) How can an AI be used to enable and continuously im-

prove decision support in the area of incidents?
This question deals with the question which AI ap-
proaches are suitable to fulﬁll the required character-
istics by means of the data generated during incidents
of analysis tools.

2) How must data be classiﬁed and prepared in order to

ﬂow recursively into the AI?
The main focus here is on how the generated data and
information can be processed for the implementation
of the training in order to enable a successful training
of the selected AI approach for the selected task area
and the identiﬁed situations.

3) How can the AI through recursive learning be person-
alised in order to adapt to speciﬁc circumstances?
This question relates to the premise of the concept of
changing proposed solutions by using the user feed-
back in order to produce a personalized result that in-
cludes the correspondingly used network environment.

2.2. Requierements

The previous application example and the scientiﬁc
questions results in different requirements on decision sup-
port systems for IT incidents:

• Analysis of data: Processing large and different data

types leads to the challenges of Big Data.

• Pattern Recognition: In connection with the data anal-
ysis adequate solutions are to be provided by specify-

2

ing of recognized incidents based on known values and
correlations.

• Decision and command support: The core functions of
the system are to show solutions and multiple possibil-
ities to act during detected incidents. These suggested
solutions are intended to provide an overview of de-
tailed and adequate measures that the user can take to
counteract an attack and to recover.

• Feedback embedding: The ability to evaluate individ-
ual solution proposals by user feedback to treat future
events in a better way.

• Anonymisation: With the new EU law of the General
Data Protection Regulation [15], personal data is suit-
able to be anonymized in order to prevent possible con-
clusions about company-speciﬁc architectures or pro-
cesses.

• Extensibility: The integration of new functions should
be possible at any time. Errors and maintenance should
be easily identiﬁed and improved during operation in
order to save resources.

• Automation: The user should be able to generate a re-
port for the participation of the higher company levels.
This should show the management level recognized
situations and describe their effects on the IT infras-
tructure.

Further requirements regards the anonymization of personal
data, expandability of the system and automation for report
generation.

3. Related Work

In order to obtain an overview of the current state of af-
fairs, the systematic method of literature research is used.
According to the classiﬁcation of Buczak [7], which is
based on the taxonomy of machine learning methods, pre-
vious work can be classiﬁed as Decision Support (DS) or
Intrusion Detection (ID).

Currently IBM developes an ID system called QRadar
Security Intelligence [16]. This SIEM uses the AI to im-
prove the performance of business process. Among other
things QRadar supports only IBM Watson. However this
proprietary system does not generate any appropriate sug-
gestions to solve the problem.

Another system in the ﬁeld of ID is SAP Enterprise
Threat Detection [17]. The SIEM focuses only on the detec-
tion of threats in the area of Enterprise Architecture, without
using a learning system.

The work [18] introduces a system for automated report
generation for university CERT teams. However this work

does not provide proposals for measures for problem solv-
ing. It also does not provide attack detection. The system
is just processing data and this is why the concept is to be
placed in category DS. In addition, there is no feedback con-
trol to improve the system.

The prototype [19] classiﬁes network trafﬁc and serves
the DS. Also the prototype shows the usability of artiﬁcial
neural networks to improve an IDS. As well as the system
FASTT [20], it categorizes IDS alarms and groups them to-
gether. FASTT uses an AI to improve the DS. Nevertheless,
both systems do not provide any recommendations for ac-
tion.

The study [21] introduces a DS-System for IT Security
and Incident Management. It aims on the report of detected
incidents to the IT security personnel of the ﬁrst-level sup-
port by using operation research. It is similar to the system
Scyllarus [22]. Scyllarus combines a bunch of IDS alarms
by using a Bayesian network. A disadvantage is that the
integration of measures and the feedback loops are missing.
All in all, no approach complies with the identiﬁed re-

quirements.

4. Concept of the Incident Support Handling

System

The

is part of

following concept

the PoCyMa
project [13]. It is a Cyber Incident Response System, which
includes multiple sources like vulnerability databases to be
aware of up-to-date attack vectors and geo-databases for IP-
Geolocation to identify attack sources. Nevertheless, this
presented approach is also usable as stand alone. The work-
ing title PoCyMa (PotatoCyberMap) originate from a live
attack event on our twitter stream from a person alias cyber
potato during our security conference in 2016. After this
event, we started to develop a comprehensive countermea-
surement, which this approach is part of it.

4.1. Placement inside of the PoCyMa Ar-

chitecture

The entire PoCyMa architecture is presnted in Figure 2.
the
Based on the Model-View-Controller principle,
PoCyMa architecture consists of the three planes, being the
Data-, Control, and Business Intelligence (BI) Plane. Every
plane is responsible for a deﬁned task. The Control Plane is
used to monitor and conﬁgure the usage of the program.
The Data Plane is used to prepare and bundle data from
different sources like data of IDS, SIEM, geolocation, and
vulnerabilities with tools like Nagios and Tranalyzer [23]
for ﬂow information. These are used for visualization in
respect to the different hierarchy levels.

The NERD project resides inside the BI plane, which
is used to support AI-based solutions. It uses information

3

Figure 2: Entire Enterprise Architecture of the Cyber Incident Response System PoCyMa

from troubleshooting systems, self developed rescue plans,
and monitoring information. Furthermore, it uses the inter-
nally provided information of the data plane. These big data
are analyzed and correlated by the NERD project to suggest
activities according to identiﬁed incidents. Due to logging
of events with a ticket system and wiki as well as their re-
spective solutions, there is a broad knowledge base to use.
The overlying objective is to provide suggestions for ade-
quate solutions, based on best practices and solved events.

4.2. Structuring the System

The system is built with a modular approach to ensure
both, an easy maintainability and expandability.
It is di-
vided into nine modules, which are shown in Figure 3, the
procedure of the AI data treatment is shown in Figure 4.

The main module provides the main interface for the
user and serves as the controller of PoCyMa BI plane. The
AI consists of a fully connected Deep Feed Forward Neu-
ral Network (NN) which uses two hidden layers and gets
trained via supervised learning. The NN is represented by
the AI-Module in Figure 3. The four layers of the NN are
needed to ensure the correct handling of the variable com-
plexity. A leaky rectiﬁed linear unit algorithm, shown in
Formula 1, is used as the activation function inside the NN.
The functionality is based on the classical maximum prin-
ciple to identify thresholds of the key attributes of the input

Figure 3: Modularized structure of NERD

values, symbolized with x.

The output layer of the NN uses a standard softmax func-
tion, shown in Formula 2, which helps dividing the proba-
bility onto the different possible outcomes z. It is typically
used for scenarios with multiple classiﬁcation and regres-
sion models as we focus on. The variable z represents the
input value from a speciﬁc neuron j. Each input value of the
multiple neuron (1 to K) inﬂuences the output value of the
considered and ﬁring neuron.

4

can be used in the training process. The value zero repre-
sents a normal behaviour and the value one shows a abnor-
mal or suspicious behaviour. This arithmetic function varies
in respect to the transformed data type and its minimum and
maximum value.

After the data has been properly labelled and trans-
formed, it is transferred to the AI module according to the
load step of the ETL process. At this time, the data set con-
tains 23 different attributes, which are used by the NN. Ta-
ble 1 show the different key attributes as input data. These
are not limited and can be extended with geoinformation
and vulnerability codes.

Table 1: Overview of the key attributes for the analysis and
classiﬁcation to suggest handling activities.

Figure 4: Procedure for preparing the data as SDL diagram

f (x) = max(x, 0)

(1)

ID Attribute

Training optimization is realised by using the Adaptive
Moment Estimation (ADAM). The train module includes
the data analysis and data processing in accordance with
the Extract-Transfer-Load (ETL) process [24] and therefore
handles the preparation of the input data, which are used by
the AI and the train module.

The prediction module analyses new data in coordina-
tion with the AI module and puts out weighted treatment
options, out of an array of trained solutions. Those solu-
tions can be printed via the output module and exported as
PDF ﬁle.

To ensure a continual improvement of the suggested so-
lutions and treatment options, the given user feedback is
used inside the training process. This feedback contains a
valuation of the given solutions in respect to their usability
and how well the solution ﬁt the initial problem or event.
With these user provided inputs, new training sets get cre-
ated which are then used to further train the NN, which
leads to helpful solutions being suggested more often and
to a more and more personalized NN.

4.3. Data Analysis and Treatment

According to the structure of PoCyMa, the needed data
is getting extracted from the data plane. This data is ﬂow-
based and contains information from at least one IDS. Ac-
cording on this data, a ﬁrst analysis in regards of certain
incidents and attack vectors, as well as a ﬁrst ﬂow labelling
is being made. Non-relevant ﬂows are ﬁltered out of the
data set.

The ﬂow data are then transformed into values between
zero and one by using an arithmetic function, so that they

Flowindex

1
2 Duration
IP Destination
3
4
Source Port
5 Destination Port

6 L4 Protocol
7 DstPortClass
8 TCP-Rate

Description
ID of concatenated ﬂows
Timelength of a ﬂow
IP Address of destination
Source Port of sender
Destination Port
of the receiver
Protocol of transport layer
Classiﬁcation of the port
Relation between
TCP-Packets and
all Packets of a ﬂow

9 TCPPAckCntAsm TCP-ACK-Asymmetrie
10
PktAsm
11 BytAsm
12 TCPStat
13
14
15

Paket-Asymmetrie
Byte-Asymmetrie
TCP Status
Minimum IP Time to live
Maximum IP Time to live
Relation between packets
send per Flow

IPMinTTL
IPMaxTTL
PerPS

16 TCPSeqFCnt-Rate Relation between
TCPSeqFaultCnt
and TCPSeqCnt
17 TCPAckFCnt-Rate Relation between
TCPAckFaultCnt
and TCPAckCnt
Average Bandwith of a ﬂow
TCP-Flags of a ﬂow

18 EstBwPFlow
19 TCPAggrFlags
20 TCPAggrAnomaly Aggregated TCP-Header,

Anomaly-Flags

21 TCPAggrOptions* Aggregated TCP Options
22 TCPStates
23 Label

States of a TCP connection
Scenario based label
including feedback

σ(z) j =

ez j
k=1 ezk

∑K

for j=1,...,K

(2)

For each ﬂow of data, the values are calculated accord-
ing to the attributes of the table. As a measure, scaling and
generalization are necessary. Metrics deﬁned in a metrics

5

collection are used for this purpose. Since the AI is a neural
network, ﬂoating point numbers between zero and one are
required. The calculation of every key attribute is similar
for all input values. A special form have the discrete values
like the port number. The index value of the current at-
tribute is divided by the maximum index number deﬁned by
the standard or request for comments (RFC). Subsequently,
a two-dimensional mapping of the attributed ﬂows to the
input data template of the processing pipeline takes place.
Nevertheless, each ﬂow is analysed individually, before a
correlation between multiple ﬂows takes place.

4.4. Decision Support and Feedback Usage

The NN is constructed in a way, that it can create treat-
ment recommendations based on the enriched ﬂow data, by
classifying the data after they were analysed and prepared
by the ETL process. For the ﬁrst prototype, we limited the
classiﬁcation to normal trafﬁc, service incident, and denial-
of-service attack. According to these classiﬁcations, the
user gets shown an array of treatment recommendations,
which are based on known best practices and information
from solved events. These solutions can then be rated by the
user in respect to their efﬁciency. This rating gets included
into the training of the NN by using an updated training
set, which considers the before made ratings of the user, for
every training process that occurs. This contributes to the
aforementioned continual solution improvement.

The process of the training is shown in Figure 5. After
a successful check, the set is loaded and the training is per-
formed with a subset of the data. After that the changed
weights of the net will be saved in a suitable form. If the
check reveals that an unexpected deletion of the set has
taken place, the entire original set is used to carry out the
training in Retrain mode.

5. Evaluation

To evaluate the concept, a ﬁrst prototype, which is based
on a multilayer perceptron emulated by Tensorﬂow and
Keras, is implemented. Different use cases were tested in
regard to the user feedback and the feedback usage inside
the training module.

5.1. Test environment

The composition of the test laboratory, which is used to
create the datasets for the different use cases used by the AI,
is shown in Figure 6. The server is providing the user with
web services like NGINX or Apache 2. Simultaneously, the
test environment is used to simulate user access, DoS at-
tacks and Curl/Ping requests on the web service. All DoS
attacks were made with help of the Xerxes and Torshammer

Figure 5: Training process and case prediction with the neu-
ral network for classiﬁcation and customized suggestions
based on labelled ﬂow data.

tools. The so created network trafﬁc is then transferred to
the NERD system.

Figure 6: Structure of the test environment

5.2. Results and Valuation

In order to analyse the network trafﬁc there are three pri-
oritised attributes out of the data template, which are se-
lected and used to deliver the needed data sets to the AI.

First of all, there is the TCP-Rate which helps to deter-
mine the varying behaviour of the TCP connection requests.
Secondly, the TCPPAckCntAsm shows asymmetries inside
the data sets, which are then used to differentiate between
regular data trafﬁc and, for example, trafﬁc created by DoS

6

attacks. Lastly, there is perPS, which shows the relationship
between sent packages in a ﬂow, allowing an efﬁcient clas-
siﬁcation of the data in respect to different the behaviour
patterns of the tested use cases.

Based on these parameters, the AI calculates a proba-
bility for the possible outcome classes. Table 2 shows the
calculated values for six scenarios.

Table 2: Results of prediction process in percent

Data
1
2
3
4
5
6

Class
Web
Web
DoS
DoS
Normal
Normal

Trafﬁc
0,76
32,57
0,00
0,00
100,00
99,98

Incident Thread
0,00
0,24
100,0
100,0
0,0
0,0

99,23
67,19
0,00
0,00
0,00
0,02

These results clearly show, that the classes, which were
determined by the AI, meet the expected values, which
therefore proves that pattern recognition for the used data
was successfully implemented.

5.3. User Feedback Usage

At the beginning of the test, the NN is set to the same
state of training as it was in the previous pattern recognition
test. Based on the user feedback, which gets generated with
the help of the rating module, the NN can learn from pre-
vious situations and events, which leads to more accurate
and precise solutions. For this test, the user rated the class
correlating to the expected outcome with the highest possi-
ble user rating. Table 3 shows the resulting outcome of the
following prediction.

Table 3: Results of the prediction process after the user rat-
ing in percent

Data
1
2
3
4
5
6

Class
Web
Web
DoS
DoS
Normal
Normal

Trafﬁc
0,07
0,47
0,00
0,00
100,00
100,00

Incident Thread
0,01
0,04
100,0
100,0
0,0
0,0

99,92
99,49
0,00
0,00
0,00
0,00

It clearly shows a climb of approximately 32 % for the
Web 2 case in relation to the previous prediction. This
shows a clear inﬂuence of the user input on the result set
and a way to improve further predictions of the AI.

5.4. Decision and Management Support

ﬁle is created which contains all results calculated by the
AI. Additionally, it contains a summary of possible causes
with their associated probabilities, as well as action propos-
als regarding hardware and software level. It can be taken
as ﬁrst step for documentation in a forensic process. There
is a separate speciﬁcation for every single cause, so that
further non-technical information can be included. Solu-
tion measures contain different approaches depending on
the cause, for example, dedicated information to ﬁrewall
rulesets, a reboot of the affected servers when there is a
service breakdown, or temporal blacklisting of speciﬁc IP
addresses while notifying the service provider in case of a
DoS attack.

Within the tests of the six aforementioned scenarios, the
system always put out the appropriate and expected trou-
bleshooting solution with the highest probability.
In ad-
dition, information is gathered on the organisation-speciﬁc
knowledge base and pages are linked in the own wiki and
conﬂuence system. Furthermore, a correlation to current at-
tack vectors and vulnerabilities is made. The automatically
created reports also include best practices for the identiﬁed
situation to be used by the higher management levels.

6. Conclusions

In this paper, we presented the novel approach of NERD,
a Cyber Incident Handling Support System. It uses the in-
formation and technology of current state of the art Secu-
rity Information and Event Management systems. There-
fore, attributes like byte asymmetry and syn-package ra-
tios are used to identify and to classify potential inci-
dents.Combined with artiﬁcial intelligence, NERD goes one
step further in the direction of self-healing systems and in-
frastructures. It enables the analysation of data to provide
decision and management support for Board of Directors
via solutions and reports. It suggests the technical user with
concrete and detailed activities to handle efﬁciently an in-
cident to reach swifter the normal status of operation than
without our system. Therefore, it uses a common knowl-
edge base and best practises as well as information of past
incidents and the speciﬁc setup of the company to provide
multiple possibilities. The artiﬁcial intelligence enables the
system to be customized for future decision-making via
feedback to be more effective by using labelled ﬂow data
as input for the learning process.. All tests with our proto-
type show an adequate and appropriate reaction of the sys-
tem. The usage of user feedback has been realised by im-
plementing a user rating system for the suggested solutions.
All decisions made by the user and their effectiveness were
then included in training the AI, which led to an improve-
ment of the system.

The requirement for decision support is met by the PDF-
Print module. For every prediction made by the AI, a PDF

The developed approach has a modular structure, shows
a high degree of automation and can be easily expanded.

7

An improvement to recognition accuracy and interference
elimination will be part of future work. We will include
more categories of incidents as well as more solution pos-
sibilities to build up a larger knowledge base. Furthermore,
we will include a functionality so share incident handling
information in an anonymized way based in a common data
exchange format [25]. This allows the distribution of the
incident handling knowledge and a quicker recovery.

References

[12] P. Cichonski, T. Millar, T. Grance, and K. Scarfone,
“Computer securityincident handling guide: Special
publication 800-61,” NIST: National Institute of Stan-
dards and Technology, 2012.

[13] Research Team of PoCyMa, “PotatoCyb0rMap.” On-
line, 2018. https://github.com/localos/PoCyMa.

[14] Bundestag,
heit
Sicherheitsgesetz),”
Bundesanzeiger Verlag, pp. 1324–1332, 2015.

“Gesetz zur Erh¨ohung der Sicher-
(IT-
I,

informationstechnischer

Bundesgesetzblatt

Systeme

Teil

[1] P. Cichonski, T. Millar, T. Grance, and K. Scarfone,
“Computer security incident handling guide,” NIST
Special Publication, vol. 800, no. 61, pp. 1–147, 2012.

[2] S. Morgan, “Top 5 Cybersecurity Facts, Figures and

Statistics,” Zeitschatten, 2018.

[3] Mandiant, “M-TRENDS 2018,” FireEye Company,

2018.

[4] K. Rohmann and P. J. Wirnsperger, “Cyber-security
report 2017 teil 2: Cyber-risiken in unternehmen,” in
Deloitte, pp. 1–32, 2017.

[15] European Parliament, “General Data Protection Reg-

ulation (EU) 2016/679,” EU Law, 2016.

[16] IBM Deutschland GmbH, “QRadar SIEM,” 2019.

[17] SAP, “Enterprise Threat Detection,” 2019.

[18] F. Reyes, W. Fuertes, F. Tapia, T. Toulkeridis,
H. Aules, and E. Perez, “A BI Solution to Identify Vul-
nerabilities and Detect Real-Time Cyber-Attacks for
an Academic CSIRT,” Springer Nature Switzerland,
2019.

[5] Research Team of ERPScan, “Machine Learning for
Cybercriminals,” 12 2017. https://erpscan.com/press-
center/blog/machine-learning-for-cybercriminals/
(Acessed 2019-01-16).

[19] B. Subba, S. Biswas, and S. Karmakar, “A Neural Net-
work based system for Intrusion Detection and attack
classiﬁcation,” in Twenty Second National Conference
on Communication (NCC), pp. 1–6, 2016.

[6] S. Dilek, H. C¸ akir, and M. Aydin, “Applications of
artiﬁcial intelligence techniques to combating cyber
crimes: A review,” CoRR, 2015.

[20] D. Kalyani and D. Mehta, “Paper on Searching and
Indexing Using Elasticsearch,” International Journal
of Engineering And Computer Science, 2017.

[7] A. L. Buczak and E. Guven, “A survey of data mining
and machine learning methods for cyber security in-
trusion detection,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tu-
torials, vol. 18, pp. 1153–1176, Secondquarter 2016.

[8] T. Eddie, “Cyber-security: The small business best
practice guide,” in Australian Government: Australian
Small Business and Family Enterprise Ombudsman,
pp. 1–29, 2017.

[9] IIROC and OCRCVM, “Cybersecurity Best Practices
Guide,” in For IIROC Dealer Members, pp. 1–52,
2017.

[10] G. Zorpette, C. Moody, M. Lanham, M. Sherburne,
and D. Hawthorne, “Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Ma-
chine Learning Applied to Cybersecurity,” in IEEE
Conﬂuence Report, p. 3, 2017.

[11] H. Esseling, “IT-Abteilung versus Gesch¨aftsleitung:
Ein Beitrag zur kulturellen Verst¨andigung,” hagel IT-
Services GmbH, 2019.

[21] G. Rauchecker, E. Yasasin, and G. Schryen, “A Deci-
sion Support System for IT Security Incident Manage-
ment,” Springer International Publishing, 2014.

[22] W. Heimerdinger, “Scyllarus intrusion detection re-
port correlator and analyzer,” DARPA Information
Survivability Conference and Exposition, 2003.

[23] S. Burschka, B. Dupasquier, and A. Fiaux, “Trana-
lyzer: Versatile high performance network trafﬁc anal-
yser,” in IEEE Symposium Series on Computational
Intelligence (SSCI), pp. 1–8, Dec 2016.

[24] S. Strohmeier, Data Warehouse-Systeme - Informa-
tionssysteme im Personalmanagement, pp. 69–80.
Vieweg+Teubner, 2008.

[25] J. Steinberger, A. Sperotto, M. Golling, and H. Baier,
“How to exchange security events? overview andeval-
uation of formats and protocols,” IFIP/IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Integrated Network Management
(IM2015), 2015.

8

