SMEs Confidentiality Issues and Adoption of Good 
Cybersecurity Practices 

Alireza Shojaifar1,2 

1 FHNW, IIT, 5210 Windisch, Switzerland 
alireza.shojaifar@fhnw.ch 
2Utrecht University, Dept. of Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht, Netherlands 
a.shojaifar@uu.nl 

Abstract. Small and medium-sized enterprises (SME) are considered more vul-
nerable to cyber-attacks. However, and based on SMEs characteristics, they do 
not adopt good cybersecurity practices. To address the SMEs’ security adoption 
problem, we are designing a do-it-yourself (DIY) security assessment and capa-
bility improvement method, CYSEC. In the first validation of CYSEC, we con-
ducted a multi-case study in four SMEs. We observed that confidentiality con-
cerns could influence users’ decision to provide CYSEC with relevant and ac-
curate  security  information.  The  lack  of  precise  information  may  impact  our 
DIY  assessment  method  to  provide  accurate  recommendations.  In  this  paper, 
we explore the importance of dynamic consent and its effect on SMEs trust per-
ception and sharing information. We discuss the lack of trust perception may be 
addressed  by  applying  dynamic  consent.    Finally,  we  describe  the  results  of 
three interviews with SMEs and present how the new way of communication in 
CYSEC  can  help  us  to  understand  better  SMEs’  attitudes  towards  sharing  in-
formation. 

Keywords: Cybersecurity, Small and medium-sized enterprises, Privacy, con-
fidentiality. 

1 

Introduction 

Small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  as  the  backbone  of  the  EU’s  economy 
[12] are the weakest targets for cyber-attacks [11]. SMEs have specific characteristics 
[13],  and  based  on  these  characteristics,  we  are  designing  a  Do-It-Yourself  (DIY) 
assessment  method,  CYSEC,  embedded  in  a  tool.  CYSEC  wants  to  mitigate  SMEs 
cybersecurity  problems  and  support  them  to  improve  their  security  awareness  and 
capabilities.  CYSEC  tries  to  establish  a  self-paced  cybersecurity  approach  within  a 
company.  So,  SMEs  may  select  security  focus  areas  at  any  time  and  based  on  their 
priorities. 

Based  on  the  first validation  of CYSEC and observation  of  actual tool usage,  we 
identified SMEs’ confidentiality concerns as a barrier  to answer self-reporting ques-
tionnaires and share their information. A reluctance to share security information may 
affect the quality of recommendations which are produced based on reported answers. 

2 

The  consequence  of  non-practical  recommendations  may  impact  users’  adoption  of 
good cybersecurity practices. 

The SMEs’ behaviour may signify that they cannot trust the tool to keep their in-
formation confidential. So, we concentrated on the relationship between trust percep-
tion and confidentiality concerns. Therefore, and to impact the users’ trust perception, 
a new privacy notice communication with the idea of dynamic consent has been add-
ed to CYSEC prototype to not only provide effective and meaningful notice for users 
but also give them the autonomy to change their preferences for sharing information 
at any time. 

This study aimed to conduct qualitative research to (1) explore SMEs’ cybersecuri-
ty  responsible  attitudes  towards  sharing  security  information  with  the  CYSEC  tool, 
SMEs community, and researchers and (2) to evaluate how the idea of dynamic con-
sent model may affect SMEs decision to share their information and trust perception. 

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the CYSEC 
method, problem investigation, theoretical basis, and the research investigation. Sec-
tion  3  describes  the  method  of  our  study.  Section  4  presents  the  analysis  approach, 
obtained results, and the answer to the research question. Section 5 discusses the limi-
tations of the study and the significance of the results. Section 6 summarises and con-
cludes. 

2 

CYSEC Method and Problem Investigation 

CYSEC is a DIY cybersecurity assessment method for SMEs. It automates elements 
of a counselling dialogue [2] between a security expert and employees in the SME to 
ward off cyber threats. CYSEC coaches SMEs to improve their cybersecurity aware-
ness and capabilities through three Key features: 

Self-assessment  Questionnaire.  Concerning  a  variety  of  security  focus  areas, 
CYSEC  has  self-reporting  questionnaires.  SMEs  may  select  a  focus  area  to  answer 
based on their priorities. 

Training  and  Awareness  Content.  Relevant  training  and  awareness  content  are 
embedded in each questionnaire to not only indicate the threats or vulnerabilities but 
also demonstrate countermeasures against security threats. 

Recommendation.  A recommendation is a part of effective security  communica-
tion  between  SME  and  cybersecurity  expert.  It  provides  training  and  awareness  ad-
vice to prevent cybersecurity compromises and patch the vulnerabilities. The recom-
mendations are produced based on  users’ answers to the questionnaires  and  may di-
rect users to adopt good security behaviour.  

For  the  first  validation  of  the  method,  we  conducted  an  explanatory  multi-case 
study in four real SMEs, and the data collection was based on the observation strate-
gy. During the studies, the researcher took notes about how the users applied CYSEC. 
Also, at the end of the actual usage of the tool, the users answered seven Likert scale 
questions and stated their attitudes. 

The  first  validation  revealed  that  confidentiality  worries  lead  SMEs  to  avoid  re-
porting their sensitive information or vulnerabilities. The researcher observed that the 

3 

users were reluctant to answer specific questions such as “Please list the systems that 
are  open  or  offer  shared  accounts”  or  “Are  the  passwords  sent  encrypted  between 
client and the server?”. One of the SME’s security responsible stated: “privacy issue 
[confidentiality] is necessary for our company any cybersecurity breach may severely 
threaten  our  business.”  Moreover,  the  SMEs’  feedback  and  observations  indicated 
that they are only worried about confidentiality and not the other security objectives: 
integrity and availability. 

Advice and information are significant for SMEs to activate protective controls [8]. 
However,  the  users’  reluctance  to  share  their  information  with  CYSEC  and  lack  of 
accurate  self-reporting  information  may  affect  the  quality  of  the  recommendations 
and advice. During the case studies and after replying to questionnaires, all the SMEs 
wanted to have a recommendation to indicate their next step. Therefore, personalized 
recommendations  which  indicate  the  SMEs’  vulnerabilities  and  solutions  can  influ-
ence the users’ adoption of good cybersecurity practices.  

A reluctance to share security information is a kind of behaviour which can be ex-
plained  based  on  users’  relatedness  to  their  data.  In  the  context  of  security,  users’ 
emotional connection to their data demonstrates their perceptions of vulnerability and 
severity of security threats [5]. So, privacy concerns may influence people’s willing-
ness to disclose personal information [7]. Furthermore, privacy and trust may have a 
symbiotic relationship [7]. It means that “trust acts to moderate the impact of reduced 
privacy,  whereas  privacy  also  moderates  the  impact  of  reduced  trust”.  So,  privacy 
may be significant when there is a lack of trust in the requestor [7].  

For the SMEs, we considered the relation between confidentiality and trust percep-
tion. When they do not trust the system to be able to keep the information confiden-
tial, they  will not share their information. As a result, they would not receive strong 
recommendations. 

2.1  Theoretical Background 

CYSEC  method  considers  features  that  support  SMEs  cybersecurity  learning  re-
quirements through building intrinsic motivation and the possibility for selection be-
tween  training  options.  Self-determination  theory  (SDT)  concentrates  on  different 
types  of  human  motivation  and  how  humans’  psychological  needs  for  autonomy, 
competence, and relatedness should be satisfied for effective functioning and psycho-
logical health [4]. Autonomy refers to the choice of freedom and control over behav-
iour, competence refers to a feeling of achievement self-efficacy for an activity, and 
relatedness refers to a feeling of connection to others. These factors were considered 
in our case studies, and the author observed the relationship between these needs and 
the users’ cybersecurity behaviour. Based on our observations, CYSEC needs to satis-
fy  the  users’  autonomy,  competence,  and  relatedness  requirements  to  provide  effec-
tive  cybersecurity  communication.  These  needs  can  be  mainly  operationalised 
through managing adaptedness of the self-assessment questionnaires based on users’ 
answers, improving quality of content, and making connection among SMEs, security 
experts, and other SMEs. 

4 

2.2  Research Investigation 

In the design of security systems, designers should consider the importance of humans 
in  the  loop.  This  means  that  designers  of  the  system  should  recognise  the  potential 
causes  of  individuals’  failure  and  support  individuals  in  conducting  their  security-
critical  functions  successfully  [1].  Also,  designers  of  security  technologies  need  to 
understand  how  users  make  security decisions  as  well as the relevant security prob-
lems as a consequence of these decisions [9]. Based on SDT [4], relatedness is one of 
the significant users’ psychological needs. To satisfy this need, mitigate users’ confi-
dentiality  concerns,  and  motivate  users  to  share  their  information  with  CYSEC,  we 
made a change in the design of CYSEC prototype. The new design may improve our 
security  communication  approach  to  mitigate  the  confidentiality  concerns  and  influ-
ence the users’ trust perception.  

Security communication may have different types, including warnings, notices, sta-
tus  indicators, training, and policies [1].  In case of  information sharing  communica-
tion, we considered notice type of message to help users to evaluate the effect of shar-
ing information with CYSEC and make a decision. Notice alerts may be applied for 
the privacy policies. “Notices  may  be used by users to evaluate  an entity and deter-
mine whether interacting with it would be hazardous or consistent with their security 
or privacy needs” [1]. 

In the design of our notice message and providing options for users to control their 
data  sharing,  the  idea  of  Dynamic  Consent  in  medical  research  has  been  applied. 
“Dynamic  Consent  uses  information  technology  to  facilitate  a  more  explicit  and  ac-
cessible opportunity to opt out,  whereby patients can tailor preferences about  whom 
they share their data  with and can change  their preferences reliably at any time pre-
venting  any  further  data  sharing”  [10].  With  this  approach,  the  SMEs  can  see  how 
their  shared security data  may be applied and how they can  contribute to improving 
security issues in the ecosystem of cybersecurity.  

Therefore, a notice box has been added to one of the questions in the CYSEC pro-
totype to improve communication between SMEs and CYSEC. The main focus of the 
study was the content of the notice box and not the place of the notice. Fig. 1 shows a 
simplified page for a specific CYSEC question with a focus on the yellow notice box. 
The  screen  is  split  into  two  parts.  On  the  left-hand  side,  the  coach  asks  a  question 
about the systems in the company with open or shared accounts, a box for the answer, 
and a yellow notice box. On the right-hand side, the training material for the current 
question is available. 

The yellow box has three options with three goals and scopes to notify users of the 
data practices. SMEs are able to change their options and potential use of their data at 
any time. These options can show different levels of SMEs relatedness and data shar-
ing.  These  levels  are  a)  security  experts,  b)  cybersecurity  researchers,  and  c)  the 
community  of  SMEs.  In  this  study,  we  believe  that  a  collaboration  between  all  the 
groups may improve cybersecurity coping mechanism. 

This research aimed to see 1) how  the people responsible  for the  SMEs’ security 
think about  sharing security  information and 2) if the new communication approach 
can  affect  SMEs  decision,  trust  perception,  and  motivation  for  sharing  their  infor-

mation. Therefore, four SME partners were invited to evaluate the new changes, and 
three of them were able to participate in three short semi-structured interviews.  

5 

Fig. 1. Screenshot of one of CYSEC questions with Dynamic Consent choices (yellow box) 

3  Method 

To achieve the aims of the study and consider the effect of new design on users’ trust 
perception  we  conducted short  semi-structured interviews [14]. The  study  wanted to 
answer the following research question: 
RQ1:  How  security  communication  through  Dynamic  Consent  notice  may  influence 
SMEs confidentiality trust perception to share their information? 
To answer RQ1, SMEs partners has been invited for short interviews. Interviews were 
useful for allowing us to better understand SMEs mental model for data sharing. Each 
interview took  maximum  15 minutes on Skype. In each interview at  first the author 
presented concisely the relevant results of the first validation. All SMEs participated 
for the first validation and were aware of the problem. Then the author explained the 
concept  of  dynamic  consent.  Furthermore,  the  author  presented  the  new  notice  box 
and  its  three  options  for  sharing  information.  Table  1  presents  our  SMEs’  de-
mographics. 

Table 1: SMEs Demographics 

ID 

Industry 
type 

Organisa-
tion size 

Geographical 
distribution 

Cybersecuri-
ty responsi-
ble  

Implementa-
tion of cyber-
security 
controls 

Structure 

1 

2 

Software 
development 

Medium 

Yes 

Available 

Software 

Medium 

Yes 

Available 

Some security 
controls 
Some security  CEO, security 

CEO, security 
team, employees 

 
 
6 

3 

development  

Software 
development 

Small 

Yes 

Available 

controls 

team, employees 

Some security 
controls  

CEO, security 
team, employees 

4 

Analysis and Results 

The interviews’ topic was developed based on the sharing information problem which 
identified  in  the  first  validation  and  the  idea  of  dynamic  consent  model.  The  users 
explained their attitudes about dynamic consent and its effect on their trust perception. 
However, during the interviews, the users indicated other issues rather than trust per-
ception, and the author considered them during the code development phase. So, two 
significant  themes  were  determined  to  characterize  the  users’  attitudes  towards  the 
CYSEC new design and dynamic consent: 

The  role  of  trust  perception  and  the  level  of  sharing  information  agreement 
(RQ1).  The  users  indicated  different  degree  of  trust  after  considering  the  dynamic 
consent  choices.  SME  #1  select  the  first  option  to  share  the  data  only  for  receiving 
recommendations and  stated that  “this box improved my  trust to the  CYSEC  since it 
can show that the tool considers the confidentiality and there is a process to protect 
the  data”. With  respect  to  the  other  options  the  SME  #1explained  that  “I  can  select 
option three if there is an agreement for sharing information with community”.  

This selection approach was almost the same with the SME #3. SME #3 explained 
that “this design improved my trust. Now I can decide how the tool can apply my da-
ta”. The user of company #3 also stated that “as a SME I will select option 1 because 
it is safer, however, as a use case partner I will select option 3 to help the communi-
ty”.  

In contrast, SME #2 did not select any options of dynamic consent and explained 
that  “I think  answering critical questions has no value  to our company.  For  critical 
questions  I  prefer  to  use  training  content  [right-hand  side  of  the  CYSEC  coach]  to 
understand for instance, why sharing accounts are not acceptable and how to stablish 
a solution”. 

Although two of the SMEs indicated that the new design of the CYSEC could in-
fluence their trust perception to share the information with the tool, none of the partic-
ipants  selected  the  second  option  to  collaborate  with  security  researcher.  Also,  they 
emphasised the importance of an agreement for information sharing with community. 
Dynamic consent  and operational  issues.  SME #1 and SME #3 indicated some 
issues about the dynamic consent box. Both explained that it is easy to use, however, 
it is better to have the box in the beginning of each coach and it is annoying that we 
see the box several times for some questions. None of the added more options to the 
list while SME #1 wanted a change in the order of second and third options. In addi-
tion, SME #1 stated that “I assume that the tool should destroy the information after 
generating recommendations”.  

7 

5 

Discussion  

5.1 

Study Limitations 

Before conducting the study, the author presented the design prototype and dynamic 
consent options to a cybersecurity expert to validate the options. Also, each interview 
was conducted without any break. However, our study has certain limitations, some of 
which  the  author  hopes  to  improve  upon  in  future  work.  First,  the  number  of  inter-
views in this research  was only three. Also, we  did not use different data sources to 
consider the triangulation effect for validity. In addition, the number of questions for 
the interview was not enough to study various aspects of the users’ point of views.  

5.2  Cybersecurity Information Exchange 

Our  study  indicated  that  having  an  agreement  for  sharing  security  information  may 
encourage SMEs to collaborate in cybersecurity improvement. Therefore, planning an 
agreement with SMEs for sharing their security information may support the cyberse-
curity  community  and  coping  mechanism.  The  study  showed  that  SMEs  needs  to 
understand more about the security collaboration with community and researchers to 
not only comply with security recommendations but also adhere to good cybersecurity 
practices. Still stimulating organisations to participate in security information sharing 
is a challenge. Rewarding, participation-fee, and economic incentives may be applied 
for achieving the company’s participation [15] [16].  

6 

Conclusions and Future Works 

The paper has evaluated the effect of applying dynamic consent model on SMEs’ trust 
perception to share their cybersecurity information with CYSEC method. CYSEC is a 
do-it-yourself  (DIY)  security  assessment  and  improvement  method  for  small  and 
medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs).  In  the  first  validation  of  CYSEC,  we  understood 
that confidentiality worries lead SMEs to avoid reporting their sensitive information. 
This behaviour may affect the quality of CYSEC recommendations, and non-practical 
recommendations may impact users’ adoption of good cybersecurity practices.  

To evaluate our new design, the dynamic consent approach has been implemented 
with three options to share the  information. The analysis of the results demonstrates 
that the dynamic consent box has a positive effect on some of the SMEs trust’ percep-
tion  to  share  their  information  with  CYSEC.  However,  they  were  reluctant  to  share 
their  information  with  community  and  security  researcher.  Sharing  the  information 
with CYSEC has  a value for SMEs to receive recommendations.  However, it seems 
that the other options have no incentives for the SMEs. 

As future work, we have planned to invite eight new SMEs to evaluate the effect of 

the new design of CYSEC. 

8 

Acknowledgments 

This work was made possible with funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research  and  innovation  programme  under  grant  agreement  No  740787  (SMESEC) 
and the Swiss State Secretariat for Education‚ Research and Innovation (SERI) under 
contract  number  17.00067.  The  opinions  expressed  and  arguments  employed  herein 
do not necessarily reflect the official views of these funding bodies. 

References 

1.  Cranor, Lorrie F. "A framework for reasoning about the human in the loop." (2008).  
2.  Shojaifar, Alireza, Samuel A. Fricker, and Martin Gwerder. "Elicitation of SME Require-
ments for Cybersecurity Solutions by Studying Adherence to Recommendations." REFSQ 
Workshops. 2018.  

3.  Margulis, Stephen T. "Privacy as a social issue and behavioral concept." Journal of social 

issues 59.2 (2003): 243-261. 

4.  Deci,  Edward  L.,  and  Richard  M.  Ryan.  "Self-determination  theory:  A  macrotheory  of 
human  motivation,  development,  and  health."  Canadian  psychology/Psychologie  canadi-
enne 49.3 (2008): 182. 

5.  Menard, Philip, Gregory J. Bott, and Robert E. Crossler. "User motivations in protecting 
information security: Protection motivation theory versus selfdetermination theory." Jour-
nal of Management Information Systems 34.4 (2017): 1203-1230. 

6.  Han, Bo, Yu “Andy Wu, and John Windsor. "User's adoption of free third-party security 

apps." Journal of Computer Information Systems 54.3 (2014): 77-86. 

7.  Joinson, A. N., Reips, U. D., Buchanan, T., & Schofield, C. B. P. (2010). Privacy, trust, 

and self-disclosure online. Human–Computer Interaction, 25(1), 1-24. 

8.  Renaud, Karen. "How smaller businesses struggle with security advice." Computer Fraud 

& Security 2016.8 (2016): 10-18. 

9.  Wash, Rick. "Folk models of home computer security." Proceedings of the Sixth Symposi-

um on Usable Privacy and Security. ACM, 2010. 

10.  Spencer, Karen, et al. "Patient perspectives on sharing anonymized personal health data us-
ing  a  digital  system  for  dynamic  consent  and  research  feedback:  a  qualitative 
study." Journal of medical Internet research 18.4 (2016): e66. 

11.  Caldwell, Tracey. "Securing small businesses–the weakest link in a supply chain?." Com-

puter Fraud & Security 2015.9 (2015): 5-10. 

12.  Hope,  K.  "Annual  report  on  European  SMEs  2016/2017,  Focus  on  self-employment." 

SME performance review 2017 (2016). 

13.  Gupta,  Atul,  and  Rex  Hammond.  "Information  systems  security  issues  and  decisions  for 
small businesses: An empirical examination." Information management & computer secu-
rity 13.4 (2005): 297-310. 

14.  Runeson, Per, et al. Case study research in software engineering: Guidelines and examples. 

John Wiley & Sons, 2012. 

15.  Vakilinia, Iman, and Shamik Sengupta. "A coalitional game theory approach for cyberse-
curity  information  sharing." MILCOM  2017-2017  IEEE  Military  Communications  Con-
ference (MILCOM). IEEE, 2017. 

16.  Gal-Or, Esther, and Anindya Ghose. "The economic incentives for sharing security infor-

mation." Information Systems Research 16.2 (2005): 186-208. 

9 

 
 
