0
2
0
2

l
u
J

9

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
0
6
7
4
0
.
7
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Human-Computer Interaction Considerations
When Developing Cyber Ranges

[Short Discussion Paper]

Lynsay A. Shepherd1[0000−0002−1082−1174], Stefano De
Paoli2[0000−0003−1120−4773], and Jim Conacher1[0000−0002−5712−0148]

1 Division of Cyber Security, School of Design and Informatics, Abertay University,
Dundee, United Kingdom
2 Division of Sociology, School of Business, Law and Social Sciences, Abertay
University, Dundee, United Kingdom
{lynsay.shepherd, s.depaoli, j.conacher}@abertay.ac.uk

Abstract. The number of cyber-attacks are continuing to rise glob-
ally. It is therefore vital for organisations to develop the necessary skills
to secure their assets and to protect critical national infrastructure. In
this short paper, we outline upon human-computer interaction elements
which should be considered when developing a cybersecurity training
platform, in an eﬀort to maintain levels of user engagement. We pro-
vide an overview of existing training platforms before covering specialist
cyber ranges. Aspects of human-computer interaction are noted with re-
gards to their relevance in the context of cyber ranges. We conclude with
design suggestions when developing a cyber range platform.

Keywords: Cybersecurity · Security Awareness · Cyber Range · Human-
Computer Interaction · Cybersecurity Education.

1

Introduction

In the ﬁeld of cybersecurity, there is a growing interest in the design, devel-
opment, and deployment of training platforms such as cyber ranges which can
supplement and improve security professionals skills. In this short paper, we aim
to present an overview of existing cybersecurity training platforms, alongside a
brief discussion of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) elements which should
be considered when developing a specialised cyber range platform. We then oﬀer
guidance for improving and maintaining user engagement with these platforms
through consideration of appropriate HCI techniques.

2 Background

This section provides a deﬁnition of HCI, and gives an overview of cybersecurity
training platforms. It then covers cyber ranges and their relevance in a secure
modern society.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

L.A. Shepherd et al.

2.1 Human-Computer Interaction

Human-computer interaction (HCI) is a broad ﬁeld which initially focused on
a combination of human factors engineering and cognitive science [4], and con-
tinues to link in with the areas of interaction design, ergonomics, informatics,
and psychology. HCI has also been incorporated into the ﬁeld of cybersecurity,
where it is termed HCISec (HCI security) and usable security.

Though HCI is linked to a number of ﬁelds and communities, the overarching
goal is the “linkage of critical analysis of usability, broadly understood, with
development of novel technology and applications” [4].

2.2 Cybersecurity Training Platforms

Training platforms are directly connected with the learning experience of the
user; therefore, the user interface plays an essential role in both supporting learn-
ing pathways and keeping the users aware of the underlying processes simulated
by the training platform.

Cybersecurity training platforms have been used in a number of domains.
These educational tools range from small mobile applications geared towards
raising public security awareness to those aimed at corporations.

Examples of such training platforms include:

– Immersive Labs “Human Cyber Readiness Platform” - aimed at businesses,
and features hands-on scenarios with Capture The Flag Challenges [11].
– Cybersecurity Lab - browser-based game targeting young people to help
them develop basic cyber security skills. The user plays the role of a Chief
Technology Oﬃcer who must defend a company against attacks [20].

– NoPhish - Android application to help the public identify phishing links [3].

2.3 Cyber Ranges

Cyber ranges can be deﬁned as “interactive, simulated representations of an or-
ganizations local network, system, tools, and applications that are connected to
a simulated Internet level environment” [19], and are a speciﬁc type of training
platform created for security professionals. They are typically composed of a vir-
tual network environment and allow for the creation of simulated cyber-attack
scenarios and incident response exercises. There is a growing need for training
platforms such as cyber ranges. Owing to the sustained increase in cyber-attacks
experienced by organizations around the World (particularly in the wake of the
COVID-19 pandemic [14]), continually enhancing the cybersecurity resilience of
such organizations is essential to help to ensure that critical national infrastruc-
ture remains protected.

Existing cyber ranges encompass a variety of areas, but they have generally
been created for military, research and commercial purposes. Examples of exist-
ing cyber ranges include the US Department of Defence Cyber Security Range
[17] (military), the Austrian Institute of Technology Cyber Range [1] (academic)

HCI Considerations When Developing Cyber Ranges

3

or the IBM Cyber Range [10] (commercial). Cyber ranges are a developing area
for research e.g. the European Commission’s H2020 Digital Security programme
has funded platforms such as FORESIGHT [8].

3 Discussion

To ensure cyber ranges deliver an appropriate user experience in the context
of an educational platform, we present design recommendations which aim to
improve knowledge acquisition and maintain a high level of user engagement.

3.1 HCI and cyber ranges

Although human-computer interaction is a large ﬁeld, there are some key ar-
eas which are appropriate in the context of the cyber ranges. This is not an
exhaustive list of all applicable elements, but an overview of perhaps the most
important aspects. The areas mentioned oﬀer the possibility of keeping the user
engaged in the context of a cybersecurity training platform.

User Interface (UI) The role of interface design in helping users learn has
been explored in the context of e-learning. Work by Guralnick [9] highlights key
factors in user interface design which aid the user. These include the layout of
elements on-screen (to guide the users’ eye to look at the relevant information),
consideration of learner paths to help the user stay focused, and well-presented
guidance on-screen to provide the user with feedback.

Crucially, if the UI is diﬃcult to navigate, the user will become frustrated,
and this will detract from the learning process. Existing cyber ranges such as the
Kypo cyber range [5] considered the role of the UI, and have utilised a portal
based on Liferay Portals [16] to ensure users of all abilities can interact with
the system. Developers should consider building upon existing frameworks to
provide a suitable UI for a cyber range.

Visualization Information visualization has proved successful in supporting
learning [13]. Developers should consider deploying the use of user-centred design
methods when creating visualisations in the cybersecurity domain [18]. Many ex-
amples of cybersecurity visualisations already exist, including Kaspersky Cyber
Threat map [12] and the Talos Spam and Malware Map [22]. Such tools could be
incorporated into a cyber range to help the user assess the impact of potential
threats e.g. identifying the source of a DDOS attack.

Design Patterns Design patterns are design solutions to resolve common prob-
lems in software development. These can utilise theories of motivation [p3] [15]
to create an engaging educational platform. Additionally, these patterns can be

4

L.A. Shepherd et al.

designed to be gameful, linking in with section 3.1 of this paper. Gameful de-
sign patterns can incorporate some of the elements which are used in gamiﬁca-
tion, such as badges and leaderboards. Gameful design patterns are particularly
well-suited to applications with “heavy simulation elements that the user should
explore”, [p34] [15] a category which cyber ranges fall into.

Gamiﬁcation Gamiﬁcation involves the use of gaming mechanics in tradition-
ally non-gaming environments [23]. Duolingo is a popular application which uses
a combination of gamiﬁcation elements such as learning paths, points, badges,
scores, and leaderboards to help users learn new languages [7].

Gamiﬁcation has been used in several existing cybersecurity training plat-
forms and thus can be applied to cyber ranges. Existing cybersecurity work
which has utilised gamiﬁcation includes prototype mobile applications aimed at
raising public security awareness [21]. Furthermore, it has also been suggested
for use in cyber defence training [2], and used to tackle threats against critical
national infrastructure [6].

4 Conclusion

In this paper, we have provided an overview of existing cybersecurity training
platforms, and have highlighted the developing ﬁeld of cyber ranges. We have
also outlined aspects of HCI which may help the end-user remain engaged with
the platform, supporting learning and consolidating knowledge gained. We hope
that developers of cyber ranges will take these elements of human-computer
interaction into consideration, creating an engaging cybersecurity platform.

References

1. AIT: Cyber

range & training (2020), https://www.ait.ac.at/en/research-

topics/cyber-security/cyber-range-training/ (Accessed 1 July 2020)

2. Amorim, J.A., Hendrix, M., Andler, S.F., Gustavsson, P.M.: Gamiﬁed training
for cyber defence: Methods and automated tools for situation and threat assess-
ment. In: NATO Modelling and Simulation Group (MSG) Annual Conference 2013
(MSG-111), 2013 (2013)

3. Canova, G., Volkamer, M., Bergmann, C., Reinheimer, B.: Nophish app evaluation:

lab and retention study. In: NDSS workshop on usable security (2015)

4. Carroll, J.M.: Human computer interaction (hci). In: The Encyclopedia of Human-
Computer Interaction, 2nd Edition, chap. 2, pp. 21–62. The Interaction Design
Foundation (2013)

5. ˇCeleda, P., ˇCegan, J., Vykopal, J., Tovarˇn´ak, D.: Kypo–a platform for cyber defence
exercises. M&S Support to Operational Tasks Including War Gaming, Logistics,
Cyber Defence. NATO Science and Technology Organization (2015)

6. Cook, A., Smith, R., Maglaras, L., Janicke, H.: Using gamiﬁcation to raise aware-
ness of cyber threats to critical national infrastructure. In: 4th International Sym-
posium for ICS & SCADA Cyber Security Research 2016 (ICS-CSR). BCS (2016)

7. Duolingo: Duolingo (2020), https://www.duolingo.com/ (Accessed 1 July 2020)

HCI Considerations When Developing Cyber Ranges

5

8. FORESIGHT: Foresight - advanced cyber-security simulation platform for pre-
paredness training in aviation, naval and power-grid environments (2019),
https://foresight-h2020.eu/ (Accessed 30 June 2020)

9. Guralnick, D.A.: User interface design for eﬀective, engaging e-learning. In: Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on E-learning. pp. 22–23. Citeseer (2006)
(2020),

10. IBM: X-force

operations

command

tactical

center

cyber

https://www.ibm.com/security/services/managed-security-services/xforce-
command-cyber-tactical-operations-center (Accessed 1 July 2020)
human

readiness

cyber

Labs:

The

11. Immersive

https://www.immersivelabs.com/product/beneﬁts/equip-cyber-workforce
cessed 1 July 2020)

platform (2020),
(Ac-

12. Kaspersky:

Cyber

Threat

Real-Time

Map

(2020),

https://cybermap.kaspersky.com/ (Accessed 1 July 2020)

13. Klerkx, J., Verbert, K., Duval, E.: Enhancing learning with visualization tech-
niques. In: Handbook of research on educational communications and technology,
pp. 791–807. Springer (2014)

14. Lallie, H.S., Shepherd, L.A., Nurse, J.R., Erola, A., Epiphaniou, G., Maple,
C., Bellekens, X.: Cyber security in the age of covid-19: A timeline and anal-
ysis of cyber-crime and cyber-attacks during the pandemic. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.11929 (2020)

15. Lewis, C.: Irresistible Apps: Motivational design patterns for apps, games, and

web-based communities. Springer (2014)

16. Liferay: Liferay DXP for Portals (no date), https://www.liferay.com/download-

features/l/portal (Accessed 1 July 2020)

17. Marines- The oﬃcial website of the United States Marine Corps: DoD Cyber Secu-
rity Range (2020), https://www.hqmc.marines.mil/doccsr/ (Accessed 1 July 2020)
18. McKenna, S., Staheli, D., Meyer, M.: Unlocking user-centered design methods for
building cyber security visualizations. In: 2015 IEEE Symposium on Visualization
for Cyber Security (VizSec). pp. 1–8. IEEE (2015)

19. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST): Cyber ranges (2018),
https://www.nist.gov/system/ﬁles/documents/2018/02/13/cyber ranges.pdf (Ac-
cessed 30 June 2020)

20. PBS

Labs:
https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/labs/lab/cyber/ (Accessed 1 July 2020)

Cybersecurity

NOVA

Lab

and

(2020),

21. Scholeﬁeld, S., Shepherd, L.A.: Gamiﬁcation techniques for raising cyber security
awareness. In: Moallem, A. (ed.) HCI for Cybersecurity, Privacy and Trust. HCII
2019., Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 11594, pp. 191–203. Springer, Cham
(2019)

22. Talos: Cyber Attack Map (2020), https://talosintelligence.com/fullpage maps/pulse

(Accessed 1 July 2020)

23. Tondello, G.F.: An introduction to gamiﬁcation in human-computer interaction.

XRDS: Crossroads, The ACM Magazine for Students 23(1), 15–17 (2016)

