SMEs’ Confidentiality Concerns 
for Security Information Sharing 

Alireza Shojaifar1,2, Samuel A. Fricker1,3 

1 FHNW, IIT, 5210 Windisch, Switzerland 
(alireza.shojaifar|samuel.fricker)@fhnw.ch 
2Utrecht University, Dept. of Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht, Netherlands 
a.shojaifar@uu.nl 
3Blekinge Institute of Technology, SERL-Sweden, 371 79 Karlskrona, Sweden 
samuel.fricker@bth.se 

Abstract. Small and medium-sized enterprises (SME) are considered an essential 
part of the EU economy; however, highly vulnerable to cyber-attacks. SMEs have 
specific characteristics which separate them from large companies and influence 
their adoption of good cybersecurity practices. To mitigate the SMEs’ cyberse-
curity  adoption  issues  and  raise  their  awareness  of  cyber  threats,  we  have  de-
signed  a  self-paced  security  assessment  and  capability  improvement  method, 
CYSEC. CYSEC is a security awareness and training method that utilises self-
reporting questionnaires to collect companies’ information about cybersecurity 
awareness, practices, and vulnerabilities to generate automated recommendations 
for  counselling.  However,  confidentiality  concerns  about  cybersecurity  infor-
mation have an impact on companies’ willingness to share their information. Se-
curity  information  sharing  decreases  the  risk  of  incidents  and  increases  users’ 
self-efficacy in security awareness programs. This paper presents the results of 
semi-structured  interviews  with  seven  chief  information  security  officers 
(CISOs)  of  SMEs  to  evaluate  the  impact  of online  consent  communication  on 
motivation for information sharing. The results were analysed in respect of the 
Self-Determination Theory (SDT). The findings demonstrate that online consent 
with multiple options for indicating a suitable level of agreement improved mo-
tivation for information sharing. This allows many SMEs to participate in secu-
rity information sharing activities and supports security experts to have a better 
overview of common vulnerabilities. 

Keywords: Cybersecurity, Small and medium-sized enterprises, Online con-
sent, Confidentiality concerns, Information sharing. 

1 

Introduction 

Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) have a considerable diversity and form 
the backbone of the EU’s economy [12]. However, although they need to deal with a 
similar level of cybersecurity risk as large companies, information security is not al-
ways  a  priority  [17,24].  Moreover,  the  lack  of  written  security  policy,  financial  re-
sources, and security expertise are other operational constraints and make SMEs more 

2 

vulnerable [11,13]. To having an effective understanding of security policy and foster-
ing a security culture, providing appropriate training and awareness tools specifically 
for small enterprises is necessary [11].  

Training and awareness programs are the most commonly suggested approaches in 
the literature for security policy compliance, and they can alleviate employees’ limited 
knowledge of cybersecurity [20]. Systematic training programs are a good means of 
facilitating  continuous  information  security  communication  in  organisations.  Infor-
mation security training should apply content and approaches that enable and motivate 
learners to systematic cognitive processing of information they receive in training [20]. 
CYSEC is a self-paced SME-specific training and awareness method that provides 
training by automating the elements of security communication between employees and 
a security expert [2]. Since there is a resistance to changing cybersecurity behaviour 
and adopting security tools by employees [16], the method implements the motivational 
constructs—namely, the needs for autonomy, competence, and relatedness—in the self-
determination theory (SDT) [4,29] to motivate learners to adopt advice. CYSEC pro-
vides training, recommendations, and relevant hands-on skills based on SMEs’ answers 
to the self-assessment questions to enable them to become more self-determined.  

Security information sharing is a challenge for companies, and they are reluctant to 
share their information and report their incidents [9,15,30]. Fear of negative publicity 
and competitive disadvantage, believing that the chance of a successful prosecution is 
not high, believing that the cyber incident was not severe enough to be reported, and a 
lack of motivation and trust are  some of the major hindrance to information sharing 
activities  [15,30].  However,  security  information  sharing  is  a  significant  measure  to 
reduce  the risks  of  similar  incidents  and  develop  a better understanding  of  the  risks 
facing a community [21,30]. The European Network and Information Security Agency 
(ENISA) [21] explains that the nature of cyber incidents and attacks is borderless. To 
support the management of threats and vulnerabilities in the community of cybersecu-
rity, the exchange of data and cross-border cooperation is necessary [21]. ENISA indi-
cates that trust is the critical element to enhance security information sharing. There-
fore, the actual usage of CYSEC requires further investigation.  
The  current  study  aims  to  evaluate  the  impact  of  online  consent  communicating  on 
SME’s chief information security officers (CISOs) motivation for security information 
sharing. Taking approaches that motivate users to adopt security recommendations can 
support the effectiveness of cybersecurity communication [1]. The semi-structured in-
terview method was selected for data collection about behavioural motivation. The data 
was qualitatively analysed based on a proposed theoretical model by Yoon and Rolland 
[26] for explaining knowledge-sharing behaviours in virtual communities. The model 
studies  the  effect  of  basic psychological  needs  in  SDT  (autonomy,  competence,  and 
relatedness) and two antecedents of the basic needs: familiarity and anonymity. Famil-
iarity refers to an individual’s understanding of the environment and increases the trust 
of other people [8]. Anonymity refers to the inability of others to identify an individual 
or for others to identify one’s self [6] and may influence individuals’ knowledge sharing 
behaviour in a virtual community [26].  

Our study results indicate that SDT and two antecedents (familiarity and anonymity) 
account for motivation for security information-sharing behaviour, and online consent 
has a positive impact on CISOs’ motivation. The online consent increased users’ trust 

3 

and provided value for SMEs to make choices and decisions about the suitable level of 
relatedness for sharing information. 

The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 presents the research 
background, the theoretical model, and the research prototype. Section 3 describes the 
design  of  our  study.  Section 4  presents  the  analysis  approach  and  the  answer  to  the 
research question. Section 5 discusses the significance of the results and the threats to 
validity. Section 6 summarises and concludes. 

2 

Research Background 

Security information sharing has been identified to increase end-users’ self-efficacy in 
security awareness programs [9, 19]. Security information sharing means the exchange 
of network and information security-related information such as risks, vulnerabilities, 
threats, internal security issues, and good practice [21]. Security information should 
be shared to understand the risks facing the community and any related significant in-
formation infrastructure and reduce the risk of incidents. 

Confidentiality concerns and the lack of incentives prevent companies to share se-
curity information [9,30]. Geer et al. [30] state individual companies might have some 
rudimentary understanding of their  own information security health, but we have no 
aggregate basis for public policy because organisations do not share their data. The 
companies’ confidentiality concerns include worries about reputation, losing custom-
ers, fears of misuse of the information, and strong emotional relatedness to the organi-
sational data. These concerns exist even if security information is anonymised. 

Trust influences a user’s willingness to share knowledge [26,28] and security infor-
mation [21]. Hosmer [25] defines trust as the expectation by one person, group, or firm 
of ethically justifiable behaviour on the part of the other person, group, or firm in a 
joint endeavour or economic exchange. Some arrangements could mitigate confidenti-
ality concerns relevant to trust issues. The arrangements include to (1) give control of 
information to the company which shared it, (2)  agree about how to use and protect 
shared information, (3)  preserve data anonymity, and (4) develop standard terms for 
communicating information [9]. Deci et al. [5] explain that also autonomy support, in-
cluding the offering of choice and relevant information, impacts trust. 

The Self-Determination Theory (SDT) has been proposed as a theoretical framework 
to study humans’ motivational dynamics and consequent behaviours [4,5,29]. People 
have different levels and orientations of motivation. Self-determination in SDT is de-
fined as: the capacity to choose and to have those choices, rather than reinforcement 
contingencies, drives, or any other forces or pressures, to be the determinants of one’s 
actions. But self-determination is more than capacity. It is also a need. Deci and Ryan 
[7] have hypothesised a basic, innate aptitude to be self-determining that leads humans 
and organisations to engage in desirable behaviours. 

SDT assumes that the satisfaction of humans’ basic psychological needs - autonomy, 
competence, and relatedness – leads to self-motivation and positive outcomes [27]. Au-
tonomy refers to a desire to engage in activities with a choice of freedom. Competence 
implies that individuals have a desire to interact effectively with the environment  for 

4 

producing  desired outcomes and  preventing undesired  events.  Relatedness  reflects  a 
sense of belongingness and connectedness to others or a social environment.   

To explain knowledge-sharing behaviours, Yoon and Rolland [26] extended SDT 
with two antecedents, familiarity and anonymity. Familiarity refers to an individual’s 
understanding  of  an  environment  based  on  the  prior  experience  and  learning  of  the 
what,  who,  how,  and  when  of  what  is  happening  [8].  Familiarity  may  improve  per-
ceived competence, the feeling of relatedness [26]. Anonymity refers to the inability of 
others to identify a person or for others to identify one’s self [6]. It can reduce social 
barriers and allow group members to contribute their opinions [26]. Anonymity may 
impact on autonomy and the feeling of relatedness. Fig. 1 shows the complete model. 

Fig. 1. Research model (Yoon and Rolland [26]) 

We applied Yoon and Rolland [26] model to evaluate the impact of the motivational 
factors in online consent on the security information-sharing activities of SME CISOs. 
We asked SMEs to use self-assessment questionnaires to collect security information 
and share with a community of security experts and other SMEs. The consent provides 
choices  and  the  opportunity  for  CISOs  to  exert  control  over  information  sharing. 
Through the choices, CISOs can define their relatedness to the tool and the community. 
Each choice gives information and explains how and where the shared information will 
be  used  to  increase  users’  familiarity  with  the  data  usage  environment.  The  consent 
emphasises that the shared information will be used anonymously. 

The consent form included three choices based on three  levels of relatedness and 
agreement. 1) disagreement to share security information. 2) agreement to automated 
processing  of  security  information  for  recommendations  of  cybersecurity  improve-
ments in their company. 3) agreement to share security information for cybersecurity 
research. The form includes the choice of anonymity. It supports familiarity by elabo-
rating on the usage of security information to reduce the complexity for new users and 
enhance the users’ competence. Fig. 2 shows the consent form 

Fig. 2. Screenshot of the Online Consent prototype 

FamiliarityAnonymityPerceived CompetencePerceived AutonomyPerceived RelatednessKnowledge Sharing BehaviourReplying to questionnaires is a part of your self-evaluation approach.However, you can improve adherence to good cybersecurity practices in the CYSEC community.I use the tool for testing purposes or my personal training (my answers may be not accurate).By choosing this item, you are using the tool only for the training and awareness purposes, such as reading the training and awareness content and using the embedded training links. And your answers will be removed from the tool.I use the tool to improve the cybersecurity in my SME with the automated feedback and recommendations it generates (I confirm that my answers are correct).By choosing this item, the stored answers are used to generate recommendations, feedback, and KPIs.My anonymised answers may be used in the CYSEC community for further research.By choosing this item, the stored data is used: (1) for your SME cybersecurity improvement and (2) anonymously for conductingresearch in FHNW Universityfor the CYSEC community to improve the cybersecurity coping mechanisms, for instance, generating recommendations based on all CYSEC partners’ capability to make a backup.Agree 
 
 
5 

3  Method 

This study aims at finding out the impact of online consent communicating on SME’s 
CISOs motivation for sensitive information sharing behaviour. Semi-structured inter-
views [10] were applied to conduct the empirical part of this study. The interview is 
one of the most frequently used methods and the most significant sources of data in 
empirical  studies  in  software  engineering.  Interviews  provide  researchers  with  im-
portant insights into the quality and usability of artefacts since much of the knowledge 
that is of interest is only available in the minds of users [14]. The same method (inter-
view with CISOs, and key informants who are Network and Information Security ex-
perts)  has  already been  used in  the  context  of  cybersecurity  [22]  and  security  infor-
mation sharing [9].  

A theoretical model based on SDT (Fig. 1) was chosen to analyse the CISOs’ infor-
mation-sharing motivation and whether online consent can  motivate them. When we 
have a developed theory as a template, the model of generalisation is the analytic gen-
eralisation [10]. The study seeks answers to this research question: Do the choice of 
anonymity and the elaboration of how shared information will be used motivate CISOs 
of  SMEs  to  share  security  information?  Security  information  sharing  is  a  necessary 
measure in the context of cybersecurity [18,21] and for SMEs [3,23]. We are studying 
how motivational constructs, controlling over data through choices, online agreement, 
and familiarity with the usage of shared information, can impact information-sharing 
behaviour. Recorded interviews were analysed based on content analysis (interviewees’ 
argumentations) and theoretical cause-effect relationships [10]. 

At first, a pilot study, including three interviews with three SMEs’ CISOs (project 
partners), has been conducted—the pilot study allowed to identify and resolve initial 
problems in the interview questions and the online consent design. The selection of the 
subjects  was  based  on  the  availability  of  the  SMEs.  There  were  twelve  SMEs  (four 
project  partners  and  eight  open  call  partners),  and  seven  of  them  participated  in  the 
interviews. The participating SMEs came from five EU countries, and all were active 
in the IT industry. All of them implemented some security controls, including password 
management, basic approaches for privacy protection, using firewalls, two-factor au-
thentication, cloud security features, and anti-virus installation. One person from each 
SME  was  interviewed.  The  people  interviewed  were  chosen  because  they  all  were 
CISOs or senior managers, and all have  been involved in cybersecurity tasks within 
their companies. All were college graduates and had several years of experience in se-
curity. One of the interviewed people was a cybersecurity expert and provided a more 
in-depth perspective on the importance of security information sharing, the necessity 
for an agreement,  and anonymity. Table 1 presents  the SMEs’ demographics. In the 
European Union, companies are considered to be SMEs if they have  fewer than 250 
employees and an annual turnover of less than € 50 million [31].  

Interviews were conducted face-to-face when possible. For four SMEs, a request for 
the online interview has been sent. All interviewees had the possibility to find a suitable 
time. In the online interviews, the screen of the interviewer’s computer was shared, and 
the interviewees were able to see and read the content and had enough time to think 
about  the  answers.  All  the  interviews  were  conducted  without  distraction.  Each 

6 

interview started with an explanation of the study. Then we presented each interviewee 
with a screenshot of the online consent and asked them about their understanding of it. 
All interviewees understood the idea and content. To collecting honest responses, the 
researcher emphasised that the collected data would be applied anonymously for aca-
demic purposes and then obtained the subjects’ consent. In the end, a summary of the 
key findings and answers presented to the interviewees. All interviews were recorded 
and transcribed. 

Table 1. SMEs’ Demographics 

ID 

Org. size  Offices  Maturity 

Structure 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

Small 

Small1 

Medium 

Small 

Small 

Small 

Small 

2 

1 

3 

2 

2 

1 

2 

Some controls implemented  CEO, security team, employees 

Some controls implemented 

Professors, manager, security team, users 

Some controls implemented  CEO, security team, employees 

Some controls implemented  CEO, security manager, employees, be-

havioural scientist 

Some controls implemented  CEO, employees 

Some controls implemented  CEO, employees 

Some controls implemented  CEO, security team, employees 

4 

Analysis of the Interview Results 

For answering the research question, we studied the impact of anonymity choice and 
elaboration of data use on SME CISOs’ motivation for security information sharing. 
The interview transcripts showed that both design elements of the online consent form 
affected the CISOs’ motivation for security information sharing. They supported relat-
edness,  autonomy,  and  competence,  and  enhanced  the  CISOs’  trust  perception.  The 
study participants were motivated to share security information when they perceived 
that they had control of the communication, and the information was securely stored. 

Security information sharing behaviour. Through the interviews, it became clear 
that the agreement form encouraged the CISOs’ information sharing with the tool. ID7 
emphasised that the agreement was not only useful but also legally necessary. ID3 and 
ID7 stated that the agreement positively affected their trust. ID3: “it has a positive effect 
on trust because it shows that you take care of the data process and make it clear.” 
ID7: “the online consent impacts on trust and shows me that there are thoughts, con-
ditions, and efforts to provide different options and approaches for disclosure.” ID1: 
“with this agreement, I feel safer.” 

Role  of  autonomy  through choice.  The  analysis  of  the  study participants’  argu-
ments showed that the autonomy offered by the choice of sharing security information 
influenced their information-sharing intention. ID7: “providing options show me that 
these people know what they are asking for and give you options.” All interviewees 
recognised the importance of security information sharing for receiving better advice; 

1 The organisation 2 was a university-hosted start-up. 

 
7 

however,  some  of  them  selected  the  third  choice  (sharing information  for  research). 
ID1: “I may change my answer later.” ID7: “I need to check with my boss. Do I still 
have the ability to edit my selection? I can decide and let you use the answers, but until 
the  end  of  the  duration  of  the  project.”  The  respondents  were  asked  whether  they 
wanted to add a new option to the online consent, but no new option was suggested. 

Role of familiarity through elaboration of security information use. Improving 
the CISOs’ familiarity with how security information would be used positively affected 
competence and relatedness. All except ID6 wanted to have a clear description of how 
their information would be used. ID6 stated: “the text is clear and understandable, and 
it improves my awareness.” IDs 1, 3, 4, 7 emphasised that the agreement has not pro-
vided  sufficient  information. When  asked  why,  ID1  stated:  “I  do  not  know  how  my 
company information is stored; also, it should be stated if we can change our answer 
later.”  ID3:  “I  assumed  that  after  generating  recommendations,  the  data  should be 
destroyed.” ID7: “it should be clearly stated if the data will be used in the future and 
after the project.” ID4 also wanted to know more about the security information recip-
ient “FHNW” indicated on the consent form. The interviewees were also asked to state 
if they wanted to know how the information is processed. Most interviewees stated that 
their organisations only wanted to have the results of the analysis, i.e. the tool’s recom-
mendations. ID2: “I do not care how and when my data will be used for the research. I 
just want to have the results.” ID5 and ID6 wanted to know, however, how their infor-
mation would be processed. 

The content of the agreement was perceived to be confusing for some of the subjects. 
Some of the interviewees suggested modifications to the content. ID2: “the second op-
tion  should  be  rephrased:  [try  to  answer  the  questionnaires  to  the  best  of  your 
knowledge to help us give you more accurate recommendations].” “Options should be 
re-arranged:  Options  #2  and  #3  should  be  separated  from  option  #1.”  “Option  #3 
should be rephrased, something like [if you allow us to collect your answer, we will be 
able to improve the tool, provide you better analysis, and better help you in the future. 
(Yes or No)]?” ID4: “rephrasing can clarify the message because I do not know if I 
select option #1, I will receive a recommendation.” ID7: “I think giving an option to 
SMEs that indicates my answer may or may not be accurate can demote the whole.” 

Role of anonymity through security information anonymisation. Anonymising 
the security information could influence perceived relatedness and autonomy and, in 
turn, encourage security information sharing. The analysis of the interviewees’ argu-
ments showed that all believed that anonymity would reduce the risks of sharing infor-
mation. They felt more secure when the tool support anonymity. ID2: “if my data is 
anonymised, I don’t care how my data will be used.” ID1: “anonymised data sharing 
shows that it is safe.” ID7: “I presume that when you put stress on anonymity in the 
third option, it can imply that the second option is not anonymised. I assume that even 
for other usages (KPI, recommendations), SMEs should not be recognisable.” 

The  interviewees  would  not  share  security  information  that  would  expose  details 
about  their  organisation,  hence  would  break  their  anonymity.  ID3:  “consent  cannot 
change  my  opinion;  I  am  not  answering  the  textbox  questions.”  ID7:  “I  know  that 
Yes/No or multi-choice questions can be used for the statistical analysis; however, any 
question that refers more to deterministic answers, I don’t want to answer.” 

8 

5 

Discussion  

5.1 

Security information sharing 

Security information sharing is widely acknowledged [9,21,30]; however, confidenti-
ality worries, lack of incentives, and lack of trust lead the companies to avoid sharing 
information and reporting vulnerabilities [9,30]. To motivating companies to share their 
security information, attention to arrangements such as giving control of information to 
the company which shared information, having an agreement, and preserving data an-
onymity is necessary [9]. 

In this study, based on a theoretical model for knowledge-sharing behaviour in vir-
tual communities [26], we have evaluated the impact of online consent communicating 
on SME CISOs’ motivation for information sharing. The model [26] extended the self-
determination  theory  and  included  two  antecedents  (familiarity  and  anonymity)  on 
basic psychological needs (perceived autonomy, perceived competence, and perceived 
relatedness). Yoon and Rolland [26] study indicates that perceived autonomy does not 
influence knowledge-sharing behaviours in virtual communities since a virtual com-
munity is a voluntary environment that is not controlled by anyone else. However, our 
findings show that in the context of security information sharing, users’ perception of 
controlling over information sharing increased their motivation, and providing choices 
enabled users to have selective permission controls. This finding is consistent with the 
previous study [9]. Moreover, Yoon and Rolland [26] study shows that anonymity has 
a negative impact on knowledge-sharing activities since the anonymity in a virtual com-
munity can be used to attack the opinions of other people, and in a highly anonymous 
environment, individuals may think about other people’s reactions to their opinion. In 
our study, users emphasised that preserving anonymity is essential. Although our study 
is based only on qualitative findings and a small sample, we can explain the anonymity 
based on the perception of altruism [28] and the risk of information misuse [3]. 

In  CYSEC,  the  self-assessment  questionnaires  are  used  to  collect  security  infor-
mation  (including  cybersecurity  awareness,  practices,  and  vulnerabilities)  and  share 
with a community of security experts and other SMEs. The results demonstrated that 
online consent with the choice of anonymity and the elaboration of how shared infor-
mation is used motivated CISOs of the SMEs to share their information. Also, we dis-
covered that CISOs would not share security information that would expose details. For 
future research, the other legal and economic incentives [18] should be considered, and 
not only CISOs opinions but also employees’ viewpoints should be studied. 

5.2 

Study Limitation 

This study has some limitations. One criterion influencing the sufficiency of the inter-
views was saturation. The saturation point is reached when no new information is gath-
ered, or the subjects’ viewpoints are repeated [14]. Due to the small sample size, we 
could not reliably validate saturation and implement a statistical analysis in our study. 
The study is based on seven interviewed persons from seven SMEs that were active in 
the IT industry, which limits generalizability. Further research with a larger sample and 

9 

a diversity of SMEs could reveal more robust results and provide more insights into the 
influence of the industry type on the SME engagement in security information sharing. 
Second, since the study is based on the CISOs and senior managers’ viewpoints of se-
curity information sharing, our study lacks the view of SMEs’ employees. To having a 
wider perspective, the views of SMEs’ employees are needed.  

6 

Summary Conclusions 

The paper has evaluated the impact of online consent communicating on motivating 
CISOs of SMEs for security information sharing. This study followed a deductive ap-
proach and tested constructs drawn on the Self-Determination Theory (SDT) as well as 
two antecedents of SDT constructs (familiarity and anonymity) to evaluate the impact 
of the online consent on the security information sharing motivation. We applied semi-
structured interviews with seven CISOs from seven SMEs for data collection. The study 
results indicate that online consent increased CISOs’ trust and had a positive impact on 
security information sharing intention. The consent supports familiarity with the envi-
ronment through the elaboration of security information usage. Moreover, online con-
sent considers the role of anonymity and autonomy through security information anon-
ymisation and the choice of sharing information.  

Acknowledgments 

This work has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and 
innovation  programme under grant agreements No. 740787 (SMESEC), No.  883588 
(GEIGER),  and  the  Swiss  State  Secretariat  for  Education‚  Research  and  Innovation 
(SERI) under contract number 17.00067. The opinions expressed and arguments em-
ployed herein do not necessarily reflect the official views of these funding bodies. 

References 

1.  Cranor, L.F.: A framework for reasoning about the human in the loop. In: 1st Conference on 

Usability, Psychology and Security. San Francisco, CA, USA (2008).  

2.  Shojaifar, A., Fricker, S. and Gwerder, M.: Elicitation of SME requirements for cybersecu-
rity solutions by studying adherence to recommendations. In: REFSQ Workshops (2018).  
3.  R.  Lewis,  P.  Louvieris,  P.  Abbott,  N.  Clewley,  and  K  Jones.:  Cybersecurity  information 
sharing: a framework for sustainable information security management in UK SME supply 
chains. In: proceedings of the European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS) (2014). 
4.  Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L.: Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic moti-
vation, social development, and well-being. American Psychologist, 55(1), pp.68-78 (2000). 
5.  Deci, E.L., Connell, J.P., and Ryan, R.M.: Self-determination in a work organisation. Jour-

nal of Applied Psychology, 74 (4), pp. 580–590 (1989). 

6.  Christopherson, K.M.: The positive and negative implications of anonymity in Internet so-
cial interactions: ‘‘On the Internet, Nobody Knows You’re a Dog’’. Computers in Human 
Behavior 23(6), pp. 3038–3056 (2007). 

10 

7.  Deci, E.L. and Ryan, R.M.: Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behaviour. 

New York: Plenum Publishing Co (1985b). 

8.  Gefen, D.: E-Commerce: the role of familiarity and trust. Omega, 28(6), pp. 725–737 (2000). 
9.   Robinson,  N.,  and  Disley,  E.:  Incentives  and  Challenges  for  Information  Sharing  in  the 
Context of Network and Information Security. European Network and Information Security 
Agency (ENISA) (2010). 

10.  Yin, R. K.: Case study research: design and methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage (2009). 
11.  Furnell, S.M., Gennatou, M. & Dowland, P.S.: A prototype tool for information security 
awareness and training. Logistics Information Management 15(5/6), pp. 352-357 (2002). 
12.  Muller, P., Julius, J., Herr, D., Koch, L., Peycheva, V., & McKiernan, S.: Annual report on 
European SMEs 2016/2017: Focus on self-employment. European Commission (2017). 
13.  Gupta, A. and Hammond, R.: Information systems security issues and decisions for small 
businesses. Information Management & Computer Security 13(4), pp. 297‐310 (2005). 
14.  Runeson, P., Höst, M., Rainer, A., Regnell, B.: Case Study Research in Software Engineer-

ing - Guidelines and Examples. Wiley (2012). 

15.  Choo, K.-K.R.: The cyber threat landscape: Challenges and future research directions. Com-

puters & security 30(8), pp. 719-731 (2011). 

16.  West, R.: The psychology of security. CACM 51(4), pp. 34‐40 (2008). 
17.  Kurpjuhn, T.: The SME security challenge. Comp Fraud & Security 2015(3), pp. 5-7 (2015). 
18.  Gal-Or, E. and Chose, A.: The economic incentives for sharing security information. Infor-

mation Systems Research, 16 (2), pp. 186-208 (2005). 

19.  Rhee, H., Kim, C. and Ryu, Y.: Self-efficacy in information security: it’s influence on end 
users’ information security practice behavior. Computers & Security 28(8), 816-826 (2009). 
20.  Puhakainen, P., and Siponen, M.: Improving employees’ compliance through information 
systems security training: an action research study. MIS Q. 34(4), pp. 757-778 (2010).   
21.  Bedrijfsrevisoren, D., Muynck, J.D., & Portesi, S.: Cyber security information sharing: An 
overview of  regulatory  and  non-regulatory  approaches.  The  European  Union  Agency  for 
Network and Information Security (ENISA) (2015).  

22.  Beebe, N.L. and Rao, V.S.: Examination of Organizational Information Security Strategy: 
A Pilot Study. In: Americas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS), USA (2009). 

23.  Birkás, B., Bourgue, R.: EISAS-European Information Sharing and Alerting System. Euro-

pean Union Agency for Network and Information Security (2013).  

24.  Osborn, E.: Business versus technology: Sources of the perceived lack of cyber security in 
SMEs. In: the 1st Int. Conference on Cyber Security for Sustainable Society (2014). 

25.  Hosmer, L. T.: Trust: The connecting link between organisational theory and philosophical 

ethics. Academy of management Review 20(2), pp. 379-403 (1995). 

26.  Yoon, C., and Rolland, E.: Knowledge-sharing in virtual communities: familiarity, anonym-

ity and self-determination theory. Behaviour & Info Tech 31(11), pp. 1133-1143 (2012). 
27.  Vallerand, R.J.: Toward a hierarchical model of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. Advances 

in Experimental Social Psychology, 29, 271-360 (1997). 

28.  Chang, H.H., and Chuang, S.: Social capital and individual motivations on knowledge shar-
ing: Participant involvement as a moderator. Information & Management 48(1),9-18 (2011). 
29.  Deci, E. L., and Ryan, R. M.: The General Causality Orientations Scale: Self-determination 

in personality. Journal of research in personality 19(2), pp. 109-134 (1985a). 

30.   Geer, Jr. D., Hoo, K.S., and Jaquith, A.: Information security: Why the future belongs to 

the quants. IEEE Security & Privacy 1(4), pp. 24-32 (2003). 

31.  European  Commission.  What  is  an  SME?  https://ec.europa.eu/growth/smes/business-

friendly-environment/sme-definition_en 

 
