1
2
0
2

t
c
O
3
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
3
4
8
2
1
.
8
0
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Defensive Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis of Smart Grid Digital
Functionalities

Jim Strighta, Peter Cheethama, Charalambos Konstantinoub,∗

aFlorida State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA
bKing Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia

Abstract

Modern smart grids oﬀer several types of digital control and monitoring of

electric power transmission and distribution that enable greater eﬃciency and

integrative functionality than traditional power grids. These beneﬁts, however,

introduce greater complexity and greatly disrupt and expand the threat land-

scape. The number of vulnerabilities is increasing as grid-connected devices

proliferate. The potential costs to society of these vulnerabilities are diﬃcult

to determine, as are their likelihoods of successful exploitation. In this article,

we present a method for comparing the net economic beneﬁts and costs of the

various cyber-functionalities associated with smart grids from the perspective

of cyberattack vulnerabilities and defending against them. The economic con-

siderations of cyber defense spending suggest the existence of optimal levels

of expenditures, which might vary among digital functionalities. We illustrate

hypothetical case studies on how digital functionalities can be assessed and

compared with respect to the costs of defending them from cyberattacks.

Keywords: Smart grid, cost-beneﬁt analysis, security management.

1. Introduction

Recognizing the susceptibility of the U.S. power grid to cyberattacks, Congress

passed the Securing Energy Infrastructure Act, establishing a two-year pilot

∗Corresponding author
Email address: charalambos.konstantinou@kaust.edu.sa (Charalambos Konstantinou)

 
 
 
 
 
 
program to look at non-digital approaches for mitigating the potential eﬀects of

such attacks [1]. Prior to the introduction in the late twentieth century of digital

control and monitoring of the grid, cyberattacks on grid infrastructure had been

only a theoretical concern. To date, disruptive power outages due to cyberat-

tacks have been rare compared to outages from natural causes. Nevertheless, the

likelihood that cyberattacks could severely curtail power availability is increas-

ing as industrial control and monitoring of power grids becomes increasingly

digitized [2].

Estimating the costs associated with rare but severe disruptions of power

grids is diﬃcult, whether these disruptions are due to cyberattacks or other

causes. However, as existing grids evolve into smart grids with new types of

functionalities as well as vulnerabilities, it becomes increasingly important to

try to understand, from a broad perspective, the costs as well as the beneﬁts

such technologies can be expected to introduce.

Smart grid often refers to the shift in electrical generation from centralized

to decentralized including the incorporation of energy storage, renewable gen-

eration, and bidirectional power ﬂow. While this decentralization may be a

deﬁning goal for a smart grid [3], the process of integrating the enabling digital

technologies occurs incrementally due to reliability and economic constraints

of the vast existing system of electricity generation and transmission. Many

diﬀerent digital technologies can or might be used to enable desired grid func-

tionalities [4]. However, each of these technologies might introduce potential

entry points for adversaries [5, 6]. Thus, it is of paramount importance to

carefully consider how funding might best be allocated to defend desired grid

functionalities against cyberattacks [7]. Ideally, the allocation of limited cyber

defense spending among various digitally-enabled grid functionalities should be

applied before widespread integration of the enabling technologies within the

system.

Cybersecurity budgeting and spending practices often suggest prioritizing

defense spending based on the criticality of digital assets but seldom explain

how to determine the amount of security spending to apply to each asset. Ex-

2

isting methods for defending against digital information system cyberattacks

(e.g., monitoring, discovering, patching vulnerabilities) usually assume poten-

tially high but nevertheless bounded costs associated with successful attacks

[8, 9]. Real-world incidents against cyber-enabled infrastructures, however, have

the potential to cost not only potentially recoverable money but also irrecover-

able lives. This makes a broad understanding of eﬀective cyber defense vital.

Building on the work of Gordon and Loeb [8], this work develops a framework for

estimating the net economic beneﬁts and costs associated with defending digi-

tally enabled technologies against cyberattacks on cyber-physical energy systems

[10].

2. Assessing Digital Beneﬁts and Costs

In this article, the analysis of digital control and monitoring functions pre-

sumes as a base state the existence of a hypothetical functioning power grid

which contains various digital technologies. These technologies are assessed in

light of the most recent understanding of expenses and beneﬁts associated with

them, and in particular, the costs (and potential costs) associated with cyber-

attacks including defending against them.

Central to our analysis is the concept of a grid digital functionality (GDF).

A GDF is regarded as any digital technology, or any combination of digital

technologies, that can be integrated into a power grid and potentially provide

or enable a useful service to either an owning utility or grid customer (or both).

The emphasis in identifying a GDF is based on its potential use in cyberat-

tacks. In general, a given GDF might be an integral part of several types of

cyberattacks. For example, residential smart meters which provide wireless dig-

ital residential power monitoring capabilities (considered as a GDF) can reduce

labor costs for utility companies, but they can potentially be used in several

types of attacks, e.g., pricing cyberattacks and energy theft [11]. Strategically

located synchrophasors within a grid can provide a useful monitoring capabil-

ity for potential operator intervention [12]. Such a monitoring capability is

also considered a GDF, but distinct from an automated monitoring and con-

3

trol capability obtained by directly linking synchrophasors with certain ﬂexible

alternating current transmission system (FACTS) control devices via a digital

communication channel. Such an automated combination of monitoring and

control is considered a distinct GDF because it has potentially distinct vulner-

abilities. Similarly, a digital control device which acts directly in response to

analog inputs is regarded as oﬀering yet another GDF. Another example in-

cludes residential wiﬁ-enabled thermostats that provide a GDF of homeowner

convenience but by so doing introduce yet another possible avenue for attacking

the grid.

Some GDFs might be dependent on the presence of other GDFs. For in-

stance, a GDF that permits control or monitoring of a substation condition,

but only via digital commands from a control center, is dependent on the ex-

istence of that digital command functionality. Indeed, many GDFs rely on the

existence of fast, accurate, reliable and secure digital communication channels.

The increasing incorporation of bidirectional power ﬂows where once only uni-

directional ﬂows existed requires precise, near-real-time monitoring of power

quality at many locations. The ability of utility customers to feed locally gen-

erated power back to the utility is enabled by the GDF of precise power quality

measurements (via phasor measurement units), but this GDF depends on the

existence of digital communication channels that are themselves GDFs. There

are several types of digital communication channels, each with its own beneﬁts

and costs, and selection of appropriate communication channels is crucial to

cost-beneﬁt analyses of GDFs that depend on them. False data injection at-

tacks and denial of service attacks that exploit weaknesses in digital communi-

cation channels can obviate any beneﬁts of GDFs dependent on these channels.

Highly secure, low latency channels are always desirable, but these qualities

have associated costs [13, 14, 10]. In particular, successful cyberattacks against

communication channels can eliminate the beneﬁts of all GDFs that depend on

them.

Let F denote the set of all GDFs associated with a smart grid. For each

x ∈ F a method is described for determining the expected net beneﬁt that x

4

provides to the grid. The expected net beneﬁt of x is expressed as the increase

in value provided by x less the expected value of the costs and potential costs

associated with x.

It might be easiest to assign dollar values to digital technology beneﬁts and

expenses from the perspective of electric utilities. However, a more comprehen-

sive approach would incorporate more general societal beneﬁts and expenses in

these valuations. For example, from their earliest deployments, residential smart

meters have met stiﬀ opposition from citizen groups on a number of grounds.

Aside from concerns related to potentially hacked smart meters, many organi-

zations have also noted privacy considerations and potential health risks due to

radio frequency radiation, among other concerns [15]. Actual worst-case costs

associated with potential unintended consequences of smart meter deployment

are diﬃcult to estimate, as are the likelihoods that these consequences will be

realized.

For the GDF of smart meters, as well as many other GDFs, one of several

possible ways of estimating such costs and likelihoods might be to convene

a panel of experts with diverse backgrounds and task the panel to arrive at

consensus values (under the direction, perhaps, of elected representatives). This

could be done within a more general context of defending modern grids against

many types of threats including, e.g., threats posed by natural or malicious

electromagnetic pulses, direct physical attacks on grid components, disruption

or elimination of GPS service, etc. A broad perspective like this might lead to

contingency plans for cases where, despite best eﬀorts, signiﬁcant power outages

develop and persist for extended periods of time.

A GDF can oﬀer many potential beneﬁts. The North American Synchropha-

sor Initiative (NASPI), for example, issued a report listing more than ten ben-

eﬁts oﬀered by synchrophasors [12]. It is safe to assume that the electric utility

industry is in the best position to calculate the beneﬁts of GDFs, with the caveat

that their calculations should be subject to appropriate public oversight. Given

a GDF x, the total value of the beneﬁts expected to accrue from its deployment

is denoted as Ben(x). Direct costs, denoted DirCosts(x), associated with x,

5

such as purchase and maintenance costs, is similarly assumed to be calculated

by the electric industry.

Other expenses associated with GDFs could often be more diﬃcult to deﬁne

and estimate than direct costs, and might be better estimated probabilistically.

Here, we consider two types of such expenses based on whether those expenses

are directly related to cyberattacks.

Let C denote the set of cyberattacks that can potentially adversely aﬀect a

power grid. Induced destruction of equipment, power disruptions, and theft of

customer data will all be considered cyberattacks. As new digital technologies

(such as Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices) interact with the grid, new attack

possibilities are introduced, so the set C should be expected to expand over

time.

Let N denote the set of non-cyber attack-related adverse events or cost im-

positions that might accrue due to inclusion of GDFs. These expenses can also

be quite varied, including such things as storm-related damage to digital equip-

ment, physical attacks on digital communication devices, and costs imposed by

regulatory requirement compliance.

Given any GDF x ∈ F , let Cx ∈ C denote the attacks directly against

x, i.e., that do not rely on attacks on a diﬀerent GDF. For each cyberattack

j ∈ Cx, let xj represent an attack of type j that uses the functionality x.

Let Cyb(xj) denote the monetary value of a successful attack of type j using

x together with the costs incurred attempting to defend x against j. These

defensive costs can be quite substantial. Cyber defense spending is probably

the most determinative factor in successful defense against cyberattacks, as the

2017 cyberattack in Ukraine seems to indicate. Typically, large companies spend

from 3% to 17% of their information technology (IT) budgets on cyber defense,

with 8% to 10% usually being adequate to “achieve a lot of security” [16]. A

recent study found that ﬁnancial services on average spend 10% of their IT

budgets on cybersecurity, approximately 0.2% to 0.9% of company revenue [17].

One percent of the $9.5 billion spent annually on IT by JPMorgan Chase is $95

million [18]. Most companies, even very large ones, would probably prefer not

6

to waste even a single percent of their IT spending, especially when it could be

more eﬀectively spent shoring up underfunded aspects of cyber defense. It is

therefore important to try to determine a point at which useful cybersecurity

spending becomes wasteful spending.

Let P (xj) denote the probability that an attack j ∈ Cx will succeed, given

the grid’s existing cyber defenses and skill levels of potential adversaries. Then

the expected cost due to cyberattacks directly against x is given by the sum-
mation (cid:80)

P (xj) Cyb(xj).

j∈Cx

Similarly, given a GDF x ∈ F and adverse event k ∈ N , let xk denote

the potential impact of k on x. Let Noncyb(xk) denote the monetary value of

k on x. If the functionality x is determined not to be relevant to k, e.g., if x

represents a software functionality and k represents radio frequency interference,

then Noncyb(xk) = 0. Let P (xk) denote the probability that the adverse event

k will impact functionality x. Then the expected cost due to non-cyber adverse
eﬀects is given by the summation (cid:80)

k∈N P (xk) Noncyb(xk). The expected net

beneﬁt (ENB) of the GDF x can now be expressed as

ENB(x) = Ben(x) − DirCosts s(x)

(cid:88)

P (xj) Cyb (xj)

j∈Cx
(cid:88)

P (xk) Noncyb (xk)

−

−

k∈N

(1)

The inﬂuence on ENB(x) of expenditures on cyber defense can now be deter-

mined by noticing that only the terms P (xj) Cyb(xj) appearing in the expression

for ENB(x) can be aﬀected by such expenditures. Let sx denote expenditures

intended to defend a functionality x against cyberattacks. Some ﬁxed value

of sx is assumed to apply in the expression for ENB(x). As sx increases, pre-

sumably the probabilities P (xj) of successful attacks against x will decrease.

However, the corresponding values Cyb(xj) will increase since these values in-

corporate the costs of cyber defense. Indeed, the summation of P (xj) Cyb(xj)

in the expression for ENB(x) in Eq. (1) could be written

7

Figure 1: Expected net beneﬁt derived from expected beneﬁt.

f (sx) =

(cid:88)

j∈Cx

Psx (xj) Cybsx (xj)

(2)

to more explicitly indicate its dependence on cyber defense spending. As a

function of sx, the ENB of reintroducing functionality x then becomes a constant

minus f (sx)

ENBCDS (sx) = Ben(x) − DirCosts(x)

(cid:88)

−

k∈N

P (xk) Noncyb (xk) − f (sx)

(3)

where ENBCDS(sx) is the ENB of reintroducing functionality x given the

amount sx of cyber defense spending (CDS) intended to defend it.

In [8], Gordon and Loeb derived, under a carefully explained set of assump-

tions, a similar function they designated ENBIS, meaning ENB from an invest-

ment in information security, which they demonstrated was strictly concave.

They obtained ENBIS from the function EBIS (expected beneﬁt of an invest-

ment in information security) illustrated in Figure 1.

The concave downward shape of EBIS was derived ultimately from the as-

8

Figure 2: A generic expected net beneﬁt of cyber defense spending (ENBCDS) function.

sumption that as investment in security increases, the probability of a suc-

cessful breach decreases, but at a decreasing rate. Gordon and Loeb deﬁned

ENBIS, the expected net beneﬁt of an investment in information security, as

EN BIS(z) = EBIS(z) − z; that is, the expected beneﬁt minus the cost of

achieving it. The investment level z∗ in Figure 1 maximizes EN BIS; it is the

level of investment which maximizes the expected beneﬁt of the investment less

its cost.

A less rigorous but perhaps more intuitive appeal to the law of diminishing

returns can illustrate why ENBCDS, as illustrated in Figure 2, has the same

downward-opening form as EBIS (and EN BIS).

Consider, for example, the situation where x refers to the GDF of remote

access to a power grid’s Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)

network. This functionality can enable more eﬃcient control of the grid by legit-

imate power system operators but, as occurred in the 2015 attack on Ukraine’s

power grid [19], it also provides potential SCADA access to attackers. For this

x, sx represents the expenditure on cyber defense eﬀorts directly against illegit-

imate remote SCADA access.

The mere introduction of remote SCADA access, with no cyber defense at

all, clearly renders the grid more vulnerable than it had been. With zero spend-

ing on cyber defense, i.e., with sx = 0, the “expected beneﬁt” of introducing

remote SCADA access is actually an expected loss, i.e., ENBCDS(sx) < 0. Sev-

9

Figure 3: Comparing grid digital functionalities.

eral cybersecurity measures can be and typically are instituted to try to thwart

unauthorized access to a utility’s SCADA network. A ﬁrewall can be installed

to segregate the utility’s corporate network from its SCADA network, but a

ﬁrewall can be defeated by determined attackers. Various levels of multi-factor

and user (and grid device [20]) authentication can be employed to deny access to

unauthorized personnel (e.g., demanding usernames and passwords with SMS

two-factor authentication, then demanding physical ID cards, then requiring ﬁn-

gerprint scans), each successive level enhancing security, but never completely

ensuring impenetrability. Additional measures could be taken, some entailing

very signiﬁcant additional expenditure (e.g., quantum authentication). Expen-

ditures initially result in increased values of ENBCDS(sx), peaking at some

value corresponding to an expenditure s∗

x, but beyond that level of spending,

the spending itself (intended to thwart myriad remaining attack types in J)

outweighs the expected gain in security. By analogy, after a homeowner has in-

stalled a certain number of diﬀerent types of locks on a door, a would-be burglar

will most likely look for a diﬀerent door or a window.

Each GDF in F has a concave ENBCDS curve, and comparing curves for the

GDFs in F can provide insight into determining where best to allocate limited

cyber defense spending. For example, Figure 3 shows notionally three ENBCDS

curves for three hypothetical GDFs in F , labeled x, y, and z. In Figure 3, s

10

represents general cyber defense spending; sA

x , sA

y , and sA

z depict the actual

levels of cyber defense spending directly on GDFs x, y, and z, respectively.

Since ENBCDS(sz) < 0 always, it makes no economic sense to invest in z at

all, so z should, with current understanding of that digital functionality, not be

used. Economic considerations alone, however, might sometimes be overridden

by other sociological factors. For instance, if z represents the functionality of

residential wiﬁ-enabled thermostats, then z is not a functionality that utilities

themselves can eliminate. There may be insuﬃcient political will to legislate

against their use, or to hold responsible the manufacturers of wiﬁ-enabled ther-

mostats for their potential misuse, in which case the spending level sA

z (not

necessarily borne entirely by utility companies) might be most appropriate in

the sense that it minimizes the expected loss to society due to the use of z.

As increasing numbers of consumer and industrial IoT devices like wiﬁ-enabled

thermostats and AC controllable loads impinge on power grids, increased atten-

tion to the likelihood of potential losses due to the types of cyberattacks they

enable will become necessary[21].

If z represents a digital functionality that could be replaced with an equiva-

lent analog functionality that currently exists, or could economically be devel-

oped and deployed, then that analog functionality should be given consideration

as a replacement for z. If z represents a GDF that is inappropriate for the given

market (e.g., power injections from residential solar systems to a utility that is

abundantly supplied by geothermal sources) then z should simply be recognized

as an inapplicable functionality for that market.

Notice that with the actual levels of spending on GDFs x and y, no net

expected beneﬁt is realized. With any small increase in cyber defense spending

for GDF y, some net expected beneﬁt will be realized, which is not necessarily

true for GDF x. However, if twice the actual spending level as currently ex-

ists for GDF x is available to be added to the spending on any GDF, greater

net expected beneﬁt would be realized by applying that spending to GDF x

than to GDF y. Dependencies between the GDFs x and y, if any, can also be

important in interpreting Figure 3. For example, if the functionality y is far

11

more susceptible to successful attack if a prior attack against functionality x

has occurred, then it might be best to divert all spending on y to x and/or

other GDFs, depending on their ENBCDS curves and actual spending levels.

3. Hypothetical Case Study: Unauthorized SCADA Remote Access

In 2015, a successful cyberattack was accomplished against the Ukrainian

power grid by gaining access remotely to the grid’s SCADA network [19]. This

mode of attack could not have been accomplished had remote access not been

provided. Allowing remote access might create the following potential beneﬁts

for a similar hypothetical grid: allow increased response time to emerging grid

conditions; reduce overall labor costs; and increase safety of utility personnel

(e.g., during adverse weather events). Monetary values for these beneﬁts and

several others could be calculated by a utility company and added, giving the

total beneﬁt Ben(x) the utility expects to realize from x, the GDF of remote

SCADA access. Similarly, the utility can calculate the direct costs of instituting

remote SCADA access. These might include costs for hardware and software,

such as dedicated ﬁrewalls, monitoring systems and cell phones for employees,

but only for those costs not directly in support of cybersecurity. These costs

are denoted as DirCosts(x).

Allowing remote access clearly opens a door for cyberattacks. In some instal-

lations, only monitoring of grid conditions can be accomplished, but in others,

such as the Ukraine attack, surreptitious actors can perform certain control

functions [22]. Unauthorized access of any type, however, has the potential to

be quite costly, and preventive measures are invariably taken to reduce the like-

lihood of such access. Some of those measures were mentioned above, but others

exist as well, and the amount of spending on each will inﬂuence how eﬀective the

overall defense against unauthorized access will be. This level of spending was

presented in Eq. (2) where with increasing sx the probability Psx (xj) generally

decreases and Cybsx (xj) increases.

A remote access capability probably introduces little additional cost due

12

Figure 4: ENBCDS for remote SCADA access.

to non-cyberattack-related adverse events other than perhaps the cost due to

potential failure of its implementing software due to the additional complex-

ity it introduces. Perhaps these costs can be combined into a single term

P (xk) Noncyb(xk) where now the cost k ∈ N is basically careful software engi-

neering. The ENBCDS could in this hypothetical case be expressed:

ENBCDS (sx) = Ben(x) − DirCosts(x)

− P (xk) Noncyb (xk) − f (sx)

(4)

Depending on actual numerical values which could probably only be obtained

through cooperation with aﬀected utilities, ENBCDS(sx) might reasonably be

represented by Figure 4.

It is conceivable that the level of spending in Ukraine used to protect against

attacks using remote SCADA access was comparable to the level sA

x depicted

in Figure 4. If additional cyber defense funding was available, some of it might

gainfully have been used to approach the level s∗

x. If the optimal level of spending

s∗
x was prohibitively high, or if the shape of the curve ENBCDS(sx) was sub-

stantially diﬀerent, the Ukrainian utilities might better have decided to forego

remote SCADA access entirely, or at least control functions enabled by remote

SCADA access.

Among the cyberattacks in C are those that rely on remote access to attack

13

another GDF. In the case of the Ukrainian attack, for example, once the attack-

ers gained SCADA network access, they attacked serial-to-ethernet converters

used to process commands from the SCADA network to substation control sys-

tems [19]. These converters provided the GDF of enabling remote re-closing of

circuit breakers by grid operators following a blackout. The attackers remotely

replaced ﬁrmware in the converters with malware to basically disable the con-

verters. The utility dealt with the inability to remotely re-close breakers by

dispatching personnel to re-close the breakers manually. Such manual fallback

measures should be recognized as potentially necessary, and the costs associated

with them should not be ignored when determining ENBCDS(sx).

4. Hypothetical Case Study: Smart Meter Deployment

In this case study, we assume that all residential power metering in a hy-

pothetical grid is accomplished using smart meters that can be wirelessly mon-

itored and controlled. Such a metering infrastructure, when functioning as

intended, has several beneﬁts for residential customers as well as electric util-

ities. Some of the more important beneﬁts include more detailed feedback to

customers of usage (permitting possible customer savings); reduced number of

outages; elimination of costly manual meter reading; and enablement of dy-

namic pricing by utility companies, reducing power production costs. In this

hypothetical case, the beneﬁt Ben(x) of the GDF x of smart meter deployment

should probably explicitly include possible customer beneﬁts, but again Ben(x)

should probably best be calculated by the utility company.

A smart meter infrastructure entails several apparent direct costs and some

signiﬁcant ancillary or potential costs not directly related to cybersecurity. Di-

rect costs might include the cost of the smart meters themselves; the cost of

smart meter installation; the cost of IT to collect, store, and process metering

data; and the costs of maintaining the smart meters and all their associated

software. Such costs can be combined to yield DirCosts(x). Among the poten-

tial costs not directly related to cybersecurity and which entail higher degrees of

14

uncertainty are lawsuits arising from illnesses allegedly caused by smart meter

radiation and from ﬁres allegedly caused by malfunctioning smart meters [23];

replacement of equipment due to storm-related damage; and costs of software

upgrades, if needed, to facilitate demand response potentialities aﬀorded by fu-

ture deployment of internet-connected domestic appliances. Eventualities like

these are included in the set K and their combined expected cost is given by
(cid:80)

k∈N P (xk) Noncyb(xk).
In the case of smart meters, in part because of their ubiquitous deploy-

ment, the set Cx of cyberattacks directly against smart meters might be par-

ticularly signiﬁcant. The types of attacks enabled by smart meter deployment

include misuse of meter functionality by customers (e.g., for incorrectly reduced

billing); unauthorized and perhaps malicious disconnection of selected customer

service; theft, misuse, or corruption of collected customer data; and malicious

widespread disconnection of customer service. These are among the attacks

in Cx that need to have probabilities of success associated with them. The
combined expected cost of all cyberattacks is (cid:80)

P (xj) Cyb(xj).

j∈Cx

The ENBCDS in this hypothetical case can be expressed as in Eq. (3) where

f (sx) is given by Eq. (2) and with Psx (xj) generally decreasing and Cybsx (xj)
generally increasing as sx increases. The function ENBCDS(sx) might be rep-

resented by a curve similar to the curve labeled x in Figure 5. This graph also

contains a curve labeled y which might represent the ENBCDS on deployed

digital protective relays. Some digital protective relays can be used without

remote communication; the main cyber defense expense for these devices might

be ensuring against resident malicious hardware or software implants.

Intu-

itively, small cyber defense expenditures on digital protective relays might be

expected to provide greater net beneﬁt than the same level of expenditures on

smart meters, which probably entail greater cyber vulnerability. If valid, the

curves in Figure 5 suggest that the amount sA

x − s∗

x of cyber defense spending

should be diverted from smart meters to digital protective relays. Of course,

many other possible GDFs are not depicted in Figure 5, and the levels of actual

and optimal spending on each of them will need to be considered in any spend-

15

Figure 5: Comparison of hypothetical ENBCDS curves.

ing decisions. Nevertheless, Figure 5 illustrates a potential beneﬁt of trying to

determine ENBCDS curves for all grid digital functionalities actually employed

or under consideration.

5. Conclusions

Modern smart grids oﬀer several types of digital control and monitoring of

electric power transmission and distribution that enable greater eﬃciency and

integrative functionality than traditional power grids. These beneﬁts, however,

introduce greater complexity and greatly disrupt and expand the threat land-

scape. The number of vulnerabilities is increasing as grid-connected devices

proliferate. The potential costs to society of these vulnerabilities are diﬃcult

to determine, as are their likelihoods of successful exploitation. In this article,

we presented a method for comparing the net economic beneﬁts and costs of

the various cyber functionalities associated with smart grids from the perspec-

tive of cyberattack vulnerabilities and defending against them. The economic

considerations of cyber defense spending suggest the existence of optimal levels

of expenditures, which might vary among digital functionalities. Appropriate

levels of defensive spending on each digital functionality should take into con-

sideration the defensive requirements of all digital functionalities, the funding

available for defensive measures, and the concerns of all electric power produc-

ers, suppliers, and consumers. We illustrated hypothetical case studies on how

16

digital functionalities can be assessed and compared with respect to the costs

of defending them from cyberattacks.

References

[1] 116th Congress,

S.174,

S.174

- Securing Energy Infrastructure

Act,

[Online]:

https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/

senate-bill/174/text (2019).

[2] S. McLaughlin, C. Konstantinou, X. Wang, L. Davi, A.-R. Sadeghi, M. Ma-

niatakos, R. Karri, The cybersecurity landscape in industrial control sys-

tems, Proceedings of the IEEE 104 (5) (2016) 1039–1057.

[3] C. Konstantinou, Towards a secure and resilient all-renewable energy grid

for smart cities, IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine (2021) 1–8doi:10.

1109/MCE.2021.3055492.

[4] A. Nordling, S. P¨adam, C. af Bur´en, P. J¨orgensen, Social costs and beneﬁts

of smart grid technologies, ISGAN (2018).

[5] M.-E. Pat´e-Cornell, M. Kuypers, M. Smith, P. Keller, Cyber risk man-

agement for critical infrastructure: a risk analysis model and three case

studies, Risk Analysis 38 (2) (2018) 226–241.

[6] A. Keliris, C. Konstantinou, M. Maniatakos, GE Multilin SR protective

relays passcode vulnerability, Black Hat USA (2017).

[7] C. Konstantinou, M. Maniatakos, Impact of ﬁrmware modiﬁcation attacks

on power systems ﬁeld devices, in: 2015 IEEE International Conference

on Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), 2015, pp. 283–288.

doi:10.1109/SmartGridComm.2015.7436314.

[8] L. A. Gordon, M. P. Loeb, The economics of information security invest-

ment, ACM Transactions on Information and System Security (TISSEC)

5 (4) (2002) 438–457.

17

[9] L. A. Gordon, M. P. Loeb, L. Zhou, Integrating cost–beneﬁt analysis into

the NIST Cybersecurity Framework via the Gordon–Loeb Model, Journal

of Cybersecurity 6 (1), tyaa005 (03 2020). doi:10.1093/cybsec/tyaa005.

URL https://doi.org/10.1093/cybsec/tyaa005

[10] I. Zografopoulos, J. Ospina, X. Liu, C. Konstantinou, Cyber-physical en-

ergy systems security: Threat modeling, risk assessment, resources, met-

rics, and case studies, IEEE Access 9 (2021) 29775–29818. doi:10.1109/

ACCESS.2021.3058403.

[11] C. Konstantinou, M. Maniatakos, F. Saqib, S. Hu, J. Plusquellic, Y. Jin,

Cyber-physical systems: A security perspective, in: 2015 20th IEEE Euro-

pean Test Symposium (ETS), IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–8.

[12] A. Silverstein, M. Weimar, J. Petersen, The value proposition for syn-

chrophasor technology: Itemizing and calculating the beneﬁts from syn-

chrophasor technology use version 1.0, report, North American Syn-

chroPhasor Initiative (NASPI) (2015).

[13] A. Pal, A. Jolfaei, K. Kant, A fast prekeying-based integrity protection for

smart grid communications, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics

17 (8) (2021) 5751–5758. doi:10.1109/TII.2020.3030799.

[14] C. Xenofontos, et al., Consumer, commercial and industrial iot (in)security:

Attack taxonomy and case studies, IEEE Internet of Things Journal (2021)

1–1doi:10.1109/JIOT.2021.3079916.

[15] M. Wigan, Smart meter technology tradeoﬀs, in: 2012 IEEE Conference

on Technology and Society in Asia (T&SA), IEEE, 2012, pp. 1–8.

[16] R. A. Clarke, R. K. Knake, The Fifth Domain: defending our country, our

companies, and ourselves in the age of cyber threats, Penguin Press, 2019.

[17] K. Crawley, How to justify your cybersecurity budget,

[Online]:

https://cybersecurity.att.com/blogs/security-essentials/

how-to-justify-your-cybersecurity-budget (2019).

18

[18] CB

Insights,

Jpmorgan

chase

competitive

strategy

tear-

down:

how the

bank

stacks

up

on

ﬁntech & innova-

tion,

[Online]:

https://www.cbinsights.com/research/

jpmorgan-chase-competitive-strategy-teardown-expert-intelligence/

(2018).

[19] K. Zetter,

Inside

the

cunning, unprecedented hack of ukraine’s

power

grid,

[Online]:

https://www.wired.com/2016/03/

inside-cunning-unprecedented-hack-ukraines-power-grid/ (2016).

[20] I. Zografopoulos, C. Konstantinou, Derauth: a battery-based authentica-

tion scheme for distributed energy resources, in: 2020 IEEE Computer

Society Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI), IEEE, 2020, pp. 560–567.

[21] Threat Post, Newsmaker

interview:

Bruce

schneier

on phys-

ical

cyber

threats,

[Online]:

https://threatpost.com/

newsmaker-interview-schneier-on-physical-cyberthreats/140491/

(2019).

[22] I. Zografopoulos, C. Konstantinou, N. G. Tsoutsos, D. Zhu, R. Broad-

water, Security assessment and impact analysis of cyberattacks in inte-

grated T&D power systems,

in: Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on

Modeling and Simulation of Cyber-Physical Energy Systems, MSCPES

’21, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2021.

doi:10.1145/3470481.3472706.

[23] J. Hart, Smart meter lawsuits, [Online]: https://stopsmartmeters.org/

smart-meter-lawsuits/ (2015).

19

