International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.12, No.3, August 2020 

DEVELOPING ENTERPRISE CYBER  
SITUATIONAL AWARENESS  

Christopher L. Gorham 

Capitol Technology University, USA 

ABSTRACT 

This  paper  will  examine  why  its  become  important  for  organizations  to  develop  an comprehensive 
Information Technology (IT) Modernization strategy that focuses on improving their business process and 
protecting  their  network  infrastructure  by  leveraging  modern-day cybersecurity  tools.  Most  of  the  topic 
will focus on the U.S. Department of Defense’s (DOD) strategy towards improving their network security 
defenses for the department and the steps they’ve taken at the agency level where components under DOD 
such as DISA (The Defense Information Systems Agency) are working towards adding tools that provides 
additional capabilities  in  the  cyber  space.  This  approach  will  be  analyzed  to  determine  if  DOD  goals 
address any of their vulnerabilities towards protecting their networks. One of the agencies under the DOD 
umbrella called  DISA  (The  Defense  Information  Systems  Agency)  provides  DOD  a  template  on  how 
to build  a  network  that  relies  upon layers  of  security to  help it combat  cyber  attacks  against  its network. 
Whether that provides an effective solution to DOD remains a question due to the many components that 
operate under its direction. Managing these networks is the principle responsibilities for the Department 
of Defense. Nevertheless, it does demonstrates that there are tools available to help DOD build an strong 
enterprise  cyber  network  of  situational  awareness that  strengthens  the  ability  to  protect  their  network 
infrastructure.  

KEYWORDS  

cyber security, cloud, network infrastructure  

1.  INTRODUCTION 

It’s generally acceptable that the strategic objective of any IT modernization plan  constructed by 
the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) should allow itself to take advantage of the benefits that 
enhances it’s ability to innovate.  DOD is one  of the largest  federal agencies in the U.S. federal 
government.  The  organizational  structure  of  the  DOD  was  created  as  the  successor  to  the 
National  Military  Establishment  in  1947  under  the  National  Security  Act  of  1947  (50  U.S.C. 
401). In 1949, DOD was established as an executive department of the U.S. Federal Government 
by the National Security Act Amendments of 1949 under code 5 U.S.C. 101. The Department of 
Defense exist as an organization under the President, in his role as the Commander in Chief and 
is lead by the Secretary of Defense who provides direction and control over matters that includes 
military  functions  for  the  Army,  Navy,  Air  Force  and  the  Joint  Chiefs  of  Staff.  These  DOD 
components  provides  operational  military  advice  under  the  commands  for  various  defense 
agencies that were established for specific purposes. 

James Proctor writes in his blog for the Inteq Group, that one of the “overarching benefits of IT 
modernization  is  providing  the  platform  to  transform  business  processes  that  enable  the 
execution  of  a  business  strategy”  (Proctor,  2019).  Mr.  Proctor  suggests  that  this  allows  an 
organization to become effective in creating a value for it’s customer as well as efficiencies for 

DOI: 10.5121/ijmit.2020.12301                                                                                                                       1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.12, No.3, August 2020 

the business overall (Proctor, 2019). When developing a strategy towards leveraging the benefits 
of IT modernization, organizations need to consider how to improve their process. 

It’s  critically  important  that  organizations  such  as  DOD  should  develop  an  Information 
Technology  (IT)  Modernization  strategy  that  focuses  on  three  critical  elements  towards 
improving their business process and cybersecurity: 

1)  Consolidating Infrastructure 
2)  Streamlining Processes 
3)  Strengthening the Workforce 

These  elements  are  strategic  goals  to  support  organizations  towards  achieving  their  mission 
objectives  by  leveraging  technology  to  gauge  their  effectiveness.  The  success  of  the  long-term 
approach towards this strategy  is dependent on the success of their short-term approach, which 
requires determining their current and future needs. Businesses will need to develop a partnership 
with  the  tech  community  to  determine  how  to  improve  business  process  while  measuring  their 
effectiveness and user satisfaction. This also includes how to reduce costs and wasteful spending 
while  improving  cyber  security  and  interoperability  methods.  Ultimately,  the  goal  for  any 
organization  that  is  focusing  on  an  agile,  fast  and  responsive  to  the  delivery  of  their  IT 
capabilities that is robust and maintains the highest level of cyber security. 

As technology becomes more centric in the lives of people in the 21st century, organizations are 
developing their business strategies around being efficient at delivery services or products in the 
hands  of  consumers.  But  with  being  efficient  leads  to  more  business  processes  becoming 
automated. Automation is the driving force behind business information systems producing data 
that allows organizations to learn more about their customers, consumer or users. It allows them 
to  gain  an  understanding  of  the  data  through  metrics  that  measures  the  performances  of  their 
process internally and externally. However, the quantity of data being produced by information 
systems can grow at an increasingly accelerated rate if not measured properly. Redundant data is 
often one of the results in managing data when different systems have to communicate with each 
other.  This  can  sometimes  lead  to  data  redundancies  where  one  system  is  collecting  the  same 
data  it  stores  in  its  own  database.  To  reduce  this  inefficiency,  information  technology  (IT) 
professionals  must  establish  a  process  that  reduces  redundancies  and  inefficiencies  from  old 
legacy systems while developing new and modernized software applications that opens the door 
to more effective automation. For this task to be accomplished, organizations need to address the 
principal  challenges  they  face  in  determining  what  areas  of  their  system  will  need  automation 
and also determining the workforce ability in meeting their automation objectives. 

Automation presents many challenges to overcome to implement successfully. This research will 
focus on some  of the challenges organizations will need to address if they are to mitigate to be 
efficient in managing their business process. Those challenges include analyzing what areas need 
automation,  the  relationship  between  the  client,  business  user  and  IT  department,  the  different 
roles in IT that are needed to build a successful system and developing an end to end process that 
keeps  the  system  updated  from  cyber  attacks.  All  these  principal  challenges  will  be  reduce  or 
minimize  from  the  standpoint  of  addressing  inefficiencies  of  the  interfaces  between  enterprise 
application systems. 

2.  TECHNOLOGY AND INFORMATION AWARENESS 

One  of  the  benefits  for  DOD’s moving  to  the  cloud  is  the  opportunity  to  leverage  the  services 
that  will  enhance  their  capabilities such  as  managing  data  and  analytics.  DISA’s  solution  may 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.12, No.3, August 2020 

offer  a  framework  for  other organizations  outside  of  DOD  that  takes  advantages  of  innovative 
cloud solutions tools to protect their network infrastructure from cyber attacks.  This is yet to be 
establish and will be incorporated into the review and analysis. 
If DOD is committed towards building a modernized cyber defense system, then it must consider 
the  risks  associated  with  such  a  strategy.  This  may  include  the  difficulty  of  migrating  from 
legacy  systems  that  many  of  it’s  components  rely  upon  towards  managing  their  data  on  the 
current network. However, there are other negative factors that come  into play that may hinder 
efforts for DOD to modernize their IT networks. 

3.  DOD’S DIGITAL ENTERPRISE STRATEGY 

DOD has developed  their Digital Modernization strategy  that presents it’s  goals and objectives 
while  aligning  their  digital  priorities  in  presenting  their  central  vision  of  creating  a  secure, 
coordinated,  transparent,  and  cost-effective  IT  architecture  (Barnett,  2019).  This  strategy  will 
allow DOD to transform data into actionable information and ensure dependable mission critical 
execution while dealing with the persistent threat of cyber warfare (Barnett, 2019). 

Some  of  the  top  priorities  that  stands  out  from  DOD’s  digital  modernization  strategy  are:  (1) 
Cybersecurity;  (2)  Artificial  Intelligence  (AI);  (3)  Cloud;  and  (4)  Command,  Control,  and 
Communications  (C3)  (Barnett,  2019).    These  priorities  will  help  guide  the  mission  towards 
advancing  mission  critical  goals  that  sets  forth  in  the  strategy  in  providing  (1)  Innovate  for 
Competitive  Advantage;  (2)  Optimize  for  Efficiencies  and  Improved  Capability;  (3)  Evolve 
Cybersecurity for an agile and Resilient Defense Posture; (4) Cultivate Talent for a Ready Digital 
Workforce (Barnett, 2019). 

DOD  hopes  their  Modernization  Strategy  will  align  with  their  high-level  goals  to  meet  the 
priorities of the agency’s leadership.  The strategy  will highlight the collaboration among DOD, 
their  industry  partners,  and  non-DOD  business  partners  (Barnett,  2019).  This  will  help  DOD 
leadership  understand  which  IT  investments  should  focus  on  how  to  enable  and  create  better 
solutions for the agency. The strategy  will represent a shift from an organization standpoint that 
will  allow  the  DOD  Chief  Information  Officer  (CIO)  to  oversee  IT  budget  requests  for 
modernization  efforts  while  developing within the framework  of  a comprehensive  management 
system(Barnett, 2019). 

Figure 1. Source: DoD Digital Modernization Strategy: FY 19-13 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.12, No.3, August 2020 

4.  ARMY PLANS TO FOLLOW NAVY, AIR FORCE IN OUTSOURCING MUCH 

OF ITS IT INFRASTRUCTURE 

One of the Department of Defense’s components, the Army, will soon undertake another strategy 
to  modernize  their  IT  infrastructure  into  the  next  generation.  The  Army,  along  with  the  Navy, 
will invest in the Enterprise-IT –as-a-Service platform for the purpose of consolidating their IT 
infrastructure and reducing the workforce head and costs. This approach follows DOD’s strategy 
of  modernizing  their  technology  to  improve  their  cyber  defenses  but  by  having  so  many 
components at the agency level  with their own infrastructure and IT workforce, a multi-phased 
approach  may  offer the best option. Currently, the  Army  has an estimate  of 70 percent of their 
routers, servers and  devices for end-users located in 288 world-wide facilities across the  world 
(Serbu,  2019).  That  number  is  close  to  90  percent  for  voice  communications,  according  to  an 
article written by Jared Sarbu titled “The Army plans to follow Navy, Air Force in outsourcing 
much  of  it’s  IT  infrastructure”.  The  Army’s  Chief  Information  Officer  (CIO),  LT.  Gen.  Bruce 
Crawford, estimates that on the current track of replacing all of the gear the Army has stored for 
it’s IT infrastructure will take until 2030 under the current modernization methodologies  (Serbu, 
2019). 

A  new  approach  was  considered  and  adopted  where  the  Army  would  instead  issue  an  RFI 
(Request For Information) for vendors to restructure their IT infrastructure in a quicker way that 
speeds up their modernization efforts (Serbu, 2019). The goal would be for the Army to plan out 
a “three pilot projects to test out the IT-as-a-service” model in 2019 to which the infrastructure 
will  be  operated  by  contractors  instead  of  government  personnel  (Serbu,  2019).  The  objective 
towards this approach if successful will be about delivering more effective IT services across the 
Army organization and serve as a model for success for DOD as a whole as they migrate their IT 
network to the cloud. 

5.  DEVELOPING A STRATEGY FOR CYBERSECURITY IN THE CLOUD 

DOD has constructed a plan towards consolidating all of their networks into an eco-system that 
should  be  able  to  provide  a  more  efficient  way  of  delivering  data.  This  effort  begins  with 
reducing their data centers from 770 to  less than 100(Insinna, 2013). That helps to reduce  cost 
while maintaining high-level performance for all remaining networks. DOD will also consolidate 
their  Network  Operating  Centers  from  65  to  25  while  transitioning  to  a  Joint  Enterprise 
Architecture via secure access for their employees (Insinna, 2013). 

To migrate to an enterprise cloud  infrastructure, DOD  will need to develop a plan to execute a 
strategy that streamlines standards for a cyber-secure cloud environment. This strategy will only 
leverage  commercial  cloud  platforms  that  meet  DOD’s  cyber  security  requirements.  This  will 
help DOD lay down the foundation of automation of many repetitive tasks that slows down the 
workforce.  Many  of  the  military  technical  tasks  can  be  targeted  for  automation  but  because  of 
additional cost measures, implementing this task can be burdensome. To address these liabilities, 
DOD  must  develop  a  strategic  plan  that  will  meet  the  needs  for  DOD  to  standardize  their  IT 
platform. 

In an effort to standardize their IT platforms, DOD will develop a platforms that centers around 
supporting  a  cloud-secure  environment.  This  will  help  them  to  use  a  unique  standard  for  the 
platforms  that  leverages  applications  that  stores  data  around  a  Common  Platform.  The 
“Common”  platform  consist  of  PaaS  (Platform-As-A-Service),  messaging  and 
identity 
management.  Together,  DOD  will  be  able  to  build  a  Common  Infrastructure  that  transports, 
facilitates  and  processing  data  and  files  in  secure  platform.  This  effort  will  build  the 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.12, No.3, August 2020 

infrastructural  foundation  towards  innovation  for  the  DOD  workforce.  But  some  realities  in 
regards  to  the  effect  of  these  efforts  to  modernize  their  network  will  most  likely  lead  to  a 
discussion on determining if automation if a benefit or consequence for the workforce. 

6.  THE EFFECT OF AUTOMATION ON THE WORKFORCE  

In an article written by James Bessen titled “Automation Reaction – What Happens To Workers 
At  Firms  That  Automate”,  he  states  that  the  impact  of  automation  on  workers  will  most  likely 
have an effect on  workers when firms increase the probability of  workers separating from their 
employers and decreases the  days they  worked  (James E. Bessen, 2019). Mr. Bessen based  his 
conclusion  off  measuring  automation  at  firms  that  studies  the  worker’s  impacts  of  automation 
from how it originated. Mr. Bessen worked with a research group to develop a methodology that 
combines event level study with analysis while leveraging the timing of “firm-level automation” 
to  identify  the  effects  on  the  workforce  (James  E.  Bessen,  2019).  He  then  focuses  on  the 
automation  events when they  occur across the non-financial sectors of the  economy in  order to 
identify a specific automation technology in isolation of other events (James E. Bessen, 2019).  

This  allows  him  to  measure  an  assortment  of  outcomes  that  identify  workers  who’ve  stayed 
employed  at  the  firm  during  the  years  surrounding  the  automation  event.  He  found  that 
automation  increases  the  probability  of  workers  leaving  their  employers  which  for  those  who 
stayed at least three years longer versus the separation of employment decreased in annual days 
worked. The effect led to a “5-year cumulative wage income loss” resulting of 8% of one year’s 
earnings (James E. Bessen, 2019). The results from wage income losses were disproportionately 
impacted by more senior workers and partially affected depending upon the benefit system of the 
employer.  Bessen’s  research  study  on  automation  focused  on  comparing  their  findings  from  a 
literature on mass layoffs that provided more detailed results of the effects of automation from a 
gradual standpoint to determine if automation displaces fewer workers than projected from other 
studies  conducted  (James  E.  Bessen,  2019).  While  his  findings  don’t  predict  the  “apocalyptic” 
outcome  of  mass  unemployment  it  does  show  that  automation  will  somewhat  have  a  negative 
impact on workers depending upon their type of work along with their seniority status at the firm 
they are employed (James E. Bessen, 2019). Based off those observations, it would be difficult to 
determine  on  a  widespread  scale  the  outcome  on  workers  as  automation  increases  across  the 
economy. 

7.  THE GENERATIONAL SHIFT FOR IT PROFESSIONALS 

As  a  result  of  technology’s  impact  on  automation  for  the  workforce,  the  way  people  perform 
their jobs will have a dramatic effect on the skills required to obtain the next-generation of jobs. 
In an article titled “The Generational Shift in IT Drives Change for IT Pros,”, Steve Cox suggests 
that the emergence of the cloud and other technologies have enables forces to bring about change 
to organizations and the IT workforce (Cox, 2018). The impact of cloud technologies have given 
businesses  a  bigger  role  in  determining  the  future  of  application  delivery  (Cox,  2018).  IT 
professionals also are partners with businesses because they play a key role in using “technology-
driven creativity to enable innovation” while simplifying business processes for the organization. 
The  IT  industry  is  moving  fast  towards  adopting  emerging  technologies  such  as  artificial 
intelligence, blockchain and the Internet of Things (IoT) that are built within the cloud  platform 
such as Amazon Web Services (AWS) and Microsoft’s Azure technologies (Cox, 2018). In order 
for businesses, governments such as DOD and the IT workforce in general to move forward, they 
must  be  partners  in  helping  their  stakeholders  develop an  innovate  approach  in  building  newer 
applications. This will require a level of understanding from  all parties that the way work being 
is defined will change in the future in addition to the skillsets necessary for workers to perform 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.12, No.3, August 2020 

their tasks. IT professionals specifically have to perform the critical part by staying in the loop on 
the  latest  technologies  (Cox,  2018).  Embracing  this  approach  will  provide  the  flexibilities  for 
organizations and government agencies such as DOD to respond to challenges in cyber warfare 
more quickly while maintaining their innovative approach in adopting emerging technologies. 

8.  ANALYSIS 

DOD’s Air Force CIO Dana Deasy spoke about the agency’s modernization efforts at a IT Day 
event in Washington last year (Vergun, 2019). Deasy spoke about how the digital modernization 
efforts  focuses  on  making  network  improvements,  control  and  communications  by  leveraging 
cloud computing and artificial intelligence (Vergun, 2019).Deasy also mentioned DOD’s efforts 
towards building out the Joint Enterprise Defense Infrastructure environment  which is it’s cloud 
computing platform that will be available for all DOD agencies offering all cloud-based services 
(Vergun, 2019). 

One  of  the  main  priorities  of  the  JEDI  contract  will  be  efforts  in  building  our  DOD’s  5G 
network.  DOD  plans  to  work  with  NATO  to  integrate  digital  modernization  planning  with 
partners that will develop proposals for 5G network dynamic spectrum sharing and start hosting 
5G  network  pilot  programs  at  selected  installations,  according  to  Deasy  (Vergun,  2019).Other 
milestones would include the  development of performance standards for supply-chain risk. This 
will begin by issuing a cyber workforce management strategy to ensure it’s compliance for 28 of 
30 cyber hygiene metrics to keep it’s data safe (Vergun, 2019). 

Whether  the  efforts  by  DOD  is  successful  or  not  will  depend  on  investments  made  in 
cybersecurity. The federal government shutdown in January 2019 actually represented a security 
risk  since  funding  stalled  during  dispute  and  prevented  any  important  work  from  being 
completed. Phil Goldstein wrote in a FedTech article titled “How Did the Government Shutdown 
Affect Federal Cybersecurity”, that critical cyber initiatives for security were put on hold during 
the  gov’t  shutdown  (Goldstein,  2019).  As  a  result,  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security’s 
(DHS) Cyber Security Office,  which  only became  operational  in November, wasn’t able to get 
operations fully up to  date and  had a difficult time  hiring cybersecurity  workers that needed to 
fill critical roles (Goldstein, 2019). 

This event demonstrated that the U.S. federal government’s budgeting process itself could cause 
problems  for  any  federal  agency  looking  to  modernize  their  IT  infrastructure.  The  process  is 
highly complicated due to the political process that often causes a stalemate.  The President and 
Congress have to be in agreement on the funding necessary for DOD to modernize their network 
infrastructure.  If  the  project  isn’t  funded  in  a  way  that  properly  addresses  all  vulnerable  areas, 
DOD risks their network becoming increasingly susceptible to cyber attacks, which could harm 
their  networks.  The  manpower  necessary  to  manage  the  network  could  be  costly  due  to  the 
required  skillsets  needed  to  modernize  and  future  proof  or  encrypting  their  data  against  cyber 
attacks. Developing a strategic plan that centers on outsourcing their infrastructure to the private 
sector  so  their  networks  can  help  leverage  modern  tools  to  rebuild  their  network  for  the  next 
generation.  This  will  provide  DOD  a  strategic  path  forward  in  combating  21st  century  cyber 
threats against their network while maintaining a foundation for the future. 

Another area of concern is how much of a factor is automation going to be for the workforce of 
DOD.  The  Army’s  approach  in  Serbu’s  article  takes  a  modernization  approach  in  re-
architecturing  their  network  for  the  future(Serbu,  2019).  As  Serbu  stated,  “the  Army  would 
instead  rely  upon  an  RFI  (Request  For  Information)  for  vendors  to  restructure  their  IT 
infrastructure  in  a  quicker  way  that  speeds  up  their  modernization  efforts  (Serbu,  2019).”  In 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.12, No.3, August 2020 

outsourcing  their  efforts  to  quickly  adopt  their  modernization  efforts,  the  effects  on  the 
workforce could be a major concern for IT workers looking to maintain and update their skills. 
New  technology  forces  workers  to  adopt  a  new  approach  in  keeping  up  with  the  ever  growing 
changes in the IT field.  

CONCLUSION 

DOD  will  need  to  analyze  this  shift  closely  to  determine  if  the  positions  that  currently  exist  in 
their workforce  meet the  demand  of the skills necessary to  modernize their infrastructure. This 
will eventually lead to a discussion of the quality of training DOD is willing to provide for their 
workers as well as incentives to attract and maintain the talent level of their IT workforce. These 
kinds of efforts by any organization will always resolve one problem area but create a new one in 
a  cause-and-effect  type  of  scenario.  DOD  will  need  to  confront  these  challenges  while 
maintaining an approach that balances their efforts to modernize their network and adopting new 
methods towards building a modern IT workforce for the future. 

REFERENCES  

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

(Ioannis  Ginnakopoulos,  2018).  “Cloud  application  deployment  with  transient  failure  recovery.”  et 
al. 
(2018) 
7:11https://doi.org/10.1186/s13677-018-0112-9 

of  Cloud  Computing:  Advances,  Systems 

and  Applications 

Journal 

(André  Müller,  2017)André  Müller  ,  André  Ludwig  and  Bogdan  Franczyk.  “Data  security  in 
decentralized cloudsystems – system comparison, requirements analysis and organizational Levels.” 
Journal of Cloud Computing: Advances,Systems and Applications (2017) 6:15 DOI 10.1186/s13677-
017-0082-3  

(Lambert  J.M.  Nieuwenhuis,  2017)  “The  shift  to  Cloud  Computing:  The  impact  of  disruptive 
technology 
homepage: 
www.elsavier.com/locate/techfore.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2017.09.037 

ecosystem.” 

enterprise 

Journam 

software 

business 

the 

on 

(James  E.  Bessen,  2019).  “Automatic  Reaction  –  What  Happens  to  Workers  at  Firms  that 
Automate?”  CPB  Netherlands  Bureau  for  Economic  Policy  Analysis  and  Erasmus  University 
Rotterdam, w.van.den.berge@cpb.nl 

(Proctor, 
https://www.inteqgroup.com/blog/benefits-of-it-modernization 

IT  Modernization. 

Benefits 

2019). 

of 

(2019). 

Retrieved 

from: 

(Serbu,  2019).  Army  plans  to  follow  Navy,  Air  Force  in  outsourcing much  of  its  IT  infrastructure. 
(2019).  Retrieved  from:  https://federalnewsnetwork.com/army/2019/03/army-plans-to-follow-navy-
air-force-in-outsourcing-much-of-its-it-infrastructure/ 

(Goldstein,  2019).  How  Did  the  Government  Shutdown  Affect  Federal  Cybersecurity.  (2019). 
Retrieved  from:  https://fedtechmagazine.com/article/2019/02/how-did-government-shutdown-affect-
federal-cybersecurity 

(Roberta  Rincon,  Phd.,  2019).  “Is There  a  Shortage  of  STEM  Jobs  to  STEM  Graduates”  Retrieved 
from:https://alltogether.swe.org/2017/12/is-there-a-shortage-of-stem-jobs-to-stem-graduates-its-
complicated/ 

(Laura D. Francis, 2019). “IT Consulting Industry Hardest Hit by Jump in H-1B Denials”. Retrieved 
from:  https://news.bloomberglaw.com/daily-labor-report/it-consulting-industry-hardest-hit-by-jump-
in-h-1b-denials-1 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Managing Information Technology (IJMIT) Vol.12, No.3, August 2020 

[10]  (Jennifer Liu, 2019). “The US has nearly 1 million open IT jobs—here’s how much it can pay off to 
switch industries into tech”. Retrieved from: https://www.sharpdecisions.com/2019/11/06/the-us-has-
nearly-1-million-open-it-jobs-heres-how-much-it-can-pay-off-to-switch-industries-into-tech/ 

[11]  (Andrew  Johnson,  2019).  “Digital  tech  skills  key  to  a  higher  paying  job”.  Retrieved  from: 
https://www.redlandcitybulletin.com.au/story/6370076/digital-tech-skills-key-to-a-higher-paying-
job/?cs=215 

[12]  (Cox, 2018).The Generational Shift in IT Drives Change for IT Pros 

(2018).Retrieved 
change-for-it-pros/a/d-id/1332222 

from:https://www.informationweek.com/cloud/the-generational-shift-in-it-drives-

[13]  (Insinna,  2013).Defense  Department  to  Wring  Savings  From  It’s  Info-Tech  Buys.  Retrieved 

from:https://www.nationaldefensemagazine.org/articles/2013/2/28/2013march-defense-department-
to-wring-savings-from-its-infotech-buys 

[14]  (Barnett,  2019).  “DOD  unveils  digital  modernization  strategy  with  familiar  themes  for  upgrading 

IT”. Retrieved from: https://www.fedscoop.com/defense-digital-modernization-strategy/ 

[15]  (Vergun,  2019).  “CIO  explains  DOD’s  Advancementsin  Digital  Modernization”.  Retrieved  from: 
https://www.defense.gov/Explore/News/Article/Article/2038760/cio-explains-dods-advancements-in-
digital-modernization/ 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
