A Review on Cyber Crimes on the Internet of 
Things 

Mohan Krishna Kagita*, Navod Thilakarathne, Thippa Reddy Gadekallu, 
Praveen Kumar Reddy Maddikunta, and Saurabh Singh 

1 School of Computing and Mathematics,Charles Sturt University, Melbourne, 
Australia. 
2 Department of ICT, University of Colombo,Sri Lanka. 
3 School of Information Technology and Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, 
India. 
4 Department of Industrial and System Engineering, Dongguk university, Seoul, 
South Korea. 
mohankrishna4k@gmail.com,navod.neranjan@ict.cmb.ac.lk, 
thippareddy.g@vit.ac.in,praveenkumarreddy@vit.ac.in,saurabh89@dongguk.edu 

Abstract.  Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  devices  are  rapidly  becoming  uni- 
versal. The success of IoT can’t be ignored in today’s scenario; along with 
its  attacks  and  threats  on  IoT  devices  and  facilities  are  also  increasing 
day  by  day.  Cyber-attacks  become  a  part  of  IoT  and  affecting  the  life  
and  society  of  users,  so  steps  must  be  taken  to  defend  cyber  seriously. 
Cybercrimes  threaten  the  infrastructure  of  governments  and  businesses 
globally and can damage the users in innumerable ways. With the global 
cybercrime  damages  predicted  to  cost  up  to  6  trillion  dollars  annually   
on the global economy by cyber-crime. Estimated of 328 Million Dollar 
annual losses with the cyber-attacks in Australia itself. Various steps are 
taken  to  slow  down  these  attacks  but  unfortunately  not  able  to  achieve 
success properly. Therefor secure IoT is the need of this time and under- 
standing  of  attacks  and  threats  in  IoT  structure  should  be  studied.  The 
reasons for cyber-attacks can be 1. Countries having week cyber securi- 
ties,2.  Cybercriminals  use  new  technologies  to attack.  3.  Cybercrime  is 
possible with services and other business schemes. MSP (Managed Ser- 
vice  Providers)  face  different  difficulties  in  fighting  with  Cyber-crime. 
They  have    to  ensure  that  customer’s  security  as  well  as  their  security    
in  terms  of  their  servers,  devices,  and  systems.  Hence,  they  must  use  
effective, fast, and easily usable antivirus and anti-malware tools. 

Keywords:  Cyber-crimes,  cyber-attacks,  IoT,  Smart  Devices,  IoT  Ap- 
plications, Smart Cities, Smart Homes, Smart office. 

* 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

A Review on Cyber Crimes on the Internet of Things 

1  Introduction 

IoT (Internet of things) is developing very rapidly and it offers various types 
of services that made it the fastest-growing technology with a big influence on 
society  and  business  infrastructures.  IoT  has  become  an  integral  part  of  hu- 
man’s modern life like in education, every type of business, healthcare, stores 
the sensitive data about companies and individuals, information about financial 
transactions, development of the product, and its marketing[37] [49]. In IoT, 
Transmission from connected devices has generated huge demand to concen- 
trate on security as millions and billions of users perform sensitive transactions 
on the  internet.  Cyber  threats and attacks are rising  daily in  both complexity 

Fig. 1. A high level of System Model of IoT 

and numbers. Potential attackers are increasing with the growth in networks and 
also the tools or methods they are using are becoming more effective, efficient, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Review on Cyber Crimes on the Internet of Things 

3 

and  sophisticated[15].  Hence,  to  get  the  full  potential  of  IoT,  it  is  needed  to        
be  protected  from  threats  and  attacks.  Smart  devices  or  technologies  like  a  hot 
spot,  internet  other  IoT  has  entered  in  every  part  of  the  life  of  human  beings,    
and security is  compromised[20]. 

These smart technologies indeed  have  many advantages to offer  but still,  
it  has  many  loopholes  that  result  in  the  possibility  of  cyber-attacks  that  will 
cause huge damage to life and property. In today’s scenario, it becomes essential 
that technologies with proper security systems should be adopted in the whole 
ecosystem  to  finish  the  possibilities  of  hacking  or  fraud.  98%  of  all  the  IoT 
devices traffic is un-encrypted, exposing personal and confidential data on the 
network[27]. The most used IoT device in the bossiness and every day in the 
office space is IP-Phones which has 44% of enterprise IoT Devices but has only 
5% of security issues when compared to other IoT devices. Most security issues 
are faced by cameras that have 33% of risk but only 5% of usage in the business 
world[21][22]. 

Fig. 2. Industrial usage of IoT devices 

As  per  the  reports  of  Australia  cybersecurity  center,  there  has  been  one 
reported incident for every 10 minutes, which costs Australian economies $328 
million annual losses. The Top five Cybercrime types targeting Australians are 
Identity theft, online fraud, and shopping scams, Bulk extortion, Online romance 
scams, Wire-fraud, and business email compromise[26]. The period of December 
2019 to June 2020 Agari data finds 68% of the identity-deception based attacks 
aimed  at  impersonating  a  trusted  individual  or  a  brand.  As  per  the  reports  
from Kaspersky estimate of 105 Million attacks on IoT devices are coming from 
276,000 unique IP addresses. Cybercriminals uses network to infect smart devices 
to conduct DDos attacks as a proxy services. 51% of health care devices attacked 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 

A Review on Cyber Crimes on the Internet of Things 

involves imaging devices[53]. New techniques , such like peer-to-peer command 
and  worm-like  features  for  self-propagation,  are  used  to  infect  vulnerable  IoT 
devices on same network[50]. 

Fig. 3. Email Fraud and Identity Deception Trends by Agari 

2  LITERATURE REVIEW 

Yang  Lu  and  Li  Da  Xu,  (2019)  explore  that  IoT  (Internet  of  things)    mod- 
ernized  the  network  globally  including  smart  equipment,  Humans,  intelligent 
objects,  and  information.  IoT  provides  an  opportunity  to  increase  integrity,  con- 
fidentiality,  accessibility,  and  availability.  Internets  of  things  are  still  on  the  de- 
veloping stage and contain many issues that are necessary to be solved[1]. System 
security  is  a  base  for  expansion  in  IoT.  In  this  study,  cybersecurity  is  studied 
thoroughly. The main focus is on the protection and integration of various smart 
devices  and  technologies  in  information  communication.  This  study  helps  other 
researchers  and  experts  who  want  to  do  researches  in  IoT  in  the  future  can  get 
useful  information[39].  The  study  shows  the  research  of  cybersecurity  on  IoT, 
taxonomy,  and  architecture  of  IoT  cybersecurity,  strategies,  and  other  trends  in 
research and  challenges. 

Hilt,  S.;  Kropotov,  V.;  Merces,  F.;  Rosario,  M.    and    Sancho,    D.  
(2017) deliberate that IoT is influencing every field of today’s society. The on- 
going progress of IoT becomes the temptation for cybercriminals[2]. Various 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Review on Cyber Crimes on the Internet of Things 

5 

studies  are  done  on  how  criminals  can  attack  IoT  and  what  impact  will  it  laid    
on.  In  this  research  IoT  cyber-crime  underground  is  selected  to  collect  ideas  
about  the  current  fears  from  different  minds  that  consider  them.  5  underground 
groups are analyzed which are categorized based on the language used in discus- 
sions among community i.e. English,  Spanish,  Portuguese, Russian and  Spanish. 
Many  research and tutorials are gathered  on the  method of hacking, exploitation 
of  vulnerability  but  no  symbol  of  any  intensive  determination  from  the  crimi- 
nal’s  clusters  to  enormous  damage  of  IoT  Structures  are  found.  Cybercriminals 
are usually inspired by financial profit and until now there are few  ways of mak- 
ing  money  from  the  attack  on  IoT.  New  devices  are  invented  by  cybercriminals 
with  which  they  find  new  ways  to  infect  and  make  a  lot  of  money  with  these 
infections. 

Dr.  Venckauskas,  A.;  Dr.  Damasevicius,  R.;  Dr.    Jusas,    V.;    Dr.    Told- 
inas,  J.;  Rudzika,  D.  and  Dregvaite,  G.  (2015),  found  that  IoT  can  be  de- 
scribed  as  a  physical  system  of  world  wide  web  that  unites  all types  of  physical 
things  on  the  internet.  The  Internet  of  things  is  quite  complex[3].  The  big  size, 
scope,  and  vast  physical  distribution  of  IoT  make  it  difficult  to  protect  it  from 
threats and attacks of cybercrimes[38]. Limitations of the Internet of Things like 
low power add a contribution to the problems by prohibited the usage of high se- 
curity  but  techniques  of  resource  greedy  cryptography[23].  IoT  provides  a  stage 
for cyber-crimes.  Hackers  or attackers take benefit of a  low level of  understand- 
ing  among  users  of  IoT  technologies  and  safety  measures  to  cheat  them.  New 
methods for digital forensics in IoT should  be increased as the number of threats 
and attacks  of existing and futuristic will increase day  by day. New technologies 
and  new  strategies  are  continuously  developing  that  create  new  challenges  for 
digital  forensics.  IoT  has  a  large  amount  of  information.  Huge  scope,  a  large 
number of data, diverse nature of the Internet of things, methods in which infor- 
mation is shared, combines and handled need the inventions of new strategies by 
the  digital  forensic  examinations.  It  is  found  that  traditional  forensic  methods 
used  in  investigating  cyber-crimes  that  are  not  effective  at  all,  as  new  tools  and 
devices are developed by cybercriminals to defraud the user on IoT[32]. 

Abomhara,  M.  and  Koien,  G.  M.  (2015)  found  that  in  the  field  of  IoT 
security, still lots of work to be done by merchants and end-users. It is necessary 
to  find  out  the  imitations  of  IoT  security  as  the  internet  on  things  is  growing       
so fast. Threats and attacks  of  IoT  infrastructure  should   be thoroughly  stud- 
ied along with the consequences  of these  threats  and attacks  against IoT[4]. It  
is  advised  that  effective  security  devices  for  controlling  access,  authentication, 
manage  identity,  flexible  faith  management  structure  should  be  taken  care  of  at  
the  starting  of  the  development  of  the  product.  This  research  is  useful  for  the 
researchers who study the field of security  by helping in finding the mains prob- 
lems  insecurity  of  IoT  and  provide  a  clear  understanding  of  threats  and  attacks 
and  the  factors  instigating  from  various  organizations  or  intelligence  agencies. 
This research helps in better clarity on various threats and their factors  inventing 
from  various  burglars  such  as  intelligence  and  organizations[28].  The  procedure 
of finding threats and vulnerabilities is important to make healthy and  com- 

 
 
6 

A Review on Cyber Crimes on the Internet of Things 

pletely  secured  IoT  and  make  sure  that the  security  solution  is  secure  enough  to 
protect from malicious attacks. 

J.  Iqbal  and  B.    M.    Beigh,( 2017), explore that as the use of the inter-  
net is increasing in the world, cyber-crime is also increasing at the same pace, 
particularly  in  India[5].  IoT  covers  vast  areas  all  over  the  world  in  the  same 
way Cyber-crime is not bound to a specific geographical area. So, these crimes 
can’t be controlled by local laws. Cyber laws in the context of India are still  
in the early developing stage. India has done many bilateral agreements related 
to Cyber-crime such as the agreement with Russia, a basic agreement with the 
US, and a framework cyber agreement with Israel to modernize it cyber space. 
But scope of these bilateral agreements is limited, ineffective and insufficient 
to  deal  cyber-crime.  This  research  found  that India  should  make  multilateral 
treaty that blends its laws on common criminal policy and deal to reduce cyber- 
crimes at global level with international co- operation. This treaty will help in 
framing active regulations and strong analytical methods, which result in increas- 
ing internationally co-operation to control cyber-crime[45]. Budapest convention 
council of Europe on cybercrime is one of the multilateral international treaties 
that deal with international co-operation for fighting cyber-crimes globally. India 
should also join this Budapest Convention as US and Israel also whom India has 
bilateral agreement are already part of this cyber- crime  convention. 

Sarmah,  A.;  Sarmah,  R.  and  Baruah,  A.  J.  (2017) found that with the 
development of new technologies are increasing; it also led to increase in crimes 
related to IoT[6]. Cyber-crime is actually a threat to people, so it is necessary 
to take steps to protect IoT from cyber-crimes for welfare of society, cultural 
and countries security aspect. Indian government has passed an IT act, 2000 to 
control cybercrimes issues. Cyber-crime is not bounded to any particular geo- 
graphical area. It passes national boundaries on internet and creates legal and 
technical difficulties in investigation and accusing the crimes. Hence it is neces- 
sary that proper action should be taken to control cyber- crimes internationally. 
Proper cooperation and coordination among various countries are necessary to 
fight against cybercrimes. The main objective of this study is to create aware- 
ness among common people about Cyber-crime. It is important that users who 
become the victim of cyber-crime should come forward and report s file against 
cyber criminals so that strict actions can be taken against them and an example 
can be set for future cyber criminals. 

MS.  Anisha(2017)  argue  that  main  reasons  of    cyber-crime    is    technology 
and  dangerous  infrastructure  of  Internet  of  Things  (IoT).  As  the  ratio  of  users     
on IoT is increasing, it leads to increase risks  of different types of cyber-crimes. 
Crimes are unpredictable due to development of new technologies. Crimes based 
on technologies are increasing day by day and it is necessary that these are solved 
on  the  priority  basis[7].  Cyber-crimes  are  not  limited  to  computers  only,  elec- 
tronic  devices  such  as  telecommunication  tools,  financial  transaction  machines 
etc.  IoT  is  diversified  in  nature  that  makes  it  difficult  to  find  out  the  problems     
of cyber security that results in unawareness on issues of  security. It is suggested 
that  free  advertisements  and  workshops  can  be  organized  to  generate  awareness 

 
 
A Review on Cyber Crimes on the Internet of Things 

7 

among  users  with  the  help  of  NGO’S  and  government.  Cybercrimes  issues  and 
threats  should  be  acknowledged  from  the  grassroots  level i.e. institutes,  schools, 
colleges, computer centers etc. Indian government has taken many effective steps 
to  control  cybercrimes  like  Information  technology  act,  2000  has  been  passed.  
But  a  fixed  cyber  law  is  not  effective  in  cyber-crime  context  as  IoT  has  a  vast   
and  diversified  nature  and  new  type  of  crimes  keeps  on  inventing.  So,  it  is  nec- 
essary  that  cyber  law  keep  close  eyes  on  cybercrime  and  updated  its  law  and 
regulations accordingly. 

Husamuddin,  M.;  Qayyum,    M.    (2017),  explore  that  Internet  of  things 
are  developing  as  an  important  technology.  Information’s  transferred  with  RFID 
tags  or sensors include sensitive data  which should  be  secure from  unauthorized 
access.  There  is  no  security  in  between  2  nodes  of  Internet  of  things  commu- 
nication  and  security  of  IoT  should  not  be  negotiated[8].  To  get  more  secure 
communication  it  is  necessary  that  IoT  should  have  services  like  end  to  end 
environments,  real  time  access  control,  protection  of  critical  infrastructure  and 
encryption.  It  is  difficult  to  think  or  stay  ahead  of  the  cyber-criminal.  It  can  be 
expected  in  future  that  smart  equipment’s  will  include  privacy  security  which   
will help users to perform more tasks conveniently  by using IOT. With improved 
privacy,  information  protected  methods  and  ethical  practices,  IoT  will  gain  the 
trust and faith of users in this connected world. 

Marion, N. E. (2010) argues that the Council of Europe’s (CoE) Agreement 
on Cybercrime is studied as representative mechanisms. This research shows 
that the Agreement includes the features of figurative policy like comforting the 
users that proper action taken to control cyber-crime, educate the users about 
cyber-crime, and act as a warning for those who commit cybercrimes. It leads to 
the serious consequences in IoT[9]. Crimes related to computers are not bound 
to  any  particular  nation  while  it  is  an  international  matter.  Countries  should 
co-operate and make synchronized laws to  have control on cybercrimes. The 
Coe treaty is such an important step towards cybercrime control globally. As 
Cybercrimes scope is very wide hence it is difficult to have proper control on 
it. In development of this treaty, representatives from different countries discuss 
and argue on the acts committed on internet and define the actions that can  be 
taken to fight against cyber- crimes[33]. A reliable international method is used 
to control cybercrimes that include co-operation in law execution agencies and 
investigating offence. The finding shows that the effectiveness of CEO Treaty is 
questionable as resolutions made in this treaty are actually figurative like issues 
related to privacy, powers of investigators and it’s kind of difficult to enforce co- 
operation among countries. There are many loopholes in this treaty that result in 
criminals to continue commit crimes. To have more effective and efficient treaty 
it is required that more and more countries sign this treaty and make national 
laws and keep on updating the laws as per new types of crimes. 

Moitra,  S.  D  (2005),  explore  in  this  research  that  there  are  various  con-  
cerns that are very important for  the  development  of  policies  related  to  cy- 
ber  crimes[10].  Various    concerns  or  issues  are  categorized  in  5  questions  that   
are 1.Criminals, 2.Crimes,  3.Occurrence  of cyber-crime, 4.Effect on  victims and 

 
 
8 

A Review on Cyber Crimes on the Internet of Things 

5.Response of society. It is also discussed in this research that why each con- 
cern is important in making policies. Europe Council enrolled its Agreement on 
Cybercrime in 2001, and  various initiatives are launched  by European Union 
to control cybercrime. Standardization and co-ordination that is necessary for 
common classification of cyber-crime is also discuss in this study. Hacker behav- 
ior, victim response, legal activity and criminal justice policies are some of the 
features that are to be studied thoroughly before making rules and regulations 
in cyber law. It is necessary to study cyber-crime further as new problems may 
occur in future and new types of cyber-crimes may appear, although policies 
still exist in various countries like in US, Agreement on Cybercrime (EU), Infor- 
mation technology act 2000 but up gradation is needed on timely basis. Finding 
shows that reliable information is to be collected and evaluated before develop- 
ing new policies. Suggestions given in this research can help those countries as 
well which are still on development stage of making policies. This research has 
some limitations like it is limited to only some salient features and lots of other 
factors are still  left. 

Oriwoh,  E.;  Sant,  P.  and    Epiphaniou,    G.  (2013)  introduce  some  guide-  
line principles for  vendors,  consumers, governments and law makers  who  use or 
work  on  IoT  (Internet  of  Things)[11].  Usually  new  technologies  and  new  appli- 
cations  of  prevailing  technologies  show  future  prospects  and  appropriate  uses 
where  it  can  be  used.  Security  concern  importance  in  development  of  any  tech- 
nologies  in  IoT  at  early  stage is  acknowledged  by  various  researchers.  Laws  are 
already in existence and  new laws also provide guidance to the users of IoT and 
ensure  that  there  should  be  no  fraud  or  breach  in  usage  of  technologies;  if  it  is 
detected then proper action should be taken to scold the offender[47]. Hence it is 
important  that  appropriate  principles  for  guidance  should  be  done  to  introduce  
the laws to the interesting  users. 

Maung,  T.  M.;  Thwin,  M.  M.  S.  (2017),  found  that  new  challenges  in 
forensic  of  cyber-crimes  develop  with  new  and  latest  operating  systems[12].  On 
one  side  these  new  versions  of  Windows  make  the  things  easy  for  users  and  on 
the  other  possibilities  of  new  crimes  arise.  Cyber-crime  forensics  investigations 
are not new arena  and,  but  it  is  necessary  that  it  keep  updated  its  methods 
to  catch  cyber  criminals.  Computer  forensics  experts  make  cyber-crime  investi- 
gations  based  on  Quality,  effectiveness,  legal  obligations  and  flexible.  Objective 
of  investigation  must  be  customized,  expertise,  systematic  and  comprehensive 
enough  that  the  process  of  investigation  complete  in  less  time  and  relevant  in- 
formation  can  be  gathered  and  investigated  accordingly[44].  Digital  evidence  in 
cyber-crime  means  the  digital  data  that  shows  crime  has  committed  and  there      
is a relation between victim and crime or criminal and crime. IT Security is very 
difficult  in  this  digital  world  as  these  exposed  to  various  threats  and  malware’s 
like viruses, spies, worms and Trojans affect IoT almost on daily basis[40]. This 
re-  search  shows  various  solutions  that  can  be  used  systematically  to  get  sound 
evidence  forensically.  These  solutions  help  and  support  in  collecting  evident  in- 
formation in various forensic areas like cloud, static, and social network[25]. The 

 
 
 
 
A Review on Cyber Crimes on the Internet of Things 

9 

main objective of this study is to find an appropriate solution for the country 
Myanmar. 

3  TYPES OF CYBER ATTACKS ON IoT  DEVICES 

3.1  Physical Attacks: 

Physical  attack  s  can  happen  when  an  IoT  device  is  accessed  physically.  This  
kind of attack can be performed by the same company employee who has access 
to the IoT  device. 

3.2  Encryption Attacks: 

Encryption attack can  be done when the IoT device is un-encrypted, attacker 
can sniff the data with the help of an intruder. Encryption attacks strike at the 
heart of your algorithmic system. Hackers analyze and deduce your encryption 
keys, to figure out how you create those algorithms. Once the encryption keys 
are unlocked, cyber-assailants can install their own algorithms and take control 
of your  system. 

3.3  DoS (Denial of Service) Attack: 

This kind of attack may not steal the data from services like websites[24]. Attack- 
ers target service with a large number of botnets sending thousands of requests 
to the service and making them crash, which makes services unavailable. 

3.4  Firmware Hijacking : 

Firmware  kind  of  attacks  can  be  done  when  an  IoT  device  is  not  updated  up 
today.  Attackers  can  hijack  the  device  and  download  malicious  software.  Com- 
puters contain a lot of firmware, all of which is potentially vulnerable to hacking. 

3.5  Botnet Attack: 

A Botnet attack is which can be done when an IoT device is turned into remotely 
controlled  bots,  which  can  be  used  as  a  part  of  the  botnet.  Botnets  can  connect    
to  the  network  and  transfer  the  private  and  sensitive  data.  Two  types  of  Botnet 
attacks a) The  Mirai botnet  b) The  PBot  malware 

3.6  Man-in-the-Middle Attack: 

A man-in-the-middle attack can be done when a hacker breather the communica- 
tion between two systems. By spying on communication between two parties[17]. 
There  are  7  types  of  Man-in-the-middle  attack  a)  IP  spoofing  b)  DNS  spoofing 
c) HTTPS spoofing d) SSL hijacking e) Email hijacking f) Wi-Fi eavesdropping 
g) Stealing browser cookies 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 

A Review on Cyber Crimes on the Internet of Things 

3.7  Ransomware Attack: 

Ransomware is a type of attacks when a hacker encrypts the data and lock down 
the access. Then the hacker sells the decryption for his price. This kind of attack 
will  disrupt  daily  business[51].  Types  of  Ransomware  attack  a)  Scareware  b) 
Screen lockers c) Encrypting ransomware. 

3.8  Eavesdropping Attack: 

Eavesdropping  is  a  kind  of  attack  when  a  hacker  intercepts  network  traffic  to    
get  access  to  sensitive  and  private  data  via  a  weekend  connection  between  an   
IoT device and a server[35]. Eavesdropping attack  can prevent by using personal 
firewall, keeping antivirus software updated, and using a virtual private network. 

3.9  Privilege Escalation  Attack: 

In  this  particular  kind  of  attack  the  hacker  looks  for  an  IoT  device  bugs  to  gain 
access.  In  this  attack,  the  use  their  newly  gained  privileges  to  deploy  malware. 
hacker  exploits  a  bug,  design  flow,  or  configuration  error  in  an  application  or 
operating  system  to  gain  elevated  access  to  the  resources  that  should  normally    
be unavailable to the third  person. 

3.10  Brute Force Password Attack: 

In the attack, the hacker uses password hashing or password cracker software’s to 
hit the server with the possible tries. Until the hacker gets the correct credentials. 
Hacker uses trail-and error method to guess Login credentials, encryption keys, 
or finding hidden web pages. Types of Brute force attacks: a) Simple brute force 
attacks.  b)  Dictionary  attacks  c)  Hybrid  brute  force  attacks  d)  Reverse  brute 
force attacks e) Credential  stuffing 

4  SMART HOME AND IT’S SUBSYSTEMS 

Smart  homes  are  equipped  with  advanced  automated  internet  connected  devices 
which  makes  your  life  much  easier  like  Multimedia  kits,  Automatic  door  and 
window  operators,  smart  home  appliances  etc.,  but  on  the  side  of  the  coin,  If    
one  of  the  device  of  your  smart  home  is  vulnerable  and  unencrypted  your  data  
will  be  on  Network  like  Google  dorks,  Shodan  which  the  hackers  first  place  to 
search[13].  The  smart  home  appliances  are  mostly  with  three  important  enti-   
ties:  Physical  Components,  communication  system  and  intelligent  information 
processing.  Which  makes the  most sophisticated smart home  devices. 

Adopting IoT Technology into our house will raise more security concerns and 
challengers, because the IoT based smart home devices are highly vulnerable to 
attack as compared to other devices[36]. If the Smart home device is attacked and 
compromised the potential to invade the user’s privacy and steal the personal 
information and can be monitored as  well[14]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Review on Cyber Crimes on the Internet of Things 

11 

Fig. 4. Smart Home and Subsystems 

5  CHALLENGES FOR THE CURRENT 

APPROACHES 

5.1  Testing Drawbacks: 

Due to insufficient testing and updating of current IoT devices i.e., Approx. 30 
billion devices present connected to the internet, which makes the IoT devices 
vulnerable to cyber-attacks. Some IoT manufacturers offers firmware updates 
but unfortunately due to lack of automatic updates according to the zeroth day 
hacks, These Devices exposed to internet and prone by the hackers[43]. 

5.2  Default Passwords: 

According  to  some  the  government  reports  that  advised  to  the  manufactures 
against selling the IoT devices with default credentials (admin / password)[46]. 
Weak passwords and default passwords of IoT devices are Identified as the most 
vulnerable devices with password hacking and  brute-forcing. 

5.3  IoT Ransomware: 

The ransomware depends on encryption to lock out completely different users 
with different devices and platforms[34]. The ransomware could potentially pro- 
tect the device from attack but eventually hacker can seal some personal data 
with the  malware. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 

A Review on Cyber Crimes on the Internet of Things 

5.4  IoT AI and  Automation: 

The  amount  of  data  gathered  by  the  sensors  and  IoT  Is  becoming  enormous 
day by day. AI tools and Automation are already been used in shifting massive 
information form network to network.  However, using this AI tools for make 
autonomous decisions can affect Millions of functions across infrastructure such 
as like healthcare, transport etc., [29]  [48]. 

5.5  Botnet Attacks: 

When  a  hacker  creates  a  collection  of  malware  infected  botnet  and  sends  thou- 
sands  of  requests  per  second  and  brings  down  the  target  is  called  as  botnet 
attack[16].  A  single  IoT  device  infected  with  malicious  code  or  malware  sone   
not  possess any real threat[19].  When the  hacker  uses  DDoS attacks  using thou- 
sands  of  IP  cameras,  home  routers,  Smart  devices  were  infected  and  directed   
with bringing down the DSN  provider platforms like Netflix,  GitHub etc., [42]. 

6  RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CYBER HYGIENE OF 

IoT DEVICES 

Installing  updated firmware  as soon as  possible, where the  manufacture  released 
all the patches for the vulnerability’s found in previous version of the device[52]. 
By  updating  the  firmware  one  can  be  protected  from  the  attacks  by  bugs  from 
older  versions  of  the  software.  It  is  recommended  to  change  the  pre-installed 
password  or  manufacture  default  passwords  which  makes  your  device  default 
password  attacks.  Always  reboot  the  device  when  you  thin  the  device  acting 
strange  or  when  noticed  suspicious  activity[18].  It  might  help  in  getting  rid  of 
existing malware. keeping access to IoT device restricted by a local VPN can be 
protects from attacks. 

7  CONCLUSION 

IoT becomes the most important for every human being in this connected world. 
IoT (internet of things) make the world so small. Every human being is connected 
with each other by using internet. Lots of transactions are done  over IoT and 
chances of crimes have increases. Crimes in cyber space are not bound to a par- 
ticular location or country, its scope is very wide[30]. Risks related to Cyber- 
attacks can’t be ignored so while adopting IoT on regular basis it is important 
to take adequate measures. Simple steps that can  be done by users to get safe 
can be by installing software protection firewall, anti-viruses, anti- malware etc. 
Awareness should be spread regarding the types of cyber-crimes in IoT and how 
it can be avoided. Various international treaties are executed to control cyber- 
crimes. Current Multilateral and local legal devices and national laws include 
different concept and content, and their coverage of criminalizing, investigation 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Review on Cyber Crimes on the Internet of Things 

13 

powers  and  methods,  digital  evidence,  risk  and  regulations,  and  control  and  co- 
operation  internationally[36].  These  treaties  are  different  in  different  geographic 
scope  like  multilateral  or  regional  and  its  applicability.  These  differences  cause 
obstacles  in  identification,  examination  and  taking  action  against  cyber-  crimi- 
nals  and  taking  preventive  measures  in  cyber-crime.  So,  it  is  concluded  that  a 
common,  cooperative,  and  flexible  international  treaties  should  be  formed  be- 
tween  the  countries  so  that  the  same  laws  are  followed  everywhere  on  IoT  and 
there  is  no  confusion.  Strict  punishments  should  be  imposed  on  cyber  criminals  
so  that  potential  criminals  left  the  idea  to  do  any  crime.  It  should    ensure  that  
laws formed must be followed properly and restrictions if any applied on internet 
access and content should not  be neglected[31]. These laws should  be according 
to  the  law  and  rights  of  humans[41].  Challenge  is  generated  due  to  the  scope    
and  effect  of  cyber  laws  in  different  countries  like  the  content  on  the  internet       
is  acceptable  in  one  country  while  the  same  content  is  illegal  in  other  countries 
than it is difficult to make common global laws. 

References 

1.  Yang Lu and Li Da Xu, (2019) Internet of Things (IoT) Cybersecurity Research: A 
Review of Current Research  Topics, IEEE Internet of Things Journal ,Volume: 6 , 
Issue: 2 , pp- 2103 – 2115. 

2.  Hilt, S.; Kropotov, V.; Merces, F.; Rosario, M. and Sancho, D. (2017) The Internet 

of Things in the Cybercrime underground, Trend Micro Research,pp-1-46 

3.  Dr. Venckauskas, A.; Dr. Damasevicius,R.; Dr. Jusas, V.; Dr. Toldinas, J.; Rudzika, 
D.and Dregvaite, G. (2015), A Review Of Cyber-Crime In Internet Of Things: Tech- 
nologies, Investigation Methods And Digital Forensics, International Journal Of En- 
gineering Sciences Research Technology, Venckauskas,  4(10):Pp-460-477 

4.  Abomhara, M. and Koien, G. M. (2015) Cyber Security and the Internet of Things: 
Vulnerabilities,  Threats,  Intruders  and  Attacks,  Journal  of  Cyber  Security,  Vol.  4, 
65–88. 

5.  J.  Iqbal  and  B.  M.  Beigh,(  2017),Cybercrime  in  India:  Trends  and  Chal-  lenges,  
International Journal of Innovations Advancement in Computer Science, Volume 6, 
Issue 12,pp-187-196. 

6.  Sarmah,  A.;  Sarmah,  R.  and  Baruah,  A.  J.  (2017),A  brief  study  on  Cyber  Crime  
and Cyber Law’s of India, International Research Journal of Engineering and Tech- 
nology, Volume: 04 Issue: 06, pp-1633- 1641 

7.  MS.  Anisha  (2017)Awareness  And  Strategy  To  Prevent  Cybercrimes:  An  Indian 
Perspective, Indian Journal Of Applied Research, Volume - 7 — Issue – 4, Pp-114- 
116. 

8.  Husamuddin,  M.;  Qayyum,  M.  (2017),  Internet  of  Things  :A  Study  on  Security   
and  Privacy  Threats,  :  The  2nd  International  Conference  on  Anti-Cyber  Crimes 
(ICACC) organized by  IEEE. 

9.  Marion, N. E. (2010) The Council of Europe’s Cyber Crime Treaty: An exercise in 
Symbolic Legislation. International Journal of Cyber Criminology, Vol. 4 Issue 12, 
pp-699–712. 

10. Moitra,  S.  (2005).  Developing  Policies  for  Cyber  crime,  European  Journal  of  Crime, 

Criminal  Law  and  Criminal Justice, 13(3), 435-464. 

 
 
 
 
14 

A Review on Cyber Crimes on the Internet of Things 

11. Oriwoh,  E.;  Sant,  P.  and  Epiphaniou,  G.  (2013)  Guidelines  for  Internet  of  Things 
deployment  approaches  –  The  Thing  Commandments,  The  4th  International  Con- 
ference on Emerging Ubiquitous Systems and Pervasive Networks, pp-122-  131 
12.  Maung, T. M.; Thwin, M. M. S. (2017), Proposed Effective Solution for Cybercrime 
Investigation in Myanmar, The International Journal Of Engineering And Science, 
Volume – 6, Issue-1, PP 01-07 

13.  Anthi, E., Williams, L., S�lowi nska, M., Theodorakopoulos, G., Bur- nap, P. (2019). 
A Supervised Intrusion Detection System for Smart Home IoT devices. IEEE Inter- 
net of Things Journal. 

14.  P.  Radanliev,  D.  C.  De  Roure,  J.  R.  C.  Nurse,  P.  Burnap,  E.  Anthi,  U.  Ani,  L. 
Maddox, O. Santos, and R. M. Montalvo, “Cyber risk from IoT technologies in the 
supply chain  – discussion on supply chains decision support system for the digital 
economy,” Oxford, 2019. 

15.  K.  Carruthers,  “Internet  of  Things  and  Beyond:  Cyber-Physical  Systems-  IEEE 

Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet of Things, Newsletter, 2014, 2016. 

16. Lipman Paul, “New Reaper IoT Botnet Leaves 378 Million IoT Devices Potentially 

Vulnerable to Hacking,”  2017. 

17.  K.  Savage,  “IoT  Devices  Are  Hacking  Your  Data  amp;  Stealing  Your  Privacy  - 

Infographic,” 2017. 

18. J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic, and M. Palaniswami, “Internet of things (IoT): A 
vision,  architectural  elements,  and  future  directions,”  Future  Generation  Computer 
Systems, vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 1645–1660, 2013. 

19.  Schiefer, M. (2015, May). Smart Home Definition and Security Threats. In IT Secu- 
rity incident Management IT Forensics (IMF), 2015 Ninth International Conference 
on (pp. 114-118).  IEEE. 

20.  Tong, J., Sun, W., Wang, L. (2013, May). An information flow security model for 
home area network of smart grid. In Cyber Technology in Automation, Control and 
Intelligent Systems (CYBER), 2013 IEEE 3rd Annual International Conference on 
(pp. 456-461).  IEEE. 

21.  Padyab, A. M., Paivarinta, T., Harnesk, D. (2014, January). Genre- Based  Assess- 

ment of Information and Knowledge Security Risks. In System Sciences (HICSS), 
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on (pp. 3442-3451). IEEE. 

22.  McCune, J. M., Perrig, A., Reiter, M. K. (2005, May). Seeing-is- believing:  Using 
camera phones for human-verifiable authentication. In Security and privacy, 2005 
IEEE symposium on (pp. 110-124). IEEE. 

23.  Madakam,  S.,  Ramaswamy,  R.,  Tripathi,  S.  (2015).  Internet  of  Things  (IoT):  A 

Literature Review. Journal of Computer and Communications, 3(05), 164. 

24. A. D. Wood and J. A. Stankovic, “Denial of Service in Sensor Networks”, IEEE 

Computer, vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 54–62, 2002. 

25.  D. G. Holmberg, “BACnet Wide Area Network Security Threat Assessment”, Tech- 

nical report, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2003. 

26. Ch,  R.,  Gadekallu,  T.  R.,  Abidi,  M.  H.,  Al-Ahmari,  A.  (2020).  Computational  
System to Classify Cyber Crime Offenses Using Machine Learning. Sustainability, 
12(10), 4087. 

27.  Maddikunta, P. K. R., Srivastava, G., Gadekallu, T. R., Deepa, N., Boopathy,  P. 
(2020). Predictive model for battery life in IoT networks. IET Intelligent Transport 
Systems. 

28.  RM, S. P., Maddikunta, P. K. R., Parimala, M., Koppu, S., Reddy, T., Chowdhary, 
C.  L.,  Alazab,  M.  (2020).  An  effective  feature  engineering  for  DNN  using  hybrid 
PCA-GWO  for  intrusion  detection  in  IoMT  architecture.  Computer  Communica- 
tions. 

 
 
A Review on Cyber Crimes on the Internet of Things 

15 

29.  Deepa, N., Prabadevi, B., Maddikunta, P. K., Gadekallu, T. R., Baker, T.,  Khan, 
M. A.,  Tariq, U. (2020). An AI based intelligent system for healthcare analysis using 
Ridge Adaline Stochastic Gradient Descent Classifier. Journal of Supercomputing. 
30. Maddikunta, P. K. R., Gadekallu, T. R.,  Kaluri,  R.,  Srivastava,  G.,  Parizi,  R. M., 
Khan,  M.  S.  (2020).  Green  communication  in  IoT  networks  using  a  hybrid  
optimization algorithm. Computer  Communications. 

31. RM,  S.  P.,  Bhattacharya,  S.,  Maddikunta,  P.  K.  R.,  Somayaji,  S.  R.  K.,  Laksh-  
manna, K., Kaluri, R., ... Gadekallu, T. R. (2020). Load balancing of energy cloud 
using wind driven and firefly algorithms in internet of everything. Journal of Parallel 
and Distributed  Computing. 

32. Iwendi,  C.,  Jalil,  Z.,  Javed,  A.  R.,  Reddy,  T.,  Kaluri,  R.,  Srivastava,  G.,  Jo,  O. 
(2020). KeySplitWatermark: Zero Watermarking Algorithm for Software Protection 
Against Cyber-Attacks. IEEE Access, 8,  72650-72660. 

33. Numan,  M.,  Subhan,  F.,  Khan,  W.  Z.,  Hakak,  S.,  Haider,  S.,  Reddy,  G.  T.,  ... 
Alazab, M. (2020). A systematic review on clone node detection in static wireless 
sensor networks. IEEE Access, 8,  65450-65461. 

34.  Patel, H., Singh Rajput, D., Thippa Reddy, G., Iwendi, C., Kashif Bashir, A.,  Jo, 

O. (2020). A review on classification of imbalanced data for wireless sensor networks. 
International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, 16(4), 1550147720916404. 

35. Reddy,  T.,  RM,  S.  P.,  Parimala,  M.,  Chowdhary,  C.  L.,  Hakak,  S.,  Khan,  W.  Z. 
(2020). A deep neural networks based model for uninterrupted marine environment 
monitoring. Computer  Communications. 

36. Iwendi, C., Maddikunta, P. K. R., Gadekallu, T. R., Lakshmanna, K., Bashir, A. K., 
Piran, M. J. (2020). A metaheuristic optimization approach for energy efficiency in 
the IoT networks. Software: Practice and Experience. 

37. Bhattacharya, S., Kaluri, R., Singh, S., Alazab, M., Tariq, U. (2020). A Novel PCA-
Firefly  based  XGBoost  classification  model  for  Intrusion  Detection  in  Net-  works 
using GPU. Electronics, 9(2), 219. 

38. Azab, A., Layton, R., Alazab, M., Oliver, J. (2014, November). Mining malware to 
detect  variants.  In  2014  Fifth  Cybercrime  and  Trustworthy Computing  Conference 
(pp. 44-53).  IEEE. 

39. Alazab, M., Layton, R., Broadhurst, R.,  Bouhours, B. (2013, November). Malicious 
spam  emails  developments  and  authorship  attribution.  In  2013  Fourth  Cybercrime 
and Trustworthy Computing Workshop (pp. 58-68). IEEE. 

40. Alazab,  M.,  Venkatraman,  S.,  Watters,  P.,  Alazab,  M.  (2013).  Information  se- 
curity governance: the art of detecting hidden malware. In IT security governance 
innovations: theory and research (pp. 293-315). IGI  Global. 

41. Farivar,  F.,  Haghighi,  M.  S.,  Jolfaei,  A.,  Alazab,  M.  (2019).  Artificial  Intelligence 
for  Detection,  Estimation,  and  Compensation  of  Malicious  Attacks  in  Nonlinear  
Cyber-Physical  Systems  and  Industrial  IoT.  IEEE  transactions  on  industrial  infor- 
matics, 16(4),  2716-2725. 

42. Azab, A., Alazab, M.,  Aiash, M. (2016, August). Machine learning based botnet 
identification traffic. In 2016 IEEE Trustcom/BigDataSE/ISPA (pp. 1788-1794). 
IEEE. 

43. Alazab,  M.,  Huda,  S.,  Abawajy,  J.,  Islam,  R.,  Yearwood,  J.,  Venkatraman,  S., 
Broadhurst,  R.  (2014).  A  hybrid  wrapper-filter  approach  for  malware  detection. 
Journal of networks, 9(11),  2878-2891. 

44. Garg,  S.,  Singh,  A.,  Batra,  S.,  Kumar,  N.,  Yang,  L.  T.  (2018).  UAV-empowered 
edge  computing  environment  for  cyber-threat  detection  in  smart  vehicles.  IEEE 
Network, 32(3),  42-51. 

 
 
16 

A Review on Cyber Crimes on the Internet of Things 

45. Bali, R. S., Kumar, N. (2016). Secure clustering for efficient data dissemination in 
vehicular  cyber–physical  systems.  Future  Generation  Computer  Systems,  56,  476- 
492. 

46. Chaudhary, R., Kumar, N.,  Zeadally, S. (2017). Network service chaining in fog and 
cloud computing for the 5G environment: Data management and security challenges. 
IEEE Communications Magazine, 55(11),  114-122. 

47. Singh,  A.,  Maheshwari,  M.,  Kumar,  N.  (2011,  April).  Security  and  trust  manage- 
ment in MANET. In International Conference on Advances in Information Technol- 
ogy and Mobile Communication (pp. 384-387). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 

48.  Vora, J., Italiya, P., Tanwar, S., Tyagi, S., Kumar, N., Obaidat, M. S., Hsiao, K. 
F. (2018, July). Ensuring privacy and security in E-health records. In 2018 Interna- 
tional conference on computer, information and telecommunication systems (CITS) 
(pp. 1-5). IEEE. 

49. Hathaliya,  J.  J.,  Tanwar,  S.,  Tyagi,  S.,  Kumar,  N.  (2019).  Securing  electronics 
healthcare records in healthcare 4.0: a biometric-based approach. Computers Elec- 
trical Engineering, 76,  398-410. 

50. Krishnasamy,  L.,  Dhanaraj,  R.  K.,  Ganesh  Gopal,  D.,  Reddy  Gadekallu,  T., 
Aboudaif,  M.  K.,  Abouel  Nasr,  E.  (2020).  A  Heuristic  Angular  Clustering  Frame- 
work for Secured Statistical Data Aggregation in Sensor Networks. Sensors, 20(17), 
4937. 

51. Mohan  Vijay  (2018).  AN  UPDATED  NEW  SECURITY  ARCHITECTURE  FOR 
IOT  NETWORK  BASED  ON  SOFTWARE-DEFINED  NETWORKING  (SDN). 
IRJCS:: International Research Journal of Computer Science, Volume V, 77-81. 
52. Krishna Kagita, M. (2019). Security and Privacy Issues for Business Intelligence in 
a  loT.  In  Proceedings  of  12th  International  Conference  on  Global  Security,  Safety 
and Sustainability, ICGS3 2019  [8688023] 

53. Krishna  Kagita,  M.  and  M.  Varalakshmi,  2020.  A  detailed  study  of  security  and 
privacy of Internet of Things (IoT). International Journal of Computer Science and 
Network, 9 (3):  109–113. 

54. Navod  Neranjan  Thilakarathne,  Mohan  Krishna  Kagita,  Dr.  Thippa  Reddy 
Gadekallu. (2020). The Role of the Internet of Things in Health Care: A Systematic 
and  Comprehensive  Study.  International  Journal  of  Engineering  and  Management 
Research, 10(4),  145-159. 

 
 
