Trust Concerns in Health Apps collecting 
Personally Identifiable Information during 
COVID-19-like Zoonosis

Molla Rashied Hussein 
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Engg.  
University of Asia Pacific 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
mrh.cse@uap-bd.edu 

Shakib Ahmed 
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Engg.  
University of Asia Pacific 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
16201039@uap-bd.edu 

Abdullah Bin Shams 
Dept. of Electrical and Comp. Engg. 
University of Toronto 
Toronto, Canada 
abdullahbinshams@gmail.com 

 Md. Ashikur Rahman 
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Engg.  
University of Asia Pacific 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
16201026@uap-bd.edu 

Samia Naz Isha 
Dept. of Pub. Health & Primary Care 
The University of Cambridge 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.  
sni25@medschl.cam.au.uk 

Ehsanul Hoque Apu  
Dept. of Biomedical Engineering 
Michigan State University  
East Lansing, MI, USA 
hoqueapu@msu.edu 

Md. Jahidul Hassan Mojumder 
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Engg.  
University of Asia Pacific 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
16201035@uap-bd.edu 

Shaila Akter 
Department of Global Health 
Heidelberg University Hospital 
Heidelberg, Germany. 
dr.shailaakter@gmail.com 

Abstract—Coronavirus  disease  2019,  or  COVID-19  in 
short, is a zoonosis, i.e., a disease that spreads from animals to 
humans. Due to its highly epizootic nature, it has compelled 
the public health experts to deploy smartphone applications 
to trace its rapid transmission pattern along with the infected 
persons  as  well  by  utilizing  the  persons’  personally 
identifiable  information.  However,  these  information  may 
summon  several  undesirable  provocations  towards  the 
technical  experts  in  terms  of  privacy  and  cyber  security, 
particularly  the  trust  concerns.  If  not  resolved  by  now,  the 
circumstances  will  affect  the  mass  level  population  through 
the 
inadequate  usage  of 
smartphones and thus liberate the forgery of a catastrophe for 
another  COVID-19-like  zoonosis  to  come.  Therefore,  an 
extensive study was required to address this severe issue. This 
paper has fulfilled the study mentioned above needed by not 
only  discussing  the  recently  designed  and  developed  health 
applications  all  over  the  regions  around  the  world  but  also 
investigating  their  usefulness  and  limitations.  The  trust 
defiance is identified as well as scrutinized from the viewpoint 
of an end-user. Several recommendations are suggested in the 
later  part  of  this  paper  to  leverage  awareness  among  the 
ordinary individuals. 

the  health  applications 

in 

Keywords—COVID-19,  Trust,  Awareness,  Public  Health, 
Smartphone  Application,  Personally  Identifiable  Information, 
Cyber Security, Recommendation.  

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

The zoonotic novel disease named coronavirus disease 
2019  (COVID-19)  has  changed  the  course  of  the  global 
economy  by  putting  constraints  on  individuals  in  daily 
commercial activities [1]. The highly contagious disease has 
potentially  affected  health  facilities'  capacity,  even  in 
developed  countries  where  there  are  proven  and  robust 
healthcare systems [2]. To control and track the COVID-19 
trajectory,  different  administrations  have  utilized  modern 
artificial intelligence (AI) based methods integrated with 5G 
technology and aerial drone devices for real-time COVID-
19 tracking [3][4]. With no specific vaccine or medicine for 
preventing  or  curing  [5],  currently,  the  best  approach  to 
avoid COVID-19 is not to get ourselves exposed to it [6]. 
Social distancing must be preserved between all, as recent 

XXX-X-XXXX-XXXX-X/XX/$XX.00 ©20XX IEEE 

studies [7] have shown that even an asymptomatic person 
may  silently  propagate  the  disease  without  raising  any 
suspicion. 

induces 

This  social  distancing 

the  public  health 
specialists  and  workers  to  collaborate  with  the  technical 
researchers  to  deploy  the  health  applications  (apps)  to 
monitor  people  digitally,  as  the  manual  process  is  quite 
tedious  to  execute.  Instead  of  gathering  the  personally 
identifiable  information  (PII)  of  the  affected  individual 
along  with  contact  information  for  the  last  2-3  weeks 
in 
through  extensive 
smartphones  can  be  an  excellent  alternative  that  have 
already been introduced, developed, and even deployed in 
some countries [8].  

the  health  apps 

interviews, 

Also, a majority of the people can use those apps using 
their smartphones not only in developed countries but also 
in  the  low-  and  middle-income  countries  (LMICs)  [9]; 
proper app usability has to be guaranteed by comparing in 
terms of development as well as confidentiality along with 
popularity among the end-users, and last but not least, user-
friendly interfaces. 

However,  as  the  PII  is  stored  in  those  apps,  potential 
exposure  of  the  PII  may  cause  a  violation  of  the  user’s 
privacy. Moreover, the re-identification of a person can be 
done by only a few demographic data from the PII. Thus an 
individual may be targeted for a prospective cyber-attack or 
threat. 

This paper is organized as follows: section I introduces 
the concept; the terminologies are defined in section II, the 
relevant health apps and their functionalities are reviewed in 
section III. After that, the trust concerns are summarized in 
section IV and  various recommendations are suggested in 
section  V.  The  paper  concludes  with  section  VI  advising 
future implementation as per the recommendations. 

II. 

DEFINITION OF TERMINOLOGIES 

Before  discussing  the  health-related  apps  and  their 
features, fundamental trust issues concerning cyber security 
and privacy must be briefly introduced. The first one is the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept  of  the  semi-honest  model,  the  second  one  is  the 
activity  of  a  malicious  actor,  and  the  last  one  is  the 
possibility of re-identification of a person to track and carry 
on cyber-attack or threat.  

In the real world, when a user is using smartphone apps 
during  any  type  of  epidemic  situation  for  public  health 
activities,  some  PII  is  saved  into  the  storage  of  that 
application. Those app data can indicate where the users are 
going or whom the users are dealing with at any moment or 
even the current location of those users.  

Now, after those epidemic situations go away, still the 
PII remains saved in that particular storage which the user 
does not want to. For that, the user demands the health app 
that keeps the data for a specific timeframe, and after that, 
those  data  will  be  removed.  For  that,  users  need  a  fully 
trustable model or a full honest model where there will be 
no hackers or malicious actors who are going to misuse the 
databases  of  a  user.  Still,  it  is  impossible  to  create  a  full 
honest model because we cannot assume that all the actors 
in a security model behave in a completely honest manner 
[10].  

However,  that  necessarily  does  not  imply  that  a  vast 
number of  malicious  actors  are  always  active  to  harm  the 
unsuspecting users all the time. Because even though they 
may wish to harm or cheat, they in fact, act rather in a semi-
honest  way  [10].  Therefore,  we  are  proposing  for  a  semi 
honest model to get rid of this problem of having trust. 

Semi honest party means the person or user who accepts 
all  the  terms  and  conditions  of  an  application  with  the 
exception  that  it  saves  a  list  of  all  its  intermediate 
computations. A semi-honest party always agrees with the 
“honest verifier” in the statement of empty-knowledge. To 
use smartphone apps for public health purposes, a user must 
register  in  it  and  share  PII.  In  contrast,  general  malicious 
behavior  may  be  non-changeable  for  many  users,  semi-
honest  behavior  may  be  useful  for  them.  Using  a  semi-
honest model, users can be more reliable to use those contact 
tracing applications. 

In  a  malicious  model,  there  is  not  an  ideal  condition 
stable  here.  The  malicious  model  means  where  all 
participants are in the attacking mode. The first thing that 
must  follow  is  that  there  should  be  no  force  to  enter  the 
protocol. There are many kinds of malicious behaviors. A 
possible  malicious  behavior  can  be  the  failure  to  start  the 
execution.  Or  it  can  break  the  commission  at  any  desired 
point in time. One of the targets of this model is, in a one on 
one party communication, not to give a third party the access 
to it. It is known to us that full fairness is not achievable. 
Another  possible  malicious  behavior  shows  that  when 
considering malicious rivals, it is unknown what their input 
to the protocol is. It means a malicious party can enter the 
protocol with a piece of open information, which may not 
equal  to  its  “true”  local  input.  There  is  no  possibility  of 
getting to know the actual input. From those discussions, we 
can  see  that  it  is  not  possible  at  all  to  stop  the  malicious 
actors. 

Behind  a  privacy  model,  there  may  be  a  significant 
number  of  threat  actors.  A  threat  actor  means  essence  or 
person who has the intent to create an impact on the security 
and  safety  of  others.  In  the  cyber  security  and  threat 
intelligence  in  a  privacy  model,  the  threat  actors  mean  a 
massive  number  of  any  essences  or  persons  either 

intentionally or unintentionally, who try to, and many times 
successfully execute malicious deeds against any industries. 

Many  kinds  of  Cyber  Threat  Actors  Have  Different 
types  of  Motivations.  We  can  specify  those  thread  actors 
mainly  in  two  types  which  are:  malicious  actors  and 
nefarious actors.  Malicious actors are the ones who try to 
hamper the system whenever they get the chance. Nefarious 
actors,  on  the  other  hand,  are  the  ones  who  are  always 
present  online  and  try  to  break  the  systems.  In  real-life, 
nefarious actors present in a privacy model are quite rare. 
Some  malicious  actors  can  still  be  present  in  a  privacy 
model. Some examples of threat actors in a privacy model 
are given:  

Cyber-terrorist:  Actors  who  attack  via  technology  in 
cyber-space  are  called  cyber-terrorist.  For  a  bad  political 
intention,  outsider  groups  of  actors  are  using  cyber 
techniques to influence the public for an evil motive and try 
to change the political state. They try to create fear  in the 
public's  mind.  There  are  no  official  reports  filed  against 
them because of their unknown identity. So that after doing 
this type of crime, they started to do more such as learn how 
to build a bomb, to recruit, have a meeting, and connect with 
like-minded individuals to spread their propaganda. 

Hacktivists: Hacking is not used for lousy intention all 
the  time.  Some  organizations  may  hire  several  hackers  to 
access any legal information for their business purpose. But 
sometimes  a  hacktivist  is  trying  to  embarrass  celebrities 
politically  or  economically,  to  highlight  human  rights, 
waking up an organization to its sensitive things, to going 
after  groups  whose 
they  disagree  with. 
ideologies 
Hacktivists may steal and disseminate sensitive, proprietary, 
or,  sometimes, classified data  in the  name  of  free  speech. 
Other times, they aim to deny access to a particular service 
or  website  by  conducting  a  distributed  denial-of-service 
attack, essentially denying legitimate access by flooding a 
website with more traffic than it can handle, causing the site 
to crash.  

State-sponsored  actors:  receive  direction,  funding,  or 
technical  assistance  from  a  nation-state  to  advance  that 
nation’s  interests.  State-sponsored  actors  have  stolen  and 
infiltrated intellectual property, sensitive PII, and money to 
fund  or  further  espionage  and  exploitation  causes.  In  rare 
cases,  these  data  appear  for  sale  on  underground  black 
markets. Instead, these data are usually kept by the actors 
for  their  purposes.  Although  the  data  taken  from  data 
breaches might not always appear on underground markets, 
what  can  occur  are  the  tools  and  guides  for  how  to  take 
advantage of the vulnerabilities that allowed access to the 
vulnerable  systems  in  the  first  place.  As  an  example,  a 
researcher  published  the  flaw  that  was  used  to  penetrate 
Equifax, and within 24 hours, the information was posted to 
hacking websites and included in hacking toolkits. 

Cybercriminals:  Cybercriminals  are  mainly  profit-
driven and represent a lengthy period and worldwide threat. 
The  target  of  the  Cybercriminals  is  to  sell  the  databases, 
hold  for  ransom,  and  otherwise  absorb  for  financial  gain. 
Cybercriminals  may  work  individually  or  in  groups  to 
achieve their purposes [11]. 

Tracking:  It  generally  means  following  the  path  or 
current location of delivery in real-time. Tracking is about 
gaining  insights  in  real-time.  A  tracking  app  can,  for 
example, determine a person’s current location using geo-

data (e.g., via GPS coordinates or radio cell location). If it 
additionally  tracks  who  has been  where and  when  it  even 
allows creating detailed movement profiles. 

The following Table 1 is going to summarize the merits 
and  demerits  of  several  health  apps  spread  over  the 
numerous countries under the regions/continents. 

Tracing:  On  the  other  side  of  the  coin,  it  means 
following the path of a delivery backward from its current 
point to where it started. Tracing is all about gaining insights 
in  retrospect.  A  tracing  app  can  be  used,  for  example,  to 
trace physical contacts between people. Using Bluetooth, a 
technology that enables digital devices to communicate with 
each other over short distances, it can measure the distance 
between  smartphones  based  on  the  strength  of  the  radio 
signals and thus detect encounters between users (proximity 
tracing). 

Demographic  variables:  They  are  defined  as  the 
independent  variables  as  they  cannot  be  manipulated. 
research,  demographic  variables  may  be  either 
In 
categorical  (e.g.,  gender,  race,  marital  status,  psychiatric 
diagnosis)  or  continuous  (e.g.,  age,  years  of  education, 
income, family size) [12]. 

De-identification:- The process of anonymizing datasets 
before sharing data. It has been the leading paradigm used 
in  research  and  elsewhere  to  share  data  while  preserving 
people's privacy. 

In today’s world, there is some modern data protection 
law,  such  as  the  European  General  Data  Protection 
Regulation (GDPR)  and the California  Consumer Privacy 
Act (CCPA) consider that every person in a dataset has to 
be  protected  for  the  dataset  to  be  considered  anonymous. 
Data  protection  laws  worldwide  regarded  as  anonymous 
data as not personal data anymore.  

III. 

RELATED WORKS 

To  secure  their  people  from  COVID-19,  governments 
around the world have authorized the usage of a smartphone 
app  designed  and  implemented  by  the  local  technical 
enterprises  with/without  the  collaboration  with  the  global 
tech giants. In this section, we will go by the regions, i.e., 
continents around the world. 

Starting  alphabetically  from  Africa,  the  continent  has 
seen  its  country  Ghana  implementing  the  GH  COVID-19 
Tracker  by  crowd  sourcing data  to  provide  knowledge  on 
the potential place of verified individuals to support health 
authorities  to  determine  high-risk  individuals.  Crowd-
sourced  data  collection  is  a  sharing  method  of  making  a 
data-set with the support of a massive group of the crowd 
and  using  a  more  secured  semi-honest  model  to  improve 
Crowd-sourcing. 

Next from Asia, more specifically, South Asia, India has 
developed  an  application  named  Aarogya  Setu  [13].  This 
application has got very good documentation [14]. Although 
there was no mention of disposal of data after the pandemic 
in the initial development, the updated privacy policy [15] 
states that  all PII collected  will  be  retained  on  the  mobile 
device  for  30  days  from  the  date  of  the  collection,  after 
which, if it has not already been uploaded to the server, will 
be purged from the App. All PII uploaded to the server will, 
to  the  extent  that  such  information  relates  to  people  who 
have not tested positive for COVID-19, will be purged from 
the  server  45 days  after being  uploaded.  All PII collected 
from persons who have tested positive for COVID-19 will 
be purged from the server 60 days after such persons have 
been declared cured of COVID-19.  

TABLE I.  

TRUST IN HEALTH APPS: MERITS AND DEMERITS 

App features by region, country and name 

Region 

Country 
Name 

Africa 

Ghana 

App Name 

Merits 

Demerits 

GH 
COVID-19 
Tracker 

Crowd-
sourcing 

Security 
Model 

India 

Aarogya 
Setu 

Well 
documented 
privacy 
policy 

Central 
server allows 
potential 
hacking of 
PII 

Malaysia 

My-
Sejahtera 

DP3T 

Data Policy 

Singapore 

TraceTo-
gether 

Secure 
Server 

Asia 

Users can 
delete the 
app anytime 

Bahrain 

BeAware 

(not enough 
information) 

Documentati
on 

Tetamman 

Tetamman 

(not enough 
information) 

Power 
leakage 

Israel 

Hamagen 

Crosscheck 
GPS data 
with MOH 
data 

Documentati
on 

Czech 
Republic 

e-Rouŝka 

Self-
explanatory 

Linguistic 
barrier 

Hungary 

VírusRadar 

Europe 

Iceland 

Rakning   
C-19 

High 
security 

(not enough 
information) 

Supervised 
by Health 
Directorate 

(not enough 
information) 

Denmark 

Smittestopp 

Helpful FAQ 
information 

Battery 
drainage 

South 
America 

Colombia 

CoronApp 

Well 
documented 

No English 
version 

Australia 

COVIDsafe 

Well 
documented 

(not enough 
information) 

Oceania 

New 
Zealand 

Covid 
Tracer 

Maximum 
security 
unless user 
misuse 

User 
dependent 
action 

Moreover, Aarogya Setu [13] app alerts a user when they 
are nearby an infected person by using both Bluetooth and 
GPS. Several Data Science concepts, such as Classification, 
Association  Rule  Mining,  and  Clustering  to  analyze 
COVID-19 spread is being used [14]. As PII of numerous 
users  of  the  app  is  stored  on  one  server,  this  design 
potentially allows the potential malicious actors to hack the 
PII of users. 

Meanwhile, from Asia, more specifically from Southeast 
Asia, MySejahtera [16] in Malaysia needs to mention good 
documentation  describing  its  data  privacy.  Another  app 

 
from Malaysia, MyTrace [17] accepts a community-driven 
approach  where  participating  devices  exchange  proximity 
information whenever an app detects another nearby device 
with MyTrace installed. As this app is based on the DP3T 
(Decentralized  Privacy-Preserving  Proximity  Tracing) 
algorithm [18], it does not require location permissions. As 
long as location permissions are required, this app serves as 
a state surveillance apparatus, not a tool to assist in breaking 
the chain. 

On 

the  other  hand,  Singapore  has 

implemented 
TraceTogether  with  proper  privacy  statement  [19].  The 
TraceTogether  program  enhances  Singapore’s  contact 
tracing efforts in the fight against COVID-19. It comprises 
the  TraceTogether  app  and  the  TraceTogether  token.  The 
app was released on 20 March, while the token was rolled 
out on 28 June. The timeline is as follows: 1 April 2020 - 
Clarified the collection of anonymized analytics data, 1 June 
2020 - Clarified the collection of identification details and 
usage of data for contact tracing, 3 Sep 2020 - Included the 
TraceTogether Token in the Privacy Safeguards.  Both the 
App and the Token can be used voluntarily, and it facilitates 
the contact tracing process. 

With  the  user’s  consent,  it  exchanges  encrypted  and 
anonymized  Bluetooth  signals  with  nearby TraceTogether 
devices,  and  the  Bluetooth  data  after  25  days  are 
automatically deleted. This allows  users to be informed if 
users were in prolonged physical proximity with an infected 
person. They are committed to safeguarding users’ privacy 
and will only use users’ data for contact tracing purposes. 
They store limited data. The only identity data they store is: 
users’ contact/mobile number, users’ identification details, 
a  random  anonymized  User  ID.  When  users  sign  up,  a 
random  User  ID  is  generated  and  associated  with  users’ 
contact/mobile  number  and  identification  details.  Users’ 
contact/mobile number, identification details, and User ID 
are stored in a secure server, and never shown to the public. 
They  do  not  collect  data  about  users’  GPS  location. 
to  approximate  users’ 
TraceTogether  uses  Bluetooth 
distance to other TraceTogether devices. They do not collect 
data about users’ GPS locations. Neither do they collect data 
about  users’  WiFi or  mobile network.  Data  about devices 
near users do not reveal personal identities. When users are 
close  to  another  TraceTogether  device,  both  devices  use 
Bluetooth to exchange a Temporary ID. This Temporary ID 
is generated by encrypting the User ID with a private key 
held  by  the  Ministry  of  Health  (MOH),  Singapore.  It  can 
only  be  decrypted  by  MOH,  and  does  not  reveal  your 
identity  or  the  other  person's  identity.  Data  about  devices 
near users is stored securely on users’ device and will only 
be shared with MOH if users test positive for COVID-19, 
for  the  sole  purpose  of  contact  tracing.  The  anonymized 
Bluetooth  data  stored  on  your  device  after  25  days  are 
automatically deleted. Therefore the right to be forgotten as 
per GDPR is preserved. Other third-party services will not 
be  able  to  track  users’  identities.  The  Temporary  ID  that 
users’ device exchanges with nearby devices are refreshed 
at regular intervals. The lack of a persistent identifier means 
it is impossible for third parties to identify or track  users. 
Users may request for users’ identification data to be deleted 
on  their  servers  unless  users’  proximity  data  has  already 
been uploaded as a confirmed case. They  will then delete 
users’  contact/mobile  number,  identification  details  and 
User ID from their server. This renders all meaningless data 

that  users’  device  has  exchanged  with  other  devices, 
because that data will no longer be associated with the users. 

the 

to  disable 

Users’  data  will  only  be  used  for  COVID-19  contact 
tracing. Any data shared with MOH will only be used solely 
for contact tracing of persons possibly exposed to COVID-
19.  TraceTogether  will  only  communicate  with  nearby 
devices for a limited time. They will only use TraceTogether 
for contact tracing. Once contact tracing ceases, users will 
be  prompted 
the 
TraceTogether App or return/dispose of the Token. For the 
App,  users  can  also  disable  its  functionality  any  time  by 
turning the App's Bluetooth permissions off or deleting the 
App.  If  contact  tracing  is  required  for  a  future  outbreak, 
users will be prompted to enable permissions, or users can 
reinstall  the  App.  They  use  anonymized  data  to  improve 
collects 
TraceTogether.  The  TraceTogether 
anonymized data about  users’ phone and app, e.g., device 
model,  app  version,  etc.  to  help  it  improve  and  provide  a 
better user experience. 

functionality  of 

app 

Next from Asia, particularly from the Middle-East area, 
Bahrain  uses  an  application  named  BeAware  [20].  This 
application needs to have good documentation mentioning 
the  data  privacy  issue.  Tetamman  [21]  in  Saudi  Arabia 
always uses GPS and Bluetooth to cause power leakage, i.e., 
battery drain. It takes much control over users’ smartphones 
as  well.  Need  to  mention  good  documentation  about  data 
privacy. Hamagen (or “Protector” in Hebrew) [22] in Israel 
cross-checks  the  GPS  history  of  patient's  mobile  phones 
with historical geographic data of patients from the Ministry 
of Health (MOH). 

Meanwhile,  from  Europe,  Czech  Republic  is  using  an 
application  named  e-Rouŝka  [23]  which  has  a  proper 
documentation  [24] with a self-explanatory video as well. 
But  those  are  in  Czech  language.  So  it  has  a  linguistic 
barrier. These kinds of information should be stored using 
international languages, such as English. In  Hungary, 
VírusRadar  [25]  is  a  mobile  app  which  implemented  for 
Apple  iOS  and  also  for  Android.  It  provides  the  highest 
security standards, full control over our personal data, and 
also guarantees privacy protection. It is generally using the 
Bluetooth  Low  Energy  (BLE)  protocol  to  detect  faceless 
encrypted contacts [26] which are highly secured. 

After that, from Europe, more specifically from Northern 
Europe, Rakning C-19 app [27] in Iceland collects the GPS 
location of the users’ phone and stores information locally 
on  the  device.  If  the  phone  owner  is  diagnosed  with  the 
Covid-19 disease, then he is asked by the Health Directorate 
to share the location data for contact tracing to mark out the 
individuals 
into  quarantine. 
Meanwhile,  Smittestopp  [28]  in  Northern  Europe,  more 
precisely, Denmark, always turns GPS and Bluetooth on and 
drains the device battery. Frequently asked questions (FAQ) 
section is helpful, but not enough proper documentation was 
found regarding the data usage policy. Linguistic barrier is 
also an issue. 

that  might  need 

to  go 

After 

that,  from  South  America,  Colombia  uses 
CoronApp [29]. The documentation of this application will 
be  found  in [30]. Nothing  has been  mentioned  about data 
privacy and further disposal of data, so it needs to mention 
the data privacy of an individual. Also, it needs to make an 
English version of documentation and existing video. 

Finally, from Oceania, Australia is using an application 
named COVIDsafe [31]. It already has documentation [32]. 
Another country from this continent, New Zealand uses NZ 
Covid Tracer App [33] for preventing and controlling their 
corona situation. This is based on user interaction. A user 
needs  to  share  his/her  credential  with  the  application  if 
he/she  is  found  to  have  COVID-19.  This  is  pretty  much 
based  on  users.  If  they  don’t  want  to  share  credentials, 
nothing can be done. But it has better data privacy though 
it’s not as effective as other contact tracing applications. It 
has two-factor authentication. Data is encrypted before sent. 
Finding this app is difficult, and it has poor design. 

IV. 

SUMMARY OF CONCERNS 

  The  following  paragraphs  have  summarized  the  trust 
concerns detected and categorized by our through analytical 
procedure. 

However, from those numerous anonymous datasets, a 
person  can  be  identified  using  a  demographic  variable, 
which create a big concern about the privacy and ethical use 
of those data. Recently the collection and subsequent sale of 
Facebook  data  to  Cambridge  Analytica  has  made  an 
enormous trust issue. 

In  2016,  journalists  re-identified  politicians  in  an 
anonymized  browsing  history  dataset  of  three  million 
German citizens, uncovering their medical information and 
their  sexual  preferences.  A  few  months  before,  the 
Australian  Department  of  Health  publicly  released  de-
identified medical records for 10% of the population only 
for researchers to re-identify them six weeks later. Before 
that, studies had shown that de-identified hospital discharge 
data  could  be  re-identified  using  basic  demographic 
attributes  and  that diagnostic codes,  year of birth,  gender, 
and  ethnicity  could  uniquely  identify  patients  in  genomic 
studies  data.  Finally,  researchers  were  able  to  uniquely 
identify individuals in anonymized taxi trajectories in NYC, 
bike  sharing  trips  in  London,  subway  data  in  Riga,  and 
mobile phone and credit card datasets [34][35]. 

There has some model on re-identification of a person 
from an anonymous dataset. Quasi-identifier is one of it.it 
consists  one  or  more  quasi-identifier  which  called  qids. 
Using  this  model  a  person  can  be  identified  from  an 
anonymous dataset.  

V. 

RECOMMENDATIONS 

Applications which are being used in different countries 
are not creating documentations properly. If an application 
has  proper  documentation,  then  people  will  feel  more 
comfortable  to  use  that  application  because  they  already 
know how the application in exactly working.  

To  increase  its  trust  issues  they  should  make  a  proper 
documentation and a self-explanatory video to let the people 
know about the working procedure of the application. 

Moreover,  linguistic  barrier  is  a  major  concern  in 
European  countries.  Many  foreign  personals  living  in 
European  countries  may  not  speak  or  read  the  native 
language,  so  having  app  tutorial  in  the  native  language 
causes  inconvenience.  This  also  applies  for  foreign 
volunteers working in developing countries. 

Aware mass level people regarding security model such 
that they know that not all actors are malicious and there are 
very few nefarious actors. Also, a pure honest model is not 

possible,  so  caveat  emptor (Latin,  meaning  “let  the buyer 
beware”)  is  the  best  policy  in  a  semi-honest  model. 
is 
Moreover, 
mathematically  possible,  proper  data  management  can 
reduce the threat significantly. 

re-identification 

though 

even 

the 

Furthermore, as every contact tracing application is using 
a centralized database to store data, if the distributed ledger 
is used, it will be safer for the data stored. If done so, in case 
of malicious attacks, the actor will be able to retrieve maybe 
a part of the database rather than the whole database. 

Therefore, Blockchain technology can play a vital role in 
this  regard.  It  ensures  maximum  security  with  a  shared 
ledger system, which makes it the best match to address the 
issues raised by the centralized systems. 

VI. 

CONCLUSION 

Researchers  have  identified  different  psychological 
factors associated with human behavior during this COVID-
19  pandemic  and  the  previous  disease  outbreak,  such  as 
panic  buying  and  patient  history  hiding  [36][37].  These 
control 
the  entire 
individual  mental  health  of 
community, society and professionals, such as health care 
workers and persons working in clinics [38][39]. Therefore, 
it  is  highly  essential  to  study  an  individual's  trust  issues 
using digital health monitoring technologies, such as health 
apps. 

the 

If the near future does not solve the trust issues, it will 
cost more as people will be reluctant to use health apps and 
make  a  pandemic  to  come  a  much  worse  one.  Further 
studies and implementations have to  be carried out as per 
the suggestions presented in the recommendations section. 
Only then we can ensure a better strategy to fight back future 
zoonosis or such. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Y.  Gvili,  “Security  Analysis  of  the  COVID-19  Contact  Tracing 
Specifications by Apple Inc. and Google Inc,” in Cryptology ePrint 
Archive:  2020/428,  International  Association  for  Cryptologic 
Research (IACR). 

[2]  S. Pillai, N. Siddika, E.H. Apu, and R. Kabir, “COVID-19: Situation 
of European Countries so Far,” Archives of Medical Research, 2020. 
[3]  M.R.  Hussein,  E.H.  Apu,  S.  Shahabuddin,  A.B.  Shams,  and  R. 
Kabir,  “Overview  of  digital  health  surveillance  system  during 
COVID-19 pandemic: public health issues and misapprehensions,” 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.13633, 2020. 

[4]  M.R.  Hussein,  A.B.  Shams,  E.H.  Apu,  K.A.A.  Mamun,  and  M.S. 
Rahman,  “Digital  Surveillance  Systems  for  Tracing  COVID-19: 
Privacy  and  Security  Challenges  with  Recommendations,”  arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2007.13182, 2020. 

[5]  C. C. Lai, T. P. Shih, W. C. Ko, H. J. Tang, and P.R. Hsueh, “Severe 
acute  respiratory  syndrome  coronavirus  2  (SARS-CoV-2)  and 
coronavirus  disease-2019  (COVID-19):  the  epidemic  and  the 
challenges,” International journal of antimicrobial agents, p.105924, 
2020. 

[6]  M.R. Hussein, A.B. Shams, A. Rahman, M.S. Raihan, S. Mostari, N. 
Siddika, R. Kabir, and E.H. Apu,  Real-time credible online health 
information inquiring: a novel search engine misinformation notifier 
extension  (SEMiNExt)  during  COVID-19-like  disease  outbreak, 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-60301/v1 (2020). 

[7]  X.  Yu,  and  R.  Yang,  “COVID‐19 

through 
asymptomatic carriers is a challenge to containment,” in Influenza 
and Other Respiratory Viruses, Wiley Online Library, 2020. 
[8]  N.  Ahmed  et  al.,  “A  Survey  of  COVID-19  Contact  Tracing 

transmission 

Apps,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10306v1 (2020). 

[9]  R. Jalabneh, H. Z. Syed, S. Pillai, E. H. Apu, M.R. Hussein, R. Kabir, 
S.M. Arafat, and M. A. Majumder, “Use of Mobile Phone Apps for 

 
en, last updated on: August 14, 2020 and last accessed on: September 
4, 2020. 

[29]  CoronApp  -  Colombia,  available  at:  https://play.google.com/store/ 
last  updated  on: 

apps/details?id=co.gov.ins.guardianes&hl=en, 
September 2, 2020 and last accessed on: September 7, 2020. 
[30]  A  healthy  isolation,  Tips  for  being  at  home,  The  Government  of 
Colombia, 
https://coronaviruscolombia.gov.co/ 
Covid19/aislamiento-saludable/coronapp.html,  last  accessed  on: 
September 12, 2020. 

available 

at: 

[31]  COVIDSafe,  Australian  Department  of  Health,  available  at: 

https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=au.gov.health.covids
afe&hl=en, last updated on: August 14, 2020 and last accessed on: 
September 9, 2020. 

[32]  How COVIDSafe works, COVIDSafe app, Australian Government: 
at: 

Department 
https://www.health.gov.au/resources/apps-and-tools/covidsafe-
app#how-covidsafe-works,  last  updated  on:  August  24,  2020  and 
last accessed on: September 9, 2020. 

available 

Health, 

of 

[33]  NZ COVID Tracer, Ministry of Health NZ (New Zealand), available 
at: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=nz.govt.health. 
covidtracer&hl=en,  last  updated  on:  September  7,  2020  and  last 
accessed on: September 13, 2020. 

[34]  L.  Rocher,  J.M.  Hendrickx,  and  Y.  de  Montjoye,  “Estimating  the 
success of re-identifications in incomplete datasets using generative 
models,”  Nature  Communications,  vol.  10,  article  3069  (2019). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-10933-3 

[35]  L. Sweeney, “Simple demographics often identify people uniquely,” 

Health (San Francisco), 671(2000), pp.1-34, 2000. 

[36]  S.  Akter,  A.H.  Mazumder,  S.  Eva,  and  E.H.  Apu,  and  N.  Khan, 
“Defilading  COVID-19:  Psychological  Factors  Associated,” 
Available  at  SSRN:  https://ssrn.com/abstract=3661767  (July  27, 
2020) 

[37]  S.Y. Arafat, S.K. Kar, M. Marthoenis, P. Sharma, E.H. Apu, and R. 
Kabir,  “Psychological  underpinning  of  panic  buying  during 
pandemic 
DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113061 (2020) 

(COVID-19),” 

Psychiatry 

Research, 

[38]  S.N.  Isha,  A.  Ahmad,  R.  Kabir,  E.H.  Apu,  “Dental  Clinic 
Architecture  Prevents  COVID-19-Like 
Infectious  Diseases,” 
HERD:  Health  Environments  Research  &  Design  Journal, 
13(4):240-241. doi:10.1177/1937586720943992 (2020) 

[39]  M.T.H.  Chowdhury,  E.H.  Apu,  S.K.  Nath  et  al.,  “Exploring  the 
knowledge, awareness and practices of COVID-19 among dentists 
in  Bangladesh:  A  Cross-sectional 
Investigation,”  DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-56753/v1 (12 August 2020) 

Contact Tracing to Control the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Literature 
Review.”  DOI:  https://doi.org/10.1016/  j.arcmed.2020.15,  (July, 
2020). 

[10]  O.  Goldreich,  “Foundations  of  cryptography:  volume  2,  basic 

applications,” Cambridge university press, 2009. 

[11]  L. Ablon, Data thieves: The motivations of cyber threat actors and 

their use and monetization of stolen data, 2018. 

[12]  K.E.  Emam,  A.  Brown,  P.A.  Malik,  Evaluating  Predictors  of 
Geographic  Area  Population  Size  Cut-offs  to  Manage  Re-
identification  Risk,  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Informatics 
Association,  Volume  16,  Issue  2,  March  2009,  Pages  256–266, 
https://doi.org/10.1197/jamia.M2902 

[13]  Aarogya  Setu,  NIC  eGOV  Mobile  Apps.  Available  at: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=nic.goi.aarogyasetu&
hl=en, last updated on: July 8, 2020 and last accessed on: August 23, 
2020. 

[14]  U. Sharma, “Understanding aarogya setu: navigating privacy during 
a pandemic proves to be tricky,” LSE Covid 19 Blog, 2020. 
available 

at: 
https://web.swaraksha.gov.in/ncv19/privacy, last updated on: July 8, 
2020 and last accessed on: August 28, 2020. 

[15]  Aarogya 

Privacy 

Policy, 

Setu 

[16]  MySejahtera,  GOVERNMENT  OF  MALAYSIA,  available  at: 

https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=my.gov.onegovappst
ore.mysejahtera&hl=en, last updated on: August 10, 2020 and last 
accessed on: August 29, 2020. 

[17]  MyTrace,  GOVERNMENT  OF  MALAYSIA,  available  at: 

https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=my.gov.onegovappst
ore.mytrace&hl=en,  last  updated  on:  April  26,  2020  and  last 
accessed on: August 29, 2020. 

[18]  M.  Nanni,  et  al.,  “Give  more  data,  awareness  and  control  to 
individual  citizens,  and  they  will  help  COVID-19  containment,” 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05222 (2020). 

[19]  TraceTogether  Privacy  Safeguards,  A  Singapore  Government 
Agency  Website, A collaboration between Ministry of Health, SG 
United  and  GovTech.  available  at:  https://play.google.com/ 
store/apps/details?id=my.gov.onegovappstore.mytrace&hl=en,  last 
updated on: July 20, 2020 and last accessed on: August 30, 2020. 

[20]  BeAware Bahrain, Information & eGovernment Authority, available 
at: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=bh.bahrain.corona. 
tracker&hl=en, last updated on: August 17, 2020 and last accessed 
on: August 31, 2020. 

[21]  Tetamman, Ministry of Health, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, available 

at:  
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.tetaman.home&
hl=en,  last  updated  on:  August  25,  2020  and  last  accessed  on: 
September 15, 2020. 

[22]  Hamagen  (“Shield”  in  Hebrew),  The  Health  Ministry,  Israel, 
available  at:  Ihttps://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com. 
hamagen&hl=en, last updated on: August 27, 2020 and last accessed 
on: September 12, 2020. 

[23]  eRouška - part of smart quarantine, Ministry of Health of the Czech 
Republic,  available  at:  https://play.google.com/store/apps/details? 
id=cz.covid19cz.erouska&hl=en, last updated on: July 26, 2020 and 
last accessed on: September 9, 2020. 

[24]  eRouška,  Ministry  of  Health  of  the  Czech  Republic,  available  at: 

https://erouska.cz/en, last accessed on: September 9, 2020. 

[25]  VírusRadar,  Government 

Informatics  Development  Agency, 
Hungary,  available  at:  https://play.google.com/store/apps/details 
?id=hu.gov.virusradar&hl=en,  last  updated  on:  May  15,  2020  and 
last accessed on: September 6, 2020. 

[26]  Nextsense, “VirusRadar – a mobile app for Covid-19 contact tracing 
in  Hungary  as  a  donation,”  available  at: 

implemented 
https://www.nextsense.com/ns-newsarticle-virusradar-a-mobile-
contact-tracing-implemented.nspx,  last  updated  on:  May  14,  2020 
and last accessed on: September 6, 2020. 

[27]  Rakning  C-19,  The  Office  of  the  Medical  Director  of  Health, 
Iceland,  available  at:  https://play.google.com/store/apps/details 
?id=is.landlaeknir.rakning&hl=en,  last  updated  on:  July  19,  2020 
and last accessed on: September 3, 2020.  

[28]  Smittestop ("Stop infection" in Danish), Ministry of Health and the 
Elderly, Denmark, available at: https://play.google.com/store/apps/ 
details?id=com.netcompany.smittestop_exposure_notification&hl=

