                           Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

A Framework for Effective Corporate Communication 
after Cyber Security Incidents  

Richard Knight a and Jason R. C. Nurse b 

a WMG, University of Warwick, UK 
b School of Computing, University of Kent, UK 

Corresponding author: Jason R.C. Nurse, j.r.c.nurse@kent.ac.uk 

Highlights 

•  We  develop  a  framework  for  corporate  communications  in  the  event  of  a  cyber 

incident 

•  Best practices for effective data breach announcement decisions identified 
•  The framework is grounded in a systematic review and real-world case studies 
• 

Interviews  with  senior  industry  professionals  allow  framework  evaluation  and 
refinement 

•  The  framework  can  complement  security  incident  response  and  management  in 

businesses 

Abstract  
A major cyber security incident can represent a cyber crisis for an organisation, in particular 
because of the associated risk of substantial reputational damage. As the likelihood of falling 
victim to a cyberattack has increased over time, so too has the need to understand exactly 
what  is  effective  corporate  communication  after  an  attack,  and  how  best  to  engage  the 
concerns of  customers, partners and other stakeholders. This research seeks to tackle this 
into  the  efficacy  of  crisis 
problem  through  a  critical,  multi-faceted 
communication  and  public  relations  following  a  data  breach.  It  does  so  by  drawing  on 
academic  literature,  obtained  through  a  systematic  literature  review,  and  real-world  case 
studies. Qualitative data analysis is used to interpret and structure the results, allowing for 
the  development  of  a  new,  comprehensive  framework  for  corporate  communication  to 
support  companies  in  their  preparation  and  response  to  such  events.  The  validity  of  this 
framework  is  demonstrated  by  its  evaluation  through  interviews  with  senior  industry 
professionals,  as  well  as  a  critical  assessment  against  relevant  practice  and  research.  The 
framework is further refined based on these evaluations, and an  updated version defined. 
This  research  represents  the  first  grounded,  comprehensive  and  evaluated  proposal  for 
characterising effective corporate communication after cyber security incidents.  

investigation 

Keywords: Cybersecurity incident, Data breach, Corporate communication, Public relations, 
Data  breach  announcements,  Incident  response,  Cyber  crisis,  Security  Management, 
Resilience 

(October, 2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/computers-and-security.)  

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

1. Introduction 

On  the  morning  of  23rd  October  2015,  the  Chief  Executive  of  TalkTalk,  a  major  UK 
telecommunications  provider,  featured  on  BBC  Radio  Four’s  Today  Programme.  The 
organisation  had  just  discovered  a  data  breach  and  subsequently  wanted  to  inform  its 
customers. During the radio interview, however, she had to admit to not knowing whether 
the data lost was encrypted (Khomami, 2015a). This apparent lack of knowledge resulted in 
criticism both in social (BBC Radio 4, 2015) and traditional media (Khomami, 2015b). Other 
public statements trying to compare the organisation’s cyber security capability favourably 
against competitors and the application of early termination fees to those customers wishing 
to  leave  were  similarly  admonished  (Cluley,  2015).  Days  later,  a  UK  House  of  Commons 
enquiry had been convened (BBC, 2015b) and the firm was subsequently fined £400,000 by 
the UK Information Commissioners Office (ICO) (ICO, 2016).   

Although the enquiry and ICO investigation found significant deficiencies in TalkTalk’s cyber 
security,  the  organisation’s  approach  to  public  communications  has  also  drawn  criticism 
(Maddocks,  2015)  and  is  likely  to  have  made  the  situation  worse.  Similar  deficiencies  in 
communication can also be witnessed more recently in other high-profile cases such as the 
Equifax breach in 2017, and the Travelex cyberattack in 2020. Whilst it is a key task of cyber 
security professionals to prevent such attacks, no system is totally secure, so it is important 
that  if  a  breach  occurs  organisations  respond  appropriately.  The  way  that  businesses 
communicate  to  their  customers  and  external  stakeholders  following  a  data  breach  can 
impact their share price and reputation to such an extent that they can be considered cyber 
crises (Wang and Park, 2017); these also have further implications for the business’ continuity 
and resilience. The approaches for communication following a cyber security incident have, 
therefore, become an important area of research and practice.  

In this paper, we seek to further academic research on the topic of  appropriate corporate 
communication  and  public  announcements  after  a  cyber  security  incident.  Through  an 
investigation  into  related  academic  and  practitioner  work,  we  aim  to  improve  the 
understanding of what constitutes effective and poor external communication following such 
incidents. In addition to providing this insight, a primary contribution of our research is the 
development,  evaluation  and  refinement  of  a  framework  to  support  organisations  in 
corporate communications after an incident. This framework can provide organisations with 
insight into the types of activities that are necessary after an incident (or cyber crisis), the key 
organisations and personnel with which to engage, and how they may consider crafting and 
disseminating public announcements and other correspondence. We note here that security 
incidents can be characterised by their malicious or unintentional nature; this study and the 
framework  outlined  consider  malicious  attacks  and  data  breaches  in  particular  given  their 
prevalence and the resulting media interest (Berkman et al., 2018). In later sections, we also 
reflect on our findings and comment on the suitability of the framework to support breaches 
that  are  as  a  result  of  unintentional  actions  (e.g.,  accidental  insider  threats  (Nurse  et  al., 
2014)). 

The approach to achieve our research aim is guided by a rigorous methodology which takes 
inputs  from  academic  research  and  commentary  on  current  data  breach  cases  from  cyber 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

security specialists. It is further informed by interviews with senior, and highly experienced, 
security and public relations professionals.   

In summary, the contributions of our work are as follows: 

•  A  critical  investigation  into  effective  and  poor  communication  after  cyber  security 
incidents,  according  to  academic  literature  and  a  series  of  real-world  case  studies 
(including commentary from well-respected, international security specialists). 

•  The development, evaluation and refinement of a framework to enhance best practice 

regarding corporate communications and announcements in such situations. 

The remainder of this article is structured as follows. In Section 2 we scope our research and 
review the background theory on data breach communications. The research methodology is 
outlined in Section 3.  We present the first stage of our work, a systematic, and critical review 
of current literature on the topic of data breach communications in Section 4. This is followed 
by an analysis of real-world cyber incident communications (and related commentary), drawn 
from  several  case  studies  in  Section  5.  Section  6  introduces  our  proposed  framework  to 
enhance  incident  response  communication  strategies  in  organisations,  which  is  then 
evaluated and appropriately updated in Section 7. Finally, we conclude and present avenues 
for future work in Section 8. 

2. Background and Related Work 

2.1 Cyber Security Incidents and Communications Theory 

Security incidents  can take various forms.  They can encompass the accidental exposure  or 
loss of data, ransomware attacks, or disruption of systems (Sarabi et al., 2016). Although data 
breaches  can  be  seen  as  a  subset,  there  is  variation  over  their  definition  (Schatz  and 
Bashroush, 2016; Edwards et al., 2016). For our research, we focus the term data breach on 
unlawful acts and use an amended version of the ISO description accordingly: “compromise 
of security that leads to the unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorized disclosure of, 
or access to, protected data transmitted, stored or otherwise processed” (Adapted from: ISO, 
2015). As mentioned earlier, we scope our work at this point to malicious data breaches. 

Another  fundamental  term  in  our  research  is  that  of  a  crisis,  or  cyber  crisis.  The  loss  of  a 
significant  amount  of  personal  or  sensitive  data  can  be  extremely  detrimental  for 
organisations given its impact (Agrafiotis et al., 2018; Wang and Park, 2017). Whilst various 
definitions  of  a  crisis  have  been  put  forward  (Mitroff,  1988),  the  following  appears  to 
encapsulate their essence:  “A high consequence, low probability [event], overlaid with risk 
and uncertainty, conducted under time-pressure, disruptive of normal business and potentially 
lethally  damaging  to  organizational  reputation”  (Gregory,  2005,  p.  313).  Although  this 
description  was  developed  through  work  in  another  domain,  it  can  aptly  be  applied  to 
describe the aftermath of a substantial data breach (which can also be linked to the size of 
the breach or the type of data lost). A cyber crisis can, therefore, be seen as a crisis resulting 
from a data breach or similar security event.  

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

The field of public relations has considerable research on crisis communications; situational 
crisis communication theory (SCCT) (Coombs, 2007) and theory of image restoration (Benoit, 
1997) being the preeminent models in this area (Avery et al., 2010). They provide a framework 
for the types of response available to organisations during a crisis.  Whilst these concepts are 
well  regarded,  they  have  been  criticised  for  not  being  practical,  meaning  they  allow 
practitioners to understand the approach they are using but do not provide detailed criteria 
that would enable organisations to determine which approach to use (Avery et al., 2010). This 
is particularly true where data breaches are concerned, due to the ambiguity over whether 
the organisation is a victim as a result of being hacked or is responsible as a result of having 
inadequate security measures in place (Bentley et al., 2018).   

2.2 External Communication after a Data Breach 

Research into how businesses communicate during a cyber crisis has tended to take a top-
down approach. Kim et al. (2017) for example, apply a deductive method to investigate how 
newspapers  interpret  data  breach  corporate  communication.  This  has  the  potential  to 
constrain  thinking,  as  analysis  of  crisis  communication  is  framed  by  these  models.  For 
instance, some studies into data breach communication models have predetermined SCCT as 
the  framework  applied  to  case  studies  (Wang  and  Park,  2017;  Wang  and  Johnson,  2018), 
which means that the data are examined through a fixed set of categories which may overlook 
other explanations for the results. Qualitative methods such as qualitative thematic analysis 
provide an alternative approach which allows patterns to be observed that may be obscured 
by a more constricted method (Kaefer et al., 2015; Strauss and Corbin, 1994).   

Much of the research carried out on data breaches is focused on companies based in the USA 
(Spanos and Angelis, 2016). In particular, the primary studies on data breach communications 
found during an initial literature review have used USA corporations as case studies (Wang 
and  Johnson,  2018;  Wang  and  Park,  2017).  There  is  also  notably  work  exploring  the 
relationships  between  social  media,  stock  prices  and  data  breach  announcements  on  USA 
companies (Rosati et al., 2019).  Although the USA has a substantial corporate base, this focus 
illustrates a gap in research. We posit that other countries, such as the UK for instance, could 
be  another  intriguing  case  for  research  given  its  position  as  a  major  world  economy  with 
extensive internet use amongst its population. In this paper therefore, we seek to provide 
another  perspective  on  the  problem  of  corporate  communications  after  a  data  breach.  In 
subsequent sections we provide a more critical review of existing literature and detail how 
we analyse it, and our own primary data to develop the new framework.  

3. Methodology  

The research presented in this article investigates a topical problem that has been explored 
and discussed in research and practice. As such, our methodology is grounded in insights from 
both of these domains, and based on those foundations and contributions, we arrive at our 
findings and framework. The methodology has four main steps, which are described below 
and depicted in Figure 1. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

Figure 1 – Research methodology overview 

3.1 Systematic Review of Literature  

Existing  academic  literature  is  of  great  value  in  informing  what  response  and  activities 
companies should adopt after a data breach. As such, we first critically review literature in 
the field of crisis communication to understand best, and recommended, practices. For this 
review,  we  use  the  PRISMA  framework  due  to  its  ability  to  provide  rigor,  consistency  and 
transparency in the selection of relevant articles (Moher et al., 2009); PRISMA has also been 
used on several occasions in computer security research (Fernández-Alemán et al., 2013).  

In PRISMA, decisions are required on article sampling and filtering criteria. Considering that 
our research spans across the computer security and business fields, we scope the databases 
and articles sampled to the sciences and business (see Section 4.1 for the list). Similarly, as 
our scope is on corporate communication after a data breach, articles should be relevant to 
this  intersection  of  topics.  Once  selected,  each  article  is  examined  using  thematic  analysis 
(Braun and Clarke, 2006), and a series of codes and themes produced which provide insight 
into the article and the relevance of its findings. Further detail is provided in Section 4. 

3.2 Real-world Case Analysis 

To complement the literature review, we next investigate cases of real-world data breaches 
to understand company responses in the context of commentary from industry specialists; in 
this commentary, we particularly consider the efficacy of the communication that occurred. 
While  there  are  various  sources  which  catalogue  data  breach  cases  (e.g.,  Morgan,  2018), 
official sources are preferable given their reputation and reliability. To assist in the sampling 
of  cases,  we  scope  our  research  to  the  UK.  This  decision  is  based  on  the reality  that  most 
research (e.g., Wang and Johnson, 2018; Wang and Park, 2017) has focused on the USA, and 
that the UK is another major economy (in Europe and worldwide) worthy of study in general 
and for comparison. Based on these criteria, the UK’s National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) 
and, in particular, its Threat Report publication (NCSC, 2019a) is selected as a source for cases. 
These  reports  are  published  regularly  and  contain  information  on  major  cyber  security 
breaches, including incidents that may not necessarily be subject to investigation. While the 
NCSC does not publish the specific criteria used to select incidents, thus making it challenging 
to comment on completeness, given its remit (to provide guidance on UK cyber security and 
its insights into cyberattacks targeting businesses across the country) we view it as a reliable 
and robust source of pertinent incidents. 

5 

Systematic review of literatureReal-world case analysisEvaluation of literature review and case analysis findings Develop, evaluate and refine frameworkAcademic best practiceIndustry best practiceBest practice guidance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

Having  established  the  sampling  approach  for  the  data  breaches,  a  similar  mechanism  is 
required for ascertaining security commentators who reflect on breaches and the response 
of the organisation. A robust method is essential to identify a suitable set of sources to ensure 
the  credibility  of  the  assessment  of  what  may  be  regarded  as  effective  and  poor 
communication.  While  we  could  openly  search  online  for  commentators,  we  note  that 
references  to  security  commentators  are  also  often  included  in  the  NCSC  threat  reports. 
Although  these  tend  to  reference  a  single  source,  it  is  possible,  by  analysing  all  of  the 
commentators cited, to obtain a set of commentators who can be used as sources for security 
commentary  on  the  selected  cases.  The  NCSC  threat  reports  are  therefore  selected  as  a 
source. Similar to the literature review, thematic analysis is applied to data gathered in this 
second stage to provide further insight pertinent to our research aim. We provide additional 
detail in Section 5. 

3.3 Evaluation of Literature Review and Case Analyses 

Based on the findings from academic literature (including suggested best practice) and real-
life  scenarios  (i.e.,  from  security  commentators)  we  look  to  develop  an  improved 
understanding of what factors may drive effective and poor crisis communication following a 
malicious cyber security breach. The themes and observations gathered from the systematic 
literature  review  and  case  analyses  are  therefore  compared  and  evaluated  in  order  to 
establish  consistencies  and  differences.  This  also  enables  an  assessment  of  how  current 
practice found in the case studies differs from, or follows, the best practice in the literature. 
We  apply  the  technique  of  cognitive  mapping  (Miles  et  al.,  2014)  to  allow  the  themes, 
patterns and their relationships to be examined and more clearly compared. This, therefore, 
provides the foundation for our key findings and the framework’s development. We expand 
on this work in Section 6.    

3.4 Develop, Evaluate and Refine Framework 

Using the insights from earlier research stages, we create a framework that is able to inform 
organisations in the preparation and execution of cyber incident response plans pertaining to 
corporate communications. The framework combines best practice and recommendations in 
a structured, coherent format suitable for businesses in planning for and reacting to a cyber 
security breach. To evaluate our proposals, we conduct a series of semi-structured interviews 
with  senior  industry  practitioners  (e.g.,  potential  users  of  the  framework),  including  CISO-
level, and also experts involved with crisis communication after a cyber security incident (e.g., 
directors and leads in crisis management organisations); this latter group is perfectly placed 
to comment on the framework’s contributions. Interviews are used in preference to other 
methods, such as questionnaires, as they allow the capture of in-depth feedback (Burdon and 
Coles-Kemp,  2019).  Interview  findings  are  then  analysed  using  thematic  analysis  and  the 
framework  is  refined  to  incorporate  these  insights.  Additional  information  is  provided  in 
Sections 6 and 7. 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

4. Reviewing Cyber Crisis Communication Literature 

4.1 Sampling Strategy 

Academic  literature  can  provide  a  strong  foundation  for  an  investigation.  In  the  case  of 
communication  and  public  relations  following  a  data  breach,  however,  an  initial  literature 
review found a limited body of work on the subject. Indeed, this is underscored by Gwebu et 
al.  (2018)  who  highlight  the  lack  of  understanding  of  how  organisations  should  respond 
effectively to a data breach. In our systematic review therefore, we sought to adopt a broad 
and more inclusive method to increase the likelihood of finding suitable articles. 

In the context of the PRISMA approach  (Moher et  al., 2009), we first identified a series of 
databases to search and search terms to use. The databases selected were Business Source 
Complete,  Web  of  Science,  Science  Direct,  ACM  Digital  Library,  Emerald  Insight,  and  IEEE 
Xplore.  These  are  well-recognised  databases  and  have  been  used  in  similar  systematic 
literature reviews in the field of cyber security (Spanos and Angelis, 2016; Lezzi et al., 2018). 
They also allow the identification of peer-reviewed articles, which increases the likelihood of 
finding high quality, objective contributions. As our research is focused broadly on security, 
incidents  and  communication,  these  formed  the  core  topics  of  the  search  terms,  and 
synonyms  and  alternative  terms  were  used  for  completeness.  The  final  search  string  used 
was:  ("cyber  security"  OR  "cybersecurity"  OR  "systems  security"  OR  "network  security"  OR 
"information security" OR "cyber crisis") AND ("data breach" OR "hack" OR "incident") AND 
("communication"  OR  "announcement"  OR  "stakeholder  management"  OR  "notification"). 
This query was executed in each database, and where possible, applied to the title, abstract 
or keywords; this is a common technique (Fernández-Alemán et al., 2013; Lezzi et al., 2018) 
and increases the likelihood of finding relevant articles.  

In total, 3516 articles were found; following deduplication, this was reduced to 3405 articles. 
In  line  with  PRISMA,  the  dataset  was  screened  to  ensure  only  relevant  articles  were 
considered. This consisted of a pre-screening activity, where article titles, abstracts and full-
texts were reviewed for relevance. This resulted in 197 articles. Two eligibility criteria were 
then applied. Firstly, only articles from well-regarded and cited journals were included. This 
was to increase the likelihood that the credibility of the literature would be high. The Journal 
Citation Report (JCR) (Clarivate Analytics, 2019) provides a mechanism to compare journals 
based  on  citation  data  and  although  this  does  not  in  itself  determine  the  value  of  a 
publication, it establishes that other authors are referencing its papers. In order, therefore, 
to ensure that academically robust articles were used in this study, those without JCR values 
were discarded. Secondly, articles published before January 2009 were excluded. Although 
the  quality  of  an  article  cannot  be  seen  as  being  related  to  its  age,  changes  in  practice, 
technology  and  legislation  can  make  its  findings  immaterial,  hence  our  decision.  These 
eligibility criteria excluded a further 152 articles resulting in a final set of 45.   

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

Figure 2 – PRISMA flow diagram 

In  Figure  2,  the  sampling  strategy,  including  totals  of  articles  excluded  at  each  stage  are 
summarised.   

4.2 Extracting Research Themes 

The articles identified were then analysed using the thematic analysis approach outlined by 
Braun and Clarke (2006). The process of familiarisation and code generation was performed 
against the articles with the resulting codes grouped into an initial set of categories. Although 
the research aim provided the context for the analysis, it was not used to restrict the code 
generation  process.  Areas  of  research  that  may  help  inform  the  debate  around  effective 
communication  following  a  data  breach  are  potentially  multidisciplinary,  therefore  any 
attempt  to  restrict  coding  at  an  early  stage  could  overlook  noteworthy  insights.  The  code 
generation  approach  consequently  resulted  in  a  broad  range  of  categories  representing 
several  domains.  These  were  subsequently  reviewed  to  identify  themes.  To  explore  these 
further, cognitive mapping was used as it allows data to be visualised and commonalities and 
patterns more clearly identified (Miles et al., 2014).  

8 

Search criteriaDatabases sampledResults after deduplication (n=3405)Results identifiedthrough database searches (n=3516)Results screenedResults included after screening (n=197)Results excluded (n=3208) Eligibility criteria appliedResultsexcluded (n=152)Results included after eligibility test (n=45) Results included in research study (n=45)IdentificationScreeningEligibilityIncluded 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

4.3 Analysis of Key Findings from Cyber Crisis Communication Literature 

A sample of the themes identified is presented in Table 1, along with the number of articles 
and codes related to each theme. This provides a useful indicator of how many times codes 
connected with each theme were identified and the breadth of articles they were found in.  

Theme 

Stock market reaction 

Legal Requirement to Notify 

Message Framing 

Not Disclosing 

Protecting Reputation 

Negative Emotions 

Word of Mouth 

Complexities with Outsourced Functions 

Articles (Codes) 

15 (54) 

11 (47) 

12 (50) 

11 (17) 

11 (36) 

6 (24) 

3 (7) 

1 (6) 

Table 1 – Sample of themes derived from the review 

Below we discuss a selection of the most pertinent of these themes for our research, followed 
by a more general reflection on other relevant themes.  

4.3.1 Stock Market Reaction 

A significant number of articles focused on the stock market impact of data breaches.  Most, 
but  not  all  articles  reported  an  initial  drop  in  share  price  following  a  data  breach.  The 
temporary nature of this drop was seen by some researchers as the result of the “knee jerk” 
reaction of ill-informed investors, rather than a product of the organisation’s effective or poor 
communications  approach  (Wang  et  al.,  2013).  Other  factors  such  as  the  size  of  the  data 
breach,  the  company’s  industry  segment  (Hinz  et  al.,  2015)  and  the  nature  of  its  products 
(Jeong  et  al.,  2018)  were  also  highlighted.  One  article,  however,  argued  that  stock  market 
reaction was greater for organisations that already had poor reputations. It further asserted 
that  their  use  of  communications  strategies  to  demonstrate  that  the  organisation  is 
committed to stakeholders and to addressing the problem can reduce the impact on its share 
price  (Gwebu  et  al.,  2018).  Whilst  this  is  only  a  single  article,  it  does  suggest  that  ‘image 
renewal’ strategies such as these may be effective and beneficial to companies, particularly 
those already perceived as tainted by the public. 

4.3.2 Legal Requirement to Notify 

The  regulatory  environment  associated  with  data  breaches  was  discussed  by  several 
researchers. In particular, the requirement to notify data protection authorities and impacted 
data subjects were assessed. The  General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), for instance, 
stipulates communication should be used to mitigate the risk of harm to individuals but that 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

this  should  be  balanced  against  ensuring  the  cost  of  this  to  the  organisation  is  not  too 
overwhelming  (de  Hert  and  Papakonstantinou,  2016).    Other  studies  highlighted  that 
adequate encryption of the data lost may be sufficient, thus suggesting that communication 
to data subjects is not always required (Nieuwesteeg and Faure, 2018).  Also of interest were 
studies  that  considered  other  jurisdictions,  most  notably  Australia  and  the  United  States 
(Burdon  et  al.,  2010;  Rosati  et  al.,  2017).  These,  combined  with  other  articles  that  draw 
attention to legislation for specific industry segments such as telecommunications, suggest 
that whilst GDPR provides a legal basis for disclosure of a data breach to the public, other 
legislation may apply, particularly where people in other countries are impacted. This multi-
jurisdictional complexity regarding disclosure rules should therefore be considered as part of 
an effective communications approach. 

4.3.3 Message Framing 

Of particular interest are the insights provided on the framing of communications following a 
data  breach.  Messaging  framing  can  be  seen  as  a method  for  distilling  complex  ideas  into 
clear,  compelling  and  digestible  dialogue  (de  Bruijn  and  Janssen,  2017).  This  can  be  used 
following a breach to ensure stakeholders are informed appropriately. Whilst the use of such 
framing strategies is central to the SCCT approach (Syed, 2018), other techniques such as Error 
Management (Zhang et al., 2019) and Extended Parallel Processing Model (EPPM) (Oh et al., 
2018) were also identified as potential framing strategies. These alternatives, therefore, may 
need to be reviewed alongside SCCT as organisations decide what is a suitable approach to 
communication. 

4.3.4 Other Themes 

The  emotional  impact  of  the  data  breach  on  those  affected  was  discussed  by  multiple 
researchers (Chen and Jai, 2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Syed, 2018; Janakiraman et al., 2018). The 
vulnerability  felt  by  individuals  impacted  by  a  breach  was  highlighted  (Janakiraman  et  al., 
2018), as were the different negative emotions directed at organisations dependent on the 
crisis  stage  and  where  the  perceived  blame  was  attributed  (Syed,  2018).  A  link  was  also 
determined between the resulting negative emotions and ‘negative word of mouth’ which 
could in turn damage the organisation’s reputation. It can, therefore, be seen as crucial that 
an effective communications strategy recognise and attempt to alleviate the negative feelings 
of those affected. 

Another  point  that  warrants  discussion  is  the  complexities  associated  with  outsourced 
functions.  This  was  investigated  by  Modi  et  al.  (2015)  who  highlight  the  difficulties  in 
coordinating  responses  and  the  potential  negative  public  reaction  due  to  customers  often 
being  unaware  of  the  third  parties  involved  in  their  transactions.  This  can  often  lead  to 
strained relations with suppliers and to a greater impact on the company’s share price. This 
view is complemented by Porcedda (2018) who describes the care that should be taken by 
organisations  processing  sensitive  data,  such  as  hospitals  when  dealing  with  breaches 
involving  cloud-service  providers.  Although  not  seen  as  a  complete  solution,  the  use  of 
contracts  to  establish  responsibilities  was  put  forward  as  beneficial.  This  may  have  a 
significant bearing on data breach communications and  could, therefore, be considered as 
part of an effective approach.         

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

5. Analysing Real-world Data Breach Communications 

5.1 Sampling Strategy 

As introduced in Section 3, NCSC threat reports were identified as an appropriate source of 
both  notable  data  breaches  within  UK  companies,  and  for  the  definition  of  relevant  cyber 
security  commentators.  Our  sampling  strategy  therefore  began  by  collecting  the  incidents 
identified by these reports; this resulted in a listing of 128 potential cases from threat reports 
between 23 September 2016 and 3 May 2019 inclusive. Cases were then screened to establish 
whether they were associated with data breaches and were UK-centric. We interpreted UK-
centric  to  mean  that  the  organisation  could  be  considered  as  a  UK  company  or  that  UK 
individuals were primarily impacted by the breach. Therefore, organisations such as British 
Airways (BA), which is regarded as the ‘British Flag Carrier’, would be included even though 
they are ultimately owned by Spain’s IAG Group. Table 2 lists the data breaches defined. 

Organisation 

Deliveroo 

B&Q 

Month 
Reported 

Breach 

January 2019 

January 2019 

British Airways (BA) 

September 2018 

Superdrug 

Butlins 

Dixons Carphone  

Clarksons 

PageUp (Whitbread) 

Ticketmaster 

Great Western Rail 

August 2018 

August 2018 

June 2018 

November 2017 

June 2018 

June 2018 

April 2018 

Sodexo 

February 2018 

National Lottery - Camelot 

March 2018 

Deloitte 

Hotpoint UK 

September 2017 

April 2017 

Table 2 – UK-Centric data breaches identified 

To identify suitable commentators, a similar approach to the method for selecting cases was 
used.  This  involved  reviewing  the  threat  reports  sampled  for  references  that  represent 
potential  third-party  sources.  These  could  be  explicit,  such  as  “Security  researcher  Chris 
Vickery has reported…” (NCSC, 2017), or a reference via a hyperlink. Through this review, we 
identified 229 references to third parties. Each of these was then reviewed and categorised 
according  to  whether  it  was  commentary  from  a  security  specialist,  a  report  from  a 
government body, news agency or security company, or a self-report from the organisation 
breached. Where possible commentators were identified, an assessment of their website and 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

other  online  reports  was  conducted  to  establish  whether  they  could  be  considered  as 
appropriate; for instance, if they previously covered security issues, possess a reputation in 
the security field, etc. The commentators selected were:  Schneier on Security, Brian Krebs, 
Troy Hunt, Chris Vickery, Oliver Hough, Gabor Szathmari, We Live Security, Cyberscoop and 
Ars Technica. Having determined both the case studies and the commentators, a search of 
each of the commentator’s websites was performed. This allowed us to gather any relevant 
incident analysis or discussion on each case from all of these sources.  

5.2 Analysis of Key Findings from Commentator Reviews 

The  analysis  of  commentator  data  was  conducted  using  the  same  process  as  outlined  in 
Section 3.2, and led to several important themes being defined. We present a sample of the 
themes in Table 3, along with the number of commentaries and codes related to each theme. 

Theme 

Commentaries (Codes) 

Credibility of Statement 

12 (22) 

Downplaying 

Media Spin 

Not Disclosing or Delaying 

Focus on the Customer 

Previous Breaches in Same Company 

Admission of responsibility 

6 (8) 

6 (9) 

4 (9) 

6 (6) 

3 (3) 

2 (2) 

Table 3 – Sample of themes derived from commentator reviews 

In what follows, we briefly explore some of the most relevant themes to our research.  

5.2.1 Credibility of Statement 

The credibility of statements made by organisations suffering a data breach was questioned 
by commentators. Hunt, for instance, repeatedly stated “I find this a little bit hard to believe” 
when discussing the statement made by the UK National Lottery recommending their 10.5 
million users reset their user IDs and passwords following reported suspicious activity on 150 
accounts (Hunt, 2018b). BA’s account of their own data breach timeline was also questioned 
by researchers who were able to analyse the certificate used by hackers to mimic its website 
(O'Donnell, 2018b). Finally, the actions of Ticketmaster in attempting to blame a third-party 
supplier resulted in a strong public response from  them (Shoorbajee, 2018b). In that  case, 
after  being  accused  of  providing  insecure  software,  the  third-party  publicly  responded  by 
arguing that Ticketmaster had failed to notify them that  Ticketmaster were deploying it to 
their payments page; and that, if they had known, they would have advised it was insecure. 
They also added that Ticketmaster was the only customer impacted. Validating statements to 
ensure they make sense and are backed up in fact, can, therefore, be seen as an important 
element of effective data-breach communication. It can also be argued that blaming partners 
may incite public disagreements which may be considered an ill-advised crisis strategy. 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

5.2.2 Not Disclosing or Delaying 

The  timing  of  communication  relative  to  the  data  breach  and  whether  the  organisation 
chooses to inform the public may also impact credibility. In the cases of Dixons Carphone and 
BA, questions were raised over whether the public was informed in a timely manner. Deloitte, 
however, appeared only to find out they had been breached months after the event. Reports 
by Cyberscoop (Bing, 2017) also suggest that the story was first made public by The Guardian 
news  outlet  rather  than  the  company  itself.  This  reluctance  to  admit  they  had  been 
compromised  is  understandable  given  Deloitte  provides  cyber  security  services  to  many 
major organisations (Krebs, 2017). That being said, the delay may have prompted the whistle-
blower that informed The Guardian to act, resulting in negative publicity for the firm.  

From the case of Deloitte, it may be argued that organisations should aim to communicate 
soon after they discover the data breach. This would however suggest that even if only 
partial  information  is  available,  the  firm  may  have  to  estimate  the  number  of  impacted 
parties. This seems to have been the case for BA who had to revise their numbers upwards 
from  380,000  (Foltyn,  2018a)  to  429,000  (Seals,  2018a).  This  topic  highlights  the  dynamic 
between the need to communicate quickly and the time required to understand the situation 
and  provide  accurate  information.  It  is  thus  important  that  the  timing  of  external 
communication is considered as part of any effective guidance. 

5.2.3 Focus on the Customer 

Commentators also discussed the steps firms were taking to protect those impacted by the 
breach.  For  instance,  a  Threatpost  commentator  summarised  the  steps  BA  was  taking  to 
ensure  customers  were  not  out  of  pocket  (Foltyn,  2018a).  This  type  of  approach  involving 
communicating  compensation  facilities  to  customers  if  they  are  subject  to  fraud  was, 
however, criticised by another commentator for ‘causing complacency’ (Anscombe, 2019). He 
describes his own experience where his credit card was used for money laundering because, 
he implies, his details had been stolen months earlier as part of the BA breach.  Having been 
subject  to  this  type  of  crime,  his  view  was  that  organisations  need  to  communicate  more 
about what they are doing to pursue the criminals. This theme of ‘facing up to the bad guys’ 
was  reinforced  by  another  commentator’s  praise  for  Clarkson’s  response  to  its  breach  by 
informing  the  police  and  accelerating  its  implementation  of  additional  security  measures 
(Cluley,  2017).  Consequently,  it  may  be  concluded  that  such  offers  of  compensation  and 
protection should be outlined in communications along with a determination to support law 
enforcement in order to track down the perpetrators.    

5.2.4 Other Themes 

Downplaying  was  a  tactic  used  by  a  number  of  companies  in  an  attempt  to  reduce  the 
perceived  significance  of  the  attack.  Deloitte,  in  particular,  was  reported  as  trying  to 
‘downplay’  their  data  breach  by  both  Krebs  (2017)  and  Schneier  (2017).  BA,  meanwhile, 
highlighted that there was no evidence of fraud (Shoorbajee, 2018a), whilst Dixons Carphone 
stated that the data did not include PIN or CVV information (Foltyn, 2018b). Whilst this may 
be a statement of fact at that time, this position is undermined by the personal stories of loss 
after  the  event,  such  as  that  by  Anscombe  as  discussed  previously,  and  by  Hunt  (2018a), 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

whose Have I Been Pwned site (https://haveibeenpwned.com) demonstrates that stolen data 
is available to be used long after the breach itself. As this is likely to be recognised by media 
and the general public alike, such an approach may be counter-productive.      

Many of the organisations studied apologised for the data breach. Clarkson’s CEO “sincerely 
apologise[d]  for  any  concern”  due  to  the  incident  (Cluley,  2017)  and  the  CEO  of  Dixons 
Carphone  admitted  the  company  had  ‘fallen  short’  (O'Donnell,  2018a).  Admission  of 
responsibility  and  work  to  address  security  weaknesses  was  seen  as  key  to  restoring 
consumer trust by a report cited by Threatpost (Seals, 2018b). This suggests that this type of 
response, whilst uncomfortable for organisations, may have some merit in the long term.  

Multiple commentators reflected on previous breaches that the impacted companies, notably 
BA (Foltyn, 2018a) and Dixons Carphone (Foltyn, 2018b), had suffered; this was possibly trying 
to imply they had not learnt lessons from prior incidents. This was particularly salient in cases 
where current post-breach communications had claimed to be sorry for the new breach and 
leak of customer data. From an effective communications perspective, a noteworthy point is 
that  organisations  need  to  be  careful  in  how  messages  are  crafted  especially  in  situations 
where  they  have  been  subject  to  incidents  in  the  past.  Next,  we  use  the  findings  of  this 
analysis of commentaries and the systematic review to develop the framework.  

6.  Developing  a  Framework  for  Effective  Corporate 
Communications 

From the analyses in Sections 4 and 5, several key points have emerged which can be related 
to effective and poor corporate communication following a data breach. These are further 
evaluated and compared in this section in order to understand whether there is a consistency 
between  the  guidance  derived  from  these  sources.  Using  these  findings,  a  framework  is 
proposed that seeks to provide support to organisations on how they can provide effective 
external communication following a malicious data breach.  

6.1 Analysis and Comparison of Findings  

In order to assess the findings thus far, a cognitive mapping method was used (Miles et al., 
2014).  This  provided  a  clear  representation  of  the  abstracted  data  from  the  two  prior 
analyses,  allowing  the  visual  examination  of  results.  Several  themes  identified  were 
considered particularly relevant to our research aim, and were further enhanced to develop 
our framework. Below, we present a selection of the some of these to provide insights into 
how our framework was built.  

6.1.1 Blame and Situational Crisis Communication Theory (SCCT) 

SCCT  provides  a  framework  of  categories  of  crises  which  allows  organisations  to  select  a 
communication  response  strategy  appropriate  to  a  given  scenario  (Coombs  and  Holladay, 
2002). In terms of data breaches, an experiment by Chen and Jai (2018) determined a partial 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

correlation  between  reduced  trust  and  organisational  responsibility  for  a  breach.  This  is 
supplemented  by  Syed  (2018)  who  posits  that  perceived  accountability  for  the  loss  of 
personal information can lead to negative emotions potentially resulting in deprecatory social 
media posts from impacted individuals. Both pieces of research, however, show variability in 
participant responses, with Syed identifying changes in emotional response depending on the 
crisis  stage.  It  is  also  important  to  recognise  the  role  that  the  media  has  in  framing  public 
perception. Chen and Jai (2018) for instance, argued that by receiving a data breach message 
via the media, individuals are more likely to consider the enterprise culpable. This  may be 
seen as significant, given the confidence people  can have in these sources  (Kulikova et al., 
2012).  

When  applied  to  data  breaches,  the  approach  advocated  by  SCCT  of  establishing 
responsibility may lead organisations to look at the perpetrators or other parties as culpable 
and see themselves as victims. This appears to be the case in the TalkTalk example where the 
CEO highlighted that she had been a victim herself (BBC, 2015a). Though within this study, 
this  technique  was  only  used  by  Ticketmaster  who  attempted  to  blame  a  supplier,  this 
hypothesis is supported by other research which has established this as a method used by 
businesses (Wang and Johnson, 2018; Wang and Park, 2017). It can, therefore, be concluded 
that it is still utilised for such incidents.  

The  results  of  apportioning  blame  can  be  seen  from  the  commentary  associated  with  the 
Ticketmaster breach, where a conflicting and seemingly plausible account was given by the 
supplier  (Shoorbajee,  2018b).  Such  public  disagreements  can  only  be  detrimental  to  a 
business’  attempt  to  protect  its  reputation.  From  the  commentator  analysis,  the  use  of 
apologies and actions to mitigate the risk of harm to the data subject have been the subject 
of  praise.  This  suggests  that  organisations  that  take  responsibility  and  are  seen  to  be 
proactively trying to address the problem are perceived in a positive light. This is supported 
by some of the research found in the systematic literature review (Janakiraman et al., 2018; 
Soomro et al., 2019). In particular, Wei et al. (2017) found that error management techniques 
could be used following a data breach to improve customer perceptions and this appears to 
be corroborated by further studies (Zhang et al., 2019; Berezina et al., 2012).  

Although the value of taking responsibility appears clear, a number of themes were identified 
in both data sets with regards to the risk of litigation. This is brought into context by the in 
excess of 240 lawsuits raised against Equifax following their data breach in 2017 (Berkman et 
al., 2018). Dependent on the jurisdiction, these actions can result in a significant cost to an 
organisation in terms of damages and legal fees. This has, however, to be balanced against 
the  onerous  sanctions  that  can  be  applied  against  businesses  should  authorities  find  they 
have not followed their obligations to inform impacted data subjects (ICO, 2019a). It is also 
important to recognise that class actions do not necessarily fall on the side of the plaintiff, 
with the burden of proof in some regions, notably the USA, requiring evidence of actual harm 
as a result of the breach. This can be difficult to ascertain, given the amount of personal data 
freely available due to other data breaches. It can thus be argued, that the risk of litigation is 
now outweighed by the positive effects of organisations taking responsibility for the crisis and 
the reduced risk of fines from relevant Data Protection Authorities (DPAs).  

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

6.1.2 Security Basics 

The protection of data subjects by organisations has been seen as an important consideration 
following a breach. The commentary from Hunt around the intentions of the US Federal Trade 
Commission (FTC) with regards culpability for credential stuffing attacks, however, suggests 
that companies should be mindful of key security controls in their data breach crisis planning 
(Hunt,  2018c).  This  is  reinforced  by  the  disclosure  rules,  which  show  that  within  some 
jurisdictions the use of up-to-date encryption can mitigate the risk of harm sufficiently so that 
firms  do  not  need  to  notify  impacted  individuals.  Without  such  mechanisms  in  place, 
corporations  may  be  subject  to  criticism,  particularly  if  they  have  not  learnt  lessons  from 
similar previous attacks (Syed, 2018; Hawkins, 2015). Our analysis in Section 5 determined 
that  the  media  is  very  likely  to  emphasize  previous  failures  with  a  resulting  impact  on 
reputations.  As  part  of  their  crisis  communication  planning  therefore,  businesses  should 
ensure the security basics against which they may be held to account are in place.  

6.1.3 External Partners 

The public disagreement between Ticketmaster and its supplier, discussed earlier, highlights 
the multifaceted arrangements that are often in place for modern products and services. This 
can  make  dealing  with  the  aftermath  of  a  data  breach  more  complex  and  in  particular, 
requires communication to be coordinated between parties. This can be difficult given the 
potential  for  strained  relationships.  Where  practicable,  it  is  therefore  advisable  to  ensure 
contracts  with  service  partners  include  provisions  for  data  breaches  and  that  they  are 
involved with data breach crisis planning. 

6.1.4 Borderless Nature of the Internet 

An article identified as part of the commentator analysis claimed that BA was faced with a 
potential $650 million class-action lawsuit (O'Donnell, 2018b). Although not explicitly stated, 
this suggests that customers from the USA were impacted. This reinforces the earlier point—
the internet is borderless and the data subjects impacted by a  breach may reside in  or be 
protected by the laws of multiple jurisdictions. This can have a number of implications for 
post-data  breach  crisis  communications,  in  particular,  whether  data  subjects  need  to  be 
notified and the timing of such disclosure. Given the complexity of jurisdictions within some 
regions,  it  is  therefore  important  that  organisations  understand  in  advance  their  legal 
obligations in the countries in which they trade. 

6.2 Development of the Framework 

From  a  detailed  analysis  and  comparison  of  the  key  points  pertaining  to  effective 
communication,  we  developed  a  framework  aimed  at  supporting  organisations  in  their 
approach  towards  external  communication  after  a  data  breach.  The  process  of  cognitive 
mapping allowed related themes to be grouped together providing further abstractions. For 
instance,  multiple  themes  from  the  systematic  review  were  found  to  be  associated  with 
possible ‘organisation aims’, and therefore were grouped. Through a review of the associated 
codes and source literature, these were found to be possible organisational aims post-breach 

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

and, because this was supported by evidence from the case studies, they were included in the 
framework under the title ‘Establish aims post breach’.   

In cases where contradictory effective communications guidance was evident, an assessment 
was  made  of  the  weight  of  the  opposing  viewpoints  in  terms  of  the  supporting  academic 
articles,  whether  the  theme  was  present  in  both  results  and,  if  necessary,  against  further 
scholarly or industry sources. The guidance of ‘accept responsibility’ (after a breach) is such 
an  example.  The  concept  of  organisational  responsibility  for  personal  data  was  found  in 
themes within both result sets. Whilst some contradictory data was found in the ‘risk of being 
sued’  theme,  this  was  negated  by  codes  in  the  same  theme  suggesting  that  the  risk  of 
litigation is reduced if data breaches are disclosed early and that there was a burden of proof 
for plaintiffs. This weight of evidence meant this theme was included in the framework within 
a  section  titled,  “Frame  the  Message”.  We  adopted  similar  techniques  to  construct  the 
broader framework. 

We present the framework that resulted from our analysis in Figures 3, 4 and 5; three figures 
were initially used for ease of presentation. The framework is split into two main areas, and 
each has several best practice guidance points as well as aspects that organisations need to 
consider. Here, we remind readers that this is an initial version of the framework which will 
be assessed and refined later. 

Figure 3 – Framework: Before Cyber Crisis 

17 

Before Cyber CrisisESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN KNOWLEDGE BASEENSURE SECURITY BASICS IN PLACEINCORPORATE PARTNERSESTABLISH AIMS POST-BREACHGuidanceConsiderationsGuidanceGuidanceoLegal obligationsoMinimise cost to businessoReputationoProtecting SalesoStock market valueoKey decision makersoJurisdictions of trade and applicable regulationsoFor each jurisdiction:•Industry-specific regulations•Disclosure benchmarks •Sanction regimes•Class action risksoSecurity procedures around storage of personal / sensitive dataoEnsure contracts account for breach situationsoInvolve in planning and rehearsalsoUp-to-date encryptionoTwo factor authenticationoThreat monitoring and open-source intelligenceCyber Crisis ResponseDecide Whether to DiscloseEstablish What to DiscloseChoose When to DiscloseSelect How to Disclose 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

Figure 4 – Framework: Cyber Crisis Response (focusing on decision contexts) 

18 

DECIDE WHETHER TO DISCLOSEIs disclosure mandatory?Knowledge DatabaseShould we disclose anyway?Who is affected?JurisdictionsIs the data sufficiently encrypted?How much data has been lost?Are there industry specific rules?RegulationsFor ImpactedJurisdictionsAssessment on whether disclosure is mandatoryoShows taking security seriouslyoRisk of data appearing on Dark Web lateroRisk of whistle-bloweroReduces litigation riskConsiderationsESTABLISH WHAT TO DISCLOSEYesYesNoRegulatory RequirementsoNeed to ensure data subjects can mitigate riskConsiderationsData Subject PerspectiveoAre they affected?oWhat has been lost?oWho do I call?Media PerspectiveCHOOSE WHEN TO DISCLOSEoBetter to notify public as quickly as possible•Helps address feelings of vulnerability for those affected•Important data subjects hear it directly from you first to avoid a loss of trust•Easier to frame/influence public opinion at an early stage in a crisisoBalance between accuracy and timing –though may be better to over-estimate to get message out quickeroBased on regulations for applicable jurisdictions and advice from Law EnforcementConsiderationsSELECT HOW TO DISCLOSEoIt is usually appropriate to use all available channels for communicationoEnsure message is delivered by CEO / Head of organisation to establish that this incident is being taken seriouslyDirectIndirectEmailSocial MediaWeb PageTraditional MediaSurface MailCyber Crisis ResponseTHE MESSAGEBefore Cyber CrisisPrepare for ReactionGuidanceoSize of breach•Overestimating may have advantages over under reportingoRequires email addresses of those impactedoCan be tailored to target those most impactedoBe mindful that this may enhance perception of harm and generate negative emotionsoOpportunity to set the initial tone of social media postsoInteractive so able to set straight negative rumours and respond to subjects impactedoRisk of negative reinforcement spiral i.e. “Twitter storm” oMore direct and personaloLessens risk of phishingoMay not have correct addressoExpensive and may be seen as damaging to environmentoOften main source of information for many citizensoMedia usually has its own agenda and may not focus on the areas you would preferoLess direct –data subjects need to visit siteoBrief staffoEnsure sufficient social media / call centre resourcesoScale up website and telephony capacityoAnticipate move of transactions to non breached channelsoEnsure capability in place for dealing with media enquiriesoAnticipate drop in share price for first few daysoPut measures in place to disrupt phishing attempts 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

Figure  5  –  Framework:  Cyber  Crisis  Response  (focusing  on  how  to  frame  the  data  breach 
message) 

The  first  area,  Before  Cyber  Crisis  (Figure  3),  focuses  on  planning  activities  that  must  be 
engaged  in  preparation  for  the  possibility  of  a  data  breach.  It  includes  organisations 
establishing  post-breach  aims,  identifying  an  updated  knowledge  base  and  incorporating 
business  partners  in  plans.  The  second  area,  Cyber  Crisis  Response  (Figures  4  and  5), 
concentrates on the activities necessary in the case of a data breach crisis event (with the 
assumption that sensitive or personal data has been breached). A disclosure decision model 
is outlined which presents a series of steps to assist organisations in deciding whether, what 
(e.g.,  framing  the  communications),  when  and  how  to  disclose  an  incident.  Together,  the 
various  points  presented  in  these  figures  seek  to  distil  the  best  practices  on  effective 
corporate communication surrounding a data breach.  

19 

ESTABLISH WHAT TO DISCLOSETHE MESSAGEFrame the MessageGuidanceConsiderationsoAccept responsibility•You are custodians of their data –apologise•Even when stakeholder (including customer) is at fault (e.g., password reuse) you will be expected to have mitigated through monitoring or another control (e.g., multifactor authentication)oAvoid downplaying –may be seen/perceived as not taking breach seriouslyoAddress feelings of vulnerability•Identify ways data subjects can protect themselves•Provide credit monitoring –free to customer or may be seen as profiteeringoAvoid blaming others, such as:•Hacking Groups –this gives them the limelight•Service Partners –this can lead to public disagreements, damaged reputationoKeep the message clear and easy to understand•Avoid jargon•Keep it simpleoReview aggravating factors to avoid message damaging credibility•Previous data breaches –“Are you really taking security seriously?”•Exposure of organisational limitations –“Is your comprehensive security plan that good?”•Breach being discovered by 3rd Party –“Is the security of customer data really at the heart of what you do?”oTake into account age and gender differences, and other customer characteristics•Ethical Stance -Gender and age differences•Younger generation may be less impressed with credit monitoring as a mitigation oOther considerations•What are you doing to bring the culprits to justice•Can you share lessons learnt in due course to help others avoid repeating your mistakes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

Briefly  reflecting  on  the  framework,  many  of  its  components  cover  general  corporate 
communications  and  announcements,  such  as  disclosure  means,  timelines  and  message 
content. These are areas that are likely to also be crucial in incidents where businesses need 
to  communicate  or  announce  an  unintentional  data  breach,  i.e.,  one  without  a  malicious 
nature. The most significant difference may be in the discussion about blame (see ‘frame the 
message’ in Figure 3). With incidents involving an unintentional exposure of data, typically 
the organisation (via its employees or stakeholders) is indisputably at fault and thus cannot 
reassign blame away from itself or act as a victim. In such cases therefore, it may be even 
more crucial to quickly assume responsibility and act. Consequently, while it is not possible 
to  comment  definitively  on  the  applicability  of  the  framework  in  supporting  unintentional 
data breaches given our scope, it may be promising.  

7. Validating and Refining the Framework  

7.1 Participants 

industry  professionals,  both 

Whilst based on robust methods, the aforementioned framework and findings it embodies 
are  theoretical  in  nature.  In  order  to  evaluate  whether  it  addressed  the  gap  identified  in 
industry practice, we therefore sought to validate it through semi-structured interviews with 
in  the  cyber  security  and  public  relations  and 
senior 
communications  fields.  Participants  were  selected  using  a  purposive  sampling  approach 
(Etikan  et  al.,  2016)  due  to  the  impracticability  of  obtaining  relevant  individuals  of  the 
necessary seniority  and expertise using probability sampling methods. This method can be 
seen as an effective way to obtain ‘hard to reach populations’ and has been used in similar 
studies (Unkelos-Shpigel et al., 2015).  

In  total,  32  people  were  approached  using  various  professional  networks  both  online  and 
offline. They represent a broad selection of executives and senior managers across a range of 
industries. A total of 13 agreed to participate; Table 4 presents their demographics.  

Ref. 

Role  

P1 

P2 

P3 
P4 

P5 

P6 

P7 

P8 

Chief  Risk  and  Compliance 
Officer 
Chief Information Officer 

Information Security Manager 
Head of Cyber Security 

Head  of  IT  Operations  and 
Security 
Head of Information Security 

Director 

Director 

in 

in 

Years’ 
experience 
30+ 
Security/IT 
30+ 
Security/IT 
6+ in Security/IT 
30+ 
in 
Security/IT 
20+ 
Security/IT 
13+ 
Security/IT 
20+ 
Security/IT 
30+ 
Security/IT 

in 

in 

in 

in 

Industry 

Financial Services 

Organisation  Size 
(Turnover) 
>£1B 

Retail 

Logistics 
Retail 

>£1B 

>£1B 
>£1B 

Manufacturing 

>£1B 

Financial Services 

>£1B 

Professional Services  <£1M 

Professional Services  >£1B 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

P9 

P10 

P11 

Information 

Information 

Chief 
Officer 
Chief 
Officer 
Director 

Security 

Security 

P12 

Director 

P13 

Head of Crisis Management 

Professional Services  £500M-£1B 

Not for Profit 

>£1B 

Professional Services  <£1M 

Professional Services  <£1M 

Professional Services  £500M-£1B 

in 

in 

in 

20+ 
Security/IT 
15+ 
Security/IT 
30+ 
Security/IT 
30+ in Corporate 
Communications 
/ 
Public 
Relations 
27+ in Corporate 
Communications 
/ 
Public 
Relations 

Table 4 – Demographic information of interview participants 

To allow for a more meaningful discussion, prior to the interview, each participant received 
an interview pack detailing the aims of the framework and the framework itself. The questions 
asked  were  based  on  the  framework,  its  potential  value  and  applicability  in  supporting 
businesses  in  corporate  communications  in  the  event  of  a  cyber  incident.  The  interviews 
lasted up to one hour, with each recorded and transcribed, before then being analysed using 
thematic analysis. This study received ethical approval through our institution’s institutional 
review board (IRB).  

7.2 Findings and Discussion 

7.2.1 Framework Feedback 

From an analysis of interviewee responses, we found that perceptions were overwhelmingly 
positive.  In  particular,  interviewees  complimented  the  structure  and  the  comprehensive 
nature of the framework. For instance, when asked  about their reaction to the framework 
P11 commented: 

 “I think it is very well-conceived. Very well structured, and I think should absolutely 
result in good decisions around communications being made.” 

Two  participants  (P7,  P13)  independently  articulated  that  the  framework  crystallised  their 
thinking. This suggests that the framework resonated with these professionals and also that 
they  ascribed  to  the  practices  it  put  forward.  In  particular,  several  participants  felt  the 
framework would  help them improve their cyber crisis response by  providing them with a 
codified  structure  to  facilitate  the  rollout  of  crisis  communication  capability.  Other 
interviewees felt that they did not need to change their approach to crisis communications 
following  a  data  breach  in  light  of  this  research,  as  the  findings  aligned  with  their  current 
practice. P4, for instance, stated: 

“We might not have it written down like this or in this type of model. But I think we 
probably mirror this quite a lot in how we actually practice.” 

This is an interesting reaction which, upon follow-up, highlighted a clear endorsement of the 
framework generally. 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

The  few  interviewees  who  said  they  would  change  their  current  practice  (in  light  of  the 
framework)  admitted  this  because  they  wanted  to  adopt  what  they  viewed  as  the  best 
practice which it aptly captured. Others felt they should adopt the framework within their 
organisations or for their customers (e.g., in the case of public relations service firms). In some 
instances,  this  appeared  to  be  as  a  result  of  a  perceived  lack  of  maturity  in  their  current 
approach. On these bases, therefore, it can be seen that the framework was welcomed by 
these  professionals  as  a  novel  and  informative  approach  to  outlining  security  incident 
communication practice.  Given the level of industry experience present in the participants 
interviewed, it is also encouraging that many were interested in adopting the approach and 
all but one made unsolicited requests to be provided with the final version of the framework.  

Of  particular  interest  were  the  aspects  of  the  framework  that  interviewees  took  time  to 
explore in greater detail. For instance, speaking about the framework’s pre-event stage, some 
participants  viewed  the  framework’s  guidance  as  crucial  as  they  allowed  organisations  to 
think through how they would communicate given different scenarios, agree on the wording 
of communication and rehearse incident response. P4 commented: 

 “Rehearse  it;  we  talk  about  muscle  memory…  Once  you’ve  been  through  that 
[rehearsals and practicing corporate response] with the right people you don’t have to 
spend a lot of time on it again. We know the answer’s “no”, because we remember we 
went through this.”  

The importance and implications of the multijurisdictional nature of breaches was another 
aspect of the framework’s stages welcomed by participants. P6 and P7 discussed their own 
experiences  of  the  various  regulatory  regimes  highlighting  the  contrasting  approaches  of 
different countries, whilst others such as P13 were more unconcerned as they felt they would 
utilise specialist legal advice if required.  They did not, however, disagree with the need to 
consider jurisdictional issues as part of their crisis response. This point, as well as the others 
highlighted  above,  provide  an  encouraging  review  of  the  framework,  by  specialists  with 
substantial experience and expertise. 

It  was  notable  that  participants  were  in  support  of  organisations  taking  responsibility  for 
breaches  and  not  using  SCCT  strategies,  i.e.,  framing  the  organisation  as  purely  being  the 
victim. P11 noted: 

“When I read it [SCCT], I completely disagreed with it. And it’s never a practice that we 
have put in place for our clients. I guess what I’m saying is that I completely concur 
with your conclusion.” 

Indeed,  a  majority  of  interviewees  were  adamant  that  organisations  were  ill-advised  to 
portray themselves as victims during a cyber crisis.  This was reinforced by the discourse on 
responsibility where an overwhelming majority of the participants supported the view in the 
framework  that  organisations  should  accept  responsibility  for  the  data  loss.  Some  of  the 
complexities prevalent within supply chains – where data was lost by a partner – were pointed 
out  by  participants,  but  the  predominant  view  was  that  public-facing  organisations  should 
accept responsibility as customers entrusted them to be custodians of their data.  

Many participants agreed with the need to front communications via the CEO. P2 elaborated 
on this highlighting the importance of ensuring they are briefed with the right information to 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

be able to deliver the message agreed by the board. One participant, P6, added the caveat 
that the CEO needed to be capable of delivering the message effectively, whilst P11 discussed 
the need to ensure the CEO is only involved in cyber crises (instead of smaller data breaches) 
as otherwise, this may exaggerate the seriousness of a low impact incident. The framework 
also  seemed  to  align  with  the  methods  used  by  interviewees  to  communicate,  with  P12 
recalling use of both social media and email to contact affected parties. The use of telephone 
communication was also covered by participants with both P9 and P12 highlighting contacting 
people by telephone as a viable medium.  

A final notable point highlighted by P1 was that the framework also considers communication 
with internal staff in cases of cyber crises: 

“So, one of the things I was pleased to see was about briefing internal staff. It’s actually 
in my experience one that kind of gets forgotten, is when companies and boards, in 
particular,  spend  a  lot  of  time  worrying  about  reputational  damage,  stock  market 
values, partner things and forget that their employees can feel, why didn’t anybody 
tell me”.  

This  is  a  salient  finding  for  our  work  as  it  demonstrates  that  the  framework  addresses  a 
current challenge in practice, and could potentially add real value to the industry.   

7.2.2 Refining the framework  

Although the feedback on the  framework was positive, participants also provided critiques 
for aspects of the framework. These were grouped into themes and were reviewed with the 
aim  of  improving  the  framework.  This  review  considered  factors  such  as  the  number  of 
participants aligned to the theme and the prominence of the theme within the transcripts. 
Where  there  were  obvious  omissions,  or  where  reasonable  amendments  were  warranted, 
these  were  also  used  to  enhance  the  framework.  In  total,  18  amendments  were  made.  A 
selection  representing  themes  of  particular  interest  are  discussed  in  the  remainder  of  this 
section, before then presenting the refined framework. 

A significant number of interviewees focused on the security basics guidance within the initial 
framework.  P8,  for  instance,  felt  that  organisations  needed  to  establish  a  full  range  of 
countermeasures, whereas P7 critiqued each of the measures outlined and P9 felt two-factor 
authentication was outmoded. P12, however, suggested that the framework should build on 
existing security standards thereby incorporating best practice. Including a section on security 
basics  in  the  initial  framework  was  intended  to  induce  organisations  to  consider  obvious 
security controls pre-event to ensure they had a compelling narrative should a breach occur.  
Although these comments may be due to the background of interviewees, the security basics 
guidance seemed to represent a distraction from the communication focus of the framework. 
This  pre-event  guidance  was  therefore  reframed  to  focus  on  assessing  security  gaps  thus 
avoiding debate on security basics whilst still prompting organisations to ensure any security 
weaknesses are reflected in their cyber crisis communication preparations and messaging. 

Another area was testing and rehearsals. Both P2 and P4 were strong advocates of rehearsals 
as  a  key  element  of  crisis  planning  and  preparation.  They  highlighted  its  importance  in 
improving decision making and facing up to the difficult judgement calls associated with data 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

breach crisis management. In particular, the involvement of the CEO in rehearsals and the use 
of simulations for honing media communications were advocated as good communications 
practice. 

“We didn’t quite do a media interview but we had a media guy in the simulation who 
would ask questions like this and our CEO would say, and ‘I would answer questions 
like this’. It was a bit third-party. They sort of rehearsed.” [P4] 

Other  participants  also  discussed  rehearsals  and  testing  in  the  context  of  their  current 
practice. P10, for instance, was concerned that the regular readiness exercises he convened 
were not taken seriously by some senior stakeholders. P11 felt that organisations that had 
properly  trained  for  cyber  crises  were  more  likely  to  ‘perform  well’.  These  references  to 
rehearsals, training and testing by different interviewees appear to ascribe to the importance 
of  this  aspect  of  pre-event  preparation.  Although  involving  suppliers  in  rehearsals  were 
included in the draft framework on reflection this did not give it adequate coverage and it 
was therefore given its own section in the updated framework. 

There was also another key point related to supporting the board. Providing the CEO with an 
opportunity to test out media strategies aligns with points made by P1. Like a number of the 
other  participants,  P1  felt  that  the  communication  should  come  from  the  top  of  the 
organisation,  but  he  also  suggested  that  the  message  would  be  developed  through 
deliberation by the board of directors. To be able to do this effectively, the participant argued, 
the  company’s  officers  required  support  and  education,  as  well  as  governance.  This  was 
needed to provide structure to the way data breach incidents were handled to prevent them 
being  immediately  escalated  to  the  top  without  due  consideration,  along  with  help  with 
framing the message and dealing with complexities such as multi-jurisdictional breaches. He 
was particularly emphatic on the importance of recognising when, as a group, they were out 
of their depth and so should seek external support.  

P2 and P4, on the other hand, indicated that they would draw on internal expertise such as 
their public relations and legal departments. This difference in approach could be attributable 
to the sector of their organisations. Another possibility is that these other areas do make use 
of external consultants in similar situations, but P2 and P4 are not aware of this due to an IT 
remit.  We  should  also  generally  note  the  influence  of  an  organisation’s  size  as  larger 
enterprise  are  able  to  maintain  specialist  functions  due  to  economies  of  scale.  That 
notwithstanding,  this  point  seems  to  represent  an  additional  area  for  consideration  for 
inclusion in the framework. 

The  difficulties  in  assessing  the  size  of  data  breaches  were  also  discussed  by  some 
participants. P2 described the variation in the number of impacted customers typical of a data 
breach escalation.  

“We always start off, or we seem to start off with a view from the monitoring that 
500,000  customers  have  been  hacked  and  then  you  let  that  play  out.  Then  as  you 
further analyse what’s going on and you’ve really got into it, you end up with 50.” 

Whereas  P13  believed  that  often  the  exact  scope  of  a  compromise  may  never  be  known. 
These  views  were  supported  by  P11  who  highlighted  the  scarcity  of  information  available 
during a cyber crisis and challenged the precept within the framework that it was better to 
over  rather  than  under-report  on  the  size  of  a  breach.  Although  this  stance  was  softened 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

following discussion and P11 was the only interviewee to directly raise this point, the advice 
to over-report, on reflection, appears too strong. A softer position, counselling organisations 
to avoid underestimating, is therefore used in the revised framework.   

Considering this wide range of feedback from interviewees presented above and in our more 
complete  analysis,  we  reflected  on  and  refined  our  framework.  The  updated  version  is 
depicted  in  Figure  6.  This  revision  also  incorporates  the  fact  that  interviewees  seemed 
distracted by the fact that the framework initially consisted of separate images. We therefore 
now  have  combined  these  into  one,  coherent  framework.  This,  we  believe,  will  be  more 
accessible to practitioners.  

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

Figure 6. Refined Framework 

26 

Pre EventCyber Crisis ResponseEstablish/Prioritise Post Event Aims •Protecting Data Subject•Managing key Stakeholders•Minimise damage to reputation•Protecting sales / ability to trade•Legal obligations•Stock market value•Minimising cost to businessConsiderEstablish and Maintain Crisis Communication Capability•Agree decision makers and cross functional crisis team •Educate, consult and support decision-makers / board•Establish crisis information knowledge database•Jurisdictions trading in and applicable regulations•For each jurisdiction:•Industry specific regulations•Disclosure benchmarks •Sanction regimes•Class action risks•How is personal / sensitive data encrypted•Security gaps identified that could be reputationally harmful •Ensure information secured but accessible in event of IT disruption•Review internal capability and retain specialists if required•Establish draft responses for likely scenarios aligned to key stakeholders•Consider website to be activated during a crisis (for FAQs, hotline etc.)•Address challenges with mass comms e.g. bulk emails identified as spam   GuidanceDetermine Security Gaps to inform Communications Response •Security audits and risks•Assess key hygiene factors•Up-to-date/strong encryption•Multi-factor authentication (MFA)•Utilise threat monitoring and open source intelligence (OSINT)ConsiderIncorporate Partners and Supply Chain•Ensure contracts account for breach situations•Determine approach if supplier breached •Involve key partners in planning and rehearsalsPerform Regular Rehearsals and Testing•Incorporate communications response within Business Continuity Plans (BCP) and Major Incident Rehearsals•Involve key decision makers •Work through realistic scenarios•Include scenarios for breaches within supply chainConsiderDecide Whether to DiscloseIs disclosure mandatory?Knowledge DatabaseShould we disclose anyway?Who is affected?JurisdictionsRegulationsfor ImpactedJurisdictionsAssessment on whether disclosure is mandatory•Is it the right thing to do?•Risk of data appearing on Dark Web later?•Risk of whistle-blower?•Shows taking seriously and  business integrity•Reduces litigation riskNoSignificant breach of sensitive or personal dataConsiderRegulatory Requirements•Need to ensure data subjects can mitigate riskData Subject Perspective•Are they affected?•What has been lost?•Who do they call?Media Perspective•Size of breach•Avoid underestimatingYesYesConsiderEstablishWhat to DiscloseGuidanceFrame the Message•Accept responsibility •You are custodians of their data –apologise•Even when stakeholder (including customer) is at fault (e.g., password reuse) you will be expected to have mitigated through multifactorauthentication(MFA) and monitoring•Avoid downplaying –may be seen as not taking breach seriously•Address feelings of vulnerability for data subjects•Identify ways data subjects can protect themselves•Consider providing credit monitoring –ensure free to customer or this may be seen as profiteering •Avoid blaming others•Blaming hacking groups –gives them the limelight•Blaming service partners –can lead to public disagreements•Review aggravating factors to avoid message damaging credibility•Previous data breaches –“Are you really taking security seriously?”•Exposure of organisational limitations –“Is your comprehensive security plan that good?”•Breach being discovered by third party –“Is the security of customer data really at the heart of what you do?”•Take into account age, gender and cultural differences•Ethical Stance –Gender and age differences•Younger generation may be less impressed with credit monitoring as a mitigation •Other considerations•How are you working with law enforcement to bring the culprits to justice?•Can you share lessons learnt in due course to help others avoid repeating your mistakes?Choose When to Disclose•Better to notify public as quickly as possible•Helps address feelings of vulnerability for those affected•Important data subjects hear it directly from you first to avoid a loss of trust•May be easier to frame public opinion at an early stage in a crisis•Obligations around insider trading•Balance between accuracy and timing •Sometimes difficult to ever establish true scale of breach•Avoid underestimating•Based on regulations for applicable jurisdictions and advice from Law EnforcementSelect How to Disclose•If possible, it is important data subjects hear it directly from you first, otherwise it may result in loss of trust•It may be appropriate to use all available channels for communication to increase reachDirectIndirectEmail•Requires email address•May enhance perception of harm and generate negative emotions•Can be tailored to target those most impacted•Challenges include server throughput and spam filtersSocial Media•Opportunity to set the initial tone of social media posts•Interactive so able to set straight negative rumours•Risk of negative reinforcement spiral, e.g. “twitter storm” Website•Less direct –data subjects need to visit site•Can contain FAQs, hotline nos.Traditional Media•Often main source of information for customers•Have own agenda and may not focus on the things you want•Consider list of trusted journalists to help disseminateSurface Mail•More direct and personal•Avoids risk of phishing•May not have correct (up-to-date) address•Expensive and may also be seen as damaging to the environmentTelephone•More personal / caring•Resource intensive•May not have current numberPrepare for Reaction•Brief staff•Ensure sufficient social media / call centre resources•Scale up response website and telephony capacity•Anticipate move of transactions to non-breached channelsDeliver the Message•Keep the message clear and easy to understand•Avoid jargon•Keep it simpleConsiderConsiderGuidance•Ensure capability in place for dealing with media enquiries•Anticipate drop in share price for first few days•Put measures in place to disrupt phishing/scam attemptsGuidance•Ensure CEO / Chair delivers message•To establish organisation is taking things seriously•Reconfirm breach represents crisis to prevent unnecessary escalation•In choosing spokesperson consider their capability in front of mediaGuidanceIs the data sufficiently encrypted?How much data has been lost?Are there industry specific rules? 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

In general, we can see that many of the previous components are maintained but a number 
of  minor  changes  have  been  made  to  the  visual.  These  are  intended  to  further  support 
organisations and provide a platform for appropriate corporate communications following a 
significant cyber security data breach. Such a framework could be aligned with wider business 
continuity  approaches  and  those  targeted  at  security  incident  management  and  response 
within an organisation. 

8. Conclusion and Future Work  

This paper has examined the topical issue of cyber crisis communication, with the intention 
of  improving  the  understanding  of  what  constitutes  effective  external  communication 
following  data  breaches.  Furthermore,  we  have  proposed,  validated  and  refined  a  novel 
framework which is able to provide guidance to businesses in preparing for and developing 
appropriate corporate communication responses to such breaches. As such, this work has the 
potential  for  significant  impact  in  supporting  industry  and  in  providing  a  basis  for  more 
rigorous discussion in academic  practice. Another key emerging area where this work may 
also  be  useful  is  in  cyber  insurance  activities  associated  with  breaches.  Cyber  insurance 
providers are increasingly relied upon to support businesses after a breach, with services such 
as  public  relations  and  reputation  management  (Nurse  et  al.,  2020).  Our  framework  could 
provide a robust and validated structure for such corporate communications plans, which is 
accessible and can be refined according to each business’ context and incident management 
strategy.  

There are some limitations of our work which should be noted. Qualitative data gathering and 
analysis techniques (e.g., sampling, interviews and thematic analysis), albeit mainstream, can 
introduce some subjectivity into research studies. We have sought to mitigate this through a 
rigorous application of these approaches. For instance, in the selection of interviewees, we 
primarily  engaged  with  senior  experts  unknown  to  the  researchers  to  avoid  receiving 
favourable  responses  due  to  pre-existing  relationships.  Moreover,  to  avoid  bias  in  theme 
definition,  in  cases  of  disagreement  assessors  discussed  and  coalesced  on  appropriate 
themes.  Secondly,  this  research  has  been  conducted  against  UK-centric  case  studies  and 
interviews  held  with  UK-based  executives  and  senior  managers.  Whilst  the  systematic 
literature review references articles produced by authors resident in a number of countries, 
because of the significant UK emphasis of this work, further investigation would be required 
to investigate whether this research is directly applicable to data breaches outside of the UK. 
Work  could,  however,  be  undertaken  to extend  this  research  to  include  case  studies from 
other regions, which may provide insight into whether these findings are transferable or any 
adaptations that need to be made. A third limitation pertains to the use of commentary of a 
select  set  of  individuals  to  determine  what  is  effective  communication.  There  may,  for 
instance,  be  other  individuals  suitably  qualified  who  hold  different  valid  opinions.  We 
attempted  to  balance  this  issue  by  using  well-regarded  sources,  and  our  approach  of 
triangulation where we rely on a variety of sources to inform our framework.  

For future work we plan to trial, and potentially pilot, the framework within a company with 
the  aim  of  both  integrating  it  into  existing  processes  and  understanding  its  effectiveness 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

through  its  application  in  scenario-based  rehearsals.  This  would  provide  a  crucial  practical 
assessment of its effectiveness and allow examination for any areas of further improvement. 
We also intend to reflect on the framework and understand the extent to which it is suitable 
to cater to unintentional data breaches. As mentioned earlier, the framework’s guidance does 
appear  to  be  largely  applicable  but  this  will  need  to  be  validated,  and  if  necessary,  the 
framework adapted. These efforts can also take advantage of our planned trial and pilot. The 
framework generally stands to be of great value as it can allow business, cyber security and 
public relations professionals to plan for and react effectively to major data breaches to avoid 
their cyber crisis turning into a reputational disaster.  

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

Author Biographies 

Richard Knight is a research student in Cyber Security in WMG at the University of Warwick, 
UK.  His  research  interests  include  cyber  security,  corporate  communications,  security 
governance, and security in agile development. Richard also has over 20 years of experience 
in industry spanning various IT and corporate support roles. 

Jason R. C. Nurse is an Associate Professor in Cyber Security in the School of Computing at 
the University of Kent, UK. He also holds the role of Visiting Academic at the University of 
Oxford, UK. He received his PhD from the University of Warwick, UK in 2010.  His research 
interests include security risk management, corporate communications and  cyber security, 
cyber resilience, and insider threat. Jason was selected as a Rising Star for his research into 
cybersecurity,  as  a  part  of  the  UK’s  Engineering  and  Physical  Sciences  Research  Council’s 
Recognising Inspirational Scientists and Engineers (RISE) awards campaign. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

None. 

References 

AGRAFIOTIS, I., NURSE, J. R. C., GOLDSMITH, M., CREESE, S. & UPTON, D. 2018. A taxonomy 
of cyber-harms: Defining the impacts of cyber-attacks and understanding how they 
propagate. Journal of Cybersecurity, 4(1). 

ANSCOMBE, T. 2019.  The aftermath of a data breach: A personal story  [Online]. Available: 
https://www.welivesecurity.com/2019/05/30/aftermath-data-breach-personal-
story/ [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

AVERY,  E.,  LARISCY,  R.,  KIM,  S.  &  HOCKE,  T.  2010.  A  quantitative  review  of  crisis 
communication  research  in  public  relations  from  1991  to  2009.  Public  Relations 
Review, 36, 190-192. 

BBC.  2015a.  TalkTalk  cyber-attack:  Website  hit  by  'significant'  breach  [Online].  Available: 

https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-34611857 [Accessed 12/08/2020]. 

BBC.  2015b.  TalkTalk  hack:  MPs  to  hold  inquiry  into  cyber-attack  [Online].  Available: 

https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-34635583 [Accessed 12/08/2020]. 

BBC RADIO 4 TODAY. 2015. I can't confirm that the data has been encrypted - Dido Harding, 
Available: 
[Accessed 

chief 
#TalkTalk 
https://twitter.com/BBCr4today/status/657466492112510976 
09/08/2020]. 

cyber-attack 

executive 

[Online]. 

on 

of 

BENOIT, W. 1997. Image repair discourse and crisis communication. Public relations review, 

23, 177-186. 

BENTLEY, J., OOSTMAN, K. & SHAH, S. 2018. We're sorry but it's not our fault: Organizational 
in  ambiguous  crisis  situations.  Journal  of  Contingencies  &  Crisis 

apologies 
Management, 26, 138-149. 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

BEREZINA, K., COBANOGLU, C., MILLER, B. L. & KWANSA, F. A. 2012. The impact of information 
security  breach  on  hotel  guest  perception  of  service  quality,  satisfaction,  revisit 
intentions  and  word‐of‐mouth.  International  Journal  of  Contemporary  Hospitality 
Management, 24, 991-1010. 

BERKMAN,  H.,  JONA,  J.,  LEE,  G.  &  SODERSTROM,  N.  2018.  Cybersecurity  awareness  and 

market valuations. Journal of Accounting and Public Policy, 37, 508-526. 

BING, C. 2017. Deloitte was breached last year, but investigators didn't find out until March 
[Online].  Available:  https://www.cyberscoop.com/deloitte-breach-2017/  [Accessed 
09/04/2020]. 

BRAUN, V. & CLARKE, V. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative research in 

psychology, 3, 77-101. 

BURDON, M., LANE, B. & VON NESSEN, P. 2010. The mandatory notification of data breaches: 
Issues  arising  for  Australian  and  EU  legal  developments.  Computer  Law  &  Security 
Review, 26, 115-129. 

BURDON, M., & COLES-KEMP, L. 2019. The significance of securing as a critical component of 

information security: An Australian narrative. Computers & Security, 87, 101601. 

CHEN, H. S. & JAI, T.-M. 2018. Cyber alarm: Determining the impacts of hotel’s data breach 

messages. International Journal of Hospitality Management. 

CLARIVATE  ANALYTICS  (2019) 

InCites  Journal  Citation  Reports.  [Online]  Available: 

https://jcr.clarivate.com/ [Accessed 29/06/2019]. 

CLULEY,  G.  2015.  Post-hack,  TalkTalk  treats defrauded  customer poorly  [Online].  Available: 
https://www.grahamcluley.com/post-hack-talktalk-treats-defrauded-customers-
poorly/ [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

CLULEY,  G.  2017.  Shipping  giant  refuses  to  pay  hackers  ransom  after  data  stolen  [Online]. 
https://www.welivesecurity.com/2017/11/30/shipping-giant-hackers-

Available: 
ransom-data/ [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

COOMBS, W. 2007. Protecting organization reputations during a crisis: The development and 
application of situational crisis communication theory. Corporate reputation review, 
10, 163-176. 

COOMBS,  W.  &  HOLLADAY,  S.  2002.  Helping  Crisis  Managers  Protect  Reputational  Assets: 
Initial  Tests  of  the  Situational  Crisis  Communication  Theory.  Management 
Communication Quarterly, 16, 165-186. 

DE BRUIJN, H. & JANSSEN, M. 2017. Building Cybersecurity Awareness: The need for evidence-

based framing strategies. Government Information Quarterly, 34, 1-7. 

DE HERT, P. & PAPAKONSTANTINOU, V. 2016. The new General Data Protection Regulation: 
Still  a  sound  system  for  the  protection  of  individuals?  Computer  Law  &  Security 
Review, 32, 179-194. 

EDWARDS, B., HOFMEYR, S. & FORREST, S. 2016. Hype and heavy tails: A closer look at data 

breaches. Journal of Cybersecurity, 2, 3-14. 

ETIKAN,  I.,  MUSA,  S.  &  ALKASSIM,  R.  2016.  Comparison  of  convenience  sampling  and 

purposive sampling. American journal of theoretical and applied statistics, 5, 1-4. 

FOLTYN,  T.  2018a.  British  Airways  suffers  breach,  380,000  card  details  stolen  [Online]. 
Available: https://www.welivesecurity.com/2018/09/07/british-airways-card-details-
stolen/ [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

FOLTYN, T. 2018b. Major breach at British retailer Dixons Carphone affects nearly six million 
bank cards [Online]. Available: https://www.welivesecurity.com/2018/06/14/major-
breach-british-retailer-dixons-carphone-nearly-six-million-bank-cards/ 
[Accessed 
09/04/2020]. 

30 

 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

FERNÁNDEZ-ALEMÁN, J., SEÑOR, I., LOZOYA, P. Á., & TOVAL, A. (2013). Security and privacy 
in  electronic  health  records:  A  systematic  literature  review.  Journal  of  biomedical 
informatics, 46(3), 541-562. 

GREGORY, A. 2005. Communication dimensions of the UK foot and mouth disease crisis, 2001. 

Journal of Public Affairs: An International Journal, 5, 312-328. 

GWEBU, K. L., JING, W. & LI, W. 2018. The Role of Corporate Reputation and Crisis Response 
Strategies in Data Breach Management. Journal of Management Information Systems, 
35, 683-714. 

HAWKINS,  B.  2015.  Case  Study:  The  Home  Depot  Data  Breach  [Online].  Available: 
https://www.sans.org/reading-room/whitepapers/breaches/paper/36367  [Accessed 
09/04/2020]. 

HINZ,  O.,  NOFER,  M.,  SCHIERECK, D.  &  TRILLIG,  J.  2015.  The  influence  of  data  theft  on  the 
share  prices  and  systematic  risk  of  consumer  electronics  companies.  Information  & 
Management, 52, 337-347. 

HUNT,  T.  2018a.  The  Legitimisation  of  Have 

https://www.troyhunt.com/the-legitimisation-of-have-i-been-pwned/ 
09/04/2020]. 

I  Been  Pwned  [Online].  Available: 
[Accessed 

HUNT,  T.  2018b.  Weekly  Update  78 

(San  Fran  Edition) 

[Online].  Available: 

https://www.troyhunt.com/weekly-update-78/ [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

HUNT, T. 2018c. Weekly Update 103 [Online]. Available: https://www.troyhunt.com/weekly-

update-103/ [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

ICO.  2016.  TalkTalk  gets  record  £400,000  fine  for  failing  to  prevent  October  2015  attack 
[Online].  Available:  https://ico.org.uk/about-the-ico/news-and-events/news-and-
blogs/2016/10/talktalk-gets-record-400-000-fine-for-failing-to-prevent-october-
2015-attack/ [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

ICO. 2019a. Intention to fine British Airways £183.39m under GDPR for data breach [Online]. 
https://ico.org.uk/about-the-ico/news-and-events/news-and-
[Accessed 

Available: 
blogs/2019/07/ico-announces-intention-to-fine-british-airways/ 
09/04/2020]. 

ISO. 2015. BS EN ISO/IEC 27040:2016 Information technology - Security techniques - Storage 

security. London: BSI. 

JANAKIRAMAN, R., LIM, J. H. & RISHIKA, R. 2018. The Effect of a Data Breach Announcement 
on Customer Behavior: Evidence from a Multichannel Retailer. Journal of Marketing, 
82, 85-105. 

JEONG,  C.,  LEE,  S.-Y.  &  LIM,  J.-H.  2018.  Information  security  breaches  and  IT  security 

investments: Impacts on competitors. Information & Management. 

KAEFER, F., ROPER, J. & SINHA, P. (2015) A software-assisted qualitative content analysis of 

news articles: Example and reflections. Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 16, 2. 

KHOMAMI, N. 2015a. TalkTalk cyber-attack: company has received 'ransom demand' [Online]. 
https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/23/talktalk-cyber-

Available: 
attack-company-has-received-ransom-demand [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

KHOMAMI,  N.    2015b.  TalkTalk  hacking  crisis  deepens  as  more  details  emerge  [Online]. 
https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/23/talktalk-hacking-

Available: 
crisis-deepens-as-more-details-emerge [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

KIM,  B.,  JOHNSON,  K.,  PARK,  S.-Y.  &  LIU,  S.  2017.  Lessons  from  the  five  data  breaches: 
Analyzing  framed  crisis  response  strategies  and  crisis  severity.  Cogent  Business  & 
Management, 4. 

31 

 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

KREBS, B. 2017. Source: Deloitte Breach Affected All Company Email, Admin Accounts [Online]. 
Available: https://krebsonsecurity.com/2017/09/source-deloitte-breach-affected-all-
company-email-admin-accounts/ [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

KULIKOVA, O., HEIL, R., BERG, J. V. D. & PIETERS, W. Cyber Crisis Management: A Decision-
Support Framework for Disclosing Security Incident Information.  2012 International 
Conference on Cyber Security, 14-16 Dec. 2012 2012 Alexandria, Virginia, USA. 103-
112. 

LEZZI,  M.,  LAZOI,  M.  &  CORALLO,  A.  2018.  Cybersecurity  for  Industry  4.0  in  the  current 

literature: A reference framework. Computers in Industry, 103, 97-110. 

MADDOCKS,  T.  2015. 

Lessons 

from 

the  TalkTalk 

crisis 

[Online].  Available: 

https://www.mediatrainingassociates.co.uk/lessons-from-the-talktalk-crisis/ 
[Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

MILES,  M.,  HUBERMAN,  A.  &  SALDAÑA,  J.  2014.  Methods  of  describing.  Qualitative  data 
analysis:  A  methods  sourcebook.  3  ed.  Los  Angeles,  California,  United  States  of 
America: Sage. 

MITROFF,  I.  I.  1988.  Crisis  management:  Cutting  through  the  confusion.  MIT  Sloan 

Management Review, 29, 15. 

MODI,  S.  B.,  WILES,  M.  A.  &  MISHRA,  S.  2015.  Shareholder  value  implications  of  service 
failures  in  triads:  The  case  of  customer  information  security  breaches.  Journal  of 
Operations Management, 35, 21-39. 

MOHER, D., LIBERATI, A., TETZLAFF, J. & ALTMAN, D. G. 2009. Preferred reporting items for 
systematic  reviews  and  meta-analyses:  the  PRISMA  statement.  Annuls  of  internal 
medicine, 151, 264-269. 

MORGAN, L. 2018. List of data breaches and cyberattacks in November 2018 - 251,286,753 
Available: 

Governance 
records 
https://www.itgovernance.co.uk/blog/list-of-data-breaches-and-cyber-attacks-in-
november-2018-251-286753-records-leaked [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

[Online]. 

leaked 

Blog 

IT 

- 

NCSC.  2017.  Weekly 

Threat  Report  10th  March  2017 

NCSC. 

https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/report/weekly-threat-report-10th-march-2017 
09/04/2020]. 
2019a. 

[Online]. 

Weekly 

reports 

threat 

https://www.beta.ncsc.gov.uk/section/keep-up-to-date/threat-
reports?q=&defaultTypes=report&sort=date%2Bdesc&start=0&rows=20 
09/04/2020]. 

Available: 

[Accessed 

[Online].  Available: 
[Accessed 

NIEUWESTEEG, B. & FAURE, M. 2018. An analysis of the effectiveness of the EU data breach 

notification obligation. Computer Law & Security Review, 34, 1232-1246. 

NURSE,  J.  R.  C.,  BUCKLEY,  O.,  LEGG,  P.  A.,  GOLDSMITH,  M.,  CREESE,  S.,  WRIGHT,  G.  R.,  & 
WHITTY,  M.  2014.  Understanding  insider  threat:  A  framework  for  characterising 
attacks. In IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops (pp. 214-228). IEEE. 

NURSE, J. R. C., AXON, L., EROLA, A., AGRAFIOTIS, I., GOLDSMITH, M. & CREESE, S. 2020. The 
Data that Drives Cyber Insurance: A Study into the Underwriting and Claims Processes. 
International  Conference  on  Cyber  Situational  Awareness,  Data  Analytics  and 
Assessment (CyberSA), pp. 1-8. 

O'DONNELL,  L.  2018a.  Dixons  Carphone  Cyberattack  Targets  5.9M  Bank  Cards  [Online]. 
Available:  https://threatpost.com/dixons-carphone-cyberattack-targets-5-9m-bank-
cards/132787/ [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

32 

 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

O'DONNELL,  L.  2018b.  Magecart  Group  Pinned  in  Recent  British  Airways  Breach  [Online]. 
Available:  https://threatpost.com/magecart-group-pinned-in-recent-british-airways-
breach/137338/ [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

OH, O., GUPTA, P., AGRAWAL, M. & RAGHAV RAO, H. 2018. ICT mediated rumor beliefs and 
resulting user actions during a community crisis. Government Information Quarterly, 
35, 243-258. 

PORCEDDA, M. G. 2018. Patching the patchwork: appraising the EU regulatory framework on 

cyber security breaches. Computer Law & Security Review, 34, 1077-1098. 

ROSATI, P., CUMMINS, M., DEENEY, P., GOGOLIN, F., VAN DER WERFF, L. & LYNN, T. 2017. The 
effect of data breach announcements beyond the stock price: Empirical evidence on 
market activity. International Review of Financial Analysis, 49, 146-154. 

ROSATI, P., DEENEY, P., CUMMINS, M., VAN DER WERFF, L., & LYNN, T. 2019. Social media and 
stock  price  reaction  to  data  breach  announcements:  Evidence  from  US  listed 
companies. Research in International Business and Finance, 47, 458-469. 

SARABI, A., NAGHIZADEH, P., LIU, Y. & LIU, M. 2016. Risky business: Fine-grained data breach 

prediction using business profiles. Journal of Cybersecurity, 2, 15-28. 

SCHATZ,  D.  &  BASHROUSH,  R.  2016.  The  impact  of  repeated  data  breach  events  on 

organisations’ market value. Information & Computer Security, 24, 73-92. 

SCHNEIER, 

B. 

2017. 

Blog: 

September 

2017  Archives 

[Online].  Available: 

https://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2017/09/ [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 
SEALS, T. 2018a. British Airways Data Breach Takes Off Again with 185K More Victims [Online]. 
Available:  https://threatpost.com/british-airways-data-breach-takes-off-again-with-
185k-more-victims/138600/ [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

SEALS, T. 2018b. ThreatList: 1 Out of 5 Would Ditch a Business After a Data Breach [Online]. 
Available: https://threatpost.com/threatlist-1-out-of-5-would-ditch-a-business-after-
a-data-breach/138612/ [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

SHOORBAJEE, Z. 2018a. British Airways has some good news and bad news about its payment 
breach  [Online].  Available:  https://www.cyberscoop.com/british-airways-additional-
customers-identified-magecart-breach/ [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

SHOORBAJEE, Z. 2018b. Ticketmaster UK trades blame with chat app provider over payment 
data breach [Online]. Available: https://www.cyberscoop.com/ticketmaster-inbenta-
technologies-chat-app-accused-breach/ [Accessed 09/04/2020]. 

SOOMRO, Z. A., AHMED, J., SHAH, M. H. & KHOUMBATI, K. 2019. Investigating identity fraud 
management  practices  in  e-tail  sector:  a  systematic  review.  Journal  of  Enterprise 
Information Management, 32, 301-324. 

SPANOS,  G.  &  ANGELIS,  L.  2016.  The  impact  of  information  security  events  to  the  stock 

market: A systematic literature review. Computers & Security, 58, 216-229. 

STRAUSS,  A.  &  CORBIN,  J.  1994.  Grounded  theory  methodology.  Handbook  of  qualitative 

research. Thousand Oaks, CA, US: Sage. 

SYED, R. 2018. Enterprise reputation threats on social media: A case of data breach framing. 

The Journal of Strategic Information Systems. 

UNKELOS-SHPIGEL, N., SHERMAN, S. & HADAR, I. 2015. Finding the missing link to industry: 
LinkedIn professional groups as facilitators of empirical research.  Proceedings of the 
Third International Workshop on Conducting Empirical Studies in Industry, 43-46. 

WANG, P. & JOHNSON, C. 2018. Cybersecurity Incident Handling: A Case Study Of The Equifax 

Data Breach. Issues in Information Systems, 19, 150-159. 

33 

 
 
 
 
                       Oct-2020: This paper has been accepted for publication in Computers & Security Journal 

WANG,  P.  &  PARK,  S.-A.  2017.  Communication  In  Cybersecurity:  A  Public  Communication 
Model For Business Data Breach Incident Handling. Issues in Information Systems, 18, 
136-147. 

WANG,  T.,  ULMER,  J.  R.  &  KANNAN,  K.  2013.  The  Textual  Contents  of  Media  Reports  of 
Information Security Breaches and Profitable Short-Term Investment Opportunities. 
Journal of Organizational Computing & Electronic Commerce, 23, 200-223. 

WEI,  W.,  HUA,  N.,  FU,  X.  &  GUCHAIT,  P.  2017.  The  impacts  of  hotels’  error  management 
International  Journal  of 

culture  on  customer  engagement  behaviors  (CEBs). 
Contemporary Hospitality Management, 29, 3119-3137. 

ZHANG, L., WEI, W. & HUA, N. 2019. Impact of data breach locality and error management on 
attitude and engagement. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 78, 159-
168. 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
