A Transparent Distributed Ledger-based
Certiﬁcate Revocation Scheme for VANETs
Andrea Tesei1, Domenico Lattuca1, Paolo Pagano2, Marco Luise1, Joaquim Ferreira3, Paulo C. Bartolomeu3

1

0
2
0
2

t
c
O
3
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
5
5
3
1
.
0
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Among the available communication systems, vehic-
ular networks are emerging as one of the most promising and
yet most challenging instantiations of mobile ad-hoc network
technologies. The deployment of such networks in large scale
requires the enforcement of stringent security mechanisms that
need to abide by the technical, societal, legal, and economical
requirements of Intelligent Transportation Systems. Authenti-
cation is an effective process for validating user identity in
vehicular netoworks. However, it cannot guarantee the network
security by itself. Available industrial standards do not consider
methods to promptly revoke misbehaving vehicles. The only
available protection consists on the revocation by expiry, which
tolerates the misbehaving vehicle to remain trusted in the system
for a long time (e.g. 3 months with certiﬁcate pre-loading
according to EU security policy). This poses a huge yet dangerous
limitation to the security of the vehicular ecosystem. In this work
we propose a Distributed Ledger-based Certiﬁcate Revocation
Scheme for Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks (VANETs) that harnesses
the advantages of the underlying Distributed Ledger Technology
(DLT) to implement a privacy-aware revocation process that
is fully transparent to all participating entities and meets the
critical message processing times deﬁned by EU and US stan-
dards. An experimental validation and analysis demonstrates the
effectiveness and efﬁciency of the proposed scheme, where the
DLT streamlines the revocation operation overhead and delivers
an economic solution against cyber-attacks in vehicular systems.

Index Terms—Certiﬁcate revocation scheme,

transparency,
privacy, Vehicular Public Key Infrastructure, Distributed Ledger
Technology, Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks (VANETs)

I. INTRODUCTION

In the recent years, the union of transportation industry and
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) become
real and created new generation vehicles with strong com-
munication capabilities, with the aim to give people better
and safer driving experience. Besides the industrial growth of
these technologies, Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks (VANETs) and
Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) have attracted much
attention also in academia, where all research and standard-
ization efforts are focused on creating secure frameworks that
enable a set of applications in the domain of road safety, trafﬁc
efﬁciency and driver assistance [1].

The ITS and VANETs in general are established with two
types of communications, namely Vehicular-to-Infrastructure

1University of Pisa, Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione, Via
G. Caruso 16, 56122 Pisa, Italy - andrea.tesei@phd.unipi.it,
domenico.lattuca@phd.unipi.it, marco.luise@unipi.it

2National Inter-university Consortium for Telecommunication (CNIT), Via

Moruzzi 1, 56124 Pisa, Italy - paolo.pagano@cnit.it

3Institute of Telecommunications, Universidade de Aveiro, Campus
Universit´ario de Santiago, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal - jjcf@ua.pt,
bartolomeu@ua.pt

(V2I) communication and Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) commu-
nication, that are exploited by two main entities: the device
installed on vehicle, called On-Board Unit (OBU), and the
Road-Side Unit (RSU) which are installed on the road. Gener-
ally speaking, through the ITS protocols and standards vehicles
can exchange safety messages with V2V communications, and
communicate directly with RSU in V2I communications [2].
The open and vulnerable nature of the ITS underlying com-
munication infrastructure, needs sophisticated security mech-
anisms to assure a safe real-life deployment. Furthermore, the
selected security mechanism needs to face the challenging ITS
security requirements, showing technical, societal, legal, and
economical concerns (e.g. privacy, unlinkability, anonymity)
[1].

Authentication is an effective means to ensure the security
of communications. Harmonization efforts (Car2Car Com-
munication Consortium (C2C-CC)) and standardization bod-
ies (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
1609.2 Work Group (WG) [3] and European Telecommuni-
cation Standards Institute (ETSI) Technical Committee (TC)
ITS WG 5 with TS 102 940 [7]) have reached a consensus
on the use of Vehicular Public Key Infrastructure (VPKI) to
manage credentials of vehicles. With a number of Trusted
Authorities (TA), VPKI systems issue different certiﬁcates
to vehicles, namely, Enrolment Credentials (ECs) that are
long-term certiﬁcates used to enroll vehicles in the system,
and Authorization Tickets (ATs) that are pseudonyms that
enable vehicle to access ITS speciﬁc applications and assure
driver anonymity in the system. However, to assure the correct
recognition of misbehaving and malicious drivers, the privacy
of the driver is said to be conditional because the union of
these two types of certiﬁcate can reveal the driver identity
just in case he is liable of violation [34]. In fact, there exists
cases in which vehicles have obtained valid credentials from
VPKI but become compromised and can attack other vehicles
sending false messages: in this situation, it is necessary to
take advantage of new type of techniques based on attacker
behaviour and message information analysis which enable
misbehaviour detection capabilities [12]. Furthermore, once
a violation is recognized, a method to promptly revoke valid
certiﬁcates to compromised vehicle is needed, as well as a
mechanism to distribute revocation information and assure
high security level of the whole system. Unfortunately, mis-
behavior detection and revocation mechanisms are not well
covered by the latest US and EU industrial standard versions
[4], [5], [6], [7], [9], thus limiting the deployment of Intelligent
Transportation Systems that are able to guarantee the security
and safety of the drivers.

 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Contribution of this paper

We propose a novel certiﬁcate revocation mechanism en-
compassing the distribution of revocation information using
Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT). The DLT is used to
store revocation information, thus enabling vehicles to retrieve
such information on-the-ﬂy when a new secured message is
received. The proposed scheme is fully compatible with the
current US and EU standards and its capabilities are demon-
strated with laboratory experiments thanks to the integration
in our Blockchain-based VPKI named IOTA-VPKI previously
presented in [1] and brieﬂy explained in Section IV-A. We also
show that the delay of revocation information distribution as
well as the time needed to complete the revocation checking
matches the standards requirements. Furthermore, we show
that the revocation checking procedure delay is independent
from the status of the certiﬁcate (i.e valid or revoked), as well
as from the number of revoked certiﬁcates, critical require-
ments for a real usage of the proposed revocation scheme. We
perform validation in a pseudo real environment composed by
OBU, RSU and an instance of IOTA-VPKI equipped with our
new revocation method.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section
II we present the problem statement and we brieﬂy describe
relevant background; in Section IV we provide a detailed
description of our proposed Vehicle Certiﬁcate Revocation
scheme, including our previous work IOTA-VPKI, the system
architecture and threat model; in Section V the test cases and
experiment settings are presented together with the obtained
results; with Section VI we further discuss our ﬁndings and
we conclude the paper with future works.

II. BACKGROUND

To protect vehicles from potential attacks due to vulnerable
communications and untrusted networks, a privacy-preserving
authentication scheme is required. From the one hand, authen-
tication avoid a malicious user to impersonate any authorized
vehicle and broadcast false beacon and awareness messages.
On the other hand, the privacy-preserving characteristic of
such authentication scheme guarantees the drivers to be pro-
tected against traceability.

Generally speaking, all methods aiming to protect vehicular
systems can be broadly categorized as proactive or reactive
[23]. Proactive security consists on the prevention of potential
attackers to access the system (i.e. every mechanism that en-
forces a security policy, for example a VPKI), whereas reactive
security consists of a detection and reaction steps that aims to
identify and correct malicious activities within the system (i.e.
misbehavior detection and revocation mechanisms). However,
only the fusion of these two types of protection can assure
the high level of security that is required for an ITS ﬁeld
deployment.

For example, if we consider the proactive security method
provided by a VPKI, the possession of valid credentials is not
enough to assure that each actor of the system behave as stated
in the standards and protocols. There are many cases when an
issued certiﬁcate should be not valid anymore: for example, the
related cryptographic material could become compromised;

2

or changing speciﬁc ﬁelds within the issued certiﬁcates is
necessary for administrative reasons; or even worst when a
vehicle become compromised and starts violating registration
terms or obligations. In these conditions, a reactive security
approach needs to be available in order to identify misbehaving
vehicles. In addition, a method to revoke the certiﬁcates issued
to the compromised vehicle should be enforced. Otherwise,
false messages can be potentially broadcasted to others and
lead to severe accidents [12]. To avoid this situation, it is
particular important
the security measures consider a
fusion of proactive and reactive methods.

that

According to [13], a revocation scheme must identify the

following three aspects:

• What set of permissions are to be revoked;
• What conditions must be met for the revocation of trust

to occur;

• What mechanism is used to communicate information
about the revocation event to other vehicles enrolled and
authorized in the system.

The ﬁrst and last aspects are part of the so called revocation
process that is described in [12] by Wang et al. as further
divided in three stages: revocation information resolution, re-
vocation information distribution, and revocation information
use. First, in order to succeed in revoking a compromised
vehicle permanently, it is necessary to resolve its real identity.
This stage is the revocation information resolution and it
can be done by analyzing the malicious messages sent by
the compromised vehicles and its corresponding anonymous
certiﬁcates. Once the real identity of the compromised vehicle
has been resolved, the updated information about revoked
certiﬁcates should be distributed to vehicles in the network
as soon as possible, so that the vulnerability window can be
minimized. This second stage is the revocation information
distribution. Finally, the revocation information is used by
vehicles to determine whether or not the sender of a message
should be trusted. This ﬁnal stage is the revocation information
use and consists on the revocation checking process done
every time a new secured message is received. This process
should be as efﬁcient as possible in order to minimize message
processing latency.

Revocation schemes mainly depend on the underlying au-
thentication available in the vehicular security architecture.
As stated in Section I, standardization bodies have reached
a consensus on the use of VPKI to authenticate and authorize
vehicles in the system: this is the reason why our analysis
is concentrated on revocation mechanisms that are compatible
with this kind of authentication scheme. We will analyze other
revocation schemes in Section III.

In general, each revocation mechanism for vehicular net-
works should be take in consideration the following require-
ments:

• The distribution of the revocation information to non-
revoked vehicles should happen as soon as possible, i.e.
minimizing the vulnerability window [22];

• The revocation process should be transparent, i.e. each
entity should be able to check when a speciﬁc certiﬁcate
was revoked;

• The revocation checking process should be as efﬁcient as
possible so that message processing latency constraints
can be matched (at most 25 ms, i.e. 1
4 of the critical
latency time deﬁned in [21]).

3

Fig. 2: ETSI misbehavior reporting use case [10].

Fig. 1: Different scopes at which detection mechanisms can
operate [12].

The second general aspect of a robust revocation scheme
deﬁned in [13] is related to the so called misbehavior detec-
tion. This mechanism is positioned in the category of reactive
security mechanisms and belongs to detection step of such
protection methods. According to [12], misbehavior detection
consists on the classiﬁcation of the messages as correct or
incorrect, where the correctness is represented by messages
that reﬂect the real world. Misbehaving nodes are thus any
node that transmit erroneous data that it should not transmit
when the hardware and software are behaving as expected.
Other deﬁnitions available in literature [14], [15], [16], [17]
often distinguishes between faulty node and malicious node:
the former are those end entities that produce incorrect or
inaccurate data without malicious intent (e.g. faulty software
or damaged hardware); the latter are actually attacker nodes
that are transmitting erroneous messages with the goal to
exploit system vulnerabilities to degrade the integrity of the
data exchanged in the network. A classiﬁcation of detection
mechanisms based on different scopes is depicted in Figure
1, namely: local detection checks internal vehicle consistency;
cooperative detection relies on collaboration between vehicles
and RSUs; ﬁnally, global detection refers to detection that
occurs in collaboration with the trust authorities.

In all cases, once detection is done a reaction step is exe-
cuted consisting on the effective revocation of valid credentials
issued to the misbehaving vehicle. This strict dependency
between revocation and misbehavior detection processes high-
lights that they must be taken into account for a real-life and
safe deployment of ITS and VANETs in general.

To the best of our knowledge,

the only standardization
activity that is running for misbehavior detection support is an
european pre-standardization study available in [10]. This is a
technical report that describes different approaches that can be
compatible with current standards. In this report detection and
reporting methods and techniques are described and different
use cases are presented to describe different scenarios.

Figure 2 depicts the misbehavior reporting use case pro-
posed by ETSI in [10],
in which every ITS station can
perform misbehavior detection of neighbouring vehicles and
report it to the Misbehavior Authority (MA). MA is then
fully integrated and connected with backend VPKI in order to
trigger revocation process. Furthermore, a ﬁrst draft version of
the misbehaviour report message format is described in this
technical report that is compatible with the existing standard
on Certiﬁcate format (ETSI 103 097 [9]).

That being said, as stated in Section I, besides the consensus
reached by U.S. and European standards on the authentication
scheme to be used in ITS, the only revocation mechanism de-
ﬁned is related to TAs by means of Certiﬁcate Revocation List
(CRL). There is no speciﬁc revocation method for vehicles that
minimize the so called vulnerability window which represents
the period in which a recognized misbehaving vehicle remains
trusted by other end entities and potentially expose other
drivers to damage. From US standards point of view, IEEE
1609.0 [3] and IEEE 1609.2 [4] (and subsequent revisions
[5], [6]) explicitly state that a method to distribute revocation
information is still an open point that needs to be addressed
also considering driver privacy concerns. From the European
perspective, neither ETSI standards [7], [8], [9], nor European
Commission (EC) certiﬁcate policy [18] and norm [19] for
Cooperative ITS (C-ITS) consider a revocation method for
vehicle certiﬁcates (i.e. ATs, and ECs): they explicitly state
that no revocation method for authorization tickets and enrol-
ment credentials is available [8]. In fact, a passive revocation
mechanism is currently used: it does not inform end entities
that a speciﬁc node is to be considered revoked, but informs
all relevant TAs so that when the valid credentials expire,
the revoked node cannot acquire a new valid certiﬁcate. This
is known as revocation by expiry and considering that the
current standards are completed by security policy [18] that
allows a pre-loading period of three months (i.e. vehicles can
request for multiple certiﬁcates before starting using them),
the vulnerability window for the whole system is too high to
be ready for a real life deployment.

Thus, the currents standards only deﬁne a revocation method

suitable for TA revocation that is based on Certiﬁcate Revoca-
tion Lists (CRL). CRLs are a blacklist-based revocation mech-
anism that is published by the TA and contains the certiﬁcates
that have been revoked after a misbehavior detection process.
This approach can be extended to vehicles as well but it comes
with several issues. First of all, vehicular networks are delay
sensitive. Hence, revocation information should be delivered
to vehicles as timely as possible in order to minimize the
vulnerability window explained above. In order to match these
requirements, CRLs should be distributed frequently causing
high bandwidth consumption. This problem can be alleviated
by using compression techniques (e.g. Bloom Filter, Delta-
CRL), or by doing selective broadcasting based on geographic
regions. However, this will move the issue to the RSU/OBU
side thus increasing their complexity. Considering the RSU
case, a geographic-aware lookup on the CRL needs to be
executed to broadcast the revocation list that applies to the
covered region. As fpr the OBU, it needs to implement a
Bloom Filter algorithm to retrieve the revocation information
and use it once a new secured message is received. Secondly, it
is well known that TA are necessary for VANETs because they
are responsible for vehicle registration, network maintenance,
and dispute arbitration [24]. However, their operations should
be transparent to all entities participating in the network. CRLs
are published by the TA without any mechanism useful to
check whether a speciﬁc certiﬁcate was revoked. If a TA
becomes compromised, nobody can assure the correctness of
the CRLs’ content. Finally, as the CRLs start growing with a
huge number of revoked certiﬁcates, the revocation checking
delay will increase accordingly and this may imperil the safety
latency constraints deﬁned in the standards.

That being said,

the lack of a revocation method and
misbehaviour detection deﬁnition in the standards and the
known issues of CRL-based approach are the main limitations
for a real life and large-scale deployment of ITS technologies.
That is the reason why our analysis if focused on extending
the previous IOTA-VPKI work presented in [1] to support a
new authority named Misbehaviour Authority (MA), which
triggers the proposed vehicle certiﬁcate revocation mechanism
(described in Section IV) and matches the requirements of ITS
systems.

III. RELATED WORK

As stated in Section II, CRL-based revocation schemes are
the most widely used certiﬁcate revocation schemes and are
proposed in many previous contributions. In [12] Wang et al.
offers a systematic investigation and wide perspective about
the available revocation methods, concentrating their analysis
on CRL-based approaches. They classify approaches based
on the location where the revocation information has been
placed: they considered revocation mechanisms implemented
at the RSU side and at the Vehicle side, explaining issues and
limitations of different approaches.

Another emerging technique is based on Merkle Hash
Trees (MHTs). In [25] Ali et al. proposed a certiﬁcateless
public key signature scheme that takes advantage of MHT
to implement a transparent revocation mechanism exploiting

4

Proof of Presence (PoP) and Proof of Absence (PoA) to verify
the revocation status before verifying the signature on secured
messages.

An additional MHT-based approach is proposed by Ganan
et al. in [26]. Here, a CRL is generated by the CA exploiting
a MHT. In this case,
the root hash value of such MHT
is distributed to all vehicles to perform revocation checking
efﬁciently.

In [27] Li et al. proposed a novel data structure named
the Merkle Patricia tree (MPT) that extends the conventional
blockchain structure to provide a distributed authentication
scheme without the revocation list.

Other approaches used in anonymous authentication are
Group Signature (GS) as proposed in [28], [29] and [30].
A GS-based approach implements revocation by changing
the shared key used to digitally sign the secured message
exchanged by vehicles. Such scheme needs to implement an
efﬁcient key management mechanism to distribute the shared
key among trusted parties.

In [31] Ma et al. proposed a decentralized key management
mechanism (DB-KMM) that implements automatic registra-
tion, update and revocation of user’s public key based on the
smart contract technique.

Wang et al. proposed in [32] a tamper-proof device (TPD)
based and privacy-preserving authentication scheme that uses
a RSU to generate up-to-date secrets needed by the vehicle
to generate private keys. Whenever a vehicle is recognized to
be misbehaving, the RSU stops to generate secrets for that
vehicle.

Another interesting approach was proposed by Verheul et
al. in [33] and is named Issue First Activate Later (IFAL).
It has the ability to pre-issue pseudonym certiﬁcates that are
only usable upon receiving small activation codes.

IV. PROPOSED SCHEME

A. Blockchain-based Vehicular PKI: IOTA-VPKI

Fig. 3: IOTA-VPKI Architecture: new version.

We introduce IOTA-VPKI in [1] as adaptation of SEC-
MACE credential management system [34]. SECMACE was

proposed by Khodaei et al and it is fully compliant with
the current US and EU standards described and analyzed in
Section II. We use the SECMACE reference architecture as our
starting point and we extend it with the introduction of IOTA
DLT implementation as the transparent storage backend of
each certiﬁcate issued to vehicles. As extensively described in
[1], IOTA is a DAG-based DLT implementation well suited for
IoT domain. Devices with small resource capacity can issue a
transaction by communicating with the nearest neighbor IOTA
Reference Implementation node (IRI).

Our VPKI architecture is composed by a set of authorities
with distinct roles: the Root Certiﬁcation Authority (RootCA)
is the highest-level authority and represents the trust anchor
of the whole system; the Long Term Certiﬁcation Authority
(LTCA) is responsible for vehicle enrolment in the system
and Long Term Certiﬁcate (LTC - also known as Enrolment
Credential) issuance; the Short Term Certiﬁcation Authority
(STCA) is responsible for vehicle access authorization to
system applications and facilities by issuing Short Term Cer-
tiﬁcate (STC - also known as Authorization Ticket); ﬁnally
the Resolution Authority (RA) can resolve a STC to a LTC
identity so that a misbehaving, malfunctioning, or outdated
vehicle can be promptly revoked.

We borrow from SECMACE also the concept of home and
foreign domains: an Home domain is the one where the vehicle
is registered from the beginning; while a Foreign domain is
the one which a vehicle can reach after leaving its Home
domain. Namely, a domain is deﬁned as a set of vehicles,
registered with their Home-LTCA (H-LTCA), subject to the
same administrative regulations and policies.

When a ITS station wants to send a message, it has to
acquire rights to access the C-ITS communications from the
H-LTCA ﬁrst by sending its own pre-registration recipe (step
1 and 2 in Figure 3). Then, it negotiates rights to access the
C-ITS services from H-STCA (step 3 and 4 in Figure 3).
Afterward, it digitally signs V2X messages with its private
key ki
v (corresponding to the currently valid STC), and ﬁnally
sends the message if and only if all the previous steps are
successfully completed (namely the vehicle is considered
registered and trusted).

In particular, we used the IOTA feature named Masked
Authenticated Message (MAM) channels to implement data
ﬂow between TAs and vehicles. MAM channels are always
managed by a channel owner that publishes new data on such
channel. In turn, devices can subscribe to the channel with
read-only permissions and get data that is available [41]. There
are three modes for MAM channels:

• Public: everyone can view the data;
• Private: only the owner can view the data;
• Restricted: data is protected by a sideKey, and the owner

gives this key only to authorized viewers.

In the ﬁrst IOTA-VPKI architecture version, TAs created a
restricted MAM channel to establish a certiﬁcate data ﬂow
and spread the sideKey with pre-registered vehicles to enable
them to decrypt the content of the messages (i.e., security
management messages) that TAs publish on the channel. The
use of MAM restricted channels act as a Group Signature

5

(GS) based approach in which revocation can be obtained by
changing the sideKey whenever a new vehicle is revoked.

However, whenever we start implement IOTA-VPKI we
realize that MAMs have a lot of limitations. First of all, using
GS approach with restricted MAM channel is not a scalable
solution because the sideKey needs a distribution algorithm
that extends the attack surface of the whole system (e.g. Man-
in-the-middle attacks during key distribution phase). Secondly,
the only way to perform the revocation of a vehicle consists
on changing the sideKey. This creates a potentially unbounded
vulnerability window that depends on the key distribution
algorithm execution time. Lastly, by using a core feature of
a speciﬁc DLT implementation would lock-in our architecture
to this speciﬁc technology becoming dependent on its future
evolution.

For this reason we completely abandoned the MAM ap-
proach and embraced the concept of IOTA zero-value trans-
actions [42] as the mean to establish the data ﬂow between
CAs and vehicles. As depicted in Figure 3, we have changed
MAM messages related to VPKI operations with general
storage in IOTA Tangle exploiting zero-value transactions. The
only known limitation of zero-value transactions is related
to the so called IOTA Snapshot process: when this process
takes place, all zero-value transactions get reset. Hence, the
stored information gets lost. To overcome this issue, an IOTA
permanent node is required to store the IOTA-VPKI zero-value
transactions and let them remain available even after a Snap-
shot process. This kind of permanent node is called Chronicle
that is a permanode solution which takes transactions from a
node and stores them in a distributed database that is secure
and scales well [43].

In the new IOTA-VPKI we have also introduced a new au-
thority named Misbehavior Authority (MA) that is responsible
of Misbehavior Detection process that is needed to trigger
the revocation process. The way that the MA performs the
detection of misbehaving vehicles is out of the scope of the
present paper and is currently under investigation. This new
approach exploits the basic transactions of a DLT implementa-
tion, ensuring that the proposed architecture can be extended to
support different available DLT technologies, thus avoiding the
lock-in problem described above. Furthermore, it enables the
implementation of a general purpose, transparent, and privacy-
aware revocation mechanism that also supports the active
revocation of misbehaving vehicles while taking advantage of
the DLT to store and distribute revocation information in a
very short time. The proposed revocation mechanism is further
discussed in the next subsection.

B. Vehicle Certiﬁcate Revocation Mechanism

Starting from the latest version of IOTA-VPKI architecture
depicted in Figure 3, we developed a novel certiﬁcate revo-
cation mechanism fully compliant with EU and US standards
as well as European Certiﬁcate Policy [18]. This certiﬁcate
revocation method takes advantage of the DLT to store and
distribute revocation information to all participants in the
network.

As described in Section II, the revocation process starts
whenever a vehicle is detected to be malfunctioning or misbe-

6

Fig. 4: Revocation mechanism ﬂow diagram.

having. Regardless of what is the intent (i.e. faulty or malicious
node), the valid credentials previously issued to the misbe-
having vehicle need to be revoked and all other participants
need to be promptly informed. To do so, we considered the
unique representation of a certiﬁcate deﬁned in IEEE 1609.2
(clause 6.4.3) [4] which deﬁnes the so called whole-certiﬁcate
hash algorithm, namely the standard way to encode the whole
certiﬁcate with secure hash function. This algorithm produces
an hash value of 3, 8, or 10 bytes (i.e. ASN.1 deﬁnitions:
HashedId3, HashedId8, and HashedId10 respectively). Given
the standard hash representation of a generic certiﬁcate, we
analyzed the current IOTA address format deﬁned in [44],
and used the IOTA ofﬁcial library to encode the certiﬁcate
hash value in a valid tryte IOTA address format. In this way,
whenever a new misbehaving vehicle is detected by the MA,
the RA simply calculates the tryte-encoded representation of
the given certiﬁcate hash value and attaches a new zero-value
transaction to the IOTA Tangle. The transaction also contains
the tryte-encoded value signed by the RA: this is needed to
avoid Denial of Service (DoS) attacks from malicious actors
trying to revoke vehicles without authorization.

On the OBU side, whenever a new secured message is
received the Security Entity (SE) checks the revocation status
of the corresponding certiﬁcate by accessing IOTA Tangle at
the address obtained by tryte-encoding the sender’s certiﬁcate:
if at least a transaction exists, the certiﬁcate were revoked
and the message cannot be trusted. The ﬂow diagram of the
revocation process that starts from a misbehavior detection
event is depicted in Figure 4.

Since the revocation checking consists only on the tryte
value calculation of the sender’s certiﬁcate hash value, the
time needed to check revocation status is constant and it is
independent from the number of the revoked certiﬁcates.

The revocation checking process happens directly by ac-
cessing the IOTA Tangle without V2I communication: this
avoids to increase the trafﬁc through VPKI elements and
is
increases the availability of revocation information that

always accessible by vehicles and trust authorities. Just in case
a vehicle has a limited access to the network and cannot access
the IOTA Tangle directly, it can exploit Peer-to-Peer (P2P)
communication to delegate revocation checking process to a
neighbouring vehicle. A similar P2P communication process is
deﬁned in IEEE 1609.2 [4] as well as in ETSI 102 941 [8] for
P2P Certiﬁcate Distribution (P2PCD) used when end entity
has not access to cellular network connection. In the worst
case scenario, when neighbouring vehicles also do not have
access to the Web, the revocation checking process cannot
be performed. Therefore, to avoid taking into consideration
messages from vehicles that may have been compromised, the
received secured message is ignored.

Apart from the RA and the MA that are responsible for
misbehavior detection and the revocation process, other trust
authorities are important as well in order to resolve the identity
of the misbehaving vehicle starting from anonymous certiﬁcate
(i.e. STC). In fact, they are involved in the revocation process
because the ﬁrst step that the RA needs to complete is the
resolution of the compromised vehicle identity. Furthermore,
once the revocation information is stored on the IOTA Tangle,
they need to be promptly informed so that a new valid
certiﬁcates to the revoked vehicle can not be issued.

In Figure 5 is depicted the ﬂow diagram that models the
identity resolution of a misbehaving vehicle. Once the MA
sends a misbehavior report to RA, the STCA is contacted
by the RA to obtain information about the STC used by the
misbehaving vehicle to sign V2X messages. During this step,
the STCA looks inside the list of issued certiﬁcates searching
for the LTC that was used by the compromised vehicle to
obtain the STC. With this information, the RA contacts the
the LTC received by
LTCA to retrieve information about
the STCA. At this point, the RA can match the information
received by the two trust authorities in order to extract the
so called canonical identiﬁer of the compromised vehicle.
Hence, the identity resolution process is completed and the
RA needs to communicate to the LTCA that the retrieved

7

Fig. 5: Identity resolution of misbehaving vehicle ﬂow diagram.

canonical identiﬁer needs to be banned from the system and
cannot obtain new valid certiﬁcates. This communication does
not happen with the STCA because, as stated in the standards,
every STC issuance process depends on the acceptance of the
LTCA that is contacted by the STCA to validate the LTC
provided by the vehicle wishing to obtain a new short-term
anonymous certiﬁcate.

Generally speaking, the proposed revocation scheme com-
pletely matches the requirements discussed in Section II:
it realizes the distribution of the revocation information by
exploiting the DLT underlying technology; it guarantees zero-
overhead on vehicle during the revocation checking process;
and, thanks to the DLT underlying storage, it also provides
transparency to the whole process.

Our revocation mechanism was tested in a pseudo-real
deployment set up with a IOTA Private Tangle, an instance
of IOTA-VPKI extended with this revocation scheme, a RSU
simulated on a desktop workstation, and an OBU that run
real software on embedded system equipped with a System-
on-Module (SOM). The results of such simulations are better
than the ones provided by SECMACE comparative analysis
[34] and will be further discussed in Section V.

C. Threat Model

To complete our analysis, we considered ETSI Threat,
Vulnerability and Risk Analysis (TVRA) report in order to
analyze possible threats and vulnerabilities in our proposed
solution. The TVRA method is used to identify risks by
isolating vulnerabilities of the system, assessing the likelihood
of malicious attacks on that vulnerability and determining the
impact that such an attack will have on the whole system [11].
The report identiﬁed the following security objectives:

• Conﬁdentiality: every information sent

to or from an
authorized entity should not be revealed to any party
not authorized to receive the information. Furthermore, it
should not be possible for unauthorized party to deduce

the location, identity, and route taken by a vehicle based
on communication trafﬁc analysis;

• Integrity: every information sent to or from an authorized
entity should be protected from unauthorized modiﬁca-
tion, deletion, malicious modiﬁcation or manipulation
during transmission;

• Availability: access to ITS services by authorized entities
should not be prevented by malicious activity within the
system;

• Accountability: it should be possible to audit all changes
to security parameters and applications like updates,
additions, and deletions;

• Authenticity: it should not be possible for an unauthorized
user to impersonate authorized entity when communicat-
ing with other authorized party.

For each security objective, the report lists a set of vulnera-
bilities that may be exploited from malicious actors to degrade
the security level of the whole system. We selected threats that
may apply to the proposed revocation scheme as well as to
the IOTA-VPKI architecture.

• Denial of Service (DoS) attack: this kind of attacks can
substantially degrade the availability of the whole system
with, for example, the intentional introduction of high
volume of messages that result in a limitation of access
to ITS services by authorized and harmless vehicles. The
IOTA-VPKI as well as the proposed revocation scheme
take advantage of the DLT technology to store VPKI op-
erations and revocation information. In this condition, if
an attacker wants to degrade the information availability
the only way is to attack the underlying DLT technology
directly which is challenging [45];

• Manipulation attack: malicious modiﬁcation or manipu-
lation of credential management information can severely
limit the integrity security objective. The IOTA-VPKI
and the proposed revocation scheme provide protection
against manipulation attacks by requiring cryptographic
signatures within each message sent to authorized ve-

hicles and stored in the DLT. Without the RA and TA
private keys it is not feasible for an attacker to modify
credentials or revocation information stored in the DLT
or sent to authorized vehicles;

• Insertion of information attack: insertion of crafted mali-
cious information aims to degrade the integrity of the
information available in the system. If the malicious
information will be trusted by harmless vehicles to take
decisions, the consequences can weaken the correctness
of security operations and management, or worse, en-
danger the life of the passengers. Revocation information
contains the RA signature so it can only be stored on the
IOTA Tangle by the authorized authority (RA). Signature
cryptography prevents malicious actors to impersonate
the RA thus avoiding unauthorized insertion of informa-
tion within the system;

• Man-In-The-Middle attack: a malicious actor can degrade
the integrity of the VPKI system by routing vehicle’s
credential requests to the attacker that, in this way, imper-
sonates a TA. Furthermore, an attacker can eavesdrop the
revocation veriﬁcation requests through the IOTA Tangle
and attempt to make the revoked vehicle trusted by other
vehicles. The proposed revocation mechanism prevents
such scenario by inserting the RA signature within the
revocation information stored on the IOTA Tangle: this
way any harmless vehicle can check the signature and
the integrity of the revocation information.

In summary, the new version of IOTA-VPKI architecture
and the revocation mechanism proposed in this paper is robust
against Denial of Service, Manipulation, Malicious insertion
of Information, and Man-In-The-Middle attacks while meeting
the Availability, Integrity, Authenticity, Accountability and
Conﬁdentiality security objectives and requirements stated in
ETSI TVRA report [11].

V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

A. Experiment Settings

To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed solution,
a pseudo-real environment was created in our laboratory and
multiple test runs in different conditions were conducted to
stress the revocation method and evaluate if it meets the
requirements discussed above.

We used two workstation with 3.0-GHz Intel Core i5 CPU
and 8-GB RAM to deploy an instance of an RSU equipped
with the IOTA Reference Implementation (IRI) node that acted
as gateway towards the IOTA ledger for issuing transactions,
and an instance of IOTA-VPKI extended with the proposed
certiﬁcate revocation scheme. The two workstation were con-
nected to each other through a 1-Gb/s switch. To simulate the
OBU we use our proprietary board equipped with SOM NXP
i.MX 8M Quad-core (4 x Cortex™-A53 1.5GHz) and 4GB
RAM, which simulated the revocation checking procedure in
different runs.

To avoid interference with public transactions, we have also
deployed an instance of Private IOTA Tangle on IOTA-VPKI
instance [46]. The Private Tangle instance was executed with
basic settings equal to Devnet [47]. However, the proposed

8

method is perfectly compatible with the public IOTA Tangle
instance.

B. Experimental Results

In each run we simulated that an OBU receives signed
messages at different frequency from different senders. Upon
receiving a new message, the OBU ﬁrst checks for the status
of the sender’s certiﬁcate by calculating the IOTA tryte address
corresponding to the hash representation of the given certiﬁ-
cate. If there exists at least one transaction on the obtained
address, the OBU ignores the received message and goes on
processing a new message. The revocation checking is done
by exploiting the IRI node deployed on the RSU. This process
was implemented in Python for both revocation execution and
revocation checking process.

In order to simulate real message frequencies, we have
considered what is stated by ETSI in the Basic Set of Appli-
cations Deﬁnitions [21]: the different frequencies according to
different message types and various conditions that may occur
on the road are 1 Hz, 2 Hz, and 10 Hz. The use of multiple
message frequencies was required to study the effectiveness
of the proposed certiﬁcate revocation scheme under different
road conditions (e.g. vehicles increase frequency in hazardous
situation). Furthermore, it allowed analysing if the latency of
the revocation process checking is independent on the available
message frequency.

Finally, to demonstrate that the latency of revocation process
checking is also independent from the status of the certiﬁcate
(i.e. valid or revoked), we set up each run with half of the
issued certiﬁcates in revoked status. We know that in a real
situation this condition is not feasible because the number of
valid certiﬁcates is generally higher than of those revoked.
However, to guarantee that the OBU processes a message from
a valid or revoked vehicle with equal probability that setting
was mandatory.

Figure 6 illustrates the Cumulative Distribution Function
(CDF) of the revocation checking procedure with different
numbers of revoked certiﬁcates and distinct message frequen-
cies. As summarized in Table I, in the ﬁrst run (500 revoked
certiﬁcates) there is a 95% of probability that the delays are
lower or equal than 16.1 ms when considering a 1 Hz message
frequency. Increasing the message frequency has almost no
impact on the delay for the 95% probability: 15.6 ms for both
2 Hz and 10 Hz message frequencies. The average delay value
is slightly higher than 10 ms for all message frequencies in
the ﬁrst run, while the maximum delay value of 31.5 ms was
measured at a 2 Hz message frequency.

In the second and third runs the measurements are very
close to the ﬁrst one. In fact, with 5K revoked certiﬁcates the
delays are lower or equal than 14.2 ms, 13.2 ms, and 12.4
ms in 95% of the cases regarding frequencies of 1, 2 and
10 Hz, respectively. Similarly, in the third run (10K revoked
certiﬁcates) the Pr{t ≤ 15.2 ms} = 0.95 for 1 Hz message
frequency and remains close to this value with increased
frequency values (i.e., 14.7 ms for 2 Hz and 16.1 ms for
10 Hz). The average values are still very close to the ﬁrst
run, namely around 11 ms (1 Hz), 10 ms (2 Hz and 10Hz).

9

Fig. 6: CDF of revocation checking delay for the different test runs (OBU side).

Finally, the worst case scenario in the second and third runs
is equal to 29.8 ms and was measured at a 1Hz message
frequency with 10K revoked certiﬁcates. Results conﬁrm that
the revocation checking delay is independent from the number
of issued and revoked certiﬁcates as well as from the message
the majority of the measurements
frequency. Furthermore,
(95%) are signiﬁcantly lower than 25 ms, which demonstrates
that the proposed revocation method is compatible with the
requirements deﬁned by ETSI in [21].

Frequency 1 Hz

# Revoked
500
5K
10K

500
5K
10K

500
5K
10K

Average Maximum Pr{t ≤ x} = 0.95
10.9 ms
11.7 ms
11.6 ms

16.1 ms
14.2 ms
15.2 ms

31 ms
24 ms
29.8 ms

Frequency 2 Hz

10.2 ms
10.1 ms
11.8 ms

31.5 ms
22.7 ms
24.9 ms

Frequency 10 Hz

10.5 ms
10.1 ms
10.5 ms

25.2 ms
25 ms
26.4 ms

15.6 ms
13.2 ms
14.7 ms

15.6 ms
12.4 ms
16.1 ms

Fig. 7: CDF of revocation process delay (IOTA-VPKI side).

TABLE I: Revocation checking delay statistics.

# Revoked
10K

Average Maximum Pr{t ≤ x} = 0.95

8 s

82.96 s

18.57 s

TABLE II: Revocation process delay statistics.

Figure 7 illustrates the CDF of the revocation process delay
with 10K measurements. This delay represents the time to
attach a zero-transaction on IOTA Tangle at the address derived
by the hash value of the certiﬁcate to be revoked. As shown in

Table II, the vulnerability window of the proposed scheme is
equal or lower than 18.57 seconds in 95% of the cases, a very
short interval when compared to those in revocation by expiry
schemes. However, in the worst case scenario a misbehaving
vehicle remains trusted in the system for 82.96 seconds, which
means that at the maximum message frequency available (i.e.
10Hz), an attacker can send a maximum of 829 messages
before the revocation information arrives at the other harmless
participants. Nevertheless, this value is still much lower than
what occurs in the vulnerability window exposed by the current
standards.

C. Comparison With Other Implementations

VeSPA [35]
SEROSA [36]
SECMACE [34]
IOTA-VPKI

Delay
≈ 800 ms
≈ 800 ms
≤ 75 ms
≤ 25 ms

TABLE III: Revocation checking delay comparison.

We considered other implementations that provide also
performance evaluation for revocation mechanism. They are
all related to credential management systems which support
active vehicle certiﬁcate revocation. Other proposals available
in the literature [37], [38], [39], support only revocation by
expiry, so they are not directly comparable with our revocation
mechanism. Table III shows the delay of revocation checking
comparisons from the OBU side. The results conﬁrm a sig-
niﬁcant performance improvement of our revocation scheme
over prior art, namely a 3-fold improvement over SECMACE
[34], best case out of the analyzed solution. It is worth notice
that SECMACE solution take advantage of OCSP veriﬁcation
protocol [40] but the veriﬁcation is done after retrieving the
CRL from the LTCA: the performance evaluation available
in [34] states that for a CRL with 100.000 pseudonyms the
latency for obtaining a CRL is less than 1500 ms. In our
solution this delay is completely absent since vehicle access
revocation information directly on IOTA Tangle.

Furthermore, the delay of our proposed scheme is indepen-
dent from the number or revoked certiﬁcates, which is not the
case for other considered solutions [35], [36].

VI. CONCLUSION

In this paper we have presented a new revocation method
for VANETs that assures the transparency of the revocation
process. The solution was based on our previous work IOTA-
VPKI [1], a DLT-based VPKI compliant with ETSI standards.
Starting on our ﬁrst architecture version, we enhanced the
Resolution Authority (RA) to support the proposed revocation
mechanism taking advantage of the Distributed Ledger Tech-
nology (DLT) to save revocation information. Furthermore, we
extended the IOTA-VPKI architecture with a Misbehavior Au-
thority (MA) that is responsible for the detection of malicious
or misbehaving vehicles so that they are promptly revoked.
Once a vehicle is recognized to be compromised by the MA,
the RA is triggered to publish the revocation information
on the IOTA Tangle ledger with a zero-value transaction.
In parallel, the RA starts the identity resolution process to
retrieve the vehicle identity and communicate it to other CAs,
indicating that no more valid credentials can be issued to the
compromised vehicle. Once an OBU receives a new secured
message it checks the IOTA Tangle for a revocation transaction
considering the anonymous certiﬁcate used to sign the secured
message: if at least one zero-value transaction signed by a
trusted CA exists at the address represented by the anonymous
certiﬁcate, the message must be ignored.

To complement our proposal, a threat model based on ETSI
TVRA report [11] is considered with a discussion of the IOTA-
VPKI robustness against Denial of Service, Manipulation,

10

Malicious insertion of Information, and Man-In-The-Middle
attacks.

Experimental results document

that 95% of the revoca-
tion checking delays are lower or equal than 16 ms, which
demonstrates the feasibility of the proposed revocation method
and compatibility with the requirements deﬁned by ETSI in
[21], enabling its use in realistic ITS environments. Further-
more, results conﬁrm that the revocation checking delay is
independent from the status of the certiﬁcate (i.e., issued or
revoked) as well as from the total number of issued certiﬁcates.
This result conﬁrms that the proposed scheme overcomes the
issues found in CRL-based approaches available in current US
and EU standards. Finally, the underlying IOTA DLT storage
guarantees the transparency of the whole revocation process,
as well as the permanent availability of revocation information
that does not require complex distribution protocols.

In turn, the RA revocation process delay measurements
demonstrate that the vulnerability window of the proposed
revocation scheme is lower than 18.57 seconds on the majority
(95%) of the measurements. This is an important improvement
with respect to the vulnerability window available in the cur-
rent standards that can reach 3 months according to the latest
European security policy (certiﬁcate pre-loading case [18]).
Even considering the worst case scenario (82.96 seconds),
the vulnerability window remains much lower than the one
exposed by passive revocation mechanism such as revocation
by expiry.

In conclusion, we consider that our solution can be proposed
as an extension of the current EU and US standards in order
to mitigate the risks and lower the vulnerability window of
the current ITS security architecture. The proposed revocation
scheme perfectly matches the requirements of VANETs, and it
is ready to be used in a real and large scale ITS deployment.
As future works, we plan to contribute to the standardization
effort with ASN.1 modules describing the data structures and
messages used by our revocation mechanism. Furthermore,
we plan to test the IOTA-VPKI system integrated with the
proposed solution in two real testbeds: the ﬁrst is available
at the Livorno seaport and highway (Italy); the second is
available in a Smart City context at Aveiro (Portugal). With
these pilot sites we will demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed solution in an European large scale testbed
embodying a realistic ITS environment.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Tesei, L. Di Mauro, M. Falcitelli, S. Noto and P. Pagano, “IOTA-
VPKI: A DLT-Based and Resource Efﬁcient Vehicular Public Key Infras-
tructure,” 2018 IEEE 88th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Fall),
Chicago, IL, USA, 2018, pp. 1-6.

[2] ‘Z. Lu, G. Qu and Z. Liu, “A Survey on Recent Advances in Vehicular
Network Security, Trust, and Privacy,” in IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 760-776, Feb. 2019.

[3] “IEEE Guide for Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments (WAVE)
Architecture” IEEE Std 1609.0-2019 (Revision of IEEE Std 1609.0-2013)
(2019)

[4] “IEEE Standard for Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments - Security
Services for Applications and Management Messages” IEEE Std 1609.2-
2016 (Revision of IEEE Std 1609.2-2013) (2016)

[5] “IEEE Standard for Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments - Security
Services for Applications and Management Messages - Amendment 1”
IEEE Std 1609.2a-2017 (Amendment to IEEE Std 1609.2-2016) (2017)

11

[30] Jiang, Yanji, Shaocheng Ge, and Xueli Shen. “AAAS: An Anonymous
Authentication Scheme Based on Group Signature in VANETs.” IEEE
Access (2020).

[31] Ma, Zhuo, et al. “An Efﬁcient Decentralized Key Management Mech-
anism for VANET with Blockchain.” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology (2020).

[32] Wang, Yimin, et al. “Enhanced Security Identity-Based Privacy-
Preserving Authentication Scheme Supporting Revocation for VANETs.”
IEEE Systems Journal (2020).

[33] E. Verheul, C. Hicks and F. D. Garcia, “IFAL: Issue First Activate Later
Certiﬁcates for V2X,” 2019 IEEE European Symposium on Security and
Privacy (EuroS&P), Stockholm, Sweden, 2019, pp. 279-293.

[34] Khodaei, Mohammad, Hongyu Jin, and Panagiotis Papadimitratos.
“SECMACE: Scalable and robust identity and credential management
infrastructure in vehicular communication systems.” IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems 19.5 (2018).

[35] Alexiou, Nikolaos, et al. “Vespa: Vehicular security and privacy-
preserving architecture.” Proceedings of the 2nd ACM workshop on Hot
topics on wireless network security and privacy. 2013.

[36] Gisdakis, Stylianos, et al. “SEROSA: SERvice oriented security archi-
tecture for Vehicular Communications.” 2013 IEEE Vehicular Networking
Conference. IEEE, 2013.

[37] F¨orster, David, Frank Kargl, and Hans L¨ohr. “PUCA: A pseudonym
scheme with user-controlled anonymity for vehicular ad-hoc networks
(VANET).” 2014 IEEE Vehicular Networking Conference (VNC). IEEE,
2014.

[38] “PRESERVE: Prparing Secure Vehicle-to-X Communication Systems”,
http://www.preserveproject.eu/, accessed on 1-July-2020 at 16:30.
[39] “Car-to-Car Communication Consortium (C2C-CC)”, http://www.

car-2-car.org/, accessed on 1-July-2020 at 16:00.

[40] S. Santesson, M. Myers, R. Ankney, A. Malpani, S. Galperin, and C.
Adams, “X. 509 Internet public key infrastructure online certiﬁcate status
protocol—OCSP,” Tech. Rep., RFC6960, Jun. 2013.

[41] “IOTA Masked Authenticated Messaging documentation”, https://docs.

iota.org/docs/client-libraries/0.1/mam/introduction/overview

[42] “IOTA

Transactions

https://docs.iota.org/docs/
documentation”,
getting-started/0.1/transactions/transactions, accessed on 1-July-2020 at
12:30.

[43] “IOTA Chronicle documentation”, https://docs.iota.org/docs/chronicle/1.

1/overview, accessed on 1-July-2020 at 12:30.

[44] “IOTA

documentation”,
getting-started/0.1/clients/addresses, accessed on 1-July-2020 at 12:30.

https://docs.iota.org/docs/

Addresses

[45] Li, Yixin, et al. “Direct Acyclic Graph-Based Ledger for Internet of
Things: Performance and Security Analysis.” IEEE/ACM Transactions
on Networking (2020).

[46] “IOTA: Set up a private Tangle”, https://docs.iota.org/docs/compass/0.1/
how-to-guides/set-up-a-private-tangle, accessed on 1-July-2020 at 12:30.
https://docs.iota.org/docs/getting-started/0.1/

[47] “IOTA

Networks”,

network/iota-networks, accessed on 27-Feb-2020 at 19.30.

[6] “IEEE Standard for Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments - Security
Services for Applications and Management Messages - Amendment 2:
PDU Functional Types and Encryption Key Management” IEEE Std
1609.2-2016 (Amendment to IEEE Std 1609.2-2016) (2019)

[7] ETSI, TS. “102 940 v1.3.1-Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Security;
ITS communications security architecture and security management.”
Technical speciﬁcation, European Telecommunications Standards Institute
(2018).

[8] ETSI, TS. “102 941 v1.3.1-Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Secu-
rity; Trust and Privacy Managementt.” Technical speciﬁcation, European
Telecommunications Standards Institute (2019).

[9] ETSI, TS. “103 097 v1.3.1-Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Security;
Security header and certiﬁcate formats.” Technical speciﬁcation, European
Telecommunications Standards Institute (2017).

[10] ETSI, TR “103 460 v0.0.16-Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Se-
curity; Pre-standardisation Study on Misbehaviour Detection Release
2.” Technical report, European Telecommunications Standards Institute
(2020).

[11] ETSI, TR. “102 893 v1.2.1-Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Secu-
rity; Threat, Vulnerability and Risk Analysis (TVRA)” Technical report,
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (2017).

[12] Q. Wang, D. Gao and D. Chen, “Certiﬁcate Revocation Schemes in
Vehicular Networks: A Survey.” in IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 26223-26234,
2020.

[13] C-ITS Platform WG5: “Security & Certiﬁcation Final Report Annex
II Revocation of trust in Cooperative Intelligent Transport Systems (C-
ITS)”. Release 1.1. European Commission, 2016.

[14] T. Leinm¨uller, E. Schoch, and C. Maih¨ofer, “Security requirements
and solution concepts in vehicular ad hoc networks” in Proc. IEEE 4th
Annu. Conf. Wireless Demand Netw. Syst. Services (WONS), Obergurgl,
Austria, Jan. 2007, pp. 84–91.

[15] F. Kargl et al., “Secure vehicular communication systems: Implementa-
tion, performance, and research challenges” Commun. Mag., vol. 46, no.
11, pp. 110–118, 2008.

[16] N.-W. Lo and H.-C. Tsai, “Illusion attack on VANET applications—A
message plausibility problem” in Proc. IEEE Globecom Workshops,
Washington, DC, USA, Nov. 2007, pp. 1–8.

[17] X. Lin et al., “Security in vehicular ad hoc networks” IEEE Commun.

Mag., vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 88–95, Apr. 2008.

[18] C-ITS Platform Phase II. “Certiﬁcate Policy for Deployment and Op-
eration of European Cooperative Intelligent Transport Systems (C-ITS).”
Release 1.1. European Commission, 2018.

[19] “Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) of 13 Match 2019 supple-
menting Directive 2010/40/EU of the European Parliament and of the
Council with regard to the deployment and operational use of cooperative
intelligent transport systems”, 2019.

[20] IOTA, https://www.iota.org, accessed on 27-Feb-2020 at 13:30.
[21] ETSI, TR. “102 638 v1.1.1-Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Vehic-
ular Communications; Basic Set of Applications; Deﬁnitions.” Technical
report, European Telecommunications Standards Institute (2009).

[22] G. Rigazzi, A. Tassi, R. J. Piechocki, T. Tryfonas and A. Nix, “Opti-
mized Certiﬁcate Revocation List Distribution for Secure V2X Communi-
cations,” 2017 IEEE 86th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Fall),
Toronto, ON, 2017, pp. 1-7.

[23] van der Heijden, Rens Wouter, et al. “Survey on misbehavior detection
in cooperative intelligent transportation systems.” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials 21.1 (2018): 779-811.

[24] Z. Lu, Q. Wang, G. Qu, H. Zhang and Z. Liu, “A Blockchain-
Based Privacy-Preserving Authentication Scheme for VANETs,” in IEEE
Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 27,
no. 12, pp. 2792-2801, Dec. 2019.

[25] Ali, Ikram, et al. “A blockchain-based certiﬁcateless public key signature
scheme for vehicle-to-infrastructure communication in VANETs.” Journal
of Systems Architecture 99 (2019): 101636.

[26] Ga˜n´an, Carlos, et al. “EPA: An efﬁcient and privacy-aware revocation
mechanism for vehicular ad hoc networks.” Pervasive and Mobile Com-
puting 21 (2015)

[27] Lu, Zhaojun, et al. “A blockchain-based privacy-preserving authen-
tication scheme for vanets.” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale
Integration (VLSI) Systems 27.12 (2019)

[28] D. Boneh, and H. Shacham, “Group Signatures with Veriﬁer-Local
Revocation” in Proceedings of the 11th ACM conference on Computer
and communications security, Washington, DC, USA, Oct. 2004.

[29] D. Boneh, X. Boyen, and H. Shacham, “Short Group Signatures” in
Proceedings of 24th Annual International Cryptology Conference, Santa
Barbara, California, USA, Aug. 2004.

