Threats and Corrective Measures for IoT Security with Observance of 
Cybercrime: A Survey 

Sita Rania, Aman Katariab, Vishal Sharmac, Smarajit Ghoshd, Vinod Karare, Kyungroul Leef, 
and Chang Choig 

aDepartment of Computer Science & Engineering, Gulzar Group of Institutes, Khanna-141401, Punjab, INDIA. 
bOptical Devices and Systems, CSIR, CSIO, Chandigarh-160030, INDIA 
c* EEECS, Queen’s University Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK 
d Department of Electrical and Instrumentation Engineering, Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala, INDIA. 
eChief Scientist, Optical Devices and Systems, CSIR-CSIO, Chandigarh-160030, INDIA.  
fSchool of Computer Software, Daegu Catholic University, Gyeongsan-si, KOREA 
gDepartment of Computer Engineering, Gachon University, Seongnam, KOREA 

A B S T R A C T 

Internet of Things (IoT) is the utmost assuring framework to facilitate human life with quality and 
comfort. IoT has contributed significantly to numerous application areas. The stormy expansion of 
smart  devices  and  their  credence  for  data  transfer  using  wireless  mechanics  boosts  their 
susceptibility  to  cyber-attacks.    Consequently,  the  rate  of  cybercrime  is  increasing  day  by  day.  
Hence, the study of IoT security threats and possible corrective measures can benefit the researchers 
to  identify  appropriate  solutions  to  deal  with  various  challenges  in  cybercrime  investigation.    IoT 
forensics plays a vital role in cybercrime investigations. This review paper presents an overview of 
the  IoT  framework  consisting  of  IoT  architecture,  protocols,  and  technologies.  Various  security 
issues at each layer and corrective measures are also discussed in detail. This paper also presents the 
role of IoT forensics in cybercrime investigation in various domains like smart homes, smart cities, 
automated  vehicles,  healthcare,  etc.  Along  with,  the  role  of  advanced  technologies  like  Artificial 
Intelligence,  Machine  Learning,  Cloud  computing,  Edge  computing,  Fog  computing,  and 
Blockchain technology in cybercrime investigation are also discussed. At last, various open research 
challenges  in  IoT  to  assist  cybercrime  investigation  are  explained  to  provide  a  new  direction  for 
further research.   

PREPRINT AVAILABLE AT https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.08793 

Keywords:  Cybercrime;  Cyber  Security;  Digital  Forensics;  Internet  of  Things;  Smart  Devices; 
Security; Threats. 

1. Introduction 

The  term  ‘Internet  of  Things’  (IoT)  characterizes  the  network  of  devices  –  “things”-  which  are  equipped  with  different 
types of sensors, advanced technologies, and software. Although the concept of IoT was introduced by Kevin Aston in the 
year 1999, but in the last few years it developed very briskly and became one of the most prominent technologies of the era 
[1, 2].  Smart devices and things have the features to gather process and communicate data to deliver several services and 
applications  for  the  convenience  of  the  users.  [3],  [4],  and  [5].  Consequently,  it  is  not  a  single  technology  but  a  strong 
merger  of  5G  and  Beyond,  Big  Data,  Artificial  Intelligence,  Edge  Computing,  FinTech,  and  Cloud  Computing  [6],  as 
shown in Figure 1 which represents IoT as the conflux of technologies. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1- IoT: A conflux of technologies [1, 3, 5, 6]  

Figure 2- Different applications of IoT [1, 6-12] 

In a short period, IoT has been deployed in many domains. Their applications range from simple household devices to very 
complex and sophisticated industrial equipment and machines.  Smart healthcare, supply chains, smart farming, unmanned 
vehicles, smart homes, underwater IoT sensors, smart cars,  smart grids, and smart industry are some of the most benefitted 
areas through IoT, shown in Figure 2 [13],[14]. IoT has also confiscated a wide range of objects to provide more lifestyle-
friendly digitized services [15]. 

As  all  the  smart  devices  are  connected  through  cyberspace,  so  increase  in  their  number  also  widens  the  surface  for 
cybercrime.  Although  the  domain  of  cybersecurity  benefitted  from  the  involvement  of  IoT  devices  but  in-parallel 
introduced  different  types  of  security  issues[16].  A  sharp  hike  is  observed  in  the  statistics  of  security  attacks  and 
cybercrimes across the world from the reports published by the Internet Crime Complaint  Centre (IC3) in the year 2019, 
shown in Table 1. From the year 2015 to 2020, a total of 3,919,014 complaints have been received, which caused a total 
loss of $23.5 Billion.  As per the facts published by IC3, India is 3rd in the list of top 20 crime victim countries [17]. 

Table 1- Data on crime complaints and financial losses from 2015 to 2020 [18, 19] 

Year 

2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 

Number of complaints 
Registered 
288012 
298728 
301580 
351937 
467361 
2211396 

Total Loss  
(In $Billion) 
1.1  
1.5  
1.4  
2.7  
3.5  
13.3 

The era of  IoT-enabled devices is  blooming  expeditiously. This rapid development is introducing both  opportunities and 
obstacles for the identification of physical and cyber threats [20]. These attacks are malignant actions planned to damage 
significant data and information and to disturb important services [21], [22] in different types of IoT devices equipped with 
sensors. [23]. Although IoT  – enabled devices facilitate the process of cybercrime  detection but are themselves prone to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cyber  threats.  One  workable  security  solution  lies  at  the  manufacturer's  end.  At  the  time  of  design  and  development  of 
smart devices and applications, secure technologies and protocols are  required to be practiced.  But IoT-enabled devices 
provide  an  increased  surface  for  cyber  threats  due  to  indigent  security  measures.    Security  threats  are  creating  a  large 
torment for the versatile IoT systems. The level of the security threats in the IoT domain may be even life threatening.  

Data  from  the  main  academic  databases  have  been  collected  to  study  the  scope  of  potential  research  in  the  domain  of 
cybersecurity in IoT [18]. Figure 3 depicts the number of research papers referred to in the survey related to security issues in 
IoT from the year 1998 to 2020. As analyzed, this area of research has gained a lot of importance in the last decade.   

Figure 3 - Number of articles cited in this survey from the year 1998 to 2020 

Table 2- Comparison of features of this survey with the existing survey articles 

S.No
. 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 

11 

Author 

Year 

Burhan et al. 
Williams et al. 
Huang et al. 
Bhat and Dutta 
Mrabet et al. 
Tounsi and Rais 
Jian-hua Li 
Khadam et al. 
Shafiq et al. 
Weichbroth and 
Lysik 
This survey 

2018 
2018 
2018 
2019 
2018 
2017 
2018 
2020 
2018 
2020 

2021 

Cyber-
attacks 
and 
security 
 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
✓ 

✓ 

Cyber 
Crime 

Security in 
IoT devices 

Privacy in 
IoT devices 

Patents 
reported 

Discussions 
on real-time 
applications 

 
✓ 
✓ 
 
 
✓ 
 
 
 
✓ 

✓ 

✓ 
 
 
✓ 
 
 
 
✓ 
 
✓ 

✓ 

✓ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
✓ 
 
 

✓ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

✓ 

 
 
 
✓ 
 
✓ 
 
 
 
 

✓ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keeping  in  view  the  relevance  of  the  domain  and  need  of  the  hour,  in  this  paper,  we  discuss  IoT  architecture,  security 
systems,  and  potential  IoT  security  threats  that  may  cause  cybercrime  to  occur.  Along  with,  IoT  forensics  and  its 
contribution to crime investigation are also discussed in detail. Table 2 presents the merits of this survey in comparison to 
the  existing  latest  surveys.  It  visualizes  the  novelty  of  this  survey  as  much  emphasis  is  focussed  on  cybercrime,  Patents 
reported and real-time applications developed to mitigate the problems occurring due to cybercrime in IoT devices. 

In the remainder of this paper, Section 2 is focused on the various types of risks associated with the IoT environment. Existing 
work  on  IoT  security  and  cybercrime  and  the  scope  of  this survey  are  presented  in  Section  3.  Section  4  is  focused  on  IoT 
framework  and  applications.  The  role  of  digital  forensics  in  cybercrime  investigation  is  elaborated  in  Section  5.  Section  6 
presents the role of advanced technologies in IoT security. Open research challenges in the domain to provide a new direction 
to the researchers are discussed in Section 7 and the paper is concluded in Section 8.  

2. Risks in IoT 

The  IoT  evolution  is  prone  to  cause  a  diversity  of  ethical  problems  in  society  like  unauthorized  access  to  confidential 
information, privacy breach, misuse of secret data, identity theft, etc. Although these problems were already existing in the 
era of the internet and Information and Communication Technology (ICT) but became more dominant in IoT systems  [24]. 
Figure 4 describes several potential risks associated with IoT.  

2.1  Privacy Facet  

Figure 4 - Risks of IoT [24-29] 

Confidentiality of users and secrecy of the data generated from numerous business processes are the major areas of concern 
linked to the IoT [30]. The dominant usage of versatile devices with poor security mechanisms leads to mismanagement of 
the IoT system [31]. To handle the security issues related to data generated by the IoT devices, there is a requirement  for 
advanced  cryptography  techniques.  However,  these  techniques  should  be  energy-optimized  and  have  the  potential  to 
synchronize  with  the dynamism  of  smart  devices  [32].  With  the  advancement  in  IoT,  many privacy  issues  evolved  [24], 
[33].  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
➢  Data Captivity:  A few moralistic questions related to the user data remain unanswered, such as generating unlawful 

leverage, hard competition, etc. These issues are essential to evade consumer captivity through data [36]. 

➢  Data Integrity: The consistency and accuracy of the data are the primary requirements for the integrity of the data in 
IoT  devices.  Maintaining  data  integrity  is  the  main  motive  of  enterprise  security  solutions  as  compromising  data 
integrity can lead to the loss of sensitive data. Data integrity is necessary for reusability, searchability, recovery, and 
traceability of the data. 

➢  Data security: The data must be secured from illegitimate usage on the devices as well as during transmission in the 
IoT environment. The diversity of the IoT devices and different communication modes cause a challenge for data 
security  protocols,  which  is  the  root  cause  of  security  breaches  [35].  Another  major  threat  to  data  security  is  the 
variety of applications using this data and cause personal information of the user exposed to cyber-attacks. 

➢  Data  Sensitivity:  Several applications collect the user’s personal information sometimes even without knowledge. 
Therefore,  the  sensitivity  of  the  data  is  a  major  area  of  concern.  The  major  risks  associated  with  this  data  are  the 
frame of reference of usage of this data.  Consequently, there  should be  some security protocols for context-aware 
data collection and usage [34].   

➢  Protocols Security:  Because of the versatility of devices and collaborators convoluted in the stationing of IoT, the 
biggest  challenge  is  the  applicability  of  law  and  regulations  for  the  formation  of  authentic  protocols  for 
communication  in  the  IoT.  As  the  IoT  systems  are  evolving  day  by  day  and  becoming  global;  so,  there  is  a  clear 
possibility of the applicability of multiple legislations. Besides, this is an important area for awareness among users, 
IoT manufacturers, and law builders. 

➢  Network Security: The network plays a vital role in the security of IoT devices. The IoT device is connected with 
the  network  for  the  data  and  workload.  This  data  can  become  an  easy  target  for  hackers  or  attackers  that  can 
compromise  the  whole  system.  It  is  necessary  to  adapt  and  devise  effective  methods  to  protect  the  network  with 
which the IoT device is connected. 

➢  Device  Level  Security:  The  security  of  an  IoT  device  is  considered  at  the  beginning  of  its  design.  To  ensure  the 
secure  implementation  of  an  IoT  device,  a  secure  architecture  is  deployed.  During  the  manufacturing  of  an  IoT 
device, the care is taken in terms of secure digital device IDs. The credentials are trusted to tackle against various 
attacks like data and device cloning, data tempering or any other misuse. 

➢  Boot  Strapping:    Bootstrapping  refers  to  any  process  which  occurs  before  any  IoT  device  becomes  operational. 
Bootstrapping  is  necessary  for  the  IoT  devices  of  the  present  generation.  The  time  of  bootstrapping  in  the  initial 
configuration of an IoT device plays a vital role. Therefore the bootstrapping process in IoT devices should be highly 
secure process. 

➢  Availability: The blend of IoT in services related to health, security, etc. has caused the continuous availability of 
these  services  a  critical  issue.    Many  people  are  heavily  dependent  on  the  IoT  devices  utilized  to  provide  these 
services. Therefore, any loss to these services will severely impact human life.  

➢  Data  Authenticity:  Ownership  of  the  collected  user  data  is  a  major  unaddressed  issue  in  IoT  along  with  data 
management. Once the user stops using the service, the personal information remains with the service provider and 
can be sold further to generate revenue. 

➢  Application  Security:  The  applications  designed  for  various  IoT  devices  are  also  vulnerable  to  different  types  of 
attacks. It is necessary that the application should be secure and defensive in nature to counter attack the attackers and 
malwares. There are different types of attacks which can intrude in the architecture of an IoT device like DDoS, spam 
attack, Message interception through a spyware, vulnerable 3pp library and injection attacks. 

➢  Traceability.  In an IoT environment, users must have the right to pass consent to provide personal information to 
numerous real-life services. The implemented security protocols and mechanisms should ensure user identification on 
the network, but restrict the user traceability to attackers from personal information [37], [38]. 

2.2  Security Facet 

The security of a computer system encompasses various methods and techniques that safeguard all kinds of resources from 
illegitimate access. Resources may include hardware, software and data, whereas illegitimate access may include unauthorized 
usage  or  damage  to  resources.  In  IoT  systems,  security  aspects  focus  on  architecture,  the  security  model  of  every  device, 
bootstrapping,  network  security  and  application  security  [39].  Security  architecture  demonstrates  the  various  system 
components liable to ensure the security of an IoT device. The security model of each device focuses on the implementation of 
security  methods  and  criteria  along  with  the  management  of  various  applications.  Network  security  deals  with  the  reliable 
functioning  of  IoT.  Online  application  security  is  all  about  the  authentication  of  various  things  on  the  network  for 

 
 
 
 
communication and exchange of data. Network security is highly dependent on the internet, which is an anxious media of data 
exchange and leads to a large possibility of data-stealing. The deployment of IoT is dependent on the internet and computer 
networks. Consequently, it is affected by all security issues related to computer networks as well as the internet. Before using 
IoT devices, all stakeholders should analyze the associated risks related to the security and privacy of the user information. 
Accordingly, more sophisticated security policies must be designed by governing organizations. 

2.3  Cybercrime 

Like any other crime, cybercrime may have a variety of aspects and may be committed in different plots. Several definitions of 
cybercrime are available, given from different aspects i.e. sufferers, protector, or viewer. According to the definition given by 
Newman [40], cybercrime is an action in which computers or computer networks are used as a means, purpose, or platform to 
execute some criminal act. It may consist of some information theft or usage of computers to do some other criminal activity. 
The  Council  of  Europe’s  Cybercrime  Treaty  defines  cybercrime  as  any  act  of  data  content  or  copyright  transgression.  The 
‘Manual on the Prevention and Control of Computer-Related Crime’ by the United Nations defines cybercrime as illegitimate 
access, deceit, and falsification.  According to Gordon and Ford, cybercrime is any criminal activity performed on a computer, 
hardware resource, or network. The Council of Europe’s Convention on Cybercrime classifies criminal acts into four classes: 
1) Breaches of data, secrecy, integrity, and hardware resources 2) Computer-centered crimes 3) Content-related crimes; and 4) 
copyright-related  crimes.  However,  these  classifications  are  over  the  line  for  some  parameters.  According  to  another 
classification  given  by  Saini  et  al.[41],  cybercrimes  are  categorized  as  data  crimes,  network  crimes,  access  crimes,  and 
content-related crimes. Data crimes consist of data-stealing, data interception, and data modification. Network crimes include 
unwanted interference in the functioning of computer networks to breach data transmitted over the network. Content-related 
crimes include infringement of ownership and spontaneous cyber hazards. Another explanation of cybercrime is demonstrated 
by Zhang  et al.[42], according to which  all crimes  in  which machines or networks  are used as aids or targets,  the place of 
crime, and any conventional crime executed with computer resources are addressed as cybercrime. Generally, ICT boosts the 
rate as well as the domain of criminal actions. The location of crime acts as a catalyst for criminal activities [43]. Internet is 
also  a  large  platform  for  criminal  acts  as  was  not  initially  deployed  with  highly  secure  protocols.  As  IoT  systems  are 
implemented on the ceiling of the present internet framework; so, the associated cybercrime issues remain unresolved. At last, 
a  large  base  of  the  cyber  framework  enhances  the  scope  not  to  reveal  criminal  acts  to  the  public  as  the  criminal  acts  are 
executed using virtual methods.  

3  Existing work on IoT Security and Cybercrime 

In the last few years, several surveys have been conducted to impress upon  the improvements and research carried out in 
the IoT systems. In these survey papers, the focus is on the fundamental aspects of IoT. Along with IoT, security issues are 
also discussed in some of these surveys. There are few dedicated survey papers on IoT security and privacy contention. In 
the surveys published in the years 2010-2020, Atzori et al.[44] discussed the  security and privacy aspects of IoT. In the 
field of security, the main attention is given to authentication and data integrity, and the scope of research is discussed. In 
the privacy aspect, the authors suggested limiting access to personal data. However, this survey highlights incomplete facts 
regarding security challenges in IoT. Miorandi et al.[45] assumed the implementation of IoT at three fundamental  levels, 
i.e.,  communication,  identification,  and  interaction.  Although  the  authors  highlighted  the  possibility  of  many  security 
challenges in IoT but proposed the research on three main issues: privacy of users, data secrecy, and trust. Many burning 
issues related to IoT security like access control, data  integrity, and authentication of the user  are not discussed in detail 
[46]. Gubbi et al.[47] discussed security and privacy in the contexts of user identification and authentication, data integrity, 
and privacy in general. The authors introduced the  cloud based IoT paradigm. On the same grounds, few technologies are 
introduced along with the domains of application of each technology.   

 In  [48],  Aggarwal  et  al.  discussed  security  prospectus  exclusively  from  a  privacy  perspective,  whereas  other  security 
challenges in IoT platforms are not discussed. Said [49] discussed various IoT architectures along with research issues. In 
this survey, only challenges faced in physical security and privacy  are  explored. Moreover, security issues  are discussed 
without giving any viable solutions.  Perera et al.  [50] elaborated that security and privacy challenges are handled at the 
middleware level in the IoT framework and different layers. In this survey, security  is expressed as a normal issue and the 
authors  did  not  pay  any  special  attention  to  the  research  in  the  field.  Granjal  et  al.  [51]  presented  an  in-depth review of 
different  security  mechanisms  and  protocols  of  the  time  for  communication  among  smart  devices.  The  authors  also 

 
 
 
 
highlighted  the  available  scope  of  research.  However,  on  the  negative  side,  the  authors  did  not  consider  all  security 
standards in their survey but focused on a few only. Sicari et al. [52] reviewed security from three different angles: security 
requirements,  privacy,  and  trust.    Under  security  requirements,  the  authors  explored  the  issues  related  to  access  control, 
confidentiality, and authentication. The biggest drawback of this work is the inadequacy of the categorization of research 
activities in the IoT security paradigm. Abomhara and Koein [53] reviewed the security threats along with the security and 
privacy  research  challenges  in  their  paper.  They  stressed  research  issues  like  interoperability  of  diverse  IoT devices and 
authorization. 

Mahmoud  et  al.  [54]  surveyed  IoT  security  principles.  The  authors  also  presented  various  security  issues  along  with 
corrective  measures.  The  need  for  advanced  technologies  to  tackle  hardware,  software,  user  identification,  and  wireless 
communication issues is also discussed. Pescatore and Shpantzer [55] presented the viewpoint of people actively involved 
in the research of IoT security issues along with the future prospects in the field. They also highlighted that IoT developers 
should  focus  more  on  security  issues  instead  of  other  ICT  systems.  Gil  et  al.  [56]  reviewed  various  technologies  and 
security models in the context of data-related challenges. The authors impressed upon the collaboration of social networks 
and IoT and introduced a new concept of the Social Internet of Things (SIoT). IoT security  is discussed but the concept of 
cybersecurity  in  IoT  is  not  touched.  Muhammad  et  al.  [57]  discussed  the  various  possible  attacks  in  IoT  systems.  The 
authors also highlighted the security and privacy challenges faced in the IoT environment by the  various sensor nodes. In 
this  survey,  the  requirements  of  secure  end-to-end  communication  among  smart  devices  using  efficient  encryption  and 
authentication methods are suggested. Vignesh and Samydurari [58] reviewed three layers architecture of   IoT comprising 
of  application, network and perception layer, along with different types of security threats at these layers. They explained 
the effect of wireless signals, movement of IoT in the external environment and the dynamism of the network model as the 
major challenges at the perception layer. At the network layer, the major highlighted challenges are DoS and Man-in-the-
Middle attacks. The major issue that persists at the application layer is the variety of application policies. 

Razzaq [59] surveyed the different security requirements of an IoT system. He categorized the various IoT attacks into four 
classes: low level, medium level, high level and extremely high level, and suggested the possible way-outs to handle these 
attacks.  Maple [60] discussed the role of  IoT devices in various domains like autonomous vehicles, health, industry  4.0, 
logistics, smart grid, agriculture, home, offices and entertainment. Along  with the security, threats in all these application 
areas are also reviewed. They highlighted the security issues related to the physical limitations of the things, the versatility 
of the devices, authentication, authorization and implementation. Various issues related to the privacy of the users are also 
discussed  in  this  survey.  Rughani  [61] presented  the  various  challenges  faced  by  crime  investigators  to  collect  pieces  of 
evidence from the smart IoT devices available at crime scenes. The author impressed upon the need for corrective measures 
for the issues to help in crime investigation and make the process easy. Corser et al. [62] discussed that to make the IoT 
systems more secure, the security of smart devices and networks needs to be improved. To improve device-level security, 
protection  of  data  and  dynamic  testing  plays  a  major  role.  To  make  communication  networks  more  reliable;  there  is  a 
requirement of authentication, secure protocols, network division and organization.  Burhan et al. [63] presented a detailed 
survey on the different layers of IoT architecture along with the potential attacks at each layer. The authors also reviewed 
various available mechanisms to handle these attacks and their limitations. Security issues in various IoT technologies like 
sensors, ZigBee, Bluetooth, RFID, Wi-Fi, and 5G networks are discussed in detail.  

Noor and Hassan [64] presented the primary objectives of IoT system security. The authors highlighted that privacy of the 
user and security of the data and infrastructure are the main challenges in the IoT environment. The authors also reviewed 
various tools and simulators to implement IoT security mechanisms.  MacDermott et al. [65] highlighted the sharp increase 
in  the  usage  of  digital  forensics  for  crime  investigation.  The  authors  also  highlighted  that  the  reason  for  this  rise  is  the 
increase in smart devices. To cope up with this change, there is a need for regular development in the techniques used for 
crime investigation.  The authors also reviewed various forensic handling methodologies. Sfar et al.  [66] presented three 
different aspects i.e., privacy, trust and identification/authentication of IoT security. Under these three aspects, various open 
research  issues  like  standardization  of  security  mechanisms,  reduction  in  the  amount  of  data  transmitted  among  smart 
devices,  implementation  of  trust  mechanisms  to  safeguard  users  and  services,  implementation  of  global  identification 
mechanism for things and automatic discovery of devices in the IoT environment are highlighted.  

Neshenko et al. [67] presented an exhaustive survey on IoT vulnerabilities. The need for endorsement of different advanced 
technologies  like  blockchain,  deep  learning,  and  cloud  paradigms  is  stressed  in  IoT  security  implementation.  Various 

 
 
 
 
research  aspects  highlighted  in  the  survey  are  the  requirement  of  global  device  identification  mechanisms,  the  need  for 
more security-centric awareness among IoT users, the requirement of more mature security protocols and the adoption of 
secure  IoT  application  development  processes.    Zhou  et  al.  [68]  reviewed  four  main  features  of  IoT:  interdependence, 
diversity, constraint and myriad. Consequently, the open research issues for these have also been discussed. It is spotlighted 
in the survey that in IoT systems, the devices are interdependent, so focusing on security mechanisms by considering each 
device as a standalone will not provide a secure IoT environment. Detection of viruses in IoT devices is also highlighted as 
an open research challenge in this survey. The issue of sensitivity of the user’s personal information is also an area of major 
concern for academicians and researchers. Lu and Xu  [17] elaborated that the privacy and security of IoT systems is the 
biggest research challenge. The authors presented a detailed review of the state-of-art research going on in cybersecurity. 
IoT  architecture  for  cybersecurity  is  discussed  in  detail.  At  last,  the  major  research  challenges  of  the  domain  are  also 
presented.  Aydos  et  al.  [69]  classified  IoT  vulnerabilities  depending  upon  the  types  of  attack  in  four  different  layers: 
physical layer, network layer, data processing layer and application layer. Depending on these vulnerabilities, the authors 
proposed a risk-based security model to evaluate each discussed layer of the IoT architecture. Nasiri et al. [70] surveyed the 
security  needs  of  an  IoT-dependent  health  care  system.  They  classified  it  into  two  categories:  cybersecurity  and  cyber 
resilience.  Under  Cybersecurity,  the  various  features  of  confidentiality,  integrity,  availability,  identification,  and 
authentication,  authorization,  privacy,  accountability,  non-repudiation,  auditing  and  data  freshness  are  elaborated.  Under 
cyber  resilience,  safety,  survival,  performance,  reliability,  maintenance  and  information  security  are  discussed  in  detail. 
Tabassum et al. [71] reviewed various IoT security challenges. The authors also demonstrated the role of IoT in industry. In 
this  study,  it  was  presented  that  how  the  security  issues  of  individual  devices/things  used  at  each  layer  in  the  IoT 
architecture can affect the security of an IoT system.  

Servida and Casey [20] presented a detailed study of the vulnerabilities of smart devices. The authors discussed how these 
vulnerabilities  can  cause  these  devices  to  become  victims  of  attacks.  On  the  positive  side,  it  is  featured  that  these 
vulnerabilities can help the investigators to fetch digital traces and investigate the crime. Therefore, device vulnerabilities 
are  both  challenges  and  opportunities  in  crime.  Blythe  et  al.  [72]  highlighted  that  the  IoT  environment  lacks  security 
features as the devices are not manufactured by considering the security challenges. It is also discussed that at some events 
even users do not use the available security features of the devices due to a lack of knowledge about the customization of 
these features. In this work, the authors impressed on the need for standardization of communication and security protocols 
in IoT systems and highlighted the need for government intervention to assure security at the device level. Adesola et al. 
[73] suggested a novel IoT and Big Data-based smart model to investigate and control criminal activities in Nigeria. The 
authors also developed a prototype for the model. This model is useful to keep the record of criminals. Abdullah  et al. [18] 
discussed  the  security  aspects  of  IoT  by  focusing  on  cybersecurity.  Open  research  issues  related  to  cybersecurity  are 
highlighted  along  with  possible  corrective  measures.  The  authors  also  applied  the  usage  of  blockchain  technology  to 
strengthen the cybersecurity aspect of IoT. Butun et al. [1] presented an in-depth review of various types of security attacks 
in wireless sensor networks and IoT systems. Various mechanisms for the prevention and detection of these attacks are also 
discussed in detail. The authors categorized the IoT attacks as active and passive attacks. It is also spotlighted that passive 
attacks cannot be identified using any mechanism. On the other hand, active attacks violate the integrity and confidentiality 
of data. Active attacks also cause unauthorized access to user data.  

Stoyanova  et  al.  [74]  surveyed  the  various  available  models  for  digital  forensics.    Special  consideration  is  given  to  the 
methods which are used to extract digital data by maintaining the privacy of the users. The authors presented open research 
challenges  in  the  field  of  digital  forensics  by  paying  special  attention  to  the  need  for  more  advanced  forensic  analyzing 
techniques and universally acceptable protocols. Tawalbeh et al. [75] discussed the various security and privacy challenges 
of IoT. The authors also proposed and evaluated a cloud-based IoT security solution. Atlam [76] reviewed IoT architecture 
and  communication  technologies.  Various  IoT  security  challenges  and  threats  are  also  discussed.  The  authors  also 
explained the role of digital forensics in crime investigation. The need for employing real-time techniques in IoT forensics 
is highlighted as the need of the hour. Al-Khater et al.[77] presented a detailed review of various categories of cybercrime 
in  detail.  Various  cybercrime  detection  techniques  using  statistical  methods,  neural  networks,  machine  learning,  deep 
learning, fuzzy logic, data mining, computer  vision, biometric and forensics are also discussed. The authors proposed the 
requirement of cybercriminal profiling, which can be used as a data set by the investigators in the process of investigation. 
Table 3 presents the comparison of existing security parameters and approaches in IoT cybercrime. 

 
 
 
 
Author (Year)+++ 

Ideology 

Parameters 

Advantages 

Table 3 - Comparison of existing security parameters/approaches/models in IoT cybercrime 

Atzori et al. (2010) [44] 

A survey of Internet of Things (IoT) 

Miorandi et al. (2012) [45] 

Gubbi et al. (2013) [47] 

Aggarwal et al. (2013) [48] 

Said et al. (2013) [49] 

Perera et al. (2013) [50] 

A survey of Applications and issues of 
security in IoT 
Application and cloud computing-
oriented survey of IoT 
A survey of applications, data 
management, and research challenges in 
IoT 
Evaluation of different IoT architectures 
is presented. 

The authors presented context-aware 
computing for IoT devices 

Granja let al. (2015 ) [51] 

Communication Protocols and security 
parameters are discussed in detail. 

Sicari et al. (2015) [52] 

Research challenges and existing 
solutions in IoT security are presented 
in the survey. 

Applications, Service 
Management, Logistics 
Applications, Security issues 
of IoT, Research Challenges 
Applications, Addressing 
Schemes, Cloud computing. 
Applications, Data 
management and Analytics, 
Security, Privacy 
Hierarchical Architecture, 
Distributed Architecture 

Context Reasoning, Context 
Modelling, Context 
Distribution 
Different protocols of IoT 
communications, Application 
layer, physical layer, and 
MAC layer security 
Mobile security in IoT, Trust, 
and Privacy in IoT, 
Enforcement in IoT, 
Authentication, 
Confidentiality, and Access 
control in IoT. 

Applications of IoT were discussed 
in a detailed manner. 
Research challenges and issues of 
securities were explained in detail. 
Cloud computing and its 
applications in IoT were discussed. 
Data management in IoT and 
applications were discussed in 
detail. 
Different IoT architectures were 
discussed in detail. 

Different contexts related to the IoT 
were presented. 

The security of different layers in 
IoT communications was discussed 
in detail. 

Security of IoT was discussed 
referring to ongoing projects on 
securing the IoT. 

Security Issues 
Discussed 
 

✓ 

✓ 

✓ 

 

 

 ✓ 

 ✓ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Author (Year) 

Ideology 

Parameters 

Advantages 

Security Issues 
Discussed 

Abomhara and Koein (2015) 
[53] 

Research directions concerning IoT 
security and privacy are presented. 

Different cyber-attacks in 
IoT, security and privacy 
challenges in IoT, security 
threats and challenges 

Threats to IoT security were 
discussed in detail. 

Mahmoud et al. (2015) [54] 

Pescatore and Shpantzer (2016) 
[55] 

IoT layer architecture and security 
features are the key aspects of this 
paper. 
Surveyed perceptions on IoT, IoT 
applications, and industry representation 
by IoT. 

IoT architecture, IoT security 
issues, IoT security 
countermeasures 
Applications, Threats to IoT, 
Risk management in IoT, 
Data monitoring 

Gil et al. (2016) [56] 

A general survey of IoT and Context-
aware of IoT. 

Muhammad et al. (2016) [78] 

A review of security solutions against 
threats on IoT devices. 

IoT Applications domain, 
Services for IoT, Data mining 
for IoT, 

Different techniques of 
attacks on IoT, security and 
privacy requirements, 
security solutions in IoT 

Basic architectures of IoT and 
security issues were discussed in 
detail. 
The survey conducted with 
participants was discussed 
concerning different parameters 
related to IoT 
Services and data as services were 
discussed. Applications of IoT are 
also presented 

The threats to IoT security and its 
measures to counter the threats 
were explained in detail. 

Vignesh and Samydurari (2017) 
[58] 

A survey on IoT layer architecture and 
security threats on each layer. 

Razzaq et al. (2017) [59] 

A survey on different types of threats in 
IoT and their solutions is discussed. 

Maple (2017) [60] 

A survey of applications of IoT, 
Authentication, and identity 
management of IoT, Security issues of 
IoT in different applications. 

Security features of IoT, 
Architecture, Security 
remedies 
Applications of IoT, Threats 
to IoT, Analysis of different 
types of attacks. 
Applications of IoT in 
automobiles, Health, industry 
4.0, agriculture, 
entertainment, and media. 

Security issues in IoT and future 
directions regarding 5G were 
discussed in the paper. 
Applications of IoT and analysis of 
different types of security threats 
were done. 
Security issues on various 
applications like health and in 
Automobiles were discussed along 
with privacy challenges in detail. 

✓ 

✓ 

✓ 

 

 ✓ 

✓ 

✓ 

✓ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Author (Year) 

Ideology 

Parameters 

Advantages 

Security Issues 
Discussed 

Rughani (2017) [61] 

The authors discussed the architecture 
of IoT devices along with the security 
aspects and their application in 
forensics. 

IoT architecture, IoT security 
issues, and digital security in 
IoT 

Discussions on forensics in IoT and 
security issues were discussed. 

Corser et al. (2017) [62] 

The authors laid prime emphasis on the 
security of IoT devices. 

IoT hardware security, 
Dynamic testing, securing 
IoT networks 

Certain security issues from a 
hardware and software perspective 
were discussed in detail. 

Burhan et al. (2018) [63] 

Compared the different application 
domains of IoT and discussed the key 
elements of IoT. 

Applications of IoT, Different 
architecture layers of IoT. 

Noor and Hassan (2018) [64] 

A survey on IoT security, possible 
attacks on IoT architecture layers are 
presented. 

MacDermott et al. (2018) [65] 

The authors discussed the IoT, the 
possible crime using, or in IoT devices. 

Sfaret al. (2018) [66] 

A survey on IoT security including 
discussion on smart manufacturing. 

Neshenko et al. (2018) [67] 

A survey on the exploitation of different 
IoT devices 

IoT security attacks on layer 
review on IoT authentication, 
trust management, and secure 
routing. 
Forensic handling regarding 
IoT and Crime using IoT 
devices. 
A cognitive approach for IoT, 
recent research in data 
privacy Trust management 
system. 
IoT architecture Security in 
IoT, IoT vulnerabilities at 
different architectural layers. 

Identity management framework, 
Security mechanisms for IoT, and 
improved layered architecture for 
IoT were discussed. 
Attacks on the IoT architecture 
layer were explained in detail. 
Secure routing was presented with 
key features. 
Forensic evidence handling in the 
smart city was discussed in detail. 

Cognitive and systemic security 
along with adaptive and context-
aware security was discussed in 
detail. 
The security aspects of the layer-
wise architecture of IoT devices 
were discussed in detail. 

✓ 

✓ 

✓ 

✓ 

  

✓ 

✓ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
Author (Year) 

Ideology 

Parameters 

Advantages 

Security Issues 
Discussed 

Zhou et al. (2018) [68] 

Lu and Xu (2018) [17] 

A survey on security features and 
privacy in IoT 
A survey article on IoT cyber-attacks 
and security schemes. 

Attacks on IoT, Threats, and 
challenges in IoT devices. 
Different cyber-attack and 
Layer wise security schemes. 

Aydos et al. (2019) [69] 

A survey of risk and threat assessment 
on different architecture layers of IoT. 

Nasiri et al. (2019) [70] 

Tabassum et al. (2019) [71] 

An article on healthcare-based secure 
IoT environment. 
An article on various security issues in 
IoT. 

IoT applications, platforms 
for IoT, IoT protocols, 
Security, threats, and 
vulnerabilities in IoT. 
Security requirements in IoT 

IoT security requirements 
Architecture of IoT. 

Servida and Casey (2019) [20] 

An article on IoT forensics and 
detection of traces in IoT. 

Digital forensics, Privacy, 
and IoT forensics 

Blythe (2019) [72] 

An article on cyber hygiene advice for 
IoT devices 

Adesola et al. (2019) [73] 

An article on crime management with 
IoT-based architecture. 

Abdullah et al. (2019) [18] 

A review of cybersecurity issues and 
challenges. 

Security features of IoT 
devices, Design code of 
practice for IoT devices. 

IoT architecture, data 
collection, and framework for 
IoT devices. 

Cyberattacks, cybersecurity, 
IoT architecture, and security 
techniques. 

Threats to IoT hardware devices 
were discussed in detail. 
Security schemes for different 
layered architectures were 
explained in detail. 

Attack on a different layer in IoT 
was presented along with a risk-
based layered approach for IoT 
security assessment in detail. 
Cybersecurity requirements were 
discussed. 
Security issues on perception, 
application, and network layer were 
discussed in detail. 
IoT forensics and detection, 
extraction, and parsing of traces 
from IoT devices were discussed in 
detail. 
Standardization of security 
protocols was the main emphasis. 

A crime prediction and monitoring 
model was proposed. 

Security techniques at different 
layers are discussed in detail. The 
blockchain is implemented to 
secure the IoT network. 

✓ 

✓ 

✓ 

  

✓ 

  

✓ 

  

✓ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
Author (Year) 

Ideology 

Parameters 

Advantages 

Security Issues 
Discussed 

Butun et al. (2019) [1] 

A survey on different kinds of attacks 
and their countermeasures in IoT 
devices. 

Stoyanova et al. (2020) [74] 

A survey on IoT forensics and its 
challenges. 

Tawalbeh et al. (2020) [75] 

An article on security and privacy in IoT 
devices. 

Atlam et al. (2020) [76] 

An article on cybercrime, security, and 
digital forensics for IoT devices. 

IoT applications, Security 
attacks on IoT devices, 
Attacks on different layers of 
IoT architecture. 
IoT forensics components, 
IoT attacks, IoT security, IoT 
protocols, IoT layered 
architecture. 
Generic IoT layers and 
proposed system model for 
secure IoT devices. 

IoT applications, IoT 
architecture, characteristics, 
and communication 
technologies in IoT, Security 
threats in IoT. 

Defence against different passive 
and active attacks on different 
layers of IoT architecture was 
discussed in detail. 
IoT forensics challenges and their 
solution, secure cloud service 
models were discussed in detail. 

A system model was proposed 
using the cloud edge nodes and IoT 
nodes. 

The security solution of four-
layered IoT architecture was 
discussed in detail. 

✓ 

✓ 

✓ 

 ✓ 

In  this  review,  we  examine  the  various  aspects  of  IoT  systems  like  architecture,  protocols  and  technologies  deployed  at  various  layers  and  application  domains. 
Potential  risks  and  possible  attacks  on  each  layer  of  the  IoT  architecture  are  also  discussed.  We  also  present  the  various  security  mechanisms  and  their  layers  of 
implementation. Special attention is given to IoT forensics in cybercrime investigations[79, 80]. Various domains like smart homes, smart cities, automated transport, 
drones,  healthcare,    etc.  are  examined  to  assist  cybercrime  investigation[81].  The  role  of  various  advanced  technologies  in  the  investigation of  cybercrime  is  also 
presented.  At the end of the paper, various open research challenges in an IoT environment to contribute towards the process of IoT forensic to aid the process of 
cybercrime investigation are presented. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4  IoT Framework and Applications 

IoT is a broad network of devices connected over the internet. It has expanded very briskly in the last few years.  Currently, 
IoT  has  evolved  as  a  contemporary  styled  network  that  acts  as  an  agent  to  link  the  real  and  virtual  world.  Application 
domains of IoT are  expanding day by day growing from the need for smartphones to different IoT devices like cameras, 
music  players,  smartwatches,  smart  TV,  smart  VR  as  shown  in  Figure  5;  So,  the  probability  of  cyber-attacks.  The 
fundamental characteristic of IoT applications is to gather data from smart devices and communicate over networks [82]. A 
gigantic volume of personalized data is gathered by various IoT applications including smart agriculture, healthcare, smart 
homes,  meetings,  etc.  [83].  This  large  amount  of data  is  communicated  in  IoT  systems,  interpreted  and  analyzed.  In  the 
research carried out by Cisco, there is an estimate of 50 billion smart devices to be plugged into the internet in the current 
year. It is also predicted that because of advanced features, smart devices will become an important part of  day-to-day life 
in  the  current  year  [69].  It  is  being  forethought  that  the  trend  of  using  IoT  systems  will  spike  and  will  keep  growing 
afterward. Due to the vast usage of IoT collected data, a new trend has started.  Even data collected on smart devices in an 
IoT environment can be shared for usage in other real-life applications. However, the biggest challenge in the collected data 
is the versatility of smart devices supported in the IoT system architecture.  

Figure 5- Growth expectations in the type of IoT devices [69, 84-89] 

4.1  IoT Architecture 

There is a need for open architecture to deploy IoT systems to support diverse categories of smart devices and to administer 
interfacing  among  them.  Many  reviews  and  research  articles  are  available  demonstrating  the  IoT  architecture[53]. 
Fundamentally,  IoT  systems  are  deployed  on  four-layer  architecture  as  shown  in  Figure  6.  These  four  layers  are  the 
application layer, network layer, perception layer and transport layer. This is the basic IoT architecture model which can be 
practiced with different IoT applications. For each layer of IoT architecture, the possible attacks and  the affected domain 
due to the attack are shown in Figure 6. These technologies help in the process of data collection, interpretation, analysis 
and communication [90]. Different layers of the IoT architecture are characterized as follows: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 - Layers of IoT with technologies deployed and possible attacks [25, 91-96] 

➢  Perception Layer. In this layer, data are generated by various smart devices. Data is also gathered by these devices, 
which can be further communicated within  the IoT environment or even to  outside applications. This  layer works 
with two types of things: IoT devices and IoT hub nodes  [97]. IoT devices identify themselves in the IoT system, 
whereas IoT hub nodes work as gateways. The data collected through devices are transmitted through gateways [98].  

➢  Network  Layer.  In  this  layer,  communication  among  IoT  devices  and  applications  is  managed.  The  mode  of 
communication may be wired or wireless. Various network security protocols are deployed in the network layer. The 
IoT gateways are set up at this layer. This layer receives the data coming from the lower layer and maps to the format 
required by the applications running in the upper layer [99].  

➢  Application Layer. The application layer is also interpreted as the service layer. Here, the data gathered by various 
devices  are  used,  analyzed,  interpreted,  and  presented.  This  layer  can  be  customized  under  different  policies 
depending upon the service administered [100].  

➢  Transport  Layer.  The  transport  layer  is  responsible  for  end-to-end  communication  over  the  network.  It  also 
provides  reliability  multiplexing  along  with  flow  control.  Congestion  control  is  also  performed  in  the  transport 
layer [101]. 

4.2   Protocols  

Functionalities provided by the various layers of the IoT architecture are administered by the different protocols deployed in 
the  different  layers  [102].  Various  protocols  used  at  the  different  layers  of  the  IoT  architecture  like  the  Application  layer, 
Perception layer, Network layer and Transport layer are shown in Figure 7. Various protocols deployed in the perception layer 
are  IEEE  802.11  series,  802.15  series,  Wireless  HART  (Highway  Addressable  Remote  Transducer)  etc.  [100].  The  IEEE 
802.15.4  is  used  for  data  exchange  in  a  long-range  wireless  personal  area  network  (LR-WPAN).  ZigBee  and    Wireless 
HARTS are also deployed in the IoT perception layer [103].  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7 - Protocols of different layers in IoT [90, 104-106] 

Protocols used in the network layer of IoT architecture are IPv6/IPv4, 6LoWPAN (IPv6 over Low-Power Wireless Personal 
Area  Networks),  6TiSCH  (Time-Slotted  Channel  Hopping)  developed  by  IETF  which  is  IPv6  standard  for  802.15.4  MAC 
layer protocols [104].  IPv6 G.9959is an IPv6 addressing standard for G.9959 MAC layer protocol which was designed for 
low power devices in a personal area network (PAN). For real-time systems, Data Distribution Service (DDS) is used. This 
protocol  does  not  require  any  networking  middleware  and  network  programming,  which  allows  the  publisher  to  release 
specific information. The lightweight messaging protocol used in the application layer is MQTT (Message Queuing Telemetry 
Transport),  and  it  uses  machine-to-machine  communication  based  on  TCP-IP.  The  protocols  specially  designed  for  IoT 
environments  e.g.  CoAP  (Constrained  Application  Protocol)  are  used  in  the  application  layer  for  limited  hardware.  The 
hardware which does not support HTTP can use the CoAP protocol. The XML-based protocol used in the application layer is 
known as Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP). XMPP is used for real-time instant messaging and multiparty 
chat. Simple or Streaming Text Oriented Messaging Protocol (STOMP) is a protocol for message-oriented middleware. It was 
designed to establish communication between clients and brokers. [107], [108-112]. In the transport layer, Datagram Transport 
Layer  Security  (DTLS) is  designed  to  prevent  message  forgery  and  tampering.  The  protocol  similar  to  the  time-division 
multiplexing  in  the  transport  layer  is  Time  Synchronized  Mesh  Protocol  (TSMP).  It  was  developed  for  inter-sensor 
communication  in  timeslots.  The  message-oriented  transport  layer  protocol  is  the  Stream  Control  Transmission  Protocol 
(SCTP),  which  uses  congestion  control  to  transfer  data  over  a  network. For  large  packets  and  data,  Transmission  Control 
Protocol (TCP) is used in the transport layer in IoT. User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is a protocol for lesser data and is used to 
send data to the server and suitable for wireless sensor network communication. The extension of the IPv6 routing protocol is 
Cognitive RPL (CORPL), which was developed especially for cognitive networks. It consists of multiple forwarders with the 
best node selected to forward the data [113-116]. 

4.3  IoT Application Domains 

The incorporation of smart devices to gather data from our day-to-day life activities make many IoT applications feasible 
[53]. These applications can be categorized into different domains, summarized below:  

➢  Personal and Social Domain. The applications under this domain allow potential users to communicate with the 

environment or with other users to establish and maintain a social circle [44]. 

➢  Mobility  and  Transportation  Domain. Under  applications falling in this domain, roads and vehicles equipped 
with  sensors  and  other  smart  technologies  which  can  gather  traffic-related  data  are  covered.  This  data  can  help 
with  traffic  control  and  management  [117].  Some  of  the  IoT-based  transport  applications  with  outstanding 
performance are Intelligent Traffic Information Service (ITIS) and Traffic Information Grid (TIG) [118].  

➢  Enterprise  and  Industrial  Domain.  IoT  Applications  falling  in  this  category  include  smart  banking, 

manufacturing, logistics, industrial operations etc. [2, 119].  

➢  Service  and  Utility  Monitoring  Domain.  This  domain  of  IoT  applications  commonly  deals  with  smart 

agriculture, environment and energy management etc. 

 
 
 
 
 
4.4  Supporting Technologies  

For all applications falling in various IoT domains, different components of the IoT system need to stay connected all time. 
This is possible only with IoT supporting technologies  [53]. The progressive growth of various technologies like sensors, 
smartphones  and  software  will  facilitate  different  things  in  the  IoT  systems  to  stay  connected  everywhere  and  at  all 
times[120]. The fundamental approach to support IoT is to connect the objects in the physical world with the digital world 
[121]. Numerous technologies device these approaches, as discussed below: 

➢  Identification  Technologies.  The  fundamental  identification  technologies  used  in  IoT  are  Radio-Frequency 
Identification  (RFID)  and  Wireless  Sensor  Networks  (WSN).  These  are  used  in  the  perception  layer  of  IoT 
architecture [44], [31], [119]. 

➢  Network and Communication Technologies. Both Wired and Wireless technologies (e.g., GSM and UMTS, Wi-Fi, 
Bluetooth, ZigBee) permit a  large number of smart devices and services to be connected  [122-124].  Flexible and 
secure IoT architecture is required for reliable communication among various wireless devices [117].  

➢  Hardware and  Software  Technologies.   A lot of research is going on in the field of Nano-electronics to develop 
vast functionality and economical wireless IoT systems [119]. Smart things with improved inter-node communication 
will help in the development of smart systems assisting fast application development to support various services in 
IoT. 

4.5  Security Challenges 

Every layer of IoT is prone to security attacks and threats. These attacks may fall in any of the categories of active or passive 
and internal or external attacks [54], [53]. In passive IoT attacks, only the information transmitted on the network is observed 
but the service is not affected. On the other hand in active attacks, a service stops responding [125].  The various devices and 
services supported by each layer of IoT are prone to Denial of Service (DoS) attacks. Under DoS attacks, devices, services, 
and networks become unsalable to unauthorized users. In the same manner, Figure 8 describes the security threats faced by the 
Perception  Layer,  Network  Layer,  Application  layer,  and  Transport  layer  and  services  supported  at  each  layer  which  are 
discussed below:   

➢  Security  Threats  in  Perception  Layer.  The very first issue faced by the various device nodes functioning in this 
layer  is  the  intensity  of  the  wireless  signals  as  the  signals  become  weaker  due  to  environmental  disturbances.  The 
second  issue  is  related  to  the  physical  attacks  on  the  IoT  devices  as  the  various  IoT  nodes  usually  operate  in  the 
outdoor environment.  The third issue is related to the dynamic topology of the IoT systems which allows the frequent 
movement  of  the  IoT  nodes  in  and  around  the  network.  Different  devices  working  in  this  layer  use  sensors  and 
RFIDs. Because of their limited adequacy from the storage and computational point of view, these devices are prone 
to different kinds of security threats [53] and [126].  Various kinds of devices operating in this layer are susceptible to 
Replay Attack, Timing Attacks, Node Capture attacks [57] and DoS attacks. All these security challenges can be dealt 
with by encryption, access control and authentication [127].  

➢  Security  Threats  in Network Layer. Along with the DoS attacks discussed previously, the network layer of an 
IoT  system  can  also  be  targeted  for  silent  monitoring,  traffic  analysis,  and  eavesdropping.  The  major  reasons 
behind these attacks are the remote access and exchange of data. This layer is terrifically prone to a Man-in-the-
Middle  attack  [53].  Eavesdropping  is  the  root  cause  of  the  insecure  communication  channel.  Communication 
technologies  and  protocols  play  a  major  role  to  stop  eavesdropping  and  further  stopping  identity  theft.  As  the 
heterogeneity  of  devices  is  a  major  issue  in  the  IoT  systems,  it  is  the  biggest  challenge  to  have  more  secure 
protocols in the network layer to deal with this diversity. Attackers also misuse the connectivity of the devices to 
steal  user  information  for  future  attacks  [106].  Along  with  the  security  of  the  network  from  the  attackers,  the 
security  of  the  devices  operating  in  the  network  is  competently  important.  Consequently,  the  devices  in  the 
network must have the comprehension to safeguard themselves against network attacks. This can be obtained only 
with secure network protocols as well as smart applications [128].  

➢  Security  Threats  in  Application  Layer. Lack  of  standard policies  related  to  IoT  systems  causes  many  security 
challenges in the IoT applications and their development. As a variety of authentication mechanisms are used in 

 
 
 
 
different  IoT  applications,  it  is  difficult  to  warrant  data  security  and  user  authentication.  The  second  major 
challenge is to deal with the interaction of the user with applications, the volume of data exchanged and to manage 
the different applications. The IoT users must be decked to decide what they wish to share about them and how 
that information is to be used and by whom [54].  

➢  Security Threats in Transport Layer. Common threats in the transport layer include Cross-site scripting (XSS). In 
this type of attack, the malicious user injects client-side-based scripts like Java, HTML, or VBScript into a webpage 
that is frequently visited by the user. These scripts will be masked as valid requests between the browser (client-side) 
and the webserver. It can lead to data theft and manipulation. The other attacks include session hijacking, Cross-site 
request forgery (CSRF), and Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) injection [129]. 

Table 4 describes the taxonomy of various attacks and defence mechanisms at different layers of IoT devices. 

Table 4- Taxonomy of various attacks and defence mechanism at different Layers. 

Network Layer 

Perception Layer 

Transport layer 

Attack 

Application Layer 
Possible 
Defence 
Mechanism 
OpenHab 
Technology 

Common 
Injection 
Attack 

Attack 
on 
Privacy 
Identity 
Spoofing 
Attack 

IoTOne 
Technology 
Preference 
based 
Protection 
Security 
Framework 
based on 
Identity 

Attack 

Node 
misbehaviour 
and Service 
Attack 

Identity Theft 
Attack 

Fault Injection 
Attack 

Possible 
Defence 
Mechanism 
Reputation 
based 

Identity 
Management 
Framework 
Risk based 
Adaptive 
Framework 

Side Channel 
Attack 

SDN enabled 
IoT 

No 
Forwarding 
Attack 

Cooperative 
Nodes 
Protocol 

Eavesdropping  Cluster based 

IDS 

Cipher 
Text 
Attack 

DDoS 
Attack 

Phishing 
Attack 

Side 
Channel 
Attack 
Crypt-
analysis 
Attack 

Attack 

Possible Defence 
Mechanism 

Attack 

Encryption based 
on Hash 

Flooding 
Attack 

Possible 
Defence 
Mechanism 
Compressed 
DTLS 
Header 

PKI Protocol 

Replay 
Attack 

Compressed 
IPsec 

Routing 
Attack 

ECC DTLS 
6LoWPAN 
Border 
router ECC 

Secure 
Authorization 
OAuth 

Lightweight 
Cryptography 

Framework 
based on 
Embedded 
Security 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 - Existing security mechanisms for the protection of IoT applications [54, 63, 130-143] 

4.6  IoT Security Mechanisms and Measures 

Security  is  a  demanding  affair  that  persists  in  IoT  systems.  The  benefits  of  the  IoT  system  cannot  be  obtained  without 
addressing different security issues [63], [144]. Various security mechanisms proposed by various researchers to safeguard 
different IoT applications are shown in Figure 8. Different security mechanisms used in the Perception Layer of the IoT 
systems are Encryption and Hash-based security [130], [145], Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) Like Protocol [131], [146], 
Secure Authorization Mechanism with OAuth (Open Authorization)  [147], [132], Lightweight Cryptographic Algorithms 
[133],  Embedded  Security  Framework  [134],  [148].  The  Network  Layer  of  IoT  is  protected  with  Identity  Management 
Framework [136], Risk-Based Adaptive Framework [137], Association of SDN (Software Defined Networking) with IoT 
[149], Cooperation of  Node-Based Communication Protocol  [138], Reputation  System-Based Mechanism  [139], Cluster-
Based Intrusion Detection and Prevention System [140].Various security mechanisms implemented in the Application layer 
of IoT are Preference-Based Privacy Protection Method [141], [150], Access Control Mechanisms [142], [151], OpenHab 
Technology, IoTOne Technology [143] and Identity-Based Security [152], [153]. All these security mechanisms about the 
security provided by the different layers of IoT are compared below in Table 5. 

Table 5- Comparison of existing IoT security mechanisms in different layers 

Method Name 
Risk-based 
adaptive 
framework 
Preference-based 
Privacy protection 

Layer 
Network 

Application 

Description 
Each portion of the four portions 
performs its tasks and acknowledges 
the other. 
The service provider, client, and 
third-party initiate communication in 
a secure environment. 

OpenHab in the 
Application layer 

Application 

Provision of Security. 

Issues focused on the method 
It keeps watching for attacks. It removes 
the incoming attack at the second portion 
[137]. 
Between the client and the service 
provider, the third party acts as a bridge 
and keeps a check on the security provided 
to the client through the service provider 
[150]. 

The device mismatch is not supported but 
registration is simple [143]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PKI protocol 

Perception 

IoTOne 

Application 

A message is sent by the base station 
to the destination consisting of a 
public key. 
OpenHab technology issues are 
solved. 

Security 
framework based 
on Identity 

Encryption based 
on Hash 
Mechanism-based 
on the secure 
authorization 

Lightweight 
cryptographic 
algorithms 
Embedded 
Framework of 
security 
The Framework of 
Identity 
Management 
SDN with IoT 

Application 

Registration, policy, client, and user 
authentication are part of this system. 

Perception 

Perception 

Encryption algorithms and hash 
functions are used in parallel. 
RBAC and ABAC mechanisms and 
systems are based on client-server. 

Perception 

Messages are converted by using 
keys. 

Perception 

Memory Operating system and run-
time environment are secured. 

Network 

Communication is done via service 
and identity. 

Network 

Low cost and lesser hardware are 
used for better performance. 

Mechanism-Based 
on Reputation 

Network 

Heterogeneous 
fusion  mechanism 
in IoT 

Transport 

Data structures, namely, the 
reputation table and watchdog 
mechanism, are maintained by the 
node to prevent intruders. 
Prevents disclosure of data and 
information. 

5  Role of Digital Forensics in Cybercrime Investigation 

The message is delivered independently 
without compromising security [146]. 

A device mismatch is allowed. The request 
is sent by the client to the server for the 
verification of the user [143]. 
Admin describes the policies. Users and all 
other resources are managed by the 
framework based on policies [152]. 

The integrity of the message is checked 
[145]. 
Resources are provided by the server to the 
client on request, thus making the system 
more secure [132]. 

Plain text from the message is converted to 
a cipher using hash functions, symmetric, 
and asymmetric keys [154]. 
More secure memory management, 
secondary storage, and run time 
environment to the users [134]. 
Information about the user is confirmed by 
the identity module to protect the users 
from the attackers [136]. 
IoT agents and controllers are provided 
security by SDN as all communications are 
done through SDN [149]. 

Ad hoc communication-based system 
[139].  

Roaming authentication security in the 
heterogeneous environment [155]. 

Although  crime  always  persisted  in  society,  the  aids  of  committing  the  crime  evolved  and  grew  with  time.    With  the 
advancement in technology, criminals have come up with new and technology-equipped methods to commit crimes called 
cybercrime. In the past, criminal inquiries depended on the investigation of the physical evidence and crime locations along 
with witnesses. However nowadays in the internet era, crime scenes may comprise smart IoT devices, computers, etc. [65]. 
Consequently, the process of criminal investigation may consist of the analysis of digital evidence [156]. 

5.1  Digital Forensics 

Digital  evidence  may  consist  of  a  variety  of  elements.  Primarily,  the  evidence  would  consist  of  smartphones,  laptops, 
computers, hard drives, USB, etc. As everyone can have any of the above devices, a large volume of data will be available 
for  analysis.  But  a  major  hindering  factor  in  the  analysis  is  the  variety  of  formats  in  which  data  is  available  on  these 
different devices [65].  As there is a big change in the type of evidence with time, so there is a need for new techniques to 
handle this change efficiently. Just like traditional forensics, digital Forensics is a domain that interprets digital data [74]. 
Digital  Forensics  experts  collect,  preserve  and  analyze  digital  evidence  [157].  Rogers  states,  “The  science  of  digital 
forensics has developed, or more correctly is developing; while this science is arguably in its infancy, care must be taken to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ensure that we do not lose sight of the goal of the investigation process namely identifying the parties responsible”  [65], 
[158]. During the design and development of new techniques to analyze digital evidence, it is mandatory to consider other 
aiding domains to develop and support in the process of the criminal investigation. A digital forensics approach deploys a 
framework for the techniques to be used in digital forensics-dependent investigation [159].  

5.2  IoT Forensics in Cybercrime Investigation 
The  IoT Forensics can be observed as a  sub-domain of Digital Forensics. IoT forensics is a comparatively new  and less 
scrutinized area. Its fundamental aim falls in line with Digital Forensics i.e., to collect and analyze digital evidence legally 
and accurately [74]. In IoT Forensics, data could be collected from sensors, IoT devices, networks, and clouds [160]. IoT 
Forensics can be categorized as device-level forensics, network forensics, and cloud forensics as shown in Figure 9. 

Figure 9 - IoT forensics components [74, 157, 160-162] 

The basic contrast between Digital Forensics and IoT forensics depends upon the devices examined in crime investigation. 
In Digital Forensics,  the  various devices under examination may be computers/laptops, servers, tablets, and smartphones 
[27].  Although  IoT  forensics  has  a  wider  area  of  applicability  like  smart  homes,  smart  vehicles,  drones,  general  IoT 
systems, etc., the published literature in the area in comparison to Digital Forensics is less.  

➢  Smart  Homes.  It  has  been  observed  that  during  criminal  investigation,  smart  home  devices  can  provide 
compromising  information  [163].  Usually,  the  main  components  of  these  devices  are  microphones  and  motion 
detectors. These devices play a major role in identifying the location of suspects. There are three main categories 
of devices to collect forensics: active, passive and single-malicious active. In [163], two smart devices i.e., light 
and bulb, have been experimented by the authors. It has been observed that a large amount of data can be collected 
even  with  these  passive  devices,  which  can  help  to  identify  the  activity  executed  in  a  specific  timestamp.  The 
design of another smart  home solution, i.e., Forensics Edge Management System (FEMS)  is discussed in  [164]. 
The  focus  of  the  proposed  system  is  to  administer  security  in  smart  homes  along  with  forensics  assistance. 
Although a variety of features ranging from automatic  detection to intelligence and flexibility are the main, this 
system  is  with  two  limitations  i.e.  complex  implementation  and  testing.  The  authors  stated  in  [165]  about  the 
security concerns in smart devices. It is impressive that the security threat in an IoT environment  increases with 
the increase in the number of devices in the network. Consequently, the need for IoT forensics arises. In this case 
study,  special  attention  is  given  to  the  IoT  forensics  in  smart  homes.  The  authors  also  highlighted  the  need  for 
advanced  IoT  forensics  because  of  the different  IoT  challenges.    It  is  expected  that  in  the  coming  future,  smart 
homes will become widespread. Therefore, a seven-step methodology is proposed for easy investigation in smart 

 
 
 
 
 
home  surroundings  [166].  It  is  highlighted  by  the  authors  that  the  proposed  framework  assists  in  evidence 
collection and storage. However, it needs to be tested with a true home automation system.  

➢  Smart City and Vehicle  Automation. Smart Cities are computerized environments; also termed cyber-physical 
ecosystems to enhance the utility of traditional city infrastructure like parking spaces, power grids, gas pipes, etc. 
[74]  [167].  In  this  way,  better  services  can  be  provided  to  the  residents  [168],  [169].  One  of  the  important 
examples  i.e.  smart  parking  is  the  area  of  the  major  concern  of  most  of  the  city  administrations  and  auto-tech 
companies [170]. The network of smart vehicles assists the exchange of information between the vehicles and the 
environment  [27].  These  smart  vehicles  have  aided  various  important  areas  like  road  safety  and  traffic 
administration.  However,  they  have  also  raised  many  issues  in  the  concern  of  digital  forensics.  In  a  case  study 
[171], a new framework named ‘Trust  – Internet of Vehicles ( IoV)’  is proposed by the authors for dependable 
investigation. It assists to gather and save dependable evidence from a network of tremendously scattered smart 
vehicles  [172].  This  framework  is  also  very  useful  in  preserving  the  evidence  and  assuring  the  integrity  of  the 
saved evidence. In [173], various threats to smart vehicles are reviewed by the authors. The authors also proposed 
and tested a new technique to investigate smart vehicles. However, still this technique needs to be validated with 
the data produced by a network of smart vehicles in an actual scenario.  

➢  Drone  Forensics.    In  [174],  the  authors  proposed  a  new  approach  for  the  forensic  analysis  of  data  gathered 
through  drones.  The  reference  data  used  for  forensic  analysis  were  collected  from  the  DJI  Phantom  III  drone.  
Drone Open-Source Parser (DROP), a new tool to format the data and prepare for internal storage of the system, is 
also proposed. It is elaborated by the authors that the drone is controlled with the help of mobile and various types 
of  data  files  are  also  found  on  the  controlled  mobile  phone.  The  data  collected  in  these  files  aid  to  identify  the 
location, flight time, and other related information of the drone under observation. However, the main limitation of 
the work is it focused only on one type of drone; so, the work is needed to be extended for other types too.  

➢  Cloud  Forensics.  Cloud  forensics  acts  as  a  backbone  to  IoT  forensics.  In  [175],  the  authors  proposed  a  new 
technique to gather and analyze data from the newer BitTorrent Sync peer-to-peer cloud storage service [176]. The 
data is generated by experimenting with a variety of diverse smart systems. The authors observed that data stored 
in various log files, installation records and metadata can be recovered. It is highlighted that  the state of data in 
memory  should  be  conserved  for  accurate  forensic  analysis.  But  proposed  method  has  not  been  legitimized  by 
actual device manufacturers [177].  

➢  Smartphone  Forensics.    In the modern era, people are highly dependent on smartphones.  Smartphones play a 
major  role  in  the  exchange  of  text,  audio  and  video data. Criminals  can  commit  different  types of  crimes  using 
smartphones like transaction fraud, harassment, child trafficking, pornography etc. It is very difficult to elicit data 
related to the above activities from smartphones for forensic analysis. To solve this issue, the authors conducted a 
study [178]. In their study, the Samsung Galaxy S3 phone is used as a device of the experiment for data extraction. 
It has been observed that to transplant a mobile phone is a tedious activity as it is always associated with the risk 
i.e. damage to PoP components.  Authors in [178] proposed a new methodology named PoP chip-off/TCA. This 
methodology aids in the transplantation of mobile phones. A new technique was designed and experimented for 
the successful forensic transplantation of a cryptographic Blackberry 9900 PGP mobile phone. 

➢  Healthcare  Forensics.    The  Healthcare  sector  is  one  of  the  most  prone domains  to  major  security  threats.  The 
main reason for this is the diverse nature of medical applications and the heterogeneity of the types of equipment 
used; so, a broader surface for attacks [74],  [179]. Besides evolution in the health care industry plays a major role 
in  the  development  of  human  life,  various  smart  health  monitoring  systems  also  put  the  security  of  patient’s 
medical data at risk. IoT based fitness systems could be targeted by attackers to steal the data of the users, which 
can be further misused [180]. Numerous medical identity thefts have been identified in the past which expresses 
the  importance  of  medical  data.  In  the  domain  of  medical  health  services  and  applications,  a  compound  annual 
growth of 29-30% is expected from the year 2019-2025 [181]. Many fitness wearables can be used as a source of 
evidence  in  criminal  investigations  as  these  gadgets  keep  on  storing  the  data  related  to  routine  activities  of  the 
users at the back end passively.  Thus, although these gadgets were designed to maintain the health status of the 
users  but  can  also  be  used  as  digital  evidence  [22].  The  number  of  users,  smart  watches,  and  fitness  bands  are 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increasing day by day; so, the study of these IoT devices has become the center of interest for forensics practice. 
According to the authors in [182], the data extracted from these gadgets may be personal to the users. Therefore, 
special attention should be given to the security of this data. As the number of security-related issues is increasing 
exponentially, there is a requirement of more advanced techniques to ensure the security of data [183].   

➢  General IoT  System Forensics. In [22], the authors came up with a new investigation platform for diverse IoT 
systems. A risk judgment scheme dependent on STRIDE and DREAD methods was designed and modeled. It was 
discussed  with  the  help  of  these  two  exemplary  models  that  cybercrime  committed  in  the  IoT  environment  can 
even cause serious risks like death. It was observed by the authors that most of the IoT systems are not deployed 
with default security measures; so, it possesses high risk. A study was carried out [184] to analyze the significance 
of  the  sync  data  in  evidence  analysis.  Sync  data  contributes  to  the  fair  investigation  of  the  digital  witness.    A 
survey was conducted [185] by the authors to study and analyze forensics investigation techniques for data stored 
in  the  system  memory.  Few  meaningful  alterations  to  the  operating  systems  were  also  impressed  upon  in  this 
study. In  [186], data  contraction and partially automated analysis techniques to handle a  large volume of digital 
evidence  were  suggested.  This  technique  assists  in  the  analysis  of  a  variety  of  IoT  data  gathered.  In  [187],  the 
authors discussed the  approaches of gathering, saving and communicating  digital evidence in a secure way to a 
genuine destination. Some technologies to bring it into practice were also highlighted by the authors. Along with, 
the basic components of the electronic evidence were also described.  

In  [188],    a  novel  approach  to  club  cloud-native  and  cloud-centric  forensic  for  the  Amazon  Alexa  ecosystem  was 
proposed. A new framework named “Probe-IoT” is presented in [189], which aids to identify criminal evidence in the IoT 
environment  using  electronic  logs.  These  logs  preserve  the  complete  information  regarding  all  data  exchanges  between 
things, users and cloud services. This framework was not tested experimentally but conceptually safeguards the integrity of 
the evidence. In [190], the authors presented a novel model for IoT forensics named PRoFIT to ensure the implementation 
of standards during forensic analysis. This model was tested in the true IoT environment deployed in a coffee shop.  1-2-3 
zone approach is applied by the authors  [191] for IoT forensic analysis. According to the authors, concerned persons and 
pieces of evidence fall in zone 1, things or devices near to the boundary of the network fall in zone 2 and devices exterior to 
the  network  are  capped  in  zone  3.  This  approach  was  developed  to  support  accurate  IoT  investigation.  However,  the 
practical implementation of this approach is comparatively challenging. The authors in  [192], presented a new framework 
dependent on three-layer architecture. The proposed framework has many advantages to ensure data security with only one 
disadvantage that it is not much suitable to cope with the limited resources of IoT devices like processing power, battery, 
etc. The researchers in  [193], proposed the design of a new model to help the  forensic expert for IoT evidence analysis. 
This  model  was  proposed  to  preserve  volatile  data  in  IoT  devices.  This  work  was  planned  as  an  extension  of  previous 
research.  Using  this  model,  forensic  experts  can  investigate  a  broader  surface  in  the  data  domain.  However,  it  has  been 
observed that this model is laborious to implement in a true environment. In [194], the authors presented IoT forensics in a 
new  way.    In  this  work,  the  IoT  domain  was  methodically  explored  to  disclose  the  various  challenges  in  the  domain  of 
digital  forensics.  A  novel  technique  named  Forensic  Aware  IoT  (FAIoT)  was  introduced  with  a  focus  to  uncover  new 
details  in  an  IoT  environment.    However,  the  applicability  of  the  approach  is  doubted  as  it  was  not  verified  in  the  IoT 
environment.  The  authors  [195]  analyzed  prominent  technical  issues  in  digital  forensics  which  can  obstacle  the 
identification of important facts for investigation. Various research issues, which can significantly improve the process of 
digital  forensics,  were  also  highlighted.  Different  types  of  attacks  that  are  frequently  planned  on  the  devices  in  an  IoT 
environment were discussed in [196] along with the complexity which they add to the digital investigation. The hackers use 
a  large  number  of  random  UDP  attacks  at  the  same  time  by  using  UDP  datagrams  of  varying  sizes.  Consequently,  the 
denial  of  service  is  caused.    Authors  introduced  a  novel  approach  to  handle  these  types  of  attacks  by  identifying  their 
originators.  However, the true implementation of the proposed work is lying on the back front.  A number of  patents are 
granted  in  the  development  of  digital  forensics  in  past.  Table  6  represents  the  patents  granted  in  recent  years.  Many 
applications and digital forensics have been developed to prevent cybercrime. Table 7 presents the list of real-time digital 
forensics applications that support various operating systems and other platforms to prevent cybercrime in IoT devices. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 6- Various Patents granted in the development of Digital Forensics. 

Patent Title 

Year 

Inventor 

Country 

Key features 

Differencing Engine 
for Digital Forensics 
Forensic 
Investigation Tool 
Forensic system, 
Forensic Methods, 
and Forensic 
Program 
Devices and methods 
for providing 
security in a remote 
digital forensic 
environment 

Method and 
apparatus for Digital 
Forensics 

Systems and 
methods for 
provisioning digital 
forensics services 
remotely over public 
and private 
networks 
Digital Forensics 

Methods for data 
analysis and digital 
forensics and 
systems using the 
same 
Forensic digital 
watermarking with 
variable orientation 
and protocols 
Secure digital 
forensics 

Filed  Published 

2018 

2020 

2017 

2019 

2015 

2016 

Monsen and 
Glisson [197] 
Jon D. 
McEachron[198] 
Morimoto et al. 
[199] 

US 

US 

US 

2016 

2017 

Kang et al.[200] 

US 

2008 

2012 

Choi et al.[201] 

US 

2012 

2015 

Shannon and 
Decker[202] 

US 

Anomaly detection to mitigate the security 
attack on cloud-based servers. 
Digital Investigation tool capable of 
recovering and decrypting the content. 
A medium to acquire and analyze the digital 
information in a server or a plurality of 
computers. 

A method for collecting digital evidence 
from the target system. Analysis of the 
collected evidence to be done at a remote 
location. 

A method to perform digital forensics by 
extracting page files from the target stored 
medium. Also, extract features from the 
extracted page file. 
A method to collect and analyse 
electronically stored information over public 
and private networks using cloud computing. 

2009 

2014 

Buchanan et 
al.[203] 

US 

2011 

2014 

Gil et al. [204] 

US 

2001 

2008 

K. Levy [205] 

US 

2007 

2011 

Carpenter and 
Westerinen 
[206] 

US 

System call information is acquired from the 
device under test. The acquired data is 
converted into a sequence format for further 
investigation. 
It comprises an online data forensic server to 
acquire and analyze the usage history of a 
device. It also issues a timestamp to the 
collected data. 

A method of forensic digital watermarking 
on the randomly selected orientation in the 
content signal. 

To perform an audit of computer processor 
status and memory, a security module is 
designed. This can be done using a separate 
hardware path to access the processor register 
data through a debug port. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 7- List of Real-Time Digital Forensics Applications to Prevent Cyber Crime 

Software 

OS/Support 

E3 Universal  Window, Linux, 

macOS, iOS 

WireShark 

Autopsy 

Paladin 

Windows, 
Linux, macOS, 
Solaris 
Windows, 
Linux, macOS 
Android 
Linux 

Dumpzilla 

Unix, Windows 

SIFT (SANS 
investigative 
forensic 
toolkit) 
Toolsley 

NetworkMiner 

Elcomsoft 

Belkasoft X 

Linux 

Web-based 

Windows, 
Linux, MacOS 
X, FreeBSD 

Windows, 
macOS, iOS 
Windows 
macOS, Linux, 
iOS, Android, 
Blackberry 

6  Advanced IoT Security 

Features 
IoT analysis, Cloud data imaging, and 
analysis, Registry analysis, Email 
investigation, JTAG, and chip dump 
processing 
VoIP, GUI, Offline analysis, WAN/LAN 
analyzer. 

Registry analysis, LNK file analysis, 
Timeline analysis, File type detection, 
Email analysis 
Device cloning support for many forensic 
image formats: E01, Ex01, RAW, VHD 
and AFF, Disk Manager, Automatic 
logging 
Forensic information extraction from 
firefox, SeaMonkey browsers including 
cookies, bookmarks, Web forms, SSL 
certificates, Browser saved passwords. 
File system support, different Evidence 
image format support, Rapid scripting 
and analysis 

File repairing, text encoding, File 
identification, File signature verification, 
Binary inspection, CRC tool 
Live sniffing, OS fingerprinting, Geo IP 
localization, DNS whitelisting, Audio 
extraction and playback of VoIP calls, 
PCAP and PcapNG file parsing 
Password recovery, Cloud explorer, Disk 
decryption, Wireless security auditor 
E01/DD imaging, Hash set analysis, 
Registry viewer, plist viewer, Artifacts 
viewer, SQLite viewer 

Sources 
https://paraben.com/digital-forensic-
tools-6/ 

https://www.wireshark.org/ 

https://www.sleuthkit.org/autopsy/ 

https://sumuri.com/software/paladin/ 

https://tools.kali.org/forensics/dumpzilla 

https://digital-
forensics.sans.org/community/downloads 

https://www.toolsley.com/ 

https://sectools.org/tool/networkminer/ 

https://www.elcomsoft.co.uk/ 

https://belkasoft.com/ 

Smart devices and applications in the various application areas of IoT make human life more  comfortable, but also make 
IoT systems more vulnerable to cyber-attacks. These devices and applications are connected to the internet, which creates 
new opportunities for cybercriminals to enter the IoT environment. Cybercriminals can enter an IoT system through routers 
and can damage it in many ways. Although several security mechanisms are available in IoT, advanced technologies like 
Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML), Neural Networks (NN), Blockchain technology, Fog computing and 
Edge computing are playing a major role to handle cyber-attacks and helping to control cybercrime [207, 208]. Authors in 
[209], discussed  in  brief  the various kinds  of  security  threats  in  an  IoT  environment.  The  need  for  a  dynamic  and  quick 
system to safeguard the IoT systems against cybercrime is impressed upon. The authors proposed a hybrid system to detect 
cyber-attacks using AI & ML in a cloud computing environment. Both types of attacks i.e. device level and network level 
can be detected with this model. According to the authors, it is considered by the security experts that AI & ML  provides 
very powerful security mechanisms as even future attacks may be predicted based on past IoT attack data. Consequently, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
this system does not wait for the occurrence of attacks but can predict in advance. The main limitation of the system is that 
it  can  work  only  with  standard  data  formats  for  prediction.  Along  with  ML  provides  solutions  to  DoS  attacks, 
eavesdropping,  spoofing  and  privacy  leakage  in  an  IoT  environment  [25].  Authors  in  [210],  presented  a  multilayer 
architecture to associate the various devices within IoT to make them accessible throughout the network at  all times. To 
deal  with  the  security  issues  of  end  nodes  and  to  provide  more  credible  services,  a  novel  framework  using  NN  was 
proposed. According to this framework, security issues need to be tackled in each layer of the IoT architecture. Each end 
node configured using this framework will have the potential to self-monitor and recover after any unwanted event/attack. 
In the proposed framework,  a NN  based adaptive model was used for the automatic  recovery of the nodes.  In  [211], the 
authors presented an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) approach to control Distributed Denial of service (DDoS) attacks. 
The ANN was tested in a simulated IoT environment. The results obtained with the proposed technique were found to be 
99.4 % accurate and this technique is capable to identify numerous DDoS/ DoS attacks. Authors in  [25], highlighted that 
the incorporation of blockchain in IoT systems has numerous benefits.  The distributed architecture of blockchain reduces 
the risk of failure of data storage nodes. Thus, it leads to more secure data storage in the IoT environment [212] [213].  The 
concept of data encryption is used by the blockchain for data storage in the IoT environment; so, there are less chances of 
storing damaged data in things [214]. The augmentation of blockchain with IoT also helps to prevent unauthorized access, 
data  loss  and  spoofing  attacks    [215].  Various  challenges  in  IoT  along  with  the  workable  solutions  administered  by  the 
blockchain technology are discussed below in Table 8. 

Table 8- Theoretical solutions offered by deploying Blockchain in IoT Framework to prevent Cyberattacks 

Challenges in IoT 
Defects in 
Architecture 

Specifications 
A point of failure exists in IoT devices 
that affect the device and the network. 

Manipulation of Data  The data extracted from IoT devices is 

Service inefficiency 
due to heavy load on 
the cloud server 
Traffic and cost 

management 

manipulated and is used 
inappropriately. 
Cloud services malfunctions due to 
cyber-attack, power failures, or bugs in 
software. 
The handling of the exponential growth 
in IoT devices is a tedious task. 

Privacy issues in IoT 
devices 

The user data present in IoT devices 
are more vulnerable due to cyber-
attacks. 

Theoretical Blockchain Solution 
Validation can be done using blockchain. The data 
is also verified through cryptography to ensure that 
a legitimate sender has sent it [216]. 
Using blockchain, the IoT devices are interlocked 
due to which the system rejects any kind of change 
in data through IoT devices [217, 218]. 
Data records are uploaded on different nodes on the 
network. Due to the same data in different nodes, 
there is no single point of failure [219, 220]. 
The IoT devices can be connected and 
communicated through peers bypassing the central 
servers through the decentralization feature [221, 
222]. 
The permissioned blockchain can eradicate this 
problem [223-225]. 

In [25], the authors discussed that a large volume of data is generated by diverse devices in the IoT environment. It is very 
taxing  to  shift  the  entire  data  to  the  cloud  for  real-time  analysis;  so,  the  concept  of  fog  computing  evolved.  Under  this 
concept, the cloud framework is extended to the edge of the network [226]. Fog computing can handle various IoT security 
attacks like a man-in-the-middle attack, data transit attacks, eavesdropping and resource constraint issues very efficiently 
[227]. Therefore, various characteristics and possible solutions deployed by fog computing are shown in Figure 10. Authors 
in  [25],  discussed  that  the  edge  computing  framework  is  an  expansion  of  cloud  computing.  The  location  of  the 
computational  power  and  analysis  mechanisms  differentiate  edge  computing  from  fog  computing  in  an  IoT  environment 
[228]. In edge computing, both these potentials reside at the edge [229]. The various devices in the IoT system coordinate 
to establish a network and perform various computations required for data analysis within that network  [230]. Therefore, 
the  need  to  communicate  the  data  outside  the  device  reduces  which  contributes  to  improved  data  security  in  the  IoT 
applications.  On  the  same  grounds,  this  framework  also  aids  to  minimize  the  communication  cost  of  data  [231].  The 
concept of edge computing helps to handle data breaches, data compliance issues, safety issues, and  bandwidth challenges 
in an IoT environment [232].  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10- Possible solutions offered through Fog Computing [233-244] 

7  Road map of problems in IoT Forensics 

IoT  Forensics  is  a  complicated  and  regularly  emerging  domain.  It  plays  a  very  crucial  role  in  cybercrime  investigation. 
However, many challenges need to be addressed very carefully. These challenges open the doors for further research in the 
field of IoT forensics [74].  Thus, the main objective of this section is to show a path to the  researchers in the domain of 
IoT forensics to aid cybercrime investigation. These include: 

➢  Data Locations. In IoT systems, the data are saved at various locations in dynamic devices that may be regulated by 
different administrations. Consequently, the investigators undergo serious problems to identify which regulations are to 
be followed when the device was used to commit a crime [245]. In this type of situation, crime investigation becomes a 
more complicated task. So, there is a need for standard processes and mechanisms to address this issue. 

➢  Forensic  Automation.  There  are  numerous  technical  issues  faced  during  the  automated  IoT  forensic  analysis.  The 
major  problems  which  affect  the  process  are  the  dynamic  nature  of  the  devices  and  the  involvement  of  advanced 
methods in the process of forensic investigation. To obtain a real-time solution to the problem, there is a requirement 
for  improved  IoT  automation.  The  authors  in  [164],  presented  a  novel  direction  to  IoT  forensics  by  introducing  an 
automated  technique  for  forensics  examination.    It  is  also  impressed  upon  by  the  authors  that  the  diversity  of  IoT 
devices  is  the  main  hindrance  in  the  real-time  implementation  of  the  proposed  technique.  Therefore,  some  standard 
mechanisms are required to deal with the heterogeneity of the devices and collected data. 

➢  IoT  Device  Management: In an IoT environment, sometimes a particular device malfunctions and starts generating 
malignant data. Although, it may require shutting that device down but may not be feasible for the forensic investigator 
to do so because of the owner’s rationality. For example, if in a smart home a washing machine is initiating vengeful 
data packets, but the owner does not pass his consent to stop it as it may disturb his daily functioning. This may lead to 
a  big  challenge  for  crime  investigator  expert.  Therefore,  a  due  attention  needs  to  be  given  to  design  the  required 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
mechanisms  to  provide  the  crime  investigators  freedom  for  forensic  investigation  without  ceasing  the  working  of 
things.  

➢  Forensic Analysis of Data in IoT. Forensic investigators deal with a large volume of IoT data using various analysis 
techniques during the process of crime investigation [246]. In an IoT environment, the data are collected and analyzed 
from  various  devices  and  the  results  are  used  for  various  types  of  decision  making  [247].    As  the  process  of  data 
analysis and interpretation is complex, the accuracy of the results and further investigation is affected [186]. Therefore, 
the need for more standardized, simple and accurate data analysis tools and techniques arises. 

➢  Scope and Life of Digital Forensic Evidence. The limited storage of IoT devices deters the availability of  evidence 
for a long time which results in the loss of crucial data related to cybercrime[160]. To overcome this problem, forensic 
data should be transferred frequently to the cloud. However, the process of data transfer gives rise to another challenge 
to ensure that evidence has not been manipulated during the process. Another major issue is related to the visibility of 
the  evidence.  The  presence  of  a  few  malignant  sensors  at  the  crime  scene  may  affect  the  working  of  the  forensic 
investigators to locate the witness equipment. Although, log files from various devices may assist the forensic experts 
but do not provide the complete set of evidence for the investigation. 

➢  Privacy  of  the  User.  The  entanglement  of  IoT  devices  in  various  domains  has  made  human  life  very  comfortable. 
However,  it  has  put  the  privacy  of  the  users  of  smart  devices  at  stake.  It  has  been  observed  that  there  is  a  lack  of 
privacy-specific  forensic  mechanisms  for  the  IoT  environment  [248].  The  main  loophole  of  most  of  the  available 
forensic  solutions  is  that  the  privacy  aspect  of  the  users  is  ignored  during  the  process  of  investigation[249].    All 
investigation solutions proposed in  [187], [190], [250] have serious privacy challenges. In very diverse and dynamic 
IoT systems, the practice of suitable privacy measures can enhance the involvement of digital evidence for cybercrime 
investigations.  

➢  Security  in  IoT  devices.  The diverse nature of devices in the IoT environment opens a new  space for unauthorized 
users  to  attack  the  system  which  is  very  difficult  to  identify  during  the  forensics  investigation.    Consequently,  the 
process  of  collection  of  evidence  becomes  more  tedious.  Therefore,  it  is  essential  that  during  the  design  of  various 
forensic  investigation  mechanisms,  the  diverse  nature  of  IoT  systems  should  be  kept  in  mind  [251].  The  authors 
introduced  the  concept  of  security  and  privacy  in  [68],  [252].  Proposed  approaches  and  algorithms  provide  more 
liberty to forensic investigators by leaving aside security issues. By considering the diverse and dynamic nature of the 
IoT environment, more such kinds of techniques are the need of the hour in cybercrime investigation [253, 254]. 

➢  Other issues and future research 

During  the  study  of  various  challenges,  it  has  been  observed  that  there  is  a  requirement  of  more  standardized 
techniques and mechanisms to administer the data gathered from heterogeneous and dynamic devices to facilitate the 
process of cybercrime investigation. Due to the diversity of the formats of the data gathered from the various devices, 
there  is  also  a  requirement  of  more  sophisticated  data  analysis  tools  and  techniques.  Advanced  methods  need  to  be 
proposed to facilitate the investigators with the liberty to work without interrupting the working of smart devices and 
equipment.  As  the  storage  capacity  of  most  of  the  smart  devices  is  limited;  there  is  a  requirement  of  accurate  and 
efficient techniques to transfer the forensic data from IoT devices to the cloud without any loss of evidence.  Suitable 
measures also need to be practiced ensuring the privacy of the user’s personal data during the process of investigation.  

8. Conclusions 

IoT  is  a  developing  technology,  which  has  bestowed  human  life  with  comfort.  However,  the  growing  practice  of  IoT 
devices in various domains related to business and personal life has put personal and data security at greater risk. A  large 
volume  of  data  is  exchanged  openly  among  the  various  smart  devices  in  an  IoT  environment  which  attracts  hackers  to 
penetrate the security system. The dependence of IoT systems on wireless communication technologies makes them prone 
to cyber-attacks which is the root cause of cybercrime.  In this paper, we present the various elements of the IoT framework 
like  architecture,  protocols,  technologies,  and  application  domains.  A  detailed  review  of  the  security  aspects  of  an  IoT 
environment  from  the  years  2010-2020  is  presented.  Various  security  aspects  which  may  facilitate  intruders  to  commit 
cybercrime  are  also  discussed.  Implementation  of  the  security  mechanisms  at  each  of  the  layers  of  IoT  architecture  is 
presented  in  this  survey.  The  role  of  IoT  Forensics  and  advanced  technologies  in  cybercrime  investigation  is  impressed 

 
 
 
 
 
upon  in  this  review.  This  survey  also  consists  of  patents  reported  and  real-time  applications  developed  to  mitigate  the 
problems  occurring  due  to  cybercrime  in  IoT  devices.  At  last,  the  various  open  research  challenges  to  be  addressed  are 
discussed to facilitate the process of cybercrime investigation in the IoT systems. 

Data Availability Statement 
Any data or material used in the survey is referred to in the article. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

I.  Butun,  P.  Österberg,  and  H.  Song,  "Security  of  the  Internet  of  Things:  Vulnerabilities,  attacks,  and 
countermeasures," IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 22, pp. 616-644, 2019. 
V. Sharma, G. Choudhary, Y. Ko, and I. You, "Behavior and vulnerability assessment of drones-enabled industrial 
internet of things (iiot)," IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 43368-43383, 2018. 
J. Lin, W. Yu, N. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Zhang, and W. Zhao, "A survey on internet of things: Architecture, enabling 
technologies,  security  and  privacy,  and  applications,"  IEEE  Internet  of  Things  Journal,  vol.  4,  pp.  1125-1142, 
2017. 
S.  Forsström,  I.  Butun,  M.  Eldefrawy,  U.  Jennehag,  and  M.  Gidlund,  "Challenges  of  securing  the  industrial 
internet  of  things  value  chain,"  in  2018  Workshop  on  Metrology  for  Industry  4.0  and  IoT,  2018,  pp.  218-223, 
Brescia, Italy. 
S.  Jeschke,  C.  Brecher,  H.  Song,  and  D.  Rawat,  "Industrial  internet  of  things:  Foundations,  principles  and 
applications," Cham, Switzerland: Springer, pp. 1-715, 2017. 
H.  Song,  D.  B.  Rawat,  S.  Jeschke,  and  C.  Brecher,  Cyber-physical  systems:  foundations,  principles  and 
applications: Morgan Kaufmann, ISBN: 0128038748, 2016. 
R. Alharbi and D. Aspinall, "An IoT analysis framework: An investigation of IoT smart cameras' vulnerabilities," 
International  conference on Living in the Internet of Things: Cybersecurity of the IoT, 2018, London, UK. 
M. A. Zamora-Izquierdo, J. Santa, J. A. Martínez, V. Martínez, and A. F. Skarmeta, "Smart farming IoT platform 
based on edge and cloud computing," Biosystems engineering, vol. 177, pp. 4-17, 2019. 
R.  Singh,  A.  Gehlot,  J.  K.  Khilrani,  and  M.  Mittal,  "Internet  of  Things–triggered  and  power-efficient  smart 
pedometer  algorithm  for  intelligent  wearable  devices,"  in  Wearable  and  Implantable  Medical  Devices,  ed: 
Elsevier, 2020, pp. 1-23. 

[10]  M. Mittal, S. Tanwar, B. Agarwal, and L. M. Goyal, Energy Conservation for IoT Devices: Concepts, Paradigms 

and Solutions vol. 206: Springer, 2019. 

[14] 

[12] 

[13] 

[11]  M. Abdel-Basset, G. Manogaran, and M. Mohamed, "Internet of Things (IoT) and its impact on supply chain: A 
framework for building smart, secure and efficient systems,"  Future Generation Computer Systems,  vol.  86, pp. 
614-628, 2018. 
F.  Piccialli  and  A.  Chianese,  "Editorial  for  FGCS  special  issue:  the  internet  of  cultural  things:  towards  a  smart 
cultural heritage," vol. 81, pp. 514-515, ed: Elsevier, 2018. 
P.  V.  Astillo,  J.  Kim,  V.  Sharma,  and  I.  You,  "SGF-MD:  Behavior  Rule  Specification-Based  Distributed 
Misbehavior Detection of Embedded IoT Devices in a Closed-Loop Smart Greenhouse Farming System,"  IEEE 
Access, vol. 8, pp. 196235-196252, 2020. 
A. Kataria, S. Ghosh, V. Karar, T. Gupta, K. Srinivasan, and Y.-C. Hu, "Improved Diver Communication System 
by Combining Optical and Electromagnetic Trackers," Sensors, vol. 20, p. 5084, 2020. 
V. Sharma, R. Kumar, and R. Kaur, "UAV-assisted content-based sensor search in IoTs," Electronics Letters, vol. 
53, pp. 724-726, 2017. 
I.  You,  H.-C.  Chen,  V.  Sharma,  and  I.  Kotenko,  Mobile  Internet  Security:  Second  International  Symposium, 
MobiSec 2017, Jeju Island, Republic of Korea, October 19–22, 2017, Revised Selected Papers vol. 971: Springer, 
2018. 
Y. Lu and L. Da Xu, "Internet of things (iot) cybersecurity research: A review of current research topics," IEEE 
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, pp. 2103-2115, 2018. 
A. Abdullah, R. Hamad, M. Abdulrahman, H. Moala, and S. Elkhediri, "CyberSecurity: A Review of Internet of 
Things  (IoT)  Security  Issues,  Challenges  and  Techniques,"  in  2019  2nd  International  Conference  on  Computer 
Applications & Information Security (ICCAIS), 2019, pp. 1-6, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. 

[17] 

[16] 

[15] 

[18] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
[19] 
[20] 

[21] 

[22] 

[23] 

[24] 

[25] 

[26] 

[27] 

[28] 

IC3. (2020). Available: https://www.ic3.gov/ Last Accessed on 28th March 2021 
F. Servida and E. Casey, "IoT forensic challenges and opportunities for digital traces,"  Digital Investigation, vol. 
28, pp. S22-S29, 2019. 
V.  R.  Kebande,  N.  M.  Karie,  A.  Michael,  S.  M.  Malapane,  and  H.  Venter,  "How  an  IoT-enabled  “smart 
refrigerator” can play a clandestine role in perpetuating cyber-crime," in 2017 IST-Africa Week Conference (IST-
Africa), 2017, pp. 1-10. 
N.  Akatyev  and  J.  I.  James,  "Evidence  identification  in  IoT  networks  based  on  threat  assessment,"  Future 
Generation Computer Systems, vol. 93, pp. 814-821, 2019. 
A. K. Singholi, M. Mittal, and A. Bhargava, "A Review on IoT-Based Hybrid Navigation System for Mid-sized 
Autonomous Vehicles," in Advances in Electromechanical Technologies, ed: Springer, pp. 735-744. 
A. Venčkauskas, R. Damaševičius, V. Jusas, J. Toldinas, D. Rudzika, and G. Drėgvaitė, "A review of cyber-crime 
in  internet  of  things:  technologies,  investigation  methods  and  digital  forensics,"  International  Journal  of 
Engineering Sciences and Research Technology, vol. 4, pp. 460-477, 2015. 
V. Hassija, V. Chamola, V. Saxena, D. Jain, P. Goyal, and B. Sikdar, "A survey on IoT security: application areas, 
security threats, and solution architectures," IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 82721-82743, 2019. 
P. Radanliev, D. C. De Roure, R. Nicolescu, M. Huth, R. M. Montalvo, S. Cannady, et al., "Future developments 
in cyber risk assessment for the internet of things," Computers in Industry, vol. 102, pp. 14-22, 2018. 
I.  Yaqoob,  I.  A.  T.  Hashem,  A.  Ahmed,  S.  A.  Kazmi,  and  C.  S.  Hong,  "Internet  of  things  forensics:  Recent 
advances, taxonomy, requirements, and open challenges," Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 92, pp. 265-
275, 2019. 
N. H. N. Zulkipli, A. Alenezi, and G. B. Wills, "IoT forensic: bridging the challenges in digital forensic and the 
Internet of Things," in International Conference on Internet of Things, Big Data and Security, 2017, pp. 315-324. 

[29]  M.  Husamuddin  and  M.  Qayyum,  "Internet  of  Things:  A  study  on  security  and  privacy  threats,"  in  2017  2nd 

[30] 

[31] 

[32] 

[33] 

[34] 

[35] 

[36] 

[37] 

[38] 

[39] 

[40] 

[41] 

[42] 

International Conference on Anti-Cyber Crimes (ICACC), 2017, pp. 93-97, Abha. 
A. Tewari and B. Gupta, "Security, privacy and trust of different layers in Internet-of-Things (IoTs) framework," 
Future generation computer systems, vol. 108, pp. 909-920, 2020. 
H.  Sundmaeker,  P.  Guillemin,  P.  Friess,  and  S.  Woelfflé,  "Vision  and  challenges  for  realising  the  Internet  of 
Things," Cluster of European Research Projects on the Internet of Things, European Commision,  vol. 3, pp. 34-
36, 2010. 
G. Marias, J. Barros, M. Fiedler, A. Fischer, H. Hauff, R. Herkenhoener, et al., "Security and privacy issues for 
the network of the future. Security Comm," Networks, vol. 5(9), pp. 987-1005,2011. 
K. Liebrand et al. "Ethics, Privacy and Data Protection in BUTLER", Project Title: Ubiquitous, secure internet-of-
things with Location and contex-awareness, Project no: 287901, 2011.   
V. Sharma, D. N. K. Jayakody, I. You, R. Kumar, and J. Li, "Secure and efficient context-aware localization of 
drones in urban scenarios," IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, pp. 120-128, 2018. 
V.  Sharma,  I.  You,  R.  Kumar,  and  V.  Chauhan,  "OFFRP:  optimised  fruit  fly  based  routing  protocol  with 
congestion  control  for  UAVs  guided  ad  hoc  networks,"  International  Journal  of  Ad  Hoc  and  Ubiquitous 
Computing, vol. 27, pp. 233-255, 2018. 
D. Patel, K. Srinivasan, C.-Y. Chang, T. Gupta, and A. Kataria, "Network Anomaly Detection inside Consumer 
Networks—A Hybrid Approach," Electronics, vol. 9, p. 923, 2020. 
A. Nieto and J. Lopez, "Analysis and taxonomy of security/QoS tradeoff solutions for the future internet," Security 
and Communication Networks, vol. 7, pp. 2778-2803, 2014. 
J. Sutanto, E. Palme, C.-H. Tan, and C. W. Phang, "Addressing the personalization-privacy paradox: an empirical 
assessment from a field experiment on smartphone users," MIS quarterly, pp. 1141-1164, 2013. 
T. Heer, O. Garcia-Morchon, R. Hummen, S. L. Keoh, S. S. Kumar, and K. Wehrle, "Security Challenges in the 
IP-based Internet of Things," Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 61, pp. 527-542, 2011. 
N.  E.  Marion,  "The  council  of  Europe's  cyber  crime  treaty:  An  exercise  in  symbolic  legislation,"  International 
Journal of Cyber Criminology, vol. 4, p. 699, 2010. 
H.  Saini,  Y.  S.  Rao,  and  T.  C.  Panda,  "Cyber-crimes  and  their  impacts:  A  review,"  International  Journal  of 
Engineering Research and Applications, vol. 2, pp. 202-209, 2012. 
Y.  Zhang,  Y.  Xiao,  K.  Ghaboosi,  J.  Zhang,  and  H.  Deng,  "A  survey  of  cyber  crimes,"  Security  and 
Communication Networks, vol. 5, pp. 422-437, 2012. 

[43]  M. Felson and R. V. Clarke, "Opportunity makes the thief," Police research series, paper, vol. 98, pp. 1-36, 1998. 

 
 
 
 
[44] 

[45] 

[46] 

[47] 

[48] 

[49] 

[50] 

[51] 

[52] 

L.  Atzori,  A. Iera,  and  G.  Morabito,  "The  internet  of  things:  A  survey,"  Computer  networks,  vol.  54, pp.  2787-
2805, 2010. 
D.  Miorandi,  S.  Sicari,  F.  De  Pellegrini,  and  I.  Chlamtac,  "Internet  of  things:  Vision,  applications  and  research 
challenges," Ad hoc networks, vol. 10, pp. 1497-1516, 2012. 
I. You, S. Kwon, G. Choudhary, V. Sharma, and J. T. Seo, "An enhanced LoRaWAN security protocol for privacy 
preservation in IoT with a case study on a smart factory-enabled parking system," Sensors, vol. 18, p. 1888, 2018. 
J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic, and M. Palaniswami, "Internet of Things (IoT): A vision, architectural elements, 
and future directions," Future generation computer systems, vol. 29, pp. 1645-1660, 2013. 
C. C. Aggarwal, N. Ashish, and A. Sheth, "The internet of things: A survey from the data-centric perspective," in 
Managing and mining sensor data, ed: Springer, ISBN: 9781461463092, pp. 383-428, 2013. 
O. Said, “Accurate Performance Evaluation of Internet Multicast Architectures: Hierarchical and Fully Distributed 
vs.Service-Centric,” KSII  Transactions  on  Internet  and  Information  Systems,  vol.  7,  no.  9,  pp.  2194–2212,  Sep. 
2013. 
C. Perera, A. Zaslavsky, P. Christen, and D. Georgakopoulos, "Context aware computing for the internet of things: 
A survey," IEEE communications surveys & tutorials, vol. 16, pp. 414-454, 2013. 
J. Granjal, E. Monteiro, and J. S. Silva, "Security for the internet of things: a survey of existing protocols and open 
research issues," IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17, pp. 1294-1312, 2015. 
S. Sicari, A. Rizzardi, L. A. Grieco, and A. Coen-Porisini, "Security, privacy and trust in Internet of Things: The 
road ahead," Computer networks, vol. 76, pp. 146-164, 2015. 

[57] 

[54] 

 [55] 
[56] 

[53]  M. Abomhara and G. M. Køien, "Security and privacy in the Internet of Things: Current status and open issues," 
in  2014 international conference on privacy and security in mobile systems (PRISMS), 2014, pp. 1-8,  Aalborg, 
Denmark. 
R. Mahmoud, T. Yousuf, F. Aloul, and I. Zualkernan, "Internet of things (IoT) security: Current status, challenges 
and  prospective  measures,"  in  2015  10th  International  Conference  for  Internet  Technology  and  Secured 
Transactions (ICITST), 2015, pp. 336-341, London UK. 
J. Pescatore and G. Shpantzer, "Securing the internet of things survey," SANS Institute, pp. 1-22, 2014. 
D. Gil, A. Ferrández, H. Mora-Mora, and J. Peral, "Internet of things: A review of surveys based on context aware 
intelligent services," Sensors, vol. 16, p. 1069, 2016. 
F. Muhammad, W. Anjum, and K. S. Mazhar, "A critical analysis on the security concerns of  internet of things 
(IoT)," International Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 111, pp. 1-6, 2015. 
R.  Vignesh  and  A.  Samydurai,  "Security  on  Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  with  challenges  and  countermeasures," 
International Journal of Engineering Development and Research, IJEDR, vol. 5 (1), pp. 417-423, 2017. 
[59]  M.  A.  Razzaq,  S.  H.  Gill,  M.  A.  Qureshi,  and  S.  Ullah,  "Security  issues  in  the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT):  a 
comprehensive  study,"  International  Journal  of  Advanced  Computer  Science  and  Applications,  vol.  8,  p.  383, 
2017. 
C. Maple, "Security and privacy in the internet of things," Journal of Cyber Policy, vol. 2, pp. 155-184, 2017. 
P.  H.  Rughani,  "IoT  evidence  acquisition–issues  and  challenges,"  Advances  in  Computational  Sciences  and 
Technology, vol. 10, pp. 1285-1293, 2017. 
G.  Corser,  G.  Fink,  and  J.  Bielby,  "Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  Security  Best  Practices;  IEEE  Internet  Technology 
Policy Community; White Paper," IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2017. 

[60] 
[61] 

[62] 

[58] 

[63]  M. Burhan, R. A. Rehman, B. Khan, and B.-S. Kim, "IoT elements, layered architectures and security issues: A 

comprehensive survey," Sensors, vol. 18, p. 2796, 2018. 

[64]  W. H. Hassan, "Current research on Internet of Things (IoT) security: A survey,"  Computer networks,  vol. 148, 

[65] 

[66] 

[67] 

pp. 283-294, 2019. 
A. MacDermott, T. Baker, and Q. Shi, "Iot forensics: Challenges for the ioa era," in  2018 9th IFIP International 
Conference on New Technologies, Mobility and Security (NTMS), 2018, pp. 1-5, Paris, France. 
A.  R.  Sfar,  E.  Natalizio,  Y.  Challal,  and  Z.  Chtourou,  "A  roadmap  for  security  challenges  in  the  Internet  of 
Things," Digital Communications and Networks, vol. 4, pp. 118-137, 2018. 
N. Neshenko, E. Bou-Harb, J. Crichigno, G. Kaddoum, and N. Ghani, "Demystifying IoT security: an exhaustive 
survey on IoT vulnerabilities and a first empirical look on internet-scale IoT exploitations," IEEE Communications 
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, pp. 2702-2733, 2019. 

[68]  W.  Zhou,  Y.  Jia,  A.  Peng,  Y.  Zhang,  and  P.  Liu,  "The  effect  of  iot  new  features  on  security  and  privacy:  New 
threats,  existing  solutions,  and  challenges  yet  to  be  solved,"  IEEE  Internet  of  Things  Journal,  vol.  6,  pp. 1606-
1616, 2018. 

 
 
 
 
[69]  M.  Aydos,  Y.  Vural,  and  A.  Tekerek,  "Assessing  risks  and  threats  with  layered  approach  to  Internet  of  Things 

[70] 

[71] 

[72] 

[73] 

security," Measurement and Control, vol. 52, pp. 338-353, 2019. 
S.  Nasiri,  F.  Sadoughi,  M.  H.  Tadayon,  and  A.  Dehnad,  "Security  requirements  of  internet  of  things-based 
healthcare system: A survey study," Acta Informatica Medica, vol. 27, p. 253, 2019. 
K. Tabassum, A. Ibrahim, and S.  A. El Rahman, "Security issues and challenges in IoT," in  2019 International 
Conference on Computer and Information Sciences (ICCIS), 2019, pp. 1-5, Sakaka, Saudi Arabia. 
J.  M.  Blythe,  N.  Sombatruang,  and  S.  D.  Johnson,  "What  security  features  and  crime  prevention  advice  is 
communicated in consumer IoT device manuals and support pages?," Journal of Cybersecurity, vol. 5, p. tyz005, 
2019. 
F.  Adesola,  S.  Misra,  N.  Omoregbe,  R.  Damasevicius,  and  R.  Maskeliunas,  "An  IOT-Based  Architecture  for 
Crime Management in Nigeria," in Data, Engineering and Applications, ed: Springer, ISBN: 9789811363511, pp. 
245-254, 2019. 

[75] 

[74]  M.  Stoyanova,  Y.  Nikoloudakis,  S.  Panagiotakis,  E.  Pallis,  and  E.  K.  Markakis,  "A  Survey  on  the  Internet  of 
Things (IoT) Forensics: Challenges, Approaches and Open Issues,"  IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 
vol. 22 (2), pp. 1191-1221, 2020. 
L.  a.  Tawalbeh,  F.  Muheidat,  M.  Tawalbeh,  and  M.  Quwaider,  "IoT  Privacy  and  security:  Challenges  and 
solutions," Applied Sciences, vol. 10, p. 4102, 2020. 
H.  F.  Atlam,  A.  Alenezi,  M.  O.  Alassafi,  A.  A.  Alshdadi,  and  G.  B.  Wills,  "Security,  Cybercrime  and  Digital 
Forensics for IoT," in Principles of Internet of Things (IoT) Ecosystem: Insight Paradigm, ed: Springer, 2020, pp. 
551-577. 

[76] 

[77]  W.  A.  Al-Khater,  S.  Al-Maadeed,  A.  A.  Ahmed,  A.  S.  Sadiq,  and  M.  K.  Khan,  "Comprehensive  Review  of 

Cybercrime Detection Techniques," IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 137293-137311, 2020. 

[78]  M.  A.  Iqbal,  O.  G.  Olaleye,  and  M.  A.  Bayoumi,  "A  review  on  internet  of  things  (IoT):  security  and  privacy 
requirements  and  the  solution  approaches,"  Global  Journal  of  Computer  Science  and  Technology,  vol.  16  (7-E) 
2017. 

[80] 

[79]  W.  U.  Khan,  J.  Liu,  F.  Jameel,  V.  Sharma,  R.  Jantti,  and  Z.  Han,  "Spectral  Efficiency  Optimization  for  Next 
Generation NOMA-enabled IoT Networks," IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 69 (12), pp. 15284-
1529, 2020. 
V.  Puri,  A.  Kataria,  and  V.  Sharma,  "Artificial  intelligence‐powered  decentralized  framework  for  Internet  of 
Things in Healthcare 4.0," Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies, p. e4245, 2021. 
[81]  M. U. Sheikh, M. Riaz, F. Jameel, R. Jäntti, N. Sharma, V. Sharma, et al., "Quality-aware trajectory planning of 
cellular  connected  UAVs,"  in  Proceedings  of  the  2nd  ACM  MobiCom  Workshop  on  Drone  Assisted  Wireless 
Communications for 5G and Beyond, 2020, pp. 79-85. 
K. Andersson, I. You, R. Rahmani, and V. Sharma, "Secure Computation on 4G/5G Enabled Internet-of-Things," 
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, vol. 2019, p. 3978193:1, 2019. 
D.  Shin,  V.  Sharma,  J.  Kim,  S.  Kwon,  and  I.  You,  "Secure  and  efficient  protocol  for  route  optimization  in 
PMIPv6-based smart home IoT networks," IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 11100-11117, 2017. 
I.  Lee  and  K.  Lee,  "The  Internet  of  Things  (IoT):  Applications,  investments,  and  challenges  for  enterprises," 
Business Horizons, vol. 58, pp. 431-440, 2015. 

[82] 

[83] 

[84] 

[87] 

[86] 

[85]  M. Babar, A. Rahman, F. Arif, and G. Jeon, "Energy-harvesting based on internet of things and big data analytics 
for smart health monitoring," Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems, vol. 20, pp. 155-164, 2018. 
J.  Liu  and  W.  Sun,  "Smart  attacks  against  intelligent  wearables  in  people-centric  internet  of  things,"  IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 54, pp. 44-49, 2016. 
Y. Zhang, R. H. Deng, G. Han, and D. Zheng, "Secure smart health with privacy-aware aggregate authentication 
and access control in Internet of Things," Journal of Network and Computer Applications,  vol. 123, pp. 89-100, 
2018. 
S. Din and A. Paul, "Smart health monitoring and management system: Toward autonomous wearable sensing for 
internet of things using big data analytics," Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 91, pp. 611-619, 2019. 
S. S. S. R. Depuru, L. Wang, V. Devabhaktuni, and N. Gudi, "Smart meters for power grid—Challenges, issues, 
advantages  and  status,"  in  2011  IEEE/PES  Power  Systems  Conference  and  Exposition,  2011,  pp.  1-7,  Phoenix, 
AZ, USA. 

[89] 

[88] 

[90]  M. Wu, T.-J. Lu, F.-Y. Ling, J. Sun, and H.-Y. Du, "Research on the architecture of Internet of Things," in 2010 
3rd International Conference on Advanced Computer Theory and Engineering (ICACTE), 2010, pp. V5-484-V5-
487, Chengdu, China. 

 
 
 
 
[91] 

[92] 

[93] 

A. C. Jose and R. Malekian, "Improving smart home security: Integrating logical sensing into smart home,"  IEEE 
Sensors Journal, vol. 17, pp. 4269-4286, 2017. 
H. Suo, J. Wan, C. Zou, and J. Liu, "Security in the internet of things: a review," in 2012 international conference 
on computer science and electronics engineering, 2012, pp. 648-651. 
S. Vashi, J. Ram, J. Modi, S. Verma, and C. Prakash, "Internet of Things (IoT): A vision, architectural elements, 
and security issues," in 2017 international conference on I-SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud)(I-
SMAC), 2017, pp. 492-496, Palladam, India. 

[94]  W. Zhang and B. Qu, "Security architecture of the Internet of Things oriented to perceptual layer,"  International 

[95] 

[96] 

[97] 

[98] 

[99] 

[100] 

[101] 

Journal on Computer, Consumer and Control (IJ3C), vol. 2, pp. 37-45, 2013. 
R. Kumar, H. Sharma, M. Mittal, and P. S. Rana, "Wireless Sensor Network: Design, Architecture, Application, 
Data Communication Security and Management," International Journal of Sensors Wireless Communications and 
Control, vol. 7, pp. 169-169, 2017. 
L. Li, S. Li, T. Tryfonas, and H. Li, "The Internet of Things: a security point of view,"  Internet Research, vol. 26 
(2), pp. 337-359, 2016. 
C.-W.  Tsai,  C.-F.  Lai,  and  A.  V.  Vasilakos,  "Future  Internet  of  Things:  open  issues  and  challenges,"  Wireless 
Networks, vol. 20, pp. 2201-2217, 2014. 
Q.  Jing,  A.  V.  Vasilakos,  J.  Wan,  J.  Lu,  and  D.  Qiu,  "Security  of  the  Internet  of  Things:  perspectives  and 
challenges," Wireless Networks, vol. 20, pp. 2481-2501, 2014. 
G.  Montenegro,  N.  Kushalnagar,  J.  Hui,  and  D.  Culler,  "Transmission  of  IPv6  packets  over  IEEE  802.15.  4 
networks," Internet proposed standard RFC, vol. 4944, p. 130, 2007. 
S. Raza, H. Shafagh, K. Hewage, R. Hummen, and T. Voigt, "Lithe: Lightweight secure CoAP for the internet of 
things," IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 13, pp. 3711-3720, 2013. 
S.  Iren,  P.  D.  Amer,  and  P.  T.  Conrad,  "The  transport  layer:  tutorial  and  survey,"  ACM  Computing  Surveys 
(CSUR), vol. 31, pp. 360-404, 1999. 

[102]  M. A. Sayeed, R. Kumar, V. Sharma, and M. A. Sayeed, "Efficient Deployment with Throughput Maximization 

[103] 

for UAVs Communication Networks," Sensors, vol. 20, p. 6680, 2020. 
J. Zheng and M. J. Lee, "A comprehensive performance study of IEEE 802.15. 4," Sensor network operations, vol. 
4, pp. 218-237, 2006. 

[104]  A.  Al-Fuqaha,  M.  Guizani,  M.  Mohammadi,  M.  Aledhari,  and  M.  Ayyash,  "Internet  of  things:  A  survey  on 
enabling technologies, protocols, and applications," IEEE communications surveys & tutorials, vol. 17, pp. 2347-
2376, 2015. 

[105]  T. Kothmayr, C. Schmitt, W. Hu, M. Brünig, and G. Carle, "DTLS based security and two-way authentication for 

the Internet of Things," Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 11, pp. 2710-2723, 2013. 

[106]  K.  Zhao  and  L.  Ge,  "A  survey  on  the  internet  of  things  security,"  in  2013  Ninth  international  conference  on 

computational intelligence and security, 2013, pp. 663-667, Emeishan, China. 

[107]  M.  Kovatsch,  "CoAP  for  the  web  of  things:  from  tiny  resource-constrained  devices  to  the  web  browser,"  in 
Proceedings of the 2013 ACM conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing adjunct publication, 2013, pp. 
1495-1504, Zurich, Switzerland. 

[108]  N.  Glombitza,  D.  Pfisterer,  and  S.  Fischer,  "Ltp:  An  efficient  web  service  transport  protocol  for  resource 
constrained devices," in 2010 7th Annual IEEE Communications Society Conference on Sensor, Mesh and Ad Hoc 
Communications and Networks (SECON), 2010, pp. 1-9, Boston, MA, USA. 

[109]  M. A. da Cruz, J. J. Rodrigues, E. S. Paradello, P. Lorenz, P. Solic, and V. H. C. Albuquerque, "A proposal for 
bridging the message queuing telemetry transport protocol to HTTP on IoT solutions," in  2018 3rd International 
Conference on Smart and Sustainable Technologies (SpliTech), 2018, pp. 1-5, Split, Croatia. 

[110]  W.  Kang,  K.  Kapitanova,  and  S.  H.  Son,  "RDDS:  A  real-time  data  distribution  service  for  cyber-physical 

systems," IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 8, pp. 393-405, 2012. 

[111]  A. Hornsby and R. Walsh, "From instant messaging to cloud computing, an XMPP review," in IEEE International 

Symposium on Consumer Electronics (ISCE 2010), 2010, pp. 1-6, Braunschweig, Germany. 
S. Vinoski, "Advanced message queuing protocol," IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 10, pp. 87-89, 2006. 
[112] 
[113]  K. Pister and L. Doherty, "TSMP: Time synchronized mesh protocol," IASTED Distributed Sensor Networks, vol. 

391, p. 398, 2008. 

[114]  R.  Seggelmann,  M.  Tuexen,  and  M.  Williams,  "Transport  layer  security  (TLS)  and  datagram  transport  layer 

security (DTLS) heartbeat extension," Internet Engineering Task Force, RFC, vol. 6520, 2012. 

 
 
 
 
[115]  T.  Dreibholz,  E.  P.  Rathgeb,  I.  Rungeler,  R.  Seggelmann,  M.  Tuxen,  and  R.  R.  Stewart,  "Stream  control 
transmission protocol: Past, current, and future standardization activities,"  IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 
49, pp. 82-88, 2011. 

[116]  B. A. Forouzan, TCP/IP protocol suite: McGraw-Hill, Inc., ISBN: 9780077414597, 2009. 
[117]  D.  Bandyopadhyay  and  J.  Sen,  "Internet  of  things:  Applications  and  challenges  in  technology  and 

standardization," Wireless personal communications, vol. 58, pp. 49-69, 2011. 

[118]  M.  Li,  M.-Y.  Wu,  Y.  Li,  J.  Cao,  L.  Huang,  Q.  Deng,  et  al.,  "Shanghaigrid  as  an  information  service  grid:  An 
overview,"  in  2005  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Services  Computing  (SCC'05)  Vol-1,  2005,  pp.  351-354, 
Orlando, FL, USA. 
A. de Saint-Exupery, "Internet of Things," Strategic Research Roadmap, Corpus ID: 6436852, 2009. 

[119] 

[120]  O.  Vermesan  and  P.  Friess,  Internet  of  things:  converging  technologies  for  smart  environments  and  integrated 

ecosystems: River publishers, ISBN: 9788792982735 2013. 

[121]  M.  A.  Alsmirat,  F.  Al-Alem,  M.  Al-Ayyoub,  Y.  Jararweh,  and  B.  Gupta,  "Impact  of  digital  fingerprint  image 
quality  on  the  fingerprint  recognition  accuracy,"  Multimedia  Tools  and  Applications,  vol.  78,  pp.  3649-3688, 
2019. 

[122]  L. Tan and N. Wang, "Future internet: The internet of things," in 2010 3rd international conference on advanced 

[124] 

[123] 

computer theory and engineering (ICACTE), 2010, pp. V5-376-V5-380, Chengdu, China. 
F. Mattern and C. Floerkemeier, "From the Internet of Computers to the Internet of Things," in From active data 
management to event-based systems and more, ed: Springer,vol. 6462, pp. 242-259, 2010. 
P. N. Mahalle, B. Anggorojati, N. R. Prasad, and R. Prasad, "Identity authentication and capability based access 
control (iacac) for the internet of things," Journal of Cyber Security and Mobility, vol. 1, pp. 309-348, 2013. 
[125]  V.  Sharma,  R.  Kumar,  K.  Srinivasan,  and  D.  N.  K.  Jayakody,  "Coagulation  attacks  over  networked  UAVs: 
concept,  challenges,  and  research  aspects,"  International  Journal  of  Advanced  Trends  in  Computer  Science  and 
Engineering, vol. 8 (1), pp. 67-72, 2019. 

[126]  Q.  Wen,  X.  Dong,  and  R.  Zhang,  "Application  of  dynamic  variable  cipher  security  certificate  in  internet  of 
things,"  in  2012  IEEE  2nd  International  Conference  on  Cloud  Computing  and  Intelligence  Systems,  2012,  pp. 
1062-1066, Hangzhou, China. 

[127]  C.  Yu,  J.  Li,  X.  Li,  X.  Ren,  and  B.  B.  Gupta,  "Four-image  encryption  scheme  based  on  quaternion  Fresnel 
transform, chaos and computer generated hologram," Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 77, pp. 4585-4608, 
2018. 

[128]  R. Roman, P. Najera, and J. Lopez, "Securing the internet of things," Computer, vol. 44(9), pp. 51-58, 2011. 
[129]  T.  Alexenko,  M.  Jenne,  S.  D.  Roy,  and  W.  Zeng,  "Cross-site  request  forgery:  attack  and  defense,"  in  2010  7th 

[130] 

IEEE Consumer Communications and Networking Conference, 2010, pp. 1-2, Las Vegas, NV, USA. 
F. Li and P. Xiong, "Practical secure communication for integrating wireless sensor networks into the internet of 
things," IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 13, pp. 3677-3684, 2013. 

[131]  R. H. Weber, "Internet of Things–New security and privacy challenges," Computer law & security review, vol. 26, 

[132] 

pp. 23-30, 2010. 
S.  Cirani,  G.  Ferrari,  and  L.  Veltri,  "Enforcing  security  mechanisms  in  the  IP-based  internet  of  things:  An 
algorithmic overview," Algorithms, vol. 6, pp. 197-226, 2013. 

[133]  T.  Eisenbarth,  S.  Kumar,  C.  Paar,  A.  Poschmann,  and  L.  Uhsadel,  "A  survey  of  lightweight-cryptography 

[134] 

implementations," IEEE Design & Test of Computers, vol. 24, pp. 522-533, 2007. 
S.  Ravi,  A.  Raghunathan,  P.  Kocher,  and  S.  Hattangady,  "Security  in  embedded  systems:  Design  challenges," 
ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems (TECS), vol. 3, pp. 461-491, 2004. 

[135]  T. G. Robertazzi, "Software-defined networking," in Introduction to Computer Networking, ed: Springer, pp. 81-

[136] 

87, 2017. 
S. Horrow and A. Sardana, "Identity management framework for cloud based internet of things," in  Proceedings 
of the First International Conference on Security of Internet of Things, 2012, pp. 200-203, Kollam, India. 
[137]  H. Abie and I. Balasingham, "Risk-based adaptive security for smart IoT in eHealth," in  Proceedings of the 7th 

[138] 

International Conference on Body Area Networks, 2012, pp. 269-275, Oslo, Norway. 
S. Buchegger and J.-Y. Le Boudec, "Performance analysis of the CONFIDANT protocol," in  Proceedings of the 
3rd  ACM  international  symposium  on  Mobile  ad  hoc  networking  &  computing,  2002,  pp.  226-236,  Lausanne, 
Switzerland. 

 
 
 
 
[139] 

[140] 

P. Michiardi and R. Molva, "Core: a collaborative reputation mechanism to enforce node cooperation in mobile ad 
hoc networks," in Advanced communications and multimedia security, ed: Springer, 2002, pp. 107-121. 
J. T. Oke, J. Agajo, B. K. Nuhu, J. G. Kolo, and L. Ajao, "Two Layers Trust-Based Intrusion Prevention System 
for Wireless Sensor Networks," Adv. Electr. Telecommun. Eng, vol. 1, pp. 23-29, 2018. 

[141]  Wang  X,  Nguyen  M,  Carr  J,  Cui  L,  Lim  K.  A  group  preference-based  privacy-preserving  POI  recommender 

system. ICT Express. 2020 Sep 1;6(3):204-8. 

[142]  C. Bormann, A. P. Castellani, and Z. Shelby, "Coap: An application protocol for billions of tiny internet nodes," 

IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 16, pp. 62-67, 2012. 

[143]  N.  Gyory  and  M.  Chuah,  "IoTOne:  Integrated  platform  for  heterogeneous  IoT  devices,"  in  2017  International 
Conference  on  Computing,  Networking  and  Communications  (ICNC),  2017,  pp.  783-787,  Silicon  Valley,  CA, 
USA. 
S. Li, L. Da Xu, and S. Zhao, "5G Internet of Things: A survey,"  Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 
vol. 10, pp. 1-9, 2018. 

[144] 

[145]  B. V. Sundaram, M. Ramnath, M. Prasanth, and V. Sundaram, "Encryption and hash based security in Internet of 
Things," in 2015 3rd International Conference on Signal Processing, Communication and Networking (ICSCN), 
2015, pp. 1-6, Chennai, India 

[146]  Z. Li, X. Yin, Z. Geng, H. Zhang, P. Li, Y. Sun, et al., "Research on PKI-like Protocol for the Internet of Things," 
in 2013 Fifth International Conference on Measuring Technology and Mechatronics Automation, 2013, pp. 915-
918, Hong Kong, China. 

[147]  E. Hammer-Lahav, D. Recordon, and D. Hardt, "The oauth 1.0 protocol," RFC 5849, April2010. 
[148] 

S.  Babar,  A.  Stango,  N.  Prasad,  J.  Sen,  and  R.  Prasad,  "Proposed  embedded  security  framework  for  internet  of 
things  (iot),"  in  2011  2nd  International  Conference  on  Wireless  Communication,  Vehicular  Technology, 
Information Theory and Aerospace & Electronic Systems Technology (Wireless VITAE), 2011, pp. 1-5, Chennai, 
India. 
F. Al Shuhaimi, M. Jose, and A. V. Singh, "Software defined network as solution to overcome security challenges 
in IoT," in 2016 5th International Conference on Reliability, Infocom Technologies and Optimization (Trends and 
Future Directions)(ICRITO), 2016, pp. 491-496. Noida, India. 

[149] 

[150]  H. Tao and W. Peiran, "Preference-based privacy protection mechanism for the internet of things," in 2010 Third 
International Symposium on Information Science and Engineering, 2010, pp. 531-534, Shanghai, China. 
[151]  K.  Gupta  and  S.  Shukla,  "Internet  of  Things:  Security  challenges  for  next  generation  networks,"  in  2016 
International Conference on Innovation and Challenges in Cyber Security (ICICCS-INBUSH), 2016, pp. 315-318. 
[152]  A. Sarma, A. Matos, J. Girão, and R. L. Aguiar, "Virtual identity framework for telecom infrastructures," Wireless 

Personal Communications, vol. 45, pp. 521-543, 2008. 

[153]  C. Hu, J. Zhang, and Q. Wen, "An identity-based personal location system with protected privacy in IoT," in 2011 
4th  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Broadband  Network  and  Multimedia  Technology,  2011,  pp.  192-195, 
Shenzen, China. 

[154]  A.  Fathy,  I.  F.  Tarrad,  H.  F.  Hamed,  and  A.  I.  Awad,  "Advanced  encryption  standard  algorithm:  Issues  and 
implementation  aspects,"  in  International  Conference  on  Advanced  Machine  Learning  Technologies  and 
Applications, 2012, pp. 516-523, Cairo, Egypt. 

[155]  Z.  Wan,  Z.  Xu,  S.  Liu,  W.  Ni,  and  S.  Ye,  "An  Internet  of  Things  Roaming  Authentication  Protocol  Based  on 

Heterogeneous Fusion Mechanism," IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 17663-17672, 2020. 

[156]  V.  Sharma,  I.  You,  K.  Yim,  R.  Chen,  and  J.-H.  Cho,  "BRIoT:  Behavior  rule  specification-based  misbehavior 

detection for IoT-embedded cyber-physical systems," IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 118556-118580, 2019. 

[157]  D. P. Joseph and J. Norman, "An analysis of digital forensics in cyber security," in First international conference 

on artificial intelligence and cognitive computing, 2019, pp. 701-708, Hyderabad, India. 

[158]  M. Rogers, "The role of criminal profiling in the computer forensics process," Computers & Security, vol. 22, pp. 

[159] 

[160] 

292-298, 2003. 
I.  You,  K.  Yim,  V.  Sharma,  G.  Choudhary,  R.  Chen,  and  J.-H.  Cho,  "On  IoT  misbehavior  detection  in  cyber 
physical systems," in 2018 IEEE 23rd Pacific Rim International Symposium on Dependable Computing (PRDC), 
2018, pp. 189-190, Taipei, Taiwan. 
S.  Alabdulsalam,  K.  Schaefer,  T.  Kechadi,  and  N.-A.  Le-Khac,  "Internet  of  Things  Forensics–Challenges  and  a 
Case Study," in IFIP International Conference on Digital Forensics, 2018, pp. 35-48, New Delhi, India. 

 
 
 
 
[161]  V. R. Kebande and I. Ray, "A generic digital forensic investigation framework for internet of things (iot)," in 2016 
IEEE 4th International Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud (FiCloud), 2016, pp. 356-362, Vienna, 
Austria. 

[162]  M. M. Losavio, K. Chow, A. Koltay, and J. James, "The Internet of Things and the Smart City: Legal challenges 

with digital forensics, privacy, and security," Security and Privacy, vol. 1, p. e23, 2018. 

[163]  Q. Do, B. Martini, and K.-K. R. Choo, "Cyber-physical systems information gathering: A smart home case study," 

Computer Networks, vol. 138, pp. 1-12, 2018. 

[164]  E.  Oriwoh  and  P.  Sant,  "The  forensics  edge  management  system:  A  concept  and  design,"  in  2013  IEEE  10th 
International  Conference  on  Ubiquitous  Intelligence  and  Computing  and  2013  IEEE  10th  International 
Conference on Autonomic and Trusted Computing, 2013, pp. 544-550, Vietri sul Mare, Italy. 

[165]  E. Oriwoh and G. Williams, "Internet of Things: The Argument for Smart Forensics. Handbook of Research on 
Digital  Crime,  Cyberspace  Security,  and  Information  Assurance,"  ed:  IGI-Global  Publishing,  ISBN: 
9781466663251, 2014. 

[166]  A.  Goudbeek,  K.-K.  R.  Choo,  and  N.-A.  Le-Khac,  "A  forensic  investigation  framework  for  smart  home 
environment,"  in  2018  17th  IEEE  International  Conference  On  Trust,  Security  And  Privacy  In  Computing  And 
Communications/12th 
International  Conference  On  Big  Data  Science  And  Engineering 
(TrustCom/BigDataSE), 2018, pp. 1446-1451, New York, NY, USA. 

IEEE 

[167]  D.  Li,  L.  Deng,  B.  B.  Gupta,  H.  Wang,  and  C.  Choi,  "A  novel  CNN  based  security  guaranteed  image 
watermarking generation scenario for smart city applications," Information Sciences, vol. 479, pp. 432-447, 2019. 
[168]  M. S. Obaidat, I. Traore, and I. Woungang, Biometric-based physical and cybersecurity systems: Springer, ISBN: 

[169] 

[170] 

9783030075262, 2019. 
I. You, K. Yim, V. Sharma, G. Choudhary, I.-R. Chen, and J.-H. Cho, "Misbehavior detection of embedded IoT 
devices in medical cyber physical systems," in Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE/ACM International Conference on 
Connected Health: Applications, Systems and Engineering Technologies, 2018, pp. 88-93, Washington DC. 
F. Al-Turjman and A. Malekloo, "Smart parking in IoT-enabled cities: A survey," Sustainable Cities and Society, 
vol. 49, pp. 101608, 2019. 

[171]  M. M. Hossain, R. Hasan, and S. Zawoad, "Trust-IoV: A Trustworthy Forensic Investigation Framework for the 

[172] 

Internet of Vehicles (IoV)," in ICIOT, 2017, pp. 25-32, Honolulu, HI, USA. 
Sharma,  Vishal,  Ilsun  You,  Karl  Andersson,  Francesco  Palmieri,  Mubashir  Husain  Rehmani,  and  Jaedeok  Lim. 
"Security,  privacy  and  trust  for  smart  mobile-Internet  of  Things  (M-IoT):  A  survey." IEEE  Access, vol.8, 
pp.167123-167163, 2020. 

[173]  X. Feng, E. S. Dawam, and S. Amin, "A new digital forensics model of smart city automated vehicles," in 2017 
IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and Communications 
(GreenCom)  and  IEEE  Cyber,  Physical  and  Social  Computing  (CPSCom)  and  IEEE  Smart  Data  (SmartData), 
2017, pp. 274-279, Exeter, UK. 

[174]  D. R. Clark, C. Meffert, I. Baggili, and F. Breitinger, "DROP (DRone Open source Parser) your drone: Forensic 

analysis of the DJI Phantom III," Digital Investigation, vol. 22, pp. S3-S14, 2017. 

[175]  Y.-Y.  Teing,  A.  Dehghantanha,  K.-K.  R.  Choo,  and  L.  T.  Yang,  "Forensic  investigation  of  P2P  cloud  storage 
services and backbone for IoT networks: BitTorrent Sync as a case study,"  Computers & Electrical Engineering, 
vol. 58, pp. 350-363, 2017. 

[176]  V. Sharma, R. Kumar, and P. Patiala, "Service-oriented middleware for multi-UAV guided ad hoc networks," IT 

CoNvergence PRActice (INPRA), vol. 2, pp. 24-33, 2014. 

[177]  V.  Sharma,  I.  You,  J.  T.  Seo,  and  M.  Guizani,  "Secure  and  reliable  resource  allocation  and  caching  in  aerial-

terrestrial cloud networks (ATCNs)," IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 13867-13881, 2019. 

[178]  T. Heckmann, K. Markantonakis, D. Naccache, and T. Souvignet, "Forensic smartphone analysis using adhesives: 

Transplantation of package on package components," Digital Investigation, vol. 26, pp. 29-39, 2018. 

[179]  H.  Abie,  "Cognitive  cybersecurity  for  CPS-IoT  enabled  healthcare  ecosystems,"  in  2019  13th  International 

Symposium on Medical Information and Communication Technology (ISMICT), 2019, pp. 1-6, Oslo, Norway. 

 [180]  A.  Cook,  M.  Robinson,  M.  A.  Ferrag,  L.  A.  Maglaras,  Y. He,  K.  Jones,  et  al.,  "Internet  of  cloud:  Security  and 
privacy issues," in Cloud Computing for Optimization: Foundations, Applications, and Challenges, ed: Springer, 
2018, pp. 271-301. 

[181]  G. M. Insights, "Digital health market share trends 2019–2025 growth forecast report,"  Global Market Insights, 

Selbyville, 2019. 

 
 
 
 
[182]  A. McIntyre, B. Blau, and M. Reitz, "‘Forecast: Wearable electronic devices, worldwide," Gartner, Stamford, CT, 

[183] 

[184] 

USA, Jan, 2016. 
S.  Watson  and  A.  Dehghantanha,  "Digital  forensics:  the  missing  piece  of  the  Internet  of  Things  promise," 
Computer Fraud & Security, vol. 2016, pp. 5-8, 2016. 
J. Boucher and N.-A. Le-Khac, "Forensic framework to identify local vs synced artefacts,"  Digital Investigation, 
vol. 24, pp. S68-S75, 2018. 

[185]  A. Case and G. G. Richard III, "Memory forensics: The path forward,"  Digital Investigation, vol. 20, pp. 23-33, 

2017. 

[186]  D. Quick and K.-K. R. Choo, "IoT device forensics and data reduction,"  IEEE Access,  vol. 6, pp. 47566-47574, 

2018. 

[187]  A. Nieto, R. Roman, and J. Lopez, "Digital witness: Safeguarding digital evidence by using secure architectures in 

personal devices," IEEE Network, vol. 30, pp. 34-41, 2016. 

[188]  H. Chung, J. Park, and S. Lee, "Digital forensic approaches for Amazon Alexa ecosystem,"  Digital Investigation, 

vol. 22, pp. S15-S25, 2017. 

[189]  M.  M.  Hossain,  R.  Hasan,  and  S.  Zawoad,  "Probe-IoT:  A  public  digital  ledger  based  forensic  investigation 

framework for IoT," in INFOCOM workshops, 2018, pp. 1-2, Birmingham, USA. 

[190]  A.  Nieto,  R.  Rios,  and  J.  Lopez,  "A  methodology  for  privacy-aware  IoT-forensics,"  in  2017  IEEE 

Trustcom/BigDataSE/ICESS, 2017, pp. 626-633, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 

[191]  E. Oriwoh, D. Jazani,  G. Epiphaniou, and P. Sant,  "Internet of things forensics: Challenges and approaches," in 
9th  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Collaborative  computing:  networking,  Applications  and  Worksharing, 
2013, pp. 608-615, Austin, TX, USA. 

[192]  L. Perlepes, G. Stamoulis, and P. Kikiras, "An End–to–End Framework for Securing the Internet of Things," 2011. 
S. Perumal, N. M. Norwawi, and V. Raman, "Internet of Things (IoT) digital forensic investigation model: Top-
[193] 
down forensic approach methodology," in 2015 Fifth International Conference on Digital Information Processing 
and Communications (ICDIPC), 2015, pp. 19-23, Sierre, Switzerland. 
S.  Zawoad  and  R.  Hasan,  "Faiot:  Towards  building  a  forensics  aware  eco  system  for  the  internet  of  things,"  in 
2015 IEEE International Conference on Services Computing, 2015, pp. 279-284, New york, NY, USA. 

[194] 

[195]  D.  Lillis,  B.  Becker,  T.  O'Sullivan,  and  M.  Scanlon,  "Current  challenges  and  future  research  areas  for  digital 

forensic investigation," arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.03850, 2016. 

[196]  A.  Bijalwan,  M.  Wazid,  E.  S.  Pilli,  and  R.  C.  Joshi,  "Forensics  of  random-UDP  flooding  attacks,"  Journal  of 

Networks, vol. 10, p. 287, 2015. 
F. Monsen and K. Glisson, "Differencing engine for digital forensics," ed: Google Patents, 2020. 
J. D. McEachron, "Forensic investigation tool," ed: Google Patents, 2019. 

[197] 
[198] 
[199]  M. Morimoto, Y. Shirai, and H. Takeda, "Forensic system, forensic method, and forensic program," ed: Google 

Patents, 2016. 

[200]  K. SeongKu, J. Mincheol, C. Youngjun, J. Choi, K. SinKyu, and S. Jungtaek, "Device and method for providing 

security in remote digital forensic environment," ed: Google Patents, 2017. 

[201]  Y. H. Choi, T. G. Kim, H. G. Oh, and D. H. Lee, "Method and apparatus for digital forensics," ed: Google Patents, 

2012. 

[202]  M. M. Shannon and M. J. Decker, "Systems and methods for provisioning digital forensics services remotely over 

public and private networks," ed: Google Patents, 2015. 

[203]  W. J. Buchanan, J. R. Graves, and N. Bose, "Digital forensics," ed: Google Patents, 2014. 
[204]  Y.  H.  Gil,  J.  Y.  Lee,  S.  H.  Jo,  Y.  S.  Kim,  K.  W.  Kim,  S.  S.  Lee,  et  al.,  "Method  for  data  analysis  and  digital 

forensics and system using the same," ed: Google Patents, 2014. 

[205]  K. L. Levy, "Forensic digital watermarking with variable orientation and protocols," ed: Google Patents, 2008. 
[206]  T. L. Carpenter and W. J. Westerinen, "Secure digital forensics," ed: Google Patents, 2011. 
[207]  V. Sharma, I. You, and G. Kul, "Socializing drones for inter-service operability in ultra-dense wireless networks 
using blockchain," in Proceedings of the 2017 international workshop on managing insider security threats, 2017, 
pp. 81-84, Dallas Texas, USA 

[208]  V. Arora, R. S. Leekha, K. Lee, and A. Kataria, "Facilitating User Authorization from Imbalanced Data Logs of 

Credit Cards Using Artificial Intelligence," Mobile Information Systems, vol. 2020, 2020. 

[209]  T. G. Zewdie and A. Girma, "IOT Security and the Role of AI/ML to Combat Emerging Cyber Threats in Cloud 

Computing Environment.", Issues in Information Systems, vol. 21 (4), pp. 253-263, 2020. 

 
 
 
 
[210] 

J.  Pacheco,  V.  H.  Benitez,  and  Z.  Pan,  "Security  framework  for  IoT  end  nodes  with  neural  networks," 
International Journal of Machine Learning and Computing, vol. 9, pp. 381-386, 2019. 

[211]  E.  Hodo,  X.  Bellekens,  A.  Hamilton,  P.-L.  Dubouilh,  E.  Iorkyase,  C.  Tachtatzis,  et  al.,  "Threat  analysis  of  IoT 
networks  using  artificial  neural  network  intrusion  detection  system,"  in  2016  International  Symposium  on 
Networks, Computers and Communications (ISNCC), 2016, pp. 1-6, Yasmine Hammamet, Tunisia. 

[212]  A. Mishra, N. Gupta, and B. Gupta, "Defense mechanisms against DDoS attack based on entropy in SDN-cloud 

using POX controller," Telecommunication Systems, pp. 1-16, 2021. 

[213]  A. Dahiya and B. B. Gupta, "A reputation score policy and Bayesian game theory based incentivized mechanism 
for  DDoS  attacks  mitigation  and  cyber  defense,"  Future  Generation  Computer  Systems,  vol.  117,  pp.  193-204, 
2021. 

[214]  C.  Esposito,  M.  Ficco,  and  B.  B.  Gupta,  "Blockchain-based  authentication  and  authorization  for  smart  city 

applications," Information Processing & Management, vol. 58, p. 102468, 2021. 
[215]  B. Dickson, "How blockchain can change the future of IoT," Venture Beat, vol. 20, 2016. 
[216] 

P.  K.  Sharma,  M.-Y.  Chen,  and  J.  H.  Park,  "A  software  defined  fog  node  based  distributed  blockchain  cloud 
architecture for IoT," Ieee Access, vol. 6, pp. 115-124, 2017. 

[217]  Y.  Yu,  Y.  Li,  J.  Tian,  and  J.  Liu,  "Blockchain-based  solutions  to  security  and  privacy  issues  in  the  Internet  of 

Things," IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 25, pp. 12-18, 2018. 

[218]  U. Javaid, M. N. Aman, and B. Sikdar, "DrivMan: Driving trust management and data sharing in VANETS with 
blockchain and smart contracts," in 2019 IEEE 89th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2019-Spring), 2019, 
pp. 1-5, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 

[219]  K.  R.  Ozyilmaz  and  A.  Yurdakul,  "Designing  a  Blockchain-based  IoT  with  Ethereum,  swarm,  and  LoRa:  the 
software solution to create high availability with minimal security risks,"  IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, 
vol. 8, pp. 28-34, 2019. 

[220]  V. Sharma, "An energy-efficient transaction model for the blockchain-enabled internet of vehicles (IoV),"  IEEE 

Communications Letters, vol. 23, pp. 246-249, 2018. 

[221]  K. Valtanen, J. Backman, and S. Yrjölä, "Blockchain-powered value creation in the 5G and smart grid use cases," 

IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 25690-25707, 2019. 

[222]  U.  Javaid,  A.  K.  Siang,  M.  N.  Aman,  and  B.  Sikdar,  "Mitigating  loT  device  based  DDoS  attacks  using 
blockchain," in  Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Cryptocurrencies and Blockchains for Distributed Systems, 
2018, pp. 71-76, Munich, Germany. 

[223]  O.  Novo,  "Blockchain  meets  IoT:  An  architecture  for  scalable  access  management  in  IoT,"  IEEE  Internet  of 

[224] 

Things Journal, vol. 5, pp. 1184-1195, 2018. 
P. Lv, L. Wang, H. Zhu, W. Deng, and L. Gu, "An IoT-oriented privacy-preserving publish/subscribe model over 
blockchains," IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 41309-41314, 2019. 

[225]  U. Javaid, M. N. Aman, and B. Sikdar, "Blockpro: Blockchain based data provenance and integrity for secure iot 
environments," in Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Blockchain-enabled Networked Sensor Systems, 2018, pp. 
13-18, Shenzhen, China. 

[226]  V. Sharma, J. Kim, S. Kwon, I. You, and F.-Y. Leu, "An overview of 802.21 a-2012 and its incorporation into iot-
fog networks using osmotic framework," in International Conference on Internet of Things as a Service, 2017, pp. 
64-72, Taichun, Taiwan. 

[227]  V.  Sharma,  I.  You,  F.  Palmieri,  D.  N.  K.  Jayakody,  and  J.  Li,  "Secure  and  energy-efficient  handover  in  fog 

networks using blockchain-based DMM," IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, pp. 22-31, 2018. 

[228]  V. Sharma, J. D. Lim, J. N. Kim, and I. You, "Saca: Self-aware communication architecture for iot using mobile 

fog servers," Mobile Information Systems, vol. 2017. 

[229]  M. Alrowaily and Z. Lu, "Secure edge computing in iot systems: Review and case studies," in  2018 IEEE/ACM 

Symposium on Edge Computing (SEC), 2018, pp. 440-444, Seattle, WA, USA. 

[230]  Y. Li and S. Wang, "An energy-aware edge server placement algorithm in mobile edge computing," in 2018 IEEE 

International Conference on Edge Computing (EDGE), 2018, pp. 66-73, San Francisco, CA, USA. 

[231]  E. Oyekanlu, C. Nelatury, A. O. Fatade, O. Alaba, and O. Abass, "Edge computing for industrial IoT and the smart 
grid: Channel capacity for M2M communication over the power line," in 2017 IEEE 3rd International Conference 
on Electro-Technology for National Development (NIGERCON), 2017, pp. 1-11, Owerri, Nigeria. 

[232]  V. Sharma, I. You, D. N. K. Jayakody, D. G. Reina, and K.-K. R. Choo, "Neural-blockchain-based ultrareliable 
caching for edge-enabled UAV networks," IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,  vol. 15, pp. 5723-5736, 
2019. 

 
 
 
 
[233]  B.  Cavallo,  G.  Di  Crescenzo,  D.  Kahrobaei,  and  V.  Shpilrain,  "Efficient  and  secure  delegation  of  group 
exponentiation  to  a  single  server,"  in  International  Workshop  on  Radio  Frequency  Identification:  Security  and 
Privacy Issues, 2015, pp. 156-173, New york, USA. 

[234]  L.  Li,  R.  Lu,  K.-K.  R.  Choo,  A.  Datta,  and  J.  Shao,  "Privacy-preserving-outsourced  association  rule  mining  on 
vertically  partitioned  databases,"  IEEE  Transactions  on  Information  Forensics  and  Security,  vol.  11,  pp.  1847-
1861, 2016. 

[235]  A. Alrawais, A. Alhothaily, C. Hu, X. Xing, and X. Cheng, "An attribute-based encryption scheme to secure fog 

[236] 

communications," IEEE access, vol. 5, pp. 9131-9138, 2017. 
J. Zhang, Q. Li, X. Wang, B. Feng, and D. Guo, "Towards fast and lightweight spam account detection in mobile 
social networks through fog computing," Peer-to-Peer Networking and Applications, vol. 11, pp. 778-792, 2018. 

[237]  M.  Agrawal  and  P.  Mishra,  "A  comparative  survey  on  symmetric  key  encryption  techniques,"  International 

Journal on Computer Science and Engineering, vol. 4, p. 877, 2012. 

[238]  D. J. Wu, A. Taly, A. Shankar, and D. Boneh, "Privacy, discovery, and authentication for the internet of things," in 

European Symposium on Research in Computer Security, 2016, pp. 301-319. 

[239]  X.  Liang,  X.  Lin,  and  X.  S.  Shen,  "Enabling  trustworthy  service  evaluation  in  service-oriented  mobile  social 

[240] 

[241] 

[242] 

networks," IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 25, pp. 310-320, 2013. 
J. Ni, K. Zhang, K. Alharbi, X. Lin, N. Zhang, and X. S. Shen, "Differentially private smart metering with fault 
tolerance and range-based filtering," IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 8, pp. 2483-2493, 2017. 
S.  Salonikias,  I.  Mavridis,  and  D.  Gritzalis,  "Access  control  issues  in  utilizing  fog  computing  for  transport 
infrastructure,"  in  International  Conference  on  Critical  Information  Infrastructures  Security,  2015,  pp.  15-26, 
Berlin, Germany. 
S.  Chandrasekhar  and  M.  Singhal,  "Efficient  and  scalable  query  authentication  for  cloud-based  storage  systems 
with multiple data sources," IEEE Transactions on Services computing, vol. 10, pp. 520-533, 2015. 

[243]  X. Yang, F. Yin, and X. Tang, "A fine-grained and privacy-preserving query scheme for fog computing-enhanced 

location-based service," Sensors, vol. 17, p. 1611, 2017. 

[244]  G. Zhuo, Q. Jia, L. Guo, M. Li, and P. Li, "Privacy-preserving verifiable data aggregation and analysis for cloud-
assisted  mobile  crowdsourcing,"  in  IEEE  INFOCOM  2016-The  35th  Annual  IEEE  International  Conference  on 
Computer Communications, 2016, pp. 1-9, San Francisco, CA, USA 
J. Gill, I. Okere, H. HaddadPajouh, and A. Dehghantanha, "Mobile forensics: A bibliometric analysis," in  Cyber 
Threat Intelligence, ed: Springer, 2018, pp. 297-310. 

[245] 

[246]  Y.  Y.  Teing,  A.  Dehghantanha,  and  K.  K.  R.  Choo,  "CloudMe  forensics:  A  case  of  big  data  forensic 

[247] 

investigation," Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, vol. 30, p. e4277, 2018. 
I. Yaqoob, E. Ahmed, I. A. T. Hashem, A. I. A. Ahmed, A. Gani, M. Imran, et al., "Internet of things architecture: 
Recent advances, taxonomy, requirements, and open challenges," IEEE wireless communications, vol. 24, pp. 10-
16, 2017. 

[248]  Z.  Li,  V.  Sharma,  and  S.  P.  Mohanty,  "Preserving  Data  Privacy  via  Federated  Learning:  Challenges  and 

Solutions," IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 9, pp. 8-16, 2020. 

[249]  A.  Nieto,  R.  Rios,  and  J.  Lopez,  "IoT-forensics  meets  privacy:  towards  cooperative  digital  investigations," 

Sensors, vol. 18, p. 492, 2018. 

[250]  A. Nieto, R. Rios, and J. Lopez, "Digital witness and privacy in IoT: Anonymous witnessing approach," in 2017 

IEEE Trustcom/BigDataSE/ICESS, 2017, pp. 642-649, Sydney, NSW. 

[251]  V. Sharma, J. Kim, S. Kwon, I. You, K. Lee, and K. Yim, "A framework for mitigating zero-day attacks in IoT," 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.05549, 2018. 

[252]  A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, R. Jurdak, and P. Gauravaram, "Blockchain for IoT security and privacy: The case study 
of a smart home," in 2017 IEEE international conference on pervasive computing and communications workshops 
(PerCom workshops), 2017, pp. 618-623, Kona, HI, USA 

[253]  V.  Sharma,  I.  You,  and  N.  Guizani,  "Security  of  5G-V2X:  Technologies,  Standardization  and  Research 

Directions," IEEE Network, vol.34 (5), pp. 306-314,2020. 

[254]  O. Gupta, S. Rani, and D. C. Pant, "Impact of Parallel Computing on Bioinformatics Algorithms," in Proceedings 
5th  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Advanced  Computing  and  Communication  Technologies,  2011,  pp.  206-
209, Rohtak, Haryana, India. 

 
 
 
 
