This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

© 2016 IEEE.  Personal use of this material is permitted.  Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for 
advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

Improving Interdisciplinary Communication with Standardized 
Cyber Security Terminology: A Literature Review 

RAMIREZ, ROBERT1, CHOUCRI, NAZLI2 
1Institute for Data, Systems, and Society, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA (email: roberto@csail.mit.edu) 
2Department of Political Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 

ABSTRACT  The growing demand for computer security and the cyberization trend are hallmarks of the 21st century. The 
rise in cyber-crime, digital currency, e-governance, and more, is well met by a corresponding recent jump in investment in 
new technology for securing computers around the globe. Recently, business and government sectors have begun to focus 
efforts on comprehensive cyber security solutions. With this growth has emerged the need for greater methods of collabo-
ration and measurement of security. Despite all these efforts, this need has not been met, and there is still too little cross-
disciplinary collaboration in the realm of computer security. This paper reviews the new trends in cyber security research, 
their contributions, and some identifiable limitations. We argue that these limitations are due largely to the absence of co-
operation required to address a problem that is clearly multifaceted. We then identify a need for further standardization of 
terminology in computer security and propose guidelines for the global Internet multistakeholder community to consider 
when crafting such standards. We also assess the viability of some specific terms, including whether cyber should be used 
as a separate word when it is a descriptor (e.g. cyber security or cybersecurity), and conclude with recommendations for 
writing future papers on cyber security or the broader new field of all things relating to cyberspace, which has recently 
been dubbed Cybermatics, a term we also examine and propose alternatives to, like Cyber or Cybernomics. By furthering 
the effort of standardizing cyber security terminology, this paper lays groundwork for cross-disciplinary collaboration, 
agreement between technical and nontechnical stakeholders, and the drafting of universal Internet governance laws. 

INDEX TERMS  Cyber security, cyber-crime, cybersecurity, internet, hacker, national security, critical infrastructure, cy-
berspace, information technology, ICT, dictionaries, standardization, standards. 

I. INTRODUCTION
Cyber security is a nascent and exploding field with a 
growing body of research [77,78]. It is rooted in tradi-
tional computer science but has recently gained preva-
lence in other fields such as law and business manage-
ment, as well as areas of technology that did not origi-
nally operate with the Internet, such as smart grids, cars, 
and other cyber-physical systems, which are experienc-
ing new security vulnerabilities as a result of their new-
found connections to it, although cyber-crime can be 
perpetrated without the Internet [112]. As a new field 
that sprang out of many old ones and serves as a unify-
ing concern among disparate disciplines, cyber security 
has been given little attention in developing standards of 
research, possibly because these disciplines’ standards 
have been specified strictly within their own field, or 
that the urgency of protecting against cyber-crime out-
weighs many standards, or perhaps that the field is still 
relatively new and many may think standardizing too 
soon could stifle growth – all of which are reasonable as-
sumptions.  

However, never has it been more urgent for cyber 
security to be unified as a well-defined and standardized 
academic discipline. Standardization is commonplace in 
scientific disciplines, beginning with either systematic 

nomenclature or otherwise standardized vocabulary [87-
89]. Yet there have been very few efforts in research 
standardization, all of them government-led [118,119]. 
Herein we argue for and facilitate more formalized re-
search by the global multistakeholder community, espe-
cially academia, in cyber security, beginning with facili-
tating greater communication among the disparate disci-
plines that concern themselves with this area, through 
identifying trends in terminology standards.. 

This paper first assesses the state of the field of 
cyber security with a literature review, covering many of 
its newer, less traditional aspects. The object of this 
study was to manually identify significant areas of focus 
in current academic cyber security research. Papers were 
selected manually from certain searches using the MIT 
libraries database. Given the extent of human ability, this 
manual portion of the study was not intended to con-
struct any detailed ontology of cyber security. Inferences 
were drawn to identify many current trends, and papers 
were grouped by broad fields. These broad fields were 
loosely defined and posited to contain all research areas 
that were not explicitly identified. Some work on craft-
ing ontologies of cyber security research has been done 
in the past using both manual and automated techniques 
[2, 30, 35, 58, 59, 62, 65, 74, 75]. However, such efforts 

1 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

usually used relatively few inputs, such as starting with a 
basic phrase of “cyber security” and performing auto-
mated searches for papers with this term; and therefore 
these studies may not have covered the entire scope of 
the field of cyber security. 

To lay the foundations for standards in cyber secu-
rity research, a unified terminology is essential. The ma-
jority of the body of this paper provides guidelines, met-
rics, and suggestions for unifying the terminology of 
cyber security research, using the myriad keywords 
taken from the literature review as a more "human-in-
formed" basis for automated searches to identify trends. 
The incidence of the keywords as well as the incidence 
of all keywords from all papers with each of the key-
words was recorded from searches on 2 major journal 
paper databases, Scopus, and IEEE Xplore. Trends were 
analyzed and, along with linguistic analyses and a test of 
trends of whether cyber is used as a prefix or as a sepa-
rate word in journal papers from 1995 to 2005, recom-
mended terminology standards criteria were established 
and baseline general standards were suggested. Some 
specific terms were also rigorously defined. This work is 
intended to serve as a guide to developing more standard 
terms or a more standardized terminology for cyber se-
curity by the academic community or governing bodies 
in the near future, or to be taken as guidelines for selec-
tion of keywords, titles, and proper technical terms in fu-
ture cyber security research. The manuscript for this 
work was written to adhere to these terms except in the 
use of quotes from other papers, which, if conflicting, 
are indicated with [sic]. 

The specific contributions of this work are thus five-

fold: 1. We identify a large proportion of the emerging 
trends in cyber security research; 2. We point out a long 
overdue need for standardization of cyber security termi-
nology; 3. We propose guidelines to consider when se-
lecting terms or standardizing terminology (e.g. preva-
lence and occurrence of terms, linguistics, governing 
bodies); 4. We propose and justify some actual terminol-
ogy standards; 5. We identify the general silos cyber se-
curity research falls into, and their associated terminol-
ogy, and suggest avenues for further research based on 
our classification. 

II. LITERATURE REVIEW METHOD 
The intention of this literature review was to assess the 
state of emerging cyber security research and explore av-
enues of cyber security that have not received as much 
traditional attention as standard topics of network secu-
rity, cryptography, and basic system security that a typi-
cal university curriculum in focuses on [105-107]. The 
manual literature review was performed via a number of 
particular searches throughout September 2015 with the 

MIT libraries revolving around journal papers containing 
the word or prefix “cyber” and selected based on breadth 
of coverage as candidates for further reading. Selection 
criteria included priority given to other literature reviews 
and papers whose intention was broad characterization 
of issues, with a slight preference away from technical 
papers.  

When technical papers were selected for review they 
were more often cyber-physical security papers, such as 
those on SCADA and PLC security. In addition, a num-
ber of papers from the Columbia University/Global 
Commission on Internet Governance (GCIG) 2015 Con-
ference on Internet Governance and Cybersecurity [sic] 
were selected independently for review. In addition, the 
selection process evolved slightly over time, becoming 
more restrictive. The selection process for papers we 
identified using the MIT libraries online database is il-
lustrated by the following search parameters, which were 
chosen to narrow down the majority of the papers se-
lected for the literature review. Successive terms in each 
search (e.g. “review” followed by “overview”) were 
added sequentially in time as the search was revised dur-
ing the initial paper selection process in September 
2015: 

1.  (cyber) AND (review OR overview OR meta-

analysis OR survey OR primer OR literature OR 
outline OR governance OR international OR 
global OR sustainable) NOT (bullying OR psy-
chology OR psychosocial) 

2.  cyberspace AND ( (review OR overview OR 
meta OR survey OR primer OR literature OR 
outline or sustainable) ) NOT ( (bullying OR 
psychology OR psychosocial) ) 

3.  (cyber) AND (ontology) 

All searches were restricted to academic journal papers 
or conference papers from the years 2012-2015. From 
these searches and the GCIG Conference, 134 candidate 
papers were selected. Further manual inspection for 
breadth of coverage was performed, with preference to 
topics less commonly covered in cyber security educa-
tion. Time constraints for reading the papers also played 
a somewhat restrictive role in paper selection. 77 papers 
in total were selected from this group and were read or 
skimmed for content [1-74, 121-123]. The number of ci-
tations per paper was not known when selecting papers. 

III. RESULTS 
After reading all of the selected papers, we analyzed 
them for commonalities. For the initial stage of the anal-
ysis, we grouped the selected papers into categories cor-
responding to the general area of research we concluded 
they concerned. Our proposed categories are outlined in 
Table 1 below. It was evident to us from the papers that 

2 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

Table 1 
Label 

A 

Categories of cyber security papers from the literature review 
General  
Descriptor* 
Public Sector 
Policy 

General topics  
encompassed** 
Global Internet 
law, politics, 
and governance 

Extended High-Level Summary*** 

Arguably the most diverse category in this literature review. Contains 
papers on cyberspace geography and jurisdiction, papers on issues 
surrounding concepts of cyber war, Internet standards and govern-
ance, or various other legal issues, including crime problems that 
have a very legalistic or political angle. Papers containing broad 
questions of national security and strategy, the global multistake-
holder community, and many other broad policy or international rela-
tions questions are included in this category. 

B 

Cyberspace 
Infrastructure 

Technical  
Cybersecurity 
Research (hard-
ware,  
software, CPS, 
cryptography) 

C 

Business and 
Operations 

Business  
Management, 
frameworks, 
practices 

Most of the technological papers. While this literature review at-
tempted to maintain a focus on cybersecurity of critical infrastructure, 
and thus that dominates this category, this category could theoreti-
cally include anything mathematical or related to software for the in-
frastructure of cyberspace.  In our review, this includes analyzing 
SCADA vulnerabilities, high level papers on security of cyber-physi-
cal (e.g. critical infrastructure) systems, as long as they maintain 
some degree of technical rigor such as modeling. But it could also 
have included encryption scheme development, Internet protocol de-
scriptions, and more. This category would not include software or 
models designed for policy analysis, business management, crimino-
logical or sociological papers, or ontologies aimed at broad descrip-
tions of cybersecurity. 

These papers are by authors aiming to call attention to poor business 
practices and other kinds of risks for businesses, culture and aware-
ness, and ways to improve these practices (many of which are simply 
negative statements: stop doing something, e.g. stop leaving 
CISOs/CIOs out of the loop). In addition, this category encompasses 
papers that include more in-depth positive frameworks for maintain-
ing cyber security in a business through education, access control, 
supply-chain management, etc. That is, these frameworks specify 
what to do as opposed to what not to do. Many of these papers in-
clude not only suggestions for management but also propose research 
agendas for cyber security management. 

References 

3, 7, 9, 12, 13, 
14, 15, 20, 21, 
23, 25, 26, 34, 
36, 39, 41, 43, 
45, 46, 49, 51, 
52, 53, 54, 56, 
64, 67, 69, 71, 
121, 122, 123 

5, 8, 16, 17, 
18, 19, 24, 29, 
38, 48, 55, 63, 
66, 70 

1, 27, 28, 31, 
37, 40, 42, 44, 
50, 57, 61, 68 

D 

General  
Research 

General cyber 
crime, threats, 
other broad 
analyses (in-
cluding  
Ontologies) 

These papers analyze what common cyber-crimes, attacks, and 
threats exist. These papers have a more technical slant than category 
A, but are much broader than B. In addition, this category contains 
ontologies for vulnerabilities and attacks, populating knowledge ba-
ses, or mapping links between threats and actors. Other inclusions in 
this category are such papers as “A systematic literature review of 
computer ethics issues” and other “system-wide” topics that are fun-
damental to understanding cyberspace. This category is typically 
aimed at a broader audience than the other categories. 

2, 4, 6, 10, 11, 
22, 28, 30, 32, 
33, 35, 47, 58, 
59, 60, 62, 65, 
73, 74 

Table 1. Descriptions and summaries of proposed categories of cyber security research based on the literature review. 
*Not meant to completely encapsulate the category out of context; simply meant as a means of easily identifying the general categories of journal papers we 
review herein. This is why we refer to the categories with the nebulous letters A–D. Categories may have some overlap and are intended primarily for organizing 
the topics found in our literature review. **In this review. *** See section 4 for illustrative summaries of select papers.

these categories were appropriate because the authors of 
the selected papers typically wrote them in such a way 
that indicated that they were writing from a specific 
worldview of expertise, such as policy, or technology; or 

to a specific audience with such a worldview, rather than 
from an integrated worldview of cyber security that en-
compasses all of these areas. We qualitatively explore 
these categories in section 4. 

3 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

By identifying these categories, we hope researchers 
will consider them in the future when creating more for-
mal categorizations or ontologies of cyber security. In 
this paper we merely call attention to our observations 
and do not claim to propose a formal structure delineat-
ing the boundaries of cyber security. 

Identifying areas of cyber security research as we 

have done is an important step in formalizing the re-
search methodology of cyber security, as it points to var-
ious fields to draw frameworks from, and helps frame re-
search agendas. In section 6 we lay additional ground-
work for this formalization for future researchers. 

It became evident from our literature review and our 
identification of cyber security categories that there is a 
communication gap in cyber security dividing traditional 
technological research and the public and private sec-
tors’ nontechnical dealings with cyber security. This 
communication gap stands out to us as the largest funda-
mental problem impeding progress in this space by over-
looking avenues for cross-disciplinary innovation. 

IV. PAPER SUMMARIES BY CATEGORY 
Precisely defining each category is beyond the scope of 
this paper, as we do not wish to circumscribe research 
with more specific attempts at definitions. Instead, we 
describe the papers in more detail to illustrate some dif-
ferent emergent categories and subcategories of cyber 
security before analyzing the general shortcomings of 
the state of research in the field. 

A. PUBLIC 
This category includes issues of concern to the govern-
ment sphere of society. It includes work regarding 
norms, laws, and national security. Organizations such 
as ICANN and W3C, while often specifying norms, also 
create many technical standards. Such technology is not 
a part of this category, but we instead place it in the In-
frastructure category. Also not in this category are topics 
like business operations and supply chain management, 
even if government services benefit from these topics. 
Instead, we discuss those topics in category C.  

Harrop et al. (2013) give a short summary of cyber 
security efforts in the UK and the US, attempting to as-
sess their protection measures, some of which address 
information sharing between entities on such topics as 
vulnerabilities and “cyber” incidents [25]. This includes 
a list of recommendations used by the UK Center for 
Protection of National Infrastructure (CPNI) to ensure 
security, and describes a number of UK efforts to help 
businesses and the nation address cyber security. They 
go on to describe the state of US cyber security such as 
the NIST cybersecurity [sic] framework [83]. They also 

list the critical national infrastructure sectors of the two 
countries. 

Pawlak et al. (2013) analyze advances in threat evo-

lution and government security, and compares them, 
concluding that governments need to do more to defend 
themselves and their states, starting with basic capacity 
building [49]. They say that nations are in danger of se-
verely lagging behind trends in cyberspace. They also 
note, based on another study, eight innovations that will 
shape the future cyber security risk landscape: the cloud, 
big data, the internet of things, mobile internet, the neu-
ronal interface, contactless payments, mobile robots, 
quantum computing, and the militarization of cyber-
space. Lastly, they call for researchers to create a model 
of how exactly public and private spheres will collabo-
rate in the future. 

Grant et al. (2014) come up with cartographic terms 

for cyberspace and apply the concept of cyber-geogra-
phy to military operations. They also suggest that re-
search might be able to use their ontology to shed light 
on the attribution problem of being unable to expediently 
identify malicious actors through cyberspace [23]. 

Chertoff et al. (2015) describe the state of Internet 
jurisdiction law and the problem of assigning legal au-
thority to a particular forum when a suit traverses multi-
ple states. They propose four potential formulations that 
might clearly and fairly define the controlling jurisdic-
tion in cases [9]. These formulations are choice-of-law 
rules based on either: the citizenship of the subject of the 
offending information, data, or system; the location 
where the harm has taken place; the citizenship of the 
data creator; or the citizenship of the data holder or cus-
todian. 

Lin (2015) compares nuclear and cyber technology 

and regulation, listing a host of differences, and a few 
similarities, between potential problems these two tech-
nologies create, which he places into categories of strat-
egy, operations, acquisition, and arms control [26]. 

Common to all these papers, including the ones not 
mentioned here, is a notion of a system of governments 
that is lagging behind technology and that may not even 
be equipped to manage it well at all. They serve as a call 
to researchers and the global multistakeholder commu-
nity alike to unite in search of solutions. They also point 
out a dangerous threat to governments and nations, not 
only in the form of cyber-attacks, but also in the form of 
other entities taking over to manage traditionally govern-
ment-regulated matters, such as international communi-
cation, national security, and even control over borders 
and international law. These problems foreshadow many 
other problems to come for national governments, all of 
which are exacerbated by the existence of the Internet 
and widespread computing. 

4 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

B. INFRASTRUCTURE 
This category includes most of the paper that address 
technological problems of cyber security, though more 
specifically, those problems related to the actual infra-
structure of cyberspace, and not necessarily program-
ming solutions to every problem that businesses or aca-
demic researchers might address – for example, a soft-
ware tool for managing finances is a category C., Busi-
ness, topic. The Infrastructure category includes papers 
that discuss various aspects of cyber security of critical 
infrastructure, as well as security issues concerning the 
operation of cyberspace, such as cryptography. It also 
encompasses papers describing methods for intrusion de-
tection, reverse engineering, and computer forensics, 
among other issues. 

Franke et al. (2014) systematically review 102 pa-
pers, drawn from IEEE Xplore, Scopus, Springer link, 
and Web of Science, in an effort to create a research 
agenda in the area of cyber situational awareness. Topics 
they cover include game theory, cognition, vulnerability 
detection, attack detection, other network analysis, 
broader primers; a great variety of articles on securing 
industrial control systems (ICSs)/SCADA (such as 
power grids); some concepts of emergency management; 
various tools, architectures, and algorithms on a host of 
topics, including attribution; and many papers on “visu-
alization,” for cyber situational awareness. They note 
deficits of papers in nation-wide or other high-level 
cyber situational awareness, despite cyber situational 
awareness being extremely popular with policy-makers; 
in teamwork (in various senses of the word) and infor-
mation exchange, and in military strategy [16]. Franke et 
al. recommend more attention be paid to these areas, and 
also to efforts to deceive attackers, and to confidentiality 
and integrity. They suggest that researchers perform ex-
periments to measure how particular solutions contribute 
to the overall understanding of a situation, and enumer-
ate further directions for game-theoretic research, data 
fusion algorithms for low-level and high-level infor-
mation, like sensors and NLP, and empirical work and 
exercises. Among efforts for cyber situational aware-
ness, ICSs research is well-endowed. 

Genge et al. (2015) provide a detailed description of 

their “cyber attack impact assessment methodology,” 
which has the potential to be a general purpose tool to 
use in analyses assessing impacts from attacks on cyber-
physical systems [18]. This carries implications for se-
curing cities and countries with it, although these appli-
cations were not detailed in the paper. 

Huang et al. (2015) detail an in-depth cyber-physical 

network architecture that, provably and in simulations, 
resists collapsing as a result of errors on either the cyber 

or the physical side, as a way of preventing cascading 
failures [29]. 

Gao et al. (2014) review a number of papers on 
SCADA implementation and security, providing a com-
prehensive reference. They describe two main categories 
of security issues in SCADA systems: direct threats (ter-
rorist attacks, etc.) and indirect security threats (e.g. vi-
ruses, bugs). Gao et al. reiterate a common notion that 
SCADA security cannot be approached like traditional 
IT security, as availability and safety are paramount in 
SCADA systems, and SCADA infrastructure is less dy-
namic and less globally networked than traditional IT 
systems [17]. 

Cheminod et al. (2013) provide a literature review 
about the conceptual state of security for critical infra-
structure and cyber-physical systems at the component 
and system level, including policy enforcement. They 
also provide a host of resources for industrial networks 
and mention future areas of research in great detail [8]. 
It is clear from these papers that there is no shortage of 
work being done on cyber-physical systems security. 
However, research of the connections and interactions of 
critical infrastructure with the rest of cyberspace and so-
ciety is somewhat behind, as is research of the interac-
tion of cyber-physical systems security and traditional 
cyber security. Not integrating cyber-physical security 
with concepts concerning other areas of cyber security is 
a common ailment among these papers. It is equally im-
portant for other STEM fields besides cyber-physical 
systems, who are now researching cyber security, to also 
integrate with traditional “computer science” cyber secu-
rity researchers in this manner. 

C. PRIVATE 
The third category we propose concerns business prac-
tices and other organizational and human factors affect-
ing cyber security. The following papers give an illustra-
tive overview of the types of papers in this category. 

Messmer (2013) calls attention to the lack of coordi-
nation in businesses, which are also lagging behind tech-
nology [42]. She points to the fact that insurance deci-
sions concerning cyber security are not discussed as of-
ten as they should be with C-level information officers. 
This problem is easily remedied, but it is a reflection of 
other organizational shortcomings in the workforce. 

Khan et al. (2015) notes that the weak links in sup-
ply chains are often subject to attack. By analyzed the 
literature to identify if supply chain models can incorpo-
rate “cyber-resilience,” they provided recommendations 
for practice as well as a number of research directions 
for identifying and securing against cyber-risk in supply 
chains [37]. “Cyber-resilience” is a popular buzzword 

5 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

that contrasts with cyber security by emphasizing the in-
evitability of cyber-attacks and the importance of being 
able to rebound as a business from such hiccups. How-
ever, proper cyber security education among employees 
and management is a better solution than implementing 
buzzwords and would eliminate the confusing notion 
that cyber security does not imply resilience. 

Andel et al. (2013) surveyed various cyber programs 
at universities and retroactively document how a particu-
lar program developed at the University of South Ala-
bama was created, detailing goals and objectives, and 
creating a curriculum that attempts to be comprehensive. 
They comment briefly on the problem of naming 
courses, which reflects the author’s views on the neces-
sity of a defined vocabulary: they give the example of 
Cybersecurity vs Cyber Engineering and the ambiguity 
of the differences between these two topics [1]. 

Sitnikova et al. (2014) write about a topic they say 
fall under “broader Internet security management and 
governance of the Internet and the cyberspace.” They 
take a risk management approach to formulate a method-
ological framework for managing cyber security. They 
base their conclusions on a review of cases and previous 
studies, and highlight solutions at various levels of busi-
ness operations, considering various elements of tech-
nology, people, and “processes,” emphasizing that tech-
nology cannot solve all problems [57]. 

Jaitner et al. (2015) identify domains of science that 
contribute to the “cyber” field of study. They also iden-
tify points of necessary (presently implemented or not) 
collaboration across fields regarding a nation’s cyber 
readiness. The goal of their paper is to identify areas not 
fully explored in academia, and for generating curricula 
recommendations. They aim to be comprehensive, draw-
ing knowledge from Russia, and covering math, finance, 
linguistics, and natural sciences [31]. 

All the papers in this category point out that the or-
ganizational principles of businesses, and even fields of 
study, are not synchronized. There are vulnerabilities in 
supply chains, in trusting employees, and in social engi-
neering. These papers also illustrate the point to be cov-
ered later about a lack of well-defined terminology and 
the prevalence of ad hoc phrases to describe certain, 
even redundant, aspects of cyber security. Moreover, pa-
pers in this category make clear that technological solu-
tions alone cannot ensure cyber security. 

D. GENERAL 
The “General” category contains all papers with issues 
which pervade the entire realm of cyber security, as well 
as descriptions of the field in general, and characteriza-
tions of cyberspace and humans’ interactions with it. 

Zhang et al. (2012) give a primer on, empirically, 
what actual crimes exist in cyber space. They categorize 
the crimes and call for action on existing problems such 
as cyber terrorism, phishing, and others [72]. 

Busse et al. (2015) give a helpful introduction to On-
tology; specifically, contrasting the various meanings the 
word takes on in information science with social sci-
ences. They conclude by stating  

“Different disciplines need to grow together more and 
more. The major challenges of our time – scientific 
and social – can only be solved interdisciplinarily. To 
be successful, it is vital that we manage to find results 
of various teams in various disciplines worldwide and 
to integrate them reasonably. Ontologies are of vital 
importance for this: by the power of standardizing 
terms, their meanings, and relations; furthermore, by 
the possibility of integrating different domain-ontolo-
gies; and, last but not least, by supporting the seman-
tic web in search, reasoning and integration with com-
puter applications. This is why we expect the im-
portance of ontologies to grow significantly in future” 
[6]. 

In short, Busse et al. provide a strong argument for 
cross-discipline communication and standardization of 
vocabulary terms. 

Ju An et al. (2010) put forth a cyber security vulner-
ability ontology for comprehensive use, giving examples 
and references [35]. They are among many authors who 
propose information science-type ontologies, but do not 
necessarily scope the use of the ontologies, demonstrate 
their use, or make their ontologies publicly accessible. 
Jardine (2015) gives an interesting perspective on 
the state of cyber-crime. He finds that most vulnerabili-
ties are decreasing when normalized, and most attacks 
are increasing whether normalized or not, but are in-
creasing more slowly over time and may soon be seen to 
be decreasing (essentially predicting a concave-down 
trend in attacks). In short, the picture of cyber-crime is 
not as bad as the absolute numbers make it seem when 
compared to the growth of cyberspace [33]. However, 
the data used may be imperfect and the trends are only 
analyzed from 2008-2014. His recommendations in-
clude: focus on the user rather than the system (i.e. put 
more effort into educating and empowering the user and 
continue putting the same effort into the technology of 
the system); use open-source code like SSL where possi-
ble to find vulnerabilities more quickly; create stricter 
rules for reasonable disclosure timeframes of zero-days 
by governments; develop international agreements on 
web-based attacks; create more cyber-crime insurance or 
other ways of spreading costs out; small-medium-sized 
companies need to invest in IT security and training as 
much as large companies; and cyber security companies 

6 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

should start to collect and represent their data in normal-
ized terms. 

Michael Chertoff, former Secretary of Homeland Se-

curity, in Chertoff et al. (2015) gives a primer on the 
dark web, the intentionally hidden part of the deep web, 
unindexed by search engines and impossible to reach 
with normal browsers. A traditional search engine sees 
about 0.03 percent of the web – the other 99.97% is the 
deep web. The authors assert that the global community 
needs to consider the deep web’s impact when discuss-
ing Internet governance. A huge amount of crime (and a 
huge diversity of it) is supported in the deep web, and 
new ways to map and monitor it are needed. They never-
theless caution that the deep web’s existence is good, in 
some ways, for everybody [10]. 

Common shortcomings of papers in this category are 

a lack of ontological understanding and scoping of the 
problems of cyber security, as well as indicators of a 
lack of a defined cyber security vocabulary across disci-
plines. These papers all conclude that the field needs 
more interdisciplinary cooperation, and that better char-
acterization of cyber-crime and novel approaches to 
combating it, not necessarily technically, are imperative. 
Lack of consistent vocabulary is not in itself problematic 
– Busse et al. go into detail about the differences in the 
meaning of the word “ontology” between computer sci-
ence, philosophy, and psychology – but the importance 
of such a paper is not to be understated [6]. To solve this 
problem in communication, the solution is itself commu-
nication. Standardizing vocabulary offers one outlet for 
such communication. Explaining differences in terms is 
another. Still another is creating businesses out of uni-
versity research. 

To summarize all four categories, it is evident from 
our literature review that there is a long-standing discon-
nect between traditional technological research in cyber 
security and the public and private sectors’ nontechnical 
dealings with cyber security. This problem is likely a 
combined issue resulting from neither technical re-
searchers nor management in business or government 
reaching out to communicate to the other parties. How-
ever, there is also a communication problem between re-
searchers in the same category. Fundamentally, commu-
nication among researchers and between research and 
other sectors of society stands out as the largest general 
issue for cyber security when the field is broadly ana-
lyzed as we have done. 

We might appear to take the supposed benefits of in-
terdisciplinary research and communication for granted. 
Indeed, it may worry some readers that authors like 
Busse et al. propose such heavy collaboration between 
disciplines, that it might cause a kind of regression to-

wards the mean if all disciplines standardized communi-
cation. However, that is not what we propose. We pro-
pose only that cyber security standardize some, if not all, 
of its terminology. Anything more is beyond the scope 
of this paper. Furthermore, we claim that not allowing 
disciplines to grow together (by not participating in this 
growth by utilizing concepts from different disciplines), 
is itself a regression towards the mean of one’s own dis-
cipline, when innovation is at the edge – the edge of dis-
ciplines. While there are numerous edges to innovate on 
that research constantly takes advantage of, one particu-
lar edge – interdisciplinarity – is often overlooked. We 
postulate that interdisciplinarity and standardization cre-
ate a new innovation edge, and we take this as the basis 
for our exploration of cyber security terminology stand-
ards that follows.  

E. COMPARISON TO PRIOR RESEARCH 
Divisions of cyber security into four categories has re-
cently been done by other initiatives as well. In 2015, the 
European CAMINO Project created the THOR acronym 
approach of “(T)echnical”, “(H)uman”, “(O) rganiza-
tional”, and “(R)egulatory.” The CAMINO Project as-
serts that cyber security can be comprehensively per-
ceived as a combination of these four dimensions [82]. 
The THOR approach was put forth with the goal of cre-
ating an operational suggestion for a cyber security 
roadmap for Europe, and assumes integration of the four 
categories they proposed. This contrasts with our meth-
odology of creating a classification of the state of re-
search, which empirically highlights the lack of coopera-
tion between the different categories. 

F. LITERATURE REVIEW CONCLUSIONS 
One common ailment of all cyber security we deter-
mined from the literature review is that it is a poorly de-
fined and new academic field subject to multiple and di-
verse definitions, with little educational basis, and few 
formalized research methods, especially outside of cryp-
tography. Furthermore, most of its immediate implica-
tions lie outside of academia or the industry it caters to; 
it is a global and ubiquitous problem. Such a problem is 
difficult to formalize with research methods and educa-
tion, to say the least. However, there are some opera-
tional measures that can be taken to improve the pace 
and quality of research; among them, is facilitating com-
munication between scholars by standardizing terminol-
ogy. It became apparent during the literature review that 
there is little to no standard terminology, especially out-
side technical cyber security, of which, cryptography is 
by far the most formalized, but even some of its practical 
implementations for private key encryption such as AES 

7 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

are supported not by rigorous mathematical proofs but 
by popular vetting [80]. 

Our focus herein is specifically the lack of con-
sistency in nomenclature, such as, as Choucri, et al. 
wrote, whether to use “cyber” as a prefix, as in “cyberse-
curity” or as an adjectival modifier (i.e. a separate word, 
as in “cyber security” or “cyber-security”) [75]. Some-
times even within the same article there is no displayed 
agreement on this convention, and authors may vacillate 
between the two [84]. 

V. QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS OF PAPERS 
In the next sections of this paper we highlight the terms 
used in papers from our literature review, analyze the in-
cidence of those and more general terms relating to 
cyber security, identify inconsistencies and their possible 
sources, and draw on linguistic and usage data to pro-
pose a basis for developing terminology standards for 
cyber security. 

A. METHOD 
To analyze the meta-data of the papers reviewed, the au-
thor-supplied keywords of all the papers reviewed were 
extracted. In addition to author supplied keywords, some 
terms of interest were also extracted from titles. Scopus 
and IEEE Xplore were searched with dates from 2010 to 
2015 to determine recent incidence of the terms. For 
added completeness, the following terms were added in 
addition: computer security, cyber domain, cyber war, 
cyber bullying, cyber physical, semantic web, semantic 
web search, cyber safety, cybernetics, sustainability, 
darknet, dark web, deep web, surveillance, cryptography, 
cryptology, encryption, and cryptanalysis. These 
searches were performed on Scopus c. 10/7/2015-
10/13/2015 and on IEEE Xplore c. 10/12/2015-
10/13/2015. The author-supplied keywords were 
searched for in quotes for exact terms (up to capitaliza-
tion). Note that Scopus and IEEE Xplore treat hyphens 
as spaces. The number of hits for the terms were graphed 
on a logarithmic scale for ease of mental processing for 
both Scopus and IEEE Xplore. Both data sets and their 
sums are graphed in Table A1. 

Table A1 categorizes the searched terms based on 

incidence with respect to powers of 10 in IEEE Xplore, 
Scopus, and in total. Double-counting in the total num-
ber of hits is not accounted for in this study, as only a 
general measure of academic use of these terms is sought 
from the data, and the hits from the individual databases 
(Scopus and IEEE Xplore) are considered in conjunction 
with the totals when conclusions are suggested herein. 

Note that searches of IEEE Xplore returned about an or-
der of magnitude less hits for most terms compared to 
Scopus. 

B. DISCUSSION OF DATA AND JUSTIFICATION FOR 
TERMINOLOGY STANDARDIZATION 
Inspection of the terms in Table A1 reveals many that 
are undoubtedly unfamiliar or informal in appearance to 
most readers. The lack of consistent nomenclature ob-
served in Table A1 is not limited to the question of how 
to form terms with “cyber,” which itself is significant, 
but extends to whether “cyber” is always the most ap-
propriate term, why we speak of e-commerce and not 
online commerce, why online psychology but cyber bul-
lying or (recently) cyberpsychology [85]. 

While these terms may seem somewhat familiar to 
some readers, many other terms encountered when read-
ing cyber security papers, especially nontechnical ones, 
are used rarely or only a few times, and can often seem 
ad hoc. Often when they are used, they are not rigor-
ously defined or contrasted with other, perhaps more ap-
propriate terms: should we speak of cyber security, cyber 
resilience, or cyber safety [79,82]? Many of these terms, 
given definitions of cyber security, are actually part of it: 
cyber security has been categorized into such stages as 
Identify, Protect, Detect, Respond, Recover, or with 
Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability; and resili-
ence and safety are arguably covered in those categoriza-
tions [83]. 

In some ways, use of cyber security terminology has 

begun to resemble the loosely-defined grammar of 
online fora, with contributors communicating in a 
mostly, but not always, mutually understood language 
that is just good enough [86]. With the rapid growth of 
cyber security, terminology standards that are just “good 
enough” will soon not be good enough, and may be even 
be overdue. Fields such as healthcare, chemistry, and 
electrical engineering all devote much effort to stand-
ards, including terminology [87-89]. While cyber secu-
rity is not as old as these fields, losses from cyber-crime 
alone amount to approximately 1% of world GDP, and 
although this is not as large as health expenditures, it 
does not even reflect gains from ICT or the growing 
global dependence on computers [103-104]. 

A search of IEEE Xplore’s standards dictionary re-
turns only two records of standards terminology docu-
ments referring to “cyber” [90-92]. The lack of cyber se-
curity terminology standards is not only problematic in 
consistency of use, but in comparative studies and valid-
ity of results. Cryptography gives rigorous definitions of 
whether an encryption scheme is “secure,” that allow 
schemes to be compared, but newer branches of cyber 

8 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

security, as well as broader “cyber” areas of study, are 
severely lacking such definitions. 

Potential benefits of terminology standardization in-

clude the following: 

  Creation of precise laws and policies 
  Repeatable, mutually intelligible, and compara-

ble research 

  Preservation and availability of knowledge 

through easily searchable and indexed publica-
tions 

Defining a term and eliminating unnecessary syno-
nyms or ambiguous phrases from vocabulary facilitates 
the creation of precise legal constructs for cyberspace 
and the creation of industry standards and best practices, 
such as the NIST Cybersecurity [sic] Framework, which 
suggested standards for ensuring proper cyber security in 
business operations [83]. 

The ability for scholars to understand each other is 
of paramount importance in research and its vocabulary. 
As with the goals of chemical nomenclature, ensuring no 
ambiguity in terms should be of first importance, with a 
secondary objective being to minimize alternative names 
for the same concept. 

This second objective would help database searches 

for new journal articles. If terminology constantly 
evolves, much knowledge can potentially be overlooked, 
with only the most common terms being searched for 
and recognized, and with papers using ad hoc or non-
standard nomenclature being ignored or not even turning 
up in search results despite their valuable contributions. 
Therefore, to ensure accurate and comprehensive 
searches, standards benefit the entire body of research, 
and authors who choose not to adhere to such standards 
risk having a low impact on the field; therefore there is a 
strong incentive to adopt such standards if a plurality of 
researchers already have, and in many cases even if they 
have not yet done so [87]. 

C. PRIOR RESEARCH STANDARDS WORK 
Standardizing the field of cyber security has been an on-
going process for many years. In particular, there have 
been a number of attempts at the creation of a glossary 
of terms. The largest of efforts is the NICCS Glossary of 
Common Cybersecurity Terminology, a compilation of 
terms by US CERT from various lexicons issued by 
standards bodies [102]. These lexicons have been issued 
over the years by organizations like NIST. The East-
West Institute has also led two smaller efforts in collabo-
ration with the United States and Russian governments 
to create short agreed upon definitions of some terms, 
but these terms have been more specific to the defense 
sector [99-101]. 

Many of these cyber security lexicons seem them-
selves ad hoc or outdated, with terms like “misnamed 
files” and “mobile code;” and inspection reveals that 
many of the standards documents cited in them are over 
10 years old [117]. Because its sources are old, NISTIR 
7298 includes floppy disks and other removable media 
in its definition of “mobile devices,” despite current us-
age of that term referring almost exclusively to 
smartphones. The field of cyber security is still new, but 
before 10 years ago it was in its infancy, especially from 
a government perspective, which most of the source doc-
uments cited in these dictionaries were generated from. 
Ten to fifteen years ago may have been too early to 
standardize cyber security terminology, at least without 
periodically updating it. CNSSI 4009, revised in 2006 
and the most cited source used by NISTIR 7298 and the 
NICCS glossary, the two primary cyber security glossa-
ries, states that a glossary must be continuously updated 
to remain useful and should keep pace with changes in 
cyber security [120]. While some of these have been up-
dated over time, such as SP 800-53, many of these 
sources remain outdated. 

Various terms from papers surveyed by our literature 

review do not appear in any of these dictionaries; terms 
like “big data”, “cyber”, “cyberbullying”, “cyber-physi-
cal”, “darknet”, “internet of things”, “smart grid”, 
“web”, and “Stuxnet”, many of which in the past 10 
years have become prominent, are notably missing from 
public sector definitions. Based on the contrasting termi-
nology used in dated and government-defined dictionar-
ies, we believe it is time that a coordinated effort be-
tween academia and industry, with input from govern-
ment, took place, to update a comprehensive and repre-
sentative cyber security dictionary of terms. 

In addition to glossaries, other work related to re-
search standards-setting includes a short and general re-
search directive for allocating funds for cyber security 
research, The Cyber Security Research and Development 
Act (Nov 2002), which gave the US Office of Science, 
Technology, and Policy the responsibility for coordinat-
ing cyber security research and development. Besides 
this, there have been a number of cyber security research 
initiatives, largely supported by governments, but no 
broad industry or academia-wide efforts to create re-
search standards; rather, these have been left to evolve 
organically [119]. A problem with this approach is that it 
took thousands of years for cryptography to evolve or-
ganically. Even concerted efforts have focused not on re-
search standards, but security standards themselves, such 
as those for control systems, or for businesses [83, 118]. 
To our knowledge, a meta-level approach to cyber secu-
rity has been largely neglected in research. 

9 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

VI. STANDARDIZATION RECOMMENDATIONS 
In this section we will propose guidelines for authors 
and the global multistakeholder community in general to 
consider with coming to a consensus on standardized 
cyber security terminology. Here we develop standard 
terminology recommendation guidelines by analyzing 
the data in Table A1, and apply the guidelines to the 
keywords from the literature review. 

A. GUIDELINES 
We propose the following guidelines for standardizing a 
cyber security term for a universal glossary, to reap the 
benefits stated above: 

1.  Clear linguistic basis as evidenced by etymology 
and adherence to proper rules of language. 
2.  Enjoys popular and historical usage by the 

global multistakeholder community based on 
trends in usage 

3.  Gives meaningful search results 
4.  Well defined and not ad hoc. 

Herein we do not attempt to create new standards, but to 
posit inferred standards based on existing norms and in-
clinations of published works, in order to better facilitate 
research and discourse in the field. We hope to solidify 
emergent standards and avoid overburdening the re-
search field with unintelligible phraseology.  

We use these guidelines to present specific recom-
mendations for terminology in section 6-C onward. In 
this paper, terms are not discounted for recommended 
standardization based on any one criteria. Throughout 
this paper, the following metric is used when suggesting 
standards: A term is recommended for standardization if 
it either: 1) explicitly satisfies at least 2 guidelines and 
does not explicitly fail to meet the other 2 guidelines, or 
2) satisfies at least 3 guidelines. 

While not all of these requirements may be neces-
sary to recommend a particular term for standardization, 
by being strict in our selection of terms, we are guaran-
teed to satisfy more than sufficient criteria for ac-
ceptance. Future researchers may wish to more precisely 
incorporate dictionary terms to avoid the risk of over-
looking important terms. We account for the concession 
by only seeking terms to accept, rather than terms to re-
ject outright. Nevertheless, we note whether we accept 
or do not accept particular terms, in the following sec-
tions. Acceptance of a term means we recommend it for 
immediate standardization, whereas Non-Acceptance 
means we recommend it for sparing use in prominent 
places such as titles or keywords pending greater ac-
ceptance by the research and multistakeholder commu-
nity. This paper is indifferent towards terms that are not 
explicitly commented on, with respect to whether we 

suggest them for inclusion in a cyber security lexicon at 
this time. 

The above guidelines are for when there are no com-
peting terms. If competing terms exist, the term that sat-
isfies more guidelines is proposed; if they satisfy the 
same guidelines (such as in the case of two identical 
terms except one uses a “cyber” modifier and the other 
uses a “cyber” prefix), whichever one satisfies more 
guidelines to a greater extent (e.g. greater current inci-
dence, earlier use or greater use over time, or greater ac-
ceptance by the global multistakeholder community) is 
given as our suggestion for the standard term. 

Further elaboration on the measurement criteria for 

each of the proposed guidelines follows below. 

1.  The Elements of Style and various linguistic ac-

counts, including journal publications and use by 
country and in government documents, will offer in-
sight into etymology and proper English use [97]. 
2.  Trends of usage over time from Scopus and IEEE 
Xplore will provide evidence of historical ac-
ceptance. To a lesser extent, use by agencies and 
working groups in the global multistakeholder com-
munity will also be examined for consistency with 
results from databases. Because the primary goal of 
this paper is to propose nomenclature for research, 
not for individual working groups or agencies for in-
ternal use, the primary sources will be results re-
turned from academic journal databases. For this 
guideline we determine when terms first began to 
enjoy use among researchers. 

3.  Meaningful search results for journal database 

searches will be determined by returning hits in a 
range of incidence which is not too high nor too low, 
that we establish below. This range is empirically 
derived based on the incidence of currently accepted 
terms or candidate terms, such as the incidence 
range of “cryptography” or “cyberspace”. The aim 
of defining such a range is to include all relevant 
terms, while excluding ad hoc terms and terms that 
are too broad to be meaningful outside of more spe-
cific contexts, such as “information.” This ideal 
range will vary between databases, but will itself be 
used in this paper to include or exclude terms, which 
is the primary goal of this section. By adhering to 
data from a particular set of databases, we can iden-
tify appropriate terms. Because the ideal range will 
vary, it should only be used by other researchers 1) 
on the same databases, 2) within the same range of 
years (2010-2015).  

4.  The presence of rigorous definitions in journal arti-
cles is required to satisfy this guideline. Even for a 

10 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

popular term, this requirement might not be satis-
fied. This is also measured by the number of over-
lapping or conflicting terms, e.g. online psychology 
versus cyberpsychology, the latter of which is not 
easily understandable. Definitions (extracted from 
dictionaries and journal articles) go beyond propos-
ing words for broad concepts, and rigorously define 
these terms. For example, terrorism is a well-ac-
cepted term, but the definition of terrorism is highly 
contested [93]. 

B. MEANINGFUL SEARCH RESULTS 
We claim, as shown in Guideline 3, that searchability is 
an important guideline to consider when agreeing on a 
standard dictionary of academic terms. By searchability, 
we mean that performing a particular search (that is, 
with a particular keyword or phrase) gives meaningful 
search results, corresponding to papers the searcher was 
looking for. That is, the intended meaning of the key-
words in the paper corresponds to the use of that key-
word in papers in the database. The more appropriate the 
author-selected keywords, the more likely the author’s 
paper is to appear in an appropriate search. We take this 
to be a primary quantitative identifier of whether a term 
should be a candidate for standardization. Identifying in-
appropriate search terms, while in itself does not exclude 
such terms as candidates for a standard cyber security 
vocabulary, does by itself provide guidelines for increas-
ing visibility when choosing title, abstract, and key-
words. We believe the optimal range where candidate 
standard terms can be found is [100,1000) total hits in 
Table A1, whereas the minimum range for candidate 
terms is [10, 100000). The following paragraphs elabo-
rate on this claim. 

In Table A1, terms in category 1 are clearly poor 
search terms. They have no value as keywords because 
of their gross ambiguity and universality. They are rec-
ommended to never be used as keywords. Taken as a 
whole, the terms in category 2 from Scopus give a broad 
idea of concepts in cyber security, but individually, these 
terms can have many meanings independent of cyber se-
curity; take space, ecosystem, sustainable, and planning, 
for instance. Even “internet” and “security” are a little 
too broad for our purposes of identifying a minimum vo-
cabulary; minimum meaning with the strictest inclusion 
criteria to ensure that all terms selected unequivocally 
belong to cyber security and would turn up in a reasona-
ble search for publications, and not in searches in vastly 
different fields like biology. 

Scopus category 3 contains some words like cyber, 

encryption, network security, and smart grid, which 
clearly belong in the field and would make for search 

terms which only return appropriate publications. How-
ever, terms like geography, supply chain, and ontology 
have many applications to other fields, which makes 
them terms unlikely to return useful results on their own. 
Moreover, researchers should not be expected to sift 
through 10,000 of more papers to find relevant ones, un-
less perhaps they intend to do a broad literature review, 
such as the one in this paper. Therefore, while terms in 
Scopus category 3 highlight key high level aspects of 
cyber security, like cryptography, in actuality, a search 
for “cryptography” by itself will not yield anything spe-
cific enough to be of value without performing more in 
depth analysis of the search results. Therefore, this range 
of incidence is not specific enough on its own to be of 
value for Scopus searches. The above conclusions simi-
larly apply to IEEE Xplore’s categories 1-4. Category 
3’s upper bound of 100,000 is hits is only recommended 
as the upper bound for the least specific keywords used 
in an article. 

Scopus category 4 terms are nearly all unambigu-
ously and readily identifiable as specific to cyber secu-
rity. They are still broad within cyber security, and are 
more appropriate as standalone search terms for specific 
literature reviews within cyber security. However, they 
do give meaningful search results. Terms in this range in 
Table 1 for Scopus and ranges of terms with similar inci-
dences in Scopus in other databases may be an appropri-
ate upper bound for inclusion as keywords, but because 
this paper aims to recommend concrete guidelines to de-
scribe a minimum number of appropriate cyber security 
search terms, category 4’s range is still too high for this 
purpose. These terms would, however, be expected to 
yield specific meaningful results in searches when com-
bined with other terms. 

Every term in Scopus category 5, with the exception 
of perhaps “index terms” is clearly a cyber security-rele-
vant term. Furthermore, the low number of hits in search 
results of these terms is manageable for anyone to sort 
through to identify papers of interest. This range’s upper 
bound of 1000 is recommended as the upper bound for 
the most specific keywords used in journal papers. 

Scopus category 6 contains a number of terms like 

cyber law, cyber insurance, and hacktivist that, while 
many may argue are valid vocabulary for inclusion as 
standards in the cyber security lexicon, do not yield very 
many search results, and furthermore, are not universally 
accepted or distinguishable from other aspects of cyber 
security. Cyber conflict is not easily distinguishable 
from cyber war, and the advantage of using terms like 
“safety” and “resilience” in place of security is not justi-
fied by papers using them [95,96,99]. Furthermore, 
many readers may find some of these terms unfamiliar. 
Given this, while category 6 may outline areas where 

11 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

further research is needed, to maximize visibility and 
yield results in meaningful searches, category 6 is not 
recommended except perhaps as the lower bound for the 
most specific terms used as keywords. 

Category 7 needs no discussion given the above; it is 

peppered with ad hoc terms of little value, as evidenced 
by their low incidence. It may be a useful reference to 
identify future research directions, but it is not recom-
mended that any terms in this category ever be used as 
paper keywords. 

In summary, the optimal range where candidate 
standard terms can be found is [100,1000), whereas the 
minimum range for candidate terms is [10, 100000). 
Searches using terms in this latter range that do not fall 
in the former range should be performed by combining 
multiple terms to yield the most meaningful search re-
sults. When suggesting standard terms and rejecting oth-
ers, we considered the optimal range of [100,1000) total 
hits when assessing whether guideline 3 was satisfied by 
a given term (see Table 2 below). While using sub-opti-
mal terms and phrases may be an indispensable aspect of 
the progression of research, to ensure that publications 
are locatable, we would recommend that at least some of 
the author-supplied keywords be ones that are more eas-
ily searchable; querying databases with target journals 
can aid authors in this decision. 

C. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR SPECIFIC TERMS 
The keywords extracted from the papers found in the lit-
erature review, as well as a dozen other terms we believe 
to be important in cyber security, are categorized in Ta-
ble 2 based on our recommendations for standard usage. 
All terms were evaluated using the terminology guide-
lines outlined in this paper, and were then sorted into 
three categories, of either Accepted, Not (yet) Accepted, 
or Partially Accepted, based on the degree of their adop-
tion by researchers and other members of the global 
multistakeholder community, as determined by the num-
ber of guidelines they satisfied. As stated before, terms 
that 1) explicitly satisfied at least 2 guidelines and did 
not explicitly fail to meet the other 2 guidelines, or 2) 
satisfied at least 3 guidelines were classified Accepted. 
We make no we recommendation that terms we 
found not to be commonly accepted not be used. Table 1 
only labels words according to their use in cyber secu-
rity. Some words that are not yet accepted include 
“cyber” by itself (and in its myriad ad hoc combinations) 
and “cybernetics”, as well as “cyber-risk” and “ontol-
ogy”. Although some of such “not accepted” terms may 
be understood by the reader, and may be well-defined in 
other fields, these terms are not yet generally understood 
within most of the cyber security academic and multi-
stakeholder community. We do advise to not include 

12 

such terms in current glossary updates, until they be-
come more universally accepted and identified with 
cyber security. 

Partially accepted terms in Table 1 are recom-
mended to be prominently used in papers, such as in the 
title or author-supplied keywords, only occasionally, 
with discretion. For example, while “risk” may be an in-
appropriate author-supplied keyword, it is an acceptable 
term for use when describing topics in cyber security 
elsewhere in a paper. These “partially accepted” terms 
only satisfied one of our proposed guidelines, without 
outright failing to meet the other three, or met two 
guidelines but failed the other two. For example, accord-
ing to Figure A1a, “critical infrastructure” is orders of 
magnitude more popular than “critical national infra-
structure.” Furthermore, the US CERT Cyber Glossary 
only defines critical infrastructure, not critical national 
infrastructure [102]. Therefore, we recommend that 
“critical infrastructure” be used and “critical national in-
frastructure” or CNI not be widely used at this time. Of 
course, CNI may still very possibly become a standard 
dictionary term in the future. 

VII. SPECIFIC NOMENCLATURE 
In this section we elaborate on some of the more promi-
nent cyber security terms categorized in Table 2, and 
their associated hindrances to the creation of a standard 
glossary of terms. Here we resolve some longstanding 
confusion and determine appropriate usage of some im-
portant terms. 

A. CYBER AS A MODIFER: ONE OR TWO WORDS? 
To resolve the conflict of whether terms should use 
“cyber-“ as a separate word (with or without a hyphen) 
as in “cyber attack” or “cyber-crime” or rather as a pre-
fix of a word as in “cyberspace,” the historical incidence 
of terms containing “cyber” was determined and linguis-
tic analyses were performed. 

First, IEEE Xplore was searched for articles contain-

ing “cyber” only as a word and those containing 
“cyber*” as either a word or as part of a word, where the 
asterisk indicates a wild card. The difference between 
the two terms was taken to yield only cyber* as a pre-
fix/part of a word. The usage of “cyber-” as a word and 
of “cyber*” as a prefix were plotted from 1990 to 2015 
after being controlled for the occurrence of “cybernet-
ics.” (Figure 2) This was done to ensure that only terms 
relevant to cyber security or the broader “cyber” re-
search field were accounted for. 

The majority of the words that appear after “cyber” 

(with a space or hyphen) in journal papers come from 
cyber physical, cyber security, cyber attack,  

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

Table 2 
Accepted 
CISO 
cloud computing 
computer abuse 
critical infrastructure 
cryptanalysis 
cryptography 
cryptology 
cyber crime 
cyber law 
cyber operations 
cyber physical 
cyber physical systems  
cyber security 
cyber threat 
cyber war  
cyber warfare  
cyberspace 
darknet 
DDOS 
deep web 
denial of service 
digital signature 
embedded computer 
encryption 
espionage 
hacker 
ict 
ids 
information technology 
internet  
intrusion detection system 
malware 
national security 
network security 
phishing 
privacy 
risk management 
scada 
steganography 
stuxnet 
system security 

Summary of Proposed Terminology Standards 
Not (yet) accepted 
academia  
active air defense 
active air defense  
active cyber defense  
adaptation tactics  
ami  
anti-forensics 
attack description language  
attribution 
cikr 
classification 
communication  
complex networks  
computational part  
cpss  
cross-domain attacks  
curriculum development  
cyber  
cyber assurance  
cyber attacks and countermeas-
ures  
cyber conflict  
cyber domain 
cyber education 
cyber psychology  
cyber readiness 
cyber resilience  
cyber safety  
cyber space  
cyber targeting  
cyber treaty 
cyber world 
cybergeography 
cybernetics 
cyber-physical-social systems 
cyber-risk 
cybers 
cybersafety 
cyberspace security 
cyber-territory 
definitional gaps 
denial of sustainability 
deterrence 
disgruntlement 
distributed systems security 
e-consumer protection 
ecosystem 
emerging cyber threats 
emerging technology trends 
employee computer crime 
ethical issues  
expressive crimes  
force  
geography  
government response  

hierarchical access  
impact assessment  
index terms  
information exchange  
information extraction  
information schema 
information security educa-
tion  
information structure 
insider 
instrumental crimes  
international   
international cooperation  
international policy  
internet security  
internet study  
jurisdiction  
knowledge base  
knowledge model  
law 
layered network 
learning objects 
legal issues 
legal rights  
literature review  
mac security  
mapping  
meta-adaptation strategies 
military operations  
model-based design  
morality of law 
socialization 
motivation  
multi-agent systems  
national cyber strategies  
networked computer tech-
nology 
neutralization  
ontology 
ontology architecture 
ontology design  
ontology security  
ontology-based context 
models  
organizational justice 
papa framework 
people  
percolation theory  
physically-aware engi-
neered systems  
planning 
policy 
policy making  
politics  
private sector  

research strategy  
risk assessment  
scientific paper 
secure software engineering  
security analysis and monitoring 
security automation  
security countermeasures 
security issues 
security methodologies 
security ontology 
security solution frames  
self-organisation  
risk assessment  
scientific paper 
secure software engineering  
security analysis and monitoring 
security automation  
security countermeasures  
security issues  
security methodologies 
security ontology 
security solution frames 
self-organisation 
semantic  
semantic operability  
semantic security  
semantic web search  
semantic web technology 
Slovenia  
social cybernetics  
sovereignty 
space 
state-level 
sustainability 
sustainable  
system dynamics 
systematic literature review 
system-level requirements  
systems strategic security man-
agement 
taxonomy  
technology  
Terrorism 
textbook 
theoretical foundation 
traceability 
u.n. 
us cyber security act 2012 
vishing 
web attacks 
web space 
propaganda  
psycho dynamism  
regulation  

Partially accepted 
accountability 
attack 
availability 
big data  
cascading failure  
cio  
cni 
computer crime 
Common vulnerabilities and 
exposures 
computer ethics  
Computer security 
computer system security  
context-awareness  
cps  
cyber bullying  
cyber insurance  
cyber stalking  
Cybercrime 
Cybersecurity 
dark web 
darknet 
e-commerce law 
evidentiary  
forensics 
hacktivist/hactivist  
industrial networks 
information 
information systems security 
insider 
missile defense 
risk assessment 
risks 
security 
security architecture 
security controls 
security patterns 
self-defense 
semantic web 
sensitivity analysis 
signals intelligence 
situational awareness 
smart grid 
social-networking 
software piracy  
supply chain 
supply chain management 
threat 
threat environment 
threat patterns  
u.s. cyber command  
vulnerability analysis  
web  

Table 2.  Keywords extracted from our literature review, and additional cyber security terms, grouped according to whether they satisfy section 6’s guidelines. 

13 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

Figure 1. Incidence of the most commonly appearing terms with the word cyber in journal papers, from Scopus. 

Figure 2. Incidence of the most commonly appearing terms with the word cyber in journal papers, from IEEE Xplore. 

14 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

cyber threats, cyber crime, cyber warfare, cyber world, 
and cyber war. Google Ngram also indicates other com-
mons terms like cyber space [sic] [94]. The top terms 
containing “cyber” as determined by Google Ngram and 
Figure A1 were also plotted between 1990 and 2015 in 
Figure 2; and to control for such more common terms 
that dominate some of the “cyber” categories, like cyber-
physical and cyberspace, curves that also control for 
these terms were plotted as well. These curves are 
bolded and labeled as “controlled.” This was done in or-
der to compare whether “other” generic terms, including 
ad hoc terms and terms that are simply less common, 
were more commonly used with “cyber” as a separate 
word or as a compound word. That is, whether “cyber” 
as a word or “cyber” as part of a compound is more 
commonly used in research articles. 

Similarly, Scopus was queried for the most common 

terms using “cyber.” However, Scopus does not have a 
wildcard search as of this writing, so it is not possible to 
extract the exact number of terms that use “cyber” in a 
compound. However, summing the hits for the most 
commonly used “cyber” terms (other than cybernetics) 
for the two types yields an approximation of the totals of 
the two types. These approximations, along with the hits 
of some of the most common terms, were plotted (Figure 
1). 

The results indicate that both when controlling and 
when not controlling for the most commonly used terms 
containing “cyber,” use of a separate word for “cyber-” 
is vastly more common than use in a compound word as 
of 2009; whereas prior to 2009, both had comparable in-
cidence. Therefore, it is recommended that “cyber-” be 
used in most cases. In Figure 1, the controlled “cyber-” 
word is even beginning to overtake the incidence of all 
(non-cybernetic) compound words, whereas the use of 
compound words outside of the few most common ones 
is not gaining additional acceptance by the academic 
community. Figure 2 tells a similar story. “Cyber-physi-
cal” is by far the most prevalent term with “cyber” as a 
separate word, threatening to overtake the incidence of 
“cyber” in compounds. The separate word far outstrips 
the compound in total non-cybernetic hits. 

It is clear from Figure 1 and Figure 2 that “cyber-“ 
as a separate word, possibly hyphenated (according to 
preference), should be the standard format to ensure 
searchability. In database search engines that do not al-
low wildcard searches for word prefixes, having “cyber” 
as a separate word is extremely valuable, as it allows 
new and unfamiliar terms to be discovered. If a single 
compound word is used to search, only by already know-
ing the exact word one is searching for (which is un-
likely given the nascence of the field) can appropriate ar-
ticles be located. 

This conclusion is consistent with guidelines 2-4 
above for standardizing terms, but not with the 1st guide-
line. However, it is far better than the alternative, which 
only satisfies the first guideline. Historically, as can be 
seen from Figures 1 and 2, “cyber” as a separate word 
enjoyed less usage than similar compound words. Only 
around 2008 did it overtake the historical word; how-
ever, the separate word’s usage so vastly outpaced the 
compound word’s, that it is impossible to resist its cur-
rent prevalence. Both standards that were returned from 
a search of IEEE Xplore’s standards dictionary were of 
“cyber security,” not “cybersecurity;” one was from 
1997, and the other was from 2010 [90-92]. 

Finally, the linguistics of cyber should be considered 
to give it proper treatment under Guideline 1. The Greek 
root κυβερνήτης is not a compound word, and cyber-
space and cyberwar can be thought of as portmanteaus of 
cybernetics and space and war, respectively [128]. Port-
manteaus are nearly always single words, not containing 
hyphenated word fragments or word fragments separated 
by a space. However, unlike many portmanteaus, the 
second word is present in its entirety in both of these ex-
amples. Alternatively, since cyber is a standalone word 
that originated as an abbreviation of cybernetics, it might 
make more sense for it to appear as a separate word in 
compounds, especially when the full word it modifies is 
retained. In addition, while UK and European English 
sometimes appear to favor “cyber security” over “cyber-
security” (often favored by the US government), re-
gional preferences have blurred recently. The ambiguous 
linguistic status of cyber is almost enough for Guideline 
1 to yield little guidance, but we believe that the etymol-
ogy of the word cyber favors a separate word usage in 
most forms. 

Despite these observations, there are terms that are 
commonly used in a compound form. Among these are 
“cyberspace” and “cybersecurity.” Curiously, cyber se-
curity and cybersecurity have comparable incidences in 
all of our figures that they appear in, although the sepa-
rated-word phrase is still used about twice as often as the 
compound word.  

B. CYBERSPACE 
“Cyberspace” actually meets all of the proposed guide-
lines for standardization, (except, arguably, the 1st guide-
line), and should therefore continue to be used fre-
quently. “Cyberspace” emerged in 1990 according to 
Scopus, enjoys popular use, gives meaningful search re-
sults (see Table A1), and is consistently favored over 
“cyber space”. Therefore, we suggest “cyberspace” as an 
appropriate standard term, and suggest “cyber space” 
never be used. 

15 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

C. CYBERSECURITY VERSUS “CYBER SECURITY” 
“Cybersecurity” meets guidelines 3 and 4, but among 
journal papers, does not enjoy pluralistic usage over 
“cyber security,” and in fact emerged after “cyber secu-
rity,” which has enjoyed more popular usage than “cy-
bersecurity” in nearly every year according to both Sco-
pus and IEEE Xplore’s databases. In addition to this, 
while two words usually become one after a period of 
hyphenation (or a space; journal databases treat hyphen-
ated words as separate words), the research community 
does not seem ready to accept cybersecurity as a single 
word yet [97]. However, due to their reasonably compa-
rable incidences over time, “cyber security” or “cyberse-
curity” are both common and generally acceptable. 
However, this requires that searches for papers referring 
to cyber security include “cyber security” OR “cyberse-
curity” for complete coverage. This is of course tedious, 
and at this stage “cyber-security” or “cyber security” is 
recommended as the standard term over “cybersecurity” 
because it satisfies all four guidelines, whereas “cyberse-
curity” only clearly satisfies 2, 3, and 4, and satisfies 2 to 
a lesser extent than “cyber security” does. 

D. CRYPTOGRAPHY,CRYPTOLOGY,CRYPTANALYSIS 
Cryptography refers to the art of designing cryptosys-
tems, cryptanalysis refers to the art of breaking cryp-
tosystems, and cryptology is the union of cryptography 
and cryptanalysis [98]. However, “cryptography” and 
“cryptology” are sometimes used interchangeably, alt-
hough these terms are fairly well-defined in principle. In 
practice, “cryptography” is used far more widely than ei-
ther “cryptanalysis” or “cryptology” according to Figure 
A1a and Figure A1b. Clearly this simply means that in 
the field of cryptology, significantly more effort has 
been devoted to cryptography than to cryptanalysis or to 
discussions of the general field. Both terms satisfy all 
four guidelines for standardization.  

Given the definition of the words, we recommend 
that cryptology and cryptography be used properly in the 
future. However, there is, by definition, overlap in the 
two terms, so in cases of overlap, the more specific term, 
which is also the more prevalent term, “cryptography” 
should be used.  

“Cryptanalysis” seems to have fallen into disuse and 

should therefore not be used as a primary search term 
when cryptography is a better alternative, given that, by 
definition, cryptanalysis seeks to break the cryptosys-
tems of cryptography; that is, cryptography is implied in 
cryptanalysis, but not vice versa. Since “cryptography” 
is the most exclusive, or most essential of these three 

terms, it is recommended that this trend in usage be fol-
lowed by authors to ensure visibility of publications. 
Again, this is not to say that cryptanalysis is a poor word 
choice. This paper makes no claims about the usefulness 
of words, only suggestions for which terms can be read-
ily turned into universal standards. 

E. CYBERCRIME AND COMPUTER CRIME 
According to Scopus, “computer crime” first appeared in 
the literature in 1972, well before either spelling of 
cyber-crime. Therefore, computer crime satisfies guide-
line 1 and cybercrime fails at guideline 1. However, 
many organizations in the global multistakeholder com-
munity refer to cybercrime, including Norton, Interpol, 
and the US government, though some do refer to cyber-
crime, especially non-US countries [113, 114]. Cyber-
crime as a hyphenated word appeared in the literature a 
few years before cybercrime in the mid-1990s, but cy-
bercrime has in recent years begun to outpace cyber-
crime in journal article usage. While both cybercrime 
and cyber-crime fall in the idea incidence range of 
[100,1000) hits from 2010-2015 on Scopus and IEEE 
Xplore combined, computer crime has far more hits, 
with 11,171 from Scopus alone. Although this is outside 
the ideal range, it is within the acceptable range. Thus 
cybercrime meets guideline 3 for meaningful search re-
sults, and both computer crime and cyber-crime satisfy 
guideline 3 partially. Lastly, only cyber-crime is defined 
by EWI or NICCS, satisfying guideline 4 [100-102]. We 
summarize our conclusions in Table 3 below. From this 
we can see that cybercrime meets the most guidelines of 
the conflicting terms. Clearly, cyber-crime is a term in 
great need of standardization, given the varied uses of its 
forms and synonyms. However, none of these three 
terms satisfies enough of our guidelines for us to recom-
mend. 

Table 3 
Term 
Computer 
crime 
Cybercrime 
Cyber crime 

Guidelines satisfied 
1 
2 
O  X 

3 
4 
 ?  X 

X  O  O  X 
 ?  O 
 ? 

 ? 

Table 3. Forms of cyber-crime: X means the guideline is not satisfied, O 
means it is satisfied, ? means it is partially satisfied or not explicitly failed. 

VIII. TOWARDS AN AGENDA AND METHODOLOGY 
We argue for the creation of a cyber security research 
agenda for integrating all four categories into a unified 
cyber security discipline. We claim that such an agenda 
should be based on quantitative metadata from a repre-

16 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

sentative sample of journal and conference papers. Be-
low in Table 4 we categorize the terms from Table 2, 
and include the percentage of papers from each category 
that use Accepted and Partially Accepted terms, respec-
tively, as well which papers use both, and citations. 

Proposed vocabulary for standardization, by category 
Accepted (A) 
Category 
cyber crime, cyber 
Public  
operations, cyber 
(48.4%, 45.2%) 
security, cyber 
(22.6% both) 
warfare, cyber-
space, DDOS, es-
pionage, internet, 
national security, 
Stuxnet 

Partially Accepted (B) 
Attack, CNI, Cyber-
crime, Cybersecurity, 
evidentiary, hack-
tivist/hactivist, infor-
mation, missile de-
fense, self-defense, 
signals intelligence, 
threat environment, 
u.s. cyber command, 
web 
Accountability, Avail-
ability, cascading fail-
ure, context-aware-
ness, cps, industrial 
networks, risk assess-
ment, information, Se-
curity, security archi-
tecture, sensitivity 
analysis, situational 
awareness, smart grid 
Attack, cio, computer 
crime, cyber insur-
ance, Cybersecurity, e-
commerce law, infor-
mation, insider, risks, 
Security, supply chain, 
supply chain manage-
ment, threat patterns 
Attack, big data, Com-
mon vulnerabilities 
and exposures, com-
puter ethics, computer 
system security, cps, 
cyber stalking, cyber-
crime, cybersecurity, 
dark web, forensics, 
information, security, 
semantic web, social-
networking, software 
piracy, threat, vulnera-
bility analysis, web 

Infrastructure 
(60.0%, 80.0%) 
(60.0% both) 

Private  
(54.5%, 72.7%) 
(36.4% both) 

General  
(68.4%, 89.5%) 
(63.2% both) 

critical infrastruc-
ture, cyber physi-
cal systems, cyber 
security, DDOS, 
digital signature, 
network security, 
privacy, scada, ste-
ganography 

CISO, cloud com-
puting, computer 
abuse, cyber crime, 
cyber law, cyber 
security, cyber-
space, internet, pri-
vacy, risk manage-
ment, scada 
cyber crime, cyber 
law, cyber secu-
rity, cyber threat, 
cyberspace, 
DDOS, denial of 
service, ICT, IDS, 
information tech-
nology, internet, 
intrusion detection 
system, malware, 
national security, 
phishing, privacy, 
system security 

Table 4. Terms from Table 2, extracted from the literature review papers, 
and the categories of papers they appeared in. Some words appear in more 
than one category. Percentages indicate the percentage of papers that had 
at least one Accepted or Partially Accepted Term in a given category, re-
spectively, and which had both. Average citations for papers using accepted 
and partially accepted, only accepted, only partially accepted, and not ac-
cepted terminology are given, labeled respectively as A+P, A, P, and N. 

Accepted and Partially Accepted keywords are 
roughly equally distributed across categories, meaning 
that every category individually does use a fair amount 
of accepted terminology. In addition, Infrastructure is the 
only one that doesn’t mention cyber-crime, internet, or 

17 

cyberspace. National security is shared between public 
and system. Cyber law shows up in private and system, 
but not public, curiously. More “application-driven or 
practical” concepts like malware, intrusion detection sys-
tems, forensics, big data, etc. appear only in System. 
Cyber security shows up in all four categories, as ex-
pected, and information shows up everywhere as well. 
DDOS is common to Public and Infrastructure. Privacy 
shows up in all categories except Public, strangely 
enough, and security as a standalone word shows up 
consistently in all other categories, yet only appears in 
one paper from Public. Attack is not a term used in any 
papers in the Private category. Cybersecurity [sic] as a 
single word shows up everywhere but Infrastructure, 
perhaps indicating that that spelling is less common in 
computer science. Infrastructure, on the other hand, is 
the only category with “smart grid.” 

Public has military terms like cyber operations and 

espionage, as well as national security terms like CNI 
and Stuxnet. Infrastructure has technical cyber security 
terminology like cyber physical systems, digital signa-
ture, accountability, and so forth; Private has many busi-
ness aspects like cloud computing, CISO, cyber insur-
ance, and computer abuse. General has a wide variety of 
general-sounding concepts: information technology, 
computer ethics, dark web, social-networking, and cyber 
threat. 

In general, as expected, papers that use accepted ter-

minology are lacking, but not scarce; and papers typi-
cally use more partially accepted terminology than ac-
cepted terminology, with some papers using both. Papers 
in the General category use more of both kinds, which is 
consistent with the definition of this category – they 
should use more accepted terminology because they are 
expected to be understood by a larger audience. Articles 
aimed at the public sector actually use the most non-
standard terminology, which further calls into question 
why governments have been the sole authors of prior 
cyber security glossaries. 

The sample size of this study is certainly too small 

to draw scientific conclusions. However, Table 4 pro-
vides another illustration of the four categories we de-
rived from the literature review, and adds support to the 
notion of their existence. In addition, Table 4 gives some 
very real evidence of differences in communication be-
tween these four areas. If a larger sample size were 
taken, of 1000 papers or more – perhaps 10,000 – com-
plete with distributions of which categories terms more 
commonly show up in as keywords or title words, it 
could be used in the formation of a research agenda for 
improving interdisciplinary cyber security research. 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

IX. BROAD NOMENCLATURE ISSUES 
While the previous discussion revolved around key-
words extracted from a literature review of current 
trends in cyber security, it is by no means a comprehen-
sive analysis, nor can such an analysis be done in a sin-
gle paper. For this reason, in this section we slightly ex-
pand our analysis. Attention in the literature has recently 
been called to the variety of terms used to describe Inter-
net-related concepts, with a number of different prefixes 
emerging since the Internet’s creation, and achieving 
fluctuating levels of dominance over the years 
[115,116]. 

A. INTERNET-RELATED PREFIXES 
These words include virtual, digital, e-, cyber, smart, 
net, and online. If a proper systematic nomenclature is 
eventually to be constructed for researchers, the distinc-
tion, if any, between these words, should be understood, 
and redundant prefixes eliminated. The below descrip-
tions refer to these words when used as prefixes or modi-
fiers in computing. 

1) VIRTUAL 
Virtual refers to that which seems real but isn't: simula-
tion. This statement uses a loose definition of real, of 
course. In optics, virtual images are a phenomenon that 
results in the appearance of an image where no photons 
are actually present, i.e. that which seems real, but is not 
[124]. Virtual machines act like real ones but aren't. In 
fact, "virtual reality" could possibly refer to anything vir-
tual (though obviously it conventionally refers to the hu-
man immersion in a virtual world). Virtual is typically 
for big picture things whose purpose is high-level. A vir-
tual machine is not made to examine electrical signaling 
in computing, but to be operated by a user at the high 
level, for various purposes. Likewise, a virtual meeting 
room cares not about how the meeting takes place; it 
cares about the contents of the meeting, and simulating a 
meeting. This is of course the essence of high versus low 
levels of abstraction: low cares about how, high cares 
only about what. 

2) DIGITAL 
Digital refers to something real, where the majority of 
the purpose of its being digital operates at a low level 
that is not visible, or which is a broad concept and not 
something humans can see right in front of them the way 
as they can with virtual things. Again, here, we use a 
loose interpretation of “real,” and in fact, because of this 
loose definition, something can feasibly be both digital 
and virtual. For example, currency or the pixels of an 

image may be implemented at a low, bit level, i.e. digi-
tally. Digital refers specifically to the digits involved – 
the bits of a computer. Digital processing of currency, 
images, and so forth, concerns itself with precisely how 
low level operations are performed. It is how pixels are 
programmed and represented, in reality, which makes an 
image digital.  

Bitcoin, arguably a digital-virtual-currency, and is 

very concerned with the cryptographic algorithms in-
volved in “mining” bitcoins. Bitcoin’s status is, how-
ever, as of this writing, still controversial, so it is unclear 
how one should classify it. Digital currencies can typi-
cally be transformed between computers and a physical 
form, whereas virtual currencies cannot [125]. 

Digital currency and virtual meeting rooms are 
largely useless without the Internet. However, digital 
and virtual are not unique to networked technology. Vir-
tual machines and digital images have no need for the 
Internet in order to function.  Therefore, virtual and digi-
tal may more broadly be considered general “cyber” pre-
fixes rather than Internets-specific prefixes. Furthermore, 
there is a clear distinction to be made between virtual 
and digital when used correctly. These two terms are pri-
marily applied to words they modify to distinguish from 
“regular” versions of the words – e.g., a virtual machine, 
as opposed to a regular machine. Because of this, they 
do not directly contrast with each other, and can some-
times be used interchangeably. 

3) E- 
E- means electronic, and refers to people-centric con-
cepts like email, e-commerce, and e-residency. E- thus 
carries a distinct Internet and "popular accessibility" air 
with it. It is very much a 21st century term. If any of the 
prefixes in this section synonymous with Internet, it is e- 
or net.  E-services or electronic services do not require 
the Internet to operate, though, but they generally do re-
quire some kind of network functionality. The IETF re-
quires request for comments (RFC) documents spell 
email lowercase with no hyphen [126]. 

4) CYBER 
Cyber of course has its history in cybernetics, meaning 
skilled in steering or governing, and saw popular adop-
tion and subsequent "official" usage by government and 
industry. It is a primary focus of this paper and needs no 
further introduction. Cyber is very much an Internet-age 
term, although it is not an exact synonym for Internet, 
but typically much broader in scope. We will not revise 
the definition of cyber here, since many other papers al-
ready define it – although none of the preeminent glossa-

18 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

ries we mentioned earlier does [99-102,117,120]. Curi-
ously, while “cybersecurity” [sic] saw large adoption as 
a security term in reference to computers, other terms 
(pre)modified by cyber have begun to emerge so quickly 
in recent years that they seem not to refer to “cyber” 
equivalents or corresponding aspects of real world phe-
nomena, but to such phenomena as aspects of cyber-
space; that is, “cyber” has become somewhat more of a 
possessive term and a noun adjunct rather than a modify-
ing adjective. We believe that rather than, say, the cyber 
(aspect) of security, authors now speak of the security of 
cyber(space), perhaps unknowingly. Lastly, many au-
thors claim that we have passed the “digital” age and are 
entering the cyber age [81]. 

5) SMART 
Smart is a buzzword that emerged slowly in the 1990s as 
a reference to technology before taking off into main-
stream vocabulary in the 2000s and skyrocketing in use 
in the early 2010s.1 We predict that usage of smart will 
diminish in the coming age of the Internet of Things, 
since eventually appending “smart” to something will be 
superfluous – people may say, “well of course it’s smart! 
It’s electronic!” when discussing a modifier like this in 
the future. Therefore, we recommend it be used with 
caution and with the knowledge that it may be as obso-
lete in 10 years as many terms in the cyber security glos-
saries of 10 years ago are today. 

6) NET 
Lastly, "net," used as an adjunct noun when modifying 
another noun, refers explicitly to the Internet or some-
times another network, as a noun, rather than an adjec-
tive like e- does. It is thus the nominal synonym of Inter-
net, whereas e- is the adjectival synonym. Net, like e-, 
has a narrow use than cyber. Unlike with cyber, which is 
ambiguously a noun or an adjective, in English it does 
not matter, in principle if net, as an adjunct noun, forms 
compounds as one or two words, though in practice net 
typically forms single-word compound nouns, such as 
netizens, NETmundial, and Netscape.  

7) ONLINE 
Online and e perform exactly the same function, but e is 
always a prefix (perhaps hyphenated) in a single-word 
compound, whereas online is a separate modifier. 

8) INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
So far, our discussions have not included information 
technology (IT) or information and communications 
technology (ICT), except that Table 4 shows them as ac-
cepted terms. Russia, for instance, sometimes considers 
information security, rather than cyber security; and IT 
has a different connotation than cyber [129]. The ITU 
heavily promotes usage of ICT, and IT/ICT security is 
sometimes viewed as a subset of cyber security focusing 
only on information and no other concerns – neverthe-
less, the exact definition of ICT is generally highly con-
tested [130-131]. Elsewhere, IT is seen as a physical 
substrate for cyberspace. In addition, cyber is a more 
flexible English modifier than IT or ICT. In our opinion, 
IT and ICT are unstable terms and, where possible, cyber 
should be used instead. It is important to maintain clear 
and consistent language to facilitate knowledge sharing 
across disciplines. 

B. A UNIFYING ACADEMIC DISCIPLINE NAME 
While cyberspace is becoming an increasing security 
concern, it is also becoming ubiquitous as an aspect of 
the human experience, which is becoming less separable 
every year from issues cyberspace combines. Social en-
gineering is a prime example of cyberspace and in par-
ticular, cyber security, bleeding into the human psycho-
logical realm. It is equally important for scholars to unite 
in research surrounding this general “cyber” field, just as 
they should with security. This conjugation of cyber-
space and physical space, and the constant growth of 
new cyber terminology, ad hoc or not, is leading to the 
formation of a new academic discipline, a so-called 
Cybermatics field according to Ma et al. (defined be-
low), with emphasis on creating new terms to describe 
characteristics of cyberspace such as “cyber-something” 
in either real or virtual terms, rather than seeking to de-
scribe characteristics of the real world in terms of com-
puters and cyberspace (such as security, adapted for cy-
berspace: cybersecurity [sic]), as was done in the early 
years of the Internet. This influx of terms warrants closer 
inspection and regulation, lest valuable knowledge gen-
erated by scholars go unnoticed by researchers unfamil-
iar with these ad hoc terms; this is a potential problem 
when searching journal databases without knowing the 
right keywords to search for, as stated earlier. 

1 http://www.scopus.com/term/ana-
lyzer.url?sid=7148782FEA989C1354BD1E385A58EF9B.I0Q
kgbIjGqqLQ4Nw7dqZ4A%3a60&origin=re-
sultslist&src=s&s=%28TITLE-ABS-
KEY%28smart%29+AND+TITLE-ABS-KEY%28com-

puter%29OR+TITLE-ABS-KEY%28inter-
net%29%29&sort=plf-
f&sdt=b&sot=b&sl=76&count=31202&analyzeResults=Ana-
lyze+results&txGid=0 

19 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

Although the term cyber is being used more and 
more frequently, it is used in a variety of contexts, both 
technical and nontechnical in nature. This domain of re-
search and knowledge extends beyond cyber security 
and includes general issues of Internet governance and 
online behavior. Recently, Ma et al. proposed the term 
“Cybermatics” to describe this new field that encom-
passes all things cyber and cyber-related [81]. This in-
cludes both concepts within cyberspace (Ma et al.’s so 
called “Cyber World”), such as cyberbullying, and con-
cepts of utilization of cyberspace (“cyber-conjugated” or 
“cyberization”), such as cyber-physical systems. 

In their paper, Ma et al. first define cyber entities, as 

“anything that exists digitally in cyberspace, either 
purely synthesized by a computer, or closely correlated 
and further conjugated with a real entity in physical, so-
cial and mental spaces” [81]. They go on to define 
Cybermatics as a holistic field which studies cyber enti-
ties and their properties, models, and representations, in-
cluding their relations and conjugations, and their tech-
nologies and applications. 

Although the intention of this paper was to search 

for cyber security journal papers, many conclusions 
drawn from it are shared throughout Cybermatics. We 
now briefly linguistically analyze whether Cybermatics 
is an appropriate name for the “Cyber” knowledge do-
main, and propose alternative labels. 

1) ETYMOLOGY OF CYBERMATICS 
We believe it is necessary to standardize a term to unify 
the academic study of cyber-related concepts. Ma et al. 
(2015) give the etymology of their proposed term 
“Cybermatics” for the new “cyber” field:  

‘The suffix -matic comes from matos in Greek that 
means “willing to (perform)''. The suffix -ic comes 
from -ikos in Greek, meaning “behaving like'' or 
“having the characteristics of''. The suffix -ics can be 
used to form a noun to name a field of study, for in-
stance, mathematics, automatics, kinematics, sys-
tematics, and so forth. The term “cybermatic” can be 
regarded as “cyber + matos + ikos”, which may de-
scribe a thing willing/able to be, behaving like or 
having cyber characteristics. In a linguistic sense, 
“Cybermatics” can be understood as a field in which 
cybermatic things, i.e., various cyber entities exist-
ing in cyber-enabled worlds as distinct phenomena, 
are studied’ [81]. 

Given Ma et al.’s description of Cybermatics throughout 
their paper, we think that Cybermatics as an overarching 
field for all things cyber – whether in the “Cyber World” 
or whether they are “Cyber-conjugated” – is possible. 
However, the name “Cybermatics” is unlikely to be 

widely accepted, and at this stage it is too early to pre-
dict adoption. To facilitate the adoption of an overarch-
ing term, we believe it is helpful for the academic com-
munity to choose from a number of candidate terms. 
While “cyber” has its basis in computer science, its 
transdisciplinary nature necessitates input from many 
bodies. Therefore, the academic community referenced 
here should consist of all parties with a stake in this 
field. 

2) ALTERNATIVE ACADEMIC DISCIPLINE NAMES 
We now suggest potential alternative transdisciplinary 
field names, for consideration by scholars. These sug-
gestions are meant only as possibilitities, and we hope 
that if any of these terms is adopted, only one is. How-
ever, we feel that considering multiple terms for adop-
tion is the best way to determine the most appropriate 
one for standardization. 

An examination of a large number of academic dis-
ciplines revealed some of the following suffixes: -mat-
ics, -ology, -nomics or -nomy, science, -ry, -ic, -istics, -
ation, studies, and -graphy [108]. Of these suffixes, three 
stand out: “Cyber science”, “Cyberistics”, and “Cyber-
nomics”. “Cyber science” ironically does not have the 
futuristic feeling of the other two (or Cybermatics), and 
its etymology requires little exploration. We do however 
propose it as a possible field name. It should be noted, 
however, that Ma et al. propose Cyber Science as only 
one subdiscipline of Cybermatics. For “cyberistics,” is-
tics is made from two suffixes, -ism and –ic, and the lat-
ter is used is Cybermatics and is etymologically sensible. 
However, -ism refers to a doctrine, practice, or system, 
and derives from Greek -ismos, meaning the practice or 
teaching of a thing. [109] “Cyber” is not a practice or 
doctrine, so this suffix is not appropriate. Of the above 
three candidates, “cybernomics” is the most interesting 
(pronounced like genomics). While genomics derives 
from a neologism “-omics,” which has specifically bio-
logical applications, the root of economics refers to law, 
custom, rule, ordinance, or management [110, 111]. One 
might speak of the laws governing cyberspace (artificial 
or natural), or what might speak of the entirety of activi-
ties related to cyberspace, as the biological –ominics can 
carry the sense of “all constituents considered collec-
tively.”  

We therefore propose “cybernomics” as a reasonable 

candidate term encompassing the “cyber” academic dis-
cipline, in competition with “Cybermatics”, “Cyber sci-
ence”, and indeed, perhaps the frontrunner candidate, 
“Cyber”. In our opinion, cyber is likely to emerge the 
winner among these terms because of its prevalence, but 
we do not advocate adoption of any particular term 
herein. We do, however, advocate adopting a standard 

20 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

term for the field in the near future, by official standards 
bodies, governing bodies, research institutions, and gov-
ernments, just as we propose an updated cyber security 
dictionary.   

X. CONCLUSION  
Many authors still use ad hoc terms despite the existence 
of standards glossaries, and spelling or phrasing of many 
terms is still not agreed upon. The lack of collaboration 
across disciplines inferred from our review emphasizes 
the need for more comprehensive standard terminology 
for both cyber security and broader cyber research. Ex-
cept when radically new concepts are written about, 
greater use of more widely accepted terms is recom-
mended, though not at the expense of innovation. Au-
thors should, before submitting for publishing, search 
the databases for their potential keywords to ensure that 
all are in the [10,100000) range, and that at least one is 
in the [100,1000) range to ensure good searchability. Be-
cause the papers reviewed were necessarily all recently 
published, and not all from the same year, (2010-2015), 
it is difficult to determine any correlation between type 
of vocabulary used and citations. Future research could 
aim to verify whether such a correlation exists – a posi-
tive one could bolster efforts toward adoption of stand-
ard vocabulary. However, we believe that regardless, 
there are compelling reasons to update existing cyber se-
curity glossaries.   

We outlined guidelines to use when considering key-

words to use in future publications and when crafting 
terminology standards, and resolved some long-held 
misconceptions in spelling and phrasing. We encourage 
use of these guidelines and the following recommenda-
tions, as well as the use of the standard glossary projects 
from EWI, NICCS, and other complementary sources 
like NISTIR 7298. These existing dictionaries are, how-
ever, mostly constructed by the public sector, and may 
or may not reflect academic and private sector areas of 
study and work regarding cyber security. Therefore, 
greater effort from outside of governments, and collabo-
ration with the greater global multistakeholder commu-
nity, is essential when creating or updating cyber secu-
rity glossaries.  

We proposed a classification of research areas con-

cerned with cyber security, which can be refined by a 
more comprehensive study of keywords comprising it. 
These keywords can be used to craft research agendas 
for each area, as well as in crafting cross-disciplinary re-
search agendas for cyber security. Within the categories 

we identified, use of standard terminology is fairly com-
mon. However, there is clear room for improvement 
among authors and working groups. Other possible cate-
gorizations may consist of the common social sectors of 
civil society, industry, academia, and the government 
that many articles cite [127]. We encourage future re-
searchers to delve further into categorization and ontol-
ogy creation of cyber security for the formulation of re-
search agendas.   

Specific spelling and phrasing conventions should 

be adhered to in order to ensure visibility of publica-
tions. Most importantly, except in the cases of cyber-
space, “cyber” terms should be written with cyber as a 
separate word, as in “cyber physical,” possibly hyphen-
ated. While cyber security is the prevailing spelling, it is 
reasonable to assume that the single word spelling, cy-
bersecurity, is still acceptable. Cyber-crime has no defin-
itive spelling, but we predict it will lean toward being 
condensed to cybercrime in the future.   

Herein we attempted to lay the groundwork for 
standardizing communication within cyber security, in 
order to begin to formalize the scientific methodology of 
the field. We believe formalizing cyber security would 
accelerate the pace of research, improve policymaking 
and business practice, and lead to greater integration 
with the rest of the scientific community. Addition ef-
forts that may be important to formalizing cyber security 
as an academic discipline include the creation of more 
businesses out of research, the creation of a committee 
within an internet governance body, or the formation of 
a multistakeholder project, to address this, and system-
atic efforts by academics to propose, assess, and rigor-
ously define vocabulary based on the 4 guidelines given 
in this paper.   The ultimate goal of such formalization 
should not be simply a lexicon of terminology, but meth-
odologies or framework for cyber security research. 
With the growing prevalence of cyberspace and the 
emergence of a so-called Cyber or Cybernomics or 
Cybermatics field, it is urgent to bring together the dis-
parate efforts in these areas and share knowledge, lest it 
be overlooked and progress delayed.     

This work was funded by the Cooperative Agreement 
between the Masdar Institute of Science and Tech-
nology (Masdar Institute), Abu Dhabi, UAE and the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cam-
bridge, MA, USA -  Reference 
02/MI/MIT/CP/11/07633/GEN/G/00 

21 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

XI. APPENDIX 

Figure A1. 
Logarithmically-scaled Scopus, IEEE Xplore, and combined search incidences of keywords extracted from reviewed articles, ar-
ranged in alphabetical order. 
Figure A1a displays the y-axis values, the horizontal lines of which are carried through to the other figures, and the incidences of 
“academia” through “cryptography” 
Figure A1b shows incidences of “cryptology” through “cyber-territory” 
Figure A1c shows incidences of “dark web” through “information systems security” 
Figure A1d shows incidences of “information technology” through “ontology-based context models” 
Figure A1e shows incidences of “organizational justice” through “semantic web technology” 
Figure A1f shows incidences of “semantic web technology” through “web space” 

Figure A1a. Figure A1a displays the y-axis values, the horizontal lines of which are carried through to the other figures, and the 
incidences of “academia” through “cryptography” 

22 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

Figure A1b. Scopus, IEEE Xplore, and total Incidences of “cryptology” through “cyber-territory” 

Figure A1c. Scopus, IEEE Xplore, and total Incidences of “dark web” through “information systems security” 

23 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

Figure A1d. Scopus, IEEE Xplore, and total Incidences of “information technology” through “ontology-based context models”

Figure A1e. Scopus, IEEE Xplore, and total Incidences of “organizational justice” through “semantic web technology” 

24 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

Figure A1f Scopus, IEEE Xplore, and total Incidences of  “semantic web technology” through “web space” 

Table A1. 
Keywords extracted from literature review, sorted by powers of 10 of the number of results returned by searching Scopus and IEEE Xplore 

Category (number of 
hits) 
1 (1,000,000+) 

2 [100000,1000000) 

3 [10000,100000) 

Term (Scopus) 

 information  

 risks  

 attack  
 availability  
 classification  
 communication  
 ecosystem  
 force  

 people  
 planning  
 policy  
 regulation  
 risk assessment  
 security  

 international  
 internet  
 law  
 mapping  
 academia  
 accountability  
 attribution  
 big data  
 cloud  
computing  
 complex  
networks  

 cryptography 
 cyber  
 encryption 
 forensics  
 geography  
 ict  

 space  
 sustainable  
 technology  
 web  
 network security  
 neutralization  
 ontology  
 policy making  

 politics  

 privacy  

 private sector  
 risk management  
 semantic  
 semantic web  
 sensitivity analysis  
 smart grid  

Term (IEEE Xplore) 

Term (Total) 

 communication  
 information  

 international  
 technology  

 attack  
 availability  
 classification  
 cloud computing  

 people  
 planning  
 policy  
 privacy  

 information  
international 
 attack  
 availability  
 classification  
 communication  
 ecosystem  
 force  
 information  
technology  
 internet  
 law  
 mapping  
 academia  
 accountability  
 attribution  
 big data  

 risks  
technology 
 people  
 planning  
 policy  
 regulation  
 risk assessment  
 security  

 space  
 surveillance  
 sustainable  
 web  
 network security  
 neutralization  
 ontology  
 policy making  

 cybernetics  

 regulation  

 cloud computing  

 politics  

 force  
 information  
 technology  
 internet  
 law  
 mapping  
 network security  

25 

 security  

 complex networks  

 semantic  
 smart grid  
 space  
 surveillance  
 sustainable  
 web  

 cryptography 
 cyber  
 cybernetics  
 encryption 
 forensics  
 geography  

 privacy  
 private  
sector  
risk management  
 semantic  
 semantic web  
 sensitivity analysis  
 smart grid  

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

 impact assess-
ment  
 information 
technology  
 international co-
operation  

 social-networking  

 supply chain  
 supply chain man-
agement 

 jurisdiction  

 surveillance  

 knowledge base  

 sustainability  

4 [1000,10000) 

 literature review  
 motivation  
 multi-agent sys-
tems  

 ami  
 computer secu-
rity  
 context-aware-
ness  
 cps  
 cpss  
 critical infra-
structures  

 cryptanalysis 
 curriculum de-
velopment  

 cyber attacks  

 cyber physical  
 cyber physical 
systems  
 cyber security  

 system dynamics  
 taxonomy  

 textbook  
 threats  
intrusion  
detection system 

 academia  

 iot  

 big data  

 knowledge base  
 literature  
review  

 knowledge model  
 learning objects  
 legal issues  

 complex networks  
 computer security  
 context-awareness  

 malware  
 motivation  
 multi-agent systems  

 malware  
 military  
operations  
 model-based  
design  

 national security  
 percolation  
theory  

 cryptography 

 ontology  

 cyber  

 risk assessment  

 cyber physical  

 risk management  

 cyber physical systems  

 risks  

 phishing  
 propaganda  

 cyber security  
 denial of service  

 scada  
 security issues  

 cps  

 national security  

 cps  

 ecosystem  
 encryption 
 forensics  
 geography  
 ict  

 semantic web  
 sensitivity analysis  
 Slovenia  
 social-networking  
 steganography  

 cybernetics  
 cybersecurity  
 cyberspace  
 ddos  
 denial of service  

 deterrence  

 digital signature  
 ethical issues  

 research strategy  
 scada  
 scientific paper  
 security issues  
 self-organisation  
 semantic web  
technology  
 situational  
awareness  
 Slovenia  

 hacking  

 sovereignty  

 information security  

 information exchange  
 information extraction  

 ids  

 supply chain  

 denial of service  

 supply chain management  
 sustainability  
 system  
dynamics  
 system  
security  

 taxonomy  

 threats  

 traceability  

 state-level  

 steganography  

 internet of things  
 intrusion detection  
system  

 system security  

 iot  

 ids  
 information  
exchange  
 information  
extraction  

 information  
security  
 information 
structure  

 insider  
 international 
policy  
 internet of 
things  

5 [100,1000) 

 anti-forensics  

 cascading failure  

 systematic  
literature review  

 terrorism  
 theoretical founda-
tion  

 traceability  

 u.n.  

 vulnerability analysis  
 industrial  
networks  
 information systems 
security  

 ict  

 social-networking  

 impact assessment  
 information secu-
rity  
 international coop-
eration  

 internet of things  

 jurisdiction  
 knowledge base  

 supply chain  
 supply chain manage-
ment  

 sustainability  
 system  
dynamics  
 system  
security  
 taxonomy  

 literature review  
 motivation  

 terrorism  
 textbook  

 ami  

 iot  

 cascading failure  

 cio  
 computer security  
 context-awareness  

 knowledge model  
 learning  
objects  
 legal issues  
 legal rights  

 cpss  
 critical infrastruc-
tures  

 cryptanalysis 
 curriculum devel-
opment  

 cyber attacks  
 cyber physical  
 cyber physical sys-
tems  
 cyber security  
 cybersecurity  
 cyberspace  
 ddos  

 deterrence  
 digital signature  

 malware  
 military  
operations  

 model-based design  
 national  
security  

 percolation theory  

 phishing  
 propaganda  

 research strategy  
 scada  
 scientific paper  
 security architecture  
 security issues  

 self-organisation  
 semantic web technol-
ogy  
 situational awareness  

 ethical issues  

 Slovenia  

 hacking  

 sovereignty  

 ids  
 information ex-
change  

 information extrac-
tion  
 information struc-
ture  

 state-level  

 steganography  
 systematic  
literature  
review  

 theoretical foundation  

 insider  

 traceability  

 international policy  

 u.n.  

 internet security  
 intrusion detection 
system  

 vulnerability analysis  

 accountability  

 ami  

26 

 information structure  
 information systems  
security  

 anti-forensics  

 hierarchical access  

 ciso  

 index terms  

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

 cio  

 cni  

 computer ethics  
 computer sys-
tem security  

 internet security  

 attribution  

 insider  

 cni  

 internet study  

 cascading failure  

 international cooperation  

 layered network  

 cio  

 internet security  

 computer ethics  
 computer system 
security  

 legal rights  

 cpss  

 jurisdiction  

 cryptology 

 cryptology 

 missile defense  

 critical infrastructures  

 knowledge model  

 cyber bullying  

 cyber bullying  

 ontology design  

 cryptanalysis 

 learning objects  

 cyber conflict  

 cyber crime  
 cyber opera-
tions  

 cyber space  

 cyber threats  
 cyber war  

 cyber warfare  
 cyber world  
 cybercrime  
 deep web 

 ontology security  
 organizational jus-
tice  

 security architecture  
 security counter-
measures  
 security ontology  

 curriculum development  

 cyber attacks  

 cyber conflict  

 cyber crime  
 cyber space  

 security patterns  
 self-defense  
 semantic security  
 semantic web search  

 cyber threats  
 cyber warfare  
 cybercrime  
 cybersecurity  

 legal issues  
 military  
operations  
 missile  
defense  

 model-based design  
 neutralization  

 percolation theory  
 phishing  
 policy making  
 politics  

 cyber crime  

 cyber domain  

 cyber operations  

 cyber space  
 cyber threats  

 cyber war  
 cyber warfare  
 cyber world  
 cybercrime  

 espionage  

 signals intelligence  

 cyberspace  

 private sector  

 darknet 

 evidentiary  
 government re-
sponse  

 software piracy  

 ddos  

 stuxnet  

 deep web 

 security architecture  
 semantic web  
technology  

 deep web 
 emerging technol-
ogy trends  

 index terms  

 threat environment  

 web space  

6 [10,100) 

active cyber de-
fense  
 ciso  
 computational 
part  

denial of sustainabil-
ity  
 disgruntlement  
 distributed systems 
security  

 computer abuse  

 critical national 
infrastructure  

 e-commerce law  
 embedded  
computing  
technologies  

 digital signature  
 emerging technology 
trends  

 situational awareness  
 systematic literature  
review  

 ethical issues  
 hacking  
 impact assessment  
 index terms  
 industrial networks  

 terrorism  
 textbook  
 theoretical foundation  
 u.n.  
 vulnerability analysis  

 anti-forensics  
 cni  

 layered network  
 legal rights  

 espionage  

 evidentiary  
 government  
response  

 active cyber  
defense  
 cikr  

 computational part  

 mac security  

 computational part  

 computer ethics  

 ontology design  

 computer abuse  

 computer system secu-
rity  

 organizational justice  

 critical national in-
frastructure  

 cyber conflict  
 cyber domain  
 cyber education  

 emerging technol-
ogy trends  
 hacktivist/hacktivist  
 hierarchical access  

 critical national infra-
structure  
 cryptology 
 cyber bullying  

 propaganda  
 research strategy  
 scientific paper  

 cyber insurance  

 cyber law  
 cyber resilience  

 information schema  
 information security 
education  
 mac security  

 cyber domain  

 cyber law  
 cyber operations  

 secure control  
 secure software engineer-
ing  
 security automation  

 cyber education  
 cyber insurance  
 cyber law  

 cyber resilience  

 cyber safety  
 cyber stalking  
 cyber-physical-so-
cial  
systems  

 cyber safety  

 cyber stalking  
 cyber-physical-
social systems  

 cyber-resilience  

 ontology architec-
ture  
 ontology-based con-
text models  

 secure control  
 secure software en-
gineering  

 cyber war  

 security countermeasures  

 cyber world  
 cyber-physical-social sys-
tems  

 security methodologies  

 cyber-resilience  

 security ontology  

 cyber-risk  

 security automation  

 cyber-risk  

 security patterns  

 cybersafety  

 security methodologies  

27 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 Industrial 
 networks  
 information systems  
security  

 internet study  
 layered  
network  
 missile  
defense  
 ontology  
design  
 ontology  
security  

 organizational justice  
 secure  
control  
 security  
countermeasures  
 security ontology  
 security  
patterns  
 self-defense  
 semantic security  
 semantic web search  
 signals  
intelligence  
 software  
piracy  

 stuxnet  
 threat  
environment  

 web attacks  

 web space  

 dark web 
 denial of sustainability  

 disgruntlement  
 distributed systems se-
curity  

 e-commerce law  
 embedded  
computing  
technologies  
 hacktivist/hacktivist  
 information schema  
 information  
security education  

 mac security  
 ontology architecture  

 ontology-based context 
models  
 secure software engi-
neering  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

 cyber-risk  

 cybersafety  
 cyberspace se-
curity  
 dark web 
 darknet 

 security automation  
 security methodolo-
gies  
 system-level re-
quirements  
 threat patterns  
 web attacks  

 cyberspace security  

 self-defense  

 cyberspace secu-
rity  

 system-level require-
ments  

 dark web 

 self-organisation  

 threat patterns  

 darknet 
 denial of sustainability  
 deterrence  
 distributed systems secu-
rity  
 espionage  
 evidentiary  
 hierarchical access  
 information security ed-
ucation  
 international policy  

 semantic security  
 semantic web search  
 software piracy  

 sovereignty  
 state-level  
 stuxnet  
 system-level requirements  

 threat environment  
 web attacks  
 web space  

7 [0,10) 

 active air de-
fense  
 adaptation tac-
tics  
 attack descrip-
tion language  

 cikr  
 common vulner-
ability exposures  
 cross-domain at-
tacks  

 cyber assurance  
 cyber attacks 
and counter-
measures  
 cyber psychol-
ogy  

 cyber readiness  

 cyber targeting  

 cyber treaty  
 cybergeography  

 cybers  

 cyber-territory  

 definitional gaps  
 e-consumer pro-
tection  
 emerging cyber 
threats  

 employee computer 
crime  

 expressive crimes  

 instrumental crimes  
 meta-adaptation strat-
egies  
 morality of law sociali-
zation  
 national cyber strate-
gies  
 networked computer 
technology  

 papa framework  
 physically-aware engi-
neered systems  

 psycho dynamism  
 security analysis and 
monitoring  
 security solution 
frames  
 semantic operability  

 social cybernetics  
 systems strategic secu-
rity management  

 u.s. cyber command  
 us cyber security act 
2012  

 vishing  

 employee computer 
crime  

 active air defense  

 embedded computing tech-
nologies  

 expressive crimes  

 active cyber defense  

 emerging cyber threats  

 adaptation tactics  
 attack description lan-
guage  

 employee computer crime  

 expressive crimes  

 cikr  

 government response  

 ciso  
 common vulnerability 
exposures  

 hacktivist/hacktivist  
 information schema  
instrumental crimes 

 active air defense  

 adaptation tactics  
 attack description 
language  
 common vulnera-
bility exposures  
 cross-domain at-
tacks  

 cyber assurance  
 cyber attacks and 
countermeasures  

 instrumental crimes  
 meta-adaptation 
strategies  
 morality of law so-
cialization  
 national cyber strat-
egies  
 networked com-
puter technology  

 papa framework  
 physically-aware en-
gineered systems  

 psycho dynamism  
 security analysis and 
monitoring  
 security solution 
frames  
 semantic operability  

 computer abuse  
cross-domain attacks 

 cyber assurance  
 cyber attacks and coun-
termeasures  

 cyber education  

 cyber insurance  
 cyber psychology  

 social cybernetics  
 systems strategic se-
curity management  

 cyber readiness  

 cyber resilience  

 u.s. cyber command  
 us cyber security act 
2012  

 cyber safety  

 cyber stalking  

 vishing  

 cyber targeting  

 cyber treaty  
 cybergeography  
cyber-resilience 
 cybers  
 cybersafety  

 cyber-territory  
 definitional gaps  
disgruntlement 
 e-commerce law  
 e-consumer protection  

28 

 internet study 

 cyber psychology  

morality of law socialization 

 cyber readiness  

 national cyber strategies  
 networked computer tech-
nology  

 cyber targeting  

 cyber treaty  

 cybergeography  
 cybers  

 cyber-territory  

 definitional gaps  
 e-consumer pro-
tection  
 emerging cyber 
threats  

 ontology architecture  
 ontology security  
 ontology-based context 
models  

 papa framework  
 physically-aware  
engineered systems  

 psycho dynamism  
 security  
analysis and monitoring  
 Security 
 solution frames  

 semantic operability  
 signals intelligence  
 social cybernetics  
 systems strategic security 
management  

 threat patterns  
 u.s. cyber command  
 us cyber security act 2012  
 vishing  

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

REFERENCES 

1.  Andel, T. R., & McDonald, J. T. (2013). A Systems Ap-
proach to Cyber Assurance Education. Information Secu-
rity Curriculum Development, 13. 
doi:10.1145/2528908.2528920 

2.  Aviad, A. a., Wecel, K. k., & Abramowicz, W. w. (2015). 
The Semantic Approach to Cyber Security Towards On-
tology Based Body of Knowledge. Proceedings Of The 
European Conference On E-Learning, 328-336. 

3.  Ayofe, A. g., & Irwin, B. n. (2010). CYBER SECURITY: 
CHALLENGES AND THE WAY FORWARD. Com-
puter Science & Telecommunications, 29(6), 56-69. 
4.  Bernik, I., G. Mesko, and V. Lysenko. 2012. "Study of 
the Perception of Cyber Threats and the Fear of Cyber-
crime." Inspec, EBSCOhost (accessed October 14, 2015). 

5.  Blasch, E., Dan, S., Pham, K., & Genshe, C. (2015). Re-

view of game theory applications for situation awareness. 
Proceedings Of The SPIE, 9469(10 pp.). 
doi:10.1117/12.2177531 

6.  Busse, J., Humm, B. b., Lübbert, C., Moelter, F., Reibold, 
A., Rewald, M., & ... Zeh, T. (2015). Actually, What 
Does "Ontology" Mean? A Term Coined by Philosophy 
in the Light of Different Scientific Disciplines. Journal Of 
Computing & Information Technology, 23(1), 29-41. 
7.  Butrimas, V. (2013). National Security and International 

Policy Challenges in a Post Stuxnet World. Lithuanian 
Annual Strategic Review, 12(1), 11. doi:10.2478/lasr-
2014-0001 

8.  Cheminod, M., Durante, L., & Valenzano, A. (2013). Re-
view of Security Issues in Industrial Networks. IEEE 
Transactions On Industrial Informatics, 9(1), 277-293. 
doi:10.1109/TII.2012.2198666 

9.  Chertoff, M., & Rosenzweig, P. (2015, March 1). A Pri-
mer on Globally Harmonizing Internet Jurisdiction and 
Regulations. Retrieved October 15, 2015. 

10.  Chertoff, M., & Simon, T. (2015, February 1). The Impact 
of the Dark Web on Internet Governance and Cyber Secu-
rity. Retrieved October 15, 2015. 

11.  Chouhan, R. R. (2014). Cyber Crimes: Evolution, Detec-
tion and Future Challenges. IUP Journal Of Information 
Technology, 10(1), 48-55. 

12.  Comninos, A. (2013, April 1). A cyber security agenda 

for civil society: What is at stake? Retrieved October 15, 
2015. 

13.  Denning, D. (2014). Framework and principles for active 
cyber defense. Computers & Security, 40108-113. 
doi:10.1016/j.cose.2013.11.004 

14.  DEV, P. R. (2015). "Use of Force" and "Armed Attack" 
Thresholds in Cyber Conflict: The Looming Definitional 
Gaps and the Growing Need for Formal U.N. Response. 
Texas International Law Journal, 50(2), 379-399. 

15.  Finlay, A. (Ed.). (2014). Communications surveillance in 

the digital age. 

16.  Franke, U., & Brynielsson, J. (2014). Cyber situational 
awareness – A systematic review of the literature. Com-
puters & Security, 4618-31. 
doi:10.1016/j.cose.2014.06.008 

17.  Gao, J., Liu, J., Rajan, B., Nori, R., Fu, B., Xiao, Y., & ... 

Philip Chen, C. L. (2014). SCADA communication and 
security issues. Security & Communication Networks, 
7(1), 175-194. 

18.  Genge, B., Kiss, I., & Haller, P. (2015). A system dynam-
ics approach for assessing the impact of cyber attacks on 
critical infrastructures. International Journal Of Critical 
Infrastructure Protection, 103-17. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijcip.2015.04.001 

19.  Gerostathopoulos, I., Bures, T., Hnetynka, P., Hujecek, 
A., Plasil, F., Skoda, D., & ... Crnkovic, I. (2015). Meta-
Adaptation Strategies for Adaptation in Cyber-Physical 
Systems. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-23727-5_4 

20.  Glennon, M. J. (2012). State-level Cybersecurity. Policy 

Review, (171), 85-102. 

21.  Glenny, M., & Kavanagh, C. (2012). 800 Titles but No 

Policy—Thoughts on Cyber Warfare. American Foreign 
Policy Interests, 34(6), 287-294. 
doi:10.1080/10803920.2012.742410 

22.  Graham, M. (n.d). Geography/internet: ethereal alternate 
dimensions of cyberspace or grounded augmented reali-
ties?. Geographical Journal, 179(2), 177-182. 

23.  Grant, T., & Liles, S. (2014). On the Military Geography 

of Cyberspace. 

24.  Gunes, V. g., Peter, S., Givargis, T., & Vahid, F. v. 

(2014). A Survey on Concepts, Applications, and Chal-
lenges in Cyber-Physical Systems. KSII Transactions On 
Internet & Information Systems, 8(12), 4242-4268. 
25.  Harrop, W., & Matteson, A. (2013). Cyber resilience: A 
review of critical national infrastructure and cyber secu-
rity protection measures applied in the UK and USA. 
Journal Of Business Continuity & Emergency Planning, 
7(2), 149-162. 

26.  Lin, H. (2015, May 15). Thinking about Nuclear and 

Cyber Conflict: Same Questions, Different Answers. Re-
trieved October 15, 2015. 

27.  Hiller, J. S., & Russell, R. S. (2013). The challenge and 

imperative of private sector cybersecurity: An interna-
tional comparison. Computer Law And Security Review: 
The International Journal Of Technology And Practice, 
29236-245. doi:10.1016/j.clsr.2013.03.003 

28.  Hsu, D. F., Marinucci, D., & Voas, J. M. (2015). Cyberse-
curity: Toward a Secure and Sustainable Cyber Ecosys-
tem. Computer, 48(4), 12-14. 

29.  Huang, Z., Wang, C., Stojmenovic, M., & Nayak, A. 

(2015). Characterization of Cascading Failures in Interde-
pendent Cyber-Physical Systems. IEEE Transactions On 
Computers, 64(8), 2158-2168. 
doi:10.1109/TC.2014.2360537 

30.  Iannacone, M., Bohn, S., Nakamura, G., Gerth, J., Huffer, 
K., Bridges, R., & ... Goodall, J. (2015). Developing an 
Ontology for Cyber Security Knowledge Graphs. Confer-
ence On Information & Knowledge Management, 1. 
doi:10.1145/2746266.2746278 

31.  Jaitner, M. m., & MacDermott, A. a. (2015). Cyber Edu-

cation? Branches of Science Contributing to the Cyber 
Domain. Proceedings Of The European Conference On E-
Learning, 120-128. 

29 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

32.  Jang-Jaccard, J., & Nepal, S. (2013). A survey of emerg-

ing threats in cybersecurity. Journal Of Computer And 
System Sciences, doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2014.02.005 
33.  Jardine, E. (2015, July 1). Global Cyberspace Is Safer 

than You Think: Real Trends in Cybercrime. Retrieved 
October 15, 2015. 

34.  JENSEN, E. T. (2015). Cyber Sovereignty: The Way 

Ahead. Texas International Law Journal, 50(2), 273-302. 
35.  Ju An, W., Guo, M., & Camargo, J. (2010). An Ontologi-
cal Approach to Computer System Security. Information 
Security Journal: A Global Perspective, 19(2), 61-73. 
doi:10.1080/19393550903404902 

36.  Kewlani, J. (2014). CYBER CRIME AND SOCIAL CY-
BERNETICS (A SOCIO-LEGAL ANALYSIS). Govern-
ment: Research Journal Of Political Science, 36-18. 
37.  Khan, O., & Sepúlveda Estay, D. A. (2015). Supply Chain 
Cyber-Resilience: Creating an Agenda for Future Re-
search. Technology Innovation Management Review, 6. 

38.  Liu, J., Xiao, Y., Li, S., Liang, W., & Chen, C. (2012). 
Cyber Security and Privacy Issues in Smart Grids. Ieee 
Communications Surveys And Tutorials, 14(4), 981-997. 
39.  Lotrionte, C. (2012). State Sovereignty and Self-Defense 

in Cyberspace: A Normative Framework for Balancing 
Legal Rights [article]. Emory International Law Review, 
(2), 825. 

40.  Matsuno, T., Kawamura, T., Ohkubo, K., Kobayashi, H., 
Takahashi, K., & Kayaguchi, S. (2012). Emergence of 
New Cyber Attacks and Future Directions in Security 
R&D. NTT Technical Review, 10(10), 

41.  Maurer, T., & Morgus, R. (2014, June 1). Tipping the 

Scale: An Analysis of Global Swing States in the Internet 
Governance Debate. Retrieved October 15, 2015. 
42.  Messmer, Ellen. 2013. "Cyber insurance decisions leave 
CIO, CISO out of the loop." Networkworld Asia 10, no. 
3: 8. Business Source Complete, EBSCOhost (accessed 
October 14, 2015). 

43.  MOORE, S. (2013). Cyber Attacks and the Beginnings of 
an International Cyber Treaty. North Carolina Journal Of 
International Law & Commercial Regulation, 39(1), 223-
257. 

44.  Namazifard, A., Tousi, A., Amiri, B., Aminilari, M., & 

Hozhabri, A. (2015). Literature Review of Different Con-
tention of E-Commerce Security and the Purview of 
Cyber Law Factors. doi:10.1109/ECDC.2015.7156333 

45.  Nye, J. (2014, May 1). The Regime Complex for Manag-
ing Global Cyber Activities. Retrieved October 15, 2015. 
46.  OECD principles for internet policy making. (2014). Re-

trieved October 15, 2015. 

47.  Oleiwi, S., & Yasin, A. (2013). Scientific paper categori-
zation to multi class using ontology. International Journal 
Of Digital Content Technology And Its Applications, 
7(12), 134-141. 

48.  Parvin, S., Hussain, F., Hussain, O., Thein, T., & Park, J. 
(2013). Multi-cyber framework for availability enhance-
ment of cyber physical systems. Computing, 95(10/11), 
927-948. doi:10.1007/s00607-012-0227-7 

49.  Pawlak, P., & Wendling, C. (2013). Trends in cyberspace: 
can governments keep up?. Environment Systems & De-
cisions, 33(4), 536-543. doi:10.1007/s10669-013-9470-5 
50.  Phair, N. (2014). CC14 Feature - Cyber Crime Risks and 

Responsibilities for Businesses. Journal Of The Austral-
ian & New Zealand Institute Of Insurance & Finance, 
37(5), 5-8. 

51.  Rid, T., & Buchanan, B. (2015). Attributing Cyber At-
tacks. Journal Of Strategic Studies, 38(1/2), 4-37. 
doi:10.1080/01402390.2014.977382 

52.  Rogers, R. (2012). Mapping and the Politics of Web 

Space. Theory, Culture And Society, 29(4-5), 193-219. 

53.  ROSCINI, M. (2015). Evidentiary Issues in International 
Disputes Related to State Responsibility for Cyber Opera-
tions. Texas International Law Journal, 50(2), 233-273. 

54.  Schmitt, M. N. (2015). THE LAW OF CYBER TAR-
GETING. Naval War College Review, 68(2), 10-29. 
55.  Shafi, Q. (2012). Cyber Physical Systems Security: A 

Brief Survey. doi:10.1109/ICCSA.2012.36 

56.  Shull, A., Twomey, P., & Yoo, C. (2014, June 1). Legal 

Mechanisms for Governing the Transition of Key Domain 
Name Functions to the Global Multi-stakeholder Commu-
nity. Retrieved October 15, 2015. 

57.  Sitnikova, E., & Asgarkhani, M. (2014). A strategic 

framework for managing internet security. 2014 11Th In-
ternational Conference On Fuzzy Systems & Knowledge 
Discovery (FSKD), 947. 
doi:10.1109/FSKD.2014.6980967 

58.  Smirnov, A., Levashova, T., Shilov, N., & Sandkuhl, K. 
(2014). Ontology for cyber-physical-social systems self-
organisation. doi:10.1109/FRUCT.2014.7000933 

59.  TAKESHI TAKAHASHI1, t., & YOUKI, K. (2015). Ref-
erence Ontology for Cybersecurity Operational Infor-
mation. Computer Journal, 58(10), 2297-2312. 

60.  TAN MING MING1, t., JABAR, M. m., SIDI, F. f., & 

KOH TIENG WEI1, t. (2015). A SYSTEMATIC LITER-
ATURE REVIEW OF COMPUTER ETHICS ISSUES. 
Journal Of Theoretical & Applied Information Technol-
ogy, 78(3), 360-372. 

61.  Uzunov, A. V., Falkner, K., & Fernandez, E. B. (2015). A 

comprehensive pattern-oriented approach to engineering 
security methodologies. Information And Software Tech-
nology, 57217-247. doi:10.1016/j.infsof.2014.09.001 
62.  Veerasamy, N., Grobler, M., Von Solms, B., Filiol, E., & 
Erra, R. (2012). Building an Ontology for Cyberterrorism. 

63.  VEGH, L. l., & MICLEA, L. l. (2015). Authenticity, In-
tegrity and Secure Communication in Cyber-Physical 
Systems. Journal Of Computer Science & Control Sys-
tems, 8(1), 33-38. 

64.  Verhulst, S., Noveck, B., Raines, J., & Declercq, A. 

(2014, December 1). Innovations in Global Governance: 
Toward a Distributed Internet Governance Ecosystem. 
Retrieved October 15, 2015. 

65.  Wali, A., Soon Ae, C., & Geller, J. (2013). A bootstrap-
ping approach for developing a cyber-security ontology 
using textbook index terms. doi:10.1109/ARES.2013.75 

30 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

66.  Wan, K. k., & Alagar, V. a. (2014). Context-Aware Secu-
rity Solutions for Cyber-Physical Systems. Mobile Net-
works & Applications, 19(2), 212-226. 

67.  Weber, R. (2014, December 1). Legal Interoperability as a 
Tool for Combatting Fragmentation. Retrieved October 
15, 2015. 

68.  Willison, R., & Warkentin, M. (2013). BEYOND DE-

TERRENCE: AN EXPANDED VIEW OF EMPLOYEE 
COMPUTER ABUSE. MIS Quarterly, 37(1), 1-20. 
69.  Wilshusen, G. C. (2011). CYBERSECURITY OVER-

VIEW. International Debates, 9(9), 4-9. 

70.  Yampolskiy, M., Horváth, P., Koutsoukos, X. D., Xue, 
Y., & Sztipanovits, J. (2015). A language for describing 
attacks on cyber-physical systems. International Journal 
Of Critical Infrastructure Protection, 840-52. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijcip.2014.09.003 

71.  Zekos, G. z. (2012). CYBER-TERRITORY AND JURIS-
DICTION OF NATIONS. Journal Of Internet Law, 
15(12), 3-23. 

72.  Zhang, Y., Xiao, Y., Ghaboosi, K., Zhang, J., & Deng, H. 

(2012). A survey of cyber crimes. Security & Communi-
cation Networks, 5(4), 422-437. 

73.  Zlomislić, V. v., Fertalj, K. k., & Sruk, V. v. (2014). De-
nial of Service Attacks: An Overview. CISTI (Iberian 
Conference On Information Systems & Technologies / 
Conferência Ibérica De Sistemas E Tecnologias De In-
formação) Proceedings, 1270-275. 

81.  Ma, J., Ning, H., Huang, R., Liu, H., Yang, L., Chen, J., 
& Min, G. (2015). Cybermatics: A Holistic Field for Sys-
tematic Study of Cyber-Enabled New Worlds. IEEE Ac-
cess, 2270-2280. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2015.2498288 
82.  Choras, M.; Kozik, R.; Torres Bruna, M.P.; Yautsiukhin, 
A.; Churchill, A.; Maciejewska, I.; Eguinoa, I.; Jomni, A., 
"Comprehensive Approach to Increase Cyber Security 
and Resilience," in Availability, Reliability and Security 
(ARES), 2015 10th International Conference on , vol., 
no., pp.686-692, 24-27 Aug. 2015 
doi: 10.1109/ARES.2015.30 

83.  Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cyberse-
curity. (2014, February 12). Retrieved January 6, 2016, 
from http://www.nist.gov/cyberframework/upload/cyber-
security-framework-021214.pdf 

84.  Neri, F.; Geraci, P.; Sanna, G.; Lotti, L., "Online Police 
Station, A State-of-Art Italian Semantic Technology 
against Cybercrime," in Social Network Analysis and 
Mining, 2009. ASONAM '09. International Conference on 
Advances in , vol., no., pp.296-299, 20-22 July 2009 
doi: 10.1109/ASONAM.2009.20 

85.  Howard, M. C., & Jayne, B. S. (2015). An Analysis of 
More Than 1,400 Articles, 900 Scales, and 17 Years of 
Research: The State of Scales in Cyberpsychology, Be-
havior, and Social Networking. Cyberpsychology, Behav-
ior & Social Networking, 18(3), 181-187. 
doi:10.1089/cyber.2014.0418 

74.  Khairkar, A., Kshirsagar, D., & Kumar, S. (2013). Ontol-

86.  NETmundial Comments. Retrieved December 9, 2015, 

ogy for Detection of Web Attacks. 
doi:10.1109/CSNT.2013.131 

75.  Choucri, N., Daw Elbait, G., & Madnick, S. (2012, No-

vember 6). What is Cybersecurity? Explorations in Auto-
mated Knowledge Generation. Retrieved January 6, 2016. 

76.  Resilience in the Cyber Era: Building an Infrastructure 
that Secures and Protects. The Economist. (2011). Re-
trieved January 6, 2016. 

77.  Lingenheld, M. (2015, April 17). The Unfortunate 

Growth Sector: Cybersecurity. Retrieved January 6, 2016, 
from http://www.forbes.com/sites/michael-
lingenheld/2015/04/27/the-unfortunate-growth-sector-cy-
bersecurity/ 

78.  Rohan. (2015, June). Cyber Security Market worth 

$170.21 Billion by 2020. Retrieved January 6, 2016, from 
http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/cyber-
security.asp 

79.  Risk and Responsibility in a Hyperconnected World: 
Pathways to Global Cyber Resilience. 39. (2012). Re-
trieved January 6, 2016, from http://www.wefo-
rum.org/reports/risk-and-responsibility-hyperconnected-
world-pathways-global-cyber-resilience 

80.  NIST. ANNOUNCING DEVELOPMENT OF A FED-
ERAL INFORMATION PROCESSING STANDARD 
FOR ADVANCED ENCRYPTION STANDARD. (1997, 
January 2). Retrieved January 6, 2016, from 
http://csrc.nist.gov/archive/aes/pre-round1/aes_9701.txt 

from http://document.netmundial.br/ 

87.  What is SNOMED CT? (2014, July 31). Retrieved Janu-
ary 7, 2016, from http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/what-
is-snomed-ct 

88.  ABOUT THE IEEE STANDARDS ASSOCIATION. Re-

trieved January 7, 2016, from http://stand-
ards.ieee.org/about/ieeesa.html 

89.  Fernelius, W., Loening, K., & Adams, R. (1976). Histori-
cal development of chemical nomenclature. Journal of 
Chemical Education, 53(6), 354-354. doi:DOI: 
10.1021/ed053p354.2 

90.  IEEE Standard Criteria for Security Systems for Nuclear 

Power Generating Stations - Redline," in IEEE Std 692-
2010 (Revision of IEEE Std 692-1997) - Redline , vol., 
no., pp.1-50, Feb. 12 2010 
doi: 10.1109/IEEESTD.2010.5953432 

91.  IEEE Standard for Criteria for Security Systems for Nu-
clear Power Generating Stations," in IEEE Std 692-2013 
(Revision of IEEE Std 692-2010) , vol., no., pp.1-57, Sept. 
30 2013 
doi: 10.1109/IEEESTD.2013.6613502 

92.  2 Results Returned for 'cyber' Retrieved January 7, 2016, 

from http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/diction-
ary.jsp?stdDict=browse_keyword&page-
Number=1&def_term=cyber&def_id=&stdDiction-
ary_tarid=&stdDiction-ary_tarn=null&stdDiction-
ary_scn=Aerospace Electronics&nav=# 

93.  Ganor, B. (2002). Defining Terrorism - Is One Man's Ter-
rorist Another Man's Freedom Fighter? Police Practice 

31 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

and Research, 3(4), 287–304-287–304. doi:DOI: 
10.1080/1561426022000032060 

94.  https://books.google.com/ngrams/graph?content=cyber 

*&year_start=1945&year_end=2015&cor-
pus=15&smoothing=3&share=&direct_url=t2;,cyber 
*;,c0;,s0;;cyber security;,c0;;cyber attacks;,c0;;cyber 
crime;,c0;;cyber% 

95.  Valeriano, B., & Maness, R. (2013). What Do We Know 

about Cyber Conflict ? Scope, Impact, and Restraint in 
Cyberspace. 

96.  Lin, Herb. Cyber Conflict and National Security. 
97.  Strunk, W., White, E. B., & Kalman, M. (2005). The ele-
ments of style. p 36.New York : Penguin Press, 2005. 
98.  RIVEST, R. L. (1990). CHAPTER 13: Cryptography. Al-

gorithms And Complexity, 717,719-717,755. 
doi:10.1016/B978-0-444-88071-0.50018-7 

99.  Jackson, W. (2011, April 28). U.S., Russian groups agree 
on 20 definitions of cybersecurity concepts. Retrieved 
January 9, 2016, from https://gcn.com/arti-
cles/2011/04/28/us-russia-cyber-dictionary.aspx 

100. Rauscher, K. (2011, April 26). Russia-U.S. Bilateral on 

Cybersecurity: Critical Terminology Foundations. Re-
trieved January 9, 2016, from http://www.east-
west.ngo/idea/russia-us-bilateral-cybersecurity-critical-
terminology-foundations 

101. Stern, S. (2014, March 21). Critical Terminology Founda-
tions 2. Retrieved January 9, 2016, from http://www.east-
west.ngo/idea/critical-terminology-foundations-2 
102. Cyber Glossary. Retrieved January 9, 2016, from 

https://niccs.us-cert.gov/glossary 

103. Health expenditure, total (% of GDP). (n.d.). Retrieved 
January 9, 2016, from http://data.worldbank.org/indica-
tor/SH.XPD.TOTL.ZS 

104. Net Losses: Estimating the Global Cost of Cybercrime: 
Economic impact of cybercrime II. (2014, June). Re-
trieved January 9, 2016, from 
http://www.mcafee.com/us/resources/reports/rp-eco-
nomic-impact-cybercrime2.pdf 

105. Information Assurance Concentration Programs. Re-

trieved January 11, 2016, from http://ia.asu.edu/educa-
tion.php 

106. Core Courses. Retrieved January 11, 2016, from 

http://www.uwb.edu/cybersecurity/curriculum/core-
courses 

107. Master of Engineering in Cybersecurity. (2016). Re-

trieved January 11, 2016, from http://cyber.umd.edu/edu-
cation/meng-cybersecurity 

108. Outline of academic disciplines. Retrieved January 11, 

2016, from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outline_of_aca-
demic_disciplines 

109. -ism. Retrieved January 11, 2016, from http://ety-

monline.com/index.php?term=-ism&allowed_in_frame=0 

110. Omics. Retrieved January 11, 2016, from https://en.wik-

ipedia.org/wiki/Omics 

111. νόμος. Retrieved January 11, 2016, from https://en.wik-

tionary.org/wiki/νόμος 

112. Cybercrime. Retrieved January 14, 2016, from 

http://www.interpol.int/Crime-areas/Cybercrime/Cyber-
crime 

113. What is Cybercrime? Retrieved January 14, 2016, from 

http://us.norton.com/cybercrime-definition 
114. Cyber crime. Retrieved January 14, 2016, from 
http://www.nationalcrimeagency.gov.uk/crime-
threats/cyber-crime 

115. Kurbalija, J. (2015, April 17). Different prefixes, same 

meaning: Cyber, digital, net, online, virtual, e-. Retrieved 
January 14, 2016, from http://www.diplo-
macy.edu/blog/different-prefixes-same-meaning-cyber-
digital-net-online-virtual-e 

116. Internet-related prefixes. Retrieved January 14, 2016, 

from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet-related_pre-
fixes#Spelling_controversies 

117. Kissel, R. (Ed.). (2013, May 1). NISTIR 7298 Revision 2, 
Glossary of Key Information Security Terms. Retrieved 
January 14, 2016, from http://www.nist.gov/cus-
tomcf/get_pdf.cfm?pub_id=913810 

118. Robert Evans. (2009). Control Systems Cyber Security 

Standards Support Activities. United States. 
doi:10.2172/950989 

119. Benigni, D. (2010). Cyber Security Standards. In J. 

Voeller (Ed.), Wiley Handbook of science and technology 
for homeland security. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 

120. National Information Assurance Glossary. (2006, June). 

Retrieved from http://jitc.fhu.disa.mil/pki/docu-
ments/committee_on_national_security_systems_instruc-
tions_4009_june_2006.pdf 

121. Applegate, S., Stavrou, A., Podins, K., Stinissen, J., & 

Maybaum, M. (2013). Towards a Cyber Conflict Taxon-
omy. 

122. Rodin, D. N. (2015). THE CYBERSECURITY PART-
NERSHIP: A PROPOSAL FOR CYBERTHREAT IN-
FORMATION SHARING BETWEEN CONTRACTORS 
AND THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT. Public Contract 
Law Journal, 44(3), 505-528. 

123. Roesener, G., Bottolfson, C., & Fernandez, G. (2014). 

Policy for US Cybersecurity. Air & Space Power Journal, 
28(6), 38-54. 

124. Images, real and virtual. (n.d.). Retrieved February 01, 

2016, from 
https://www.pa.msu.edu/courses/2000fall/PHY232/lec-
tures/lenses/images.html 

125. Bradbury, D. (2014, March 19). Is Bitcoin a Digital Cur-
rency or a Virtual One? Retrieved February 01, 2016, 
from http://www.coindesk.com/bitcoin-digital-currency-
virtual-one 

126. IETF. RFC Editor Terms List. Retrieved February 01, 
2016, from https://www.rfc-editor.org/materials/terms-
online.txt 

127. Consumer data privacy in a networked world. [electronic 
resource] : a framework for protecting privacy and pro-
moting innovation in the global digital economy. (2012). 
Washington [D.C.] : The White House, [2012]. 

128. cybernetics. Retrieved March 3, 2016, fromhttps://en.wik-

tionary.org/wiki/cybernetics 

32 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2544381, IEEE Access

129. Gadya FS., Austin G. “Russia, The United States, And 

Cyber Diplomacy Opening the Doors”. The EastWest In-
stitute. 2010 

130. Zuppo, Colrain M. "Defining ICT in a Boundaryless 
World: The Development of a Working Hierarchy" 
131. von Solms R, van Niekerk J, “From Information Security 
to Cyber Security”, Computers & Security (2013), doi: 
10.1016/j.cose.2013.04.004. 

33 

2169-3536 (c) 2015 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

 
