1
2
0
2

r
a

M
3
2

]
h
p
-
c
o
s
.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[

3
v
7
8
8
9
0
.
0
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantifying Urban Road Network Vulnerability and Resilience to Attacks

Skanda Vivek∗
School of Science and Technology, Georgia Gwinnett College, Lawrenceville, GA 30043
(Dated: March 24, 2021)

The rise of connected and autonomous vehicles, combined with the proliferation of IoT and
connected surfaces, lead to the emergence of novel complex cyber risks. Lack of encryption and
authentication in internal vehicular networks are widely recognized as cause for concern by cyberse-
curity experts, automobile, and OEM manufacturers. This concern has only been growing with the
increase in cybersecurity incidents and demonstrations showing diﬀerent vehicular vulnerabilities,
making it nearly impossible to completely secure vehicles against cyber-attacks. Of particular con-
cern is the potential for large-scale vehicular cyber-attacks to cascade to transportation networks,
which are the lifeline of cities. Here, we develop a framework based on complex network theory, traf-
ﬁc ﬂow, and new data based technologies to quantify the vulnerability of city-scale transportation
to cyber-attacks. Application of our framework to the road network of Boston reveals that targeted
attacks on a small fraction of nodes leads to disproportionately larger disruptions of routes. We de-
velop an early-detection framework to quantify real-time risk based on gathering multidimensional
traﬃc ﬂow, incident, and social media data sets. Our results illustrate an eﬀects based approach to
transportation cyber-defense, through informed, intelligent vehicular agents.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Two recent trends of (i) increasing connectivity and
(ii) tight coupling arising from cyber-physical complex-
ity drive the potential for cyber-attacks to result in large
scale disruptions or in some cases; complete failure of crit-
ical infrastructures. It is estimated that 20% of vehicles
in the US can connect to the internet, and this market
share is growing every year. Along with the growth in
connected vehicle surface area, comes the risk of vehicu-
lar hacking. There has been a growth in incidents where
hackers have demonstrated that they can gain control
of safety-critical vehicle functions such as brake, engine,
and steering [1–3]. Various surfaces have been found for
example through vehicle entertainment control unit [3],
spooﬁng vehicle sensors like LIDAR [4], and poorly au-
thenticated 3rd party apps that are linked to critical vehi-
cle safety functions [5]. Ultimately, it becomes very hard
to ensure that vehicles are completely secure against vul-
nerabilities.

Studies in complex networks have resulted in ap-
proaches to evaluate the fragility of connected networks
to disruptions and potential for cascading disruptions [6–
9]. In recent years, network based approaches have been
applied in the context of existing critical infrastructure
disasters [10], including the power grid [11], road net-
works [12, 13], and aircraft delays [14]. However, the
coupling between cyber and the physical realm of trans-
portation leads to the potential for complex risks, that
are so far largely unknown.

Arguably the greatest potential for disruption from a
large-scale cyber attack on connected vehicles lies in the
physical realm of transportation. One of the greatest se-
curity threats for connected vehicles are ﬂeet wide hacks,

∗ skanda.vivek@gmail.com

stated by Tesla CEO Elon Musk in 2017 [15]. While
it is hard in the absence of data, to identify how a cy-
ber attack might eﬀect vehicle functions, several studies
and hacking demonstrations have shown that this could
lead to collisions [16] or cause vehicles to enter a safe
mode [17–20], decreasing the likelihood for collisions but
increasing local local traﬃc jams around compromised
vehicles. Other studies have shown that hackers could
intentionally shutdown vehicles [21].

Here, we develop a framework to quantify and early-
detect the impacts of vehicular cyber attacks on trans-
portation networks. Our work leverages on complex net-
work theory, and concepts from tightly coupled complex
systems [22]. First, we develop a theory to quantify the
vulnerability of transportation to targeted cyber attacks
(Fig. 1a). Through simulations on representative grids,
we observe ensuing cascading traﬃc jams around blocked
vehicles, shown in red in Fig. 1b. These observations help
inform a theoretical framework that we apply to quantify
city scale disruptions through cell phone location data
sets in combination with spatial road networks. Appli-
cation of our methods on the street network of Boston
identiﬁes the most vulnerable nodes through a measure of
network centrality (Fig. 1d). Finally, we develop a novel
framework for early-detection of cyber attacks through
multidimensional incident, ﬂow, and social data sets, that
serve as a pulse of modern societies (Fig. 1e).

Figure 1c demonstrates the system perturbation in the
absence (blue) of detailed information, and the presence
(yellow) of real-time information. Through our frame-
work of near real-time situational awareness quantiﬁed
from multidimensional data sources, various stakeholders
such as automobile manufacturers, emergency managers,
drivers, and vehicles themselves can make informed de-
cisions that mitigate propagation of perturbation, and
speed up recovery. In the broader context, our work con-
ceptualizes an eﬀects based approach to identify critical
infrastructure assets most vulnerable, and build resilient

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

FIG. 1. Tightly coupled vehicle cyber and city transportation networks. (a) Cyber-attack on intra vehicular networks impacting
vehicle functioning. (b) Additional impacts on vehicular traﬃc. (c) Illustration of system perturbation following a large-scale
hack and subsequent recovery (blue). Potential for improved resilience through reduced perturbation and faster recovery
following early detection through novel, multiple data sources (yellow). (d) Cascading impacts on city-scale transportation
networks (e) Potential for building in resilience through early-warning from multiple traﬃc ﬂow, incident, and social media
data sources.

infrastructure networks to cyber attacks.

II. RESULTS

A. Quantifying post-hack traﬃc disruptions on
model grids

To quantify post-hack traﬃc disruptions, we do traf-
ﬁc simulations using the Simulation of Urban Mobility
(SUMO) platform [23] on representative grids.
In the
simulations, vehicles enter the grid at a ﬁxed rate, and
exit once they have ﬁnished their route. Routes are

chosen randomly, and the rate of entry corresponds to
uniform density of 6 vehicles/km/lane in free ﬂow con-
ditions. Each edge is bidirectional, and each road has
1 lane. Roads were blocked at the center, and in the
event of road blockage, vehicles could not pass through
the road. An initially blocked road leads to a traﬃc jam.
Eventually, this traﬃc jam cascades to adjacent roads,
blocking vehicles using those roads in turn, and this cas-
cade continues until the whole grid is blocked by vehicles.

To understand how an initially blocked road leads to
cascading network failure through traﬃc jams of stopped
vehicles, we use NetworkX [24], a python based net-
work analysis package. NetworkX treats roads as edges

System PerturbationTime(a)(b)(c)(e)(d)Traffic disruptionCyber attackTargeted attackand intersections as nodes. Figure 2a shows an exam-
ple scenario in a 5x5 network, where an edge is initially
blocked. The 2 nodes connecting the edge are marked
in red (Fig. 2a, left). Each road is 200m long and can
contain a maximum of 25 vehicles end to end. Figure 2a
(right) shows the cascade when traﬃc jams spill over from
the initially blocked edge to neighboring edges, whose
corresponding nodes are marked in red.

Using the route information in the corresponding
SUMO simulation, we quantify the fraction of routes in-
accessible if roads are blocked. From this we obtain the
probability of a vehicle route being blocked as a function
of number of vehicles in the blockage, P (NS) (Fig. 2b).
Note that in the case of 1 edge disruption, ∼6% of vehi-
cle routes are impacted before there are any vehicles in
the blockage. Whereas in the case of 40 edges initially
disrupted, ∼90% of vehicle routes are impacted before
there are any vehicles in the blockage. This initial dis-
ruption cascades to the entire grid as more vehicles enter
the blockage. The dashed black lines denote the the-
oretical formula from probabilistic arguments, with the
assumptions are that all edges are equally probable for
routes, and independent of each other. The theoretical
formula for P (NS) is:

(cid:18)

P (NS) = 1 −

1 −

NR
NT

(cid:19)min(h0+NS /25,NT )

(1)

Here, NR denotes the average number of edges in a
route (which is 5 for 5x5 networks), NT is the total num-
ber of edges in the network (80 bidirectional roads in a
5x5 network), h0 is the initial number of disrupted roads,
and NS is the number of vehicles in the blockage. Since
there are a maximum of 25 vehicles possible in each 200m
edge (8m separation between vehicles), NS/25 represents
the number of additional roads blocked from cascading
vehicle blockages. However, this is limited by the max-
imum number of edges that can be blocked (NT ), given
the ﬁnite size of grids. Circles are measurements of inac-
cessible routes from SUMO simulations, which are well
represented by the theoretical formula.

Using this probability, we develop a theoretical formula
to predict how the number of stopped vehicles grows in
time, as a function of P (NS), rate at which vehicles enter
the simulation r, and the maximum capacity of vehicles
in the grid, K:

dNS
dt

(cid:32)

= r · P (NS) ·

1 −

(cid:19)2(cid:33)

(cid:18) NS
K

(2)

In equilibrium, r is related to the time spent by vehicles
and number of vehicles in the simulation at any given
moment as r ∗ T = N . Further, T = NR ∗ 200/v, where
v is the average velocity of vehicles in the simulation in
m/s and each road is 200m long. r · P (NS) denotes the
contribution of vehicles entering the simulation to the
rate of growth of vehicle blockage. In the limit no routes

3

are blocked, P (NS) is 0, and there is no growing blockage.
When all routes are blocked, P (NS) = 1 and all vehicle
routes are blocked, thus all incoming vehicles enter the
blockage.

The (1−NS/K) contribution is due to the ﬁnite vehicle
capacity of the grid. As more of the grid is occupied by
traﬃc jams, vehicles cannot enter the simulation at their
intended origin, which diminishes the rate of growth of
stopped vehicle blockage close to grid carrying capacity.
The (1 + NS/K) term is because existing vehicles in the
simulation cannot reach their intended destination due to
the growing traﬃc jam, and instead attach to the growing
vehicle blockage quicker than their intended destination.
Thus, the (1 − NS/K)2 term accounts for vehicles not
able to leave depart from their origin due to the grow-
ing vehicle blockage, as well existing vehicles that attach
to the blockage on their routes. Figure 2c shows that
the theory matches traﬃc simulation results quite well
for diﬀerent initial numbers of roads blocked. We also
conﬁrmed this for simulations of diﬀerent grid sizes.

B. Applying our theoretical framework of
transportation disruption to the Boston road
network

In our SUMO simulations on grids, routes were chosen
randomly, and each road has the same importance as
every other route. However, in city road transportation
networks certain routes like central highway systems are
more important than others. To account for this, we use
information of city vehicle trip routes, explained in the
following section. For Boston route information, we use
data from a previous study which obtained the origin (O)
and destinations (D) for individual travelers during peak
7:30-8:30 AM rush hour [25]. The OD information was
obtained though tracking of cell phone records of a target
population during that period.

To build the urban road network of Boston, and an-
alyze the relative importance of roads in the context of
traveller routes, we used OSMnx [26], a python package
that represents Open Street Maps information on streets
as networks. The resultant map of Boston contained in-
formation about nodes and edges. Nodes correspond to
intersections and edges to roads that connect intersec-
tions. While we do not have granular information about
the routes taken, Open Street Maps provides limited in-
formation on the speed limits of roads. Using this infor-
mation, we infer routes from OD data with the shortest
free-ﬂow travel times, based on Dijkstra’s shortest path
algorithm [27].

In order to understand the fragility of urban routes to
targeted disruptions, we apply our framework, in partic-
ular the probability kernel P (NS), to real trips in Boston.
For Boston route information, we use data from a previ-
ous study which obtained OD pairs from travelers during
peak 7:30-8:30 AM rush hour [25]. The OD informa-
tion was obtained though tracking of cell phone records

4

FIG. 3. Multilayered complex transportation and data net-
works, vulnerability to targeted cyber-attacks, and potential
for early-detection through feedback. (a) Boston transporta-
tion networks with nodes from OSM (green), top 5% impor-
tant nodes (red circles), real-time traﬃc speeds data (colored
lines), and real-time incidents (blue circles). (b) Cascading
impacts of initially targeted 5% important nodes to the rest of
the city. (c) Probability of shortest time routes being blocked
vs fraction of vehicle capacity in the blockage. Colors cor-
respond to diﬀerent initial fractions of roads disrupted and
dashed lines are inverse exponential ﬁts. Blue circles in the
inset are time for half of Boston to be ﬁlled with stopped
vehicles vs initial scale of disruption.

Figure 3a shows the top 5% of nodes (red circles) in the
Boston road network. Visually, it appears most of the
nodes are clustered around highways like I-90 and cen-
tral streets such as Washington street. When these roads
are initially disrupted, this cascades to adjacent roads as
can be seen in Figs. 3b.

The importance of a node is measured through the
fraction of shortest time routes passing through the node,
out of all routes as below:

g(v) =

(cid:80)
O
(cid:80)

(cid:80)
(cid:80)

O

D δOD,v
D δOD

(3)

where g(v) is the importance of the node v, δOD = 1
when a route has origin O and destination D, and
δOD,v = 1 when a route with origin O and destination D,
passes through node v. The summations are done over
all origin-destination pairs. Depending on the scenario,

FIG. 2. Simulations and analytical calculations of post-hack
vehicular traﬃc on grids. (a) 5x5 grid, with intersections de-
noted by nodes and roads by edges. Cascade of traﬃc jams
from initial road (adjacent intersections in red, left) to neigh-
boring roads (right). (b) Probability kernel P (NS) showing
the probability that vehicles routes are blocked with number
of stopped vehicles. Initially, ∼ 6% of routes are blocked due
to a single road disrupted and ∼ 90% of routes are blocked
when half the roads are disrupted. Dashed lines are theo-
retical prediction. (c) Growth of stopped vehicle traﬃc jam
with time, colors correspond to diﬀerent numbers of initially
blocked roads along with theoretical formula (black dashed
lines).

of a target population during that period. To analyze
Boston road networks, we used OSMnx [26], a python
package for working with Open Street Maps. The resul-
tant map of Boston contained information about nodes
and edges. Nodes correspond to intersections and edges
to roads that connect intersections. While we do not have
granular information about the routes taken, we obtained
the shortest time paths corresponding to the OD data in
the Boston road networks. For each route, we obtained
all the nodes in sequence, corresponding to the shortest
time path.

In regular taﬃc conditions, one would expect the var-
ious map applications to show the shortest time paths.

(b)(c)(a)(a)(b)(c)this formula can be modiﬁed to reﬂect other measures of
centrality such as betweenness, which have been applied
to road networks [28, 29].

Surprisingly, we ﬁnd that most of the shortest time
routes from the OD pair data pass through a very small
fraction of nodes. Figure 3c shows that 10% of all short-
est time routes passes through the single most important
node, and almost 80% of routes pass through the top 5%
nodes in Boston. This shows that the Boston routing
network is extremely fragile to a targeted disruption of
a few essential nodes. Once vehicles start piling up, the
situation cascades to city scale failure. In the case of the
single most important node being shutdown, a traﬃc jam
involving 10% of the Boston vehicle capacity would re-
sult in 30% of shortest time routes being blocked. To ex-
tract P (NS), we ﬁt an inverse exponential to our P (NS)
measured from shortest time paths, where p0 and a are
ﬁtted, p0 corresponds to the initial disruption at NS = 0
i.e. fraction of shortest paths initially inaccessible.

P (NS) = (1 − p0)(1 − exp(−aNS)) + p0

(4)

We apply our extracted kernel P (NS) to reveal the dy-
namic cascade. For this, we obtain the maximum number
of vehicles possible in Boston (KBos) by dividing the total
road length* number of lanes in m/8; assuming a uniform
spacing of 8 m between vehicles at maximum capacity
which corresponds to a maximum density ρmax = 125
vehicles/km/lane. To ﬁnd the rate of vehicles entering
we use the information of ODs from rush hour obtained
from cell phone data. We apply these values in the for-
mula below:

dNS
dt

(cid:32)

= rrush · P (NS) ·

1 −

(cid:19)2(cid:33)

(cid:18) NS
KBos

(5)

rrush is the number of trips per second, calculated from
the number of trips during rush hour. Figure 3c (in-
set) shows that time at which half of Boston is ﬁlled
is between 2-4 hours, depending on the percentage of
Interestingly, above 5% of
nodes initially disrupted.
nodes hacked, there is a point of diminishing return above
which more nodes disrupted does not speed up the ensu-
ing cascade.

C. Early-detection framework for cyber attacks
through multidimensional data

Figure 3a shows multiple datasets on traﬃc speed and
incidents obtained from the HERE traﬃc API [30], over-
layed on the spatial map of Boston, along with the top 5%
of nodes shortest routes, as obtained from the centrality
metric deﬁned in Eqn. 3. Real-time traﬃc information
by HERE or other providers, could be used to measure
city-scale perturbations of traﬃc from regular conditions,
such as due to cyber attacks. In addition, its been shown

5

that behavior on social media e.g. Twitter also contain
useful signatures of traﬃc anomalies [31, 32]. The equa-
tions below represent a novel framework to combine dis-
parate data sets for early detection of cyber attacks.

R[ (cid:126)Xj] =

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

Dim

i

R[ (cid:126)xi]δG( (cid:126)xi),Xj

C · R =

(cid:88)

j

R[ (cid:126)Xj]e−(cid:107) (cid:126)Xj −B[ (cid:126)Xj ](cid:107)

(6)

(7)

Here, R[ (cid:126)xi] denotes the risk due to incident i located at
location (cid:126)xi. R[ (cid:126)xi] can be quantiﬁed based on the severity
of the incident. For example, HERE traﬃc incident data
provides information on the type of incident as well as
criticality level of the incident that can be useful in eval-
uating the risk level of the incident. G( (cid:126)xi) is the mapping
of that incident to the closest intersection(node) location,
Xj on the Boston road network. The sum over i denotes
all the incidents that can be mapped to the node j, and
the sum over Dim denotes the sum over all the diﬀerent
data sets such as ﬂow, incident, twitter, etc. R[ (cid:126)Xj] gives
the total risk at node j.

In order to compute city scale risk, it is important to
identify the subset of nodes that are critical and con-
sequently at risk for targeted disruption. These nodes
are represented as basis set B, for example the top 5% of
nodes in the Boston road network. Risk at node j is then
weighted according to the absolute distance from the
closest corresponding basis node B[ (cid:126)Xj] as e−(cid:107) (cid:126)Xj −B[ (cid:126)Xj ](cid:107).
A node that is at or very close to a critical node is
weighted more than a node that is further away. Finally,
the city scale risk, C ·R is the sum of node risks, weighted
by their respective distance from critical nodes.

As a proof of concept, we applied our framework on
HERE traﬃc ﬂow data collected from Boston during a 24
hour period in November 2020. As a proxy for locations
at risk, we looked at locations on the urban network of
Boston where traﬃc speeds were less than 0.25 times the
speed limit, for example corresponding to a road speed
limit 60 mph, if the road segment had a speed lower
than 15mph it is considered an at risk location. Sud-
den drops in traﬃc speeds at multiple locations could
indicate emergency disasters such as weather related ex-
tremes or future cyber incidents. To compute city scale
risk, we chose the basis set of nodes B as the top 5%
nodes as deﬁned previously, on the Boston road network.
We found the closest Basis node and corresponding dis-
tance from risk locations using the Haversine formula,
that determines the great-circle distance between two
points on a sphere given their longitudes and latitudes.
For simplicity, all risk values R[ (cid:126)xi] were given a value
of 1. By summing over exponentially weighted distances
(in miles) of risk locations from the closest basis node
corresponding to Eqn. 7, we obtained the city scale risk.
Figure 4 shows peaks in city occur roughly correspond-
ing at rush hour, and dips during night times. This gives

6

FIG. 4. City scale road transportation risk measured using HERE traﬃc ﬂow data

a baseline of risk during nominal conditions in Boston,
and signiﬁcantly higher risks could be useful in detecting
large-scale anomalies, with the greatest potential harm
to urban road transportation.

III. DISCUSSION

The United States Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency has identiﬁed 16 critical infrastructure
sectors, so vital that their incapacitation would cause a
debilitating eﬀect on security, economic security, public
health, or any combination of the above.
Importantly,
the Department of Homeland Security notes [33] that
there is insuﬃcient knowledge of the risks facing criti-
cal infrastructure networks, as well as general reluctance
of organizations to include a more complete evaluation of
cybersecurity risks including external dependencies and
downstream eﬀects. In spite of the critical importance
for considering multi-domain dependencies during cyber

attacks, existing approaches are focused on narrowly de-
ﬁned asset levels such as software quality, malware anal-
ysis, and intrusion detection. Only a few studies account
for risk arising from cross-dependencies between corre-
lated networks during cyber attacks [17, 34, 35].

We have introduced a 3 layered framework for moni-
toring complex cyber risks through informed, intelligent
agents which are: (i) Developing theoretical approaches
to quantify multi-layered eﬀects of cyberattacks.
(ii)
Applying these approaches to large-scale infrastructures
through network maps, ﬂow datasets, and centrality met-
rics. (iii) Detecting system perturbations through net-
work based risk metrics using multiple available data
sources in near real-time. While we have illustrated these
concepts in large-scale vehicular cyber-attacks and eﬀects
on the impending transportation network, our framework
can be applied in general to other critical infrastructures.
IV. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author thanks David Yanni for discussions and

Hannah Conner for supplementary code.

[1] Karl Koscher, Alexei Czeskis, Franziska Roesner, Shwe-
tak Patel, Tadayoshi Kohno, Stephen Checkoway, Da-
mon McCoy, Brian Kantor, Danny Anderson, Hovav
Shacham, et al. Experimental security analysis of a mod-
ern automobile. In 2010 IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy, pages 447–462. IEEE, 2010.

[2] Stephen Checkoway, Damon McCoy, Brian Kantor,
Danny Anderson, Hovav Shacham, Stefan Savage, Karl
Koscher, Alexei Czeskis, Franziska Roesner, Tadayoshi
Kohno, et al. Comprehensive experimental analyses of
automotive attack surfaces. In USENIX Security Sympo-
sium, volume 4, pages 447–462. San Francisco, 2011.
[3] Charlie Miller and Chris Valasek. Remote exploitation of
an unaltered passenger vehicle. Black Hat USA, 2015:91,
2015.

[4] Yulong Cao, Chaowei Xiao, Benjamin Cyr, Yimeng
Zhou, Won Park, Sara Rampazzi, Qi Alfred Chen, Kevin

Fu, and Z Morley Mao. Adversarial sensor attack on
lidar-based perception in autonomous driving.
In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Com-
puter and Communications Security, pages 2267–2281,
2019.

[5] Mahmoud Hashem Eiza and Qiang Ni. Driving with
sharks: Rethinking connected vehicles with vehicle
cybersecurity.
IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine,
12(2):45–51, 2017.

[6] R´eka Albert, Hawoong Jeong,

and Albert-L´aszl´o
Barab´asi. Error and attack tolerance of complex net-
works. nature, 406(6794):378–382, 2000.

[7] Adilson E Motter and Ying-Cheng Lai. Cascade-based
Physical Review E,

attacks on complex networks.
66(6):065102, 2002.

[8] Adilson E Motter. Cascade control and defense in com-
plex networks. Physical Review Letters, 93(9):098701,

2004.

[9] Jichang Zhao, Daqing Li, Hillel Sanhedrai, Reuven Co-
hen, and Shlomo Havlin. Spatio-temporal propagation
of cascading overload failures in spatially embedded net-
works. Nature communications, 7(1):1–6, 2016.

[10] Dongli Duan, Changchun Lv, Shubin Si, Zhen Wang,
Daqing Li, Jianxi Gao, Shlomo Havlin, H Eugene Stan-
ley, and Stefano Boccaletti. Universal behavior of cascad-
ing failures in interdependent networks. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 116(45):22452–22457,
2019.

[11] Sergey V Buldyrev, Roni Parshani, Gerald Paul, H Eu-
gene Stanley, and Shlomo Havlin. Catastrophic cas-
cade of failures in interdependent networks. Nature,
464(7291):1025–1028, 2010.

[12] Alexander A Ganin, Maksim Kitsak, Dayton Marchese,
Jeﬀrey M Keisler, Thomas Seager, and Igor Linkov. Re-
silience and eﬃciency in transportation networks. Science
advances, 3(12):e1701079, 2017.

[13] Yuan Zhu, Kaan Ozbay, Hong Yang, Fan Zuo, and
Di Sha. Modeling and simulation of cascading failures
in transportation systems during hurricane evacuations.
Technical report, 2019.

[14] Pablo Fleurquin, Jos´e J Ramasco, and Victor M Eguiluz.
Systemic delay propagation in the us airport network.
Scientiﬁc reports, 3:1159, 2013.

[15] Fleet security: The sum of all car hacking fears.
https://www.upstream.auto/blog/fleet-security/#:
~:text=Elon%20Musk%20recently%20voiced%20the,a%
20fleet%2Dwide%20hack.%E2%80%9D, 2017. Accessed:
2020-08-30.

[16] Mani Amoozadeh, Arun Raghuramu, Chen-Nee Chuah,
Dipak Ghosal, H Michael Zhang, Jeﬀ Rowe, and Karl
Levitt.
Security vulnerabilities of connected vehicle
streams and their impact on cooperative driving. IEEE
Communications Magazine, 53(6):126–132, 2015.

[17] Skanda Vivek, David Yanni, Peter J Yunker, and Jesse L
Silverberg.
Cyberphysical risks of hacked internet-
connected vehicles. Physical Review E, 100(1):012316,
2019.

[18] Simon Parkinson, Paul Ward, Kyle Wilson,

and
Jonathan Miller. Cyber threats facing autonomous and
connected vehicles: future challenges. IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 18(11):2898–2915,
2017.

[19] Autonomous cars without human drivers are coming
to california next year. http://bgr.com/2017/10/11/
self-driving-car-tests-california-rules/,
2017.
Accessed: 2018-03-27.

[20] Driverless testing of autonomous vehicles. https://www.
dmv.ca.gov/portal/dmv/detail/vr/autonomous/auto,
2018. Accessed: 2018-03-27.

[21] Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai. Hacker ﬁnds he can
remotely kill car engines after breaking into gps tracking

7

apps. Motherboard. Dispon´ıvel em: https://motherboard.
com/en us/article/zmpx4x/hacker-monitor-cars-
vice.
kill-engine-gpstracking-apps, 2019.

[22] Charles Perrow. Normal accidents: Living with high risk
technologies-Updated edition. Princeton university press,
2011.

[23] Michael Behrisch, Laura Bieker, Jakob Erdmann, and
Daniel Krajzewicz. Sumo–simulation of urban mobility.
In The Third International Conference on Advances in
System Simulation (SIMUL 2011), Barcelona, Spain, vol-
ume 42, 2011.

[24] Aric Hagberg, Pieter Swart, and Daniel S Chult. Ex-
ploring network structure, dynamics, and function us-
ing networkx. Technical report, Los Alamos National
Lab.(LANL), Los Alamos, NM (United States), 2008.
[25] Serdar C¸ olak, Antonio Lima, and Marta C Gonz´alez. Un-
derstanding congested travel in urban areas. Nature com-
munications, 7(1):1–8, 2016.

[26] Geoﬀ Boeing. Osmnx: New methods for acquiring, con-
structing, analyzing, and visualizing complex street net-
works. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems,
65:126–139, 2017.

[27] Edsger W Dijkstra et al. A note on two problems in con-
nexion with graphs. Numerische mathematik, 1(1):269–
271, 1959.

[28] Linton C Freeman. A set of measures of centrality based

on betweenness. Sociometry, pages 35–41, 1977.

[29] Rodrigo de Abreu Batista and Ana Lucia Cetertich Baz-
zan. Identiﬁcation of central points in road networks us-
ing betweenness centrality combined with traﬃc demand.
Polibits, (52):85–91, 2015.

[30] HERE Global BV. Traﬃc api developer’s guide, 2017.
[31] Bei Pan, Yu Zheng, David Wilkie, and Cyrus Shahabi.
Crowd sensing of traﬃc anomalies based on human mo-
bility and social media. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM
SIGSPATIAL international conference on advances in
geographic information systems, pages 344–353, 2013.
[32] Prasanna Giridhar, Md Tanvir Amin, Tarek Abdelzaher,
Dong Wang, Lance Kaplan, Jemin George, and Raghu
Ganti. Clarisense+: An enhanced traﬃc anomaly expla-
nation service using social network feeds. Pervasive and
Mobile Computing, 33:140–155, 2016.

[33] Erin Kenneally, Lucien Randazzese, and David Balenson.
Cyber risk economics capability gaps research strategy.
In 2018 International Conference On Cyber Situational
Awareness, Data Analytics And Assessment (Cyber SA),
pages 1–6. IEEE, 2018.

[34] Igor Linkov, Daniel A Eisenberg, Kenton Plourde,
Thomas P Seager, Julia Allen, and Alex Kott. Resilience
metrics for cyber systems. Environment Systems and De-
cisions, 33(4):471–476, 2013.

[35] Charles Harry and Nancy Gallagher. Classifying cyber
events. Journal of Information Warfare, 17(3):17–31,
2018.

