5W1H-based Expression for the Effective Sharing of 
Information in Digital Forensic Investigations 

Jaehyeok Han

1

, Jieon Kim

1

, and Sangjin Lee

1 

1

Institute of Cyber Security & Privacy (ICSP), Korea University 

145, Anam-ro, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul, South Korea  
{one01h,kijie,sangjin}@korea.ac.kr 

Abstract.  Digital  forensic  investigation  is  used  in  various  areas  related  to 
digital  devices  including  the  cyber  crime.  This  is  an  investigative  process 
using many techniques, which have implemented as tools. The types of files 
covered by the digital forensic investigation are wide and varied, however, 
there  is  no  way  to  express  the  results  into  a  standardized  format.  The 
standardization are different by types of device, file system, or application. 
Different outputs make it time-consuming and difficult to share information 
and  to  implement  integration.  In  addition,  it  could  weaken  cyber  security. 
Thus, it is important to define normalization and to present data in the same 
format. In this paper, a 5W1H-based expression for information sharing for 
effective  digital  forensic  investigation  is  proposed  to  analyze  digital 
forensic information using six questions−what, who, where, when, why and 
how.  Based  on  the  5W1H-based  expression,  digital  information  from 
different types  of  files  is  converted  and  represented  in  the  same  format  of 
outputs.  As  the  5W1H  is  the  basic  writing  principle,  application  of  the 
5W1H-based  expression  on  the  case  studies  shows  that  this  expression 
enhances  clarity  and  correctness  for  information  sharing.  Furthermore,  in 
the  case  of  security  incidents,  this  expression  has  an  advantage  in  being 
compatible with STIX. 

Keywords:  Digital  forensics,  5W1H,  Information  expression,  Ontology, 
Classification. 

1 

Introduction  

Digital  forensics  is  a  technique  for  finding  clues  and  evidence  for  criminal 
investigations by collecting and analyzing data stored on digital devices. Recently, 
digital forensics has expanded its use in various fields such as security incidents, 
besides criminal investigations. Also, digital forensic tools such as EnCase, FTK 
(Forensic Tool Kit), and Autopsy have  been developed. However, those forensic 
tools extract data to different outputs, which make difficult to integrate and share 
the digital forensic information. Since the  tools use  all different ways to express 

 
2  

and present their data, it is inefficient and ineffective to process data integration. 
Thus, this paper suggests a methodology to improve data processing and facilitates 
the development of digital forensic tools by data standardization, which could help 
people read easier. 

We  proposes  5W1H-based  expression  for  information  sharing  for  effective 
digital forensic investigation. Further, the other parts of the paper are organized as 
follows.  Section  2  reviews  related  work  and  explains  a  relationship  of  data, 
information,  and  intelligence  in  digital  forensics.  Methodology  for  5W1H-based 
expression for information sharing is presented in section 3, and section 4 intro-
duces  case  studies  and  applies  them  to  5W1H-based  expression.  Section  5  dis-
cusses the results and concludes. 

2 

Background and Related works 

First,  we  looked  the  concepts  of  the  data,  information,  and  intelligence  on  the 
digital  forensic  investigation,  information  is  produced  by  analyzing  data  from 
digital  evidence,  and  intelligence  is  produced  by  utilizing  information.  In  other 
words,  after  drawing  results  from  digital  evidence,  a  direction  on  how  to 
investigate  will  be  set.  Data,  information,  and  intelligence  can  be  classified  by 
their  volume  and  usability.  Data  is  typically  available  in  huge  volumes,  and 
describes individual and unarguable facts. Information is produced when a series 
of  data  points  are  combined  to  answer  a  simple  question.  Intelligence  takes  this 
process a stage further by interrogating data and information to tell a story (e.g. a 
forecast) that can be used to derive decision making. Crucially, intelligence does 
not answers a simple question, rather it paints a  picture that can be used to help 
people to answer much more complicated questions. 

Information on its own may be of utility to the investigator, but when related to 
other information about the operational environment and considered in the light of 
past experience it gives rise to a new understanding of the information, which may 
be  termed  ‘intelligence’.  Ultimately,  intelligence  has  two  critical  features  that 
distinguish  it  from  information.  Intelligence  allows  anticipation  or  prediction  of 
the  certain  situations  and  circumstances,  and  it  helps  to  make  decisions  by 
illuminating  the  differences  in  available  courses  of  action  [12].  Fig.  1  describes 
when  applying  relationship  of  data,  information,  and  intelligence  on  digital 
forensic  investigation  in  Windows  OS  system.  From  the  disk  image  dump  file 
obtained  in  the  data  collection  level,  the  files  extracted  through  volume  and  file 
system  analysis  are  inputted  into  data  (registry,  event  log,  etc).  Contents,  which 
are parsed results from files, would draw information. 

In  other  words,  intelligence  is  an  integrated  connection  to information  which 
could  be  generated  to  a  report.  This  is  because  the  conclusions  in  the  report 
contain  information  that  can  explain  the  causal  relationship  or  whether  it  is 
possible to investigate the content requested from the given data. While law  

3 

Figure 1. Relationship between data, information, and intelligence in a digital forensic 
investigation with Windows artifacts. 

enforcement    and  investigative  agencies  focus  primarily  on  generating  reports, 
digital  forensic  investigators  focus  on  the  systematic  and  effective  method  to 
accumulate knowledge at information level for the efficiency of resources such as 
profiles.  In  fact,  benefits  of  a  sully  structured  form  is  to  automate  the 
normalization and combination of data, and to fuse together disparate  sources of 
information  [6].  So,  we  suggests  how  to  present  and  share  information  for 
effective digital forensic investigation based on 5W1H. 

3 

Information expression based on 5W1H 

The primary purpose of digital evidence exchange format and package is to  store 
and  preserve  the  collected  results  from  digital  data.  Since  lots  of  system  logs 
contains  how  the  evidence  is  managed  in  detail,  all  the  processes  can  be  traced 
back if behavior and objects are guaranteed their originality. When repeating the 
same  process  over  and  over  again,  it  should  yield  the  same  results.  If  there  is  a 
trouble  while  collecting  and  acquiring  data,  then  the  process  on  digital  forensic 
investigation is meaningless after that. In addition, it would be created as a dump 
image  or  logical  file,  then  volume  is  too  massive  to  shared  contents  that  have 
processed and parsed from the internals of files. So, it is necessary to downscale 
the range of investigation by extracting only essential contents. It is important to 

4  

analyze the contents to know what information they have and the results will be 
different by authorities and stakeholders. 

A 5W1H method is a basic writing principle, which asks six questions--what, 
who, where, when, why and how. Media that delivers objective facts followed this 
rule  for  correctness,  conciseness,  and  clearness.  Previous  research  has  been 
studied  usually  in  natural  sentences  to  understand  tasks  and  summarize  the 
information.  Information  representation  based  on  the  5W1H  method  in  digital 
forensic  investigation  maintained  their  characteristics  and  enhanced  its  search 
efficiency and visibility. Moreover, it is a primary element for vague and complex 
investigation.  Basically,  digital  forensic  investigators  try  to  list  as  much 
information as possible. For example, the header of a ZIP file contains metadata 
such  as  the  name  of  a  compressed  file,  modified  time,  and  file  size.  That 
information  is  stored  in  a  unit  of  a  structure.  When  there  is  no  capability  to 
analyze it, it is unable to know what each structure points to. 

The process of parsing is an automated system to put newly input data on an 
already known frame. It is a simple process to normalize it into an existing frame 
by  statistics,  empirical  experiments,  or  logical  analysis,  but  it  can’t  provide  any 
new information. In the case of information which can be expressed by 5W1H, it 
can  ensure  clarity  and  correctness.  However,  some  information  is  unable  to  be 
expressed by 5W1H. In this case, the information only contains simple state of an 
object or the information cannot answer to the 5W1H questions. If no information 
is  available  to  represent  5W1H-based  expression,  it  still  needs  to  list  the 
normalized contents and do further examination to find traces more. 

3.1  

Information Extraction 

In order to extract information from data, volume and file system analysis [3] of 
the  targeted  system  (or  operational  environment)  or  dump  images  is  processed 
first, and then the content is extracted through structure analysis (a.k.a.parsing) by 
types  of  files  [8].  Most  tools  create  analysis  results  in  the  form  of  databases, 
markup  language,  and  comma-separated  values  (CSV).  Different  types  of  data 
outputs can be converted to the same type of outputs by format conversion. In the 
case  of  security  incidents,  STIX  (Structured  Threat  Information  eXpression)  or 
CybOX  (Cyber  Observable  eXpression)  [2][4]  can  be  used  since  it  requires  a 
faster information exchange. Besides contents extracted from files, a specification 
language such as UCO (Unified Cyber Ontology) [5] to express ontology can be 
utilized.  However,  many  tools,  used  for  parsing,  print  out  results  which  have 
different  keys  with  the  same  content,  which  makes  digital  forensic  investigation 
inefficient. 

For example, let's consider messages that sent and received using a messenger. 
Mostly  messengers  have  log  files  of  the  activity  following  elements  in  common 
such  as  timestamp,  sender,  receiver,  text,  and  attachment.  These  things  should 
have  examined  during  investigation,  but  the  normalization  of  the  elements  is 
different by type of devices, operating systems, or applications. In reality, they are 

 
5 

often stored in SQLite databases format and it is easy to meet a different schema 
for  each  types.  It  means  that  it  is  necessary  to  express  the  information  in  a 
standardized format such as CASE [2]. 

3.2   Classification and Filtering 

Since  the  amount  of  content  to  be  extracted  from  the  file  is  very  large,  and  the 
5W1H is useful for expressing the behavior of a user or system, the information is 
divided  into  20  categories.  The  category  covers  all  the  keys  used  in  Opentext 
EnCase(19),  X-Ways  Forensics(21),  Magnet  AXIOM(14)  [10],  and  Oxygen 
Forensics(16). Additionally, the lists necessary for the investigation is derived as 
follows and the 5W1H was tagged with the contents in accordance with  Table 1, 
which is the data types and definitions for classification. 

•  archive 

•  connection 

•  executable 

•  memory 

•  social 

•  call 

•  document 

•  font 

•  message 

•  string 

•  calendar 

•  email 

•  location 

•  network 

•  system 

•  cloud 

•  exchange 

•  media 

•  people 

•  web 

Also, in order to exchange information which is much larger than intelligence 
as a resource for decision-making, it is not possible that data is normalized in the 
form of collection, refinement, or package  [9]. In other words, we need a virtual 
layer  that  acts  as  a  bridge  to  information,  and  we  propose  a  classification  of 
information based on the 5W1H. 

The  information  with  category  and  the  5W1H  tag  is  written  by  JSON-LD 
(JavaScript Object Notation for Linked Data), normalized format, and saved it with 

Table 1. Criteria for applying domains based on 5W1H. 

Domain 

who 

when 

Concept 

subject 

time, period 

where 

place, direction 

what 

why → etc 

object 

reason 

Question 
Who (or What) did it? 
Who acted on whom? 
What time did it happen? 
Since when, until when?  
Where it was happend? 
Where did you go from where? 
What was it? 
What did you get? 
Why do you think so? 
Where did you check it? 

how 

method 

How did it work? 

 
 
 
 
6  

serialization for sharing or archiving with other users over a network. In the  case 
of STIX, 94 categories are provided. It usually defined the information in network 
communication, and it is useful to use it in conjunction since it is very limited to 
express the analyzed results in digital forensic investigation. Besides, certain rules 
can be shared using the Indicator of Compromise (IOC). It is useful to have a way 
of  expressing  this  information  in  order  to  classify  and  share  it.  Especially,  the 
5W1H-based  method  will  help  effective  digital  forensic  investigation.  This 
process often involves a large number of stakeholder personnel to ensure a chain 
of custody, a guarantee of participation, and credibility, which can be effective for 
flexible communication. 

3.3   Writing Objects for Sharing 

We have defined a specification to create flexible representations of information 
and have correctness and conciseness on digital forensic investigation. This aims 
to  make  it  effective  to  integrate  and  process  information  in  order  to  derive 
additional clues. In our method, the basic unit of information expression is an object 
written in JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) format and it has attributes in key-
value.  A  object  is  the  normalized  data  to  express  traces  or  events.  A  object  is 
written with contents that  will come from images or files according to the type of 
data  with  documents  which  defines  many  attributes,  which  are  materials  to 
normalized  and  express  contents,  facilitate  the  exchange  of  information,  and 
develop  an  automated  system.  We  defines  some  attributes  or  used  vocabularies 
already  defined  in  STIX  or  DFXML(Digital  Forensics  XML)  [11].  All  objects 
have  header  to  identify  each  of  them.  Depending  on  this  attributes,  they  are 
classified two types as trace object or event object. 

A trace object describes the fact observed from images or files of analysis and 
is capable to represent the state of a particular subject. An event object is a model 

Figure 2. Examples of the classification of the contents for writing objects based on 5W1H 
categories. 

 
7 

designed to represent information that can be inferred from the contents identified 
from the trace object. So, this supports the ability to correlate facts represented by 
the  trace  object  with  each  other  and  to  associate  events  with  related  objects,  as 
shown  in  the  Fig.  2.  Here,  in  writing  the  event  object,  we  wrote  the  relation  to 
objects  in  the  form  based  on  5W1H,  including  activities  by  user  or  system.  In 
other words, it can be seen as a reassignment of the trace object representing the 
content, as shown in Fig. 3. 

• 

traceObj = { id: trace1, 
                    type: system, 
                    ArtifactType: WinEventLog, 
                    Even-tID: 4624, 
                    SubjectUserName: Jaehyeok, 
                    EventOccuredTime: 2019-07-14, 
                    source: security.evtx }  

•  eventObj = { id: event1, 

                     who: Jaehyeok, 
                     how: logged on, 
                     when: 2019-07-14, 
                     etc: souce = [trace1]} 
⇒ An user Jaehyeok successfully logged on at 2019-07-14 by trace1. 

Figure 3. Relationship between trace object and event object to express 
information. 

4  

Case studies 

4.1  

Investigations into confidential leaks 

In  this  section,  we  will  take  a  look  at  the  cases  where  information  expression 
based  on  the  5W1H  is  applied.  Tom  was  an  employee  in  ABC  company,  who 
quitted his job after receiving a job offer from a competitor. Tom got a job offer 
from an employee of the competitor by email and text message before leaving the 
company.  Tom  used  a  USB  storage  device  to  copy  Confidential  Document.docx 

 
 
8  

and  Account  Book.xlsx.  He  also  copied  the  partner  evaluation  report.pdf  of 
another department using the cloud service on the company's public PC. Tom sent 
a text message to the employee in the competitor who suggested a career change 
after leaving his office. At that time, a member of the audit team felt suspicious of 
Tom and investigated his devices that were given to him to determine whether he 
leaked the confidential information or not [13]. 

This is another scenario. An employee at an IT company suddenly had a health 
problem  while  working  abroad.  His  family  requested  an  investigation  to  find 
whether it is an industrial accident. They also requested to analyze the computer 
usage  history  within  one  week  of  the  incident  through  digital  forensics  to 
determine  whether  excessive work  affected  his  sudden  death.  As  a  result,  it  was 
found  out  that  the  user  logged  in  to  the  work  computer  for  a  long  time  and 
accessed a large number of document files right before the incident. 

As  described  above,  the  5W1H-based  expression  is  useful  for  applying  the 
digital  profiling  technique  because  it  specifies  and  stores  the  domain.  Digital 
profiling [7] refers to the process of collecting, analyzing and utilizing information 
on  cyberspace  as  well  as  digital  devices.  It  includes  information  about  personal 
information,  characteristics,  behaviors,  affiliations,  connections,  and  interactions 
and  can  be  used  in  organized  crime  investigations,  merchandise  marketing, 
corporate security, criminal justice and human resources. 

4.3   Verification of tools 

Many  tools  must  be  used  to  ensure  reliability  [15]  during  the  analysis  process 
because  the  tools  used  in  digital  forensic  investigation  are  different  from  each 
other and the credibility of results are not guaranteed. NIST proposed a method to 
verify  the  reliability  of  forensic  tools.  CFTT  [14]  provides  the  information 
necessary for the tool user to determine the reliability of the tool. There are disk 
imaging,  write  block,  deleted  file  recovery,  and  forensic  file  carving,  but  the 
methodology for analytical tool testing from the  acquired data  is limited. This is 
because it is difficult to establish a clear standard for evaluating the reliability of 
the  analysis  tool  that  grasps  the  behavior  of  the  system  or  the  user's  behavior 

Figure 4. Comparison of analysis results for different tools using 5W1H-based expression. 

 
9 

through  an  evaluation  image.  Therefore,  if  the  analysis  results  extracted  from 
different tools are compared to each other based on 5W1H method proposed in the 
paper, it can be used to verify the reliability of each tool. 

Fig. 4 is an example how to determine the reliability of tools by comparing the 
analysis results of different tools. For the sake of illustration,  Tool A and Tool B 
shows in the call_log.db as a call log data for who−From, To, When−StartTime, 
EndTime,  and  how−Application.  Contents  corresponding  to  CallType  was 
extracted from  Tool  A and that result is correct−All answer is  O and this means 
TRUE.  On  the  other  hand,  Tool  B  derived  several  incorrect  answer  or  nothings. 
So, we could consider that Tool A is more reliable tool than Tool B. 

5  

Conclusion 

The types of files covered by the digital forensic investigation are wide and varied, 
however,  there  is  no  way  to  express  the  results  into  a  standardized  format. 
Different outputs make it time-consuming and difficult to share information and to 
implement integration. Based on the 5W1H-based expression, digital information 
from  different  types  of  files  is  converted  and  represented  in  the  same  format  of 
outputs. The application of the 5W1H-based expression on the case studies shows 
that  this  expression  enhances  clarity  and  correctness  for  information  sharing.  In 
addition,  This  5W1H  based  expression  improved  from  syntactic  system  to 
semantic system. 

It  is  best  to  standardize  the  format  of  data  expressions  and  to  normalize  the 
format when outputting results, but since many tools have already been developed 
and distributed, it is inefficient and practically impossible to force standardization 
to  them.  We  have  developed  a  prototype  mapper  script  using  python  that  can 
convert  the  output  from  Plaso  [4]  to  ours.  This  mapper  is  one  of  our  efforts  to 
express  information  from  various  contents,  to  comprehensively  analyze,  and 
profile  them  suitably.  In  the  future,  the  range  of  data  storage  will  expand  to 
cyberspace including digital devices. With this trend, attentions and efforts will be 
needed to develop and standardize the specification language. 

References  

1.  CASE community, https://caseontology.org/  
2.  Barnum,  S.:  Standardizing  cyber  threat  intelligence  information  with  the  structured 
threat information expression. STIX Whitepaper,(1.1) http://stixproject.github.io 
/getting-started/whitepaper/(12.04. 2016) (2014) 

3.  Carrier, B.: The sleuth kit. TSK–sleuthkit.org (2011)  
4.  Casey, E., Back, G., Barnum, S.: Leveraging cybox™ to standardize representationand 
exchange of digital forensic information. Digital Investigation 12, S102–S110(2015)  
5.  Casey,  E.,  Barnum,  S.,  Griﬀith,  R.,  Snyder,  J.,  van  Beek,  H.,  Nelson,  A.:  Advancing 

10  

coordinated cyber-investigations and tool interoperability using a community developed 
specification language. Digital investigation 22, 14–45 (2017)  

6.  Casey, E., Barnum, S., Griﬀith, R., Snyder, J., van Beek, H., Nelson, A.: The evolution 
of  expressing  and  exchanging  cyber-investigation  information  in a  standardized  form. 
In: Handling and Exchanging Electronic Evidence Across Europe, pp. 43–58. Springer 
(2018)  

7.  Colombini,  C.,  Colella,  A.:  Digital  profiling:  A  computer  forensics  approach. 
In:International  Conference  on  Availability,  Reliability,  and  Security.  pp.  330–343. 
Springer (2011)  

8.  Debinski, M., Breitinger, F., Mohan, P.: Timeline2gui: A log2timeline csv parserand training 

scenarios. Digital Investigation 28, 34–43 (2019), https://plaso.readthedocs.io/  

9.  Epifani,  M.,  Turchi,  F.:  Standard  for  the  electronic  evidence  exchange.  In:  Handling 
and Exchanging Electronic Evidence Across Europe, pp. 311–335. Springer (2018)  
10. Forensics,  M.:  AXIOM  Artifact  Reference  (2020), https://support.magnet 
forensics.com/s/product-documentation?prod=axiom-artifact 
11. Garfinkel, S.: Digital forensics xml and the dfxml toolset. Digital Investigation 8(3-4), 

161–174 (2012) 

12. Intelligence, J.: Joint publication 2-0. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Washington DC (2007) 
13. Kuhar, S., Podgorelec, V.: Ontology visualization for domain experts: A new solution. 
In:  2012  16th  International  Conference  on  Information  Visualisation.  pp.363–369. 
IEEE (2012) 

14. Lyle,  J.R.:  Computer  forensics  tool  testing  (cftt).  Tech.  rep.(2003),  https://www.nist. 
gov/itl/ssd/software-quality-group/computer-forensics-tool-
testing-program-cftt 

15. Techniques,  I.:  Iso/iec  27041:  2041  information  technology  —  security  techniques— 
guidance  on  assuring  suitability  and  adequacy  of  incident  investigative  method. 
ISO/IEC-The standard was published in October (2015) 

 
 
