From Cyber Terrorism to Cyber Peacekeeping: Are we there yet?

MARIA PAPATHANASAKI, GEORGIOS DIMITRIOU, University of Thessaly, Greece
LEANDROS MAGLARAS, ISMINI VASILEIOU, De Montfort University, UK
HELGE JANICKE, Cyber Security Cooperative Research Centre, Australia

0
2
0
2

p
e
S
7
2

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
4
0
7
0
.
0
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

In Cyberspace nowadays, there is a burst of information that everyone has
access. However, apart from the advantages the Internet offers, it also hides
numerous dangers for both people and nations. Cyberspace has a dark side,
including terrorism, bullying, and other types of violence. Cyberwarfare is
a kind of virtual war that causes the same destruction that a physical war
would also do. In this article, we discuss what Cyberterrorism is and how it
can lead to Cyberwarfare.

CCS Concepts: • Computer systems organization → Redundancy; Robot-
ics.

Additional Key Words and Phrases: cybersecurity, Cyberterrorism, Cyber
Peacekeeping

ACM Reference Format:
Maria Papathanasaki, Georgios Dimitriou, Leandros Maglaras, Ismini Vasileiou,
and Helge Janicke. 2018. From Cyber Terrorism to Cyber Peacekeeping: Are
we there yet?. ACM Trans. Graph. 37, 4, Article 111 (August 2018), 7 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456

1

INTRODUCTION

From the first years of its existence, people undeniably benefit from
the Internet. However, only a few comprehend that the e-world
is fraught with danger. Unfortunately, Cyberspace has a dark side,
including terrorism, bullying, and other types of violence. The dark
web is becoming more and more popular among the youth and a
portion of criminals [Vilić et al. 2017]. Cyberwarfare is every ac-
tion in Cyberspace and targets against a country’s power or other
non-governmental entities (companies, organizations, etc.). Cyber-
warfare can cause physical destruction via computers. It is accom-
plishing military operations using virtual means. This way, coun-
tries manage to achieve missions that would require the physical
presence of the army. For instance, China regularly cyber attacks
Taiwan to weaken the economy of the country. It is essential to note
that Cyberwarfare is still a kind of virtual war that causes the same
destruction to a state that a physical war would also do. Of course,
there is a huge possibility that an e-war can lead to a physical one,
causing even more destruction. In summary, we could say Cyber-
warfare is the techniques and tactics a country uses virtually and

Authors’ addresses: Maria Papathanasaki, Georgios Dimitriou, University of Thessaly,
Lamia, Greece; Leandros Maglaras, Ismini Vasileiou, leandros.maglatas@dmu.ac.uk,
De Montfort University, Leicester, UK; Helge Janicke, Cyber Security Cooperative
Research Centre, Australia.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
0730-0301/2018/8-ART111 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/1122445.1122456

physically, simultaneously or alternately, for an extended period
against another state.

Fig. 1. Hackers can spread fear

2 CYBERWARFARE

There are many types of warfare that act individually or combined.
The most important of them are presented below:

(1) Espionage: Several countries have been accused of spying
over others using their secret agencies by recording phone
calls in countries like the Bahamas, Afghanistan, Mexico, and
others. Whereas some countries resorted to spying on the
electronic diplomatic communication channels.

(2) Sabotage: To better understand that type of cyber war-
fare, we will talk about Stuxnet. In June 2010, a virus named
Stuxnet made its appearance in power plants, traffic con-
trol systems, and factories worldwide. Stuxnet appears to be
twenty times more complex than the most complex virus
until then and has many powers; one of those was the ability
to turn up the pressure inside nuclear reactors. It is a weapon
made entirely out of code. What makes Stuxnet even scarier
is its capability to make everything seem familiar to the en-
gineers. That virus could enter into the systems by security

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

 
 
 
 
 
 
111:2

• Papathanasaki, et al.

gaps that system creators were unaware of, named zero days.
Such gaps can be sold on the black market for 100.000, and
Stuxnet bought twenty of them. The virus’s creator targeted a
nuclear factory in Iran and managed to shut down a thousand
centrifuges in the reactors, leading the Iranian government to
suspend the work of all its nuclear facilities without any expla-
nation. Stuxnet infected their nuclear factories, and should
nobody notice that, it would lead to a national electricity
blackout. What was Iran’s response to the attack? They made
an open call for hackers to join the Iranian Revolutionary
Guard, creating the second-largest online army worldwide.
To this day, we do not know for sure who was behind the
attack [Langner 2011]). Nine months after the attack, Stuxnet
was redesigned, this time even better, to be able to destroy
oil pipelines or power grids, and it is available to anyone to
download. Stuxnet is an open-source weapon, free for every-
one to play with, including the next person who will use it
against a nation.

(3) Denial of service attack: Such type of attack aims to make
people unable to reach a network resource or make a machine
unavailable to users. Attackers often target banks, credit card
payment gateways, and other high profile web servers.
(4) Electrical power grid: An electrical power grid is a network
for delivering electricity from producers to consumers. A
country can infiltrate another country’s electrical grid and
leave inside any virus that can disrupt the whole system, like
an attack that took place in April 2009. Another example is
the attack against a nation, causing a power outage for twelve
hours. The most recent attack was made against Russia in
June 2019, fortunately without consequences because of the
Russian government’s prompt actions. It is recommended that
all countries disconnect the power grid from the Internet and
run the net with droop speed control, to avoid such attacks
[Halpern 2015].

(5) Propaganda: Cyber propaganda is any type of misinforma-
tion, and psychological control of people, using the Internet.
According to Jowett and O’Donnell, "propaganda is the delib-
erate, systematic attempt to shape perceptions, manipulate
cognitions, and direct behavior to achieve a response that
furthers the desired intent of the propagandist" [Jowett and
O’donnell 2018]. People who try to propagandize others often
use any way possible to brainwash internet users in order to
make them serve their purposes.

(6) Economic disruption: In 2017 a huge attack took place in
Ukraine’s and U.S.’s National Health Service, using malicious
software to make disruptions. Those attacks aim to harm a
company’s economy, which is also referred to as financial
crime [Perlroth et al. 2017]

(7) Surprise cyber attack: Such attacks have as a primary goal
to draw attention. The bigger the attention they get, the more
successful the attack is. A well-known surprise cyberattack
was al-Qaeda’s 9/11 attack against the USA, which was broad-
casted worldwide, and up to this day, it still remembered.

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

2.1 Motivation and Ethics

What makes Cyberwarfare appealing to more and more countries
is a very simple reason. As always, money counts, and in the case
of a war, they count even more. Cyberwar costs less than a physical
one, and it also offers the opportunity to weaken another nation
without risking people’s lives. Most of the attacks are politically
motivated. For instance, in 2008, hackers attacked CNN. Another
motivation for causing a cyber attack is the sabotaging Internet
itself. Hackers are trying to break into web servers, communication
links, businesses, and homes, harming internet service providers,
electrical grids, financial networks, etc. Some attacks are used to
produce income for the attacker. Some ransomware can be used by
countries to ensure a noticeable profit causing long-term damages
to their targets. From the other side of the coin, some organizations
are motivated by the need of our time for web safety. For example,
Kaspersky Lab examines the issue of Cyberwarfare and tries to
raise awareness amongst the internet community. Traditional wars
are guided by the Just War Theory (JWT). Several well-defined
principles state when a nation is ethically justified to go to war and
remain ethical during one. However, are these principles applicable
when it comes to cyber-warfare? It is essential to mention that a
physical war should be avoided until all other options have been
exhausted. On the other side, a Cyberwar is preferable against a
physical one, since bloodshed and material damage do not directly
occur. People from different nations may not kill each other as it is
used to happen in real wars, but a cyberattack against power and
food supplies can lead to numerous deaths too. Currently, there are
no agreed ethical guidelines for Cyberwarfare. Some researchers
have tried to transfer the existing legislature into the cyber world,
but warfare ethics are unstable to this day.

2.2 Opposing Cyberwarfare

Modern society depends on the Internet more than ever. To ensure
our safety, it has been stated that sub-webs should be built since
rebuilding the whole Internet is extremely difficult. Sub-webs are
going to be equipped with the latest safety protocols. In 2012 a com-
pany named Artemis expressed interest in creating such a "secure
place". The user had to type .secure at the end of the site address
he wanted to visit and was part of the Artemis sub-web. However,
Artemis offered safety only to the websites and not the users them-
selves, exposing them to any kind of malware. Up to date, nobody
has managed to make a sub-web safe enough for users. Another
solution is to cut the Internet off from an area that is being attacked.
That would be a great solution if it were not for the citizens of
that area who would not appreciate the inability to connect to the
Internet. An attack that took place in 2012 worldwide almost led
the FBI to shut down the connection of the infected area in which
more than a million computers existed. To avoid that, they installed
two of their own internet servers until they arrested the attackers.
All organizations ought to have emergency servers to use in case of
an attack.

Last but not least, we have to understand the limits of each coun-
try into Cyberspace. There are limits to every state power in Cy-
berspace and should not be exceeded. Moreover, each government

has to reorganize its Cybersecurity and try through a new curricu-
lum to help young people acquire more developed critical thinking.

3 CYBERTERRORISM

In 1997 Dr. Barry C. Collin proposed the term “Cyberterrorism”
for the first time. He described it initially as a premeditated attack
on computer systems and data by terrorists. A few years later, all
internet terrorism activities were included in the definition of that
term. Today, cyber terrorism is considered as every terrorism that
uses the Internet as a tool or the network as an attack target [Wu and
Wang 2019]. According to FBI, cyber terrorism is a “premeditated,
politically motivated attack against information, computer systems,
computer programs, and data which results in violence against non-
combatant targets by sub-national groups or clandestine agents”.

But is Cyberterrorism worth such fear from us? To this day, no
attacks related to physical war have taken place, making Cybert-
errorism probably a misnomer. P.W. Singer and Allan Friedman in
their book [Singer [n.d.]], mention that "Cyberterrorism is like a
famous T.V. program named "Shark Week," in which is shown that
people every year are more likely to die by an accident involving
a toilet, than a shark”. Despite this fact, people are more afraid of
dying by a shark than a toilet. Why is that happening? Apparently,
we are more afraid of what media, films, or others make us fear.
We can easily compare the sharks to Cyberterrorism attacks. Peo-
ple nowadays are terrified of that term as much as other reasons
for death. However, as it is mentioned above, Cyberterrorism has
not killed or hurt anyone physically yet. What is the reason that
makes people afraid of Cyberterrorism? Unfortunately, ignorance is
a significant enemy of somebody’s composure. Most internet users
cannot distinguish the real danger from an insignificant threat.

Cyberterrorism tries to inflame rebellions in the heart of a nation,
destroying its peace. However, Cyberterrorism is not only about
national infrastructure sabotaging. For example, even a warning
message for a bomb in a public building is considered to be Cyberter-
rorism. Also, that term refers to acts that hackers do against people
in order to spread fear, show off their powers, or even destroy their
lives by blackmailing them (See Figure 1).

It is significant to make a distinction between Cyberterrorism and
Cybercrime. Although they are similar terms, they should contend
with a different approach by society. Cyberterrorism, in particular,
most of the time, has political motives, but Cybercrime, by contrast,
takes place on a more personal level. Certainly, both of the purposes
of the terms is to cause harm, but the reasons that lead to that
are different. The main goal of Cyberterrorism is to discourage the
masses from raising their voice and propagandize them.

3.1 TYpes of Cyberterrorism

Cyberterrorism depending on the way of technology is used to cause
harm, can be categorized into six parts, according to Susan Brenner
[Brenner 2006]:

From Cyber Terrorism to Cyber Peacekeeping: Are we there yet?

•

111:3

Chernobyl disaster in 1986, could have easily been caused by cyber
terrorists. For example, they could have broken into the security
systems and make the reactors explode. Then they would take ad-
vantage of the deaths that happened and turn the people against
the government (See Figure 2).

Fig. 2. Computers can be used as weapons

3.1.2 Weapons of mass distraction. To better understand this cate-
gory, let’s re-inspect the terrorist attacks of the 11th of September
2001 wherein, a terrorist group ‘Al-Qaeda’ (meaning: The Founda-
tion) hijacked four passenger airplanes, setting them out to fly into
both world trade center (Twin Towers) and the Pentagon. As a result,
the attacks caused 2986 people’s death, including the hijackers, and
at least 10.000.000.000 in infrastructure damage. Millions of Ameri-
cans where watching live the attacks on television, and even more,
were trying to reach CNN’s official website to get more information
about the hijacks. So, what is the factor that would make al-Qaeda
terrorism a weapon of mass destruction? Imagine the people who
visited the CNN website, instead of seeing the real front page, to
see a mirror of that page that shows fake news about other attacks
worldwide. That would make people scared even more, and probably
it would trigger more terrorist attacks and riots, making computers
the real mass destruction weapons.

3.1.3 Weapons of mass disruption. Mass disruption weapons aim
to make public infrastructure (means of mass transportation, health
services, financial institutions, etc.) unreliable to citizens. This time
cyber terrorists are trying to cause mental damage to people in-
stead of physical. For example, let’s take the "Botnet" malware that
managed to turn the Seattle’s Northwest Hospital into chaos. In
January 2005, Christopher Maxwell, a twenty-year-old young man
from California, infected the hospital network, blocking surgery
room doors, moreover doctors’ beeper and intensive care unit’s
machines stopped working.

3.1.4 Cyberwarfare. It has been clear from the previous chapter
what Cyberwarfare is and how it affects modern society.

3.1.1 Weapons of mass destruction. According to S. Brenner, such
attacks are not realistic, since computers do not own the power
to provoke physical destruction directly to any kind of property.
However, they can foment indirect ways that are going to provoke
the physical destructions eventually. She also mentions that the

3.1.5 Hybrid warfare. Hybrid warfare is a kind of Cyberwarfare
that apart from uninformed people, others participate too. To be
more specific, hybrid warfare combines the army with diplomats,
hackers, journalists, and even civilians. All these forces combined,
make an extraordinary powerful group that can easily propagandize

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:4

• Papathanasaki, et al.

people. On the 21st of November 2013 in Crimea (Ukraine), civilians
rose in protest against the President of Ukraine, because of his denial
to sign his country’s union with more than four million people were
united under one force to fight against the president. Who managed
to gather that massive amount of people, though? We cannot be
sure who provoked the upheaval, but we know that whoever did
this was preparing the whole mission for a long time until the time
was right to attack. As Cyberwarfare evolves, more and more hybrid
attacks occur, and a new term is born: Unlimited Warfare.

3.1.6 Unlimited Warfare. That kind of war is an upcoming way to
attack another nation without any barrier. It is said that the first rule
of Unlimited Warfare is the absence of rules and limits. Apparently,
that "rule" violates any ethical border and leads people to act without
any reservations. Unrestricted warfare can be extremely dangerous
to modern society due to the lack of respect amongst developed
countries. Undeniably the sense of justice and safety is affected
during a war. In the case of unlimited warfare, we are talking about
a total demolition of what current societies have built.

3.2 Cyberterrorism and Social Media

Cyber Terrorism in social media is used for identity theft, online
fraud, cyber-attacks, and other reasons. What are the threat cate-
gories in social media for cyber terrorism, and how do attackers use
social media? As it has been mentioned before, Cyberterrorism is
a premeditated electronic attack against civilians to cause harm or
spread fear.

Because social media are accessible from people of all ages world-
wide, cyberterrorists can easily approach someone and detach useful
information, making 90% of Cyberterrorism to happen through so-
cial media. According to Lockheed Martin Corporation, the stages
of intrusion kill chain (IKC) are four:

(1) Information Gathering: collecting information.
(2) Weaponization: Developing malicious code.
(3) Exploitation: Execution of the malicious code.
(4) Installation: Installation of malicious programs.

Usually, cyber terrorists are trying to harm somebody’s reputa-
tion, destroy his life, or weaken his mental balance. They also aim
to cause more extensive harm, like destroying a company’s public
profile.

3.3 Opposing Cyberterrorism

The Internet is being used more and more every day by people.
What measurements should we take to keep ourselves safe, and
what do governments ought to do to maintain their stability? On a
personal level, we have to be careful with the information we share.
Moreover, we should block any spam accounts we detect and avoid
chatting with unknown to us people. We also have to stop using
hashtags because they make our profile easier to find. When we
face misinformation, we should report them, and double-check the
news we read online. It is essential to get informed from reliable
sites, and never reading just the title of an article because it could
be misleading.

A new growing phenomenon in social media is crowdturfing
(crowdsourcing + astroturfing). Crowdturfing uses misleading "posters,"

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

which present to their page followers, making them build a nega-
tive or positive opinion about a subject by presenting fake views of
others. That way of propagandizing can help the spread of cyber-
rumors about a person or a company. Crowdturfing puts information
integrity and authenticity into risk, so we should have critical think-
ing before making any decision. For instance, social media can use
a pop-up that reminds users about the consequences of misinforma-
tion, aiming their ethical logic [Parlakkılıç 2018]. It goes without
saying that all computers with internet access should have installed
updated antivirus software, and all users have to protect their pass-
words and their sensitive information. As Marwan Albahar stated,
“if technology can take us to the moon, a breakdown or compromise
of the same will ensure that we stay there forever and never return”
[Commission et al. 2013; Hughes [n.d.]].

4 CYBER PEACEKEEPING

According to United Nations (UN), Cyber Peacekeeping is defined
as the “Action undertaken to preserve peace, however fragile, where
fighting has been halted and to assist in implementing agreements
achieved by the peacemakers”. Since 1928 UN peacekeeping op-
erations grow more and more. During these years UN has faced
many failed processes leading to its radical reformation of its way
of acting. Peacekeeping is an activity that overlaps with a wider set
of peace operations. According to the UN, these other activities are
[Burton 2015]:

• Conflict Prevention Early intervention to prevent a dispute

escalating.

• Peacemaking Diplomatic measures aimed at bringing about

a ceasefire.

• Peace Enforcement Restoring peace without the consent of

the parties.

• Peace Building Laying the foundation for long term peace

and preventing relapse into conflict.

United Nations follow three peacekeeping principles that are

listed below:

(1) Consent of the parties: Peacekeeping operations are only de-
ployed with the consent of the conflicting parties. Without the
consent of all parties, the operation risks becoming involved
in the conflict.

(2) Impartiality: Operations maintain peace without favoring
any of the involved parties. An operation must be seen as
impartial to remain legitimate.

(3) Non-use of force, except in self-defense and defense of the
mandate: The use of force should be a measure of last resort.
The force could be used against those who were determined
to undermine the peace process.

Cyberwar is considered to be the latest form of war, and it should
be treated like every other type of war. That fact leads us to the
conclusion that cyberwar could potentially threaten the peace in
a country. Preventing a war is preferable than dealing with its af-
termath, so it is essential to take every measurement possible to
prevent such actions.

4.1 Goals and principles

In our daily lives, peacekeeping is maintained through a set of rules
that everyone must obey. These regulations are set by the state and
intend to adjust the smooth function of the society. Cyberspace
is our society in a small scale, which also needs rules to be kept
safe and accessible to everyone. Human rights, democracy, safety
and freedom are only a few of the countless fundamental rights
that ought to be protected in Cyberspace. Nowadays, legislature
is handling more and more human protection cases and it has be-
come stricter against the ones who offend against it. According to
the European Union Cybersecurity Strategy, Cybersecurity is gov-
erned by a principle guide that should be followed internationally
[Commission et al. 2013].

• Cyberworld follows the same rules as the physical one Every
rule that ensures the safety of the physical world, also applies
to the digital society.

• Unlimited access to everyone The Internet is a huge world,
containing everything the physical one has to offer, but in
a virtual way. In contrast to the real world, the Internet is
accessible to everybody, and offers unlimited information for
free. That means that safety is essential in such an extremely
large space.

• Protection of users Someone’s safety can only be assured in
a secure place. According to European Union Charter of Fun-
damental Rights, all users’ data are processed, ensuring that
everyone’s sensitive personal information remains private.
• Security maintenance, is everyone’s responsibility The Inter-
net is accessed daily by citizens, organizations, public and
private authorities. All of the above are partially responsible
for their safety, and Cybersecurity is strengthened every time
individuals take measurements about their own security.
• Safety control distribution The size of Cyberspace requires
control by many entities. These days, our safety on web rests
on the shoulders of non-governmental / governmental orga-
nizations. Those entities act according to protocols that EU
has defined, and standards that are adapted to the needs of
the time.

4.2

Implementation of Cyber Peacekeeping

Since ancient times, people are trying to find ways to avoid or stop
wars. In ancient Greece, during the Olympic Games, people agreed
to a truce. Throughout wars, they would dedicate some days to
bury the dead soldiers or pray to Gods. All these contradict the fact
that at the same time they would make deadlier weapons to destroy
races easier. Nowadays a huge concern rises. Perhaps the deadliest
weapon of all times has been created; Cyberspace.

It may sound extreme to say that Cyberspace is deadly; however
it is possible to lead to a world war faster than a physical one. On
the other side, it could also be the way to avoid such wars. The
Internet is growing stronger every day, and maintaining peace in
it is extremely challenging. Peacekeeping seems to be inevitable
considering the dangers that lurk, and it is the only way to ensure
the safety and peace among the users, who could be individuals or
nations.

From Cyber Terrorism to Cyber Peacekeeping: Are we there yet?

•

111:5

United Nations often interfere when asked, to offer help to states
that are in conflict. For example two countries that wish to stop an
imminent war, can turn to UN for assistance. UN often retreat armed
soldiers to a defined boundary and use diplomacy to avoid making
the situation worse. Bringing the conflict to an end means that
Cyberwarfare also stops, leading both countries to an agreement.
The complexity of the UN’s procedure depends mainly on the states’
cooperation and the harm that every country has caused to the
other [Robinson et al. 2019].

To conclude UN peacekeepers Observe, Monitor and Report (OMR)
the cases of Cyberwar, and close the safety gaps of Cyberspace, mak-
ing it safer over time [Robinson et al. 2018].

5 CYBER DEFENCE

Cyber defence is a computer network defense mechanism which
includes response to actions and critical infrastructure protection
and information assurance for organizations, government entities
and other possible networks. Cyber defense focuses on preventing,
detecting and providing timely responses to attacks or threats so
that no infrastructure or information is tampered with. With the
growth in volume as well as complexity of cyber attacks, cyber
defense is essential for most entities in order to protect sensitive
information as well as to safeguard assets.

5.1 NATO’S Cyber Defence

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) was created on 4 April
1949 and is an alliance between 30 European and North American
Countries. NATO assures these countries’ safety against others’
attacks and aims to tighten the bonds among the member states.
Since the day NATO was formed, its priority is to defend its part
in Cyberspace. To ensure that NATO stays safe, two tools, which
are presented below, are combined with monitoring and dealing in
real-time all threats:

(1) The National Criminal Intelligence Resource Center (NCIRC)
NCIRC is based in the U.S. Its objective is all forms of crime
prevention and the criminal justice system’s improvement.
(2) Code-division multiple access (CDMA) CDMA is a channel
access method applied in most radio communication tech-
nologies, allowing users to share a bandwidth of frequencies
without interference [Torrieri 2005].

It should be noted that NATO itself does not have offensive cyber
attack capabilities, and up to this day, any offensive act is utterly
upon the individual member states. Moreover, because of the com-
plexity of counterattacking cyber attackers, NATO aims to make
them feel that they are unable to achieve a successful attack, avoid-
ing that way many offensive operations before they start. NATO’s
power originates from the cooperation of the individual states and
state-sponsored hackers. It also approaches Cybersecurity diplomat-
ically and peacefully, trying to develop trust between NATO-states
and other countries [Burton 2015].

5.2 Cyber Self-defence

Nowadays, all individual systems that constitute a state, such as
military, financial, and health systems, are connected so tightly
that a massive attack could cause great harm [Waxman 2013]. Until

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

111:6

• Papathanasaki, et al.

a few years ago, most kinds of attacks resulted from pranks by
small groups of people. However, today, these attacks are under
a well-planned procedure that exceeds the prank limits. Instead
of the Cyberworld’s safety valves, every simple user, company, or
state ought to take extra measurements for their safety and privacy
protection, following the four factors explained below.

(1) Culture awareness Individuals are important to follow sim-
ple rules such as creating strong passwords, installing an-
tivirus software, and publicly sharing sensitive information
[Vasileiou and Furnell 2019].

(2) Active & passive defense Having up to date antivirus, two-
factor authentication to all devices and accounts and an active
firewall are only few of the many steps that someone could
do to prevent attacks.

(3) Breach readiness It goes without saying that everyone has to
keep backups in case of an attack that might cause data loss.
(4) High-value data content management It is highly recom-
mended that no sensitive and personal data are shared online.
Especially any personally identifying data should be avoided
to be published under all circumstances.

By hiring specialized staff to recognize and evaluate the incoming
threats, companies will prevent attacks before they cause harm.
Staying cyber safe is not hard to achieve, and it depends on us to a
great extend.

5.3 Cyber Defence Technology

5.3.1 Vulnerability Assessment(VA) and Penetration Tests (PT). Se-
curing systems requires that we find any vulnerabilities before
attackers do. That procedure, which is described as Vulnerability
Assessment (VA), provides cyber defense at a great extend. At VA
all software, networks and systems are checked for weaknesses that
leave room to attackers to attack undisturbed. The vulnerabilities
that a system may have are listed below.
• Authentication Vulnerabilities
• Configuration Weakness Vulnerabilities
• Access Control Vulnerabilities
• Exception Handling Vulnerabilities
• Boundary Condition Vulnerabilities
• Input Validation Vulnerabilities

After a possible vulnerability is discovered, Penetration Tests (PT)
take place to investigate the safety gap more. All weaknesses are
discovered through various techniques that include both automated
and manual testing (software/knowledge-experience). Attackers
run VA at the victim using the same techniques and get a list of all
possible vulnerabilities. Fortunately, if the victim manages to ensure
the systems’ safety before the attack, a successful Vulnerability
Assessment - Penetration Test (VAPT) will have taken place, and
nobody will penetrate them [Waxman 2013].

In conclusion, VAPT tests are recommended to take place in all
systems to ensure their maximum cyber safety. Also, more VAPT
software and techniques should be created, that will improve the
existing ones.

5.3.2 AI. There is no doubt that Artificial intelligence (AI) plays an
important role in the fight against the cyber crime. First of all, AI

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

can be used in creating intelligent machines, or in solving difficult
problems such as in cyber defense [Maglaras and Jiang 2014; Tyugu
2011].

For example, neural networks are popular in cyber defense, be-
cause of the high speed neurons learn and solve problems. The
most used AI tool however, are the expert systems, that are used
for decision support. Expert systems subserve the decision making
in many domains including cyberspace. They contain an extensible
database of scientific knowledge, and they can support solving of a
great range of problems. The ability of the expert systems to solve
problems depends on the quality of the knowledge they contain
[Rosenblatt 1957].

An ideal way to cope with DDoS attacks is the intelligent agents
software components. Intelligent agents are able to make decisions
and act accordingly, depending on the circumstances. Due to some
legal and commercial problems they are not widely used, but as
soon as these obstacles are overcomed, intelligent agents should be
used to implement a powerful infrastructure against DDoS attacks
[Kotenko et al. 2010; Kotenko and Ulanov 2007].

Artificial intelligence is constantly developing ways to improve
the existing systems. This is possible through enriching current
knowledge databases with new information, or by reorganizing
them. The huge amount of data that we have at our disposal is often
hard to manipulate, so data mining was developed. Data mining
was born through unsupervised type of machine learning, and it
is widely used in cyber defense, because of the safety gaps that
occur from that uncontrollable amount of data. In order to help
the systems learn easier and faster, new algorithms and learning
methods are developed constantly, making threat detection systems
more productive.

Last but not least, a common technique used in problem solving
and decision support, is constraint satisfaction. In that process, the
problem requires its solution within some limitations also known
as constraints. Depending on the constraints, the techniques that
are used vary. A typical example of constraint satisfaction is the
game Sudoku. In that game the player is asked to fill a table 9x9
with numbers from 1 to 9 when a part of the table is pre-filled. The
constraints in that problem solving game, is that the lines, rows
and blocks of the table, must not contain the same number more
than once. The solution of the problem is the one that satisfies all
constraints [Tyugu and Tyugu 2007].

As it was mentioned before, AI methods are used more and more
on Cyber Defense, and in the future it seems that they will be an
indefeasible part of it. The power of cyber attackers is growing
rapidly, however the techniques that were mentioned above, have
the power to hinder their attacks if used properly.

6 CONCLUSIONS

Research into conducting and understanding cyber warfare and
cyber terrorism is extensive and wide-ranging [Robinson et al. 2019],
yet research into restoring peace after cyber warfare has recently
been addressed [Ayres and Maglaras 2016]. Attribution of cyber-
attacks is an open issue [Cook et al. 2016] and the correct norms
and procedures are yet to be discovered. Some security solutions
specifically for Critical Infrastructures must be put forward in the

National or International level. Undertaking efficient cyber security
risk assessments, maturity assessments [Drivas et al. 2020] and
implementing mitigation plans ae important steps for securing CNIs
[Cook et al. 2017].

There is still much work to be done on Cyber Peacekeeping and
Cyber Defense, but soon enough, they will be necessary to avoid
cyber attacks. Maintaining peace will be hard to accomplish in
the near future; however, more and more organizations apart from
NATO and UN will be available to defend peace in Cyberspace.

REFERENCES

Nicholas Ayres and Leandros A Maglaras. 2016. Cyberterrorism targeting the general
public through social media. Security and Communication Networks 9, 15 (2016),
2864–2875.

Susan W Brenner. 2006. At light speed: Attribution and response to cyber-

crime/terrorism/warfare. J. Crim. L. & Criminology 97 (2006), 379.

Joe Burton. 2015. NATO’s cyber defence: strategic challenges and institutional adapta-

tion. Defence Studies 15, 4 (2015), 297–319.

SeeEuropean Commission et al. 2013. Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union:

An Open, Safe and Secure Cyberspace. adopted February 7 (2013).

Allan Cook, Helge Janicke, Richard Smith, and Leandros Maglaras. 2017. The industrial
control system cyber defence triage process. Computers & Security 70 (2017), 467–
481.

Allan Cook, Andrew Nicholson, Helge Janicke, Leandros A Maglaras, and Richard Smith.
2016. Attribution of cyber attacks on industrial control systems. EAI Endorsed Trans.
Indust. Netw. & Intellig. Syst. 3, 7 (2016), e3.

George Drivas, Argyro Chatzopoulou, Leandros Maglaras, Costas Lambrinoudakis,
Allan Cook, and Helge Janicke. 2020. A NIS Directive compliant Cybersecurity
Maturity Assessment Framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10411 (2020).

Micah Halpern. 2015. Iran Flexes Its Power by Transporting Turkey to the Stone Age.

Observer. Observer Opinion 22 (2015).

Rex B Hughes. [n.d.]. NATO and Cyber Defence: Mission Accomplished?, ATLANTISCH

PERSPECTIEF, April 2009.

Garth S Jowett and Victoria O’donnell. 2018. Propaganda & persuasion. Sage publica-

tions.

Igor Kotenko, Alexey Konovalov, and Andrey Shorov. 2010. Agent-based modeling and
simulation of botnets and botnet defense. In Conference on Cyber Conflict. CCD COE
Publications. Tallinn, Estonia. Citeseer, 21–44.

Igor Kotenko and Alexander Ulanov. 2007. Multi-agent framework for simulation of
adaptive cooperative defense against internet attacks. In International Workshop on
Autonomous Intelligent Systems: Multi-Agents and Data Mining. Springer, 212–228.
Ralph Langner. 2011. Ralph Langner: Cracking Stuxnet, a 21st-century cyber weapon.

TED.

Leandros A Maglaras and Jianmin Jiang. 2014. Ocsvm model combined with k-means
recursive clustering for intrusion detection in scada systems. In 10th International
conference on heterogeneous networking for quality, reliability, security and robustness.
IEEE, 133–134.

Alaattin Parlakkılıç. 2018. Cyber Terrorism Through Social Media: A Categorical Based
Preventive Approach. International Journal of Information Security Science 7, 4 (2018),
172–178.

Nicole Perlroth, Mark Scott, and Sheera Frenkel. 2017. Cyberattack hits Ukraine then

spreads internationally. The New York Times 27 (2017), 2017.

Michael Robinson, Kevin Jones, Helge Janicke, and Leandros Maglaras. 2018. An
introduction to cyber peacekeeping. Journal of Network and Computer Applications
114 (2018), 70–87.

Michael Robinson, Kevin Jones, Helge Janicke, and Leandros Maglaras. 2019. Devel-
oping cyber peacekeeping: Observation, monitoring and reporting. Government
Information Quarterly 36, 2 (2019), 276–293.

Frank Rosenblatt. 1957. The perceptron, a perceiving and recognizing automaton Project

Para. Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory.

Peter W Singer. [n.d.]. und Allan Friedman. 2014. Cybersecurity and Cyberwar: What

Everyone Needs to Know.

Don Torrieri. 2005. Principles of spread-spectrum communication systems. Vol. 1.

Springer.

Enn Tyugu. 2011. Artificial intelligence in cyber defense. In 2011 3rd International

Conference on Cyber Conflict. IEEE, 1–11.

Enn Tyugu and Enn Kharal dovich Tyugu. 2007. Algorithms and architectures of artificial

intelligence. Vol. 159. IOS Press.

Ismini Vasileiou and Steven Furnell. 2019. Cybersecurity Education for Awareness and

Compliance. IGI Global.

Vida M Vilić et al. 2017. Dark web, cyber terrorism and cyber warfare: Dark side of the

cyberspace. Balkan Social Science Review 10, 10 (2017), 7–25.

From Cyber Terrorism to Cyber Peacekeeping: Are we there yet?

•

111:7

Matthew C Waxman. 2013. Self-defensive force against cyber attacks: legal, strategic

and political dimensions. International Law Studies 89 (2013).

Chunying Wu and Juan Wang. 2019. Analysis of Cyberterrorism and Online Social
Media. In 4th International Conference on Modern Management, Education Technology
and Social Science (MMETSS 2019). Atlantis Press.

ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2018.

