SOK: Building a Launchpad for Impactful Satellite
Cyber-Security Research

James Pavur
Oxford University
james.pavur@cs.ox.ac.uk

Ivan Martinovic
Oxford University
ivan.martinovic@cs.ox.ac.uk

0
2
0
2

t
c
O
1
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
7
8
0
1
.
0
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—As the space industry approaches a period of rapid
change, securing both emerging and legacy satellite missions will
become vital. However, space technology has been largely over-
looked by the systems security community. This systematization
of knowledge paper seeks to understand why this is the case and
to offer a starting point for technical security researchers seeking
impactful contributions beyond the Earth’s mesosphere.

The paper begins with a cross-disciplinary synthesis of relevant
threat models from a diverse array of ﬁelds, ranging from legal
and policy studies to aerospace engineering. This is presented
as a “threat matrix toolbox” which security researchers may
leverage to motivate technical research into given attack vectors
and defenses. We subsequently apply this model to an original
chronology of more than 100 signiﬁcant satellite hacking incidents
spanning the previous 60 years. Together, these are used to assess
the state-of-the-art in satellite security across four sub-domains:
satellite radio-link security, space hardware security, ground
station security, and operational/mission security. In each area,
we note signiﬁcant ﬁndings and unresolved questions lingering
in other disciplines which the systems security community is
aptly poised to tackle. By consolidating this research, we present
the case that satellite systems security researchers can build on
strong, but disparate, academic foundations and rise to meet an
urgent need for future space missions.

I. INTRODUCTION

From the launch of Sputnik in October of 1957, space
technology has played a critical role in the emergence of the
information age. Today, satellites are far more than simple
scientiﬁc demonstrations, instead underpinning essential ser-
vices that deﬁne our lives. As the satellite industry undergoes
a market renaissance driven by miniaturization and declin-
ing launch costs, understanding and defending these systems
against cyber-attacks can only increase in importance.

Rather than presenting a direct survey of satellite trends and
emerging security technologies, something well-provided in
prior work, this paper is motivated by an enduring problem for
space systems security research [1]. In the status quo, satellite
cyber-security is a disparate and ill-deﬁned topic, with critical
contributions scattered across diverse disciplines ranging from
history and security studies to aerospace engineering and

astrophysics. Academics in each domain have made valuable
discoveries, but contributions in one ﬁeld are easily overlooked
by researchers with a narrow focus on their own.

This paper offers a cross-disciplinary synthesis of progress
to date on space systems security. The paper begins by
presenting a uniﬁed matrix of existing threat models - linking
attackers, vulnerabilities and motivations drawn from dozens
of prior studies. Underpinning this effort is an exhaustive
historical timeline of satellite hacking incidents, where our
own archival research is added to prior contributions from Fritz
and Manulis et al. [1], [2]. The combination of this historical
analysis and threat modeling framework offers a useful aid
to those seeking credible and empirical
threat models as
motivation for systems security research on satellites.

Beyond this, we further analyze these historical incidents
through the lens of four main problem domains: RF-link
security, space platform security, ground systems security, and
mission operations security. In each, we not only highlight
relevant work and trends, but draw out key unsolved questions
from other ﬁelds which the systems security community is
aptly situated to tackle. The ultimate motivation for the paper
is to provide a launchpad for technical security researchers
seeking unique and enduring challenges in space.

II. THREAT MODELING IN CONTEXT

In order to identify needs which may be fulﬁlled by the
systems security community, a robust understanding of the
means and motivations of attackers is necessary. This section
contextualizes previous work in light of emerging industry
trends to arrive at a high-level model of threats and vulnera-
bilities impacting space systems.

A. The Rise of Satellites

Today, more than 2,000 operational satellites orbit Earth,
supporting a market worth more than $150 billion annually [3],
[4]. They underpin a wide range of vital services, includ-
ing: more than 10 TB/s of global internet capacity, media
broadcasts over 100 million customers, daily terabytes of earth
observation data, and precise global positioning services [4].
Their importance will only increase. By 2035, satellite broad-
band is anticipated to exceed 100 TB/s globally and the direct
industry value will exceed half a trillion dollars annually [4].
Around 40% of operational satellites are used for business
communications and 30% support a mix of civilian and

 
 
 
 
 
 
military government operations, the remainder are dedicated
to mixed-use remote-sensing, meteorological, and navigational
missions [5]. However, this balance will likely shift in re-
sponse to demand for ubiquitous broadband service and remote
sensing capacity. The emerging sector rising to meet
this
demand is widely referred to as “New Space” [6]. Among the
most prominent New Space missions are mega-constellations
proposed by organizations like Blue Origin, SpaceX, and
OneWeb. If successful, these projects will increase the number
of Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites by an order of magnitude.
The most important driver of these changes is diminishing
launch costs. Modern launch vehicles have reduced to cost-per-
kilogram to LEO to under $2,000 [7]. This is radically more
affordable than NASA’s famous shuttle missions (at around
$54,500), and almost 90% cheaper than the average cost of
all missions from 1970-2000 (around $18,500) [8]. For the
ﬁrst time, the deployment of satellite payloads is within the
means of a vast array of new industry entrants.

Concurrent improvements in computing capabilities - par-
ticularly with respect to miniaturization - have compounded
these effects. As computer hardware grows smaller and less
power-demanding, increasingly complex and light satellites
become feasible. This has resulted in the emergence of “small
satellites” - a wide range of sub-500 kg devices, with many
weighing less than 1 kg.

The emergence of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) satellite
component has further driven growth in the small satellite
market. The availability of ready-made satellite ﬂight hardware
decreases procurement costs, allowing New Space entrants to
accept larger technical and commercial risks. Indeed, it is now
possible to purchase a fully assembled 1 kg “Cube Satellite”
for as little as $16,000 [9].

B. Emerging Threat Landscape

As the demand for and usage of space assets grows, the
threat environment they face has shifted. Historically, satellites
have beneﬁted from a sort of “security through obscurity”
whereby system complexity and equipment costs dissuade all
but the most sophisticated cyber-adversaries. The combined
effects of COTS components and constellations with thousands
of identical satellites mean that diversity and complexity of
implementation are unlikely to provide enduring security.

In general, the threat to satellites is well understood and
intuitive. In a military context, space systems are essential for
Command, Control, Communications, Computer, Intelligence,
Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (C4ISR) capabilities [10],
[11]. As a result, adversaries seeking to “level the playing
ﬁeld” against great powers have strong incentives to target
satellites [12]. Civil society also depends heavily on space
services, whether those take the form of positioning data
essential to modern transport and logistics or meteorological
services which protect millions from natural disasters. Those
seeking to cause societal disruption may perceive satellites
as an attractive “single point of failure” in many critical
infrastructures [13].

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF SATELLITE THREAT ACTORS

Attacker
Type

National
Military

State
Intelligence

Industry
Insiders
Parts
Suppliers

Organized
Crime

Commercial
Competitors

Terrorists

Individuals

Political
Activists

Example
Motivations

Technical
Capabilities

• Space Control
• Anti-Satellite Weapons
• Counter-Intelligence
• Technology Theft
• Eavesdropping
• Sabotage
• Technology Theft
• Sabotage
• Espionage
• Eavesdropping
• Ransom
• Technology Theft
• Sabotage
• Technology Theft
• Societal Harm
• Notoriety
• Message Broadcasting
• Notoriety
• Personal Challenge

• Message Broadcasting

High

High

High

High

Moderate

Moderate

Low

Low

Low

With regards to potential attackers, a 2016 report by
Chatham House, a prominent UK policy think-tank, taxon-
omizes threat actors into four broad categories: states seeking
military advantage, organized criminal efforts for ﬁnancial
gain,
terrorist groups seeking recognition, and individual
hackers proving their skills [4]. This can be supplemented
with the list of threat actors published by the Consultative
Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) [14]. CCSDS
represents a consortium of national space agencies from eleven
member states and thirty-two observer nations and is one of
the most inﬂuential technical bodies for the development of
space protocol and systems standards. Beyond overlaps with
Chatham House’s model, CCSDS adds: foreign intelligence
services, political activists, commercial competitors, agency
insiders and business partners [14]. Independent authors within
the military strategy and civil space science domains have
further suggested supply-chain threats from equipment man-
ufacturers [15], [16]. Table I offers a composite summary of
threat actors from these and other reports as a starting point
for the development of threat models [17], [18].

It is worth noting that our research has been restricted to
English-language resources, which tend to show a western
bias in threat. For example,
the Center for Strategic and
International Studies (CSIS), a Washington DC political and
security think-tank, isolates four main state belligerents in
orbit: Russia, China, Iran and North Korea [17]. CSIS contends
that Russian cyber-capabilities against satellites are particu-
larly sophisticated and have been demonstrated in historical
infrastructure and space systems. With
attacks on critical

2

respect to China, CSIS highlights the fact that the People’s
Liberation Army Strategic Support Force (SSF) has organiza-
tional responsibility over both China’s counterspace weapons
and offensive cyber operations - creating natural cross-over
opportunities. Other sources note that Chinese military reports
have explicitly advocated for the use of digital counterspace
against US space assets [18]. Less information is provided to
motivate the North Korean and Iranian threat, but CSIS notes
sustained Iranian interest in cyber-attacks against the related
ballistic missile defense (BMD) domain and North Korean
cyber-attacks against terrestrial critical infrastructure. Very few
English-language sources offer deep threat assessments of US
and EU offensive capabilities in space, but it is perhaps not
unreasonable to assume similar interests and means.

C. Vulnerability Classes

In addition to understanding who might be interested in
harming satellites, it is important to consider how they might
go about doing so. A high-level starting point can be found
in the security studies and international relations ﬁelds, where
scenario modeling is a common component of strategic analy-
sis. Chatham House groups threats to satellites into two broad
categories: attacks which target satellites themselves (e.g. via
control system exploitation) and attacks which target satellite
ground stations (e.g. via traditional network intrusion) [4]. The
European Space Agency (ESA) brings civilian governmental
perspectives, outlining additional threats to scientiﬁc missions
intercept and jamming, denial of service
including signal
attacks, and supply chain malware [16]. Further technical
speciﬁcs can be gleaned from CCSDS which adds replay
attacks, access-control failures, social engineering, data cor-
ruption, and meta-data analysis on encrypted trafﬁc [14]. In
their research on the intersection between space and military
law, Rendleman and Ryals raise the novel additional threat
of satellite hijackers who steal orbiting satellites to bolster
their own space capabilities [19]. Finally, multiple researchers
across the communications and systems security domain have
considered the threat of signal piracy and spooﬁng attacks [2],
[15], [20].

We can bring structure to this diverse array of perspectives
by expanding Chatham House’s systemic taxonomy slightly.
Speciﬁc, we propose three broad categories of attack surfaces:
those relating to satellite signals, those relating to the space-
platform and those which target satellite ground systems (Fig-
ure 1). Some alternative models will further divide ground
systems into “Customer” and “Mission” segments, but we ﬁnd
that most threat models impact both use-cases [1].

While our classiﬁcation system still results in some overlap,
such as the case where RF-signals are used to send malicious
ﬂight commands to space platform, it has two key beneﬁts.
First, it aligns closely with common organization paradigms
around space missions. Satellite missions are multi-stakeholder
processes, where distinct organizations are often responsi-
ble for the on-orbit operations, communications, and ground
segments. By mapping vulnerabilities to these domains, we
can better clarify which organization has responsibility for

Fig. 1. A Subsystem Approach To Satellite Vulnerability Classiﬁcation

defending against which threats. A second beneﬁt of this
approach is that the technical skills required for systems secu-
rity research in each domain are intuitively distinct: on-orbit
defenses draw from the embedded and control systems topics;
signals defense requires networking and radio expertise; and
technology
ground systems leverage traditional operational
(OT) and information technology (IT) perspectives.

We further can combine this subsystem taxonomy with
the threat actors outlined in Section II-B. This allows us to
develop a matrix synthesizing prior work into a mapping of
threat actors and capabilities to vulnerabilities and impacted
subsystems as shown in Table II.

D. Unique Technical Security Challenges

A superﬁcial reading of these vulnerabilities may suggest
that satellites pose few novel challenges for systems security
researchers. After all, terrestrial instances of all the listed vul-
nerabilities can easily come to mind. Indeed, many researches
- especially from the commercial space sector - contend that
traditional IT security approaches offer sufﬁcient coverage,
advocating for the use of NIST controls and generic security
information and event management (SIEM) tools [21]–[24].
Beyond technical intuition, this viewpoint is commercially
appealing as it allows for the direct use of widely available
security tools (and cross-domain hire of experts in those tools)
as the main line of defense for satellite missions [25].

As tempting as this viewpoint may be, it is not without
detractors. Byrne et al., speaking primarily from the per-
spective of aerospace academia, argue that “the assertion
that existing controls will protect against risk is sometimes
accepted without reasonable supporting data or, even worse,
is accepted where the lack of data is used as proof” [26]. Falco,
a computer science academic, takes this further, arguing that
attempts to map traditional IT security to the space domain
has created harmful technical knowledge gaps and discouraged
specialization [13].

Falco further isolates six reasons that satellite cyber-security
requires unique technical perspectives unmet by status-quo

3

PayloadVulnerabilities*DenialofService*HardwareBackdoor*BespokeMalware*PrivilegeEscalation*Hijacking*SensorInjectionSignalVulnerabilities*Jamming*Eavesdropping*Spoofing*Metadata-Analysis*CommandInjection*ReplayAttacks*SignalInjectionGroundstationVulnerabilities*BespokeMalware*GenericMalware*SocialEngineering*PhysicalAccess*DataCorruption*HardwareBackdoorTABLE II
DEMONSTRATIVE MATRIX OF THREAT ACTORS, CAPABILITIES, OBJECTIVES, AND VULNERABILITIES

Vulnerability
Type

Example
Attack

Relevant
Subsystems

Military

Intelligence
Agency

Corporate
Insider

Hardware
Supplier

Organized
Crime

Corporate
Competitor

Terrorist
Group

Individual
Hacker

Activist
Group

Denial of
Service
Hardware
Backdoor
Bespoke
Malware
Privilege
Escalation

Hijacking

Sensor
Injection

Jamming

Eavesdropping

Metadata
Analysis
Command
Injection
Replay
Attacks
Signal
Injection
Generic
Malware
Social
Engineering
Physical
Access
Data
Corruption

Forced ”Safe
Mode”
Malicious Bus
Messages
PLC Servo
Exploit
Spotbeam
Redirection
TT&C Auth.
Overwrite
Falsiﬁed IR
Signature
Broadcast
Interruption
IP Trafﬁc
Intercept
IP Trafﬁc
Fingerprinting
TT&C
Spooﬁng
TT&C
Replay
Broadcast
Piracy
Windows
Ransomware
Technology
Theft
Cleanroom
Breach
IMINT
Corruption

Payload

Payload
Ground
Payload
Ground

Payload

Payload

Payload

Signal

Signal

Signal

Signal

Signal

Signal

Ground

Ground

Ground

Ground

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

c

c

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

c

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

c

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

c

c

c

c

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

c

c

c

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

c

(cid:88)

i

i

(cid:88)

c

x

x

c

c

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

i

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

c

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

x

x

x

x

c

x

x

x

x

(cid:88)

c

x

x

(cid:88)

i

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

c

x

i

(cid:88)

i

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

c

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

i

(cid:88)

i

i

(cid:88)

i

i

c

c

c

c

i

(cid:88)

c

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

x

i

i

i

i

i

i

x

(cid:88)

c

i

i

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

i

x

i

x

i

i

i

x

i

(cid:88)

i

i

i

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

i

i

x

x

x

x

x

x

i

c

x

x

x

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

(cid:88)

x

x

Key: (cid:88) - Attacker is likely both capable of executing the attack and motivated to do so. c - Attacker is likely capable, but the vulnerability doesn’t align with motivations.
i - Attacker is likely interested in the attack, but has limited capacity to execute it. x - Attacker is likely neither interested in nor capable of executing the attack.
Note: There may be crossover between categories, such as an insider threat sponsored by an intelligence agency. This matrix is intended as a demonstrative summary of likely
outcomes, not a rigid proscription of all possible attacker motives and means.

infrastructures,

security practice [13]. First, satellites represent a single point
increasing the
of failure for other critical
number and capabilities of attackers who may be interested
in harming them beyond that obviously relevant to mission
function. Second, there is little regulation guiding satellite
cyber-security, creating uncertainty regarding the controls ap-
propriate to a given system. Third, complicated supply chains
not only give rise to backdoor risks, but also make it difﬁcult
to assign organizational responsibility for security practice.
Fourth, the widespread use of COTS hardware integrated with
bespoke systems creates a unique situation where vulnerabili-
ties likely apply to many platforms, but applying patches may
require bespoke modiﬁcations. Fifth, the specialized nature
of aerospace means that few individuals in cyber-security
understand satellites sufﬁciently to adequately contextualize
threats and defense. Finally, satellites are compute-constrained
devices with limited resources and security/performance trade-
offs are more acute than in terrestrial systems.

The second point, regarding the shortcoming of existing reg-
ulatory standards is further supported by Fidler, writing for the
Council on Foreign Relations - an international relations policy
think-tank [18]. In particular, he contends that mappings of IT
standards to space systems amount to little more than “paper-
shufﬂing” [18]. Bardin contends that industry is unsure what
would even constitute a cyber-attack against space systems,

due to lack of comprehensive threat modeling [5]. This may
be attributable in part to overuse of the term “hacking” in
media and policy circles to describe any disruption to satellite
operations [2], [5]. For example, technical authors often treat
radio jamming as an unrelated topic while policy analysts
explicitly consider it a cyber-attack vector [4], [16], [17].

Falco’s third and fourth point, regarding supply chains,
have been subject to much attention as well. Space missions
have uniquely complex bureaucratic structures. Many distinct
organizations may share some device resources (e.g. com-
munications systems), while operating others independently
(e.g. on-board sensors). Excepting the largest players, satellite
operators do not control the entire mission lifecycle. Launch
vehicles, orbital injection, operation, and retirement are fre-
quently handled by distinct entities. Some service providers
(e.g. satellite television services) may have no ownership
stake in the space platform at all, but instead simply lease
radio access. The result is that operators of an information
cannot necessarily trust each other and may not share security
priorities. Any given member of the mission ecosystem can
potentially compromise others [16]. This threat is particularly
acute for “New Space” systems which rely heavily on third-
party COTS equipment [15], [23].

Finally, Falco’s “expertise vacuum” is widely recognized
as a signiﬁcant barrier. Niche components of satellite systems

4

lack direct terrestrial equivalents (e.g. star-trackers), impairing
the development of a general body of knowledge for securing
these devices [23]. In academic contexts, the cross-disciplinary
mixture of engineering, astrophysics, computer science, and
security studies complicates the search for appropriate venues
and communities for publication and peer-review. For ex-
ample, expertise in cryptography may not be directly useful
without additional hardware and astrophysics knowledge as
extra-terrestrial radiation can induce random bit-ﬂips in cryp-
tographic key storage and requires special attention [27].

Ultimately, space systems are much more than mere “com-
puters in the sky.” Well-regarded terrestrial security practices
often fail to transfer to space systems for unintuitive reasons
which require a wide breadth of expertise to overcome. The
result is that relatively little work, especially within systems
security, has been conducted on space technologies.

III. LEARNING FROM HISTORY

Given the dearth of academic satellite cyber-security re-
search, the threat may appear distant and hypothetical. Indeed,
few satellite hacking incidents over the past half-century have
received signiﬁcant public attention and one might be tempted
to argue that satellite cyber-security is more an invented
problem than present danger.

Fig. 2. Countries Involved in Satellite Hacking by Year of First Entry.
This chart includes countries with governments and/or citizens implicated as
attackers in satellite security incidents.

However, a deeper look at the history of operations targeting
satellites reveals an unconventional but voluminous body of
knowledge. Indeed, cyber attacks against satellite systems have
been occurring, almost unnoticed, for decades - perpetrated by
attackers from across the globe (Figure III). In this section,
we present an overview of this empirical data with a focus on
long-term trends and unsolved security problems. This analysis
builds on the prior work of Fritz and Manulis et al. [1], [2].
In conjunction with this paper, we have developed an
annotated chronology which details 113 signiﬁcant satellite
hacking incidents from 1957 to present day (Appendix A). To
our knowledge, this chronology represents the most exhaustive
record of satellite hacking incidents to date. Derived from orig-
inal archival research synthesizing unclassiﬁed primary and

5

secondary source materials, it offers evidence-based technical
insights into the evolution and practice of satellite exploitation.
Before delving into the survey, it is worth clarifying its
scope. In particular, the topicality of RF interference has been
subject to much debate - with some regarding it as an issue
of electronic warfare as opposed to cyber-operations. We have
elected to include some of the most notable instances of such
attacks in our analysis for two reasons. First, a willingness
to engage in jamming suggests that an attacker values the
ability to “virtually” deny satellite access to their victims
insights into threat models for digital
- offering potential
counterspace. Second, the hardware and expertise involved
jamming operations often has signiﬁcant cross-over with more
obviously topical signal-hijacking and injection attacks.

A. 1957-1979: Early Days

In the earliest days of human spaceﬂight,

the principle
information security concerns revolved around the ability of
adversaries to compromise satellite ﬂight control signals. One
of the ﬁrst public discussions of satellite information security
was a 1962 US congressional hearing to determine if private
companies should be allowed to operate in space [28]. It was
suggested that commercial missions would be more vulnerable
to jamming and replay attacks from Soviet adversaries, while
higher-altitude military satellites were presumed secure due to
the complexity of the requisite equipment.

The subsequent two decades saw no major satellite hacking
incidents. However, a important political debate was brewing
over satellite broadcast abuse. The US had begun transmitting
anti-communist propaganda on satellite beams directed into
Soviet territory. In response, the USSR put forward a UN
proposal in 1972 asserting a sovereign right to jam illegal radio
signals in their territory [29]. To this day, state sovereignty
over radio emanations from foreign satellites remains con-
tentious. Modern norms on interstate jamming and eavesdrop-
ping attacks can be readily traced back to this 1972 dispute.

B. 1980-1989: Piracy and Spooﬁng

The ﬁrst major satellite hacking incident

is generally
thought to have occurred in 1986. An industry insider and
satellite-dish salesman pseudonymously dubbed “Captain Mid-
night” hijacked an HBO television broadcast destined for satel-
lite TV customers in Florida and replaced it with a message
chastising network executives for new signal-scrambling copy
protection technology [30]. Interestingly, this attack almost ex-
actly mirrored a ﬁctional short-story from a satellite enthusiast
magazine the previous year - although no formal association
has been proven [31]. The next year, a similar attack took place
wherein an employee of the Christian Broadcasting Network
replaced a satellite stream operated by The Playboy Channel
with biblical verses chastising viewers for not attending church
on Sunday [32].

1986 also marked the ﬁrst major satellite eavesdropping
case, wherein the government of Indonesia was accused by an
American satellite imaging company of illegally intercepting

earth observation data without paying for a subscription to the
satellite’s service [33].

2009, and eavesdropping attacks compromising US military
drone video feeds by Iraqi insurgents in 2009 [42]–[46].

Terrestrially, the 1980s marked the ﬁrst major attack against
satellite ground systems. In 1987, a group of West German
teens compromised top secret NASA networks by means of
a Trojan Horse program which concealed a keylogger [34].
These networks were reported to include information on
classiﬁed military space missions and to have the capability to
cause direct harm to satellites. Upon intercepting a mail-box
message indicating that the compromise had been discovered,
the teenagers voluntarily turned themselves in.

C. 1990-1999: Broadcast and Flight Control Systems

Both satellites usage and exploitation accelerated through-
out the 1990s. As satellite television became commonplace,
states began to use jamming attacks to control the ﬂow of
information across their borders. Iran began jamming foreign
satellite television stations in 1994, a practice which continues
today [35], [36]. In 1998, Indonesia became the ﬁrst country to
deliberately use a satellite to jam signals from a neighboring
satellite as part of a dispute with Hong Kong over orbital
slot access [2], [37]. By the end of the 1990s, commercially
available satellite jammers emerged on the market, including
a $4,000USD Russian-made device capable of disabling GPS
signals over a 200 km radius [38].

The 1990s saw the widespread emergence of cryptographic
systems for satellite television piracy - kicking off an on-
going battle between satellite pirates and media companies
which began with simple smart-code sharing networks and
escalated into sophisticated cryptanalysis [39], [40]. From
1993 onwards, reports detail an essentially annual cycle of
hackers breaking TV protections, media companies designing
improvements, and governments making related arrests.

Finally, a number of attacks against satellite ground stations
occurred over the 1990s. These included high-proﬁle incidents
where hackers claimed to have accessed to systems which
would allow to issue ﬂight control commands to orbiting
satellites. Most notable among these is a 1998 scenario
wherein hackers, widely believed to be Russian-government
afﬁliated, gained access to ﬂight control systems in NASA’s
Goddard Space Flight Center [2], [41]. During this incident,
the German-US ROSAT x-ray telescope inexplicably altered
its orientation to point optical sensors directly at the sun -
leading to irreparable hardware damage [2], [41]. Although
details surrounding the incidents are highly classiﬁed, this
is often cited as the ﬁrst cyber-attack which caused physical
damage in orbit.

D. 2000-2009: Organized Attackers

The 2000s saw more incidents than the previous forty years
combined. One major trend was the emergence of organized
non-state attackers. Notable incidents of this nature included
signal hijacking attacks by Falun Gong (a Chinese religious
and protest movement) from 2002-2005, similar attacks by the
Tamil Tigers (a Sri Lankan militant organization) from 2007-

Government-led jamming operations continued unabated.
Most notable among these were an instance of Iranian jam-
ming of signals directed to Turkey in 2000 and Cuban jamming
of signals destined for the Middle East in 2003 [47], [48].

Signiﬁcant attacks against groundstations during this period
include complete ﬂight control takeover of two NASA satel-
lites in 2007 and 2008 [5], [49], [50]. These attacks were orig-
inally reported as signal jamming but later linked to a Chinese
government compromise of NASA ground stations [49].

The 2000s also saw the ﬁrst public case of a malware
infection in orbit. In 2008, a Russian cosmonaut introduced
Windows-XP malware to systems aboard the International
Space Station (ISS). This incident is widely believed to have
been accidental [50]–[52].

Although not directly related to cyber-security, a major
space security incident occurred in January of 2007 when
China demonstrated an anti-satellite (ASAT) weapon [53]. Not
only did this generate a signiﬁcant amount of space debris, it
also demonstrated emerging state interest in offensive coun-
terspace technology. This ASAT demonstration was preceded
by a less well known “virtual” attack in 2006, when a Chinese
ground-based laser system was used to blind sensors aboard a
classiﬁed US military satellite [54].

E. 2010-Present: Evolving Threats

The accelerating usage of cyber-operations in space has
continued over most recent decade. In particular, a wave of
jamming incidents in the Middle East and North Africa were
kicked off by the Arab Spring protest movements in 2010 and
have continued thereafter. This caused the list of countries
with demonstrated satellite jamming capabilities to more than
double with the addition of Egypt, Jordan, Bahrain, Ethiopia,
Saudi Arabia, Eritrea, Syria, Azerbaijan, and Israel - along
with renewed jamming from Libya and Iran [55]–[66]. Outside
of the region, North Korea also began a sustained jamming
campaign against South Korean military GPS in 2010 [67].

More sophisticated signal-related attacks also emerged. This
included signal intrusion attacks by Hamas against Israeli news
stations and academic research demonstrating weaknesses in
satellite internet, messaging, and telephone services [68]–[75].
In 2014, Russia was accused of launching a “stalker sat”
which followed other satellites in orbit to intercept uplink
signals, representing the ﬁrst publicly acknowledged instance
of satellite-to-satellite eavesdropping [76].

Attacks against ground-stations and satellite control systems
grew more sophisticated as well, with many being linked
to state actors. In particular, China has been accused of
compromising US space control systems in 2011, 2014, and
2017 [77]–[80]. This is perhaps unsurprising given that, in
2014, an internal US audit of the Joint Polar Satellite System
(JPSS) ground stations found more than 9,000 “high-risk”
security issues, many of which remained unpatched from
prior audits [81]. Commercial ground systems were also

6

demonstrated to have severe vulnerabilities, including many
hardcoded passwords and backdoors [82], [83].

This period has also seen the ﬁrst organized criminal abuse
of satellite systems. In 2016, the Russian advanced persistent
threat (APT) actor dubbed “Turla group” was found to be
abusing satellite internet signals to anonymously exﬁltrate data
from compromised computer systems [84]. This exﬁltration
method was further detailed by a security researcher at the
DEFCON conference in 2020 [85].

In recent years, new attention has been paid to the satellite
cyber-security ﬁeld. In 2020, the US Air Force hosted an
online “Hack-A-Sat” competition which explicitly sought to
introduce cyber-security professionals to the world of satellite
cyber-security and to uncover vulnerabilities in real space
systems [86]. Similarly, in 2020, DEFCON hosted its ﬁrst
“aerospace village,” a sub-conference which included a brief-
ings track focused exclusively on space systems security [87].

F. General Trends and Developments

Fig. 3. Satellite Attack Types by Decade. Data from 2020 is included for
completeness on the basis of publicly available reports as of August 15, 2020.
In practice, there is often substantial lag between intrusions, detection, and
reporting.

In sum,

there has been a clear general

trend towards
increased use of cyber-capabilities that target satellite sys-
tems (Figure III-F). Over the past 60 years, and especially
over the past 20, the number of actors willing and able to
attack satellites in cyberspace has increased dramatically.

Today, almost 30 states have demonstrated some degree
of cyber-offensive counterspace capabilities, including many
which lack spacefaring capabilities. Moreover, there has been
a distinct rise in the frequency, complexity, and magnitude of
attacks instigated by non-state actors (Figure III-F). Contrary
to common perception, there is little historical evidence indi-
cating that non-state actors are less willing or able to engage
in digital-counterspace than state counterparts. However, this
may be due to a reporting bias whereby non-state incidents
are widely covered but nation-state attacks are classiﬁed.

7

Fig. 4. Satellite Attacks Associated With State and Non-State Actors. NB:
Attribution is often uncertain and subject to dispute. Further detail regarding
the attribution of any particular incident can be found in the open-source
dataset referenced in Appendix A.

Together, these trends clarify the need for research combat-
ing cyber-security threats to satellites. Attacks against satellites
are happening in the status quo and have been for decades.
As attackers grow more sophisticated and prevalent, increased
awareness of present practice is a key ﬁrst-step towards
contributing meaningful technical research.

The remainder of this systematization of knowledge pa-
per delves deeper into this chronology to identify unsolved
technical questions in satellite cyber-security. These historical
incidents are contextualized vis-a-vis the vulnerability matrix
outlined in Section II-D and organized on the basis of technical
subsystems (RF, Space, Ground, and Mission).

IV. DEFENDING THE SIGNAL

More than two thirds of historical satellite incidents in our

review related to attacks on the RF communications link.

A signiﬁcant portion of these are best classiﬁed as “jam-
ming” attacks, which tend to require physical mitigations
- such as frequency hopping. As our focus is on digital
counterspace, as opposed to electronic warfare, we will not
delve deeply into jamming, but it is worth noting that the
anti-jamming ﬁeld is well-developed [88], [89]. Further, jam-
ming incidents often demonstrate important political context
regarding attacker motivations and equipment capabilities.

Beyond jamming, we outline three general categories of
communications attacks in our historical analysis. The ﬁrst,
eavesdropping, relates to the interception and interpretation
of signals by an unintended third-party recipient. The second,
signal injection, relates to the encapsulation of malicious data
inside an otherwise legitimate radio transmission. The ﬁnal
category, signal spooﬁng, relates to attempts to artiﬁcially
hijack and replace legitimate radio signals with malicious ones.

A. Eavesdropping Attacks

The eavesdropping challenge for satellites is primarily one
of scale. Signals from a single geostationary (GEO) satellite

can encompass an entire continent due to the vast transmission
distances. This means that attackers across a wide range of
jurisdictions may be capable of receive the transmission and
that sending sensitive data unencrypted over such signals is
generally ill-advised. In our historical review, we ﬁnd that the
scope and frequency of eavesdropping incidents has increased
signiﬁcantly overtime. It has been suggested that this is largely
due to widespread access to the requisite equipment - such as
Software Deﬁned Radios (SDRs) - at reduced costs [75], [90].
Despite a clear case for the use of encryption in satellite
environments, the practical implementation of satellite crypto-
systems is quite complex. Satellite signals travel over immense
distances and are frequently subjected to signiﬁcant packet
loses and high latency due to speed-of-light constraints [91].
The naive addition of terrestrial encryption schemes to satellite
environments can have severe negative impacts on overall
performance. By some estimates, this can amount to as much
as 80% reduction in perceived performance [2], [92].

Most satellite encryption techniques focus on ground-based
encryption, treating the satellite as a “bent-pipe” for signal
relay. However, in cases such as the transmission of Telemetry,
Tracking and Command (TT&C) data, on-board encryption
capabilities may be required. Satellite hardware is heavily re-
sourced constrained and subject to a harsh orbital environment
and thus on-board encryption is a non-trivial challenge [27].
Indeed, improperly implemented on-board encryption may be
perverted by attackers into a denial-of-service mechanism
by sending large quantities of deliberately invalid data to
overwhelm limited computational capabilities [91].

1) Encryption in Broadcast Networks: In broadcast satellite
environments, such as those used for television and radio
services, a number of cryptographic solutions have emerged.
This development has been driven by a commercial need
to restrict satellite television access to paying customers.
However, our historical review outlines a perpetual “game of
cat-and-mouse” between satellite TV operators and attackers.
One of the most widely used systems in this context is
the Common Scrambling Algorithm (CSA), which encrypts
Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) streams with a hybrid
combination of stream and block ciphers [93]. CSA has been
found to have severe weakness which make it possible to crack
most streams in real-time on consumer hardware [93]–[95].

Alternative schemes are often proprietary and based on the
use of smart-cards or specialized receivers with pre-distributed
keys. An example is the DigiCipher format which accounted
for around 70% of encrypted satellite broadcasts in North
America in 2012 [5]. Another popular system is the PowerVu,
which is used by the American Forces Network [5]. In 2014, it
was demonstrated that PowerVu root management key entropy
could be trivially reduced to a 16 bits, enabling real-time
attacks on the system [96].

In general though, most attacks have targeted key distribu-
tion rather than cryptography. Smart cards, for example, are
often emulated or copied to share one legitimate subscription
among hundreds of illegitimate users. This works because
broadcast signals are often encrypted with a single key which

all customers must be capable of deriving. France et al.
proposed a process by which individual keys could be revoked
without re-issuing cards to all legitimate customers [97]. In
general, academic work on the topic has focused on this
key-revocation problem, but enduring solutions have proven
elusive [91], [98]–[101].

2) Encryption in IP Networks: For internet and broadband
services, encryption is more complex. Due to speed-of-light
latency, particularly in long-range GEO networks, TCP can
suffer several negative performance effects [91], [102]. Satel-
lite ISPs mitigate these issues and preserve limited bandwidth
through the use of active trafﬁc manipulation [91], [103].
This requires ISPs to have direct access to customer TCP
headers and, in some cases, HTTP payloads. As a result, the
use of VPNs and customer-implemented end-to-end encryption
results in signiﬁcant performance reductions.

Several solutions have been proposed to protect trafﬁc over-
the-air while maintaining acceptable performance. For exam-
ple, Roy-Chowdhury et al. suggests the use of a multi-step
SSL variant reveals certain header information to ISPs while
leaving payload data encrypted [91]. Duquerroy et al. proposed
a modiﬁcation of IPSec called SatIPsec which provides a
layer-three encrypted tunnel with support for multicasting
encryption [103], [104]. However, this solution also granted
ISPs access to some customer trafﬁc and required pre-shared
secrets [91]. More recently, Pavur et al. have developed an
open-source proxy which leverages the UDP-based QUIC pro-
tocol for over-the-air encryption and is intended for customers
to deploy on their personal devices [92].

In practice, many satellites ISPs use none of these solutions,
instead sending sensitive customer trafﬁc in clear-text. This
has been shown to impact the security and privacy of home
internet customers, critical infrastructure systems, maritime
vessels, and aviation networks [105].

B. Signal Injection Attacks

Fig. 5. Demonstrative Signal Injection Attack. At time 1 in the ﬁgure, the
user requests a secure download ﬁle from a trusted server. Both the ISP (2a)
and the eavesdropper (2b) receive this transmission concurrently. While the
ISP routes the request over the internet (3a), the attacker transmits a malicious
response to the customer antenna (3b).

8

UserAttacker1GETupdate.exe2bOKvirus.exe3bISP2a3aGETupdate.exeWebSigniﬁcantly less research has been conducted on signal
injection attacks. Historically, satellite companies operated
under the assumption that the complexity and cost of requisite
equipment to alter or misuse legitimate satellite signals was
beyond the means of most attackers [28]. However, novel
attacks requiring little to no specialized equipment appeared in
our historical analysis. For example, the Turla group attacks
uncovered by Kaspersky in 2015 demonstrated that simply
transmitting normal web-requests to IP addresses in a satellite
ISP’s network would result in those messages being injected
into satellite broadcasts [84], [85]. Similarly, a security re-
searcher demonstrated that software deﬁned radios were suf-
ﬁcient to transmit specially crafted packets on the Globstar
network, despite their use of complex Distributed Spread
Spectrum (DSS) signaling [71]. Further, the theoretical threat
has been suggested, but not demonstrated, that an attacker
could inject packets directly into a user’s receiving antenna by
emulating a satellite - allowing them to compromise programs
running on the victim’s machine and bypass many ﬁrewall
restrictions [103]. Lane et al. argues that carefully crafted
packets may even be used to trigger vulnerabilities in the
networking hardware stacks on the satellite itself [15].

To the best of our knowledge, no general defense against
signal injection has been proposed. However, many of the en-
cryption protocols discussed in section IV-A may also bolster
the general integrity of satellite signals. Additionally many
TT&C encryption standards, such as Space Data Link Security
(SDLS), would intuitively complicate these attacks [106].

C. Spooﬁng

The ﬁnal category of signals-based attacks identiﬁed in our
historical review is that of signal spooﬁng. The form and
severity of these attacks has varied widely between incidents.
However,
the most common variant are attacks targeting
media broadcasts - generally satellite television signals. Here,
attackers typically replace the attacker’s uplink signal with a
more powerful malicious radio transmission [4].

As broadcast satellites often operate as dumb “bent-pipes,”
they will dutifully relay any incoming transmission on the
correct frequency. The most intuitive protection against such
attacks would be on-board veriﬁcation of incoming signals. To
the extent that such mechanisms exist in the status quo, they
rely on proprietary and bespoke trade secrets which have not
been well studied. To the best of our knowledge, no public
on-board veriﬁcation standard for satellite broadcasts exists.
Such a system is non-trivial to design due to compatibility
requirements with legacy ground-stations, high cost of replac-
ing orbital hardware, and general difﬁculties with encryption
hardware in space (see Section IV-A).

One variant of signal-spooﬁng attacks which has received
substantial academic attention relates to the spooﬁng of Global
Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) signals, such as those
from the US-operated Global Positioning System (GPS). Be-
cause GNSS signals are quite faint by the time they reach
Earth, attackers can overpower these transmissions locally
using inexpensive and widely available equipment. GNSS

spooﬁng has been studied since at least the late 1990s, but the
recent emergence of consumer-grade HDR hardware has made
it possible for even hobbyists to spoof GNSS signals [20], [38].
Indeed, in 2016, SDR-enabled wireless GPS spooﬁng attacks
were used by players of the popular mobile game Pokemon
GO as a cheating mechanism [107].

The simplest GNSS spooﬁng attacks target terrestrial sys-
tems and involve directing a false simulated GNSS signal
towards the victim receiver [108]. More complicated attacks
seek to avoid detection by, for example, correcting time syn-
chronization discrepancies or modifying known valid GNSS
signals rather than simulating them from scratch [108]. The
most sophisticated attacks may go further, simulating the spa-
tial distribution of the originating GNSS satellites to emulate
expected physical signal characteristics [109].

Dozens of defenses against GNSS spooﬁng attacks have
been proposed. These range from sanity checking GNSS read-
ings with additional sensor data (e.g. using an accelerometer
to identify GNSS motion that does not correspond to physical
motion) to spectrum anomaly detection to ﬂag the presence of
spoofed transmissions against a historic baseline [110], [111].
A full treatment of state-of-the-art research on GNSS counter-
spooﬁng could easily exceed the length of this paper and
is well beyond our prerogative. As a starting point, Jafania-
Jahromi et al. provide an accessible but deep survey of more
than a dozen different classes of GPS anti-spooﬁng techniques,
including techniques which allow individuals to determine
their location accurately in the presence of an attacker [112].
Beyond GNSS spooﬁng, little research attention has been
paid to the spooﬁng of satellite broadcasts. These range from
satellite internet services to specialized critical infrastructure
communications links. Given the relative maturity of the
GNSS security community,
is possible lessons learned
it
there may prove applicable to related challenges. Future re-
search which considers the utility of GNSS counter-spooﬁng
techniques for non-GNSS transmissions may be a promising
approach to defending satellite signal authenticity.

D. Key Concerns for Satellite Signals Security

At a high level, the dominant security challenge for satellite
RF links is their inherently public physical nature. While
similar issues have been mitigated terrestrially (e.g. in cellular
networks), the unique hardware and environmental constraints
of orbit mean few terrestrial solutions are “drop-in” compatible
with satellites. This has impeded the widespread adoption
of link-layer encryption. Even when defenses are widely
employed, such as in broadcast television, they often depend
on proprietary “black-box” encryption which have repeatedly
proven vulnerable to exploitation.

Without robust and open signal security protocols which
consider the unique demands of space, attackers will continue
engaging in sophisticated eavesdropping, injection, and spoof-
ing attacks. This goes beyond the academic task of inventing
crypo-systems. Many well-studied, such as SatIPSec, have
been largely ignored due to their complexity and cost of
adoption [104]. Effective future work must incorporate not

9

only technical systems-security perspectives, but also prag-
matic understandings of the commercial and operational needs
of satellite operators.

V. DEFENDING SPACE PLATFORMS

When compared with the RF domain, only a small amount
of literature exists on the defense of satellite payloads them-
selves. This dearth of research likely results from a few
factors. First, satellite payloads have historically been highly
bespoke systems [2], [13], [113]. Academics seeking broadly
novel scientiﬁc ﬁndings may struggle to generalize from issues
relating to any speciﬁc platform. This is further compounded
by the proprietary and often restricted nature of satellite
hardware, with export controls impeding trans-national collab-
oration. Finally, the industry acts as a “gatekeeper” to many of
these components and often demonstrates skepticism or even
hostility towards security research [25].

Also worth noting is that aerospace academia differs sub-
stantially from systems security academia. Even “simple”
CubeSat projects are multi-year endeavors involving dozens
or hundreds of collaborators [114]. A PhD thesis in aerospace
engineering may revolve around the design of a single sub-
system for such missions [115]. Publications, especially prior
to launch, tend to consist of narrow descriptions of engineering
and implementation details, with less focus on broad theoreti-
cal generalizations and more focus on practical lessons and
novel techniques. It is not unusual to encounter aerospace
research describing the results of months or years of 3D-CAD
modeling or simulation in less than ﬁve pages, with the model
or satellite itself constituting the main contribution.

The relative verbosity, fast publication rhythm, and paper-
ﬁrst culture of systems security academia complicates cross-
domain collaboration. On some topics, such as RF commu-
nications, this matters little; security academics can manage
ﬁnancially and technically without leaning on aerospace coun-
terparts. However, space platforms are inordinately complex
and expensive. Security researchers wishing to “go it alone”
can struggle to make meaningful headway. Future work which
demonstrates interdisciplinary collaboration that fulﬁlls the
career and scientiﬁc objectives of participants from both ﬁelds
is a much needed contribution - perhaps even irrespective of
the substance of the research.

As satellite development undergoes signiﬁcant changes,
collaboration may become slightly easier. For example, the
increased use of COTS components lowers to cost of new
research collaborations with increasing the chance of broadly
generalization ﬁndings.

Despite present day barriers,

there has been a small
but meaningful quantity of prior work on payload security.
Wheeler et al. outlines four broad attack surfaces:
input
systems like sensors and RF antennae, output systems such
as telemetry transmitters, internal communications such as
Spacewire buses, and the underlying ﬂight computer which
integrates these components [116]. They further offer a “top-
ten” list of possible vulnerabilities, ranging from malformed

sensor data leading to buffer-overﬂows to malicious triggered
safe-mode status caused by unhandled hardware states [116].
The primary status quo defense against such attacks is
boundary delineation. Through RF encryption and specialized
groundstation hardware, satellite operators mitigate the risk of
malicious individuals issuing instructions which could trigger
unintended in-orbit behaviors.

Cohen et al.

takes issue with this strategy, contending
that it creates an “open-trust” environment in space [117].
Once boundary protections are overcome, lateral movement
aboard the spacecraft and privilege escalation are trivial.
This increases the threat posed by backdoors introduced into
the spacecraft during its development on the ground. For
example 6 provides a high-level schematic of on-board satellite
sub-systems and scenarios where compromise of each could
escalate to mission failure.

This problem is not easily mitigated as cyber-attacks and
environmentally-induced hardware malfunction are often in-
distinguishable to a ground observer [116]. The remoteness
of space means that forensic auditing capabilities must be
built prior to launch and remain uncompromised following an
attack [117]. Moreover, the limited bandwidth, data-storage,
and compute capabilities of satellites means that it is rarely
economical to store or transmit complete audit logs [117]. The
transmission and storage of security data directly competes
with the core mission functionalities.

independently suggest

To mitigate these issues, both Cohen et al. and Wheeler
the adoption of an on-board
et al.
monitoring agent which detects behavioral anomalies and
engages in autonomous intrusion prevention [116], [117]. This
would facilitate clearer auditing and recovery in response to
malicious behaviors, but, if not implemented correctly, could
trigger harmful false-positives. Unfortunately, this approach
lacks backwards compatibility, although some basic func-
tionality (such as audit logging) may be applied to existing
satellites [116].

In addition to a general security monitoring component, it
has been suggested that satellite hijacking attempts could be
prevented through frequent, automatic re-imaging of satellite
software [118]. By storing a veriﬁed secure copy of the
satellite operating system on a trusted platform module (TPM)
it may be possible to bolster resilience by limiting the amount
of time which an attacker might abuse the system. There are
two notable downsides to this approach. The ﬁrst is that it
requires the addition of new hardware components (the TPM) -
increasing satellite weight and power drain. The second is that
it makes it difﬁcult for satellite operators to securely patch to
vulnerabilities as, in the case of a read-only ﬁrmware backup,
they would be overwritten.

Some attention has also been paid to the ﬂight code itself.
Wheeler et al. notes that more than 95% of the alerts raised
by conventional code analysis tools triggered false positives on
one demonstrative satellite, and they suspect many false neg-
atives also occurred [116]. It has been suggested that formal
veriﬁcation may mitigate these issues, but no practical solution
has been demonstrated to date [15]. Satellite software is also

10

Fig. 6. A simpliﬁed satellite architecture with example compromise scenarios for onboard sub-systems.

rarely monolithic, incorporating third-party code for various
components and increasing the risk of software backdoors.

In sum, payload security is a critical but understudied
topic. Prior work has demonstrated a wide range of severe
and unmitigated attack vectors. While barriers to research are
particularly acute, there is clear need for future technical work.

VI. DEFENDING SATELLITE GROUND SYSTEMS

Unlike space platforms, which suffer from esoteric hardware
and limited access, ground systems beneﬁt from the wealth of
general cyber-security knowledge. Typically, satellite ground
stations are not distinct from any other terrestrial computing
network and, where they do differ, remain similar to terres-
trial communications systems [22]. Although some diversity
of implementation exists, all ground stations at a minimum
consist of radio equipment to communicate with satellites and
a computer/modem which operates this equipment. Normally,
the computer will run traditional operating systems with
specialized software for satellite communications.

On rare occasions, our historical review found this special-
ized software to be the target of attacks. For example, in 2000
hackers stole copies of Exigent satellite control software for
the purpose of reverse engineering [119]. More typically, at-
tacks are byproducts of general, untargeted, intrusions (e.g. in
1999 when a curious teenage hacker accidentally gained access
to NASA ﬂight control systems [120]). Because of this, very
little academic literature focuses on ground station security.
Nevertheless, some unique aspects are worth consideration.

First, satellite ground systems almost always represent the
ﬁnal security boundary against payload exploitation [117].
As discussed in Section V, satellite software and hardware
typically follow an “open trust” model whereby the ground
station is trusted by all devices aboard the space platform.
As such, ground systems represent a single point of failure
for satellite missions. In light of this problem, Llanso and
Peaerson suggest
the development of redundant restricted-
permission stations so that control can be regained in the
case of compromise or loss [118]. This is one potential use

for emerging “Ground Station as a Service” offerings such as
Amazon Web Services pay-as-you-go Ground Station [121].
Second, satellite ground systems may be located in remote
areas with limited physical security controls [5]. This arises
because the main placement considerations relate to signal
coverage and access to a particular orbit - rather than terrestrial
accessibility. Often,
little to no staff will have a regular
physical presence on-site [4]. Instead, day-to-day operations
will be highly automated and controlled remotely from a
centralized operations center [4]. This increases the threat of
attacks leveraging physical access and contrasts with physical
controls applied to many other critical information systems.

Finally, satellite ground stations are generally the main
“bridge” between the terrestrial internet and satellites. Due
to heavy use of remote access, ground stations are difﬁcult to
fully “air-gap” [15], [122]. Prior security research has found
numerous readily exploitable vulnerabilities in ground-station
software and demonstrated that satellite ground terminals can
be easily identiﬁed using IOT search engines like Shodan [82],
[83]. Moreover, relative normalcy of ground station hardware
means barriers to entry are low compared to other segments.
Generally, traditional enterprise security practices are pre-
scribed to defend ground systems. For example, auditing mal-
ware on a satellite ground station can be done with traditional
forensic tools [117]. There are some systems which are unique
to the satellite environment and may require special security
treatment - such as long-range radio hardware [23]. However,
our historical analysis has found no public instance of attacks
targeting this equipment speciﬁcally and limited academic
study of these components.

In sum, satellite ground station security is typically con-
sidered an extension of traditional IT security. The critical
difference is often the severity of potential harms rather than
mechanisms of attacks and defenses. However, this maxim is
far from universal. Future offensive security work focused on
unique satellite mission control hardware and software may
uncover previously overlooked vulnerabilities.

11

TelemetryLogicerrorincryptographicimplementationpermitsunauthenticatedcommanding.OnBoardComputerMalwareinfectioninrealtimeoperatingsystemputsspacecraftintolimitedfunctionality"safe-mode."Positioning&NavigationCompromisedGPSsensorsleadstoinaccurateorbitdeterminationanddebriscollision.Propulsion&ReactionControlTamperedfuelrecord-keepingleadstoprematureendoflife.ThermalControlFalsifiedtemperaturemeasurementsleadtosystemoverheat/freezeevent.PowerManagementMalwareinfectiondisablessolarchargingandleadstoprematureendoflife.MissionPayloadBackdoorin3rd-partyscientificmoduleinjectsbuscommandstopropulsionsystemcausingspin-out.SatelliteControlBusVII. HOLISTIC SECURITY MODELS

While the subsystem taxonomization in this paper is useful
for identifying technical challenges and contributions, it ne-
glects one key area of evolution in real-world satellite security
practice. In recent years, a sizeable literature base has emerged
discussing high-level organizational best practices and security
frameworks. As this research tends to be more theoretical than
applied, historical barriers to equipment access are acute. This
may explain the relative abundance of security frameworks
compared to technical research.

Generally, these frameworks can be categorized into two
broad classes: those which focus on the organizational practice
of satellite operators and those which focus on the duties of
policymakers. In this section, we will brieﬂy discuss some of
the core challenges facing such frameworks and some of the
more consequential proposals.

A. Operational Frameworks

A key ﬁrst step in developing any satellite security frame-
work is to deﬁne its scope. Cunningham et al. argue that this
is best done by dividing satellite missions into ﬁve broad
phases and linking each phase to a distinct “cyber-security
overlay” which promotes security by design. For example,
in the “payload and subsystem development” phase they
suggest that satellite operators “incorporate security code and
controls” [122]. Like many high-level frameworks, the core
technical dimensions here are somewhat vague. However, the
phase-oriented approach does bring a key beneﬁt in delineating
which organizations are responsible for given protections - a
historical challenge discussed at length in Section II-D.

An alternative framing is proposed by Zatti in which satellite
security controls are tied to speciﬁc mission types with the
addition of some generic controls common to all missions [50].
Vivero suggests a similar approach [123]. This framing seeks
to balance the diversity of satellite systems with the need
for common best practices. One key advantage of mission-
the attackers
framing is in threat modeling. For example,
interested in harming human spaceﬂight have radically dif-
ferent capabilities and motivations from those interested in
compromising satellite television. Unfortunately, this framing
leaves ambiguity in multi-stakeholder projects as to which
organization is responsible for implementing which controls.
CCSDS suggests a hybrid approach [14]. This remediates
the jurisdictional shortcomings of a pure mission-class ap-
proach while providing clearer threat-modeling. The proposal
incorporates explicit consideration of mission-based attack
probability mapped to lifestyle stages. While this is not pre-
sented as exhaustive framework, but rather a proof-of-concept,
it is nevertheless among the most technically comprehensive
examples to date.

is
The most commonly suggested approach, however,
to map pre-existing IT security controls to satellite sys-
tems, though these suggestions rarely include speciﬁc map-
pings [21]–[23]. This is appealing because it draws on a set of
generally accepted best practices. However, as noted by Knez
et al., the uniqueness of space systems complicates this process

and many controls are only superﬁcially meaningful [21]. Such
standards neither consider the unique threat models targeting
satellite systems nor the multi-stakeholder ecosystem. More-
over, they lack differentiation between the lifecycle stages -
assuming relatively static systems. The threats facing a web
server are largely consistent throughout its life, but the threats
facing a satellite during orbital injection differ radically from
those threatening a broadcasting communications platform. In
practice, the NIST Cybersecurity Framework is widely em-
ployed in industry but it is unclear if it is ﬁt for purpose [25].

B. Policy and Legislative Frameworks

Given the importance of satellites to modern information
societies, it has been suggested that satellite operators may
not adequately self-regulate. This is especially concerning for
dual-use systems which are commercially owned but provide
critical communications linkages to government operations. As
such, it may be necessary to adopt regulations that re-balance
incentive structures to better prioritize security.

One of the primary discussions is taxonomic. The question
as to whether or not satellite systems are considered “critical
infrastructure” remains unsettled and has a signiﬁcant impact
on the way in which companies and governments must protect
them [16]. This may explain the relative paucity of satellite
standards compared to similar infrastructure sectors [13], [22].
A general desire to classify satellites as critical infrastruc-
ture has been acknowledged by the US government since at
least 2002, however an explicit classiﬁcation of this nature has
yet to occur [124]. Such classiﬁcation may force improve-
ments, particularly with regards to redundancy and supply
chain veriﬁcation. However, industry actors have expressed
resistance to rigid legal standards, contending that status quo
requirements are adequate [25].

Beyond the critical infrastructure debate, an additional point
of contention regards the legal rights of satellite operators
to defend themselves. Rendleman and Ryals suggest satellite
operators should be permitted to corrupt ﬁles and commit
denial of service attacks (e.g. spectrum jamming) against
attackers to regain control of their satellites [19]. They suggest
the use of letters of Marque and Reprisal, a historical practice
which allowed privateers to engage in combat against foreign
vessels on the high seas [19]. This aligns with a broader trend
applying maritime policy frameworks to space [125]. However,
such “hack-back” rights are highly controversial [19].

One ﬁnal notable genre of policy development centers on
the international dynamics of satellite cyber-security. Housen-
Couriel argues that status quo practice has created a legal
lacuna in which it is unclear which international organiza-
tions and laws apply to satellite hacking incidents [126].
This suggests a need for new international law that either
clariﬁes the applicability of existing frameworks or the creates
new frameworks speciﬁc to space systems [126]. Chatham
House makes similar suggestions, pointing to the International
Telecommunications Union (ITU) as the ideal regulatory body
for such a regime [4]. They further suggest that this should

12

incorporate interstate threat intelligence sharing due to trans-
national effects of satellite failure - something which has
been historically constrained by high classiﬁcation levels [4].
Blount contends that cyber-intelligence sharing in space has
promise due to existing collaborations (such as on debris
tracking) [127]. While little progress has been made thus far,
it remains possible that policymakers will seek technical input
into the design of such systems.

Ultimately, we ﬁnd a substantial body of policy research
which has evolved more or less in isolation from relevant
is that many proposals
technical communities. The result
appear aspirational rather than actionable. Much as in other
areas, conscious effort by the system security community to
bridge this gap may pave the way for novel and impactful
future work in both ﬁelds.

VIII. CONCLUSION

Satellites are an increasingly vital component of modern life
and their security represents a key point of failure in systems
ranging from military communications to meteorological fore-
casting. Our analysis of 60 years of historical trends suggest
that satellites will continue facing sophisticated, aggressive,
and constantly evolving threats in cyberspace.

Despite this legacy, the intersection between outer space
and cyberspace remains poorly understood - with important
contributions scattered across diverse and isolated disciplines.
In this paper, we have synthesized these perspectives to draw
out research problems which the systems security community
can contribute towards solving.

In the communications domain, we ﬁnd a need for sub-
stantial cryptographic developments to provide secure and
commercially palatable alternatives to dominant satellite radio
protocols. With respect to satellite platforms, we ﬁnd that
almost no technical research exists on the defense and moni-
toring of systems in orbit - especially against ground-inserted
malware. On the ground, we ﬁnd that general IT security
approaches are popular among satellite operators, but that
little research has consider unique functions of space control
software or signaling hardware. Finally, from a high-level
operational perspective, we ﬁnd many aspirational mission
security framework proposals, but little research which maps
policy objectives to clear technical practices and implementa-
tions.

As thousands of satellites reach orbit over the next decade,
these questions cannot remain unanswered. There is a critical
opportunity for the systems security community to build upon
the research of others and collaborate to better protect the next
half-century of human spaceﬂight.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Manulis, C. P. Bridges, R. Harrison, V. Sekar, and
A. Davis, “Cyber security in New Space,” Interna-
tional Journal of Information Security, May 12, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10207-
020-00503-w (visited on 08/13/2020).

[2]

J. Fritz, “Satellite hacking: A guide for the perplexed,”
Culture Mandala, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 5906, Jan. 1, 2013.
[3] Union of Concerned Scientists. (2018). “UCS Satellite
Database,” [Online]. Available: https://www.ucsusa.
org/nuclear-weapons/space-weapons/satellite-database
(visited on 01/21/2019).

[4] D. L. M. Dsc and D. P. Lewis, “Space, the Final
Frontier for Cybersecurity?,” Sep. 22, 2016. [On-
line]. Available: https : / / www . chathamhouse . org /
publication/space-ﬁnal-frontier-cybersecurity (visited
on 01/18/2019).
J. Bardin, “Satellite Cyber Attack Search and Destroy,”
in Computer and Information Security Handbook,
2nd ed., Elsevier Science & Technology, Jul. 5, 2013,
pp. 1093–1102.

[5]

[6] M. Weinzierl, “Space, the Final Economic Frontier,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 32, no. 2,
pp. 173–192, May 2018. [Online]. Available: https :
//www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/jep.32.2.173
(visited on 02/04/2019).

[7] A. Tartar and Y. Qiu, “Which Rockets Are Winning
the Race to Make Space Affordable?” Bloomberg
Businessweek, Jul. 26, 2018. [Online]. Available: https:
/ / www. bloomberg . com / graphics / 2018 - rocket - cost/
(visited on 02/04/2019).

[8] H. Jones, “The Recent Large Reduction in Space
Launch Cost,” 48th International Conference on En-
vironmental Systems, 2018.
Interorbital.
(). “Interorbital Storefront,” [Online].
Available: http://www.interorbital.com/Store (visited
on 02/04/2019).

[9]

[11]

[10] M. E. Grant, “Space Dependence - A Critical Vulner-
ability of the Net-Centric Operational Commander,”
NAVAL WAR COLL NEWPORT RI JOINT MILI-
TARY OPERATIONS DEPT, May 17, 2005. [Online].
Available: https : / / apps . dtic . mil / docs / citations /
ADA463682 (visited on 02/11/2019).
J. Lungerman, “What Happens If They Say No? Pre-
serving Access to Critical Commercial Space Capa-
bilities during Future Crises,” AIR UNIV MAXWELL
AFB AL AIR FORCE RESEARCH INST, Dec. 2014.
[Online]. Available: https : / / apps . dtic . mil / docs /
citations/ADA617824 (visited on 02/11/2019).
J. Pavur and I. Martinovic, “The Cyber-ASAT: On
the Impact of Cyber Weapons in Outer Space,” in
2019 11th International Conference on Cyber Conﬂict
(CyCon), vol. 900, IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–18, ISBN: 9949-
9904-5-9.

[12]

[13] G. Falco, “The Vacuum of Space Cyber Security,”
in 2018 AIAA SPACE and Astronautics Forum and
Exposition, American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, 2018. DOI: 10.2514/6.2018-5275.
[14] CCSDS, “Security Threats Against Space Missions,”
Report Concerning Space Data System Standards,
Dec. 2015. [Online]. Available: https://public.ccsds.
org/Pubs/350x1g2.pdf.

13

[15] D. Lane, E. Leon, D. Solio, D. Cunningham, D.
Obukhov, and F. Tacliad, “High-Assurance Cyber
Space Systems for Small Satellite Mission Integrity,”
AIAA/USU Conference on Small Satellites, Aug. 8,
2017. [Online]. Available: https://digitalcommons.usu.
edu/smallsat/2017/all2017/95.

[16] L. del Monte, “Towards a cybersecurity policy for
a sustainable, secure and safe space environment,”
presented at the Proceedings of the 64th International
Astronautical Congress (IAC), 2013.

[17] T. Harrison, K. Johnson, and T. Roberts, “Space Threat
Assessment 2018,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https :
//www.csis.org/analysis/space-threat-assessment-2018
(visited on 01/25/2019).

[19]

[18] D. Fidler. (Apr. 3, 2018). “Cybersecurity and the New
Era of Space Activities,” [Online]. Available: https :
/ / www. cfr. org / report / cybersecurity - and - new - era -
space-activities (visited on 01/18/2019).
J. D. Rendleman and R. Ryals, “Cyber operations to
defend space systems?” In AIAA SPACE 2013 Confer-
ence and Exposition, American Institute of Aeronau-
tics and Astronautics, 2013. DOI: 10 . 2514 / 6 . 2013 -
5401.

[20] N. O. Tippenhauer, C. P¨opper, K. B. Rasmussen,
and S. Capkun, “On the Requirements for Successful
GPS Spooﬁng Attacks,” in Proceedings of the 18th
ACM Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, (Chicago, Illinois, USA), ser. CCS ’11, 2011,
pp. 75–86, ISBN: 978-1-4503-0948-6. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2046707.2046719.

[21] C. Knez, T. Llans´o, D. Pearson, T. Schonfeld, and
K. Sotzen, “Lessons learned from applying cyber risk
management and survivability concepts to a space
mission,” in 2016 IEEE Aerospace Conference, Mar.
2016, pp. 1–8. DOI: 10.1109/AERO.2016.7500812.

[22] B. Young, “Commercial Satellites, Critical Informa-
tion Infrastructure Protection, and Preventing Today’s
Threat Actors from Becoming Tomorrow’s Captain
Midnight,” Strategic Cyber Defense: A Multidisci-
plinary Perspective, vol. 48, p. 86, 2017.

[23] T. Vera, “Cyber Security Awareness for SmallSat
Ground Networks,” AIAA/USU Conference on Small
Satellites, Aug. 10, 2016. [Online]. Available: https:
/ / digitalcommons . usu . edu / smallsat / 2016 /
TS9GroundSystems/2.
J. Vivero and R. Marin, “Cyber Situational Awareness
in Space Organizations Operations Centres,” presented
at the 2018 SpaceOps Conference, 2018, p. 2481.

[24]

[25] CSRIC, “Cybersecurity Risk Management and Best
Practices Working Group 4: Final Report,” Mar. 2015.
[Online]. Available: https : / / transition . fcc . gov /
pshs/advisory/csric4/CSRIC IV WG4 Final Report
031815.pdf.

[26] D. J. Byrne, D. Morgan, K. Tan, B. Johnson, and C.
Dorros, “Cyber Defense of Space-based Assets: Ver-
ifying and Validating Defensive Designs and Imple-

mentations,” Procedia Computer Science, 2014 Con-
ference on Systems Engineering Research, vol. 28,
pp. 522–530, Jan. 1, 2014. [Online]. Available: http:
/ / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S1877050914001276 (visited on 01/25/2019).
[27] R. Banu and T. Vladimirova, “On-Board Encryption
in Earth Observation Small Satellites,” in Proceedings
40th Annual 2006 International Carnahan Conference
on Security Technology, Oct. 2006, pp. 203–208. DOI:
10.1109/CCST.2006.313451.

[28] New York Times, “Radio Satellites Open to Jamming,”

New York Times, p. 15, Feb. 28, 1962.

[29] Washington Post, “Soviets Ask Controls on Satellite
TV,” The Washington Post, Times Herald (1959-1973),
p. 1, Aug. 10, 1972.

[30] B. Davis, “Captain Midnight Unmasked by FCC, En-
ters Guilty Plea,” Wall Street Journal, p. 1, Jul. 23,
1986.

[31] A. Pollack, “Technology,” New York Times, p. 1,

Mar. 6, 1986.

[32] R. B. Smith, Appeal from the United States District
Court for the Eastern District of Virginia, at Norfolk.
Rebecca B. Smith, District Judge. Aug. 14, 1991.
[Online]. Available: https://law.resource.org/pub/us/
case / reporter / F2 / 940 / 940 . F2d . 653 . 91 - 5000 . html
(visited on 02/06/2019).

[33] Times of India, “Space Piracy,” The Times of India

(1861-current), p. 8, Jan. 23, 1986.

[34] G. Parry, “Youths hacked into secret Nasa network,”

The Guardian, p. 1, Sep. 15, 1987.

[35] AFP, “Foreign satellite programs jammed in Iran,”
Agence France Presse – English, Jun. 18, 1994.
[36] S. Media, “Satellite Jamming in Iran: A War Over
Airwaves,” Small Media, 2012. [Online]. Available:
https://smallmedia.org.uk/sites/default/ﬁles/Satellite%
20Jamming.pdf.

[37] W. Wong and J. G. Fergusson, Military Space
Power: A Guide to the Issues. ABC-CLIO, 2010,
166 pp.,
ISBN: 978-0-313-35680-3. Google Books:
GFg5CqCojqQC.
Intelligence Newsletter, “Anybody Need A GPS Jam-
mer?” Intelligence Newsletter, Feb. 5, 1998.

[38]

[39] N. Hellen, “Hackers Target BskyB Channels,” Evening

Standard, May 26, 1993.

[40] S. Walsh, “Cable TV ’Pirate’ Faces Sentencing; Pros-
ecutors Hope to Send Signal Of Toughness on High-
Tech Crime,” The Washington Post, Dec. 13, 1994.

[41] B. Elgin, “Network Security Breaches Plague NASA,”
Bloomberg Businessweek, Nov. 20, 2008. [Online].
Available: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/
2008- 11- 19/network- security- breaches- plague- nasa
(visited on 02/06/2019).

[42] Associated Press, “Falun Gong Hijacks Chinese TV,”
Wired, Sep. 24, 2002. [Online]. Available: https : / /
www.wired.com/2002/09/falun-gong-hijacks-chinese-
tv/ (visited on 02/06/2019).

14

[43] South China Morning Post, “Falun Gong accused of
pirate broadcast,” South China Morning Post, Oct. 17,
2003.

[44] Xinhua, “AsiaSat accuses Falungong of intercepting

[45]

satellite signal,” Nov. 21, 2004.
J. Daly. (Jun. 14, 2007). “LTTE: Technologically in-
novative rebels,” [Online]. Available: http : / / www .
asiantribune.com/node/6151 (visited on 02/06/2019).

[46] S. Gorman, Y. J. Dreazen, and A. Cole, “Insurgents
Hack U.S. Drones,” Wall Street JournalUS,
ISSN:
0099-9660. [Online]. Available: https : / / www . wsj .
com / articles / SB126102247889095011 (visited on
06/01/2018).

[47] AFP, “Iranian government jamming satellite TV: Op-

position group,” Jul. 30, 2000.

[48] S. Marquez, “US condemns Cuba for jamming signals

to Iran,” Associated Press, Jul. 16, 2003.

[49] C. Arthur, “Chinese hackers suspected of interfer-
ing with US satellites,” The GuardianTechnology,
ISSN: 0261-3077. [Online]. Available: https : / / www.
theguardian . com / technology / 2011 / oct / 27 /
chinese - hacking - us - satellites - suspected (visited on
02/06/2019).

[50] S. Zatti, “The Protection of Space Missions: Threats
and Cyber Threats,” in Information Systems Security,
R. K. Shyamasundar, V. Singh, and J. Vaidya, Eds.,
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer
International Publishing, 2017, pp. 3–8, ISBN: 978-3-
319-72598-7.

[51] D. Francis, “Computer virus infects orbiting space
station,” The GuardianTechnology, ISSN: 0261-3077.
[Online]. Available: https : / / www . theguardian .
com / technology / 2008 / aug / 28 / spacetechnology .
spaceexploration (visited on 02/06/2019).

[52] S. Gibbs, “International Space Station attacked by
‘virus epidemics’,” The GuardianTechnology,
ISSN:
[Online]. Available: https : / / www .
0261-3077.
theguardian . com / technology / 2013 / nov / 12 /
international- space- station- virus- epidemics- malware
(visited on 02/06/2019).

[53] C. Zissis. (Feb. 22, 2007). “China’s Anti-Satellite
Test,” [Online]. Available: https : / / www . cfr . org /
backgrounder / chinas - anti - satellite - test (visited on
02/11/2019).

[54] Courier Mail, “China targets US satellite,” The Courier

Mail, Oct. 7, 2006.

[55] BBC Monitoring World Media, “UK-based Al-Hiwar
satellite TV off-air after ’deliberate jamming’,” BBC
Worldwide Monitoring, May 8, 2009.

[56] BBC, “EU pressures Iran to end jamming,” Mar. 22,
2010. [Online]. Available: http : / / news . bbc . co . uk /
1 / hi / world / middle east / 8579719 . stm (visited on
02/06/2019).

[57] BBC Monitoring Middle East, “Jamming of Al-Jazeera
TV broadcasts traced to Jordan; experts comment,”
BBC Worldwide Monitoring, Oct. 2, 2010.

[58] N. Messieh. (Aug. 14, 2011). “Bahrain satellite chan-
nel jammed, launches on Livestation instead,” [On-
line]. Available: https : / / thenextweb . com / me / 2011 /
08/14/bahrain-satellite-channel-jammed-launches-on-
livestation-instead/ (visited on 02/06/2019).

[59] ECADF. (Jun. 30, 2011). “China accused of jamming
TV, websites in Ethiopia – COMPUTERWORLD
Reported,” [Online]. Available: https : / / ecadforum .
com / 2011 / 06 / 30 / china - accused - of - jamming - tv -
websites-in-ethiopia-computerworld-reported/ (visited
on 02/06/2019).

[60] Thuraya Press Ofﬁce. (). “Thuraya Telecom Services
Affected by Intentional Jamming in Libya,” [Online].
Available: https://www.thuraya.com/content/thuraya-
telecom- services- affected- intentional- jamming- libya
(visited on 02/06/2019).

[61] BBC Monitoring World Media, “Iran’s Arabic TV
said ”jammed from Saudi Arabia”,” Supplied by BBC
Worldwide Monitoring, Mar. 17, 2011.

[62] Leo. (Jan. 23, 2013). “Les h´eros ordinaires,” [Online].
Available: https://erythreens.wordpress.com/2013/01/
23/les-heros-ordinaires/ (visited on 02/06/2019).
[63] P. Richardson, “Eritrea Accuses Ethiopia of Block-
ing Satellite Transmissions,” Bloomberg, Jan11, 2012.
[Online]. Available: https : / / www . bloomberg . com /
news / articles / 2012 - 01 - 11 / eritrea - accuses -
ethiopia - of - blocking - satellite - transmissions (visited
on 02/06/2019).

[64] BBC Monitoring World Media, “World broadcasters
condemn satellite jamming ”emanating from Syria”,”
BBC Worldwide Monitoring, Oct. 22, 2012.

[65] BBC Monitoring Trans Caucasus Unit, “Azeri editor
says authorities to lose despite jamming satellite sig-
nals,” BBC Worldwide Monitoring, Jun. 27, 2013.

[66] BBC Monitoring Middle East, “Syrian TV still
jammed, minister says channel back on air,” BBC
Worldwide Monitoring, Feb. 10, 2018.

[67] B. M. A. Paciﬁc, “North Korea increases jamming
electronic signals against South - report,” BBC World-
wide Monitoring, Oct. 9, 2013.

[68] BBC Monitoring World Media, “Hamas ”hacks into”
satellite transmission of Israeli Channel 10 TV,” BBC
Worldwide Monitoring, Jul. 15, 2014.

[69] D. Housen-Couriel, “When Hamas comes into your
living room,” The Times of Israel, Mar. 16, 2016.
[70] L. Egea, “Playing in a Satellite environment 1.2,” pre-
sented at the Blackhat 2010, 2010. [Online]. Available:
http : / / www. blackhat . com / presentations / bh - dc - 10 /
Nve Leonardo / BlackHat - DC - 2010 - Nve - Playing -
with-SAT-1.2-wp.pdf.

[71] C. Moore, “Spread Spectrum Satcom hacking: Attack-
ing The Globstar Simplex Data Service,” presented at
the Blackhat, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.
blackhat . com / docs / us - 15 / materials / us - 15 - Moore -
Spread - Spectrum - Satcom - Hacking - Attacking - The -
GlobalStar-Simplex-Data-Service-wp.pdf.

15

[74]

[73]

[72] B. Driessen, R. Hund, C. Willems, C. Paar, and T.
Holz, “Don’t Trust Satellite Phones: A Security Analy-
sis of Two Satphone Standards,” in 2012 IEEE Sympo-
sium on Security and Privacy, May 2012, pp. 128–142.
DOI: 10.1109/SP.2012.18.
J. Hu, R. Li, and C. Tang, “A Real-time Inversion
Attack on the GMR-2 Cipher Used in the Satellite
Phones,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://eprint.iacr.
org/2017/655.pdf.
J. Pavur, D. Moser, V. Lenders, and I. Martinovic,
“Secrets in the Sky: On Privacy and Infrastructure
Security in DVB-S Satellite Broadband,” presented at
the WiSec ’19: Conference on Security and Privacy in
Wireless and Mobile Networks, ACM, May 15, 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3317549.
3323418.
J. Pavur, D. Moser, M. Strohmeier, V. Lenders, and
I. Martinovic, “A Tale of Sea and Sky: On the Security
of Maritime VSAT Communications,” in To Appear in
2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P),
Oakland, CA: IEEE, May 2020.
Inside Satellite TV, “Russia ”eavesdropping” on satel-
lite operations,” Inside Satellite TV, Nov. 10, 2015.

[75]

[76]

[77] Symantec.

(2017). “Thrip: Espionage Group Hits
Satellite, Telecoms, and Defense Companies,” [On-
line]. Available: https : / / www. symantec . com / blogs /
threat - intelligence / thrip - hits - satellite - telecoms -
defense-targets (visited on 01/23/2019).

[78] M. Flaherty, J. Samenow, and L. Rein. (Nov. 12,
2014). “Chinese hack U.S. weather systems, satel-
lite network,” [Online]. Available: https : / / www .
washingtonpost.com/local/chinese- hack- us- weather-
systems - satellite - network / 2014 / 11 / 12 / bef1206a -
68e9-11e4-b053-65cea7903f2e story.html (visited on
02/07/2019).

[79] L. Newman, “Report: Another Chinese Military Unit
Has Been Hacking U.S. Systems-This Time Satellite
Networks,” Slate Magazine, June 10, 2014 Tuesday
10:10 PM GMT.

[80] BBC, “Hackers controlled Nasa computers,” Mar. 8,
2012. [Online]. Available: https://www.bbc.com/news/
technology-17231695 (visited on 02/06/2019).
[81] A. Crawley, “Expedited Efforts Needed to Remediate
High-Risk Vulnerabilities in JPSS Ground System,”
US Department of Commerce Ofﬁce of the Inspector
General, Washington, DC, Aug. 21, 2014. [Online].
Available: https://www.oig.doc.gov/OIGPublications/
OIG-14-027-M.pdf.

[82] R. Santamarta, “Last Call for SATCOM Security,”
Blackhat Whitepaper 2018, Aug. 2018.
[Online].
Available: https://i.blackhat.com/us-18/Thu-August-
9/us-18-Santamarta-Last-Call-For-Satcom-Security-
wp.pdf.

[83] ——, “SATCOM Terminals: Hacking by Air, Sea, and
Land,” DEFCON White Paper, 2014, p. 26. [Online].
Available: https : / / www. blackhat . com / docs / us - 14 /

16

[84] S. Tanase.

materials / us - 14 - Santamarta - SATCOM - Terminals -
Hacking-By-Air-Sea-And-Land-WP.pdf.

(Sep. 9, 2015). “Satellite Turla: APT
Command and Control in the Sky,” [Online]. Avail-
able: https : / / securelist . com / satellite - turla - apt -
command- and- control- in- the- sky/72081/ (visited on
06/20/2018).
J. Pavur, “Whispers Among the Stars,” Conference
Brieﬁng, presented at the DEFCON 28 - Safe Mode,
Aug. 5, 2020. [Online]. Available: https : / / www .
youtube . com / watch ? v = ku0Q Wey4K0 (visited on
08/13/2020).

[85]

[86] Defense Digital Service. (2020). “Hackasat,” [Online].
Available: https : / / www . hackasat . com (visited on
08/13/2020).

[87] AeroSpace Village. (2020). “AeroSpace Village – Se-
curing the Skies and beyond,” [Online]. Available:
https://aerospacevillage.org/ (visited on 08/13/2020).

[88] L. Simone, N. Salerno, and M. Maffei, “Frequency-
Hopping Techniques for Secure Satellite TT amp;C:
System Analysis amp; Trade-Offs,” in 2006 Interna-
tional Workshop on Satellite and Space Communica-
tions, Sep. 2006, pp. 13–17. DOI: 10 . 1109 / IWSSC .
2006.255980.

[89] L. Gunn, P. Smet, E. Arbon, and M. D. McDon-
nell, “Anomaly Detection in Satellite Communications
Systems using LSTM Networks,” in 2018 Military
Communications and Information Systems Conference
(MilCIS), Canberra, ACT: IEEE, Nov. 2018, pp. 1–6,
ISBN: 978-1-5386-5760-7. DOI: 10.1109/MilCIS.2018.
8574109.

[90] C. Weinbaum, S. Berner, and B. McClintock, “Sigint
for Anyone: The Growing Availability of Signals In-
telligence in the Public Domain,” RAND Corporation
Washington United States, PE-273-OSD, Jan. 1, 2017.
[Online]. Available: https : / / apps . dtic . mil / docs /
citations/AD1053269 (visited on 01/24/2019).
[91] A. Roy-Chowdhury, J. S. Baras, M. Hadjitheodosiou,
and S. Papademetriou, “Security issues in hybrid net-
works with a satellite component,” IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 50–61, Dec. 2005,
ISSN: 1536-1284. DOI: 10.1109/MWC.2005.1561945.
J. Pavur, M. Strohmeier, V. Lenders, and I. Martinovic,
“QPEP: A QUIC-Based Approach to Encrypted Per-
formance Enhancing Proxies for High-Latency Satel-
lite Broadband (Pre-Print),” Feb. 12, 2020. arXiv:
2002.05091 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.
org/abs/2002.05091 (visited on 02/13/2020).

[92]

[93] K. Wirt, “Fault Attack on the DVB Common Scram-
bling Algorithm,” in Computational Science and
Its Applications – ICCSA 2005, ser. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,
May 9, 2005, pp. 577–584, ISBN: 978-3-540-25861-
2 978-3-540-32044-9. DOI: 10.1007/11424826 61.

[94] W. Li and D. Gu, “Security Analysis of DVB Common
Scrambling Algorithm,” in The First International

Symposium on Data, Privacy, and E-Commerce (IS-
DPE 2007), Nov. 2007, pp. 271–273. DOI: 10.1109/
ISDPE.2007.63.

[95] E. Tews, J. W¨alde, and M. Weiner, “Breaking DVB-
CSA,” in Research in Cryptology, ser. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,
Jul. 20, 2011, pp. 45–61, ISBN: 978-3-642-34158-8
978-3-642-34159-5. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-34159-
5 4.

[96] Colibri, “PowerVu management keys hacked,” May 12,

2014.

[97] L. Francis, W. G. Sirett, K. Mayes, and K. Markanton-
akis, “Countermeasures for attacks on satellite tv cards
using open receivers,” presented at the Proceedings of
the 2005 Australasian Workshop on Grid Computing
and E-Research-Volume 44, Australian Computer So-
ciety, Inc., 2005, pp. 153–158, ISBN: 1-920682-26-0.
[98] M. P. Howarth, S. Iyengar, Z. Sun, and H. Cruick-
shank, “Dynamics of key management in secure satel-
lite multicast,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 308–319, Feb.
2004, ISSN: 0733-8716. DOI: 10 . 1109 / JSAC . 2003 .
819978.

[99] Y. Sheng, H. Cruickshank, M. Moseley, and J. Ash-
worth, “Security architecture for satellite services over
cryptographically heterogeneous networks,” in 2011
6th International ICST Conference on Communica-
tions and Networking in China (CHINACOM), Aug.
2011, pp. 1093–1098. DOI: 10.1109/ChinaCom.2011.
6158319.

[100] R. Hughes, W. Buttler, P. Kwiat, S. Lamoreuax, G.
Morgan, J. Nordholt, and C. Peterson, “Quantum
cryptography for secure satellite communications,” in
2000 IEEE Aerospace Conference. Proceedings (Cat.
No.00TH8484), vol. 1, Big Sky, MT, USA: IEEE,
2000, pp. 191–200,
ISBN: 978-0-7803-5846-1. DOI:
10.1109/AERO.2000.879387.

[101] SES. (Jun. 7, 2018). “SES Announces 10 Project
Partners in QUARTZ Satellite Cybersecurity Consor-
tium,” [Online]. Available: https : / / www . ses . com /
press - release / ses - announces - 10 - project - partners -
quartz- satellite- cybersecurity- consortium (visited on
01/23/2019).

[102] A. J. H. Fidler, G. Hernandez, M. Lalovic, T. Pell,
and I. G. Rose, “Satellite — A New Opportunity
for Broadband Applications,” BT Technology Journal,
vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 29–37, Jan. 1, 2002. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1014561823985.
[103] S. Iyengar, H. Cruickshank, P. Pillai, G. Fairhurst,
and L. Duquerroy, “Security requirements for IP over
satellite DVB networks,” in 2007 16th IST Mobile and
Wireless Communications Summit, Jul. 2007, pp. 1–6.
DOI: 10.1109/ISTMWC.2007.4299224.

[104] L. Duquerroy, S. Josset, O. Alphand, P. Berthou, and
T. Gayraud, “SatiPSec : An Optimized Solution for
Securing Multicast and Unicast Satellite Transmis-

[105]

sions,” in 22nd AIAA International Communications
Satellite Systems Conference & Exhibit 2004 (ICSSC),
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
May 2004. DOI: 10.2514/6.2004-3177.
J. Pavur, “Whispers Among the Stars: A Practical
Look at Perpetrating (and Preventing) Satellite Eaves-
dropping Attacks,” Conference Brieﬁng, presented at
the Black Hat USA, Aug. 5, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.blackhat.com/us- 20/brieﬁngs/schedule/
index . html # whispers - among - the - stars - a - practical -
look - at - perpetrating - and - preventing - satellite -
eavesdropping-attacks-19391 (visited on 08/13/2020).
[106] CCSDS, “Space Data Link Security Protocol - Sum-
mary of Concept and Rationale,” Green Book, Jun.
2018. [Online]. Available: https : / / public . ccsds . org /
Pubs/350x5g1.pdf.
rtl-sdr.com. (Jul. 20, 2016). “Cheating at Pok´emon
Go with a HackRF and GPS Spooﬁng,” [Online].
Available: https : / / www . rtl - sdr . com / cheating - at -
pokemon-go-with-a-hackrf-and-gps-spooﬁng/ (visited
on 08/13/2020).

[107]

[108] T. E. Humphreys, “Assessing the Spooﬁng Threat:
Development of a Portable GPS Civilian Spoofer,” in
In Proceedings of the Institute of Navigation GNSS
(ION GNSS, 2008.

[109] K. Wesson, D. Shepard, and T. Humphreys, “Straight
talk on anti-spooﬁng,” Gps World, vol. 23, no. 1,
pp. 32–39, 2012.
J. S. Warner and R. G. Johnston, “GPS spooﬁng
countermeasures,” Homeland Security Journal, vol. 25,
no. 2, pp. 19–27, 2003.

[110]

[111] H. Wen, P. Y.-R. Huang, J. Dyer, A. Archinal, and
J. Fagan, “Countermeasures for GPS signal spooﬁng,”
in ION GNSS, vol. 5, 2005, pp. 13–16.

[113]

[112] A. Jafarnia-Jahromi, A. Broumandan, J. Nielsen, and
G. Lachapelle, “GPS vulnerability to spooﬁng threats
and a review of antispooﬁng techniques,” International
Journal of Navigation and Observation, vol. 2012,
2012.
J. Vivero and L. del Monte, “Space Missions Cyberse-
curity,” presented at the SpaceOps 2014 Conference,
2014, p. 1765.
eoPortal. (). “SwissCube,” [Online]. Available: https://
directory.eoportal.org/web/eoportal/satellite-missions/
s/swisscube (visited on 08/13/2020).

[114]

[115] M. Pietzka, “Development and Characterization of a
Propulsion System for CubeSats based on Vacuum Arc
Thrusters,” 2016.

[116] W. A. Wheeler, N. Cohen, J. Betser, C. Meyers,
W. Snavely, S. Chaki, M. Riley, and B. Runyon,
“Cyber Resilient Flight Software for Spacecraft,” in
AIAA SPACE and Astronautics Forum and Exposition,
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
2017. DOI: 10.2514/6.2017-5305.

[117] N. Cohen, W. A. Wheeler, R. Ewart, and J. Betser,
“Spacecraft Embedded Cyber Defense- Prototypes &

17

Experimentation,” in AIAA SPACE 2016, ser. AIAA
SPACE Forum, 0 vols., American Institute of Aero-
nautics and Astronautics, Sep. 9, 2016. DOI: 10.2514/
6.2016-5231.

[118] T. Llanso and D. Pearson, “Achieving Space Mis-
sion Resilience To Cyber Attack: Architectural Im-
plications,” in AIAA SPACE 2016, ser. AIAA SPACE
Forum, 0 vols., American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, Sep. 9, 2016. DOI: 10.2514/6.2016-5604.
[119] R. Lemos. (Mar. 7, 2001). “Satellite control codes
stolen by hackers,” [Online]. Available: https://www.
zdnet.com/article/satellite- control- codes- stolen- by-
hackers/ (visited on 02/07/2019).

[120] C. Wilson. (Sep. 22, 2000). “Teen Given Six Months
for Hacking Into NASA,” [Online]. Available: https:
/ / abcnews . go . com / Technology / story ? id = 119422 &
page=1 (visited on 02/07/2019).

[121] Amazon Web Services. (). “AWS Ground Station,”
[Online]. Available: https://aws.amazon.com/ground-
station/ (visited on 08/13/2020).

[122] D. Cunningham, G. Palavincini, and J. Romero-
Mariona, “Towards Effective Cybersecurity for Mod-
ular, Open Architecture Satellite Systems,” AIAA/USU
Conference on Small Satellites, Aug. 9, 2016. [Online].
Available: https : / / digitalcommons . usu . edu / smallsat /
2016/TS4AdvTech1/6.
J. Vivero, “Space Missions Cybersecurity Modelling,”
in 31st AIAA International Communications Satellite
Systems Conference, American Institute of Aeronautics
and Astronautics, 2013. DOI: 10.2514/6.2013-5634.

[123]

[124] U.S. Government Accountability Ofﬁce, “Critical In-
frastructure Protection: Commercial Satellite Secu-
rity Should Be More Fully Addressed,” GAO-02-781
Oct. 3, 2002. [Online]. Available: https://www.gao.
gov/products/GAO-02-781 (visited on 01/21/2019).

[125] P. Meyer, “Outer Space and Cyber Space: A Tale
of Two Security Realms (SWP 51),” 2016. [Online].
Available: http://summit.sfu.ca/item/16251 (visited on
01/18/2019).

[126] D. Housen-Couriel, “Cybersecurity and Anti-Satellite
Capabilities (ASAT): New Threats and New Legal
Responses,” Journal of Law & Cyber Warfare, vol. 4,
p. 116, 2014–2015. [Online]. Available: https : / /
heinonline . org / HOL / Page ? handle = hein . journals /
jlacybrwa4&id=406&div=18&collection=journals.

[127] P. J. Blount, “Satellites Are Just Things on the In-
ternet of Things,” Air and Space Law, pp. 273–293,
2017, ISSN: 0927-3379. [Online]. Available: http : / /
www . kluwerlawonline . com / document . php ? id =
AILA2017019.

[128] T. Shales, “Cable’s ’Captain Midnight’ Apprehended,”

The Washington Post, p. 2, Jul. 23, 1986.

[129] Washington Post, “Doors Fail When Reagan Is Home,”

The Washington Post, p. 1, Apr. 5, 1986.

[130] M. Stein. (Sep. 20, 1993). “Elbowing for a Piece
of Space : The parking lot for satellites is getting

jammed.,” [Online]. Available: https://www.latimes.
com/archives/la- xpm- 1993- 09- 20- mn- 37280- story.
html (visited on 08/17/2020).

[131] N. Boustany, “Kurdish TV Gets Static from Turks,”
Washington Post,
ISSN:
1998-11-25T12:00-500,
0190-8286.
[Online]. Available: https : / / www .
washingtonpost . com / archive / politics / 1998 / 11 / 25 /
kurdish - tv - gets - static - from - turks / f41ee658 - 8258 -
495a-bc78-b644c2bcf56d/ (visited on 02/06/2019).

[132] S. Kinzer, “Kurds Are Determined to Restore TV
Station Shut by the British,” New York TimesINTER-
NATIONAL, A13, 1999,
ISSN: 03624331. [Online].
Available: https : / / search . proquest . com / docview /
110109073 / abstract / FE7E2E2363E74DF2PQ / 2 (vis-
ited on 08/17/2020).

[133] A. Hassanpour, “Satellite footprints as national bor-
der: MED-TV and the extraterritoriality of state
sovereignty,” Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs,
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 53–72, Apr. 1998.
[Online].
Available: https : / / search . proquest . com / docview /
215231901?accountid=13042.
J. Glave, “Have Crackers Found Military’s Achilles’
Heel?” Wired, [Online]. Available: https://www.wired.
com/1998/04/have-crackers-found-militarys-achilles-
heel/ (visited on 02/06/2019).

[134]

[135] BBC. (March2, 1999). “Satellite hijack ’impossible’,”
[Online]. Available: http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/
tech/288965.stm (visited on 02/06/2019).

[136] AFP, “Moscow Admits Satellite Phone Jamming,”

Nov. 24, 1999.

[137] L. Grau, “GPS Signals Jammed During Tank Trials,”
Military Review, Mar. 2001. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.hsdl.org/?view&did=3694.

[138] S. Costello. (Sep. 25, 2000). “Suspect Arrested in
NASA Hack,” [Online]. Available: https : / / www .
computerworld . com . au / article / 78798 / suspect
arrested nasa hack/ (visited on 02/07/2019).
[139] P. McNulty, United States of America v. Gary McKin-

non, Nov. 2002.

[140] G. McKinnon, “Theresa May saved my life – now
she’s the only hope for the Human Rights Act — Gary
McKinnon,” The GuardianOpinion, ISSN: 0261-3077.
[Online]. Available: https : / / www. theguardian . com /
commentisfree/2016/nov/15/theresa- may- saved- my-
life-human-rights-act (visited on 08/17/2020).
J. Schwartz, “Compressed Data; Hacker Obtains Shut-
tle Design Files, Bafﬂing NASA,” The New York
TimesBusiness, Aug. 12, 2002, ISSN: 0362-4331. [On-
line]. Available: https : / / www . nytimes . com / 2002 /
08 / 12 / business / compressed - data - hacker - obtains -
shuttle - design - ﬁles - bafﬂing - nasa . html (visited on
08/17/2020).

[141]

[142] B. M. R. Martins, “GNSS Vulnerabilites and Robust-
ness,” 2014. [Online]. Available: https://core.ac.uk/
download/pdf/143409373.pdf.

18

[143] Royal Academy of Engineering, “Global Naviation
Space Systems: Reliance and Vulnerabilities,” Mar.
2011. [Online]. Available: https : / / rntfnd . org / wp -
content/uploads/2013/09/Royal-Acad-of-Eng Global
Navigation Space-Systems Report.pdf.

[144] M. Urban, “Enthusiast watches Nato spy pictures,”
Jun. 13, 2002. [Online]. Available: http://news.bbc.co.
uk/1/hi/programmes/newsnight/2041754.stm (visited
on 08/17/2020).

[145] R. Windrem. (Oct. 24, 2003). “U.S. satellite feeds
to Iran jammed,” [Online]. Available: http : / / www .
nbcnews . com / id / 3340692 / t / us - satellite - feeds - iran -
jammed/ (visited on 02/06/2019).

[146] M. K. Littman, “Satellite Network Security,” Encyclo-
pedia of Information Science and Technology, Second
Edition, pp. 3350–3355, 2009. DOI: 10.4018/978- 1-
60566-026-4.ch532.

[147] D. Hencke and O. Gibson, “Protest to Libya after satel-
lites jammed,” The GuardianUK news, ISSN: 0261-
3077. [Online]. Available: https://www.theguardian.
com / uk / 2005 / dec / 03 / politics . libya (visited on
02/06/2019).

[148] C. Q. Choi. (Apr. 9, 2007). “Libya Pinpointed as
Source of Months-Long Satellite Jamming in 2006,”
[Online]. Available: https : / / www. space . com / 3666 -
libya - pinpointed - source - months - long - satellite -
jamming-2006.html (visited on 02/06/2019).
[149] K. Spector. (Aug. 3, 2006). “Hacking Hezbollah,”
[Online]. Available: https://foreignpolicy.com/2006/
08/03/hacking-hezbollah/ (visited on 02/06/2019).
J. A. Steinberger, “A Survey of Satellite Communica-
tions System Vulnerabilities,” JOINT ELECTRONIC
WARFARE CENTER KELLY AFB TX, 2008.
[151] P. Martin, “NASA Cybersecurity: An Examination of
the Agency’s Information Security,” Natinoal Aero-
nautics and Space Administration, Report Before US
House of Representatives, Feb. 29, 2012.

[150]

[152] A. Laurie, “$Atellite Hacking for Fun & Pr0ﬁt!” Pre-
sented at the Blackhat 2009, 2009. [Online]. Available:
http : / / www. blackhat . com / presentations / bh - dc - 09 /
Laurie / BlackHat - DC - 09 - Laurie - Satellite - Hacking .
pdf.

[153] Wired, “The Great Brazilian Sat-Hack Crackdown,”
Wired, Apr. 20, 2009. [Online]. Available: https : / /
www . wired . com / 2009 / 04 / ﬂeetcom/ (visited on
02/06/2019).

[154] Associated Press. (Jun. 1, 2010). “Glitch shows how
much US military relies on GPS,” [Online]. Available:
https://phys.org/news/2010- 06- glitch- military- gps.
html (visited on 02/06/2019).

[155] BBC Monitoring Asia Paciﬁc, “South Korean satellite
comes under North jamming attack,” BBC Worldwide
Monitoring, Nov. 16, 2012.

[156] UT Austin Press Ofﬁce. (Jul. 29, 2013). “UT Austin
Researchers Successfully Spoof an $80 million Yacht
at Sea,” [Online]. Available: https://news.utexas.edu/

2013/07/29/ut-austin-researchers-successfully-spoof-
an-80-million-yacht-at-sea/ (visited on 02/06/2019).

[157] Trend, “Egypt jamming Al Jazeera’s satellite signals,”

Trend Daily News, Sep. 4, 2013.

[158] CBS New York, “N.J. Man In A Jam, After Illegal
GPS Device Interferes With Newark Airport,” Aug. 9,
2013. [Online]. Available: https : / / newyork . cbslocal .
com / 2013 / 08 / 09 / n - j - man - in - a - jam - after- illegal -
gps-device-interferes-with-newark-liberty-operations/
(visited on 08/17/2020).
ISTV, “Thailand suffers satellite jamming,” Inside
Satellite TV, Jan. 20, 2014.

[159]

[160] AP, “Network: Signal jammed in Egypt during com-

[161]

edy show,” Mail Online, Mar. 8, 2014.
ICT Monitor, “MBC hit by Libya satellite jamming,”
Oct. 3, 2014.

[162] Der Spielgel. (Apr. 13, 2014). “DLR mit Trojanern von
Geheimdienst ausgesp¨aht,” [Online]. Available: https:
//www.spiegel.de/netzwelt/web/dlr-mit-trojanern-von-
geheimdienst-ausgespaeht-a-964099.html (visited on
08/17/2020).

[163] Arabsat. (May 29, 2014). “Arabsat is subject to Jam-
ming and its Engineers succeed in locating its source,”
[Online]. Available: /NewsDetails.aspx?pageid=428&
lang=2 (visited on 08/17/2020).

[165]

[164] Sec and Schneider, director, Iridium Hacking, Chaos
Communication Camp 2015, Aug. 2015. [Online].
Available: /v / camp2015 - 6883 - iridium hacking (vis-
ited on 08/17/2020).
J. Dean, “Briton held after cyberattacker tells Pen-
tagon: We control your satellites,” The Times, Mar. 7,
ISSN: 0140-0460. [Online]. Available: https :
2015,
/ / www . thetimes . co . uk / article / briton - held - after -
cyberattacker - tells - pentagon - we - control - your -
satellites-fdfpqhxjx2z (visited on 02/07/2019).
[166] BBC, “N Korea ’jamming GPS signals’ in South,”
Apr. 1, 2016. [Online]. Available: https : / / www .
bbc . com / news / world - asia - 35940542 (visited on
02/08/2019).

[167] BBC Monitoring Kiev Unit, “Ukrainian TV channels
report targeted signal jamming,” BBC Worldwide Mon-
itoring, Jul. 18, 2016.

[168] Y. Okbi, “Hackers take over Israeli news broadcast,
post ’Allahu Akbar’,” The Jerusalem Post, Nov. 29,
2016.

[169] A. A. Z. Hudaib, “Satellite Network Hacking & Se-
curity Analysis,” International Journal of Computer
Science and Security (IJCSS), vol. 10, no. 1, p. 8, 2016.
[170] S. Chambers. (Jul. 19, 2017). “Ship’s satellite commu-
nication system hacked with ease,” [Online]. Available:
https://splash247.com/ships-satellite-communication-
system-hacked-ease/ (visited on 02/08/2019).
[171] The Times, “Russia ’disrupted Nato wargames by
jamming GPS’,” The Times, Nov. 13, 2018.
[172] D. Winder. (Jun. 2019). “Conﬁrmed: NASA Has Been
Hacked,” [Online]. Available: https://www.forbes.com/

19

sites/daveywinder/2019/06/20/conﬁrmed- nasa- has-
been-hacked/ (visited on 08/17/2020).

[173] NASA Ofﬁce of the Inspector General, “Cybersecu-
rity Management and Oversight at the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory,” Jun. 18, 2019.

[174] S. Gerling, director, Hacking Yachts Remotely via
Satcom or Maritime Internet Router, Dec. 3, 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=mT7dXJ ob8k&t= (visited on 08/18/2020).
[175] D. E. Sanger and W. J. Broad, “U.S. Revives Secret
Program to Sabotage Iranian Missiles and Rockets,”
The New York TimesU.S., Feb. 13, 2019, ISSN: 0362-
4331. [Online]. Available: https://www.nytimes.com/
2019/02/13/us/politics/iran- missile- launch- failures.
html (visited on 08/17/2020).

[176] Z. Doffman. (Jul. 2019). “Crashed UAE Military Spy
Satellite Raises Possibility Of Enemy Cyberattack,”
[Online]. Available: https : / / www. forbes . com / sites /
zakdoffman/2019/07/12/did- an- iranian- cyberattack-
force- a- military- spy- satellite- to- drop- from- the- sky/
(visited on 08/17/2020).

[177] R. McKie, “Nasa astronaut ’accessed ex-partner’s bank
account from space station’,” The GuardianUS news,
Aug. 24, 2019, ISSN: 0261-3077. [Online]. Available:
https://www.theguardian.com/us- news/2019/aug/24/
nasa- astronaut- allegedly- accessed- ex- partners- bank-
account-while-living-on-iss (visited on 08/17/2020).

[178] E. Fieldstadt. (Apr. 2020). “Woman who accused
NASA astronaut wife of hacking bank account charged
with false allegations,” [Online]. Available: https : / /
www . nbcnews . com / news / us - news / woman - who -
accused- nasa- astronaut- wife- hacking- bank- account-
charged-n1178611 (visited on 08/17/2020).

[179] V. Murray. (2019). “Legal GNSS Spooﬁng and its
Effects on Autonomous Vehicles,” [Online]. Available:
https://www.blackhat.com/us- 19/brieﬁngs/schedule/
#legal-gnss-spooﬁng-and-its-effects-on-autonomous-
vehicles-15497 (visited on 08/17/2020).
J. Mazoomdaar. (Nov. 6, 2019). “Not only Kudanku-
lam, ISRO, too, was alerted of cyber security breach,”
[Online]. Available: https://indianexpress.com/article/
india / not - only - kudankulam - isro - too - was - alerted -
of - cyber - security - breach - 6105184/ (visited on
08/17/2020).

[180]

20

APPENDIX A
SATELLITE SECURITY INCIDENT CHRONOLOGY

Year Attack

Type

Attacker
Type

Attacker
Country

Victim
Type

Victim
Country

1962

1972

1986

1986

Government

Jamming
In a 1962 congressional hearing on the ﬁrst American commercial satellite company, the prospect of signal
jamming and potential satellite hijacking was suggested as a possible threat to low-altitude satellite missions.
Primary/Contemporary References: [28]

United States

Hypothetical

Commercial

Government

Jamming
A UN proposal by the Soviet Union is raised suggesting that states have an intrinsic right to jam satellite signals
in their territories via technical means.
Primary/Contemporary References: [29]

Soviet Union

Multiple

Multiple

Insider

Signal Hijacking
An industry insider injected video and audio into an HBO television broadcast in Florida. Interestingly, this attack
may have been inspired by a ﬁctional article which appeared the previous year in a satellite television enthusiast
magazine about an individual who hijacked HBO signals in protest of new scrambling policies (Pollack 1986).
Primary/Contemporary References: [30], [128] Secondary References: [2], [22]

United States

United States

Commercial

Government

Jamming
In 1986 a garage door company discovered that communications satellites which were directed towards Regan’s
vacation home in California were jamming terrestrial garage door openers more than 200 miles away.
Primary/Contemporary References: [129]

Ground (Accidental) United States

United States

1986 Eavesdropping

Government

Indonesia

Commercial

United States

In 1986 the government of Indonesia was accused by an American satellite imaging ﬁrm of using large satellite
receivers to intercept earth observation images without subscribing to the service.
Primary/Contemporary References: [33]

1987

Individual

Signal Hijacking
In 1987, Thomas Haynie, an employee of the Christian Broadcasting Network hijacked satellite transmissions
from the Playboy Channel and replaced them with static text from the bible.
Primary/Contemporary References: [32] Secondary References: [2]

United States

United States

Commercial

1987 Groundstation

Individual

Germany

Gov. Military

United States

In 1987, a group of youths in West Germany managed to compromise top secret networks belonging to NASA
and other major space agencies. These networks provided at least the ability to ﬁnd secret information about
space missions and potentially information which could have compromised these missions.
Primary/Contemporary References: [34]

1993 Cryptographic

Individual

United Kingdom
United Kingdom
A group of hackers distributed BSkyB satellite channels through a decoder-card sharing scheme across an
apartment complex.
Primary/Contemporary References: [39]

Commercial

1993

Government

Jamming
Satellite operators from Indonesia and Tongo threatened each other over the proposed Tonga Gorizont 17 satellite
in GEO above New Guinea. The orbital slot was under contention due to potential interference as both states
threatened to jam the other’s transmissions from the orbit. This is the ﬁrst public record of a state threatening
digital counterspace operations against another state’s assets.
Primary/Contemporary References: [130]

Commercial

Indonesia

Tonga

21

Year Attack

Type

Attacker
Type

Attacker
Country

Victim
Type

Victim
Country

1994

Government

Jamming
The Iranian government was suspected of jamming foreign television programs from Arab-Sat and Asia-Sat
platforms during ongoing debate over banning the domestic use of satellite dishes altogether.
Primary/Contemporary References: [35]

Commercial

Multiple

Iran

1994 Cryptographic

Individual

United States

Commercial

United States

Gregory Manzer was sentenced on charges of creating and distributing technology to break the VideoCipher
encryption technology used by HBO and ESPN satellite channels.
Primary/Contemporary References: [40]

1996

1996

Government

Jamming
In 1996 the Indonesian government used a communications satellite called Palapa B1 to jam signals from a
Hong Kong/British satellite Apstar-1A which was leased by Tonga - making good on threats from three years
prior.
Primary/Contemporary References: N/A Secondary References: [1], [2], [37]

Commercial

Hong Kong

Indonesia

Government

Jamming
The Turkish Government is believed to have jammed broadcasts originating from MED-TV, a Kurdish nationalist
satellite television station operating on an Eutelsat satellite. The jamming campaign continued sporadically
between 1996 and 1999. Turkish authorities claimed MED-TV was “Terrorist Television” and incited acts of
violence. British authorities ultimately terminated the MED-TV transponder license in 1999.
Primary/Contemporary References: [131], [132] Secondary References: [37], [133]

United States

Commercial

Turkey

1997 Groundstation

Government

Russia

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

Hackers in 1997 successfully compromised Goddard Space Flight Center computers capable of satellite command
and control. Later investigation linked this incident to Russia-government associated hackers although full
veriﬁcation of this claim cannot be made without access to classiﬁed investigation reports.
Primary/Contemporary References: [41] Secondary References: [2]

1998

1998

Unknown

Payload Damage
A cyber-intrusion at Goddard Space Flight Center possibly caused the German-US ROSAT telescope to face
the sun and burn its optical sensors.
Primary/Contemporary References: [41] Secondary References: [50]

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

Unknown

Commercial

Jamming
A Moscow-based company began selling a $4000 portable jammer capable of disabling GPS signals over a
200km radius.
Primary/Contemporary References: [38]

Multiple

Multiple

Russia

1998 Groundstation

Individual

United States

Gov. Military

United States

In 1998, a hacker group called ”Masters of Downloading” claimed to have stolen classiﬁed software that
provided sensitive information and limited control over military satellites include GPS systems. The pentagon
acknowledged a minor breach but contended that the hackers exaggerated their capabilities.
Primary/Contemporary References: [134] Secondary References: [2]

1999 TT&C

Individual

United Kingdom
In 1999 hackers claimed to have hijacked a British military satellite’s control systems and to have demanded
ransom from the British government. However, the British military strongly disputed these claims.
Primary/Contemporary References: [135] Secondary References: [2]

Gov. Military

Unknown

1999

Government

Jamming
Russian government admits jamming satellite phone networks in Chechnya to present communications among
separatists.
Primary/Contemporary References: [136]

Commercial

Russia

Russia

22

Year Attack

Type

Attacker
Type

Attacker
Country

Victim
Type

Victim
Country

1999 Groundstation

Individual

United States

Gov. Manned

Multiple

A teenager going by the name cOmrade plead guilty to charges of compromising NASA computer systems that
support the International Space Station. The intrusions occurred in 1999.
Primary/Contemporary References: [120]

2000

2000

Government

Jamming
During a 2000 tank competition to demonstrate tanks for sale to the Greek military, French forces used ground-
based GPS jammers to cause navigation problems during US and British entries.
Secondary References: [2], [137]

Navigational

Multiple

France

Government

Jamming
Iran accused of using jamming devices impacting Turkish territory to interfere with Eutelsat-based opposition
broadcasts.
Primary/Contemporary References: [47]

Commercial

France

Iran

2000 Groundstation

Individual

United States

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

Jason Dikeman was charged in 2000 of gaining unauthorized access to systems which control NASA satellites.
Primary/Contemporary References: [138]

2000 Groundstation

Unknown

Unknown

Gov. Military

United States

In 2000 unknown hackers stole software from a US defense contracting company which enables ground stations
to send commands to satellites.
Primary/Contemporary References: [119]

2001 Groundstation

Individual

United Kingdom
UK based hacker Gary McKinnon was indicted on charges of compromising 16 NASA computer systems.
McKinnon claimed to have been looking for evidence of a cover-up relating to extra-terrestrial intelligence and
unidentiﬁed ﬂying objects. While there is not evidence that McKinnon compromised systems related to satellite
control, it represents an early high-proﬁle attack against a space agency with the intent of stealing space-mission
data. Subsequent coverage has focused on matters of extradition and human rights for cyber-crime.
Primary/Contemporary References: [139] Secondary References: [1], [140]

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

2002 Groundstation

Individual

Venezuela

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

A Venezuelan hacker using the pseudonym ”RaFa” provided a reporter at Computer World copies of a
PowerPoint documents detailing the design of NASA launch vehicle Cobra and other sensitive engineering
information. Later, Rafael N ˜Aº ˜A±ez Aponte was sentenced and extradited for compromises and defacement of
US military information systems conducted under the same pseudonym but charges for the NASA compromise
were never pressed. Some sources associate this compromise with the 2002 Marshal Space Flight Center
Intrusions, although this attribution is disputed.
Primary/Contemporary References: [141] Secondary References: [41]

2002

Signal Hijacking
Falun Gong transmitted protest videos from Taipei over ofﬁcial Chinese Central Television satellite broadcasts.
Primary/Contemporary References: [42]

Gov. Media

Dissident

Taiwan

China

2002 Groundstation

Government

China

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

An attacker compromised computers at Marshall Space Flight Center stealing intellectual property related to
launch vehicle design. This attack has since been tenuously attributed to China, although more contemporaneous
sources associate it with the Rafa intrusions.
Primary/Contemporary References: [141] Secondary References: [2], [41]

23

Year Attack

Type

Attacker
Type

Attacker
Country

Victim
Type

Victim
Country

2002

Individual

Jamming
United Kingdom
Several sources assert that in 2002, a poorly installed CCTV camera in the town of Douglas, Isle of Mann
caused interference with GPS signals over a 1 km area. We were unable to ﬁnd a primary source for this claim,
but it is a commonly referenced example of accident GPS interference.
Secondary References: [1], [142], [143]

United States

Navigational

2002 Eavesdropping

Individual

United Kingdom
John Locker, a satellite eavesdropper, reported the ability to intercept images from NATO surveillance aircraft.
NATO respondents claimed that the images did not contain sensitive information but media reports claimed that
they revealed sensitive details regarding the capabilities and location of classiﬁed vehicles.
Primary/Contemporary References: [144] Secondary References: [1]

Gov. Military

United States

2003

2003

2003

2004

Government

Signal Jamming
US government broadcasts in favor of regime change in Iran were jammed by attacks on the Telstar-12 satellites
by the Iranian government.
Primary/Contemporary References: [145] Secondary References: [146]

United States

Commercial

Iran

Government

Jamming
In 2003 the Cuban government was accused of deliberately jamming US signals for the Voice of America station
which were being broadcast to Iran, perhaps on behalf of the Iranian government and with communications
gear supplied by China. This has been associated with the Iranian jamming of the Telstar-12 incident by some
secondary sources.
Primary/Contemporary References: [48] Secondary References: [1]

United States

Commercial

Cuba

Dissident

Signal Hijacking
Falun Gong again transmitted protest media across an AsiaSat transponder in 2003 to interrupt CCTV coverage
of the Zhenzhou V space mission.
Primary/Contemporary References: [43]

Commercial

Taiwan

China

Signal Hijacking
Falun Gong again transmitted protest media across an AsiaSat transponder.
Primary/Contemporary References: [44]

Dissident

Taiwan

Commercial

China

2005 Groundstation

Government

China

Gov. Manned

United States

Windows malware installed in Kennedy space center’s vehicle assembly building sent information about the space
shuttle to computers in Taiwan. While this may have been espionage to mimic shuttle technology, investigators
also believe information that could threaten the shuttle was exﬁltrated. Weak attribution to the PLA has been
made.
Secondary References: [2], [41]

2005

Government

Jamming
In 2005 the Libyan government was accused of jamming telecommunications satellites which impacted both
European television stations and government communications.
Primary/Contemporary References: [147] Secondary References: [2]

United States

Commercial

Libya

2006

Jamming

Government

Libya

Commercial

United Arab Emi-
rates

In 2006 the Libyan government was accused of jamming satellite telephone frequencies in order to combat the
use of satphones by smugglers.
Primary/Contemporary References: [148] Secondary References: [2]

2006

Signal Hijacking
Israeli forces in 2006 hijacked the Hezbollah-associated satellite television channels to air threatening anti-
Hezbollah messages.

Government

Commercial

Lebanon

Israel

24

Year Attack

Type

Attacker
Type

Attacker
Country

Victim
Type

Victim
Country

Primary/Contemporary References: [149] Secondary References: [2]

2006 Groundstation

Unknown

Unknown

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

A purported 2006 phishing incident targeting NASA employees lead to the leak of NASA budgetary documents
detailing satellite investment priorities. We were unable to ﬁnd primary source information regarding this breach,
but several prior surveys have cited it as example of IP theft attacks.
Secondary References: [1], [2], [41]

2006

2007

Government

Sensor Disruption
China beamed a ground-based laser at sensors on a US spy satellite. Very little information about the incident
and its effects is public.
Primary/Contemporary References: [54]

Gov. Military

United States

China

Terrorist

Signal Hijacking
Tamil rebels may have hijacked an Intelsat satellite signal to broadcast propaganda. The rebels claim they had
purchased access to the satellite but Intelsat disputes this. The incident went on for more than 2 years.
Primary/Contemporary References: [45] Secondary References: [5]

United States

Commercial

Sri Lanka

2007 Groundstation

Government

China

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

The ground station analysis process for Earth Observation Data at Goddard Space Flight center was compromised
by attackers believed to be associated with the Chinese state according to secondary sources. No primary source
coverage of this incident could be found, but it is cited in several surveys as an instance of state sponsored
espionage.
Primary/Contemporary References: Secondary References: [1], [2], [41]

2007 TT&C

Government

China

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

Two NASA satellites in 2007 and 2008 suffered major disruption attacks. Initial reporting suggested that these
were just jamming attacks but later reports suggest ground station control takeover and accuse China.
Primary/Contemporary References: [49] Secondary References: [5], [50]

2008

Insider

Payload Damage
An astronaut is believed to have introduced a virus to ISS windows-XP computers by bringing a compromised
laptop on board. More recent reports suggest the virus was brought aboard by Russian cosmonauts, but it is
unlikely to have been done deliberately.
Primary/Contemporary References: [51] Secondary References: [50], [52]

Gov. Manned

Multiple

Russia

2008 Groundstation

Unknown

Unknown

Gov. Manned

United States

Attackers were reported as having used a Trojan horse installed on devices at NASA’s Johnson Space Center to
compromise communications to the international space station and disrupt some services on-board. It is unclear
if the attack was targeted or coincidental.
Secondary References: [1], [2], [150]

2009 Groundstation

Individual

Italy

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

In March 2009, an Italian hacker compromised several NASA systems including systems used to control NASA’s
Deep Space Network and control systems in Goddard Space Flight Center. NASA claims that no critical harm
was posed to space missions.
Primary/Contemporary References: [151]

2009 Eavesdropping

Terrorist

Iraq

Gov. Military

United States

Iraqi insurgents intercepted unencrypted video streams via satellite links using a commercial software product
called SkyGrabber.
Primary/Contemporary References: [46] Secondary References: [5]

25

Year Attack

Type

Attacker
Type

Attacker
Country

Victim
Type

Victim
Country

2009 Eavesdropping

Researcher

United Kingdom
United Kingdom
A 2009 Blackhat presentation demonstrates the ability to intercept live video feeds from DVB-S signals,
including sensitive military and media feeds by modifying existing satellite hardware.
Primary/Contemporary References: [152]

Commercial

2009

2009

Individual

Signal Hijacking
In 2009 almost 40 individuals in Brazil were arrested on charges of hijacking UHF frequencies belonging to
US Naval satellites for personal usage. UHF transponder hijacking is believed to be widely used by criminal
organizations and individuals seeking free long-range communications services in remote parts of the country.
Primary/Contemporary References: [153] Secondary References: [2]

Gov. Military

United States

Brazil

Government

Jamming
United Kingdom
In May of 2009 the Al-Hiwar satellite station broadcast from the United Kingdom was jammed. No culprit has
been conclusively identiﬁed but the Egyptian government is strongly suspected.
Primary/Contemporary References: [55]

Commercial

Egypt

2010 Groundstation

Individual

China

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

A Chinese hacker was arrested on charges of stealing export-controlled data from NASA computer systems. The
hacker was arrested by Chinese authorities with supporting evidence provided by the United States. It represents
one of the ﬁrst cooperative law enforcement actions regarding government systems compromise between the
two states.
Primary/Contemporary References: [151]

2010 Eavesdropping

Researcher

Spain

Commercial

Spain

A 2010 Blackhat presentation demonstrates the ability to intercept live internet feeds from DVB-S signals using
general purpose equipment
Primary/Contemporary References: [70]

2010 Groundstation

Accidental

United States

Navigational

United States

In 2010 an Air Force update to GPS ground control stations resulted in multi-day outages effecting as many as
10,000 military GPS devices.
Primary/Contemporary References: [154] Secondary References: [50]

2010

Government

Jamming
A series of jamming incidents around the 31st anniversary of the Islamic Revolution in Iran jammed broadcasts
from international satellite television channels on a Eutelsat satellite. The Iranian government is suspected of
instigating the attacks.
Primary/Contemporary References: [56] Secondary References: [2]

Commercial

France

Iran

2010

Jamming

Government

Jordan

Commercial

United Arab Emi-
rates

In 2010 Jordan was accused of jamming Al-Jazeera satellite television feeds including some which broadcast
the World Cup.
Primary/Contemporary References: [57]

2010

Government

Jamming
North Korea has attempted to disrupt South Korean GPS navigational signals through jamming attacks starting
in 2010 and continuing thereafter.
Primary/Contemporary References: [155]

Navigational

South Korea

North Korea

2010 Groundstation

Government

United States

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

An Ofﬁce of the Inspector General for NASA audit found that e-waste systems prepared for resale relating to
the Space Shuttle missions retained sensitive data which was not correctly deleted, including export controlled
information. Similar sensitive information was found on hard drives in dumpster outside a NASA facility.
Primary/Contemporary References: [151]

26

Year Attack

Type

Attacker
Type

Attacker
Country

Victim
Type

Victim
Country

2011 Groundstation

Government

United States

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

The Ofﬁce of the Inspector General for NASA issued a report indicating that critical vulnerabilities were found
in at least six systems which could be used by a remote attacker to control or debilitate ongoing satellite
missions.
Primary/Contemporary References: [151]

2011 Groundstation

Unknown

China

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

Attackers in 2011 gained administrative control of computer systems in the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory
using previously stolen credentials. The attack was later attributed to China.
Primary/Contemporary References: [80] Secondary References: [13]

2011

2011

Government

Jamming
A Bahraini opposition station called LuaLua TV was jammed within 5 hours of its ﬁrst broadcast over a Eutelsat
transponder, likely by the Bahraini government.
Primary/Contemporary References: [58] Secondary References: [2]

Commercial

Bahrain

France

Government

Jamming
Ethiopian Satellite Television - an anti-regime satellite television channel - was jammed by the Ethiopian
government in 2010 (and several times thereafter). Some have suggested that the equipment and technology for
these attacks was provided by Chinese government ofﬁcials.
Primary/Contemporary References: [59] Secondary References: [2]

United States

Commercial

Ethiopia

2011

Jamming

Government

Libya

Commercial

United Arab Emi-
rates

In 2011 the Libyan government again jammed satellite telephone frequencies in order to combat the use of
satphones by smugglers.
Primary/Contemporary References: [60] Secondary References: [2]

2011

Jamming
Iran has accused Saudi Arabia of jamming its state run satellite television networks starting in 2011.
Primary/Contemporary References: [61]

Saudi Arabia

Government

Commercial

Iran

2011 Groundstation

Unknown

Unknown

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

In 2011 a laptop containing command and control algorithms used for the operation of the International Space
Station was stolen. The laptop was unencrypted, but it is unclear if the attacker speciﬁcally targeted NASA
information.
Primary/Contemporary References: [151] Secondary References: [1]

2011 Groundstation

Unknown

China

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

Chinese hackers are suspected of having compromised accounts of privileged users at the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory which provided attackers with full access to devices on the network.
Primary/Contemporary References: [151]

2012 Groundstation

Individual

Romania

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

In February 2012, NASA’s Inspector General pressed charges against a Romanian national for intrusions into Jet
Propulsion Laboratory computer systems to steal information regarding a scientiﬁc sensor for space missions.
Primary/Contemporary References: [151]

2012 Groundstation

Individual

Romania

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

In January 2012, the Romanian government arrested a 20-year-old hacker who had compromised both NASA
and Romanian government information systems. Other than a low-impact denial of service, this had no lasting
repercussions.
Primary/Contemporary References: [151]

27

Year Attack

Type

Attacker
Type

Attacker
Country

Victim
Type

Victim
Country

2012

Government

Jamming
An Eritrean opposition satellite radio channel called Radio Erena was jammed by the Eritrean government in
2012.
Primary/Contemporary References: [62]

Commercial

Ertirea

France

2012

Jamming

Government

Ethiopia

Commercial

United Arab Emi-
rates

The Ethiopian government is suspected of jamming Eritrean satellite communications signals on ARABSAT
platforms starting in 2012 (and several times thereafter).
Primary/Contemporary References: [63] Secondary References: [2]

2012

2012

Jamming
Eutelsat was targeted by jamming signals believed to originate in Syria.
Primary/Contemporary References: [64]

Government

Syria

Commercial

France

Jamming
South Korea
North Korea
North Korea is believed to have jammed South Korean military communications satellites starting in 2012.
Primary/Contemporary References: [67]

Gov. Military

Government

2012 Cryptographic

Researcher

Germany

Multiple

Multiple

German researchers published a paper detailing the ability to decrypt voice communications over many satellite
phones implementing the common GMR-1 and GMR-2 encryption algorithms.
Primary/Contemporary References: [72]

2013

2013

2013

2013

Researcher

Spooﬁng
In 2009 University of Texas at Austin researchers demonstrated the ability to leverage GPS spooﬁng to redirect
an $80 million yacht remotely.
Primary/Contemporary References: [156] Secondary References: [50]

United States

United States

Navigational

Government

Jamming
The Azerbaijani government was found by the USA to be deliberately jamming opposition satellite television
stations on Turksat platforms.
Primary/Contemporary References: [65]

Commercial

Azerbaijan

Turkey

Jamming
The Egyptian government was accused of jamming Al Jazeera satellite broadcasts during instability in 2013.
Primary/Contemporary References: [157]

Government

Commercial

Egypt

Qatar

Individual

Jamming
A limousine driver in New Jersey had installed a GPS jammer in his vehicle to prevent his employer from
tracking the vehicle. The jammer caused interference with navigational systems at a nearby airport.
Primary/Contemporary References: [158] Secondary References: [1]

United States

United States

Navigational

2014 Groundstation

Ofﬁcial Audit

United States

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

US department of commerce ofﬁce of the inspector general found more than 9,000 high risk issues in the Joint
Polar Satellite System (NOAA) ground stations
Primary/Contemporary References: [81]

2014 Groundstation

Researcher

United States

Commercial

United States

A presentation at Defcon in 2014 found severe vulnerabilities - such as hard-coded passcodes) in 10 SATCOM
terminals. Some of these are remotely exploitable but many require physical or at least logical access to the
devices.
Primary/Contemporary References: [83]

28

Year Attack

Type

Attacker
Type

Attacker
Country

Victim
Type

Victim
Country

2014

2014

Dissident

Jamming
Thailand government television stations were repeatedly jammed in 2014 during a series of government
protestors. No culprit was identiﬁed but it is believed to have been the protestors.
Primary/Contemporary References: [159]

Commercial

Thailand

Thailand

Unknown

Jamming
In 2014 a comedy broadcast in Egypt was deliberately jammed with interference from two stations in Cairo. It
is unclear who is responsible.
Primary/Contemporary References: [160]

Saudi Arabia

Commercial

Egypt

2014

Jamming

Government

Libya

Commercial

Libya is believed to have jammed a dozen channels by Dubai-headquartered MBC.
Primary/Contemporary References: [161]

United Arab Emi-
rates

2014 Groundstation

Government

China

Gov. Military

Germany

Hackers are accused of having compromised computer systems at Deutsche Zentrum f ˜A¼r Luft- und Raumfahrt
(DLR) with spyware that may have been able to implicate the security of critical space missions and missile
technologies. Initial attribution suggests Chinese attackers, but the evidence is uncertain.
Primary/Contemporary References: [162] Secondary References: [1]

2014 Eavesdropping

Government

Russia

Multiple

Multiple

The Russian satellite Lurch, launched in 2014, is suspected of hovering close to other communications satellites
in order to intercept signals
Primary/Contemporary References: [76]

2014 Groundstation

Government

China

Gov. Military

United States

In 2014 Crowdstrike released a report indicating that Chinese government-afﬁliated hackers targeted information
about satellite control systems and successfully compromised some sensitive space networks. Few additional
details are available.
Primary/Contemporary References: [79]

2014

Dissident

Signal Hijacking
Hamas brieﬂy successfully compromised Israeli Channel 10 satellite television broadcasts and transmitted a
message threatening Gaza residents.
Primary/Contemporary References: [68]

Commercial

Palestine

Israel

2014 Groundstation

Government

China

Government
Weather

-

United States

Chinese hackers, believed to be associated with the Chinese government, compromised a sensitive network
related to NOAA weather satellites and caused a brief network outage during incident response. It is unclear
what systems were compromised or what ability the hackers had.
Primary/Contemporary References: [78]

2014

2015

Government

Jamming
Television broadcasts from the ARABSAT platform were jammed by an attacker in Ethiopia, potenitally
associated with the Ethiopean state which has a history of similar jamming attacks targeting Eritrean broadcasts.
However, some sources have conjectured that the incident was accidental as ARABSAT does not broadcast to
either country.
Primary/Contemporary References: [163] Secondary References: [1]

Saudi Arabia

Commercial

Ethiopia

Criminal

Signal Injection
Russian-government afﬁliated group Turla was found to use satellite internet signals to exﬁltrate data from
malware infections with minimum traceability. Evidence of this method was found in malware dating back to
2007.

Commercial

Multiple

Russia

29

Year Attack

Type

Attacker
Type

Attacker
Country

Victim
Type

Victim
Country

Primary/Contemporary References: [84]

2015 Eavesdropping

Researcher

United States

Commercial

United States

2015 Blackhat demonstration indicated practical ability to spoof devices on the Globalstar network and intercept
simplex data messages intended for other devices. Globalstar contended that they simply provide hardware and
that encryption was the job of their clients based on mission need.
Primary/Contemporary References: [71]

2015 Eavesdropping

Researcher

Germany

Commercial

United States

Security researchers demonstrated the ability to intercept and interpret communications over the Iridium LEO
network using a software deﬁned radio.
Primary/Contemporary References: [164] Secondary References: [1]

2015 Groundstation

Individual

United Kingdom
A British individual was arrested on charges related to compromising pentagon satellite communications systems.
The hacker posted threats online claiming to have the ability to ”control” satellites but the Pentagon has not
conﬁrmed the extent of the intrusion.
Primary/Contemporary References: [165]

Gov. Military

United States

2016

2016

2016

2016

Government

Jamming
In April 2016 North Korea resumed the 2012 (and occasionally thereafter) jamming campaign against South
Korean GPS signals. Russia is suspected (but not proven) to have provided the jamming equipment.
Primary/Contemporary References: [166]

Navigational

South Korea

North Korea

Government

Jamming
Media Group Ukraine’s broadcast of a 2016 football match was targeted by a malicious jamming attack. No
attribution for the attack has been made but Russia is highly suspected.
Primary/Contemporary References: [167]

Commercial

Ukraine

Russia

Dissident

Signal Hijacking
Hamas again compromised satellite transmissions, this time of the popular Israeli TV show Big Brother, and
replaced them with propaganda ﬁlms.
Primary/Contemporary References: [69]

Commercial

Palestine

Israel

Individual

Signal Hijacking
An individual hacker or group of hackers in Saudi Arabia hijacked Israeli news satellite feeds in protest of an
Israeli bill restricting the volume of calls to prayer (muezzin bill). They replaced the media feed with the call
to prayer and text threatening punishment from God.
Primary/Contemporary References: [168]

Saudi Arabia

Commercial

Israel

2016 Cryptographic

Researcher

China

Commercial

Multiple

Cryptographic researchers in China present a realtime attack against the GMR-2 encryption algorithms used by
many satellite phones, updated prior research from Germany.
Primary/Contemporary References: [169]

2017 Groundstation

Government

China

Commercial

United States

The Chinese Thrip espionage group was found by Symantec in 2017 to have attempted to infect computers
which monitor and control satellites.
Primary/Contemporary References: [77]

2017 Groundstation

Researcher

United Kingdom
A French security researcher on twitter claimed to have compromised a Cobham VSAT terminal on a naval
vessel over the internet using a default username and password combination.
Primary/Contemporary References: [170]

Commercial

France

30

Year Attack

Type

Attacker
Type

Attacker
Country

Victim
Type

Victim
Country

2018

2018

Government

Jamming
Israel is suspected of having initiated a jamming attack against Syrian satellite television stations in retaliation
for an attack on an Israeli jet ﬂying over Syrian territory.
Primary/Contemporary References: [66]

Commercial

Israel

Syria

Government

Jamming
Russia is accused of having jammed GPS signals across Norway and Finland to disrupt ongoing NATO war
games in the region. The jamming attacks also impacted commercial aviation systems.
Primary/Contemporary References: [171]

Navigational

Russia

NATO

2018 Groundstation

Unknown

Unknown

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

A raspberry-pi microcomputer attached to Jet Propulsion Laboratory systems was compromised and used by
attackers to futher access other JPL systems, including systems which control the Deep Space Network radio
systems and systems which might allow for malicious control of ongoing space missions.
Primary/Contemporary References: [172], [173]

2018 Groundstation

Unknown

Unknown

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

An advanced persistent threat attacker was found to have compromise Jet Propulsion Laboratory mission
networks and to have maintained access to the systems for nearly a year prior to detection in April 2018.
They would have had the capability to disable critical space communications systems and were found to have
exﬁltrated export regulated and sensitive information
Primary/Contemporary References: [173]

2018 Groundstation

Researcher

United States

Multiple

United States

An updated version of IOActive research presented in Blackhat 2014 found that VSAT stations could be used
to ﬁnd GPS coordinates of military installations and potentially weaponized to cause interference. The attacks
again focused on VSAT terminal ﬁrmware.
Primary/Contemporary References: [82]

2018 Groundstation

Researcher

Germany

Commercial

Unknown

A security researcher demonstrated the ability to compromise maritime satellite terminals over the internet and
use them to send NMEA messages to cause harm to operational technology aboard yachts at sea.
Primary/Contemporary References: [174]

2019 Groundstation

Unknown

Unknown

Gov. Scientiﬁc

United States

A zero day attack in specialized satellite operations software was compromised on a server belonging to the
Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Attackers has the ability to upload control instructions to the spacecraft.
Primary/Contemporary References: [173]

2019 Groundstation

Government

United States

Gov. Military

Iran

Media sources have asserted that a series of unexpected failures of Iranian rocket launches in 2019 were the
result of a US-government sabotage effort involving either supply-chain compromises or cyber-attacks on Iranian
launch vehicles. No ofﬁcial conﬁrmation of these conjectures has been made by either state.
Primary/Contemporary References: [175], [176]

2019 Groundstation

Government

Iran

Gov. Military

United Arab Emi-
rates

Media sources have asserted that an unexpected launch failure of an military spy satellite belonging to the UAE
may have arisen from an Iranian cyber-attack. No ofﬁcial conﬁrmation of these conjectures have been made by
either state.
Primary/Contemporary References: [176]

31

Year Attack

Type

Attacker
Type

Attacker
Country

Victim
Type

Victim
Country

2019 Misc.

Individual

United States

Commercial

United States

US Astronaut Anne McClain was accused of illicitly accessing the bank account of a former partner whilst
living aboard the International Space Station. This was widely reported as the ﬁrst crime accusation against a
person in orbit. However the case has not been resolved and, in 2020, the partner who made the accusations
was indicted on charges of making false allegations to law enforcement.
Primary/Contemporary References: [177], [178]

2019

Researcher

Spooﬁng
A security researcher at Black Hat USA 2019 demonstrated a series of GPS spooﬁng attacks against an
autonomous vehicle. The researcher was able to cause the vehicle to drive off the road by spooﬁng measurements
of its current location.
Primary/Contemporary References: [179]

United States

United States

Navigational

2019 Groundstation

Government

North Korea

Gov. Scientiﬁc

India

A North Korean attributed malware, dubbed “Dtrack” was reported to have been found on computer systems
belonging to the Indian Space Research Organisation. Little information regarding the result of the compromise
is publicly available, although some media sources surmise it may relate to the concurrent failure of the
Chandrayaan 2 Lunar Lander. No evidence of this claim has been provided.
Primary/Contemporary References: [180]

2020 Eavesdropping

Researcher

United Kingdom
A security researcher at Black Hat and DEFCON presented research demonstrating that satellite broadband
signals could be intercepted by eavesdroppers using inexpensive home-television equipment. They further
demonstrated that this impacted the security and privacy of terrestrial, maritime, and aviation customers. The
research was based around some prior academic publications.
Primary/Contemporary References: [74], [75], [85], [105]

United States

Commercial

2020 Misc.

Individual

United States

Gov. Military

United States

The US Air Force and Defense Digital Service hosted “Hackasat.” A series of satellite hacking related events
and competitions with the goal of increasing technical exposure to satellite cyber-security. The ﬁnal challenge
of the competition was to upload a mission plan to a live satellite (after exploiting a series of vulnerabilities
in a ground-based system meant to replicate a satellite) and take a “cyber moon-shot” photograph of the moon
using the satellite’s onboard camera.
Primary/Contemporary References: [86]

32

