IET Research Journals

0
2
0
2

t
c
O
0
3

]

Y
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

3
v
3
7
1
4
1
.
0
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Enhanced Cyber-Physical Security Using
Attack-resistant Cyber Nodes and
Event-triggered Moving Target Defence
Martin Higgins1, Keith Mayes2, and Fei Teng1*
1 Imperial College London, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, South Kensington, London, UK
2 Royal Holloway, University of London, Information Security Group, Egham, London, UK
* E-mail: f.teng@imperial.ac.uk

ISSN 1751-8644
doi: 0000000000
www.ietdl.org

Abstract: This paper outlines a cyber-physical authentication strategy to protect power system infrastructure against false data
injection (FDI) attacks. We demonstrate that it is feasible to use small, low-cost, yet highly attack-resistant security chips as
measurement nodes, enhanced with an event-triggered moving target defence (MTD), to offer effective cyber-physical security. At
the cyber layer, the proposed solution is based on the MULTOS Trust-Anchor chip, using an authenticated encryption protocol,
offering cryptographically protected and chained reports at up to 12/s. The availability of the trust-anchors, allows the grid controller
to delegate aspects of passive anomaly detection, supporting local as well as central alarms. In this context, a distributed event-
triggered MTD protocol is implemented at the physical layer to complement cyber side enhancement. This protocol applies a
distributed anomaly detection scheme based on Holt-Winters seasonal forecasting in combination with MTD implemented via
inductance perturbation. The scheme is shown to be effective at preventing or detecting a wide range of attacks against power
system measurement system.

1

Introduction

The power system is arguably the most critical of all modern net-
worked infrastructures. To some extent, water, communications,
sanitation and defence systems are dependent on a stable electric-
ity supply and it is no wonder that the power system has become a
key target for hackers seeking to disrupt or destroy. In 2015, Ukraine
experienced one of the ﬁrst successful (and well documented) cy-
ber attack against a distribution power grid with the consequence of
around 300,000 people disconnected from their power supply [1].
This attack brought signiﬁcant focus to the area of cyber-attacks
against power systems. However, to some extent, the impact of the
Ukraine attacks was limited as the attackers chose a non-stealthy
method of implementing the attack. If the attackers had opted for a
stealthy attack type, such as False Data Injection (FDI) attacks, the
attackers may have been able to continue attacking and achieve much
greater damages.

In the past, the majority of works focused on either physical or
cyber security enhancements in isolation however, more recently,
works have been published which demonstrate the importance of
considering overlapping cyber and physical solutions [2]. In this
paper we propose and evaluate a practical and affordable system de-
sign that protects against attacks against both the physical and cyber
layers and allows for distributed protection.

The cyber domain of power system is susceptible to various at-
tacks. National guidelines suggest the use of cryptographic tools for
authentication and encryption [3]. However, as outlined in [4], su-
pervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) networks (which
are used for monitoring and controlling power systems), often lack
secure modern encryption. This can be due to the age of assets
(encryption and security of networks being a more recent concern)
or requirements for high speed in data processing with encryption
adding too much time delay in measurement transmission [5]. The
size and scale of power networks can also makes the cost of reﬁt-
ting prohibitive with increased focus put on ’sweating’ assets rather
than incorporating new infrastructure. As a result, while new cyber
layer protection solution is urgently required, it must be low cost (to
ensure practical take up), secure by the Common Criteria security
framework [6] and shown not to impede data transmission.

Furthermore, the links between cyber and physical systems are
also vulnerable to the attacks. In the case of the power measure-
ment system, a simple alternative to attacking the cyber-secured
measurement node, is to modify the analogue (or physical) measure-
ment source, which can not be protected by cyber domain solutions.
The attackers may conduct FDI attacks by manipulating analogue
measurements before they reach cyber-secured point.

One attack type that uses this form of measurement changing is
the false data injection (FDI) attack. FDI attacks use system infor-
mation to remain hidden while attacking systems measurement to
misguide the WLS-based state estimation [7]. Although extensive
research have been conducted to detect FDI attack, the vast major-
ity of papers operate on the assumption of residual testing based on
centralised state estimation (CSE) [8]. The consequences of a suc-
cessful FDI attack can be severe. For example, in [9] it is shown that
FDI attacks can be used to promote load shedding via the system
operator or overload certain lines and in [10] it was shown how FDI
attacks can be used to mask transmission outages. A few papers re-
cently started to tackle FDI attacks from a distributed perspective.
In [11], [12] & [13] FDI attacks against distributed Kalman style or
extended Kalman style ﬁltering are explored to show how dynamic
style estimation (at the individual state or measurement) can still
have potential susceptibilities to attack. We consider that to be se-
cure at the physical layer the system must be protected against these
types of attacks. Topology-driven moving target defence (MTD) has
been shown previously to be effective against FDI attack. It is possi-
ble to implement MTD in the physical power system either through
both transmission switching [14] or more commonly by admittance
perturbation via distributed ﬂexible AC transmissions (D-FACTs)
devices [15] [16] [17] [18]. Very few papers have explored trans-
mission switching as a legitimate method of applying of MTD in
the power system. This is because, while in theory it could be effec-
tive at driving increased residuals in the case of an attacker unaware
of MTD as we showed in [19], the impacts of such an approach
on power system control and cost to operation would be undesir-
able. Also, from the attackers perspective identifying these changes
and countering are much easier in the case of transmission switch-
ing. By comparison, D-FACTS based applications are much more
common and cause less overall impact to power system stability and

IET Research Journals, pp. 1–11
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2015

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1: Outline of proposed cyber-physical defence model featuring the MTD trigger mechanism, metering and distributed anomaly detection.

have lower operational costs. Indeed, while it has been shown that
MTD can be effective, limited work has been put into how it should
be implemented in power systems. Questions around the frequency
and when MTD should be applied remain. Continuous application
of MTD will result in signiﬁcantly higher costs [20] and time-based
application i.e. once per hour, is possible but will risk attacks slip-
ping between applications. In this paper, we argue that MTD should
only be applied if there is a creditable suspicion that the system is
under attack. In [21] an event driven MTD is proposed for control
systems and we adopt a similar idea for power system application.

1.1 Contributions

This paper proposes and evaluates a practical and affordable sys-
tem design that protects against both physical and cyber layer
attacks and allows for distributed protection. We demonstrate how
a cyber-physical authentication process can provide a foundation for
system security at every level of measurement and transmission. This
process is illustrated in Fig. 1.

1.1.1 Cyber Layer:
In the cyber layer, we propose creating
trustworthy measurement nodes by using a small pay load, encrypted
protocol to secure the measurement reporting system while main-
taining the required frequency of reporting. Each node is based on
a highly tamper-resistant security chip that performs measurement
capture, processing and reporting. The chip acts as a trustwor-
thy platform, supporting the secure communication protocol with
the grid authority (GA). The combination of the chip and proto-
col, offers effective protection against implementation attacks, and
communications attacks, such as man-in-the-middle/FDI. The se-
cured platform also allows conﬁdent delegation of some limited
processing to the nodes, such as the proposed anomaly check and
MTD triggering. The MULTOS Trust-Anchor for secure measure-
ment transmission and MTD delegation has not been applied before.
This maybe because MULTOS platforms have been traditionally in
the form of secured smart card and passport chips, which do not
have general external I/O. Although Authenticated Encryption has
been standardised for some time; it has only relatively recently been
studied on such security chips. The design secures the logical and
implementation security of the system, but importantly, it provides a

framework for delegated/distributed implementation of trusted func-
tions and self-defensive mechanisms. We have also shown that the
secure nodes can sample, process and locally react, much faster than
would be feasible for a centralised system, offering the potential for
new algorithms and research.

Physical Layer:

1.1.2
In the physical layer, we propose a pro-
tection protocol based on event-triggered MTD. The protocol con-
sists of an initial anomaly detection followed by MTD and traditional
CSE. The anomaly detection uses Holt-Winters seasonal forecasting
distributed to the individual measurement. The seasonality captures
the intra-day demand differences to minimise the overall window
for attack. If the anomaly detection is triggered, MTD is then im-
plemented via inductance perturbation of D-FACTS devices. This
changes the system model and drive detection of the FDI attack via
increased residual errors. The event trigger comes prior to the appli-
cation of MTD and is based on distributed measurements to target
and minimise the overall use of MTD. This is important as the FDI
attacks are stealthy from a centralised residual detection perspective,
but their impacts can still be seen in the distributed changes to power
ﬂows. One of the key motivation drivers for this research is that MTD
can be expensive to implement given the sub-optimal use of assets
from an optimal power ﬂow perspective as shown in [22]. Very few
works have addressed the importance of distributed measurement
with respect to FDI attacks and none that we have seen combine
a distributed and centralised approach as we have done here.

This paper proceeds as follows: ﬁrstly Section 2 provides back-
ground to the proposed approaches. This includes outlining the
state estimation environment for the power system. Section 3 pro-
poses and describes a secure solution based on an Authenticated
Encryption (AE) protocol and the use of distributed Security Chips
(SC). A novel event-triggered MTD is proposed in 4 and the
Holt-Winters seasonal forecasting technique as triggering strategy
outlined. Experiments, performance results and the effectiveness of
security measures are discussed in Section 5, with conclusions and
suggestions for future work in Section 6.

2

IET Research Journals, pp. 1–11
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2015

2

Background

2.1 Cyber Vulnerability of SCADA System in Power System

An attacker has several options when seeking to undermine the mea-
surement and reporting system. The node itself can be attacked to
either ensure that the node does not perform as intended or to reveal
a credential (such as a cryptographic key) or proprietary functional-
ity. Also possible, is that the measurement source (e.g. value to be
sampled) could be modiﬁed so that incorrect values are captured,
but then securely delivered to the GA (upstream physical attack).
However, the node’s remote communications link presents the most
attractive target, and attackers may seek to remove, modify or re-
play valid transmissions, or generate fake transmissions that might
be accepted by the node, and inject consequently false data into the
state-estimator downstream of the physical system.

2.1.1 Node Implementation Attacks: Critical infrastructure
may be attacked in a variety of ways. Adhering to information se-
curity best practice for the functional design of a measurement node,
(e.g., for algorithm, protocols, processes and keys) is not sufﬁcient,
as attacks may target the implementation.

Logical security attacks, target weak design typically in the al-
gorithms, keys and poor software within either the node platform,
the measurement application, or the loading and conﬁguration func-
tionality. Physical attacks, generally require considerable expertise,
equipment and time. For example, an attempt may involve decap-
sulating a chip, hardware reverse engineering, probing buses and
memories and modifying tracks. Fault attacks are less intrusive,
they disrupt normal operation of the chip; but without damage. For
example, faults can be generated by, voltage glitches or radiation
pulses. Under fault condition, an unprotected chip may reveal sensi-
tive information, for example RSA keys [23]. Side-channel leakage,
is the leakage of sensitive information via an unintended channel.
This can be key or data-dependent timing, variations in power con-
sumption or electromagnetic emissions. Simple analysis techniques
(see [24] [25]) are powerful against naive implementations. In the
case of a power measurement system, a simple alternative to attack-
ing the measurement node, is to modify the analogue measurement
source (physical attack). A similar effect is achieved by manipulat-
ing any part of the path that digitises and communicates the source
measurement value, up until the point when it is within the node.

All of the these attacks can be successful against implementa-
tions that do not have specialist security protection. However, there
is much industry expertise for the protection of secured micro-
controller chips, which we exploit in our proposal, as discussed in
Section 3.

2.1.2
Adversary Threat Model: We make the assumption of
a well resourced attacker, similar to those seen in [1] capable of
launching attacks in both the cyber and physical realms. The at-
tacker can attack either remotely via SCADA networks or directly
at the physical sensor locations themselves. We also assume that the
attacker has the capability to structure an FDI attack via the changing
of meter measurements so that it stealthy. Consistent with this is the
assumption that the attacker has knowledge of the original system
topology of the power system, but is not aware of MTD conﬁgura-
tions. We now proceed to outline the respective cyber and physical
attack types in this section.

2.1.3 Node Communication Attacks: To undermine commu-
nications between two legitimate parties, an attacker may attempt
to:

1. Passively eavesdrop
2. Send a new message assuming a legitimate identity
3. Delay, replay, or re-order legitimate messages
4. Modify a legitimate message
5. Block some legitimate messages
6. Denial of Service (DoS) transmissions

The goal of eavesdropping is to capture unprotected data or in-
formation that can reveal credentials, such as keys or counters,

which aid attacks against the protection. For grid measurement
transmission, we are primarily concerned with the integrity of mea-
surements, rather than conﬁdentiality, however encrypting messages
also protects associated control data and provides an extra barrier
to attackers. Depending on the communications channel, an attacker
might simply be able to source a fake message, or may have to be
positioned as a "man-in-the-middle". In either case, the attack will
be defeated by mutual authentication of communicating parties, as
the attacker will not have the cryptographic credentials to authenti-
cate, or to fake, or modify a valid message. Most communications
systems experience some variation in transmission delay, but, ex-
cessive delay (or replay) can be detected by timestamps. Message
re-ordering can also be detected by chaining encrypted transmission
sequences. If in normal operation, a system occasionally loses mes-
sages, then an attacker could block some without being detected,
however limited data loss could be overcome by redundant trans-
missions. DoS would prevent legitimate messages getting through,
however it is a condition, detectable by the legitimate communicat-
ing parties; which should be able to take some alarm and/or remedial
action.

2.2

False Data Injection Attacks on State Estimation

In terms of the physical attack target, we consider a power grid
state estimation system subject to FDI style attacks [26]. FDI attacks
focus on misleading system operators by introducing false informa-
tion within the distributed grid system measurements, to damage the
physical grid, or its operation, or cause ﬁnancial consequences. From
the attackers perspective, a major advantage of the FDI attack is that
it may be performed stealthily. Meaning that if the false data is struc-
tured to seem plausible it will appear like a system under normal
conditions to the operator. While the majority of early works focused
on a linear approximation of the FDI attack, it was shown in [27]
that an AC attack model was indeed possible provided the attacker
had knowledge of the system topology. A comprehensive review of
FDI attacks can be found in [8]. We outline here the basis for CSE
and FDI attacks. Under CSE, we consider a set of n state variables
x ∈ Rn×1 estimated by analysing a set of m meter measurements
z ∈ Rm×1 with a corresponding error vector e ∈ Rm×1 . The non-
linear vector function h(.) relating meter measurements z to states
h(x) = (h1(x), h2(x), ..., hm(x))T is shown by

z = h(x) + e.

(1)

With active and reactive power ﬂow measurements under the non-

linear expression deﬁned by

Pij = V 2

i gij − ViVj gij cos ∆θij − ViVj bij sin ∆θij ,

(2)

Qij = −V 2

i (bij + bsh

ij ) + ViVj gij cos ∆θij − ViVj bij sin ∆θij .
(3)

While the linear model is no doubt easier, it contains a number
of assumptions around voltage angle and other areas [28]. Under
certain circumstances, a linear model can be used for operation due
to it’s close approximation. These assumptions are:

1. Line resistances are considered negligible compared to line
reactance i.e. RL << XL
2. The voltage proﬁle is ﬂat and voltage amplitude equivalent across
all nodes
3. The voltage angle differences are small which results in a lineari-
sation of the sine/cosine elements in power ﬂow equations

Under these assumptions Vi ≈ Vj , the small angle differences re-
sult in sin ∆θij ≈ θij and gji is much smaller than bji, leading to
the linear approximation for power ﬂow

IET Research Journals, pp. 1–11
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2015

3

Pij = −bij θij .

Which gives the linear approximation as

z = Hx + e.

(4)

(5)

The state estimation problem is to ﬁnd the best ﬁt estimate of
ˆx corresponding to the measured power ﬂow values of z. Under
the most widely used estimation approach, the state variables are
determined by minimization of a WLS optimization problem as

min J(x) = (z − h(x))T W(z − h(x)).

(6)

W is a diagonal m × m matrix consisting of the measurement
weights. Under the AC model, the minimisation will be done using
the partial derivative with respect to the states and iterative processes.
This is done using iterative processes usually the Newton-

Raphson [7] utilising the Jacobian J of partial derivatives

J =

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

δh1
δx1
...
δh1
δxm

...
...
...

δh1
δxn
...
δhm
δxn

(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)
(cid:12)

.

The current approach in power systems operation for bad data
detection (BDD) is to use the 2-norm of the measurement residual
with a detection threshold η [7].

r = ||z − h(ˆx)||2.

(7)

If rt > η, BDD alarms will trigger and the system operator will
discard the result. However, recent papers have shown these meth-
ods can be attacked by structuring the attack vector in terms of the
system topology

za = h(x + c)

(8)

where c is a desired attack bias of length n applied to the state angles
or voltage measurements.

r = ||za − h( ˆx + c)||2.

(9)

As discussed, the za vector is designed considering the state set
x and bias c whilst also considering the transformation function h().
This ensures that the residual can be designed such that it will fall
within acceptable limits and ensure stealthiness.

3 MULTOS Trust-Anchor

Our proposed solution requires trustworthy measurement nodes that
are strongly attack resistant. Fortunately, there is a well-established,
process of assessment to determine this, known as Common Criteria
(CC) [6]. The CC evaluation is most commonly applied to security
chips such as used in bank cards, passports or Hardware Security
Modules (HSM). High levels of evaluation, conﬁrm strong resistance
to all known attacks, including, logical, physical, fault and side-
channel. The resistance is based on specialist hardware, supported
by software defensive measures. A CC evaluated SC should not be
vulnerable to logic ﬂow attacks, being compliant with security best-
practices for design, and loading. For defending against physical
attack, the CC chips will have numerous effective defences includ-
ing: passive/active shields (to impede probing), hardware encrypted
buses and memories (to prevent data discovery), light and anomaly
sensors (to detect decapsulation and faults) and scrambled circuitry
(to impede reverse engineering). For fault attack resistance, the hard-
ware sensors, detect fault insertion and prevent a response useful to
the attacker. Software countermeasures provide secondary defences;
e.g., verifying an algorithm result before providing an output, and
redundantly testing ﬂags and loop counts. Side-channel leakage, is
well defended against, with countermeasures that impede statistical
averaging of signals, or reduce the source generation of the leakage.
Attack countermeasures include, power smoothing, noise insertion,

Fig. 2: Encrypt then MAC Authenticated Encryption

randomisation of execution, timing equalisation and dual-rail logic
(or dual CPUs).

MULTOS [29] chip platforms are quite common in CC evalu-
ations, and the MULTOS [30] Trust-Anchor was selected for our
proposal. MULTOS is a high security multi-application smart card
Operating System (OS) that is managed by the MULTOS Con-
sortium. MULTOS chips are found in range of products including
payment smart cards and electronic passports, achieving high-levels
of CC certiﬁcation. The initialisation, and personalisation of these
products has strict security controls, meaning that only reviewed
code and data from certiﬁed developers can be loaded. An intro-
duction to MULTOS can be found in [31]. The Trust-Anchor is
intended as a deployed hardware security model (HSM) for the Inter-
net of Things (IoT) and differs from a smart card chip, in that it has
added I/O capability and free-runs. Despite strong defensive capa-
bilities, the chips lag behind the state-of-the-art in CPU performance
and memory sizes, although the chips excel in cryptographic opera-
tions as they incorporate relatively high-speed Crypto Co-processor
(CCoP) hardware; related performance evaluations can be found in
[32] [33] [34]. The choice of SC, means we can reasonably assume
that physical, fault, side-channel and malware attacks are practically
infeasible, and so our focus turns towards a protocol for securing the
interaction between the SC and GA. A previous study for EMVCo
[35] measured the performance of Authenticated Encryption (AE)
[36] for future payment card processing; with MULTOS as a test
platform. A number of AE modes were implemented, however for
small message sizes (up to 32 bytes), Encrypt-then-MAC (ETM)
[36] was the most efﬁcient; due to the relative speeds of the CPU
and CCoP. ETM is discussed next.

3.1

Authenticated Encryption

The ETM scheme (see Fig. 2) is mechanism 5 in ISO/IEC 19772
[36], and is a conventional approach with separate encryption and
MAC processes. The encryption stage uses block encryption in
counter mode with key K, followed by a MAC (CBC_MAC used)
computation on the cipher text using a different key (K’) to that
used for encryption. The scheme has much to recommend it for
securing grid communication. It provides authentication, conﬁden-
tiality, integrity protection and has a counter for cryptographically
chaining transmissions. If ﬁxed sized data is used (e.g. the opti-
mum 32-bytes) then the counter may be predicted in the case of lost
messages, avoiding the need for re-synchronism, unless in extreme
circumstances.

4

IET Research Journals, pp. 1–11
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2015

Trust Anchor

Grid Authority

Trust Anchor

Grid Authority

ns ←$ [0.296 − 1], cs ←$ [0.232 − 1]
rs ←$ [0.2128 − 1], AEnck0,k(cid:48)

0

(rs, ns, cs)

C0, C1, MAC ←

bufi ← Cybuf (bufi−1, vi)

AEncks,k(cid:48)

s

(mci, mpi, t)

C0, C1, MAC ←

(M0, M1, MACr) ← ADecks,k(cid:48)

s

(C0, C1))

(M0, M1, MACr) ← ADeck0,k(cid:48)

0

(C0, C1)

if (MACr (cid:54)= MAC)

N ack

F ail

if (MACr (cid:54)= MAC)

N ack

F ail

(mci, mpi, t) ← (M0, M1)

(rs, ns, cs) ← (M0, M1)
r(cid:48)
s ← (rs + 1)
ks ← Enck0
k(cid:48)
s ← Enck0
AEncks,k(cid:48)

(mmi, asi, Ti)

(rs)
(r(cid:48)
s)

s

r(cid:48)
s ← (rs + 1)
ks ← Enck0
k(cid:48)
s ← Enck0

(rs)
(r(cid:48)
s)

→ C0, C1, MAC

(mmi, asi, Ti) ← Calc(bufi)
AEncks,k(cid:48)

(mmi, asi, Ti)

s

→ C0, C1, MAC

(M0, M1, MACr) ← ADecks,k(cid:48)

s

(C0, C1)

if (MACr = MAC)

(mmi, asi, Ti) ← (M0, M1)

(M0, M1, MACr) ← ADecks,k(cid:48)

s

(C0, C1)

Fig. 4: Data Collection and Reporting

if (MACr = MAC)

(mmi, asi, Ti) ← (M0, M1)

Fig. 3: Dynamic Initialisation

3.2 Node Dynamic Initialisation

An SC would be initialised/personalised prior to use. This involves,
for example, the setting (by a security authority) of IDs, long-term
secret keys, access PINs, applications and data. Every node would
be diversiﬁed, having different keys, nonces and counters, so at-
tacking one node provides no advantage when attacking others. As
the long-term secret keys are of best-practice size and do not leave
the Trust-Anchor, it is acceptable to use them in normal operations,
however it is even better to use them sparingly, to create session
keys, which may be refreshed as necessary. The session key estab-
lishment process also provides opportunity to dynamically change
nonce and counter values. The protocol steps for dynamic initialisa-
tion and session key generation are shown in Fig. 3, with symbols in
Table 1.

The GA, begins by generating AE session values; a random num-
ber, a random nonce and a starting counter value (random or preset).
These values ﬁll two AES blocks and are AE encrypted using the
long-term secret keys and the default nonce and counter values for
the particular Trust-Anchor. The resulting cipher blocks and MAC
are then sent to the Trust-Anchor, which AE decrypts the message
into two plain text blocks and computes its own version of the MAC.
If the local and received MACs do not match, the protocol ends with
a failure, otherwise the plain text is copied into the local copies of the
random number, nonce and count, and the random number, and its
increment are then AES encrypted under the long-term encryption
key to generate the encryption and MAC session keys respectively.
The Trust-Anchor then AE encrypts a dummy measurement report
under session keys and sends to the GA (which also generates the
keys). The GA, AE decrypts the message using session keys, and
if received and locally generated MACs match, the session key es-
tablishment has succeeded. The received data is copied locally and
the session keys are operational. The initialisation may be repeated,
to change the AE session keys, nonce and counter values, either
as security policy, or due to lost synchronism; in which case the
AE count for initialisation is reset to the default for the particular
Trust-Anchor.

3.3 Data collection processing and reporting

Referring to Fig. 4 and Table 1, the Trust-Anchor is continually sam-
pling the measurement source, storing results in a cyclic buffer. The
GA, begins a dialog by AE encrypting under session keys, the model
control ﬁelds, the model parameters and the current time. The result-
ing cipher blocks and MAC are sent to the Trust-Anchor, which AE
decrypts the message into two plaintext blocks and computes its own
version of the MAC. If the local and received MACs do not match,
the protocol ends with a failure, otherwise the plain text updates
local copies of model controls, parameters and real-time. The Trust-
Anchor then runs the detection algorithm on the buffered samples
and calculates the model measurements, updates the alarm status,
creates a Timestamp, generates a local alarm (if merited) and sub-
sequently AE encrypts the results under the session keys and sends
to the GA. If the MAC veriﬁcation succeeds, the report is accepted
into the modelling and state estimation application. If the Trust-
Anchor does not respond, or veriﬁcation fails, the GA may attempt
lost message recovery.

3.4

Lost message recovery

A goal of the protocol is to tolerate the loss of at least two consecu-
tive measurement reports, without loss of sample data. The reported
model measurement ﬁeld includes the latest sample plus up to 7
previous samples, allowing data recovery even if blocks are lost.
However, the AE counter advances during encryptions/decryptions
and using the wrong value will prevent correct decryption and MAC
veriﬁcation. As the message sizes are always the same, the counter
value after a lost message can be estimated (within a small window),
and so the GA can attempt AE decryption with several alternative
counter values, and if successful will not lose any reported data. Sim-
ilarly, at the Trust-Anchor, a MAC failure could indicate a missed
or corrupted report request, and so the next count values could be
tried for the AE decryption. In the case of irretrievable loss of syn-
chronism, the GA will recover by using the dynamic initialisation
process.

IET Research Journals, pp. 1–11
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2015

5

Table 1 Symbol Deﬁnitions

4.2

Anomaly-detection based Triggering Strategy for MTD

ks, k(cid:48)
s

k0, k(cid:48)
0

Symbol
ID

Description
Security Chip ID (128-bit, or 80-bit if IC-
CID))
Personalised long-term encryption and
MACkeys (128-bit)
The
current
MACkeys (128-bit)
Random values for session key generation
(128-bit)
The current AE session nonce (96-bit)
Starting and ith transmission, AE session
counts (32-bit)
Mj , Cj
The jth message and cipher blocks (128-bit)
MACi, MACr The ith AE token, and recomputed token

ns
cs, ci

encryption

rs, r(cid:48)
s

session

and

t, Ti
asi
dvi, mmi

mpi, mci

y

AEncky,k(cid:48)
ADecky,k(cid:48)
Encky

y

(MAC: 64-bit)
The time and ith Timestamp (32-bit)
The alarm status information 24-bit)
The ith sample (15-bit) and model metrics
(32-bit)
The model parameters (208-bit) and con-
trols (16-bit)
Authenticated Encryption under key set y
Authenticated Decryption under key set y
AES Encryption under key y

4

Event-triggered Moving Target Defence

4.1 Moving Target Defence

MTD involves using the system assets to change the underlying
topology and expose FDI attacks. FDI attacks requires the attack
vector be structured based on the network topology. For real power
residual, error at the individual measurement level will be the dif-
ference between the measured ﬂows and estimated value from the
system model such that real power residual can be expressed as a
function of the individual meter measurements and system states by

ij = −P m
rP

ij + V 2

i gij − ViVj gij cos ∆θij

(10)

− ViVj bij sin ∆θij .

With a similar equation for resultant changes in the reactive power
measured residual. If the attacker is aware of the system topology,
he/she can structure the attack such that the residual is small. How-
ever, if changes to the physical system are introduced (via inductance
modiﬁcation in this case) and the attacker does not consider this in
the updated attack vector za the residual will increase as differences
between the expected and injected value emerge. Where ignoring the
change in voltage angles and magnitudes for a simpliﬁed view, the
impact to residual will be approximated by

∆rP

ij ≈ ViVj ∆bij sin ∆θij

(11)

MTD can also be enhanced to camouﬂage it’s existence to min-
imise the potential for attackers circumventing MTD [18] [19].
However, as shown in [20] the cost of application will mean the sys-
tem operator will want to minimise the overall use of MTD to only
those times when the system is potentially under attack. As a result
of this, we propose an MTD triggering scheme based on individual
meter measurement deviations.

The proposed defensive process has three main components; the
anomaly detector, the active defence protocol and the ﬁnal attack
veriﬁcation exploiting the secured measurement and communica-
tions authentication provided by the low cost MULTOS devices. The
anomaly detection can be done either locally at the distributed level
or via post processing at the same place as the CSE. For deciding
the error bounds to implement the trigger we use Holt’s exponential
smoothing and forecasting and have outlined this process below.

We propose a distributed trigger (located at the individual measure-
ment level) based on Holt-Winter’s Exponentially Forecasting for
anomaly detection. This distributed layer of detection confers sev-
eral beneﬁts to the grid. For one, distributed error checks can be
preformed much more quickly than the CSE which can take upto a
few minutes and may not even converge. Distributed measurements
devices can also offer some localised control options in the case of
a wider network failure of the SCADA or communications network.
Crucially with respect to FDI attacks, distributed measurement based
anomaly detection will not be susceptible to the same model based
FDI attacks outlined in [26]. Recent papers have shown that CSE
can be attacked by structuring the attack vector in terms of the sys-
tem topology i.e. za = h(x + c) where c is a desired attack bias of
length n. Therefore, to circumvent this type of stealthy bias injec-
tion, we consider a distributed error detection based on forecasted
measurements to act as trigger for MTD. We consider the measured
vector at a given bus system as discrete, linear model and follows the
form:

ˆzt+1 = Ftzt + bt + ν

(12)

Where ˆzt+1 is the estimated metered power ﬂow measurements
at a given time t, ν represents the system noise which will follow
a Gaussian distribution such that ν (cid:44)→ N (0, Q). Ft represents the
state transition factor i.e. the expected change in the system state
for a given time period and bt the state trajectory vector used to
capture long run trends and will incorporate factors such as season-
ality. Ft, bt and ν are calculated by analyzing previous data trends
using Holt-Winters’s exponential forecasting [37] and contain sea-
sonal elements so as to capture differences in intraday measurement
resulting from load peaks. Anomaly detection in dynamic estima-
tion will be the difference between the forecasted state value and the
measured value for a given time and is given by

et = zt+1 − ˆzt+1.

(13)

With the assumption that residuals are independent and follow
a zero mean Gaussian process. They can either be deﬁned using
static pre-set limits or more commonly using an updated variance
value σ2 from observed residuals. The introduction of this additional
criteria means in order to attack stealthily (or at least not trigger
MTD) the attacker would have to now satisfy both the centralised
and distributed criteria such that

{z ∈ Rm×1 ∧ ||z − h(x)||2< rc ∧ z − ˆz < rd}
where rd and rc are the alarm limits for distributed and central-
ized triggering/detection. It is possible that an attacker maybe able
to structure an attack in this manager but their ﬂexibility in which
loads can be overloaded will be greatly reduced.

(14)

4.3

Selection of Alarm Limits

Alarm limits can be imposed considering a number of factors

4.3.1
Type-II error: Type-II error is an important consideration
for alarm limits. It might be tempting to set limits artiﬁcially low to
capture more potential attacks. However, this could result in higher
unnecessary costs to the system operator as MTD will be triggered
frequently when no attack persists. Frequent false errors can also
reduce reasonable responses as system operator grow used to see-
ing a high number of alarms and lack the bandwidth to verify them
efﬁciently.

4.3.2 Criticality and Capacity:
Individual measurement criti-
cally can also weigh into limit setting. A system operator may wish
to lower limits for critical measurements. Conversely, areas with
high additional transmission capacity, operating well below their
thermal limits will suffer less consequences from overloading FDI
attacks. As a result, alarm limits could be relaxed to reﬂect their

6

IET Research Journals, pp. 1–11
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2015

respective innate resilience of regions and focus on other weaker
areas.

We prioritized type-II error considerations in our model and opted
for limits based on the probability distribution function of a Gaus-
sian distribution with 3 standard deviations (SD) corresponding to a
99.7% conﬁdence interval (or type-II error of around 0.3%). This is
in contrast to CSE which usually operators with a 2 SD limit [26].
We believe it appropriate to have different alarm limits for these two
approaches. For one, the frequency and number of distributed checks
can be much higher for distributed decision making. Where unlike
CSE, there are multiple potential alarm measurements i.e. 34 alone
in a 14-bus system, as opposed to CSE, which is only one central-
ized measurement. Also, as discussed, there is a cost in applying the
MTD from an operational power ﬂow perspective and it may not be
desirable to use MTD triggering constantly when the branch power
ﬂow level offers no danger to the system. Ultimately, the selection of
alarm limits comes down to engineering judgement. For highly crit-
ical regions, a system operator may tolerate increased false positives
from a lower limit, in order to increase sensitivity.

In our model then the upper limit is deﬁned by λupper = zt + 3σ

and lower limit λlower = zt − 3σ and are bound such that

λlower < et < λupper.
For the power system models, we assume an intra-day proﬁle similar
to that of a consumer load ﬂow. This means our forecasting model
needs to approximate the underlying seasonality in creating the
prediction model. The Holt-Winters method is used to capture sea-
sonality and trend when forecasting data sets. The method is made
up of a forecasting equation and accompanied by three equations for
the current level Lt

(15)

Lt = α(

zt
St

) + (1 − α)(Lt−1 + Tt−1).

(16)

The overall trend of the data set Tt described by

Tt = β(Lt − Lt−1) + (1 − β)Tt−1.

(17)

And also the seasonality component of the dataset St

St = γ(

zt
Lt

) + (1 − γ)St−p.

(18)

Where p is the time period in a season. α, γ and β are the weight-
ing values for level, trend and seasonality. These are selected for a
minimized RMSE error based on a observing differences between
the model estimates and actual values. The ﬁnal predicted value
using HW will be described by

ˆzt = (Lt−1 + Tt−1)St−p.

(19)

4.4 Computational Considerations

It is assumed with respect to the CSE (which is already commonly
used) that operators already have the capability to perform the state
estimation for their system. With regard to the computation cost of
applying the Holt-Winters distributed forecasting for the event trig-
ger, the impact is small. As shown, the basic calculations are linear
and can be performed quickly even with a large number of mea-
surements. Also, as discussed, as the method is distributed to the
individual meter level the computational cost of this approach is
not dependent on the size of the system i.e. we would not expect
real impact from the curse of dimensionality resultant from system
size as the core calculations and regressions are still dependent on
individual measurements only.

Fig. 5: IEEE 14-bus system used for simulation

performed using Intel Core i7-7820X CPU with 64GB of ram run-
ning on a Windows 10 system. The node performance experiments
were carried out using a MULTOS Trust-Anchor development kit.

5.1 MULTOS Trust-Anchor Performance

The use of the MULTOS Trust-Anchor, satisﬁes the node attack-
resistance requirements of the proposed system, however it is a CPU
speed and memory restricted device, so its ability to satisfy per-
formance requirements needs to be determined by experiment. The
GA is assumed to have access to powerful server capability and
so only the measurement node performance was practically inves-
tigated. The Trust-Anchor chip used for the research had digital
I/O, but no Analog to Digital Converter (ADC) and so an exter-
nal device was connected via its I2C bus. This did not change the
attack assumptions, as it was already accepted that the analogue
source value might be modiﬁed, so this just extended to the ADC
chip and the I2C bus. The ADC can sample orders of magnitude
faster than needed, so the effective sample rate is determined by the
Trust-Anchor reading from it. Normally, the Trust-Anchor would be
required to free-run, but for precise experimental measurements, it
was run in command/response mode, where actions were triggered
by commands from the GA. The Trust-Anchor was used within a
breakout board that allowed PC control via a USB port. GA mes-
sages were manually created and sent to the Trust-Anchor via the
MULTOS MUTIL scripting utility. MUTIL logs include message
timing, and a millisecond timer was also conﬁgured within the Trust-
Anchor, as a calibration check. Test software was in ‘C’, within a
single application. For message timing precision, commands were
run at least 64 times before response, in order to compensate for
residual measurement tolerance.

The initial performance results are presented in Table 2, entry row
eight is the worst case performance test. It assumes that a GA re-
quest arrives and must ﬁrst be AE decrypted. The request requires
the Trust-Anchor to acquire a new sample, add it to the cyclic buffer,
compute the model means, test the sample and means against the
model thresholds, and ﬁnally AE encrypt the resulting report for
transmission back to the GA. The total execution time is 82.83
ms, supporting a maximum repetition rate of approximately 12Hz
(12/s). This suggests the Trust-Anchor could support more sophisti-
cated, ﬁne-grained local processing of measurement data, as part of
a distributed anomaly detection system.

5

Experiments and Findings

5.2

Anomaly Detection

This section assesses the performance of the proposed detection
strategy on both the standard IEEE 14-Bus test system (Fig. 5)
and the IEEE 118-Bus test system. All grid simulations were im-
plemented using the MATPOWER toolbox in MATLAB [38] and

As shown in [39], the UK transmission network typical operates at
around 80% capacity. Given this we opted to apply a 15% change
in the system power ﬂows at the attacker target. This would give
the attacker enough ﬂexibility to start to push these limits (at least

IET Research Journals, pp. 1–11
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2015

7

Fig. 6: Power ﬂow measurement across line 1-5 in the IEEE 14-bus system over a 24 hour period. System measurements shown in blue with
upper/lower bounds designated via hole-winters seasonal forecasting in red. Three time periods shown: initial training period for the forecasting,
followed by under normal operation and under the FDI attack initiated.

Table 2 Trust-Anchor Results

Function

1 ADC Read Loop
2 As(1)+ update cyclic buf
3 Ad(2)+ calc means
4 As(3)+ check thresholds
5 ETM decrypt
6 ETM encrypt
7
8 Sample Test and Report

Time Blocks Total Max Rate
(ms)
0.72
1.70
12.88
33.52
12.20
12.45

(Hz)
1391.30
587.16
77.67
29.84

(ms)
0.72
1.70
12.88
33.52
24.41
24.91

2
2

82.83

12.07

at a regional level). In Fig. 6 and 7 we show the anomaly detec-
tion algorithm implemented for a FDI attack line overload of 15%.
There is an initial training period for the HW seasonal forecasting
for a system under normal operation. The focus is on individual line
over loads and Fig. 6 shows line 1-5 for the 14 bus system for 400
hours of operation with a dual peak proﬁle occurring over 24 daily
measurements. In blue, we show the measured data set and red the
upper and lower bounds as predicted by the Holt-winters forecast.
As we can see, the ﬁrst few days of implementation require a data
training period have high volatility in the forecast model and high
corresponding type-II error. However, this declines as the model has
sufﬁcient data to train over. Once this training period is completed,
the data sets ﬁt closely and we can see no anomalies are detected
over the next week of operation past the training period. We see a
similar result for the IEEE 118-bus system in Fig. 7.

In Fig. 6 & Fig. 7, we initially continue basic operation for the
10 days before implementing the FDI attack. This attack is stealthy
from a centralised perspective but is detected by our distributed
anomaly detection. This illustrates the effectiveness of the anomaly
detection which can evaluate potential FDI attacks at a distributed
level (we show that these attacks would otherwise bypass CSE). It
should be noted that there is potential for false positives with this
kind of anomaly testing. As the forecasting is based on prior mea-
surements if new loads are added it may take a few cycles for the
forecasting to reﬂect the new reality. However, these type-2 error
anomalies for the distributed detection should occur relatively rarely
(0.3% of measurements in a 3 SD operating window or around 5%
for a 2 SD conﬁguration) and can be conﬁgured based on the accept-
able ranges of the system operator. Furthermore, the occasional false
triggering only leads to the activation of MTD to conﬁrm the alarm,
and hence the overall impact on system operation or cost is limited.

5.3

Event-triggered MTD

In this subsection, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
event-triggered MTD. The study is carried out between the hours
150 and hour 300 as equivalent to Fig. 6 and Fig. 7. We ﬁrst present
the base case and assume no FDI attack is implemented. As shown in

Fig. 8 & 12, the residual value of BDD in CSE under normal opera-
tion is well below the alarm limit. It should be noted that while there
is some initial type-2 error, this is not due to the FDI attack and is,
in fact, consistent with 95% chi-squared test with one anomaly point
over the measurement period. In the cases where the FDI attacks are
applied, we assume a stealthy FDI attack is launched from hour 240.
In the case with only traditional BDD in CSE, Fig. 9 & 13 shows
that the residual value does not increase tangibly over the no attack
case (3 type-II errors still consistent with 2 SD conﬁdence), which
means this FDI attack is not detected. However, once the proposed
protocol is applied, as shown in 10 & 14, a marked increase in the
overall system residual is visible, which is due to the triggered MTD,
as shown in Fig. 6, and the attacker’s reliance on outdated model. It
should also be noted that, the proposed protection protocol does not
affect the centralized alarms when no attack is present as shown be-
tween hour 240 and hour 300. In the case of false triggering of MTD,
11 & 15 show that even though MTD is applied, there is no tangible
increase of residual in the centralized alarms as the new set of mea-
surement reﬂects the updated system physical topology. In this case,
no false alarm for cyber attack will be raised.

5.4

Security Attack Coverage

Having experimentally proven that the performance of the proposed
solution is well within our design requirements, we now recap on
the security attack coverage, as shown in Table 3. Choosing the
MULTOS Trust Anchor, provides a highly attack-resistant hardware
security end-point, supporting secure loading/conﬁguration pro-
cesses; making node implementation attacks practically infeasible.
The use of open/standardised algorithms and diversiﬁed credentials
also removes motivation for sophisticated node implementation at-
tacks. The use of Authenticated Encryption, prevents eavesdropping
through encryption and message faking or modiﬁcation via MACs.
The use of a counter within the AE mode, and chaining of trans-
missions, prevents malicious re-ordering, and a Timestamp detects
message delay. The protocol design is resilient to some lost mes-
sages (whether natural or malicious), without loss of sample data.
The protocol also has resilience to loss of synchronism in counter
values, and the ability to re-synch when necessary, with refresh of
session keys. Normal operation cannot continue under DoS attack,
however the condition is detectable by the GA and nodes; and nodes
are capable of raising a local alarm when denied communication to
the GA. The nodes also have the capability to continue stand-alone
passive data monitoring, to detect extreme cases of source modiﬁca-
tion. Stealthy source modiﬁcation is detected by the event-triggered
MTD. Malicious disablement of node local alarms, can be detected
by similar means.

6

Conclusions

This paper proposes a combined cyber-physical authentication pro-
tocol for secure and reliable, state estimation of power grids, in

8

IET Research Journals, pp. 1–11
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2015

Fig. 7: Power ﬂow measurement across line 1-2 in the IEEE 118-bus system over a 24 hour period. System measurements shown in blue
with upper/lower bounds designated via hole-winters seasonal forecasting in red. Three time periods shown: initial training period for the
forecasting, followed by under normal operation and under the FDI attack initiated.

Fig. 8: Residual Value for CSE under no FDI Attack for the IEEE
14-bus system.

Fig. 10: Residual Value for CSE under Stealthy-FDI Attack Ap-
plied from 240 hours with event triggered MTD for the IEEE 14-bus
system.

Fig. 9: Residual Value for CSE under Stealthy-FDI Attack Applied
from 240 hours without MTD for the IEEE 14-bus system.

Fig. 11: Residual Value for CSE under no stealthy-FDI attack with
event triggered MTD triggered at 240 hours for the IEEE 14-bus
system.

the presence of malicious actors. The solution combines distributed
measurement nodes based on small low-power, low-cost, security
chips (SC) via the MULTOS Trust-Anchor with a physical system
event-triggered MTD protocol featuring distributed and centralised
anomaly detection. Simulations were preformed on both the IEEE
14-bus and IEEE 118-bus systems to show the effectiveness of the
proposed MTD and anomaly detection protocol in deriving FDI
attacks. Practical experiments demonstrated that the Trust-Anchor
could satisfy the most demanding GA request at a rate of 12/s; more

than fast enough for envisaged operational scenarios. The communi-
cation protocol is resilient to missing measurement reports, without
loss of data, and without the need for re-tries. Analysis of potential
attacks, showed that most were countered by the choice of Trust-
Anchor and the protocol design. Passive monitoring by the node
(using the delegated model) detects extreme measurement source
modiﬁcation. DoS will disrupt operation, but is a detectable alarm
event at the nodes and the GA; and a node’s passive measurement

IET Research Journals, pp. 1–11
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2015

9

Fig. 12: Residual Value for CSE under no FDI Attack for the IEEE
118-bus system.

Fig. 14: Residual Value for CSE under no stealthy-FDI attack with
event triggered MTD implemented at 240 hours for the IEEE 118-
bus system.

Fig. 13: Residual Value for CSE under Stealthy-FDI Attack Applied
from 240 hours without MTD for the IEEE 118-bus system.

monitoring will continue under DoS attack. On top of these com-
munications protections, the physical protection protocol, looks for
distributed anomalies and probes for stealthy FDI attacks using grid
system assets.

6.1

Future Work

The vast majority of works in the ﬁeld of FDI attacks have been
based purely in simulation. Clearly, there is room for test-bed ex-
periments for FDI attacks to observe practical examples with a view
to implementation of protections into the grid. Also, on the physical
side, expansion into different type of MTD protocols i.e. watermark-
ing might also provide an interesting avenue for research. From a
cyber perspective, areas such as the effect of high-rate sampling of
measurement sources to detect identifying characteristics, for early
warning of potential problems, or subtle attacks; invisible to current
systems would also be of interest.

Acknowledgment

This work was partly supported by ESRC grant (ES/T000112/1) and
EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Future Power Networks and
Smart Grids (EP/L015471/1). The authors would like to thank Chris
Torr at MULTOS for his expert support and guidance, and Crisp
Telecom Ltd. for access to test and development facilities.

Fig. 15: Residual Value for CSE under Stealthy-FDI Attack Applied
from 240 hours with event triggered MTD for the IEEE 118-bus
system.

Table 3 Security Attack Coverage

Cover? How?

Attack Category
Node Implementation Attacks
Logical/physical/fault/side
channel
Malware/personalisation/loading Yes
Node Communication Attacks
Eavesdropping

Yes

Yes
Fake message, legitimate ID
Delay/replay/re-order messages Yes

Modify a legitimate message
Block some legitimate mes-
sages
DoS transmissions

Source Modiﬁcation Attacks
Overt/extreme

Stealthy/subtle

Inherent
Trust-Anchor
Inherent in MULTOS

in

Yes

AE Encrypted trans-
missions
AE MAC will fail
AE count chaining
and Timestamp
AE MAC will fail
Protocol resilient
lost messages
Partly Detect alarm at GA
and nodes

Yes
Yes

to

Yes

Yes

passive

by
Detect
monitoring
Detect by MTD ac-
tive tests

10

IET Research Journals, pp. 1–11
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2015

30 Multos Inc. ‘MULTOS Trust Anchor Development Board Website’. (London:
Multos, 2020. Available from: https://www.multos.com/dev_boards/
devboard_details

31 Mayes, K., Markantonakis, K.: ‘Smart Cards, Tokens, Security and Applications,

Chapter 17’. vol. 1. 1st ed. (London: Springer, 2017)

32 Mayes, K., Babbage, S., Maximov, A.: ‘Performance Evaluation of the new TUAK
Mobile Authentication Algorithm’. In Proc of ICONS16: ICONS/EMBEDDED.
2016. pp. 38–44

33 Mayes, K.

‘Performance of Authenticated Encryption for Payment Cards with
Crypto Co-processors’. In Proc of ICONS17: ICONS/EMBEDDED. 2017. pp. 1–
9

34 Mayes, K. ‘Performance Evaluation and Optimisation for Kyber on the MULTOS

IoT Trust-Anchor’. In Proc of IEEE SmartIoT. 2020. pp. 1–8. , Beijing, China.

35 EMVco LLC. ‘EMVco Payment Processing Website’. (London: EMVco LCC,

36

1999. Available from: https://www.emvco.com/
IEC.
encryption’. (London: International Electrotechnical Commission, 2009.

‘19772 Information technology - Security techniques - Authenticated

37 Taylor, J.W., McSharry, P.E.: ‘Short-term load forecasting methods: An evaluation
based on European data’, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 2007, 22, (4),
pp. 2213–2219

38 Zimmerman, R.D., Murillo.Sánchez, C.E., Thomas, R.J.: ‘MATPOWER: Steady-
state operations, planning, and analysis tools for power systems research and
education’, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 2011,

39 National Grid.
National

‘Electricity
2017.

don:
www.nationalgrideso.com/research-publications/
electricity-ten-year-statement-etys

Available

from:

Grid,

Ten Year

Statement’.

Lon-
https://

7

References

1 Liang, G., Weller, S.R., Zhao, J., Luo, F., Dong, Z.Y.: ‘The 2015 Ukraine Black-
out: Implications for False Data Injection Attacks’, IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, 2017,

2 He, H., Yan, J.: ‘Cyber-physical attacks and defences in the smart grid: a survey’,
IET Cyber-Physical Systems: Theory & Applications, 2016, 1, (1), pp. 13–27
3 National Institute of Standards and Technologies (NIST):‘Guidelines for smartgrid
cybersecurity’ (NIST Special Publication, Gaithersburg, MD, 2014). Available at
http://www.dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.7628r1)

4 Ghosh, S., Sampalli, S.. ‘A Survey of Security in SCADA Networks: Current Is-
sues and Future Challenges’. (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc.,
2019

5 Tan, S., De, D., Song, W.Z., Yang, J., Das, S.K.. ‘Survey of Security Advances
in Smart Grid: A Data Driven Approach’. Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Inc., 2017
Information Technology Security Evaluation Part
‘Common Criteria for
1:
(ISO Security Standards, 2017.
Available from: https://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/files/
ccfiles/CCPART1V3.1R5.pdf

Introduction and general model’.

6

7 Monticelli, A.: ‘State Estimation in Electric Power Systems: A Generalized

approach’. vol. 1. 1st ed. (Springer, 1999)

8 Deng, R., Xiao, G., Lu, R., Liang, H., Vasilakos, A.V.: ‘False data injection on
state estimation in power systems-attacks, impacts, and defense: A survey’, IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 2017,

9 Tan, Y., Li, Y., Cao, Y., Shahidehpour, M.: ‘Cyber-attack on overloading multiple
lines: A bilevel mixed-integer linear programming model’, IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid, 2018, 9, (2), pp. 1534–1536

10 Chung, H.M., Li, W.T., Yuen, C., Chung, W.H., Zhang, Y., Wen, C.K.: ‘Local
Cyber-Physical Attack for Masking Line Outage and Topology Attack in Smart
Grid’, IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 2018,

11 Yang, Q., Chang, L., Yu, W.: ‘On false data injection attacks against Kalman ﬁl-
tering in power system dynamic state estimation’, Security and Communication
Networks, 2016, 9, (9), pp. 833–849

12 Gabbar, H.A., Dinavahi, V. ‘On False Data Injection Attack against DynamicState
Estimationon Smart Power Grids’. In: 5th IEEE International Conference on Smart
Energy Grid Engineering (SEGE). (Oshawa, Canada, 2017.

13 Karimipour, H., Dinavahi, V.: ‘Robust Massively Parallel Dynamic State Estima-
tion of Power Systems Against Cyber-Attack’, IEEE Access, 2017, 6, pp. 2984–
2995

14 Wang, S., Ren, W., Al.Saggaf, U.M.: ‘Effects of Switching Network Topolo-
gies on Stealthy False Data Injection Attacks Against State Estimation in Power
Networks’, IEEE Systems Journal, 2015, 11, (4), pp. 2640–2651
15 Morrow, K.L., Heine, E., Rogers, K.M., Bobba, R.B., Overbye, T.J.

‘Topol-
ogy Perturbation for Detecting Malicious Data Injection’. In: 2012 45th Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences. 2012.

16 Liu, C., Zhou, M., Wu, J., Long, C., Farraj, A., Hammad, E., et al.

‘Reactance
Perturbation for Enhancing Detection of FDI Attacks in Power System State Esti-
mation’. In: 2017 IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing
(GlobalSIP). 2017.

17 Li, B., Xiao, G., Lu, R., Deng, R., Bao, H.: ‘On Feasibility and Limitations of
Detecting False Data Injection Attacks on Power Grid State Estimation Using D-
FACTS Devices’, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 2019, pp. 1–1
18 Tian, J., Tan, R., Guan, X., Liu, T.: ‘Enhanced hidden moving target defense in
smart grids’, IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 2019, 10, (2), pp. 2208–2223
19 Higgins, M., Teng, F., Parisini, T.: ‘Stealthy MTD Against Unsupervised Learning-
based Blind FDI Attacks in Power Systems’, IEEE Transactions on Information
Forensics and Security, 2020, Available from: https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9207760

20 Lakshminarayana, S., Yau, D.K.Y. ‘Cost-Beneﬁt analysis of Moving-Target de-
In: Proceedings - 48th Annual IEEE/IFIP International
fense in power grids’.
Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks, DSN 2018. (Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2018. pp. 139–150

21 Tamba, T.A., Hu, B., Nazaruddintld, Y.Y.: ‘An Actuator Intrusion Detection

Mechanism for Event-Triggered Moving Target Defense Control’. 2019.

22 Lakshminarayana, S., Yau, D.K.Y.: ‘Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis of Moving-Target De-
fense in Power Grids’, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 2020, pp. 1–1. Avail-
able from: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9144465/

23 Boneh, D., Demillo, R.A., Lipton, R.

‘On the Importance of Checking Com-
(New Jersey: Princeton, 1997. Available from: https://www.

putations’.
researchgate.net/publication/2409434

24 Kocher, P.C. ‘Timing Attacks on Implementations of Diie-Hellman, RSA, DSS,
and Other Systems’. (San Francisco: Cryptography Research Inc, 1996. Available
from: https://paulkocher.com/doc/TimingAttacks.pdf

25 Kocher, P., Jaaee, J., Jun, B. ‘Differential Power Analysis’. (San Fransico: Cryto-
graph Research Inc, 1999. Available from: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.
5555/646764.703989

26 Liu, Y., Ning, P., Reiter, M.K.: ‘False data injection attacks against state estimation
in electric power grids’, ACM Transactions on Information and System Security,
2011,

27 Hug, G., Giampapa, J.A.: ‘Vulnerability assessment of AC state estimation with
respect to false data injection cyber-attacks’, IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid,
2012,

28 Wood, A.J., Wollenberg, B.F., Sheblé, G.B.

eration, and Control’.
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/imperial/detail.
action?docID=1418364.

(New Jersey: Wiley, 2014.

‘Power Generation, Op-
Available from:

29 Multos Inc. ‘Multos Trust Anchor Website’. (London: Multos, 2020. Available

from: https://www.multos.com/

IET Research Journals, pp. 1–11
© The Institution of Engineering and Technology 2015

11

