0
2
0
2

v
o
N
4
1

]

Y
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
2
1
2
7
0
.
1
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Do Cyber Capabilities and Cyber Power

Incentivize International Cooperation?

Jukka Ruohonen

University of Turku
juanruo@utu.fi

November 17, 2020

Abstract

This paper explores a research question about whether defensive and of-
fensive cyber security power and the capabilities to exercise the power inﬂu-
ence the incentives of nation-states to participate in bilateral and multilateral
cooperation (BMC) through formal and informal agreements, alliances, and
norms. Drawing from international relations in general and structural real-
ism in particular, three hypotheses are presented for assessing the research
question empirically: (i) increasing cyber capability lessens the incentives for
BMC; (ii) actively demonstrating and exerting cyber power decreases the will-
ingness for BMC; and (iii) small states prefer BMC for cyber security and pol-
itics thereto. According to a cross-country dataset of 29 countries, all three
hypotheses are rejected. Although presenting a “negative result” with respect
to the research question, the accompanying discussion contributes to the state-
centric cyber security research in international relations and political science.

Keywords: cyber security, cyber power index, international relations, struc-
tural realism, multilateralism, comparative research, small-N, negative result,
food for thought

Introduction

This paper explores a research question about whether “cyber capabilities” and
“cyber power”, in particular, incentivize nation-states to participate in bilateral
and multilateral cooperation. The exploration is carried out with a “cross-country”
empirical analysis operating at a “macro-political” level. In other words, the unit

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
of analysis is a whole country. This clariﬁcation opens a Pandora’s box of well-
known problems that should be acknowledged before proceeding any further.
The macro-political level entails comparisons across “the most complicated set
of social units we know, total societies; and generalizations do not come eas-
ily” (Verba, 1967, p. 113). There are only a limited number of countries in the
world. Thus, the “population” is limited in statistical terms, but, in more qual-
itative terms, even a comparison across two, three, or a few countries is often
challenging. So, to clear the muddy waters: the paper does not attempt to gener-
alize. Nor are causal claims made. The research approach is exploratory, and the
empirical dataset examined is based on different “indices” on “cyber security”.

Macro-political indices are notoriously difﬁcult to construct. Why? To un-
derstand the question, one only has to think about the two words: macro and
political. One thought arising immediately is that quantifying a macro-level in-
dex for a whole country is often a political act. When politics are involved, un-
certainty increases. Mistakes happen, and mistakes are more prone to happen
when operating with concepts that cannot be deﬁned and quantiﬁed rigorously.
Democracy is among these concepts, rule of law is among these concepts, and cy-
ber power is among these concepts. All these concepts are difﬁcult to deﬁne and
quantify. Depending on a context, indicators can be viewed as facts, proxies, pre-
dictors, diagnoses, targets for reform, or conceptual frameworks, and depending
on a given viewpoint, these are affected by stakeholder incentives, comparabil-
ity issues across countries, reporting of uncertainty, and other problems (Botero
et al., 2011). This alloy makes it easy to mount attacks against comparative cross-
country research. However, much of the conventional criticism is almost univer-
sal criticism with which many empirical sciences can be attacked (Swank, 2007).
Despite the problems and the criticism, macro-political indices can be constructed.
Mistakes are corrected. Macro-political indices are also needed for policy-making.
In fact, there are many international organizations, such as the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), devoted to cross-country data.
Old concepts are backed by mature measurement methodologies. Although
these often amount to different checklists, the lists are still encompassing and in-
creasingly sharp and well-assembled. But cyber power is not a mature concept.
Nor is cyber security. It is therefore understandable that there were no macro-
political indices for these concepts until recently. This lack has contributed to a
lack of comparative cross-country research. Although there are some existing em-
pirical studies (Holt et al., 2016; Makridis and Smeets, 2019; Mezzour et al., 2018),
these are outliers even when compared to closely related research domains, such
as cross-country analysis of telecommunications, Internet adoption, and similar
topics. Given recent improvements with indices, however, the situation is likely

2

to change. This paper contributes to the nurturing of such a potential change.

Though, there is still even a debate on what cyber security actually is. To
provide a high-level overview of the terminology involved, cyber security is of-
ten framed with the domain on which it operates (“cyber space”), offensive and
protective actions in this space, and the consequences from these actions (Rack-
evi˘cien ˙e and Mockien ˙e, 2020). This high-level terminological overview serves its
purpose: the cross-country focus is on the offensive capabilities and actions on
one hand, and the protective measures adopted by nation-states on the other. The
consequences are asserted to manifest themselves as increased desire for inter-
national cooperation—or lack thereof. This focus places the paper ﬁrmly into a
so-called state-centric domain of cyber security research (cf. Eriksson et al., 2009;
Ruohonen, 2020). The comparative macro-political approach frames the paper’s
scope further; the word politics underlines the presence of cyber security poli-
cies. Among other things, such as economic realities, these policies are affected
by technology, science, and international (power) politics as well as domestic pol-
itics (Dunn Cavelty and Wenger, 2019). This complex constellation deﬁnes the
concept of “cyber security politics”. Domestically, there are polities within which
such politics are made, but international cyber security politics have long been
in dire straits. Despite many initiatives, both laws and norms are immature at
best in the (international) cyber space. Although some of the initiatives have ma-
tured into international treaties, such as the Budapest Convention, many of the
initiatives have been a “mess in New York” (Maurer, 2020, p. 298), composed of
“endless talkshops” (Corﬁeld, 2020a) rather than genuine international treaty ne-
gotiations. This international chaos provides the motivation to examine the ques-
tion whether offensive and protective cyber actions incentivize cooperation. The
concept of “cyber power” can be deﬁned via these actions as the exercise, mainte-
nance, or demonstration of power. The “cyber capability” for these actions origi-
nates from the combination of offensive and protective potential, economy, tech-
nology, science, and the domestic and international cyber security politics. With
these clariﬁcations, the hypotheses for the empirical exploration can be stated.

Hypotheses

The preceding discussion about various “cyber concepts” aligns with classical
notions and theories in international relations. When keeping in mind the state-
centric straitjacket, Waltz’s (1979, pp. 88–89) famous theory seems pertinent as
a starting point: domestic politics occur in a centralized and hierarchical polity,
whereas international politics are organized anarchically without a common polity.
International relations do not differ from the cyber space in this regard. There is no

3

“world government” in either domain. Also other elements in the Waltz’s theory
seem applicable as a heuristic driver toward developing hypotheses. In particu-
lar, his notion of “structure” in international relations—despite the anarchy (here,
for helpful reading, see Lechner 2017), provides a decent analytical vehicle. It has
three layers: ordering principles (e.g., to move from an anarchic to a hierarchical or-
der changes a system’s structure), functional differentiation between units, and the
distribution of capabilities (Waltz, 1979, pp. 100–101). Changes in the distribution of
capabilities may change both anarchic and hierarchical systems; however, changes
in the functional differentiation cannot change an anarchic system because there
is no differentiation to begin with. How these structural layers can be used to
elaborate recent developments in the cyber space and cyber security politics?

To begin the elaboration, it must be assumed that a change in the ordering
principles is occurring; otherwise the research question would not make sense.
Having locked this assumption, it makes sense to start from the functional differ-
entiation in the cyber space, and particularly in the Internet and its governance.
For a long time, the governance of the Internet was highly functionally differ-
entiated. And it was never an anarchy. The governance of the Internet mainly
revolved around different loosely organized, non-state networks, standardization
organizations, committees, non-governmental organizations, and the like, com-
posed of engineers, scientists, hobbyists, and the like. These governance bodies
were—and still are—characteristically non-state, even though they often received
funding from governments and companies, and were under their loose oversight.
In fact, the whole concept of governance is often understood to mean governing
without the necessity of a government (Rhodes, 1996; Wachhaus, 2014). In the
Internet governance literature this type of governing became known as a multi-
stakeholder governance (Strickling and Hill, 2017). However, cracks started to
show in this type of governance model as the 2010s progressed. While it was still
easy to reject state-centric explanations about a decade ago (Mueller and Chango,
2008), in the late 2010s the arguments against state-centric governance had turned
defensive and even pessimistic (Mueller, 2019). The “militarization” of the cyber
space (Deibert, 2013) was one but not the only reason. Also the “structure” of the
Internet centralized to the hands of a few large multinational companies.

Again, how to interpret these changes against Waltz’s basic theoretical prem-
ises? At the risk of an overstatement, it could be said that states and capitalism
brought the anarchy of international relations to the cyber space. And with anar-
chy came the conventional speculations. Although the Internet has so far shown
remarkable resilience, discussions about hegemonic power started to appear in
the academic literature (Rovner and Moore, 2017). In 2020 pundits and commenta-
tors speculated openly about the apparent technology-related international power

4

politics and the potential splintering of the Internet and its governance into differ-
ent regional camps (Kleinw¨achter, 2020). At the same time, offensive cyber actions
continued unabated in the international anarchy. These developments awaken the
Waltz’s theory. Thus, to continue with the theoretical premises: states at minimum
seek their self-preservation and at maximum seek a hegemonic position through
their domestic polities (i.e., in the present context, by increasing their cyber capa-
bilities) and international endeavors (e.g., by creating alliances or weakening the
alliances of others), such that a balance of power is achieved only if all states recog-
nize the same rules and play with the same minimum bets (Waltz, 1979, pp. 118–
120). While acknowledging the limitations of this simpliﬁcation (Blachford, 2020),
these basic premises of structural realism allow to posit the ﬁrst hypothesis:

H1 Increasing cyber capability decreases willingness for BMC.

Note that the hypothesis is postulated with a negative correlation (i.e., due to
the hegemony assumption), although a reverse statement might be equally plau-
sible; increasing cyber capabilities of some states may incentivize other states to
form alliances with them, for instance. In contrast to this slight ambiguity, a more
direct hypothesis is available by assuming that active demonstration and use of
cyber power signal a lack of strong incentives for international cooperation:

H2 Demonstrating and exerting cyber power decreases willingness for BMC.

Both H1 and H2 are exploratory yet still theory-motivated hypotheses. To
move toward the actual context, the 2010s was also a period during which differ-
ent “cyber norms” were actively pursued. For the present purposes, such norms
can be deﬁned as “non-binding conventions or a standard of appropriate behav-
ior about how a class of actors should act”, such that, “over time and when they
provide order, stability, and security, they are often codiﬁed into law” (Ryan, 2018,
p. 335). Partially due to the anarchy, whether perceived or real, much of the intel-
lectual fervor behind this “norm-building” drew from international relations and
military logic (Mueller, 2019). Even today—for some establishments, stakehold-
ers, and pundits, the “hope is that the emergence of a Westphalian cyber-order
will bring back the certainty of the Cold War” (Balzacq and Dunn Cavelty, 2016,
p. 196). To this end, indeed, it was common in the 2010s to formulate different
general principles for appropriate state behavior in the cyber space. For instance,
territorial sovereignty should be honored; every state has a right to build cyber
capabilities; criminal law should apply; all states have a right to self-defense; and
so forth (Tikk, 2011). Many analogous general principles were codiﬁed into the so-
called Tallinn Manual, released in 2013 and later updated in 2017 (for background
see von Heinegg 2014). Alongside such informal guidebooks came also more gen-
eral theories such as deterrence; the idea that escalating cyber conﬂicts between

5

states could be mitigated with international norms that, at minimum, make cyber
attacks politically costly (Taddeo, 2017). Although it remains unclear whether de-
terrence tactics work in the cyber space (Corﬁeld, 2020b; Nye, 2017), many states
have recently adopted these into their cyber security strategies (Olejnik, 2020),
some of which may also include an aggressive “strike-back” deterrence variant.

To some degree, the aggressive deterrence strategies and other offensive tactics
have had a corrosive effect upon shared cyber norms and their codiﬁcation into
international and domestic laws (Tikk-Ringas, 2015). In intentional power poli-
tics small states have usually the most to lose, and thus it is not surprising that
cyber norms have been pushed forward particularly by small states. Although
global generalizations are problematic at best (Solar, 2020), together with non-
governmental organizations and other actors, small states have generally acted
as so-called “norm entrepreneurs” by trying to inﬂuence the international cyber
security policy discourse through their normative power (Adamson and Hom-
burger, 2019). This “norm persuasion” strategy is analogous to that often used by
the European Union (EU), with varying degrees of success (Chan, 2020). With re-
gard to normative power and small states in general, Waltz is surprisingly silent.
Basically he merely asserts vaguely that only “by merging and losing their politi-
cal identities can middle states become superpowers” (Waltz, 1979, p. 182). While
the reference to the late 1970s Europe is clear but implicit, the roles played by
small states provide a clear hypothesis for a cross-country analysis. Given the tra-
ditional alliance options for small states (Amstrup, 1976), it can be expected that:

H3 Small states prefer BMC for cyber security and international politics thereto.

The small but visible steps in the normative ordering principles have been ac-
companied by efforts at the international political arenas, including the United
Nations (UN) in particular. The speciﬁc UN playgrounds have been the Interna-
tional Telecommunication Union (ITU) and the so-called Group of Governmental
Experts (UNGGE) on Developments in the Field of Information and Telecommu-
nications in the Context of International Security. While the UNGGE has been
able to agree that international law applies to the cyber space, otherwise disagree-
ments have been widespread. Not only have there been conﬂicts about deﬁnitions
and scope, but the negotiations have also been affected by hidden agendas and
a disconnect from those who conduct offensive cyber operations (Maurer, 2020;
Urgessa, 2020). Economic and trade issues have stirred the pot further (Pomfret,
2020). Partially due to these deadlocks, other governance forums have gained
more traction, including those orchestrated by companies (van Horenbeeck, 2018).
All in all, it can be summarized that there is at least a normative push toward a
(horizontal) hierarchical order in the international cyber space. At the same time,

6

cyber capabilities continue to grow and vary between states, and cyber power is
actively maintained, exercised, and demonstrated.
It can be left to a reader to
assess whether this state of international cyber security affairs is an anarchy.

Data and Methods

The empirical material is based on the so-called “cyber power index” (CPI) dataset
released by associates at the Harvard University (Voo et al., 2020a). Although ITU
(2019) has released a comparable index, which has also been used in previous re-
search (Hansel and Ruhnke, 2017; Makridis and Smeets, 2019), the CPI dataset
has a couple of beneﬁts speaking for itself. As was already remarked, reliability
and validity often remain issues for macro-political indices, and the CPI dataset is
not an exception in this regard. However, ﬁrst, the dataset is accompanied with
a fairly detailed codebook containing mostly complete references to the primary
sources from which the indices have been constructed. These sources seem rea-
sonable. Unlike ITU, second, the CPI dataset provides the individual variables
from which the composite “cyber power index” has been constructed. Originally,
the theoretical idea behind the dataset was to correlate the “intent” to use cyber
power against the capability to exercise it (Voo et al., 2020b). But as the preced-
ing discussion has tried to explicitly argue and implicitly persuade, such a crude
analysis does not really do honor to the potential offered by the CPI dataset.

Thus, two separate dependent variables are used to proxy BMC. The ﬁrst is
the amount and quality of bilateral and multilateral cooperation agreements in
the cyber space. These include both formal agreements, including memberships
in regional and global organizations, and informal arrangements, such as joint
declarations and cooperation frameworks. The scale of this dependent variable is
continuous, higher values indicating more agreements and more formality. The
second dependent variable proxies a country’s endorsement of cyber norms. It
is coded from eleven criteria that mostly address a country’s participation in in-
ternational organizations (Voo et al., 2020a). In addition to ITU’s committees and
the UNGGE, these organizations include both “talkshops”, such as the Internet
Governance Forum (IGF) and the Global Forum for Cyber Expertise (GFCE), and
more technical cooperation avenues, such as the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC).
In addition, national cyber security strategies and related commitments are ac-
counted for in the coding. The range of this variable is scaled to the unit interval.
The CPI dataset contains information about 29 countries. By implication, the
empirical analysis pursued falls to the so-called “small-N” category of compara-
tive research; there are only a few observations but a large number of variables.

7

Table 1: Independent Variables

A. Cyber capability (H1)

CPI variables

Description

militarystrategy

A national cyber strategy detailing defensive and
(or) offensive military capabilities in the cyber
space, ranked by consistency of the strategy.

cybermilpeople

Number of staff in military cyber forces.

cybercommand

The presence of a national, centralized cyber com-
mand, ranked by years since establishment.

B. Cyber power (H2)

CPI variables

Description

stateattack

Number of publicly attributed, notable, and so-
phisticated state-sponsored cyber attacks.

attacksurveillance Deﬁned analogously to the stateattack variable,

but with a surveillance objective.

attackcontrol

Like stateattack, but with a control objective.

attackintelligence

Ibid., but with an intelligence objective.

attackcommercial

Ibid., but with a commercial objective.

attackoffense

Ibid., but with an offensive objective.

intentoffense

A variable with a [0, 1] range; based on seven
questions asking whether a country’s cyber mil-
itary planning, strategy documents, etc. acknowl-
edge the capability for destructive cyber opera-
tions, including the destroying or disabling of ad-
versaries’ infrastructures and capabilities.

C.

Small states (H3)

CPI variables

Description

–

A dummy variable scoring one for Estonia,
Lithuania, Singapore, Sweden, and Switzerland.

8

The usual problems follow. Regarding these problems, particularly problematic
is the operationalization of cyber capabilities used to postulate H1. As was al-
ready discussed, these capabilities originate from the capabilities of “total soci-
eties” (Verba, 1967), from education to technology and economy. How to quantify
something like science? Although there are no right answers to such a question
(and many would argue that the question is absurd to begin with), the CPI dataset
contains various generic indices, such as the prevalence of e-commerce, patent
applications, and Internet adoption. Given the importance of public-private part-
nerships for cyber security (Ruohonen, 2020), indices are available also for the
number of cyber security and surveillance companies. However, the small-N con-
straints force a more limited but sharper focus. Thus, the capabilities are explicitly
restricted to the military cyber capabilities listed in Table 1. Given the wording
used for H2, the concept of cyber power is likewise framed to state-sponsored
cyber attacks and to the demonstration of such power through publicly avail-
able military strategies. Finally, there is again no correct way to deﬁne small
states (H3). Nevertheless, based on a subjective evaluation, ﬁve countries are clas-
siﬁed as small states; these include also countries whose national security strate-
gies have long relied on neutrality and the avoidance of formal military alliances.
As for computation and methods, basic statistical techniques sufﬁce to exam-
ine the three hypotheses postulated. The principal components analysis (PCA)
is used to construct the composite cyber capability and cyber power variables in
Table 1. Product-moment correlations and the ordinary least squares (OLS) re-
gression are used to assess their linear relation to the BMC variables constructed.

Results

The variance between the 29 countries is large with respect to their commitments
to BMC. As can be seen from Fig. 1, India and the United States stand out as out-
liers in terms of bilateral and multilateral agreements and their formality. Regard-
ing the latter country, the result is hardly unexpected (Solar, 2020). The United
States ranks high also in terms of cyber norms together with Japan and the three
largest European countries. There is a group of ﬁve countries that appear to have
a lesser interest in the norm-building activities. Among them is Lithuania. Even
though Estonia ranks fairly high in both BMC variables, a negative answer to
H3 therefore seems plausible even without statistical computing. To some ex-
tent, these cross-country observations support the arguments that many states
still struggle to integrate their cyber security strategies into their national (secu-
rity) strategies (Dunn Cavelty and Wenger, 2019). These struggles are not merely
about rational national strategies: cyber security politics are strongly present in

9

many countries; there are many “swing states” that have not decided on their vi-
sion for the future of the cyber space and its security (Eldem, 2019). In any case,
the variance of both BMC variables is large enough for H1 and H2 to be plausible.

Figure 1: The Two BMC Variables

A prerequisite for PCA and other related dimension reduction techniques is
that the target variables are correlated with each other (Seber, 1984). This as-
sumption provides a good way to start the empirical analysis. Thus, according
to Bartlett’s (1951) classical χ2-based test the null hypothesis that a sample corre-
lation matrix equals an identity matrix is rejected for the six cyber power variables
(p < 0.001) but not for the three cyber capability variables (p (cid:39) 0.094). This ob-
servation hints that the composite cyber capability variable might have problems
with its internal consistency. However, according to the PCA results, the ﬁrst
principal component accounts for about 78% of the total variance among the three

10

020406080Bilateral and multilateral agreements and their formality0.30.40.50.60.70.8Cyber normsAustraliaBrazilCanadaChinaEgyptEstoniaFranceGermanyIndiaIranIsraelItalyJapanLithuaniaMalaysiaNetherlandsNew ZealandSouth KoreaRussiaSaudi ArabiaSingaporeSpainSwedenSwitzerlandTurkeyUkraineUnited KingdomUnited StatesVietnamr = 0.42cyber capability variables. This is a reasonable share—and it is actually higher
than for the six cyber power variables (71%). Therefore, the scores from the ﬁrst
principal components can be reasonably used to examine Hypotheses H1 and H2.

Table 2: Correlations (Pearson; ∗ (cid:55)→ p < 0.05, two-sided)

1.

2.

3.

4.

1. Agreements
2. Norms
3. Capability
4. Power
5.

Small states

0.42∗
−0.32
−0.08
0.04

−0.48∗
0.12
−0.06

−0.32
0.13

−0.09

Table 3: Regression Results (OLS)
Agreements (R2 = 0.139)

Norms (R2 = 0.229)

Coef.
Variable
−0.003
Capability
−0.444
Power
Small states −0.222

p-value
0.062
0.321
0.981

Coef.
< 0.001
−0.001
−0.001

p-value
0.015
0.848
0.991

Table 4: Auxiliary Regression Results (OLS)
Agreements (R2 = 0.243)

Norms (R2 = 0.582)

CPI variable
scorecapabilities
scoreintent

Coef.
0.989
−12.314

p-value
0.028
0.653

Coef.
0.009
0.186

p-value
0.003
0.263

The correlations between the principal component scores and the two BMC
variables are shown in Table 2. Although the coefﬁcients are small in magnitude
for the cyber power composite, the cyber capability PCA-variable correlates nega-
tively with both the BMC agreements and cyber norms. For the latter, the correla-
tion coefﬁcient is also statistically signiﬁcant at the conventional threshold. These
observations are in accordance with the prior expectation stated in the form of H1.
However, the OLS regression results in Table 3 bring a dose of skepticism. (The
intercept is included in all regression models but not shown for brevity.) Although
the regression coefﬁcient for the capability variable is again statistically signiﬁcant
with respect to cyber norms, its magnitude is extremely small. No other coefﬁcient

11

attains statistical signiﬁcance. The coefﬁcients of determination are fairly decent
for a three-variable model, but still not particularly remarkable.

As there are more reasons to expect potential operationalization problems than
to assume that the statistical computation is faulty, four brief checks are in order
about the variables used. The ﬁrst check is about the European Union, which
has had a strong inﬂuence upon the domestic cyber security laws in its member
states (Carvalho et al., 2020; Tikk-Ringas, 2015), and, to a lesser extent, upon inter-
national cyber norms. However, replacing the dummy variable of the small states
with a dummy variable for the EU member states does not change the results no-
tably. The second check is similar but with a dummy variable for the members
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). Again, this dummy variable
is not statistically signiﬁcant for either BMC variable. The third check is about
three large states (or, rather, active and powerful states in the cyber space; China,
Russia, and the United States), but, yet again, statistical signiﬁcance is not present.
The fourth and ﬁnal check is about the original operationalization used in the CPI
dataset. Thus, Table 4 shows a simpliﬁed regression using only two independent
variables: the “intent” to use cyber power and another construction for the ca-
pability to exercise it (Voo et al., 2020b). The coefﬁcient for the CPI’s capability
score (scorecapabilities) is again statistically signiﬁcant with respect to cyber
norms, but, again, the magnitude of it is small. Although the cyber norm esti-
mates generally yield a decent model (R2 (cid:39) 0.58), the statistical evidence does not
seem convincing enough to outright accept Hypothesis H1. That said, outright re-
jection seems appropriate for Hypotheses H2 and H3. These conclusions provide
interesting material for a brief speculation about the meaning behind the results.

Conclusion

The conclusion is easy to summarize: defensive and offensive cyber power and
capabilities for such power seem to neither increase nor decrease the willingness
and incentives of nation-states to participate in bilateral and multilateral coopera-
tion efforts on cyber security. The three hypotheses that were contemplated can all
be rejected. The statistical evidence falls somewhere between “no evidence of ef-
fect” and effect “too small to be worthwhile pursuing” (cf. da Silva 2015) further.
Something else drives the incentives. But before any speculation should come
a few words about the so-called “negative results”. In general, these are “non-
results” that fail to provide a favorable outcome to prior research questions. Such
results are increasingly seen as valuable as they provide evidence on what is not
yet known; what remains unknown; what does not work. Such results are neces-
sary for the progress and integrity of science (da Silva, 2015; Lehrer et al., 2007).

12

Against this backdrop, any result depends on the sincerity of researchers, and
any negative result can be turned into a “positive result” by insincere researchers
merely by rewriting the prior theories and research questions to match the results.
But how persuasive and realistic was the brief theorization along the Waltz’s
(1979) classical take on structural realism in international relations? Maybe the
prior speculations and hypotheses should have been rewritten after all? With-
out attempting to participate in the extensive and everlasting debate about the
Waltz’s theory in general (see Blachford 2020; Lechner 2017, among many others),
it is fairly easy to attack his theory when it comes to cyber security. For years and
years on, cyber security has been said to differ from “conventional” security, and
there are no reasons to question this anthem, at least not yet. Thus, as an exam-
ple, the CPI dataset only accounts for things that are controllable by states (Voo
et al., 2020b), despite the fact that criticism has long been levered against such
state-centric approaches due to their omission of the private sector, civil soci-
ety, and many related aspects (Mueller, 2019; Ruohonen, 2020). Furthermore,
can there even be a Waltzian balance of power in cyber space? To be sure, there
are initiatives and programs to govern offensive cyber technologies possessed by
states (Herpig, 2018), but does counting these really compare to counting nuclear
warheads? But instead of attacking others, perhaps a better option is to accept the
negative empirical result presented and contemplate the reasons behind it.

As was remarked, it is impossible to argue that there would not be incentives
for BMC, whether in terms of formal cooperation arrangements or cyber norms.
Surely all those committees and talkshops were not established for nothing? To
better understand the question, it is helpful to distinguish cyber security politics
from cyber security politics, the latter referring to the politics engaging with cy-
ber security broadly (Dunn Cavelty and Wenger, 2019), or, rather, to the art of
making cyber security politics. From this viewpoint, the failure to establish solid
norms and laws in the cyber space would be a failure in politics. And, indeed, for
many practitioners, observers, and scholars alike (Corﬁeld, 2020a; Maurer, 2020),
failures in diplomacy are the ﬁrst thing coming to mind from the seemingly never-
ending sequence of talkshops. To add a little bit of cynicism, or realism, another
thing coming to mind is a facade. The CPI dataset is enough to show that sophis-
ticated state-sponsored cyber attacks continue unabated. At the same time, cyber
norms have been partially hijacked to advance aggressive norms such as deter-
rence. While it is difﬁcult to evaluate the potential for an escalation, this kind of a
thinking crosses the Rubicon. With the helpful rereading of Waltz and others by
others (Guzzini, 2004), it seems fair to ask whether state actors in the cyber space
are maximizing power or whether they are maximizing security, and what are the
implications if increases in power do not translate into increases in security?

13

Finally, it could well be that also the fundamental concepts were deﬁned in-
correctly What if maximizing power is the ultimate goal and power is about the
“control over the minds and actions of others”? As for those whose memory still
serves them, there were realists long before Waltz, and there were also those who
equated political power to psychological power. To be sure, destroying or dis-
abling a digital infrastructure is a grievous act, but does it compare to inﬂuencing
total societies via psychological means? Who was he who a long time ago stated
that political power is about the “control over the minds and actions of others”?

References

Adamson, L. and Homburger, Z. (2019). Let Them Roar: Small States as Cyber

Norm Entrepreneurs. European Foreign Affairs Review, 24(2):217–234.

Amstrup, N. (1976). The Perennial Problem of Small States: A Survey of Research

Efforts. Cooperation and Conﬂict, 11(2):163–182.

Balzacq, T. and Dunn Cavelty, M. (2016). A Theory of Actor-Network for Cyber-

Security. European Journal of International Security, 1(2):176–198.

Bartlett, M. S. (1951). The Effect of Standardization on a χ2 Approximation in

Factor Analysis. Biometrika, 38(3-4): 337–344.

Blachford, K. (2020). The Balance of Power and the Power Struggles of the Polis.

Journal of International Political Theory, (Published online in July):1–19.

Botero, J. C., Nelson, R. L., and Pratt, C. (2011). Indices and Indicators of Justice,
Governance, and the Rule of Law: An Overview. Hague Journal on the Rule of
Law, 3:153–169.

Carvalho, J. V., Carvalho, S., and Rocha, A. (2020). European Strategy and
Legislation for Cybersecurity: Implications for Portugal. Cluster Computing,
23:1845–1854.

Chan, K. K.-L. (2020). Power Through Trade: Opportunities and Constraints of
the European Union’s Norm Entrepreneurship—The Case of Hong Kong. Asia
Europe Journal, 18:413–427.

Corﬁeld, G. (2020a). Attempts to Deﬁne International Infosec Rules of the Road
Bogged Down by Endless Talkshops, Warn Diplomats. The Register, avail-
able online in November: https://www.theregister.co.uk/2020/01/31/un_
cyber_norms_chaos_fic_2020/.

14

Corﬁeld, G. (2020b).

Try to Avoid Thinking of the Internet as a Flashy
New Battleﬁeld, Warns Former NCSC Chief. The Register, available online
in November: https://www.theregister.com/2020/11/11/ciaran_martin_
speech_cyber_policy/.

da Silva, J. A. T. (2015). Negative Results: Negative Perceptions Limit Their Po-
tential for Increasing Reproducibility. Journal of Negative Results in BioMedicine,
14(2):1–4.

Deibert, D. J. (2013). Black Code: Censorship, Surveillance, and the Militarisation

of Cyberspace. Millennium: Journal of International Studies, 32(3):501–530.

Dunn Cavelty, M. and Wenger, A. (2019). Cyber Security Meets Security Politics:
Complex Technology, Fragmented Politics, and Networked Science. Contempo-
rary Security Policy, 41(1):5–32.

Eldem, T. (2019). The Governance of Turkey’s Cyberspace: Between Cyber Se-
International Journal of Public Administration,

curity and Information Security.
43(5):452–465.

Eriksson, J., Giacomello, G., Salhi, H., Dunn Cavelty, M., Singh, J. P., and Franklin,
M. I. (2009). Who Controls the Internet? Beyond the Obstinacy or Obsolescence
of State. International Studies Review, 11(1):205–230.

Guzzini, S. (2004). Enduring Dilemmas of Realism in International Relations. Eu-

ropean Journal of International Relations, 10(4):533–568.

Hansel, M. and Ruhnke, S. (2017). A Revolution of Democratic Warfare? Assess-
ing Regime Type and Capability-Based Explanations of Military Transforma-
tion Processes. International Journal, 72(3):356–379.

Herpig, S. (2018). Governmental Vulnerability Assessment and Management:
Weighing Temporary Retention versus Immediate Disclosure of 0-Day Vulnera-
bilities, A Proposal Supported by the Transatlantic Cyber Forum. Stiftung Neue
Verantwortung, Think Tank at the Intersection of Technology and Society, avail-
able online in October 2019: https://www.stiftung-nv.de/sites/default/
files/vulnerability_management.pdf.

Holt, T. J., Burruss, G. W., and Bossler, A. M. (2016). Assessing the Macro-Level
Correlates of Malware Infections Using a Routine Activities Framework. Inter-
national Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, 62(6):1720–1741.

15

ITU (2019). Global Cybersecurity Index 2019. International Telecommunication
Union (ITU), available online in November 2020: https://www.itu.int/dms_
pub/itu-d/opb/str/D-STR-GCI.01-2018-PDF-E.pdf.

Kleinw¨achter, W.

(2020).

Internet Bifurcation: Will

ital Arm-Twisting Splinter the Open and Free Internet?
September:
available
20200924-will-us-china-digital-arm-twisting-splinter-open-and-free-internet/.

online

the US-China Dig-
CircleID,
http://www.circleid.com/posts/

in

Lechner, S. (2017). Why Anarchy Still Matters for International Relations: On

Theories and Things. Journal of International Political Theory, 13(3):341–359.

Lehrer, D., Leschke, J., Lhachimi, S., Vasiliu, A., and Weiffen, B. (2007). The Journal
of Spurious Correlations: Why Do We Need a Journal of Negative Results in the
Social Sciences? Bulletin of Sociological Methodology, 94(1):95–98.

Makridis, C. A. and Smeets, M. (2019). Determinants of Cyber Readiness. Journal

of Cyber Policy, 4(1):72–89.

Maurer, T. (2020). A Dose of Realism: The Contestation and Politics of Cyber

Norms. Hague Journal on the Rule of Law, 12:283–305.

Mezzour, G., Carley, K. M., and Carley, L. R. (2018). Remote Assessment of Coun-
tries’ Cyber Weapon Capabilities. Social Network Analysis and Mining, 8:1–15.

Mueller, M. and Chango, M. (2008). Disrupting Global Governance: The Internet
Whois Service, ICANN, and Privacy. Journal of Information Technology & Politics,
5(3):303–325.

Mueller, M. L. (2019). Against Sovereignty in Cyberspace.

International Studies

Review, (Published online in September):1–23.

Nye, J. S. (2017). Deterrence and Dissuasion in Cyberspace. International Security,

41(3):44–71.

Olejnik, L.

(2020).

Analysis of

Cybersecurity Strategy.
available
analysis-of-interesting-points-in-australian-2020-cybersecurity-strategy/.

Interesting Points in Australian 2020
Security, Privacy & Tech Inquiries Blog,
https://blog.lukaszolejnik.com/

September:

online

in

Pomfret, R. (2020). Global Production Networks, New Trade Technologies and
the Challenge for International Institutions. Foreign Trade Review, 55(1):21–41.

16

Rackevi˘cien ˙e, S. and Mockien ˙e, L. (2020). Cyber Law Terminology as a New
International Journal for the Semiotics of Law,

Lexical Field in Legal Discourse.
33:673–687.

Rhodes, R. A. W. (1996). The New Government: Governing without Government.

Political Studies, 44(3):652–667.

Rovner, J. and Moore, T. (2017). Does the Internet Need a Hegemon? Journal of

Global Security Studies, 2(3):184–203.

Ruohonen, J. (2020). An Acid Test for Europeanization: Public Cyber Security
Procurement in the European Union. European Journal for Security Research,
5(2):349–377.

Ryan, N. J. (2018). Five Kinds of Cyber Deterrence. Philosophy & Technology,

31:331–338.

Seber, G. A. F. (1984). Multivariate Observations. John Wiley & Sons, New York.

Solar, C. (2020). Cybersecurity and Cyber Defence in the Emerging Democracies.

Journal of Cyber Policy, (Published online in November):1–21.

Strickling, L. E. and Hill, J. F. (2017). Multi-Stakeholder Internet Governance: Suc-

cesses and Opportunities. Journal of Cyber Policy, 2(3):296–317.

Swank, D. (2007). What Comparativists Really Do. Comparative Social Research,

24:361–372.

Taddeo, M. (2017). Deterrence by Norms to Stop Interstate Cyber Attacks. Minds

and Machines, 27:387–392.

Tikk, E. (2011). Ten Rules for Cyber Security. Survival: Global Politics and Strategy,

53(3):119–132.

Tikk-Ringas, E. (2015). Legal Framework of Cyber Security.

In Lehto, M. and
Neittaanm¨aki, P., editors, Cyber Security: Analytics, Technology and Automation,
pages 109–127. Springer, Heidelberg.

Urgessa, W. G. (2020). Multilateral Cybersecurity Governance: Divergent Con-

ceptualizations and Its Origin. Computer Law & Security Review, 36:105368.

van Horenbeeck, M. (2018). The Future of Internet Governance and Cyber-

Security. Computer Fraud & Security, (5):6–8.

Verba, S. (1967).
20(1):111–127.

Some Dilemmas in Comparative Research. World Politics,

17

von Heinegg, W. H. (2014). The Tallinn Manual and International Cyber Security
Law. In Gill, T. D., editor, Yearbook of International Humanitarian Law, Volume 15,
2012, pages 3–18. Asser Press, The Hague.

Voo, J., Hemani, I., Jones, S., DeSombre, W., Cassidy, D., and Schwarzenbach,
A. (2020a). Harvard Belfer National Cyber Power Index. Harvard Data-
verse. Available online in November: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/LT55JY/
L2JAI1.

Voo, J., Hemani, I., Jones, S., DeSombre, W., Cassidy, D., and Schwarzenbach,
A. (2020b). National Cyber Power Index 2020. Available online in Novem-
ber: https://www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/2020-09/NCPI_
2020.pdf.

Wachhaus, A. (2014). Governance Beyond Government. Administration & Society,

46(5):573–593.

Waltz, K. N. (1979). Theory of International Politics. Addison-Wesley, Reading.

18

