International Research Conference on Smart Computing and Systems Engineering – 2018 
Department of Industrial Management, Faculty of Science, University of Kelaniya, Sri Lanka 

      SCSE_65_2018 

     Improved hierarchical role based access control model for cloud 

                     computing 

                 * N.N.Thilakarathne and Dilani Wickramaaarachchi 

       Department of Industrial Management, University of Kelaniy, Srilanka 

       *Neranjanthi@gmail.com 

          Abstract 

Cloud computing is considered as the one of the most dominant paradigm in field of 
information  technology  which  offers  on  demand  cost  effective  services  such  as 
Software as a service (SAAS), Infrastructure as a service (IAAS) and Platform as a 
service (PAAS).Promising all these services as it is, this cloud computing paradigm 
still associates number of challenges such as data security, abuse of cloud services, 
malicious insider and cyber-attacks. Among all these security requirements of cloud 
computing access control is the one of the fundamental requirement in order to avoid 
unauthorized  access  to  a  system  and  organizational  assets.  Main  purpose  of  this 
research is to review the existing methods of cloud access control models and their 
variants  pros  and  cons  and  to  identify  further  related  research  directions  for 
developing an improved access control model for public cloud data storage. We have 
presented detailed access control requirement analysis for cloud computing and have 
identified  important  gaps,  which  are  not  fulfilled  by  conventional  access  control 
models.  As  the  outcome  of  the  study  we  have  come  up  with  an  improved  access 
control model with hybrid cryptographic schema and hybrid cloud architecture and 
practical implementation of it. We have tested our model for security implications, 
performance,  functionality  and  data  integrity  to  prove  the  validity.  We  have  used 
AES and RSA cryptographic algorithms to implement the cryptographic schema and 
used public and private cloud to enforce our access control security and reliability. 
By validating and testing we have proved that our model can withstand against most 
of the cyber-attacks in real cloud environment. Hence it has improved capabilities 
compared with other previous access control models that we have reviewed through 
literature. 

Keywords – Public cloud data storage, Hybrid cloud, Hybrid cryptographic schema 

Introduction 

Cloud  is  one  of  the  major  and  dominate  technology  that  pave  the  way  for  digital 
transformation across the globe. It is a model for providing convenient on demand 
network access for computing resources such as applications, services, servers and 
storages  that  can  be  rapidly  provisioned  and  released  with  minimal  management 
effort  or  service  provider  interaction  (Bibin,  2013).Cloud  has  a  lot  of  advantages 
mainly in ubiquitous services where everybody can access computer services through 
internet. This cloud model composed of three service delivery models mainly SAAS, 
PAAS, and IAAS. Depending on the type of data that you are working with, cloud 
computing come in three forms. Public cloud, Private cloud and the Hybrid cloud. 
Along with the rapid steady development of the cloud applications cloud computing 

 
 
 
 
 
International Research Conference on Smart Computing and Systems Engineering – 2018 
Department of Industrial Management, Faculty of Science, University of Kelaniya, Sri Lanka 

cyberattacks are also increased and cloud itself create a good attacking surface for 
hackers. (Faisal at el., 2015)Denial of Service attacks (DOS attacks), Authentication 
attacks, Side channel attacks, Cryptographic attacks ,and  Inside Job attacks are best 
attack vectors for those hackers and due to these generalized attacks we need a better 
security reinforcement for  cloud computing as it can lead to a major cyber-attack. 
Due to this reason there are number of security challenges associated with utilizing 
cloud computing such as data security, abuse of cloud services, malicious insider and 
cyber-attacks. (Aditya and Ashish, 2013) 

Among all security requirements of cloud, access control is one of the fundamental 
requirements  in  order  to  avoid  unauthorized  access  to  system  and  organizational 
assets  and  cloud  access  control  models  can  be  traditionally  categorized  into  
Discretionary access control (MAC), Mandatory access control (DAC) and   Role 
Based Access Control (RBAC).In the Discretionary access model (DAC) model ,the 
administrator of the object decides its access permissions for users based on an access 
control list and in the Mandatory access control (MAC) model access permissions 
are  decided  by  the  administrator  of  the  system.  In  the  Role-based  access  control 
model (RBAC), a user has access to a resource based on his/her assigned role in the 
system. Younis at el.,2014)Roles are defined based on job functions and permissions 
are defined on authority and responsibilities of the job. Operations on the resources 
are  invoked  based  on  the  permissions.  RBAC  models  are  more  scalable  than  the 
discretionary  and  mandatory  access  control  models,  and  more  suitable  for  use  in 
cloud computing environments (Natarajan, 2011). 

Methodology 

A thorough Literature Survey has been done to find out the  potential gaps and the 
features that are not available in the existing access control mechanisms. Based on 
that we have identified Hierarchical RBAC access control model to be improved with 
hybrid cloud architecture (combination of public and the private cloud) and hybrid 
encryption schema (AES -128 bit symmetric key algorithm and RAS 1024 bit public 
key encryption).Our proposed model uses AES for encrypting and decrypting cloud 
data  and  RSA  public  key  encryption  algorithm  is  used  to  encrypt  the  secret  key 
generated by the AES cryptographic algorithm.  

 
International Research Conference on Smart Computing and Systems Engineering – 2018 
Department of Industrial Management, Faculty of Science, University of Kelaniya, Sri Lanka 

Figure 1:  Architecture of our proposed access control model 

As depicted in figure 1, proposed architecture of the access control model comprised 
of Public Cloud, Private Cloud, System Administrator, Role Manager, Data Owner, 
End User, and Override User. 

Public  information  are  encrypted  using  symmetric  AES  algorithm  which  will  be 
saved  in  the  public  cloud.  The  organizations  stores  only  critical  and  confidential 
information in private cloud. Private cloud is built on an internal data center that is 
hosted  and  operated  inside  the  organization.  The  amount  of  information  stored  in 
private cloud is relatively smaller when compared to public cloud. Administrator of 
role based system provides authentication to end users. End users are just to access 
data from cloud. They cannot do any modifications or updates to original data. They 
cannot communicate directly with the private  cloud as they do not possess access 
permission.  Administrators  generate  the  system  parameters.  System  parameters 
represent  the  position  of  the  role  and  stored  that  role  in  private  cloud.  Also 
administrators manages role hierarchy. Role manager will be there for manage roles 
for users. According to the role and authorization from the role manager, user gets 
access permission to cloud data. The access policies related to authorization and roles 
are stored in private cloud.  

Results 

We  have  implemented  the  proposed  model  in  ASP.NET,  C#  using  Visual  Studio 
2017 IDE and for the public cloud we have taken an instance from Microsoft azure. 
Testing and validation done on Microsoft Azure instance that has single core, 1.75G 
Ram  with  10  GB  storage.  For  the  implementation  on  the  private  cloud  we  have 
chosen a SQL server instance from the Microsoft Azure with inbuilt firewall with 50 
MB  storage.  (SQL  Server  database  as  a  service).  For  the  public  cloud  we  have 
deployed our developed model on to the Microsoft Azure as an app service. 

After the successful implementation, we have tested our model for performance, data 
integrity, security implications and functional analysis. From the performance testing 

 
       
International Research Conference on Smart Computing and Systems Engineering – 2018 
Department of Industrial Management, Faculty of Science, University of Kelaniya, Sri Lanka 

we conclude that encryption time took more time than decryption time and we can 
see when the file size increases both the encryption and decryption time are gradually 
increasing. For the Data integrity testing we have compared and verified MD5, SHA-
1, SHA-256 and SHA-512 values for both original file and decrypted download file 
and both types of files have same values when testing for data integrity. Thus  we 
conclude  that  the  file  integrity  of  resources  was  preserved  during  encrypting  and 
decrypting which enforce the reliability and the integrity of our access control model. 

We have performed three vulnerability assessment tests to compare and validate our 
model in real cloud environment and results from these three tests have showcased 
that our access control model  withstand against most of the cyber-attacks. Further 
for functional testing we have compared our access control model with conventional 
access  control  models  for  cloud,  based  upon  the  functionality  that  our  model  and 
those models can offer as depicted in figure 2.  

Figure 2: Functional analysis and testing 

Conclusion 

The main objective of this research was to come up with an improved access control 
model, that can be utilize in public cloud and also that can be utilize for secure cloud 
data  storage.  Before  proposing  our  model  we  have  reviewed  almost  every  access 
control model in cloud and none of the researches were targeted about the security 
implications  of  access  control  in  real  cloud  computing  environment.  We  have 
showed the experimental result of our implemented access control model through the 
perspective of performance, data  integrity and security  in real cloud environment. 
We  observed  that  time  taken  for  encryption  and  decryption  is  efficient  on  public 
cloud and maintaining data storage in public cloud is efficient as it is highly scalable, 
cost  effective  and  provides  redundancy  for  the  organization  data.  Further  we 
observed  that  original  and  decrypted  data  after  encryption  was  same,  when  data 
integrity checking  thus  it  will enhance the  reliability and assurance of our  model. 
From the security perspective we have observed that it’s not vulnerable to exploit 
and hence it provide the reliability and security for our access control model. 

We  believe  that  the  proposed  model  is  useful  in  various  commercial  and  non  – 
commercial  situations  as  it  implements  the  hierarchical  cryptographic  role  based 
access  control  policies  based  on  the  job  functionality  and  user  requests  in  an 
organization  for  providing  secure  data  storage  in  the  real  cloud  environment 
enforcing hybrid cryptographic techniques for providing security for underlying data 
along with hybrid cloud architecture. 

 
 
 
International Research Conference on Smart Computing and Systems Engineering – 2018 
Department of Industrial Management, Faculty of Science, University of Kelaniya, Sri Lanka 

References 

Aditya, k., & Ashish, D. (2013). Cryptographic Role-Based Access Control for 
Secure Cloud Data Storage 
Bibin,  K.  (2013).  Access  Control  in  Cloud  Computing  International  Journal  of 
Scientific and Research Publications  Volume 3, Issue 9, September 2013 
Faisal  ,M.,  &  Aranganathan,  S.  (  2015  )    Secure  Access  Control  Requirement 
Analysis in Cloud Computing “ Volume 3, Issue 3, March 2015 
Natarajan,  M.  (2011)  Review  of  Access  control  models  for  cloud  computing  
Jackson State University, 1400 Lynch St, Jackson, MS, USA 2011 
Younis,A ., Kashif, Kifayat., & Madjid , M.(2014) An access control model for 
cloud computing  journal of information security and applications 2014 

 
 
 
 
