Smarter Password Guessing Techniques Leveraging
Contextual Information and OSINT

Aikaterini Kanta∗†, Iwen Coisel†, Mark Scanlon∗
∗Forensics and Security Research Group, School of Computer Science, University College Dublin, Ireland
†European Commission, Joint Research Centre (DG JRC) - Via Enrico Fermi 2749, 21027 Ispra (VA), Italy
Email: aikaterini.kanta@ucdconnect.ie, iwen.coisel@ec.europa.eu, mark.scanlon@ucd.ie

0
2
0
2

c
e
D
2

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
9
5
1
1
0
.
2
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—In recent decades, criminals have increasingly used
the web to research, assist and perpetrate criminal behaviour.
One of the most important ways in which law enforcement
can battle this growing trend is through accessing pertinent
information about suspects in a timely manner. A signiﬁcant
hindrance to this is the difﬁculty of accessing any system a
suspect uses that requires authentication via password. Password
guessing techniques generally consider common user behaviour
while generating their passwords, as well as the password policy
in place. Such techniques can offer a modest success rate
considering a large/average population. However, they tend to
fail when focusing on a single target – especially when the
latter is an educated user taking precautions as a savvy criminal
would be expected to do. Open Source Intelligence is being
increasingly leveraged by Law Enforcement in order to gain
useful information about a suspect, but very little is currently
being done to integrate this knowledge in an automated way
within password cracking. The purpose of this research is to delve
into the techniques that enable the gathering of the necessary
context about a suspect and ﬁnd ways to leverage this information
within password guessing techniques.

Index Terms—Password Security, Password Guessing Tech-
niques, Context-based Password Cracking, Open Source Intel-
ligence (OSINT)

account, this work is exploring ways this information about a
suspect as an individual or a community can be leveraged in
order to better facilitate the recovery process.

II. RELATED WORK

A. Password Metrics

There have been studies that analyse the composition of
passwords with focus on how people choose them, where
password re-use and reliance on dictionary words can be
observed [4], [5], [7]. In addition, studies have considered the
demographics of participants and if they play an important
role in the selection process [8], [9]. Finally, it is observed
that users tend to use personal information when they create
a password, as it is more easily memorable to them [6], [10].

B. Open Source Intelligence

Steele [11] deﬁnes Open Source Intelligence (OSINT) as
information that
is publicly available and can be used to
answer a speciﬁc question. To this end, there are many OSINT
tools available to the community that can aid in ﬁnding,
extracting and sorting though this information1.

I. INTRODUCTION

C. Password Guessing Related Tools

Nowadays, criminal activity is increasingly conducted in
cyberspace. Criminals take advantage of the easy access to
information and the global access to victims. This leads
to a scale of crime that cannot be easily achieved in the
physical world. As a result, it is becoming increasingly urgent
for law enforcement to be able to act swiftly in a digital
forensic investigation especially in the cases where ongoing or
future criminal acts must be prevented. Very often, password
protected accounts or encrypted devices act as a barrier for
police personnel to conduct their lawful investigations [1].

Passwords have been the go-to method of user authentica-
tion for decades – a fact that does not look like it is about to
change. The difference in the last few years is the fast increase
of online login systems with password policies that require
passwords of different patterns, lengths and makeup [2]. This
leads to users having the tendency to either reuse the same
password across different systems or to create passwords that
are easy to remember (i.e., weaker) to keep up with the
different password policies [3], [4]. A signiﬁcant portion of
passwords are therefore based on dictionary words [5] or
contextual information related to the user [6]. Taking this into

Traditional password guessing techniques include brute
force, dictionary attacks and rainbow table approaches. Lately,
newer, smarter methods have been proposed with higher
recovery numbers, e.g., password candidate generation tools
based on Markov Chains [12], probabilistic context-free gram-
mars [13] and variations of thereof [10], and combinator attack
tools, e.g., PRINCE2.

III. METHODOLOGY

Digital forensic investigators frequently ﬁnd themselves
working on a case where a password connected to a crime
needs to be retrieved. Many times, it is not possible to retrieve
the password of a suspect in a timely manner. This is where
tying the suspect to their associated contextual information
can prove fruitful. Context in this instance refers to contextual
information about a suspect that can be harnessed for the sake
of making better “educated” guesses about their password.

This information can stem from their online/ofﬂine life
and can be the product of traditional means of investigation,

1https://osintframework.com/
2https://github.com/hashcat/princeprocessor

 
 
 
 
 
 
about cooking. Current work is focused on the contextual
analysis of a large corpus of passwords stemming from online
leaks. Future work will include the reﬁnement of this dataset
and the expansion of the scope of this analysis to more
contextual information. In addition, the manner with which
OSINT can be exploited and processed towards producing
meaningful data will be explored. This will subsequently be a
starting point for creating a bespoke, personalised dictionary
list to feed into password cracking tools.

REFERENCES

[1] A. Sayakkara, N.-A. Le-Khac, and M. Scanlon, “A Survey of Elec-
tromagnetic Side-channel Attacks and Discussion on Their Case-
Investigation,
Progressing Potential
vol. 29, pp. 43 – 54, 2019.

for Digital Forensics,” Digital

[2] B. Ur, P. G. Kelley, S. Komanduri, J. Lee, M. Maass, M. L. Mazurek,
T. Passaro, R. Shay, T. Vidas, L. Bauer et al., “How does your password
measure up? The effect of strength meters on password creation,” in
Presented as part of the 21st USENIX Security Symposium USENIX
Security 12), 2012, pp. 65–80.

[3] S. Komanduri, R. Shay, P. G. Kelley, M. L. Mazurek, L. Bauer,
N. Christin, L. F. Cranor, and S. Egelman, “Of Passwords and People:
Measuring the Effect of Password-Composition Policies,” in Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
2011, pp. 2595–2604.
Lord,

[4] N.

Users’
2018.
uncovering-password-habits-are-users-password-security-habits-improving-infographic

Password
[Online].

Are
Habits:
Password
Habits
Dec
Improving?”
https://digitalguardian.com/blog/

“Uncovering
Security
Available:

[5] J. Yan, A. Blackwell, R. Anderson, and A. Grant, “Password Memora-
bility and Security: Empirical Results,” IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 2,
no. 5, pp. 25–31, 2004.

[6] D. Wang, Z. Zhang, P. Wang, J. Yan, and X. Huang, “Targeted Online
Password Guessing: An Underestimated Threat,” in Proceedings of the
2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, 2016, pp. 1242–1254.

[7] S. Pearman, J. Thomas, P. E. Naeini, H. Habib, L. Bauer, N. Christin,
L. F. Cranor, S. Egelman, and A. Forget, “Let’s go in for a closer look:
Observing passwords in their natural habitat,” in Proceedings of the 2017
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
2017, pp. 295–310.

[8] J. Bonneau, “The Science of Guessing: Analyzing an Anonymized
Corpus of 70 Million Passwords,” in 2012 IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy.

IEEE, 2012, pp. 538–552.

[9] M. AlSabah, G. Oligeri, and R. Riley, “Your Culture is in Your Pass-
word: An Analysis of a Demographically-Diverse Password Dataset,”
Computers & Security, vol. 77, pp. 427–441, 2018.

[10] Y. Li, H. Wang, and K. Sun, “A Study of Personal Information in
Human-Chosen Passwords and Its Security Implications,” in IEEE
INFOCOM 2016-The 35th Annual IEEE International Conference on
Computer Communications.

IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–9.

[11] R. D. Steele, “Open source intelligence,” Handbook of Intelligence

Studies, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 129–147, 2007.

[12] M. D¨urmuth, F. Angelstorf, C. Castelluccia, D. Perito, and A. Chaabane,
“OMEN: Faster Password Guessing Using an Ordered Markov Enumer-
ator,” in International Symposium on Engineering Secure Software and
Systems. Springer, 2015, pp. 119–132.

[13] M. Weir, S. Aggarwal, B. De Medeiros, and B. Glodek, “Password
Cracking Using Probabilistic Context-Free Grammars,” in 2009 30th
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 391–405.
[14] R. C. Van der Hulst, “Introduction to Social Network Analysis (SNA)
as an Investigative Tool,” Trends in Organized Crime, vol. 12, no. 2, pp.
101–121, 2009.

[15] A. L. Ivan, C. A. Iov, R. C. Lutai, and M. N. Grad, “Social Media In-
telligence: Opportunities and Limitations,” CES Working Papers, vol. 7,
no. 2A, p. 505, 2015.

[16] D. Fleurbaaij, M. Scanlon, and N.-A. Le-Khac, “Privileged Data within
the 16th IEEE International
Digital Evidence,” in Proceedings of
Conference On Trust, Security And Privacy In Computing And Com-
munications (TrustCom-17).
Sydney, Australia: IEEE, 08 2017, pp.
737–744.

Fig. 1. Password Generation Process

e.g., forensic investigation of the suspect’s residence and
belongings or the digital investigation of the suspect (i.e., both
their local devices and online presence). The latter type of
investigation can yield results including the suspect’s interests
(e.g., sports, music, etc.), browsing history, other passwords,
online interactions, family and pet names, etc. This is where
OSINT can play a key role in an investigation. Already Social
Media Intelligence (SOCMINT) is used by law enforcement
in order to gain pertinent, case-progressing information [14].
It can be applied to online groups of users to detect patterns in
social behaviour as well as to individual suspects [15]. OSINT
tools can extract information regarding the online presence of
a user or group of users from networks of acquaintances on
social media. The prevalence of users increasingly living their
lives online can also result in sourcing their email addresses,
usernames, phone numbers, and exercise or sleeping patterns.
The information gathered can then be leveraged, ﬁltered
and translated to meaningful contextual data about the sus-
pect. Information retrieval and machine learning techniques
should be beneﬁcial at this stage, based on the volume of
available data and whether an individualised or community-
based approach is chosen. For the individual-based approach,
information gathered online and ofﬂine will be compiled. An
analysis on the raw data and a classiﬁcation into categories is
the next step, in order to extract meaningful keywords that will
represent user/community interests. In turn, these keywords
will help law enforcement ofﬁcers assemble a more useful
list of password candidates to enrich and complement existing
password guessing tools. A ﬂowchart of this process can be
seen in Figure 1.

IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

To validate the proposed hypothesis, i.e., prove that context
does play a role in the selection of passwords, our future work
will ﬁrstly focus on a community-based approach. The reason
for this, is the current lack of available data for individuals and
the sensitivity of this data [16]. As one example, a community
of users on an anime forum would be expected to have a higher
percentage of passwords related to anime than a community

