0
2
0
2
c
e
D
2

]

M
M

.
s
c
[

1
v
7
0
1
1
0
.
2
1
0
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Retracing the Flow of the Stream: Investigating
Kodi Streaming Services

Samuel Todd Bromley1, John Sheppard2,3, Mark Scanlon3, and Nhien-An
Le-Khac3

1 Royal Canadian Mounted Police, Canada stbromley@gmail.com
2 Waterford Institute of Technology, Ireland jsheppard@wit.ie
3 Forensics and Security Research Group, University College Dublin, Ireland
{mark.scanlon, an.lekhac}@ucd.ie

Abstract. Kodi is of one of the world’s largest open-source stream-
ing platforms for viewing video content. Easily installed Kodi add-ons
facilitate access to online pirated videos and streaming content by facil-
itating the user to search and view copyrighted videos with a basic level
of technical knowledge. In some countries, there have been paid child
sexual abuse organizations publishing/streaming child abuse material to
an international paying clientele. Open source software used for viewing
videos from the Internet, such as Kodi, is being exploited by criminals
to conduct their activities. In this paper, we describe a new method to
quickly locate Kodi artifacts and gather information for a successful pros-
ecution. We also evaluate our approach on diﬀerent platforms; Windows,
Android and Linux. Our experiments show the ﬁle location, artifacts and
a history of viewed content including their locations from the Internet.
Our approach will serve as a resource to forensic investigators to examine
Kodi or similar streaming platforms.

Keywords: Kodi · Video Streaming · Log File Analysis · Forensics

1

Introduction

The rise in illegal streaming services saw the September 2019 shutdown of the
Xtream-codes IPTV service. This service was run from Greece and operated
through servers in Italy, the Netherlands, France, Germany and Bulgaria. It has
been reported that the operation involved over two hundred servers and one
hundred and ﬁfty PayPal accounts used by the criminals. It is estimated that
there were 5,000 re-sellers of the service to over 50 million subscribers [2].

One of the most popular streaming applications is Kodi. Kodi is an open
source media center developed by non-proﬁt technology consortium XBMC. It
is compatible with Windows, Linux, OSX and Android. It is used for streaming
music and video from a user’s private library on their own network or from public
sources over the Internet. It is highly customizable through the use of add-ons.
Add-ons, written by third-party developers, are easily installed through the Kodi
interface by specifying a repository or “repo” URL to connect to.

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Bromley et al.

In this paper, we aim to answer the following research questions: 1) How
should a forensic investigation of of Kodi be conducted? 2) What can be recov-
ered from a Kodi system? 3) Where are the Kodi forensic artifacts located? The
contribution of this work can be summarized as follows:

– Introducing a framework for conducting IPTV investigations based on Kodi.
– Detailing the Kodi ecosystem where evidence can be found for investigation

of digital piracy or streaming of illegal content.

2 Related Work

IPTV Forensics - Users purchase IPTV subscriptions from commercial sell-
ers, which grants access to the sellers’ private server’s live television feeds using
IPTV set top boxes or software. Alternatively, users can download software to
access less reliable free streams. The cybercrime aspect of IPTV and cloud in-
vestigations are examined in [10]. A case study was conducted, focusing on the
cloud based development and distribution networks of the most popular Kodi
Add-ons of 2018. Acestreams are an example IPTV service using streaming mesh
networks [5]. Acestreams employ the use of BitTorrent technology to distribute
live television, the principle being, that one user’s upstream data pipe, is used
to supply video content to another user’s downstream pipe to view video [8].

Android Set Top Box Forensics - Android set top boxes are by far the most
popular method of using Kodi. These low cost devices are sold online and are
pre-conﬁgured to run Kodi and other streaming software. Android-based foren-
sic investigations have primarily focused on mobile phone and tablet versions
of Android and applications installed on these devices [9,11]. An overview of
Android forensics and the Android ﬁle system can be found in [6] and [4]. These
provide a framework for Kodi artifacts on the Android operating system. Given
the growth of Android powered Smart TVs, Kodi can be expected to become
more common place.

3 Findings and Analysis for Kodi on Windows

Media Library - The Kodi media library is a feature of Kodi that allows the
cataloging and sharing of downloaded movies and videos that are located on the
computer. This feature is used for personal video collections. The media library
tracks which videos have been previously played, allowing the user to watch
videos without repetition. This is an excellent source of information for inves-
tigators. All previously played videos are stored in the media library artifacts,
including those from external media. This log of previously viewed media could
inform the investigator of hidden portable media that may not have been seized.

Retracing the Flow of the Stream: Investigating Kodi Streaming Services

3

Add-ons - The true beneﬁts of Kodi are the user created add-ons. User cre-
ated Add-ons allow the user to view copyrighted material hosted for free on
the Internet. These add-ons allow the Kodi user to easily navigate, search and
stream copyrighted materials. The MPAA and the ACE sub group are actively
attempting to have these add-ons eliminated. As soon as one is taken down
legally another typically pops up.

Artifacts - The minimum number of pages detected within the databases is
eight when no ﬁles have been indexed. The ﬁle metadata records have all been
observed to start from page 8 of the database on-wards. In general, data within
the pages are stored little-endian (least signiﬁcant byte ﬁrst), however big-endian
values have been noted as existing within individual records.

The SQLite database “Addons27.db” is located in C:\Users\X\AppData\
Roaming\Kodi\userdata\Database\Addons27.db. This table contains artifacts
related to add-ons including associated repositories. These add-on artifacts iden-
tify the name of installed add-ons, whether the add-on is still in use, installation
date of the installed add-ons, date add-on updated, date add-on last used, and
the origin of the add-on.

Repositories - Repository.exodusredux is the Repository that was manually in-
stalled in .zip form. “b6a50484-93a0-4afb-a01c-8d17e059feda” is the serial num-
ber of the original installer ﬁle. This indicates that the ﬁle was an original, non-
updated, ﬁle loaded from the Kodi installer [12]. In the “Addons27.db” SQLite
database there is a table called “repo”. The ‘repo” table provides the following
artifacts; name of repository installed, checksum for installed repository, last
update check date, and the version of the repository.

Kodi Log Files - Kodi activity is recorded in two log ﬁles. One is a current log
ﬁle active since the latest reboot, the other is an inactive log ﬁle from the previ-
ous reboot. In the Windows environment, Kodi saves a log ﬁle in the following
location: C:\Users\X\AppData\ Roaming\Kodi\kodi.txt. This ﬁle contains all
actions by the user for that session. From a forensic point of view, interesting ar-
tifacts include: date and time Kodi last used, searches performed, user account,
last viewed ﬁle, source of last viewed ﬁle, and when was Kodi last shut down.
As Kodi overwrites its oldest log ﬁle on starting the application information will
be lost if the investigator executes the Kodi program in a non-forensically sound
manner.

4 Examining Kodi installed on Android and Linux

Android - Our experiments were conducted using a Samsung S9+ Android
mobile device running the Android 9.0 OS, as the test Android system to locate
the Android artifacts. The artifacts and databases are located in similar locations
in the Android operating system as they are in other operating systems.

4

Bromley et al.

In the Kodi userData folder (hidden by default), all the same database Kodi

artifacts are present which can be logically extracted.

Linux (Ubuntu) - The Kodi ﬁle structure once again is the same. The default
Kodi installation with that version of Ubuntu is Kodi version 15.2 (Isengard)
in the hidden folder “.kodi”. The folder and databases structure is identical
with the minor diﬀerence that in this version of Kodi, the artifacts are called
“MyVideos93.db” and “Addons19.db”. The 2 numerical digits at the end of the
database name are the result of the Kodi version. The information contained is
identical. The database is stored “.kodi” folder. Although the SQLite database
names are slightly diﬀerent, the contents are the same.

Linux (OSMC) - The last device investigated was a Raspberry Pi 3 running
Open Source Media Center (OSMC). OSMC is a dedicated Kodi Linux operating
system. The SD card used was ﬁrst sanitized and OSMC TGT rbp2 20180316
was installed through OSMC’s qt host installer application. The Pi was conﬁg-
ured for a wired network and debugging was enabled on the device. A selection
video add-ons were again installed and experiments were conducted as before.
Once this was completed, the SD card was removed from the Raspberry Pi and a
raw image was created using the command-line tool, dd. The image was analyzed
using Autopsy and FTK Imager for dual tool veriﬁcation. The purpose of the
analysis was to investigate the ﬁlesystem layout, the structure of the add-ons,
the location of Kodi logs and the identiﬁcation of Kodi artifacts.

5 Discussion

Kodi Home Folder - The Kodi directory is the most important directory of
a Kodi investigation. This location contains the following directories:

– add-ons - a list of repository add-ons and video add-ons associated with the

device under examination

– media - media ﬁles
– system - system customization, empty by default
– temp - log ﬁles
– userdata - databases, settings ﬁles and customization ﬁles

The add-ons folder contains a set of sub folders classed as repositories, video
plugins, movie and TV metadata scrapers, language resources, and scripts. It
also contains a packages folder that contains zipped versions of these ﬁles with
timestamps of when they were downloaded.

Kodi Add-ons - Investigation of these add-ons reveals a common core ﬁle
structure comprising of .xml, python, .txt and image ﬁles. These add-on direc-
tories typically contain the following ﬁles and reveal the following information:

Retracing the Flow of the Stream: Investigating Kodi Streaming Services

5

– The ﬁle add-on.xml comprises of several metadata ﬁelds that describe the
add-on to the user and system. Other ﬁelds reference any required depen-
dencies, credits and version information. It also includes the update URL.

– The ﬁle add-on.py is the Python code for that add-on.
– The resources sub directory stores add-on ﬁles that do not need to be stored
in the root directory, such as software libraries, translations, and images.
– The ﬁle License.txt contains the text of the add-on’s software license [7].

Kodi Userdata - The userdata folder contains the following folders:

– add-on data - contains conﬁguration data for the add-ons installed in the

.kodi/add-ons directory

– database - containing databases that are required for locating Music and
Video Libraries and any downloaded or scraped music or video information

– keymaps - contains ﬁles for any customized keymapping
– library - custom libraries
– peripheral data
– playlists - where the playlists are stored
– thumbnails - cached thumbnails

Kodi Databases - The database ﬁles can be found in the userdata/Database
location. The following databases are present in SQLite format. Diﬀerent versions
of Kodi use diﬀerent numbers appended to the end of the SQLite databases. In
each instance the number XX is determined by the current Kodi version in use.

– AddonsXX.db - Database ﬁle containing information on all Kodi add-ons
– ADSPXX.db-Database ﬁle containing information for Audio Digital Signal

Processing add-ons

– EPGXX.db - Database ﬁle containing information on Electronic Programme

Guide (EPG) for Live-TV

– MyMusicXX.db - Database ﬁle containing Music information
– MyVideosXX.db - Database ﬁle containing Movie, TV Show and Music

Videos information

– Textures13.db - Database ﬁle containing information on all Kodi thumbnails,

fanart and posters.

– TVXX.db - Database ﬁle containing information on Live-TV channels
– ViewModesXX.db - Database ﬁle containing information on the use and

frequency of the Kodi device.

Kodi Logs - In the event of a Kodi machine being investigated, care should
be taken around the Kodi logs. If the machine is switched oﬀ, the machine
should ﬁrst be imaged using appropriate controls. This will prevent the log from
before the last reboot from being overwritten. This will inform an investigator
with information such as when an add-on was installed on the device or recent
activity that has occurred on the device.

6

Bromley et al.

6 Conclusion and Future Work

This paper has compared the Kodi ﬁlesystem, logs, add-ons, databases and other
artifacts across a range of devices. It examined Kodi as a software application
on a Windows 10 and Ubuntu machine, the Kodi Android app, Kodi as a stand-
alone operating system, and OSMC. The primary sources where evidence could
be collected were highlighted through the Kodi folder. The structure of the Kodi
ﬁlesystem has been presented. Future work in this area requires the investigation
of the relationships with these add-ons and the cyberlockers providing the illegal
streams. In addition, much remains to be done with automated stream content
analysis using computer vision to automatically detect illegal content [3,1]. As
techniques are created to monetize such illicit services by cybercriminals, the
need for the investigation of these machines will increase.

References

1. Anda, F., Le-Khac, N.A., Scanlon, M.: DeepUAge: Improving Underage Age Es-
timation Accuracy to Aid CSEM Investigation. Forensic Science International:
Digital Investigation 32, 300921 (04 2020)
Shutdown

2. Bouma,
vice
https://www.cordcuttersnews.com/police-shutdown-an-illegal-iptv-service-with-50-million-subscribers/

Police
50

L.:
With

Ser-
2019),

(September

Subscribers

Million

Illegal

IPTV

an

3. Du, X., Hargreaves, C., Sheppard, J., Anda, F., Sayakkara, A., Le-Khac, N.A.,
Scanlon, M.: SoK: Exploring the State of the Art and the Future Potential of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Digital Forensic Investigation. In: Proceedings of the 15th
International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security. ACM (2020)
4. Faheem, M., Le-Khac, N.A., Kechadi, T.: Smartphone Forensic Analysis: A Case
Study for Obtaining Root Access of an Android Samsung S3 Device and Analyse
the Image without an Expensive Commercial Tool. Journal of Information Security
5, 83–90 (2014)

5. Hei, X., Liu, Y., Ross, K.W.: IPTV over P2P Streaming Networks: The Mesh-pull

Approach. Communications Magazine 46(2), 86–92 (Feb 2008)

6. Hoog, A.: Android Forensics: Investigation, Analysis and Mobile Security for

Google Android. Syngress Publishing, 1st edn. (2011)

7. KodiWiki: Kodi addon structure (2019), https://kodi.wiki/view/Add-on_structure
8. Scanlon, M., Hannaway, A., Kechadi, M.T.: A Week in the Life of the Most Popular
BitTorrent Swarms. In: Proceedings of the 5th Annual Symposium on Information
Assurance (ASIA 2010). pp. 32–36. Albany, New York, USA (06 2010)

9. Sgaras, C., Kechadi, T., Le-Khac, N.A.: Forensics Acquisition and Analysis of
Instant Messaging and VoIP Applications. Lecture Notes in Computer Science
8915, 188–199 (2015)

10. Sheppard, J.: Cloud Investigations of Illegal IPTV Networks. In: Proceedings of the
17th IEEE International Conference On Trust, Security And Privacy In Computing
And Communications. pp. 1942–1947. IEEE (08 2018)

11. Walnycky, D., Baggili, I., Marrington, A., Moore, J., Breitinger, F.: Network and
Device Forensic Analysis of Android Social-messaging Applications. Digital Inves-
tigation 14(S1), S77–S84 (Aug 2015)

12. XBMC Foundation: “addons/addon.h ﬁle reference,” kodi documentation,

https://codedocs.xyz/enen92/xbmc/addons_2_addon_8h.html

