1
2
0
2

n
a
J

6
2

]

Y
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

1
v
0
7
5
0
1
.
1
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Towards a Secure and Resilient
All-Renewable Energy Grid for Smart Cities

Charalambos Konstantinou, Senior Member, IEEE

1

Abstract—The concept of smart cities is driven by the
need to enhance citizens’ quality of life. It is estimated that
70% of the world population will live in urban areas by
2050. The electric grid is the energy backbone of smart
city deployments. An electric energy system immune to
adverse events, both cyber and physical risks, and able to
support the integration of renewable sources will drive a
transformational development approach for future smart
cities. This article describes how the future electric energy
system with 100% electricity supply from renewable energy
sources requires the “birth of security and resiliency”
incorporated with its ecosystem.

Index Terms—Security, resiliency, renewable energy

sources, future grid, smart city.

I. INTRODUCTION

Electric energy systems constitute the backbone of
critical infrastructure. National security and economic
vitality rely on a safe, secure, and resilient power system.
The American electric grid, once considered a mar-
vel of 20th century engineering, has become obsolete
in the face of 21st century threats. Our energy grid
has numerous shortcomings and can no longer deliver
(cyber) secure and (disaster) resilient electric power to
businesses and households, leading to an urgent and
enormous threat to our society and economy. Vertical
power systems with rigid transmission and distribution
system control hierarchy have failed repeatedly during
extreme threats. Recent studies by the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC) found that knocking
out as 9 of the 55,000 power substations could result in
U.S. coast-to-coast blackouts lasting 18 months or more
[1]. For example, the Hurricane Michael resulted in 1.7
million power outages along the U.S. Gulf and Atlantic
coasts [2]. During June – September 2007, heat waves
and forest ﬁres occurred in Greece causing extensive
damages to the medium-voltage distribution network and
knocking out power in many areas of the country [3].
Recovery from such disasters also costs tens of billions
of dollars including time, manpower, and lost economic
productivity, and deepen social inequalities. These fail-
ures have taught utilities, regulators, and stakeholders
that faults cascade across national and continental elec-
tric grids, and exacerbating a local phenomenon into a
socioeconomic catastrophe. Traditional power systems
are prone to such cascading power outages that last long

periods of time and are complex and time-consuming
to recover – in other words, not secure and resilient.
Continuing to operate the electric energy system critical
infrastructure using the traditional model
is a well-
recognized security and resiliency threat and the main
barrier for the development of future smart cities.

The integration of photovoltaic (PV) solar systems
and wind farms together with other renewable energy
sources (RES) into the electric grid, as shown in Fig. 1,
helps towards improving security and reliability of the
power system during normal operations and enhancing
resiliency during and after extreme events. In the ﬁrst
quarter of 2018, solar accounted for 55% of all new
generating capacity brought online in the U.S. [4], and
Florida alone is expected to add over 8.6 GW of solar
generation by 2025. The inclusion of such distributed
resources in the form of solar PV, battery-based storage,
and demand resources can increase the resiliency to
catastrophic events once research efforts would be able to
address open system design questions. Examples include
how to strategically locate and operate these resources
to sustain smart cities infrastructure by guaranteeing
continuity or rapid restoration of power to vital loads
following large-scale disturbances by formation of ad-
hoc self-contained microgrids in outage situations. In
addition, as more and more RES are integrated into
power systems, it is projected that offshore oil and gas
platforms will be re-used at end-of-life stage for the
production of renewable energy (e.g., offshore wind,
wave and tidal energy, ocean current energy, ocean-based
solar energy, deep-water source cooling, etc.). To thwart
the existing problems, a transformational development
approach needs to be established, able to develop and
build a secure and resilient electric grid for future smart
cities. Such development will lead to an electric energy
system immune to extreme phenomena while supporting
the integration of RES and reducing the dependency on
oil drilling into power systems, such as those at the North
Sea as well as the Gulf of Mexico and its coastal zone.

II. PILLARS OF A SECURE AND RESILIENT
ALL-RENEWABLE ENERGY GRID

The objective towards achieving a secure and resilient
100% renewable energy grid requires the development of
multi-layer control and system methods, ranging from

 
 
 
 
 
 
2

Fig. 1. Simpliﬁed diagram of the electric grid integration with renewable energy sources concept.

system stability controls to secure co-design of hard-
ware/software/physical systems, that contribute towards
a holistic cyberphysical energy system (CPES) integrated
within smart cities [5]. The technological dimensions
that will characterize those smart cities are electricity
grids and the information and communication networks
that can contribute in the development of intelligent
transportation systems and support clean energy (e.g.,
electric vehicles, energy-efﬁcient buildings, etc.). Tech-
nological methods will revolve around decision and
cyber-resilient mechanisms of critical CPES and smart
cities infrastructures dedicated to advance research and
developments on renewable energy modeling and sim-
ulation. It is necessary to develop a core innovation
ecosystem that enables crosscutting and convergent tech-
nology, transformative policy, economic and business
models, and develop a future workforce to meet the
needs of our cities’ future electric grid. Such vision needs
to be approached under two main pillars: (1) develop and
build a secure and resilient electric grid able to use 100%
renewable energy for electricity, heating/cooling, and
transportation and be immune to natural disasters and
cyber-attacks; and (2) ensure that the new technologies
will be used safely and effectively by operators, and
that the new system will be accepted and trusted by
consumers and citizens. Our daily lives and economy
will be secured, transformed, electriﬁed, and propelled
to the next generation. The integration and convergence
of these two areas will synergistically catalyze a safer,
more reliable, and more efﬁcient community and society.
The two directions are described below:

A. Resilience driven system operation for ﬂexible recov-
ery under extreme events with renewable assets.

Smart grids and microgrids operating in conjunction
with the bulk power system is an accepted solution and
robust in theory [6]–[8]. There have been multiple smart
grid projects which have enhanced one aspect or another
to deal with these extreme events – related challenges –
yet cohesive, comprehensive, general purpose platforms
that can be used to drive rapid industry-wide enablement
of resiliency are non-existent. Recent surveys in the
area clearly indicate the necessity of effective resilience
assessment and enhancement methods [9], [10]. This
direction needs to assimilate advancements in grid mod-
ernization technologies achieved through past efforts,
modern measurement devices, emerging energy storage
and RES integrations, forecasts, automation, and intel-
ligent algorithms, to create a modernization blueprint
for utilities seeking to transform traditional operating
architecture to secure and resilient smart energy systems;
such that
the damage caused by extreme events is
minimized (either cyber-attacks [11], [12], e.g., Ukraine
electric grid attack in 2015 and 2016, weather incidents,
e.g., most of the U.S. population live in disaster-prone
areas: 75% of Floridians reside along the coastlines that
are routinely threatened by major hurricanes, or even
human operation, e.g., 2010 BP oil spill cost is estimated
at over $60 billion and unprecedented damage to the
Gulf’s natural environment [13]).

This transformation will enable resilient-driven power
system operation – including planning to post-event
restoration and recovery – that would minimize the
power outages resulting in less economic losses, public

3

unexpected changes in the measured system variables.
Attack detection approaches are further classiﬁed into
two main categories: pattern recognition, i.e., learn the
recorded historical data corresponding to attacks and
then recognize the class of real-time data, and anomaly
detection, i.e., compare the real-time behavior of the
system with the expected normal behavior.

A number of agencies and organizations such as the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),
the International Organization for Standardization (ISO),
and other standards bodies are working together along
with the research community to understand new cyber-
security threats, how to create a base set of controls
to manage them, understand the risks they pose, and
how to mitigate those risks [14]. NIST created NIST
SP 800-82 [15], to aid in the implementation of cyber-
security measures in industrial control systems. Also,
NIST created two inter-agency reports on internet-of-
things (IoT) devices, IoT device cybersecurity capability
core baseline (NISTIR 8259A) and considerations for
managing IoT cybersecurity and privacy risks (NISTIR
8228). In addition, utility regulations have cybersecurity
requirements and standards. The North Atlantic Electric
Reliability Corporation (NERC) published the NERC
CIP v5 Cyber Security Standards. The private sector,
and speciﬁcally natural gas and oil companies [16],
utilize NIST’s cybersecurity frameworks and additional
international cybersecurity standards including ISA/IEC
62443 series on industrial automation and control sys-
tems security, and the Department of Energy (DOE)
Cybersecurity Capability Maturity Model (C2M2). Other
efforts include NIST’s National Cybersecurity Center of
Excellence (NCCoE) which works with various criti-
cal infrastructure sectors such as electrical utilities and
technology collaborators to explorer the status of cyber-
security concerns that may arise from distributed RES
cyber-interconnections [17], and develops reference ar-
chitectures to address these vulnerabilities [18]. Example
areas of concern are malware protection and detection,
data integrity, device and data authenticity.

Based on security requirements/outcomes of different
attack/concern scenarios and standards/best-practices,
cybersecurity capabilities need to include analysis and
visualization, authentication and access control, behav-
ioral monitoring, command registers and data historians,
data integrity, and malware detection [19]–[21]. Fig. 3
shows how the desired cybersecurity capabilities may
be deployed to protect not only utility systems and
distributed RES, but also microgrid and behind-the-meter
resources and loads [18].

Fig. 2. An example concept of a ﬂexible and agile platform able to
adapt to diversifying and expanding threats to power system operation.

security lapses, and inconveniences. Smart grid frame-
works and algorithms need to be encompassed into
smart cities and engineered to leverage maturation of
microgrid technologies, asset management, and increas-
ing customer-ownership of viable, resiliency-enabling
energy resources. For example, the smart and automated
generation ﬂeet continuity of power supply to critical
loads, during and after extreme events, must be driven
by intelligent optimization algorithms based on multi-
dimensional data resources, probabilistic asset availabil-
ity forecasting, and resiliency-metrics driven restoration.
A graphical illustration of such approach is presented in
Fig. 2. The goal from a technology development perspec-
tive should be to create ﬂexible and agile platforms that
can adapt to diversifying and expanding threats to power
system and smart cities operations, and offer just-in-time
and post-event intelligence that would aid optimally and
securely utilities and smart cities units restoration and
recovery management processes, i.e., minimizing down-
time, operational risks, further exposure to vulnerability,
and cost incurred due to the event. Such platforms will
need to encompass bulk power systems and distribution
feeder-level control, self-contained community microgrid
formation with multiple points of common coupling to
the surrounding distribution grid, support integration of
a ﬂeet of multiple PV systems (able to provide power to
critical loads during grid outages), and behind-the-meter
resources and customer-owned RES and storage.
planning-based
of

and
operation-based platforms supporting RES inclusion
resilience
requires, not only the incorporation of
enhancement strategies, but also needs to encompass
cybersecurity practices and standards able to mitigate
growing threats. Existing approaches to mitigate attacks
mainly focus on two aspects: (1) resilience control and
estimation strategies by excluding the attacked part and
adapting optimized control and estimation strategies
under attacks, and (2) attack detection by monitoring

development

both

The

4

Fig. 3. Cybersecurity capabilities deployed in utility and microgrid infrastructures [18].

B. Development of an innovation ecosystem for future
oil drilling free and all-renewable energy grid.

Climate change, corporate social responsibility, falling
renewable costs, and the drive to diversify have renewed
many oil and gas companies’ interest in the renewable
energy sector. In addition, the growing energy demand
drives RES usage to keep increasing. For example, the
U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) indicates
that, in 2019, wind was responsible for generating ap-
proximately 42% of RES generated power at utility-
scale facilities in the U.S., and 7.3% of the total U.S.
electricity generation, making it the most popular RES
[4].

Although RES integration aids in accommodating
an increasing power demand, their volatile intermittent
nature causes a mismatch between supply and demand.
Traditionally, alternating current (AC) electric power
systems rely on synchronous generators to provide grid
stability, and thus achieving an all-renewable energy
grid will require to maintain the system stability. The
replacement of synchronous machines with PV and wind
systems will affect the grid stability since synchronous
generators inherently provide the inertial response to
power systems. For example, short-term wind power
ﬂuctuations occur on a time-scale during which load
balancing methods do not yet operate. Since the power
system is mainly governed by synchronous inertia, in
order to ensure system stability, certain aspects of the
electric grid need to be taken into consideration for RES
integration (e.g., optimal location, power ﬂow, generation
variance, etc.) [22].

Overall, removing synchronous power generators has
the consequent result of less system inertia with impacts
on transient and small-signal stability. However, if cor-
rectly designed, active power controllers for RES within
the future inverter-dominated grid can supply a synthetic
inertia response to stabilize frequency deviations and
maintain grid synchronization. In addition, solar PV
systems bolstered by energy storage solutions such as
battery energy storage systems (BESS), fuel cells, and
ﬂywheels, or derated from their maximum available
power capability, can provide synthetic inertia response
for under-frequency cases. While U.S. researchers and
ﬁrms are driving signiﬁcant
innovations in the RES
industry, the U.S. is currently trailing other countries
in developing the necessary ecosystem to support the
RES integration in the energy sector, and thus, future
smart cities [23], [24]. Germany, for example, is a world
leader in renewable energy and in the ﬁrst half of 2018
it produced enough electricity to power every household
in the country for a year. For the same year (2018),
RES accounted for about 11% of total U.S. energy
consumption (similar as in 2019 – 11.4%, shown in Fig.
4) and about 17% of electricity generation.

The signiﬁcance of RES as energy contributor and the
opportunities in driving an oil drilling-free ecosystem are
not fully understood or recognized by the society as a
whole. Consequently, the RES industry has suffered from
disconnected supply and value chains, and a lack of col-
laboration. It is essential to structure effective short- and
long- term plans for technology development as well as
integration and policy growth. Four primary barriers for

5

systematic approach, formulate and adopt technical, pub-
lic, and economic policies to accelerate the use of renew-
able energy, and develop education programs to train the
next generation of power and energy systems engineers.
As world urbanization continually grows, smart cities
supporting a secure and resilient electric grid will offer
an attractive solution that can contribute in economic
growth, increased efﬁciency of energy and transportation
systems, and promote sustainable development.

In terms of anticipated impacts, developments in this
area will further lead to: (1) greater clarity and improved
understanding of the fundamental gaps in the power
system infrastructures and how concerted engineering
methods can result in revolutionary improvements in the
reliability, efﬁciency, and resiliency of the fully RES-
supported critical city infrastructure, (2) convene and
co-development of the complementary skills needed to
address the current and future challenges as well as foster
and grow effective relationships with all stakeholders
involved, and (3) preparation of the broader community
to adopt the resulting technologies in a timely manner.
Societal impact can be achieved by: (1) conducting an
inventory of perceived challenges among industry stake-
holders to determine prioritized challenges; (2) providing
support to industry through advocacy and education; and
(3) creating talent pipelines that support industry needs
while promoting diversity in the energy sector.

Interdisciplinary environments will facilitate bridging
multiple disciplines and viewpoints to enrich the impact
of the anticipated research and development as well as
learning experiences. Speciﬁcally, it would necessary to
draw on the strengths of multiple academic disciplines
and collaborations including electrical (e.g., impact of
RES generation on the stability of electromechanical
oscillation), mechanical (e.g., assessing structural re-
silience of offshore wind turbines), computer engineer-
ing (e.g., defense-in-depth strategies to establish attack-
resilient and self-healing security frameworks), social
sciences (e.g., uneven recovery after hurricanes has only
deepened inequalities based on race and class), and
government and industrial stakeholders (e.g., ensure that
research outcomes truly represents national needs and
urgency). This broad coalition is necessary to realize
a convergent research approach and lead to signiﬁcant
societal impact. In terms of education, interdisciplinary
courses merging concepts together from various disci-
plines will become a priority in order students to acquire
more knowledge and skills in the area [25].

Looking broadly at

the goals of security and re-
siliency in energy systems utilized in industrial appli-
cations and smart city ecosystems, there are two areas
where signiﬁcant progress must still be made, as shown
in Fig. 5. First,
increasing the resilience of critical
systems to high-impact low-probability adverse events

Fig. 4. U.S. primary energy consumption by energy source, 2019. Sum
of components may not equal 100% because of independent rounding.
Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) [4].

the innovative ecosystem include: (1) the fragmentation
of the RES industry for the energy sector, (2) gaps in
RES research and manufacturing capabilities, (3) lacks
of business models, public understanding, policies and
investment interests, and (4) workforce availability and
talent development challenges. It is critical that govern-
ments, through public-private partnerships, address these
barriers to enable secure and resilient electric grid and
capture economic beneﬁt from translating RES research
and development into new manufacturing employment
and investment.

III. STEPS FORWARD

While solar and other forms of RES are growing
rapidly, they are primarily providing off-take energy and,
as yet, are largely not integrated into grid operations, nor
do they contribute in any signiﬁcant way to electric and
cities systems resiliency. It is critical to effectively utilize
RES as a fully integrated grid operating asset and a
resource for enhancing security, reliability, and resilience
in a substantial and multi-faceted effort. It is important
to expand current utility forecasting capabilities not only
in terms of assets, but also develop probabilistic models
for asset availability, accessibility, and usability during
and succeeding a major disaster. The task is complex and
is dependent on multiple, interacting and often counter-
intuitive correlations between variables. Thus, there is a
need to develop new indices for security and resilience,
suited for the extreme event challenges of resulting
from adverse events, either malicious or not, such as
cyber-attacks and natural hazards including droughts,
earthquakes, ﬂoods, hurricanes, tornadoes, and ﬁres.

Future research in the area needs to develop interdis-
ciplinary and innovative technologies for secure and re-
silient electric grid with 100% renewable energy vision;
put people in the loop in a cyberphysical human-centered

petroleum37%nuclear electric power 8%coal11%renewable energy11%natural gas32%20%-wood 20%-biofuels4%-biomass waste24%-wind22%-hydroelectric9%-solar2%-geothermaltotal = 100.2 quadrillionBritish thermal units (Btu)total = 11.4 quadrillion Btu6

of state-of-the-art attack detection/prevention methods,
and increasing customer-ownership of viable, resiliency-
enabling energy resources. For example, smart and auto-
mated generation ﬂeet continuity of power supply to crit-
ical loads, during and after extreme events, can be driven
by intelligent optimization algorithms based on multi-
dimensional data resources and metrics [27]. Adding lay-
ers of probabilistic asset availability forecasting can lead
to a better demonstration of metrics-driven monitoring
and restoration. Security and resiliency metrics will be
foundational components of future technology platforms
which would glue together complex and interacting
decision variables. This puts security and resiliency of
the bulk power system and distribution systems of smart
cities at the heart of the modernization challenges.

REFERENCES

[1] R. Smith, “US risks national blackout from small-scale attack,”

Wall Street Journal, vol. 12, 2014.

[2] M. Woodward and C. Marcy. Hurricane Michael caused 1.7
million electricity outages in the Southeast United States.
[Online]. Available: https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.
php?id=37332

[3] D. Founda and C. Giannakopoulos, “The exceptionally hot sum-
mer of 2007 in Athens, Greece—A typical summer in the future
climate?” Global and planetary change, vol. 67, no. 3-4, pp.
227–236, 2009.

[4] U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). Generation from
[Online]. Available:

renewable sources: Total
https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/renewable-sources/

(all sectors).

[5] I. Zografopoulos, J. Ospina, X. Liu, and C. Konstantinou,
“Cyber-physical energy systems security: Threat modeling, risk
assessment, resources, metrics, and case studies,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.10198, 2021.

[6] S. Muyeen and S. Rahman, Communication, control and security
challenges for the smart grid. The Institution of Engineering
and Technology, 2017.

[7] R. Chang, Y. Yuan, H. Lv, W. Yin, and S. X. Yang, “Selling the
smart grid—part 1: Why consumers must buy in for the smart
grid to succeed,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 1,
no. 2, pp. 24–31, 2012.

[8] Y. Yuan, R. Chang, H. Lv, W. Yin, and S. X. Yang, “Selling the
smart grid-part 2: How consumers will interact with the smart
grid,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 1, no. 3, pp.
20–28, 2012.

[9] R. Arghandeh, A. Von Meier, L. Mehrmanesh, and L. Mili, “On
the deﬁnition of cyber-physical resilience in power systems,”
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 58, pp. 1060–
1069, 2016.

[10] N. Bhusal, M. Abdelmalak, M. Kamruzzaman, and M. Benidris,
“Power system resilience: Current practices, challenges, and
future directions,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 18 064–18 086, 2020.
[11] R. k. Kaur, L. K. Singh, and B. Pandey, “Security analysis
of smart grids: Successes and challenges,” IEEE Consumer
Electronics Magazine, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 10–15, 2019.

[12] J. Ospina, X. Liu, C. Konstantinou, and Y. Dvorkin, “On the
feasibility of load-changing attacks in power systems during the
covid-19 pandemic,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 2545–2563, 2021.
spill
[Online]. Available: https://apnews.com/

[13] C. Burdeau. BP estimates cost of 2010 Gulf oil

at $61.6 billion.
15247c9394684b86baf0fff7fa2489c7

[14] D. Gritzalis, M. Theocharidou, and G. Stergiopoulos, Critical

Infrastructure Security and Resilience. Springer, 2019.

Fig. 5. Outcome of future secure and resilient energy systems.

is of paramount

(e.g., cyber-attacks, weather-induced failures and faults,
natural hazards, etc.) is a major priority for CPES and
of high signiﬁcance for safeguarding national economic
and security. Such events can lead, for example,
to
escalating instability in system dynamics and cause
large-area failures. It
importance to
develop resilient and operational-secure strategy methods
for electric grid applications in smart city environments
considering the renewable future of the oil and gas
industry. These methods will take into consideration of
offshore installations within the oil and gas industry
and how to reuse these structures for RES,
leading
to a “green decommissioning” and to a “green econ-
omy”. Towards this energy transition framework, it is
necessary to encounter erratic events as well as the
presence of modeling weather uncertainty. As a result,
future methodologies would require to address disruptive
events by exploiting both localized and supervisory RES
schemes, and prevent them from escalating into system
failures.

Second, a resilient electric grid should eliminate, or at
least signiﬁcantly reduce, impacts induced from extreme
weather- and cyber- based events. Thus, it is important
to expand current utility forecasting capabilities not only
in terms of assets, but also develop probabilistic models
for asset availability, accessibility, and usability during
and succeeding a major disaster. The task is complex and
is dependent on multiple, interacting and often counter-
intuitive correlations between variables. Thus, there is a
need to develop new indices for security and resilience,
suited for the weather challenges and technological ad-
vancements of each smart city. Therefore, in the future,
it would necessary to develop smarter and cost-effective
strategies within comprehensive frameworks and algo-
rithms for enabling resiliency of RES-based power sys-
tems – encompassing time-span from planning to post-
event restoration and recovery that would minimize the
power outages [26]. A framework based on security
and resiliency metrics can be engineered to leverage
maturation of microgrid technologies, asset management,
conformation to cybersecurity standards and support

[15] K. Stouffer, S. Lightman, V. Pillitteri, M. Abrams, and A. Hahn,
“NIST special publication 800-82, revision 2: Guide to industrial
control systems (ICS) security,” National Institute of Standards
and Technology, 2014.

7

[16] Oil

and Natural Gas Subsector Coordinating Council
the
[Online]. Available:

(ONG SCC). Defense-in-Depth: Cybersecurity
Natural Gas & Oil
https://www.api.org/news-policy-and-issues/cybersecurity
[17] I. Zografopoulos and C. Konstantinou, “DERauth: a battery-
based authentication scheme for distributed energy resources,”
in 2020 IEEE Computer Society Annual Symposium on VLSI
(ISVLSI).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 560–567.

Industry.

in

[18] National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence - NIST. Securing
the IIoT - Cybersecurity for DERs.
[Online]. Available:
https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use-cases/energy-sector/iiot
[19] Z. Li, M. Shahidehpour, and F. Aminifar, “Cybersecurity in
distributed power systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 105,
no. 7, pp. 1367–1388, 2017.

[20] A. P. Kuruvila,

I. Zografopoulos, K. Basu, and C. Kon-
stantinou, “Hardware-assisted detection of ﬁrmware attacks
in inverter-based cyberphysical microgrids,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.07691, 2020.

[21] C. Konstantinou and S. P. Mohanty, “Cybersecurity for the smart

grid.” IEEE Computer, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 10–12, 2020.

[22] X. Liu, J. Ospina, and C. Konstantinou, “Deep reinforcement
learning for cybersecurity assessment of wind integrated power
systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 208 378–208 394, 2020.
[23] S. P. Mohanty, U. Choppali, and E. Kougianos, “Everything you
wanted to know about smart cities: The internet of things is the
backbone,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 5, no. 3,
pp. 60–70, 2016.

[24] S. K. Ram, B. B. Das, K. Mahapatra, S. P. Mohanty, and
U. Choppali, “Energy perspectives in iot driven smart villages
and smart cities,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, pp. 1–
1, 2020.

[25] C. Konstantinou, “Cyber-physical systems security education
through hands-on lab exercises,” IEEE Design Test, vol. 37, no. 6,
pp. 47–55, 2020.

[26] J. Stright, P. Cheetham, and C. Konstantinou, “Defensive cost-
beneﬁt analysis of smart grid digital functionalities,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2008.12843, 2020.

[27] O. M. Anubi and C. Konstantinou, “Enhanced Resilient State
Estimation Using Data-Driven Auxiliary Models,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 639–647,
2020.

