1

Cyber-Physical Energy Systems Security:
Threat Modeling, Risk Assessment, Resources,
Metrics, and Case Studies

Ioannis Zografopoulos, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Juan Ospina, Member, IEEE, XiaoRui
Liu, Student Member, IEEE, and Charalambos Konstantinou, Senior Member, IEEE

1
2
0
2

b
e
F
9
1

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

2
v
8
9
1
0
1
.
1
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Cyber-physical systems (CPS) are interconnected
architectures that employ analog, digital, and communication re-
sources for their interaction with the physical environment. CPS
are the backbone of enterprise, industrial, and critical infrastruc-
ture. Thus, their vital importance makes them prominent targets
for malicious attacks aiming to disrupt their operations. Attacks
targeting cyber-physical energy systems (CPES), given their
mission-critical nature, can have disastrous consequences. The
security of CPES can be enhanced leveraging testbed capabilities
to replicate power system operations, discover vulnerabilities,
develop security countermeasures, and evaluate grid operation
under fault-induced or maliciously constructed scenarios. In this
paper, we provide a comprehensive overview of the CPS security
landscape with emphasis on CPES. Speciﬁcally, we demonstrate
a threat modeling methodology to accurately represent the CPS
elements, their interdependencies, as well as the possible attack
entry points and system vulnerabilities. Leveraging the threat
model
formulation, we present a CPS framework designed
to delineate the hardware, software, and modeling resources
required to simulate the CPS and construct high-ﬁdelity models
which can be used to evaluate the system’s performance under
adverse scenarios. The system performance is assessed using
scenario-speciﬁc metrics, while risk assessment enables system
vulnerability prioritization factoring the impact on the system
operation. The overarching framework for modeling, simulating,
assessing, and mitigating attacks in a CPS is illustrated using
four representative attack scenarios targeting CPES. The key
objective of this paper is to demonstrate a step-by-step process
that can be used to enact in-depth cybersecurity analyses, thus
leading to more resilient and secure CPS.

Index Terms—Cyber-physical systems, security, threat model-

ing, power grid, simulation, risk assessment, testbeds.

I. INTRODUCTION

A. Background and Motivation

Over the past years, electric power systems (EPS) have
diverged from a unidirectional generation and transmission
model towards a more distributed architecture that supports
traditional generation sources as well as distributed energy
resources (DERs) in the form of distributed generation (DG),
such as PV and wind, and distributed storage (DS) sources,
such as battery energy storage systems (BESS) and thermal
energy storage systems (TESS). The transformation of EPS to
cyber-physical energy systems (CPES) is primarily enabled
due to the introduction of information and communication
technologies (ICT), automated control systems, remote sens-
ing, and embedded industrial
internet-of-things (IIoT) de-
vices. According to the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) [1], cyber-physical systems (CPS) refer
to architectures that incorporate digital, analog, and physical

components. The interaction of these components is deter-
mined by the dynamics of the system and the rules which
orchestrate its operation. CPES are energy-focused engineered
systems that are transforming the way traditional EPS operate
by seamlessly integrating physical entities with human, digi-
tal, and networking components designed to operate through
integrated physics and computational logic. As such, CPES
contribute signiﬁcantly towards the EPS modernization allow-
ing for better planning, more ﬂexible control, cyber-secure
operations, system-wide optimization, transactive energy sys-
tems (TES), improvements in power quality, system reliability
enhancements, resiliency, interoperability, and cleaner energy
generation.

The security of CPS presents signiﬁcant challenges in
controlling and maintaining secure access to critical system
resources and services (e.g., for CPES: generation reserves,
frequency stability controls, power line protection, etc.), as
well as ensuring the conﬁdentiality, accessibility, and integrity
of the information exchanged (e.g., control signals of su-
pervisory control and data acquisition – SCADA systems).
CPS, being large-scale complex systems of systems, employ
numerous computing components such as remote terminal
units (RTUs), programmable logic controllers (PLCs), and
intelligent electronic devices (IEDs) that are often designed
without security in mind. Typically, the hardware, software,
and communication interfaces of these devices are developed
utilizing commercial off-the-shelf components [2]. Thus, vul-
nerabilities within such components can be ported to the
CPS environments creating potential entry points for malicious
adversaries1 aiming to disrupt CPS operations. An indicative
incident of malicious behavior targeting CPS operation was
reported in March 2019. Attackers targeted the United States
(U.S.) grid infrastructure and performed a denial-of-service
(DoS) attack through the exploitation of a known CPES
vulnerability, namely a web interface ﬁrewall vulnerability [3],
[4]. The attack resulted in the loss of communication between
the utility’s generation assets and the energy management
system [5], causing brief interruptions in the utility’s service.
The number of cyber-attacks where adversaries exploit known
and existing vulnerabilities to compromise CPS is increasing.
This fact is validated by security reports stating that “99%
of the vulnerabilities exploited in 2020 are known to security
professionals, while zero-day vulnerabilities only account for
the 0.4% of vulnerabilities exposed during the past decade”

1Throughout the paper, we use the terms adversary, threat actor, and

attacker interchangeably.

 
 
 
 
 
 
[6].

The importance of CPS, and CPES in particular, for eco-
nomic prosperity and public health at the national, state, and
local level can motivate attackers to compromise such systems
in order to obtain ﬁnancial or political gains. Hence, the evalu-
ation of the CPES robustness and resilience against attacks in
realistic scenarios is of paramount importance. At the same
time, the quantiﬁcation of cybersecurity risks is becoming
more complex and challenging as EPS – also referred to as
the “largest interconnected machine on earth” [7] – integrate
numerous cyber-components at all levels and scales. In the
past, the simulation of speciﬁc abnormal scenarios (e.g., faults,
overvoltage conditions, frequency ﬂuctuations, etc.) was sufﬁ-
cient to provide insights into EPS operations. However, current
advances towards intelligent and interconnected CPES require
more accurate models and representations capable of capturing
the dynamic behavior of these interoperable systems. The
enhancement of CPES security and reliability requires constant
probing for potential weaknesses [8]. Security studies need to
reﬂect the nature of the CPES infrastructure in actual testing
environments that support the interfacing of actual hardware
devices designed to operate in the ‘real’ system. In this context,
hardware-in-the-loop (HIL) testbeds are effective in providing
testing capabilities for evaluating the synergistic relationship
between physical and virtual components in controlled en-
vironments. Security-oriented HIL testbeds are invaluable in
performing cybersecurity and risk analyses, identifying system
vulnerabilities in various layers (e.g., hardware, ﬁrmware,
software, protocol, process), implementing intrusion detection
and prevention algorithms, and assessing the efﬁciency of
mitigation techniques without inducing excessive economic
burdens or safety hazards [2], [9].

The primary motivation of this paper is to develop a
framework, which bridges theoretical and simulation-based
security case studies and evaluates CPS system behavior
leveraging testbed environments, leading to more secure CPES
architectures. In order for testbeds to reliably capture the
characteristics of the cyber-physical environment, testing and
experimental case studies need to be described and mod-
eled considering both the cyber and physical domains. The
case studies require detailed descriptions of the resources
and metrics that will be utilized for evaluating the CPES
performance, reliability, and resilience. In addition, the testing
setup must also capture the threat modeling characteristics
of the adversary and the attack methodology. In terms of
a potential adversary, the threat modeling characteristics are
adversarial knowledge, resources, access to the system, and
speciﬁcity. As for the attack methodology, the threat modeling
characteristics include the attack frequency, reproducibility,
discoverability, target level, attacked asset, attack techniques,
and premise. Doing so, in a holistic and step-by-step approach,
allows researchers and stakeholders to thoroughly examine and
uncover security risks existing in the CPES under evaluation.

B. Research Contribution and Overview

The underlying goal of this manuscript is to provide a
complete and detailed presentation of CPS security research

2

studies by demonstrating a modular framework for assess-
ing CPS security in the context of CPES. To this end, the
paper describes all the required components for evaluating
the behavior and performance of CPES under diverse and
adverse operational scenarios. The framework exhibits the
modeling techniques used to represent the cyber and physical
domains of the system, considers the resources used to model
the CPES, and presents essential evaluation metrics for each
corresponding case study. The contributions of this work,
focusing on CPES security, can be summarized as follows:
• A literature review is provided that presents the research
efforts in the area of CPS and CPES security, describes cyber-
physical testbeds developed by prominent research centers and
laboratories around the world, and illustrates current threat and
risk modeling approaches widely used in the industry.
• A threat modeling methodology is proposed, comprised of
two major parts, the adversary model and the attack model,
allowing for an inclusive evaluation of malicious attack strate-
gies.
• Leveraging our threat modeling approach, a risk assessment
process is provided that takes into account risks related to
the effectiveness of an attack, the targeted system component,
and the criticality of the cyber-physical process being com-
promised.
• A framework is described that elucidates the crucial com-
ponents and resources needed to accurately characterize CPS,
making it essential for evaluating numerous studies (e.g.,
cyber, control, etc.). It is important to note that the proposed
CPS framework can be used to characterize CPS in other
sectors such as healthcare and transportation, but in this work,
it is evaluated speciﬁcally for CPES.
• Four illustrative CPES attack case studies are presented,
demonstrating the practicality of the CPS framework. For
each case study, we provide the corresponding background
and mathematical formulation, threat model, attack setup, and
risk assessment. We also describe how each stage of the CPS
analysis framework is applied to thoroughly model the speciﬁc
characteristics of each case study.

A schematic overview of this paper is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Section II presents the current state of CPES testbed research,
a literature review of CPES security studies, and preliminary
information for threat analysis and risk assessment of CPS.
Section III delineates our comprehensive threat modeling
and risk assessment methodology. Section IV provides the
description of the proposed CPS framework with details on
the modeling, resources, and performance metrics. In Section
V, we discuss the background information and mathematical
formulation for attack cases targeting CPES and present such
simulated test case scenarios accompanied by their experimen-
tal results implemented using the developed CPS framework.
Finally, Section VI concludes this work.

II. CYBER-PHYSICAL ENERGY SYSTEMS (CPES):
TESTBEDS, STUDIES, AND SECURITY ANALYSIS

This section provides an overview of different CPES
testbeds developed by various research centers and presents
their research objectives alongside the equipment used to

3

Fig. 1: Roadmap of the paper.

realize them. We deﬁne different classes of CPES security
studies from literature and discuss prominent examples from
such categories. Furthermore, we describe threat modeling
and risk assessment methodologies and discuss how they can
support security studies by deﬁning, preventing, and mitigating
threats.

A. CPES Testbeds

Throughout the years, EPS were designed and simulated
following unidirectional structures in which power is generated
at large bulk power generation facilities and then delivered
through different stages of transmission and radial distribu-
tion systems to consumers. Minimum efforts were exerted to
facilitate the integration of renewable energy sources (RES)
and DERs [10]. However, the increasing penetration of RES
and DERs along with the grid modernization efforts through
ICT, increase the complexity of EPS [11]. On the one hand,
RES and DERs can be used to meet consumer demands
providing reliable, economic, and environmentally friendlier
energy. On the other hand, attackers can exploit the fact that
these resources are not centrally controlled (i.e., controlled
directly by utilities) and stealthily plant
their attacks on
vulnerable system assets [12], [13]. The complex nature of
modern EPS introduces a variety of potential entry points for
attacks due to the fact that these systems depend on ICT for
the communication between system assets [14]. Although the
exigency for secure and resilient EPS is evident, our limited
experience with dealing and coordinating such sophisticated
architectures exacerbates the situation. We lack mechanisms to
detect and mitigate the impact of unexpected adverse events on
power system operation. The design of power system monitor-
ing, control, and estimation algorithms, which are inherently
secure, regardless of relying on CPES interconnected nature,
relies heavily on the existence of representative frameworks

where current and future security features and methodologies
can be developed and evaluated.

CPES testbeds can provide an ideal environment where thor-
ough system evaluations can be performed without any impact
on the actual power system. The use of testbeds helps de-risk
certain procedures before migration to the actual system, and
avoid any potential adverse impact they could inﬂict. Such
procedures include the testing and impact evaluation of new
EPS equipment (e.g., integration of PV parks, electric vehicles
– EV charging stations, etc.), new control strategies (e.g.,
power dispatch prioritization between DER, RES, or other
power generation resources), and mitigation methodologies
for unexpected events (e.g., faults, equipment failures, cyber-
attacks, etc.). The main structural components of such cyber-
physical testbeds are depicted in Fig. 2. Below, we provide a
list of the possible security-related tasks that can be performed
on CPES testbeds:

• Train users and stakeholders in a simulated/emulated CPES
environment.
• Validate interoperable systems’ performance holistically,
i.e., from the lowest level of operation (e.g., sensor, actuators,
process, etc.) to the highest levels including communication
between assets, distributed control, and monitoring applica-
tions.
• Develop and validate cyber-physical metrics and examine
system security.
• Test novel security mechanisms such as intrusion detection
and prevention systems (IDS/IPS), authentication protocols,
and encryption algorithms.
• Evaluate the impact of attacks on the cyber and physical
domains of the EPS.
• Examine the effectiveness of mitigation strategies against
adverse cyber-physical events.

The importance of cybersecurity research for CPS and crit-
ical CPES infrastructures has led many universities and U.S.

TABLE I: Cyber-physical testbed architectures, accuracy, repeatability, cost characteristics, and example testbeds with their
simulation resources.

4

Resources*

Year References

Testbed
Architecture

Hardware
Assisted

Software
Assisted

Hybrid: Physical
Hardware &
Simulated Cyber

Accuracy

Repeatability

Cost

High

Low

High

Medium

High

Low

Medium

Medium

Medium

Example
Testbed

INL

NREL

Texas
A&M
TU
Dortmund

FSU-CAPS

PNNL

PS: RTDS

NS: not applicable
PS: RTDS, Opal-RT
NS: not applicable

PS: RTDS

NS: OPNET

PS: Opal-RT

NS: OPNET
PS: RTDS, Opal-RT
NS: OPNET, EXataCPS

PS: Opal-RT

NS:OPNET, ns-2, ns-3

Hybrid:
Simulated
Hardware &
Physical Cyber
*PS, and NS stand for the corresponding CPS tetbeds’ power and network simulators.

HELICS

Medium

Medium

Low

PS: RTDS, Opal-RT
NS: OPNET, OMNeT

2015

[15]–[21]

2015

[22]–[24]

2014

[25], [26]

2014

[27], [28]

2013

[29]–[32]

2017

[33], [34]

2017

[35]–[39],
[40]

i) make decisions not only based on theoretical analyses but
practical studies leveraging the use of hardware resources,
ii) evaluate the CPS behavior under abnormal operational
scenarios without inhibiting the operation of the real system,
and iii) preemptively assess cyber-attack or fault mitigation
and control strategies before the corresponding hardware is
deployed to the ﬁeld, and thus, de-risk this cost-prohibitive
and unpredictable process. Hardware-assisted testbeds, how-
ever, suffer from three major disadvantages: i) they are not
cost-effective since they require the testbed components to
match the actual equipment deployed in the ﬁeld, ii) once
the equipment and testbed conﬁgurations are setup in-place,
any modiﬁcation or expansion of the system architecture can
be either time-consuming or practically and economically
infeasible, and iii) scalability issues of representing large-scale
EPS due to the requirement of procuring more assets (e.g.,
generators, inverters, etc.).

A typical example of a hardware-assisted research labora-
tory that leverages actual operational equipment to perform
CPES security research is the Idaho National Laboratory (INL)
of the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) [15]. INL’s Power
and Energy Real-Time Laboratory [16], [17], alongside their
nuclear laboratory [18], [19] and microgrid (MG) testbed [20],
[21], allow the simulation of realistic scenarios supported
by actual hardware equipment and data generation routines.
The real-time simulation capabilities of INL’s testbeds allow
researchers to create sophisticated scenarios involving power
hardware devices that are interfaced with real-time simu-
lation environments via HIL methodologies such as power
hardware-in-the-loop (PHIL) and controller hardware-in-the-
loop (CHIL) [17]. HIL allows controllers (CHIL) and parts
of EPS (PHIL) to be extensively tested before their ﬁnal
integration to the main grid [42]. The National Renewable
Energy Laboratory (NREL) of DOE also includes hardware-

Fig. 2: Cyber-physical testbed components for EPS research.

national laboratories to develop in-house testbeds, not only
for research but also for education and training purposes [41].
A variety of testbeds have been designed and implemented
based on the application ﬁeld and the research objectives.
In Table I, we provide a summary of some of the existing
real-time simulation CPS testbeds along with their inherent
resources (i.e., simulation capabilities). We also categorize the
cyber-physical testbeds based on their architecture, cost, and
accuracy characteristics. Additionally, we present an in-depth
overview of the differences between hardware and software-
assisted testbeds.

Hardware-assisted testbeds are designed to explicitly study
CPS while mostly incorporating several actual physical com-
ponents encountered in the ﬁeld. For instance, CPES hardware-
assisted testbeds integrate physical equipment such as gen-
erators, relays, switchgear, energy storage systems – ESS,
PV panels, wind turbines, etc. By replicating the behavior
of the actual system with a considerable amount of physical
equipment, these testbeds provide stakeholders the ability to:

assisted testbeds [22]. NREL’s Flatirons campus specializes
in designing, analyzing, and providing accurate simulation
models for wind turbines, hydropower, and hydrokinetic gener-
ation plants [23]. Their unique facilities drive the improvement
of their high-ﬁdelity simulation models, which are cross-
referenced to real assets, providing invaluable tools for power
engineers performing system analyses incorporating off-shore,
or distributed hydro and wind generation [24]. The actual
power system assets of wind turbines and hydro-plants, as well
as their simulation models, can be leveraged to investigate
the potential impact of component failures or cyber-attack
incidents with minimum cost, and most importantly, without
compromising the actual EPS operation.

Hardware-assisted CPES testbeds do not exclusively utilize
physical equipment. In most cases, the conducted research
is supported by simulation software enabling the analysis
of more complex systems. Since an actual duplicate of an
operational CPS in the lab is typically infeasible,
in the
past years, a high number of software-based CPS testbeds
have been developed following,
the notion of digital-twin
systems [43], [44]. The main difference between software-
assisted testbeds and their hardware-assisted counterparts is
that they do not possess any actual ﬁeld equipment, thus
limiting their testing scenarios. Moreover, software-assisted
testbeds can be further segmented into sub-categories based
on the simulation platform utilized for the system analysis.
Some of them utilize widely available software simulators,
e.g., Matlab/Simulink, PowerWorld, PSSE, etc., while other
rely on real-time simulators (RTS) such as Opal-RT, RTDS,
Typhoon, and Speedgoat. The main advantage of software-
based CPS testbeds, compared to hardware-based testbeds, is
the increased ﬂexibility in designing, modifying, and scaling
the systems under test. Also, their cost can be signiﬁcantly
lower for simulating large-scale CPES. However, the validity
of the software-based simulated results relies heavily on the ﬁ-
delity of the models (for emulation, virtualization, etc.) used to
represent the corresponding real systems under investigation.
Examples of testbed environments with extensive CPS sim-
ulation capabilities include the ones at Texas A&M and TU
Dortmund. At the Texas A&M CPS testbed, despite the lack
of actual EPS equipment, CPES technologies such as smart
grid controllers and RES can be virtualized and evaluated
using software-based implementations. The testbed also in-
cludes RTS systems (RTDS ) and supports the modeling of
communications of CPES components via network simulators
(OPNET ). Furthermore, it allows researchers to evaluate how
communication-enabled devices expand the threat surface [25].
The rapid penetration of ICT technologies in CPS is driving
the design and development of large-scale software-deﬁned
network (SDN) testbeds [45]. In such SDN-type testbeds,
researchers can evaluate novel network technologies, com-
munication protocols, custom data routing algorithms, etc.
An example of such an environment is the SDN4SmartGrids
CPS testbed at TU Dortmund, where both SDNs and power
system RTS are employed for experimentation with ICT-based
smart grid applications [27]. In particular, the TU Dortmund’s
testbed is comprised of a RTS (Opal-RT ) responsible for
simulating the power system components. The infrastructure

5

emulating the network topology and communication between
the simulated grid assets (e.g., EVs, ESS, etc.), management
systems, and telemetry units (e.g, phasor measurement units –
PMUs, advanced metering infrastructure – AMI, etc.) is im-
plemented using the SDN and the OPNET network simulator
[28].

In order to bridge the gap between the hardware and
software-assisted CPS testbed methodologies, hybrid testbeds
are considered as an effective alternative. As their name
implies, hybrid approaches trade-off the utilization of the
physical components, that can be found at the transmission
and distribution (T&D) level of CPES, with the utilization of
simulators and software suites designed to accurately represent
the behavior of real energy systems. Hybrid testbeds enable
diverse security investigations that can focus on the physical-
system (e.g., programmable controllers, IEDs, grid assets,
etc.), the cyber-system (i.e., SCADA communications, teleme-
try and remote control of assets, monitoring and measurement
components, etc.), or any combination of the two. The main
advantage of such testbeds is that they provide re-conﬁgurable
platforms that can scale up, using simulation,
to realistic
systems’ sizes, while also retaining the ability to investigate,
with high granularity,
the individual security and control
properties present in physical devices. Consequently, hybrid
CPS testbeds can evaluate holistically the impact of cyber-
attacks on CPES, without any of the limitations encountered
in hardware-assisted or software-assisted testbeds.

A prime example of a hybrid CPES testbed framework
is HELICS [35], [36]. The HELICS infrastructure enables
the integration of different RTS operating at different time-
steps as well as the interconnection of T&D system com-
ponents. By timely simulating (depending on the temporal
constraints) complex T&D architectures, cybersecurity assess-
ments, including real-time impact analysis and risk mitigation
strategies, can be conducted providing meaningful insights
regarding the behavior of CPES [37]–[39]. The Paciﬁc North-
west National Laboratory (PNNL) also features a hybrid
testbed leveraging the aforementioned advantages. The testbed
facilitates a variety of cybersecurity studies [33], and provides
an effective framework for system vulnerability assessments,
interactive simulations of CPES environments, threat scenario
analyses, and risk mitigation strategy evaluations.

The facilities of the Center for Advanced Power Systems
(CAPS) of Florida State University (FSU) also include a
hybrid testbed setup. The testbed supports the use of RTS,
based on the RTDS and Opal-RT platforms, power sys-
tem simulation software such as OpenDSS, PSCAD/EMTDC,
Matlab/Simulink, RT-Lab, RSCAD/RTDSphysical, and EPS
components including generators, inverters, and ﬂexible AC
transmission systems (FACTS) [29]. The center’s infrastruc-
ture can be segregated into two main subsystems able to per-
form both real-time and HIL simulations. The ﬁrst subsystem
is composed of 15 RTDS -enabled racks, each consisting of
around 26-30 parallel processors. The subsystem can support
real-time simulations comprised of more than 1, 000 electrical
nodes (e.g., measurement points) and 5, 000 control units
at time-steps in the range of 50µs. It should be noted that
for time-critical implementations, such as power electronics

converters, the time-step of real-time simulation can be further
reduced in the vicinity of 1µs. Fiber-optic networks facilitate
the interconnection between the RTS and the physical EPS
equipment. Namely, the physical equipment of the testbed
includes a 4.16 kV distribution system, a 7.5 MVA on-site ser-
vice transformer, a 5 MW variable-voltage variable-frequency
converter, a 5 MW dynamometer, and a 1.5 MVA experimental
bus at 480 Vac [30]. The second subsystem includes three
Opal-RT -enabled racks, supported by multiple processor units
along with Xilinx ﬁeld-programmable gate array (FPGA) com-
putation units. The FPGA hardware accelerators perform the
simulation of high-frequency power electronic converters with
stringent timing constraints (i.e., in the ns range), while the rest
of the EPS is simulated using µs time-steps. Both subsystems
have support for multiple industrial protocols utilized for the
communications between the physical or simulated EPS assets.
Advanced control schemes and experimentation with com-
munication network components are also supported via HIL
simulations [31], [46]. Additionally, the impact of unexpected
failures or cyber-attacks targeted at these components can be
examined in a controlled environment where minimum risk
exists [32].

B. CPES Security Studies

During the past decade, signiﬁcant effort has been exerted
into CPES security studies with the objective of enhancing
CPES resiliency and alleviating cybersecurity vulnerabilities.
For instance, a comprehensive work reviewing cybersecurity
vulnerabilities and solutions for smart grid deployments is
presented in [75]. Security solution evaluation, system threat
classiﬁcation, and future cybersecurity research directions are
also considered. The authors in [76], investigate cyber-attacks
on IoT-enabled grid deployments. They discuss how advance-
ments in IoT technologies can drive the power grid moderniza-
tion process, but at the same time increase the system’s threat
surface given its interconnected topology encompassing mil-
lions of IoT nodes. Researchers in [77] examine the security of
modern power systems from the viewpoint of interconnection
with microgrids. Emphasis is given on the cybersecurity and
reliability challenges arising in these architectures. Essential
approaches (e.g.,
testbed-assisted security studies) are dis-
cussed to enhance the security of future power systems. In
addition, [78] provides a complete overview of the cyber-
threats encountered on the infrastructure, network protocols,
and application levels of power systems. Furthermore, attacks
targeting the data availability, integrity, and conﬁdentiality of
microgrids are discussed in [79].

In this section, we outline the main topics of existing
literature in the area of CPES security. More speciﬁcally, the
literature work is classiﬁed using the following categories: i)
studies investigating the exploitation of CPES vulnerabilities,
ii) studies evaluating the impact of cyber-attacks on CPES,
iii) studies proposing and assessing algorithms (e.g., anomaly
detection, IDS/IPS, etc.) for the detection of cyber-attacks, and
iv) studies focusing on mitigation and defense mechanisms.
In Table II we provide an overview of recent CPES security
studies classiﬁed under the four aforementioned categories.

6

1) Attacks Exploiting CPES Vulnerabilities: CPES are ad-
vancing towards decentralized interconnected systems in or-
der to support increasing power demand while minimizing
transmission losses, leverage MG deployments and their func-
tionalities (e.g., grid-connected or autonomous operations),
and incorporate DERs. In addition, to enhance CPES control,
reliability, and security, digital ICT equipment such as ad-
vanced measuring and monitoring units are being employed in
geographically dispersed locations of decentralized CPES. For
example, PMUs provide time-synchronized (using GPS) gran-
ular measurements for EPS related states including voltage,
current, and power magnitudes and phase angles. However,
it has been demonstrated that adversaries can leverage open-
source public resources to perform GPS spooﬁng attacks
against PMUs [47]. By introducing small undetectable timing
delays (in the µs range) in the measurement signals (within
the IEEE standard limits for synchrophasors C37.118 [80]), the
phase differences between actual and measured angles can be
signiﬁcantly altered exceeding allowed limits, tripping circuit
breakers (CBs), sectionalizing parts of the EPS, and causing
power outages (e.g., brownouts, blackouts) [81].

Moreover, in [48], researchers introduce a coordinated load
redistribution attack affecting power dispatch mechanisms. By
attacking generators or transmission lines while falsifying load
demand and line power ﬂows, system operators are misled into
increasing load curtailment. Furthermore, in [49], the authors
investigate two types of DoS attacks along with their impact
on EPS. The ﬁrst attack is assumed to be a stealthy false data
injection attack (FDIA) performed to mask the attack impact
from detection algorithms. The second, assumed as a non-
stealthy attack, aims to maximize the damage on power system
operation by targeting the most vulnerable transmission line,
impeding power dispatch, and causing load shedding. In [50],
the authors propose hybrid data integrity and data availability
attacks. They demonstrate how control center measurements
can be manipulated leading to undetectable FDIAs. In more
detail, by modifying some measurements (i.e., integrity attack)
while making some others unavailable to the state estimation
algorithm (i.e., availability attack), FDIAs can bypass bad data
detection algorithms.

Ubiquitous power electronics bring new challenges to CPES
operation [82]. Future CPES are expected to be inverter-
dominated systems. As such, vulnerabilities in such compo-
nents can lead to abnormal system operation. In [52], the
authors investigate how stealthy non-invasive attacks on grid-
tied inverters can compromise their nominal operation and
impact grid operation. Speciﬁcally, by spooﬁng the inverter’s
hall sensor they demonstrate ﬂuctuations in the output volt-
age, active and reactive power while also introducing low-
frequency harmonics to the grid. Similarly, by exploiting
a vulnerability in the authentication mechanism of General
Electric Multilin protection and control devices, the authors
in [83] show that remote or local attackers can obtain weakly
encrypted user passwords, which could then be reversed
allowing unauthorized access. Furthermore,
the authors in
[12], [13] show that by coordinating the power usage of
multiple devices, power reserve limits of EPS can be exceeded
causing tripping of lines and shedding of loads. A botnet

7

TABLE II: CPES security study categories and research examples.

Security Study Category

Attacks exploiting
CPES vulnerabilities

Evaluation of attack
impact on CPES

Attack detection
algorithms in CPES

Attack mitigations
and defenses in CPES

Example Literature
Low-budget GPS spooﬁng attacks
Load redistribution attacks
Coordinated DoS attacks
Data integrity attacks on state estimation
FDIAs with limited resources
Hall sensor spooﬁng attack
Graph-theoretic quantitative security assessment
Unsupervised learning-based evaluation
Simulation-based impact evaluation
Deep reinforcement learning analysis
Stochastic modeling assessment
Quantitative attack impact evaluation on substations
Markov-process based reliability analysis
Unsupervised learning-based FDIA detection
Wavelet transformation-based FDIAs in AC state estimation
Historical data-assisted FDIA detection
Distributed collaborative FDIA detector
Machine-learning assisted FDIA detection
Unsupervised learning anomaly detector
Sensor- and process noise-based attack detection
Autoencoder-based anomaly detection
Semi-supervised method for malware
Markov-process based reliability analysis
Data-driven and compressive sensing resilient state estimator
Battery-based hardware security authentication
Battery-power assisted risk mitigation
Robust control-based defense mechanism
Control ﬂow integrity validation method
Hardware security-based communication protocol extension

Reference
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]
[51]
[52]
[53]
[54]
[55]
[56]
[57]
[58]
[59]
[60]
[61]
[62]
[63]
[64]
[65]
[66]
[67]
[68]
[59]
[69]
[70]
[71]
[72]
[73]
[74]

of IoT (internet-of-things)-connected high-wattage loads, such
as washing machines, air-conditioning units, dryers, etc., are
coordinated over the network, causing unexpected power usage
proﬁles and pushing the grid to instability limits. Such attacks
demonstrate that there is no requirement of strong adversarial
knowledge nor considerable attack resources [51].

2) Evaluation of Attack Impacts on CPES: Impact evalu-
ation and analysis studies are considered essential for prior-
itizing and safeguarding critical components in CPES. Such
analyses explore the consequences of malicious attacks and
can serve to proactively prepare systems for their adverse
implications. Impact evaluations can expose critical system
components, assist in prioritizing and securing them, and aid in
the development of contingency plans in case these vulnerable
components get compromised. For instance, the authors in [53]
propose assessment metrics designed to evaluate the resiliency
of CPES against adversarial attacks. Different techniques from
game theory, graph theory, and probabilistic modeling have
been utilized to assess the capability of CPES when supporting
critical (or unsheddable) loads after they have been compro-
mised or the system has suffered unexpected disturbances.
Other works focus on analyzing the impact of cyber-attacks
in transactive energy systems – TES [54]. Here, the authors
investigate the system operation under two types of attacks

that are designed to maliciously affect either the bid prices
or the bid quantities. In view of the fact that IEDs, AMI, and
smart inverters are penetrating EPS at a rapid pace, the authors
in [55] and [84] demonstrate the adverse grid consequences
if such devices are compromised. Speciﬁcally, the simulated
impact of malicious smart
inverter ﬁrmware modiﬁcations
in MGs is demonstrated in [55]. Attacks targeting SCADA-
controlled switching devices or monitoring devices impeding
situational awareness (in an integrated T&D system model)
are evaluated in [84].

Furthermore, cybersecurity assessment methodologies in-
vestigating the impact of RES integration to the grid are also
investigated in the literature. For instance, the authors in [56]
leverage open-source intelligence and contingency analysis
methods to discover the most critical system paths. Such
transition paths could be utilized by an adversary to maximize
the impact of cyber-attacks, leading to disastrous consequences
for the EPS. A different approach, which considers intrusion
and disruption process modeling, is proposed in [57], where a
stochastic game theory-based CPES security evaluation model
is developed. The authors in [58] propose a mathematical
framework to estimate the probability and evaluate the impact
of malicious attacks on substation automation systems. In [59],
the reliability and security of CPES are analyzed through a

communication failure assessment process. Overall, assess-
ment methodologies of attack impacts on CPES are designed
with the purpose of aiding CPES evaluation studies. Thus,
they should be leveraged as part of a defense-in-depth (DiD)
portfolio when assessing potential damages and devising CPES
defense strategies.

3) Attack Detection Algorithms in CPES: The severity of
the effects of cyber-attacks in CPES underlines the need
for accurate and effective attack detection mechanisms that
can improve the situational awareness of system operators.
Hence, remediation actions can be issued to avoid system
and equipment failures, as well as ensure human safety. A
plethora of detection schemes have been proposed especially
for FDIAs in CPES [60]–[63]. For instance, in [63] researchers
develop a distributed host-based collaborative mechanism for
detecting false data measurements in PMUs. Each PMU is
assigned a host monitor to probe its status (i.e., normal
operation or anomalous) by comparing it with predeﬁned
nominal values. Then, a majority voting algorithm is executed
to decide if the acquired measurements are valid by comparing
the status of the under-investigation PMU with the correspond-
ing neighboring PMUs. Unsupervised learning-based anomaly
detection methods have also been proposed for cyber-attack
detection in CPES [64]. An example of such anomaly detection
scheme is presented in [65], where authors identify suspicious
sensor activity using recurrent neural networks (RNNs). Other
researchers have also demonstrated how data integrity attacks
(DIA) can be identiﬁed when sensor and process patterns devi-
ate from a residual-based ﬁngerprinted data [66]. Furthermore,
given the extensive use of Fieldbus communication devices in
CPES, methodologies have been designed to detect anomalous
network trafﬁc in a variety of Fieldbus protocols [67]. All
of the reviewed detection mechanisms have the objective of
notifying system operators once incongruous sensor or monitor
behavior is detected in the CPES. As a result, malicious
incidents can be effectively handled, minimizing their impact
on CPES operations.

4) Attack Mitigations and Defenses in CPES: The deploy-
ment of defense and mitigation mechanisms is critical
to
enhance the overall CPES security and minimize the adverse
impact of cyber-attack scenarios. For example, mitigation
strategies can protect CPES against FDIAs which could poten-
tially result in generator equipment damage [71]. Speciﬁcally,
BESS could be leveraged to assist the generators and reduce
the load curtailment inﬂicted by malicious attacks. A hybrid
control-based approach to safeguard systems against cyber-
attacks is presented in [72]. The hybrid controller switches
to the most secure controller, from a subset of available
controllers, given that some of these controllers might have
been compromised by an adversary. In [68], a semi-supervised
learning mechanism is utilized to study malware patterns and
defend the system from unknown malware targeting the CPES
infrastructure.

Apart from software-based mitigation techniques and de-
fenses, hardware-oriented mechanisms have also been pro-
posed. In [70],
the authors propose the use of hardware
security primitives leveraging the intrinsic variation of BESS
lithium cells to enhance communication protocol security. The

8

practicality of the approach is validated in a simulated testbed
environment [74]. Furthermore, in [73], an instrumentation-
based defense technique is presented employing a sub-optimal
plan to secure CPES in real-time. Even though the discussed
defense and mitigation mechanisms may not be applicable for
all cyber-attack scenarios, research and development in this
direction contribute towards understanding attackers’ tactics
and defending against them, enhancing the security of CPES.

C. Threat Analysis and Risk Assessment

Precise modeling is essential in order to investigate complex
CPES architectures, discover any potential vulnerabilities, and
extensively test and evaluate security features. The intricacies
of CPS typically consist of multiple interconnected layers
bridging assets of varying importance for the system operation,
and leveraging ICT and communication protocols. Different
methods are being used to review CPS architectures and assess
their cybersecurity. Among them, the DiD and the Purdue
models are the most popular ones. The DiD strategy was
initially employed in military applications [85]. It ensures
resiliency, redundancy, and the existence of multiple defenses
if a vulnerability is exploited, a critical security ﬂaw is
identiﬁed, or a failure or unintentional fault occurs. Enforcing
the DiD multi-layered topology has two main advantages from
a security perspective. First, it delays the attack progress in
the system since each layer provides an isolated execution
environment. Second, it allows system operators to deal with
the attack independently on multiple layers, rather than having
to rely on a single point-of-defense. Similarly, the Purdue
model for industrial control system (ICS) network segmenta-
tion [86], part of the Purdue Enterprise Reference Architecture
(PERA), incorporates the DiD concept by demonstrating the
interconnections and dependencies between layers and com-
ponents, allowing for the design of secure CPS [87]. In the
following parts (II-C1 and II-C2), we provide the essential
information and related work regarding threat modeling and
risk assessment methodologies with emphasis on industrial
CPS and critical infrastructures.

1) Threat modeling: The term ‘threat modeling’ refers to
the procedure by which potential vulnerabilities are discovered
before they can become system threats. This process is crucial
for the design of security defenses and mitigation strategies. It
is evident that performing threat modeling for CPES is essen-
tial since their compromise can have disastrous consequences
to the grid operation and the economic and social well-
being. However, CPES consist of multiple layers and assets,
hence, it can be challenging, due to extensive time, modeling
efforts, resources, and cost, to exhaustively examine all the
possible scenarios that could arise as system vulnerabilities.
To overcome such issues, without compromising the system’s
reliability, multiple threat modeling approaches have been
proposed aiming to prioritize vulnerabilities and assist the
implementation of potent security mechanisms. These method-
ologies provide a holistic view of the system by highlighting
the signiﬁcant assets, commonly referred to as crown-jewels
[88], and assessing threats based on their potential impact and
ease of deployment on the system.

STRIDE2 and DREAD3 are well-established threat model-
ing frameworks for the security assessment of products and
services throughout their life-cycle [89], [90]. For instance,
STRIDE uses data ﬂow diagrams for the threat modeling
process. The data ﬂow diagrams map system threats to the
corresponding vulnerable system components (STRIDE per-
element approach). Given the interdependent nature of CPES,
an attacker can compromise the system operation by exploiting
different component vulnerabilities. Therefore, to guarantee
the overall system security, vulnerabilities need to be ad-
dressed both at the component level as well as within the
component interrelations (visualized in the data ﬂow diagrams)
[91]. DREAD can be leveraged to evaluate and rank the
severity of threats. A DREAD analysis is comprised of the
following six steps: asset identiﬁcation, system architecture
formation, application decomposition,
identiﬁcation,
threat documentation, and threat impact rating. DREAD and
STRIDE methodologies can also be used jointly for compre-
hensive cybersecurity assessments [92].

threat

Apart from STRIDE and DREAD, other methodologies for
security assessments have been proposed and utilized in the
cybersecurity arena. For instance, OCTAVE4 Allegro is an
alternative approach used by organizations when performing
mainly information technology (IT) security evaluations and
strategic planning for cyber-threats [93]. However, recent
works validate the applicability of OCTAVE Allegro for CPS
security assessments, both for the enumeration of potential
risks as well as the design of countermeasures to maintain
nominal system operation [84], [94]. The main steps followed
in OCTAVE security assessments include: the development of
risk evaluation criteria according to operational constraints,
critical asset identiﬁcation, critical asset vulnerabilities and
corresponding threats discovery, and threat impact assessment.
STRIDE, DREAD, and OCTAVE are well-established tools
when performing threat modeling analyses and identifying
vulnerabilities in the pre-attack context.

The investigation of adversary behavior post-compromise
is also important. At this point, the adversary has already
overcome the ﬁrst line of defense and has access to system
resources. Notably, there is extensive research on initial ex-
ploitation and use of perimeter defenses [95], [96]. However,
there is a knowledge gap of the adversary process after initial
access has been gained. To address the aforementioned pitfall
threat modeling, risk analysis, and mitigation
and support
methodologies, pre-and post-compromise events, MITRE de-
veloped the ATT&CK for Enterprise framework [97].

MITRE ATT&CK is an open-source knowledge-base that
includes common adversarial attack patterns (e.g., attacks,
techniques, and tactics). The ATT&CK database is constantly
being updated with recent attack incidents to enhance en-
terprise cybersecurity by exposing system vulnerabilities and
warrant safer operational environments for businesses and

2STRIDE is an acronym for Spooﬁng, Tampering, Repudiation, Information

disclosure, Denial-of-service, and Elevation of privilege.

3DREAD is also an acronym that stands for Damage, Reproducibility,

Exploitability, Affected Users, and Discoverability.

4OCTAVE acronym is for Operationally Critical Threat, Asset, and Vulner-

ability Evaluation.

9

organizations. The framework describes the tactics, techniques,
and procedures (TTPs) that an adversary could follow in order
to make decisions, expand access, and stealthily compromise
an organization while residing inside the enterprise network
[98], [99]. In January 2020, MITRE corporation, realizing that
ICS is an essential part of critical CPS infrastructures and
with the objective of addressing cybersecurity issues arising
by the diverse and interconnected nature of CPS, launched
the ATT&CK for ICS framework [100].

The ATT&CK for ICS framework is also a free community-
includes information
supported threat knowledge-base that
about TTPs that adversaries utilize when targeting ICS (within
CPS). The framework assists in understanding the adversarial
attack chain and enhance the security standpoint of ICS and
related CPS assets. ATT&CK for ICS is based on MITRE’s
ATT&CK for Enterprise framework, i.e., it ports many of
the gathered threat intelligence from enterprise networks to
ICS since industrial networks often have similarities with
enterprise networks. The heterogeneity of ICS, however, with
a plethora of operating systems (OS), network devices, and
communications protocols co-existing with a variety of ﬁeld
devices (e.g., PLCs, IEDs, PMUs, RTUs, etc.) led to signiﬁcant
revisions from the ATT&CK for Enterprise to the ATT&CK
for ICS.

The ATT&CK for ICS framework is designed to support a
multi-layer reference approach for adversarial behavior evalua-
tions. The framework is segregated into four core components,
making it applicable to a wide spectrum of industrial CPS.
The ﬁrst component category includes i) assets which consist
of control servers, engineering workstations, ﬁeld controllers,
human-machine interface (HMI), among others. All
these
assets might not be apparent in every system. This is factored
in by the ATT&CK methodology which investigates attacks
targeting the respective assets independently as well as their
cooperation with other industrial assets. The second core part
of ATT&CK for ICS is the abstraction focusing on the ii)
functional levels of the Purdue architecture. Such levels de-
scribe the depth of inﬁltration that the adversary has achieved.
The level ranges from Level 0, which corresponds to the
physical devices (e.g., sensors and actuators) that orchestrate
the industrial process, all the way to Level 2, which includes
the supervisory control systems, the engineering workstations,
and HMIs. These functional
levels are depicted in Table
III. The last two parts of the framework revolve around the
adversarial iii) tactics and iv) techniques. The term ‘tactics’
refers to the reason why an adversary performs an action, i.e.,
adversary objective such as disrupting an industrial process
control routine. Techniques describe the activities that the ad-
versary uses to achieve the attack goal, i.e., represent “how” an
attacker accomplishes his/her objectives by taking an action,
e.g., through modifying the PLC control logic.

2) Risk Assessment: The term ”risk assessment” refers to
the process of identifying potential risks and their correspond-
ing impact to the system operation as well as determining
strategies to mitigate, defer or, accept these risks based on
their criticality [93]. Cyber-threat risk assessment is a critical
operation that CPES and their ICS need to perform regularly.
The introduction of new technologies into CPES (i.e., DERs,

TABLE III: ICS functional levels, equipment categories, and
their corresponding components [101].

Functional
Level

Level 2

Level 1

Level 0

Category

Components

Supervisory
Equipment

Control
Equipment
Process
Control

Supervisory control
functions, site monitoring,
local displays
Protection devices, local
control devices

Sensors, actuators

EVs, control devices, etc.) along with the interoperable nature
of the supported ICT infrastructure increases the risks arising
from both the cyber (e.g., measurement, control commands,
or communication integrity attacks) and the physical domain
(e.g., sensor and actuator compromise).

Typically, risk assessment methodologies rely on proba-
bilistic analyses that leverage Markov-chains [102], Petri-nets
[103], Bayesian belief networks [104], or game theory to
estimate the impact of adverse events on system operation
[105], [106]. In [106], for example, researchers model both
the attackers and the system’s defenses as agents with different
action sets and objectives. Due to the contradictory roles of
such agents, the corresponding action payoff depends on the
ability to compromise the system’s assets or the ability to
detect the malicious attack from the perspective of attackers
or defenders, respectively. Other works have proposed worst-
case scenario risk assessment analyses that employ exhaustive
Monte Carlo simulations and focus on diverse operation areas
of EPS (e.g., automatic generation control –AGC, T&D system
operations, etc.). Then, the interdependence of such EPS areas
with speciﬁc risk mitigation mechanisms is analyzed [107],
[108]. For instance, the authors in [108], review the impact on
buses and transmission lines under abnormal operations caused
by cyber-attacks. They also investigate how adverse scenarios
can be mitigated if robust protection system strategies, i.e.
coordinated bus and transmission line trippings, are corre-
spondingly put in-place. Although probabilistic risk analyses
and worst-case scenario assessments can provide useful results
under speciﬁc constraints (i.e., if only part of a system is
examined), applying such methods to dynamically changing
large-scale T&D integrated models can be a challenging task.
The multitude of T&D assets expands the search space of
exhaustive methods such as Monte Carlo-based risk analyses
[109]. For each asset and every investigated potential attack,
the risk analysis process needs to be re-examined and re-
computed. The risk calculation overhead is also exacerbated
due to the interconnected CPS architecture.

The aforementioned methods, apart from being compu-
tationally intensive, can also potentially suffer from poor
accuracy. The security risk assessment accuracy of these
methods relies on the precise modeling of the CPES physical
components (e.g., generators, transmission lines, substations,
etc.), their topology, as well as their interconnections with

10

the cyber components (e.g., ICT nodes supporting EPS func-
tions) [110]–[112]. Failure to properly model CPES can mask
interconnection dependencies between components and their
layers (cyber or physical), and thus, perturb the risk score
calculation process. The presented risk assessment approaches
in this section are credible if security assessment is performed
i.e., they fail to capture comprehensively system
partially,
risks as their focus is on speciﬁc parts of a CPES ignoring
the impact propagation to the rest of the infrastructure. In
this work, the threat and system representation is performed
meticulously during the threat modeling process (Section III)
and the CPS framework stages (Section IV), respectively.
As a result, our approach determines in advance a detailed
system model, overcoming the drawbacks encountered when
performing segmented risk evaluations.

In our analysis, system-speciﬁc characteristics are formal-
ized and Risk scores are calculated by combining the attack
Threat Probability along with the CPES objective priorities
(Section III-C). The proposed methodology expedites the risk
assessment analysis of CPS (since the threat modeling, CPS
framework analysis, and performance metrics determination
have been performed previously), and thus, mitigation policies
can be evaluated iteratively until the corresponding Risk goals
are met. For example, if an EPS asset is compromised, there
might be multiple defense mechanisms that could be enforced
to mitigate the attack. However, the implementation of some
of these mechanisms might result in signiﬁcant impacts (e.g.,
uneconomic operation, partial grid disconnections, etc.) or
affect other parts of the system due to its interdependent
nature. The ability to evaluate, in real-time, the effectiveness
of risk mitigation mechanisms provides signiﬁcant beneﬁts
for CPS, aiming to balance security objectives and system
performance.

III. THREAT MODELING FOR CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS

The fundamental property of any adverse failure is an
artifact of the semantics and capabilities of building CPS
from a diverse, possibly inﬁnite, set of ways. It is crucial to
mitigate any adverse event in CPS, regardless of whether it
is accidental or intentional. However, some distinctions need
to be made between these two types. For example, there is a
high probability that a natural adverse event (e.g., short circuit
fault) can be detected by the process, considering a built-in
fault detection scheme in the system. In contrast, an intentional
fault (possibly caused by an attacker) could alter the results
of the system in a congruous way, hence causing the event to
go undetected. Traditionally, fault monitoring and detection
approaches do not consider the implications that arise due
to adversaries and their attack goals. Their aim is solely to
recover from transient faults overlooking the actions which
trigger this abnormal behavior. Without considering a threat
model that includes malicious and motivated adversaries, as
well as sophisticated attacks, defense detection schemes can be
potentially evaded by attackers entirely, despite the redundancy
already built into control processes. A fault can become an
exploited vulnerability and the compromised component, if
not sanitized properly, can pose a danger to the entire CPS.

The complex nature of CPS, and consequently CPES,
urges the identiﬁcation of attack vectors on both the cyber
and the physical domains of the system. Adversaries are
constantly improving, adapting, and modifying their attack
patterns to evade security mechanisms. As a consequence,
security researchers cannot passively await until an asset in the
system is compromised to initiate remediation. To support the
identiﬁcation, anticipation, and mitigation of cyber-attacks in
CPS, we develop a holistic threat model that incorporates the
core components of MITRE’s ATT&CK for ICS methodology
while providing an additional dimension for security investi-
gations. Speciﬁcally, the presented threat modeling approach
extends MITRE’s methods since:
• We incorporate an adversary model
granular and explicit threat modeling analyses.
• We rigorously deﬁne all aspects of potential cyber-attacks
so that they can be implemented in CPS testbeds for security
evaluations (e.g., evaluate defense mechanisms, mitigation
strategy, detection schemes, etc.).
• We perform risk assessments considering the actual impact
of cyber-attacks on the CPS and leveraging both the threat
modeling and CPS framework resource mapping. Hence, every
possible attacked CPS component is accounted towards the
Risk score calculation, aiding threat prioritization, and CPS
security posture awareness.

to allow for more

In the developed threat modeling methodology, we evaluate
threats and prioritize them based on the degradation that
they can potentially inﬂict on the CPS. Our threat model
consists of two major components, the adversary model and
the attack model, as illustrated in Fig. 3. To understand the
security implications of threats targeting CPS, the adversary
model needs to capture speciﬁc information involving the
adversary’s capabilities, intentions, and objectives. In addi-
tion, it is essential to model attacks based on their speciﬁc
methodology, targeted system component, and system impact,
as well as deﬁne rules that enable multi-layer and severity
attack analyses. The adversary and attack models compose the
threat score index factored in the threat risk calculation process
presented in Section III-C. For instance, the threat score of an
attack performed by a stealthy and motivated adversary will be
higher than the threat score of the same attack performed by
an adversary with limited resources and oblivious knowledge
about the system. Our versatile threat modeling approach can
support various types of malicious events and enable end-users
to adjust the desired level of threat model granularity.

A. Adversary Model

The capabilities of an attacker and the characteristics of
the adversary model can be captured by factors such as
resources, skills, knowledge of the system, access privileges,
and opportunities (i.e., the means to carry out the attack and
the number of failed attempts allowed) required to perform the
attack. When it comes to system knowledge, distinction has
to be made between white-box attacks, where an adversary
has complete information, and black-box or gray-box attacks,
where an adversary has limited information about the system
[113]. In the gray-box threat model, the adversarial knowledge

11

Fig. 3: Adversary model and attack model components com-
prising the comprehensive threat model architecture.

is limited to the target model, while in black-box attacks
adversaries do not know the target model and can only query to
generate adversarial samples [114]. We port such classiﬁcation
in the context of CPES, in which attackers may have full,
partial, or zero knowledge of the system model and real-
time power grid measurements. Existing work often assumes
that adversaries have perfect knowledge of the system model,
i.e., the information needed to create the measurement matrix
(Jacobian) of the power system that depends on the network
topology, the parameters of power lines, and the location of
RTUs and PMUs [115]. However, in realistic attack scenarios,
adversaries have limited knowledge of the system due to the
dispersed, interconnected, and complex nature of the power
grid, the restricted access to CPES control and monitoring
functions, and errors in the data collection process [51], [116],
[117].

Our adversary model takes into consideration the presented
distinctions and deﬁnes a hierarchy of the available informa-
tion to the attackers in order to characterize their knowledge
capabilities. At the lowest level of the system, knowledge
hierarchy is an adversary that has no information about the
system model. At the highest level is an adversary that knows
the model characteristics, the algorithmic details, and all the
grid measurements. In order for the adversary, however, to
acquire system measurements or perform reconnaissance and
monitoring, he/she should have – to some extent – access to
the system. As such, our model delineates this access as the
accessibility level an adversary needs to have in the target
CPS.

In the MITRE ATT&CK for ICS framework,

the term
‘attacker tactics’ covers the attackers’ access level with their
corresponding intentions and objectives. In our modeling ap-
proach, however, the term is captured in two sub-categories,
access and speciﬁcity, to allow for a more elaborate adver-
sary classiﬁcation. The access category deﬁnes the degree to
which an attacker can interact with a system asset, while
the adversarial speciﬁcity encapsulates the objectives and
goals of the adversary who executes the attack on the CPS.
Adversarial objectives are broadly lumped under targeted and
non-targeted. In the case of targeted objectives, an adversary’s
intention is to execute an attack which can result in a speciﬁc
target output (e.g., the miscalculation of EPS system states,
due to topology modiﬁcations of wind integrated resources

[118], or FDIAs [119]). On the other hand, non-targeted
attacks can generically maximize malformed outputs of CPS
algorithms (with respect to the ground truth) affecting the
operational reliability of the system. Finally, our adversary
model also captures the adversary resources, differentiating
between attackers with limited resources and attackers with a
variety of intellectual and physical assets at their disposal.

Adversary Model Formulation: Our attacker model is de-
composed into four dimensions: adversarial knowledge, re-
sources, access, and speciﬁcity:

1) Adversary Knowledge
a) Strong-knowledge adversary: White-box attacks assume an
adversary with full knowledge of the system model, parame-
ters, and state vectors.
b) Limited-knowledge adversary: Gray-box attacks assume an
adversary with some knowledge of the system’s internals with
a partial understanding of the network and system model.
c) Oblivious-knowledge adversary: Black-box attacks assume
an adversary with zero knowledge about the details of the sys-
tem and can only estimate the system outputs using conﬁdence
scores. In such scenarios, the attacker does not have knowledge
in regard to the system model.
2) Adversary Access
a) Possession: This type of attack requires the adversary to
have physical access to the attacked component (e.g., IED,
solar inverter, transformer, etc.) operating either in the digital
or analog domain. The access could involve chassis intrusions
(e.g., microprobing, memory ﬂashing, circuit bending, etc.),
or interface access to the device (e.g., side-channel analysis,
power analysis, protocol decode, etc.).
b) Non-possession: In this type of attacks, the adversary can-
not physically manipulate the asset under attack. Attacks can
be performed leveraging proximity access (e.g., GPS spooﬁng,
side-channel analysis), or by exploiting network interfaces
(e.g., replay attacks, rollback attacks, etc.).
3) Adversarial Speciﬁcity
a) Targeted attacks occur in multi-class identiﬁcation, control,
and monitoring -based scenarios and misclassify CPS algo-
rithms and operations to a speciﬁc malicious result category
xj ∈ X from all possible results X . The adversary goal is to
maximize the probability of the targeted class, i.e., maximize
P(xj).
b) Non-targeted attacks are similar to targeted attacks in
terms of misclassiﬁcation objective, however, the selection of
category xj is relaxed to any arbitrary output category except
the correct one xi.
4) Adversarial Resources
a) Class-I attackers that, despite their adversarial motivation,
do not have the ﬁnancial resources, equipment support, or
access privileges, to successfully realize any attack without
being detected.
b) Class-II attackers that can be funded individuals, organiza-
tions, or nation-state actors with large budgets and substantial
access privileges, skills, and tools capable of realizing sophis-
ticated attacks.

12

B. Attack Model

The second part of the proposed threat modeling method fo-
cuses on the speciﬁc characteristics of malicious attacks (e.g.,
frequency, reproducibility), the targeted CPS components, and
the process aiming to achieve the system compromise. The
attack model improves MITRE’s taxonomy, which includes
concepts such as the attack levels, assets, and techniques, by
incorporating supplemental dimensions necessary for holistic
security investigations. For instance, particular attention is
drawn on aspects like the attack frequency, reproducibility/dis-
coverability, along with the premise of the compromise. The
aforementioned features enable the comprehensive characteri-
zation of the attacks elucidating all their underlying elements,
and as a result, they assist in performing threat and system
impact evaluations for CPS environments.

The presented attack model accounts for the CPS structure
and interconnections. Given that the same adversarial objective
can be achieved following different attack paths, propagation
scenarios with diverse attack entry points should be inves-
tigated. These attack paths can be initiated from process
control devices such as sensors or actuators and propagate to
supervisory and control equipment like HMIs. In particular, the
attack model considers the attack frequency, i.e., the number
of compromises required to achieve a particular adversarial
objective, and the attack reproducibility and discoverability.
The aspects of reproducibility and discoverability are crucial
for CPS risk evaluations. This is attributed to the fact that
even catastrophic attacks might not pose any actual danger
for the CPS if materializing them is nearly impossible, or they
can be easily discovered during their initial stages. The attack
functional level, attacked asset, and attack techniques notions
correspond to the deﬁnitions introduced in MITRE [100]. The
only difference is that the selected attack techniques in our
methodology represent some of the most common use cases
encountered speciﬁcally in CPES. An overview of the CPS
functional levels along with the corresponding attacked assets
are illustrated in Fig. 4. Also, we consider the attack premise
which indicates whether the attack is targeting the physical
or cyber domain of a CPS, trailing the attack path origin and
its expected impact. The formulated attack model with the
additional aspects of attack frequency, attack reproducibility
and discoverability, and attack premise allows to ﬁne-tune each
attack case study’s model, and overall compose a well-deﬁned
CPS threat modeling approach.

Attack Model Formulation: Our attack model

is decom-
posed into six dimensions: attack frequency, attack repro-
ducibility and discoverability, attack level, attacked asset,
attack techniques, and attack premise.

1) Attack Frequency
a) Iterative attacks: attacks that need multiple iterations to
achieve the desired malicious output.
b) Non-Iterative attacks: attacks that only need to be realized
once to achieve the desired malicious output.
2) Attack Reproducibility and Discoverability
a) One-time attacks: attacks that can only be realized once
since they are detected after the ﬁrst attempt.

13

statistical analysis of process control information.
f) Human-machine interfaces (HMIs): A graphical user inter-
face that enables users to monitor system operations, diagnose
malfunctioning system behavior, and initiate control and mit-
igation actions. HMIs can vary between vendors supporting
different capabilities, graphical representations, and control
interfaces (e.g., web-based, LAN-based, etc.). Additionally,
different user groups can have access to different HMIs ac-
cording to the systems they are monitoring and their clearance
level for managing the CPS.
g) Input/output (I/O) servers: Such servers constitute the
connecting link between system applications and the ﬁeld
devices which coordinate the ICS equipment under the control
subsystems directions. I/O and data acquisition servers (DAS)
operate as buffers since they can convert low-level control
system data to packets, and forward them to the supervision
locations (e.g., HMIs, engineering workstations). Additionally,
they serve as intermediate translation units as they collect
information from ﬁeld devices (utilizing diverse communica-
tion technologies) and translate them to the predeﬁned formats
expected by system applications.
5) Attack Techniques
a) Modify control logic: In such attacks, adversaries can cause
the CPS to operate abnormally by modifying the code running
on the system’s control devices (e.g., PLC, RTU, IED). These
system devices are orchestrating physical processes via actu-
ators and other ﬁeld equipment.
b) Wireless compromise: In these attack scenarios, adversaries
can gain unauthorized remote access to the CPS network by
exploiting: the vulnerabilities of devices with wireless con-
nectivity, insecure wireless communication protocols, and/or
network connections leaking sensitive information.
c) Engineering workstation compromise: In such attack setups
adversaries, after granted access to a CPS engineering work-
station, can cause system malfunctions via compromising CPS
conﬁgurations controlled by engineering workstations, e.g.,
security systems, process controls, ICT infrastructure, etc.
d) Denial-of-service (DoS): Malicious adversaries performing
DoS attacks can compromise a CPS asset by inhibiting its
nominal functionality rendering it unresponsive. For instance,
overﬂowing a device with artiﬁcial data, blocking its inbound
or outbound communications, or even suspending/disrupting
its operation can impact time-critical CPS.
e) Man-in-the-middle (MitM): During MitM attacks adver-
saries can maliciously intercept, modify, delay, block, and/or
inject data streams exchanged between CPS asset communi-
cations. Depending on the adversary access level on the CPS
networks, numerous attacks (e.g., modify or inject control
commands, delay alarm messages, etc.) can be planted affect-
ing CPS operations.
f) Spoof reporting messages: Adversaries performing this type
of attack can broadcast malicious modiﬁed system messages.
The attack goal is to either impact CPS operations by limiting
the situational awareness (e.g., suppressing critical alarm mes-
sages), or misreport information (e.g., sensor measurements),
thus, driving systems to unstable and potentially irreversible
states.

Fig. 4: CPS functional attack levels and assets overview.

b) Multiple-times attacks: attacks that can be reproduced
multiple-times before they are identiﬁed and detected.
3) Attack Functional Level
a) Level 0: attacks that target CPS processes and their corre-
sponding operational equipment (e.g., sensors, actuators, etc.).
b) Level 1: attacks that target the industrial control network
(e.g., PLCs, system controllers, RTUs, etc.) and aim to
stealthily manipulate functions that control CPS processes.
c) Level 2: attacks that target the SCADA, and monitoring
devices (e.g., HMIs, engineering workstations, data historians,
etc.) on the network level (i.e., LAN) overseeing CPS pro-
cesses.
4) Attacked Asset
a) Field controllers: Such assets are low-level embedded
devices (e.g., RTUs, PLCs, IEDs) that enable the control of
CPS processes. They typically possess limited computation
capabilities and they are in charge of coordinating industrial
processes (e.g., generator governors, manufacturing process
controllers, etc.).
b) Control servers: These devices cover the functionality
of both programmable controllers (e.g., PLCs) as well as
communication servers (e.g., SCADA master terminal units
(MTU), distributed control servers, etc.). Thus, apart from in-
terfacing with low-level CPS devices (e.g., sensors, actuators),
they can also support software-based services in industrial
environments.
c) Safety instrumented systems (SIS): These systems (e.g.,
protective relays, recloser controllers) are designed to perform
automated remediation actions if an abnormal system behavior
is detected (e.g., short-circuit, fault, etc.). The goal of protec-
tion systems is to keep the industrial CPS plant online, while
avoiding hazard conditions.
d) Engineering workstations: These units are usually powerful
and reliable computing conﬁgurations used for the monitoring
and control of CPS, processes, and equipment. They are often
accompanied by hardware components and software packages
that enable CPS supervision.
e) Data historians: Such elements are databases used to keep
records and store process data. This information is stored in a
time-series format that enables the examination, display, and

g) Module ﬁrmware: In module ﬁrmware attack cases, ad-
versaries can upload maliciously modiﬁed code to embedded
inverters, etc.). These
devices of CPS (e.g., PLCs, smart
actions can affect devices operation via modiﬁcation of their
control objectives, and/or insertion of backdoor features (e.g.,
remote access, exploit system logs, etc.) allowing them to
stealthily manipulate CPS assets.
h) Rootkits: In this type of attack, adversaries employ rootkits,
typically planted in the OS of devices, to disguise malicious
software, services, ﬁles, network connections ports, etc. Rootk-
its provide attackers with user or even root-level privileges
while hiding their presence from CPS defense mechanisms.
6) Attack Premise
a) Attacks targeting the cyber domain
i) Communications and protocols: refers to attacks targeting
the in-transit CPS data, i.e., exchanged communications data
including remote access credentials, measurements, system re-
ports and warnings, etc., with the objective to get unauthorized
access (data espionage) or insert malicious modiﬁcations (data
alteration).
ii) Asset control commands: includes attacks targeting the
CPS data integrity, i.e., mask counterfeit system data as gen-
uine and unmodiﬁed, and trustworthiness (e.g., impersonate
authorized user groups and issue, access, or modify control
commands).
iii) Data storage: accounts for attacks targeting the accuracy
and non-repudiation of CPS data (e.g., logs and historical
records of all the performed tasks such as asset setpoint modi-
ﬁcations, user sign-ins and action histories, inbound/outbound
connections and trafﬁc, etc.).
b) Attacks targeting the physical domain
i) Invasive: attacks that require physical access to the CPS
asset (e.g., PLC hardware including micro-controller, mem-
ory, integrated circuit – IC, etc.) in order to manipulate it
(e.g., desoldering, depackaging) [120]. These attacks are time-
consuming and require specialized equipment, however, they
are difﬁcult to detect.
ii) Non-Invasive: attacks that do not require any physical tam-
pering of the ICs residing on the CPS assets, and performing
them multiple times can be achieved with minimum effort.
No traces are left after the attack is performed rendering them
the most difﬁcult type of attacks to detect. Common examples
of non-invasive attacks include power analysis attacks, timing
attacks, electromagnetic emission attacks, brute force attacks
through physical means, hall sensor spooﬁng, etc. [52].
iii) Semi-Invasive: attacks that are a trade-off between invasive
and non-invasive attacks, given that they are not as difﬁcult
to perform as invasive attacks and can be easily performed
multiple times similar to non-invasive ones [121]. Common
examples of semi-invasive attacks include fault injection, laser
scanning, ultra-violet radiation, or control process tampering
[122].

C. Risk Assessment Methodology

Risk assessment is a fundamental process in every cyber-
security analysis study. Its importance is further accentuated
in the context of mission-critical CPS where operational

14

disruptions can have disastrous impacts. Existing efforts of-
ten port IT risk assessment methodologies into operational
technology (OT) security evaluations, and consequently, fail
to holistically capture CPS constraints and objective [123].
Some key differences between IT and OT security revolve
around the risks associated with loss of operation, asset
availability, communication latency, architectural differences,
and contingency management strategies [124]–[126].

Qualitative assessments for cybersecurity risks require sub-
stantial system knowledge of the CPS structure and experience
from the organizations and groups conducting the analysis
[123], [127]. On the other hand, quantitative studies calculate
exact risk scores aiding the prioritization and mitigation pro-
cedures [104], [128]. Other works employ simulation-assisted
investigations in order to evaluate the corresponding impact of
cyber-attacks [129]. Moreover, researchers have also consid-
ered dynamically adapting risk assessment models factoring
the system and attack impact evolution for the risk score
calculations [130]. Recent works have proposed combinations
of different risk methods harnessing the advantages of more
than one strategy and providing more realistic evaluations
[131]–[133]. These combined approaches are motivated by the
fact that in CPS we can have the same impact on system
operation using different attack paths. Thus, although the
system impact remains the same, the risk scores of these
attacks would substantially differ. For example, such scenarios,
i.e., following different attack procedures to achieve the same
adversarial objective, would be difﬁcult to capture using a
qualitative-only risk assessment method.

In this paper, we utilize a hybrid risk assessment method
bridging the advantages of both quantitative and qualitative
methods. The hybrid approach adapts to dynamic system oper-
ation and adjusts risk scores based on the current system state.
Speciﬁcally, we assess qualitatively the impact of attacks.
To calculate the corresponding attack damage, however, we
quantitatively prioritize CPS objectives. The threat probability
is also assessed quantitatively to weigh the attack damage and
model the risk. It is important to note that both the objective
priority as well as the threat probabilities can change during
the real-time system operation.

Such scenarios can be accommodated by our risk model.
For instance, the loss of power at a residential area has the
same outage impact, regardless if this is due to a natural
disaster (e.g., hurricane, thunderstorm), a malicious attack,
or EPS electrical faults (e.g., short-circuits). However, the
threat probabilities and CPS objective priorities for the three
aforementioned scenarios differ signiﬁcantly. “People health
and personnel safety” objective during a natural disaster has
much higher priority compared to a power outage due to
an EPS fault. The latter event, being not a life-threatening
situation, would have a higher “uninterrupted operation and
service provision” priority.

Furthermore, the presented threat modeling methodology
of Section III-A and III-B, which enables precise adversary
and attack descriptions, serves as the backbone of our risk
assessment method. Speciﬁcally, the deﬁnitive granularity of
threat characterizations, not only exposes the vulnerable sys-
tem assets but also can infer which CPS objective will be

affected the most. The CPS objective is critical for the attack
impact evaluations, while vulnerable assets demonstrate the
feasibility of an attack. Thus, CPS attack risk scores can be
calculated and their prioritization can be performed based on
the affected CPS objective. The threat Risk is deﬁned as:

Risk = T hreat P robability × Damage

(1)

The Threat Probability portion of the risk formula accounts
for the threat details, i.e., the adversary and attack models
discussed previously, in addition to how likely it is for the
investigated threat to materialize in the speciﬁc system context.
The second component of Eq. (1) includes the Damage, which
assesses the corresponding impact inﬂicted on the system. The
Damage is deﬁned as follows:

Damage =

n
(cid:88)

k=1

Objective P riority ×

Attack Impact

(2)

where the Objective Priority and the Attack Impact are used
to address the consequences of the attack in the context of
the speciﬁc CPS objectives. The Attack Impact is evaluated
qualitatively using a number from 1 to 3, reﬂecting Low,
Medium, or High impact, respectively. In addition, for every
CPS, the objectives are ranked in order of importance. We
utilize four (n = 4) main objective categories: i) people health
and personnel safety, ii) uninterrupted operation and service
provision, iii) organization ﬁnancial proﬁt, and iv) equipment
damage and legal punishment. Numbers from 1 to 4 are used
for the objective priorities; 1 indicates the least signiﬁcant goal
while 4 stands for the most critical objective.

In Table IV, we demonstrate a damage calculation example
where we provide a subjective priority ranking as well as
the attack impact values. Using Eq. (2), the total potential
damage score can be calculated as (cid:80)(4 + 9 + 6 + 2) = 21.
Given a speciﬁc Threat Probability value, we can then assess
the total Risk for the examined attack scenario. Overall,
the presented application-aware risk assessment procedure is
taking into consideration all the underlying components of
sophisticated and multi-layer threats targeting complex CPS.
In addition, it provides a universal method to assess attack risk,
regardless of the particular CPS architecture or the correspond-
ing operational objectives. Based on the assessment results,
administrative authorities can prioritize which assets need
immediate attention and which threats pose the highest risk
(if vulnerabilities of the in-scope CPS assets are exploited).

4

IV. CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEM FRAMEWORK: MODELING,
RESOURCES, AND METRICS FOR CPES STUDIES

The framework depicted in Fig. 5 shows the different
domains in which the proposed CPS framework is divided.
The main objective of the framework is to provide a clear
understanding of all the underlying concepts and components
being considered in CPS investigations. Speciﬁcally, the pre-
sented conceptual framework is intended to assist researchers
in identifying the models, resources, and metrics required to
perform reliable CPES studies. Based on the study objectives,

15

TABLE IV: Example of attack damage calculation.

Objective
People health and
personnel safety
Uninterrupted operation
and service provision
Organization ﬁnancial
proﬁt
Equipment damage and
legal punishment

Priority Attack Impact Score

4

3

2

1

Low (1)

High (3)

High (3)

Medium (2)

4

9

6

2

the framework can be treated as a ‘how-to guide’ towards the
implementation of use cases and the development of CPES
testbeds. This section, ﬁrst, describes the cyber-system and
physical-system layers that need to be considered for the CPES
representation. Then, we describe the different factors that
need to be taken into account when performing CPES studies,
i.e., the modeling techniques, resources, and metrics.

Physical-System Layer: NIST’s deﬁnition for CPS estab-
lishes that the physical-system layer of a CPS is composed of
hardware and software components embedded into the system
environment. These components have the capability of inter-
acting with other physical-layer units through physical means,
i.e., via sensors and actuators, or through the cyber-system
layer using standard communication protocols. Some sectors
where CPS can be extensively found are smart manufacturing
[134], healthcare [135], robotics [136], transportation [137],
and EPS [138]. In this paper, the developed framework focuses
on the EPS sector, i.e., the models, resources, and metrics
used in the physical-system layer are based on elements
encountered in the generation, transmission, and distribution
systems that comprise CPES. Example components within the
physical-system layer of CPES are PV panels, Li-ion BESS,
wind energy systems, power converters, generators, voltage
regulators, transformers, and T&D lines.

Cyber-System Layer: The cyber-system layer of a CPS
is composed of the ICT structures deployed in the system.
It encompasses communication and networking components
such as hubs, modems, routers, switches, cables, connectors,
databases, and wired and/or wireless network interface cards
(NIC) [139], [140]. These components allow the interconnec-
tion of multiple computing devices using common communi-
cation protocols over digital links with the purpose of sharing,
storing, and processing resources and data located across
networking nodes. In this paper, our developed framework
focuses on elements that make up communication networks
in CPES, i.e., the models, resources, and metrics used in the
cyber-system layer are related to components such as smart-
meters, PMUs, EPS-related communication protocols (e.g.,
DNP3, IEC61850, IEEE 37.118, etc.), and other networking
devices that support communication in EPS operations.

A. Modeling

Models able to represent systems by describing and explain-
ing phenomena that cannot be experienced directly [141]. Such
models are built from mathematical equations and/or data that

16

Fig. 5: Cyber-physical system (CPS) framework: the cyber-system and physical-system layers are presented with their respective
factors, i.e., modeling, resources, and evaluation metrics, needed for conducting cyber-physical studies. Different use cases
requirements can be adjusted to perform CPS related investigations.

are used to explain and predict the behavior and response of
complex systems. Speciﬁcally for CPES, researchers focus
on creating models capable of replicating the behavior of
the components that comprise the cyber-system and physical-
system layers of EPS, e.g., models for components such as
PV systems, wind energy systems, ESS, transformers, trans-
mission lines, distribution lines, smart meters, PMUs, routers,
switches, etc. In this part, we describe the different modeling
techniques used to model both the cyber and physical layers
of CPES.

1) Physical-System Layer: The design and modeling of the
physical-system involve areas such as hardware design, hard-
ware/component sizing, connection routing, and overall system
testing. All components in this layer must be categorized
based on their respective temporal and spatial requirements
along with their intrinsic physical characteristics. In EPS, some
of these characteristics and requirements are related to rated
voltage, current, and power values, location of the generation
and load resources, and physical characteristics of the lines
(i.e., resistance, reactance, capacitance, and length). These
features are utilized in developing models that represent the
physical devices in the system. The objective is to capture
and simulate system behavior so that a digital twin of the real
system can be implemented. This ‘virtualization’ capability
provides a signiﬁcant advantage by allowing the analysis and
study of different types of scenarios that can arise during
the operation of the CPS. We can analyze and track physical
processes, replicate potential harmful operating conditions or
scenarios, and accelerate the testing of software and hardware
components. More speciﬁcally, for EPS modeling, the current
state-of-the-art simulation technology is based on electromag-
netic transient (EMT) and transient stability (TS) simulation

techniques [142]–[144].

a) Electromagnetic transient (EMT): EMT simulation is a
technique used to precisely reproduce the system response
to fast dynamic events and system perturbations, that occur
in the range of tens of microseconds or lower, caused by
fast switching electromagnetic ﬁelds or loading events. Due
to requirements, such as the unsymmetrical and instantaneous
modeling of the signals and values that characterize the be-
havior of the system, nonlinear ordinary differential equations
the system behavior in the
(ODE) are used to represent
EMT simulation environment. This detailed modeling provides
improved accuracy, compared to TS-type simulations, when
capturing the system behavior and response to fast transient
events. However, it requires high computational resources for
the simulation of systems with a large number of components.
Typical applications where EMT studies are used include the
simulation of power electronic devices, unbalanced distribu-
tion systems, and the impact evaluation of DER integration
into modern power networks.
b) Transient Stability (TS) Simulation: TS simulation is a
technique used to capture the slow dynamic events, i.e., events
in the range of tens of milliseconds and higher, that occur in
power systems. These events are related to the voltage stability,
rotor angle stability, and frequency stability phenomena. In
TS, the EPS is represented by nonlinear differential algebraic
equations (DAE). These equations are used to solve the system
states assuming that the fundamental power frequency (e.g.,
50 or 60 Hz) is maintained throughout the system. Commonly,
TS-type simulations are used for studies related to the analysis,
planning, operation, and control of EPS elements with large
time-steps, i.e., in the milliseconds range. Given that large
time-steps and positive-sequence phasor-domain simulations

Physical-System LayerCyber-System LayerSimulation/EmulationHardwareMonitoringHardwareCHILµ-grid controllercontroller𝑃𝑉𝐷𝐶/𝐴𝐶𝐻𝑀𝐼PHILInterfaceInterfaceInterfaceInterfaceCHILNetworkrouterResourcesModelingEvaluationMetricsMetricsMetrics & Simulation ValidationThreat ModelingInputs: Use CasesAdversary modelAttack modelCyber-studiesControl studies.....OptimizationStability..are used in TS-type simulations, they allow users to simulate
large-scale T&D networks while requiring signiﬁcantly less
computational resources when compared to EMT-type simu-
lations [142].
c) Hybrid-Simulation (TS+EMT): Hybrid-simulation models
make use of both EMT and TS simulation tools to leverage
the beneﬁts of two or more simulation environments, hence
allowing even more comprehensive and accurate simulation
studies. Some examples of these types of simulations are
found in recent literature [145]–[147]. Integrated T&D co-
simulations are a major ﬁeld of study enabling the use of
hybrid-simulation environments. Such environments can pro-
vide ways of simulating in detail, for example, power elec-
tronic converters interfaced with large-scale power networks.
T&D co-simulation also provides an effective way of studying
the diverse impacts that anomalous events (e.g., unintentional
faults or intentional malicious attacks) may have locally and
globally in the overall physical-system layer of the CPES.

2) Cyber-System Layer: The design and modeling of the
cyber-system layer involve communication network modeling,
communication protocol implementation, design of informa-
tion systems, and data storage processing. To model
this
layer, researchers must have a deep understanding of the
communication infrastructure that needs to be replicated using
the respective cyber-system layer models. Some of the charac-
teristics that need to be taken into consideration for modeling
the communication infrastructure are: i) the topology of the
ii) physical characteristics (cable
communication network,
lengths, physical components, delays, etc.), and iii) Quality-
of-Service (QoS), among others [140]. In a real-world CPS
(e.g., cellular networks, military zones, or SCADA systems),
multiple and diverse networking and computing components
comprise the cyber layer. This hinders the implementation
of tests and studies designed to evaluate the operation and
performance of the actual network or to simply conduct any
other CPS-related investigation.

As discussed in Section II, carrying out evaluation type of
studies in real systems can be dangerous for human safety,
excessively costly, and may cause interruption or degradation
of the network performance and the QoS (as perceived by the
users). To address these issues, models can be used to simulate
or emulate the behavior and performance of the cyber-system
layer under different scenarios. In essence, simulation allows
replicating the behavior of cyber-system layer components,
while emulation duplicates the behavior of these components
and allows them to be used alongside real devices. The simula-
tion and emulation of the cyber-system layer are fundamental
tools for understanding and studying topics related to complex
network deployment, networking architectures, communica-
tion protocol features, and deployment of new services.

The simulation/emulation modeling process is often instan-
tiated by identifying all the network components, commonly
referred to as communication network entities. These entities,
i.e., nodes and links conﬁgurations, constitute the network
topology. Fig. 6 depicts a conceptual illustration of how the
modeling process is performed in a communication network
simulation. As seen in Fig. 6, in a network simulator/emu-
lator architecture, a node is a key entity that represents any

17

Fig. 6: Conceptual diagram of the modeling and simulation
process of communication networks.

computing device connected to the overarching network. This
the possible representations of
abstraction encapsulates all
computing devices that may exist in a network setup. Some
of these computing devices can refer to routers, switches,
and hubs which embody the backbone of the network, while
computers, RTUs, PLCs, meters, and servers constitute the
endpoints of the network. A node is primarily characterized
by its packet transmission entity attribute. In this packet trans-
mission attribute, endpoints delineate the source or destination
of the data packets while all backbone elements perform the
forwarding tasks related to these packets. Other parameters,
known as state variables, differentiate the behavior for each
one of the modeled nodes. Some of these parameters are
memory consumption, physical location, battery power, and
CPU utilization. Additionally, other simulation entities, such
as NIC, help to identify nodes in the network. These interfaces
also have individual state variables that represent their state
(i.e., idle or busy, and installed or not installed) while being
in charge of transmitting, receiving, and processing the packets
exchanged with other network nodes.

Similar to the nodes, interfaces include other entities, such
as queues and links, which represent realistic packet process-
ing scenarios. Queues are modeled as buffers in the outgoing
and incoming packet processes. Links are modeled as the
connections between the two nodes communicating via the
corresponding interfaces (i.e., communication medium). More
links are modeled by deﬁning communication
speciﬁcally,
parameters such as the available bandwidth, propagation de-
lays, jitter, and pre-deﬁned packet loss rates. Furthermore,
packets are modeled as entities that contain the data exchanged
between nodes in the network. For each node in the network,
entities that represent the protocol stack must also be deﬁned,
while the packet sizes are determined by the corresponding
communication protocol (e.g., TCP, UDP, etc.).

A protocol entity is responsible for managing the outgoing
and incoming packets by adding and removing packet headers.
Protocol modeling is also a key process. It covers the speciﬁc
steps required to accurately emulate the behavior of the
protocol stack. In this process, models are developed to capture
elements and properties from the network access layer, internet

endpointendpointendpointbackbonebackboneNodeentityNodePacket transmissionNICProtocolstackModelperformanceState variablesPhys. locationmemory…Idle/busyConnected/not.…QueuesLinkspacketsBandwidthDelay………18

i) Ofﬂine simulation: Ofﬂine simulation tools provide a simple
and cost-effective way of conducting simulations on any
generic computing device. These tools can execute models at
slower or faster-than-real-time speeds depending on the com-
plexity of the model as well as the availability of computing
resources. Figs. 7a and 7b show how the computation time of
the system models, for both slower and faster-than-real-time
ofﬂine simulations, is not synchronized with the simulation
clock, i.e., the real-time clock. Ofﬂine simulations allow the
simulation of complex systems without considering real-time
constraints, which for instance, enable researchers to simulate
large periods of time, e.g., months or years, in a few minutes or
seconds. Some tools and software which are available for this
type of simulations include: MATLAB/Simscape Electrical
(EMT & TS), OpenDSS (TS), Gridlab-D (TS), eMegaSim
(EMT), ePhasorSim (TS), and ETAP eMTP (EMT).
ii) Real-time simulation: Real-time simulation tools provide
the capability of generating results that are synchronized with
a real-time clock. This allows physical devices to be interfaced
with the simulated system via realistic data exchanges syn-
chronized using a real-time clock. Fig. 7c demonstrates how
for real-time simulation the computation time for the system is
synchronized with the simulation clock. The computation time
needed to solve all the states of the simulated system needs to
be lower or exactly the same as the simulation clock, i.e., the
real-time clock. Real-time simulation setups allow researchers
to connect real devices using HIL techniques such as CHIL
and PHIL. Some tools and software which are available for this
type of simulations include: eMegaSim (EMT), ePhasorSim
(TS), HyperSim (EMT), RTDS (EMT), and Typhoon HIL
(EMT).
b) Hardware: Real-time HIL implementations allow the inter-
connection of external hardware devices to a real-time simu-
lation environment through the appropriate I/O or networking
interfaces. Two of these HIL techniques are CHIL and PHIL.
i) Controller Hardware-in-the-Loop (CHIL): In CHIL, phys-
ical devices are in constant communication and interaction
with a simulation running in the real-time environment. This
interconnection includes sending control signals and receiving
feedback signals through I/O and/or networking ports [150],
[151]. As seen in the hardware section of Fig. 5, a physical de-
vice connected using a CHIL implementation can be interfaced
directly: i) with the physical-system layer simulation using the
appropriate interface, or ii) through the cyber-system layer
using standard communication protocols and corresponding
networking components.
ii) Power Hardware-in-the-Loop (PHIL): In PHIL, a power
inverter, or battery
hardware system such as a PV panel,
system is physically connected to the RTS through analog
and digital I/O ports. A PHIL implementation needs the
use of a power ampliﬁcation unit that is responsible for the
ampliﬁcation and conversion of the digital voltage and current
data signals – coming from the simulation environment – into
analog voltage and current signals required by the connected
actual/physical device. Interfacing algorithms are also essential
to facilitate the interconnection between the software models
and the physical-system [152].

(a)

(b)

(c)
Fig. 7: Differences in the computation timing of ofﬂine simu-
lation and real-time simulation: (a) slower-than real-time, (b)
faster-than real-time, and (c) real-time simulation.

layer, transport layer, and application layer. Finally, models for
performance evaluations, which do not represent real elements
in the network, are also deﬁned as additional entities that
facilitate the implementation and evaluation of the network.
Some representative examples of such entities are logging and
helper utilities which can aid the network evaluation process
[148].

B. Resources

The ‘resources’ represents the different hardware and soft-
ware systems that form, and can be used to model and
simulate, the cyber- and physical-system layers of the CPES
being studied. In this part, we make a distinction between
the hardware and simulation/emulation resources that need to
be considered for modeling the cyber- and physical-system
layers using tools and techniques such as ofﬂine simulation,
emulation, real-time simulation, and HIL.

1) Physical-System Layer: The simulation and hardware
resources for the modeling and implementation of the CPES
physical-system layer are presented below.
a) Simulation: A simulation provides a set of models or
representations used to reproduce the behavior or operation
of different processes of a particular system over time. Par-
ticularly for EPS, EMT- and TS-type simulations are the
most prominent
tools used to investigate the behavior of
different system components. These simulation classes can be
further classiﬁed into two main categories: ofﬂine and real-
time simulations [149].

𝑡𝑛−1𝑡𝑛𝑡𝑛+1SimulationClockComputationTime: 𝑓(𝑡)𝑓𝑡𝑛𝑓𝑡𝑛+1𝑡𝑛−1𝑡𝑛𝑡𝑛+1SimulationClockComputationTime: 𝑓(𝑡)𝑓𝑡𝑛𝑓𝑡𝑛+1𝑓𝑡𝑛+2𝑡𝑛−1𝑡𝑛𝑡𝑛+1SimulationClockComputationTime: 𝑓(𝑡)𝑓𝑡𝑛𝑓𝑡𝑛+1𝑓𝑡𝑛+219

TABLE V: Physical-system layer performance metrics. These metrics are divided according to the domain where they can be
measured.

Name

Rise time

Percent overshoot

Settling time

Steady-state error

Integrate absolute error (IAE)

Voltage stability

Frequency stability

Optimization

Power quality

Reliability

Command vs. Measured % error

PHIL Accuracy

Description
Evaluates the time required for the output to rise from %x to %y of
the steady-state response
Evaluates the maximum peak value of the output minus the step
value divided by the step value
Evaluates the time required for the output to reach and remain
within a deﬁned error band
Evaluates the difference between the input (command) and the
output of the system
Evaluates the absolute error of the system over time
Metrics that evaluate the voltage stability and regulation of the EPS
according to deﬁned limits
Metrics that evaluate the frequency stability of the EPS according to
deﬁned limits
Optimization metrics used to evaluate energy and power
management functions, e.g., energy cost, efﬁciency
Power quality metrics such as THD, transients, ﬂickering, and
voltage sags used to evaluate EPS operation [153]
Reliability indices to evaluate EPS operation, e.g., SAIFI, SAIDI,
ASAI, lost load % [153]
Percentage error between signal command coming from controller
and signal measured
Metrics that evaluate the accuracy of the PHIL integration [154]

Domain

Control

Control

Control

Control

Control

EPS

EPS

EPS

EPS

EPS

Simulation (CHIL)

Simulation (PHIL)

2) Cyber-System Layer: The simulation/emulation and
hardware resources related to the modeling and development
of the cyber-system layer for the communication network are
presented below.
a) Simulation/Emulation: As mentioned before, the main dif-
ference between simulation and emulation is that in a simu-
lation, the models used are designed to replicate the behavior
of the system while emulation is designed to duplicate the
behavior of the system. A more detailed description of the
difference between simulation and emulation is given below
in the context of the resources required to effectively replicate
the cyber-system layer.
i) Simulation: In network simulations, theoretical and mathe-
matical models are developed to create entirely virtual mod-
els of the corresponding networking components. Network
simulation tools use discrete-event simulation approaches that
generate sequences of discrete events that characterize the
discrete cyberspace. The two critical components of such
discrete-event driven simulators include the simulation time
variable and a list of pending future events. The simulation
time variable represents the current time at which the state
of the system is known (in the simulation), while the list of
pending future events contains all the state changes that have
been scheduled to occur in the future, which guide the ﬂow
of the simulation. In a network simulation, external devices
cannot be interfaced with virtual simulated devices, contrary to
a network emulation, hence, the entire communication network
needs to be simulated. Some of the available software tools
that support this type of simulations are: ns-2 [155], ns-3
[156], SimPy [157], and EXata [158], [148].

ii) Emulation: In network emulation, hardware and software
solutions are designed to accurately replicate the behavior of
networking components, exactly as if they were actual parts
of an external network. Network emulation tools enable the
conﬁguration and manipulation of network parameters and
constraints (e.g., packet
loss, delays, jitter, etc.) to mimic
the mirrored network. Some of the available software tools
that support this type of network modeling are: the Common
Open Research Emulator (CORE) [159], NetEm [160], and
EXata [158]. Notably, some tools are capable of adapting
network simulation models for emulation purposes by adding
real-time synchronization mechanisms between the virtualized
simulated environment and the real networking components
[161], [162].
b) Hardware (HIL): Similarly to the HIL implementations
realized in the physical-system layer, HIL implementations
of network components in the cyber-system layer can also
be performed using the corresponding networking interfaces.
Networking HIL provides emulation capabilities that allow
the integration of real equipment
into the emulated net-
work through standard communication protocols. Commonly,
a larger portion of the network or system is emulated and
connected with external (real) devices. Such a method provides
high-ﬁdelity responses – as expected from the actual device –
while maintaining the scale of the emulation. Some software
tools that support HIL with communication network models
are EXataCPS [158], ns-3 [156], and CORE through the RJ45
utility [159].

C. Performance Metrics

A multitude of metrics exists to evaluate the performance
of the modeled cyber- and physical-system layers. The use of
metrics allows the concise evaluation of the overall system
alongside its corresponding subsystems. In essence,
these
metrics provide quantitative ways to measure and evaluate the
performance of the system’s operation at a particular time,
both at the cyber- and the physical-system layers.

1) Physical-System Layer: Some of the most commonly
used metrics employed to evaluate the performance and op-
eration of different functions that exist in the physical-system
layer of CPES are presented in Table V and described below:
a) Control systems: Metrics related to control systems can be
used to examine the performance of different control routines
present at the physical-system layer. The evaluation can in-
clude the steady-state response of the system or other system
performance indicators such as rise time, percent overshoot,
settling time, steady-state error, and integrate absolute error.
b) EPS resiliency, stability, and optimization: Performance
metrics can be deﬁned in order to evaluate the performance
of the system according to a predeﬁned baseline behavior.
For instance, in an EPS where the operation of a new MG
controller is investigated, performance metrics related to volt-
age regulation, frequency regulation, energy cost, and power
quality can be utilized. Similarly, especially for controllers,
which are limited by their computing resources, different
performance metrics can be utilized to determine execution
times, CPU utilization, and memory utilization.
c) Simulation accuracy: The simulation accuracy, either of-
ﬂine or real-time, can also be assessed based on different
performance metrics dependent on the stability and accuracy
of the system response, respectively. The main objective of
these metrics is to validate the response of different physi-
cal systems (being simulated) when compared to the actual
response expected from the system under examination.

2) Cyber-System Layer: Different metrics can be utilized to
evaluate the performance of the modeled cyber-system layer
communication network. Here, we demonstrate, as a practical
example, some of the most widely used metrics designed to
evaluate the network performance at different layers of the
open systems interconnection (OSI) model [148]. Table VI
outlines some representative network performance metrics.
a) Physical (L1) and Data Link Layers (L2): These layers
describe how data should be generated and transmitted by
network devices over the corresponding physical media.
b) Network Layer (L3): This layer describes how data packets
are transferred between a source and a destination node inside
the network. It represents layer 3 of the OSI model. The main
performance metrics described below are designed to evalu-
ate two main routing functions: path selection, and network
topology management. Path selection aims to determine the
best path from source to destination, while network topology
management deﬁnes how network entities are interconnected
for data forwarding purposes.
c) Transport (L4), Session (L5), Presentation (L6), and Appli-
cation (L7) Layers: These layers describe the shared commu-
nication protocols and interfacing methods used by the nodes

20

in the network. In essence, these are the layers responsible for
providing full end-user access to the communication network
infrastructure.

It is important to note that many other network and physical
performance metrics can be used to evaluate speciﬁc sce-
narios. The presented lists include a subset of the available
metrics discussed in the literature. There are also application-
speciﬁc metrics that can be deﬁned according to each study’s
requirements. Overall, researchers should carefully model their
systems as well as select the corresponding resources and
metrics to accurately represent the cyber- and physical-layer
of the CPES under test. This will allow the integration of any
external physical device, either through CHIL and/or PHIL,
and ensure the holistic validation of the system’s operation.

V. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP & CASE STUDIES

The case studies discussed in this section demonstrate how
the presented threat modeling approach, the CPS framework,
and risk assessment methodology can be utilized to perform
detailed CPES studies. Table VII describes how each study
can be formalized using our proposed threat modeling method.
Following, the corresponding modeling layers, resources, and
evaluation metrics are identiﬁed for each case study according
to the conceptual CPS framework. Additionally, for each
attack scenario, the speciﬁc background, and mathematical
formulation are described and the corresponding threat model
is provided based on Section III. The threat model describes
the assumptions made for the adversary intentions and ca-
pabilities as well as the attack-speciﬁc details, demonstrating
the practicality of our modeling approach for diverse attack
scenarios. Furthermore, we demonstrate how the proposed risk
assessment procedure can be applied to each case study and
assist in prioritizing mitigation strategies. In our work, the
objective priority for CPES is outlined in Table VIII. It should
be noted that the order of objectives might change depending
on the system’s component being analyzed or the stakehold-
ers’ priorities. For instance, the impact of the “uninterrupted
operation and service provision” objective could indicate less
priority in the case of a compromised inverter serving as an
ancillary power generation source in a residential deployment,
in contrast to a T&D system-wide attack.

The attack cases presented in this section can be character-
ized as either DIA or data availability attacks (DAA). Table
IX provides the essential notation for the case studies. Each
scenario follows a mathematical background as part of a CPS
plant formulation:

x(k + 1) = Gx(k) + Bu(k)

y(k) = Cx(k) + e(k)

(3)

(4)

where x(k) ∈ Rn represents the states of the system, u(k) ∈
Rl represents the control variables, and y(k) ∈ Rm represents
the system measurements. G ∈ Rn×n, B ∈ Rn×l, and C ∈
Rm×n represent the system matrix, input matrix, and output
matrix, respectively. The term e ∈ Rm represents measurement

TABLE VI: Cyber-system layer performance metrics. These metrics are divided according to the OSI model layer and connection
where they can be measured.

21

Name
Bit rate (R)

Bit-error rate (BER)

Packet-error rate (PER)

Nominal channel capacity
(NCC)

Channel utilization (CU)

Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
Signal-to-interference-plus-noise
ratio (SINR)

Spectral efﬁciency (SE)

Received signal strength
indication (RSSI)

Hop count

Round trip time (RTT)

Expected transmission time
(ETT)

Betweenness

Node degree

End-to-end delay

Jitter
Bandwidth

Link stress

Description
Number of bits conveyed per unit of time
Ratio of the number of received bits altered during
transmission to the total number of bits sent
Ratio of the number of packets received incorrectly to
the total number of packets received
Maximum number of bits that can be transmitted per
unit of time
Ratio between NCC and the total number of bits
received per transmission time
Ratio of the signal power to the background noise
Similar to SNR but considers the interference power
from other signals
Number of received bits per unit of time per unit of

bandwidth and per unit areas (i.e.,

b/s
Hz·m2 )

Signal strength measured at the receiver’s antenna
during packet reception
Minimum hop-count from source node to destination
node
Time that it takes for a signal to be sent and the
acknowledgement received
Time needed for a data packet to be correctly
transmitted over a link
Number of shortest paths between any two nodes that
pass through the evaluated node
Number of nodes that depend on the evaluated node.
Time required to transmit a packet along the path
between source and destination nodes
Packet delay variation
Overall bandwidth consumption in the network
Number of packet replicas traversing the same physical
link

Layer
L1/L2

L1/L2

Connection
Wired/Wireless

Wired/Wireless

L1/L2

Wired/Wireless

L1/L2

Wired/Wireless

L1/L2

L1/L2

L1/L2

L1/L2

L1/L2

L3

L3

L3

L3

L3

Wired/Wireless

Wired

Wireless

Wireless

Wireless

Wired/Wireless

Wired/Wireless

Wireless

Wired/Wireless

Wired/Wireless

L4/L5/L6/L7 Wired/Wireless

L4/L5/L6/L7 Wired/Wireless
L4/L5/L6/L7 Wired/Wireless

L4/L5/L6/L7 Wired/Wireless

noise in the system’s input measurements. As for the cyber part
of the CPS, it can be generally expressed as:

u(k + 1) = Hy(k)

(5)

where H ∈ Rl×m represents the control matrix [163].

Fig. 8 depicts a diagram of the CPS mathematical formula-
tion and the respective variables compromised by attackers
during DIA and DAA scenarios. In the DIA case, either
the measurements (y) or the control variables (u) can be
compromised by attackers via modiﬁcation or fabrication. On
the other hand, in a DAA scenario, either the measurements
(y) or controls (u) can be compromised by attackers via
interruption, i.e., delaying their acquisition or utilization by
the system.

A. Case Study 1: Cross-layer Firmware Attacks
Background & Formulation: Cross-layer ﬁrmware attacks re-
fer to attacks targeting the ﬁrmware code of embedded devices
(i.e., the device read-only resident code which includes mi-
crocode and macro-instruction level routines), aiming to gener-
ate and propagate impacts from the device layer to system and

Fig. 8: Diagram of CPS plant under DIA and DAA scenarios.

application layers, respectively. Typically, embedded devices
in industrial CPS run on bare metal hardware without OS
and directly boot monolithic single-purpose software. In such
devices, tasks are executed on a single-threaded inﬁnite loop.
If the device ﬁrmware code execution is maliciously modiﬁed,
adversaries could gain total control over the embedded device.
The effects of such attacks can have a cross-layer impact
affecting multiple components and processes of the CPS. For
example,
in a CPES, by modifying the ﬁrmware control-
ling grid-tied inverters connected to BESS or EV chargers,
an adversary could compromise the system’s measurements,

Physical-Layer𝑥𝑘+1=𝐺𝑥𝑘+𝐵𝑢(𝑘)𝑦𝑘=𝐶𝑥𝑘+𝑒(𝑘)𝑢𝑘+1=𝐻𝑦𝑘Cyber-Layer𝑢𝑦𝑎𝑦𝑢𝑎𝑦(𝑘−𝑑)𝛥𝑦𝛥𝑢DAADIA!!𝑢(𝑘−𝑑)!!TABLE VII: Threat model of the attack case studies.

Load-changing Attacks

Time-delay Attacks

Threat Model

Knowledge
Access
Speciﬁcity
Resources
Frequency
Reproducibility
Functional Level
Asset

Cross-layer Firmware
Attacks
Oblivious
Possession
Non-targeted
Class I or II
Iterative
Multiple-time
L1
PLC

Technique

Modify control logic

Premise

Physical: Invasive, or

non-invasive

Cyber: Asset control
commands

Limited or Oblivious
Non-possession
Targeted
Class II
Iterative
Multiple-times
L1 or L2
PLC or HMI
Modify control logic or
wireless compromise

Cyber: Communications
and protocols or Asset
control commands

22

Propagating Attacks in
Integrated T&D CPES
Strong
Possession
Targeted
Class II
Non-Iterative
One-time
L2
Engineering workstation
Engineering workstation
compromise

Oblivious
Non-possession
Targeted
Class I or II
Iterative
Multiple-time
L1
Control Server
Wireless compromise,
MitM, Spooﬁng, DoS

Cyber: Communications
and protocols

Cyber: Asset control
commands

TABLE VIII: Objective Priority for CPES Risk Assessment.

Objective
People health and personnel safety
Uninterrupted operation and service provision
Equipment damage and legal punishment
Organization ﬁnancial proﬁt

Priority
4
3
2
1

TABLE IX: Symbols and notation for case studies formulation.

Domain Symbol

k
n
m
l
x
y
ya
u
ua
e
G
B
C
H
β
W
Tattack

Deﬁnition
timestep
total number of states
total number of measurements
total number of controls
system’s states
system’s measurements
attacked system’s measurements
control variables
attacked control variables
measurement noise
system matrix
input matrix
output matrix
control matrix
multiplicative attack factor
additive White-noise attack factor
attack period (time)

∆y manipulated measurements used to create ya
∆u
fD
d
sr

manipulated controls used to create ya
time-delay function
discrete constant value or time function.
compromised signal (could be either y or u)

CPS

DIA

DAA

thus causing frequency ﬂuctuations, voltage sags, and system
stability issues. Other scenarios could even cause wide-area
outages, such as the Ukrainian power grid attack in 2015,
in which attackers replaced the legitimate ﬁrmware of serial-

to-Ethernet converters at substations causing them to become
inoperable [14]. In general, cross-layer ﬁrmware attacks can
be categorized as a DIA-type of attack since modiﬁcations at
the ﬁrmware level could result in compromising the integrity
of data at different CPS layers.

In this type of DIA, the adversary (though ﬁrmware mod-
iﬁcations) can tamper with the input/sensed measurements
(e.g., modify, scale, etc.), y(k), and thus directly affect the
inverter control strategy and variables, u(k), driving the system
into instability. This type of attack can be characterized as a
combined DIA attack [164]–[166]. In more detail, the system’s
input measurements are modiﬁed using both an additive ran-
dom/white noise component and an attack model in which
nominal measurements are scaled (increased or decreased).
These DIAs can be modeled as:

(cid:40)

ya(k) =

y(k)
, when k /∈ Tattack
βy(k) + W , when k ∈ Tattack

(6)

where β represents the multiplicative attack term, W repre-
sents the additive random/white noise attack, Tattack repre-
sents the period of time when the DIA is performed, and ya
represents the ‘altered’/attacked input measurements. β > 1
represents increasing-type of attacks, and β < 1 decreasing
attacks.

Following this combined-type DIA mathematical formu-
lation, we demonstrate how the inverter operation can be
compromised by spooﬁng its energy conversion module. The
results of this compromise affect not only the inverter behavior
but also propagate and impact the MG operation as well.
Threat Model: As presented in Section III, the threat modeling
process for any attack can be characterized by the adversary
in
model and the attack model formulations. Speciﬁcally,
this cross-layer ﬁrmware attack case, we assume an oblivious
adversary without full observability of the CPES, and who
has direct physical access to the targeted hardware controller
(i.e., adversary access: possession). Regarding adversarial
speciﬁcity, the attack is presumed to be a non-targeted attack.

Fig. 9: Conceptual illustration of the MG system used for the
cross-layer ﬁrmware case study.

23

(a)

(b)

Fig. 10: Cross-layer ﬁrmware attack targeting the inverter’s
maximum power point tracking (MPPT) controller.

The adversarial resources could range from the minimum, i.e.,
Class I, up to state-funded criminal organizations (Class II),
in the worst-case scenario.

Furthermore, our case study assumes an attack that occurs
iteratively and can be reproduced multiple times. The targeted
asset is a solar inverter controller, so the attack level is deﬁned
as Level 1. Finally, the technique employed to compromise
the system involves control logic code modiﬁcation, and the
attack premise can be categorized as either invasive or non-
invasive (on the physical domain) or could target the inverter
control (e.g., power conversion, power factor, active reactive
injections, setpoints, etc.) using malicious commands (on the
cyber domain).
Attack Setup & Evaluation: In this case study, a cross-layer
ﬁrmware attack is modeled as a DIA that compromises
physical components, more speciﬁcally a PV inverter, at the
physical-system layer of the CPES. Both EMT and TS simu-
lation modeling approaches are used to model a MG system
comprised of a solar PV with its inverter, a Li-ion BESS, a
diesel generator, and residential and industrial loads. The MG
is connected to the main grid via a 13.8 kV/5 kV distribution
substation transformer with a capacity of 250 MVA. The
nameplate generation capacity for the diesel generator is set to
1 MW. The maximum generation capacity that the PV inverter
can reach is 250 kW based on the provided solar irradiance
proﬁle. The BESS is capable of providing up to 100 kW and
storing 100 kWh. The loads of the MG include aggregated
residential loads with a constant power demand of 250 kW and
a variable lumped industrial load whose power demand ranges
between 250-750 kW. Fig. 9 shows a conceptual illustration of

(c)
Fig. 11: Cross-layer ﬁrmware attack impact on the DC-DC
converter stage: (a) solar irradiance proﬁle, (b) impact on the
DC voltage output, and (c) impact on the DC power output.

the described MG. The main software resource used to conduct
the EMT and TS ofﬂine-simulations of the physical-system
layer for this case study is MATLAB/Simscape Electrical.

In Fig. 10 we illustrate, the top-level architectural overview
of an inverter, the core components comprising it, and the
maximum power point tracking (MPPT) controller block that
is the main target of this attack use case. Attackers can
disrupt the nominal inverter operation by tampering with the
ﬁrmware subroutines which control both the DC-DC boost
and the DC-AC conversion stages. In particular, Figs. 11, 12
demonstrate the speciﬁcs of how the operation of an inverter
can be affected by an adversary capable of compromising
the ﬁrmware. For our use case, we employ a grid-tied solar
inverter module provided by Texas Instruments [167]. The
inverter leverages an F2803x series control card which is
responsible for managing the inverter’s peripheral devices
(e.g., sensing modules, analog-to-digital converters, transistor
gate driver circuits, etc.) as well as the power conversion
process (i.e., solar energy to electricity). By modifying the
operation of the MPPT algorithm – within the ﬁrmware code
of the control card that the inverter utilizes to optimize the
output power generated by the solar panels – the attacker is

24

enabled power resource (t = 1sec) in order to protect the rest
of the MG devices and avoid operational disruptions.

The metrics used to evaluate the performance and behavior
of the MG operation, based on the presented CPS framework,
are the physical-system layer performance metrics related to
frequency stability and voltage stability. Fig. 13 demonstrates
impact of malicious inverter operation on the
the overall
MG, and how the grid’s power, voltage, and frequency are
affected. In more detail, we notice that at t = 35sec when
a signiﬁcant load increase in the MG occurs, the contribu-
tion of the anomalous inverter behavior signiﬁcantly impacts
the frequency causing potential stability issues. However, at
t = 15sec and t = 50sec, when the power generation of
the inverter as well as its power contribution to the grid is
much lower following the solar irradiance proﬁle, the impact
of the inverter’s malicious behavior is reduced. Thus, from
an adversarial perspective, targeting an inverter device during
peak-hours when the solar generation is reaching its maximum
can yield signiﬁcant implications on the grid’s operation. Fig.
11 shows the impact of the attack on the DC-side of the
converter. It can be observed that both the DC voltage and
current ﬂuctuate, creating harmonic distortion at the output.
Similarly, Fig. 12 demonstrates how the AC power generation
is affected by the ﬁrmware modiﬁcation attack. At t = 1sec
the oscillatory behavior causes an islanding scenario that
disconnects the PV system from the rest of the MG. Fig. 14
shows the mapping of the presented case study with the CPS
framework.

It is important to note that in the presented case study, it
is assumed that the cross-layer ﬁrmware attack is performed
by an adversary with the capability of compromising the
physical device, hence, modeling the cyber-system layer was
not required. An extension of this study could involve the
implementation of an over-the-air cross-layer ﬁrmware attack
that compromises a device via the cyber-system layer. The
implementation of such a scenario would also require the
modeling of the cyber-system layer, i.e., the communication
network that serves as the medium and entry point for the
attack.
Risk Assessment: Due to the inherent difﬁculty of getting
simultaneous access to multiple devices in order to cause
severe impacts on grid operation, the T hreat P robability for
this type of attack is set to Medium (2). For the resulting
damage part of the Risk formula, we use the priorities indi-
cated in Table VIII, and set the “People health and personnel
safety”, “Uninterrupted operation and service provision”, and
“Equipment damage and legal punishment” attack impacts to
Low (1), while the “Organization ﬁnancial proﬁt” counter-
part is set to Medium (2). Thus, the comprehensive Risk
for the evaluated cross-layer ﬁrmware attack study is estimated
to be 2 ∗ (cid:80)(4 + 3 + 2 + 2) = 22.

B. Case Study 2: Load-changing attacks

Background & Formulation: In load-changing attacks, an ad-
versary triggers an unexpected or sudden demand increase or
decrease of IoT connected high-wattage appliances and DERs,
with the objective of causing grid instabilities [12]. Although

(a)

(b)

(c)
Fig. 12: Cross-layer ﬁrmware attack impact on the DC-AC
converter stage (grid-tied inverter end): (a) impact on the AC
voltage output, (b) impact on the AC current output, and (c)
impact on the AC power output.

able to destabilize the operation of the converter.

MPPT algorithms enable inverters to obtain high power
conversion efﬁciencies. By constantly monitoring the solar
PV outputs (i.e., PV generated voltage and current), MPPT
algorithms regulate the converter’s operating point achiev-
ing maximal power transfer. Given that
the PV real-time
generation measurements are critical for the MPPT opera-
tion, any perturbations of the sensed values can potentially
compromise the inverter’s nominal operation. For our case
study, the modiﬁcation of the inverter’s ﬁrmware tampers with
the inverter’s MPPT function and the controls of the DC-
DC and DC-AC converters. In the context of DIA attacks,
the sensed inputs to the MPPT function,
i.e., PV voltage
and current, are maliciously modiﬁed. By tampering with
the MPPT input measurements, down-scaling, and introducing
additive sinusoidal noise (combined-type DIA attack), we are
able to generate the oscillatory behavior depicted in Fig.
11. This unstable behavior propagates through the inverter’s
power conversion process leading to anomalous behavior on
the grid-tied inverter end, as seen in Fig. 12. The result of
this compromise is the eventual disconnection of the inverter-

25

utility equipment or initiate cascading failures in distribution
systems.

In terms of mathematical formulation, load-changing attacks
can be framed as a DIA-type that maliciously modiﬁes the con-
trol variables of loads in CPES, causing signiﬁcant unexpected
power variations that could, in turn, lead to circuit overﬂows
or instabilities at certain vulnerable locations of the electric
grid. This type of attack involves the malicious manipulation
of high-wattage appliances and/or DERs that can signiﬁcantly
disturb the balance between power supply and demand. In or-
der to perform this type of attack, we assume that the adversary
accesses and controls multiple compromised elements through
the cyber layer of the system, i.e., its communication network
infrastructure, and then manipulates their control variables
causing rapid ﬂuctuations in the system’s response. A load-
changing attack is different from a ‘measurements-altering’
DIA in the sense that, instead of measurements being affected,
the control variables are the ones being directly manipulated
by the adversary. Using the same CPS system described by
Eqs. (3) – (5), the generalized DIA for the load-changing
attack scenario is described by:

xa(k + 1) = Gx(k) + B(cid:0)u(k) + ∆u(k)(cid:1)
ya = C(cid:0)x(k + 1) + B∆u(k)(cid:1) + e(k + 1)

(7)

(8)

where xa and ya represent
the states and measurements,
respectively, ‘altered’ by the manipulation of the system’s
control variables ∆u.

In order to map the above formulation to the load-changing
attack case within CPES, the term u in Eq. (7) can be adapted
to represent
the controllable ‘altered’ load demand in the
system as:

da(k) = di(k) + ∆d(k)

(9)

where d represents the controllable load demand, di is the
initial ‘un-altered’ load demand, ∆d is the portion of the total
load demand affected by the attack, and da represents the
total load demand ‘altered’ by the load-changing attack. If
the attackers simultaneously compromise more than one load
in the system, Eq. (9) can be extended as:

DT (k) =

m
(cid:88)

l=1

di,l(k) +

n
(cid:88)

j=1

da,n(k) + Ploss

(10)

where DT represents the total demand in the system, m is
the number of total ‘unaltered’ loads, n is the total number of
loads compromised by adversaries, and Ploss is the total loss
in the distribution network.

Based on the CPES requirement to balance load and gen-
eration in real-time in order to maintain frequency stability in
the system [172], the summation of all generation output and
all load demands and losses must be approximately equal:

DT (k) ≈

Ng
(cid:88)

g=1

Pg(k)

(11)

where Ng represents the number of g generators in the
system. To understand the effect of sudden load changes in
the frequency stability at each generator bus, we use the swing

(a)

(b)

(c)
Fig. 13: Cross-layer ﬁrmware attack impact on the power
grid: (a) renewable source generated power, (b) phasor and
EMT magnitude of the MG voltage, and (c) MG operating
frequency.

Fig. 14: Mapping of cross-layer ﬁrmware attack case study
with CPS framework.

currently hypothetical, due to the low penetration rates of
IoT-controllable high-wattage loads and DERs, load-changing
attacks are projected to become a ‘real’ threat in the near future
as the number of controllable DERs and loads is anticipated
to grow exponentially [168]–[170]. Attackers able to install
malware that could control DERs and load consumption, can
therefore maliciously manipulate system operating conditions
and affect the CPES. One example of such an attack can
entail an adversary capable of synchronously switching on and
off high-wattage devices at unexpected times, causing power,
voltage, and frequency instabilities, i.e., an Aurora-type attack
at the load side [171]. This event could also potentially damage

ModelingResourcesMetrics---EMT& TS : OfflineMATLAB/SimscapeElectricalFrequency &voltagestabilityCyber-SystemPhysical-SystemLayersequations. The swing equations in Eq. (12) – (14) describe
the relationship between the input mechanical power (Pm),
output electrical power (Pe), and the rotational speed of the
generator (ω) [173]. The term Pe is directly related to Pg,
since it represents the generator power output plus electrical
losses of the generating unit.

26

d2δ
dt2 = Pm − Pe

= ω(t) − ωs

2H
ωs
dδ(t)
dt
dω(t)
dt

2H
ωs

= Pm − Pe

Pe =

VsVr
X

sin(δ)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

In these equations, H represents the constant normalized
inertia, ωs is the synchronous speed (i.e., 50 or 60 Hz),
and δ is the power angle; the angle between the generator’s
internal voltage, i.e., the voltage at the generator bus Vs, and
its terminal voltage, i.e., the voltage at receiving bus Vr. X
is the reactance based on the classical model of a generator
[174]. The relationship between the electrical frequency ω(t)
with the power angle δ is shown in Eq. (13). Based on these
relationships, any sudden change in load demand, caused by
high-wattage loads turning on/off in the system, will affect Pe,
and thus cause subsequent frequency ﬂuctuations, as seen in
Eq. (14).

Threat Model: In the load-changing attack case study,
the
adversary is assumed to be either oblivious, i.e., having no
knowledge of the system topology, or with limited knowledge.
Such limited information regarding the CPES could assist in
optimally coordinating the attack and could be acquired, for
example, via open-source intelligence techniques. The adver-
sary can perform the attack remotely, thus, non-possession
is presumed of the IoT devices controlling the high-wattage
loads. Load-changing attacks are targeted attacks aiming to
destabilize grid operation by causing blackouts, voltage sags,
and/or frequency ﬂuctuations. As a consequence, determined
adversaries with signiﬁcant resources at their disposal (Class II
attackers) are required to successfully materialize such attacks.
As for the attack model of the load-changing scenario,
the attack frequency component is considered iterative due
to the fact that in order to cause a signiﬁcant effect on the
system, a single attack incident may not be sufﬁcient. The
reproducibility of such stealthy and indirect attacks is set to
multiple-times. Furthermore, the attack functional level is at
Level 1 or 2, per the assets that are vulnerable and enable this
load-changing scenario (e.g., PLCs, controllers, HMIs, etc.).
Last, the attack techniques that the adversaries use can either
include control logic modiﬁcations if PLCs are targeted or
wireless compromise if a wireless controller is affected. In both
cases, the attacks target the cyber domain, and speciﬁcally, the
integrity of the in-transit data issued from HMIs or SCADA
MTUs (i.e., communications and protocols), or the control
commands to PLCs.

Attack Setup & Evaluation: In order to demonstrate the ef-

Fig. 15: Load-changing attack on IEEE-39 bus system. Load-
changing attack targets are shown as red arrows in the system
topology.

Fig. 16: Mapping of load-changing attack case study lever-
aging the CPS framework.

fects of load-changing attacks on CPES, we simulate such
attacks targeting multiple load buses in the IEEE-39 bus
system. Three vulnerable load buses (bus 16, 23, and 29) are
selected as the targets for the load-changing attacks [175], as
shown in Fig. 15.

In this case study, it is important to examine the dynamic
impact of frequency instabilities caused by load-changing
attacks. Hence, to study these frequency instabilities, we model
the physical-system layer using an EMT-approach with support
from real-time simulation. At this layer, the generators are
modeled as synchronous machines taking into consideration
the dynamics of the stator, the ﬁeld, and the damper wind-
ings. An excitation system is used for the system’s control
and protection functions designed to handle any disturbances
measured in the power system [176]. Loads are modeled as
constant impedance, current, and power (ZIP) models [177].
The mapping of this load changing attack case study to the
CPS framework is presented in Fig. 16. The main software
resource used to conduct the EMT real-time simulations of
the physical-system layer is eMegaSim (from Opal-RT ). The
metrics used to evaluate the performance and behavior of
the IEEE-39 bus test system, based on the presented CPS
framework, are the physical-system layer performance metrics
related to frequency stability (Table V).

In order to evaluate the impact of the load-changing attack
on the power grid frequency, we observe the frequency varia-
tions measured at the generators’ connections to the grid. We
develop four different scenarios of load-changing attacks in

ModelingResourcesMetrics---EMT : Real-timeeMegaSimFrequency stabilityCyber-SystemPhysical-SystemLayerswhich the system is initialized with original load values from
literature [178], and the system frequency is kept at a nominal
value of 60 Hz. All load-changing attacks are triggered at
t = 4sec with a duration of 0.5sec. Fig. 17a shows the effect
of a 20% load demand increase at bus 29. Such sudden load
demand increase causes the measured frequency to decrease
to around 59.87 Hz on the nearby generator 9 while having a
smaller impact on other generators. At t = 4.5sec, when the
load demand increase is terminated, the frequency ﬂuctuates
and increases to around 60.11 Hz at bus 29. Fig. 17b shows
the results of a simultaneous load-changing attack that causes
a 20% load demand increase at buses 29 and 16. The main
difference between this case compared to the ﬁrst scenario is
the higher number of generators that are affected by the attack.
A load-changing attack with greater system impact is de-
picted in Fig.17c. In this scenario, an attack is simulated as a
50% load demand increase that affects simultaneously buses
29 and 16. Here, we observe that the frequency measured
at multiple generators approximately reaches 59.85 Hz when
the load-changing attacks are triggered at t = 4sec, and
60.23 Hz when the load demand assumes nominal values
(t = 4.5sec). The ﬁnal scenario is shown in 17d, where we
implement an attack that suddenly increases the load demand
by 50% at buses 29, 16, and 23. In this scenario, we observe
how every generator in the system is heavily affected by the
attack. The frequency measured at multiple generators reaches
minimum and maximum values of 59.85 Hz and 60.23 Hz at
the respective trigger and termination events of the attack. The
most affected generators in this case study are generators 9 and
6.

In the aforementioned scenarios, the attacker is assumed
to be able to alter the power consumption proﬁles of IoT-
connected controllable loads, and therefore cause sudden load
demand increase. The presented results demonstrate the fea-
sibility and impact of load-changing attacks. The frequency
ﬂuctuations from such adverse events can lead to exceeding
the nominal EPS frequency limits [179], [180], thus causing
potential load-shedding incidents or equipment failures [181].
As demonstrated in Fig. 18, EPS have in-built control and pro-
tection mechanisms to maintain the power system frequency
within its nominal range. For example, the AGC mechanisms
can adjust minute frequency deviations from their nominal
value. However, if the EPS frequency deviates more than
0.036 Hz from the predeﬁned grid frequency (i.e., 60 Hz), the
generator governor systems are employed to account for such
frequency discrepancies and stabilize the system. On the other
hand, during more severe incidents, such as overfrequency (at
or above at 62.2 Hz) or underfrequency (at or below 57.8 Hz)
events, switching equipment and relays will automatically trip
to protect generators from such instantaneous and potentially
catastrophic frequency ﬂuctuations [182]. Furthermore, during
underfrequency incidents load shedding is typically employed
to bring the system frequency within acceptable operational
limits (between 58.4 Hz– 59.5 Hz) [179]. An ancillary mech-
anism like the generator governors and AGC can then be
utilized to bring the system back to its nominal frequency state.
On the other hand, during severe events, where the frequency
keeps decreasing even further, generators’ CBs are tripped to

27

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 17: Frequency variation impact on the power grid: (a)
with 20% demand increased at bus 29, (b) with 20% demand
increased at buses 29 and 16, (c) with 50 % load increase at
buses 29 and 16, and (d) with 50 % load increase at buses 29,
16, and 23.

protect the equipment from permanent damage.

Risk assessment: Similar to case study 1, load-changing at-
tacks require access to multiple devices to properly coor-
the T hreat P robability
dinate a successful attack. Thus,
for this type of attack is set to Medium (2). Following
the same objective priorities depicted in Table VIII, we set
the “People health and personnel safety”, and “Equipment

28

TDA margins, boundaries, surfaces, etc.) regarding effective
conditions for TDA disruptions against grid stability.

Threat model: In the TDA case study, we assume an oblivious
adversary having essentially no knowledge of the system
topology; such detailed information is not necessary to per-
form TDA events [186], [187]. Additionally, since this type of
attack is performed by introducing substantial delays, mainly
on the network level, possession of the targeted device is not
required. Due to the objective of TDAs aiming to destabilize
power grids by obstructing controls, crucial for the system’s
assets operation, TDA can be seen as a targeted attack.
Depending on the size and complexity of the compromised
CPES, the adversaries might require fewer or an extensive
array of skills and resources. Thus, adversaries’ resources for
performing TDAs can be classiﬁed in either Class I or Class
II type of attackers.

In order for TDAs to compromise CPES and severely impact
their operation, TDAs should be performed iteratively and
multiple-times. In addition, Level 2 assets are commonly the
ones being targeted by TDAs. As mentioned before, typically,
TDAs occur on the cyber domain, i.e., communications and
protocols, and target asset availability by tampering with con-
trol commands issued by control server devices. Consequently,
wireless compromise, MitM, spooﬁng, and DoS attacks are the
most prominent techniques adopted by adversaries to cause
anomalous incidents and cascading failures based on TDAs.

Attack Setup & Evaluation: In this case study, we develop
and simulate a TDA scenario in order to demonstrate its
effect on a MG CPES. Speciﬁcally,
in our study, a MG
disconnects from the main grid by an intentional islanding
command relayed from the MG controller at time t = 10sec.
Due to the insufﬁcient generation capacity in the system, the
MG controller sends a load shedding command to a breaker
that controls a controllable load. At this point, the adversary
performs a TDA that will delay this load shedding command
sent from the MG controller to one of the controllable loads,
thus causing major disturbances at the physical-system layer
of the CPES. The TDA occurs at the cyber-system layer of
the CPES, so for this particular case study, models for the
cyber-system layer and the physical-system layer are required
to perform a real-time co-simulation of the respective layers.
The physical-system layer is modeled using an EMT-
simulation approach with support from real-time simulation.
At this layer, the MG is modeled as a test system composed
of a conventional generator operated using a frequency control
mechanism rated at 1 MW, a Li-ion BESS rated at 100 kW/100
kWh, two controllable loads rated at 300 kW (load #1) and
700 kW (load #2), and a critical (non-sheddable) load rated at
200 kW. The main software resource used to conduct the EMT
real-time simulations of the physical-system layer for this case
study is eMegaSim (from Opal-RT ). The cyber-system layer
is modeled using a communication network emulation plat-
form that supports co-simulation capabilities. Speciﬁcally, the
software resource used to model the communication network
that represents the cyber-system layer is EXataCPS.

Every MG component from the physical layer is mapped
with a virtual communication node inside the network em-

Fig. 18: Power system corrective mechanisms to maintain
stability under different frequency deviations.

damage and legal punishment” attack impact to Low(1). On
the other hand, since potential protection mechanisms could
be triggered in the event of a load-changing attack causing
potential brownouts, in order to avoid cascading system effects
[183], the “Uninterrupted operation, and service provision” as
well as the “Organization ﬁnancial proﬁt” are set to Medium
(2). Consequently, the Risk of the presented load-changing
demand attacks is estimated to be 2 ∗ (cid:80)(4 + 2 + 6 + 2) = 28.

C. Case Study 3: Time-Delay Attacks

Background & Formulation: Time-delay attacks (TDA) are a
type of DAAs where attackers aim to destabilize the operation
of a compromised control system by delaying measurements
and/or control commands of sensors and actuators. This type
of attack does not require a massive amount of attacker
resources. For example, it can be implemented via network
congestion, caused by ﬂooding the network with a huge
amount of data, thus disrupting the nominal operation of the
attacked system.

The mathematical formulation of TDAs is formulated as
follows. Consider the CPS system described by Eqs. (3) – (5).
If Tattack is deﬁned as the period of time when the TDA is
performed, then the TDA can be structured as:
(cid:40)

fD

(cid:0)sr(k)(cid:1) =

sr(k − d)
sr(k)

, if k ∈ Tattack
, otherwise

(16)

where sr represents the compromised signal (which can be
either u, i.e., the control variable, or y, i.e., the measurements,
in the CPS), fD represents a time-delay function, and d
represents either a discrete constant delay value or a time-
varying delay function.

TDAs are considered a major threat to CPES due to their
potential capability of disturbing the stability of islanded
MGs, or even the overall power grid, by simply delaying
measurements or control commands transmitted and received
from sensing and control devices (e.g., smart meters, PMUs,
etc.). Due to the importance of TDAs, existing literature aims
to understand the complications such attacks could cause to
CPES operations [32], [184], [185]. For instance, in [185], the
authors present an analysis of different TDA concepts (e.g.,

29

(a)

Fig. 19: Conceptual illustration of the real-time co-simulation
MG system testbed used in the TDA case study.

ulation platform. The backbone of the communication net-
work is represented by a network router. The network router
is responsible for sending control commands and receiving
measurements from the MG components, i.e., BESS, loads,
and generator, to the MG controller, respectively. The com-
munication protocol used is the IEEE Std 1815, commonly
known as DNP3. IEDs in the network are modeled as DNP3
outstations and communicate with the MG controller which
is modeled as a DNP3 master. The DNP3 master and outsta-
tion devices exchange data and control commands including,
power generation, load consumption, breaker status, etc. The
connections between the communication network nodes are
modeled as wired 802.3 Ethernet connections with 100 Mbps
bandwidth. Fig. 19 shows a conceptual illustration of the real-
time co-simulation scenario designed to perform the described
case study. The metrics used to evaluate the performance
and behavior of the MG operation, based on the proposed
CPS framework, are the physical-system layer performance
metrics related to frequency stability, and the cyber-system
layer performance metrics related to average end-to-end delay
and total number of packets delayed by the TDA.

Based on the described setup, the impact of a malicious
TDA in an islanded MG system is evaluated. An attacker
compromises the communication link between the MG con-
troller and the IED controlling the disconnection of the breaker
the controllable (sheddable) load #1 (300 kW). Three
at
different attack test cases are evaluated by varying the time-
delay duration of the TDA. These delays are 0.5sec, 5sec,
and 15sec approximately. In the communication network, the
attacks are modeled by modifying the exchanged packets while
introducing a timing delay between the DNP3 master and the
corresponding outstation.

The ﬁrst attack scenario shows a 0.5sec TDA that blocks
the load shedding command performed by the MG controller.
Fig. 20a showcases the impact of the 0.5sec seconds TDA

(b)
Fig. 20: Normal operation Vs. 0.5sec time-delay attack (TDA)
scenario: (a) EPS frequency response during a 0.5sec time-
delay attack (TDA) on the islanding command, and (b) gen-
erator power ﬂuctuation during the 0.5sec time-delay attack
(TDA).

when compared to the normal operation of the MG system.
In the graph, we observe how at t = 10sec the breaker at the
point of common coupling (PCC) is disconnected, i.e., breaker
command goes from 1 to 0, in order to perform intentional
islanding of the MG. Then, due to the insufﬁcient generation
capacity, the MG controller sheds controllable load #1 (shed
command goes from 0 to 1). In the normal operation case, the
shedding procedure is performed as soon as the MG islands,
while in the TDA scenario the shedding procedure gets delayed
by the amount of the time-delay attack. Notably, the maximum
and minimum values of the MG frequency during the normal
operation scenario are 60.02 Hz and 59.71 Hz, respectively. On
the other hand, the maximum and minimum values of the MG
frequency during the 0.5sec TDA scenario are 60.42 Hz and
59.32 Hz, indicating (see Fig. 18) that system operators would
have to employ emergency corrective measures to maintain
system stability. Fig. 20b depicts the output power of the

051015202530Time (s)5858.55959.56060.56161.562Frequency (Hz)01Commands (0-1)Freq - normalFreq - 0.5s delayShed - normalShed - 0.5s delayIsland051015202530Time (s)1002003004005006007008009001000110012001300Power (kW)ES - normalGenset - normalES - 0.5s delayGenset - 0.5s delay30

(a)

(a)

(b)
Fig. 21: Normal operation Vs. 5sec time-delay attack (TDA)
scenario: (a) EPS frequency response during a 5sec time-delay
attack (TDA) on the islanding command, and (b) generator
power ﬂuctuation during the 5sec time-delay attack (TDA).

(b)
Fig. 22: Normal operation Vs. 15sec time-delay attack (TDA)
scenario: (a) EPS frequency response during a 15sec time-
delay attack (TDA) on the islanding command, and (b) gen-
erator power ﬂuctuation during the 15sec time-delay attack
(TDA).

generator set and the ESS during both scenarios.

Similarly, the second test scenario demonstrates a 5sec TDA
that blocks the load shedding command performed by the
MG controller. Fig. 21a presents the impact of the 5sec TDA
when compared to the normal operation of the MG system.
As seen, the impact on the operating frequency of the MG is
greater than the ﬁrst test scenario due to the sustained timing
attack. The 5sec TDA causes a maximum and minimum MG
frequency of 60.52 Hz and 55.75 Hz, respectively. Granted
the substantial under-frequency incident, i.e., 55.75 Hz, load-
curtailment along with generator tripping would have to be
enforced to protect the EPS equipment and avoid the incident
propagation leading to a generalized grid collapse (Fig. 18). As
a result, this attack case demonstrates the potential of TDAs
to greatly disrupt the operation of the system causing major
equipment damages.

In the third test scenario, we perform a 15sec TDA that
blocks the load shedding command performed by the MG

controller. This case is analogous to a DoS attack, due to
the long period of the TDA, which can greatly disrupt the
operation of the MG’s load shedding mechanism. As seen in
Fig. 22a, this scenario demonstrates the worst-case scenario of
a TDA to the CPES. The MG frequency decreases rapidly until
it hits a minimum value of 15.31 Hz. Additionally, as depicted
in Fig. 22b, the frequency-mode generator set is not capable
of maintaining the stability of the system for such a prolonged
period causing large oscillations in its power output. Notably,
in realistic systems frequency violations should be averted be-
fore reaching such extreme values (e.g., 15.31 Hz). However,
by leveraging the CPES framework we can perform worst-
case scenario analyses, evaluate the system behavior under
coordinated attacks (e.g., if an attacker disables automated grid
safety mechanisms), and identify critical system components
and contingencies without endangering the EPS operation.

In order to explore the behavior of the CPES at the cyber-

051015202530Time (s)5556575859606162Frequency (Hz)01Commands (0-1)Freq - normalFreq - 5s delayShed - normalShed - 5s delayIsland051015202530Time (s)1002003004005006007008009001000110012001300Power (kW)ES - normalGenset - normalES - 5s delayGenset - 5s delay051015202530Time (s)5556575859606162Frequency (Hz)01Commands (0-1)Freq - normalFreq - 15s delayShed - normalShed - 15s delayIsland051015202530Time (s)1002003004005006007008009001000110012001300Power (kW)ES - normalGenset - normalES - 15s delayGenset - 15s delay31

Fig. 25: Mapping of TDA case study with CPS framework.

presented previously. In order to get more details regarding
the attack study, the total number of packets delayed by the
TDA are measured and plotted in Fig. 24. Here, we observe a
side-by-side comparison of the number of packets delayed in
two of the presented test scenarios, i.e., 0.5sec and 5sec delay
scenarios, and the total number of packets sent by the master
and outstation devices in the 30sec real-time co-simulation.
Fig. 25 shows the mapping of the presented case study with
the CPS framework.
Risk assessment: In this type of attack, an adversary does not
require signiﬁcant resources or capabilities to compromise the
CPES, as long as the system has not been fortiﬁed with state-
of-the-art defense mechanisms. This “low-bar” requirement of
resources increases the probability of successfully perform-
ing such an attack on a vulnerable CPES. As a result, the
T hreat P robability for the TDA case study is set to High
(3). The impact on “People health and personnel safety”
as well as the “Organization ﬁnancial proﬁt” are set to Low
(1). However, TDAs can potentially cause severe impacts
on the grid operation. For this reason, the “Uninterrupted
to Medium (2),
operation and service provision” is set
and the “Equipment damage and legal punishment” objective
priority is set to High (3). The resulting Risk for the TDA
is estimated to be equal to 3 ∗ (cid:80)(4 + 1 + 6 + 6) = 51.

D. Case Study 4: Propagating Attacks in Integrated Transmis-
sion and Distribution (T&D) CPES

Background & Formulation: As mentioned in Section IV,
T&D integrated models for real-time simulation within CPES
co-simulation testbeds can provide comprehensive and accu-
rate simulation results able to capture the dynamic behavior
of CPES. Speciﬁcally, integrated T&D model co-simulations
can be used to holistically evaluate the impact of disruptions
(e.g., malicious attacks, faults, etc.) in EPS, and exhibit
how maloperations on the transmission system extend to the
distribution system and vice versa. Thus, in this case study,
we present DIA-type attacks as propagating processes, similar
to computer viruses, evaluated in real-time integrated T&D
simulation models.

EMT and TS power system simulations often model only
the transmission or the distribution system of power grids.
This is mostly due to the high computational power required
to have a real-time simulation model of an entire EPS [145].
Aggregated distribution system sections are typically replaced
by static or dynamic loads when simulating transmission sys-
tem models [172]. Correspondingly, the transmission system’s
behavior is often abstracted using ideal voltage sources in
distribution system modeling [188]. In addition, T&D models
are usually simpliﬁed to a single-phase representation [189],
[190]. Such modeling approaches lose key information related

Fig. 23: Average end-to-end delay of all nodes in the
communication network (cyber layer).

Fig. 24: Number of packets delayed by time-delay attack
(TDA) at delay = 0.5sec and delay = 5sec Vs. total number
of packets in 30sec.

system layer, we analyze two metrics that provide important
information regarding the response of the communication
devices to the TDA. These two metrics are the average end-to-
end delay at the communication network, and the number of
packets delayed by the TDA. Fig. 23 shows the average end-
to-end delay of all the network devices communicating using
DNP3 at the cyber-system layer. Fig. 24 presents the total
number of packets delayed due to the TDA that compromises
the correct operation of the CPES according to two of the
TDA scenarios (0.5sec and 5sec TDA). As seen in Fig. 23,
the average end-to-end delay of the communication network,
operating under normal conditions, has a maximum value
of 0.0144sec. This value is related to the master DNP3
device located at the PCC that is communicating with all
the DNP3 outstations. This is the average time that the MG
controller takes to communicate the load shedding signal to the
respective sheddable load under normal operating conditions.
the TDA compromises the system’s operation
In contrast,
by delaying the load shedding signal based on the scenarios

PCCGensetESL-300kWL-700kW00.0020.0040.0060.0080.010.0120.0140.0160.0180.02Time (s)Network Layer-Avg. delay0.5s5s010002000300040005000600070008000900010000Number of PacketsPackets Delayed @ L-300kW NodeTotal Packets in 30s4720693719371ModelingResourcesMetricsEmulationEXataCPS-Avg. delay-# Packets delayed EMT : Real-timeeMegaSimFrequency stabilityCyber-SystemPhysical-SystemLayers32

where V , I, and Y are the respective common voltages, cur-
rents, and admittance matrices at the boundaries of the groups.
In essence, the use of this approach improves the accuracy and
computational execution time of the entire system’s solutions.
As a result, this is a feasible way for simulating a real-time
integrated T&D system and evaluating the propagation impact
of adverse disruptions, e.g., faults, attacks, etc.

Threat model: Integrated T&D models can be seen as complex
structures. Depending on the T&D aspect
targeted by an
adversary and the type of the attack, the threat model may be
adjusted to the speciﬁc details. For our use case, we assume
an adversary with strong knowledge of the system’s topology
and its components. Additionally, in our setup, the adversary
aims to destabilize the integrated T&D system by maliciously
controlling switching devices, i.e., the CBs, thus possession of
the device is assumed. In the worst-case scenario analysis, the
attackers could lead the CPES towards full system collapse,
designating a targeted attack by Class II adversaries with
abundant resources (e.g., nation-state funded groups).

In terms of the attack model formulation, the attack fre-
quency is non-iterative, since compromising a critical system
asset (crown-jewel) could impact the overall system. The re-
production of such types of attacks can be seen as impractical
due to their high system impact. Thus, we model them as one-
time attacks. The attack level is presumed to be Level 2 since
critical system components need to be compromised. Such
assets for our case include engineering workstations since
the attacker targets – in a DIA-type event – the control and
coordination between the T&D systems. The attack technique
is correspondingly an engineering workstation compromise.
Directly issuing malicious commands from an engineering
workstation can also be a possible attack path, assuming a
malicious insider scenario. However, in our case study, we
assume a sophisticated and stealthy attack implemented on the
cyber domain targeting the data integrity of the issued control
commands from the engineering workstations (DIA). For
instance, disruptions on the T&D can occur by falsifying the
in-transit data exchanged between engineering workstations
and CB control devices, triggering unexpected CB tripping
and system sectionalization.

Attack Setup: In this case study, an integrated real-time EMT
T&D system is modeled in order to investigate different
interactions of propagating attacks and disturbances between
a transmission and an unbalanced distribution system. Specif-
ically, we integrate a transmission system, modeled as the
IEEE-9 bus system, with a distribution system, modeled as
the IEEE-13 bus test system. In order to match the power
generation and load consumption between the power grid
benchmarks, we scale some of the systems’ parameters. For
example, the active power and reactive power of the generators
and the loads in the transmission system are reduced by an or-
der of magnitude, while all the loads in the distribution system
are increased by an order of magnitude. Additionally, as shown
in Fig. 27, the load at bus 5 of the IEEE-9 bus transmission
model is ‘replaced’ by the IEEE-13 bus distribution system.
Generator 1 (G1) is used as the slack bus. The EMT modeling
and real-time simulation of this case study’s physical-system

Fig. 26: Transmission and distribution (T&D) integrated sim-
ulation system setup.

to the behavior of highly unbalanced distribution systems. In
reality, T&D systems are highly coupled [191], and in order
to perform comprehensive and accurate security assessment
and impact analysis studies in CPES, both T&D domains
need to be accurately modeled and simulated in a coordinated
fashion. This coordination involves a clock-synchronized loop
in which, even if the two models are executed on different
cores of a machine, they communicate in parallel to match
boundary conditions (i.e., voltages, power values, etc.) at every
simulation step, as seen in Fig. 26.

There are different techniques that can be used to develop
real-time integrated T&D models. Different platforms provide
different solutions and methods that allow the parallel execu-
tion of different systems in real-time EMT environments. In
general, the overall T&D system is separated into different
groups (assigned to different cores of the machine) that are
solved individually using a state-space approach. State-space
equations and matrices are used to describe the system group
dynamics, while the interaction between the groups is solved
using a nodal admittance method [192]. In the state-space
approach the physical-system is modeled as:

s(cid:48) = Aqs + Dqv

o = Eqs + Fqv

(17)

(18)

where s is the state vector, v is the input vector, o is the output
vector, and A, D, E, and F are the state-space matrices. The
term q represents the size of the matrices.

In a typical EMT state-space implementation, such as
the one available in Matlab Simscape Power Systems, every
time a switch changes status (on/off), the entire state-space
solutions are re-computed. Using such an approach for real-
time simulation (<≈50µs simulation time-step) of large in-
terconnected T&D systems could be infeasible due to the
required computational resources. With every single status
change within the system model, the state-space outputs of
the entire system would need to be re-computed. To address
this computational issue, platforms such as Opal-RT, and its
Advanced Real-Time Electro-Magnetic Solvers (ARTEMiS )
package, use state-space nodal methods [193]. ARTEMiS
implementations discretize, pre-compute, and store into cache
memory, the state-space matrices for all the combinations of
switch topologies that can occur. Then, using a nodal method,
the common voltages, admittances, and currents of the system
(i.e., shared values between groups) are solved as:

V Y = I

(19)

33

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 28: Frequency response when the CB at bus 5 of the
IEEE-9 bus system is: (a) opened at t = 1.5sec, (b) opened
at t = 1.5sec and then closed at t = 1.75sec, and (c) opened
at t = 1.5sec, closed at t = 1.75sec, and opened again at
t = 2sec.

[171]. We observe how such attacks could stealthily destabilize
the EPS just by tampering with the CB controls between
different zones of the power grid. Here, two main ﬂuctuations
are observed following the CB tripping behavior, one between
t = 1.5sec and t = 1.75sec when the CB is tripped
open, and between t = 1.75sec and t = 2sec when the
CB is closed. The last scenario assumes an attacker aiming
to damage system components by asynchronously changing
the status of the CB multiple times. Fig. 28c demonstrates
the frequency ﬂuctuations on the generator buses when the
CB between the T&D systems is opened at t = 1.5sec,
closed at t = 1.75sec, and then opened again at t = 2sec.
Notably,
if safety mechanisms are not promptly enforced,
the frequency instabilities occurring between t = 1.5sec and
t = 2.4sec could affect frequency-sensitive grid components
(i.e., consumer, commercial, and industrial loads), and impact
grid equipment and control functions (e.g., generators, trans-

Fig. 27: The integrated T&D real-time simulation model: it
includes the IEEE-9 bus system (transmission model) and
IEEE-13 bus system (distribution model).

layer are performed using eMegaSim of Opal-RT.

In order to evaluate the bi-directional impact of propagation
attacks in integrated T&D models of CPES, we develop two
attack scenarios in this case study. The ﬁrst scenario assumes
that the adversary has the capability of altering the EPS topol-
ogy. This can be achieved by decoupling the T&D system at
the PCC via a DIA attack on the EPS switch devices (i.e., the
distribution feeder CBs). The second scenario demonstrates the
impact on the distribution system when transmission system
components are compromised. Following our CPS framework,
the metrics used to evaluate the performance and behavior
of the T&D system under the propagation attack scenarios,
are the physical-system layer performance metrics related to
frequency stability and voltage stability.

In the ﬁrst propagation attack scenario, we assume that the
adversary by tripping the CBs at the PCC between the T&D
system can disturb the EPS frequency impacting its operation
and potentially causing damages to ﬁeld equipment (e.g.,
transformers, commercial and residential loads, etc.). Different
attack paths can be pursued to compromise and decouple
T&D systems. For instance, such adversarial objectives (i.e.,
T&D decoupling) can be achieved by i) intruding via the
communication infrastructure and remotely manipulating the
control tags issued by engineering workstations located at
the system operation management facilities, ii) implementing
DoS attacks on the targeted PLCs, disabling the CBs, iii)
compromising the controller logic of IED-enabled switching
equipment, or iv) penetrating the utility SCADA network and
maliciously manipulating control settings (e.g., over/under -
voltage or current limits) [194].

The results presented in Fig. 28a are measured at the gener-
ator buses, i.e., buses 1, 2, and 3 of Fig. 27. The frequency at
the transmission side of the network rapidly increases when the
CB is tripped at t = 1.5sec, and returns to its nominal values
at around t = 1.8sec. The peak frequency value is around
60.23 Hz. Fig.28b shows the frequency response of the system
when the attacker opens the CB between the T&D system at
t = 1.5sec, and then closes it after 15 cycles (approximately
0.25sec later) which would avoid triggering any protection
countermeasures during this intermittent frequency transient

formers, automated voltage control, etc.).

In the second scenario, it is assumed that an adversary
has the capability of compromising components at the trans-
mission side of the power grid. For example, such types of
attacks have been experimentally evaluated and indicate that
if they last around three minutes, they can cause permanent
damage on generators [122]. In this use case, our aim is
to evaluate how an attack on the transmission level can
propagate on the distribution level and manifest as a voltage
variation. Contingency analysis is employed in the integrated
simulation environment to study the effects of transmission-
side adverse events on the distribution system. In more detail,
contingency analysis is a simulation-based system analysis
tool used to assess the impact of various combinations of com-
ponent failures occurring in transmission systems. The North
American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) enforces a
N − 1 constraint for the U.S. power grid, which means that
EPS transmission systems need to maintain nominal operation
even if one component fails [195]. Such components include
generators, transmission lines, transformers, etc. Depending on
the security level of the EPS, a higher N − k criterion may be
required, where k ≥ 2 represents two or more contingency
events. For example, a nuclear plant may be required to
satisfy a N − 2 constraint, allowing the grid to withstand the
simultaneous failure of two components.

For the purpose of our study, we assume that the attacker is
able to compromise one or more components of the transmis-
sion system, causing under-voltage events at the distribution-
side. When component failures occur, the system aims to
maintain stability. However, the intermittent transmission sys-
tem instability along with the potential inability to support
power demand results in voltage deviations which are also
propagated to the distribution level. Four main sub-cases are
designed in this second scenario to illustrate the corresponding
voltage impact at bus 632 of the distribution system. The
ﬁrst two sub-cases consider an attacker that compromises one
generator (G2 or G3) once at a time (N − 1), where the rest
sub-cases consider an attack on two generators (G2 and G3)
consecutively (N − 1 − 1), or simultaneously (N − 2). In all
sub-cases, we evaluate the voltage variation (depicted in per
unit – p.u.) measured at bus 632.

As seen in Fig. 29a and Fig. 29b, the voltage measured
at bus 632 of the distribution system drops from 1 p.u. to
0.5 p.u. at t = 1.5sec,
i.e., when one of the generators
(G2 or G3) is disconnected from the transmission system
(N − 1). Fig. 30a demonstrates the voltage variations of
the N − 1 − 1 contingency event in which G2 and G3 are
disconnected at t = 1.5sec and t=1.6sec, respectively. During
this case, the bus voltage initially drops from 1 p.u. to 0.5
p.u. (G2 disconnection), and then to 0.2 p.u. when G3 is also
disconnected. In the N − 2 case, presented in Fig. 30b, the
simultaneous disconnection of G2 and G3 from the system
lowers the voltage signiﬁcantly at t = 1.5sec. The voltage
measured at bus 632 of the distribution system decreases to
under 0.2 p.u. within 0.05sec. Fig. 31 illustrates the mapping
of the propagating attack case study in T&D systems with the
CPS framework.

34

(a)

(b)

Fig. 29: Voltage response at bus 632 (distribution system) dur-
ing N-1 transmission system contingencies when: a) generator
G2 is disconnected at t = 1.5sec, and (b) generator G3 is
disconnected at t = 1.5sec.

Risk Assessment: Compromising T&D systems requires de-
termined adversaries possessing both strong knowledge of
the system architecture as well as ample resources since
these can enhance the probability of materializing successful
attacks. Thus, we set the T hreat P robability to High (3)
[196]–[199]. Attackers could perform stealthy and disastrous
attacks by leveraging the knowledge of system topology, asset
placement
information, power demand proﬁles, etc. As a
result, by targeting mission-critical system components during
peak utilization periods (e.g., peak power demand time of
the day), adversaries could maximize the corresponding attack
impact [84]. A power system collapse (e.g., blackout), which
could be the impact of the successful propagation of T&D
attacks, can signiﬁcantly affect “People health and personnel
safety”, “Uninterrupted operation and service provision”, and
“Equipment damage and legal punishment”. Based on these
assumptions, the ResultingDamage is set to High (3),
while the “Organization ﬁnancial proﬁt” is set to Low (1).
The aggregated Risk for this type of attack can be estimated
to be 3 ∗ (cid:80)(12 + 9 + 6 + 1) = 84.

E. Post-risk assessment discussion

The next step after the risk score calculation includes
risk prioritization. The risk identiﬁcation, assessment, and
prioritization serve as preliminary steps and are critical for
the decision making and formulation of mitigation plans.
Speciﬁcally, in this work, we have considered four diverse
attack use cases aimed at CPES while targeting different cyber

35

scores. The same cannot be argued for attacks that can be
sustained even post-compromise, targeting less critical CPES
equipment.

The risk score-based ranking helps to categorize the attacks
(and their corresponding risks) into pools [93]. For example,
assuming that we have four pools, the most devastating attacks
(i.e., with scores greater than a system-deﬁned threshold)
would be placed into pool 1, while less critical attacks –
with smaller risk scores – would be allocated to pools 2 -
4 in a descending risk score fashion. For each of the pools,
predeﬁned strategies are designed to mediate potential attacks.
Typically, attacks belonging to pool 1 should be mitigated at
all costs since they can compromise the whole system (in our
case the CPES). However, the mitigation of attacks belonging
to lower-ranked pools might either be i)deferred if they do not
pose signiﬁcant threats to system operation, ii) transferred to
other parties instead of allocating system resources to resolve
them, or iii) accepted if the cost of mitigating them outweighs
the impact that could be inﬂicted on the system. Thus, the
risk assessment does not only provide better awareness of
system risks and an efﬁcient way to perform risk comparisons,
but it can also automate the process of handling risks and
administering corrective measures.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

In this work, we provide a comprehensive analysis of CPS
security, with particular emphasis on CPES applications. The
ﬁrst step in this process encompasses an extensive threat
modeling procedure, where adversary and attack models are
constructed. The adversary and attack models provide an in-
depth understanding of attackers’ motives and capabilities,
in addition to the attack’s details including potential entry
points, attack techniques, and end goals. The next step in
the analysis includes the presentation of a CPS framework,
where the resources, metrics, and modeling techniques needed
to effectively evaluate CPS, and more speciﬁcally CPES, are
discussed in detail. This framework is designed with the
objective of assisting researchers and stakeholders identify
the models and resources required to perform high-ﬁdelity
and reliable CPS studies. Furthermore, we present a risk
assessment methodology that leverages both the treat modeling
as well as the CPS framework to characterize system risks.

In order to illustrate the suitability of the overall method-
ology and description of the CPES security landscape, we
investigate four attack case studies. For each scenario, we
provide a fundamental background alongside its mathemati-
cal formulation and discuss the corresponding threat model
and attack setups. The presented case studies are simulated
under nominal and abnormal operating conditions to uncover
their system-wide impacts. Risk assessment analysis is also
performed as part of each case’s security investigation. During
the risk assessment stage, we calculate the relative risk scores
indicating the severity of each compromise. The risk scores
correspond to the discussed studies, the threat scenarios, and
the targeted assets (e.g., microinverters, T&D system, time-
delay, etc.). These scores can be utilized for the ranking and
prioritization of possible disruptions, and the determination of

(a)

(b)

Fig. 30: Voltage response at bus 632 (distribution system)
during transmission system contingency scenarios:a) N-1-1
contingency where generators G2 is disconnected at t =
1.5sec and G3 at t = 1.6sec consecutively, and (b) N-2
contingency where generators G2 and G3 are disconnected
at t = 1.5sec simultaneously.

Fig. 31: Mapping of T&D case study with CPS framework.

or physical subsystems or components. In more detail, we
discuss cross-layer ﬁrmware attacks with a calculated risk
score equal to 22, load changing attacks with risk score equal
to 28, TDAs with a risk score evaluated to 51, and ﬁnally
propagating attacks targeting integrated T&D CPES with an 84
risk score. These risk scores provide a useful way to perform
one-to-one comparisons between attacks even if their speciﬁcs
are unknown.

Attacks with higher risk scores (e.g., the T&D propagation
attacks) will induce a higher impact on the system when
compared to other attacks such as the cross-layer ﬁrmware
attack with a less pronounced risk score. In Section III-C, we
justify how the use of each case’s risk score variations depend
on the corresponding attack characteristics (e.g., threat prob-
ability, objective priorities, and potential impact on the CPES
operation). As a result, attacks similar to the one targeting
the integrated T&D system, aim to affect almost every CPES
operational objective. Furthermore, they are attractive from an
adversarial perspective due to the maximization of the inﬂicted
system disruption. Hence, such attacks will obtain high-risk

ModelingResourcesMetrics---EMT : Real-timeeMegaSimFrequency &voltagestabilityCyber-SystemPhysical-SystemLayersproper risk mitigation strategies to address malicious attacks
implications.

The holistic approach and studies presented in this paper
provide guidelines for modeling CPS threats as well as de-
signing, simulating, and evaluating detailed CPS models. The
presented framework can promote rigorous security analysis of
CPS. Our future work will extend this framework and advance
its capabilities even further, allowing for:

• Secure and resilient CPES operation: In this work, we have
stressed the importance of cyber-secure CPES as well as that
the integration of contemporary cyber features and new physi-
cal components can increase the attack surface. The emphasis
though, should not only be placed on detecting attacks, lim-
iting and mitigating them but also in designing fault-tolerant
and resilient CPES. Having identiﬁed potential vulnerabilities
present in the CPES and leveraging our framework, we will
deﬁne resiliency methodologies and metrics to assess CPES
the resiliency methodologies will
posture. In more detail,
serve as CPES design best practices promoting the design
of robust systems with in-built redundancy mechanisms if
adverse scenarios occur. On the other hand, the resiliency
metrics will be ported to our current framework and have
a twofold objective, i) they will indicate how effectively the
system can handle adverse circumstances, and ii) they will
serve as criteria for the categorizations of CPES based on their
ability to withstand attacks.
• Autonomous CPES operation and simulation-aided risk as-
sessments: CPES are becoming more sophisticated and support
a plethora of automated processes (e.g., automated control
mechanisms, PLCs, AGC, etc.). Such automated systems
should be capable to make real-time decisions, especially
for time-critical parts of CPES, and coordinate the dynamic
system behavior. It is expected that CPES will become more
complex and densely interconnected as they integrate more
features (remote access and control, assets, communications
protocols, etc.). During their autonomous operation, the system
might encounter unexpected states (e.g., unintended faults
during natural disasters, or malicious attacks) that might re-
quire speciﬁc handling. Thus, determining and evaluating their
security should be facilitated in a dynamic, albeit abstract way.
Following this approach, guarantees that every unexpected
scenario will be accounted for, and adverse situations will
be timely prevented. Digital twin system conﬁgurations can
achieve these objectives and enable the design and real-
time evaluation of risk mitigation strategies. As a result, a
CPES testbed will be designed to support the fully-automated
operation, and incident-response structures, where attacks can
be promptly detected and optimally mitigated, eliminating any
adverse consequence on the actual system.
• Dynamic reconﬁguration and self-healing capabilities: Se-
curing CPES should be viewed from two directions. The ﬁrst
direction includes the security measures and practices which
should be employed to protect system operations and avert
attackers. On the other hand, the second direction features
the policies and strategies which should be pursued post-
compromise or during dire circumstances. The ﬁrst direction
has been extensively discussed in this paper; we aim to account

36

for the second direction in our future framework extensions.
Speciﬁcally, utilizing our framework and system resources
we will provide classes of crisis-handling plans promoting
CPES self-healing capabilities. These classes will provide
tailor-made strategies to overcome emergencies, depending
on the current state of the CPES and the under-investigation
scenario characteristics. For example, during a transmission
system contingency, the corresponding class would provide
alternative ways to dispatch power overcoming this issue and
potential predicaments. These dynamic re-conﬁgurations and
self-healing CPES capabilities will stimulate the design of
future secure and resilient systems and prove invaluable tools
for system operators.

REFERENCES

[1] NIST, “Cyber-Physical Systems.” [Online]. Available: https://www.

nist.gov/el/cyber-physical-systems

[2] S. McLaughlin, C. Konstantinou, X. Wang, L. Davi, A.-R. Sadeghi,
M. Maniatakos, and R. Karri, “The cybersecurity landscape in industrial
control systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 104, no. 5, pp. 1039–
1057, 2016.

[3] NIST,

“CVE-2018-0296 Detail,”

https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/

CVE-2018-0296, 2018.

[4] MITRE, “CVE-2018-0296,” https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?

name=CVE-2018-0296, 2018.

[5] North American Electric Reliability Corporation, “NERC lesson
learned, risks posed by ﬁrewall ﬁrmware vulnerabilities,” 2019.
the Biggest Security Threats, Not

the
[6] Gartner,
Most
https://www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/
focus-on-the-biggest-security-threats-not-the-most-publicized/, 2017.
[7] J. Weeks. U.s. electrical grid undergoes massive transition to connect
[Online]. Available: https://www.scientiﬁcamerican.

“Focus
on
Publicized,”

to renewables.
com/article/what-is-the-smart-grid/

[8] D. Gritzalis, M. Theocharidou, and G. Stergiopoulos, “Critical infras-

tructure security and resilience,” January): 0–16, 2019.

[9] A. Keliris, C. Konstantinou, N. G. Tsoutsos, R. Baiad, and M. Ma-
niatakos, “Enabling multi-layer cyber-security assessment of industrial
control systems through hardware-in-the-loop testbeds,” in 2016 21st
Asia and South Paciﬁc Design Automation Conference (ASP-DAC).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 511–518.

[10] C. Konstantinou, “Towards a secure and resilient all-renewable energy

grid for smart cities,” IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, 2021.

[11] S. Muyeen and S. Rahman, Communication, control and security
The Institution of Engineering and

challenges for the smart grid.
Technology, 2017.

[12] J. Ospina, X. Liu, C. Konstantinou, and Y. Dvorkin, “On the feasi-
bility of load-changing attacks in power systems during the covid-19
pandemic,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 2545–2563, 2021.

[13] A. Dabrowski,

J. Ullrich,

and E. R. Weippl,

“Grid shock:
Coordinated load-changing attacks on power grids: The non-
smart power grid is vulnerable to cyber attacks as well,” in
Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual Computer Security Applications
Conference, ser. ACSAC 2017. New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2017, p. 303–314. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3134600.3134639

[14] C. Konstantinou and M. Maniatakos, “Security analysis of smart
grid,” pp. 451–487, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://digital-library.
theiet.org/content/books/10.1049/pbpo095e ch15

[15] “Idaho National Lab Grid Resilience Program.” [Online]. Available:

https://inl.gov/research-programs/grid-resilience/

[16] “Idaho

National

Lab
Available:

Resilience

Cen-
https://factsheets.inl.gov/FactSheets/

Optimization

[Online].

ter.”
INLResilienceOptimizationCenter.pdf

[17] “Idaho National Lab Infrastructure and Capabilities.” [Online]. Avail-
able: https://factsheets.inl.gov/SitePages/AboutINLFactSheets-Internal.
aspx

[18] “Idaho National Lab Nuclear Programs.”

[Online]. Available:

https://factsheets.inl.gov/FactSheets/NuclearPrograms.pdf

[19] “Idaho National Lab Nuclear Laboratory.”

[Online]. Avail-

able: https://factsheets.inl.gov/FactSheets/NationalNuclearLaboratory
Overview.pdf

[20] “Idaho National Lab Energy Systems Laboratory.” [Online]. Available:
https://factsheets.inl.gov/FactSheets/EnergySystemsLaboratory.pdf
[21] “Idaho National Lab Energy, Environment Science and Technology.”
[Online]. Available: https://factsheets.inl.gov/FactSheets/EESandT.pdf
[22] “National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL).” [Online]. Available:

https://www.nrel.gov/index.html

[23] “National Renewable Energy Laboratory Flatirons Campus.” [Online].

Available: https://www.nrel.gov/ﬂatirons-campus/

[24] “Increasing Power Expands Research Capabilities at NREL’s Flatirons
Campus.” [Online]. Available: https://www.nrel.gov/news/program/
2020/increasing-power-at-ﬂatirons-campus.html

[25] B. Chen, K. L. Butler-Purry, A. Goulart, and D. Kundur, “Implementing
a real-time cyber-physical system test bed in rtds and opnet,” in 2014
North American Power Symposium (NAPS), 2014, pp. 1–6.

[26] C. Queiroz, A. Mahmood, and Z. Tari, “Scadasim—a framework for
building scada simulations,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 2,
no. 4, pp. 589–597, 2011.

[27] N. Dorsch, F. Kurtz, H. Georg, C. H¨agerling, and C. Wietfeld,
“Software-deﬁned networking for smart grid communications: Ap-
plications, challenges and advantages,” in 2014 IEEE international
conference on smart grid communications (SmartGridComm).
IEEE,
2014, pp. 422–427.

[28] H. Georg, S. M¨uller, N. Dorsch, C. Rehtanz, and C. Wietfeld, “In-
spire: Integrated co-simulation of power and ict systems for real-time
evaluation,” 10 2013, pp. 576–581.

[29] M. J. Stanovich, I. Leonard, K. Sanjeev, M. Steurer, T. P. Roth,
S. Jackson, and M. Bruce, “Development of a smart-grid cyber-
physical systems testbed,” in 2013 IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid
Technologies Conference (ISGT), 2013, pp. 1–6.

[30] CAPS–Florida State University, “Center for Advanced Power Sys-
tems Infrastructure,” [Online]: https://www.caps.fsu.edu/media/1256/
caps-ﬂyer.pdf, 2020.

[31] C. Ogilvie, J. Ospina, C. Konstantinou, T. Vu, M. Stanovich,
K. Schoder, and M. Steurer, “Modeling communication networks in a
real-time simulation environment for evaluating controls of shipboard
power systems,” in 2020 IEEE CyberPELS (CyberPELS), 2020, pp.
1–7.

[32] J. Ospina, I. Zografopoulos, X. Liu, and C. Konstantinou, “Demo:
Trustworthy cyberphysical energy systems: Time-delay attacks in a
real-time co-simulation environment,” in Proceedings of the 2020 Joint
Workshop on CPS & IoT Security and Privacy, ser. CPSIOTSEC’20.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020,
p. 69. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3411498.3422926

[33] S. Sridhar, A. Ashok, M. E. Mylrea, S. Pal, M. J. Rice, and S. N. G.
Gourisetti, “A testbed environment for buildings-to-grid cyber re-
silience research and development,” 9 2017.

[34] J. N. Haack, B. A. Akyol, N. D. Tenney, B. J. Carpenter, R. M. Pratt,
and T. E. Carroll, “Volttron™: An agent platform for integrating electric
vehicles and smart grid,” 12 2013.

[35] HELICS. (2020) Hierarchical engine for large-scale infrastructure
co-simulation (HELICS). [Online]. Available: https://gmlc-tdc.github.
io/helics.org/

[36] ——.

(2020) Tools with HELICS Support.

[Online]. Available:

https://docs.helics.org/en/latest/Tools using HELICS.html

[37] T. D. Le, A. Anwar, R. Beuran, and S. W. Loke, “Smart grid co-
simulation tools: Review and cybersecurity case study,” in 2019 7th
International Conference on Smart Grid (icSmartGrid).
IEEE, 2019,
pp. 39–45.

[38] N. Duan, N. Yee, B. Salazar, J. Joo, E. Stewart, and E. Cortez,
“Cybersecurity analysis of distribution grid operation with distributed
energy resources via co-simulation,” Lawrence Livermore National
Lab.(LLNL), Livermore, CA (United States), Tech. Rep., 2019.
[39] B. S. Palmintier, “HELICS for Integrated Transmission, Distribution,
Communication, & Control (TDC+ C) Modeling,” National Renewable
Energy Lab.(NREL), Golden, CO (United States), Tech. Rep., 2019.

[40] C. Siaterlis, B. Genge, and M. Hohenadel, “Epic: A testbed for
scientiﬁcally rigorous cyber-physical security experimentation,” IEEE
Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 319–
330, 2013.

[41] C. Konstantinou, “Cyber-physical systems security education through
hands-on lab exercises,” IEEE Design Test, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 47–55,
2020.

[42] M. O. Faruque and V. Dinavahi, “Hardware-in-the-loop simulation of
power electronic systems using adaptive discretization,” IEEE transac-
tions on industrial electronics, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 1146–1158, 2009.

37

[43] S. Boschert and R. Rosen, Digital Twin—The Simulation Aspect.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016, pp. 59–74. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32156-1 5

[44] M. Zhou, J. Yan, and D. Feng, “Digital

twin framework and its
application to power grid online analysis,” CSEE Journal of Power
and Energy Systems, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 391–398, 2019.

[45] T. Huang, F. R. Yu, C. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Zhang, and Y. Liu, “A survey
on large-scale software deﬁned networking (sdn) testbeds: Approaches
and challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 19,
no. 2, pp. 891–917, 2016.

[46] J. Ospina, N. Gupta, A. Newaz, M. Harper, M. O. Faruque, E. G.
Collins, R. Meeker, and G. Lofman, “Sampling-based model predictive
control of PV-integrated energy storage system considering power
generation forecast and real-time price,” IEEE Power and Energy
Technology Systems Journal, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 195–207, 2019.
[47] A. Keliris, C. Konstantinou, M. Sazos, and M. Maniatakos, “Low-
budget energy sector cyberattacks via open source exploitation,” in
2018 IFIP/IEEE International Conference on Very Large Scale Inte-
gration (VLSI-SoC).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 101–106.

[48] Y. Xiang, L. Wang, and N. Liu, “Coordinated attacks on electric power
systems in a cyber-physical environment,” Electric Power Systems
Research, vol. 149, pp. 156–168, 2017.

[49] J. Tian, B. Wang, T. Li, F. Shang, and K. Cao, “Coordinated cyber-
physical attacks considering dos attacks in power systems,” Interna-
tional Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control, vol. 30, no. 11, pp.
4345–4358, 2020.

[50] H. Tu, Y. Xia, K. T. Chi, and X. Chen, “A hybrid cyber attack model
for cyber-physical power systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 114 876–
114 883, 2020.

[51] K. Pan, A. Teixeira, M. Cvetkovic, and P. Palensky, “Data attacks
on power system state estimation: Limited adversarial knowledge vs.
limited attack resources,” in IECON 2017 - 43rd Annual Conference
of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, 2017, pp. 4313–4318.
[52] A. Barua and M. A. Al Faruque, “Hall spooﬁng: A non-invasive
dos attack on grid-tied solar inverter,” in 29th {USENIX} Security
Symposium ({USENIX} Security 20), 2020, pp. 1273–1290.

[53] V. Venkataramanan, A. Hahn, and A. Srivastava, “Cp-sam: Cyber-
physical security assessment metric for monitoring microgrid re-
siliency,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1055–
1065, 2019.

[54] Y. Zhang, V. Krishnan, J. Pi, K. Kaur, A. Srivastava, A. Hahn, and
S. Suresh, “Cyber physical security analytics for transactive energy
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 931–
941, 2019.

[55] A. P. Kuruvila, I. Zografopoulos, K. Basu, and C. Konstantinou,
“Hardware-assisted detection of ﬁrmware attacks in inverter-based
cyberphysical microgrids,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.07691, 2020.

[56] X. Liu, J. Ospina, and C. Konstantinou, “Deep reinforcement learning
for cybersecurity assessment of wind integrated power systems,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 208 378–208 394, 2020.

[57] H. Orojloo and M. A. Azgomi, “A stochastic game model for evaluating
the impacts of security attacks against cyber-physical systems,” Journal
of Network and Systems Management, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 929–965,
2018.

[58] Y. Fan, J. Li, D. Zhang, J. Pi, J. Song, and G. Zhao, “Supporting sus-
tainable maintenance of substations under cyber-threats: an evaluation
method of cybersecurity risk for power cps,” Sustainability, vol. 11,
no. 4, p. 982, 2019.

[59] Y. Yang, S. Wang, M. Wen, and W. Xu, “Reliability modeling and
evaluation of cyber-physical system (cps) considering communication
failures,” Journal of the Franklin Institute, 2018.

[60] L. Wei, D. Gao, and C. Luo, “False data injection attacks detection
with deep belief networks in smart grid,” in 2018 Chinese Automation
Congress (CAC).

IEEE, 2018, pp. 2621–2625.

[61] J. James, Y. Hou, and V. O. Li, “Online false data injection attack
detection with wavelet transform and deep neural networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 3271–3280,
2018.

[62] D. Ye and T.-Y. Zhang, “Summation detector for false data-injection
attack in cyber-physical systems,” IEEE transactions on cybernetics,
vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 2338–2345, 2019.

[63] B. Li, R. Lu, W. Wang, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Distributed host-based
collaborative detection for false data injection attacks in smart grid
cyber-physical system,” Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing,
vol. 103, pp. 32–41, 2017.

[64] A. Sayghe, Y. Hu, I. Zografopoulos, X. Liu, R. G. Dutta, Y. Jin, and
C. Konstantinou, “Survey of machine learning methods for detecting

false data injection attacks in power systems,” IET Smart Grid,
vol. 3, pp. 581–595(14), October 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//digital-library.theiet.org/content/journals/10.1049/iet-stg.2020.0015

[65] J. Goh, S. Adepu, M. Tan, and Z. S. Lee, “Anomaly detection in
cyber physical systems using recurrent neural networks,” in 2017 IEEE
18th International Symposium on High Assurance Systems Engineering
(HASE).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 140–145.

[66] C. M. Ahmed, M. Ochoa, J. Zhou, A. P. Mathur, R. Qadeer, C. Murguia,
and J. Ruths, “Noiseprint: Attack detection using sensor and process
noise ﬁngerprint in cyber physical systems,” in Proceedings of the 2018
on Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2018,
pp. 483–497.

[67] P. Schneider and K. B¨ottinger, “High-performance unsupervised
anomaly detection for cyber-physical system networks,” in Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Workshop on Cyber-Physical Systems Security and
PrivaCy, 2018, pp. 1–12.

[68] S. Huda, S. Miah, M. M. Hassan, R. Islam, J. Yearwood, M. Alrubaian,
and A. Almogren, “Defending unknown attacks on cyber-physical
systems by semi-supervised approach and available unlabeled data,”
Information Sciences, vol. 379, pp. 211–228, 2017.

[69] O. M. Anubi and C. Konstantinou, “Enhanced resilient state estimation
using data-driven auxiliary models,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Informatics, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 639–647, 2020.

[70] I. Zografopoulos and C. Konstantinou, “DERauth: A Battery-Based
Authentication Scheme for Distributed Energy Resources,” in 2020
IEEE Computer Society Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI), 2020,
pp. 560–567.

[71] T. R. B. Kushal, K. Lai, and M. S. Illindala, “Risk-based mitigation
of load curtailment cyber attack using intelligent agents in a shipboard
power system,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 5, pp.
4741–4750, 2018.

[72] C. Kwon and I. Hwang, “Cyber attack mitigation for cyber–physical
systems: hybrid system approach to controller design,” IET Control
Theory & Applications, vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 731–741, 2016.

[73] X. Hao, M. Lv, J. Zheng, Z. Zhang, and W. Yi, “Integrating cyber-attack
defense techniques into real-time cyber-physical systems,” in 2019
IEEE 37th International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 237–245.

[74] I. Zografopoulos, J. Ospina, and C. Konstantinou, “Special session:
Harness the power of ders for secure communications in electric energy
systems,” in 2020 IEEE 38th International Conference on Computer
Design (ICCD), 2020, pp. 49–52.

[75] M. Z. Gunduz and R. Das, “Cyber-security on smart grid: Threats and

potential solutions,” Computer Networks, vol. 169, p. 107094, 2020.

[76] K. Kimani, V. Oduol, and K. Langat, “Cyber security challenges
for iot-based smart grid networks,” International Journal of Critical
Infrastructure Protection, vol. 25, pp. 36–49, 2019.

[77] B. Canaan, B. Colicchio, and D. Ould Abdeslam, “Microgrid cyber-
security: Review and challenges toward resilience,” Applied Sciences,
vol. 10, no. 16, p. 5649, 2020.

[78] Z. El Mrabet, N. Kaabouch, H. El Ghazi, and H. El Ghazi, “Cyber-
security in smart grid: Survey and challenges,” Computers & Electrical
Engineering, vol. 67, pp. 469–482, 2018.

[79] F. Nejabatkhah, Y. W. Li, H. Liang, and R. R. Ahrabi, “Cyber-security
of smart microgrids: A survey,” Energies, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 27, 2021.
[80] “Ieee standard for synchrophasor data transfer for power systems,”
IEEE Std C37.118.2-2011 (Revision of IEEE Std C37.118-2005), pp.
1–53, 2011.

[81] C. Konstantinou, M. Sazos, A. S. Musleh, A. Keliris, A. Al-Durra,
and M. Maniatakos, “Gps spooﬁng effect on phase angle monitoring
and control in a real-time digital simulator-based hardware-in-the-loop
environment,” IET Cyber-Physical Systems: Theory & Applications,
vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 180–187, 2017.

[82] S. K. Mazumder, A. Kulkarni, S. Sahoo, F. Blaabjerg, A. Mantooth,
J. Balda, Y. Zhao, J. Ramos-Ruiz, P. Enjeti, P. R. Kumar, L. Xie,
J. Enslin, B. Ozpineci, A. Annaswamy, H. Ginn, F. Qiu, J. Liu,
B. Smida, C. Ogilvie, J. Ospina, C. Konstantinou, M. Stanovich,
K. Schoder, M. Steurer, T. Vu, L. He, and E. Pilo de la Fuente,
“A review of current research trends in power-electronic innovations
in cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected
Topics in Power Electronics, pp. 1–1, 2021.

[83] A. Keliris, C. Konstantinou, and M. Maniatakos, “GE Multilin SR
protective relays passcode vulnerability,” Black Hat USA, 2017.
[84] Zografopoulos, I. and Konstantinou, C. and Tsoutsos, N. G. and Zhou,
D. and Broadwater, R., “Security Assessment and Impact Analysis
of Cyberattacks in Integrated T&D Power Systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2102.03215, 2021.

38

Security,

Industrial

of Homeland

Prac-
Cyber-
Improving
[Online].
with
https://www.us-cert.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/recommended

[85] Department
tice:
security
Available:
practices/NCCIC ICS-CERT Defense in Depth 2016 S508C.pdf
[86] T. J. Williams, “The purdue enterprise reference architecture,” Comput.
Ind., vol. 24, no. 2–3, p. 141–158, Sep. 1994. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-3615(94)90017-5

“Recommended
System

Defense-in-Depth

Strategies.”

Control

[87] Ackerman, Pascal,

[Online]. Avail-
able: https://subscription.packtpub.com/book/networking and servers/
9781788395151

“Industrial Cybersecurity.”

[88] MITRE

Enterprise
[Online].

Analysis.
publications/systems-engineering-guide/enterprise-engineering/
systems-engineering-for-mission-assurance/crown-jewels-analysis

Engineering.
Available:

Crown

Jewels
https://www.mitre.org/

“Experiences

Threat Modeling

[89] Shostack, Adam,

at Mi-
crosoft.”
[Online]. Available: https://adam.shostack.org/modsec08/
Shostack-ModSec08-Experiences-Threat-Modeling-At-Microsoft.pdf
[90] J.D. Meier, Alex Mackman, Michael Dunner, Srinath Vasireddy,
“Improving Web
Ray
Application
[On-
line]. Available: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/
msp-n-p/ff648644(v=pandp.10)

and Anandha Murukan,

and Countermeasures.”

Escamilla

Security:

Threats

[91] R. Khan, K. McLaughlin, D. Laverty, and S. Sezer, “Stride-based threat
modeling for cyber-physical systems,” in 2017 IEEE PES Innovative
Smart Grid Technologies Conference Europe (ISGT-Europe).
IEEE,
2017, pp. 1–6.

[92] Mahmood,

Haider.

DREAD and STRIDE.
application-threat-modeling-using-dread-and-stride/

Application

using
[Online]. Available: https://haiderm.com/

Threat Modeling

[93] Caralli, Richard A., Stevens,

James F. and
Improving
[Online].
https://resources.sei.cmu.edu/asset ﬁles/TechnicalReport/

Wilson, William R., “Introducing OCTAVE Allegro:
the
Information Security Risk Assessment Process.”
Available:
2007 005 001 14885.pdf

James F., Young,

[94] P. Radanliev, D. De Roure, J. R. Nurse, R. Nicolescu, M. Huth,
S. Cannady, and R. M. Montalvo, “Integration of cyber security
frameworks, models and approaches for building design principles for
the internet-of-things in industry 4.0,” 2018.

[95] K. Stouffer, J. Falco, and K. Scarfone, “Guide to industrial control
systems (ics) security,” NIST special publication, vol. 800, no. 82, pp.
16–16, 2011.

[96] S. D. Ant´on, D. Fraunholz, C. Lipps, F. Pohl, M. Zimmermann, and
H. D. Schotten, “Two decades of scada exploitation: A brief history,”
in 2017 IEEE Conference on Application, Information and Network
Security (AINS), 2017, pp. 98–104.

[97] “MITRE ATT&CK.” [Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/
[98] MITRE ATT&CK for Enterprise. MITRE ATT&CK Groups Overview.

[Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/groups/

[99] MITRE

Cybersecurity.
Playbook

APT
[Online].
https://www.mitre.org/capabilities/cybersecurity/overview/

Detection
Available:
cybersecurity-blog/7-steps-for-an-apt-detection-playbook-using

7
using

ATT&CK.

Steps

For

an

Industrial Control Systems.”

[100] “MITRE ATT&CK for

[Online].
Available: https://collaborate.mitre.org/attackics/index.php/Main Page
[101] The MITRE Corporation. MITRE ATT&CK for ICS levels. [Online].
Available: https://collaborate.mitre.org/attackics/index.php/All Levels
[102] L. Pi`etre-Cambac´ed`es and M. Bouissou, “Attack and defense modeling
with bdmp,” in International Conference on Mathematical Methods,
Models, and Architectures for Computer Network Security. Springer,
2010, pp. 86–101.

[103] X. Li, C. Zhou, Y.-C. Tian, N. Xiong, and Y. Qin, “Asset-based dynamic
impact assessment of cyberattacks for risk analysis in industrial control
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 14, no. 2,
pp. 608–618, 2017.

[104] K. Huang, C. Zhou, Y.-C. Tian, S. Yang, and Y. Qin, “Assessing the
physical impact of cyberattacks on industrial cyber-physical systems,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 65, no. 10, pp. 8153–
8162, 2018.

[105] R. E. Bloomﬁeld, P. Popov, K. Salako, V. Stankovic, and D. Wright,
“Preliminary interdependency analysis: An approach to support critical-
infrastructure risk-assessment,” Reliability Engineering & System
Safety, vol. 167, pp. 198 – 217, 2017, special Section: Applications
of Probabilistic Graphical Models in Dependability, Diagnosis and
Prognosis. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0951832017305963

[106] E. Bompard, C. Gao, R. Napoli, A. Russo, M. Masera, and A. Stefanini,
“Risk assessment of malicious attacks against power systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics - Part A: Systems and
Humans, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 1074–1085, 2009.

[107] W. Li, Risk assessment of power systems: models, methods, and

applications.

John Wiley & Sons, 2014.

[108] X. Liu, M. Shahidehpour, Z. Li, X. Liu, Y. Cao, and Z. Li, “Power
system risk assessment in cyber attacks considering the role of pro-
tection systems,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 8, no. 2, pp.
572–580, 2017.

[109] W. Wang, A. Cammi, F. Di Maio, S. Lorenzi, and E. Zio, “A
monte carlo-based exploration framework for identifying components
threats in nuclear power plants,” Reliability
vulnerable to cyber
Engineering & System Safety, vol. 175, pp. 24 – 37, 2018.
[Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0951832017308621

[110] G. Giannopoulos, R. Filippini, and M. Schimmer, “Risk assessment
methodologies for critical infrastructure protection. part i: A state of
the art,” JRC Technical Notes, 2012.

[111] M. Theocharidou and G. Giannopoulos, “Risk assessment methodolo-
gies for critical infrastructure protection. part ii: A new approach,”
Scientiﬁc and Technical Research Reports, 2015.

[112] C. Vellaithurai, A. Srivastava, S. Zonouz, and R. Berthier, “Cpin-
dex: Cyber-physical vulnerability assessment for power-grid infrastruc-
tures,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 566–575,
2015.

[113] A. Chakraborty, M. Alam, V. Dey, A. Chattopadhyay,

and
D. Mukhopadhyay, “Adversarial attacks and defences: A survey,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.00069, 2018.

[114] K. Ren, T. Zheng, Z. Qin, and X. Liu, “Adversarial attacks and
defenses in deep learning,” Engineering, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 346 –
360, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S209580991930503X

[115] G. Liang, J. Zhao, F. Luo, S. R. Weller, and Z. Y. Dong, “A review
of false data injection attacks against modern power systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1630–1638, 2016.
[116] J. Zhang, Zhigang Chu, L. Sankar, and O. Kosut, “False data injection
attacks on power system state estimation with limited information,”
in 2016 IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM),
2016, pp. 1–5.

[117] M. A. Rahman and H. Mohsenian-Rad, “False data injection attacks
with incomplete information against smart power grids,” in 2012 IEEE
Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 2012, pp. 3153–
3158.

[118] M. Mohammadpourfard, A. Sami, and Y. Weng, “Identiﬁcation of false
data injection attacks with considering the impact of wind generation
and topology reconﬁgurations,” IEEE Transactions on Sustainable
Energy, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1349–1364, 2018.

[119] J. Zhao, G. Zhang, M. La Scala, Z. Y. Dong, C. Chen, and J. Wang,
“Short-term state forecasting-aided method for detection of smart grid
general false data injection attacks,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid,
vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1580–1590, 2017.

[120] C. Konstantinou and M. Maniatakos, “A case study on implementing
false data injection attacks against nonlinear state estimation,” in
Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Workshop on Cyber-Physical Systems
Security and Privacy, ser. CPS-SPC ’16. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2016, p. 81–92. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2994487.2994491
[121] S. P. Skorobogatov and R. J. Anderson, “Optical fault

induction
attacks,” in Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems - CHES
2002, B. S. Kaliski, c¸. K. Koc¸, and C. Paar, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2003, pp. 2–12.

[122] J. Meserve, “Staged cyber attack reveals vulnerability in power grid,”
[Online]: http://www.cnn.com/2007/US/09/26/power.at.risk/index.html,
2007.

[123] X. Lyu, Y. Ding, and S. Yang, “Safety and security risk assessment in
cyber-physical systems,” IET Cyber-Physical Systems: Theory Appli-
cations, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 221–232, 2019.

[124] W. A. Conklin, “IT vs. OT Security: A Time to Consider a Change
in CIA to Include Resilience,” in 2016 49th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), 2016, pp. 2642–2647.
[125] R. Paes, D. C. Mazur, B. K. Venne, and J. Ostrzenski, “A guide to
securing industrial control networks: Integrating it and ot systems,”
IEEE Industry Applications Magazine, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 47–53, 2020.
[126] P. K. Garimella, “It-ot integration challenges in utilities,” in 2018
IEEE 3rd International Conference on Computing, Communication and
Security (ICCCS), 2018, pp. 199–204.

39

[127] R. J. Rodr´ıguez, “On qualitative analysis of fault trees using structurally
persistent nets,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics:
Systems, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 282–293, 2015.

[128] A. A. C´ardenas, S. Amin, Z.-S. Lin, Y.-L. Huang, C.-Y. Huang, and
S. Sastry, “Attacks against process control systems: risk assessment,
detection, and response,” in Proceedings of the 6th ACM symposium
on information, computer and communications security, 2011, pp. 355–
366.

[129] J. Shi, “Security risk assessment about enterprise networks on the base
of simulated attacks,” Procedia Engineering, vol. 24, pp. 272–277,
2011.

[130] W. Wu, R. Kang, and Z. Li, “Risk assessment method for cyber security
of cyber physical systems,” in 2015 First International Conference on
Reliability Systems Engineering (ICRSE), 2015, pp. 1–5.

[131] Q. Zhang, C. Zhou, N. Xiong, Y. Qin, X. Li, and S. Huang,
“Multimodel-based incident prediction and risk assessment in dynamic
cybersecurity protection for industrial control systems,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 46, no. 10,
pp. 1429–1444, 2016.

[132] Y. Peng, T. Lu, J. Liu, Y. Gao, X. Guo, and F. Xie, “Cyber-physical
system risk assessment,” in 2013 Ninth International Conference on
Intelligent Information Hiding and Multimedia Signal Processing,
2013, pp. 442–447.

[133] E. Zio, “The future of risk assessment,” Reliability Engineering &
System Safety, vol. 177, pp. 176 – 190, 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0951832017306543

[134] J. Wan, S. Tang, D. Li, M. Imran, C. Zhang, C. Liu, and Z. Pang,
“Reconﬁgurable smart factory for drug packing in healthcare industry
4.0,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, no. 1, pp.
507–516, 2019.

[135] Y. Zhang, M. Qiu, C. Tsai, M. M. Hassan, and A. Alamri, “Health-
cps: Healthcare cyber-physical system assisted by cloud and big data,”
IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 88–95, 2017.

[136] Y. Chang, “Architecture design for performing grasp-and-lift tasks in
brain–machine-interface-based human-in-the-loop robotic system,” IET
Cyber-Physical Systems: Theory Applications, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 198–
203, 2019.

[137] J. K. Naufal, J. B. Camargo, L. F. Vismari, J. R. de Almeida, C. Molina,
R. I. R. Gonz´alez, R. Inam, and E. Fersman, “A2cps: A vehicle-centric
safety conceptual framework for autonomous transport systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 19, no. 6, pp.
1925–1939, 2018.

[138] J. Johnson, J. Quiroz, R. Concepcion, F. Wilches-Bernal, and M. J.
Reno, “Power system effects and mitigation recommendations for
der cyberattacks,” IET Cyber-Physical Systems: Theory Applications,
vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 240–249, 2019.

[139] C. B. Vellaithurai, S. S. Biswas, R. Liu, and A. Srivastava, Real
Time Modeling and Simulation of Cyber-Power System. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2015, pp. 43–74. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-45928-7 3

[140] X. Fan, S. G. Aksoy, Q. Huang, J. P. Ogle, D. Wang, A. Tbaileh, and
T. Fu, “Coordination of transmission, distribution and communication
systems for prompt power system recovery after disasters:report – grid
and communication interdependency review and characterization of
typical communication systems,” 3 2019.

[141] Science Learning Hub, “Scientiﬁc modeling,” [Online]: https://www.

sciencelearn.org.nz/resources/575-scientiﬁc-modelling, 2019.

[142] V. Jalili-Marandi, V. Dinavahi, K. Strunz, J. A. Martinez, and
A. Ramirez, “Interfacing techniques for transient stability and electro-
magnetic transient programs IEEE task force on interfacing techniques
for simulation tools,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 24,
no. 4, pp. 2385–2395, 2009.

[143] P. Le-Huy, G. Sybille, P. Giroux, L. Loud, J. Huang, and I. Kamwa,
“Real-time electromagnetic transient and transient
stability co-
simulation based on hybrid line modelling,” IET Generation, Trans-
mission Distribution, vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 2983–2990, 2017.

[144] D. Shu, X. Xie, V. Dinavahi, C. Zhang, X. Ye, and Q. Jiang, “Dynamic
phasor based interface model for EMT and transient stability hybrid
simulations,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 33, no. 4, pp.
3930–3939, 2018.

[145] R. Huang, R. Fan, J. Daily, A. Fisher, and J. Fuller, “Open-source
framework for power system transmission and distribution dynamics
co-simulation,” IET Generation, Transmission & Distribution, vol. 11,
no. 12, pp. 3152–3162, 2017.

[146] A. Hariri and M. O. Faruque, “A hybrid simulation tool for the study
of pv integration impacts on distribution networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Sustainable Energy, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 648–657, 2017.

[147] Y. N. Velaga, G. Krishnamoorthy, A. Dubey, A. Chen, and P. K. Sen,
“Advancements in co-simulation techniques in combined transmission
and distribution systems analysis,” The Journal of Engineering, vol.
2019, no. 12, pp. 8432–8438, 2019.

[148] M. S. Obaidat, F. Zarai, and P. Nicopolitidis, Modeling and simulation
of computer networks and systems: Methodologies and applications.
Morgan Kaufmann, 2015.

[149] J. Mahseredjian, V. Dinavahi, and J. A. Martinez, “Simulation tools
for electromagnetic transients in power systems: Overview and chal-
lenges,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 24, no. 3, pp.
1657–1669, 2009.

[150] M. D. Omar Faruque, T. Strasser, G. Lauss, V. Jalili-Marandi,
P. Forsyth, C. Dufour, V. Dinavahi, A. Monti, P. Kotsampopoulos,
J. A. Martinez, K. Strunz, M. Saeedifard, Xiaoyu Wang, D. Shearer,
and M. Paolone, “Real-time simulation technologies for power systems
design, testing, and analysis,” IEEE Power and Energy Technology
Systems Journal, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 63–73, 2015.

[151] A. Newaz, J. Ospina, and M. O. Faruque, “Controller hardware-in-the-
loop validation of a graph search based energy management strategy
for grid-connected distributed energy resources,” IEEE Transactions on
Energy Conversion, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 520–528, 2019.

[152] G. F. Lauss, M. O. Faruque, K. Schoder, C. Dufour, A. Viehweider,
and J. Langston, “Characteristics and design of power hardware-in-the-
loop simulations for electrical power systems,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 406–417, 2016.

[153] T. Key and K. Forsten, “Security, quality, reliability and availability:

Metrics deﬁnition: Progress report,” EPRI, 2005.

[154] W. Ren, “Accuracy evaluation of power hardware-in-the-loop (PHIL)

simulation,” Florida State University, 2007.

[155] USC ISI. The network simulator
https://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/

- ns-2.

[Online]. Available:

[156] ns-3 project. ns-3 network simulator.

[Online]. Available: https:

//www.nsnam.org/

[157] MIT. Simpy - discrete event simulation for python. [Online]. Available:

https://simpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

[158] SCALABLE Network Technologies. Scalable software solutions.

[Online]. Available: https://www.scalable-networks.com/

[159] The CORE project. CORE: Common Open Research Emulator.

[Online]. Available: https://github.com/coreemu/core

[160] Linux Man Pages. NetEm - Network Emulator. [Online]. Available:

https://www.linux.org/docs/man8/tc-netem.html

[161] E. Weing¨artner, F. Schmidt, H. Vom Lehn, T. Heer, and K. Wehrle,
“Slicetime: A platform for scalable and accurate network emulation,”
in Proceedings of the 8th USENIX conference on Networked systems
design and implementation, 2011, pp. 253–266.

[162] E. Weing¨artner, F. Schmidt, T. Heer, and K. Wehrle, “Synchronized
network emulation: matching prototypes with complex simulations,”
ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review, vol. 36, no. 2,
pp. 58–63, 2008.

[163] Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, and L. Xie, “A novel data integrity attack detection
algorithm based on improved grey relational analysis,” IEEE Access,
vol. 6, pp. 73 423–73 433, 2018.

[164] L. Ma, Z. Wang, Q. Han, and H. Lam, “Variance-constrained distributed
ﬁltering for time-varying systems with multiplicative noises and de-
ception attacks over sensor networks,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 17,
no. 7, pp. 2279–2288, 2017.

[165] M. S. Chong, M. Wakaiki, and J. P. Hespanha, “Observability of
linear systems under adversarial attacks,” in 2015 American Control
Conference (ACC), 2015, pp. 2439–2444.

[166] G. Na and Y. Eun, “A multiplicative coordinated stealthy attack and
its detection for cyber physical systems,” in 2018 IEEE Conference on
Control Technology and Applications (CCTA), 2018, pp. 1698–1703.
[167] Texas Instruments, “Grid-tied Solar Micro Inverter with MPPT,” [On-

line]: https://www.ti.com/tool/TIDM-SOLARUINV, 2019.

[168] U.S. DOE, “Annual energy outlook 2019 with projections to 2050,”

[Online]: https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/pdf/aeo2019.pdf, 2019.

[169] M. Antonakakis, T. April, M. Bailey, M. Bernhard, E. Bursztein,
J. Cochran, Z. Durumeric, J. A. Halderman, L. Invernizzi, D. Kallitsis,
Michalis Kumar, C. Lever, Z. Ma, J. Mason, D. Menscher, C. Seaman,
N. Sullivan, K. Thomas, and Y. Zhou, “Understanding the mirai botnet,”
in 26th {USENIX} security symposium ({USENIX} Security 17), 2017,
pp. 1093–1110.

[170] S. Soltan, P. Mittal, and H. V. Poor, “Blackiot: Iot botnet of high
the power grid,” in 27th {USENIX}

wattage devices can disrupt
Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 18), 2018, pp. 15–32.

40

[171] C. Konstantinou and M. Maniatakos, “Impact of ﬁrmware modiﬁcation
attacks on power systems ﬁeld devices,” in 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm). IEEE,
2015, pp. 283–288.

[172] P. Kundur, N. J. Balu, and M. G. Lauby, Power system stability and

control. McGraw-hill New York, 1994, vol. 7.

[173] J. D. Glover, M. S. Sarma, and T. Overbye, Power system analysis &

design, SI version. Cengage Learning, 2012.
[174] I. Boldea, Synchronous generators. CRC press, 2015.
[175] S. Amini, F. Pasqualetti, and H. Mohsenian-Rad, “Dynamic load
altering attacks against power system stability: Attack models and
protection schemes,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 9, no. 4,
pp. 2862–2872, 2016.

[176] S. K. Singh, B. P. Padhy, S. Chakrabarti, S. Singh, A. Kolwalkar, and
S. Kelapure, “Development of dynamic test cases in opal-rt real-time
power system simulator,” in 2014 Eighteenth National Power Systems
Conference (NPSC).

IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–6.

[177] A. Bokhari, A. Alkan, R. Dogan, M. Diaz-Aguil´o, F. De Leon,
D. Czarkowski, Z. Zabar, L. Birenbaum, A. Noel, and R. E. Uosef,
“Experimental determination of the zip coefﬁcients for modern resi-
dential, commercial, and industrial loads,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Delivery, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 1372–1381, 2013.

[178] M. Pai, Energy function analysis for power system stability. Springer

Science & Business Media, 2012.

[179] NERC, “2019 Frequency Response Annual Analysis,” https://www.

nerc.com/, 2019.

[180] NYISO,

“Transmission

and Dispatch Operations Manual,”

https://www.nyiso.com/documents/20142/2923301/trans disp.pdf/
9d91ad95-0281-2b17-5573-f054f7169551, 2020.

[181] T. Shekari, A. Gholami, F. Aminifar, and M. Sanaye-Pasand, “An
adaptive wide-area load shedding scheme incorporating power system
real-time limitations,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 759–
767, 2016.

[182] NERC, “NERC Reliability Standard PRC NERC Reliability Standard

PRC-024-1,” https://www.nerc.com/, 2020.

[183] H. Seyedi and M. Sanaye-Pasand, “New centralised adaptive load-
shedding algorithms to mitigate power system blackouts,” IET gen-
eration, transmission & distribution, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 99–114, 2009.
[184] A. Sargolzaei, K. K. Yen, and M. Abdelghani, “Time-delay switch
attack on load frequency control in smart grid,” Advances in Commu-
nication Technology, vol. 5, pp. 55–64, 2013.

[185] J. Wang and C. Peng, “Analysis of time delay attacks against power
grid stability,” in Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Cyber-Physical
Security and Resilience in Smart Grids, 2017, pp. 67–72.

[186] A. Sargolzaei, K. K. Yen, and M. N. Abdelghani, “Preventing time-
delay switch attack on load frequency control in distributed power
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1176–
1185, 2016.
[187] A. Teixeira,

I. Shames, H. Sandberg, and K. H.

“A secure control
Automatica, vol. 51, pp. 135 – 148, 2015.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0005109814004488

framework for

Johansson,
resource-limited adversaries,”
[Online]. Available:

[188] W. H. Kersting, Distribution system modeling and analysis.

CRC

press, 2012.

[189] M. Emmanuel and R. Rayudu, “The impact of single-phase grid-
connected distributed photovoltaic systems on the distribution network
using pq and pv models,” International Journal of Electrical Power &
Energy Systems, vol. 91, pp. 20–33, 2017.

[190] A. Pradhan, A. Routray, and S. M. Gudipalli, “Fault direction esti-
mation in radial distribution system using phase change in sequence
current,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 22, no. 4, pp.
2065–2071, 2007.

[191] A. Singhal and V. Ajjarapu, “Long-term voltage stability assessment
of an integrated transmission distribution system,” in 2017 North
American Power Symposium (NAPS).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.

[192] C. Dufour, H. Saad, J. Mahseredjian, and J. B´elanger, “Custom-coded
models in the state space nodal solver of ARTEMiS,” in Proceeding of
the 2013 International Conference on Power System Transients (IPST-
2013), 2013.

[193] Opal-RT. ARTEMiS User Guide, v 6.1.

[Online]. Available:

https://www.opal-rt.com/

[194] S. Adepu, N. K. Kandasamy, J. Zhou, and A. Mathur, “Attacks on
smart grid: Power supply interruption and malicious power generation,”
International Journal of Information Security, pp. 1–23, 2019.
[195] NERC, “Reliability Considerations from the Integration of Smart Grid,”
[Online]: https://www.nerc.com/ﬁles/SGTF Report Final posted v1.
1.pdf, 2010.

41

[196] A. Nicholson, S. Webber, S. Dyer, T. Patel, and H. Janicke,
“Scada security in the light of cyber-warfare,” Computers &
Security, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 418 – 436, 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404812000429

[197] L. Maglaras, M. A. Ferrag, A. Derhab, M. Mukherjee, H. Janicke,
and S. Rallis, “Threats, protection and attribution of cyber attacks on
critical infrastructures,” 2019.

[198] Y. Mo, T. H. Kim, K. Brancik, D. Dickinson, H. Lee, A. Perrig, and
B. Sinopoli, “Cyber–physical security of a smart grid infrastructure,”
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 100, no. 1, pp. 195–209, 2012.

[199] C. Wilson, Cyber Threats to Critical

Information Infrastructure.
New York, NY: Springer New York, 2014, pp. 123–136. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-0962-9 7

