When Interactive Graphic Storytelling Fails

James Barela∗, Tiago Gasiba†, Santiago Reinhard Suppan‡, Marc Berges§, Kristian Beckers¶

∗ § Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen

† ‡ ¶ Siemens AG, M¨unchen

∗ james.c.barela@tum.de † tiago.gasiba@siemens.com,
‡ Santiago.Suppan@Siemens.com, § Berges@TUM.de, ¶ kristian.beckers@siemens.com

1
2
0
2

n
a
J

6

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
6
0
1
2
0
.
1
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Many people are unaware of the digital dangers
lie around each cyber-corner. Teaching people how to
that
recognize dangerous situations is crucial, especially for those
who work on or with computers. We postulated that interactive
graphic vignettes could be a great way to expose professionals to
dangerous situations and demonstrate the effects of their choices
in these situations. In that way, we aimed to inoculate employees
against cybersecurity threats.

We used the Comic-BEE platform to create interactive security
awareness vignettes and evaluated for how employees of a major
industrial company perceived them. For analysing the potential
these comics, we ran an evaluation study as part of a
of
capture-the-ﬂag (CTF) event, a interactive exercise for hacking
vulnerable software. We evaluated whether the comics fulﬁlled
our requirements based on the responses of the participants.
We showed the comics, on various cybersecurity concepts, to 20
volunteers. In the context of a CTF event, our requirements were
not fulﬁlled. Most participants considered the images distracting,
stating a preference for text-only material.

Index Terms—Security training, Online platforms , Branching

stories, Vignettes, Awareness training

I. INTRODUCTION

Our world has become vastly dependent on information
technology. Millions of devices communicate every second
in cyberspace. We are now connected to one another to a
degree that seemed inconceivable just 20 years ago, but with
so many connections, we are confronted with just as much,
if not more, vulnerability; Hubbard & Seiersen, in their book
How to Measure Anything in Cybersecurity Risk [1], lay out
the case that
the global attack surface is increasing from
at least four perspectives: (1) the number of people on the
Internet, (2) the number of online resources that each person
is consuming, (3) the vulnerabilities that come with those
people and resources, and (4) the risk from building online
services on top of one another, which could result in a “breach
cascade”. Modern industrial systems and critical infrastructure
should account for cyber threats, especially when corporate
organizations, national economies, and public safety have been
put at risk [2], [3]. As a result of these omnipresent risks,
laws and standards have been created, such as NERC CIP-
003-7, IEC 62443, and ISO 27001, that attempt to mitigate
the risks posed by cyberattacks. These international standards
acknowledge that among the weakest points in our security
are not the technologies themselves, but the people behind the
technologies. People often lack the knowledge and training to
avoid even the simplest of hacker schemes, such as social en-
gineering, or phishing attacks. Despite these requirements and
all the best efforts of IT Security departments, organizations

are still only as strong as the employees who regularly engage
with the technologies. People are the front line of defense
against cyber threats—in particular, the engineers, managers,
and other staff who interact directly with information systems
and their security measures on a daily basis. Therefore, these
international standards require that such personnel are well-
trained, that they are aware of the risks, and that they are
prepared and have the resources to mitigate those risks.

Unfortunately, this is as far as mandates, requirements, and
laws can go; companies have to interpret and implement them,
as well as measure if the training yields the desired results. If
there is an attack, and it is not averted because employees did
not receive the right training, then it will have already been
too late.

The question is, how do we train companies’ most valuable
resource, their employees? And how do we ensure that the
training has been efﬁcient and cost-effective? National institu-
tions exist that are dedicated to the sole purpose of education
(the Department of Education, USA; Bundes Ministerium f¨ur
Bildung und Forschung, Germany; etc). But what this work
needs to take into consideration is that the people in need
of educating are (1) in the Age of Information, a different
world from anything that has ever existed before; and (2) that
they are not children being prepared for the workplace, but
adults who are already in the workplace. The old paradigms are
falling out of favor and it would be prudent to take advantage
of the resources that are available, i.e., computers and the
Internet. Security training needs to be close to the context
employees work in. Therefore, our training content was based
on interviews with security experts working in the company
itself. Training also needs to be cost-effective and scale well,
which is why we selected an online platform.

In addition, understanding computers to be the main method
for delivery (as opposed to lectures or in-person presentations)
the media should take full advantage of the properties of a
computer. Given Mayer’s extensive work on learning with
multimedia, this paper will explore a new method, which
shows promise for training employees effectively by reducing
cognitive load [4], [5]. Our method uses a vignette modality
so that participants had to further engage with the comic in a
way that implements situated learning [6]. Furthermore, we
evaluate the claims made by the developers of the comic-
creation platform, especially with regard to the time and skills

 
 
 
 
 
 
that are required to create a comic.1

Our requirements for providing an online educational tool

for cybersecurity topics are:
REQ1: Trainees shall be entertained during the course of the

training

REQ2: The comics shall not be perceived as disturbing or

even cause stress during game play

REQ3: Trainees shall recognize the context and feel com-
pelled to show they know the right answer
REQ4: Trainees shall understand how to use the comics

intuitively

In short, we present and evaluate a method for developing
educational cybersecurity comics and then using them to
train employees in a company. We present the method of
development and the subsequent evaluation, which was con-
ducted as part of a capture the ﬂag event, with 20 employees
of a major industry player. In general, the comic approach
did not fulﬁll our requirements as part of a CTF, we think
that the lessons learned can and should be shared with the
scientiﬁc community. We close the paper with the participants’
reasoning, critical discussion on the results, and practical
advice.

II. RELATED WORK AND BACKGROUND

Security training has often been perceived as an uninter-
esting and even boring topic. Therefore, several researchers
have been developing serious games to combine entertainment
and training in this ﬁeld. CyberCIEGE [7] is a role playing
video game, where players act as an information-security
decision-maker of a company. Players have to minimize risk,
while continuing to work. Using the typical mechanics of
a board game, PlayingSafe
[8] consists of multiple choice
questions about cybersecurity. Another game, SEAG [9] also
uses multiple choice questions, and additionally players have
to match cybersecurity terms with their respective pictures.
Our work differs from these, since none of them use interactive
comic-based vignettes that are based on real-world, industry
concerns.

Comics have been used before to teach about complex
issues, such as training soldiers on matters of military leader-
ship [10]. These comics displayed a problem and participants
would ﬁll in a response. Responses could then be discussed
on a forum that included responses from previous participants.
Our work does not utilize forums, and the interaction is of
the multiple-choice type. This allows for more immediate
participant feedback.

In regards to creating or generating comics, Microsoft
has done work on automatically generated comics based on
cursory language analysis [11]. Their goal was not to produce
training material, but to visually represent chat environments
to enrich the user experience.

Ledbetter [12] stated that the goals for creating Comic-
BEE are: to introduce young people to cybersecurity content

in fun and engaging ways, and thereby encourage them to
contemplate and pursue cybersecurity career paths. Among
the reasons they cite are that (1) educational comics can be
appealing on multiple levels, including engaging and increas-
ing interest in readers; and (2) young people are not being
sufﬁciently exposed to cybersecurity concepts, despite being
ever more surrounded by technology.

This paper is concerned with how to design instructional
material, and how it can be applied to a company and other
institutions like it. The evolution of instructional design has
been written about by Wilson & Cole [13]; especially as it
can be understood through the lens of cognitive models: from
the 1960’s, with Behavioral psychology; through Information
Processing psychology in the 1970’s and 1980’s; to the 1990’s
and the present, which emphasizes the construction of knowl-
edge and the role of social mediation. The state-of-the-art is
now considered to be “Constructivism,” which has been the
predominant learning theory over the past three decades [14].
Constructivism presupposes two main tenets: (1) knowledge
is a construction that comes from an active interaction with
the world, and (2) that it is inherently an adaptive process
that is not necessarily concerned with the ontological nature of
reality. This will be important, as our method utilizes simulacra
of real-world cybersecurity concepts.

III. CREATING OUR INTERACTIVE GRAPHICAL STORIES

To begin this study, the authors sought a platform that
was designed for creating educational comics in a quick and
easy way. Learning material was then generated that was
relevant to the working environment of the target participants.
The information to create the training material was gathered
from interviews with security experts from the industry. The
gathered information was consolidated and concentrated into 5
main topic areas, each of which would become its own comic.
The developed comics were deployed along with a survey to
gather qualitative data about how the comics were received by
the participants.

A. The Comic Development Platform

The comic platform is a tool developed by Secure Decisions,
a division of Applied Visions, Inc., which has been sponsored
by the Science and Technology division of Homeland Security
in the United States.2

This platform was chosen as it is aligned with the goals
of this work and also allows the implementation of the
requirements deﬁned in this paper. The Comic-BEE team
was contacted and they provided the requisite credentials for
creating comics on their site. The platform was evaluated
with a ﬁrst attempt to create a small sample comic. The goal
was also to learn the various commands and features of the
platform.

The following sub-sections describe the process for creating
a comic, divided according to the four areas for creating

1The following will be used interchangeably: comic, story,

interactive

2Contract

#HHSP233201600057C,

retrieved

from

stories, graphical vignettes, etc

https://govtribe.com/vendor/applied-visions-inc-northport-ny

comics within the platform itself: Plan Lesson, Write Script,
Layout Storyboard, and Create Final Comic.

1) Plan Lesson: The comic creator has to conﬁgure the
project for learning objectives; either the creator’s own, or
those from the NICE Cybersecurity Workforce Framework [2].
The comic creator also chooses whether the scores will be
saved to the Comic-BEE servers (wherein choices are cap-
tured, along with all the relevant data for scoring the comics);
or whether readers will be shown their results, in which case
the scores are not saved to a server. Optionally, if the creator
chooses that scores will be captured, the creator can choose
whether to prompt readers with a phrase of his choice; for
example, “Please tell us why this was your choice :)”. The
comic creator also has to deﬁne the topic, select what sort of
audience will be expected, what kind of learning environment
the readers will be in, the knowledge readers should take away,
prior knowledge, and the readers’ expertise level (before and
after exploring the comic). There is also a space here where
any known limitations of readers can be enumerated.

Figure 1: Black and White working space in Layout Story-
board

2) Write Script:

In this section, scenes and choices are
inputted and organized. There are options to create scenes
based on the Learning Objectives or Real life Scenarios. If
the creator selects either of them, a new scene is automatically
created that the creator can Edit, Duplicate, or Delete. Here,
the scene is named; designated as Start, Normal, or Ending
(different from the Real Life Scenario prompt); the script
is written, the question posed; and choices enumerated and
rated. Choices can be rated as ﬁve levels of expertise, from
Apprentice to Journeyman, and rated from 1 to 5 for quality,
Worst to Best. It is here, in the choices, where speciﬁc learning
objectives are assigned. A minimum of one choice is required
for Start and Normal scenes, and Ending scenes do not have
choices; the maximum number of choices can exceed 20;
though, given item choice number theory [15], [16], [17], three
was found to be sufﬁcient.

Figure 2: Full-color working space in Create Final Comic

3) Layout Storyboard: The storyboard section is the ﬁrst
for which the creator can edit characters and assets in panels
and storyboards. Scenes can be anywhere from 1 to 6 panels,
with 8 various arrangements to choose from. After having
selected a panel layout, the creator is given a working space to
add any text, items, or characters to each panel individually;
to aid in this, the scripts from the Write script section are
shown alongside the working space. Characters can be sitting
or standing, and be facing left, forward, or right. Everything
is in black and white, see Figure 1. After having populated all
of the panels and scenes, the creator can move on to create
the ﬁnal comic.

just as before, but

4) Create Final Comic: Here, the creator has a working
this time there is a button for
space,
replacing the characters and items with their full-color coun-
terparts, see Figure 2. Characters can further be customized to
have up to ten various expressions, seven arm positions, four
directions to face, and four leg positions. Items and characters
can be stretched, rotated, and mirrored, and they are arranged
according to layers within the working space. To add a sort
of variance, background colors can be selected, there are all
sorts of shapes, and creators can even upload their own SVG
ﬁles to be included in their projects.

B. Collecting Learning Material from Experts

Experts on information security, organizational procedures,
and resource allocation were consulted for this work. To begin
developing comics, ﬁrst it was necessary to ﬁnd topics deemed
important by the experts. We used a questionnaire of three
items during phone interviews to ﬁnd out common problems:
Q1 What are among the most common problems encoun-

tered?

Q2 What are the situations that surround the most common
problems? What other choices can be made (either right
or wrong)?

Q3 What is the context of events that occur before or after
common problems (do not have to be directly related

to the problems themselves), e.g., workload, time-frame,
other tasks. . .

feedback consisted of the following ﬁve feedback questions
for readers:

The questionnaire was designed to allow the respondent to
elucidate on all aspects of insecure scenarios, including the
proximal and ultimate causes of the problems, the situations
that may surround problems, and the contexts surrounding
problems that may (seemingly) have little or nothing to do
with the problems themselves.

C. Developing Learning Material

The ﬁnal list was comprised of ﬁve different learning topics.
In order to create a comic with more branching paths, a
second expert (Expert 2) was consulted for creating new ideas
that elaborated on the aforementioned topics. Several methods
were tried for collecting and organizing ideas and paths, but
the best method seemed to be a visual representation that
displayed all the choices, such as the whiteboard, which was
used to create the second comic.

D. The Comic Creation Process

After some trial and error, the following six phases ended
up being the most effective method for creating complete and
coherent comics.

1) Design: Collect ideas from experts and colleagues, and
turn them into viable scenes and choices that could be
used in a storyboard.

2) Storyboard: Scenes and choices are organized into a
coherent story, especially so they could be included into
the comic platform.

3) Comic Platform - Write Script: The design and story-
board is now taken from the “page” and put online into
the comic platform.

4) Comic Platform - Storyboard: The story was ar-
ranged into a storyboard. For a full description see Sub-
section III-A3.

5) Comic Platform - Final Draft: The ﬁnal draft of the
comic was created. For a full description, see Sub-
section III-A4.

6) Feedback on Final Draft: After the comic was fully
realized, it would be sent out for feedback once more,
and that feedback would be taken to revise the comic
one last time before it would be ready to be used.

E. Developing the Comics

The ﬁve topic ideas were all made into their own dedicated
comic, each covering a single topic: Backup and Restore
(B&R), Principle of Least Privilege (PLP), Password Man-
agement (PassM), Where to Share Data (WSD), and Patch
Management (PatchM). Altogether, about 60 hours were spent
working directly on the comics; indirectly, the process took
approximately 8 weeks. For a breakdown of the amount of
time spent working directly on each comic by phase, see
Table I.

After completing each phase of the comic creation process,
the comics were sent to experts for feedback, whereby the
responses were received up to a week later. Each round of

1) How realistic are the scenes and choices?
2) Is anything missing?
3) Is anything wrong?
4) Do you think they could work as teaching material? (e.g.,

in training)

5) What do you think, in general?

IV. EVALUATION

This section describes the context of the experiment, the

participants, and also our results.

A. Setting and Sampling

Upon completing the comics, the next step was to distribute
them among employees of the company, who would evaluate
them. Though this group of employees would be informed
that any information they provided would be voluntary and
anonymous, the author also preferred that their attention was
rapt and that they had an incentive to complete them. This
is why they were not sent out in emails, as was done for
the feedback sessions, where it was likely that they would be
ignored. Instead, it was considered better if the comics could
be implemented alongside another training, giving the authors
a so-called “captive audience”. Such an occasion was identiﬁed
in one of the company’s many Capture the Flag (CTF) events.
The comics were added to the CTF as an exercise to earn
points by ﬁnding the “correct” story path leading to a ﬂag
that earns points.

The event lasted two days; on the ﬁrst day, there were 10
teams of two and one individual participating in the event.
On the second day, there were 5 participants. The partici-
pants included Web Developers, personnel from Research and
Development, Software Testers, and Project Managers. The
participants’ age ranged from their 20’s to their 50’s (see
Table II).

Capture the Flag events are, by their nature, competitive and
fast-paced. Given the structure of the CTF event, participants
were given the incentive to complete the comics (and all
the other events) for points, and to do so as quickly as
possible. Participants were provided with a virtual machine
that contained all of the tasks and objectives; this also allowed
the moderators of the event to monitor their progress. Once an
objective was successfully completed, participants were given
a random string of digits, whereby these “ﬂags” could be
exchanged for points. As is typical in a CTF event, the team
with the most points wins the event and is given a small prize.
As the comics were not initially part of the ofﬁcial CTF event,
they had to be modiﬁed to include ﬂags on the scenes that were
considered to be “correct”.

B. Results

Before the CTF, feedback was mostly positive; the follow-
ing remarks were typical: “Very realistic”, “Try mentioning
company policy”, “Nothing wrong”, “It could give an overall
idea why backup is important”, and “It is good”. This gives

Table I: Time taken for comic creation (in hours) by phase and comic

Phase
1. Design
2. Storyboard
3. Comic Platform - Write Script
4. Comic Platform - Storyboard
5. Comic Platform - Final Draft
6. Feedback on Final Draft
Total

B&R PLP
0.75
0.75
1
2
1.25
2
2
1.75
4
8
1
1
10
15.5

PassM WSD PatchM Total
3.5
0.75
6
1
5.75
0.75
9.75
2
30
6
5
1
60
11.5

0.5
1
0.75
2
6
1
11.25

0.75
1
1
2
6
1
11.75

Note: Feedback was collected for up to 1 week after each phase

an indication that Requirement 3 is at least partially fulﬁlled.
There was one instance of a colleague who found the comics to
be indecipherable. He mentioned that he did not know which
way to read the comics and even that he did not like comics.
This point was noted because it was unexpected that someone
would not like comics. However, his feedback does not affect
any of our target requirements.

Additional comments that recommended changes were also
taken into account, and the corresponding necessary changes
were made.

During the CTF events, approximately 20 people partici-
pated in the CTF and had viewed the comics. On the ﬁrst CTF
day, the comics were given to the participants at the beginning
of the event in the morning, as a sort of “warm-up” exercise.
Participants needed to solve the comics in order to be able
to start with the CTF challenges. This caused some negative
feedback from the participants and some obvious stress; thus
clearly indicating that Requirement 2 is not fulﬁlled.

After the CTF event, which lasted 8 hours, a 10-minute
feedback session was held. The same ﬁve feedback questions
were asked as were asked to ofﬂine participants (see the listing
in section III-E). Additionally, participants were told that any
feedback they provided would be voluntary. Since distress in
the feedback by the participants was noticeable (due to not
being anonymous), the feedback strategy was changed for the
second CTF day.

For this second session, which took place the following
day, the participants were asked to respond to the questions
on a slip of paper. Additionally, they were asked to answer
the following demographic questions: gender, age, whether
they have read comics before, which kind, whether they like
comics, and the ﬁeld they work in.

that

On the ﬁrst day, the author noted that the participants found
the comics “Okay”, but
the images themselves were
largely ignored, as they were perceived to be unnecessary.
One participant said that he would “just read the answers
and make his decision”, three other participants agreed with
him, and many other participants seemed to concur. Another
participant said that “[i]t is normally the case that the visuals
actually add to the learning experience”. Another participant
added, “In this case it seemed that the pictures were entirely
unnecessary, a waste. We were able to skip right over them to
read the responses and make our selections without looking at

them. What if the answers were also pictures? Because it took
me out of the context to be looking at pictures then make a
text selection”. By receiving this feedback, requirement 3 and
4 are obviously not fulﬁlled.

When asked to volunteer information about their past expe-
rience with comics, about 3 of the remaining 10 participants
indicated that they had read comics before, and when the
author asked who was familiar with the Asterix series all of
the participants seemed to be familiar.

The participant feedback for the second CTF day is shown
in Table II. Here we get a glimpse of failed requirements 1
and 4.

On the ﬁrst CTF event, the participants clearly gave feed-
back that the comics were perceived as disturbing the CTF
game, as they consumed time to answer but did not add to the
CTF fun.

V. CONCLUSIONS

This study was conducted to (1) evaluate an online comic-
creation platform and (2) to analyze user perceptions of
the resultant interactive graphical stories. These stories were
implemented for security awareness as part of a capture the
ﬂag (CTF) challenge. While the comic creation process was
tedious, it was mostly prolonged by the feedback process.
The authors thought
this could be streamlined, and in a
conversation with the platform provider, they have decided to
implement a feature that would allow for feedback to be given
on the platform itself. Since publication, this new feature has
been implemented in an update to the platform.

As for the CTF and feedback, we gained numerous valu-
able insights. First, the participants perceived the content of
the comics to be realistic. Second, stories or vignettes in
the form of comics were also considered a good idea for
communicating complex ideas, and being used as training
material. The participants perceived the following elements
as needing improvement: the images and stories were not
seen as essential in the stressful situation (while under time
pressure of the CTF) and were therefore, largely ignored. In
particular, during a hacking competition, people tried to apply
the hacking mindset to the comics and just tried all paths and
possible answers without reading or understanding them. Their
only goal was to have the right answer before the other teams,
understanding the story was not the main goal.

Table II: Participant Demographic Information: Day 2

# Gender Age Range Read comics before? Do you like comics? Which comics? What’s your ﬁeld
Software Testing
1
Security Testing
2
R&D
3
R&D
4
Web Development
5

-
-
Mad
Asterix
-

20’s
20’s
40’s
40’s
50’s

F
F
M
M
M

N
N
Y
Y
N

-
N
Y
Y
N

[7] C. E. Irvine, M. F. Thompson, and K. Allen, “Cyberciege: gaming for
information assurance,” IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 61–
64, 2005.

[8] M. Newbould and S. Furnell, “Playing safe: A prototype game for raising
awareness of social engineering,” in Australian Information Security
Management Conference, 2009, p. 4.

[9] A.-S. T. Olanrewaju and N. H. Zakaria, “Social engineering awareness
game (seag): An empirical evaluation of using game towards improving
information security awareness,” in Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Computing and Informatics, ICOCI 2015, 2015, (Ac-
cessed on 10/16/2016).

[10] A. Gordon, “Fourth frame forums: interactive comics for collaborative
learning,” Proceedings of the 14th annual ACM international conference
on Multimedia, pp. 69–72, 2006.

[11] D. Kurlander, T. Skelly, and D. Salesin, “Comic Chat,” Proceedings
of the 23rd annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques - SIGGRAPH ’96, vol. 96, pp. 225–236, 1996.

[12] B. Ledbetter, Z. Wallace, A. Harms, A. Siraj, and A. E. Comics,
“CySCom : CyberSecurity COMics Using Comics for Teaching Cyber-
security Concepts to Youth,” in 2016 IEEE Conference on Intelligence
and Security Informatics (ISI).
Tucson, AZ, USA: Intelligence and
Security Informatics (ISI), 2016, pp. 282–284.

[13] B. G. Wilson and P. Cole, “Cognitive teaching models,” in Handbook
of research in instructional, D. Jonassen, Ed. New York: MacMillan,
1996, pp. 601–621.

[14] C. T. Fosnot and R. S. Perry, Constructivism: A Psychological Theory
of Learning, 2nd ed. New York and London: Teachers College Press,
1996. [Online]. Available: http://faculty.arts.ubc.ca/emeyers/LIBR535/
readings/Fosnot&Perry 2005.pdf

[15] R. Vyas and A. Supe, “Article in The National medical journal of India
· November,” The National Medical Journal of India, vol. 21, no. 3,
pp. 130–133, 2008. [Online]. Available: https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/23468587

[16] M. C. Rodriguez, “Three Options Are Optimal for Multiple-Choice
Items: A Meta-Analysis of 80 Years of Research,” Educational Mea-
surement: Issues and Practice, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 3–13, 2005.

[17] P. I. Nwadinigwe and L. Naibi, “The Number of Options in a Multiple-
Choice Test Item and the Psychometric Characteristics,” Journal of
Education and Practic, vol. 4, no. 28, pp. 189–196, 2013.

Thus, one of our main results is that

the comics were
not well-received, not because of the comics or the content
itself, but rather because of the context in which they were
implemented - in a CTF platform.

Based on these insights we have identiﬁed the following

recommendations:

• to save time, feedback can be limited to the initial and

ﬁnal stages of the content creation process

• comics, interactive or otherwise, should not be imple-
mented during time-dependent (sensitive) activities such
as during a CTF event

• it must be ensured that comics are used for training
in non-stressful environments, such as during a break
or other leisure time, to encourage a relaxed and even
playful mood

• while they can be about serious matters, the comics can
also be fun; we hypothesise that by being fun, they remain
in the memory of the participants for longer time

Scientiﬁc conferences present successful research to a large
extent. Unfortunately, the investigative journey presented in
this work has resulted in our requirements and goal not
being achieved. While these were not the results we were
anticipating, it is all the more reason that we are glad to have
this work published, so that future researchers can learn from
our experiences. In particular, we consider the lessons-learned
to be important so that they can be considered when using
comics as a form of IT security awareness training.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank all participants of the
experiment for their time and their valuable insights and
suggestions. The authors would also like to thank the providers
of the comic platform.

REFERENCES

[1] D. W. Hubbard and R. Seiersen, How to measure anything in cyberse-
curity risk. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2016.
[2] W. Newhouse, S. Keith, B. Scribner, and G. Witte, “National
Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) Cybersecurity Workforce
Framework,” 2017. [Online]. Available: http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/
SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-181.pdf

[3] J. M. Blythe, “Cyber security in the workplace: Understanding and
promoting behaviour change,” in CEUR Workshop Proceedings, 2013.
[4] R. E. Mayer and R. Moreno, “Nine Ways to Reduce Cognitive Load
in Multimedia Learning,” Educational Psychologist, vol. 38, no. 1, pp.
43–52, 2003. [Online]. Available: http://www.tandfonline.com/action/
journalInformation?journalCode=hedp20

[5] R. E. Mayer, “Multimedia learning,” Psychology of Learning and

Motivation, vol. 41, pp. 85–139, 1 2002.

[6] J. S. Brown, A. Collins, and P. Duguld, “Situated Cognition and the
Culture of Learning,” Educational Researcher, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 32–
42, 1988.

