Real-time Power System Simulation with Hardware
Devices through DNP3 in Cyber-Physical Testbed

Hao Huang
Texas A&M University
hao_huang@tamu.edu

C. Matthew Davis
PowerWorld Corporation
matt@powerworld.com

Katherine R. Davis
Texas A&M University
katedavis@tamu.edu

1
2
0
2

l
u
J

6

]

Y
S
.
s
s
e
e
[

2
v
5
6
9
5
0
.
1
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Abstract—Modern power grids are dependent on communi-
cation systems for data collection, visualization, and control.
Distributed Network Protocol 3 (DNP3) is commonly used in
supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems in
power systems to allow control system software and hardware to
communicate. To study the dependencies between communication
network security, power system data collection, and industrial
hardware, it is important to enable communication capabilities
with real-time power system simulation. In this paper, we present
the integration of new functionality of a power systems dynamic
simulation package into our cyber-physical power system testbed
that supports real-time power system data transfer using DNP3,
demonstrated with an industrial real-time automation controller
(RTAC). The usage and conﬁguration of DNP3 with real-world
equipment in to achieve power system monitoring and control of a
large-scale synthetic electric grid via this DNP3 communication
is presented. Then, an exemplar of DNP3 data collection and
control is achieved in software and hardware using the 2000-bus
Texas synthetic grid.

Index Terms—DNP3 Protocol, SCADA, Hardware-in-the-Loop,

Interactive Control, Cyber Security

I. INTRODUCTION

Electric power systems are some of the largest industrial
control systems (ICS). In these systems, operations taken by
physical actuators depend on data, where this data may be
delivered through a communications infrastructure. A power
system is also a critical infrastructure; hence, its reliability and
resilience are its key requirements. For example, it is important
to ensure the integrity of generator dispatch to achieve effec-
tive utilization of energy resources and reasonable electricity
prices. To achieve such goals, a reliable and secure communi-
cation network is essential. However, increasing cyberattacks
are occuring worldwide [1], [2], and more studies are showing
vulnerabilities in current communication protocols [3]. Thus,
how to analyze, detect, and respond to cyber attacks is a vital
research topic in power systems.

Distributed Network Protocol 3 (DNP3) [4] is commonly
used in ICS for data acquisition and control [5]. However,
several studies show the vulnerability of DNP3 and implement
different types of attacks, such as event buffer ﬂooding [6],
man-in-the-middle [7], packet snifﬁng and modiﬁcation [8],
etc. Such explorations historically stay within the scope of
only the communication network and its emulation, while
neglecting real hardware devices and analysis of power system
impact. To study the cyber-physical security of power systems,
it is important to consider both cyber and physical elements.
Recently, several hardware-in-the-loop testbeds are built with
Real-Time Digital Simulator (RTDS) or OPAL-RT for power

978-1-7281-8612-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE

system cyber-physical security studies and algorithm valida-
tion [9]–[11]. Even though the incorporation of these commer-
cial products for hardware-in-the-loop testbeds can replicate
certain impacts of cyber adversaries in power systems, they
cannot capture the detailed cyber attack process in the cyber
network. Therefore, it is necessary to have a stand-alone power
system real-time simulation that also has the functionality to
communicate over a cyber network.

This paper introduces usage of a new DNP3 functionality
of PowerWorld Dynamic Studio (PWDS) that allows the
communication of PWDS with DNP3 clients, which enables
the detailed analysis of DNP3 communication among real-
time power system simulation, cyber adversaries, and indus-
trial intelligent electronic devices (IEDs). PWDS provides an
interactive simulation environment for real-time power system
analysis. It can run either stand-alone or as a server; as a
server, one of its capabilities is to generate IEEE C37.118
phasor measurement unit (PMU) data [12]–[14] which has
been utilized in [15]–[17] for real-time power system data
visualization, interactive control through a web interface, and
digital PMU data to analog signal conversion. The addition of
DNP3 functionality allows PWDS to run as a DNP3 server,
generate DNP3 packets, and deliver the packets over the
communication network to DNP3 clients/masters.

The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) has funded several
projects for power system cyber-physical security. In [18], the
Cyber Physical Resilient Energy Systems (CYPRES) project is
developing a secure cyber-physical modeling foundation that is
truly cyber-physical: a secure end-to-end system for managing
the energy system, communications, security, and modeling
and analytics. PWDS with DNP3 communication capability
is used in creating the hardware-in-the-loop testbed with
power system modeling and analysis. This testbed is perform-
ing hardware integration over physical and emulated utility
communication networks, enabling realistic security studies
bridging both cyber and physical domains for CYPRES.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
1) This paper presents a cyber-physical testbed implemen-
tation of new functionality of PWDS that enables the
communication between real-time power system simu-
lation with industry hardware devices through DNP3.
2) We utilize an industrial control and automation device,
SEL Real-Time Automation Controller (RTAC), to com-
municate with PWDS through DNP3.

3) With the synthetic Texas power grid [19], we present an
exemplar of how to use RTAC and PWDS to mimic
real-world applications of reading measurements and

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Outstation Records

controlling devices using DNP3.

II. POWERWORLD DYNAMIC STUDIO DNP3
FUNCTIONALITY
PowerWorld Dynamic Studio (PWDS) is a transient stability
based simulation running as a server. It is capable of sending
and receiving data from connected clients,
thus allowing
multiple users to interact with the transient stability simu-
lation. The PWDS "speaks" several protocols. It is capable
of communicating via a proprietary protocol called the DS
protocol (PWDSP), the IEEE C37.118 protocol [12] as output,
and DNP3 [4]. The use of standard protocols allows the DS
to function as a stand-in for a real power system in a wide
range of applications including those that are modeling cyber
infrastructure.

Just like the cases used for running the simulations, where
the transient stability data must be setup ahead of time for the
PWDS, a case’s DNP3 data is also set up in PowerWorld Sim-
ulator before being used in PWDS. The DNP3 conﬁgurations
are presented to the user in terms of two objects in Simulator:
DNP3Objects and Outstations. The Outstation is a container
object that groups together several DNP3Objects. A simple
example of the use of an Outstation is to group together all
the points from a particular substation. However, there is no
restriction in the software about which points can be assigned
to an outstation, so within each DNP3 outstation, we can insert
the DNP3Object for different devices. In the PWDS, Figure 1
shows the list of outstations in a sample case, while Figure 2
shows the dialog for an outstation. Dialogs in Simulator allow
the user to create Outstation objects and insert DNP3Objects.

The DNP3Object

is conﬁgured using the "DNP3 Point
Information" dialog as shown in Figure 3. This dialog allows
the user to map an object and ﬁeld in the power system model
to a DNP3 point. As shown in Figure 3, there are 5 DNP3
Point Type to choose, which are Binary Input, Analog Input,
Counter Input, Binary Output, and Analog Output. The Point
Field determines the speciﬁc data. For example, generator’s
STATUS is set in Binary Input. When the generator is on,
the binary input data is represented as 1, otherwise, it is 0.
In Binary Output, the generator’s status can be controlled by
connected DNP3 client/master. For a generator’s power data,
such as its real power and reactive power output, these are set
in Analog Input as MW and MVar. For Analog Output, PWDS
DNP3 only supports MWSETPOINT and VPUSETPOINT for
generators to set generator’s real power and voltage values.
Other devices, including loads, shunts, branchs, and buses, can
be conﬁgured in the same way. The Event Class determines
when the data should be reported to DNP3 client, and these
are customized by the user or application. Events are each
placed in one of three buffers, associated with "Classes" 1, 2

Figure 2. Outstation Information Dialog

Figure 3. DNP3 Point Information Dialog

and 3. In addition to these, Class 0 is deﬁned as "static" or
and gives the current status of the monitored data [4].

III. SEL REAL-TIME AUTOMATION CONTROLLER (RTAC)

The SEL RTAC is an industrial automation and control
device that supports various communication protocols, such
as DNP3, Modbus, IEC 61850, etc. [20]. RTACs have been
utilized in SCADA systems as remote terminal units (RTUs)
for data collection and protocol conversion. The built-in IEC
61131 engine enables ﬂexible customer-designed logic with
incoming power system data and the RTAC’s system tags
for substation control. The RTAC is conﬁgured through the
SEL AcSELerator RTAC software (SEL-5033) that provides a
programmable interface for users to conﬁgure the communi-
cation protocol types and parameters, the connection type, and
user deﬁned logic [21]. The embedded ﬂex parse messaging
within the SEL protocol allows users to create customized
regular expressions to collect speciﬁc information, such as
connected device conﬁgurations, energy measurements, etc.
[22]. Additionally,
the RTAC can be accessed through its
web interface, where we can conﬁgure its ethernet ports’ IP

Figure 4. PWDS Communicates with SEL RTAC Over DNP3

address, check connected IEDs, access the system alarms and
event logs, and get a diagnostic report.

RTAC has been utilized in various power testbeds for cyber-
physical security studies [23], [24], algorithm validation [25]–
[27], and data collection, conversion and control [16], [28].
Within those applications, the RTAC is ether connected to
relays working as a RTU or communicating with phasor
data concentrators (PDC) to collect PMU data for real-time
automated control. Any application or devices that support
DNP3 communication can communicate with RTAC through
serial or TCP/IP communication, which can be utilized in
power system cyber-physical security studies.

Hence, PWDS can generate DNP3 packets based on the
pre-deﬁned outstation and DNP3 tags and send them through
TCP/IP network to its destination. In this way, PWDS can
communicate with the RTAC and supply each outstation’s
DNP3 data,
including the measurements, such as current,
voltage, power ﬂow, etc., and the on/off status of generators,
branches, loads and shunts. This functionality provides for
new approaches to study cyber-physical security among power
system real-time simulation, hardware devices, and communi-
cation network.

IV. DNP3 COMMUNICATION BETWEEN POWERWORLD DS
AND RTAC

DNP3 is frequently used in power system supervisory
control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems to collect data
and send control commands. As PWDS runs the simulation
in real-time, each device modeled in the case has its own
data including status (open/close) and measurements (e.g., real
power, reactive power, voltage). With the DNP3 functionality
in PWDS, the real-time simulation data is wrapped in DNP3
packets and delivered to DNP3 clients/masters. This allows the
integration of real-time power system simulation with other
software and hardware to replicate realistic SCADA systems
with both cyber and physical elements.

The integration of PWDS and RTAC presents one char-
acteristic of a cyber-physical hardware-in-the-loop testbed.
The data generated by the simulation represents the ﬁeld
device measurements. The RTAC collects the data through
DNP3, emulating real data transmission in the communication
network. The DNP3 packets can then be captured by network
analysis tools such as WireShark for further analysis. Then,
within RTAC, as the DNP3 client, we can observe the collected
data and control devices to mimic real-world operation.

This section presents how to set the PowerWorld case to
generate DNP3 packets and conﬁgure the RTAC to collect
the corresponding DNP3 data. In this paper, we utilize the

Figure 5. One-Line Diagram of Substation GLEN ROSE1

synthetic 2000-bus Texas case [19] to conﬁgure the Power-
World case and RTAC to establish the DNP3 communication
and collect data and control devices. With 1250 substations
in the case, we use the Substation 560 (GLEN ROSE1) as
the example to show the procedure, whose one-line diagram
is shown in Figure 5 with two generators, three transformers,
four transmission lines and four buses. The procedure can be
replicated for all other substations and devices.

A. Conﬁguration of PWDS and RTAC

To enable the PWDS DNP3 functionality, the ﬁrst step is to
conﬁgure the corresponding power system case in Simulator
under the DNP3 folder. Within the Outstation, we can insert as
many DNP3 outstations as needed. Then, in the DNP3Object,
we can insert different DNP3 Point Type, including Analog
Input, Analog Output, Binary Input and Binary Output, for
various devices under corresponding Outstation. With 1250
substations, for convenience, we conﬁgure the outstation num-
ber based on the substation ID. Then, the devices within
each substation, including generators, branches, loads, shunts
and buses, and their corresponding data are conﬁgured to
different Point Field as discussed in Section II. Once the DNP3
conﬁguration for the power system case is done, we can load
the case to PWDS, run the real-time simulation and turn on
the server. The host machine of PWDS can generate DNP3
packets at all its Ethernet ports, whose IP addresses are the
DNP3 Server IP Address for DNP3 client/master to collect
data for different local area networks (LANs). Regarding to
DNP3 Protocol Port, it can be conﬁgured in PWDS, which is
set to 20000 in this case.

For RTAC, it is the DNP3 client for outstations in PWDS.
To establish the DNP3 communication between PWDS and
RTAC, RTAC’s Ethernet port that connects to the host machine
of PWDS and one of the host machine’s Ethernet ports should
be under the same LAN. In this paper, the connected RTAC
Ethernet port’s IP is 172.168.2.2 and one of the host machine’s
Ethernet port’s IP is 172.168.2.10. Then, for each outstation,
we can program a corresponding DNP3 client through SEL
5033 by inserting DNP Protocol with Client-Ethernet con-
nection type. For clarity, we name the DNP3 client based on
the substation ID. Within the client, the Server IP Address
is 172.168.2.10 and the Server IP Port is 20000. The Server
DNP Address is the corresponding outstation number, which
is the substation ID in this paper. As to Client IP Port and

Figure 6. RTAC Conﬁguration for Client PowerWorld_RTAC_560 for Sub-
station 560.

Figure 7. Client PowerWorld_RTAC_560 Controller

Client DNP Address, they can be conﬁgured based on user’s
preference as long as that port and address are not taken
by other DNP3 applications/clients. The example of commu-
nication conﬁguration for Substation 560 (GLEN ROSE) is
shown in Figure 6. For DNP3 communication settings, other
parameters, such as Integrity Poll Period, Class 1,2,3 Polling
Period and Poll Timeout, are the default settings in SEL 5033.
After conﬁguring the communication settings, we create
Analog Input, Analog Output, Binary Input and Binary Output
in RTAC to receive the data from PWDS. Once the conﬁgu-
ration of RTAC is done, we can load the settings to RTAC
through SEL 5033 by Go Online option. Then, the RTAC
conﬁguration will be loaded to the hardware device for DNP3
communication. To check the communication between RTAC
and PWDS, we can check the Controller after the SEL 5033
is online. As shown in Figure 7, a successful DNP3 connec-
tion’s Ofﬂine tag is FALSE and the Message_Sent_Count,
Message_Received_Count and Message_Success_Count are
keeping increasing simultaneously. If there is any message
fail to transmit, the Message_Failure will become TRUE and
Message_Failure_Count will show the number. From PWDS,
we can check the Logs, where shows the Connected Clients
and DNP3Log as shown in Figure 8. There is an online period
for SEL 5033. After the online period is passed, RTAC’s
settings are already conﬁgured and it can work as normal until
the program has been updated and reloaded.

B. Exemplar of DNP3 Reading and Control

After the DNP3 communication between RTAC and PWDS
is established, we can check the data in RTAC and send the
control from RTAC to PWDS.

For simplicity and clarity, when we conﬁgure the Pow-
erWorld case with DNP3Object, we also create corre-
sponding DNP3 tags for RTAC with the following pattern,
DataType_SubstationID_DeviceType_Keyﬁeld_DataName.
In
this way, we can easily check the data from RTAC with
detailed information of corresponding PowerWorld case infor-
mation. For DNP3 data transition between client and server, it
is based on the Zero-based Index (PWDS) and Point Number
(RTAC) as shown in Figure 9 for Analog Input data. RTAC

Figure 8. DNP3 Connection Logs

collects the data from PWDS to corresponding tag based on the
index and point number. This is the same for Analog Output,
Binary Input, and Binary Output data.

Once the DNP3 communication is successfully established,
we can observe the data in RTAC Tag list. As shown in Figure
10 and 11, they show the Analog Input and Binary Input
data for Branch 5047_5260_1’s reactive power ﬂow and status
respectively and they are the same value as in PWDS. Besides
the RTAC Controller tags, we can also check q and its validity
value to see whether the DNP3 communication is successful
or not. As shown in Figure 10 and 11, both tags show good,
so the current communication is established. When there is
misconﬁguration or cyber intrusion in the communication
network, this tag will become invalid.

RTAC client can also control the status of the device and
change the generator MWSETPOINT through Analog Output
and Binary Output data. As shown in Figure 12, we send a
control command to Generator 5262_1 in Substation 560 to
change its real power output as 1000 MW through Analog
Output using the force value function in SEL 5033. After the
generator receives the command, it gradually reduces its output
from 1211 MW to 1004 MW. Because of the generator’s
exciter and governor model in PWDS, the generator’s output
will not reduce to 1004 MW immediately. In Figure 12, there
are two reading for Generator 5262_1 real power output, one
is instMag whose value is 1004 MW and the other is mag
whose value is 1015 MW. The instMag is the instantaneous
value of corresponding tag’s data, while the mag is the value

Figure 11. RTAC Analog Input Data for Branch 5047_5260_1 Status.

Figure 9. DNP3 Analog Input Conﬁguration in PWDS (Up) and RTAC
(Bottom) for Data Mapping

Figure 10. RTAC Analog Input Data for Branch 5047_5260_1 Reactive Power
Flow.

snapshot after instMag exceeds the dead-band value, which is
the time-stamped dead-banded event value [20].

Figure 13 shows the RTAC client open Branch 5047_5260_1
through Binary Output. After the command is executed, the
branch will be open and updated Binary Input for correspond-
ing data will be FALSE.

All the commands sent from RTAC is logged in PWDS as
shown in Figure 14 with speciﬁc execution time and the counts
of events.

Figure 12. RTAC DNP3 Client Control Generator 5262_1 real power output
(Top) and the updated Analog Input reading (Bottom)

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we present the cyber-physical testbed imple-
mentation of new functionality of PWDS that supports DNP3
communication capability, enabling real-time power system
simulation in PWDS to generate DNP3 packets and deliver
to DNP3 clients/masters. With an industrial automation and
control device, this paper shows how to conﬁgure the synthetic
power system case and RTAC to establish a successful DNP3
communication. It also shows the data that collected in RTAC
Analog Input and Binary Input for corresponding measurement
and status, and how the control command can be sent with
Analog Output and Binary Output and committed in PWDS
for real-time power system simulation.

The new functionality of DNP3 communication in PWDS
provides a new mechanism to establish a hardware-in-the-
loop testbed for power system cyber-physical security studies.
PWDS can generate DNP3 packets based on conﬁgured DNP3

[3] Y. Xu, Y. Yang, T. Li, J. Ju, and Q. Wang, “Review on cyber vulnerabil-
ities of communication protocols in industrial control systems,” in 2017
IEEE Conference on Energy Internet and Energy System Integration
(EI2).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.

[4] “IEEE Standard for Electric Power Systems Communications - Dis-
tributed Network Protocol (DNP3),” IEEE Std. 1815-2012, pp. i –799,
2012.

[5] G. Clarke, D. Reynders, and E. Wright, Practical modern SCADA
protocols: DNP3, 60870.5 and related systems. Newnes, 2004.
[6] D. Jin, D. M. Nicol, and G. Yan, “An event buffer ﬂooding attack in dnp3
controlled scada systems,” in Proceedings of the 2011 Winter Simulation
Conference (WSC).
IEEE, 2011, pp. 2614–2626.

[7] Y. Yang, K. McLaughlin, T. Littler, S. Sezer, E. G. Im, Z. Yao, B. Prang-
gono, and H. Wang, “Man-in-the-middle attack test-bed investigating
cyber-security vulnerabilities in smart grid scada systems,” 2012.
[8] D. Lee, H. Kim, K. Kim, and P. D. Yoo, “Simulated attack on dnp3
protocol in scada system,” in Proceedings of the 31th Symposium on
Cryptography and Information Security, Kagoshima, Japan, 2014, pp.
21–24.

[9] A. Hahn, A. Ashok, S. Sridhar, and M. Govindarasu, “Cyber-physical
security testbeds: Architecture, application, and evaluation for smart
grid,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 847–855,
2013.

[10] R. Liu, C. Vellaithurai, S. S. Biswas, T. T. Gamage, and A. K. Srivastava,
“Analyzing the cyber-physical impact of cyber events on the power grid,”
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 2444–2453, 2015.
[11] S. Poudel, Z. Ni, and N. Malla, “Real-time cyber physical system
testbed for power system security and control,” International Journal
of Electrical Power & Energy Systems, vol. 90, pp. 124–133, 2017.

[12] IEEE Std C37.118.1-2011 (Revision of IEEE Std C37.118-2005).
[13] T. J. Overbye, Z. Mao, K. S. Shetye, and J. D. Weber, “An interactive,
extensible environment for power system simulation on the pmu time
frame with a cyber security application,” in 2017 IEEE Texas Power and
Energy Conference (TPEC).

IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.

[14] T. J. Overbye, Z. Mao, A. Birchﬁeld, J. D. Weber, and M. Davis, “An
interactive, stand-alone and multi-user power system simulator for the
pmu time frame,” in 2019 IEEE Texas Power and Energy Conference
(TPEC).

IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.

[15] Z. Mao, H. Huang, and K. Davis, “W4ips: A web-based interactive
power system simulation environment for power system security anal-
ysis,” in Proceedings of the 53rd Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences, 2020.

[16] T. Becejac, C. Eppinger, A. Ashok, U. Agrawal, and J. O’Brien, “Prime:
a real-time cyber-physical systems testbed: from wide-area monitoring,
protection, and control prototyping to operator training and beyond,”
IET Cyber-Physical Systems: Theory & Applications, 2020.

[17] I. Idehen, T. Overbye, and L. Klemesrud, “An electric power system
energy management platform (emp) research testbed,” in 2020 IEEE
Texas Power and Energy Conference (TPEC).

IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.

[18] “Cyber Physical Resilient Energy Systems (CYPRES).” [Online].

Available: https://cypres.engr.tamu.edu/

[19] A. B. Birchﬁeld, T. Xu, K. M. Gegner, K. S. Shetye, and T. J. Over-
bye, “Grid structural characteristics as validation criteria for synthetic
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 32, no. 4, pp.
3258–3265, July 2017.

[20] D. Sheet-SEL, “3555 real time automation controller (rtac),” Accessed:

Aug, vol. 3, pp. 20 181 231–170 401, 2019.

[21] R. AcSelerator, “Sel-5033 software, instruction manual,” 2017.
[22] H. Huang and K. Davis, “Extracting substation cyber-physical architec-
ture through intelligent electronic devices’ data,” in 2018 IEEE Texas
Power and Energy Conference (TPEC).

IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.

[23] I. A. Oyewumi, A. A. Jillepalli, P. Richardson, M. Ashrafuzzaman, B. K.
Johnson, Y. Chakhchoukh, M. A. Haney, F. T. Sheldon, and D. C.
de Leon, “Isaac: The idaho cps smart grid cybersecurity testbed,” in
2019 IEEE Texas Power and Energy Conference (TPEC).
IEEE, 2019,
pp. 1–6.

[24] H. Albunashee, C. Farnell, A. Suchanek, K. Haulmark, R. McCann,
J. Di, and A. Mantooth, “A testbed for detecting false data injection
attacks in systems with distributed energy resources,” IEEE Journal of
Emerging and Selected Topics in Power Electronics, 2019.

[25] F. Shariatzadeh, C. B. Vellaithurai, S. S. Biswas, R. Zamora, and A. K.
Srivastava, “Real-time implementation of intelligent reconﬁguration al-
gorithm for microgrid,” IEEE Transactions on sustainable energy, vol. 5,
no. 2, pp. 598–607, 2014.

[26] J. Leonard, R. Hadidi, and J. C. Fox, “Real-time modeling of multi-level
megawatt class power converters for hardware-in-the-loop testing,” in
2015 International Symposium on Smart Electric Distribution Systems
and Technologies (EDST).

IEEE, 2015, pp. 566–571.

Figure 13. RTAC DNP3 Client Control Branch 5047_5260_1 to Open (Top)
and the updated Binary Input reading (Bottom)

Figure 14. DS Logs for Operations from RTAC Client.

outstations and objects and deliver these packets to the DNP3
clients in industrial hardware, like RTAC, or EMS software,
through a communication network. For future work, we can
incorporate real or emulated communication network between
PWDS and industrial hardware and software. Cyber intrusions
can then be performed in the communication network, and the
power system impacts can be observed in PWDS with real-
time simulation; hardware devices can also detect such events
with pre-deﬁned alerts and control logic.

VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The work described in this paper was supported by
funds from the US Department of Energy under award DE-
OE0000895 and the National Science Foundation under Grant
1916142.

REFERENCES

[1] Defense Use Case, “Analysis of the cyber attack on the ukrainian power
grid,” Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E-ISAC),
vol. 388, 2016.

[2] R. K. Knake, A cyberattack on the US power grid, 2017.

[27] D. Watson, C. Hastie, and M. Rodgers, “Comparing different regulation
offerings from a battery in a wind r&d park,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Systems, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 2331–2338, 2017.

[28] D. Watson, T. Chakraborty, and M. Rodgers, “The need for scada
communication in a wind r&d park,” Sustainable Energy Technologies
and Assessments, vol. 11, pp. 65–70, 2015.

