Crypto-Hotwire: Illegal Blockchain Mining at Zero Cost
Using Public Infrastructures

Felipe Ribas Coutinho
UFRJ
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Victor Pires
UFRJ
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Claudio Miceli
UFRJ
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Daniel S. Menasch ´e
UFRJ
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

1
2
0
2

n
a
J

4

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
5
4
8
0
0
.
1
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

ABSTRACT
Blockchains and cryptocurrencies disrupted the conversion
of energy into a medium of exchange. Numerous applica-
tions for blockchains and cryptocurrencies are now envi-
sioned for purposes ranging from inventory control to bank-
ing applications. Naturally, in order to mine in an economi-
cally viable way, regions where energy is plentiful and cheap,
e.g., close to hydroelectric plants, are sought. The possibil-
ity of converting energy into cash, however, also opens up
opportunities for a new kind of cyber attack aimed at il-
legally mining cryptocurrencies by stealing energy. In this
work, we indicate, using data from January and February
of 2018 from our university, that such a threat is real, and
present a projection of the gains derived from these attacks.

1.

INTRODUCTION

With the popularization of virtual currencies (also known
as cryptocurrencies), a new class of cyberattacks has emerged:
cryptojacking. It consists of infecting and controlling the use
of CPU and memory of computers for purposes of mining
cryptocurrencies. According to [12], in 2018 such attacks
were already more prevalent than classic attacks, such as
DDoS, in certain regions of the US [4–6, 10, 13].

Mining attacks previously reported in the literature [7–
9, 11, 12, 14] typically account for hacked computers being
remotely exploited and locally monitored. We are unaware
of reports on the use of public computing infrastructures in
which machines can be locally exploited and remotely mon-
itored. This occurs, for instance, in universities and coﬀee
shops, where a vast number of users has physical access to
machines, posing additional challenges to their remote mon-
itoring, e.g., by the university information technology (IT)
team [4–6, 10, 13].

We refer to this new type of attack as “crypto-hotwire”,
in a reference to criminals that bypass meters and “hotwire”
the power supply to cut bills [2]. Note that physical “hotwire”
is typical in countries such as Brazil, evidencing problems
of public order which lend energy theft as one of the major
drivers for smart grids. The theft of energy may occur for
a number of undue purposes. In the case of crypto-hotwire,
the theft of energy occurs for the mining of virtual curren-
cies, which serves as a general medium of exchange.

Public infrastructures, in particular, are major targets of
crypto-hotwire, since they have a large number of machines,

Symposium on Cryptocurrency Analysis (SOCCA) 2020 Milan, Italy
Copyright is held by author/owner(s).

signiﬁcant Internet bandwidth and abundant energy. The
large number of machines makes it easier for users to phys-
ically access the resources and turn miners on and oﬀ. In
contrast, to make use of home users’ machines, e.g., through
a botnet, such household machines need to have vulnerabil-
ities that allow the attacker to invade the system remotely.
The attack complexity is reduced when attackers can have
physical access to a machine to install a mining module.

Once mining begins on a public infrastructure machine, it
leaves almost no trace on the network, rendering its detec-
tion very challenging. This is because simply monitoring the
network may not be enough to identify attacks, since they
have a strongly local aspect and do not leverage any explicit
software vulnerabilities. As a case study, in this work we
study the action of attackers who seek to invade our uni-
versity’s machines to execute mining processes. This study
aims to (a) assess the prevalence of mining attacks at the
university and (b) analyze the data generated by incidents,
such as traﬃc and energy consumption, in order to generate
a behavior pattern for detecting this type of attack.

In summary, the main contributions of this article are:
We found that illegal cryptocurrency mining is
prevalent: Using data collected at the Federal Univer-
sity of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), we found that illegal cryp-
tocurrency mining occurs in practice. In particular, we were
able to identify dozens of attempts of mining activities tar-
geting the Monero cryptocurrency. Unlike classic attacks
that leave a trace on the bandwidth of the network, cryp-
tocurrency mining can be very diﬃcult to detect because it
involves virtually only local activity at the aﬀected machine.
We quantify the costs and gains from illegal min-
ing: Through controlled lab experiments, we quantify the
costs and gains arising from the mining. In particular, we
ﬁnd that costs can escalate more quickly that earnings. Such
a ﬁnding may motivate a wide increase in illegal use of re-
sources.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Af-
ter providing basic background, we present our research
methodology in Section 3. Sections 4 and 5 present our
main ﬁndings, on the prevalence and gains from mining,
and Section 6 concludes.

2. MINING AND MINING ATTACKS

The process of generating cryptocurrencies on a network
is called mining. This process consists of solving a mathe-
matical problem (puzzle) and being rewarded for that solu-
tion. Mining demands high energy and power consumption
In order for mining to become a
for solving the puzzles.

 
 
 
 
 
 
proﬁtable process for the miner, it is necessary to reduce
these costs. In an extreme situation, the miner can reduce
personal costs to zero, making use of energy from public in-
frastructure.
If this is the case, the costs are incurred by
those who ﬁnance such infrastructures.

The mining process can be carried out on a single com-
puter or using making such a group. In “solo” mining, the
reward generated by the mining depends exclusively on the
processing power of the computer.
In pool mining, many
computers mine together and the accumulated processing
power increases the chances of block resolution. When the
block is resolved, the response compensation is proportion-
ally divided according to the power used by each one. Cur-
rently, there are tools that allow any user to easily connect
a machine to a mining pool. A user who has physical access
to public infrastructure machine can connect it to a mining
pool and individually proﬁt from it.

Traditional mining attacks. Next, we present a brief
introduction to mining attacks, indicating their classic types
and what distinguishes them when the focus is on public in-
frastructure. A mining or cryptojacking attack consists of
the infection of one or more hosts, inserting in them mal-
ware that runs cryptocurrency mining software. It is worth
mentioning that in this work we consider users who inten-
tionally mine virtual coins on local physical machines. Al-
ternatively, in the literature the focus has been on remote
users performing such unwanted mining. This occurs in two
ways: via Javascript or worms. In the ﬁrst case, the mining
code is executed in the browser and the loading of this code
is done along with the loading of the desired page by the
user, in a covert way. In the case of worms, the executed
code is browser independent, potentially being downloaded
individually.

In the case of Javascript, monitoring CPU usage and mem-
ory of the browser, one can identify potential problems,
while in the case of worms, it is necessary to monitor the
CPU and memory usage of the machine as a whole, as it is
not known in advance what process is doing malicious ex-
ecutions. Such solutions are eﬀective for home users, but
they do not easily scale. Anomalies in the use of CPU and
memory at the scale of universities, for instance, should be
much harder to track than anomalies in a local machine.

New attack vectors and access vectors. Although
the topic of cryptojacking is in vogue [7,12], we are unaware
of previous work that has analyzed the risks associated with
this type of attack in public infrastructures, in which users
have physical access to devices. Anecdotal evidence suggests
that those attacks are prevalent [4, 10, 13].

In related works, the authors consider that the browser
does not intentionally access mining scripts (i.e., it is as-
sumed a remote access vector) and that the honest user is
interested in monitoring (locally) for suspicious activity. In
this work, on the other hand, we assume that the user in-
tentionally executes mining scripts (local access vector, in
physical facilities) and that monitoring needs to be remote,
e.g., through deep packet inspection.

The problem considered in this work is particularly com-
plex in developing countries, such as Brazil. In these coun-
tries, we have a signiﬁcant portion of the population access-
ing the electrical network by means of physical hotwires.
Such physical hotwires potentially gives rise to energy theft.
The crypto-hotwire described in this work can be appreci-
ated as a sophisticated version of the physical energy theft

which are prevalent in slums. Although substantial resources
have been invested to detect such physical energy theft, they
are still widely present. Thus, their virtual counterparts, be-
ing more subtle, pose a greater threat.

3. METHODOLOGY

In the following, we describe the experimental methodol-
ogy for measuring the network of our university. We focus
on monitoring the prevalence of mining in the institution.

Our university has several systems for detecting invasions
and threats that are used to provide security for its students,
faculty and staﬀ. In this work, we consider data provided
by two tools used by the University Information Security:
SGIS – System Incident Management System Security, pro-
vided by the National Education and Research Network and
the management system of tickets used by the institution.
The ticket system includes tickets requested by members of
our university, while SGIS generates tickets using the result
of network traﬃc scans at the PoP (point of presence at
the state of Rio de Janeiro, encompassing many academic
institutions).

Discovery of mining attacks begins with the notiﬁcation
of any irregularities. The notiﬁcation of irregularities oc-
curs in three ways, carried out in parallel: (a) notiﬁcation
from partner institutions and government agencies inform-
ing that the hosts are communicating with other infected
mining machines; (b) monitoring the university’s network
traﬃc by checking if the host is communicating with mining
servers, also known as mining pools; (c) notiﬁcations from a
machine indicating anomalies in behavior.

From the notiﬁcation, a physical audit is performed on
the suspect machines to detect the possible attack vector
involved. In this audit, data is also collected on the conﬁg-
urations of the machines involved. The audit consists of:

Physical inspection. Physically reaching the machine,
and analyzing the purpose of the machine and active con-
nections using Wireshark or tcpdump, in conjunction with
netstat (e.g., many active UDP connections for a personal
computer from a faculty in the History department can in-
dicate a suspicion that the machine has been compromised)
Analysis of vulnerabilities. Analysis of the vulnera-
bilities of the machine, from an external view, e.g., Shodan
and from an internal view, e.g., using Apache vulnerability
tracker provided by Kali Linux if installed on the machine
Search for additional evidences. Search in the ma-
chine’s folders (in particular, Apache subdirectories) for a
(binary) ﬁle that is typically used for illicit purposes. In our
case, we focus on searching for cryptocurrency mining ﬁles.
So we do a search in the names of all ﬁles on the machine for
strings such as “crypto”, “Monero” and “Bitcoin”. We also
search for such strings in the system’s cron for scheduling
mining processes, as well as as in the bashrc history

Analysis of browsing history. Search the history of
sites accessed by the browser for suspicious sites. For ex-
ample, in the case of suspected cryptocurrency mining, it
is checked whether there are records of access to publicly
known mining sites, eg, http://btc.com.

The attack vectors that were found at our university were:
(i) virtual epidemic vectors (worms); (ii) virtual targeted
vectors (attacks on the network, coming from an Internet
connection); (iii) physical vectors (attacks on the network,
resulting from physical access to computers). In the partic-
ular case of cryptocurrency mining, physical access to ma-

reported cases
crypto-hotwire cases

1 – – – – – 7 – – – – – –14– – – – – –21– – – – – –28– – –
(a) January 2018 (days)

10

5

0

10

5

0

1 – – – – – 7 – – – – – –14– – – – – –21– – – – – –28– – –
(a) February 2018 (days)

Figure 1: Number of incidents (blue) and crypto-
hotwire incidents (red) between January 1 and
February 28, 2018.

chines represents an important vector.

4. PREVALENCE OF ILLEGAL MINING

The observed crypto-hotwire mining incidents occurred
during the period from January 17 to February 28, 2018. In
February 2018 mitigation strategies were deployed, and since
then it has been more diﬃcult to identify mining attacks.

In this study, we focus on general notiﬁcations received
between January 1 and February 28, 2018. Figure 1 reports
the number of notiﬁcations of security incidents during the
analyzed period. They cover notiﬁcations of various types of
attacks, including DDoS, copyright infringement and brute
force attacks on ssh. In Figure 1 we notice that there are
contiguous periods of greater notiﬁcation activity, for ex-
ample, between January 25 and February 2, and between
February 19 and February 25. In other contiguous periods,
for example, between January 1 and 8, and between Febru-
ary 11 and 16, we have few notiﬁcations. The main reason
for having these contiguous periods is related to the fact that
when an attack occurs, the attacker often manages to com-
promise multiple machines. When the problem is mitigated,
the system is renewed and switches to a new cycle.

Out of the reported incidents, 144 cases were classiﬁed
as crypto-hotwire incidents. The dates of the notiﬁcations
for these cases are reported in red bars in Figure 1. The
notiﬁcations are daily, and the script that takes informa-
tion from our university’s backbone uses deep packet in-
spection and generates the notiﬁcations. The script runs
throughout the day, and at midnight it restarts the counter
of notiﬁcations. This explains why, in almost all days, the
number of notiﬁcations ranges from 7 to 6. Probably the
devices compromised and the users running illegal mining
were almost always the same, and their activity generated
around 7 predictable notiﬁcations per day (e.g., in commu-
nication between the user and the mining center). It should
be noted that on some days, for example, January 27 (Satur-
day) we have no notiﬁcations because our university network
is unstable on weekends, undergoing maintenance in some
of these periods. On certain days, for example, on January

24, we had a fall in the number of crypto-hotwire notiﬁca-
tions, which subsequently increased on 25 January. This is
due to the the fact that on January 24 the mining problem
was solved provisionally, reinstalling some machines in the
system. However, the problem returned as the attack vec-
tor was still active and resumed its activities on January 25.
Below, we describe in more detail one of the episodes that
occurred during this period.

Bitcoin mining episode.

In a unit of our university,
we identiﬁed computers mining Bitcoin. From a browser’s
history, we identiﬁed that a user had accessed mining pool
sites, http://btc.com and http://f2pool.com. On these
sites, the user logs in and leaves the computer on to raise
funds from mining. Carelessly, the user under consideration
left a ﬁle with a trace of his logging and mining passwords
on the machine. With the credentials of access to the min-
ing pools, it was possible to identify the start and end times
of each mining activity.
It should be noted that the no-
tiﬁcation of the above event, which alerted the security to
take initiatives, was generated by the fact that there was
frequent access to mining pool websites. Thus, suspicious
If mining had been done executing
traﬃc was generated.
minimum interactions with the rest of the network, we be-
lieve that it would have been much more diﬃcult to detect
mining activity.

Among the most mined virtual currencies at our univer-
sity, we highlight Bitcoin and Monero. Bitcoin was the ﬁrst
virtual currency to be adopted on a large scale, which justi-
ﬁes its prevalence. Bitcoin is a reference for other cryptocur-
rencies, and there are already numerous simple programs to
mine Bitcoin on any platform (Linux, MacOS, Android and
Windows, in the most diverse versions). Monero [1] pro-
vides its users with privacy levels greater than those oﬀered
by Bitcoin. In addition, like Bitcoin, it also provides mining
software facilities for script kiddies. For these reasons, many
miners have adopted Monero as the ﬁrst choice cryptocur-
rency, as identiﬁed in our measurements.

5. ESTIMATED GAINS AND COSTS

Next, we report results obtained with controlled experi-
ments in the lab to estimate gains and costs associated with
mining at our university. In particular, we sought to em-
ulate the machines that we found to be mining in January
and February 2018, as described in the previous section.

Controlled experiment environment. We consider
three conﬁgurations that correspond to the machines that
we have found to be mining Monero and Bitcoin at our
university. It is not surprising that the conﬁgurations are
standard on computers widely used through our university,
considering that equipment purchases are frequently made
in batches. Thus, the conﬁgurations also capture potential
mining gains and costs across our university as a whole.

The experiment counted with 3 machines. Conﬁgurations
1, 2 and 3 correspond to an Intel Pentium Dual Core, In-
tel Core i3 and Intel Core i5, all with 4 Gb of RAM and 2
cores except i5 which counts with 4 cores. The hosts run
the Linux Ubuntu 16.04 operating system, and the energy
consumption monitoring software PowerTOP. The mining
software chosen was MinerGate, for the Monero virtual cur-
rency. For network data collection purposes (monitoring
network ﬂows) we use NFDump (netﬂow).

Experimental results. Let r(j) be the hashing power
In our measurements,

of a machine with conﬁguration j.

numerous cities in the Brazil, for example, there is a min-
imum energy consumption associated with the basic mini-
mum value of the electricity bill. In homes where this limit is
not reached, or in underutilized commercial establishments,
e.g., aﬀected by the COVID-19 pandemic, it is possible to
monetize the monthly energy surplus.

6. CONCLUSION

In this paper we have reported mining attacks leverag-
ing direct physical access to computational resources. Such
attack vectors are easy to implement in public infrastruc-
tures, and those attacks potentially generate ﬁnancial re-
sources that can be converted into any type of goods. We
presented measurements indicating that those mining at-
tacks occurred at our university. In particular, we indicate
that Bitcoin and Monero were the two most mined coins. We
believe that this work opens up many directions for future
developments. In particular, we envision measurements to
assess the prevalence of crypto-hotwire attacks beyond the
university environment, e.g., in regions where energy theft is
prevalent [2], counting with collaborations between energy
and communication service providers. As another direction
for future research, we envision new services leveraging the
monetization of mining for public beneﬁt, and leave their
ethical and environmental implications as subject for future
work.

7. REFERENCES
[1] Andersen, D. Mining money with monero and cpu vector

intrinsics, 2014. https://tinyurl.com/moneroda.

[2] BBC. Criminal gangs ’hotwire power supply’ to cut bills,
2014. https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-25718447.
[3] Cherone, L., and Mahon, P. Minerblock extension, 2018.

https://tinyurl.com/minerblock.

[4] Coindesk. London student mines dogecoin with

university’s computers – they don’t know, yet, 2014.
https://tinyurl.com/coindesklondon.

[5] CoinTelegraph. Free money: How students mine

cryptocurrency in their dorm rooms, 2019.
https://tinyurl.com/coinfreemoney.

[6] Govtech. Cryptocurrency mining threat on k-12

computers likely to ease soon, 2018.
https://tinyurl.com/govtechcrypto.

[7] Hong, G., Yang, Z., and Yang, S. How you get shot in

the back: A systematical study about cryptojacking in the
real world. In ACM SIGSAC Security (2018).

[8] Kharraz, A., Ma, Z., Murley, P., Lever, C., et al.
Outguard: Detecting in-browser covert cryptocurrency
mining in the wild. The web conference (2019).

[9] Pastor, A., Mozo, A., Vakaruk, S., et al. Detection of
encrypted cryptomining malware connections with machine
and deep learning. IEEE Access (2020).

[10] PC Magazine. College kids are using campus electricity to
mine crypto, 2019. https://tinyurl.com/pcmagcrypto2019.
[11] R¨uth, J., Zimmermann, T., Wolsing, K., et al. Digging

into browser-based crypto mining. In IMC (2018).
[12] Segura, J. The state of malicious cryptomining, 2018.

https://tinyurl.com/maliccry.

[13] Vectra. The alarming surge in cryptocurrency mining on

college campuses, 2018. https://tinyurl.com/vectraai.

[14] Zimba, A., and Wang, Z. Crypto mining attacks in

information systems: An emerging threat to cyber security.
Journal of Computer Information Systems (2018), 13.

Figure 2: Traﬃc generated by miners is similar or
smaller than standard desktops.

we found r(1) = 85H/s, r(2) = 88H/s, r(3) = 177H/s, re-
spectively. In a system where N machines have conﬁgura-
tion j, the total hashing power of the system is given by
R(j) = N r(j), j = 1, 2, 3.
In what follows, we consider
N = 3 which corresponds to approximately the number of
machines found mining at our university between January
and February 2018.

The daily gain corresponding to the hashing power re-
ported above, with the N = 3 hosts, is given by G(1) = R$
0.27, G(2) = R$ 0.28 and G(3)= R$ 5.61, under conﬁgura-
tions 1, 2 and 3 respectively. To obtain such values, we use
the average quotation of Monero in the Brazilian currency
(reais) during the study period. It is worth noting that the
expected gains are very small compared to costs, which are
an order of magnitude higher, as indicated below.

To estimate the energy expenditure per host, we measure
the energy consumption of machines. The measured energy
consumption of the machines was E(1) = 21 W/h, E(2) =
40 W/h and E(3) = 40 W/h, for conﬁgurations 1, 2 and
3, respectively. Multiplying by the number of active hosts
assumed to be 3, and for the cost of energy c we obtain the
estimated total cost, C (j) = E(j)N c, with C(j) equal to R$
61.69, R$ 117.50 and R$ 117.50 for conﬁgurations 1, 2 and
3, respectively.

Until then, we have not taken into account the network
patterns associated with mining in our controlled experi-
ment, nor the underlying network costs. For a preliminary
analysis on network aspects, we consider 3 additional ma-
chines with the same conﬁgurations as the ones considered so
far. Such additional machines are baseline machines, which
run general-purpose desktop applications, and which do not
mine. One of our purposes is to contrast the network usage
of the corresponding machines. As shown in Figure 2, the
traﬃc pattern of hosts that are mining is lower than that of
hosts performing standard equipment activities. This fact
corroborates the idea that it is more challenging to iden-
tify mining attacks remotely, as considered in this work, in
comparison with local detection in the browser, using mine
blockers tools [3].

Monetization of mining for public beneﬁt.

The
monetization of mining, to the beneﬁt of the university it-
self, is potentially promising, but involves ethical aspects and
environmental implications. Since the university has periods
of low movement or idleness of resources, which causes re-
sources to be underutilized, mining may be considered dur-
ing these periods. Predicting the value of cryptocurrencies
and the surplus energy with which each institution can count
a priori, however, is non-trivial. In domestic households in

