International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

DESIGNING A CYBER-SECURITY CULTURE 
ASSESSMENT SURVEY TARGETING CRITICAL 
INFRASTRUCTURES DURING COVID-19 CRISIS 

Anna Georgiadou, Spiros Mouzakitis, and Dimitris Askounis 

Decision Support Systems Laboratory, National Technical University of Athens, Iroon 
Polytechniou 9, 15780 Zografou, Greece 

ABSTRACT 

The  paper  at  hand  presents  the  design  of  a  survey  aiming  at  the  cyber-security  culture  assessment  of 
critical infrastructures during the COVID-19 crisis, when living reality was heavily disturbed and working 
conditions fundamentally affected. The survey is rooted  in a security culture framework layered into two 
levels, organizational and individual, further analyzed into 10 different security dimensions consisted of 52 
domains.  An  in-depth  questionnaire  building  analysis  is  presented  focusing  on  the  aims,  goals,  and 
expected results. It concludes with the survey implementation approach while underlining the framework’s 
first application and its revealing insights during a global crisis. 

KEYWORDS 

Cybersecurity Culture, Assessment Survey, COVID-19 Pandemic, Critical Infrastructures 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

Coronavirus disease 2019, widely known as COVID-19, is an infectious disease caused by severe 
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) [1]. The disease was first detected in 
late  2019  in  the  city  of  Wuhan,  the  capital  of  China's  Hubei  province[2].  In  March  2020,  the 
World  Health  Organization  (WHO)  declared  the  COVID-19  outbreak  a  pandemic  [3].  Today, 
with more than 11 million confirmed cases in 188 countries and at least half a million casualties, 
the virus is continuing its spread across the world. While epidemiologists argue that the crisis is 
not even close to being over, it soon becomes apparent that “the COVID-19 pandemic is far more 
than a health crisis: it is affecting societies and economies at their core” [4].   

Terms  such  as  “Great  Shutdown”  and  “Great  Lockdown”  [5,  6,  7]  have  been  introduced  to 
attribute  the  major  global  recession  which  arose  as  an  economic  consequence  of  the  ongoing 
COVID-19  pandemic.  The  first  noticeable  indication  of  the  accruing  recession  was  the  2020 
stock  market  crash  on  the  20th  of  February.  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  in  the  April 
World  Economic  Outlook  projected  global  growth  in  2020  to  fall  to  -3  percent.  This  is  a 
downgrade of 6.3 percentage points from January 2020, making the “Great Lockdown” the worst 
recession  since  the  Great  Depression,  and  far  worse  than  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  [7]. 
According to the International Labour Organization (ILO) Monitor, published on 7th April 2020, 
full  or  partial  lockdown  measures  are affecting  almost  2.7  billion  workers,  representing  around 
81% of the world’s workforce [8].  

Organizations  from  various  business  domains  and  operation  areas  globally  try  to  survive  this 
unprecedented  financial  crisis  by  investing  their  hopes,  efforts,  and  working  reality  on 

DOI: 10.5121/ijnsa.2021.13103                                                                                                                     33 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

information technology and digitalization. The workforce is being encouraged and facilitated on 
teleworking  while  most  products  and  services  become  available  over  the  web  while,  in  many 
cases, 
the 
aforementioned  organiations  face  another,  not  that  apparent,  COVID-19  side-effect:  the  cyber-
crime increase.  

to  current  rather  demanding  reality.  However, 

transforming  and  adjusting 

The increase in the population percentage connected to the World Wide Web, the expansion of 
time  spent  online,  combined  with  the  sense  of  confinement  and  the  anxiety  and  fear  generated 
from the lockdown, seem to catalyzeaction of cyber-criminals. Coronavirus has rapidly reshaped 
the dark web activities, as buyers and sellers seize the opportunity to capitalizeon global fears, as 
well  as  dramatic  shifts  in  supply  and  demand.  Phishing  emails,  social  engineering  attacks, 
malware, ransom ware and spyware, medical related scums, investment opportunities frauds, are 
only a few examples of the cyber-crime incidents reported during the crisis period [9, 10]. 

INTERPOL’s Cybercrime Threat Response team has detected and reported a significant increase 
in  the  number  of  attempted  ransom  ware  attacks  against  key  organizations  and  infrastructure 
engaged  in  the  virus  response.  Cybercriminals  are  using  ransom  ware  to  hold  hospitals  and 
medical  care services  digitally  hostage;  preventing  them  from  accessing  vital  files  and systems 
until a ransom is paid[11].   

Cyber-security agencies, organizations, and experts worldwide have issued recommendations and 
proposed safeguard measures to assist individuals and corporations defend against cyber-crime. 
While the virus is dominating in every aspect of our daily lives and human interaction is being 
substituted  by  digital transactions,  cybersecurity  gains  the role it  was  deprived from  during  the 
last  years.  The  question  that  remains  unanswered,  given  the  circumstances,  is:  What  are  the 
COVID-19  pandemic  cyber-security  culture  side-effects  on  both  individual  and  organizational 
level? 

The  manuscript  at  hand  presents  the  design  and  rollout  plan  of  a  survey  aiming  to  assess  the 
cyber-security  culture  during  the  COVID-19  pandemic  in  the  critical  infrastructure  domain. 
Section  2  presents  background  information  regarding  the  importance  of  public  cyber-security 
surveys  conducted  over  the  years,  emphasizingon  the  variety  and  originality  of  their  findings. 
Building upon their approach, a detailed methodology is reported in Sections 3 & 4, in an effort 
to  develop  a  brief,  targeted  and  comprehensible  survey  for  the  assessment  of the  cybersecurity 
readiness  of  organizations  during  the  crisis  with  emphasis  on  employees’  feelings,  thoughts, 
perspective, individuality. In Section 5, we sketch the survey next steps towards its conduction 
and fruitful completion. Finally, Section 6 concludes by underlying the importance of our survey 
reasoning while focusing on the challenging scientific opportunities that arise from it. 

2.  BACKGROUND   

Over  the  last  decades,  cybersecurity  surveys  have  been  a  powerful  asset  to  academics  and 
information  security  professionals  seeking  to  explore  the  ever-changing  technological  reality. 
Their  goal  was  to  uncover  current  trends  in  cyber  threats,  organizations'  investment  priorities, 
cloud  security  solutions,  threat  management,  application  security,  security  training  and 
certification, and more. 

Initially, they were narrowed down and addressed to certain participants depending on the nature 
and specific purpose of each survey. A lighthouse representative of this kind was the Computer 
Crime  &  Security  Survey  conducted  by  the  Computer  Security  Institute  (CSI)  with  the 
participation  of  the  San  Francisco  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation’s  (FBI)  Computer  Intrusion 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

Squad.  This  annual  survey,  during  its  15  years  of  life  (starting  from  1995  and  reaching  up  to 
2010),  was  probably  one  of  the longest-running  continuous  surveys  in  the information  security 
field[12].  This  far-reaching  study  provided  unbiased  information  and  analysis  about  targeted 
attacks,  unauthorized  access,  incident  response,  organizational  economic  decisions  regarding 
computer security and risk management approaches based on the answers provided by computer 
security  practitioners  in  U.S.  corporations,  government  agencies,  financial  institutions,  medical 
institutions and universities. 

Following their lead, many public and private sector organizations are seeking revealing findings 
that will help them calibrate their operations and improve their overall presence in the business 
world  via  cybersecurity  surveys.  Healthcare  Information  and  Management  Systems  Society 
(HIMSS)    focusing  on the health  sector[13];  ARC  Advisory  Group  targeting  Industrial  Control 
Systems (ICS) in critical infrastructures such as energy and water supply, as well as in process 
industries, including oil, gas and chemicals [14]; SANS exploring the challenges involved with 
the design, operation and risk management of ICS, its cyber assets and communication protocols, 
and supporting operations[15]; Deloitte in conjunction with Wakefield Research interviewing C-
level  executives  who  oversee  cybersecurity  at  companies  [16];  these  being  only  some  of  the 
countless examples available nowadays. 

Current trend in the cybersecurity surveys seems to be broadening their horizon by making them 
available and accessible through the internet [17, 18]. Since their goal is to reach out and attract 
more  participants,  thus  enriching  the  collected  data  and,  consequently,  enforcing  their  results, 
tend  to  be  shorter,  more  comprehensive  to  the  majority  of  average  users  and  apparently  web-
based. 

Recognizing the unique value of this undisputable fruitful security evaluation methodology and 
rushing from the special working and living circumstances due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we 
identified  the  research  opportuning  to  evaluate  how  this  crisis  has  affected  the  cybersecurity 
culture of both individuals and organizations across the suffering globe. Security threats, frauds, 
breaches  &  perils  have  been  brought  to  the  light,  recommendations  have  been  given  and 
precautions have been made [19, 20, 21]. What about the cybersecurity culture and its potential 
scars  from  this  virus?  Addressing  this  concern  was  our  aim  when  designing,  conducting  and 
analyzing the survey presented in this paper. 

3.  SECURITY CULTURE FRAMEWORK 

During the last years, our research efforts have been focusing on cyber-security in terms of tools, 
standards,  frameworks  and  marketplace  solutions  especially  targeting  the  human  element.  We 
have  benchmarked  the  dominant  reveals  on  the  field,  classified  their  possibilities  and  analyzed 
their  core  security  factors.  Having  identified  their  gaps  and  overlaps,  common  grounds  and 
differentiation  and  thoroughly  studied  several  academic  principles  regarding  information 
security, including technical analyses, algorithmic frameworks,  mathematical models, statistical 
computations,  behavioral,  organizational  and  criminological  theories,  we  have  created  a 
foundation  combining  the  elements  that  constitute  the  critical  cyber-security  culture  elements 
[22].  The  suggested  cybersecurity  culture  framework  is  based  on  a  domain  agnostic  security 
model  combining  the  key  factors  affecting  and  formulating  the  cybersecurity  culture  of  an 
organization.  It  is  layered  into  two  levels,  organizational  and  individual,  analyzed  into  10 
different security dimensions consisted of 52 domains assessed by more than 500 controls. This 
hierarchical approach is being presented in Figure 1. Table 2 and Table 4list dimensions, domains 
and  indicative  controls  in  an  attempt  to  unfold  to  the  reader  the  generalized  philosophy  of  our 
framework. 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

Level

Dimension

Domain

Controls

Figure 1.  Cyber-Security Culture Model: Main Concepts 

Table 1.Organisational Levelpresenting indicative controls 

Dimension 
Assets 

Domain 
Application 
Software 
Security 

Data Security and 
Privacy 

Hardware Assets 
Management  

Hardware 
Configuration 
Management  

Information 
Resources 
Management  

Indicative Controls 
  Do  you  only  use  up-to-date  and 

trusted 

third-party 

components for the software developed by the organization? 

  Do you apply static and dynamic analysis tools to verify that 
secure  coding  practices  are  being  adhered  to  for  internally 
developed software? 

  Do  you  maintain  an  inventory  of  all  sensitive  information 
stored,  processed,  or 
the  organization’s 
technology  systems,  including  those  located  on-site  or  at  a 
remote service provider? 

transmitted  by 

  Have  you  ensured  that  sensitive  data  or  systems  are  not 
regularly accessed by the organization from the network? 
  Do  you  employ  integrity  checking  mechanisms  to  verify 

hardware integrity? 

  Do  you  maintain  an  accurate  and  up-to-date  inventory  of  all 
assets with the potential to store or process information? 
  Have  you  established  and  do  you  maintain  secure 
configuration  management  processes  (e.g.  when  servicing 
field devices or updating their firmware)? 

  Do you store the master images and templates on securely 

configured servers, validated with integrity monitoring tools, 
to ensure that only authorized changes to the images are 
possible? 

  Do  you  properly  label  all  relevant  assets,  depending  on  their 

classification? 

  Are 

the  classification  scheme  and 
properly communicated to all relevant parties? 

labeling  procedures 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

Network 
Configuration 
Management  

Network 
Infrastructure 
Management  

Software Assets 
Management  

Personnel 
Security 

  Do you maintain documented security configuration standards 

for all authorized network devices? 

  Have you compared all network device configurations against 
approved  security  configurations  defined  for  each  network 
device  in  use,  and  do  you  alert  when  any  deviations  are 
discovered? 

  Have  you  associated  active  ports,  services,  and  protocols  to 

the hardware assets in the asset inventory? 

  Do you perform automated port scans on a regular basis 

against all systems and alert if unauthorized ports are detected 
on a system? 

  Have  you  utilized  software  inventory  tools  throughout  the 
organization to automate the documentation of all software on 
business systems? 
Is the software inventory system tied into the hardware  asset 
inventory  so  that  all  devices  and  associated  software  are 
tracked from a single location? 

 

  Does your staff wear ID badges? 
  Are  authorized  access  levels  and  type  (employee,  contractor, 

visitor) identified on the Badge? 

Physical Safety 
and Security 

 

Is  access  to  your  computing  area  controlled  (single  point, 
reception 
log, 
security 
or 
temporary/visitor badges)? 

sign-in/sign-out 

desk, 

  Do you have an emergency evacuation plan and is it current? 

Continuity 

Backup 
Mechanisms  
Business 
Continuity & 
Disaster 
Recovery  
Capacity 
Management  

Change 
Management 

Continuous 
Vulnerability 
Management  

Access and 
Trust 

Access 
Management  

  Do you store backups in a remote location? 
  Do you encrypt backups containing confidential information? 
  Do 
emergency/incident  management 

you 

an 
communications plan? 

have 

  Do you have a current business continuity plan? 

  Do you  have  enough capacity to ensure that data  availability 

is maintained? 

  Do you either deny or restrict bandwidth for resource-hungry 

services if these are not business critical? 

  Are the maintenance and copying of program source libraries 

subject to strict change control? 

  Have  you  established  a  formal  approval  procedure  for 

proposed changes? 

  Do  you  perform  authenticated  vulnerability  scanning  with 
agents  running  locally  on  each  system  or  with  remote 
scanners  that  are  configured  with  elevated  rights  on  the 
system being tested? 

  Have  you  utilized  a  risk-rating  process  to  prioritize  the 

remediation of discovered vulnerabilities? 

  Have you enabled firewall filtering between VLANs to ensure 
that  only  authorized  systems  are  able  to  communicate  with 
other 
specific 
systems 
responsibilities? 

necessary 

fulfill 

their 

to 

  Have you implemented physical or logical access controls for 
the  isolation  of  sensitive  applications,  application  data  or 
systems? 

37 

 
 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

Account 
Management  

  Do  you  automatically  disable  dormant  accounts  after  a  set 

period of inactivity? 

  Do  you  maintain  an  inventory  of  each  of  the  organization’s 
authentication systems, including those located on-site or at a 
remote service provider? 

Communication  

  Do you have documentation of the mapping of organizational 

communication flows? 

  Do  users  acknowledge  receipt  of  secret  authentication 

information? 

External 
Environment 
Connections  

Password 
Robustness and 
Exposure  

  Do your policies and procedures ensure the flexibility of your 
organization  by  defining  ways  of  adapting  to  changes  in  the 
sector and the environment? 

  Have  you  established  a  good  cooperation  level  with  other 
sectoral organizations (inter-organizational strategic ties)? 
  Does  your  log-on  procedure  avoid  displaying  a  password 

being entered? 

  Are  your  computers  set  up  so  that  others  cannot  view  staff 

entering passwords? 

Privileged 
Account 
Management  

  Do  you  identify  the  privileged  access  rights  associated  with 
each system or process and the users to whom they need to be 
allocated? 

  Do you log changes to privileged accounts? 
Role Segregation     Do  you  properly  inform  employees  about  his  responsibilities 
that remain valid after termination or change of employment? 
  Are access permissions and authorizations managed according 
to the principles of least privilege and separation of duties? 
  Have  you  formalized  contractual  relationships  with  partners 

Third-Party 
Relationships  

Wireless Access 
Management  

and suppliers regarding information security? 

  Do you identify and define the necessary requirements a third 

party should have to be considered trusty? 

  Do  you  maintain  an  inventory  of  authorized  wireless  access 

points connected to the wired network? 

  Have you created a separate wireless network for personal or 

untrusted devices? 

Operations  Compliance 

  Do  you  audit  your  processes  and  procedures  for  compliance 

Review  

with established policies and standards? 

  Do  you  review  and  revise  your  security  documents,  such  as: 
policies,  standards,  procedures,  and  guidelines,  on  a  regular 
basis? 

38 

 
 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

Documentation 
Fulfillness 

Efficient 
Distinction of 
Development, 
Testing and 
Operational 
Environments  
Operating 
Procedures  

Organizational 
Culture and Top 
Management 
Support  
Risk Assessment 

Defense 

Boundary 
Defense 

Cryptography 

Email and Web 
Browser 
Resilience 

Information 
Security Policy 
and Compliance 

Malware Defense 

Security 
Awareness and 
Training Program  

Security 
Governance 

Audit Logs 
Management 

  Do  you  have  all  the  necessary  policies  and  procedures 

properly documented? 

  Do you have all the necessary records properly documented? 
  Do  users  have  different  user  profiles  for  operational  and 

testing systems? 

  Do  you  maintain  separate  environments  for  production  and 

non-production systems? 

  Do you specify the operational instructions of the installation 

and configuration of systems?   

  Do you specify the operational instructions of the scheduling 
requirements, including interdependencies with other systems, 
earliest job start and latest job completion times?  
Is  your  leadership  actively  and  continuously  involved  in 
information security planning?  

 

  Do  you  pursue  the  principle  of  efficiency  in  information 

security - economy/cost optimization? 

  Do  you  receive  threat  and  vulnerability  information  from 

 

information sharing forums and sources? 
Is  the  organizational  risk  tolerance  determined  and  clearly 
expressed? 

  Do  you  maintain  an  up-to-date  inventory  of  all  of  the 

organization’s network boundaries? 

  Do you decrypt all encrypted network traffic at the boundary 

proxy prior to analyze the content? 

  Do you encrypt all data stored in cloud services? 
  Do you encrypt event files locally and in transit? 
  What  is  the  percentage  from  your  total  received  emails  that 

are detected as spam? 

  What  is  the  percentage  of  your  SSL  certificates  that  are 

configured incorrectly? 

  Have you properly broken-down information security policies 

into sub-areas and orderly documented them? 

  Do  your  policies  and  procedures  comply  with  relevant 

regional legislation? 

  What  percentage  of  your  systems  (workstations,  laptops, 
servers) are covered by antivirus/antispyware software? 
  Do  you  send  all  malware  detection  events  to  enterprise  anti-
malware  administration  tools  and  event  log  servers  for 
analysis and alerting? 

  Do you perform a skills gap analysis to understand the skills 
and behaviors  workforce  members are not adhering to, using 
this information to build a baseline education roadmap? 
  Do you deliver training to address the skills gap identified to 
positively impact workforce members' security behavior? 
  Have  you ensured that local logging has been enabled on all 

systems and networking devices? 

  Do you protect logs from unauthorized alterations or deletion? 

39 

 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

Incident 
Response and 
Management 

Penetration Tests 
and Red Team 
Exercises 

Reporting 
Mechanisms 

Security 
Management 
Maturity 

  What  percentage  of  your  security  incidents  cause  service 

interruption or reduced availability? 

  Do  you  have  established  processes  to  receive,  analyze  and 
respond  to  vulnerabilities  disclosed  to  the  organization  from 
internal  and  external  sources  (e.g.  internal  testing,  security 
bulletins, or security researchers)? 

  Have  you  tested  that  you  gracefully  handle  denial  of  service 

attempts (from compromised meters)? 

  Do  you  apply  a  qualified  third-party  security  penetration 
testing to test all hardware and software  components prior to 
live deployment? 

  Do  you  provide  your  employees  with  a  channel  in  order  to 
information  security  policies  or 

report  violations  of 
procedures? 

  How much time does the organization take in order to respond 

to a report? 

  Are  critical  security  tasks  handled  based  on  team  decision-

making techniques? 

  Do you organize vertical and horizontal security meetings on 

a regular basis? 

Controls used by our evaluation methodology aim to assess whether specific security fields have 
been  taken  into  consideration  and  to  what  extend  rather  than  measure  the  effectiveness  and 
efficiency  of  the  actual  policies  and  procedures  in  place.  In  other  words,  evaluate  the 
is 
multidisciplinary  approach 
organizationally reaching rather than the completeness of security technology solutions acquired 
and utilizedby the enterprise under examination. 

information  security  and 

the  depths 

in  which 

towards 

This approach is even more evident in the individual level where the beliefs, emotions, attitude, 
and  behavior  of  the  employees  is  examined  under  various  prisms  using  a  variety  of 
psychological, behavioral, emotional and specialization assessments. 

Table 2. Individual Level presenting indicative controls 

Dimension 
Attitude 

Domain 
Employee Climate 

Awareness 

Employee Profiling 

Employee 
Satisfaction  

Policies and 
Procedures 
Awareness  

Roles and 
Responsibilities 
Awareness  

Behaviour 

Policies and 
Procedures 

Indicative Controls 
 

I believe that cyber criminals are more advanced than the 
people who are supposed to be protecting us. 
I worry that if I report a cyber-attack to the Police it might 
damage the reputation of the company. 

 

 

  Seniority 
  Enterprise role 
 

I am pleased with my organization’s approach towards 
information security. 
I am happy to conform with the security guidance offered 
by our security experts. 

  Are you aware of the organizations’ communication 

flows? 

  Are you aware of the organization’s role in the supply 

chain? 

  Are you aware of all the devices and systems you are 

responsible for? 

  Are you aware of all the external information systems 

they come in contact with? 

  Do you make sure your mobile devices are not left 

exposed? 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

Compliance  

  Do you efficiently protect mobile devices from physical 

Security Agent 
Persona 

hazards? 

  What would you do if you saw a colleague not wearing 

their security pass around the office? 

  What would you do if you overheard a discussion, which 

you knew to be about some highly sensitive and 
confidential information, being held in a corridor where 
external visitors often pass through? 

Security Behaviour 

  How many of your security incidents stem from non-

Employee 
Competency  
Security Skills 
Evaluation  

Training 
Completion and 
Scoring  

secure behavior? 
I get into the office wearing my security pass. 

 

Specific per organization and employee. 

  What is necessary for a person to turn a plain text 

message into an encrypted message? 

  Which of the following events presents the greatest risk? 
  My achievement score at the last security training 

program I participated in was around. 

  How many self-security assessments do you normally 

attempt per year? 

Competency 

4.  DESIGNING THE SURVEY 

Our  goal  was  to  design  a  survey  that  would  be  short  and  targeted  to  get  the  security  pulse  of 
current business reality in the critical infrastructure domain. One of our major aims was to keep 
the questionnaire small and easily addressed in a timely manner by a common employee with no 
special security expertise or knowledge. This way, we could facilitate participation of a broader 
workforce  group  lessening  effort  and  prerequisites  while  maximizing  result  variation  and 
credibility.  Towards  that  goal,  we  needed  to  formulate  questions  targeting  specific  security 
factors  bridging  various  security  domains  while  smartly  extracting  information  depicting  the 
existing working security routine and culture, their disruption by the COVID-19 crisis and their 
reaction to these special and rather demanding circumstances.  

On  the  other  hand,  taking  into  consideration  the  reported  cyber-crime  incidents  along  with  the 
fraud and attack techniques used by the criminals of the dark web during this period, we focused 
our  evaluation  on  specific  dimensions  related  to  network  infrastructure,  asset  management, 
business continuity, employee awareness, and attitude. 

In  the  paragraphs  to  follow,  we  outline  how  starting  from  a  detailed  cyber-security  culture 
framework  with  more  than  500  controls,  we  have  narrowed  down  our  objectives  to  a 
questionnaire containing no more than 23 questions, depending on the provided answers. Table 
3indexes  the  questions  constituting  the  final  version  of  our  questionnaire  including  secondary 
clarification  questions  presented  based  on  provided  participant  input  whereas  Table  4correlates 
each of the questions to specific cyber-security levels, dimensions, and domains of our model. 

41 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

Table 3. Question indexing, including secondary clarification questions presented based  
on provided input (asterisk annotated). 

Q1 

Prior to the COVID-
19 crisis, were you 
able to work from 
home? 

Q2.1  Did you receive any 

security guidelines 
from your employer 
regarding working 
from home? 
Q2.2*  Please describe the 
main (2-3) security 
guidelines provided. 
What kind of devices 
are you using to 
connect to your 
corporate working 
environment? 
Are these devices 
accessed by users 
other than yourself? 

Q4 

Q3 

Q9.2 

How were you 
informed how to use 
them? 

Q12.6 

I am proud to work 
for my organisation. 

Q10.1  Has your company 
adopted a specific 
collaboration 
solution? 

Q12.7 

I have access to the 
things I need to do 
my job well. 

Q10.2*  What abilities does it 

Q13 

What is your age? 

offer? 

Q11.1  Did you face any of 

Q14 

the below cyber-
security related 
threats during the 
COVID-19 crisis? 

Q11.2*  Please name any 

Q15 

Q5 

These devices are 
personal or corporate 
assets? 

Q12.1 

What is the highest 
degree or level of 
school you have 
completed? 

Please select the 
business domain of 
the organisationyou 
work for. 

Q16 

Which of the 
following best 
describes your work 
position? 

Q17 

Comments 

other cyber-security 
threats you 
encountered during 
this period, not listed 
above. 
To what extent do 
you agree with the 
following 
statements:  
(during this specific 
period of the 
COVID-19 crisis) 

I prefer working 
from home than 
going to the office. 
I work more 
productively from 
home. 
I collaborate with 
my colleagues as 
effectively as when 
we are in office. 

Q12.2 

Q12.3 

Q6 

Q7 

Q8 

Are these devices 
managed by your 
organisation? 
Which of the 
following apply for 
the devices you 
currently use for your 
working from home 
employment? 
(providing security 
measures alternatives, 
e.g. antivirus, 
password protections) 
How do you obtain 
access to your 
corporate working 
environment? 

Q12.4 

I am satisfied by my 
employer’s approach 
to the crisis. 

Q9.1  Were you asked to 
use applications or 

Q12.5 

I have all the support 
I need to face any 

42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

services that you 
were unfamiliar with, 
because of the need 
for remote working? 

technical problems I 
have (e.g. corporate 
access issues, 
infrastructure 
failures, etc.). 

4.1.  Organizational Level 

Culture  is  defined  as  a  set  of  shared  attitudes,  values,  goals,  and  practices  that  define  an 
institution  or  organization.  Consequently,  cyber-security  culture  refers  to  the  set  of  values, 
conventions,  practices,  knowledge,  beliefs  and  behaviors  associated  with  information  security. 
Therefore, its skeleton is being outlined by the working environment along with the technological 
infrastructure and security countermeasures that define it.  

To  understand,  assess  and  detail  the  security  cultural  status  of  the  critical  infrastructure 
organizations represented in our survey, we have included questions Q1-Q10 that heartbeat the 
overall  technological  and  security  readiness  and  adaptability.  Under  the  coronavirus  prism,  we 
intended to  understand  if  teleworking  was  an  option prior  to  the  crisis  or  not  and  under  which 
security policies. Thus, we have included queries polling the remote access procedures and their 
meeting standards as well as the types, configuration and management of the devices used to gain 
access  to  the  corporate  environments.  In  other  words,  we  attempted  to  assess  the  way  and  the 
means of the working from home experience with a clear focus on cyber-security.  

Given that one of the most important shifts in the “everyday business” was the “home office”, we 
clearly  focused  on  the  technological  infrastructure  used  during  this  period.  Preconfigured 
workstations  were  substituted  by  remote  assets,  such  as  laptops,  tablets,  smartphones,  which 
gained  access  to  the  corporate  network  via  different  communication  protocols  and  security 
standards.  We  needed  to  evaluate  this  newly  deployed  working  ecosystem  and  understand  the 
security precautions made by the participating enterprises. 

Additionally,  we  intended  to  assess  the  security  maturity  of  the  management,  the  security 
response team, and awareness training program by introducing several questions clearly related to 
cyber-security familiarity and readiness. The  most critical question of these  category is the one 
referring  to  security  guidelines  provided  during  the  COVID-19  crisis  seeking  to  match  their 
responsiveness and contemporality. Most of the leading cyber-security entities and experts during 
the  coronavirus  pandemic  have  issued  special  security  guidelines  towards  individuals  and 
organizations.  Succeeding  or  failing  to  propagate  similar  guiding  principles  towards  your 
workforce during such confusing and challenging periods is a core security indicator.  

Another  business  facet  which  was  examined,  although  not  directly  related  to  information 
security,  was  the  collaboration  possibilities  offered  to  employees.  Business  trend  and  current 
reality  (including  but  not  limited  to  COVID-19  crisis)  lead  to  a  “remote”  or  “hybrid”  working 
structure [23, 24]. Communication and teamwork need to be facilitated and promoted, especially 
during  this  period  when  general  isolation  is  mandated  as  the  main  defense  against  the  virus 
spread.  Companies  are  expected  to  make  provision  for  all  means  necessary  to  assist  their 
employees in being productive, effective and cooperative [25]. This notion and quality are being 
tested via two simplified questions included in our survey. 

4.2.  Individual Level 

Moving  down  to  an  individual  level,  evaluation  becomes  more  demanding  since  virus  fear  and 
emotional  stress  dominate  every  aspect  of  daily  life  directly  or  indirectly  affecting  the  human-
43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

related security factors. Questions Q11-Q12 attempt to probe the security behavior, attitude and 
competency  of  the  remote  workers  by  examining  their  emotions,  thoughts  and  beliefs  and  by 
asking them to report any security incidents they came up against. 

As  Cisco  CEO  John  Chambers  stated  in  a  January  2015  post  for  the  World  Economic  Forum 
titled  “What  does  the  Internet  of  Everything  mean  for  security?”,  “there  are  two  types  of 
companies: those who have been hacked, and those who don’t yet know they have been hacked”. 
Similarly,  there  are  two  types  of  technology  users,  those  who  understand  the  perils  they  face 
every day, either successfully or not, and those who are simply unaware of the dangers they are 
most probably already exposed to. Our question Q11 tries to examine this security familiarity and 
awareness among the different seniority, age, expertise, background of the participants. 

Question Q12 clearly traces the emotional and intellectual state of the remote workers by listing 
several  questions  deriving  from  the  Insider  Threat  theory  according  to  which  dissatisfaction, 
stressful events and personality predispositions can transform a loyal employee to a malicious or 
unintentional insider [26, 27]. 

Questions  Q13-Q16  refer  to  generic  information  used  for  an  individual  profiling  and 
categorization which shall enable us to analyze gathered results under different prisms offering 
various  grouping  possibilities  and  leading  to  possibly  interesting  findings  on  the  basis  of  age, 
industry, education, working experience and expertise. This enterprise profiling is also believed 
to be closely related to security factors formulating fertile ground to a number of human-related 
cyber-threats [28, 29, 30]. 

Table 4. Correlating questions to cyber-security culture framework 

Organizational Level 

Individual Level 

Assets 

Continui
ty 

- Networ

k 
Infrastr
ucture 
Manage
ment 
- Networ

k 
Config
uration 
Manage
ment 

Access 
and 
Trust 

- Acces

s 
Mana
gemen
t 

- Extern

al 
Envir
onme
nt 
Conne
ctions 

Change 
Manage
ment 

Hardwar
e Assets 
Manage

Access 
Manage
ment 

Q1 

Q2.
1 

Q2.
2* 

Q3 

Operation
s 

Defens
e 

Securit
y 
Govern
ance 

Atti
tud
e 

Awa
renes
s 

Behavio
r 

Com
pete
ncy 

Organizati
onal 
Culture 
and Top 
Manageme
nt Support 

Securit
y 
Aware
ness 
and 
Trainin
g 
Progra
m 

Securit
y 
Manage
ment 
Maturit
y 

44 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

Access 
Manage
ment 

- Acces

s 
Mana
gemen
t 

- Extern

al 
Envir
onme
nt 
Conne
ctions 

- Access 
Manag
ement 
- Extern
al 
Enviro
nment 
Conne
ctions 

Q4 

Q5 

Q6 

Q7 

ment 

- Hardwa

re 
Assets 
Manage
ment 
- Informa
tion 
Resour
ces 
Manage
ment 
-  Data 
Securi
ty and 
Privac
y 
- Hardwa

re 
Assets 
Manage
ment 
- Softwar

e 
Assets 
Manage
ment 
- Informa
tion 
Resour
ces 
Manage
ment 
- Data 
Security 
and 
Privacy 
- Hardwa
re 
Configu
ration 
Manage
ment 
- Informa
tion 
Resourc
es 
Manage
ment 
- Data 
Security 
and 
Privacy 

- Policies 

and 
Procedu
res 
Compli
ance 
- Security 
Behavio
r 

Malwa
re 
Defens
e 

Polic
ies 
and 
Proce
dures 
Awar
eness 

-  Policie
s and 
Proced
ures 
Compl
iance 
-  Securit

y 
Behavi
or 
-  Securit

y 
Agent 
Person
a 

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

- Networ

k 
Infrastr
ucture 
Manage
ment 
- Networ

k 
Config
uration 
Manage
ment 

- Acces

s 
Mana
gemen
t 

- Extern

al 
Envir
onme
nt 
Conne
ctions 

Bound
ary 
Defens
e 

-  Busine
ss 
Contin
uity & 
Disaste
r 
Recove
ry 
-  Chang

e 
Manag
ement 

Commu
nication 

Organizati
onal 
Culture 
and Top 
Manageme
nt Support 

Operating 
Procedures 

Q8 

Q9.
1 

Q9.
2 

Q10
.1 
Q10
.2* 

Q11
.1 

Q11
.2* 

Q12
.1 
Q12
.2 
Q12
.3 
Q12
.4 
Q12
.5 
Q12
.6 
Q12
.7 
Q13 
Q14 
Q15 

Q16 

- Security 
Behavio
r 
- Security 
Agent 
Persona 

Secu
rity 
Skill
s 
Eval
uatio
n 

46 

Em
ploy
ee 
Cli
mat
e 

Em
ploy
ee 
Sati
sfac
tion 

Em
ploy
ee 
Prof
ilin
g 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

The  accruing  questionnaire  manages  to  combine  the  two  security  levels  of  our  framework 
effectively and efficiently. Additionally, its contents have been tailored to rapidly yet effectually 
heartbeat the cyber-security reality during a disrupting chronological period, such as the COVID-
19 pandemic. This agile instrument, although offering a quick and fruitful measurement method 
compared to similar concurrent surveys, it cannot be considered an in-depth information security 
assessment.  Furthermore,  it  should  not  be  used  to  label  participating  organizations  but  only  to 
provide an overview of the AS-IS situation. 

Having developed a first questionnaire version addressing the security elements of interest based 
on  our  security  culture  framework,  we  carefully  designed  the  rest  of  the  survey  methodology 
including: 

• 

validity  testing:  identify  ambiguous  questions  or  wording,  unclear  instructions,  or  other 
problems  before  widespread  dissemination  possibly  conducted  by  a  group  of  survey 
experts, experienced researchers and analysts, certified security and technology officers. 
•  delivery  method:  select  the  appropriate  delivery  method  and  possibly  run  an  instrument 

• 

• 

validity testing to verify survey conduction methodology. 
sample  selection: carefully  chose  representatives  from  energy,  transport,  water,  banking, 
financial  market,  healthcare  and  digital  infrastructure  from  different  European  countries 
(e.g. Cyprus, France, Ger-many, Greece, Italy, Romania, Spain) affected by the COVID-19 
crisis. 
survey  duration:  defining  a  specific  start  and  end  period  communicated  to  all  invited 
parties. 

Survey has been concluded and its results have been made available via a research data repository 
[31]. Their analysis and interesting findings are currently under publication. 

5.  NEXT STEPS 

Having  performed  this  indicative(meaning  non-restricted  within  the  business  limits  of  an 
organization) pilot application of our cyber-security culture framework during a crisis period, we 
now  focus  on  conducting  similar  cyber-security  culture  assessment  surveys  to  specific 
organizations targeting different security domains and not only during the pandemic. We intend 
to proceed with extended applications of our framework and conduct a comparative analysis on 
the  cyber-security  differences  among  the  various  business  domains  possibly  identifying 
variations in needs, threats, attitude, awareness, and overall culture. 

6.  CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 

Our  survey  focuses  on  evaluating  the  security  readiness  and  responsiveness  of  corporations 
during  the  Great  Shutdown  and  more  specifically  it  shall  be  addressing  critical  infrastructure 
domain representatives from different countries affected by the coronavirus.  

Security cultural approach demands flexibility and concurrency. Corporations of the public and 
private sector regardless of their specialization and expertise need to develop a digital workplace 
strategy  that  includes  collaboration  applications,  security  controls,  network  management,  and 
digital  technologies.  They  need  to  adjust  their  employment  modes,  business  models, 
communication, and marketing channels. 

In  a  radically  evolving  and  transforming  environment,  security  and  risk  teams  need  to  become 
part of the crisis management group, remote working employees need to remain vigilant to cyber-
47 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

threats  and  operations  life-cycle  needs  to  remain  uninterrupted  especially  for  the  operators  of 
essentials  services.  Our  research  aims  to  investigate  if  and  to  what  extend  is  this  approach 
embraced  by  the  critical  infrastructure  organizations  in  different  countries  nowadays  while 
revealing interesting findings related to cyber-security and inspiring further scientific research on 
this field. 

Since unfortunately COVID-19 crisis still holds, we now consider repeating our survey properly 
adjusted and addressed to the same organizations involved in the first iteration, to understand if 
their security culture status has differentiated and evolved via this crash-testing experience or if 
the  long-standing  critical  circumstances  have  negatively  affected  their  attitude  and  behavior 
towards information technology and security. We are also examining a similar tailor-made survey 
focusing  on  other  domains  of  interest  possibly  differentiating  organizations  of  the  public  and 
private sector and different financial or workforce dimensions.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This  project  has  received  funding  from  the  European  Union’s  Horizon  2020  research  and 
innovation programme under grant agreement No 832907 [32]. 

REFERENCES 

[1]   T.  P.  Velavan  and  C.  G.  Meyer,  “The  COVID-19  epidemic,”  Tropical  Medicine  and  International 

Health, vol. 25, no. 3, p. 278–280, 2020.  

[2]   D. S. Hui, E. I. Azhar, T. A. Madani, F. Ntoumi, R. Kock, O. Dar, G. Ippolito, T. D. Mchugh, Z. A. 
Memish,  C.  Drosten,  A.  Zumla  and  E.  Petersen,  “The  continuing  2019-nCoV  epidemic  threat  of 
novel  coronaviruses  to  global  health  —  The  latest  2019  novel  coronavirus  outbreak  in  Wuhan, 
China,” International Journal of Infectious Diseases, vol. 91, pp. 264-266, 2020.  

[3]   “WHO  Director-General's  opening  remarks  at  the  media  briefing  on  COVID-19,”  World  Health 

Organization (WHO), 2020. 

[4]   United  Nations  Development  Programme,  “Socio-economic  impact  of  COVID-19  |  UNDP,”  2020. 
https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/coronavirus/socio-economic-

[Online].  Available: 
impact-of-covid-19.html. [Accessed 07 07 07]. 

[5]   M. Wolf, “The world economy is now collapsing,” Financial Times, 14 04 2020. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.ft.com/content/d5f05b5c-7db8-11ea-8fdb-7ec06edeef84. [Accessed 01 07 2020]. 
[6]   E.  Talamàs,  “The  Great  Shutdown:  Challenges  And  Opportunities,”  Forbes,  14  05  2020.  [Online]. 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/iese/2020/05/14/the-great-shutdown-challenges-and-

Available: 
opportunities/#60eaf6e86f12. [Accessed 07 07 2020]. 

[7]   G.  Gopinath,  “The  Great  Lockdown:  Worst  Economic  Downturn  Since  the  Great  Depression,” 
IMFBlog,  14  04  2020.  [Online].  Available:  https://blogs.imf.org/2020/04/14/the-great-lockdown-
worst-economic-downturn-since-the-great-depression/. [Accessed 07 07 2020]. 

[8]   “ILO Monitor:COVID-19 and the world of work. Second edition,” International Labour Organization 

(ILO), 2020. 

[9]   A. G. Blanco, “The impact of COVID-19 on the spread of cybercrime,” BBVA, 27 04 2020. [Online]. 
https://www.bbva.com/en/the-impact-of-covid-19-on-the-spread-of-cybercrime/. 

Available: 
[Accessed 07 07 2020]. 

cyberthreats,” 

[10]  “COVID-19 

INTERPOL, 
https://www.interpol.int/en/Crimes/Cybercrime/COVID-19-cyberthreats. [Accessed 07 07 2020]. 
[11]  “Cybercriminals targeting critical healthcare institutions with ransomware,” INTERPOL, 04 04 2020. 
https://www.interpol.int/en/News-and-Events/News/2020/Cybercriminals-

[Online].  Available: 
targeting-critical-healthcare-institutions-with-ransomware. [Accessed 07 07 2020]. 

Available: 

[Online]. 

2020. 

[12]  C. D. Robert Richardson, “CSI Computer Crime and Security Survey 2010/2011,” Computer Security 

Institute (CSI), 2011. 

[13]  “2019  HIMSS  Cybersecurity  survey,”  Healthcare  Information  and  Management  Systems  Society, 

2019. 

48 

 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

[14]  T. Menze, “The State Of Industrial Cybersecurity,” ARC Advisory Group, 2019. 
[15]  B.  Filkins  and  D.  Wylie,  “SANS  2019  State  of  OT/ICS  Cybersecurity  Survey,”  SANS™  Institute, 

2019. 

[16]  “The future of cyber survey 2019,” Deloitte, 2019. 
SMEs' 
[17]  “SMESEC 

- 

[Online].  Available: 
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdLcZ_6LKFANf6oX2XlOf_4Q55yDGR7ZZKCus7md
4F1IsqvEQ/viewform. [Accessed 17 04 2020]. 

Cybersecurity  Watch,” 

SMESEC 

, 

[18]  Information  Security  Community,  “Cybersecurity  Trends  Survey,” 
https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/Cybersecurity-DR. [Accessed 17 04 2020]. 

[Online].  Available: 

[19]  “COVID-19, Info Stealer & the Map of Threats – Threat Analysis Report,” Reason Labs, 09 03 2020. 
[Online].  Available:  https://blog.reasonsecurity.com/2020/03/09/covid-19-info-stealer-the-map-of-
threats-threat-analysis-report/. [Accessed 16 04 2020]. 

[20]  “Home working: preparing your organisation and staff,” National Cyber Security Centre, 17 03 2020. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/home-working. [Accessed 17 04 2020]. 
[21]  “Working From Home - COVID19 - ENISA,” ENISA - European Union Agency for Cybersecurity, 
[Online].  Available:  https://www.enisa.europa.eu/topics/WFH-COVID19?tab=details.  [Accessed  17 
04 2020]. 

[22]  A. Georgiadou, S. Mouzakitis, K. Bounas and D. Askounis, “A Cyber-Security Culture Framework 

for Assessing Organization Readiness,” Journal of Computer Information Systems, 2020.  

[23]  Tessian, “Securing the Future of Hydrid Working,” Tessian, 2020. 
[24]  “The 2020 State of Remote Work,” Buffer & AngelList, 2020. 
[25]  S.  Shen,  J.  Sun,  D.  D.  Wan,  A.  Gao,  L.  Mok  and  O.  Chen,  “Coronavirus  (COVID-19)  Outbreak: 

Short- and Long-Term Actions for CIOs,” Gartner, 2020. 

[26]  D. Cappelli, A. Moore and R. Trzeciak, The CERT Guide to Insider Threats: How to Prevent, Detect, 
and Respond to Information Technology Crimes (Theft, Sabotage, Fraud), Boston: Addison-Wesley 
Professional, 2012.  

[27]  CERT  Insider  Threat  Team,  “Unintentional  Insider  Threats:  A  Foundational  Study,”  Software 

Engineering Insitute, Pittsburgh, 2013. 

[28]  S.  R.  Band,  D.  Cappelli,  L.  F.  Fischer,  A.  P.  Moore,  E.  D.  Shaw  and  R.  F.  Trzeciak,  “Comparing 
Insider  IT  Sabotage  and  Espionage:  A  Model-Based  Analysis,”  Software  Engineering  Institute, 
Pittsburgh, 2006. 

[29]  M. Bishop, “Position: "insider" is relative,” in Proceedings of the 2005 Workshop on New Security 

Paradigms, Lake Arrowhead, California, 2005.  

[30]  M. Bishop and C. Gates, “Defining the insider threat.,” in Proceedings of the 4th annual workshop on 
Cyber security and information intelligence research: developing strategies to meet the cyber security 
and information intelligence challenges ahead, Oak Ridge Tennessee USA, 2008.  

[31]  A. Georgiadou, S. Mouzakitis and D. Askounis, “Working from home during COVID-19 crisis – A 

Cyber-Security Culture Assessment Survey,” Mendeley Data, Athens, 2020. 

[32]  “Energy  Shield,”  Energy  Shield,  2019.  [Online].  Available:  https://energy-shield.eu/.  [Accessed  25 

03 2020]. 

49 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Network Security & Its Applications (IJNSA) Vol.13, No.1, January 2021 

AUTHORS   

Mrs.  Anna  Georgiadou  is  a  research  associate  in  the  Management  and  Decision  Support  Systems 
Laboratory in the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the National Technical University of 
Athens (NTUA). She has been working as a senior engineer on operation and system support services for 
major  telecommunication  providers,  energy  regulators,  banking  systems,  and  other  critical  national 
infrastructures. She has recently become a Ph.D. candidate in the cyber-security field inspired by her active 
participation  in  the  HEDNO’s  (Hellenic  Electricity  Distribution  Network  Operator)  information  security 
management  group.  She  is  a  certified  database  and  network  administrator,  software  developer,  and  data 
analyst. 

Dr.  Spiros  Mouzakitis  is  a  senior  research  analyst  for  the  National  Technical  University  of  Athens 
(NTUA).  He  has  18  years  of  industry  experience  in  the  conception,  analysis,  and  implementation  of 
information  technology  systems.  His  research  is  focused  on  decision  analysis  in  the  field  of  decision 
support  systems,  risk  management,  Big  Data  Analytics,  as  well  as  optimization  systems  and  algorithms, 
and  enterprise  interoperability.  He  has  published  in  numerous  journals  including  Computer  Standards  & 
Interfaces, International Journal of Electronic Commerce, Information Systems Management, and Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, and has presented his research at international conferences. 

Dr. Dimitris Askounis is a Professor in the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the National 
Technical  University  of  Athens  (NTUA).  He  has  been  involved  in  numerous  IT  research  and  innovation 
projects  funded  by  the  EU  since  1988  in  the  thematic  areas  of  eBusiness  interoperability,  eGovernance, 
data  exploitation  and  management,  decision  support,  knowledge  and  quality  management,  computer 
integrated  manufacturing,  enterprise  resource  planning,  etc.  He  teaches  digital  innovation  management, 
decision support, and management systems, and he is a member of scientific committees on innovation and 
entrepreneurship  competitions  and  incubators  offered  by  International  University  networks,  Financial 
Institutions,  etc.  Dr.  Askounis  has  published  over  80  papers  in  scientific  journals  and  international 
conference proceedings. 

50 

 
 
 
 
