Socio-Technical Root Cause Analysis of 
Cyber-enabled Theft of the U.S. Intellectual Property - 
The Case of APT41 

Mazaher Kianpour 
mazaher.kianpour@ntnu.no 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology 
Gjøvik, Norway 

ABSTRACT 
Increased connectivity has made us all more vulnerable. Cy- 
berspace, besides all its benefits, spawned more devices to 
hack and more opportunities to commit cybercrime. Crim- 
inals have found it lucrative to target both individuals and 
businesses, by holding or stealing their assets via different 
types of cyber attacks. The cyber-enabled theft of Intellec- 
tual Property (IP), as one of the most important and critical 
intangible assets of nations, organizations and individuals, 
by foreign  countries  has  been  a  devastating  challenge  of 
the United States (U.S.) in the past decades. In this study, 
we conduct a socio-technical root cause analysis to inves- 
tigate one of the recent cases of IP theft by employing a 
holistic approach. It concludes with a list of root causes and 
some corrective actions to stop the impact and prevent the 
recurrence of the problem in the future. Building upon the 
findings of this study, the U.S. requires a detailed revision of 
IP  strategies  bringing  the  whole  socio-technical  regulatory 
system into focus and strengthen IP rights protection con- 
sidering China’s indigenous innovation policies. It is critical 
that businesses and other organizations take steps to reduce 
their exposure to cyber attacks. It is particularly important 
to train employees on how to spot potential threats, and to 
institute policies that encourage workers to report potential 
security failures so that action can be taken quickly. Finally, 
we discuss how cyber ranges can provide an efficient and 
safe platform for dealing with such challenges. The results 
of this study can be expanded to other countries in order to 
protect their IP rights and deter or prevent and respond to 
future incidents. 

CCS CONCEPTS 
• Security and privacy →  Social aspects of security and 
privacy; Economics of security and privacy; •  Social and 
professional topics → Intellectual property. 

KEYWORDS 
socio-technical root cause analysis, cyber-enabled economic 
warfare,  Chinese  state-sponsored  attacks,  APT41,  Intellectual 
Property theft 

INTRODUCTION 

1 
After an "amazing and productive meeting", so-called by Don- 
ald Trump, between U.S. President and China’s Leader, the 
White House announced that it is expected that the two na- 
tions immediately begin negotiations on structural changes 
with respect to forced technology transfer, intellectual prop- 
erty protection, cyber intrusions, and cyber theft [13]. De- 
spite Trump’s statement, the outcome of the negotiations 
was highly uncertain as in September 2019, the U.S. Deputy 
Assistant Attorney General stated that more cases are being 
opened that implicate trade secrets and intellectual property 
theft, and most of them are attributed to China. Moreover, 
the Department of Justice warn companies to bolster their 
defenses [14], and the director of Federal Bureau of Inves- 
tigation (FBI) said that FBI has nearly 1,000 investigations 
open into economic espionage and attempted intellectual 
property theft, nearly all of them leading back to China [27]. 
According to a survey by CNBC, 1 in 5 American corpora- 
tions say China has stolen their intellectual properties within 
the last year [29]. Intellectual properties - patent, trademarks, 
trade secrets, are the pillars of a creative and innovative econ- 
omy and have a vital role in the development of countries 
all over the world. According to Global Innovation Policy 
Center, improving IP protection leads to the following: [5]: 

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 
• 

55% more likely to adapt to sophisticated, state-of-the- 
art technology 
53% more likely to employ high-skilled and high-paid 
workers 
53% more likely to experience increased R&D activity 
30% more likely to attract venture capital and private 
equity funds 
39% more likely to attract foreign investment 
Over 4 times more online and mobile content gener- 
ated 

 
 
 
 
 
, , 

Mazaher  Kianpour 

Table 1: Steps of root cause analysis in this study (Adopted from [2]) 

Step 

Purpose 

Define the 
Problem 

Understanding and scoping the problem and de- 
scribing  the  existing  environment  in  where  the 
problem  occurs,  and  finding  the  impacts  of  the 
problem 

Outputs 

Problem Definition 

Tools 

Survey 

Find Causes  Better understanding of the problem and creating 
a broad overview of possible causes 

List of possible causes 

Find the root 
causes 
Find  Solu- 
tions 

Identifying the root causes leading to the incident  Description  of  the  root 

Propose  feasible  solutions  to  eliminate  the  root 
causes and assess the potential effectiveness of the 
solution 

causes 
Description of the Solu- 
tions and a list of priori- 
tized solutions 

Socio-technical  Systems 
Theory and Fishbone Di- 
agram 
Security  by  Consensus 
Model 
Cybersecurity 
Value 
Chain  and  Q  Methodol- 
ogy 

On the other hand, calculation of the cost of cyber-attacks 
is affected by numerous factors and it is virtually impossible 
to determine the precise costs that individuals, organizations 
and governments may incur. IP theft cyber-crimes are no 
exception. The estimation of costs varies regarding the size 
of the economic loss attributed to the theft of IP and trade 
secrets. Estimated annual cost to the U.S. economy through 
the theft of trade secrets exceeds $225 billion and could be 
as high as $600 billion [6]. These numbers show that the 
reported  damage  from  the  NotPetya  cyber-attack,  which  is 
estimated at $10 billion and known as the costliest cyber- 
attack to date [8], is much smaller in comparison to the the 
IP thefts against a single country in one year. 

The  IP  protection  benefits  along  with  the  high  cost  of 
IP  theft  necessitate  a  societal  response.  For  a  societal  re- 
sponse to be effective, understanding the problem and find- 
ing  its  root  causes  need  to  be  one  of  the  first  steps.  This 
study presents the work undertaken to investigate the socio- 
technical causes of failure in Intellectual Property (IP) pro- 
tection in the U.S. This research could be a foundation for 
more  substantial  and  larger-scale  research  and  studies  to 
develop a significant base to examine the existing practices 
and the underlying causes of failure across a range of individ- 
ual, organizational and governmental in other countries. We 
acknowledge  the  multiplicity  of  the  interdependent  causes 
of failure in IP protection and take this into account through 
the  use  of  multiple  disciplines  and  field  of  study  such  as 
politics, law and economics. 

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  structured  as  follows.  Section 
2  describes  our  research  method  and  the  steps  we  took  to 
analyze the root causes of this problem. The analysis results, 
the employed tools and the proposed corrective actions are 
discussed in Section 3. Finally, Section 4 concludes the paper. 

2  RESEARCH  METHOD 
IP theft exists within a broad range of scope, persistence, and 
severity  across  different  industries  and  sectors.  Some  of  these 
incidents cause a minor nuisance, others cause financial and 
some can damage reputations of whole industries and even 
nations. In most of these cases, prevention efforts are prefer- 
able to dealing with the consequences of them. Hence, root 
cause analysis of these problem can be the key to setting 
up a prevention strategy to IP theft . In terms of scope and 
extent of a root cause analysis, there can be a large variation 
depending on the nature of problem and its repercussions. 
Root cause analysis is part of an complete corrective pro- 
cess, and identifying the root causes is only one part of this 
process. 

To our knowledge, we could not find a commonly accepted 
definition and approach of root cause analysis. This analy- 
sis is understood as a wide range of approaches, tools and 
techniques used to identify causes of problems and eliminate 
them to prevent from reoccurring those problems [2, 10]. 
However, we defined the root causes as the casual or con- 
tributing factors that, if corrected would, with a given degree 
of certainty, prevent recurrence of the identified problem. In- 
dividuals,  organizations  and  governments  would  save  time 
and money by eliminating the root cause. It also prevents the 
problems in other areas and improves the communication 
between groups and actors. Basically, the root cause analysis 
should be performed all the time when problems occur. Prob- 
lems that are left unattended tend to become crisis. Some 
of the reasons why problems occur include supplier defects, 
under/overspending budgets, human error, out of control 
processes, etc. Consequently, to conduct a root cause analy- 
sis, we took the steps outlined in Table 1. Although this steps 
are presented as a sequential process, in reality we repeated 
some steps to revise and fine-tune the study. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Socio-Technical Root Cause Analysis of Cyber-enabled Theft of the U.S. Intellectual Property - The Case of APT41 

, , 

3  SOCIO-TECHNICAL ROOT CAUSE ANALYSIS OF 

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY THEFT 

In this section, we follow the aforementioned steps to con- 
duct a socio-technical root cause analysis of IP theft by Chi- 
nese state-sponsored groups against the U.S. cancer research 
centers. These operations are known as Advanced Persistent 
Threat (APT) and this case is categorized under APT41. 

Define the problem 
Economic espionage is not a new problem but with the devel- 
opment  of  the  Internet,  new  means  and  methods  are  being 
developed  at  an  accelerating  rate.  Espionage  is  a  national 
security crime violating Title 18 USC, 792-7981 and Article 
106a, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ)2. Convictions 
of espionage require the transmitting, collecting and losing 
national  defense  information  with  intend  to  aid  a  foreign 
power  or  harm  the  U.S.  Although  in  many  resources  eco- 
nomics espionage and IP theft are used interchangeably, they 
are  different. Economic  espionage  and IP  theft  are  defined 
under 1831 and 1832 of the Economic Espionage Act of 19963, 
respectively.  Economic  Espionage  comprises  behavior  that 
denies the rightful owner of the economic benefit of property 
that the owner has gone to reasonable means to protect and 
does so with the intent to benefit a foreign entity. Whereas, 
IP  theft  covers  the  conversion  of  a  an  intellectual  property 
to  the  economic  benefit  of  anyone  other  than  the  rightful 
owner. In fact, all of these are relevant and governments and 
organizations  should  consider  all  of  them.  However,  different 
violations  may  result  in  different  courses  of  action  against 
the perpetrators. It also should be noted that, accurately de- 
termination  of  the  end  users  is  not  always  possible.  What 
appears to be a domestic perpetrator may in fact turn out to 
be a foreign collection effort. 

With the advent of information age and cyberspace, cyber- 
enabled  methods  allowed  adversaries  to  harm  their  targets 
far  disproportionate  to  their  own  size  or  resources.  These 
malicious  cyber-enabled  actions  are  called  differently,  de- 
pending on their purpose in various contexts, such as cyber- 
crime,  cyberespionage,  cybersabotage  and  cyberterrorism. 
Reports  show  that  the  U.S.  government,  businesses,  indus- 
tries and banks have been the target of numerous small- and 
large-scale  cyber  attacks  which  is  described  as  the  great- 
est transfer of wealth in the history of this country [1, 31]. 
Hence,  the  Foundation  for  Defense  of  Democracies  (FDD) 
introduced  a  new  class  of  these  security  threats  labeled  as 
Cyber-Enabled Economic Warfare [28]. These threats arise 

1https://uscode.house.gov/browse/prelim@title18/part1/chapter37& 
edition=prelim 
2http://www.ucmj.us/sub-chapter-10-punitive-articles/ 
906a-article-106a-espionage 
3https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-110/pdf/ 
STATUTE-110-Pg3488.pdf 

from opportunities provided by rapidly evolving world’s fea- 
tures.  The  ever-changing  nature  of  communications,  and 
growing  technology-driven,  information-intensive  societies 
make the tackling these threats a must. 

Today, digital technologies and Internet file sharing net- 
works  has  facilitated  intellectual  property  theft.  The  U.S. 
believes  that  China  is  responsible  for  over  90  percent  of 
cyber-enabled intellectual property theft in the United States 
[12]. In Table 2, we summarize the significant IP thefts by 
Chinese  against  the  U.S.  businesses  and  organizations  in 
2019. The incident reported in August is related to the theft 
of protected data from multiple U.S. cancer institutes by Chi- 
nese state-sponsored hackers as a part of APT41 operations. 
Healthcare  research  centers  have  been  frequently  targeted 
by Chinese cyber attacks in last decades. Cancer-related re- 
search  institutes,  in  particular,  are  becoming  more  popular 
targets for Chinese APT groups reflecting the growing con- 
cerns of China over dramatically increasing cancer incidence 
and  mortality  rates,  and  Five-Year  economic  development 
plans4. 

APT41, APT22, APT18 and APT10 are the most signifi- 
cant  identified  Chinese  cyber  espionage  operations  against 
the U.S. sectors including telecommunication, healthcare, 
and high-tech. In this study, we focused on APT41 which 
through 2014 started to carry out an array of IP theft op- 
erations against 11 industries, particularly healthcare and 
pharmaceutical, in 14 countries. The activity of this group 
traces back to 2012 by conducting financially motivated op- 
erations against the video gaming industry. However, since 
2014, they expanded into a state-sponsored group targeting 
more industries and focusing on espionage activities. The 
group’s  noticeable  use  of  supply  chain  compromises,  tracking 
individuals and conducting surveillance highlights a creative 
and well-resourced adversary. A comprehensive report by 
FireEye demonstrates that APT41 group also targeted third 
parties and leveraged this access to target additional victims. 
This report also outlines the technical information and the 
links to other known Chinese cyber espionage operators. Ac- 
cording to this report, APT41 leveraged timely news stories 
as content to lure in their spear-phishing emails, although 
social engineering content does not always correlate with 
targeted users or organizations. Moreover, access to third- 
parties and compromising supply chain enabled APT41 to 
develop tactics, techniques, and procedure (TTPs) that were 
later leveraged to target additional victims. A comprehensive 

4According to the published dataset by the International Agency on Re- 
search on Cancers (IARC), in 2011, cancer mortality surpassed all other 
illnesses and became the leading cause of death in China [26]. Total num- 
ber of new cases in 2018, both sexes, all ages, increased to 4285033, IARC 
reported [11]. 

 
 
 
 
  
 
, , 

Mazaher  Kianpour 

Table 2: The Significant IP Thefts By China against the U.S. 
in 2019 [19] 

Month     Descriptionn 

July 

October  Chinese  hackers  engaged  in  a  multi-layer 
campaign between 2010 and 2015 to acquire 
IP  from  foreign  companies  to  support  the 
development of the Chinese C919 airliners. 
August  Chinese  state-sponsored  hackers  were  re- 
vealed to have targeted multiple U.S. cancer 
institutes to take information relating to cut- 
ting edge cancer research. 
State-sponsored  Chinese  hackers  conducted 
a  spear-phishing  campaign  against  employ- 
ees of three major U.S. utility companies 
Over the course of seven years, a Chinese es- 
pionage group hacked into ten international 
cellphone  providers  operating  across  thirty 
countries  to  track  dissidents,  officials,  and 
suspected spies. 
Hackers  affiliated  with  the  Chinese  intelli- 
gence service reportedly had been using NSA 
hacking  tools  since  2016,  more  than  a  year 
before those tools were publicly leaked. 

May 

June 

January      U.S.  prosecutors  unsealed  two  indictments 
against Huawei and its CFO Meng Wanzhou 
alleging crimes ranging from wire and bank 
fraud to obstruction of justice and conspiracy 
to steal trade secrets. 

list of enterprise techniques used by APT41 are collected by 
MITRE ATT&CK5. 

Find causes 
A  well-executed  and  effective  IP  strategy  needs  addressed 
policies  at  all  levels  of  socio-technical  systems.  This  includes 
various communities, all types of national and international 
institutions,  social  organizations  and  governments.  It  can 
be argued that even sectors that are not typically associated 
with  an IP  strategy  in  an  institution  can  complement  an  IP 
development-oriented  policy,  impacting  other  communities 
and institutions. A wide range of actors either provide or in- 
teract with IP protection. We identified these different actors 
at each level of a socio-technical system (i.e. international, 
national,  organizational  and  individual)  and  studied  their 
role  in  this  case  both  in  the  U.S.  and  China.  It  should  be 
noted  that  actors  are  not  constrained  within  each  level  and 
can operate with multiple actors in other levels. 

5https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0096/ 

To go even further, we used a four level construct as an 
instrument to study the casual factors involved in IP theft. As 
such, these levels can be used as a generalized tool for analy- 
sis: policy level where the statement of intent and long-term 
objectives are described and implemented as a procedure or 
protocol;  a  strategic  level  where  the  actors  are  set  up  with 
determined actions to achieve the goals; an operational level 
where connects the details of tactics with the goals of strat- 
egy and coordinates the different tasks within an individual 
actor, and a tactical level where the specific techniques and 
procedures  are  organized,  employed  and  executed  for  each 
task. This delineation will be used to provide casual factors 
of IP theft. 

Policy  Level. There are two global perspectives on IP rights 
protection: one group considers IP rights protection as an 
obstacle to domestic developments by creating barriers to 
the use of intangible resources on favorable terms [7], and 
the other group considers them as a means to foster growth 
in domestic industries, encourage innovation and protect 
foreign firms in high-infringement jurisdictions [21]. These 
two different views on whether and how IP rights promote 
development in domestic and global economies often re- 
sult in policies that are either conductive to development or 
are challenging as development aids. Nevertheless, we will 
continue  with  describing  some  frictions  that policy  makers 
should be aware of when formulating IP rights. 

Adopt a "one size fits all" strategy: when formulating IP 
rights, policy makers may consult other countries, sectors 
and organizations. While this may be a helpful approach, 
policy makers should be careful not to leverage contents that 
are inconsistent with national and institutional interests and 
requirements. Moreover, since each country and sector has 
its own interests and requirements, the cost and benefits of 
the attack should be different accordingly. Therefore, using 
a "one size fits all" strategy can be not as effective as well- 
tailored strategies for the actors. Although policy makers 
can mitigate this risk by prioritising perceived threat if there 
is desire to have consistency with the national, international 
and institutional cybersecurity strategies. 

Neglect links with other national or international strate- 
gies:  As  we  argued  in  the  introduction,  IP  theft  attacks  are 
considered as cyber espionage operations. National [24, 30] 
and international cybersecurity strategies provide details on 
how these threats and challenges will be managed. Establish- 
ing  links  across  these  strategies  and  sector-specific  strate- 
gies is not straightforward and this inconsistency makes the 
identification of essential resources to achieve the strategic 
objectives  listed  at  national  and  institutional  levels  much 
difficult. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Socio-Technical Root Cause Analysis of Cyber-enabled Theft of the U.S. Intellectual Property - The Case of APT41 

, , 

Lack of an update/review mechanism: adoption of digital 
patient records, automation of clinical systems, ease of dis- 
tributing  protected  information,  heterogeneous  nature  of 
networked systems and antiquates clinical applications that 
are  not  designed  to  securely  operate  in  today’s  networked 
environment  are  all  security  threats  in  the  U.S.  healthcare. 
Evolving threat landscape is also at the core of this increased 
cybersecurity risk to this sector. According KPMG survey, 
institutions  in  this  sector  may  be  overconfident  about  their 
cybersecurity capabilities [4]. It is probable that the current 
regulations and agreements could not be responsive to these 
rapid  changes  and  become  irrelevant  with  the  passage  of 
time. Therefore, it is required to have mechanisms to review 
and update the regulations, agreements and policies among 
the actors at all levels. 

Lack of an inter-level coordination group: Since we are liv- 
ing in an interconnected, interdependent digital world, the 
formulation of IP rights requires input from a variety of gov- 
ernmental,  organizational  and  individual  actors.  This  input 
can be obtained through different ways. In support of this 
process,  establishment  of  an  inter-level  coordination  group 
helps harmonize varying requirements across the actors. This 
group can also help to translate the technical requirements 
at the working level into policy-related decisions. 

Failing to identify critical assets: The protection of criti- 
cal  infrastructures  and  industries  is  a  common  requirement 
identified by the U.S. National Cybersecurity Structure [30]. 
There are different studies to identify these critical infras- 
tructures and industries. Similar studies should also be done 
to identify the most critical type of intellectual properties 
for specific nations and industries. Prioritizing these IPs is 
beneficial in planning rapid response in the event of stealing 
and also in optimizing the costs of the protections. 

Lack of awareness – especially among policy-makers: a well- 
developed  IP  right  should  provide  the  actors  at  the  other 
levels  with  guidance  of  concerning  key  goals,  required  re- 
sources, and how these could be employed most effectively. 
In the case of a IP right covering a specific industry, raising 
awareness among the policy makers may be significantly im- 
portant to facilitate implementation and execution of them. 

Strategic  Level.  The  advent  of  cyberspace  has  changed  the 
business  models  of  the  organizations  and  the  interaction 
among them. These changes may give rise to tensions among 
the actors depending on the context and preconditions. We 
know  that  the  context  of  intellectual  property  protection  is 
not  restricted  to  a  specific  entity.  The  strategic  objectives, 
therefore, must reflect the underlying basics of the processes 
that provide actual means and identifies the actors involved. 
Here,  we  discuss  a  number  of  lessons  that  we  learnt  from 
other strategy development models like developing conflict 
prevention frameworks. 

From  complexity  to  perplexity:  the  need  to  work  within 
a  complex  environment  defined  by  increased  diffusion  of 
power  is  probably  the  greatest  challenge  to  the  actors.  An 
abundance  of  actors  that  need  to  be  engaged  in  IP  protec- 
tion  represents  a  conceptual  and  resource  challenge  to  the 
governments and industries. On one hand, this engagement 
builds  trust  among  the  actors  that only  a  short  list  of  them 
are collected in Table ??. On the other hand, the complexity 
of this environment is not comprehensible for the all actors 
and may cause confusion and perplexity which unable them 
to deal with the challenges. 

Unclear communication: specific definitions, legal frame- 
works, and implications are inevitable challenges among the 
industries  and  nations,  let  alone  the  international  actors.  It 
is necessary to be aware of this challenge and not let a actor 
be constrained by particular language of the group in which 
one is operating. These actors are in danger of ignorance if 
their communication approach is not aligned with the group. 

Operational  Level. As the link between strategic objec- 
tives and tactical employment of forces, activities at opera- 
tional level of a digital ecosystem can be further expanded 
due to the importance of coordinating large unit actions and 
the necessity of synchronization close and deep operations. 
In the following, we will outline five cases that could have a 
detrimental effect on effectiveness of a digital ecosystem. 

Leaving a  policy  vacuum:  policy vacuums occur, intention- 
ally or unintentionally, when there is an absence of specific 
policies  relating  to  a  specific situation  at  operational  level. 
Often, either no policies for conduct in these situations exist 
or  existing  policies  seem  inadequate.  These  vacuums  will 
progressively fill itself due to function creep both vertically 
and  horizontally,  leading  to  friction  with  other  public  and 
private  organisations,  and  could  also  lack  proper  account- 
ability.  A  Computer  Emergency  Response  Team  (CERT),  for 
example, shall be focused on incident response and recovery. 
However, when this operational entity lacks a proper strate- 
gic vision, function creep may occur towards proactive and 
prevention aspects of defense. 

Uncoordinated operations: Cyberspace has become a fifth 
dimension of warfare, in addition to land, sea, air, and space; 
countries should therefore prepare accordingly, by establish- 
ing standard procedures for defending against, and recover- 
ing from, related attacks. Countries are vulnerable to attacks 
that target strategic assets and infrastructure, and disrupt 
internet traffic, as a means to create unrest. These threats 
are exacerbated by a lack of coordination among the actors 
at all levels. Conflicting laws and regulations also confuse 
organizations and increases the risks of cyber attacks. 

Drafting obsolete legislation: As cyber threats evolve, public 
and private organizations must stay up-to-date. Lawmakers 
are  struggling  to  keep  up  with  the  realities  of  3D-printed 

 
 
, , 

Adopt a ‘one size fits all’ 
strategy 

Lack of an  update/ 
review mechanism 

Failing to identify critical 
assets 

Neglect links with other 
national / international 
strategies 

Lack of awareness 
among policy-makers 

Lack of inter-level 
coordination group 

Uncoordinated 
operations 

Lack of flexible 
cooperation and clear 
information exchange 

Unclear communication 

Ignoring Experiences 

Underestimating the 
assets’ value 

From complexity to 
perplexity 

Failing to understand 
Information Security 
requirements 

Mazaher  Kianpour 

Leaving a policy vacuum 

Drafting obsolete 
legislation 

Tolerating Cyber- 
Illiteracy 

Intellectual Property 
Theft 

Lack of International 
Interoperability 

Figure 1: Casual factors of APT41 in the form of fishbone diagram 

weapons, for example, and drone interference with aircraft, 
not  to  mention  the  staggering  rate  of  change  in  terms  of 
increased  global  internet use and hyper-connectivity of  de- 
vices. An inability to stay ahead of the curve creates the 
risk of abuses (through ignorance or malice) with no legal 
recourse - and may leave entire nations without the ability 
to make an informed response to cyber attacks. 

Lack of flexible cooperation and clear information exchange: 
Global threats necessitate  new  ways  of  working  together 
to bolster data security. By better connecting academic  re- 
searchers, private sector organizations, non-profits and gov- 
ernment agencies, the  transmission  and  shared analysis  of 
big data can lead to more fruitful discoveries. However, data 
collaboration  will  only  remain  viable  if  it  can  be  done  se- 
curely. This entails data anonymization that minimizes so- 
called re-identification, and international collaboration among 
lawmakers and law enforcement agencies. As the cyber 
world increasingly inserts itself into to the physical world, 
there is a hunger for new ways to collaborate. 

Tolerating cyber-illiteracy: the existing gap in understand- 
ing of cybersecurity issues by higher level officials, decision 
makers, and policy makers leads to neglect of serious threats 
and incidents. The unique characteristics of organized cyber 
crimes  such  as  technology  and  skill  intensiveness,  higher 
degree of globalization and newness urges to close this gap 
not only among the practitioners, but also among the judges 
to prevent imbalanced sentences [18]. 

Tactical  Level. Good tactics, well-translated strategic ob- 
jectives into tactical plans to achieve them, enable us to find 
advantages  on  adversaries  to  defeat  their  malicious  opera- 
tions. With clear understanding of the tactical level activities 
and avoiding following bad practices, these activities might 
yield a desired strategic end. 

Ignoring experiences: A US-China trade deal on IP would 
not be unprecedented. The two countries concluded a bilat- 
eral agreement on IP in 1992, after the United States threat- 
ened  to  increase  tariffs  on  Chinese  products  [22].  Also,  in 
2015, President Obama also made a cybersecurity agreement 
with China to refrain from cyber-enabled theft of intellectual 
property  for  commercial  gain  [9].  Usually,  the  initial  legal 
and organizational responses to a specific cyber crime will 
turn out to be inadequate, or obsolete in the face of technical 
and  social  changes.  Identifying  underlying  issues,  sharing 
experiences and enhancing national and international inter- 
operability can help to combat evolving and ever-changing 
cyber threats. 

Failing to understand information security requirements: 
Providing cybersecurity is impossible without implication of 
adequate Information Security Management Systems across 
the digital ecosystem. For some businesses and sectors (e.g., 
healthcare) this can be one of the most difficult tasks to ac- 
complish and considered as a disruption due to the traditional 
practices. However, without meeting the requirements, it is 
impossible to provide even the most basic protection of the 
digital systems. 

Figure  1  illustrates  all  the  mentioned  causal  factors  that 
contribute  in  IP  theft  in  the  form  of  a  fishbone  diagram. 
Fishbone diagram, as one of the primary techniques used to 
perform a five whys analysis, is a basic tool to show causes 
of a specific event proposed by Kaoru Ishikawa [15, 25]. 

Find the root causes 
We use the Security by Consensus (SBC) model as a holistic 
approach considering both social and technical contexts to 
examine the root causes of this case. The SBC model was 
first developed in 1989 as a conceptual framework to ana- 
lyze and compare European and North American technical 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Socio-Technical Root Cause Analysis of Cyber-enabled Theft of the U.S. Intellectual Property - The Case of APT41 

, , 

individuals in these groups. From cultural and ethical per- 
spective, identified root causes include: 

• 

The U.S.: 
–  A  shortage  of  awareness  and  poor  cybersecurity 

culture in healthcare sector 

–  Intellectual property illiteracy in healthcare sector 

to handle IP rights properly 

–  Lack of a counterintelligence mindset, and adversar- 
ial and system thinking among the practitioners and 
decision makers 

• 

China: 
–  Adoption of a top-down innovation model (and mind- 

sets) 

–  Inadequate education with regard to IP rights 

Legal/Contractual. Social and governmental institutions use 
a system of rules to regulate behavior. These legal systems 
regulate and ensure that individuals or organizations adhere 
to the will of the state and comply with the regulations. In 
the context of cybersecurity and intellectual property rights, 
understanding the unique meaning of types of compliance 
is crucial in managing risks in an organization: 

• 

• 

• 

Statutory cybersecurity and privacy requirements are 
required  by  law  and  refer  to  current  laws  that  were 
passed be a state of federal government. 
Regulatory cybersecurity and privacy requirements 
are required by law but are different from statutory 
requirements in that these requirements refer to rules 
issued by a relating body that is appointed by a state 
or federal government. These are legal requirements 
through proxy, where the regulating body is the source 
of the requirement. It is important to keep in mind that 
regulatory requirements tend to change more often 
than statutory requirements. 
Contractual cybersecurity and privacy requirements 
are required by legal contract between private parties. 
This may be as simple as a cybersecurity or privacy 
addendum in a vendor contract that calls out unique 
requirements. It also includes broader requirements 
from  an  industry  association  that  membership  brings 
certain obligations 

From legal and contractual perspective, identified root 

• 

causes include: 
The U.S.: 
–  Expensive attorneys fees 
–  Lack of perception (among law practitioners) of value 

that technology is creating 

–  Lack of understanding and transparency of the afore- 

mentioned compliance 

–  Lack of synchronizations of laws with the speed of 

technology advance 

Figure 2: SBC framework for IT crime prevention 

computer  security  evaluation criteria  [17].  As  illustrated  in 
Figure 2,  SBC model proposes two general classes  of barriers 
to crime activities: social and technical. This model assumes 
a potential perpetrator, a suitable victim, and inadequate pro- 
tection of the victim. In our case, perpetrator and victim are 
APT41  Chinese  state-sponsored  group  and  the  U.S.  cancer 
research centers, respectively. Inadequate protection can be 
classified according to the two classes of barriers or protec- 
tion mechanisms: inadequate social protection or inadequate 
technical protection. The opportunity structure for this case 
is determined by the interplay between criminals, victims 
and these barriers. 

In the SBC framework, socio-technical systems’ actors cre- 
ate circumstances and potentials to become a possible victim 
of a cyber crime by inadequately protecting the digital sys- 
tems they own or use. The two general classes of protection 
measures are social and technical which can be subdivided 
into other categories. Description of the different categories 
are given below. The original intention of SBC model is to 
serve as an abstract model of systems’ problems at different 
levels. As was saw in Figure 2, the SBC framework focuses 
on both offender and victim’s social and technical barriers. 
This is the strength of this framework to investigate the root 
causes of this case. 

Cultural/Ethical. This category encompasses the social be- 
havior and norms found in societies and organizations, as 
well as the knowledge, values, capabilities and habits of the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
, , 

Mazaher  Kianpour 

• 

China: 
–  Lack of meaningful injunctive relief 
–  Low damage awards 
–  Interpretation of IP laws can be fragmented and out 

of sync with international standards 

–  Not being a member of Patent Law Treaty 

Managerial/Administrative. Management is the administra- 
tion of an organization at each level of a socio-technical 
system, and includes the activities of setting the strategy of 
the organization and coordinating the efforts of its internal 
actors (e.g. employees, managers, owners, etc.) and exter- 
nal actors (e.g. customers, government, society, suppliers, 
etc.) to accomplish the objectives through the application 
of available resources. From managerial and administrative 
perspective, identified root causes include: 

• 

The U.S.: 
–  Incapability of confronting China’s incentive plans 
–  Insufficient administrative enforcement 
–  Insufficient systematic and strategic approach to de- 

ploy IP rights and patentability requirements 

• 

–  Insufficient tax incentives for the creation of IP assets 
China: 
–  Encouraging and assisting in the conduct of cyber 

attacks 

–  Low quality of innovation 
–  Inefficient capital markets and resource allocation 
–  Slow transformation of state-owned enterprises 
–  Difficult and inefficient technology transfer, market 
access,  licensing,  and  the  effective  commercializa- 
tion of IP remain in place 

Operational/Procedural.  Operations  and  procedures  describe 
the sequence of steps, and specify for each steps what tasks 
need  to  be  executed  and  by  whom.  These  steps  are  aimed 
at harvesting value from assets owned by the organization. 
From operational and procedural perspective, identified root 
causes include: 

• 

The U.S.: 
–  Non-established procedures for asset valuation (cost- 

benefit analysis) 

–  Non-established risk assessment procedures 
–  Insufficient  communication  and  information  exchange 

procedures inter- and intra-organizations 

–  Complacency with cybersecurity practices and lack 
of effective and timely disabling of access to web- 
sites and services whose primary function is to offer 
infringing content online 

• 

–  Failure to conduct third party due diligence 
China: 
–  Insufficient action, with low transparency, against 

the online piracy ecosystem 

Technical. Technology is the sum of techniques, tools, and 
processes used in the production of physical devices, ser- 
vices, software platforms and applications to accomplish the 
organizational  objectives.  Technology  can  be  embedded  in 
machines to allow for operation, or it can be the knowledge 
of techniques. From technical perspective, identified root 
causes include: 

• 

• 

The U.S.: 
–  Lack of phishing tests in certain institutions 
–  Pervasiveness of legacy systems 
–  Use of company-sanctioned services and devices 
–  Lack of using Data Loss Prevention (DLP) tools 
China: 
–  Growing number of platforms that facilitate online 

piracy 

Find the solutions 
According  to  a  report  by  Netwrix  [23],  malware,  human 
error and privileged abuse are the leading intellectual prop- 
erty  theft  scenarios.  Analysis  of  this  case  also  showed  that 
these were the main factor of attacker’s success. This find- 
ing  shows  that  to  protect  IP, or  any  valuable  asset,  against 
attacks, healthcare industries need to mount both social and 
technical  defenses.  In  this  section,  discuss  three  types  of 
corrective actions: 

• 

• 
• 

Immediate action to quickly mitigate the risk of the 
incident; 
Permanent action to eliminate the root causes; and, 
Preventive action to prevent the incident from recur- 
ring. 

While  permanent  actions  confirm  that  the  selected  cor- 
rection  actually  targets  the  root  causes,  preventive  actions 
implement any changes to systems, processes, or procedures 
necessary to prevent recurrence the problems. These actions 
can be taken at different steps in cybersecurity value chain. 
In this study, we used the proposed cybersecurity value chain 
proposed  by  NIST  [3]  and  suggested  62  corrective  actions 
to tackle this case. To measure the feasibility and effective- 
ness of these actions, we employed Q Methodology and used 
convenience  sampling  accorded  five  experts  (two  lawyers, 
one economists, and two IT professionals) viewpoints. The 
difference between Q methodology and survey, interview, or 
focus  group  approaches  is  that  the  response  variable  in  Q 
methodology is the participant in the study, not the partici- 
pants’ answers to a series of questions [20]. Table 3 indicates 
top 30 of most feasible and effective actions and their cor- 
responding strategies as selected by the five experts. These 
results show the importance of Response and Recovery ac- 
tions for the case APT41 as they are mostly categorized in 
Immediate corrective actions. 

 
 
 
Socio-Technical Root Cause Analysis of Cyber-enabled Theft of the U.S. Intellectual Property - The Case of APT41 

, , 

Table 3: Proposed corrective actions for this case. I: Immediate, Pe: Permanent, Pr: Preventive 

Strategies 

Operations 

Deter 

Asset Management 

Business Environment 
Governance 

Risk Assessment 

Risk Management 

Supply Chain Risk Management 

Awareness and Training 

Protect 

Data Security 

Information Protection Processes 

Maintenance 

Detect 

Anomalies and Events 

Detection Processes 

Response Planning 

Tactics 
Prioritizing assets based on their classification, criticality and business 

  value (I) 

Creating RACI matrix for the entire ecosystem (I) 
Prioritizing organizational objectives and activities (Pr) 
Setting up and communicating actor’s cybersecurity policy (Pr) 
Identifying and documenting assets’ vulnerabilities, internal and ex- 

  ternal threats, and potential business impacts and likelihood (Pe) 

Identifying and prioritizing risk responses (I) 
Making sure that risk management processes  are established  and 

  agreed by all actors (Pe) 

Determining organizational risk tolerance (I) 
Making sure that supply chain risk management is established, agreed 

  and conducted by all actors (Pr) 

Making sure that response and recovery planning are conducted with 
suppliers and third parties (Pr) 
Informing all users of their roles and responsibilities and training 
them (Pe) 
Making sure that data-in-rest and data-in-transit are protected (I) 
Creating a baseline configuration of IT/IC systems incorporating se- 

  curity principles (Pr) 

Creating and testing response plans (Incident Response  and  Busi- 
ness Continuity) and recovery plans (Incident Recovery and Disaster 
Recovery) (Pe) 
Approving and performing physical and online maintenance of the 
assets (Pe) 
Analyzing detected incidents to understand attack targets and methods 
  (Pr) 
Determination of incidents impacts and alert thresholds (I) 
Testing detection processes and making sure they comply with the 
requirements and continuously improving (Pr) 
Executing response plan during or after an incident (I) 
Make sure the personnel understand their roles and order of operations 

Communications 

  when a response is needed (Pe) 

Reporting and sharing incidents consistent with the criteria, response 

Response 

  plan and requirements (I) 

Analysis 

Mitigation 

Recovery 

Recovery planning 

Communications 

Coordination with actors according to response plan (I) 
Investigating and categorizing the notifications from detection sys- 
  tems (I) 
  Performing forensics (I) 
Establishing processes to receive, analyze and respond to vulnerabil- 
ities disclosed to the organization from internal or external sources 
(I) 
  Containing and mitigating incidents (I) 
Mitigating newly identified vulnerabilities or documenting them as 
accepted risks (I) 
Executing recovery plan during or after a cybersecurity incident (I) 
  Managing public relations (I) 
Communicating recovery activities with other actors (I) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                        
 
                                                        
 
 
                                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                         
 
 
, , 

Mazaher  Kianpour 

Operational exercises, exchanging of lessons learned and 
emphasis on continuous update and review of policies and 
strategies play significant roles in prevention of cyber-enabled 
IP theft. This is not limited to technical practitioners and 
covers a broad range of people who are involving in the 
provision of cybersecurity. For both professional and non- 
professionals, cyber ranges can provide a secure environ- 
ment for cybersecurity education, training and testing [16]. 
Cyber ranges can build a foundation for such environments 
relying on both technology and human intelligence. This 
combination enables us to gain insight into cybercriminals’ 
behavior and raise awareness among the defenders. With 
proper training provided by the cyber ranges, actors can use 
this intelligence to identify goals and the underlying pro- 
cesses to achieve them. By that means, better decisions will 
be made and it is possible to significantly reduce the success 
rates of the attacks. 

4  CONCLUSION 
Intellectual  property  is  an  enabler  of  innovation  and  eco- 
nomic growth. Protection of IP rights enables countries and 
IP-intensive  industries  to  foster  development  and  invest  in 
RD activities. The U.S. is incurring billions of dollars annually 
due to IP theft. In recent years, in continue of a long-standing 
approach,  countries  carry  out  espionage  operations  against 
other  countries.  In  August  2019,  Chinese  state-sponsored 
hackers  were  revealed  to  have  targeted  multiple  U.S.  can- 
cer  institutes  to  take  information  relating  to  cutting  edge 
cancer  research.  This  is  one  of  the  industries  targeted  by 
APT41,  a  prolific  Chinese  cyber  threat  group  that  carries 
out state-sponsored espionage activity in parallel with finan- 
cially  motivated  operations.  Reports  show  that  this  group 
started  their  activities  from  2013.  In  this  paper,  we  conducted 
a socio-technical root cause analysis to examine the casual 
factors and root causes of these operations. 

The aim of a root cause analysis is to find the main reasons 
of emerging a problem and proposing actions to eliminate 
these problems. Our study shows that the economic benefit 
of preventing IP theft in the U.S. is significant. On the other 
side, because of large productivity gains in China, expecting 
the implementation of mutually beneficial IP rights protec- 
tion by the Chinese government is not a subtle strategy to 
adopt by the U.S. Assessing the significance of each political, 
economic, socio-cultural and technological factors on the 
prevention, response and recovery from these incidents ne- 
cessitates new analytical studies. However, this study showed 
that most of the root causes of APT41 are implanted in the 
U.S. industries and institutions. These findings complement 
the results presented in Table 3 that the top immediate and 
permanent actions selected by the experts focus on the U.S. 
In this table, we proposed a set of corrective actions that, 
if followed precisely, prevent recurring this problem. We 

evaluated the effectiveness and feasibility of these action by 
conducting a systematic study of experts viewpoints. As a 
result, this study outlined thirty actions that are suggested 
to operationalize immediately and permanently. Due to the 
multidisciplinary nature of this problem, these corrective 
actions are not limited to technical solutions (e.g. and covers 
the social solutions as well. Hence, we believe that profes- 
sionals and non-professionals can leverage the educating and 
training capabilities that cyber ranges can provide for indi- 
viduals, organizations and governments and build a resilient 
infrastructure. 

In  an  effort  to  better  understand  the  selected  case  and 
define the problem, we used the qualitative and quantitative 
evidence  drawn  from  a  wide  range  of  sources  such  as  pri- 
mary  and  secondary  legislation,  reports  from  government 
agencies, legal analysis by practitioners, studies from interna- 
tional organizations (e.g. OECD, WTO, and WIPO), academic 
and legal journals, and news websites. All sources used are 
publicly available and are free and accessible to all. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  Christian Aghroum. 2012. Foreign spies stealing US economic secrets 
in cyberspace. Report to Congress on foreign economic collection and 
industrial espionage. 2009-2011. Securite et strategie 8, 1 (2012), 78–79. 
[2]  Bjørn Andersen and Tom Fagerhaug. 2006. Root cause analysis: simpli- 

fied tools and techniques.  Quality Press. 

[3]  Matthew P Barrett. 2018. Framework for improving critical infrastruc- 

ture cybersecurity version 1.1. Technical Report. 

[4]  G Bell and M Ebert. 2015. Health care and cyber security: increasing 

threats require increased capabilities. KPMG (2015). 

[5]  Global Innovation Policy Center. 2019. Inspiring Tomorrow, US Cham- 

ber International IP Index (7th Edition). 

[6]  IP Commission. 2017. The Report of the Commission on the Theft of 
American  Intellectual  Property.  http://ipcommission.org/report/IP_ 
Commission_Report_Update_2017.pdf 

[7]  Carlos M Correa. 2016. The Current System of Trade and Intellectual 
Property Rights. In European Yearbook of International Economic Law 
2016. Springer, 175–197. 

[8]  Kaspersky  Daily.  2018.  Top 5  most notorious cyber-attacks. https:// 
www.kaspersky.com/blog/five-most-notorious-cyberattacks/24506/ 
[9]  Julie Hirschfeld Davis and David E. Sanger. 2015. Obama and Xi Jinping 
of  China  Agree  to  Steps  on  Cybertheft.  https://www.nytimes.com/ 
2015/09/26/world/asia/xi-jinping-white-house.html 

[10]  A  Mark  Doggett.  2005.  Root  cause  analysis:  a  framework  for  tool 

selection. Quality Management Journal 12, 4 (2005), 34–45. 

[11]  International  Agency  for  Research  Cancer.  2018.  China’s  Fact 
https://gco.iarc.fr/today/data/factsheets/populations/ 

Sheet. 
160-china-fact-sheets.pdf 

[12]  Chuck Grassley. 2019. Grassley on Chinese Espionage: It’s called 
cheating.  And  it’s  only  getting  worse.  https://www.judiciary. 
senate.gov/grassley-on-chinese-espionage-its-called-cheating_ 
and-its-only-getting-worse 
[13]  The   White   House.   2018. 

Statement from  the  Press  Sec- 

retary     Regarding     the     President’s     Working     Dinner     with 
China. 
statement-press-secretary-regarding-presidents-working-dinner-china/ 
[14]  Nancy Hungerford. 2019.  Chinese theft of trade secrets on the rise, 
the US Justice Department warns.  https://www.cnbc.com/2019/09/ 

https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/ 

 
 
Socio-Technical Root Cause Analysis of Cyber-enabled Theft of the U.S. Intellectual Property - The Case of APT41 

, , 

23/chinese-theft-of-trade-secrets-is-on-the-rise-us-doj-warns.html 
[15]  Kaoru  Ishikawa.  1982.  Guide  to quality control.  Number  TS156.  I3713 

[24]  Cyberspace Administration of China. 2016. Full text of National Cy- 

berspace Security Strategy.  cac.gov.cn/2016-12/27/c_1120195926.htm 

1994. 

[16]  Mazaher Kianpour, Stewart Kowalski, Erjon Zoto, Christopher Frantz, 
and  Harald  Øverby. 2019.  Designing Serious  Games  for Cyber Ranges: 
A Socio-technical Approach. In 2019 IEEE European Symposium on 
Security and Privacy Workshops (EuroS&PW). IEEE, 85–93. 

[25]  Taiichi Ohno. 1988. Toyota production system: beyond large-scale pro- 

duction.  crc Press. 

[26]  World  Health  Organization  Representative  Organization.  2019.  The 
situation  in  China.  http://www.wpro.who.int/china/mediacentre/ 
factsheets/cancer/en/ 

FBI  has  1,000  in- 
theft. 

[17]  Stewart Kowalski. 1996.  IT  insecurity:  A  multi-disciplinary inquiry. 

[27]  South   China   Morning   Post.   2019. 

(1996). 

[18]  Nir Kshetri. 2010. The global cybercrime industry: economic, institutional 
and strategic perspectives. Springer Science & Business Media. 
[19]  James Andrew Lewis. 2013.  Significant cyber incidents since 2006. 

into  Chinese 

vestigations 
https://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/3019829/ 
fbi-has-1000-probes-chinese-intellectual-property-theft-director 
[28]  Samantha F Ravich. 2015. Cyber-Enabled Economic Warfare: An Evolv- 

intellectual 

property 

Center for Strategic and International Studies (2013). 

ing Challenge.  Hudson Institute. 

[20]  Aaron M Lien, George B Ruyle, and Laura Lopez-Hoffman. 2018. Q 
Methodology:  A  method  for  understanding  complex  viewpoints  in 
communities served by extension. Journal of Extension 56, 2 (2018), 
2IAW4. 

[21]  Keith  E  Maskus.  1998.  The  role  of  intellectual  property  rights  in 
encouraging foreign direct investment and technology transfer. Duke 
J. Comp. & Int’l L. 9 (1998), 109. 

[22]  Jean-Frédéric  Morin  and  Dimitri  Thériault.  2019.  Copyright  Provisions 

in Trade Deals: A Bird’s-eye View. (2019). 

[23]  Netwrix.  2019.  2018  IT  Risks  Report.  http://www.netwrix.com/go/ 

[29]  Eric     Rosenbaum.     2018. 

1      in      5      corporations      say 
China   has   stolen   their   IP   within    the    last    year:    CNBC 
CFO     survey. 
https://www.cnbc.com/2019/02/28/ 
1-in-5-companies-say-china-stole-their-ip-within-the-last-year-cnbc. 
html 

[30]  Donald Trump. 2018. National Cyber Strategy of the United States of 

America. Washington, DC (2018). 

[31]  GC Wilshusen. 2012. Information Security: Cyber Threats Facilitate 
Ability  to Commit Economic Espionage., Pub.  L. No. Technical Report. 
GAO-12-876T. 

research 

 
 
 
