Threat Actor Type 
Inference and 
Characterization within 
Cyber Threat Intelligence

Vasileios Mavroeidis
University of Oslo
Oslo, Norway
vasileim@ifi.uio.no

Ryan Hohimer
DarkLight Inc.
Richland, Washington, United States
ryan.hohimer@darklight.ai 

Tim Casey
Intel Corp.
Chandler, Arizona, United States
tim.casey@intel.com

Audun Jøsang 
University of Oslo
Oslo, Norway
audun.josang@mn.uio.no

Abstract: As the cyber threat landscape is constantly becoming increasingly complex 
and polymorphic, the more critical it becomes to understand the enemy and its modus 
operandi for anticipatory threat reduction. Even though the cyber security community 
has  developed  a  certain  maturity  in  describing  and  sharing  technical  indicators  for 
informing defense components, we still struggle with non-uniform, unstructured, and 
ambiguous higher-level information, such as the threat actor context, thereby limiting 
our ability to correlate with different sources to derive more contextual, accurate, and 
relevant intelligence. We see the need to overcome this limitation in order to increase 
our ability to produce and better operationalize cyber threat intelligence. Our research 
demonstrates how commonly agreed-upon controlled vocabularies for characterizing 
threat actors and their operations can be used to enrich cyber threat intelligence and 
infer new information at a higher contextual level that is explicable and queryable. 
In particular, we present an ontological approach to automatically inferring the types 
of  threat  actors  based  on  their  personas,  understanding  their  nature,  and  capturing 
polymorphism and changes in their behavior and characteristics over time. Such an 
approach not only enables interoperability by providing a structured way and means for 
sharing highly contextual cyber threat intelligence but also derives new information at 

This research work was supported by the research project CyberHunt (Grant No. 303585) 
funded by the Research Council of Norway.

327

 
 
 
 
machine speed and minimizes cognitive biases that manual classification approaches 
entail.

Keywords:  cyber  threat  intelligence,  proactive  cyber  defense,  adversaries,  threat 
actors,  threat  characterization,  cyber  security  automation,  ontology,  knowledge 
representation

1. INTRODUCTION

Cyber  threat  intelligence  (CTI)  is  undeniably  an  essential  element  for  building  a 
robust security posture against adversarial attacks. Establishing a threat intelligence 
program allows security teams to benefit from increased situational awareness, and 
thus minimize their organizations’ attack surfaces. Evidence-based knowledge of both 
adversary  dynamics  and  an  organization’s  attack  surface  can  support  anticipatory 
threat reduction. Organizations follow a process of increasing maturity with respect 
to their cyber capability, transitioning from manual and reactive approaches to more 
automated and proactive. 

Proactive  cyber  defense  is  intelligence-driven  and  focuses  on  providing  awareness 
and  preparing  an  organization  against  anticipated  attacks.  Every  adversarial  attack 
can  be  decomposed  into  elements  that  provide  information  about  the  who,  what, 
where, when, why, and how. The who, commonly known as attribution, identifies the 
individual,  group,  organization,  or  nation  that  conducted  the  adversarial  operation. 
The what reflects the scope of the attack. The where relates to the attack’s direction, 
such as where it is coming from and its target – an organization, industry, or country. 
The when can be perceived as the timestamp of the attack and can be deterministic 
or  probabilistic.  The  why  is  equivalent  to  motivation  and  designates  the  goals  and 
the  objectives  of  the  adversary.  The  how  is  made  up  of  the  tactics,  techniques, 
and  procedures  (TTPs)  employed  by  the  adversary  for  conducting  the  operation. 
Collectively,  these  factors  provide  insight  into  how  adversaries  plan,  conduct,  and 
sustain their operations.

Attribution is typically a challenging task requiring direct evidence through principled 
and systematic analysis which correlates multiple internal and external data sources 
and threat intelligence. Such a process identifies and maps TTPs and associated tools 
and infrastructure to known sources of similar attacks. However, threat actors intend to 
remain unidentified and employ deception and obfuscation techniques that can lead to 
incorrect attribution or weakening the possibility of correctly associating a particular 

328

activity with a known adversary. For example, the Russia-backed group Turla (also 
known as Waterbug) was discovered to be using the infrastructure and malware of 
APT34  (also  known  as  OilRig),  an  Iranian  threat  group  [1].  Nevertheless,  many 
times, a threat actor profile is created and linked to one or more adversarial operations 
based on common identifiable properties without actual attribution, meaning that the 
adversary’s real-world identity remains unknown.

Capturing high-level information, such as the motives behind an adversarial operation 
and contextualizing technical findings; for example, by estimating the sophistication 
level, skills, and resources needed to plan and execute the attack, can characterize the 
perpetrator and infer its nature even when direct attribution has not been achieved. 
The  opposite  is  also  plausible.  The  nature  of  a  perpetrator  reflects  its  capability, 
persistence,  and  motives.  In  addition,  in  a  threat  landscape  that  has  become  very 
diversified and hybridized, the importance of portraying adversaries and their nature 
as  threat  actor  types  is  apparent.  Threat  actors  are  continuously  evolving  and  are 
becoming  polymorphic  with  multiple  motivations  and  goals.  Existing  approaches 
in characterizing threat actors and their operations mostly fall under the category of 
regular intelligence reports that fail to capture information in a specific representation 
format that both humans and machines can interpret. On the other side, lies purely 
technical information intended to be consumed directly by cyber defense products.

A  wide  range  of  threat  actor  types  exists,  ranging  from  disgruntled  employees  to 
organized  cyber  crime  and  nation-state-backed  groups.  Threat  actors  have  specific 
traits common to most of their behaviors. For example, an employee with a grudge 
against their organization is motivated by disgruntlement. In contrast, a state-sponsored 
group may aim to achieve dominance over another nation for geopolitical reasons. To 
operationalize this type of characterization, we need to satisfy two criteria. First, the 
definitions  of  actor  types  must  be  unambiguous,  and  second,  we  must  characterize 
them using a set of attributes that enables robust, reliable enumeration and inference.

This research reflects the operational and strategic benefits derived from semantically 
portraying threat actors as threat actor types (e.g., nation-state, hacktivist, terrorist, 
organized cyber  crime) to  understand  the  actors’  nature and  capture  polymorphism 
and changes in their behavior and characteristics over time. Furthermore, we present 
an ontological system for threat actor type inference which relies on a standard set of 
attributes for characterizing threat actors and their operations. Axioms (expressions) 
capture  domain  knowledge  regarding  the  composition  of  threat  actor  types  based 
on  their  defining  attributes.  The  presented  approach  can  augment  existing  static 
enumerative approaches for threat actor type classification with a flexible generative 
system based on the logic encapsulated in the ontologies. Such an approach enables 
machine  understanding  and  logical  reasoning  based  on  that  understanding  with 

329

transparent  and  explicable  results.  The  proof-of-concept  ontology  we  engineered 
utilizes Casey’s Threat Agent Library (TAL) [2]. The original TAL typology has been 
refined and can be updated further to reflect a more contemporary description of threat 
actor types and their defining attributes.

A  semantically  expressed  threat  actor  typology  based  on  a  set  of  standard 
characterization attributes provides the following advantages.

•  Based  on  commonly  agreed-upon  definitions,  a  machine-understandable 
interpretation  of  threat  actor  types  and  their  defining  attributes  eliminates 
ambiguity regarding their meaning by annotating their unique characteristics. 
The term commonly above refers to the need for interoperability. A standard 
vocabulary and representation for threat actor types can be integrated across 
different  technologies,  such  as  threat  intelligence  platforms  and  threat 
intelligence sharing languages, and used when generating threat reports. For 
example, people often interpret seemingly simple terms such as hacktivist 
differently. Correlating a threat actor type with an operation is then subject 
to fallacies when the semantics for what comprises a particular type are not 
in  place.  This  makes  shareable  information  inaccurate  and  contradictory 
since different entities may have different interpretations of the same term 
leading to inconsistent threat actor profiles.

•  Representing domain knowledge in a declarative form, such as axioms and 
facts, can enable automatic inference via the ability of machines to reach a 
conclusion based on evidence. In this research, axioms capture the unique 
attribute combinations that characterize different threat actor types. Using 
a description logics reasoner, also known as an inference engine, instances 
of  threat  actors  can  be  programmatically  examined  to  infer  their  type. 
Automatic  inference  also  speeds  up  traditional  analytical  processes  that 
require competing hypotheses about the adversary’s type to be tested.

• 

Polymorphism and changes in threat actor behavior over time are becoming 
common,  with  adversaries  being  influenced  by  different  motivations  and 
goals. Some threat actors evolve in nature and gradually engage in larger-
scale and more complex operations. In contrast, others pause their operations, 
disappear, or even go through organizational changes like establishing new 
units. It is essential for the threat intelligence community to recognize and 
formally represent polymorphism and behavioral changes over time so that 
threat actor profiles can evidentially account for more than one threat actor 
type (Figure 1). For example, as presented in Section 5, the state-sponsored 
Lazarus Group has engaged in activities not only motivated by geopolitical 

330

reasons  to  achieve  dominance  over  other  nations  by  conducting  stealthy 
cyber-espionage  campaigns  but  also  for  nationalistic  reasons  and  revenge 
by  engaging  in  destructive  hacking,  as  well  as  for  financially  motivated 
reasons  by  conducting  bank  heists  possibly  to  fund  their  operations.  As 
discussed  later,  available  threat  actor  knowledge  bases  appear  to  fail  to 
capture  polymorphism  and  behavioral  changes,  resulting  in  monolithic 
representations  that  lack  evidence-based  relationships  concerning  the 
derivation  of  their  characterization.  In  addition,  most  of  the  time,  the 
characterizations  are  based  on  proprietary  works  that  are  also  ambiguous 
due  to  nonexistent  or  insufficient  definitions. Ambiguity  and  imprecision 
create confusion and diminish the value of intelligence in cyber operations.

FIGURE 1: SEMANTIC MODELING OF THREAT ACTOR POLYMORPHISM

•  The definition and utilization of characterization attributes (e.g., motivations, 
goals, objectives, visibility) can contextually enrich cyber threat intelligence 
and  enable  granular  querying  of  higher  contextual  precision  to  answer 
complex  questions.  The  derived  intelligence  can  provide  defenders  with 
increased situational awareness and thus allow them to better prioritize their 
defense efforts according to their most relevant threats.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the Threat Agent 
Library [2] that was referenced to create a prototype ontology for threat actor type 
inference,  and  presents  and  analyzes  different  threat  actor  knowledge  bases  with 
respect to how they handle high-level contextual information in terms of ambiguity, 
structured shareability, explainability, and most importantly operationalization ability. 
Additionally, Section 2 discusses how the Structured Threat Information eXpression 
(STIX)  language  deals  with  interpreting  threat  actor  polymorphism.  Section  3 

331

discusses knowledge representation and ontology engineering within the cyber threat 
intelligence  domain,  and  annotates  how  ontology  inference  can  provide  defenders 
with  additional  information  and  insights  at  machine  speed.  Section  4  presents  an 
ontology  for  threat  actor  characterization  and  threat  actor  type  inference.  Section 
5  validates  the  proposed  concept’s  efficacy  and  presents  a  use-case  analysis  where 
the ontology presented in Section 4 is used to infer threat actor types automatically. 
Furthermore,  Section  5  demonstrates  the  potential  of  characterization  attributes 
in  providing  highly  contextual  and  queryable  cyber  threat  intelligence.  Finally,  
Section 6 concludes the paper.

2. BACKGROUND INFORMATION

A. Threat Agent Library
Introduced  in  2007,  the Threat Agent  Library  (TAL)  [2]  is  a  set  of  definitions  and 
descriptions to represent significant threat agent categories, or as termed in this paper, 
threat actor types. The TAL was developed to support risk management processes by 
simplifying the identification of threat agent archetypes that pose the most significant 
risk  to  specific  assets  (Figure  2).  Based  on  the  available  information  on  each 
archetype class, an organization can get an insight into current adversarial activities 
and  consequently  take  action  to  improve  its  security  posture. The  library  (Table  I) 
enumerates twenty-one archetypes (e.g., government spy, radical activist, untrained 
employee,  disgruntled  employee)  and  their  associated  defining  attributes:  access, 
outcome, limits, resources, skills, objective, visibility, and motivation. The defining 
attributes reflect the typical characteristics of each threat actor type.

FIGURE 2: RISK ASSESSMENT USING THE THREAT AGENT LIBRARY

This  research  presents  a  proof-of-concept  ontological  representation  of  TAL,  with 
minor improvements, for automatically inferring threat actor types from cyber threat 
intelligence instances (objects). The decision to use TAL is based on its assessment of 
combinations of characterization attributes that uniquely identify different threat actor 
types. Further, we emphasize the importance of having a set of standard characterization 
attributes to contextualize cyber threat intelligence, thereby making it more actionable 

332

and relevant. We also argue that modeling approaches should be temporal-based to 
capture threat actor polymorphism and behavioral changes over time. As presented 
in the next sections, available threat actor knowledge bases struggle to capture such 
formalisms resulting in contextual loss and ambiguity.

B. Threat Actor Characterization Using STIX 2.1
Structured Threat Information eXpression (STIX) is a schema that defines a taxonomy 
for cyber threat intelligence. We discuss and analyze STIX version 2.1 [3] for two 
reasons. First, because of its ability to describe threat actors, threat actor activity, and 
their  associated  characteristics  in  a  machine-readable  format,  and  second,  because 
it has been embraced as the standard representation format for sharing cyber threat 
intelligence in a structured manner. 

The  STIX  Threat  Actor  object  aggregates  information  about  threat  actors,  such 
as  their  goals,  motivations,  sophistication,  resource-level,  and  type.  Additionally, 
it  utilizes relationship objects to  reference objects  that represent  the  actual identity 
behind a threat actor (be it a human or organization), the tools that the actor has been 
known to use or used in a specific attack, the patterns of attack that the actor is known 
to follow, the location where the actor is believed to be, infrastructure both owned 
and compromised that the actor is known to use, as well as attributes about the actor 
that help characterize them. This is an object of high value in proactive cyber defense 
where strategic, operational, and tactical cyber threat intelligence play a significant 
role. Figure 3 presents the STIX threat actor object with its characterization attributes 
and relationships with other objects.

FIGURE 3: STIX THREAT ACTOR OBJECT

333

A critical aspect that the STIX threat actor object does not account for is capturing 
and semantically representing behavioral polymorphism in a temporal manner, as in 
the case where a threat actor is conducting different operations than what is known, 
reflecting  a  possible  change  to  its  primary  or  secondary  motivations  and  goals. 
Furthermore, the characterization attributes of the threat actor object do not hold any 
direct relationships with other objects to justify the existing characterization. This is 
especially the case when a threat actor object has more than one value populated for an 
attribute (e.g., a threat actor that accounts for more than one threat actor type). Also, 
some  of  the  STIX  vocabularies  used  for  characterizing  adversaries  are  ambiguous 
because  they  lack  definitions. The  generation  of  the  threat  actor  type  attribute  is  a 
manual and subjective process prone to human fallacies. For example, a threat actor 
object  with  the  populated  threat  actor  type  value  nation-state  and  resource-level 
individual (limited resources) is unlikely to be correct but is deemed a valid STIX 
statement. This reflects the advantage of utilizing an automated generative threat actor 
type inference approach (Section 4) for augmenting existing manual approaches.

C. Threat Actor Knowledge Bases
A knowledge base is a collection of information about a particular subject area that 
can  be  used  to  support  decision-making  and  draw  conclusions. A  knowledge  base 
with  information  about  threat  actors’  capabilities,  goals  and  motivations,  and  past 
and ongoing activities can inform prevention and response strategies. Unstructured 
knowledge bases can be a simple aggregating system such as a collection of threat 
reports. At  a  basic  level,  the  development  of  a  structured  knowledge  base  requires 
a schema that defines its structural composition, information sources for populating 
the  knowledge  base,  and  optimally  controlled  vocabularies  for  additional  context 
and granular searchability. Describing a threat actor with high-confidence demands 
processing,  correlating,  analyzing,  and  integrating  different  relevant  intelligence 
sources.

This section presents a set of open-source threat actor knowledge bases, and analyzes 
their structural composition with respect to how easy it is to operationalize them in the 
context of finding information relevant to our needs. 

MITRE ATT&CK [4] is a knowledge base of known adversary tactics and techniques 
based  on  openly  available  analyzed  activity.  It  is  a  valuable  resource  to  better 
understand observed adversarial behavior, and it can be used for multiple purposes, 
such  as  for  adversary  emulation,  behavioral  analytics,  cyber  threat  intelligence 
enrichment, defense gap assessment, red teaming, and SOC maturity assessment [5]. 
ATT&CK matrices exist about adversary behavior targeting enterprise environments, 
mobile,  and  industrial  control  systems.  Moreover,  information  pertinent  to  the 
software adversaries use, mitigation techniques, procedure examples, and detection 

334

recommendations  are  also  available.  Further,  the  associated  PRE-ATT&CK  matrix 
focuses on operational techniques known to be utilized before an attacker exploits a 
particular target network or system. 

Of particular importance is the available ATT&CK Groups knowledge base, a list of 
known adversaries and their associated techniques and software tools. Figure 4 shows 
the main components of ATT&CK and their relationships.

FIGURE 4: ATT&CK MODEL RELATIONSHIPS – REDESIGNED FROM [5]

One way of getting started with ATT&CK is identifying adversarial groups relevant 
to  an  organization,  based  on  whom  they  have  previously  targeted,  such  as  similar 
organizations  within  the  same  sector,  and  then  look  at  their  TTPs  [6].  TTPs  that 
are  commonly  used  can  be  prioritized  for  detection  and  mitigation.  However,  the 
ATT&CK  Groups  knowledge  base  lacks  proper  structurality  and  relationships 
between adversaries and their targets and between adversaries and their motivations. 
Information  such  as  targeted  countries  and  sectors  and  threat  group  motivations 
is  embedded  within  the  general  description  of  a  group  and  can  be  unstructurally 
searched  using  the ATT&CK  portal.  However,  the  vocabularies  utilized  to  specify 
a  group’s  targets  and  their  motivations  are  not  available,  limiting  searchability, 
and  consequently,  the  ability  to  extract  more  relevant  information.  Synergistically, 
structuring the available information, establishing relationships between concepts, and 
utilizing a set of standard characterization attributes and other common vocabularies 
can facilitate more informed and targeted queries over the knowledge base, resulting 
in getting more relevant, and maybe otherwise missed TTPs to prioritize.

335

The description of APT191 is a good example of unstructured populated information 
regarding industries the group has targeted.

APT19 is a Chinese-based threat group that has targeted a variety of industries, 
including  defense,  finance,  energy,  pharmaceutical,  telecommunications, 
high tech, education, manufacturing, and legal services. In 2017, a phishing 
campaign was used to target seven law and investment firms.

Similarly,  the  description  of APT382  is  a  good  example  of  unstructured  populated 
information regarding a group’s motivations.

APT38 is a financially motivated threat group that is backed by the North 
Korean  regime. The  group  mainly  targets  banks  and  financial  institutions 
and has targeted more than 16 organizations in at least 13 countries since at 
least 2014.

The  Threat  Actor  Encyclopedia  [7]  is  an  effort  from  Thailand’s  Computer 
Emergency Response Team (ThaiCERT) to create a knowledge base of threat group 
profiles  by  aggregating,  processing,  and  structuring  open-source  intelligence.  As 
in  other  efforts,  we  observed  ambiguity  and  confusion  regarding  the  interpretation 
and  use  of  characterization  attributes.  For  instance,  the  threat  actor  encyclopedia’s 
motivation vocabulary includes the terms information theft and espionage, financial 
crime, financial gain, and sabotage and destruction. Definitions of the above terms 
have not been provided, making it difficult, for example, to understand the contextual 
difference  between  financial  gain  and  financial  crime.  It  can  also  be  argued  that 
information theft and espionage, sabotage and destruction, and financial crime are 
not motivation types but operation types or intended effects.

The  Malware  Information  Sharing  Platform  (MISP)  is  an  open-source  threat 
intelligence  platform  for  collecting,  storing,  and  sharing  information  about  cyber 
security  incidents  [8].  Due  to  its  open-source  nature  and  modular  architecture,  the 
platform can integrate intelligence clusters that, in many cases, are community-driven 
efforts  and  can  be  used  to  enrich  events  and  attributes.  The  MISP  Threat  Actor 
cluster3 is a knowledge base of threat groups. The cluster’s structural composition is 
an array of threat group objects that capture information related to the groups, such as 
name and related aliases, a description, targeted countries and sectors (e.g., private, 
military, government), their affiliated countries and sponsors, attribution confidence, 
incident types (e.g., espionage, sabotage, or defacement), references relating to the 
captured  knowledge,  relations  with  other  groups  and  operations,  and  associated 
malware. A  subset  of  the  elements  has  been  derived  from  the  Council  on  Foreign 

1 
2 
3 

https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0073/
https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0082/
https://github.com/MISP/misp-galaxy/blob/main/clusters/threat-actor.json

336

Relations Cyber Operations4 vocabulary used for reporting cyber incidents. Like the 
rest of the knowledge bases investigated, the MISP Threat Actor cluster could benefit 
from  introducing  a  more  expressive  structured  representation.  Currently,  multiple 
characterization attributes are included only in the general description of a threat actor 
object, making it difficult to parse the information via automated means. For instance, 
in the example below, the description captures information regarding the motivations, 
objectives, targeted countries, and the types of operations a group has been observed 
conducting. 

Libyan  Scorpions  is  a  malware  operation  in  use  since  September  2015 
and  operated  by  a  politically  motivated  group  whose  main  objective  is 
intelligence  gathering,  spying  on  influential  and  political  figures,  and 
operating an espionage campaign within Libya.

Moreover,  the  use  of  different  non-standardized  vocabularies  for  enriching  the 
knowledge  base  and  the  integration  of  different  intelligence  sources  for  providing 
additional context introduces ambiguity and confusion. The two shortened examples 
presented below indicate the importance of utilizing a set of standard characterization 
attributes with accurate definitions and vocabularies for optimally resolving ambiguity 
and operationalizing the provided intelligence.

In  the  example  below,  espionage  is  used  both  to  describe  an  incident  type  and  a 
motive. Additionally, definitions for the available terms are not in place, increasing 
the probability of misusing the vocabularies. 

{
   “description”: “Anchor Panda is an adversary that CrowdStrike has tracked 
extensively over the last year targeting both civilian and military maritime 
operations...”,
   “meta”: {
      “attribution-confidence”: “50”,
      “cfr-suspected-state-sponsor”: “China”,
      “cfr-suspected-victims”: [“United States”, “...”],
      “cfr-target-category”: [“Government”, “...”],
      “cfr-type-of-incident”: “Espionage”,
      “country”: “CN”,
      “motive”: “Espionage”,
      “refs”: [“...”],
      “synonyms”: [“APT14”]
   },
   “value”: “Anchor Panda”
}

4 

https://www.cfr.org/cyber-operations/  

337

In the example below, the motive of the group is defined as Hacktivists-Nationalists, 
which is reminiscent of a threat actor/group type rather than a motive that influences 
the actions of an actor.

{
   “description”: “Turkish nationalist hacktivist group that has been active for 
roughly one year...The group carries out distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) 
attacks and defacements against the sites of news organizations and governments 
perceived to be critical of Turkey’s policies or leadership, and purports to act in 
defense of Islam”,
   “meta”: {
      “attribution-confidence”: “50”,
      “country”: “TR”,
      “motive”: “Hacktivists-Nationalists”,
      “synonyms”: [“Lion Soldiers Team”, “...”]
   },
   “value”: “Aslan Neferler Tim”
}

3. KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION AND ONTOLOGY

Knowledge  representation  conceptualizes  an  understanding  of  the  world.  It  can 
provide  a  view  of  a  particular  domain  of  interest  and  capture  that  knowledge  in  a 
formal representation so that a computer system can utilize it to solve complex tasks, 
such as inferring new critical information. An ontology is a formalism of knowledge 
representation  that  encodes  knowledge  about  a  particular  domain.  An  ontology  is 
machine-understandable,  holds  formal  semantics  that  carry  meaning,  and  allows 
for  reasoning.  Formal  semantics  and  logic  ensure  that  the  meaning  of  a  concept  is 
unambiguous. An  ontology  is  defined  using  a  knowledge  representation  language, 
such  as  the  Web  Ontology  Language  (OWL).  An  OWL  ontology  consists  of  the 
following  three  syntactic  categories  [9]:  a  sequence  of  logical  axioms  (statements) 
that are asserted to be true in the domain being described, expressions that represent 
complex notions in the domain being described (e.g., a class expression describes a 
set of individuals in terms of the restrictions on the individuals’ characteristics), and 
entities such as classes, properties, and individuals, that constitute the basic elements 
of  an  ontology. A  class  represents  a  concept  and  provides  the  means  for  grouping 
resources  with  similar  characteristics.  For  instance,  a  threat  actor  class  can  group 
all  known  adversaries.  Subclasses  represent  concepts  that  are  more  specific  than  a 
superclass.  For  instance,  the  class  threat  actor  can  decompose  into  subclasses  that 

338

capture a threat actor’s intent, such as hostile or nonhostile, and again decompose into 
subclasses that define hostile or nonhostile types, such as nation-state, civil activist, 
and  untrained  employee.  Taking  the  Lazarus  Group  as  an  example  and  based  on 
available information, it can be classified as a nation-state adversary, a subclass of the 
hostile class. The hostile class is a subclass of the threat actor type class, indicating 
that  the  nation-state-backed  group  Lazarus  is  an  instance  of  a  hostile  threat  actor. 
The functional syntax of this example is shown below, with Figure 5 providing an 
illustration. 

Declaration ( Class( :ThreatActorType ) )
Declaration ( Class( :Hostile ) )
Declaration ( Class( :NonHostile ) )
Declaration ( Class( :NationState ) )
Declaration ( Class( :UntrainedEmployee ) )
SubClassOf ( :Hostile :ThreatActorType )
SubClassOf ( :NationState :Hostile )
SubClassOf ( :NonHostile :ThreatActorType )
SubClassOf ( :UntrainedEmployee :NonHostile )
Declaration ( NamedIndividual( :LazarusGroup ) )
ClassAssertion ( :NationState :LazarusGroup )

FIGURE 5: EXAMPLE ILLUSTRATION OF ONTOLOGY CLASSES AND SUBCLASSES

339

Properties  define  relationships  between  individuals  (object  properties)  or  between 
individuals and data type literals (data type properties). For instance, as described in 
the example provided in Section 2.D, APT38 is a financially motivated threat group 
that  is  backed  by  the  North  Korean  regime.  In  addition, APT38  is  also  known  as 
Stardust  Chollima  by  Crowdstrike  [10]  and  as  BlueNoroff  by  Kaspersky  [11]. The 
relation  of  APT38  with  a  particular  defining  motivation  and  other  aliases  can  be 
captured  by  creating  relevant  object  properties  and  formulating  semantic  triples. A 
triple is a set of three entities that codify a statement in the form of subject-predicate-
object.  This  principle  is  illustrated  in  Figure  6,  where  the  arcs  represent  relations 
(object properties – predicates), and the ellipticals represent individuals.

FIGURE 6: SEMANTIC REPRESENTATION OF APT38

OWL  offers  expressive  constructs  for  reasoning  based  on  description  logics.  For 
example,  the  defined  object  property  known-as  is  bidirectional  when  declared 
symmetric  and  allows  traversing  information  when  declared  transitive.  Property 
declarations can compensate for missing arcs in a knowledge base. A reasoner can 
parse  the  knowledge  base  and  infer  new  information.  In  the  example  illustrated  in 
Figure 6, the symmetric property known-as allows inferring that APT38 is known as 
BlueNoroff and the opposite, such as that BlueNoroff is known as APT38. Furthermore, 
because  of  transitivity,  a  reasoner  infers  that  StarDust  Chollima  is  also  known  as 
APT38  (dashed  arc)  even  though  it  was  not  directly  defined.  Ontological  axioms, 
expressions, and constructs can infer information based on causal relationships. For 
instance, a reasoner will not infer that a threat actor is of nation-state type when the 
resource-level property is not populated with the value government, according to the 
class expression that encodes what a nation-state threat actor comprises. 

340

4. A DOMAIN ONTOLOGY FOR THREAT 
ACTOR PROFILING 

This  section  presents  a  domain  ontology  for  threat  actor  profiling  and  actor  type 
inference  based  on  the  Threat  Agent  Library  (TAL)  [2].  TAL  defines  threat  actor 
type attributes through controlled vocabularies, such as motivation, access, outcome, 
limits, resources, skills, objectives, and visibility, and when used collectively, these 
identify the unique characteristics of each threat actor type. Threat actor types refer 
to  categories  that  adversaries  can  be  classified  into,  such  as  spy,  civil  activist,  and 
nation-state. In TAL, threat agent denotes a class of threat actor and is synonymous 
with threat actor type. The definitions of the TAL terms can be found in [2] and [12].

To develop the ontology, we slightly refined TAL to increase its expressiveness and 
resolve ambiguities that could otherwise affect ontological assertions and inferencing. 
TAL’s  threat  actor  types  and  their  associated  defining  attributes  are  shown  in  
Table I. The table’s key takeaways are: TAL comprises twenty-one unique threat actor 
type  categories  and  their  associated  characteristics  based  on  eight  attributes.  The 
motivation attribute was added to the library in later work [12]. The shaded cells in 
the second column of Table I refer to either minor nonbreaking attribute modifications 
that resolve ambiguity concerning their ontological use, or attribute updates that allow 
for more flexible use. For instance, the individualistic motivation Personal Financial 
Gain has been replaced with Financial Gain to allow more flexible characterization, 
meaning  that  the  property  can  now  be  used  to  characterize  groups  and  not  only 
individuals,  such  as  organized  cyber  crime  groups  that  operate  mainly  for  profit, 
indicating financially motivated actors.

341

TABLE I: THREAT AGENT LIBRARY – REDESIGNED FROM [2]

342

A high-level illustration of the ontology is presented in Figure 7. The threat actor type 
and  characterization  attribute  classes  enumerate  possible  values  using  individuals 
(instances). For example, the visibility attribute comprises four individuals that define 
different levels of visibility: clandestine, covert, opportunistic, and overt.

FIGURE 7: HIGH-LEVEL 
REPRESENTATION OF 
ONTOLOGY CLASSES AND 
ASSOCIATED INDIVIDUALS

343

Object properties relate individuals to individuals. For example, an individual (object) 
that describes an adversarial operation can have a relationship to a motivation that is 
believed to influence the attack, such as the desire to achieve dominance. This can be 
expressed using the object property hasDefiningMotivation, deriving a semantic triple 
(subject-hasDefiningMotivation-dominance).

In  addition,  the  ontology  can  automatically  infer  threat  actor  types,  decreasing  the 
human  biases  entailed  in  traditional  manual  classification  and  decision-making 
processes, by capturing the existing domain knowledge within ontology expressions 
(axioms) that characterize threat actor types based on combinations of the attributes 
mentioned earlier. An example expression that captures the combination of attributes 
comprising a nation-state-backed actor (government cyberwarrior based on TAL) is 
shown below in Manchester syntax.

((hasVisibilityAttribute some Visibility) or
(hasVisibilityAttribute value visibility:dontCare))
and ((hasObjectiveAttribute value objective:damage) or
(hasObjectiveAttribute value objective:deny) or
(hasObjectiveAttribute value objective:destroy))
and ((hasOutcomeAttribute value outcome:damage) or
(hasOutcomeAttribute value outcome:embarrassment))
and (hasAccessAttribute value access:external)
and (hasDefiningMotivationAttribute value motivation:dominance)
and (hasLimitsAttribute value limits:extraLegalMajor)
and (hasResourcesAttribute value resources:government)
and (hasSkillsAttribute value skills:adept)

Objects with populated attributes that fulfill expression requirements (equivalency) are 
classified as threat actor types in an automated manner near real-time by a description 
logics  reasoner.  As  demonstrated  in  Section  5,  polymorphic  threat  groups  can  be 
attributed  to  more  than  one  threat  actor  type,  compared  to  traditional  enumerative 
approaches that use mutually exclusive lists and lead to contextual loss. The suggested 
approach  does  not  prohibit  an  analyst  from  manually  classifying  a  threat  actor  as 
a  specific  type  or  populating  other  attributes  (open  world  assumption).  Changes  to 
the defining characterizations of threat actor types can be reflected by updating the 
ontology  expressions.  To  enable  temporality,  the  characterization  attributes  of  a 
threat actor instance are populated using an individual object (instance) that connects 
with other related instances (e.g., malicious activity or identity) using relationships  
(Figure 8). Temporality-based knowledge representation can justifiably reflect shifts 
and polymorphism in adversarial behavior.

344

FIGURE 8: TEMPORALITY-ENHANCED SEMANTIC MODELING OF THREAT ACTOR POLYMORPHISM 

5. THE LAZARUS GROUP USE CASE

In this section, we utilize the ontology presented in Section 4 to model the Lazarus 
Group for the purpose of inferring threat actor types automatically. We demonstrate 
how a standardized set of characterization attributes for describing adversary capability 
and  behavior  makes  cyber  threat  intelligence  more  contextual  and  queryable  and 
makes it possible to derive new information at machine speed by utilizing a reasoner. 
We apply a top-down modeling approach to open-source information about operations 
believed to have been conducted by the Lazarus Group. Even though an attribution 
of high confidence has been achieved and the capabilities and sophistication of the 
Lazarus Group are known, we characterize the operations (use cases) based on their 
individual characteristics. A top-down modeling approach uses existing knowledge and 
historical data to create a threat actor profile and is more accurate and contextual than 
a bottom-up approach, which derives intelligence from early-stage ongoing analyses 
of cyber attacks. Nevertheless, both modeling methods should follow an evidence-

345

based  approach  by  establishing  direct  relationships  between  the  characterization 
attributes and the instances of operations the information has been derived for robust, 
explicable, and temporal-enabled threat intelligence.

According to the MITRE ATT&CK Groups knowledge base5:

The Lazarus Group is a threat group that has been attributed to the North 
Korean  government.  North  Korean  groups  are  known  to  have  significant 
overlap, and the name Lazarus Group is known to encompass a broad range 
of activity. Some organizations use the name Lazarus group to refer to any 
activity attributed to North Korea, whereas other organizations track North 
Korean clusters or groups such as Bluenoroff, APT37, and APT38 separately.

According to the Council on Foreign Relations6:

The  Lazarus  Group  targets  and  compromises  entities  primarily  in  South 
Korea and South Korean interests for espionage, disruption, and destruction. 
It  has  also  been  known  to  conduct  cyber  operations  for  financial  gain, 
including targeting cryptocurrency exchanges.

The  descriptions  above  are  indicative  of  a  polymorphic  threat.  Based  on  TAL,  an 
ontological  equivalency  expression  of  a  nation-state  threat  actor  (government 
cyberwarrior) identifies the following characteristics:

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

access → external
visibility → any-opportunistically
objective → deny-destroy-damage
limits → extra-legal, major
outcome → damage, embarrassment
defining motivation → dominance
skills → adept
resources → government

Establishing  formal  threat  actor  type  definitions  using  a  set  of  machine-readable 
characterization attributes equips defenders with a queryable representation that can 
derive explicable intelligence.

The Lazarus Group is known to have been active for more than a decade and is an 
example of an adversary that has exhibited polymorphism and increased operational 
sophistication over time. The nation-state-backed group has engaged in multiple cyber 
espionage, destructive, disruptive, and financially motivated operations. For example, 

5 
6 

https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0032/
https://www.cfr.org/cyber-operations/lazarus-group

346

the DarkSeoul attack on March 20, 2013, targeted South Korean news agencies and 
banks, causing significant damage to the affected entities by wiping the hard drives 
of tens of thousands of computers. At an early stage, Symantec stated that the actual 
motives  for  the  attacks  were  unclear  and  added  that  they  might  be  part  of  either  a 
clandestine attack or the work of nationalistic hacktivists taking issues into their own 
hands in response to political tensions on the Korean Peninsula [13]. In a report [14], 
McAfee, after analysis, remarked that an attack which was initially perceived as an 
unsophisticated incident of cyber vandalism or hacktivism had actually grown out of 
a sophisticated multi-year covert cyber espionage campaign that this time was indeed 
intended  to  damage,  cause  disruption,  and  potentially  harvest  information.  Table  I 
identifies the defining characteristics of a cyber vandal and radical activist according 
to TAL.

The  threat  actors  NewRomanic  Cyber Army Team  and Whois Team,  who  claimed 
responsibility for the attacks in South Korea, were later discovered to be a fabrication 
to mask the real source of the attack. In addition, Marpaung and Lee explained that 
DarkSeoul was a low-tech threat compared to advanced persistent threats that nation-
state groups typically perform [15].

By  structuring  the  information  about  the  DarkSeoul  attack,  the  following 
characterization  attributes  emerge.  The  threat  actor  was  external  to  the  targeted 
entities (access → external) and conducted a large-scale covert operation (visibility 
→ covert) which caused destruction, disruption, and possibly harvested information 
(objective → destroy, damage, and maybe copy). Based on the attack type and impact, 
we can conclude that the actor took no account of the law (limits → extra-legal major) 
and that its primary goal was large-scale data destruction with a sequential impact on 
the affected entities’ operations (outcome → damage). This type of attack reflects a 
motivation to achieve dominance over another party, or as in this case, over another 
nation (defining motivation → dominance). Furthermore, what was initially perceived 
as  an  unsophisticated  attack  due  to  the  raw  destructive  nature  of  the  payload  was, 
in  fact,  a  coordinated  strike  against  multiple  entities  delivered  with  precision  and 
planning commonly associated with state-sponsored intrusion campaigns [14] (skills 
→ adept), (resources → government). Based on the above characterization, a reasoner 
would infer that a government cyberwarrior conducted the operation, otherwise known 
as nation-state threat actor type. It is worth noting that the contextual characterization 
of the DarkSeoul attack in this particular case takes into account information about a 
set of individual attacks all described in one object, thus indicating a relatively high-
level sophistication, which in turn is a factor for estimating the skills and resources 
required  for  conducting  the  attacks.  Exemplifying  each  incident  separately  would 
populate objects that a reasoner would infer as the threat actor type (cyber) vandal. 
The attributes such as motivation, outcome, objectives, and visibility highly overlap 

347

between the vandal and government cyberwarrior (nation-state) types. Other attributes 
such  as  skills,  resources,  and  limits  are  dissimilar  and  annotate  the  differences  in 
capability between the two types. The attribution of the DarkSeoul attack confirmed 
that it was planned and executed by a nation-state threat actor.

Another similar incident occurred on June 25, 2013, on the 63rd anniversary of the 
start of the Korean War (1950–1953), which resulted in the division of the Korean 
peninsula. On that day, multiple attacks reminiscent of nationalistic hacktivism, a type 
of patriotic activism, targeted the Blue House, government ministries, and media by 
defacing web pages, stealing data, and corrupting servers. One of the distributed denial-
of-service (DDoS) attacks observed against the South Korean government websites 
was directly linked to malware used in the DarkSeoul attack [16]. The ontology in 
Section 4 does not account for a nationalistic hacktivist threat actor type that would 
ideally characterize this operation’s actor. The defining attributes of each threat actor 
type describe their subtle differences. For example, even though the characterization 
attributes  of  the  nationalistic  hacktivist  type  would  highly  overlap  with  the  radical 
activist type in terms of outcomes and objectives, nationalistic hacktivists are mainly 
motivated by the desire to achieve dominance over another nation because of their 
loyalty and strong devotion to their own nation or the leaders of the nation. In contrast, 
a  radical  activist  operates  for  more  ideological  and  political  reasons  to  replace  the 
fundamental  principles  of  a  society  or  a  political  system.  In  addition,  nationalistic 
hacktivists would be resource-constrained compared to a nation-state-backed group. 
As explained in Section 3, the definition of new actor types and updating existing ones 
should be a standards-based task where the security community agrees on explainable 
characterization attribute-based descriptions for promoting and facilitating universal 
adoption.

In November 2014, Sony Pictures Entertainment (SPE) was attacked with malware 
resulting in information theft which was later used for extortion regarding canceling 
the release of a film depicting an assassination plot against North Korean leader Kim 
Jong Un. The stolen data included employee personal information, company emails, 
usernames and passwords, details of SPE’s internal IT infrastructure, and unreleased 
movies.  In  addition,  the  attackers  succeeded  in  rendering  thousands  of  computers 
inoperable  by  deleting  the  master  file  table  and  the  master  boot  record  from  hard 
drives [17]. The perpetrators identified themselves as Guardians of Peace (GOP). The 
attack, which was initially believed to be the work of a hacktivist group or disgruntled 
insiders, was later attributed to the Lazarus Group [18]. Based on available information, 
we characterize the operation and derive the following attributes. The Sony incident 
was  a  covert  operation  (visibility  →  covert)  planned  and  executed  by  an  unknown 
external group (access → external) that caused theft of information and damage to 
assets (objective → copy, damage, destroy). The stolen information was used to hurt 

348

the company’s image and resulted in significant financial losses (outcome → damage, 
embarrassment).  The  extortion  demands,  in  addition  to  threatening  emails  sent  to 
Sony  employees,  reflected  a  threat  actor  who  takes  no  account  of  the  law  (limits 
→ extra-legal, major) and an actor who attempts to achieve dominance through its 
actions (defining motivation → dominance). In addition, the threat actor demonstrated 
considerable resources and advanced skills, as indicated by its persistence in Sony’s 
network  and  the  significant  losses  suffered  (skills  →  adept),  (resources  →  at  least 
organization). Based on the above characterization, a reasoner would infer that the 
populated attributes are equivalent to government cyberwarrior or otherwise known 
as a nation-state threat actor type. Nevertheless, the attack could also be understood 
as a form of nationalistic hacktivism because of its context. Interestingly, in the early 
stage of the attack and before the explicit demand to withdraw the movie’s theatrical 
release,  some  of  the  targeted  high-ranking  Sony  employees  received  compensation 
requests from the attackers for the damage they had suffered [17]. This could indicate 
a personal financial motivation, irrespective of the group’s primary goal.

The  Lazarus  Group,  being  polymorphic,  has  also  been  observed  to  be  financially 
motivated and has demonstrated highly organized and sophisticated cyber criminal 
behavior by penetrating targets with large financial streams. According to Kaspersky 
[11], Lazarus Group operations are expensive, and financially motivated attacks could 
be a way to better finance them. Chanlett-Avery et al. emphasized that the Lazarus 
Group  engages  in  financially  motivated  attacks  to  raise  revenue  for  the  regime  in 
response to sanctions imposed by the United States and the United Nations Security 
Council  as  a  reaction  to  North  Korea’s  weapons  of  mass  destruction  and  ballistic 
missile programs, as well as human rights abuse [19].

Temporality-based  semantic  representation  and  inference  provide  more  complete, 
queryable, and explainable intelligence and a certain extent of automation in intelligence 
generation  with  respect  to  how  threat  actors  evolve  into  new  behaviors.  Based  on 
the queries that an organization wants to answer, the characterization attributes and 
inferred information (instances) can be used to derive highly relevant and contextual 
cyber  threat  intelligence.  Furthermore,  universally  agreed  unambiguous  definitions 
and vocabularies enable more robust information sharing.

As  illustrated  by  Figure  9,  the  evidence  indicates  that  the  Lazarus  Group  is 
polymorphic and, through its operations, has exhibited behavior and capability aligned 
with organized cyber crime, nationalistic hacktivists, cyber vandals, and nation-state-
backed entities.

349

FIGURE 9: THE POLYMORPHISM OF THE LAZARUS GROUP

6. CONCLUSION

Threat actors are becoming increasingly sophisticated and polymorphic. To understand 
those  hybridized  threats,  defenders  seek  timely,  accurate,  relevant,  and  actionable 
threat intelligence for anticipatory threat reduction. Today’s threat intelligence tends 
to be ambiguous and inadequately structured to track and demystify changes in the 
behavior of actors over time, such as new goals, motivations, and related operations 
and TTPs. Threat actors have an asymmetric information advantage over defenders. 
Before executing a targeted attack, they are well aware of the profiles, infrastructures, 
systems, and applications of their victims. This work laid the foundation for generating 
highly contextual, explicable, processable, and shareable threat actor intelligence that 
can accurately capture, interpret, and explain changes in threat actor behavior and their 
polymorphism over time. In particular, we demonstrated how a set of characterization 
attributes can enrich threat actor information and how, in combination, can enumerate 
their  type.  By  encapsulating  this  knowledge  within  an  ontology,  we  demonstrated 
how a perpetrator’s nature could be inferred automatically using deductive reasoning 
and withhold the relations/semantics that justify the inference.

350

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to express their gratitude to Mr. Paul Patrick from DarkLight 
Inc. for providing comments that helped improve the manuscript.

REFERENCES

[1]   DeepSight Adversary Intelligence Team, “Waterbug: Espionage Group Rolls Out Brand-New Toolset 
in Attacks Against Governments,” Symantec, 2019. Accessed: Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://
symantec-enterprise-blogs.security.com/blogs/threat-intelligence/waterbug-espionage-governments
[2]   T. Casey, “Threat agent library helps identify information security risks,” Intel White Paper, 2007.
[3]   B. Jordan, R. Piazza, and T. Darley, Eds., OASIS Structured Threat Information Expression (STIX™) 

Version 2.1, OASIS – Cyber Threat Intelligence Technical Committee, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://
docs.oasis-open.org/cti/stix/v2.1/cs02/stix-v2.1-cs02.html

[4]   “Adversarial Tactics, Techniques & Common Knowledge (ATT&CK),” MITRE, 2020. Accessed: Jul. 

2020. [Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org

[5]   O. Alexander, M. Belisle, and J. Steele, “MITRE ATT&CK for Industrial Control Systems: Design and 
Philosophy,” 2020. Accessed: Jul. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://collaborate.mitre.org/attackics/img_
auth.php/3/37/ATT%26CK_for_ICS_-_Philosophy_Paper.pdf

[6]   K. Nickels, “Getting Started with ATT&CK: Threat Intelligence,” 2019. Accessed: Jul. 2020. [Online]. 

Available: https://medium.com/mitre-attack/getting-started-with-attack-cti-4eb205be4b2f

[7]   “Threat Group Cards: A Threat Actor Encyclopedia,” ThaiCERT, 2020. Accessed: Jul. 2020. [Online]. 

Available: https://www.thaicert.or.th/downloads/files/Threat_Group_Cards_v2.0.pdf

[8]   C. Wagner, A. Dulaunoy, G. Wagener, and A. Iklody, “Misp: The design and implementation of a 

collaborative threat intelligence sharing platform,” in Proc. 2016 ACM on Workshop on Inf. Sharing and 
Collab. Secur., 2016. 

[9]   B. Motik, P. Patel-Schneider, and B. Parsia, “OWL 2 Web Ontology Language Structural Specification and 

Functional-Style Syntax (Second Edition),” W3C, 2012.

[10]   A. Meyers, “Meet CrowdStrike’s Adversary of the Month for April: STARDUST CHOLLIMA,” 

Crowdstrike, 2018. Accessed: Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.crowdstrike.com/blog/meet-
crowdstrikes-adversary-of-the-month-for-april-stardust-chollima/

[11]   “Lazarus Under The Hood,” Kaspersky, 2017. Accessed: Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://media.
kasperskycontenthub.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/31/2017/04/22070418/Lazarus_Under_The_Hood_
PDF_final.pdf

[12]   T. Casey, “Understanding cyber threat motivations to improve defense,” Intel, 2015.
[13]   A. L. Johnson, “South Korean Banks and Broadcasting Organizations Suffer Major Damage 
from Cyberattack,” 2013. Accessed: Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://community.
broadcom.com/symantecenterprise/communities/community-home/librarydocuments/
viewdocument?DocumentKey=6859f4a7-d5c2-4a81-bbed-dfa70470e9db&CommunityKey=1ecf5f55-
9545-44d6-b0f4-4e4a7f5f5e68&tab=librarydocuments

[14]   R. Sherstobitoff, I. Liba, and J. Walter, “Dissecting Operation Troy: Cyberespionage in South Korea,” 

McAfee, 2013. Accessed: Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.mcafee.com/enterprise/en-us/assets/
white-papers/wp-dissecting-operation-troy.pdf

[15]   J. Marpaung and H. Lee, “Dark Seoul Cyber Attack: Could it be worse?,” in Conf. Indonesian Stud. Assoc. 

in Korea, 2013. 

[16]   A. L. Johnson, “Four Years of DarkSeoul Cyberattacks Against South Korea Continue on Anniversary 
of Korean War,” Broadcom, 2013. Accessed: Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://community.
broadcom.com/symantecenterprise/communities/community-home/librarydocuments/viewdocument?
DocumentKey=edd5c93e-7160-4bf2-a15c-f1c024feb0d7&CommunityKey=1ecf5f55-9545-44d6-b0f4-
4e4a7f5f5e68&tab=librarydocuments

[17]   U.S. District Court, Criminal Charge, North Korean Regime-Backed Programmer Charged in Conspiracy 
to Conduct Multiple Cyberattacks and Intrusions, 2018. Accessed: Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://
www.justice.gov/usao-cdca/press-release/file/1091951/download

351

[18]   “Operation Blockbuster: Unraveling the Long Thread of the Sony Attack,” Novetta, 2016. Accessed: 

Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://operationblockbuster.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Operation-
Blockbuster-Report.pdf

[19]   E. Chanlett-Avery, W. L. Rosen, W. J. Rollins, and A. C. Theohary, “North Korean Cyber Capabilities: In 

Brief,” 2017. Accessed: Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://fas.org/sgp/crs/row/R44912.pdf

352

