Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2020, Wellington 

Ahmad, Maynard, Motahhir & Alshaikh 
Huawei vs T-Mobile: Anatomy of a Cybersecurity Incident 

Teaching Information Security Management Using an 
Incident of Intellectual Property Leakage 
Completed research paper 

Atif Ahmad 
School of Computing and Information Systems 
The University of Melbourne 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia 
Email: atif@unimelb.edu.au 

Sean B. Maynard 
School of Computing and Information Systems 
The University of Melbourne 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia 
Email: seanbm@unimelb.edu.au 

Sameen Motahhir 
Center for Digital Humanities, Department of Languages and Linguistics 
Information Technology University 
Lahore, Pakistan 
Email: sameen.motahhir@itu.edu.pk 

Moneer Alshaikh 
Department of Cybersecurity 
College of Computer Science and Engineering 
University of Jeddah, Saudi Arabia 
Email: malshaikh@uj.edu.sa 

Abstract 

Case-based learning (CBL) is a powerful pedagogical method of creating dialogue between theory and 
practice.  CBL is particularly suited to executive learning as it  instigates critical discussion and draws 
out  relevant  experiences.  In  this  paper  we  used  a  real-world  case  to  teach  Information  Security 
Management to students in Management Information Systems. The real-world  case is described in a 
legal  indictment  (T-mobile  USA  Inc  v.  Huawei  Device  USA  Inc.  and  Huawei  Technologies  Co.  LTD) 
alleging  theft  of 
intellectual  property  (trade  secrets)  and  breaches  of  contract  concerning 
confidentiality and disclosure of sensitive information. The  incident concerns a mobile phone testing 
robot  (Tappy)  developed  by  T-mobile  USA  to  automate  testing  of  mobile  phones  prior  to  launch.  T-
mobile alleges Huawei stole the technology by copying the robot’s specifications and stealing parts and 
software to develop its own testing robot. The incident scenario is interesting as it relates to a business 
asset  that  has  both  digital  and  physical  components  that  has  been  compromised  through  an 
unconventional  cyber-physical  attack  facilitated  by  insiders.  The  scenario  sparked  an  interesting 
debate among students about the scope and definition of  security incidents, the role and structure of 
the  security  unit,  the  utility  of  compliance-based  approaches  to  security,  and  the  inadequate  use  of 
threat intelligence in modern security strategies. 

Keywords: Information security, Cyber security, Information systems, Cyber-Security Education 

1 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2020, Wellington 

Ahmad, Maynard, Motahhir & Alshaikh 
Huawei vs T-Mobile: Anatomy of a Cybersecurity Incident 

1 

Introduction 

The  responsibility  to  protect  the  firm’s  business  information  resources  is  frequently  delegated  to  a 
senior executive, typically the Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) or Chief Information Officer 
(CIO) (Maynard et al. 2018a). However, an informal review of information security curricula reveals, 
unsurprisingly, that the majority of information security teaching in tertiary education is offered from 
a technical rather than business perspective. Technical topics are conducive to producing IT Security 
Architects,  IT  Security  Analysts,  Security  Technicians,  Incident  Responders  and  Forensic 
Investigators. Whereas programs centred on business/management aspects (i.e. Information Security 
Management (ISM)) are better suited to the development of CISOs or CIOs, security auditors, security 
policy developers, and security risk assessors (Cram and D'Arcy 2016). 

Case-based  Learning  (CBL)  instigates  critical  discussion,  draws  out  relevant  experiences  from 
students,  encourages  questioning  of  accepted  practices,  and  creates  dialogue  between  theory  and 
practice  (Kendall  and  Kendall  2017).  For  CBL  in  ISM  to  be  effective,  instructors  require  pedagogical 
instruments that are developed with ISM  in mind.  An informal review of  teaching cases shows there 
are  very  few  specifically  in  the  security  domain.  The  few  that  do  exist  are  not  aimed  at  learning 
outcomes related to management practice. For example, in “Cybersecurity: the Three headed Janus”, 
Diffee  and  Datta  (2018)  focuses  on  ethics,  process  and  people  in  cybersecurity  whereas  in  “Snowfall 
and  a  Stolen  Laptop”,  McLaughlin  et  al.  (2015)  describe  the  incident  response  processes  and 
technologies used to track a stolen  laptop belonging to the Dean  of the E. Philip Saunders College of 
Business  at  Rochester  Institute  of  Technology.  Therefore,  we  ask  the  following  question,  “How  can 
Case-based Learning in ISM be improved?” 

To  answer  this  question  we  identify,  apply  and  demonstrate  the  utility  of  our  selected  case  as  a 
contribution to CBL in ISM. We have identified a case that is targeted towards a critical ISM problem 
facing private enterprises: intellectual property (IP) theft. In the US alone, theft of trade secrets costs 
businesses  $300  billion  per  year  (National  Bureau  of  Asian  Research  2017).  There  are  incentives  to 
steal  IP  as  competitors  can  gain  a  significant  advantage  on  the  open  market  by  leveraging  stolen  IP 
rather  than  resourcing  innovation  themselves.  Protecting  IP  is  both  complex  and  expensive  as  it 
involves  understanding  and  developing  mechanisms  for  the  people,  process  and  technology 
dimensions  of  information  security,  a  classic  problem  in  the  discipline  of  Management  Information 
Systems (Ahmad et al. 2014a).  

Further,  we  chose  the  particular  legal  indictment  because  it  speaks  to  the  risks  introduced  by  the 
conventional practice of delegating ISM to IT operations. Specifically, that IT operations is well suited 
to  maintaining  IT  service  availability  but  not  well  positioned  to  recognise,  and  therefore  protect,  IP. 
The  problem  is  even  more  severe  where  the  asset  is  not  entirely  digital  or  does  not  qualify  as  a 
conventional IT asset.   

The paper is structured as follows. We present background on the teaching context before presenting 
details  of  the  legal  case.  We  then  present  the  discussion  questions,  the  intent  of  the  instructors  in 
orchestrating debate and key themes that emerged in discussions. 

2  Background  

The  case  is  used  in  a  subject  within  an  on-line  executive  Master  of  Information  Technology 
Management  degree  program.  Students  enrolling  in  this  degree  tend  to  be  on  the  executive 
management  track  within  their  organisations.  Hence,  the  subject  is  aimed  at  industry  professionals 
with at least 5 years of experience in IT-related work. This section describes the design of the subject as 
background to better appreciate the context of the case. 

The  subject  is  designed  with  ISM  in  mind  from  the  outset.  We  use  the  term  ISM  to  refer  to  the 
intersection between Information Security and Management Information Systems. The following three 
principles inform the subject’s learning objectives:  

P1.  ISM  aims  to  protect  the  business  function  of  the  organization  and  therefore  must  consider 

management practices such as strategy, risk, and policy. 

P2.  ISM aims to protect sensitive data, information, and knowledge wherever it may be stored and 

however it may be transmitted. 

P3.  ISM is essentially a busines problem with people, process, and technology dimensions. 

Table 1 provides an overview of the teaching content. In the first module, we introduce ISM from an 
organizational  perspective  rather  than  a  technology  perspective  to  set  the  feel  of  the  subject.  The 

2 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2020, Wellington 

Ahmad, Maynard, Motahhir & Alshaikh 
Huawei vs T-Mobile: Anatomy of a Cybersecurity Incident 

central  theme  is  enterprise  security,  which  is  explained  in  terms  of  the  relationship  between  the 
constructs of threat, asset, and control (see the security triplet model in Baskerville (2005)). Further, 
the  module  focuses  on  the  primary  objectives  for  private  enterprise,  that  being  the  protection  of 
competitive  advantage  (particularly  IP)  and  IT  service  continuity.  We  show  how  IP  theft  in 
organisations can be facilitated through cyber means, illustrating this through legal case studies (e.g. 
Brooklyn Law School 2014; United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit 2019). 

Module and Content 
1:  Information Security in the Business Context 
The  Security  Triplet;  Computer  Security 
vs 
Information  Security  vs  Information  Assurance,  The 
C-I-A Triangle 

2:  Management Practice in Information Security 
Overview  of  strategy,  risk,  policy,  and  SETA. 
Challenges for the CISO 

3:  Planning & Strategy in Information Security 

Standards & Frameworks - ISO 27000 series, Security 
Strategies for Command & Control,  
4:  Role of Technological Controls  

Configuring Defences, Perimeter Defence: Firewalls / 
VPNs, Internal Lines of Defense: IDS, Access Control, 

5:  Risk in Information Security  

The  Security  Risk  Management  Process,  Risk 
Identification 
and  Assessment,  Risk  Control 
Strategies, Benchmarking and Baselining 

6:  Strategy in Information Security  

Security Triplet, Security Strategy Paradigms, Beyond 
the Castle Model of Defense; Governance Models 

7:  Policy in Information Security  

Policies,  Standards  and  Practices,  Policy-centric 
Decision Making, Enterprise vs Issue Specific Policies, 
Assessing Policy Quality 

8:  SETA in Information Security  

SETA;  Development,  Delivery  and  Evaluation  of 
Training 

9:  Advanced Topics  

Knowledge  Leakage;  Situational  Awareness  in  Risk 
Management 

Table 1: Overview of teaching content  

Primary Readings 
(2017); 
Ch  1,  Whitman  and  Mattord 
Cherdantseva  and  Hilton 
(2015);  U.S. 
District  Court  for  the  Western  District  of 
Washington 
(2005); 
Ahmad et al. (2019) 
Ch  2,  Whitman  and  Mattord 
Maynard et al. (2018a) 

(2014);  Baskerville 

(2017); 

Ch 4, Whitman and Mattord (2017); Ahmad 
et al. (2014b) 

Ch  6  &  7,  Whitman  and  Mattord  (2017); 
Ahmad et al. (2014b) 

Ch  5,  Whitman  and  Mattord 
Shedden et al. (2016); Webb et al. (2014);  

(2017); 

Ch 4, Whitman and Mattord (2017); Ahmad 
et  al.  (2014b);  Leuprecht  et  al.  (2016); 
Maynard  et  al.  (2018b);  Park  et  al.  (2012); 
Tan et al. (2010); Ahmad et al. (2020) 
Ch  4,  Whitman  and  Mattord 
(2017); 
Maynard and Ruighaver (2007); Cram  et  al. 
(2017); Maynard et al. (2011) 

Ch  4,  Whitman  and  Mattord  (2017);  Bada 
and  Nurse  (2019);  Alshaikh  et  al.  (2019); 
Alshaikh et al. (2018); Alshaikh et al. (2014); 
Shedden et al. (2011) 
Ahmad et al. (2014a); Shedden et al. (2016); 
Thompson  and  Kaarst‐Brown  (2005);  Webb 
et al. (2014); Ahmad et al. (2019) 

Module  2  introduces  students  to  management  security  controls  such  as  strategy,  policy,  risk  and 
Security Education, Training, Awareness (SETA) and the role of the CISO (these are explored later in 
the  subject).  In  module  3,  students  investigate  how  organizations  plan  and  implement  security 
programs  using  industry  standards  and  codes  of  practice  (e.g.  the  ISO2700  series  ISO/IEC  2005). 
Module 4 discusses perimeter security technologies (e.g. firewalls, VPNs), and technologies on internal 
lines of defense (e.g. IDS, anti-virus, access control). The focus assisting students to understand how 
these technologies can be applied and combined to support a security strategy. 

The  security  risk  management  process  is  investigated  in  module  5.  Module  6  presents  principles  of 
security strategy as they apply to organizational infrastructure (see Ahmad et al. (2012)) and draws an 
analogy between the preventative mindset that lead to the development of the castle architecture and 
to that of modern network configurations in use today. The quality of security policy (module 7) is a 
research-oriented topic based on (Maynard and Ruighaver 2007). The many dimensions of quality are 
presented with a case study from the instructor’s own experiences in a major re-drafting of a series of 
security  policies  as  part  of  a  compliance  exercise.  The  fine  distinctions  between  Security  Education, 
Training  and  Awareness  are  the  focus  of  module  8.  The  focus  of  this  session  is  on  the  need  to 
understand the root cause of poor security behaviour and to develop strategies to engage and motivate 
employees to align their behaviour with organizational security policy (Bada and Nurse 2019). 

3 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2020, Wellington 

Ahmad, Maynard, Motahhir & Alshaikh 
Huawei vs T-Mobile: Anatomy of a Cybersecurity Incident 

The final module looks at  advanced topics  relevant to students of management information systems. 
In  2020,  the  focus  was  on  understanding  how  knowledge  assets  are  different  from  conventional 
information  and  IT  assets,  and  how  said  assets  require  innovative  security  strategies  for  protection 
(Ahmad  et  al.  2014a;  Shedden  et  al.  2016).  A  second  focus  was  on  the  need  for  organizations  to 
develop situational awareness of the threat environment (Ahmad et al. 2019; Webb et al. 2014). 

3  The Incident Scenario 

Our  incident  scenario  is  unique  as  it  relates  to  the  theft  of  an  organizational  asset  that  has  both 
physical  and  digital  components.  Instructors  wanted  students  to  question  their  definition  of 
‘information  security’  and  ‘cybersecurity’  (particularly  the  scope  and  boundaries  of  the  definition). 
Further,  the  incident  was  unique  as  there  are  few  if  any  incidents  discussed  in  teaching  cases  that 
adopt  a  management  information  systems  lens  where  the  security  incident  relates  to  a  business 
problem  that  centres  on  the  interaction  between  people,  process,  and  technology  (most  cases  take  a 
technology lens and focus on cases of IT service disruption, e.g. McLaughlin et al. (2015); Sipior et al. 
(2019); Diffee and Datta (2018)).  

3.1  Background to T-mobile 

T-mobile  US  Inc.  is  a  leading  mobile  telephony  and  wireless  broadband  operator  in  the  USA  with 
annual  revenues  in  2019  exceeding  45  billion  US  dollars  (Trefis  Team  2020).  The  firm  is  owned  by 
German telecommunications giant Deutsche Telekom (43%), Japanese conglomerate SoftBank Group 
(24%)  and  the  public  through  share  ownership  (33%)  (Shu  2020).  Although  T-mobile  supplies 
technology devices like mobile phone handsets to its customers, it does not manufacture these devices 
but rather uses a competitive tender process to procure these from suppliers. Despite the competitive 
tender  process,  sub-standard  devices  were  resulting  in  a  high  rate  of  return  from  its  customer  base. 
Poor device reliability was a significant competitive disadvantage for T-mobile (Salman 2012). 

3.2  The Competitive Advantage 

In 2007,  T-mobile engineered a  robot arm nicknamed ‘Tappy’ to test  software glitches in  the mobile 
phones  and  tablets  procured  from  suppliers  (Cheng  and  Keane  2019).  The  robot  arm  features  a 
rubberized  tip  used  to  operate  device  screens  (e.g.  press  buttons,  push  rollerballs,  navigate  touch 
screens) and is driven by software that tests a wide range of scenarios (typing, playing music, making 
calls,  gaming,  web  browsing,  downloading  applications)  to  test  the  device’s  functionality  for  glitches 
(e.g.  memory  leaks,  stalls,  freezing,  responsiveness).  A  video  camera  positioned  strategically  records 
the  device’s  responses  to  the  robot  arm’s  commands  to  capture  said  glitches.  After  each  test,  Tappy 
produces a detailed report showing how the device performed and where the glitches occurred.  Only 
devices that perform perfectly for 24 consecutive hours are released to the public.  

According  to  T-mobile,  since  the  introduction  of  Tappy,  device  returns  were  reduced  by  up  to  75% 
(Salman 2012). As a result of this significant competitive advantage (no other firm had a testing robot 
at this point), T-mobile competitors began developing their own testing robots. Huawei China’s efforts 
to build ‘xDeviceRobot’ did not prove fruitful (Wamsley 2019). In fact, Huawei devices had the poorest 
record  among  all  the  manufacturers  supplying  T-mobile.  Huawei  asked  T-mobile  to  license  the 
technology  to  them,  however  T-mobile  refused  the  request.  It  was  at  that  point  that  Huawei  China 
enlisted  the  help  of  Huawei  USA  to  collect  intelligence  about  Tappy.  The  request  for  intelligence 
eventually snowballed into an incident of industrial espionage, and a series of legal indictments. 

3.3  The Incident of Theft 

T-mobile had designed strict security protocols to protect Tappy (U.S. District Court for the Western 
District of Washington  2014). Tappy  was housed under tight security in a dedicated lab at the firm’s 
headquarters  in  the  greater  Seattle  area.  Initially,  only  T-mobile  employees  could  operate  Tappy. 
However,  later,  T-mobile  relaxed  the  restrictions  to  allow  employees  from  its  supplier  partners  to 
operate  the  robot  arm  as  well.  Prior  to  accessing  Tappy,  T-mobile  required  all  suppliers  including 
Huawei  to  sign  contracts  prohibiting  them  from  taking  any  photos,  videos,  or  using  any  knowledge 
gleaned about Tappy during the testing process to reverse engineer Tappy. 

The  legal  indictment  describes  the  incident  in  detail  as  a  sequence  of  four  key  events  (U.S.  District 
Court for the Western District of Washington 2014): 

Event  A:  The  Line  of  Questioning:  "On  several  occasions  in  2012  and  continuing  to  2013,  Huawei 
employees  asked  T-Mobile  personnel  detailed  questions  about  the  testing  robot.  These  questions 
frequently concerned the conductive tip on the end of the 'end effector' – a metal plate that affixes to 

4 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2020, Wellington 

Ahmad, Maynard, Motahhir & Alshaikh 
Huawei vs T-Mobile: Anatomy of a Cybersecurity Incident 

the bottom of the robot arm. Indeed, as time went on Huawei’s questions became more pointed and 
intrusive  about  the  exact  operational  details  of  the  robot.  T-Mobile  personnel  did  not  provide 
answers to these questions about T-Mobile’s proprietary technology." [page 10 of 22, section 43]. 

Event B: The Photographs: "....one day after Mr. Wang had just been told he could not enter the lab, 
Mr. Xiong and Ms. Lijingru secretly escorted Mr. Wang into the T- Mobile testing lab to photograph 
the  testing  robot.  Using  a  smartphone,  Mr.  Wang  took  at  least  seven  photographs  of  the  testing 
robot, in violation of the Clean Room Letter’s  explicit prohibition on photography in  the lab... That 
night,  Mr.  Wang  forwarded  the  photographs  he  had  taken  of  the  robot  to  Huawei’s  R&D  team  in 
China." [page 11 of 22, section 48, 50]. 

Event  C:  Theft  of  a  Physical  Artifact:  "While  alone  in  the  lab,  Mr.  Xiong  attempted  to  hide  one  of 
these  end  effectors  out  of  the  view  of  the  security  camera  behind  a  computer  monitor.  Three  hours 
later,  while  glancing  repeatedly  at  the  security  camera,  Mr.  Xiong  moved  the  end  effector  from 
behind the monitor and slipped  it into his laptop bag. Mr. Xiong then carried the laptop bag out of 
the testing chamber... Mr. Xiong took the end effector to Huawei Device USA’s offices and used it to 
provide  measurements  to  Huawei  China’s  R&D  division  during  a  conference  call."  [page  11  of  22, 
section 55, 57]. 

Event D: Theft of Software: "Sequence files control the movements of the proprietary testing robot. 
These  files,  which  are  themselves  proprietary  trade  secrets,  are  present  on  the  computers  in  the 
testing lab. On information and belief, Huawei employees accessed and sent proprietary sequencing 
files via email to others at Huawei. They were explicitly forbidden from doing so by T-Mobile." [page 
13 of 22, section 61,62]. 

4  Student Engagement with the Incident Scenario 

4.1  Context of the Incident Scenario 

The  T-mobile  v  Huawei  incident  is  presented  in  the  very  first  of  the  teaching  modules.  Students  are 
given  background  on  the  very  real  and  pervasive  problem  of  IP  theft  after  which  the  Huawei  vs  T-
mobile case is presented with a short 1-minute video clip from T-mobile showing employees describing 
the bugs they catch using Tappy (T-Mobile 2013) and the following preamble: 

“USA-based  T-Mobile  initiated  legal  proceedings  against  Chinese  mobile  manufacturer  Huawei 
alleging  the  latter  stole  the  designs  and  parts  to  its  proprietary  phone  testing  robot  technology 
(known  as  ‘Tappy’).  Tappy  was  an  internally  developed  and  refined  piece  of  equipment  that 
developed  and  refined  piece  of  quality  assurance  equipment  that  was  instrumental  in  removing 
defects from mobile handsets. 

Tappy was placed in a secure location and carefully guarded with strict physical and legal security 
protocols  to  ‘protect  the  trade  secrets  invested  in  the  robot,  its  component  parts,  specifications, 
software and functionality’. The firm alleges that Huawei stole the technology by copying the robot’s 
specifications and stealing parts, software and trade secrets to develop its own testing robot.” 

4.2  Discussion Questions, Instructor Intent and Student Response 

Students are presented with a link to the legal indictment (U.S. District Court for the Western District 
of Washington 2014) and four quotes from the legal indictment (events A to D as above in section 3.3). 
Students are then taken to an online discussion forum where they are presented with three questions. 
We discus each question, instructor intent and student responses below: 

Question 1: Would you call this an information security incident? Why or why not? 

The scenario is interesting  to the instructors  because  Tappy  was not a conventional IT asset and  the 
incident  was  not  the  result  of  a  conventional  cyber-attack.  The  first  question  encourages  students  to 
question  the  utility  of  the  technology  perspective  in  identifying  risks  and  estimating  busines  impact. 
The intent is for students to adopt the business perspective once they come to recognize the limitations 
of the technology perspective. 

In their response to the first question, students focused on the boundary between accidental leakage vs 
industrial  espionage  pointing  out  that  T-mobile  took  active  measures  to  protect  Tappy  and  Huawei 
purposively and maliciously breached security protocols to steal IP. Some students focused on implicit 
evidence  of  Huawei's  planning  and  preparation  as  an  argument  for  declaring  the  events  an  incident. 
Others debated whether it was an information security incident or just a security incident since Tappy 
was not a digital asset and had a distinct physical component. For example, one student stated: 

5 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2020, Wellington 

Ahmad, Maynard, Motahhir & Alshaikh 
Huawei vs T-Mobile: Anatomy of a Cybersecurity Incident 

“By my understanding of the definition – yes, this was indeed an “information security incident” as 
data, IP, ‘information’  etc. was stolen; however, physical  items were also stolen leading me to also 
classify the incident more broadly as a ‘security incident’.” 

Question 2: Which organisational function or department would be responsible for preventing such 
an incident from occurring? 

The  second  question  encourages  students  to  further  explore  the  implications  of  adopting  a  business 
perspective as opposed  to  a technology perspective  to security  incidents. Specifically, the fact that  in 
most organizations it would be unclear which unit or department would be responsible for the security 
of Tappy given it is not a laptop, server, or other conventional IT device (i.e. the security unit in many 
organizations  is  mainly  responsible  for  IT  security  only).  Many  organizations  do  not  retain  the 
equivalent  security  unit  in  the  physical  and  human  resource  domains.  Physical  security  usually 
consists of outsourced building managers and security guards that manage doors, access control, etc. 
They will likely consider monitoring Tappy outside of their responsibility. The main responsibilities of 
Human  Resources  are  recruitment,  selection,  performance  management  and  onboarding  and 
offboarding employees. 

In their response to the question, most students suggested that the responsibility for preventing such 
an incident was shared by all employees and that the senior management were ultimately accountable 
for the failure of security. For example: 

"Simply  put,  information  security  is  everyone's  responsibility,  in  this  case  different  functions  from 
left  to  right  (Info  sec,  HR,  Risk,  IT,  Physical  Security,  Sourcing  &  Procurement  etc)  and  top 
(management) to bottom (individual T-mobile staff) do play a role to safeguard the asset." 

"I  do  believe  the  ultimate  responsibility  falls  on  senior  management.  They  should  have  had  an 
effective information assurance strategy in place. They should have commissioned a risk assessment; 
this  would  have  identified  which  organisational  functions  and  departments  were  responsible  for 
which assets and in which capacity. They should also have had processes, policies, training, controls 
etc. in place to protect valuable assets like Tappy." 

At  this  point  the  instructors  directed  students  to  consider  certain  aspects  of  the  scenario.  Using  an 
organizational chart, the instructors explained that the structural divisions between IT, legal and HR 
make  it  difficult  to  translate  a  shared  responsibility  into  a  focused  response  to  a  security  incident. 
Further,  that  in  practice  securing  IP  is  not  a  priority  for  legal,  HR  and  physical  security  units.  The 
instructors’ comments lead to a discussion on the empowerment of the CISO as well as queries on the 
possibility of having the legal, HR and physical security units report to a broader enterprise-wide Chief 
Security Officer to overcome structural divisions. For example: 

“Are these CSO peering with their CIO and CTO counterparts? In my experience, even IT struggles to 
get a real position of power at a board level (often the CIO sits under a COO who is a board member) 
diluting  the  influence  within  the  business.  Considering  security  is  closely  intertwined  with  risk 
management,  have  you  seen  examples  of  security  and  risk  being  coupled  and  managed  under  the 
same management structure with board level influence?” 

Another  key  thread  of  discussion  debated  the  utility  of  compliance  in  security.  Students  reflected  on 
their experience working in regulated environments: 

In highly regulated industries such as financial services, it is my experience that there is compliance 
fatigue  that  can  undermine  security  initiatives  bottom-up.  Could  this  be  solved  through  more 
effective  communication  of  the  underlying  security  imperative?  This  could  stop  the  sometime  held 
view of compliance being a barrier to someone doing their job and little more. This for me then ties 
back to either the weight of the CISO role in the organisation and the relationships held with the C-
Suite executives and the Board… 

And: 

I  feel  for  people  working  in  the  regulated  industries  as  I  am  having  similar  experience.  What  I've 
found after all is whether an organisation has good security people (both leaders and operations on 
the ground) to pivot the control environment from compliance driven to security driven/embedded. 
Compliance itself actually provides a good foundation… Through the compliance process e.g. control 
compliance  monitoring,  the  controls  (formal,  technical)  could  be  more  polished  and  agile  to  be 
effective to fit for purposes. Compliance is not everything and it will never be good enough, but it can 
form a baseline of a healthy cyber ecosystem. 

6 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2020, Wellington 

Ahmad, Maynard, Motahhir & Alshaikh 
Huawei vs T-Mobile: Anatomy of a Cybersecurity Incident 

Question  3:  How  can  organisations  like  T-Mobile  prevent  such  incidents  from  taking  place?  What 
countermeasures would you put in place? 

The  intent  of  question  3  was  to  shift  the  discussion  from  that  of  organizational  response  to  that  of 
organizational prevention of a security incident. Given the scenario describes a  security incident that 
doesn’t fit the definition of a conventional scenario of cyber-attack, students would not be able to use 
conventional  technology  controls  and  responses  (e.g.  encrypt  files,  compartmentalize  digital 
environments  firewalls,  detect  malware  using  intrusion  detection  systems,  anti-virus  software)  and 
would be lead to question the underlying organizational strategy for handling incidents.  

At  first  students  suggested  the  conventional  improvements  in  security  measures  (better  monitoring, 
better  training,  tighter  physical  access  to  labs).  Some  students  simply  argued  at  a  high-level, 
suggesting better information assurance strategies, auditing of management executives etc.  

However, some of the more experienced executive students pointed out that the attack was facilitated 
by  insiders  that  were  authorized  to  be  in  the  general  vicinity  of  Tappy.  Further,  that  since  the 
adversary  had  passed  through  the  ‘shield’,  then  the  remaining  operational  security  measures  can  be 
more easily circumvented. For example: 

I  don’t  think  a  single  specific  organisational  function  or  department  is  or  could  be  responsible  for 
preventing  the  incident  from  occurring  -  Huawei  was  invited  into  the  ‘Tappy’  lab  by  T-Mobile  to 
collaborate  on  a  product  that  would  mutually  benefit  both  parties.  Standard  security  functions 
(physical,  contractual  etc.)  in  place  were  relatively  non-specific  to  their  partnership  and  I  imagine 
the T-Mobile employees themselves were required to adhere to similar security protocols. 

The  conversation  took  an  interesting  turn  when  the  query  was  raised  as  to  why  T-mobile  had  not 
identified  Huawei  as  a  threat  given  its  prior  track  record  in  IP  theft  and  its  declared  interest  in 
acquiring a license to access Tappy: 

If  T-Mobile  recognised  Tappy  as  a  competitive  advantage  with  significant  IP,  they  should  have 
limited  interaction  to  Tappy  with  all  non-employees  where  they  thought  the  risks  (losing  the 
competitive advantage obtained through IP in Tappy) exceeded the benefit (faster approved phones 
to  consumers  and/or  better  quality  phones  than  other  carriers).  To  me,  this  seems  like  a  strategic 
business decision that could then ultimately define the other security measures in place. If the cost to 
the  business  was  too  great,  interactions  should  be  minimised,  and  protection  of  the  IP  should  be  a 
primary goal that trumps quicker debugging.  

I  completely  agree  that  increased  monitoring  and  escalation  of  suspicious  activity  would  have 
resulted in a better outcome, and ideally these kinds of procedures could have been established before 
inviting  potential  threats  to  dabble  with  T-Mobile's  intellectual  property.  If  T-Mobile  had  policies 
and procedures in place to mandate nondisclosure and confidentiality agreements, is it too much to 
ask that they also analyse threats and make informed business decisions before sending these prior 
to future engagements? 

The instructors weighed in again on the conversation. This time they provided students with a means 
of prioritizing threat actors to inform preventative strategies: 

…  part  of  conducting  a  threat  assessment  on  a  potential  competitor  is  to  ask  two  basic  questions. 
Does the competitor have a reason to steal IP? Does the competitor have the means or capability to 
steal  the  IP?  These  two  factors  (means  and  motivation)  narrow  down  the  pool  of  potential  threat 
actors to the critical ones. Had T-mobile done that, they almost certainly have placed Huawei at the 
top of their list. Wouldn’t a natural outcome of this observation be to actively monitor all interactions 
with Huawei and take swift action if there was any indication of a breach in progress? 

Students were quick to internalize this logic and apply it to develop new insights: 

I  didn't  realise  there  was  quite  a  bit  of  public  discussion  around  Huawei's  ties  to  the  Chinese  state 
and potential espionage back in 2011 which would have been uncovered in the threat assessment, as 
you mentioned. So, using means and motivation a T-Mobile threat assessment might play out a little 
like this in 2012:  

Apple: 

HTC: 

Means – High, huge market cap and cash pile.  
Motivation – Low, they've probably got their own equivalent device. 

Means – Medium, average manufacturer.  
Motivation – Medium, focused on cheaper devices, user experience less relevant. 

7 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2020, Wellington 

Ahmad, Maynard, Motahhir & Alshaikh 
Huawei vs T-Mobile: Anatomy of a Cybersecurity Incident 

Samsung:  Means – High, chaebol, money and politically connected in South Korea.  

Motivation – Very High, they want any advantage to improve their high-end 
market and have open cases of design theft. 

Huawei:  Means – Very High, connected to Chinese state, maybe involved in espionage.  

Motivation – High, they want any advantage to improve their high-end market. 

Using the findings around potential espionage, I'd agree Huawei would be on the top of the list and 
I'd want to actively monitor any suspicious activity. I'm guessing, based on the above assumptions, 
I'd also want to pay closer attention to suspicious activity from Samsung over HTC or Apple?” 

5  Discussion 

The  underlying  objective  of  our  teaching  is  to  develop  a  new  generation  of  Information  Systems 
practitioners  in  ISM  that  will  have  the  foundational  knowledge  to  protect  business  information 
resources (see the first principle that informs our learning objectives). The first step in developing this 
knowledge  is  for  students  to  adopt  the  business  or  organisational  perspective  and  develop  an 
understanding of its implications. In order to achieve this goal, our most significant challenge was to 
encourage  students  to  question  the  limitations  of  the  existing  technology  perspective  that  is  deeply 
entrenched in the  prevailing  discourse across  media,  in the majority of the academic literature  (ISM 
research  is  conducted  largely  by  technologists  as  opposed  to  business  information  systems 
researchers),  and  even  in  industry  itself  (most  industry  practitioners  in  ISM  have  technology 
backgrounds). 

As  Ahmad  et  al.  (2014a)  points  out,  an  interesting  dilemma  emerges  from  the  delegation  of  ISM  to 
technology  operations.  That  being,  that  IT  personnel  adopt  a  technology  lens  rather  than  a  business 
lens  to  their  routine  operations.  In  most  cases,  business  objectives  and  technology  objectives  align 
well,  for  example  in  the  case  of  IT  service  availability.  However,  in  some  cases  the  objectives  do  not 
align.  This  is  particularly  where  the  asset  is  competitively  sensitive  knowledge  or  information.  Here, 
the  sensitivity  is  known  to  the  business  and  IT  operations  are  not  well  positioned  to  recognise,  and 
therefore  protect, IP. The  problem is even more severe where the asset is not entirely digital or does 
not qualify as a conventional IT asset. Tappy is precisely this kind of asset. 

Executive students learn best when they leverage their own experiences and engage in problem-based 
learning, action-learning and reflective learning in a community of practice (Wuestewald 2016). In our 
experience with this  scenario,  we found  executive students responded  very well  because it  presented 
them  with  an  opportunity  to  reflect  on  their  practical  experience.  Overall,  fifteen  of  the  twenty-two 
students  participated  in  the  conversation  and  the  thread  had  52  posts  which  is  more  than  twice  the 
number of posts in any discussion thread in the subject. Further, as exemplified in the response to the 
final  question,  more  advanced  students  demonstrated  an  ability  to  apply  the  business  perspective  to 
develop new practical insights, which suggests the case fulfilled its objectives. 

6  Summary and Future Work 

The T-mobile v Huawei case provides a useful basis for teaching Information Systems students about 
ISM. The case is a useful addition to the limited number of cases in ISM as it relates to a business asset 
that has both digital and physical components that has been compromised through an unconventional 
cyber-physical attack facilitated by insiders. The case  sparked an interesting debate among executive 
students  about  the  scope  and  definition  of  security  incidents,  the  role  and  structure  of  the  security 
unit,  the  utility  of  compliance-based  approaches  to  security,  and  the  inadequate  use  of  threat 
intelligence in modern security strategies. In the second phase of this project we will be conducting a 
second and much larger study of executive students to confirm the utility of the case in teaching ISM. 

7  References  

Ahmad, A., Bosua, R., and Scheepers, R. 2014a. "Protecting Organizational Competitive Advantage: A 

Knowledge Leakage Perspective," Computers and Security (42), pp. 27-39. 

Ahmad, A., Desouza, K. C., Maynard, S. B., Naseer, H., and Baskerville, R. L. 2020. "How Integration 
of  Cyber  Security  Management  and  Incident  Response  Enables  Organizational  Learning," 
Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology (71:8), pp. 939-953. 

Ahmad,  A.,  Hadjkiss,  J.,  and  Ruighaver,  A.  B.  2012.  "Incident  Response  Teams  -  Challenges  in 

Supporting the Organizational Security Function," Computers & Security (31:5), pp. 643-652. 

8 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2020, Wellington 

Ahmad, Maynard, Motahhir & Alshaikh 
Huawei vs T-Mobile: Anatomy of a Cybersecurity Incident 

Ahmad,  A.,  Maynard,  S.  B.,  and  Park,  S.  2014b.  "Information  Security  Strategies:  Towards  an 
Organizational  Multi-Strategy  Perspective,"  Journal  of  Intelligent  Manufacturing),  pp.  257-
370. 

Ahmad,  A.,  Webb,  J.,  Desouza,  K.  C.,  and  Boorman,  J.  2019.  "Strategically-Motivated  Advanced 
Persistent Threat: Definition, Process, Tactics and a Disinformation Model of Counterattack," 
Computers & Security (86), pp. 402-418. 

Alshaikh,  M., Ahmad, A.,  Maynard, S.  B., and Chang, S. 2014. "Towards a Taxonomy of Information 
in  Organisations,"  25th  Australasian  Conference  on 

Security  Management  Practices 
Information Systems, Auckland, New Zealand, p. 10. 

Alshaikh,  M.,  Maynard,  S.  B.,  Ahmad,  A.,  and  Chang,  S.  2018.  "An  Exploratory  Study  of  Current 
Information Security Training and Awareness Practices in Organizations," Proceedings of the 
51st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Hawaii, p. 10. 

Alshaikh,  M.,  Naseer,  H.,  Ahmad,  A.,  and  Maynard,  S.  B.  2019.  "Toward  Sustainable  Behaviour 
Change:  An  Approach  for  Cyber  Security  Education  Training  and  Awareness,"  in:  European 
Conference on Information Systems. Sweden p. 15. 

Bada, M., and Nurse, J. R. 2019. "Developing Cybersecurity Education and Awareness Programmes for 
Small-and Medium-Sized  Enterprises  (Smes),"  Information & Computer Security (27:3), pp. 
393-410. 

Baskerville,  R.  2005.  "Information  Warfare:  A  Comparative  Framework  for  Business  Information 

Security," Journal of Information System Security (1:1), pp. 23-50. 

Brooklyn Law School. 2014. "Dupont Inc. V. Kolon USA Inc. : 3:09-Cv-58," US District Court for the 

Eastern District of Virginia. 

Cheng,  R.,  and  Keane,  S.  2019.  "Huawei's  Legal  Troubles  Take  a  Twist  with  T-Mobile's  Torture-Test 
Robot."      Retrieved  22  May,  2020,  from  https://www.cnet.com/news/how-a-torture-test-
robot-figures-into-the-legal-assault-on-huawei/ 

Cherdantseva, Y., and Hilton, J. 2015. "Information  Security and Information  Assurance: Discussion 
About  the  Meaning,  Scope,  and  Goals,"  in  Standards  and  Standardization:  Concepts, 
Methodologies, Tools, and Applications. IGI Global, pp. 1204-1235. 

Cram,  W.  A.,  and  D'Arcy,  J.  2016.  "Teaching  Information  Security  in  Business  Schools:  Current 
Practices  and  a  Proposed  Direction  for  the  Future,"  Communications  of  the  Association  for 
Information Systems (39:1), p. 3. 

Cram,  W.  A.,  Proudfoot,  J.  G.,  and  D’Arcy,  J.  2017.  "Organizational  Information  Security  Policies:  A 
Review  and  Research  Framework,"  European  Journal  of  Information  Systems  (26:6),  pp. 
605-641. 

Diffee,  E.,  and  Datta,  P.  2018.  "Cybersecurity:  The  Three-Headed  Janus,"  Journal  of  Information 

Technology Teaching Cases (8:2), pp. 161-171. 

ISO/IEC.  2005.  "Iso/Iec  27001:2005.  Information  Technology  -  Security  Techniques  -  Information 

Security Management Systems - Requirements." 

Kendall, J. E., and Kendall, K. E. 2017. "Enhancing Online Executive Education Using Storytelling: An 
Approach to Strengthening Online Social Presence,"  Decision Sciences Journal of Innovative 
Education (15:1), pp. 62-81. 

Leuprecht,  C.,  Skillicorn,  D.  B.,  and  Tait,  V.  E.  2016.  "Beyond  the  Castle  Model  of  Cyber-Risk  and 

Cyber-Security," Government Information Quarterly (33:2), pp. 250-257. 

Maynard,  S.  B.,  Onibere,  M.,  and  Ahmad,  A.  2018a.  "Defining  the  Strategic  Role  of  the  Chief 
Information  Security  Officer,"  Pacific  Asia  Journal  of  the  Association  for  Information 
Systems (10:3), pp. 61-86. 

Maynard,  S.  B.,  and  Ruighaver,  A.  B.  2007.  "Security  Policy  Quality:  A  Multiple  Constituency 
Perspective,"  Assuring  Business  processes,  Proc.  of  the  6th  Annual  Security  Conference,  G. 
Dhillon (ed.), Washington DC, USA: Global Publishing, USA. 

Maynard, S. B., Ruighaver, A. B., and Ahmad, A. 2011. "Stakeholders in Security Policy Development," 
Proceedings of the 9th Information Security Management Conference, Perth, Australia: Edith 
Cowan University, pp. 182-188. 

9 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2020, Wellington 

Ahmad, Maynard, Motahhir & Alshaikh 
Huawei vs T-Mobile: Anatomy of a Cybersecurity Incident 

Maynard,  S.  B.,  Tan,  T.,  Ahmad,  A.,  and  Ruighaver,  T.  2018b.  "Towards  a  Framework  for  Strategic 
Security Context in Information Security Governance," Pacific Asia Journal of the Association 
for Information Systems (10:4), pp. 65-88. 

McLaughlin, M.-D. J., Hansen, S., Cram, W. A., and Gogan, J. L. 2015. "Snowfall and a Stolen Laptop," 

Journal of Information Technology Teaching Cases (5:2), p. 102. 

National Bureau of Asian Research. 2017. "Update to the the Ip Commission Report: The Report of the 

Commission on the Theft of American Intellectual Property." 

Park, S., Ruighaver, A. B., Maynard, S. B., and Ahmad, A. 2012. "Towards Understanding Deterrence: 
Information Security Managers’ Perspective," in Proceedings of the International Conference 
on It Convergence and Security, K.J. Kim and S.J. Ahn (eds.). Springer Netherlands, pp. 21-
37. 

Salman, L. 2012. "T-Mobile Introduces Tappy, the Software Testing Robot."   Retrieved May 22, 2020, 
from  https://www.ubergizmo.com/2012/09/t-mobile-introduces-tappy-the-software-testing-
robot/ 

Shedden, P., Ahmad, A., and Ruighaver, A. B. 2011. "Informal Learning in Security Incident Response 

Teams." 

Shedden,  P.,  Ahmad,  A.,  Smith,  W.,  Tscherning,  H.,  and  Scheepers,  R.  2016.  "Asset  Identification  in 
Information  Security  Risk  Assessment:  A  Business  Practice  Approach,"  Communications  of 
the Association for Information Systems), pp. 297-320. 

Shu, C. 2020. "Softbank Reportedly Plans to Sell About $20 Billion of Its T-Mobile Shares."   Retrieved 
May  31,  2020,  from  https://techcrunch.com/2020/05/18/softbank-reportedly-plans-to-sell-
about-20-billion-of-its-t-mobile-shares/ 

Sipior, J. C., Lombardi, D. R., and Gabryelczyk, R. 2019. "Information Technology Operational Risk: A 

Teaching Case," Journal of Computer Information Systems), pp. 1-17. 

T-Mobile.  2013.  "Say  Hello  to  T-Mobile's  Tap-Happy  Device  Testing  Robot."      Retrieved  March  31, 

2020, from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mv69ZxKOFSw&t=9s 

Tan,  T.,  Ruighaver,  A.,  and  Ahmad,  A.  2010.  "Information  Security  Governance:  When  Compliance 
Becomes  More  Important  Than  Security,"  in  Security  and  Privacy  –  Silver  Linings  in  the 
Cloud, K. Rannenberg, V. Varadharajan and C. Weber (eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 
55-67. 

Thompson,  E.  D.,  and  Kaarst‐Brown,  M.  L.  2005.  "Sensitive  Information:  A  Review  and  Research 
Agenda,"  Journal  of  the  American  Society  for  Information  Science  and  Technology  (56:3), 
pp. 245-257. 

Trefis  Team.  2020.  "What’s  Behind  >140%  Surge  in  T-Mobile’s  Stock  Price  in  the  Last  4  Years."   

Retrieved 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/greatspeculations/2020/02/12/whats-behind-140-surge-in-t-
mobiles-stock-price-in-the-last-4-years/#77a2f2b711e3 

2020, 

May 

1, 

from 

U.S.  District  Court  for  the  Western  District  of  Washington.  2014.  "T-Mobile  USA,  Inc.,  a  Delaware 
Corporation,  Plaintiff,  V.  Huawei  Device  USA,  Inc.,  a  Texas  Corporation;  and  Huawei 
Technologies  Co.  Ltd,  a  China  Company,  Defendants.,"  United  States  District  Court  for  the 
Western District of Washington at Seattle,, pp. 1-22. 

United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit. 2019. "USA V. Sinovel Wind Group Co., Ltd.  : 
Nos. 14-3313, 14-3105," United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, pp. 1-13. 

Wamsley, L. 2019. "A Robot Named 'Tappy': Huawei Conspired to Steal T-Mobile's Trade Secrets, Says 
Doj "   Retrieved May 27, 2020, from https://www.npr.org/2019/01/29/689663720/a-robot-
named-tappy-huawei-conspired-to-steal-t-mobile-s-trade-secrets-says-doj 

Webb,  J.,  Ahmad,  A.,  Maynard,  S.  B.,  and  Shanks,  G.  2014.  "A  Situation  Awareness  Model  for 

Information Security Risk Management," Computers & Security (44), pp. 391-404. 

Whitman,  M.  E.,  and  Mattord,  H.  J.  2017.  Principles  of  Information  Security,  (6th  ed.).  Course 

Technology, Cengage Learning. 

Wuestewald,  T.  2016.  "Adult  Learning  in  Executive  Development  Programs,"  Adult  Learning  (27:2), 

pp. 68-75. 

10 

 
 
 
 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems 
2020, Wellington 

Ahmad, Maynard, Motahhir & Alshaikh 
Huawei vs T-Mobile: Anatomy of a Cybersecurity Incident 

Copyright 

Copyright  ©  2020  Ahmad,  Maynard,  Motahhir  &  Alshaikh.  This  is  an  open-access  article  licensed 
under  a  Creative  Commons  Attribution-NonCommercial  3.0  New  Zealand,  which  permits  non-
commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and ACIS 
are credited. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
