Protect Against Unintentional Insider Threats: The risk of an employee’s cyber misconduct on 
a Social Media Site. 

Guerrino Mazzarolo, Juan Carlos Fernández Casas, Anca Delia Jurcut, Nhien-AnLe-Khac 

Abstract 

Social Media is a cyber-security risk for every business. What do people share on the Internet? 

Almost everything about oneself is shared: friendship, demographics, family, activities and work-

related  information.  This  could  become  a  potential  risk  in  every  business  if  the  organization’s 

policies, training and technology  fail to  properly address  these issues.   In many cases, it is  the 

employees' behaviour that can put key company information at danger. Social media has turned 

into a reconnaissance tool for malicious actors and users accounts are now seen as a goldmine for 

cyber criminals. Investigation of Social Media is in the embryonic stage and thus, is not yet well 

understood. This  research project  aims to  collect and analyse open-source data from  LinkedIn, 

discover data leakage and analyse personality types through software as a service (SAAS). The 

final  aim  of  the  study  is  to  understand  if  there  are  behavioral  factors  that  can  predicting  one’s 

attitude toward disclosing sensitive data. 

Key words: Unintentional Insider Threats; behaviour assessment; social network analysis; cyber-

security risk 

I. 

Introduction 

Until  the  past  decade  we  have  been  used  to  interacting  with  people  face  to  face.  We  captured 

memories with analogic cameras, talked to one another in person, or sent handwritten letters to our 

family. In a matter of years those everyday common acts have become outdated. The evolution of 

 
 
 
the  internet  has  brought  about  a  new  age  of  social  communication  and  this  phenomenon  has 

extended  into  every  aspect  of  our  modern  life.  A  new  model  of  society  is  progressing;  instant 

communication, endless engagement, follower counts, superficial engagement, liking, posting, or 

sharing  content  are  the  pillars  of  a  society  based  on  the  appearance  instead  of  the  being.  The 

number of people using social media has increased significantly, to more than 2.46 billion in 2017 

and breaching 3 billion in 2021 (see Figure 1).  

Figure 1. Number of social network users worldwide from 2010 to 2021 (Statista, 2020) 

The influence of social media on businesses, as well as people, cannot be denied. Today, almost 

every enterprise has its own social media channel enabling businesses to gain exposure, traffic and 

market insights. However, as with all things, not all that glitters on social media is gold.  

Social media presents a cyber-security risk for every business. Individuals share almost everything 

about  themselves  on  the  web:  friendships,  demographics,  family,  activities  and  work-related 

information. This could present a potential risk for businesses if organisational policies, training 

and technology fail to properly address the issue.  In many cases, it is employees' behaviour that 

puts key company information in danger. Most personnel lead a very connected life, where they 

are constantly checking and posting a large amount of information on social media. This can lead 

some employees to divulge private company data through platforms that they believe are protected 

and private.  

In 2018, the Office of the Information and Privacy Commissioner of Alberta (OIPC) reported that 

a breach occurred when an employee, who was looking for technical support from a close contact, 

 
 
 
accidentally sent and revealed spreadsheets containing private information without authorization 

(OIPC,  2018).  People  often  fail  to  consider  or  appreciate  how  attractive  data  can  be  for 

cybercriminals, state-intelligence gathering, data brokers and marketers. Once any data becomes 

public, what it is used for is outside of customer’s control. The information shared could contribute 

to  a  cybersecurity  risk  and  might  be  difficult  to  manage  or  mitigate  (Zulkarnaen,  Rasdan,  Mat 

Daud,  Ghani,  Suriatini  &  Hery,  2016).  Social  media  has  turned  into  a  reconnaissance  tool  for 

malicious individuals and user accounts are now seen as a goldmine for cyber criminals.  

In  fact,  any  data  disclosure  could  be  used  for  different  malicious  purpose:  phishing  and  social 

engineering, intelligence gathering, intellectual property theft, or unfair competition. The problem 

of cyber-security in relation to social media is real, consistent and continues unabated. In April 

2019,  the  US  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigations  (FBI)  issued  a  security  alert  to  private  sector 

partners regarding foreign intelligence services using social media accounts to target and engage 

employees with US government clearance (Cimpanu, 2019). 

In 2014, iSIGHT Partners revealed a three-year cyber espionage operation targeting and spying on 

foreign military and political leaders using social networking. According to the iSIGHT Partners 

report,  hackers  used  fake  accounts  on  Facebook,  Twitter,  LinkedIn,  Google+,  YouTube  and 

Bloggers  alleging  that  they  worked  in  journalism,  government,  or  defence  (iSIGHT  Partners, 

2014). Mika Aaltola, researcher at the Finnish Institute of International Affairs, published a paper 

focused detailing a Chinese preference for LinkedIn in terms of acquiring classified information 

from  states  and  enterprises  (Aaltola,  2019).  These  are  not  unusual  examples  of  intelligence 

operations  nor  limited  to  a  unique  social  media  platform.  All  intelligence  agencies  use  similar 

 
 
activities. When data leakage occurs, security professionals are faced with the same question: ‘how 

can we prevent this from happening again?’  

Over the past decade researchers and practitioners have discussed and examined the causes and 

characteristics of the perpetrators of insider threats. With the development of risk strategy, it has 

become clear that mitigation cannot solely rely on security control measures and other security 

related tools (Mahfuth, 2019). Increasingly research communities have focused their interest on 

technical and behavioural indicators as well as human factors (Gamachchi & Boztas, 2017). 

 The  investigation  misleading  information  related  to  insider  threats  in  social  media  is  in  an 

embryonic stage and thus, not well understood. To advance the knowledge in this field there is a 

continuous need to find new techniques in order to detect and deter insider threats (Holt & Bossler, 

2016).  The  purpose  of  this  paper  is  to  address  this  challenge  and  put  forward  a  grounded 

framework analysing the contributions that have been made to date. Research included examines 

social media security risks from the unintentional insider view and provides a testing environment 

based on cybersecurity defence and theories to better understand how human personality engages 

with this unique domain. A secondary purpose is to verify whether a new indicator from these 

theories could be developed, with the inherent potential for practical implementation resulting in 

a reduced overall risk of data breach.  

                                                      II. Insider Threat: A Background 

Insider threats have been present well prior to the existence of technology. For centuries humanity 

has  told  stories  about  infamous  attacks  coming  from  trusted  people.  The  quote  that  can  be 

considered as a mantra for insider threat hunter is: ‘Et tu, Brute?’, a Latin phrase meaning ‘Even 

 
 
you, Brutus?’. It is allegedly attributed to Emperor Caesar at the moment of his assassination in 

the  Senate  house,  addressed  to  his  beloved  nephew  Brutus  (Shelley,  2013).  These  words  have 

come to represent an ultimate betrayal from the most unexpected source, such as a trusted partner 

or family member. 

More and more often, cybercrime champions are addressing cases within organisations. The report 

‘2020 Cost  of Insider Threats: Global’ disclosed that the number of incidents  has increased by 

47% and the average annual cost of insider threats has also grown by 31% to $11.45 million in the 

past two years (Ponemon Institute, 2020).  In addition, statistic suggest that insider threats account 

for  roughly  30%  of  all  cyber  security  incidents  in  government  departments  and  organisations 

(IBM, 2017). The dangers that come from inside are more difficult to predict and discover 

because  employee  are  familiar  with  the  organisation’s  infrastructure  and  the  security  controls 

applied. This result in accessing effortlessly to classified material (Mazzarolo and Jurcut, 2020). 

Insider crimes are usually conducted by two types of users: malicious users acting on purpose and 

employees accidentally causing data breaches and leaks. The result can be the same: data leakage, 

fraud,  theft  of  confidential  information,  robbery  of  intellectual  property,  and  the  sabotage  of 

computer systems. 

Descriptions of the types of insider threat can be found from different authoritative sources. In this 

case,  the  US-CERT  explanations  are  used  for  the  sake  of  completeness.  The  ‘Guide  to  Insider 

Threats’ defines intentional as follows: 

‘A malicious insider threat is a current or former employee, contractor, or business 
partner who has or had authorised access to an organisation's network, system, or 
data and intentionally exceeded or misused that access in a manner that negatively 

 
 
affected  the  confidentiality,  integrity,  or  availability  of  the  organisation's 
information or information systems’ (Capelli, Moore, & Trzeciak, 2012). 

The report ‘Unintentional Insider Threats: A Foundational Study’ defines unintentional threats as: 

‘… a current or former employee, contractor, or business partner who has or had 
authorised access to an organisation's network, system, or data and who, through 
action or inaction without malicious intent, causes harm or substantially increases 
the probability of future serious harm to the confidentiality, integrity, or availability 
of  the  organisation's  information  or  information  systems’  (CERT  Insider  Threat 
Team, 2013, p. 2). 

Governmental agencies, security firms and academic researchers have come together to confront 

the  mutual  enemy  and  propose  alternative  and  multidisciplinary  solutions  (Karampelas,  2017). 

In order to understand what drives different insiders to illegal deeds, the NATO Cooperative Cyber 

Defence Centre of Excellence (CCDCOE) established five distinct insider profiles: sabotage, theft 

(of  intellectual  property),  fraud,  espionage,  and  unintentional  insiders  (Kont,  Pihelgas, 

Wojtkowiak, Trinberg, & Osula, 2015). 

Where sabotage, theft, fraud, and espionage require a deliberate malicious factor the unintentional 

player probably will not even know they are doing something wrong, but will have inadvertently 

harmed  an  organisation's  assets  through  the  leaking  of  data,  or  providing  access  to  external 

cybercriminals. Figure 2 shown the type of insider threat and their actions.1 

figure 2. insider threat type. 

1In  the  counter-intelligence  (CI)  field,  the  acronym  MICE  (Money,  Ideology,  Coercion/Commitment  and  Ego)  has  been  fully 
accepted by the CI community for decades as the main “motivational and emotional aspects” for the act of disclosing information. 
Those four factors obviously implied some kind of weakness or vulnerability. Sometimes, a mix of two or three of these factors 
also are decisive as motivation. Nowadays, an alternative framework is being discussed and accepted by some CI experts. It is the 
path from MICE to RASCLS, the acronym for reciprocation, authority, scarcity, commitment (and consistency), liking, and social 
proof. According to the former CIA National Clandestine Service (NCS) officer Randy Burkett, today’s CI departments often deal 
with non-state actors with complex mixtures of competing loyalties, including family, tribe, religion, ethnicity, and nationalism. 
(Burkett, 2013). 

 
 
 
 
Previous research analysed insider threat cases and tried to find common characteristics that lead 

to an incident. These indicators are essential for cyber security operators to monitor, detect, and 

response against possible incidents. The common behaviours that could indicate an insider threat 

can be differentiated between digital and personal behaviours. Some frequent patterns are reviewed 

by security company Varonis (Petters, 2020). Digital hints are associated with an employee’s usage 

of data, especially if the actions are not directly part of their routine job description. For example, 

seeking, saving, moving, or printing large amounts of classified information, accessing documents 

that are not linked to the employee role, or using unauthorised remote storage data. Real life user 

style could also be a precursor signalling further incidents. Some behaviours such as displaying 

disgruntled conduct, ethical flexibility, logging in to the firm network during off-hours, repeatedly 

violating organisational policies or request access exceeding ‘need to know’ responsibility are all 

warning signs requiring attention. 

Insider threat occurrences can impact organisations in a multitude of aspects however, the riskiest 

consequences are financial and reputational. In July 2019, the federal court charged engineer Page 

Thomson  with  computer  fraud  and  abuse  for  an  intrusion  on  the  stored  data’  of  Capital  One 

(Sheetz,  2019).  The  banking  corporation  revealed  that  it  suffered  a  data  breach  that  exposed 

hundreds  of  thousands  of  customers’  personal  information.  Capital  One  believed  the  financial 

impact of the 2019 breach to be between $100m and $150m because of costs associated with the 

disaster recovery plan including customer notifications, credit monitoring, technology costs and 

legal  support (Warwick, 2019).  Insider  attacks  can additionally  produce  loss that is  difficult  to 

quantify or recover, such as damage to an organisation's reputation. Cases such as that of Edward 

 
Snowden,2 Chelsea Manning3 and Robert Hanssen4 resulted in gigantic damage to the reputation 

of the United States government agencies. 

In order to reduce the insider threat risk, it is crucial to implement a layered approach including 

policies, procedures and technical controls. Nowadays, as a countermeasure against data leakage 

within corporations, the implementation of a comprehensive Insider Threat Programme (InTP) is 

highly recommended. In deploying this programme, corporations should take into consideration 

that fact that every organisation has to tailor its approach to meet its unique needs. The Intelligence 

and National Security Alliance (INSA) provides a framework for implementing an InTP with the 

Insider Threat roadmap, based on a 13-step model representing those actions that have been taken 

by  current  successful  programmes 

in  both  business  and  government  (INSA,  2015). 

Figure 3. Insider Threat Program Roadmap (INSA, 2015). 

                                  III. Research problem and current investigative approach.  

2Edward Snowden (1983) is an American citizen, a former Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) employee and subcontractor (Booz 
Allen Hamilton Co.) who leaked top-secret information from the National Security Agency (NSA) in 2013. Snowden gradually 
became disillusioned with the NSA global surveillance programs he was involved since he considered they were a clear intrusion 
into people's private lives. Although he tried to raise his ethical concerns through internal channels, nobody paid enough attention 
to the warnings that Snowden could become (was becoming) an “insider threat”. Edward Snowden could be considered as 
an example of “insider threat” with  an ethical commitment. According to Snowden, he considers himself a  whistle-blower 
despite a leaker since he did not leak the intel for “personal profit”. 
3Chelsea Manning (1987) born as male Bradley Manning, she got female gender identity in 2013. She was a former US Army 
soldier  working  as  intelligence  analyst  posted  in  Iraq  in  2009.  She  leaked  sensitive  US  intel  (up  to  750,000  documents)  to 
WikiLeaks.  She  was  imprisoned  from  2010  until  2017  when  her  sentence  was  commuted.  According  to  several  military 
psychiatrists that assessed Manning’s personality and psychology during the trial, Manning had been isolated in the Army while 
dealing  with  her  gender  identity  dichotomy.  The  specialists  considered  that  Manning  had  the  perception  that  her  leaks  were 
positively  changing  the  world.  Chelsea  Manning  could  be  considered  as  an  “insider  threat”  under  the  parameters  of 
psychological imbalance (gender dichotomy and ego) combined with an ethical commitment for a better world. 
4Robert Hanssen (1944) is a former Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) senior intelligence officer who spied for the Soviet Main 
Intelligence Directorate (GRU) from 1979 to 2001. Hanssen sold thousands of classified documents to the KGB for more than $1.4 
million in cash and diamonds. The intel provided by Hanssen to the Russians detailed US strategies in nuclear war, military weapons 
technologies and counterintelligence. He is currently serving 15 consecutive life sentences. According to the US Department of 
Justice, Hanssen’s acts of espionage could be considered "possibly the worst intelligence disaster in US history." Robert Hanssen 
is a clear example of “insider threat” with a profit motivation (money). 

 
 
 
 
 
While  malicious  actors  within  the  organisation  are  the  most  sophisticated  and  dangerous  to 

manage, recent investigations highlight that unintentional insider threats represent a major risk for 

business. These menaces can become also a potential attack vectors for both intentional insiders 

and  external  adversaries  (Trzeciak,  2017).  This  study  investigates  unintentional  insider  threats 

(UIT), examining related research and best practice developed up until this point to support a better 

understanding  of  its  origin.  Through  the  development  of  a  specific  use  case,  based  on  data 

disclosure  on  social  media,  a  preliminary  theory  is  presented  regarding  potential  mitigation 

strategies and countermeasures. Even if the overall insider threat represents a unique risk for the 

organisation, UIT denote an exceptional challenge and differ completely from intentional actors 

in  terms  of  motivation  and  indicators.  Meanwhile,  policy,  technical  controls,  monitoring,  and 

incident  handling  have  a  decisive  impact  in  detecting,  deterring,  and  responding  to  malicious 

threats. The same cannot be said for accidental cases. 

The adoption of teleworking, cloud solutions, Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) arrangements and 

continuous interactions with internet and social media have blurred the separation between work 

and private life. The result is that organisations need to re-assess their security boundaries in order 

to  implement  appropriate  protective  measure  and  avoiding  leakage  of  internal  information.  

The threatscape brings in different scenarios: during their day to day business activities, employees 

can accidentally click a phishing email, install unapproved software, upload sensitive information 

to the cloud, or transfer confidential data to unauthorized USBs or via email. Fortunately, technical 

controls are now available which can block or deter these activities and preserve an organisation’s 

confidentiality  and  integrity.  However,  accidental  disclosure  of  sensitive  information  to  social 

 
 
media  is  often  blurred.  CERT  National  Insider  Threat  Centre  acknowledge  organisational 

obstacles to establishing, monitoring, and enforcing policy regarding what personnel publish on 

social media sites (CERT, 2018).  

A large amount of data is regularly self-disclosure by users on Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn etc. 

This becomes a real problem when the data disclosed is linked with professional activity such as 

posting images of the work space, expressing negative views of employers or colleagues and, in 

the worst cases, sharing classified information publicly. 

Despite  the  impressive  scale  of  information  disclosure,  very  little  is  understood  about  what 

motivates users to disclose personal information.  Human error results in the majority of insider 

threat  incidents.  Because  of  the  human  factor,  a  multidisciplinary  people-centric  approach  is 

required as a supplementary tier of defence (Elifoglu, Abel, & Tasseven, 2018). 

Supervising  employee  conduct  and  maintaining  data  privacy  obligations  on  social  media  is  a 

challenge. Enterprises must guarantee employee rights following legal and ethical grounds, whilst 

ensuring  that  their  online  activities  do  not  compromise  company  reputation  or  leak  classified 

information. Recommendations for a first deterrence include implementing a social media policy 

to  provide  a  clear  code  of  conduct  and  non-disclosure  agreements  with  associated  disciplinary 

procedure in case of employee misconduct or infringement. Certain monitoring tools allow for the 

tracking of employee comments and negative sentiments regarding businesses (Cross, 2014). Even 

if  those  applications  help  to  reduce  the  risk,  they  still  require  tailored  configuration  and  close 

analysis in order to perform well. Training and security awareness are certainly one of the most 

effective countermeasures. Proper training influence employees and prevent them from clicking 

links or prompt them to think twice before posting information on the web (Trend Micro, 2018). 

 
A blend of policy, awareness and technical controls can reduce the number of security incidents 

resulting from unintentional behaviour by more than 50% (Friedlander, 2016). 

Reducing insider threats is not a straightforward task. There are several behavioural indicators that 

can  support  investigation  and  identify  where  a  potential  threat  is  coming  from.  This,  however, 

should be integrated with trustworthy insider threat detection tools that allow the gathering of full 

data  on  user  activities.  Zuffoletti,  CEO  of  SafeGuard  Cyber,  advises  companies  to  think  about 

social media both as a vector for threat hunting and part of their attack surface (Sheridan, 2019). 

Due the  scope  of the subject,  the complexity, and the  continuous debate  on how to  reduce the 

incident landscape, our research restricted the domain and focused the effort to a) targeting the 

misuse  of  employer’s  information  on  social  media  and  b)  analysis  and  correlation  of  human 

personality 

based 

on 

risk 

taking 

tolerance. 

Our 

hypotheses  were 

tested 

and 

discussed 

according 

to 

Pareto  model.  

The Pareto analysis, also called 80/20 rule, undertakes that the large majority of problems (80%) 

are determined by a little important causes (20%). Pareto analysis framework have been preferred 

for this work because it allows to discover the most important causes of internal data disclosure in 

social media based on risky personality and can translate the results obtained  in further actionable 

countermeasures (Powell and Sammut-Bonnici, 2015). 

The collecting of evidence regarding employees mishandling information was based on internet 

search methodology and relied on Social Media Intelligence (SOCMINT). SOCMINT refers to a 

subset  of  Open  Source  Intelligence  (OSINT)  that  collects  information  exclusively  from  social 

media sites. The term ‘SOCMINT’ was developed by Sir David Omand, Jamie Bartlett and Carl 

Miller (2012). In this same document the authors stressed that this practice should be restricted to 

 
non-intrusive collection from open sources (Omand, Bartlett, Miller, 2012). The Șușnea, Iftene 

definition  of  SOCMINT  was  found  to  be  compliant  with  this  research  approach.  It  defines 

SOCMINT  as  a  convergence  of  OSINT  designs  and  web-mining  techniques  applied  to  social 

media information and used to identify as well as understand situations that could become a threat 

for national security. This model is adapted and moved it to the industry defence strategy (Șușnea, 

Iftene,  2018).  Different  tools  has  been  developed  for  data  reconnaissance  and  intelligence 

gathering. 

Some  popular  applications  for  collecting  different  types  of  public  information  are  Creepy, 

Maltego, theHarvester, Recon-ng and many more (Chauhan S. and Panda N. K., 2015). As search 

engine technique, Nihad at al, recommend the use of Google dork for sophisticated research  since 

it has countless dedicated operators that help advanced and targeted searches (Nihad and Rami, 

2018). 

Deanna  Caputo,  behavioural  scientist  at  MITRE's  Social,  Behavioral,  and  Linguistic  Sciences 

Department suggested that ‘technology always in some way involves human beings’ and therefore 

‘you can't tackle a technological challenge without taking into account human nature’ (Caputo, 

2012). Human elements are also a major factor in UIT. Previous research has explored personality 

traits  with  the  aim  of  discovering  specific  characteristic  that  indicate  insider  threat.  Previous 

studies stress how personality could put people at risk of cybercrime. Holt et al. , investigated the 

magnitude  to  which  personality  traits  and  user  behaviours  involve  the  likelihood  of  malicious 

software 

infections 

(Holt,  Van  Wilsem,  Van  de  Weijer,  &  Leukfeldt,  2018).  

Weijer and Leukfeldt (Wijer and Leukfeldt, 2017) examine how the big-five personal attributes 

can cause exposure to attacks and they found evidence of certain people’s traits directly linked 

with  cyber  victimization.  Borwell  et  al.  remarked  that  the  human  element  is  recognized  as  the 

weakest link in information security, and there is often a connection between behaviour of humans 

and cybercrimes exploitations (Borwell, Jansen, Stol, 2018). 

A particularly interesting study explored insider threat events with malicious intent and proposed 

a justification across a connection between these and ‘Dark Triad’ personality attributes (difficult 

personalities with traits as Machiavellianism, narcissism and psychopathy) (Maasberg, Warren, & 

Beebe, 2015).   The  above  mentioned  papers  has  been  used  as  background  for  exploring  the 

possible link between unintentional incident and user behaviour. Further analysis has taken into 

consideration the outcome in previous research works and the  correlation on big-five (openness, 

conscientiousness,  agreeableness,  extraversion,  and  neuroticism),  DISC  (dominance,  influence, 

steadiness, 

conscientiousness) 

and 

cybercrime 

activity. 

Most  existing  works,  however,  focus  on  intentional  insider  threats  with  the  organisational 

boundary. Nurse et al. , describe the personality characteristic element as a factor of antecedents 

or key initial reasons to understanding an individual’s propensity to attack (Nurse, Buckley, Legg, 

Goldsmith,  Creese,  Wright,  &  Whitty,  2014).  Additionally,  INSA  underline  that  certain 

personality traits may predispose an employee to acts of espionage, theft, violence, or destruction 

(INSA, 2017). Personality as a collection of behaviours, cognitions, and emotional patterns has an 

impact on an individual’s thinking and doing (Cherry, 2019). As a result, this could be of use in 

terms of indicating possible involvement in activities that could threaten organisations. 

Our  research  was  based  on  an  extensive  literature  review  and  the  assessment  of  current  cyber 

security defence capabilities to contain UIT. This work permits to identify a specific use case that 

includes  current  challenges  in  an  unknown  environment,  i.e.  social  media  while  providing  the 

opportunity to define an innovative countermeasure approach based on personality.  

 
                                                           IV. Method and data. 

In  this  section,  recommendations  include  targeted,  risk-based  approaches  that  focus  on  the 

following  two  areas:  event  detection  and  personality  screening.  A  thorough  literature  review 

supported the development of a framework that includes threat vectors and human factors with the 

aim of discovering a new methodology that is twice as impactful helping to detect data leakage on 

social media and identify personality traits that can support a preventive cyber defence activity 

through a process for risk mitigation.     

                                        Figure 4. UIT method framework. 

                                                            Phase 1: Threat vector. 

In our research, datasets were collected following the best practice of the social media intelligence  

discipline  (SOCMINT),  a  branch  of  open-source  intelligence  (OSINT)  (Schaurer,  2012).   

SOCMINT describes methods and technologies that allow monitor social media website such as 

LinkedIn,  Instagram,  Facebook  or  Twitter  and  simultaneously  collect  publicly  available  data. 

Google  dork  is  a  passive  information  gathering  method  based  on  query  Google  engine  against 

certain specific information. This tool has many special features to help in finding sensitive data 

that we could apply in this research. More details  about how to use Boolean string to refine and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
target specific hunt in Google and in order to discover information about companies, employees 

and geolocations can be found in Johnny Long book ‘Google Hacking  for Penetration Testers’ 

(Long, 2004). Some of the most valuable operators available in Google Dorking are shown in table 

1. 

Table 1. Google Dorking Operators 

The variables of interest in our study were: site; country/region; company name; and employee 

categories (contractor, consultant, full-time, temporary).  

The execution of the following query “ site:website.com inurl:in ("Region Area, Country" AND 

"company name") & ("consultant" OR "contractor" OR "full time" OR "temporary")” resulted in 

a  first list of raw data equal to (n=866) records.  

Different methods have been investigated in recent years and various solution has been provided 

in order to collect data online. Two of these techniques generated great interest and result: web-

scraping and application programming interface (API) (Willers, 2017). The final goal of both, web 

scraping and API, is to retrieve web information. Web scraping extract public accessible data from 

website beyond the use of software. Differently, API offer direct access and extraction of the data. 

Our research, through the open source tool  Data Scraper, extracted data out of HTML web pages 

previously  settled  with  Google  dork  and  imports  it  into  Microsoft  Excel  spreadsheets. 

The  dataset  previously  obtained  was  subjected  a  data  wrangling  through  the  application  Open 

Refine including: inspection: detect unexpected, incorrect, and inconsistent data; cleaning: fix or 

remove any identified anomalies, then verifying: results were inspected to verify correctness.  

Following  this  processes,  in  our  research,  n  =  470  results  with  unique  and  consistent  profiles 

remained.  

In the first phase of this analysis, the intention was anomalous detection based on the infringement 

of security police and non-disclosure agreements on social media. Due to the small number of data 

points, a manual qualitative analysis was performed (with the support of an automatic string search 

on python language). This attribute-based analysis took into consideration all sections of LinkedIn, 

however, the most significant data for investigation were found in the ‘Summary and Experience’ 

table.  The ‘Summary’ normally includes name, photo, headline, most recent company, education, 

contact information and a brief career story. The ‘experience section’ usually contains job title, 

company, location, dates of employment and detail information about each job experience. The 

user detection list was established according to the information disclosure classification in Table 

2 and ranked as low or high-risk impact. 

Table 2. Iinformation disclosure classification. 

Social networks promote users to divulge information about their job functions, responsibilities, 

family,  interests,  hobbies  and  beyond,  apparently  with  the  scope  of  engaging  them  in  a  wider 

network with their friends and colleagues. However, the amount and the sensitivity of information 

disclosed without any form of protection and filter could become extremely risky. 

The description details of what you do in your current (or past) job can leverage the disclosure of 

company classified information. This paper focuses on the leak of internal sensitive information: 

classified projects, further merger or acquisition, further financial investment in specific area of 

interest;  internal  ICT  infrastructure:  software  and  hardware  in  use;  sensitive  role  information: 

which employees have access to critical systems or key stakeholders, or who has authority within 

the company; personal information linked with the job: travels, connections, comments. 

 
Qualitative interpretation  and  evaluation  of each  profile resulted in  a list  of n  = 120 users that 

exposed information about employer on social media. Figure 5 shown additional insight. 

                                 Figure 5. User Risk Assessment. 

Fifty-nine  percent  of  users  were  not  relevant  and  were  labelled  as  low-risk  profiles.  Forty-one 

percent of examined profiles demonstrated a certain level of sensitive information disclosed. The 

sample population of this research is shown in Table 3.  

Table 3. High risk traits 

                                                          Phase 2: Human factor. 

The second phase of this research related to human factors and building a personality model for 

each  user.  This  was  a  preliminary  study  constricted  by  finance,  time  and  manpower.  Focus 

remained on quickly developing and deploying a pragmatic solution. Following careful analysis 

of open source tools available in the market, several products were tested although two got primary 

attention  for  similar  characteristics:  Crystal  and  Emma.  Both  products  are  based  on  artificial 

intelligence and easy to configure. The two tools have been evaluated based on rating and review. 

Their capabilities were finally verified throughout 10 volunteers that took part in a study aimed to 

compare, verify and confirm the reliability of the results. Crystal was ultimately chosen because it 

appeared more mature, accurate and was able to provide with a more in-depth analysis.  

 
 
 
 
 
Through the use of algorithms that evaluate the communicative content available on LinkedIn and 

then with  statistical  modelling,  this application  judges personalities corresponding  to  the DISC 

model  classification  system  (Marston,  2008).  DISC  is  a  behaviour  assessment  focused  on  four 

different personality traits: Dominance (D), Influence (I), Steadiness (S), and Conscientiousness 

(C).  Crystal algorithms are assessing the public data available in  any profile and provide text-

sample  analysis  from  writing  style  and  structure  (D’Agostino  and  Skloot,  2019).  Additionally, 

Crystal  handles  what  others,  in  your  close  network  circles,  have  written  about  you  (Figure  6). 

Crystal can only retrieve information that is being publicly shown. The final goal is to identify 

people behavioural patterns as accurately as possible. The benefit of using a text-sample approach 

is the accuracy and the independent framework that avoid third party commitment. The two major 

flaws are the need of sufficient data sample for the analysis and the possibility of  intentionally 

ingest poisoned data for alter the result.  Traits are shown in the Table 4. 

Table 4. DISC personality traits. 

Previous research has demonstrated that personality elements have a degree of impact on internal 
threats (Xiangyu, Qiuyang & Chandel, 2017). This fact supports the assertion that an evaluation 
of employee personality traits could be used as indicator in the overall risk screening. Previous 
literature has also revealed that specific high scores in traits such as extraversion and openness, 
and low scores in neuroticism, agreeableness, and conscientiousness, correspond with risk-taking 
behaviour.  Specifically,  Xiangyu  et  al.  emphasised  that  personality  profiles,  based  on  the  ‘Big 
Five’ methodology (Goldberg, 1990), could be used to predict risk-taking behaviour according to 
the following description:  

‘high extraversion and openness stream the motivational force for risk taking; low 
neuroticism and agreeableness supply the insulation against guilt or anxiety about 
negative  consequences,  and  low  conscientiousness  makes  it  easier  to  cross  the 
cognitive  barriers  of  need  for  control,  deliberation  and  conformity’  (Nicholson, 
Soane, Fenton-O'Creevy & Willman, 2005).    

 
 
 
 
Research  about  the  influence  of  personality  on  self-disclosure  of  information  on  social  media 

demonstrates  that  individuals  who  are  more  extroverted  disclose  more  accurate  personal 

information in an attempt to gain more relevance and improve their position on the web (Chen, 

Pan  &  Guo,  2016).  This  correlation  supports  the  Five-factor  Model  and  the  DISC  personality 

assessment  (Jones,  Morris  &  Hartley,  2013).  Following  on  from  this  research,  as  well  as  the 

subsequent assessment while reviewing of traits in each model the following parallels to DISC 

have been made: 

•  Conscientiousness’ = a parallel to DISC personality type C. 

• 

‘Agreeable’ = a parallel to DISC personality type S. 

• 

‘Extroverted’ = a parallel to DISC personality type I. 

•  A combination of ‘Openness’ and ‘Neuroticism’ = a parallel to DISC personality type D. 

In  addition,  when  looking  at  a  DISC  profile,  both  S  and  C  personality  styles  fall  to  the  more 

‘introverted’ side of the DISC spectrum, while D and I personality styles are considered to be more 

classically ‘extroverted’. 

According to the above analyses, the following hypotheses have been made: 

•  Hypothesis  1:  Dominant  traits  correlate  with  high-risk  taking.  These  traits  include: 

decisiveness, having a high ego, strength, being a risk taker, and overstepping authority. 

 
 
 
 
•  Hypothesis  2:  Influence  traits  correlate  with  high-risk  taking.  These  traits  include: 

persuasiveness, talkativeness, impulsiveness, being emotional and being more concerned 

with acceptance than concrete results.  

•  Hypothesis 3: Steadiness traits correlate with low-risk taking. These traits include: being 

predictable, understanding, friendly and compliant towards authority 

•  Hypothesis 4: Conscientiousness traits correlate with low-risk taking. These traits include: 

sticking to the rules, standards, procedures and protocols. 

From the previous phase, ‘Threat vector’, the users (n=120) was processed by software Crystal 

and  categorized  in  the  four  unique  DISC  groups  as  shown  in  Figure  7.  The  personality  traits 

provide  the  most  accurate  possible  personality  profile  based  on  the  information  available  in 

LinkedIn (Skloot, 2019).  

Figure 7. Personality Risk Indicators 

Phase 3: Insider threat prevention. 

These predictions were based on interpretation of previous literature and experiment conducted 

between March  –  October 2019 and results  have offered significant  validation of the proposed 

hypotheses. The n between threat vector and human factor is summarized in Table 5. 

49 incidents have been recorded: 9 associated with dominance traits (18%), 3 with influence (6%), 

6 with steadiness (12%) and 31 with conscientiousness (64%).  

Table 5. Data analysis. 

 
 
 
 
Pareto analysis has been used to correlate both variables, incidents and behavioural characteristics. 

The evaluation made on the information exposure causes (Figure 8) reveals that the major source 

to  the  incidents  is  related  with  two  types  of  employee’s  traits.  80%  of  incidents  are  caused  by 

unintentional  actions  attributable  to  conscientiousness  and  dominant  behaviour.  Focusing  the 

countermeasure  effort  in  security  awareness  and  additional  technical  controls  to  those  specific 

groups could reduce or contain the disclosure of information. 

Figure 8. Pareto Analysis on UIT 

Investigating  how  personality  affects  data  disclosure  on  LinkedIn  has  provided  the  following 

findings: 

Hypotheses 1, 2 and 3 are positively correlated with the expected data exposure on social media 

(1 and 2 as high risk-taking profile and 3 as low risk-taking behaviour). Results showed that higher 

scores on behavioural traits of dominance (H1) and influence (H2) were significantly related to 

high number of data disclosure. In contrast emotional stability/steady (H3) recorded a low number 

of  disclosure  cases.  Against  research  expectation,  conscientiousness  (H4)  shown  the  highest 

number of data disclosure. Therefore, H4 was negatively correlated with the results.  

•  The  trait  characteristics  of  dominant  personality  styles  are  openness,  neuroticism, 

extroversion and aversion to authority. It was reasonable to hypothesize that staff with traits 

of  openness  would  be  engaged  in  low  levels  of  data  disclosure  concerns  and  as 

consequences share unnecessary information. 

The influence profile characteristics are extroversion, sociability, and talkativeness; they 

want to be the centre of attention. I-styles crave interactions with others and, as a result of 

this, higher disclosure of personal information was expected and confirmed. 

•  People who demonstrate steadiness personality characteristics demonstrate traits including 

being: careful, calm, stable, more passive, predictable, and reliable. The lowest number of 

data disclosure in relation to this group appears to confirm thesis supported in this research. 

• 

Individuals  who  rate  conscientiousness,  they  strictly  follow  procedures  and  standards. 

They  tend  to  be  cautious  and  contemplative  and  are  not  natural  risk  takers.  It  was  not 

possible to identify a causal explanation of why this personality trait resulted in the highest 

in data disclosure.  

                                                    V. Discussion 

This research shows that individual differences in personality can be used as an additional indicator 

for deterring UIT. Three out of four hypotheses were positively confirmed. Individuals with higher 

‘dominant’ and ‘influence’ traits were more prone to accepting risk and increase the number of 

incidents  resulting  in  sensitive  data  disclosure.  On  the  contrary,  individuals  with  ‘reliable’  and 

‘extremely 

loyal’ 

characteristics  were 

associated  with 

a 

lower 

incident 

rate.  

A conscientiousness profile could not confirm the hypothesis of low risk-taking. In order to explain 

that result, an assumption is required based on inductive reasoning. A consciences style, taken to 

an extreme, could display addiction to work, perfectionism, attention to detail and compulsiveness 

behaviour  traits.  Even  though  conscientiousness  positively  interacts  with  psychological  well‐

being, theoretical and empirical work suggest that individuals can be excessively conscientious, 

resulting  in  obsessive‐compulsiveness,  and  thereby  less  positive  individual  outcomes  (Carter, 

Guan, Maples, Williamson, and Miller, 2015). Their argument does not appear to satisfactorily 

explain this result however and further analysis is needed. Further analysis should be employed to 

 
 
support  an  understanding  of  why  this  profile  was  associated  with  the  highest  information 

disclosure. 

Limitations  and  challenges  (both  theoretical  and  technical)  were  encountered  during  the 

development  of  this  research.  Social  media  and  search  engines  are  continually  reviewing  their 

privacy policies. It became difficult for programmers to interact with application program interface 

(API)  and  to  automate  functions  that  collect  and  analyse  data  online.  Dataset  change  occurs 

continually as users add, modify or remove the data. The ability to interpret or predict what will 

happen  based  on  behavioural  traits  is  limited.  When  proposing  DISC  behavioural  styles,  it  is 

recommended that consideration is given to style blends, rather than focusing solely on a person’s 

mostly highly scoring trait. Most people will, in fact, show more of some traits and less of others 

and could possibly have some of all four traits. There are some concerns about the implications 

that large-scale data mining and analytics could have for society, particularly regarding the impact 

on privacy, mass surveillance regimes and social bias (Kennedy & Moss, 2015). 

                                                VI. Conclusion and further work. 

Accidental insiders pose a serious threat to every business. Employees are the most valuable assets 

of  any  company,  but  they  can  also  become  the  most  substantial  security  threat.  Research  has 

indicated that a considerable percentage of cybersecurity incidents and data leakages are caused 

by a current or former employee acting inadvertently. The expansion of online activity and social 

networking in recent years has jeopardized security and caused significant losses to organisations 

due to leakage of information by their own employees (Johnson, 2016). 

 
 
 
When assessing the overall risk of unintentional insider threat, it is important to consider different 

aspects to prevent, detect and respond in case of an incident. The preventative measures currently 

in use, based on purely technical approaches, are insufficient; defending insider threats requires 

more than technology (Stahie, 2019). The aim of this research was to develop a framework that 

provided  possibilities  for  detecting  data  leakage  within  an  organisation  and  exploring  the 

personality  sphere  linked  to  those  incidents,  in  order  to  find  common  characteristics  that  can 

support  a  predictive  defence  capability.  Building  a  comprehensive  IT  security  program  should  

take into consideration the reduction of blaming and punishment to the end users because often 

they are the victims. As recommended by CERT,  a positive incentive offer the possibility of a 

more  reasonable  and  beneficial  approach  to  reducing  the  insider  threat  with  less  undesirable 

consequences (CERT, 2016).  

The evolution of technology has progressed to the same extent as security challenges (Schneir, 

2018).  Threats,  arising  from  internal  personnel’s  activities  or  lack  of  awareness,  appear  to 

represent  a  higher  risk  to  information  security  than  challenges  triggered  by  outside  attackers 

(Hekkala, Väyrynen & Wiander, 2012). This study contributed to the perception of how additional 

protection  regarding  data  leakage  from  UIT  can  be  achieved  on  social  media.  Expanding  on 

previous research, a new framework for insider threat detection and prevention was presented and 

developed based on social media domains and personality traits. This paper differentiates itself 

from  existing  research  which  is  based  almost  exclusively  on  technical  indicators.  The  test 

environment  included  an  attempt  to  correlate  incident  detection  tracking  using  advanced 

techniques, searches, and risk-taking personality traits based on SOCMINT techniques and DISC 

methodology. Contrary to research expectation, the results obtained shows that conscientiousness 

 
 
traits result  to be the most risky profile in data disclosure. Additionally, steady seam to confirm 

the aversion of risky attitude and avoid incidents. Once again this proves the complexity of insider 

threat subject and the difficulties to  encounter trustable indicators that can prevent data leakage. 

Even  if  they  have  signed  non-disclosure  agreements  and  are  bound  to  security  policy  and 

regulation, people disclose information. Revealing information about someone to others is part of 

being  human  but  doing  that  over  social  media  can  be  extremely  dangerous.  A  social  media 

audience is unlimited, and cybercriminals are scanning and targeting employees in real-time with 

the  purpose  of  collecting  sensitive  data  that  can  be  utilised  in  offensive  activity  such  as  social 

engineering  or  phishing.  The  result  of  information  disclosure  can  have  dramatic  financial  and 

reputational  consequences  (Long,  Fang  &  Danfeng,  2017).  Incident  detection  correlated  with 

personality trait analysis could help decrease the overall risk but this needs to be integrated with 

other indicators. If it is used alone there is a risk it could be over interpreted when it cannot be 

considered a constant/established trait; people’s actions are influenced by different circumstances. 

This  research  was  based  on  risk-taking  behaviour  however,  other  relevant  human  factors  can 

influence  daily  activity  such  as  fatigue,  stress  and  environmental  variables  (Carnegie  Mellon 

University, 2013). 

Unintentional insider threat presents a problem to security practitioners and academics alike and 

further research is necessary to develop a more exhaustive understanding of risk tolerance in the 

context of UIT. In the future, organisations will inevitable rely more on online services such as the 

Cloud. Cutting edge technology and unpredictable situations (such as the COVID-19 pandemic, 

 
 
where a large portion of the workforce has suddenly transitioned to teleworking) can significantly 

increase insider risk.  

Randy Trzeciak, director of the CERT National Insider Threat Centre, is quoted as having said 

‘this  extraordinary  situation  has  increased  risk  factors  for  insider  incident’  (Carnegie  Mellon 

University,  2020).  As  a  result,  insider  threats  will  become  progressively  more  complex  and 

difficult to identify. Moving from traditional detection methods to new approaches, such as those 

analysed  in  this  case  study,  will  soon  be  insufficient.  Technologies  such  as  data  science  and 

artificial intelligence might be soon be implemented to support detection of insider threats before 

they cause irreversible damage (Jou, 2019). In February 2020 during the last RSA conference, one 

of the most important information security worldwide summits, experts suggested that enterprises 

should  develop  their  own  risk  algorithms  by  combining  machine  learning  capabilities  with 

behavioural  analytics  (Asokan,  2020).  Next  steps  will  concern  further  work  on  joint  multi-risk 

domain indicators that could be used as a UIT deterrent. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURES 

Number of social network users worldwide from 2010 to 2021 (in billions) 

Figure 1. Number of social network users worldwide from 2010 to 2021 (Statista, 2020) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Insider Threat type 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Insider Threat Program Roadmap (INSA, 2015) 

Figure 4. UIT method framework 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

User Risk Assessment

71

49

High Risk

Low Risk

Figure 5. User Risk Assessment 

Experience

About

Activity

Profile

Personality 
Profile

Education

Figure 6. Personality profile. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
Personality Risk Indicators

60

40

20

39

31

0
CONSCIENTIOUSNESSSTEADINESS

6

17

3

3

9

12

INFLUENCE

DOMINANCE

High Risk

Low Risk

Figure 7. Personality Risk Indicators 

Figure 8. Pareto Analysis on UIT 

TABLES 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1. Google Dorking Operators 

Type of information 

Intitle: Looks out for mentioned words in the Page title 
Inurl: Looks out for mentioned words in the URL. 
Filetype: This is used to find filetypes. 
Intext: This helps to search for specific text on the page 
site: Results from within a specific website 
OR: Search for one of two keywords 
AND: Search for one and other keywords 
"": Search for a specific combination of keywords 

Table 2. Information disclosure classification 

Type of information 

Internal sensitive information 
Internal ICT infrastructure 
Sensitive role information 
Personal information linked with the job 

Table 3. High risk traits 

Traits 

Male 
n=46 

Female 
n=3 

Age 
Work experience 
Role 

24-32 years 
24-58 years 
6 months-18 years 
3 months-3 years 
20%Technical-80% Managerial  100%Managerial 

Table 4. DISC personality traits. 

Dominance 

Influence 

Steadiness 

Conscientiousness 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Direct 
Result-oriented 
Decisive 

Extrovert 

Neurotics 

s
o
r
P

s
n
o
C

Inspirational 
Interactive 
Outgoing 

Patient 
Tactful 
Agreeable 

Extrovert 

Slow 

Analytical 
Reserve 
Precise 

Calculating 

Impulsive 

Sensitive 

Condescending 

Table 5. Data analysis. 

DISC 

Events 

Incidents  %Data Disclosed  

Dominance 
21 
Influence 
6 
23 
Steadiness 
Conscientiousness  70 

9 
3 
6 
31 

18% 
6% 
12% 
63% 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References: 

Aaltola M. (2019). Geostrategically motivated co-option of social media. Retrieved from: 
https://www.fiia.fi/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/bp267_geostrategically_motivated_co-
option_of_social-media.pdf67_geostrategically_motivated_co-option_of_social-
media.pdf&usg=AOvVaw0ACCbu_3czY2_ORvF3pUWp 

Anagi Gamachchi, Serdar Boztas, (2017). Insider Threat Detection Through Attributed Graph 
Clustering. 2017. 16th IEEE International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in 
Computing and Communications. 

Asokan A. (2020). How Machine Learning Can Strengthen Insider Threat Detection. Retrieved  
from https://www.bankinfosecurity.com/how-machine-learning-strengthen-insider-threat-
detection-a-13790 

Borwell J., Jansen J., and Stol W. (2018).  Human factors leading to online fraud victimisation: 
Literature review and exploring the role of personality traits. Retrieved from: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325195147_Human_factors_leading_to_online_fraud_
victimisation_Literature_review_and_exploring_the_role_of_personality_traits 

Burkett, Randy. (2013). An alternative Framework for Agent Recruitment: From MICE to 
RASCLS. Studies in intelligence Vol. 57. No 1. USA. Central Intelligence Agency. Pp 7-17 

Cappelli, D. M., Moore, A. P., & Trzeciak, R. F. (2012). The CERT Guide to Insider Threats, 
page XX. 

Carnegie Mellon University. (2013). Unintentional Insider Threats: A foundational study. 
Retrieved March 20, 2020 from CERT, (2013). Unintentional Insider Threats: A foundational 
study. 

Carnegie Mellon University. (2020). Insider Threats in the Time of COVID-19. Retrieved from 
https://www.sei.cmu.edu/news-events/news/article.cfm?assetId=638958 

Carter N. T., Guan L., Maples J.L., Williamson R.L., Miller J.D. (2015). The Downsides of 
Extreme Conscientiousness for Psychological Well‐being: The Role of Obsessive Compulsive 
Tendencies. Retrieved from: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/274723683_The_Downsides_of_Extreme_Conscientio
usness_for_Psychological_Well-being_The_Role_of_Obsessive_Compulsive_Tendencies 

Caputo D. (2012). Applying behavioral science to the challenges of cybersecurity. Retrieved 
from https://www.mitre.org/careers/working-at-mitre/employee-voices/applying-behavioral-
science-to-the-challenges-of-cybersecurity 

CERT, SEI. (2013). Unintentional Insider Threats: A Foundational Study (CMU/SEI-2013-TN-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
022). Retrieved from http://resources.sei.cmu.edu/library/asset-view.cfm?assetid=58744 

CERT, SEI. (2018). Common Sense Guide to Mitigating Insider Threats, Sixth Edition. Pp 5-6. 
Retrieved from: 
https://resources.sei.cmu.edu/asset_files/TechnicalReport/2019_005_001_540647.pdf 

CERT, SEI. (2016). The Critical Role of Positive Incentives for Reducing Insider Threats. 
Retrieved from: 
https://resources.sei.cmu.edu/asset_files/TechnicalReport/2016_005_001_484929.pdf 

Chauhan S. and Panda N. K. (2015). Hacking Web Intelligence: Open Source Intelligence and 
Web Reconnaissance Concepts and Techniques. Pp 101. Syngress, 225 Wyman Street, Waltham, 
MA 02451, USA 

Chen X., Pan Y., Guo B. (2016). The influence of personality traits and social networks on the 
self-disclosure behavior of social network site users. Retrieved  from 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/303316556_The_influence_of_personality_traits_and_
social_networks_on_the_self-disclosure_behavior_of_social_network_site_users 

Cherry K. (2019). What Is Personality and Why Does It Matter? Retrieved from 
https://www.verywellmind.com/what-is-personality-2795416 

Cimpanu C. (2019). FBI warning: Foreign spies using social media to target government 
contractors. Retrieved from https://www.zdnet.com/article/fbi-warning-foreign-spies-using-
social-media-to-target-government-contractors/ 

Cross M. (2014). Social Media Security. Leveraging Social Networking While Mitigating Risk. 
Waltham, MA. USA. Syngress Publishing,Inc. 

Kont M., Pihelgas M., Wojtkowiak J., Trinberg L., & Osula A.M. (2015). Insider Threat 
Detection Study. Retrieved from https://ccdcoe.org/uploads/2018/10/ 
Insider_Threat_Study_CCDCOE.pdf 

Elifoglu I. H., Abel I, and Tasseven O. (2018). Minimizing Insider Threat Risk with Behavioral 
Monitoring . Retrieve from https://www.stjohns.edu/sites/default/files/uploads/review-of-
business-382-june_2018.pdf 

ESET and Myers-Briggs. (2019). Cybertechnology: the human factor. Retrieved from 
https://cdn1.esetstatic.com/ESET/UK/Collateral/White_Paper_Cyberchology.pdf 

Friedlander G. (2016). How to change user behavior and reduce risk by over 50%. Retrieved 
from https://ciotechworld.com/how-to-change-user-behavior-and-reduce-risk-by-over-50/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Goldberg L. R. (1990). An alternative "description of personality": The Big-Five factor structure. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59(6), 1216–1229. Retrieved from  
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.59.6.1216 

Hekkala K., Väyrynen R., Wiander T. (2012). Information Security Challenges of Social Media 
for Companies. Retrieved from 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/264894370_Information_Security_Challenges_of_Soci
al_Media_for_Companies 

Holt T.J., Bossler A. M. (2016). Cybercrime in Progress: Theory and prevention of technology-
enabled offenses. Pp 156. Crime Science Series. London: Routledge. 
Holt T.J., Van Wilsem J., Van de Weijer S., Leukfeldt R., (2018). Testing an Integrated Self-
Control and Routine Activities Framework to Examine Malware Infection Victimization. Social 
Science Computer Review. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1177/0894439318805067. 

IBM. (2017). Insider Threats: The Danger Within. Retrieved from  
https://www.ibm.com/industries/federal/cybersecurity-insider-threats 

Intelligence and National Security Alliance. (2015). Insider Threat Program Roadmap. Retrieved 
from https://www.insaonline.org/insider-threat-roadmap/ 

INSA. Assessing the mind of the malicious insider: using behavioral model and data analytics to 
improve continuous evaluation. Retrieved from https://www.insaonline.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/04/INSA_WP_Mind_Insider_FIN.pdf 

iSIGHT Partners. (2014). Newscaster: An Iranian Threat Within Social networks. Retrieved 
from: 
https://paper.seebug.org/papers/APT/APT_CyberCriminal_Campagin/2014/2014.05.28.NewsCa
ster_An_Iranian_Threat_Within_Social_Networks/file-2581720763-pdf.pdf 

Javers E. (2019). Here’s why LinkedIn is a ‘gold mine’ for foreign spies digging for corporate 
and government secrets. Retrieved from https://www.cnbc.com/2019/11/08/linkedin-is-a-gold-
mine-for-spies-seeking-corporate-govt-secrets.html 

Johnson C. (2016). How Social Media Jeopardizes Data Security. Retrieved from 
https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/272459 

Jones C.S., Morris R, Hartley N.T. (2013). Comparing Correlations Between  Four-Quadrant 
And Five-Factor Personality Assessments. Retrieved from 
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1054970.pdf 

Jou S. (2019). How to use Artificial Intelligence to Prevent Insider Threats. Retrieved from 
https://community.microfocus.com/t5/Security-Blog/How-to-use-Artificial-Intelligence-to-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prevent-Insider-Threats/ba-p/2686761 

Kennedy H, Moss G. (2015). Known or knowing publics? Social media data mining and the 
question of public agency. Retrieved from 
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/2053951715611145 

Kont, M., Pihelgas, M., Wojtkowiak, J., Trinberg, L., & Osula, A.-M. (2015). Insider Threat  

Long C., Fang L.  and Danfeng Y. (2017). Enterprise data breach: causes, challenges, prevention, 
and future directions. Retrieved from 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318152978_Enterprise_data_breach_causes_challenges
_prevention_and_future_directions_Enterprise_data_breachfrom 

Long D. J. (2004). Google Hacking for Penetration Testers. Rockland, MA. USA. Syngress 
Publishing,Inc. 

Mahfuth A. (2019). Human Factor as Insider threat in Organizations. International Journal of 
Computer Science and Information Security (IJCSIS), Vol. 17, No. 12, December 2019. 

Maasberg M., Warren J., Beebe N.L. (2015). The dark side of the insider: detecting the insider 
threat through examination of dark triad personality traits. Retrieved from 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/283296167_The_Dark_Side_of_the_Insider_Detecting
_the_Insider_Threat_Through_Examination_of_Dark_Triad_Personality_Traits 

Marston W. M., (2008). Emotions of Normal People. Louth, UK Cooper Press. 

Nicholson N., Soane E., Fenton-O'Creevy M., Willman P. (2005). Personality and Domain-
Specific Risk Taking. Retrieved from 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/38174010_Personality_and_Domain-
Specific_Risk_Taking from 

Nihad and Rami, 2018). Open Source Intelligence Methods and Tools: A Practical Guide to 
Online Intelligence. New York City, USA. Apress Publisher. 

Nurse J.R.C., Buckley O., Legg P.A., Goldsmith M., Creese S., Wright G.R.T, Whitty M. 
(2014). Understanding Insider Threat: A Framework for Characterizing Attacks. Retrieved from 
https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/160607091.pdf 

Office of the Information and Privacy Commissioner of Alberta. (2018). OIPC Investigation 
Finds City of Calgary Properly Responded to Privacy Breach. Retrieved from 
https://www.oipc.ab.ca/news-and-events/news-releases/2018/oipc-investigation-finds-city-of-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
calgary-properly-responded-to-privacy-breach.aspx 

Omand D., Bartlett J., Miller C., (2012). Introducing social media intelligence (SOCMINT). 
Retrieved from 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/262869934_Introducing_social_media_intelligence_S
OCMINT 

Karampelas P. (2017). An organizational visualization profiler tool based on social interactions. 
Pp 369-394. Switzerland. Springer International Publishing. 

Petters J. (2020). What is an Insider Threat? Definition and Examples. Retrieved from 
https://www.varonis.com/blog/insider-threats/ 

Ponemon Institute. (2020). 2020 Cost of insider threats global report. Retrieved from 
https://www.observeit.com/cost-of-insider-threats/ 

Powell T. and Sammut-Bonnici T. (2015). Pareto analysis. Retrieved from: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/272353122_Pareto_Analysis 

Sheetz M. (2019). Meet Paige Thompson, who is accused of hacking Capital One and stealing 
the data of 100 million people. Retrieved from https://www.cnbc.com/2019/07/30/paige-
thompson-alleged-capital-one-hacker-stole-100-million-peoples-data.html 

Sheridan K. (2019). Capital One: What we should learn this time. Retrieved from 
https://www.darkreading.com/cloud/capital-one-what-we-should-learn-this-time/d/d-id/1335426 

Șușnea E. and Iftene A. (2018). The Significance of Online Monitoring Activities for the Social 
Media Intelligence. Retrieved from https://ibn.idsi.md/sites/default/files/imag_file/MFOI-
2018_0.pdf#page=230 

Stahie S. (2019). Insider Threat Is Still the Biggest Danger for Companies – Data Loss 
Prevention Is Not Working. Retrieved from https://securityboulevard.com/2019/10/insider-
threat-is-still-the-biggest-danger-for-companies-data-loss-prevention-is-not-working/ 

Schneir B. (2018). How changing technology affects security. Retrieved from 
https://www.wired.com/insights/2014/02/changing-technology-affects-security/ 

Trend Micro. (2018). The Importance of Employee Cybersecurity Training: Top Strategies and 
Best Practices. Retrieved from https://blog.trendmicro.com/the-importance-of-employee-
cybersecurity-training-top-strategies-and-best-practices/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trzeciak R. (2017). 5 Best practices to Prevent Insider Threat. Retrieved from 
https://insights.sei.cmu.edu/sei_blog/2017/11/5-best-practices-to-prevent-insider-threat.html 

Shelley V. (2013). Shhh… Can You Keep a Secret? Protecting Against Insider Threats. 
Retrieved from https://securityintelligence.com/insider-threats-how-keep-secret/ 

Schaurer, F. (2012). “Social Media Intelligence (SOCMINT). Same Song, New Melody?” 
OSINT Blog. Retrieved from http://osintblog.org/2012/10/31/social-media-intelligence-socmint-
same-song-new-melody/. 

Skloot G. (2019). How Accurate Is Crystal? Retrieved from 
https://www.crystalknows.com/blog/crystal-accuracy 

Statista. (2020). Number of social network users worldwide from 2010 to 2023. Retrieved from 
https://www.statista.com/aboutus/ 

Warwick A. (2019). Former AWS engineer arrested for Capital One data breach. Retrieved  from 
https://www.computerweekly.com/news/252467556/Former-AWS-engineer-arrested-for-
Capital-One-data-breach 

Wijer S.G.A. and Leukfeldt E. (2017). Big Five Personality Traits of Cybercrime Victims. 
Retrieved from: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/317987452_Big_Five_Personality_Traits_of_Cybercri
me_Victims 

D’Agostino D. and Skloot G. (2019).Predicting Personality: Using AI to Understand People and 
Win More Business. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey. 

Willers J. (2017). Methods for extracting data from the Internet. Retrieved from: 
https://lib.dr.iastate.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=6650&context=etd 

Xiangyu L., Qiuyang L., Chandel S. (2017). Social Engineering and Insider Threats. Retrieved 
from 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322412904_Social_Engineering_and_Insider_Threats 

Zafarani R., Abbasi  M. A., Liu H. (2014). Social Media Mining: An Introduction. New York, 
NY. USA. Cambridge University press. 

Zulkarnaen, Rasdan, Mat Daud, Ghani, Suriatini & Hery (2016). Human Factors in 
Cybersecurity. Human Factor of Online Social Media Cybersecurity. Risk Impact on Critical 
National Information Infrastructure. Pp 196. Switzerland. Springer International Publishing. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
