1
2
0
2

v
o
N
2

]
h
p
-
t
n
a
u
q
[

2
v
8
4
5
2
1
.
3
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

Quantum Technology for Military Applications

Michal Krelina∗1,2

1Faculty of Nuclear Sciences and Physical Engineering, Czech Technical University in
Prague, Brehova 7, Prague, Czech Republic
2Quantum Phi s.r.o., Bryksova 944, Prague, Czech Republic

Abstract

Quantum technology is an emergent and potentially disruptive discipline, with the ability to
aﬀect many human activities. Quantum technologies are dual-use technologies, and as such are of
interest to the defence and security industry and military and governmental actors. This report
reviews and maps the possible quantum technology military applications, serving as an entry point
for international peace and security assessment, ethics research, military and governmental policy,
strategy and decision making. Quantum technologies for military applications introduce new capa-
bilities, improving eﬀectiveness and increasing precision, thus leading to ‘quantum warfare’, wherein
new military strategies, doctrines, policies and ethics should be established. This report provides
a basic overview of quantum technologies under development, also estimating the expected time
scale of delivery or the utilisation impact. Particular military applications of quantum technology
are described for various warfare domains (e.g.
land, air, space, electronic, cyber and underwater
warfare and ISTAR—intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition and reconnaissance), and related
issues and challenges are articulated.

Keywords: quantum warfare, quantum technology, quantum computing, quantum sensing, quantum
network, quantum radar, quantum imaging, military applications, quantum security, dual-use technology

1

Introduction

Although fourth generation modern warfare is characterised by decentralisation and the loss of states’
monopoly on war [1, 2], armies of advanced countries characteristically have access to state-of-the-art
military technologies. This includes the appearance of quantum technologies on the horizon.

The term quantum technology (QT) means the technology mostly arising out of the so-called second
quantum revolution. Earlier, the ﬁrst quantum revolution brought technologies that are familiar to us
today, such as nuclear power, semiconductors, lasers, magnetic resonance imaging, modern communica-
tion technologies or digital cameras and other imaging devices. The ﬁrst quantum technology resulted
in nuclear weapons and energy; then, the classical computer gained a signiﬁcant role. Presently, laser
weapons are being implemented and tested [3].

The second quantum revolution [4] is characterised by manipulating and controlling individual quantum
systems (such as atoms, ions, electrons, photons, molecules or various quasiparticles), allowing to reach
the standard quantum limit; that is, the limit to measurement accuracy at quantum scales.
In this
report, the term quantum technology refers to the technology from the second quantum revolution.
Quantum technology does not bring fundamentally new weapons or standalone military systems, but
rather signiﬁcantly enhances measurement capability, sensing, precision and computation power and
eﬃciency of the current and future military technology. Most of the quantum technologies typically are
technologies of dual use. Consequently, there is tremendous potential for military applications of quantum

∗michal.krelina@cvut.cz

1

 
 
 
 
 
 
technology. Various studies and recommendations are emerging, signalling the increasing likelihood of
such technology being realised; see, for example, [5, 6, 7, 8].

This report provides a more in-depth context in which to understand the term ‘quantum warfare’,
discussing the possibility of its aﬀecting the intelligence, security and defence sectors, and describing
new possible capabilities or improvements. The goal is not to provide a precise forecast of quantum-
based technologies, but rather to show possible directions and trends in implementation and applications.
Quantum technologies in general are considered emerging technologies, with the potential to change the
conduct of warfare and the outcomes of battles [8]. Although the current quantum technologies mostly
have low Technology Readiness Levels (TRL), they are believed to have disruptive potential [9]. The
mapping of quantum technologies’ conceivable military applications is also important for the further
assessment of threats to global peace and in the discussion of ethics policies or quantum-based preventive
arms control.

This report comprises eight sections. In Section 2, the terms ‘quantum technology’ and ‘quantum war-
fare’ are deﬁned, with the quantum technology taxonomy and quantum technologies being introduced.
Section 3 provides the basic quantum technology overview that is the foundation for a particular ap-
plication, including the expected time of deployment and utilisation impact. Section 4 presents the
general considerations and expectations regarding quantum technology development and deployment in
the military domain. In Section 5, the applications of individual quantum technologies in the military
are presented for various domains ( e.g. cyber, underwater, space and electronic warfare). Section 6
identiﬁes and discusses the quantum hype as well as the realistic possibilities. Section 7 contains the
initial discussion on related military, peace and ethical aspects as well as the technical consequences and
challenges. Section 8 concludes the paper.

Sections 5 and 4 concern national security and defence issues. Although Section 3 is based on state-of-the-
art research and provides related references, Section 5 is based more on various military or government
reports, policy briefs and international security analyses such as [5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13]. Here, the reader
should be wary of the hype surrounding quantum technology and avoid exaggerated expectations; this
aspect is addressed in Section 6 and by [14]. For many of the presented quantum technology military
applications, it is uncertain whether all challenges connected with the demands of high-end military
technologies will be resolved, or even that the technology will actually be deployed.

2 Deﬁnitions

The term quantum technology is deﬁned as follows:

Quantum technology (QT) is an emerging ﬁeld of physics and engineering based on quantum-
mechanical properties—especially quantum entanglement, quantum superposition and quan-
tum tunnelling—applied to individual quantum systems, and their utilisation for practical
applications.

As follows from the deﬁnition, quantum technology describes the various physical principles of quantum-
mechanical systems, with numerous applications; for instance, the technique of trapped ions can serve as
a quantum bit for quantum computers and as a quantum sensor for magnetic ﬁelds or quantum clocks.

Dual-use technology refers to ﬁelds of research and development with potential application in
both defence and commercial production [15].

Quantum technology is a typical dual-use technology which has been of considerable interest not only
for military but also for governmental actors [16] and peacekeeping organisations.

Quantum warfare (QW) is warfare that uses quantum technologies for military applications
that aﬀect intelligence, security and defence capabilities of all warfare domains, and it ushers
in new military strategies, doctrines, scenarios and peace as well as ethics issues.

2

There have been attempts also to deﬁne the quantum domain [17] as a new domain for warfare. However,
in this text, we will consider quantum technology as a factor that improves all currently deﬁned domains,
rather than as a standalone warfare domain.

Subsequently, it is helpful to deﬁne the term quantum attack, which refers to using quantum technologies
to break, disrupt or eavesdrop on either classical or quantum security systems. Typical examples are
eavesdropping using quantum key distribution or quantum computers breaking the Rivest–Shamir–Adleman
(RSA) encryption scheme.

Although there is plenty of QT literature, there is no explicit agreement on quantum technology taxon-
omy. We will use the following taxonomy:

• Quantum Computing and Simulations

– Quantum Computers (digital and analogue quantum computers and their applications, such

as quantum system simulation, quantum optimisation, ...)

– Quantum Simulators (non-programmable quantum circuits)

• Quantum Communication and Cryptography

– Quantum Network and Communication (quantum network elements, quantum key distribu-

tion, quantum communication)

– Post-Quantum Cryptography (quantum-resilient algorithms, quantum random number gen-

erator)

• Quantum Sensing and Metrology

– Quantum Sensing (quantum magnetometers, gravimeters, ...)

– Quantum Timing (precise time measurement and distribution)

– Quantum Imaging (quantum radar, low-SNR imaging, ...)

Aside from the general quantum technology taxonomy presented above, we introduce a new division
of quantum technologies according to their beneﬁts and utilisation. The following classiﬁcation can
be generalised; however, we place more emphasis on military applications. The quantum technology
utilisation impact classiﬁcation is as follows:

• Must have: quantum technology that has to be implemented to protect against future quantum

attacks (e.g. post-quantum cryptography);

• Eﬀectiveness: quantum technologies that increase the eﬀectiveness of the current technology and

methods (e.g. quantum optimisations, quantum machine learning or artiﬁcial intelligence);

• Precision: quantum technologies that increase the precision of the current measurement technol-
ogy (e.g. quantum magnetometry, quantum gravimetry, quantum inertial navigation, timing);

• New capabilities: quantum technologies oﬀering new capabilities that were beyond the scope of
the present technology (e.g. quantum radar, quantum simulation for chemistry, quantum crypto-
analysis, quantum key distribution).

Note that this classiﬁcation is not mutually exclusive.

3 Quantum Technology Overview

This section provides a basic description of quantum technologies, with related references. For each
quantum technology, the current development status is presented, the utilisation impact determined,
expected time to deployment estimated1, and the main challenges are sketched. For quantum computing
application, the approximate number of required logical qubits is provided.

1Short-term: 0–5 years, Mid-term: 6–10 years, Long term: 10–20 years.

3

Diﬀerent quantum technologies and their applications are at diﬀerent TRLs2 from TRL 1 (e.g., some
types of qubits) to TRL 8 (e.g., quantum key distribution).

We are not aiming for completeness here, nor do we present any theoretical background, but just introduce
the basics, the eﬀects and the current state of development, as needed to follow the discussed military
applications.

3.1 Quantum Information Science

Quantum information science (QIS) is an information science related to quantum physics, and deals with
quantum information. In classical information science, the elementary carrier of information is a bit that
can be only 0 or 1. The quantum information elementary carrier of information is the quantum bit,
qubit in short. A qubit can be |0(cid:105) or |1(cid:105), or an arbitrary complex linear combination of states |0(cid:105) and
|1(cid:105) called the quantum superposition.

The other crucial property is the quantum entanglement. Quantum entanglement refers to a strong
correlation between two or more qubits (or two or more quantum systems in general) with no classical
analogue. Quantum entanglement is responsible for many quantum surprises. Another feature is the
no-cloning theorem [18], which says that quantum information (qubit) cannot be copied. This theorem
has profound consequences for qubit error correction as well as for quantum communication security.

Quantum information science describes the quantum information ﬂow in quantum computing and quan-
tum communications, although in a broader sense it can be applied in quantum sensing and metrology,
see [19, 20].

There is considerable academic interest, and several quantum algorithms have been created [21]. However,
only a few are expected to be valuable for defence and security applications.

3.2 Quantum Computing

commercially available with very limited number of physical qubits

• Status:
• Utilisation impact: new capability, eﬀectiveness, precision
• Timeline expectation: one million physical qubits in ten years
• Main challenges:

improving the quality of qubits (coherence, error resistance, gate ﬁdelity),

upscaling the number of qubits, logical qubits

Quantum computing refers to the utilisation of quantum information science to perform computations.
Such a machine can be called a quantum computer. The classiﬁcation of quantum computers can be
very complex. For the purposes of this report, we simplify the classiﬁcation as follows:

• Digital quantum computer (also called a gate-level quantum computer) is universal, programmable
and should perform all possible quantum algorithms and have numerous applications described
below. Classical computers can fully simulate the gate-level based quantum computer. The diﬀer-
ence is in resources and speed. For instance, the simulation of fully entangled qubits increases the
requirement of classical resources exponentially. This means that the simulation of (cid:38) 45 qubits is
practically impossible on the classical (super)computers.

• Analogue quantum computer (also called Hamiltonian computation) is usually realised using quan-
tum annealing (as the noise version of the adiabatic quantum computing). Quantum annealer
diﬀers from the digital quantum computer by the limited connectivity of qubits and diﬀerent prin-
ciples. Therefore, the utilisation of analogue quantum computers is more constrained but is still
suitable for tasks such as quantum optimisations or Hamiltonian-based simulations.

2See Technology Readiness Levels according to EU, https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/

wp/2014_2015/annexes/h2020-wp1415-annex-g-trl_en.pdf

4

• Quantum simulator is used for the study and simulation of other quantum systems that generally
are less accessible and is usually built as a single-purpose machine. In comparison with a quantum
computer, the quantum simulator can be imagined as a non-programmable quantum circuit.

In general, quantum computing will not replace classical computation. Quantum computers will be prac-
tical and useful for a limited type of problems only, typically problems with high complexity. The actual
deployment of quantum computing applications depends on the quality (coherence, error resistance, gate
ﬁdelity) and the number of qubits. Some of the essential parameters to follow are: the number of qubits,
qubit coherence time, quantum-gate ﬁdelity and qubit inter-connectivity. The set of quantum instruc-
tions applying quantum gates on individual qubits is called a quantum circuit. A quantum circuit is a
practical realisation of the quantum algorithm.

Following [7], quantum computers can be classiﬁed into three evolutionary stages: Component quantum
computation (CQC), Noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) computing and Fault-tolerant quantum
computing (FTQC). The CQC stage covers quantum computing demonstrators and maturing the basic
elements. CQC has a very limited computational capability that is suﬃcient for demonstration of some
proofs of principle. The NISQ stage quantum computer should have a suﬃcient number of qubits to
demonstrate the advantages of quantum computing. Continuous research should lead to increasing the
number and quality of qubits. The FTQC stage starts when a perfect logical qubit is reached (for an
explanation, see below).

Physical qubits can be realised by numerous quantum systems. The most recent advanced are quantum
computer based on superconducting qubits and the trapped-ion qubits that are in or close to the NISQ
stage. All other technologies, such as cold atoms, topological, electron spin, photonic or NV centre-based
qubits, are still in CQC stage or theory only. The individual quantum computers and their performance
diﬀer signiﬁcantly (in, e.g. speed, coherence time, the possibility to entangle all qubits, gate ﬁdelity).
Various metrics and benchmarks, such as Quantum Volume metric [22], have been developed for their
comparison.

The problem, common to all types of qubits, is their quality. A qubit is very fragile and has a limited
coherence time (a time scale during which it will not lose the quantum information). Every operation
performed on a qubit has limited ﬁdelity. Researchers accordingly need to employ the error correction
codes. The error correction for qubits is much more complicated than error correction of classical
bits, because qubits cannot be copied, as the no-cloning theorem explains. Two types of qubits are
distinguished: the physical qubit realised by a physical quantum system and the logical qubit consisting
of several physical qubits and error correction codes. A logical qubit is a perfect or near-perfect qubit with
very long-to-inﬁnity coherence time, very high ﬁdelity and higher environment resistivity. For example,
based on surface error correction protocol, for one logical qubit, depending on the algorithm, up to 10
000 physical qubits [23] will be needed. For a recent overview of quantum computing, see, for example,
[24].

Examples of leading-edge quantum computers are the quantum computer with 53 physical superconduct-
ing qubits, manufactured by Google (which claimed quantum supremacy in 2019 [25]), and the one by
IBM. The best trapped-ion quantum computers are of 32 qubits by IonQ or six qubits by Honeywell. In
the case of photonic qubits, there is a 24-qubit quantum computer by Xanadu. The anticipated timelines
as imagined by the quantum computing roadmap by IBM and Google are the following: IBM plans a
433-qubit quantum processor in 2022 and 1,121 qubits by 2023 [26]. Google has announced a plan to
reach a quantum module of 10,000 qubits. All other quantum processors would consist of such modules
up to 1 million qubits in 2029 [27]. Based on a survey among leaders in key relevant areas of quantum
science and technology, it is likely that quantum computers will start to become powerful enough to pose
a threat to most of the public key encryption schemes (for more details, see Sec. 3.2.2) in about two
decades [28]. Examples of analogue quantum computers are the quantum annealer by D-Wave Systems
with over 5,000 qubits and the coherent Ising machine by Toshiba.

The diﬀerence between analogue and digital quantum computers lies in their diﬀerent physical principles
and their limitations. The digital quantum computer is limited by resources and not by noise (noise
can be corrected using more resources). In contrast, the analogue quantum computer is limited by noise
which is diﬃcult to understand, control and characterise (especially for a quantum annealer). Therefore,
analogue quantum computers’ applicability is limited [24].

5

In reality, the tasks accomplished by quantum computers will be mostly only subprograms or subroutines
of the classical computer programs. The classical program will not only control quantum computers
but will also provide a lot of computation that it would be impractical to carry out on a quantum
computer. This includes the recent applications of quantum simulation in chemistry using, for example,
the Variational quantum eigensolver (VQE) [29], which is a hybrid combination of classical and quantum
computing. Also, quantum computers are large machines, many of which require cryogenics. It is unlikely
therefore that in the decades to come most customers will acquire a personal quantum computer, but
rather they will access these as a service in the cloud. The cloud-based models of quantum computing
(often called Quantum Computing-as-a-Service – QCaaS) are commercially available nowadays, even for
free, and they allow access to anyone interested in quantum computing. The cloud access to quantum
computers is oﬀered by individual quantum hardware manufacturers. Some platforms, such as Microsoft
Azure Quantum or Amazon Braket, oﬀer access to quantum computers of various manufacturers within
one ecosystem.

It is also helpful to clarify the terms of quantum supremacy, advantage and practicality. Quantum
supremacy is a case where a particular problem is solved by a quantum computer signiﬁcantly faster
than by a classical computer. However, the problem is likely to be theoretical rather than practical.
Quantum advantage refers to a case when a quantum computer is able to solve real-world problems
that classical computers cannot. Quantum practicality is similar to quantum advantage, with the only
diﬀerence being that the quantum computer solves real-world problems faster than the classical computer.

We provide below a basic overview of possible quantum computer applications. The reader should keep
in mind that quantum computing is a fast developing sector, and new revolutionary quantum algorithms
are still waiting to be discovered. Note that, in the context of quantum computing applications, the term
‘qubit’ implies a logical qubit. However, small quantum circuits can be run with only physical qubits,
with reasonable precision.

3.2.1 Quantum Simulations

• Status: algorithms in development, small-scale applications
• Utilisation impact: new capability (e.g. quantum chemistry computation)
• Timeline expectation: short-term, usability scales up with the number of qubits
• Qubits requirement: ∼ 200 (e.g. for nitrogen ﬁxation problem)
• Main challenges: number of logical qubits

Long before the ﬁrst quantum computer was created, the main task for the quantum computer was
considered the simulation of other quantum systems [30]. Molecules are such a quantum system. Despite
advancement of extant computing power, the full simulation of only simpler molecules can be performed
using present computational chemistry, or of larger molecules for the price of many approximations and
simpliﬁcations. For example, for a system with n electrons, the classical computer would need 2n bits to
describe the state of electrons, whereas the quantum computer needs only n qubits. Therefore, quantum
simulations are the ﬁrst and still perhaps the most promising application for quantum computers.

The most dominant approaches are two: quantum-phase estimation [31] and quantum variational tech-
niques (VQE) [32, 33]. The latter approach in particular has the highest likelihood of success on NISQ
computers; for example, in 2020, Google performed the biggest quantum chemical simulation up to date
(of H12 molecule using the VQE) [34].

Algorithms for quantum chemistry simulations are being developed. They can be applied to more
complex simulations, hand in hand with the number of qubits. Therefore, even at this early stage of
quantum computing, there is signiﬁcant interest from the chemical and pharmaceutical industries. In
general, such simulations allow the discovery and design of new drugs, chemicals and materials. Recently
considered topics, for instance, are high-temperature superconducting, better batteries, protein folding,
nitrogen ﬁxation and peptides research.

6

3.2.2 Quantum Cryptoanalysis

• Status: algorithms ready
• Utilisation impact: new capability (e.g. public-key cryptography schemes breaking)
• Timeline expectation: mid- to long-term
• Qubits requirement: ∼ 6, 200 for 2048 bit RSA factorisation [35], ∼ 2, 900 for 256 bit ECDLP-

based3 encryption [36]

• Main challenges: number of logical qubits

One of the most well-known quantum computer applications is the factorisation of large prime numbers
by exponential speedup described by Shor’s algorithm [37]. This is a threat for public-key cryptography
schemes, such as RSA, DH and ECC4, based on the large prime number multiplications, the discrete
logarithm problem or the elliptic-curve discrete logarithm problem-based schema that are considered
computationally intractable or very hard for classical computers.

Although the resources of existing NISQ quantum computers are far from what is needed for RSA
breaking, the threat is quite real. An adversary or foreign intelligence could intercept and store encrypted
traﬃc until the quantum cryptoanalysis becomes available. Because the time of declassiﬁcation of many
secrets is far beyond the expected timelines for powerful quantum computer delivery, such a threat can
be considered genuine, nowadays.

Quantum cryptoanalysis also oﬀers improved tools for a brute-force attack on the symmetric encryption
schemes. For example, the well-known Grover’s searching algorithm [38] reduces the key security by half
against a brute-force attack; a 256-bit AES5 key could be resolved by brute force in roughly 2128 quantum
operations. Despite the huge resource requirements of quantum computers, doubling the symmetric key
length [39]is recommended, nevertheless. Moreover, Simon’s algorithm and superposition queries [40]
can completely break most message authentication code (MAC), and authenticated encryption with
associated data (AEAD), such as HMAC-CBC and AES-GCM6 [41, 42].

Further, there is active research on cryptoanalytic attacks upon symmetric key systems based on the
structure present in symmetric cryptosystems, which can oﬀer up to super-polynomial speedup [43].
However, these algorithms suﬀer from excessive resource requirements on the quantum computer.

3.2.3 Quantum Searching and Quantum Walks

• Status: algorithms under development
• Utilisation impact:
• Timeline expectation: short- to mid-term
• Qubits requirement: ∼ 100, depends on the searched system size
• Main challenges: number of logical qubits

eﬀectiveness (e.g. faster searching)

One of the most famous searching quantum algorithms is the Grover’s algorithm [38], which oﬀers
quadratic speedup in database searching, or generally in inverting a function. For an unsorted list or
database, the classical searching algorithms are about complexity O(N ) (meaning proportional to the
number of N entities), although Grover’s algorithm is about O(

N ).

√

Quantum searching algorithms are an important topic for the so-called Big Data (unstructured data)
analysis. Working on a large amount of data requires a large quantum memory. However, there is no
reliable quantum memory that would keep the quantum information for an arbitrarily long time and in
large amounts. Second, the transformation of classical data to the quantum form is time-consuming and
ineﬀective. Therefore, only the searching on data generated algorithmically is considered practical at the
moment.

3Cryptography based on Elliptic Curve Discrete Logarithm Problem.
4cryptography schemes named after Rivest–Shamir–Adleman, Diﬃe–Hellman, Elliptic Curve Cryptography
5Advanced Encryption Standard
6Hash-based Message Authentication Code-Cipher Block Bhaining, AES with Galois/Counter Mode

7

The other approach to searching can be based on the quantum random walk mechanism [44], which oﬀers
similar speedup as Grover’s algorithm.

3.2.4 Quantum Optimisations

• Status: algorithms in development
• Utilisation impact:
• Timeline expectation: short- to mid-term
• Qubits requirement: ∼ 100, depends on the problem complexity
• Main challenges: number of logical qubits

eﬀectiveness (e.g. faster solution of NP problems)

Quantum optimisation is a very actively explored topic, given the possibility of solving NP-level7 complex
problems. An example of such an NP problem is the travelling salesman problem. Here, given a list of
places and the distances between them, the goal is to ﬁnd the shortest (and optimal) route. Naively, one
can try all possibilities, but such an approach has severe disadvantages, and may even become impossible,
with increasing complexity. Therefore, the most common solutions are based on heuristic algorithms that
are not necessarily guaranteed to ﬁnd the best solution but at least one close to it.

Quantum computing introduces a new perspective on the issue and oﬀers diﬀerent approaches and tech-
niques. The most dominant methods are currently based on a variational approach, such as the Quantum
approximate optimisation algorithm (QAOA) [45]. Part of QAOA is the sub-technique called Quadratic
unconstrained binary optimisation (QUBO) [46], which is also suitable for analogue quantum comput-
ers. Other methods are, for example, the quantum analogy of the least-squares ﬁt [47] or semideﬁnite
programming [48].

So far, it is not clear whether the quantum optimisation will oﬀer some speedup against the classical
heuristic methods. However, there is consensus that if at all some speedup is achievable, it will not be
more than polynomial [48]. A new paradigm introduced by quantum computing leads to new quantum-
inspired classical algorithms, such as in the case of QAOA [49] that delete the quantum speedup. On
the other hand, we can speak about quantum-inspired algorithms as of the ﬁrst quantum computing
practical result.

There have been many demonstrations, use cases and proofs of concept for quantum optimisations,
especially in connection with analogue quantum computing that currently oﬀers the most quantum
computing resources for such applications. The typical demonstrations were optimisations for traﬃc,
logistics or the ﬁnancial sector8.

3.2.5 Quantum Linear Algebra

• Status: algorithms in development
• Utilisation:
• Timeline expectation: short- to mid-term
• Qubits requirement: depends on the solved system size
• Main challenges: number of logical qubits

eﬀectiveness (e.g. faster linear equation solving)

It has been shown that quantum computers can reach super-polynomial speedup for solving linear equa-
tions also. Such a speedup was estimated especially for the HHL (Harrow-Hassidim-Lloyd) [50] algorithm
for sparse matrices. However, the estimated speedup depends on the size of the problem (matrix). There
are also large resource requirements, which for some problems can be considered too impractical [51].
On the other hand, for the system of linear equations of 10,000 parameters, for instance, 10,000 steps
are needed to solve it, whereas the HHL can provide an approximate solution after 13 steps.

7NP is a complexity class characterised by the fact that it cannot be solved in polynomial time but can be veriﬁed in
polynomial time. Speciﬁcally, the NP-hard problems are not only hard to solve but are diﬃcult to verify as well. Examples
of NP-hard problems are the Travelling Salesman Problem and Graph Colouring problems.

8For examples of developed quantum optimisation applications at D-Wave’s quantum annealer, see https://www.

dwavesys.com/applications.

8

At present, many numerical simulations in planning, engineering, construction and weather forecasting
simplify complex problems as a large set of linear equations. For many of them, being statistical in
nature, the approximated solution could be suﬃcient.

Note that the HHL algorithm was shown as universal for quantum computing and was demonstrated
for various applications such as k-mean clustering, support vector machines, data ﬁtting, etc. For more
details, see [52].

One of the major caveats of quantum algorithms working with a large amount of input data is data
loading. Classical data, especially binary data or bits, need to be transferred into quantum states for
follow-on processing by eﬃcient quantum algorithms. This process is slow, and the classical data loading
itself can take longer than the coherence time. The solution is a quantum memory or quantum RAM
[52, 53].

3.2.6 Quantum Machine Learning and AI

• Status: algorithms in development
• Utilisation impact:
• Timeline expectation: short- to mid-term
• Qubits requirement: ∼ 100, depends on the problem complexity
• Main challenges: number of logical qubits

eﬀectiveness (e.g. better machine learning optimisations )

Due to the hype around classical machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence (ML/AI), it can be expected
that there will be quantum research on this topic also. First, note that one cannot expect full quantum
ML/AI, considering the very low eﬃciency of working with classical data [54], all the more so if the
missing quantum memory and very slow loading and coding of classical data (e.g. data of picture) into
quantum information format are considered. It is simply not practical. Another situation will emerge
when ML/AI is applied to quantum data; for instance, from quantum sensors or imaging [55].

Nevertheless, quantum-enhanced ML/AI [56, 57] can be introduced, where quantum computing can
improve some machine learning tasks such as quantum sampling, linear algebra (where machine learning
is about the processing of complex vectors in a high-dimensional linear space) or quantum neural networks
[54]. One example is the quantum support vector machine [58].

In fact, the ML/AI topic covers various techniques and approaches, and it is no diﬀerent in connection
with quantum computing. Quantum ML/AI or quantum-enhanced ML/AI is the subject of many re-
search works nowadays. For a survey of quantum ML/AI algorithms and their possible speedup, see
[59].

3.3 Quantum Communication and Cryptography

Quantum communication refers to a quantum information exchange via a quantum network that uses
optical ﬁbre or free-space channels. In most cases, quantum communication is realised using a photon
as the quantum information carrier. However, due to the limitations of photons, such as losses at large
distances, the quantum network contains other elements such as a quantum repeater or quantum switch.

The goal of quantum cryptography is to replace conventional (mainly asymmetric) encryption schemes
with quantum-resistant algorithms with the quantum key distribution. The typical quantum features
used for quantum communication are the following: quantum entanglement, quantum uncertainty, and
the no-cloning theory which states that quantum information cannot be copied [18, 60].

3.3.1 Quantum Network

• Status:

in research (commercially available for QKD with trusted nodes only)

9

• Utilisation impact:
resilient cryptography)

new capability, eﬀectiveness (e.g. ultra secure communication, quantum-

• Timeline expectation: mid-term
• Main challenges: quantum repeater and switch (quantum memory)

The aim of the quantum network (sometimes called quantum internet [61] or quantum information
network (QIN)) is to transmit quantum information via numerous technologies across various channels.
The quantum information (qubit) is usually carried by individual photons, and as such the quantum
information transmission is fragile. Moreover, many quantum network applications rely on quantum
entanglement.

The usual channels for quantum information transmission are specialised low-loss optic ﬁbres or the
current telecommunication optic ﬁbre infrastructures with higher loss. The case of two communicating
endpoints close to each other is as simple as using one optical ﬁbre. The complexity of the network
increases with more end nodes or large distances, where components such as a quantum repeater or
quantum switch are required. Note that very modest (one qubit) quantum processors are suﬃcient for
most quantum network applications.

The free-space quantum channel is more challenging. Optical or near-optical photons are of limited
utility in the atmosphere due to the strong atmospheric attenuation. Therefore, the most commonly
considered and realised quantum network scenario is using quantum satellites [62, 63]. The advantage
of satellites is the possibility of utilising optical-photon communication for transmission of the quantum
information, where the losses in the satellite–ground link are lower than the loss between two ground
nodes far apart. Nevertheless, the optical photons’ communication in the free-space channel for short
distances can be realised using, for instance, drones [64]. The best way would be to use the microwave
spectrum as employed by classical wireless communication. However, communication that uses the
microwave spectrum at the level of individual photons is even more challenging [65]. Microwave single-
photon technology involves greater diﬃculty in generating and detecting individual photons. Another
problem is a noisy environment in microwave bands.

Quantum communication at long distances requires quantum repeaters due to photon loss and decoher-
ence. A quantum repeater is an intermediate node that works similarly to the ampliﬁer in classical optical
networks but needs to obey the no-cloning theorem. In fact, the quantum repeater allows entangling
qubits of end nodes. When two end nodes are entangled, the eﬀect of quantum teleportation [66] can be
exploited. This means that the quantum information can be teleported without a physically sent photon;
just a classical communication is required. Utilising quantum entanglement, the quantum information
can then ﬂow through a quantum network or part of it, which can even be under eavesdropper control
without any chance of revealing the transmitted quantum information. For correct functioning of the
quantum repeater, quantum memory is required. However, no reliable and practical quantum memory
is available yet.

As an intermediate step, a trusted repeater can be used. The trusted repeater will not entangle end nodes
and is used for the quantum key distribution (QKD, see the next section, 3.3.2) only. To imagine how
it works, let us consider two parties A and B and a trusted repeater R. Then the key kAB is encrypted
with key kAR. The trusted repeater R decrypts kAR to get kAB. At this point, the trusted repeater R
knows the key kAB, and A and B have to trust that the key is safe and not under the control of the
eavesdropper. Finally, R re-encrypts kAB using the kRB key and sends it to B. This is a technique used
in present QKD networks.

The next step, currently tested in experiments, is the measurement device-independent QKD (MDI-
QKD) [67, 68]. It is a quantum protocol that not only replaces trusted repeaters (still not quantum,
no support of entanglement) with secure repeaters, but also serves as a switch. That means the usual
star network topology and infrastructure can start to be built. Note that in the MDI-QKD network,
attacks on the central node physically cannot reveal the key nor reveal sensitive information. Later, the
central nodes will be replaced by the quantum switch and repeater, and the fully functional quantum
information network will be achieved.

Quantum networks will work in parallel with the classical networks, since not all transmitted information
needs to be encoded in quantum information. In fact, parallel classical network is required, for instance,

10

for quantum teleportation. Quantum networks can be used for the following applications:

- Quantum key distribution (QKD), a secure transmission of cryptographic key (see Section 3.3.2);

- Quantum information transmission between quantum computers or quantum computing clusters

at large distances or for sharing of remote quantum capabilities;

- Blind quantum computing [69, 70] allowing to transmit a quantum algorithm to quantum computer,
perform computations and retrieve results without the owner or eavesdropper knowing what the
algorithm or result was;

- Network clock synchronisation [71], see Section 3.4.2;

- Secure identiﬁcation [72] allowing identiﬁcation without revealing authentication credentials;

- Quantum position veriﬁcation [73] allowing to verify the position of the other party;

- Distributed quantum computing [74, 75] for several quantum computers, allowing to compute tasks

as one quantum computer;

- Consensus and agreement tasks refering to the so-called Byzantine Agreement (problem of decision
of group on one output despite the intervention of an adversary). The quantum version [76] can
reach agreement in O(1) complexity in comparison with classical complexity O(cid:112)n/ log n.

- Entangled sensor network [77, 78] allowing improvement in the sensitivity of the sensors and re-
duction of errors, and evaluating global properties rather than gathering data about speciﬁc parts
of a system.

A quantum network allows direct secure quantum communication between quantum computers, where
quantum data can be directly exchanged. This can be useful for eﬀective redistribution of computing tasks
according to individual quantum computer performance, mainly when an enormous task can be divided
into smaller tasks. Another case is the quantum cloud, where quantum data can be shared between several
quantum computers. Moreover, it is questionable whether it will be possible to build one standalone high-
performance quantum computer. The realisation will be more likely via distributed quantum computing
[74, 75], where many quantum computers will be connected via the quantum network.

3.3.2 Quantum Key Distribution

commercially available (with trusted repeaters)

• Status:
• Utilisation: new capability
• Timeline expectation: short-term
• Main challenges:
physical hardware

secure quantum repeater (quantum memory), security certiﬁcation of the

Quantum key distribution (QKD) is the most mature application of quantum communication. The goal
is to distribute a secret key between two or more parties for encrypted data distributed via classical
channels. Due to the no-cloning theorem, any eavesdropper has to perform a measurement that is
detectable by communicating parties.

The dominant classes of protocols are two: one based on BB84 (Bennett-Brassard 1984) protocol [79]
and the other the E91 (Ekert 1991) protocol [80]. The dominant BB84 protocol is technically simpler
but requires a quantum random number generation (see Section 3.3.4), and the providing party has to
prepare a key before the distribution. Protocol E91 utilises quantum entanglement that generates the
key during the process of distribution, and all parties know the key simultaneously. In this protocol,
the quantum random number generator is not required. However, the technical solution with quantum
entanglement is more challenging. Both classes of protocols are information-theoretically secure.

Theoretically, the QKD is impenetrable during the transmission. However, the typical vector of attack
can focus on the ﬁnal (receiver/transmitter) or intermediate nodes where the hardware of the software

11

layer can contain vulnerabilities such as bugs in control software, an imperfect single-photon source,
parties veriﬁcation problem, etc. This is an area of very active research. For example, the imperfect
physical hardware can be abused by the so-called photon-number-splitting [81], or Trojan-horse [82]
attacks. Here, security certiﬁcation of the hardware and software is necessary and will take time.

Apart from trusted repeaters, the other weak point is the qubit transfer rate, which is too slow to
distribute long keys. A new high transfer rate of single-photon sources can resolve the issue.

At present, QKD technology is commercially available as a point-point connection at short distances
or by using trusted repeaters at large distances. The trusted repeater can be a space satellite, as was
demonstrated by China [62, 63].

3.3.3 Post-Quantum Cryptography

• Status: algorithms ready
• Utilisation impact: must have
• Timeline expectation: short-term
• Main challenges:

standardisation, implementation

Post-quantum cryptography (sometimes referred to as quantum-proof, quantum-safe or quantum-resistant
cryptography) represents an area of encryption techniques that should resist future quantum computer
attacks. Presently, this is not true for most of the asymmetric encryption that uses public-key technology.
On the other hand, most of the symmetric cryptographic algorithms and hash functions are considered
relatively secure against attacks by quantum computers [83]. Nevertheless, doubling the symmetric key
length is recommended [39].

Now, several approaches are considered as quantum-resistant. For example, lattice-based cryptography
[84], supersingular elliptic curve isogeny cryptography [85], hash-based [86] cryptography , multivariate-
based [87] cryptography, code-based cryptography [88] and symmetric key quantum resistance.

Unlike QKD, all these algorithms are not provably secure from a mathematical perspective. Therefore,
within the process of standardisation, all these algorithms are rigorously tested and analysed, including
the implementation. There is no worst case where a quantum-resistant algorithm with bugs in implemen-
tation could be cracked by a classical computer [89]. The most followed standardisation process is the
one by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). The standardisation process is
in the third round [90], with three ﬁnalists (algorithms based on the lattice, code-based and multivariate)
and several alternate candidates. The NIST standardisation process is expected to conclude in 2023-24.
Regardless, more and more commercial vendors are oﬀering new quantum-resistant encryption solutions
now.

3.3.4 Quantum Random Number Generator

commercially available

• Status:
• Utilisation impact: new capability (truly random number generation)
• Timeline expectation: short-term
• Main challenges:

increasing bit rate

Random number generators (RNG) are essential for many applications such as Monte Carlo simulations
and integration, crypto operations, statistics and computer games. Nevertheless, the RNG in a classical
computer, since it acts deterministically, is not truly random, and is called pseudo-random number
generation. However, for many applications, the pseudo-RNG is suﬃcient.

On the other hand, generating strong keys is the cornerstone of security, which can be achieved only by
truly random RNG. One solution is a quantum random number generator (QRNG) that is hardware-
based. Moreover, QRNG is a crucial part of BB84-based QKD protocols, to be provably secure.

12

QRNG can be used for any cryptography and makes all cryptography better. One of the advantages of
QRNG is that it can be veriﬁed and certiﬁcated [91], unlike any other RNG.

3.4 Quantum Sensing and Metrology

Quantum sensing and metrology is the most mature quantum technology area, which improves timing,
sensing or imaging. For example, atomic clocks from the ﬁrst quantum revolution have been part of the
Global Positioning System (GPS) for almost half a century. The current quantum clocks are coming up
with much higher time measurement precision.

Quantum sensing stands for all quantum technologies that measure various physical variables such as
external magnetic or electric ﬁelds, gravity gradient, acceleration and rotation. Quantum sensors can
produce very precise information about an electric signal, magnetic anomalies and for inertial navigation.

Quantum imaging is a subﬁeld of quantum optics exploiting photon correlations, allowing suppression of
noise and increasing the resolution of the imagined object. Quantum imaging protocols are considered
for quantum radar, detecting objects in the optically impermeable environment, and in medical imaging.

Quantum sensing and metrology technology relies on one or more of the following features: quantum
energy levels, quantum coherence and quantum entanglement [92].
Individual quantum sensors have
various metrics that vary with the application. The common metrics are: sensitivity (a signal that gives
unity signal-to-noise ratio after 1 second of integration time), dynamic range (minimal and maximal
detectable signal), sampling rate (how often the signal is sampled), operating temperature, etc. Derived
key metrics include, for example, spatial resolution at a certain distance and the time required to achieve
a speciﬁed sensitivity. The typical measure quantities are magnetic and electric ﬁelds, rotation, times,
force, temperature and photon counting.

3.4.1 Quantum Electric, Magnetic and Inertial Forces Sensing

laboratory prototypes

• Status:
• Utilisation impact: precision, new capability
• Timeline expectation: short- to long-term
• Main challenges: miniaturisation, cooling

Many sensing quantum technologies are universal and can measure various physical quantities. A detailed
description of each technology is outside the scope of this report; however, a basic overview is provided.
Many applications include various quantum technologies. For example, quantum inertial navigation
consists of three types of sensing: acceleration, rotation and time. In general, precise quantum-based
timing is required for many applications, not only for quantum technologies. For quantum timing, see
Section 3.4.2. The most promising technologies are: atomic vapour, cold-atom interferometry, nitrogen-
vacancy centres, superconducting circuits and trapped ions.

Cold-atom interferometry (measured quantities: magnetic ﬁeld, inertial forces, time). Atoms cooled at
very low temperatures exhibit wave-like behaviour and are sensitive to all forces that interact with their
mass. The changes are observed in the interference pattern [92, 93, 5]. The particular realisation can be
in the form of Raman atom interferometry, atom Bloch oscillation or others [94, 95, 96]. For example, in
gravimetry, the quantum-based gravimeter has the potential to reach about several orders of magnitude
higher precision [5] than the best classical counterparts. Such a precise gravimeter allows very detailed
mapping of the Earth’s surface and underground with a resolution at the centimetre level. Regarding
inertial navigation, the shaken lattice interferometry has the potential to overcome shortcomings of the
state-of-the-art atom interferometry techniques and can work as accelerometer and gyroscope at once
[97]. Several challenges remain. Some of the biggest challenges are the integration of the quantum sensor
into one quantum inertial measurement unit, miniaturisation of laser cooling apparatus used for cooling
down atoms and simultaneously maintaining the coherency (suppression of the interaction with the noisy
environment), or the dynamic range of the cold atom sensor outside the laboratory. However, signiﬁcant
advances also can be found in this area, e.g. [98]. For a review see [99].

13

Trapped ions (measured quantities: electric and magnetic ﬁeld, inertial forces, time). Trapped ions are
one of the most universal sensing platforms [100, 101, 102]. Well-controlled trapped ions form a crystal
with quantised modes of motion. Any disturbance can be measured through the transition between these
modes. A single trapped ion can serve as a precise measurement of time or as a qubit in a quantum
computer. For inertial navigation, the optical lattice technology of trapped cold atoms in 1, 2 and 3-
dimensional arrays potentially oﬀers a sub-cm level in size. Besides allowing measurement of gravitational
and inertial parameters, it can measure Casimir or van der Waals forces. More recently, using quantum-
entangled trapped ions, measurement of electric ﬁelds has reached a sensitivity of ∼ 240 nV/ms−1 [103],
which is several orders of magnitude better than the classical counterpart.

Nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centres (measured quantities: electric and magnetic ﬁeld, rotation, temperature,
pressure). Nitrogen-vacancy centre in a diamond crystal works as an electron spin qubit that couples with
external magnetic ﬁelds. In addition, negatively charged NV centres using Berry’s phase can measure
In general, NV centre-based sensors oﬀer high sensitivity, cheap production and operation
rotation.
in a wide range of conditions [92, 104, 105]. In particular, NV centre-based technology can also work
at room temperature and higher. A novel proposed 3D design allows to sense all three components of
magnetism, acceleration, velocity, rotation or gravitation simultaneously [106]. The strengths of NV
centres in diamond-based sensing are spatial resolution and sensitivity. On the other hand, the challenge
is choosing, implementing and manufacturing individual NV centres or their ensembles. In the case of
electric ﬁeld sensing, it is challenging to deﬁne a sensitivity [107].

Superconducting circuits (measured quantities: electric and magnetic ﬁeld). The technology of super-
conducting circuits based on the Josephson eﬀect describes the quantum tunnelling eﬀect between two
superconductors [92]. This technology allows manufacturing a quantum system at the macroscopic scale
and can be controlled eﬀectively with microwave signals. The superconducting quantum interference
device (SQUID) is one of the best magnetometric sensors. However, the disadvantage is the requirement
of cryogenics. Note that for the measurement of magnetic-ﬁeld variations smaller than the geomagnetic
noise, the preferred design is based on an array of sensors to cancel the spatial-correlation with appli-
cations, such as in medical and biomedical applications (e.g. MRI or molecule tagging). The recent
development shows that the superconducting qubits used in quantum computers can be used to measure
electric and magnetic ﬁelds [92] as well.

Atomic vapour (measured quantities: magnetic ﬁeld, rotation, time). Spin-polarised high-density atomic
vapour undergoes state transition under external magnetic ﬁeld which can be measured optically [92, 108,
109]. An advantage is a deployment at room temperature. The atomic vapour is suitable for rotation
sensing, known as the Atomic Spin Gyroscopes (AGS). AGS can be chip-scale [5]. For comparison,
the best classical rotation sensors are very precise (e.g. ring laser gyroscope). The expected quantum
sensor will be about twice as precise. However, the mentioned best classical gyroscope has a size of
4 × 4 m, which is impractical [110]. Atomic vapour cell magnetometers based on atomic ensembles have
the potential to outperform SQUID magnetometers and work at room temperature [92].

3.4.2 Quantum Clocks

• Status:
laboratory prototypes
• Utilisation impact: precision
• Timeline expectation: short- to mid-term
• Main challenges: miniaturisation

Atomic clocks have been with us for several decades; for example, as part of GPS satellites. The current
atomic clocks are based on atomic physics, where the electromagnetic emissions from electrons when
changing energy level utilise a ‘tick’. As such, the atomic clock is a very mature technology. Today, the
atomic clocks based on atomic fountain or thermal atomic beam and magnetic state selection principles
can reach a relative uncertainty ∼ 10−15 − 10−16 [111], or state-of-the-art chip-size atomic clocks have
uncertainty 2 × 10−12 [5].

The second quantum revolution comes with new principles for atomic or quantum clocks. Quantum
logic clock is based on single-ion, a technology related to trapped-ion qubit for quantum computing

14

[101]. Quantum logic clock was the ﬁrst with clock uncertainty below 10−18 [112]. Quantum clocks can
also beneﬁt from quantum entanglement [113].

Later, the quantum logic clock was superseded by experimental optical lattice clocks. Note that the
current atomic clocks work with microwave frequencies, i.e. the transition between energy levels emits a
microwave photon. The measurement of level transition with the emitted photon in optical frequencies
is harder to achieve, although it oﬀers better performance. Optical clocks are still in development, with
systems being based on: single ions isolated in an ion trap, neutral atoms trapped in an optical lattice
and atoms packed in a 3D quantum gas optical lattice. The 3D quantum gas optical lattice clocks in
particular have demonstrated frequency precision 2.5 × 10−19 [114]. Recently, it was demonstrated that
quantum entanglement could enhance the clock stability [115].

Another research focuses on vapour-cell (or gas-cell) atomic clock that provides chip-size realisation [116];
solid-state (for instance, the NV centre in diamond) clock [117]; or nuclear clock with a similar principle
as microwave or optical atomic clock, except that it uses nuclear transition instead of electron transition
in an atom’s shell [118], with the potential for unprecedented performance, outstripping atomic optical
clocks [119].

Various clock technologies have their own challenges, such as precise frequency comb, laser system for
control and cooling down and black body radiation shift (in the case of optical clocks). Also, miniaturi-
sation usually comes at the cost of lower frequency precision. Another common type of challenge is the
synchronisation of those clocks.

Precise timing is essential for many technologies, such as satellite navigation, space systems, precise mea-
surement, telecommunication, defence, network synchronisation, ﬁnance industry, energy grid control,
and in almost all industrial control systems. However, very precise timing is crucial for quantum tech-
nologies, especially for quantum sensing and imaging. For instance, a very high precision clock allows
new measurements, such as gravity potential measurement down to the centimetre level at the Earth’s
surface or searching for new physics.

3.4.3 Quantum RF Antenna

• Status:
laboratory prototypes
• Utilisation:
eﬀectiveness
• Timeline expectation: short- to mid-term
• Main challenges: miniaturisation, cooling

Radio frequency (RF) antennas serve as receivers or transmitters of various signals. They can be simple
dipole antennas to complex AESA9 modules. Their size limitation is bounded by the wavelength of the
produced or received signal. For example, a 3 GHz signal has a wavelength of ∼ 10 cm and the size of the
antenna should be no less than approximately 1/3 of this wavelength. This is called the Chu–Harrington
limit [120, 121].

Rydberg atoms’ technology allows breaking this limit and having an antenna of the size of a few mi-
crometres independently on the receiving signal wavelength. Rydberg atoms are highly excited atoms
with a correspondingly large electric dipole moment, and therefore high sensitivity to external electric
ﬁeld [122, 123]. Note that Rydberg atoms-based antenna can only receive a signal.

The recent prototypes of Rydberg atoms-based analyser were demonstrated for frequencies 0 to 20 GHz
for AM or FM radio, WiFi and Bluetooth signals [124]. The combination of more antennas can detect
the angle-of-arrival of the signal [125]. At the laboratory level, Rydberg atoms technology is available
commercially.

Quantum RF receiver as a single cell (for targeted frequency, narrow bandwidth) or arrayed sensor (broad
frequency span) can ﬁnd its applications in navigation, active imaging (radar), telecommunications,
media receiver or passive THz imaging.

9AESA (active electronically scanned array) module consists of an array of small transmitters and receivers that are

controlled by a computer. Simply put, each cell of AESA can behave as an independent radar module.

15

3.4.4 Quantum Imaging Systems

laboratory prototypes and proof-of-concept veriﬁcations

• Status:
• Utilisation: new capability
• Timeline expectation: short- to long term
• Main challenges:

improving resolution, high rate single-photon sources

Quantum imaging systems are a wide area covering 3D quantum cameras, behind-the-corner cameras,
low brightness imaging and quantum radar or lidar (for quantum radar, see Section 3.4.5).

SPAD (Single Photon Avalanche Detectors) Array is a very sensitive single-photon detector connected
with a pulsed illumination source that can measure the time-of-ﬂight from source to an object and hence
the range of the object. Then, putting SPAD into an array can work as a 3D camera. SPAD works with
the optical spectrum with extension developed to the near-infrared spectrum.

SPAD array can be used to detect objects out of the line of sight, too (e.g. hidden behind the corner of
a wall). The idea is based on laser and camera cooperation, where the laser sends a pulse in front (e.g.
a spot on the ﬂoor) of the SPAD camera. From the spot, the laser pulse will scatter in all directions,
including behind the corner, where the photons can be reﬂected to the spot in front of the SPAD camera
and then to the camera. SPAD is sensitive enough to detect such a three-scattered signal [126].

Quantum ghost imaging [127, 128, 129], also known as coincidence imaging or two-photon imaging, is
a technique that allows imaging an object that is out of the line of sight of the camera. In the source,
two entangled photons are created, each of a diﬀerent frequency. The one in the optical frequency is
recorded directly by a high-resolution photon-counting camera. The second photon having a diﬀerent
frequency (e.g. the infrared) is sent toward the object. The reﬂected photon is detected by a single-
photon detector (the so-called ‘bucket’ detector). The image is then created from the correlations between
both photons. The ghost imaging protocol was demonstrated without quantum entanglement, too (using
classical correlation), although with worse resolution.

Such a schema allows imaging an object at extremely low light levels. Also, infrared light can better
penetrate some environments with a better signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [130]. Ghost imaging experiments
that use x-ray or ultra-relativistic electrons were demonstrated recently [131, 132].

Sub-shot-noise imaging [133] is another quantum optics schema allowing detection of a weak absorption
object with a signal below the shot noise. Shot noise is the result of ﬂuctuations in the detected number
of photons. For example, the shot noise is the limit for lasers. This limit can be overcome using correlated
photons. The detection of one ‘herald’ or ‘ancilla’ photon signiﬁes the presence of the correlated photon
that probes the object or environment.

Quantum Illumination (QI) [134] is a quantum protocol to detect a target using two correlated (en-
tangled) photons. One photon, called the ‘idler’, is kept. The other, called the ‘signal’ photon, is sent
toward the target and reﬂected, and both photons are measured. The advantage of this protocol re-
mains even when the entanglement is destroyed by a lossy and noisy environment. QI protocol is one of
those mainly adapted for the quantum radar, but it can also be applied to medical imaging or quantum
communication.

3.4.5 Quantum Radar Technology

laboratory prototypes and proof-of-concept veriﬁcation

• Status:
• Utilisation: new capability
• Timeline expectation: long-term and more
• Main challenges: high rate single-photon source, quantum microwave technology

Quantum radar, in principle, works similarly to classical radar, in the sense that a signal has to be sent
toward the target, and the radar system needs to wait for the reﬂected signal. Nevertheless, theoretically
improved precision and new capabilities can be achieved by quantum mechanical approaching.

16

There are several protocols considered for quantum radar, such as interferometric quantum radar [135],
quantum illumination (QI) [134], hybrid quantum radar [136, 137] or Maccone-Ren quantum radar [138].
None of the mentioned protocols is perfect. Interferometric quantum radar, for example, is too sensitive
to noise and requires quantum entanglement preservation. QI is an ideal protocol for a noisy environment
and is even laboratory-veriﬁed for microwave spectrum [139], but it requires knowledge of the distance
to the target, and such as it has no ranging function. Nevertheless, the QI-based approach to quantum
target ranging is under development [140]. This ranging problem is also solved by the hybrid quantum
radar, but at the expense of sensitivity. The Maccone-Ren protocol has QI properties and ranging
function, but it is only a theoretical concept so far.

The biggest challenge common to all protocols is the high rate of generation of entangled photons in (not
only) a microwave regime. The quantum version of the radar equation [141] still holds the dominant term
1/R4, where R is the radar–target distance. As a result, the number of demanded entangled photons
In a sense, quantum
(modes) is several orders of magnitude higher than is available currently [142].
radar is similar to noise radars and shares many properties such as the probability of interception, low
probability of detection, eﬃcient spectrum sharing, etc., see [137] and references therein.

Another related challenge is target ﬁnding. Theoretical work [143] shows that quantum entanglement can
outperform any classical strategy in ﬁnding the unknown position of the target. Moreover, the presented
method can work as a quantum-enhanced frequency scanner for the ﬁxed target range.

3.4.6 Other Sensors and Technology

laboratory prototypes

• Status:
• Utilisation: new capability (e.g. chemical and precise acoustic detection)
• Timeline expectation: short- to medium term
• Main challenges:

improving resolution

Quantum technologies can be used for ultra-precise sound sensing up to the level of a phonon, a quasipar-
ticle quantising sound waves in solid matter [144, 145], using photoacoustic detection. Precise detection
of acoustic waves is essential for many applications, including medical diagnostics, sonar, navigation,
trace gas sensing and industrial processes [146, 147].

Photoacoustic detection can be combined with quantum cascade laser and used for gas or general chemical
detection. Quantum cascade laser (QCL) is yet a mature technology [148]. QCL is a semiconductor laser
that emits in the mid- and long-wave IR bands and, as with many other quantum technologies, requires
cooling far below −70◦C. However, recent development allows chip-level implementation working at
around −23◦C, which can be achieved by a portable cooling system [149].

4 Quantum Technology In Defence

Military technologies have more demanding requirements than industrial or public applications. This re-
quires greater caution, considering possible deployment on the battleﬁeld. Sec. 5 presents various possible
military applications with diﬀerent TRLs, time expectations and with multiple risks of realisation.

It will be simpler and less risky for technologies that are easily implemented and ﬁt into current tech-
nologies, such as quantum sensors where, simply put, we can replace a classical sensor with a quantum
sensor.

On the contrary, QKD is an example of a technology that is already commercially available but is
challenging to deploy. A lot of new hardware, systems and interoperability with current communication
systems are needed. Thus, this technology carries more signiﬁcant risks in terms of military deployment.

We can expect an advantage in lowering SWaP and scaling up quantum computers and quantum networks
in the long term. That will make the deployment easier and probably necessary if the nation/army wants
to compete with other nations/armies with edge (quantum) technologies.

17

4.1 Quantum Strategy

The future users of military quantum technologies will have to think carefully about whether, where and
when to invest time and resources. The goal of the defence forces is not to develop military technology
but usually only to specify requirements and their acquisition. However, they can participate signiﬁcantly
in development, especially if they are the end user.

As a foundation, it is ideal to have a national quantum ecosystem in place composed of industry and
academic institutions. Such an ecosystem should be supported generally at the government level, i.e.
having a national quantum plan, but should also be motivated to develop technologies for the defence
sector. This can be achieved through appropriate grant funding and even various thematic challenges,
in which individuals and startups can participate and perhaps bring new disruptive ideas and solutions.
This will naturally lead to closer cooperation with industry and academia. The quantum industry is
quite interesting, where there is a great deal of cooperation between academia and industry.

The ﬁrst step is to establish a quantum technology roadmap or quantum strategy. The roadmap/strategy
should specify all the next steps, from identifying disruptive quantum solutions, market survey, technol-
ogy and risk assessment and development itself to prototype testing and eventually solution deployment.
The roadmap or quantum strategy can consist of three parts:

1. Identiﬁcation,
2. Development,
3. Implementation and deployment.

The most critical part is the identiﬁcation of the most advantageous and disruptive quantum technologies
for the considered warfare domains. This step also includes the technological and scientiﬁc assessment
to balance technological risk (limited deployability, performance below expectations, or impossibility of
transfer from the laboratory to the battleﬁeld) versus the potential advantage of individual quantum
technologies. This process of identiﬁcation should be repeated in cycles in order to react relatively
quickly to new discoveries and disruptive solutions. It is important to remember that many applications
are yet to be identiﬁed or discovered.

The next step is the usual process of research and development (R&D). The R&D should be suﬃciently
supported ﬁnancially, but also with minimal bureaucratic obstacles. It should involve fast development
cycles with close interaction with the end user of the military technology (speciﬁcations and performance
consultations, prototype testing, preparing for certiﬁcations, ...). At the end of this phase, the new
system at the initial operating capability should be ready.

The last step is to reach full operational capability, including modiﬁcation or creation of new military
doctrines, preparing new military scenarios, strategies and tactics fully exploiting the quantum advantage.

The ﬁnal note pertains to the Identiﬁcation phase. Here, the decision maker needs to also assume the
long-term perspective. So far, many quantum technologies have been considered individually: sensors,
QKD, quantum computing, etc. However, the long-term vision considers the interconnection of quantum
sensors and quantum computing via the quantum network. Here, the theoretical and experimental works
demonstrate additional quantum advantage exploiting quantum entangled sensors and computers [77,
78]. More similar applications may yet be discovered or invented. This is important to consider when the
optical-ﬁbre/quantum networks are being built. Later, the current elements such as trusted repeater can
be replaced by fully quantum repeaters and switches, allowing to reach the full potential of the quantum
network.

4.2 TRL and Time Horizon

As has been mentioned several times, various quantum technologies are at diﬀerent TRL, varying from 1
to 8. The TRL variation and time horizon expectations are even more complex when considering various
applications and deployment platforms, especially for military purposes. Some TRL and time horizon

18

estimates were provided in [150]. However, some estimations, such as quantum precision navigation at
TRL 6, seem too optimistic based on what is described in this report.

Here, we provide our own TRL and expected time horizon in Tab. 1, which correspond to the ﬁndings
of this work.

Technology
Quantum computer (annealer)
QKD (satellite)
Post-quantum cryptography
Quantum communication network
Quantum inertial navigation
Quantum clocks
Quantum radar
Quantum RF antenna
Quantum magnetic and gravity sensing
Quantum imaging

TRL
4-5 (5-6)
7-8 (6-7)
7-8
1-3
4-5
4-6
1-2
4
5-6
5

Horizon
2030
2025 (2030)
2025
2030-2035
2025-2030
2030
none
2025-2030
2025
2025-2030

Table 1: TRL and time horizon expectations. These expectation reﬂect general TRL rather than just
military TRL. Note that various quantum technologies are at diﬀerent TRL within the same application.

The reader can compare these with other timelines in [11, 150].

The actual military deployment can take some time to overcome all technological obstacles and meet
military requirements. Take, for example, the quantum gravimeter for undeground scanning. The ﬁrst
generation will likely be deployed as a static sensor placed on a truck, and the range/spatial resolution
will be rather low. In time, the next generation will improve sensitivity and spatial resolution. Along
with reduction of SWaP, the sensor will be capable of being placed aboard an aircraft, and later on a
drone and maybe on an LEO satellite. However, it is also possible that the sensor’s limits will be reached
earlier, resulting in deployment becoming impossible, e.g. on a drone or LEO satellite.

4.3 Quantum Technology Countermeasures

A standalone section on quantum technology countermeasures is warranted, although this topic will be
touched upon, e.g. in Sec. 5.6 about the quantum analogy of the classical electronic warfare. This topic
is less studied, and few texts deal with this subject; besides, a detailed description is beyond the scope
of this report.

Brieﬂy, this topic refers to the methods and techniques of spooﬁng, disabling or destroying quantum
technologies, whether it is quantum computers, quantum networks or quantum sensors and imaging
systems. Quantum technologies exploit the quantum-physical properties of individual quanta. As such,
they are very susceptible to interference and noise from the environment, and so can potentially be
spoofed or paralysed. Especially in relation to quantum networks and in particular to QKD, we speak
about quantum hacking [151, 152, 153, 154, 155], which has developed hand in hand with QKD itself.

Authors and decision makers on quantum strategy should keep in mind that when quantum technologies
are deployed in the military ﬁeld, various countermeasures will very likely emerge sooner or later. What
is currently unknown is the possible eﬀectiveness of quantum technology countermeasures and their
impact.

5 Quantum Technology Military Applications

Quantum technologies have the potential to signiﬁcantly aﬀect many areas of human activity. This is
especially true for the defence sector. Quantum technologies can impact all the domains of modern

19

Figure 1: Sketch of quantum warfare utilising various quantum technology systems.

warfare. The second quantum revolution will improve sensitivity and eﬃciency, and introduce new
capabilities and sharpen modern warfare techniques rather than lead to new types of weapons.

The following text maps the conceivable quantum technology applications for military, security, space
and intelligence in diﬀerent aspects of modern warfare. It also mentions the industrial applications which
may suggest quantum technologies’ capabilities and performances, especially when no public information
on military applications is available.

It is important to notice that many applications are still more theoretical than realistic. The signiﬁcant
quantum advancement achieved in the laboratory does not always result in similar progress outside the
laboratory. The transfer from laboratory to practical deployment involves other aspects too, such as
portability, sensitivity, resolution, speed, robustness, low SWaP (size, weight and power) and cost, apart
from a working laboratory prototype. The practicality and cost-eﬀectiveness of quantum technologies
will determine whether particular quantum technologies are manufactured and deployed.

The integration of quantum technology into a military platform is even more challenging. Apart from
quantum computers that will mostly be located at data centres similarly as for civil use, the integration
and deployment of quantum sensing, imaging and networks faces several challenges posed by the increased
demands of military use (in comparison with civil/industry or scientiﬁc requirements). For example, the
military level requirement of precise navigation necessitates fast measurement rates that can be quite
limiting for the current quantum inertial sensors. There are more examples, and probably more are yet
to come.

Moreover, this area is still very young, and new technological surprises, both in a bad and a good sense,
could impose other quantum advantages or disadvantages.

20

5.1 Quantum Cybersecurity

Key points:

• Necessity of quantum crypto-agility implementation.
• Operations that want to take advantage of Shor’s algorithm should start to collect the data of

interest before the quantum-safe encryption is deployed.

• The implementation of QKD needs to be carefully considered.
• In QKD, the endpoints will be the weakest part of the system.

Quantum advantage in cyber warfare can provide new, but on the one hand very eﬀective (with exponen-
tial speedup), vectors of attack on the current asymmetric encryptions (based on integer factorisation,
the discrete logarithm or the elliptic-curve discrete logarithm problem) and, theoretically, on symmetric
encryption [156, 90]. On the other side are new quantum-resilient encryption algorithms and approaches,
as well as quantum key distribution. For an overview, see, for example, [157, 158, 159, 160].

The current trend also is the development and employment of machine learning or artiﬁcial intelligence
for cyber warfare [161]. For more details on the quantum opportunities, see Section 5.2.

5.1.1 Quantum Defence Capabilities

The post-quantum cryptography implementation is the ‘must-have’ technology that should be carried out
as soon as possible. The risk that hostile intelligence is gathering encrypted data with the expectation
of future decryption using the power of quantum computers is real, high and present [162]. This applies
to military, intelligence and government sectors as well as to industry or academia where secrets and
conﬁdential data are exchanged or stored. The current trend is to start preparing the infrastructure
for implementing quantum crypto-agility when the certiﬁed (standardised) post-quantum cryptography
becomes ready to deploy [156, 90].

New quantum-resilient algorithms can oﬀer not only a new mathematical approach diﬃcult enough
even for quantum computers, but also a new paradigm of working with encrypted data. For instance,
fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) allows the data to never get decrypted—even if they are being
processed [163]. Although the security applications, such as for genomic data, medical records or ﬁnancial
information, are the most mentioned, applications for intelligence, military or government are evident,
too. As such, FHE is a good candidate for cloud-based quantum computing to ensure secure cloud
quantum computation [164].

Note that post-quantum cryptography should be implemented in the Internet of Things (IoT), or the
Internet of Military Things (IoMT) [165], as a rapidly growing sector with many potential security
breaches. For an overview of post-quantum cryptography for IoT, see [166].

Quantum key distribution (QKD) [167, 168, 160] is another new capability that allows safe encryption
key exchange where the security is mathematically proven. Although it is impossible to eavesdrop on
the quantum carrier of the quantum data (key), the weaknesses can be found at the end nodes and
trusted repeaters, due to imperfect hardware or software implementation. Another question is the cost,
considering the quantum data throughput, security and non-quantum alternatives independently if the
solution is optical ﬁbre-based or utilising quantum satellites. The QKD solution seems to be preferred
in EU [169], while the post-quantum encryption solution ﬁnds favour in US [170].

The last note refers to quantum random number generators. QRNG increases security [171] and denies
attacks on pseudorandom number generators [172].

5.1.2 Quantum Attack Capabilities

With Shor’s algorithm-based quantum cryptoanalysis of Public key encryption (PKE)—for instance,
RSA, DH, ECC—the attacker can decrypt the encrypted data collected earlier. There is no precise fore-

21

cast when the so-called ‘Q-Day’, the day when a quantum computer breaks the 2048-bit RSA encryption,
will happen. However, the general opinion is it will take about 10–15 years (based on a survey in 2017)
[173]. A similar threat applies to most message authentication codes (MAC) and authenticated encryp-
tion with associated data (AEAD), such as HMAC-CBC and AES-GCM, because of Simon’s algorithm
and superposition queries.

One has to assume that such oﬀensive operations already exist or that intense research is being done. In 10
years, most sensitive communication or subjects of interest will be using the post-quantum cryptography
or QKD implemented in the next six years. That means by the time a quantum computer able to crack
PKE becomes available, most of the security-sensitive data will be using a quantum-safe solution.

In theory, Grover’s algorithm weakens the symmetric key encryption algorithms; for example, DES and
AES. However, the quantum computing, and in particular quantum memory, requirements are so huge
that it seems to be unfeasible in the next few decades [174].

Another vector of attack uses the classical hacking methods of classical computers that will remain behind
quantum technologies. In general, quantum technology is a technologically young sector where plenty
of new quantum system control software is being developed. The new software and the hardware tend
to have more bugs and security breaches. For example, the current QKD quantum satellites working as
trusted repeaters controlled by a classical computer can be an ideal target for a cyber attack. Moreover,
speciﬁc physical-based vectors of attack against quantum networks (e.g. QKD) are the subject of active
research [175], such as photon-number-splitting [81] or the Trojan-horse attack [82], and future surprises
cannot be excluded. For an overview of quantum hacking, see, e.g. [157].

5.2 Quantum Computing Capabilities

Key points:

• Quantum computing capabilities will increase with the number of logical qubits.
• Most likely, quantum computing will be used as part of a hybrid cloud.
• Small, embedded quantum computing systems are desirable for direct quantum data processing.
• General use for quantum optimisations, ML/AI enhancements and faster numerical simulations.

Quantum computing will introduce new capabilities to the current classical computing services, helping
with computational problems of high complexity. Further, besides the quantum simulations described
above, quantum computing covers quantum optimisations, machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence
(ML/AI) improvement, quantum data analysis, and faster numerical modelling [24, 11]. The military
problems that could be solved with near-term quantum computers were presented in [10]. They are:
Battleﬁeld or war simulations; Analysis of radio frequency spectrum; Logistics management; Supply
chain optimisation; Energy management; and Predictive maintenance.

To get the most eﬀective results, future quantum computing implementation will be in computing farms
along with classical computers, which will create a hybrid system. A hybrid quantum-classical operating
system will analyse the tasks to be computed using ML/AI, and split individual computations into
resources such as CPU, GPU, FPGA10, or quantum processor (QPU), where the best and fastest result
can be obtained.

A small, embedded quantum computer that could be placed, for example, in an autonomous vehicle or
mobile command centre is questionable. The current most advanced qubit designs need cryogenic cooling.
Therefore, more eﬀorts should be focused on the other qubit designs as photonic, spin or NV centres that
can work at room temperature. The embedded quantum chip could perform simple analytical tasks or
serve for simple operations related to quantum network applications where a straightforward quantum
data process is desired. Nevertheless, the machine learning and model optimisation of autonomous
systems and robotics can also beneﬁt from ‘large’ quantum computers.

10Central Processing Unit; Graphics Processing Unit; Field-Programmable Gate Array

22

In the military
Quantum computing is likely to be eﬃcient in optimisation problems [176, 177, 10].
sector, examples of quantum optimisations could be logistics for overseas operations and deployment,
mission planning, war games, systems validation and veriﬁcation, new vehicles’ design and their attributes
such as stealth or agility. At the top will be an application for enhanced decision making, supporting
military operations and functions through quantum information science, including predictive analytics
and ML/AI [178]. Speciﬁcally, quantum annealers have proven themselves in verifying and validating
complex systems’ software code [179, 180].

Quantum computers are expected to play a signiﬁcant role in Command and Control (C2) systems. The
role of C2 systems is to analyse and present situational awareness or assist with planning and monitoring,
including simulation of various possible scenarios to provide the best conditions for the best decision.
Quantum computers can improve and speed up the scenario simulations or process and analyse the Big
Data from ISR (Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance) for enhanced situational awareness. This
also includes the involvement of quantum-enhanced machine learning and quantum sensors and imaging.

Quantum information processing will probably be essential for Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnais-
sance(ISR) or situational awareness. ISR will beneﬁt from quantum computing, which oﬀers a consider-
able boost to the ability to ﬁlter, decode, correlate and identify features in signals and images captured
by ISR. Quantum image processing in particular is an area of extensive interest and development. It
is expected that in the near term situational awareness and understanding can beneﬁt from quantum
image analysis and pattern detection utilising neural networks [13].

Quantum computing will enhance classical machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence [54], including
for defence applications [178]. Here, quantum computing will surely not be practical to carry out the
complete machine learning process. Nevertheless, quantum computing can improve ML/AI machinery
(e.g. quantum sampling, linear algebra, quantum neural networks). A recent study [181] shows that
quantum ML provides an advantage just for some kernels ﬁtting particular problems. Quantum com-
puting can possibly enhance, in principle, most classical ML/AI applications in defence; for example,
automating cyber operations, algorithmic targeting, situation awareness and understanding and auto-
mated mission planning [182, 183]. The most immediate application of quantum ML/AI is probably
quantum data; for instance, data produced by quantum sensing or measuring apparatus [55]. Actual
applicability will grow with quantum computer resources, and in eight years, quantum ML/AI can be
one of the important quantum computing applications [184]. Such applicability can be accelerated by
hybrid classical-quantum machine learning where tensor network models could be implemented on small
near-term quantum devices [185].

Quantum computers, through quantum neural networks, can be expected to provide superior pattern
recognition and higher speed. This may be essential, for instance, in bio-mimetic cyber defence systems
that protect networks, analogously to the immune systems of biological organisms [13].

Besides, through faster linear algebra (see 3.2.5), quantum computing has the potential to improve the
current numerical linear equation-based numerical modelling in the defence sector, such as war games
simulations, radar cross section calculations, stealth design modelling, etc.

In the long term, the quantum systems can enable Network Quantum Enabled Capability (NQEC) [13].
NQEC is a futuristic system that allows communication and sharing information across the network
between individual units and the commander to respond quickly to battleﬁeld developments and for
coordination. Quantum enhancement can bring secured communication, enhanced situational awareness
and understanding, remote quantum sensor output fusing and processing, and improved C2.

5.3 Quantum Communication Network

Key points:

• Various security applications (e.g. QKD, identiﬁcation and authentication, digital signatures).
• The adoption of security applications will happen as quickly as all new technology security aspects

are explored, carefully.

23

• Quantum clock synchronisation allows utilising higher precision quantum clocks.
• Quantum internet is the most eﬀective way of communication between quantum computers and/or

quantum clouds.

Quantum internet stands for a quantum network with various services [186] which have signiﬁcant, and
not only security, implications. However, many progressive quantum communication network applica-
tions require quantum entanglement; that is, they require quantum repeater and quantum switch. Recall
that the trusted repeaters can be used for QKD only (see Sec. 3.3.1). Future combinations of optical
ﬁbre and free-space channels will interconnect various end nodes such as drones, planes, ships, vehicles,
soldiers, command centres, etc.

5.3.1 Security Applications

Quantum key distribution is one of the most matured quantum network applications. This technology
is going to be interesting for the defence sector later, when long-distance communication using MDI-
QKD or quantum repeaters becomes possible. Currently, basic commercial technology that uses trusted
repeaters is available. These pioneers can serve as a model of how quantum technologies can be employed.
Here, QKD companies promote the technology as the most secure, and more and more use cases appear,
especially in the ﬁnancial and healthcare sectors. On the other hand, the numerous recommendation
reports and authorities are more circumspect; for example, the UK National Cyber Security Centre [187]
that does not endorse QKD for any government or military applications in its current state.

Apart from QKD, which distributes the key only, the quantum network could be used for quantum-
secure direct communication (QSDC) [188, 189, 190, 191] between space, special forces, air, navy and
land assets. Here, the direct messages encrypted in quantum data take advantage of security similar
to QKD. One obstacle could be a low qubit rate, which will only allow sending simple messages and
not audiovisual and complex telemetry data. In that case, the network switch to the QKD protocol for
distributing the key and the encrypted data will be distributed over classical channels. Other protocols
such as quantum dialogue [192] and quantum direct secret sharing [193] aim to use the quantum network
for provable secure communications as QSDC. Note that QKD and QSDC are considered to be a native
part of 6G wireless communication networks and discussed accordingly in [194].

Another signiﬁcant contribution of the quantum approach to security is the quantum digital signature
(QDS) [195].
It is the quantum mechanical equivalent of a classical digital signature. QDS provides
security against tampering of a message after a sender has signed the message.

Next, quantum secure identiﬁcation exploits quantum features allowing identiﬁcation without reveal-
ing authentication credentials [72]. Non-quantum identiﬁcation is based on the exchange of login and
password or cryptographic keys, which allows intruders to at least guess who has tried to authenticate.

The other application is position-based quantum cryptography [196, 197]. Position-based quantum cryp-
tography can oﬀer more secure communication, where the accessed information will be available only
from a particular geographical position, such as communication with military satellites only from partic-
ular military bases. Position-based quantum cryptography can also provide secure communication when
the geographical position of a party is its only credential.

5.3.2 Technical Applications

Quantum network will perform network clock synchronisation [71, 198] that is already a major topic
in classical digital networks. Clock synchronisation aims to coordinate otherwise independent clocks,
especially atomic clocks (e.g.
in digital computers). A quantum
network that uses quantum entanglement will reach even more accurate synchronisation, especially when
quantum clocks come to be deployed (for Time standards and frequency transfer see Sec. 5.4). Otherwise,
the high precision of quantum clocks would be utilised locally only. Precise clock synchronisation is
essential for the cooperation of C4ISR (Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence,

in GPS) and local digital clocks (e.g.

24

Surveillance and Reconnaissance) systems for accurate synchronisation of various data and actions across
radar, electronic warfare, command centres, weapon systems, etc.

A short note is dedicated to blind quantum computing [69, 70]. This class of quantum protocols allows
for a quantum program to run on a remote quantum computer or quantum computing cloud and retrieve
results without the owner knowing what the algorithm or result was. This is valuable when secret
computation is needed (e.g. military operation planning or new weapon technology design) and no own
quantum computer capability is available.

Distributed quantum computing via the quantum network—see Section 3.3.1—will be important for
the military and governmental actors owning quantum computers, to build high-performance quantum
computing services or quantum cloud.

A quantum network capable of distributing entanglement can integrate and entangle quantum sensors
[77] for the purpose of improving the sensitivity of the sensors, reducing errors, and most importantly to
perform a global measurement. That provides an advantage in cases where the parameters of interest are
global properties of the entire network; for example, when a signal’s angle of arrival needs measurement
from three sensors, where each measures a signal with a certain amplitude and phase. Afterwards, each
sensor’s output can be used to estimate the angle of arrival of the signal. Quantum entangle sensors can
evaluate this globally. This process can then be improved by machine learning [78].

Quantum protocols for distributed computing agreement [76] can have advantageous military application
for a swarm of drones, or in general for a herd of autonomous vehicles (AVs). Here, quantum protocols
can help achieve agreement between all AVs at the same time scale, independent of their quantity.
Nevertheless, open space quantum communication between all rapidly moving AVs will be a challenge
that has to be solved ﬁrst. Note that the ﬁrst experiment of quantum entanglement distribution from a
drone was successfully carried out, recently [64].

5.4 Quantum PNT

Key points:

• All quantum PNT technologies have in common the demand for a highly accurate quantum clock.
• Quantum inertial navigation could bring few orders of magnitudes higher precision than its classical

counterpart.

• Quantum inertial navigation can be extended by the quantum augmented navigation using quantum

magnetic or gravity mapping.

• Promising quantum navigation based on Earth’s magnetic anomalies.

Quantum technologies are expected to signiﬁcantly improve positioning, navigation and timing (PNT)
systems, especially inertial navigation. Time standards and frequency transfer (TFT) is a fundamental
service that provides precise timing for communication, metrology, but also global navigation satellite
system (GNSS). Although present TFT systems are well established, the performance of optical atomic
or quantum clocks in combination with TFT utilizing quantum networks [199, 200] will keep pace with
the increasing demands of the present applications (communication, GNSS, ﬁnancial sector, radars,
electronic warfare systems) and enables new applications (quantum sensing and imaging).

New quantum-based technologies and approaches support the development of sensitive precision instru-
ments for PNT. The quantum advantage will be manifested for GPS denied or challenging operational
environments, enabling precise operations. Examples of such environments are underwater and under-
ground, or environments under GPS jamming.

Current GNSS (GPS, GLONASS, Galileo, BeiDou, ...) rely on precise timing provided through multiple
atomic clocks in individual satellites that are corrected by the more stable atomic clocks on the ground.
The higher precision of the quantum clock will increase the accuracy of positioning and navigation
as well. Over the long term, the GNSS satellites should be connected to the quantum internet for
timing distribution and clock synchronisation. Chip-size precise mobile clocks could help discover GNSS

25

deception and spooﬁng [201].

Some quantum GNSS (not only quantum clock) have been considered and investigated; for instance,
interferometric quantum positioned system (QPS) [199, 202, 203]. One of the schemes of QPS [202,
203] has a structure similar to the traditional GNSS where there are three baselines, each consisting
of two low-orbiting satellites, with the baselines are perpendicular to each other. However, although
theoretically the accuracy of positioning is astonishing, signiﬁcant engineering must be done to design a
realistic QPS.

Most of the current navigation relies on GPS, or in general GNSS, which is the most precise available
technology for navigation. GNSS technology is prone to jamming, deception, spooﬁng or GPS-deprived
environments such as densely populated areas with high electromagnetic spectrum use. Moreover, for
underground or underwater environments, GNSS technology is not available at all. The solution is
inertial navigation. The problem with classical inertial navigation is its drifting, a loss of precision over
time. For example, the marine-grade inertial navigation (for ships, submarines and spacecraft) has a
drift 1.8 km/day and navigation grade (for military aircraft) has a drift 1.5 km/hour [204]. In 2014,
DARPA started a MTO-PTN project with a goal to reach drift 20 m and 1 ms/hour [205]. Even so,
some expectations are very high, that quantum inertial navigation will oﬀer error of only approximately
hundreds of meters per month [5, 206].

The full quantum inertial navigation system consists of a quantum gyroscope, accelerometer and atomic/quantum
clocks. Although the individual sensors required for quantum inertial navigation are tested out of labo-
ratories, it is still challenging to create a complete quantum inertial measurement unit. For navigation
for highly mobile platforms, sensors need fast measurement rates of several 100 Hz, or to improve the
measurement bandwidth of quantum sensors [204, 207]. The key component that needs the most im-
provement is the low-drift rotation sensor. The classical inertial sensors are based on various principles
[208]. One common chip-size technology is the MEMS (Micro Electro Mechanical Systems) technol-
ogy, where MEMS gyroscopes have demonstrated instabilities at level ∼ 10−7 rad·s−1 that is suitable
for military applications [99]. The instability limit for the best current cold-atom gyroscopes is about
∼ 10−9 − 10−10 rad·s−1 (at integration time 1000 s) [209]. The uncertainty is in the precision of the in
ﬁeld-deployable quantum sensors in comparison to the presented laboratory experiments’ precision. The
intermediate step between classical and quantum inertial navigation can be a hybrid system fusing the
outputs of classical and quantum accelerometers [210]. With the size of the quantum inertial navigation
device decreasing to chip size, its deployment can be expected on smaller vehicles, especially unmanned
autonomous vehicles or missiles. However, the miniaturisation we can reach is unknown. There are
many doubts about chip-sized quantum inertial navigation. It is certainly a next-generation technology,
although a very big challenge.

Currently, the individual elements, such as gyroscope or accelerometer, are also tested on various plat-
forms; for instance, on board an aircraft [211], or more recently a [212].

For many years, the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) were mapping the
Earth’s magnetic anomaly and creating a magnetic anomalies map. Using sensitive quantum magnetome-
ters in combination with Earth’s magnetic anomaly map is another way to realise quantum non-GNSS
navigation [213, 214].

Gravitational map matching [215] works on a similar principle, and one can expect improved performance
using the quantum gravimeter. Together, quantum gravimeter and magnetometer could be a basis for a
submarine quantum augmented navigation, especially in undersea canyons, wrinkled seabeds, or littoral
environments.

In general, quantum inertial navigation or augmented navigation has vast potential, since there is no
need for GPS, infra or radar navigation and it is not susceptible to jamming, or in general to electronic
warfare attacks. However, the claim of ‘no need for GPS’ is not quite accurate. These systems will
always need some external input on their initial position, most probably from GNSS.

26

5.5 Quantum ISTAR

Key points:

• Intense involvement of quantum computing to gather and process information.
• Desired deployment on low-orbit satellites, but the resolution is questionable.
• Vast applications for undersea operations.
• Expected advanced underground surveillance with uncertain resolution.
• New type of 3D, low-light or low-SNR quantum vision devices.

ISTAR (intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition and reconnaissance) is a crucial capability of a
modern army for precise operations. Quantum technologies have the potential to dramatically improve
situational awareness of multi-domain battleﬁelds.

In general, a large impact can be expected from quantum computing that will help with acquiring new
intelligence data, processing Big Data from surveillance and reconnaissance and identifying targets using
quantum ML/AI [178, 183].

Apart from the processing part of ISTAR, dramatic advancement can be expected from quantum sensing
placed on individual land/sea/aerial vehicles and low-orbit satellites.

Quantum gravimeters and gravitational gradiometers promise high accuracy that can improve or intro-
duce new applications: geophysics study, seismology, archaeology, minerals (ﬁssile material or precious
metals) and oil detection, underground scanning and precise georeferencing and topographical mappings
(e.g. of the seabed for underwater navigation) [7].

Another signiﬁcant type of sensing is quantum magnetometry. The applications of quantum magnetom-
etry are partially overlapped by applications for quantum gravimetry, thus introducing new applications:
Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld including magnetic anomalies, local magnetic anomalies due to the presence, such
as metallic objects (submarines, mines, etc.), or weak biological magnetic signals (applications mainly
for medical purposes) [7].

The third ﬁeld interesting for ISTAR is quantum imaging. Quantum imaging oﬀers plenty of diverse
applications; for example, quantum radar (see Section 5.7), imaging devices for medicine, 3D camera,
stealth rangeﬁnder, etc.

The potential quantum computing applications in ISR and situational awareness are described in Sec. 5.2.

5.5.1 Quantum Earth’s Surface and Underground Surveillance

Quantum sensing based on magnetometry, gravimetry and gravity gradiometry at the ﬁrst level helps
with the study of continents and sea surface, including underground changes of natural origin. Both
magnetic anomaly and gravity-based sensing provide a diﬀerent picture of the Earth’s surface. The Earth
is very inhomogeneous (ocean, rocks, caves, metallic minerals, ...), including the massive constructions
or vehicles made by people which generate a unique gravitational (depending on the mass) and magnetic
(depending on metallic composition) footprint.

The discussed quantum sensing technologies—magnetometry, gravimetry and gravity gradiometry—can
reach very high precision, at least in the laboratory. For example, the precision of absolute gravimetry
out of the laboratory is about 1 µGal (10 nm·s−2) [216]. Note that the sensitivity of 3.1 µGal corresponds
to a sensitivity per centimetre of height above the Earth’s surface. However, the problem is the spatial
resolution that usually is anti-correlated with the sensitivity (higher sensitivity is at the cost of lower
spatial resolution and vice versa). Spatial resolution and sensitivity are the critical attributes that deﬁne
what you will recognise (large-scale natural changes or small underground structures) and from what
distance (from the ground, drone or satellite-based measurement). Examples of the current spatial
resolution are about 100 km [217] for satellite-borne gravity gradiometer or 16 km [218] additional
width using radar satellite altimetry (for sea areas), or 5 km [219] for airborne gravimetry. For more

27

information, see e.g. [5].

For many quantum sensing applications, it would be essential to place sensors on low Earth orbit (LEO)
satellites [220]. However, the current sensitivity and spatial resolution allow only the applications for
Earth monitoring (mapping resources such as water or oil, earthquake or tsunami detection).

Apart from low-orbit satellites, the mentioned quantum sensors are considered for deployment on air-
borne, sea or ground vehicle platforms. Nowadays, quantum sensing experiments are performed outside
the laboratory environment, such as in a truck [221], on drones and aeroplanes [222, 223] or aboard ships
[217]. For example, the quantum gravimeter could be mounted on drones to search for human-made
structures such as tunnels used to smuggle drugs [223]. Placing quantum sensing devices on a drone
(this may be an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), Unmanned Surface Vessel (USV), Remotely Oper-
ated Vehicle (ROV) or unmanned underwater vessel (UUV)) needs more engineering to reach the best
sensitivity, resolution and operability simultaneously.

Low-resolution quantum sensing could be used for precise georeferencing and topographical mappings
to help with underwater navigation or mission planning in rugged terrain. Also, the detection of new
minerals and oil ﬁelds can become a new centre of interest, especially under the seabed [224]. This can
be a source of international friction, despite the fact that borders are clear in most cases.

High-resolution quantum magnetic and gravity sensing [225, 226, 227, 217] is considered in numerous
reports and articles [7, 228, 229, 230, 231, 225] to be able to: detect camouﬂaged vehicles or aircraft;
eﬀectively search for a ﬂeet of ships or individual ships from LEO; detect underground structures such
as caves, tunnels, underground bunkers, research facilities and missile silos; localise buried unexploded
objects (landmines, underwater mines and improvised explosive devices); achieve through-wall detection
of rotating machinery.

However, note again that it is highly uncertain where the technical limits are and whether the mentioned
quantum gravimetry and magnetometry applications will reach such sensitivity and resolution (especially
for using from LEO) as to realise all the aforementioned ideas. Quantum sensors will be delivered to the
market in many generations, each with better sensitivity and resolution and lower SWaP, allowing more
extensive deployment and application.

5.5.2 Quantum Imaging Systems

Besides quantum radar and lidar (see Section 5.7), there are other military-related applications of quan-
tum imaging.
In general, all-weather, day-night tactical sensing for ISTAR for long/short-range, ac-
tive/passive regime, invisible/stealth using EO/IR/THz/RF frequencies features and advantages are
considered. Quantum imaging systems can use various techniques and quantum protocols; for example,
SPAD, quantum ghost imaging, sub-shot-noise imaging, or quantum illumination as was described in
Section 3.4.4. In general, it is not a problem to construct quantum imaging systems of small sizes. The
critical parameters are the ﬂux of the single-photon/entangled photon emitter or the single-photon de-
tection resolution and sensitivity. Moreover, a large-scale deployment of a quantum imaging system with
high photon ﬂux will require powerful processing that can limit the system deployability and performance.

Quantum 3D cameras exploiting quantum entanglement and photon-number correlations will introduce
fast 3D imaging with unprecedented depth of focus with low noise aiming at sub-shot noise or long-range
performance. This capability can be used to inspect and detect deviation or structural cracks on jets,
satellites and other sensitive military technology. Long-range 3D imaging from UAV can be used for
reconnaissance and to explore mission destination or hostile facilities and equipment.

Another commercially available technology is quantum gas sensors [232]. Technically it is a single-photon
quantum lidar calibrated to detect methane leakage. The next prepared product is a multiple gas detector
able to also detect carbon dioxide (CO2). With proper improvement and calibration, it could serve for
human presence detection, too.

A speciﬁc feature at short range is the possibility of behind-the-corner or out of the line-of-sight visibility,
[126]. These methods can help to locate and recover trapped people, people in hostage situations or to

28

improve automated driving by detecting incoming vehicles from around a corner.

Quantum imaging can serve as a low-light or low-SNR vision device; for example, in an environment such
as cloudy water, fog, dust, smoke, jungle foliage or in the nighttime, leading to an advantage. Low-SNR
quantum imaging could help in target detection, classiﬁcation and identiﬁcation with low signal-to-noise
ratios or concealed visible signatures and potentially counter adversaries’ camouﬂage or other target-
deception techniques. Quantum imaging will be very useful for helicopter pilots when landing in dusty,
foggy or smoky environments [9].

One signiﬁcant product will be a quantum rangeﬁnder [233, 234]. Conventional rangeﬁnders use a bright
laser and can be easily detected by the target. A quantum rangeﬁnder will be indistinguishable from the
background both temporally and spectrally when viewed from the target. In other words, the quantum
rangeﬁnder will be invisible and stealthy, including at night time, whereas the classical rangeﬁnder can
be visible to the target or others.

Under some circumstances, quantum ghost imaging can play the role of quantum lidar [235], especially
when the target does not move or moves very slowly and inﬁnite depth of focus is required for 3D imaging.

5.6 Quantum Electronic Warfare

Key points:

• Enhancement of current EW by smaller universal quantum antennas, precise timing and advanced

RF spectrum analysers.

• The problem with detection of quantum channels.
• When the quantum channel is localised, several types of attacks are considered and developed.

Quantum electronic warfare (EW) can be divided into quantum-enhanced classical EW and quantum
EW focusing on countermeasures, counter-countermeasure and support against quantum channels. By a
quantum channel is meant any transfer of photons carrying quantum information for quantum internet,
quantum radar or another quantum system that uses the free-space or optical ﬁbres channel.

Classical EW systems for electronic support measures can beneﬁt from the quantum antenna. Quantum
antenna based on Rydberg atoms can oﬀer a small size independent of the measured signal wavelength
(frequency) [122, 123]. This means that even for low-frequency (MHz to kHz [236, 124]) signal intercep-
tion a few-micrometres of quantum antenna is suﬃcient. There can be an array of quantum antennas for
multi-frequency measurement for diﬀerent bandwidths or one antenna dynamically changing bandwidth
according to the interest. Moreover, Rydberg atoms-based antennas can measure both AM and FM sig-
nals, oﬀer self-calibration, and measure both weak and very strong ﬁelds and detect the angle-of-arrival
[125]. In the future, quantum antennas could look like an array (matrix) of Rydberg atom cells. Diﬀerent
cells can measure diﬀerent signals, and in the joint measurement of two or more cells, the angle-of-arrival
of the signal could be determined. The weakest aspect of such antennas is the cryogenics required for
cooling Rydberg atoms that need to be scaled down to an acceptable size.
In general, quantum RF
sensors are a key enabler for advanced (LPD/LPI11) communications, over-horizon directional RF, re-
sistance to RF interference and jamming, RF direction ﬁnding, or RF-THz imaging. As an example, an
arrayed quantum RF sensor is developed as a potential upgrade for ﬁghter F-35 [237].

Classical EW can also beneﬁt from quantum computing, oﬀering improved RF spectrum analysers for
electronic warfare where quantum optimisations and quantum ML/AI techniques can be applied. Higher
eﬀectiveness can be reached by the processing and analysing directly of quantum data [55] from RF
quantum sensors (Rydberg atoms, NV centres), where the impact of a quantum computer can be more
signiﬁcant. Moreover, other quantum-based solutions and approaches are under development, such as
NV centre based RF spectrum analysis or SHB based rainbow analyser [238].

The current EW systems will also beneﬁt from quantum timing. Quantum timing can enhance capabili-
ties such as signals intelligence, counter-DRFM (digital radio frequency memory) and other EW systems

11Low Probability of Intercept/Low Probability of Detection (LPI/LPD)

29

that require precise timing; for instance, counter-radar jamming capabilities.

The other area of quantum EW will be signals intelligence (SIGINT) and communications intelligence
(COMINT) (detecting, intercepting, identifying, locating) and quantum electronic attack (jamming,
deception, use of direct energy weapons). Quantum channels (for quantum communication or quantum
imaging) have speciﬁc characteristics. First, the simple signal interception is problematic because the
quantum data are carried by individual quanta, and their interception can be easily detected. Second,
typical quantum imaging technologies use a low signal-to-noise ratio, which means that it is challenging
to recognise signal and noise without extra knowledge. Third, coherent photons, usually used as a signal,
behave like a laser that is very focused. Finding such a quantum signal without knowing the position of
at least one party is very challenging. These characteristics make the classical EW obsolete and blind
against quantum channels.

The situation is diﬃcult even for potential quantum electronic warfare systems, since it is open to
question whether it will be possible to detect the presence of a quantum (free-space) channel. This will
require the development of quantum analogy of laser warning receivers [239]. For quantum EW, it will
be critical to get intel on the position of one or both parties using the quantum channel.

Classical EW would intercept and eavesdrop on the free-space classical channel. However, this is not
possible for the quantum channel where it would be detected promptly. One possible attack is a man-
in-the-middle type attack [240, 241], since the early quantum network parties can have a problem with
authentication or trusted repeaters. Other types of attacks are considered at the quantum physics level;
for example, a photon number splitting attack relies on utilising coherent laser pulses for the quantum
channel [81] or the Trojan-horse attacks [82], or the collecting of scattered light and its detection [242].
However, these types of attacks are very sophisticated, and their practicability, for example in space, is
uncertain.

It is more probable that the quantum EW attack will be just a type of denial of service, where the
quantum channel is intercepted, leading to stoppage of use of the channel. Another possibility is the
sophisticated jamming of the receivers on one or both sides, leading to enormous noise. When the
position of the receiver or transmitter is known, another countermeasure of the classical EW is to make
use of directed energy weapons such as laser, leading to damage or destruction of sensors. Such an attack
also could help eavesdroppers [155].

In general, new approaches and methods will need to be developed to realise the capabilities of quantum
electronic warfare and address the corresponding requirements.

5.7 Quantum Radar and Lidar

Key points:

• Long-range surveillance quantum radar is unlikely with existing quantum microwave technology.
• Possible applications in the optical regime - quantum lidar.
• Quantum radar could be used for space warfare.

The perception of the quantum radar topic [141, 243, 244] is aﬀected by the hype in the media claiming
quantum radar development in China [245, 246] or by optimistic laboratory experiments. Indeed, the
theoretical advantages and features of quantum radar are signiﬁcant (some of them depend on individual
quantum protocols):

- Higher resistance to noise—that is, better SNR (signal-to-noise ratio)—higher resistance to jam-

ming and other electronic warfare countermeasures;

- Based on individual photons; that is, the output signal power is so low that it will be invisible to

electronic warfare measures;

- Target illumination; that is, a radar allowing identiﬁcation of the target.

Based on the list of unique quantum radar features, it could be a powerfully disruptive technology that
could change the rules of modern warfare. Therefore, attention is being paid to this topic internationally,

30

despite the immaturity of the technology, and the many doubts about whether the quantum radar could
work as the standard primary surveillance radar.

Moreover, many people immediately imagine quantum radar as a long-range surveillance radar with a
range of hundreds of kilometres, whereas such an application of quantum radar seems unlikely [247, 248].
Such an optimal, long-term surveillance quantum radar would be extremely expensive (many orders of
magnitude higher than the classical radar cost for any range) [247], and it would still not fulﬁl all the
advantages and features listed above.

Brieﬂy, the practical problems are the following [247]. Quantum radar too is subject to the radar
equation, where the received power is lost with the distance’s fourth power.
In parallel, to keep the
quantum advantage, it is desirable to have one or fewer photons per mode. In summary, the relatively
high power made of low-photon modes in the microwave regime is needed to be generated. This requires
a lot of quantum signal generators, cryogenics, large antenna sizes, etc. All this leads to extremely
high cost, and impractical design [247, 137]. Scientists need to come up with more practical quantum
microwave technology to overcome these diﬃculties.

Apart from the high price, scepticism also remains about the detection of stealthy targets or jamming
resistance. Quantum radar can be advantageous against a barrage jammer, but not necessarily against
a DRFM or other smart jammer [247].
In summary, the long-range surveillance quantum radar is
unlikely to be achieved even as a long-term prospect. For its realisation, one would need to evolve new
technology allowing smaller cryogenics, RF quantum emitter working at a higher temperature or more
eﬃcient cryogenics cooling, and a more powerful emitter (high rate of low photon pulses). Note that even
if the room-temperature superconducting materials were developed, it would not help in the Josephson
parametric ampliﬁer (JPA) method of entangled microwave photon generation [249]. Nevertheless, JPA
is not the only method to obtain entangled microwave photons [137]. It is not entirely impossible that a
new theory and designs of quantum radar will be discovered in the future. The long-range surveillance
quantum radar described above would suﬀer from large size, weight and power consumption, and it is
questionable if such a radar would be stealthy [247].

Another problem is the ranging in the case of quantum illumination (QI) protocol. QI protocol requires
knowledge of the target in advance, and therefore it requires some extension for ranging, whether classical
or quantum [6].

For several years, it was believed that the quantum radar cross section (RCS) is higher than the RCS of
classical radars [250, 251]. A new precise study of quantum RCS [252] shows that the previously claimed
advantage of quantum RCS over the classical RCS results from erroneous approximation. Quantum and
classical RCS seem to be equal, at the moment.

Another approach can be the quantum-enhanced noise radar [253, 254, 137]. Noise radar uses noise
waveform as a transmission signal, and detection is based on the correlation between the transmitted
signal and the received noise waveform radar returns. The advantage is the low probability of interception
(LPI), being nearly undetectable by today’s intercept receivers. The quantum noise radar design needs
more study to see practical applicability. However, a potential use here is especially for the microwave
regime.

Still, the current theory and research have applications in the radar sector, especially that which uses the
optical or near-optical photons; that is, quantum lidar. Here, a short-range quantum lidar could be used
for target illumination at short distances. Experiments with single-photon imaging were demonstrated
from 10 [255] to 45 km [256]. In this range, quantum lidar could operate as an anti-drone surveillance
radar or as part of a SHORAD (Short Range Air Defense) complex.

Space can be another example of an advantageous environment for quantum radar/lidar [257] which is
low noise for the optical regime, and it even almost eliminates the decoherence problem in the case of
entangled photons. For example, Raytheon performs simulations of the quantum radar in the optical
regime for space domain [258, 259]. The idea is to place a quantum radar on a satellite and detect
small satellites that are diﬃcult to detect because of their small cross-sectional area, reﬂectivity, and
environmental lighting conditions. The deployment of quantum radar/lidar for the space environment
can provide almost all the advantages listed above.

31

A small note is dedicated here to quantum-enhanced radar. Classical radar can be equipped with an
atomic or quantum clock. Such quantum-enhanced radars show high precision and reduced noise, and
thus demonstrate an advantage in detecting small, slow-moving objects such as drones [260].

5.8 Quantum Underwater Warfare

Key points:

• Submarines can be one of the ﬁrst adopters of quantum inertial navigation.
• Quantum magnetometers as the main tool for detection of submarines or underwater mines.

Quantum technologies can signiﬁcantly interfere in underwater warfare, with enhanced magnetic detec-
tion of a submarine or underwater mines, novel inertial submarine navigation and quantum-enhanced
precise sonars.
In general, in the maritime environment, sensing based on quantum photo-detectors,
radar, lidar, magnetometers, or gravimeters can be applied [257]. For a general overview of the implica-
tions of quantum technology for nuclear weapon submarines’ near invulnerability, see [261].

Submarines and other underwater vehicles will beneﬁt from quantum inertial navigation described in
Section 5.4 about PNT. Large submarines can probably be one of the ﬁrst adopters of quantum iner-
tial navigation because they can aﬀord to install larger quantum devices, including cryogenics cooling.
Moreover, sensitive quantum magnetometers and gravimeters can help map surroundings such as an
undersea canyon, icebergs and a wrinkled sea bottom without using sonar that can be easily detected.
An example of another type of inertial navigation especially suitable for underwater arctic navigation is
based on quantum imaging [262].

The basic tool for anti-submarine warfare could be the quantum magnetometer. Researchers anticipate
that the SQUID magnetometers in particular could detect a submarine from 6 kilometres away, with
still improving noise suppression [263, 264]. Note that the current classical magnetic anomaly detectors,
usually mounted on a helicopter or a plane, have a range of only hundreds of meters. An array of
quantum magnetometers, such as along the coast, could cover signiﬁcant areas, leading to denial area for
submarines. Moreover, an array of quantum magnetometers seems to work better with more suppressed
noise.

Quantum magnetometers can also be used to detect underwater mines using, for instance, an unmanned
underwater vessel [230].

However, the main discussion is about the detection range, sensitivity, etc., as in Sec. 5.5.1. Even other
underwater domain technology such as sonar oﬀers longer detection range [229]. It was also pointed out
in [261] that quantum technologies will have little impact on SSBN (ballistic missile submarines). It is
possible that quantum magnetometers could work with other sensors to aid in detection, identiﬁcation
and classiﬁcation of targets [229].

5.9 Quantum Space Warfare

Key points:

• Important for long-distance quantum communication.
• Low Earth orbit will be important for the future deployment of quantum sensing and imaging

technologies.

• Space warfare will lead to new quantum radar/lidar and quantum electronic warfare technologies

for deployment in space.

The space domain is gaining in importance and will be an important battleﬁeld used by advanced
countries. Space used to be a place mainly for satellites for navigation, mapping, communication and

32

surveillance, often for military purposes. Nowadays, space is becoming more weaponised [265]; for
example, satellites with laser weapons or ‘kamikaze’ satellites are placed in Earth orbit, and anti-satellite
warfare is growing in parallel. Another surging problem is the amount of space garbage, with the number
of satellites estimated at 2,200 and several more planned to be released [266].

Space also will be key for placing quantum sensing and communication technology in satellites [267, 268,
269, 270, 271], as well as for space countermeasures.

For many quantum technology applications described in previous sections, it would be desirable to
place quantum sensing technology such as quantum gravimeter, gravity gradiometer or magnetometer on
satellites in Earth orbit, especially the low one (LEO). Such applications are in development; for example,
a low-power quantum gravity sensing device that can be deployed in space on board a small satellite for
accurately mapping resources or to aid in assessing the impact of natural disasters [272]. However, such
an application does not require too high spatial resolution. See Sec. 5.5.1 for a detailed discussion. The
same applies to satellite-based quantum imaging. For example, China claimed the development of a spy
satellite that uses ghost imaging technology [273]. However, what spatial resolution it has is uncertain.
Nevertheless, quantum ghost imaging would have the advantage of being usable in cloudy, foggy weather
or at night as well.

On the other hand, utilisation of satellites for quantum communication has already been demonstrated
[62, 274]. Satellite-based quantum communication will be essential for the near-term integrated quantum
network at long distances [275]. The present quantum communication satellites suﬀer from the same
In fact, present quantum satellites are trusted
problems as trusted repeaters for optic ﬁbre channel.
repeaters. The issue with trusted repeaters is that they keep the doors open to possible cyber attacks on
the satellite control system. A better security situation is with the presently demonstrated MDI-QKD
protocol [276], where the central point works as a repeater or switch, but in a safe regime, and later with
quantum repeaters. For a space quantum communication overview, see [270, 271].

A new required military capability will be technology to detect other satellites, space-borne objects,
space garbage and track them. classical radars are used for this purpose; for instance, the Space Fence
project as part of the US Space Surveillance Network [277]. However, most of these space surveillance
radars have problems with objects with a size of about 10 cm and smaller [266] (in the case of Space
Fence, the minimal size is about 5 cm), and another problem is the capacity, as to how many objects they
can track. This is the case with most of the space garbage that is only a few centimetres in size. Instead
of classical radar, quantum radar or lidar is considered [257, 6, 259] as an alternative. Speciﬁcally
for the space environment, the quantum radar in optical regime is considered [259], since the optical
photons do not suﬀer from losses such as in the atmosphere. Space quantum radar can oﬀer most of the
advantages of quantum radar as described in Section 5.7, including stealth. According to simulations
[259], quantum radar in space can oﬀer at least one order of magnitude higher detection sensitivity and
object tracking sensitivity in space in comparison with GEODSS (Ground-based Electro-Optical Deep
Space Surveillance). Space quantum radar would be very useful for tracking small, dark and fast objects,
such as satellites, space garbage or meteoroids.

The increasing presence of quantum sensing and communication devices in space will lead to increased
interest in quantum electronic warfare as described in Section 5.6.

5.10 Chemical and Biological Simulations and Detection

Key points:

• ∼ 200 qubits are suﬃcient to carry out chemical quantum simulation research.
• The capability of achieving more complex simulations increases with the number of logical qubits.
• Chemical detection in the air or in samples.
• Suitable for detecting explosives and chemical warfare agents.

The defence-related chemical and biological simulations are primarily interesting for the military and
national laboratories, the chemical defence industry or CBRN (Chemical, Biological, Radiological and

33

Nuclear) defence forces. Research on new drugs and chemical substances based on quantum simulations
will require an advanced quantum computer, classical computing facility and quantum-chemical experts.
The quantum simulations for chemical and biological chemical warfare agents, in principle, have the
same requirements as civil research, such as the already ongoing protein folding, nitrogen ﬁxation and
peptides research.

The number of required qubits depends on the number of spatial basis functions (various basis sets
exist, e.g., STO-3G, 6-31G or cc-pVTZ); for example, using the 6-31G basis, the Benzene and Caﬀeine
molecules can be simulated by approx. 140 and 340 qubits, respectively [278]. Then, the Sarin molecule
simulation, for instance, requires about 250 qubits. Based on quantum computer roadmaps [27, 279]
and logical qubit requirements, one can come to 100 logical qubits in 10 years, but probably earlier with
more eﬀective error corrections and error-resisting qubits. This is suﬃcient for medium-sized molecule
simulations.

The threat could be the design and precise simulation of structures and the chemical properties of new
small- to medium-sized molecules that could play the role of chemical warfare agents similar to, for
example, Cyanogen, Phosgene, Cyanogen chloride, Sarin or Yperit. On the other hand, in general the
same knowledge can also be used for CBRN countermeasures and new detection technique development.

The research on protein folding, DNA and RNA exploration, such as motifs identiﬁcation, Genome-
wide association studies and De novo structure prediction [280] could impact the research on biological
agents as well [281]. However, more detailed studies are needed to assess the real threat from quantum
simulations.

Photoacoustic detection with quantum cascade laser will be eﬀective as a chemical detector. For example,
quantum chemical detectors can detect TNT and triacetone triperoxide elements used in improvised
explosive devices (IED) that are a common weapon used in asymmetric conﬂicts. The same system for
detecting Acetone can be used to discover baggage and passengers with explosives boarding aircraft.
In general, quantum chemical detection can be used against chemical warfare agents or toxic industrial
chemicals [282, 283].

In the mid- to long term, such detectors can be placed on autonomous drones or ground vehicles that
are inspecting an area [284].

5.11 New Material Design

Key points:

• General research impacts; for example, room-temperature superconducting allowing the highly
precise SQUID magnetometers to operate without cooling can have a remarkable impact on military
quantum technology applications.

• Defence industry research on camouﬂage, stealth, ultra-hard armour or high-temperature tolerance

material.

Modern science is developing new materials, metamaterials, sometimes called quantum material, by
exploiting the quantum mechanical properties (e.g. graphene, topological insulator). Material as a
quantum system can be simulated by a quantum computer; for example, the electronic structure of the
material. The considered applications can be, for instance, the room-temperature superconductor, better
batteries and improvement of speciﬁc material features.

To explain in greater detail, the room-temperature superconductivity material, for example, exploits
superconductivity at high temperatures [285]. That would allow building Josephson junctions, usually
used as the building blocks of SQUIDs or superconducting qubits. So far, cooling near absolute zero is
required. It is expected that a quantum computer with about 70 logical qubits [286] could be suﬃcient
for the basic research on high-temperature superconductors.

For the defence industry, opportunities for research on new materials such as better camouﬂage, stealth

34

(electromagnetic absorption), ultra-hard armour or high-temperature tolerance material design are con-
sidered without any details being revealed.12

5.12 Brain imaging and human-machine interfacing

Key points:

• Quantum enabled magneto-encephalography
• Enhanced human-machine interfacing

MEG (magneto-encephalography) scanner is a medical imaging system that visualises what the brain
is doing by measuring the magnetic ﬁelds generated by current ﬂowing through neuronal assemblies.
Quantum magnetometers—based, for instance, on optically pumped magnetometers [287]—can enable
high-resolution magnetoencephalography for real-time brain activity imaging. This technology is safe
and non-invasive, and is already laboratory tested. The technology itself is small, and wearable [287].

In the near term, quantum MEG could be a part of a soldier’s helmet for continuous and remote medical
monitoring and diagnosis in case of injury. The long-term expectations include enhanced human–machine
interfacing, i.e. practical non-invasive cognitive communication with machines and autonomous systems
[11].

6 Optimism versus Pessimism

Many of the quantum technology military applications mentioned above sound very optimistic and can
drive exaggerated expectations. Some applications are taken from various reports and newspapers or
magazine articles, wherein the author could have overestimated the quantum technology transfer from
It is
the laboratory to the battleﬁeld or been inﬂuenced by general quantum technology hype [288].
especially important to avoid exaggerated expectations when the topic concerns national security or
defence. This issue has been described in [14].

Quantum technology military applications described above are based on public-domain, state-of-the-art
research supplemented by various reports and newspaper or magazine articles about defence applications.
Critical remarks on their feasibility are not given for several technologies, since there is no public infor-
mation on the same. In these cases, the reader should be more careful and critical until more detailed
studies are available.

On the other hand, it is known that big defence corporations and national defence laboratories have
had quantum research and development programmes for several years. However, only some detailed
information is publicly communicated. The opposite extreme seems to include announcements, such as
from China [245, 246, 273, 263], where it is diﬃcult to disentangle the real research advancement from
the state’s strategic propaganda [289].

For many of the mentioned quantum technologies, only a laboratory proof of concept has been provided
so far. The decisive factors determining whether the quantum technologies will be applied outside
the laboratory to general use are component miniaturisation and susceptibility to interference. These
improvements must not be made at the expense of sensitivity, resolution and functionality. Another
decisive factor in real deployment is the price of the technology.

In conclusion, considering the advancements in quantum technology research and in supportive sys-
tems, such as laser and cryogenic cooling miniaturisation in the last few years, it is reasonable to be
optimistic rather than pessimistic about the future quantum technology military applications (from the
perspective of military or governmental actors). One needs to be careful about the real capabilities in
operational deployment, to see whether they fulﬁl the requirements and if the price-performance ratio
justiﬁes acquisition and deployment.

12Usually mentioned in public news articles or interviews but without details or references.

35

7 Quantum Warfare Consequences and Challenges

The development, acquisition and deployment of quantum technologies for military application will raise
new, related challenges. The concept of quantum warfare will impose new demands on military strategy,
tactics and doctrines, on ethics and disarmament activities and on technical realisation and deployment.
Studies should be conducted to understand the issues, implications, threats and choices that arise from
the development of quantum technologies, and not only for military application.

7.1 Military Consequences and Challenges

Quantum technologies in military applications have the potential to sharpen the present capabilities,
such as by providing more precise navigation, ultra-secure communication or advanced ISTAR and
computing capabilities. In general, quantum warfare will require an update, modiﬁcation or creation of
new military doctrines, military scenarios and plans to develop and acquire new techniques and weapons
for the quantum age.

Before this, the development of technology policies and strategies is needed to respond to the strategic
ambitions of individual actors [290]. National technology policies and strategies should include, for exam-
ple, the research of national quantum technology resources (universities, laboratories and corporations)
and markets, the state of development and feasibility studies and the military and security threat and
potential assessments, such as [261].

The monitoring of quantum technology evolution and adaptation is essential to avoid technological
surprises due to neighbouring or potentially hostile countries. Quantum warfare monitoring is essential
even if the quantum technology is beyond their ﬁnancial, research or technological capabilities for some
countries. Therefore, all modern armies should be interested in the possible impacts of quantum warfare.

The national trade and export policies are also important. For example, the European Union has declared
quantum computing as an emerging technology of global strategic importance and is considering more
restricted access to the research programme named Horizon Europe [291]. Further, China has prohibited
the export of cryptography technology, including quantum cryptography [292].

Another topic is the careful communication of signiﬁcant quantum advantages along with allies, especially
in the quantum ISTAR and quantum cyber capabilities, which can reveal military secrets, such as
classiﬁed ﬁles, nuclear submarines’ positions or underground facilities. A signiﬁcant disruption of the
balance of power could upset allies as well as neutral or hostile players [9].

7.2 Peace and Ethics Consequences and Challenges

To date, the military applications of quantum technologies mapped in Sec. 5 do not introduce new
weapons even as they sharpen the existing military technology; for instance, by developing more precise
sensing and navigation, new computing capabilities and stronger information security. Nevertheless, the
question if quantum technologies, especially for military applications, will be good or bad for world peace
is relevant.

Already various calls for ethical guidelines for quantum computing [293, 294, 295] have appeared, wherein
ethical concerns, such as human DNA manipulation, creation of new materials for war and intrusive AI
are mentioned [294].

Despite the fact that quantum technologies do not generate new weapons, their improvement of present
military technology will sharpen such capabilities, shortening the time for an attack, warning and decision
making. Consequently, quantum technologies can make the use of force more likely even while reducing
individual risk [296], and thus make war more probable [297, 298].

The preventive arms control of generic dual-use technologies such as quantum technologies will be more
diﬃcult because they can be used for civilian applications too, such as in quantum sensing for medicine.

36

An analogy with nanotechnologies has been made [299]. Export controls to prevent or slow down pro-
liferation and military use by other countries or non-state groups are the most likely way to attempt to
reduce any threat posed by quantum technologies [298].

Speciﬁcally, quantum computing research and development is very expensive. However, the goal is to
develop a technology that allows simple and reliable qubit production. This can lead to cheaper, more
widely distributed and accessible technology for actors with fewer skills, which is a trait of upcoming
problematic military technology [298].

7.3 Technical Consequences and Challenges

The transfer of successful laboratory proofs of concept to real ‘outside’ application faces many techni-
cal and technological challenges, such as miniaturisation and operability that is not at the expense of
laboratory-achieved sensitivity and resolution. Further, there are other related technical challenges.

A signiﬁcant problem could be the quantum workforce. The quantum workforce does not need to
comprise physicists or scientists with a doctorate. However, they should be quantum engineers with
knowledge of quantum information science and a quantum technology overview who can understand and
be able to process and evaluate the outgoing data from quantum sensors, computers and communications.
Presently, an existing quantum ecosystem is growing continuously, and this ecosystem will require an
increasingly larger quantum workforce [300]. This requires training and educating new quantum engineers
and experts; that is, more universities oﬀering quantum programmes and more students taking them.
Besides, it can be even more diﬃcult to get these people to work in the army. Therefore, the basic
principles of quantum information and quantum technology should also appear as part of the curriculum
at military colleges of modern armies, where quantum technologies are or will be deployed.

Another technical challenge will be the enormous amount of data. Quantum technologies, through all
quantum sensors, quantum imaging, quantum communication and computing, will produce a lot of clas-
sical and quantum data that will increase requirements for data transmission, processing and evaluation.
These requirements should be considered during the planning of C4ISR and quantum infrastructure.

The ﬁnal challenge will be standardisation. The standardisation process is important for the inter-
operability of devices manufactured by diﬀerent producers. Apart from the uniﬁcation interface and
communication protocols, the standardisation process can also include security veriﬁcation, such as in
the post-quantum cryptography standardisation process [90]. Various connected devices in particular
(such as nodes, repeaters, switches, ﬁbre channels and open-space channels) can be expected in the case
of a quantum network, and it is important to develop and implement some standards that will allow the
successful transmission of quantum information.

8 Conclusion

Quantum technology is an emerging area of technologies that utilise the manipulation and control of
individual quanta for multiple applications with the potential to be disruptive. Many of these applications
are dual-use or are directly used for military purposes. However, individual quantum technologies are at
TRLs for military use, from TRL 1 (basic principles observed) to TRL 6 (technology demonstrated in
relevant environment).

Quantum technology for military applications will not only oﬀer improvements and new capabilities but
will also require the development of new strategies, tactics and policies, assessment of threats to global
peace and security and identiﬁcation of ethics issues. All this is covered by the term ‘quantum warfare’.

In this report, various quantum technologies at diﬀerent TRL have been described, focusing on possible
utilisation or deployment in the defence sector. A precise forecast of quantum technology deployment is
not possible, since the transition from the laboratory to real-world applications has not been implemented
or is in progress. This raises questions such as whether we will be able to reach a resolution providing

37

a real quantum advantage over the classical systems that are usually signiﬁcantly cheaper and often in
action already. Despite the fact that the description of the possible military application of quantum
technologies sounds very optimistic, one should be wary of the quantum hype and draw attention to the
challenges that lie ahead of the real deployment of quantum technologies for military applications.

Quantum technologies can be expected to have strategic and long-term impacts. Nevertheless, the
probability of technological surprises aﬀecting military and defence forces is rather low. The best ways
to avoid surprises are cultivating quantum technology knowledge and monitoring quantum technology
development and employment. Treating quantum technology with care will play the role of quantum
insurance.

Availability of data and material

The datasets used and analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author
on reasonable request.

Authors’ contributions

As the sole author of the manuscript, MK conceived, designed and performed the analysis and review,
and wrote the paper.

Competing interests

The author declares that he has no competing interests.

Acknowledgement

The author is very grateful for several comments and feedback on the draft, especially by Dr Katarzyna
Kubiak, Dr J¨urgen Altmann and others. The author is also grateful for the minor comments to the ﬁrst
preprint and valuable suggestions and journal reviewers’ comments.

References

[1] Lind William et al. “’The Changing Face of War: Into the Fourth Generation”. In: Marine Corps

Gazette (1989).

[2] William S. Lind. “Understanding Fourth Generation War”. In: Military review 84 (2004), p. 12.

[3] Syed Aﬀan Ahmed, Mujahid Mohsin, and Syed Muhammad Zubair Ali. “Survey and technological
analysis of laser and its defense applications”. In: Defence Technology (2020). issn: 2214-9147.
doi: 10.1016/j.dt.2020.02.012.

[4] Jonathan P. Dowling and Gerard J. Milburn. “Quantum technology: the second quantum revo-
lution”. In: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences 361.1809 (June 2003). Ed. by A. G. J. MacFarlane, pp. 1655–
1674. doi: 10.1098/rsta.2003.1227.

[5] S. Till and J. Pritchard. UK quantum technology landscape 2016. DSTL/PUB098369, UK National

Quantum Technologies Programme. 2016.

[6] Andrew Davies and Patrick Kennedy. Special report - From little things: Quantum technologies

and their application to defence. ASPI (Australian Strategic Policy Institute). 2017.

38

[7] Stuart A. Wolf et al. Overview of the Status of Quantum Science and Technology and Recommen-

dations for the DoD. Institute For Defense Analyses. June 2019.

[8] Harald Andas. Emerging technology trends for defence and security. FFI-RAPPORT. Apr. 2020.

[9] Philip Inglesant, Marina Jirotka, and Mark Hartswood. Responsible Innovation in Quantum Tech-
nologies applied to Defence and National Security. NQIT (Networked Quantum Information Tech-
nologies). 2018.

[10] ATARC Quantum Working Group. Applied Quantum Computing for Today’s Military. White

paper. May 2021.

[11] Australian Army. Army Quantum Technology Roadmap. Apr. 2021.

[12] Kelley M. Sayler. Defense Primer: Quantum Technology. IF11836. June 2021.

[13] Andrew Middleton, Stephen Till, and Matt Steele. Quantum Information Processing Landscape

2020: Prospects for UK Defence and Security. DSTL/TR121783. June 2020.

[14] Michael J. Biercuk. Read before pontiﬁcating on quantum technology. War on the Rock. 2020.
url: https : / / warontherocks . com / 2020 / 07 / read - before - pontificating - on - quantum -
technology/ (visited on 02/27/2021).

[15] Giulio Perani. Military technologiesand commercial applications: Public policies in NATO coun-

tries. July 1997.

[16] Meia Nouwens and Helena Legarda. China’s pursuit of advanced dual-use technologies. IISS. Dec.
2018. url: https://www.iiss.org/blogs/research-paper/2018/12/emerging-technology-
dominance (visited on 09/30/2010).

[17] Adam Davidson. A new dimension of war: the quantum domain. Canadian Forces College. 2020.

[18] James L. Park. “The concept of transition in quantum mechanics”. In: Foundations of Physics

1.1 (1970), pp. 23–33. doi: 10.1007/bf00708652.

[19] M.A. Nielsen and I.L. Chuang. Quantum Computation and Quantum Information: 10th Anniver-

sary Edition. Cambridge University Press, 2010. isbn: 9781139495486.

[20] N.D. Mermin. Quantum Computer Science: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press, 2007.

isbn: 9781139466806.

[21] Stephen Jordan. Quantum Algorithm Zoo. url: https://quantumalgorithmzoo.org/ (visited

on 09/13/2021).

[22] Andrew W. Cross et al. “Validating quantum computers using randomized model circuits”. In:

Physical Review A 100.3 (Sept. 2019). doi: 10.1103/physreva.100.032328.

[23] Austin G. Fowler et al. “Surface codes: Towards practical large-scale quantum computation”. In:

Physical Review A 86.3 (Sept. 2012). doi: 10.1103/physreva.86.032324.

[24] E.M. National Academies of Sciences et al. Quantum Computing: Progress and Prospects. National

Academies Press, 2019. isbn: 9780309479721. doi: 10.17226/25196.

[25] Frank Arute et al. “Quantum supremacy using a programmable superconducting processor”. In:

Nature 574.7779 (Oct. 2019), pp. 505–510. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1666-5.

[26] Jay Gambetta. IBM’s Roadmap For Scaling Quantum Technology. IBM. 2020. url: https://
www.ibm.com/blogs/research/2020/09/ibm-quantum-roadmap/ (visited on 10/07/2020).

[27] Doug Finke. Google Goal: Build an Error Corrected Computer with 1 Million Physical Qubits by

the End of the Decade. Quantum Computing report. 2020. url: https://quantumcomputingreport.
com/google-goal-error-corrected-computer-with-1-million-physical-qubits-by-the-
end-of-the-decade/ (visited on 10/07/2020).

[28] Michele Mosca and Marco Piani. Quantum Threat Timeline. Global Risk Institute. 2019.
[29] Simulating Molecules using VQE. Qiskit Textbook. url: https://qiskit.org/textbook/ch-

applications/vqe-molecules.html (visited on 01/25/2021).

[30] Richard P. Feynman. “Simulating physics with computers”. In: International Journal of Theoret-

ical Physics 21.6 (), pp. 467–488. issn: 1572-9575. doi: 10.1007/BF02650179.

[31] Markus Reiher et al. “Elucidating reaction mechanisms on quantum computers”. In: Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 114.29 (July 2017), pp. 7555–7560. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
1619152114.

39

[32] Alberto Peruzzo et al. “A variational eigenvalue solver on a photonic quantum processor”. In:

Nature Communications 5.1 (July 2014). doi: 10.1038/ncomms5213.

[33] Jarrod R McClean et al. “The theory of variational hybrid quantum-classical algorithms”. In:

New Journal of Physics 18.2 (Feb. 2016), p. 023023. doi: 10.1088/1367-2630/18/2/023023.

[34] Frank Arute et al. “Hartree-Fock on a superconducting qubit quantum computer”. In: Science
369.6507 (Aug. 2020), pp. 1084–1089. doi: 10.1126/science.abb9811. url: https://doi.org/
10.1126/science.abb9811.

[35] Craig Gidney and Martin Eker˚a. “How to factor 2048 bit RSA integers in 8 hours using 20 million
noisy qubits”. In: Quantum 5 (Apr. 2021), p. 433. issn: 2521-327X. doi: 10.22331/q-2021-04-
15-433.

[36] Thomas H¨aner et al. “Improved Quantum Circuits for Elliptic Curve Discrete Logarithms”. In:
Post-Quantum Cryptography. Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 425–444. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-030-44223-1_23. arXiv: 2001.09580 [quant-ph].

[37] P.W. Shor. “Algorithms for quantum computation: discrete logarithms and factoring”. In: Pro-
ceedings 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science. IEEE Comput. Soc. Press,
1994. doi: 10.1109/sfcs.1994.365700.

[38] Lov K. Grover. “A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database search”. In: Proceedings of the
twenty-eighth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing - STOC ’96. ACM Press, 1996.
doi: 10.1145/237814.237866.

[39] Daniel J. Bernstein. “Grover vs. McEliece”. In: Post-Quantum Cryptography. Springer Berlin

Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 73–80. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-12929-2_6.

[40] D.R. Simon. “On the power of quantum computation”. In: Proceedings 35th Annual Symposium
on Foundations of Computer Science. IEEE Comput. Soc. Press, 2002. doi: 10.1109/sfcs.1994.
365701.

[41] Marc Kaplan et al. “Breaking Symmetric Cryptosystems using Quantum Period Finding”. In:

(2016). arXiv: 1602.05973 [quant-ph].

[42] Xavier Bonnetain and Samuel Jaques. “Quantum Period Finding against Symmetric Primitives

in Practice”. In: (2020). arXiv: 2011.07022 [quant-ph].

[43] Marc Kaplan et al. “Breaking Symmetric Cryptosystems Using Quantum Period Finding”. In:
Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2016. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2016, pp. 207–237. doi:
10.1007/978-3-662-53008-5_8.

[44] Neil Shenvi, Julia Kempe, and K. Birgitta Whaley. “Quantum random-walk search algorithm”.

In: Physical Review A 67.5 (May 2003). doi: 10.1103/physreva.67.052307.

[45] Edward Farhi, Jeﬀrey Goldstone, and Sam Gutmann. A Quantum Approximate Optimization

Algorithm. 2014. arXiv: 1411.4028 [quant-ph].

[46] Fred Glover, Gary Kochenberger, and Yu Du. A Tutorial on Formulating and Using QUBO

Models. 2019. arXiv: 1811.11538 [cs.DS].

[47] Nathan Wiebe, Daniel Braun, and Seth Lloyd. “Quantum Algorithm for Data Fitting”. In: Phys-

ical Review Letters 109.5 (Aug. 2012). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.109.050505.

[48] Fernando G. S. L. Brandao and Krysta Svore. Quantum Speed-ups for Semideﬁnite Programming.

2017. arXiv: 1609.05537 [quant-ph].

[49] Boaz Barak et al. Beating the random assignment on constraint satisfaction problems of bounded

degree. 2015. arXiv: 1505.03424 [cs.CC].

[50] Aram W. Harrow, Avinatan Hassidim, and Seth Lloyd. “Quantum Algorithm for Linear Systems
of Equations”. In: Physical Review Letters 103.15 (Oct. 2009). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.103.
150502.

[51] Artur Scherer et al. “Concrete resource analysis of the quantum linear-system algorithm used to
compute the electromagnetic scattering cross section of a 2D target”. In: Quantum Information
Processing 16.3 (Jan. 2017). doi: 10.1007/s11128-016-1495-5.

[52] Scott Aaronson. “Read the ﬁne print”. In: Nature Physics 11.4 (Apr. 2015), pp. 291–293. doi:

10.1038/nphys3272.

40

[53] Miles Blencowe. “Quantum RAM”. In: Nature 468.7320 (Nov. 2010), pp. 44–45. doi: 10.1038/

468044a.

[54] Jacob Biamonte et al. “Quantum machine learning”. In: Nature 549.7671 (Sept. 2017), pp. 195–

202. doi: 10.1038/nature23474.

[55] Vedran Dunjko, Jacob M. Taylor, and Hans J. Briegel. “Quantum-Enhanced Machine Learning”.
In: Physical Review Letters 117.13 (Sept. 2016). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.117.130501.
[56] P. Wittek. Quantum Machine Learning: What Quantum Computing Means to Data Mining. El-

sevier Science, 2016. isbn: 9780128100400.

[57] Vedran Dunjko and Peter Wittek. “A non-review of Quantum Machine Learning: trends and
explorations”. In: Quantum Views 4 (Mar. 2020), p. 32. doi: 10.22331/qv-2020-03-17-32.
[58] Vojtˇech Havlicek et al. “Supervised learning with quantum-enhanced feature spaces”. In: Nature

567.7747 (Mar. 2019), pp. 209–212. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-0980-2.

[59] Somayeh Bakhtiari Ramezani et al. “Machine Learning Algorithms in Quantum Computing: A
Survey”. In: 2020 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). IEEE, July 2020.
doi: 10.1109/ijcnn48605.2020.9207714.

[60] Nicolas Gisin and Rob Thew. “Quantum communication”. In: Nature Photonics 1.3 (Mar. 2007),

pp. 165–171. doi: 10.1038/nphoton.2007.22.

[61] Stephanie Wehner, David Elkouss, and Ronald Hanson. “Quantum internet: A vision for the road

ahead”. In: Science 362.6412 (Oct. 2018), eaam9288. doi: 10.1126/science.aam9288.

[62] Juan Yin et al. “Satellite-based entanglement distribution over 1200 kilometers”. In: Science

356.6343 (June 2017), pp. 1140–1144. doi: 10.1126/science.aan3211.

[63] Juan Yin et al. “Satellite-to-Ground Entanglement-Based Quantum Key Distribution”. In: Phys-

ical Review Letters 119.20 (Nov. 2017). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.119.200501.

[64] Hua-Ying Liu et al. “Optical-Relayed Entanglement Distribution Using Drones as Mobile Nodes”.
In: Physical Review Letters 126.2 (Jan. 2021). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.126.020503.
[65] S. Pogorzalek et al. “Secure quantum remote state preparation of squeezed microwave states”. In:

Nature Communications 10.1 (June 2019). doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-10727-7.

[66] Dik Bouwmeester et al. “Experimental quantum teleportation”. In: Nature 390.6660 (Dec. 1997),

pp. 575–579. doi: 10.1038/37539.

[67] Samuel L. Braunstein and Stefano Pirandola. “Side-Channel-Free Quantum Key Distribution”.
In: Physical Review Letters 108.13 (Mar. 2012). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.108.130502.
[68] Hoi-Kwong Lo, Marcos Curty, and Bing Qi. “Measurement-Device-Independent Quantum Key
Distribution”. In: Physical Review Letters 108.13 (Mar. 2012). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.108.
130503. url: https://doi.org/10.1103/physrevlett.108.130503.

[69] Anne Broadbent, Joseph Fitzsimons, and Elham Kasheﬁ. “Universal Blind Quantum Computa-
tion”. In: 2009 50th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science. IEEE, Oct.
2009. doi: 10.1109/focs.2009.36.

[70] Joseph F. Fitzsimons. “Private quantum computation: an introduction to blind quantum comput-
ing and related protocols”. In: npj Quantum Information 3.1 (June 2017). doi: 10.1038/s41534-
017-0025-3.

[72]

[71]

Isaac L. Chuang. “Quantum Algorithm for Distributed Clock Synchronization”. In: Physical Re-
view Letters 85.9 (Aug. 2000), pp. 2006–2009. doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.85.2006.
Ivan Damg˚ard et al. “Secure identiﬁcation and QKD in the bounded-quantum-storage model”.
In: Theoretical Computer Science 560 (Dec. 2014), pp. 12–26. doi: 10.1016/j.tcs.2014.09.014.
[73] Dominique Unruh. “Quantum Position Veriﬁcation in the Random Oracle Model”. In: Advances
in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2014. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014, pp. 1–18. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-662-44381-1_1.

[74] Claude Cr´epeau, Daniel Gottesman, and Adam Smith. “Secure multi-party quantum computa-
tion”. In: Proceedings of the thiry-fourth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing - STOC
’02. ACM Press, 2002. doi: 10.1145/509907.510000.

41

[75] Daniele Cuomo, Marcello Caleﬃ, and Angela Sara Cacciapuoti. “Towards a distributed quantum
computing ecosystem”. In: IET Quantum Communication 1.1 (July 2020), pp. 3–8. doi: 10.1049/
iet-qtc.2020.0002. url: https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-qtc.2020.0002.

[76] Michael Ben-Or and Avinatan Hassidim. “Fast quantum byzantine agreement”. In: Proceedings
of the thirty-seventh annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing - STOC 05. ACM Press,
2005. doi: 10.1145/1060590.1060662.

[77] Timothy J. Proctor, Paul A. Knott, and Jacob A. Dunningham. “Multiparameter Estimation
in Networked Quantum Sensors”. In: Physical Review Letters 120.8 (Feb. 2018). doi: 10.1103/
physrevlett.120.080501.

[78] Yi Xia et al. “Quantum-Enhanced Data Classiﬁcation with a Variational Entangled Sensor Net-

work”. In: Physical Review X 11.2 (June 2021). doi: 10.1103/physrevx.11.021047.

[79] C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard. “Quantum cryptography: Public key distribution and coin toss-
ing”. In: Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Computers, Systems and Signal Pro-
cessing. Vol. 175. IEEE, 1984.

[80] Artur K. Ekert. “Quantum cryptography based on Bell’s theorem”. In: Physical Review Letters

67.6 (Aug. 1991), pp. 661–663. doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.67.661.

[81] Gilles Brassard et al. “Limitations on Practical Quantum Cryptography”. In: Physical Review

Letters 85.6 (Aug. 2000), pp. 1330–1333. doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.85.1330.

[82] Nitin Jain et al. “Trojan-horse attacks threaten the security of practical quantum cryptography”.
In: New Journal of Physics 16.12 (Dec. 2014), p. 123030. doi: 10.1088/1367- 2630/16/12/
123030.

[83] Daniel J. Bernstein. “Introduction to post-quantum cryptography”. In: Post-Quantum Cryptog-

raphy. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 1–14. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-88702-7_1.

[84] Jeﬀrey Hoﬀstein, Jill Pipher, and Joseph H. Silverman. “NTRU: A ring-based public key cryp-
tosystem”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1998, pp. 267–288.
doi: 10.1007/bfb0054868.

[85] Luca De Feo, David Jao, and J´erˆome Plˆut. “Towards quantum-resistant cryptosystems from su-
persingular elliptic curve isogenies”. In: Journal of Mathematical Cryptology 8.3 (Jan. 2014). doi:
10.1515/jmc-2012-0015.

[86] Ralph C. Merkle. “A Certiﬁed Digital Signature”. In: Advances in Cryptology — CRYPTO’ 89

Proceedings. Springer New York, 2001, pp. 218–238. doi: 10.1007/0-387-34805-0_21.

[87] Tsutomu Matsumoto and Hideki Imai. “Public Quadratic Polynomial-Tuples for Eﬃcient Signature-

Veriﬁcation and Message-Encryption”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 1988, pp. 419–453. doi: 10.1007/3-540-45961-8_39.

[88] R. J. McEliece. “A Public-Key Cryptosystem Based On Algebraic Coding Theory”. In: Deep

[89]

Space Network Progress Report 44 (Jan. 1978), pp. 114–116.
In: Wall Street Journal (Mar. 2021). issn: 0099-9660. url: https://www.wsj.com/articles/
encryption-isnt-main-data-security-threat-11615577004 (visited on 03/15/2021).

[90] Gorjan Alagic et al. Status Report on the Second Round of the NIST Post-Quantum Cryptography

Standardization Process. NISTIR 8309, NSIT. July 2020. doi: 10.6028/nist.ir.8309.

[91] Alastair A. Abbott, Cristian S. Calude, and Karkl Svozil. “A quantum random number generator
certiﬁed by value indeﬁniteness”. In: Mathematical Structures in Computer Science 24.3 (Mar.
2014). doi: 10.1017/s0960129512000692.

[92] C.L. Degen, F. Reinhard, and P. Cappellaro. “Quantum sensing”. In: Reviews of Modern Physics

89.3 (July 2017). doi: 10.1103/revmodphys.89.035002.

[93] B. Barrett, A. Bertoldi, and P. Bouyer. “Inertial quantum sensors using light and matter”. In:

Physica Scripta 91.5 (Apr. 2016), p. 053006. doi: 10.1088/0031-8949/91/5/053006.

[94] Mark Kasevich and Steven Chu. “Atomic interferometry using stimulated Raman transitions”.
In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 (2 July 1991), pp. 181–184. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.67.181.
[95] Ernst M. Rasel et al. “Atom Wave Interferometry with Diﬀraction Gratings of Light”. In: Phys.

Rev. Lett. 75 (14 Oct. 1995), pp. 2633–2637. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.75.2633.

42

[96] Brenton Young et al. “Atom Optic Inertial and Gravitational Sensors”. In: Frontiers in Optics
2007/Laser Science XXIII/Organic Materials and Devices for Displays and Energy Conversion.
OSA, 2007. doi: 10.1364/ls.2007.ltuh1.

[97] C.A. Weidner and Dana Z. Anderson. “Experimental Demonstration of Shaken-Lattice Interferom-
etry”. In: Physical Review Letters 120.26 (June 2018). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.120.263201.
[98] Lingxiao Zhu et al. “A dielectric metasurface optical chip for the generation of cold atoms”. In:

Science Advances 6.31 (July 2020), eabb6667. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abb6667.

[99] Remi Geiger et al. “High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors”. In: AVS Quan-

tum Science 2.2 (June 2020), p. 024702. doi: 10.1116/5.0009093.

[100] Michael J. Biercuk et al. “Ultrasensitive detection of force and displacement using trapped ions”.
In: Nature Nanotechnology 5.9 (Aug. 2010), pp. 646–650. doi: 10.1038/nnano.2010.165.
[101] S. A. Diddams. “An Optical Clock Based on a Single Trapped 199Hg+ Ion”. In: Science 293.5531

(July 2001), pp. 825–828. doi: 10.1126/science.1061171.

[102] Peter A. Ivanov, Nikolay V. Vitanov, and Kilian Singer. “High-precision force sensing using a

single trapped ion”. In: Scientiﬁc Reports 6.1 (June 2016). doi: 10.1038/srep28078.

[103] Kevin A. Gilmore et al. “Quantum-enhanced sensing of displacements and electric ﬁelds with
two-dimensional trapped-ion crystals”. In: Science 373.6555 (Aug. 2021), pp. 673–678. doi: 10.
1126/science.abi5226.

[104] J. M. Taylor et al. “High-sensitivity diamond magnetometer with nanoscale resolution”. In: Nature

Physics 4.10 (Sept. 2008), pp. 810–816. doi: 10.1038/nphys1075.

[105] M. P. Ledbetter et al. “Gyroscopes based on nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond”. In: Physical

Review A 86.5 (Nov. 2012). doi: 10.1103/physreva.86.052116.

[106] Tillmann Baumgratz and Animesh Datta. “Quantum Enhanced Estimation of a Multidimensional
Field”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 116 (3 Jan. 2016), p. 030801. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.030801.
[107] M Radtke et al. “Nanoscale sensing based on nitrogen vacancy centers in single crystal diamond
and nanodiamonds: achievements and challenges”. In: Nano Futures 3.4 (Dec. 2019), p. 042004.
doi: 10.1088/2399-1984/ab5f9b.

[108] H. B. Dang, A. C. Maloof, and M. V. Romalis. “Ultrahigh sensitivity magnetic ﬁeld and mag-
netization measurements with an atomic magnetometer”. In: Applied Physics Letters 97.15 (Oct.
2010), p. 151110. doi: 10.1063/1.3491215.

[109] W. Wasilewski et al. “Quantum Noise Limited and Entanglement-Assisted Magnetometry”. In:
Phys. Rev. Lett. 104 (13 Mar. 2010), p. 133601. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.104.133601.
[110] Karl Ulrich Schreiber and Jon-Paul R. Wells. “Invited Review Article: Large ring lasers for rotation
sensing”. In: Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 84.4 (Apr. 2013), p. 041101. doi: 10 . 1063 / 1 .
4798216.

[111] BIPM Time Department. BIPM Annual Report on Time Activities. May 2020.

[112] S.M. Brewer et al. “Al+27 Quantum-Logic Clock with a Systematic Uncertainty below 10-18”.
In: Physical Review Letters 123.3 (July 2019). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.123.033201.
[113] W. Y. Hwang et al. “Entangled quantum clocks for measuring proper-time diﬀerence”. In: The

European Physical Journal D 19.1 (Apr. 2002), pp. 129–132. doi: 10.1140/epjd/e20020065.

[114] G. Edward Marti et al. “Imaging Optical Frequencies with 100 Hz Precision and 1.1 m Resolution”.
In: Physical Review Letters 120.10 (Mar. 2018). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.120.103201.
[115] Edwin Pedrozo-Pe˜naﬁel et al. “Entanglement on an optical atomic-clock transition”. In: Nature

588.7838 (Dec. 2020), pp. 414–418. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-3006-1.

[116] James Camparo. “The rubidium atomic clock and basic research”. In: Physics Today 60.11 (Nov.

2007), pp. 33–39. doi: 10.1063/1.2812121.

[117] J. S. Hodges et al. “Timekeeping with electron spin states in diamond”. In: Physical Review A

87.3 (Mar. 2013). doi: 10.1103/physreva.87.032118.

[118] Lars von der Wense and Benedict Seiferle. “The 229Th isomer: prospects for a nuclear optical
clock”. In: The European Physical Journal A 56.11 (Nov. 2020). doi: 10.1140/epja/s10050-
020-00263-0.

43

[119] C. J. Campbell et al. “Single-Ion Nuclear Clock for Metrology at the 19th Decimal Place”. In:

Physical Review Letters 108.12 (Mar. 2012). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.108.120802.

[120] L. J. Chu. “Physical Limitations of Omni-Directional Antennas”. In: Journal of Applied Physics

19.12 (Dec. 1948), pp. 1163–1175. doi: 10.1063/1.1715038.

[121] Roger F. Harrington. “Eﬀect of antenna size on gain, bandwidth, and eﬃciency”. In: Journal of
Research of the National Bureau of Standards, Section D: Radio Propagation 64D.1 (Jan. 1960),
p. 1. doi: 10.6028/jres.064d.003.

[122] Adrien Facon et al. “A sensitive electrometer based on a Rydberg atom in a Schr¨odinger-cat

state”. In: Nature 535.7611 (July 2016), pp. 262–265. doi: 10.1038/nature18327.

[123] Kevin C. Cox et al. “Quantum-Limited Atomic Receiver in the Electrically Small Regime”. In:
Physical Review Letters 121.11 (Sept. 2018). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.121.110502.
[124] David H. Meyer, Paul D. Kunz, and Kevin C. Cox. “Waveguide-Coupled Rydberg Spectrum
Analyzer from 0 to 20 GHz”. In: Physical Review Applied 15.1 (Jan. 2021). doi: 10 . 1103 /
physrevapplied.15.014053.

[125] Amy K. Robinson et al. “Determining the Angle-of-Arrival of an Radio-Frequency Source with a

Rydberg Atom-Based Sensor”. In: (2021). arXiv: 2101.12071 [physics.atom-ph].

[126] Genevieve Gariepy et al. “Single-photon sensitive light-in-ﬁght imaging”. In: Nature Communi-

cations 6.1 (Jan. 2015). doi: 10.1038/ncomms7021.

[127] Reuben S. Aspden et al. “Photon-sparse microscopy: visible light imaging using infrared illumi-

nation”. In: Optica 2.12 (Dec. 2015), p. 1049. doi: 10.1364/optica.2.001049.

[128] Paul-Antoine Moreau et al. “Ghost Imaging Using Optical Correlations”. In: Laser & Photonics

Reviews 12.1 (Dec. 2017), p. 1700143. doi: 10.1002/lpor.201700143.

[129] Ronald Meyers and Keith Deacon. “Space-Time Quantum Imaging”. In: Entropy 17.3 (Mar. 2015),

pp. 1508–1534. doi: 10.3390/e17031508.

[130] S.P. Walborn et al. “Spatial correlations in parametric down-conversion”. In: Physics Reports

495.4-5 (Oct. 2010), pp. 87–139. doi: 10.1016/j.physrep.2010.06.003.

[131] Daniele Pelliccia et al. “Experimental X-Ray Ghost Imaging”. In: Physical Review Letters 117.11

(Sept. 2016). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.117.113902.

[132] S. Li et al. “Electron Ghost Imaging”. In: Physical Review Letters 121.11 (Sept. 2018). doi:

10.1103/physrevlett.121.114801.

[133] Giorgio Brida et al. “Measurement of Sub-Shot-Noise Spatial Correlations without Background
Subtraction”. In: Physical Review Letters 102.21 (May 2009). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.102.
213602.

[134] Seth Lloyd. “Enhanced Sensitivity of Photodetection via Quantum Illumination”. In: Science

321.5895 (Sept. 2008), pp. 1463–1465. doi: 10.1126/science.1160627.

[135] James F. Smith III. “Quantum entangled radar theory and a correction method for the eﬀects of
the atmosphere on entanglement”. In: Quantum Information and Computation VII. Ed. by Eric J.
Donkor, Andrew R. Pirich, and Howard E. Brandt. SPIE, May 2009. doi: 10.1117/12.819918.
[136] S. Barzanjeh et al. “Microwave quantum illumination using a digital receiver”. In: Science Ad-

vances 6.19 (May 2020), eabb0451. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abb0451.

[137] David Luong, Sreeraman Rajan, and Bhashyam Balaji. “Entanglement-Based Quantum Radar:
From Myth to Reality”. In: IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine 35.4 (Apr. 2020),
pp. 22–35. doi: 10.1109/maes.2020.2970261.

[138] Lorenzo Maccone and Changliang Ren. “Quantum Radar”. In: Physical Review Letters 124.20

(May 2020). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.124.200503.

[139] Shabir Barzanjeh et al. “Microwave Quantum Illumination”. In: Physical Review Letters 114.8

(Feb. 2015). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.114.080503.

[140] Athena Karsa and Stefano Pirandola. “Energetic Considerations in Quantum Target Ranging”.

In: (2021). arXiv: 2011.03637 [quant-ph].

[141] M. Lanzagorta. Quantum Radar. Synthesis digital library of engineering and computer science.

Morgan & Claypool, 2011. isbn: 9781608458264.

44

[142] S. Pirandola et al. “Advances in photonic quantum sensing”. In: Nature Photonics 12.12 (Nov.

2018), pp. 724–733. doi: 10.1038/s41566-018-0301-6.

[143] Quntao Zhuang and Stefano Pirandola. “Entanglement-enhanced testing of multiple quantum
hypotheses”. In: Communications Physics 3.1 (June 2020). doi: 10.1038/s42005-020-0369-4.
[144] Yiwen Chu et al. “Quantum acoustics with superconducting qubits”. In: Science 358.6360 (Sept.

2017), pp. 199–202. doi: 10.1126/science.aao1511.

[145] K. J. Satzinger et al. “Quantum control of surface acoustic-wave phonons”. In: Nature 563.7733

(Nov. 2018), pp. 661–665. doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0719-5.

[146] Hongpeng Wu et al. “Beat frequency quartz-enhanced photoacoustic spectroscopy for fast and
calibration-free continuous trace-gas monitoring”. In: Nature Communications 8.1 (May 2017).
doi: 10.1038/ncomms15331.

[147] Balthasar Fischer. “Optical microphone hears ultrasound”. In: Nature Photonics 10.6 (May 2016),

pp. 356–358. doi: 10.1038/nphoton.2016.95.

[148] J. Faist et al. “Quantum Cascade Laser”. In: Science 264.5158 (Apr. 1994), pp. 553–556. doi:

10.1126/science.264.5158.553.

[149] Ali Khalatpour et al. “High-power portable terahertz laser systems”. In: Nature Photonics (Nov.

2020). doi: 10.1038/s41566-020-00707-5.

[150] D.F. Reding and J. Eaton. Science & Technology Trends 2020-2040. NATO Science & Technology

Organization. 2020.

[151] Vadim Makarov and Dag R. Hjelme. “Faked states attack on quantum cryptosystems”. In: Journal
of Modern Optics 52.5 (Mar. 2005), pp. 691–705. doi: 10.1080/09500340410001730986.
[152] Yi Zhao et al. “Quantum hacking: Experimental demonstration of time-shift attack against prac-
tical quantum-key-distribution systems”. In: Physical Review A 78.4 (Oct. 2008). doi: 10.1103/
physreva.78.042333.

[153] Lars Lydersen et al. “Hacking commercial quantum cryptography systems by tailored bright
illumination”. In: Nature Photonics 4.10 (Aug. 2010), pp. 686–689. doi: 10 . 1038 / nphoton .
2010.214.

[154]

Ilja Gerhardt et al. “Full-ﬁeld implementation of a perfect eavesdropper on a quantum cryptog-
raphy system”. In: Nature Communications 2.1 (June 2011). doi: 10.1038/ncomms1348.
[155] Audun Nystad Bugge et al. “Laser Damage Helps the Eavesdropper in Quantum Cryptography”.
In: Physical Review Letters 112.7 (Feb. 2014). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.112.070503.
[156] Michael J. D. Vermeer and Evan D. Peet. Securing Communications in the Quantum Computing
Age: Managing the Risks to Encryption. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2020. doi: 10.
7249/RR3102.

[157] S. Pirandola et al. “Advances in quantum cryptography”. In: Advances in Optics and Photonics

12.4 (Dec. 2020), p. 1012. doi: 10.1364/aop.361502.

[158] Jon R. Lindsay. “Demystifying the Quantum Threat: Infrastructure, Institutions, and Intelligence
Advantage”. In: Security Studies 29.2 (Feb. 2020), pp. 335–361. doi: 10.1080/09636412.2020.
1722853.

[159] Arthur Herman and Idalia Friedson. Quantum Computing: How to Address the National Security

Risk. Hudson Institute. 2018.

[160] European Commission. Joint Research Centre. The impact of quantum technologies on the EU’s
future policies.Part 2, Quantum communications: from science to policies. Publications Oﬃce,
2018. isbn: 978-92-79-77314-3. doi: 10.2760/881896.

[161] Katie Kline, Marco Salvo, and Donyae Johnson. How Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Quantum Com-
puting are Evolving Cyber Warfare. Cyber Intelligence Initiative, The Institute of World Politics.
Mar. 2019. url: https://www.iwp.edu/cyber-intelligence-initiative/2019/03/27/how-
artificial-intelligence-and-quantum-computing-are-evolving-cyber-warfare/ (visited
on 02/24/2021).

[162] Stuart A. Wolf et al. The Changing Face of Data Security: 2020 Thales Data Threat Report.

Thales. 2020.

45

[163] Dario Gil. How to Preserve the Privacy of Your Genomic Data. Scientiﬁc American. Nov. 2020.
url: https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-to-preserve-the-privacy-of-
your-genomic-data/ (visited on 11/11/2020).

[164] He-Liang Huang et al. “Homomorphic encryption experiments on IBM’s cloud quantum comput-

ing platform”. In: Frontiers of Physics 12.1 (Dec. 2016). doi: 10.1007/s11467-016-0643-9.

[165] Lori Cameron. Internet of Things Meets the Military and Battleﬁeld. IEEE Computer Society.
url: https : / / www . computer . org / publications / tech - news / research / internet - of -
military-battlefield-things-iomt-iobt (visited on 03/29/2021).

[166] Tiago M. Fernandez-Carames. “From Pre-Quantum to Post-Quantum IoT Security: A Survey
on Quantum-Resistant Cryptosystems for the Internet of Things”. In: IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 7.7 (July 2020), pp. 6457–6480. doi: 10.1109/jiot.2019.2958788.

[167] Daniel Moskovich. An Overview of the State of the Art for Practical Quantum Key Distribution.

2015. arXiv: 1504.05471 [quant-ph].

[168] Marco Lucamarini et al. Implementation Security of Quantum Cryptography. ETSI White Paper

No. 27. July 2018.

[169] European Commission. The European Quantum Communication Infrastructure (EuroQCI) Initia-
tive. Oct. 26, 2020. url: https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/european-
quantum-communication-infrastructure-euroqci (visited on 09/08/2021).

[170] National Security Agency (NSA). NSA Cybersecurity Perspectives on Quantum Key Distribution
and Quantum Cryptography. Oct. 26, 2020. url: https : / / www . nsa . gov / News - Features /
Feature-Stories/Article-View/Article/2394053/nsa-cybersecurity-perspectives-on-
quantum-key-distribution-and-quantum-cryptogr/ (visited on 09/08/2021).

[171] Carlos Abellan and Valerio Pruneri. “The future of cybersecurity is quantum”. In: IEEE Spectrum

55.7 (July 2018), pp. 30–35. doi: 10.1109/mspec.2018.8389185.

[172] John Kelsey et al. “Cryptanalytic Attacks on Pseudorandom Number Generators”. In: Fast Soft-
ware Encryption. Ed. by Serge Vaudenay. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1998,
pp. 168–188. isbn: 978-3-540-69710-7.

[173] Michele Mosca and John Mulholland. A Methodology for Quantum Risk Assessment. GRI (Global

Risk Institute). 2017.

[174] Xenia Bogomolec, John Gregory Underhill, and Stiepan Aur´elien Kovac. Towards Post-Quantum
Secure Symmetric Cryptography: A Mathematical Perspective. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report
2019/1208. 2019.

[175] Takahiko Satoh et al. Attacking the Quantum Internet. 2020. arXiv: 2005.04617 [quant-ph].

[176] Helene Lavoix. Quantum Optimization and the Future of Government. The Red Team Analy-
sis Society. Oct. 2019. url: https : / / www . redanalysis . org / 2019 / 10 / 28 / optimisation -
quantique-et-futur-gouvernements/ (visited on 11/17/2020).

[177] Rajesh Uppal. Military decision support require eﬃcient optimization algorithms. International
Defense Security & Technology. Oct. 2019. url: https : / / idstch . com / technology / ict /
military- decision- support- require- efficient- optimization- algorithms/ (visited on
01/27/2021).

[178] J.R. Wilson. The future of artiﬁcial intelligence and quantum computing. Military & Aerospace
Electronics. Aug. 2020. url: https : / / www . militaryaerospace . com / computers / article /
14182330 / future - of - artificial - intelligence - and - quantum - computing (visited on
01/27/2021).

[179] Edward H. Allen, Greg S. Tallant, and Mark A. Elliot. Computer systems and methods for quantum

veriﬁcation and validation. US patent US8832165B2. 2010.

[180] Quantum Computing: Spot-Checking Millions of Lines of Code. Lockheed Martin. 2017. url:
https://www.lockheedmartin.com/en-us/news/features/2017/quantum-computing-spot-
checking-millions-lines-code.html (visited on 11/17/2020).

[181] Hsin-Yuan Huang et al. “Power of data in quantum machine learning”. In: Nature Communications

12.1 (May 2021). doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-22539-9.

46

[182] Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning in Defense Applications et al., eds. Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence and Machine Learning in Defense Applications: 10-12 September 2019, Strasbourg, France.
English. OCLC: 1130085146. 2019. isbn: 9781510630413.

[183] Stephan De Spiegeleire, Matthijs Maas, and Tim Sweijs. Artiﬁcial intelligence and the future of
defense: strategic implications for small- and medium-sized force providers. The Hague Centre for
Strategic Studies (HCSS). 2017.

[184] Alain Chanc´e. Quantum machine learning is going to be the biggest application of quantum com-
puting in the next ten years. http://quantumwa.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/Peter-
Wittek - Quantum - machine - learning - is - going - to - be - the - biggest - application - of -
quantum- computing- in- the- next- ten- years.pdf.pdf. Interview with Prof. Peter Wittek.
2018.

[185] William Huggins et al. “Towards quantum machine learning with tensor networks”. In: Quantum

Science and Technology 4.2 (Jan. 2019), p. 024001. doi: 10.1088/2058-9565/aaea94.

[186] Niels M. P. Neumann, Maran P. P. van Heesch, and Patrick de Graaf. “Quantum Communication

for Military Applications”. In: (2020). arXiv: 2011.04989 [quant-ph].

[187] Quantum security technologies. NCSC (white paper). Mar. 2020. url: https://www.ncsc.gov.

uk/whitepaper/quantum-security-technologies (visited on 11/25/2020).

[188] G. L. Long and X. S. Liu. “Theoretically eﬃcient high-capacity quantum-key-distribution scheme”.

In: Physical Review A 65.3 (Feb. 2002). doi: 10.1103/physreva.65.032302.

[189] Kim Bostr¨om and Timo Felbinger. “Deterministic Secure Direct Communication Using Entangle-

ment”. In: Physical Review Letters 89.18 (Oct. 2002). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.89.187902.

[190] Wei Zhang et al. “Quantum Secure Direct Communication with Quantum Memory”. In: Physical

Review Letters 118.22 (May 2017). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.118.220501.

[191] Ruoyang Qi et al. “Implementation and security analysis of practical quantum secure direct
communication”. In: Light: Science & Applications 8.1 (Feb. 2019). doi: 10.1038/s41377-019-
0132-3.

[192] Gan Gao. “Two quantum dialogue protocols without information leakage”. In: Optics Communi-

cations 283.10 (May 2010), pp. 2288–2293. doi: 10.1016/j.optcom.2010.01.022.

[193] Lian-Fang Han et al. “Multiparty quantum secret sharing of secure direct communication using
single photons”. In: Optics Communications 281.9 (May 2008), pp. 2690–2694. doi: 10.1016/j.
optcom.2007.12.045.

[194] Xiaohu You et al. “Towards 6G wireless communication networks: vision, enabling technologies,
and new paradigm shifts”. In: Science China Information Sciences 64.1 (Nov. 2020). doi: 10.
1007/s11432-020-2955-6.

[195] Daniel Gottesman and Isaac Chuang. “Quantum Digital Signatures”. In: arXiv e-prints (May

2001). arXiv: quant-ph/0105032 [quant-ph].

[196] Robert A. Malaney. “Quantum Location Veriﬁcation in Noisy Channels”. In: 2010 IEEE Global
Telecommunications Conference GLOBECOM 2010. IEEE, Dec. 2010. doi: 10.1109/glocom.
2010.5684009.

[197] Kaushik Chakraborty and Anthony Leverrier. “Practical position-based quantum cryptography”.

In: Physical Review A 92.5 (Nov. 2015). doi: 10.1103/physreva.92.052304.

[198] P. K´om´ar et al. “A quantum network of clocks”. In: Nature Physics 10.8 (June 2014), pp. 582–587.

doi: 10.1038/nphys3000.

[199] Vittorio Giovannetti, Seth Lloyd, and Lorenzo Maccone. “Quantum-enhanced positioning and
clock synchronization”. In: Nature 412.6845 (July 2001), pp. 417–419. doi: 10.1038/35086525.
[200] Richard Jozsa et al. “Quantum Clock Synchronization Based on Shared Prior Entanglement”. In:
Physical Review Letters 85.9 (Aug. 2000), pp. 2010–2013. doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.85.2010.
[201] T. Krawinkel and S. Sch¨on. “Beneﬁts of Chip Scale Atomic Clocks in GNSS Applications”. In:

Sept. 2015, pp. 2867–2874.

[202] Thomas B. Bahder. “Quantum positioning system”. In: (June 2004). arXiv: quant-ph/0406126.

47

[203] Chunyan Yang, Dewei Wu, and Yonglin Yu. “The integration of GPS and interferometric Quantum
Position System for high dynamic precise positioning”. In: The 2010 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Information and Automation. IEEE, June 2010. doi: 10.1109/icinfa.2010.5512389.

[204] M. Travagnin. Cold atom interferometry for inertial navigation sensors: technology assessment:
space and defence applications. EUR 30492 EN, JRC122785. Publications Oﬃce of the European
Union, 2020. isbn: 978-92-76-27076-8. doi: 10.2760/237221.

[205] Robert Lutwak. Micro-Technology for Positioning, Navigation, and Timing Towards PNT Every-
where and Always. DARPA. Dec. 10, 2014. url: https://www.gps.gov/governance/advisory/
meetings/2014-12/lutwak.pdf (visited on 09/10/2021).

[206] A. Lewis et al. Quantum Technologies: Implications for European Policy. EUR 28103 EN, EU

JRC Science Hub. May 2016.

[207] Kai Bongs et al. “Taking atom interferometric quantum sensors from the laboratory to real-world
applications”. In: Nature Reviews Physics 1.12 (Oct. 2019), pp. 731–739. doi: 10.1038/s42254-
019-0117-4.

[208] Naser El-Sheimy and Ahmed Youssef. “Inertial sensors technologies for navigation applications:
state of the art and future trends”. In: Satellite Navigation 1.1 (Jan. 2020). doi: 10.1186/s43020-
019-0001-5.

[209] D. Savoie et al. “Interleaved atom interferometry for high-sensitivity inertial measurements”. In:

Science Advances 4.12 (Dec. 2018), eaau7948. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aau7948.

[210] Xuezhi Wang et al. “Enhancing Inertial Navigation Performance via Fusion of Classical and

Quantum Accelerometers”. In: (2021). arXiv: 2103.09378 [quant-ph].

[211] B. Battelier et al. “Development of compact cold-atom sensors for inertial navigation”. In: Quan-
tum Optics. Ed. by J¨urgen Stuhler and Andrew J. Shields. SPIE, Apr. 2016. doi: 10.1117/12.
2228351.

[212] ColdQuanta. High-BIAS2 Accelerates Quantum Sensing Into Commercialization With New Mile-
stones For Quantum Positioning System. Press release. Apr. 2021. url: https://www.prnewswire.
co.uk/news-releases/high-bias2-accelerates-quantum-sensing-into-commercialization-
with - new - milestones - for - quantum - positioning - system - 859771353 . html (visited on
09/08/2021).

[213] Aaron Canciani and John Raquet. “Airborne Magnetic Anomaly Navigation”. In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems 53.1 (Feb. 2017), pp. 67–80. doi: 10.1109/taes.
2017.2649238.

[214] Quantum Physicists Found a New, Safer Way to Navigate. Wired. Jan. 2018. url: https://
www.wired.com/story/quantum-physicists-found-a-new-safer-way-to-navigate/?from=
article_link (visited on 12/17/2020).

[215] J. Moryl, H. Rice, and S. Shinners. “The universal gravity module for enhanced submarine naviga-
tion”. In: IEEE 1998 Position Location and Navigation Symposium (Cat. No.98CH36153). IEEE,
1998. doi: 10.1109/plans.1998.670124.

[216] Vincent M´enoret et al. “Gravity measurements below 10-9 g with a transportable absolute quan-

tum gravimeter”. In: Scientiﬁc Reports 8.1 (Aug. 2018). doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-30608-1.

[217] Y. Bidel et al. “Absolute marine gravimetry with matter-wave interferometry”. In: Nature Com-

munications 9.1 (Feb. 2018). doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-03040-2.

[218] David T. Sandwell et al. “New global marine gravity model from CryoSat-2 and Jason-1 reveals
buried tectonic structure”. In: Science 346.6205 (Oct. 2014), pp. 65–67. doi: 10.1126/science.
1258213.

[219] Yannick Bidel et al. “Absolute airborne gravimetry with a cold atom sensor”. In: Journal of

Geodesy 94.2 (Jan. 2020). doi: 10.1007/s00190-020-01350-2.

[220] M. Travagnin. Cold atom interferometry for earth observation: perspectives for satellite based
quantum gravimetry. European Commission. Joint Research Centre. Publications Oﬃce, 2020.
doi: 10.2760/225071.

[221] Chetan Mahadeswaraswamy. “Atom interferometric gravity gradiometer: Disturbance compensa-

tion and mobile gradiometry”. PhD thesis. Stanford University, Jan. 2009.

48

[222] R. Geiger et al. “Detecting inertial eﬀects with airborne matter-wave interferometry”. In: Nature

Communications 2.1 (Sept. 2011). doi: 10.1038/ncomms1479.

[223] Sid Perkins. “Tiny gravity sensor could detect drug tunnels, mineral deposits”. In: Science (Mar.

2016). doi: 10.1126/science.aaf9852.

[224] Rongxing Guo. Cross-border resource management: theory and practice. eng. 1. ed. Developments
in environmental science 4. OCLC: 255072969. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2005. isbn: 9780444519153.
[225] Stephen Battersby. The Quantum Age: technological opportunities. UK Government Oﬃce for

Science. 2016.

[226] Gravity sensors see underground. Gravity Pioneer project, UK National Quantum Technologies

Programme. 2019.

[227] Luca Marmugi et al. “Remote detection of rotating machinery with a portable atomic magne-

tometer”. In: Applied Optics 56.3 (Jan. 2017), p. 743. doi: 10.1364/ao.56.000743.

[228] Sarah Yasmin. “Application of Quantum Magnetometers to Security and Defence Screening”.

University College London, 2018.

[229] Andrew Bond and Leighton Brown. The Suitability of Quantum Magnetometers for Defence Ap-

plications. Thales, UDT 2019. 2019.

[230] S. Kumar et al. “Real-time tracking magnetic gradiometer for underwater mine detection”. In:
Oceans ’04 MTS/IEEE Techno-Ocean ’04 (IEEE Cat. No.04CH37600). IEEE, 2004. doi: 10.
1109/oceans.2004.1405583.

[231] Arnold H. Streland. Going Deep: A System Concept for Detecting Deeply Buried Facilities From
Space: Fort Belvoir, VA: Defense Technical Information Center, Feb. 23, 2003. doi: 10.21236/
ADA424602. (Visited on 02/26/2021).

[232] QLM Technology Ltd. Quantum Gas Cameras for Continuous Industrial Methane Monitoring.

Product Brochure. 2021.

[233] Lior Cohen et al. “Thresholded Quantum LIDAR: Exploiting Photon-Number-Resolving Detec-
tion”. In: Physical Review Letters 123.20 (Nov. 2019). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.123.203601.
[234] Stefan Frick, Alex McMillan, and John Rarity. “Quantum rangeﬁnding”. In: Optics Express 28.25

(Nov. 2020), p. 37118. doi: 10.1364/oe.399902.

[235] Nicholas D. Hardy and Jeﬀrey H. Shapiro. “Computational ghost imaging versus imaging laser
radar for three-dimensional imaging”. In: Physical Review A 87.2 (Feb. 2013). doi: 10.1103/
physreva.87.023820.

[236] David H Meyer et al. “Assessment of Rydberg atoms for wideband electric ﬁeld sensing”. In:
Journal of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics 53.3 (Jan. 2020), p. 034001. doi:
10.1088/1361-6455/ab6051.

[237] ColdQuanta. QRF - Technology Deep Dive. 2021. url: https : / / cdn . sanity . io / files /

sbcw1clc/production/7bd897d88fc744d0ef0ae7725ceff5475699eb33.pdf.

[238] G. Baili et al. “Quantum-based metrology for timing, navigation and RF spectrum analysis”. In:

Quantum Technologies in Optronics. European Defence Agency, 2019. doi: 10.2836/848731.

[239] Jan Pietrzak. “Laser warning receivers”. In: Laser Technology VII: Applications of Lasers. Ed.
by Wieslaw L. Wolinski, Zdzislaw Jankiewicz, and Ryszard Romaniuk. SPIE, Oct. 2003. doi:
10.1117/12.520769.

[240] Yang-Yang Fei et al. “Quantum man-in-the-middle attack on the calibration process of quantum

key distribution”. In: Scientiﬁc Reports 8.1 (Mar. 2018). doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-22700-3.

[241] Tom Vergoossen et al. “Satellite Quantum Communications When Man-in-the-Middle Attacks

Are Excluded”. In: Entropy 21.4 (Apr. 2019), p. 387. doi: 10.3390/e21040387.

[242] Min Soo Lee et al. “Quantum hacking on a free-space quantum key distribution system without
measuring quantum signals”. In: Journal of the Optical Society of America B 36.3 (Feb. 2019),
B77. doi: 10.1364/josab.36.000b77.

[243] Ricardo Gallego Torrom´e, Nadya Ben Bekhti-Winkel, and Peter Knott. Introduction to quantum

radar. 2021. arXiv: 2006.14238 [quant-ph].

[244] Jeﬀrey H. Shapiro. “The Quantum Illumination Story”. In: IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Sys-

tems Magazine 35.4 (Apr. 2020), pp. 8–20. doi: 10.1109/maes.2019.2957870.

49

[245] China’s quantum radar was successfully developed [in Chinese]. Phoenix News. Sept. 2016. url:

http://news.ifeng.com/a/20160907/49929146_0.shtml (visited on 10/06/2020).

[246] China Shows Oﬀ First Quantum Radar Prototype. Aviation Week. Nov. 2018. url: https://
aviationweek.com/defense-space/china-shows-first-quantum-radar-prototype (visited
on 10/06/2020).

[247] Fred Daum. “Quantum Radar Cost and Practical Issues”. In: IEEE Aerospace and Electronic

Systems Magazine 35.11 (Nov. 2020), pp. 8–20. doi: 10.1109/maes.2020.2982755.

[248] Athena Karsa et al. “Quantum illumination with a generic Gaussian source”. In: Physical Review

Research 2.2 (June 2020). doi: 10.1103/physrevresearch.2.023414.

[249] David Luong et al. “Receiver Operating Characteristics for a Prototype Quantum Two-Mode
Squeezing Radar”. In: IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems 56.3 (June 2020),
pp. 2041–2060. doi: 10.1109/taes.2019.2951213.

[250] Marco Lanzagorta. “Quantum radar cross sections”. In: Quantum Optics. Ed. by Victor N. Zadkov

and Thomas Durt. SPIE, Apr. 2010. doi: 10.1117/12.854935.

[251] Matthew J. Brandsema, Ram M. Narayanan, and Marco Lanzagorta. “Theoretical and computa-
tional analysis of the quantum radar cross section for simple geometrical targets”. In: Quantum
Information Processing 16.1 (Dec. 2016). doi: 10.1007/s11128-016-1494-6.

[252] Matthew J. Brandsema, Marco Lanzagorta, and Ram M. Narayanan. “Equivalence of Classical
and Quantum Electromagnetic Scattering in the Far-Field Regime”. In: IEEE Aerospace and
Electronic Systems Magazine 35.4 (Apr. 2020), pp. 58–73. doi: 10.1109/maes.2020.2970264.

[253] C. W. Sandbo Chang et al. “Quantum-enhanced noise radar”. In: Applied Physics Letters 114.11

(Mar. 2019), p. 112601. doi: 10.1063/1.5085002.

[254] Konstantin Lukin. “Evolution of Quantum Radar Concept to Noise Radar Concept”. In: IEEE
Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine 35.11 (Nov. 2020), pp. 30–36. doi: 10.1109/maes.
2020.3004015.

[255] Agata M. Pawlikowska et al. “Single-photon three-dimensional imaging at up to 10 kilometers

range”. In: Optics Express 25.10 (May 2017), p. 11919. doi: 10.1364/oe.25.011919.

[256] Zheng-Ping Li et al. “Single-photon computational 3D imaging at 45km”. In: Photonics Research

8.9 (Sept. 2020), p. 1532. doi: 10.1364/prj.390091.

[257] Marco Lanzagorta and Jeﬀrey Uhlmann. “Space-based quantum sensing for low-power detection
of small targets”. In: Radar Sensor Technology XIX and Active and Passive Signatures VI. Ed. by
Kenneth I. Ranney et al. SPIE, May 2015. doi: 10.1117/12.2183326.

[258] Darin C Koblick and Steven Wilkinson. “Space-Based Spooky Radar Orbit Determination Beneﬁts

at Earth-Moon Lagrange Points”. In: AMOS 2020. 2020, p. 13.

[259] Future space domain awareness. Raytheon Intelligence and space. Sept. 2020. url: https : / /
www.raytheonintelligenceandspace.com/news/feature/future-space-domain-awareness
(visited on 01/21/2021).

[260] Transforming detection with quantum-enabled radar. University of Birmingham. 2020. url: https:
//www.birmingham.ac.uk/news/latest/2020/12/transforming-detection-with-quantum-
enabled-radar.aspx (visited on 02/02/2021).

[261] Katarzyna Kubiak. Quantum Technology and Submarine Near-Invulnerability. Global Security

Policy Brief, European Leadership Network. Dec. 2020.

[262] Marco Lanzagorta. “Quantum imaging for underwater arctic navigation”. In: Radar Sensor Tech-
nology XXI. Ed. by Kenneth I. Ranney and Armin Doerry. SPIE, May 2017. doi: 10.1117/12.
2262654.

[263] David Hambling. China’s quantum submarine detector could seal South China Sea. New Scientist.
Aug. 2017. url: https : / / www . newscientist . com / article / 2144721 - chinas - quantum -
submarine-detector-could-seal-south-china-sea/ (visited on 03/01/2021).

[264] Sebastien Roblin. No More ’Stealth’ Submarines: Could Quantum ’Radar’ Make Submarines Easy
to Track (And Kill)? The National Interest. Apr. 2019. url: https://nationalinterest.org/
blog/buzz/no-more-stealth-submarines-could-quantum-radar-make-submarines-easy-
track-and-kill-54547 (visited on 10/14/2020).

50

[265] Nayef Al-Rodhan. Weaponization and Outer Space Security. Global Policy Journal. 2020. url:
https://www.globalpolicyjournal.com/blog/12/03/2018/weaponization- and- outer-
space-security (visited on 02/27/2021).

[266] Mark Harris. Why satellite mega-constellations are a threat to the future of space. MIT Tech-
nology Review. 2019. url: https://www.technologyreview.com/2019/03/29/136268/why-
satellite-mega-constellations-are-a-massive-threat-to-safety-in-space/ (visited on
01/29/2021).

[267] Quantum Technologies in Space - Intermediate Strategic Report for ESA and national space agen-

cies. QTSpace. 2017.

[268] Bin Jia et al. “Quantum technology for aerospace applications”. In: Sensors and Systems for
Space Applications VII. Ed. by Khanh D. Pham and Joseph L. Cox. SPIE, June 2014. doi:
10.1117/12.2050032.

[269] Daniel KL Oi et al. “CubeSat quantum communications mission”. In: EPJ Quantum Technology

4.1 (Apr. 2017). doi: 10.1140/epjqt/s40507-017-0060-1.

[270] Jasminder S. Sidhu et al. “Advances in Space Quantum Communications”. In: (2021). arXiv:

2103.12749 [quant-ph].

[271] Stefano Pirandola. Satellite Quantum Communications: Fundamental Bounds and Practical Se-

curity. 2021. arXiv: 2012.01725 [quant-ph].

[272] Grey Hautaluoma. NASA Awards Prizes to Six Startup Companies in Entrepreneur’s Challenge.
NASA. Dec. 2020. url: https://www.nasa.gov/press- release/nasa- awards- prizes- to-
six-startup-companies-in-entrepreneur-s-challenge (visited on 12/19/2020).

[273] South China Morning Post. Could ghost imaging spy satellite be a game changer for Chinese
military? IBM. 2017. url: https://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/2121479/
could-ghost-imaging-spy-satellite-be-game-changer-chinese (visited on 03/01/2021).

[274] Sheng-Kai Liao et al. “Satellite-to-ground quantum key distribution”. In: Nature 549.7670 (Aug.

2017), pp. 43–47. doi: 10.1038/nature23655.

[275] Yu-Ao Chen et al. “An integrated space-to-ground quantum communication network over 4, 600
kilometres”. In: Nature 589.7841 (Jan. 2021), pp. 214–219. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-03093-8.
[276] Yuan Cao et al. “Long-Distance Free-Space Measurement-Device-Independent Quantum Key Dis-
tribution”. In: Physical Review Letters 125.26 (Dec. 2020). doi: 10.1103/physrevlett.125.
260503.

[277] Sandra Erwin. Space Fence surveillance radar site declared operational. Space News. 2019. url:
https://spacenews.com/space-fence-surveillance-radar-site-declared-operational/
(visited on 01/29/2021).

[278] A. Aspuru-Guzik. “Simulated Quantum Computation of Molecular Energies”. In: Science 309.5741
(Sept. 2005), pp. 1704–1707. doi: 10.1126/science.1113479. url: https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.1113479.

[279] Chinese team lead by Pan Jianwei is expected to realize a 60-bit quantum computer this year.
Quantum Hermit. Sept. 2020. url: http://quantumhermit.com/chinese-team-lead-by-pan-
jianwei- is- expected- to- realize- a- 60- bit- quantum- computer- this- year/ (visited on
11/10/2020).

[280] Prashant S. Emani et al. Quantum Computing at the Frontiers of Biological Sciences. 2019. arXiv:

1911.07127 [quant-ph].

[281] Mark Wheelis and Malcolm Dando. “New Technology and Future Developments in Biological
Warfare”. In: Biological Weapons: From The BWC To Biotech. Ed. by Kerstin Vignard. Disar-
mament Forum 4. UNIDIR, 2000, pp. 43–53.

[282] C. Kumar and N. Patel. “Quantum cascade laser based techniques for the detection of explosives,
chemical warfare agents and toxic industrial chemicals”. In: 2007 International Workshop on
Physics of Semiconductor Devices. IEEE, Dec. 2007. doi: 10.1109/iwpsd.2007.4472446.
[283] J. S. Li et al. “Contributed Review: Quantum cascade laser based photoacoustic detection of
explosives”. In: Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments 86.3 (Mar. 2015), p. 031501. doi: 10.1063/1.
4916105.

51

[284] Ford Burkhart. Airborne sensors: challenges and opportunities. SPIE. Apr. 2017. url: https:

//optics.org/news/8/4/26 (visited on 12/21/2010).

[285] J. Ignacio Cirac and Peter Zoller. “Goals and opportunities in quantum simulation”. In: Nature

Physics 8.4 (Apr. 2012), pp. 264–266. doi: 10.1038/nphys2275.

[286] Erric Kessler. Introduction to Quantum Computing on AWS. AWS Online Tech Talks. August 24,

2020.

[287] Tim M. Tierney et al. “Optically pumped magnetometers: From quantum origins to multi-channel
magnetoencephalography”. In: NeuroImage 199 (Oct. 2019), pp. 598–608. doi: 10 . 1016 / j .
neuroimage.2019.05.063.

[288] Michael J. Biercuk. Hype and cash are muddying public understanding of quantum computing.
The Conversation. 2017. url: https://theconversation.com/hype-and-cash-are-muddying-
public-understanding-of-quantum-computing-82647 (visited on 02/27/2021).

[289] Elsa B. Kania and John Costello. Quantum Hegemony? China’s Ambitions and the Challenge to

U.S. Innovation Leadership. Center for a New American Security. Sept. 2018.

[290] Defence Technology Framework: Defence Science and Technology. UK MoD Defence Science and

Technology. 2019.

[291] Work Programme 2021-2022 - 7. Digital, Industry and Space. Horizon Europe. 2021.

[292] Announcement No. 63 (2020) of the Ministry of Commerce, the State Encryption Administration,
and the General Administration of Customs, Announcement on Issuing the List of Commercial
Encryption Import Licenses, Export Control Lists, and Related Management Measures. Ministry
of Commerce of the People’s Republic of China. Dec. 2020. url: http://www.mofcom.gov.cn/
article/zwgk/zcfb/202012/20201203019733.shtml (visited on 03/01/2021).

[293] Sara Castellanos. “Quantum Computing Scientists Call for Ethical Guidelines”. In: Wall Street
Journal (Feb. 2021). issn: 0099-9660. url: https : / / www . wsj . com / articles / quantum -
computing-scientists-call-for-ethical-guidelines-11612155660 (visited on 03/01/2021).
Ilyas Khan. Will Quantum Computers Truly Serve Humanity? Feb. 2021. url: https://www.
scientificamerican . com / article / will - quantum - computers - truly - serve - humanity/
(visited on 03/01/2021).

[294]

[295] Quantum Computing Ethics. url: https://www.weforum.org/projects/quantum-computing-

ethics/ (visited on 03/01/2021).

[296] C. Anthony Pfaﬀ. “The Ethics of Acquiring Disruptive Military Technologies”. In: Texas National

Security Review 3.1 (Jan. 2020), pp. 34–61.

[297] J¨urgen Altmann. Technology, Arms Control and World Order: Fundamental Change Needed. Toda

Peace Institute, Policy Brief No. 89. Sept. 2020, p. 16.

[298] J¨urgen Altmann. “New Military Technologies: Dangers for International Security and Peace”. In:
Sicherheit & Frieden 38.1 (2020), pp. 36–42. issn: 0175-274X. doi: 10.5771/0175-274X-2020-
1-36.

[299] J¨urgen Altmann. Nanotechnology and Preventive Arms Control. Deutsche Stiftung Friedens-

forschung DSF. 2005.

[300] Araceli Venegas-Gomez. “The Quantum Ecosystem and Its Future Workforce”. In: PhotonicsViews

17.6 (Nov. 2020), pp. 34–38. doi: 10.1002/phvs.202000044.

52

