1
2
0
2

r
a

M
1
3

]

R
C
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
2
0
7
1
.
3
0
1
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

DIGITAL FORENSICS VS. ANTI-DIGITAL FORENSICS:
TECHNIQUES, LIMITATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

A PREPRINT

Jean-Paul A. Yaacoub, Hassan N. Noura, Ola Salman and Ali Chehab
American University of Beirut,
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department,
Beirut 1107 2020, Lebanon

April 1, 2021

ABSTRACT

The number of cyber attacks has increased tremendously in the last few years. This resulted into both
human and ﬁnancial losses at the individual and organization levels. Recently, cyber-criminals are
leveraging new skills and capabilities by employing anti-forensics activities, techniques and tools to
cover their tracks and evade any possible detection. Consequently, cyber-attacks are becoming more
efﬁcient and more sophisticated. Therefore, traditional cryptographic and non-cryptographic solutions
and access control systems are no longer enough to prevent such cyber attacks, especially in terms
of acquiring evidence for attack investigation. Hence, the need for well-deﬁned, sophisticated, and
advanced forensics investigation tools are highly required to track down cyber criminals and to reduce
the number of cyber crimes. This paper reviews the different forensics and anti-forensics methods,
tools, techniques, types, and challenges, while also discussing the rise of the anti-anti-forensics as
a new forensics protection mechanism against anti-forensics activities. This would help forensics
investigators to better understand the different anti-forensics tools, methods and techniques that cyber
criminals employ while launching their attacks. Moreover, the limitations of the current forensics
techniques are discussed, especially in terms of issues and challenges. Finally, this paper presents a
holistic view from a literature point of view over the forensics domain and also helps other fellow
colleagues in their quest to further understand the digital forensics domain.

Keywords Forensics; Digital-Forensics; Anti-Forensics; Anti-Anti-Forensics; Counter Anti-Forensics; Forensics
Investigation; Source of Evidences; Evidence Integrity; Digital Data; Privacy Preserving

1

Introduction

In cyber forensics, investigators aim to retrieve digital evidence from digital and cyber/physical devices including
network devices, computers, smart and mobile sensors and devices, as well as drones and robots. Unfortunately,
forensics investigations are not very effective due to the increasing use of anti-forensics techniques. In fact, current
forensics approaches suffer from different technical ﬂaws due to the anti-forensics tools to avoid detection. The anti-
forensics techniques are used to disable and distort forensics investigation by attacking the forensics tools or by deleting,
hiding or encrypting the evidence itself. More speciﬁcally, some anti-forensics tools are used to compromise the
integrity of evidences. In this paper, the existing forensics techniques are reviewed including computer, mobile, network,
clouds, digital, malware, and e-mail forensics, and the anti-forensics techniques and activities are also described and
classiﬁed. Recently, the anti-anti-forensics techniques appeared to defend the forensics tools and techniques against
anti-forensics activities. Therefore, the importance of forensics and anti-anti-forensics will be highlighted to identify
the anti-forensics attempts that target the evidence.

Lately, not enough focus was given to the forensics domain, especially, in some ﬁelds such as the Internet of Things
(IoT) and Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS). Therefore, this paper aims to develop a robust knowledge about recent
forensics and anti-forensics approaches, methods, techniques, tools, towards reducing and preventing the causes and

 
 
 
 
 
 
A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

consequences of cyber attacks. Therefore, one of the paper objectives is to provide a better understanding of the digital
forensics and anti-forensics domains.

1.1 Contributions

This paper contributions can be summarized in the following points:

• Identifying & Classifying: digital forensics domains, techniques, tools, while also presenting their different

approaches along their limitations.

• Identifying & Classifying: anti-forensics activities, techniques and tools, along their outcomes and conse-

quences.

• Including: the limitations and challenges that digital forensics investigators encounter during their investiga-

tion.

• Discussing: Counter Anti-Forensics (CAF) or Anti-Anti-Forensics (AAF) in terms of detection using machine
learning methods, and in terms of prevention using privacy preserving techniques to protect digital evidences.

• Highlighting: the most persistent digital forensics challenges.

• Proposing: various suggestions and recommendations which are included to overcome the existing challenges

and to enable efﬁcient forensics investigations.

1.2 Related Work

Many surveys were conducted and solely focused on cyber-crimes from a forensics viewpoints [1], while separately
discussing digital forensics tools depending on the forensics type (network, malware, memory, etc.) [2, 3, 4]. Anti-
forensics techniques were presented in [5, 6, 7]. In [8], big data challenges were presented as a serious forensics issue.
This paper presents a detailed analytical understanding of forensics (chain of custody, evidence source, forensics types,
available tools and approaches) and anti-forensics (aspects, techniques, tools and approaches) domains, while being
among the ﬁrst to discuss the anti-anti-forensics aspect. Moreover, a broader range of forensics challenges is presented.
Finally, privacy preserving of digital evidences’ aspect was also presented in this work from a forensics viewpoint
in respect to users privacy and evidences integrity. In other terms, this paper covers all the topics that are separately
presented by other work, and also develops its own perspective on forensics/anti-forensics techniques. This will help
fellow researchers and colleagues to broaden their search and understanding abilities.

1.3 Problem Formulation

Cyber-crimes are expanding daily, and the use of anti-forensics techniques and activities is also increasing. As a
result, this made it difﬁcult to retrieve traces and gather evidences in regards of starting a forensics investigation. This
paper aims to identify the different forensics and anti-forensics approaches for a better understanding and further
enhancements and precautions against anti-forensics activities.

1.4 Organization

This paper is divided into x sections aside the introduction and is presented as follows:

2 Background - Forensics Domain

In this section, the forensics data classiﬁcation is highlighted, while the cyber-crimes aspects is discussed from a
forensics point of view, in addition to identifying and classifying cyber-threats.

2.1 Forensics Data Classiﬁcation

Till now, there is no unique uniform standard that classiﬁes forensics data. However, some of the existing classiﬁcations
are somewhat similar. In [9], Halboob et al. identiﬁed the forensics data as being directly accessible data (DAD),
privacy-preserved accessible data (PAD), or non-accessible data (NAD). However, in a more granular way, forensics
data can be classiﬁed into four main categories (see Figure 1), as listed in the following:

2

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

Figure 1: Forensics Data Classiﬁcation

• Public & Irrelevant Data: This type of data does not present any useful information. It aims to ensure that

investigations are more time consuming and less accurate.

• Public & Relevant Data: This data can be modiﬁed and wiped beyond recovery by cyber-criminals to evade

any detection and eliminate any data that can serve as a possible evidence.

• Private & Irrelevant Data: This data can be encrypted or hidden by using data hiding techniques (E.g

steganography).

• Private & Relevant Data: This type of data serves as a hidden treasure for forensics investigators. In fact, this
data can reveal many information about the attackers, including source, attack ﬁngerprints, skills, experience
and strategies, which can help track and identify them.

2.2 Forensics Investigators:

Depending on the source of the retrieved data, forensics investigators can be classiﬁed into four categories:

• Logical Forensics Investigators: or Digital Forensics Investigators (DFI) are concerned about retrieving
evidences from digital devices, including software, operating systems, Portable Computers (PCs), laptops, or
even smart-phones found at a crime scene.

• Cyber Forensics Investigators: are involved in the world of IoT and its different ﬁelds/domains, including

cloud services.

• Physical Forensics Investigators: or traditional investigators rely on their expertise, knowledge, and experi-

ence to retrieve physical forensics evidences, mainly from hardware equipment and devices.

2.3 Cyber-Crimes

It is essential to identify a committed cyber-crime’s life-cycle to achieve a criminal goal.
cyber-crimes, cyber-threats and cyber-attacks are discussed in details.

In the following, the

2.3.1 Cyber-Crime Steps

Cyber-crimes are committed using predeﬁned steps to commit various crimes such as hacking, phishing, spamming, or
to commit cyber-offense hate crimes, blackmails, bullying child/adult pornography [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. This paper
presents the cyber-crime’s life-cycle as follows (see Figure 2), which is a modiﬁed version of the main cyber-crime
phases presented in [15].

• Reconnaissance: This phase consists of collecting information by the attacker about the targeted victim(s)

(individuals or organizations) according to an attacker’s objective, available budget and resources.

• Covert Attacks: Once the information is gathered, attacking plans and strategies are prepared according to
their available tools and techniques. Most of these attacks are conducted through covert channels using Virtual
Private Networks (VPNs), The Onion Router (TOR) or proxies. These attacks can be performed by:

– Insiders: or whistle-blowers, by being a rogue or unsatisﬁed employee recruited by a competitive

organization to target a rival organization.

– Outsiders: by leading a covert remote attack through spamming emails that lure an employee to click on

malicious links, or visit malicious websites.

3

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

Figure 2: Cyber-Crime Cycle

Finally, the types of attacks that can be performed by an attacker, in this phase, can be divided into two types:
– Direct Human Interaction Attacks: are performed through social and reverse engineering attack

types [16, 17].

– Indirect Human Interaction Attacks: are performed through phishing, spear phishing, whaling and

vishing [18].

• Disclosing Information: Data/information disclosure is possible by using a covert malicious soft-
ware/application being installed on the victim’s system either through spamming or surveillance attacks
to reveal business trade secrets, target an organization’s reputation, intellectual property theft, or causing huge
ﬁnancial losses.

• Information Transfer: This phase includes copying the exposed information to a place, where it is easier for
the attacker to manipulate it without being detected. Most of the time, the exposed data might be encrypted,
where decrypting would be time consuming.

• Data Retrieval: Data can be retrieved in three main ways [15]:

– The ﬁrst way: is based on retrieving data instantaneously, but with a higher risk of being detected.
– The second way: is based on retrieving data passively, which is a time consuming process but without

the risk of being detected.

– The third way: is based on creating a false-ﬂag attack to divert the attention of the attacker towards

another incident.

This bides attackers more time to retrieve the needed data and cover their tracks, with organisations taking
months and even years to recover from their losses.

2.3.2 Cyber-Criminal Classiﬁcation

Cyber-criminals can be classiﬁed into three main categories:

• Worldwide Organized Groups: are geographically separated groups that operate (jointly/separately) locally,

regionally, or even globally to cause a bigger damage against their intended target(s).

• Regional Organized Groups: operate locally or regionally within a limited geographical area and are limited

in terms of experience, knowledge, skills and available tools (script kiddies).

• Individuals: are known as lone wolves and mainly operate locally. Their ability is limited especially in terms

of available manpower and skills to perform coordinated tasks.

4

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

2.3.3 Cyber-Crime Structure

A cyber-crime’s type is deﬁned depending on the cyber-criminal’s skills, knowledge, experience, available tools,
resources, and manpower. This also includes the level of structure, communication, collaboration and cooperation
between different cyber-criminals. In this regard, this paper classiﬁes cyber-crimes into four main types.

• Coordinated & Organized: Cyber-crimes are coordinated if they are performed simultaneously and in a
professional, experienced and synchronised manner. These crimes are mainly based on Web defacement or
series Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks compromising the availability of a given organization and
preventing legitimate users from gaining any access for a given period of time. This causes serious ﬁnancial
and economic losses. These cyber-crimes can also be used to perform a cyber-heist against banks [19, 20].
Organized cyber-crimes are conducted to exploit organizations’ vulnerabilities and security gaps to ensure a
high proﬁt at a lower risk [21] through the coordination and the collaboration between well-trained and skilled
cyber-criminals. This is done using anonymous covert connection types such as The Onion Router (TOR) [22]
and the deep dark web [23, 24] to evade any detection.

• Uncoordinated & Disorganized: Uncoordinated crimes can be easily detected due to ﬂaws in the carried
out attacks. This is due to the lack of experience, knowledge, communication, and synchronization between
cyber-criminals. As for disorganised attacks, there is a possibility to loose the attack’s tracks and fail to
eliminate any possible evidence source. Thus, unfulﬁlling the attacker’s main objective.

• Conventional: These crimes can be predictable, due to following a certain attack or hacking cycle, which
makes it easier to identify them. In fact, they can have serious impact and implications whenever they are
conducted, especially if they are coordinated and organised.

• Unconventional: This class of cyber-crimes is unpredictable and can be divided into two main types. The ﬁrst
type is related towards conducting highly advanced attacks through the exploitation of unknown security gaps.
The second type is based on using advanced anti-forensics tools to erase data beyond recognition and recovery.

Figure 3 includes the attackers’ types according to their intentions.

Figure 3: Classiﬁcation of Cyber Attackers

5

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

2.4 Cyber-Threats

Threats occur from the risk and potential of having the occurrence of an accident, or a given attack. In fact, the types of
the existing threats can be summarized in Figure 4. However, it is still not enough to really understand the source and
nature of the attack.

2.4.1 Threat Source

A cyber-threat source cannot be always easily tracked due to criminals relying on anonymous ways to perform their
attack. However, it can be classiﬁed as one of the following categories:

• Cyber-Criminals: are usually organised hacking groups or individuals that conduct cyber-heist, bullying,
blackmailing or leaking private (ﬁnancial, military, medical or governmental) information to malicious third
parties through the deep dark web for personal or monetary gains.

• Hacktivists: are usually hackers that aim to launch (distribute) denial of service or web defacement attacks as

part of creating a cyber-protest against a political party or a government.

• Cyber-Terrorists: aim to perform web-defacement and information leakage attacks targeting organisations,

oil industries, governmental and military installations.

• Cyber-Spies: usually target organisations, enterprises, governmental and military installations as part of

conducting espionage or/and sabotage operations.

Figure 4: Threat Identiﬁcation & Classiﬁcation

2.4.2 Threat Type

Depending on their nature, threats can be identiﬁed differently. For example, Stoneburner et al. deﬁned a threat as being
a potential security breach that aims to accidentally trigger or exploit a speciﬁc vulnerability or security gap [25]. It is
somehow similar to a technical exposure. Therefore, identifying threats is not a straightforward task. However, this
paper presents them as follows:

• Security Breach: is usually caused by the presence of weak security measures (gaps), or limited security
measures that only cover parts of the exploited system and not apply the defense-in-depth mechanism, unless
its a zero-day attack attempt.

• Cyber Attack: is primary caused through the exploitation of a given system, device or/and information via
wireless communications including networks and internet, by targeting its conﬁdentiality, integrity, availability
or/and authenticity.

• Physical Attack: is caused by criminals masqueraded as employees that breach into a given organisation and

physically damage its systems and devices.

6

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

• Untested Application: applications that are untested are prone to various malicious and non-malicious security
breaches, including malfunctioning, abnormal performance, backdoors, rootkits and malwares including viruses
and Trojans.

• Old Version Systems: that are not constantly/regularly updated are usually targeted by already known

exploits/attacks, leading to various security/privacy breaches.

• Exploitable Vulnerability: is an exploitable gap found in a given security program which upon its exploitation

it allows a given attacker to gain an unauthorized access to a given system/device.

2.5 Forensics Chain of Custody

To accomplish a forensics investigation, a Chain-of-Custody [26] should be followed by any forensics investigator. This
chain consists of four phases, and they are described in the following:

• Identiﬁcation: includes identifying the event and identifying the evidence. To investigate an incident, two
types of investigation skills are needed: soft investigations skills and hard investigation skills. This will
achieve a successful investigation to identify what happened, where it happened, how it happened, who was
targeted, and who was the attacker. These two types of skills can be deﬁned as follows:

– Soft Digital Forensics Investigative Skills (SDFIK): include a strong cooperation and collaboration
between forensics investigators, the public, and the investigation team. Its main task is to assess a situation
promptly and to help, identify and differentiate between normal and suspicious events.

– Hard Digital Forensics Investigative Skills (HDFIK): require the collection of information from any

public domain, while maintaining the needed awareness level, following the chain-of-custody.

• Data Collection: can be done, either by communication monitoring, or through communication interception.
In this phase, all data types are collected to identify any potential evidence. The original data must ﬁrst be
copied, and then, all the forensics work can be performed on the copied data once the hashes are compared
and matched.

– Monitoring Communications: is usually achieved by conducting an “intrusive surveillance” [27, 28]
(i.e covert vehicle [29], mainly a covert spying van), conducting a “directed surveillance” [30] (i.e relying
on smart street or security cameras), or using human agents [31].

– Intercepting Communications: is usually achieved by identifying and intercepting IP/MAC addresses
of cyber-criminals and suspects alike [32, 33], in addition to tracking their e-mails/web-activities, and
identifying their phone numbers and monitoring their phones messages, calls and logs (i.e land-lines and
smart-phones [34]).

• Analysis & Evaluation: Upon completion of initial investigation phases, it is also important to analyze what
happened in order to evaluate the type of crimes committed. This phase consists of two sub-phases which are
explained as follows:

– Evaluation & Analysis: This phase consists of analyzing the retrieved data from software/hardware
equipment including Hard or Solid State Drives (SSD), virtual machines, networks, and network devices,
smart-phones, tablets, and laptops [35]. This also includes conducting a SIM card analysis based
on identifying contact lists, call logs, and Short Message Services (SMS) (mainly recent, or around
a given crime event), before classifying it as intellectual property theft, stalking or/and threatening
behaviour, cyber-sexual offences, unauthorized access, sabotage, espionage, and/or disclosure of sensitive
information, etc...

• Reporting: is the last phase of a forensics investigation. Thus, it is divided into two main steps:

– The ﬁrst step consists of the evidences collection to follow a legal process of prosecution to prove that

the suspected criminal is guilty.

– The second step is the legal process to prove the evidence’s legality. A legal evidence is based on
identifying whether a given fact can be proved and backed or not. This is done by checking if the evidence
is supported by real facts to prosecute a given suspect. In some cases, the evidence can be returned [36].

In the next section, the paper dives deeper in the digital forensics domain, reviewing its different sub-domains.

3 Digital Forensics Sub-Domains

Digital forensics are used to uncover and interpret electronic data related to a cyber-crime. The aim is to preserve the
evidence to be legally used in courts without any alteration/modiﬁcation. In fact, digital forensics evidences can be

7

retrieved from various digital forensics sources, as illustrated in Figure 5. Additionally, there are several forensics types,
as presented in Figure 6, which will be discussed in the following sections.

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

Figure 5: Classiﬁcation of Digital Forensics Artifacts

Figure 6: Forensics Types

3.1 Computer Forensics

Cyber-crimes will lead to more than $2 trillion losses in business by 2019 [37]. In fact, more than 4,762,376,960 data
records were either lost or stolen since 2013. As a result, the demands for Computer Forensics (CF) techniques and
tools arose respectively. Through investigations, computer forensics collect data from computer-based devices. This
allows them to check the running processes on the attacker/victim computer through system ﬁle checking and extraction,
which makes it possible to track and trace a given attack. Therefore, CFs read the hard disk information derived from
digital sources within a short time span [38], before any deletion/modiﬁcation occurs.

8

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

3.1.1 Available Tools

Since computer forensics help with identifying and tracking down attackers [2], different tools started being used (see
Table 1), including FTK imager, Encase, Helix, Winhex, SMART, X-Ways and Autopsy, along with other tools listed
in [39, 40, 41, 4]. However, computer forensics still present various challenges, limitations and drawbacks that need to
be considered [42, 43, 44].

Computer Forensics Analysis
Tools (CFATs)

Description

Table 1: Computer Forensics Analysis Tools

Forensics

Investigative

Autopsy
Encrypted disk detector
Magnet RAM capture
RAM capturer
Splunk
Forensics Acquisition of Websites
(FAW)
USB write blocker
NFI Defraser
ExifTool
Toolsley
SANS
Toolkit (SIFT)
Dumpzilla
Foxton
ForensicUserInfo
Black Track
Paladin
Sleuth Kit
Computer Aided Investigate Envi-
ronment (CAINE)
Encase
Forensics Tool Kit (FTK)
Zeitline
Cyber Forensics Timelab (CFT)
Crowd Response
Registry Recon
Llibforensics
Coroner’s Toolkit
Computer Online Forensics Evi-
dence Extractor (COFEE)
HELIX3

PlainSight

A GUI-based open source digital forensics program that analyses hard drives & smartphones
It serves to to check encrypted physical drives
It is used to capture a computer’s physical memory and analyses memory artefacts
It is used to dump data from a computer’s volatile memory which may contain log in credentials & Encrypted password volumes
Combines many tools including WHOIS/GeoIP lookup along pinging and port scanning along other tools
It captures the entire or partial page, along HTML source code and all images type

It extracts the USB drives content without leaving any ﬁngerprint
It detects partial or/and full multimedia ﬁles in data streams
It Helps investigators to read, write and edit meta information for various ﬁle types
File identiﬁcation and signature veriﬁcation, along Data URI and password generating, and other useful investigative tools
Among the most popular open source incident response platforms

It extracts different browser information and analyses them
It can be a browser history capturer or a browser history viewer
Extracts NT Hash, login counts, proﬁle paths account expiry date, password reset and other infro
It is used as a pen testing and a forensics tool
Has a variety of forensics tools needed to investigate any incident
Collection of command line tools & It consists of analysing volumes & ﬁles
It is used to analyse, investigate and create a forensics report using a variety of tools

Can access a large ﬁle system number of ﬁle system whilst creating timestamps
It analyses different ﬁle systems whilst revealing their different timestamps
It is known as timeline editor, collects evidences from log ﬁles to solve digital crime cases
It scans & views hard-drives whilst identifying the sorted timestamp of the found ﬁle
It gathers a system’s information to initiate an incident response along with security engagements [45]
It extracts registries information (previous/current) from the evidence & rebuilds their representation
It is a library for digital forensics applications, developed in Python, extracts information from different evidence types
It is used to aid analysis of computer disasters and data recovery
It gathers evidence from Windows systems, and can be installed on a USB pen drive or external hard disk with 150 different
tools & a GUI based interface for command
It is used in incident response, made up of many open source digital forensics tools including hex editors & password cracking
tools
It includes viewing Internet histories, checking USB device usage, extracting password hashes & Information gathering along
other tasks, like analysing data collected from physical memories

3.1.2 Computer Forensics Steps

Several computer forensics steps must be considered to ensure a successful investigation. In [46], Kumari et al.
discussed some computer forensics steps like sanitizing the storage area to protect forensics processes, and the use of
Message-Digest algorithm (MD5 hash) image’s calculated value to ﬁnd out whether the image used is original or not.
As a result, computer forensics can be divided into ﬁve main steps, also mentioned in [47] including:

• Developing Policies & Procedures: digital evidences can be complex and sensitive, where data can be easily
compromised if not carefully handled and protected. Therefore, establishing standard policies and procedures
with strict guidelines can help support and enhance a computer forensics investigation.

• Assessing Evidences: evidence/potential evidence assessment reveals a clear understanding of the committed
cyber-crime details. Therefore, new methods needs to be adopted to assess any potential information serving
as an evidence, including the digital evidence type and its format.

• Acquiring Evidences: requires a very detailed plan to acquire data legally. However, documenting data is
recommended before, during and after any acquisition process. This allows essential information (based on
software and hardware speciﬁcations) to be recorded and preserved by maintaining data’s integrity.

• Examining Evidences: includes examining the data that is copied, retrieved and stored in databases from a
given designated archive, by relying on speciﬁc key words or/and ﬁle types/names even if these ﬁles were
recently deleted. This offers the chance to know when the data was created or/and modiﬁed.

9

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

• Documenting & Reporting: An accurate record of the activities is kept by computer forensics investigators.
This includes methods of retrieving, copying and storing data, along with acquiring, examining and assessing
the evidence. Therefore, preserving the data integrity, enforcing the right policies and procedures, and
authenticating any ﬁndings (how/when/where) related to the recovered evidence.

• Computer Activity Timeline Detection: Computer Activity Timeline Detection (CAT Detect) [48, 49] is
based on analysing computer activities to detect inconsistencies in a computer system timeline. However,
the investigation process is prone to data, event, or even ﬁle loss either through deletion, manipulation or
overwriting. "CAT Detect" can remove inconsistencies in a given timeline by parsing the window system
event logs, and can access the MAC (Modiﬁed Accessed Created) ﬁle metadata, and create a database table
related to the information ﬁle being accessed. Thus, making it possible to build the evidence through time-line
construction.

• Computer Forensics Timeline Visualisation: Computer Forensics Timeline Visualisation (CFT Visual) is a
timeline based tool used in the Cyber-forensic Timelab [50]. By applying this method, the obtained evidences
are based on the time variations which would result into creating a timeline based graph of events that allows
the investigators to know and identify what happened right after and before a given event (cause/consequence).

3.2 Network Forensics

Network-forensics is a branch that derives from the digital forensics tree. It is responsible of monitoring and analysing
devices and network trafﬁc as part of legal information gathering and legal evidence retrieval.

3.2.1 Network-Based Evidence

Network forensics tools are used to retrieve network-based evidences, which are categorized as follows (see Figure 7).

• Network Devices: include wireless access points (APs), switches and routers, with their IP and MAC addresses

pools.

• Servers: include DHCP/DNS Servers, as well as authentication and application servers, with the usernames,

passwords, activities, and privileges.

• Security Elements: include Web proxies, network Intrusion Detection/Prevention Systems (IDS/IPS), as well

as stateful and stateless ﬁrewalls to monitor incoming and outgoing internet trafﬁc and saved logs.

• Local Networks: include diagrams and used applications, with their logs that contain details and information

about the connected users.

Figure 7: Network Based Evidence

3.2.2 Network Forensics Approaches

Due to the increase in the network misuse behaviour, new approaches were needed to ensure a quick emergency
response and incident investigation, to enhance the network security and forensics aspects. As a result, an evidence
graph was presented by Wei et al. in [51]. In [46], Kumari et al. reviewed different approaches used for network
forensics investigations. In [52], Alzaabin et al. presented a forensics analysis system used for crime investigation. The
authors relied on the "Crime Investigation System Using the Relative Importance of Information Spreaders in Networks
Depicting Criminals Communications" (CISRI) framework [52] to determine the head of the cyber-criminal group
through crime investigation and to describe the relationship between a given criminal group through a graph that is

10

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

based on phone calls, call logs and messages. In [53], Hajdarevic et al. presented a different approach that allows the
collection, the analysis and the reporting of evidences through a forensics investigation. This helps making the digital
evidence legal and acceptable by courts. In [54], new network forensics prototype tools were presented to generate an
automated evidence analysis. This helps reducing the response time to overcome the issues of manual analysis. In fact,
these prototypes would help identify the attackers and determine each one’s role in a given cyber-criminal group. In
[55], Koroniotis et al. managed to provide a new network forensics taxonomy that is applicable to botnets in IoT-related
and non-IoT-related domains to assess their strengths and weaknesses. In [3], Pilli et al. developed a network forensics
analysis framework known as “Network Forensics System” including forensics analysis, and network security and
monitoring tools [3, 56], to seize cyber-criminals in cyber-space [57].

In fact, network forensics can be categorized differently, or mainly as two categories explained in [58, 59]. In the ﬁrst
category, “Catch It As You Can (CIAYC)” [60], all packets are sent through a trafﬁc point before being stored into
databases for further analysis. In the second category, “Stop Look And Listen (SLAL)” [61], data is only stored in
databases for future analysis.

3.2.3 NFA & NSM Tools

Network Forensics Analysis Tools (NFATs) [62] and Network Security and Monitoring Tools (NSMTs) [58] are
used to analyse the collected and aggregated data. Moreover, they provide IP security, along with the detection of
insider/outsider attacks, as well as ensuring a risk analysis, and data recovery. This allow them being used for anomaly
detection with the ability to detect and predict future attacks through the reliance on IDS/IPS and Firewall logs [63].
Therefore, the main network forensics tools are summarized in Table 2 as follows:

A Further description of network security and monitoring tools is summarized in Table 3.

3.3 Cloud Forensics

The evolution of the digital world, led to the cooperation and collaboration between cloud forensics and digital forensics.
In this context, cloud forensics [64, 65] play a key role in the big data era. Smart-phones, computers, laptops, tablets,
and vehicles store their data in the cloud, which presents several beneﬁts. These beneﬁts include the scalability, the
large capacity, and the on-demand accessibility. However, transferring the data over the network exposes it to various
attacks against cloud-related domains. As a result, cloud users would become victims of cyber-crimes. Hence, this calls
for digital forensics to be applied in the cloud environments (known as cloud forensics) [66]. However, cloud forensics
investigation is not a straightforward task, due to the difﬁculty in locating and identifying the evidence’s source, along
with the lack of accountability of cloud providers.

3.3.1 Cloud Forensics Tools

Despite the fact that there are few available cloud forensics tools, there is an increasing demand to develop more
sophisticated and more efﬁcient ones [67]. In [68, 69, 70], different cloud forensics tools are discussed and compared.
Hence, the main cloud forensics tools are presented in Table 4.

3.4 E-mail Forensics

The number of email accounts and messages is growing constantly [71]. In fact, e-mail forensics can be somehow
related to computer forensics [72], given that the e-mails present the main platform of communications that ensures
both conﬁdentiality and integrity of the data shared.

3.4.1 Email-Forensics Approaches

Many e-mail communication services (E.g outlook, yahoo, G-mail), platforms and marketing services (E.g Constant
Contact, SendinBlue, AWeber, GetResponse and Mailchimp) are now being used. As a result, e-mail forensics are
becoming key targets for hackers to retrieve companies conﬁdential and sensitive information through phishing [73]
and spear phishing [74], whaling, war-dialing and vishing. This is due to targeting employees and staff, administrators
and Chief Executive Ofﬁcers (CEOs). Therefore, it is essential to ﬁnd the right forensics tool to ensure the email
forensics protection. In [75], Paglierani et al. managed to discover G-mail account credentials. This method consisted
of the re-establishment of the already existing G-mail sessions, by employing an Email Forensics Extensible Markup
Language/Email Forensics Resource Description Framework (EFXML/EFRDF) representation [76] of email headers.
In [46], Kumari et al. used Digsby [77] for e-mail forensics investigation, where Digsby Log Analyser (DigLA) was
issued to locate and detect data log ﬁles without the need to know details about the ﬁle location [77]. Furthermore,

11

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

Table 2: Forensics tools used for network forensics investigations

Network Forensics
Analysis Tools (NFATs)

Description

NetIntercept

NetWitness

NetDetector

Iris

Inﬁnistream

Solera DS 5150
DeepSee

OmniPeek/Etherpeek

SilentRunner

NetworkMiner

Xplico
PyFlag

TCPDump
Ngrep
Wireshark
Airxxx-ng series
DeepNines
Argus

Fenris

Forensics & Log Analysis
Snort
Savant
Dragon IDS
RSA EnVision
Solera DS

SLEUTH KIT

It captures network trafﬁc, stores it in a pcap format, detects spooﬁng, and generates a variety of
reports.
It captures network trafﬁc and reconstructs the network sessions to the application layer to ensure an
automated analysis and zero-day detection.
It captures intrusions and performs multi time-scale network analysis and signature-based anomaly
detection.
It collects network trafﬁc and reassembles it, also it has an advanced search and ﬁltering mechanism
for a quick data identiﬁcation.
It utilizes intelligent Deep Packet Capture (iDPC) technology, whilst performing a real-time or
back-in-time analysis, and smart recording and data mining for optimization.
It is used for a high-speed data capture, and network trafﬁc ﬁltering
It includes three softwares which are reports, sonar and search, to index, search and reconstruct
network trafﬁc.
It provides a real-time network visibility, along with a high capture capabilities and expert analysis,
also it ensures a low-level network trafﬁc analyser.
It captures, analyzes and visualizes network activity, whilst reconstructing security incidents in their
exact sequence.
It captures network trafﬁc through real-time or passive snifﬁng, and assesses how much data was
leaked.
It captures Internet trafﬁc and reconstructs it to present the results in a visualized form.
It analyses network captured packets, whilst also supporting a number of network protocols, along
parsing pcap ﬁles, to extract and dissect packets at low level protocols.
I is a windump command-line network packet analyser supporting network forensics analysis.
It is a tool that debugs a low-level network trafﬁc.
It forms a basis of network forensics monitoring and forensics studies.
It is used to ensure a low-level trafﬁc analysis tools for wireless LANs.
It provides a real-time identity-based network defense with basic network forensics.
It is used for non-repudiation purposes, along with the detection of slow scans, whilst supporting
zero-day attacks.
It is used for code/protocol analysis, debugging, vulnerability research, security audits, network
forensics and reverse engineering.
It is used to ensure a log ﬁle analysis combined with network forensics, and Python implementation.
It is used for network intrusion detection and prevention, and network forensics analysis.
It is used for a live forensics/network analysis, along with critical infrastructure reporting.
It offers network/host intrusion detection, and forensics network analysis.
It provides a live network forensics analysis, data leakage protection and log management.
t provides a live network forensics analysis, used as an analysis tool along with the ability to extract
metadata.
It is a tool used to examine ﬁle systems and to detect suspicious computer behaviour without
interrupting the network.

such a tool ensures a faster digital evidence collection for analysis purposes, whilst providing password decryption for
machine speciﬁc and portably Digsby installations [77].

3.4.2 Email-Forensics Tools

Different e-mail forensics tools were presented along with many other approaches and explanations in [78, 79, 80].
Consequently,the e-mail forensics tools are summarized in Table 5 as follows.

3.5 Malware Forensics

Is also known as malware analysis that aims to study the process of determining the functionality of a given malware,
along its impact and origins ad type (i.e virus, worm, trojan horse, rootkit, or backdoor). Since most mobile forensics
analysis focus on the process of data acquisition [81, 82], it is very essential to identify suspicious applications,
especially since malware can be hidden in malicious applications that seem to be legitimate, especially on Android
platforms [83, 84].

12

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

NSM Tool Names
TCPDump

Wireshark
TCPFlow
Flow-tools
NfDump

PADS

Nessus
Sebek
TCPTrace
Ntop
TCPStat
IOS NetFlow
TCPDstat
Ngrep
TCPXtract
SiLK

TCPReplay
P0f

Nmap
Bro
Snort

Table 3: Description Of Network Security & Monitoring Tools

Description
A packet sniffer and analyser that runs in a command line, and intercepts and displays network transmitted
packets.
A cross-platform tool that performs a live capture in libpcap format, along with an ofﬂine analysis.
A tool that captures transmitted data as part of TCP connections and stores it for a protocol analysis.
A library that collects, sends, processes and generates NetFlow data reports.
It Works with NetFlow formats by capturing daemon reads, displays them and creates statistics of ﬂows and
stores the ﬁltered data.
A lightweight and intelligent network sniffer, and a signature-based detection engine used to passively detect any
network asset.
A vulnerability scanner thar ensures a high-speed and sensitive data discovery and vulnerability analysis.
Designed to capture all Honeypot activity
It Produces different output types containing information, such as elapsed time and throughput.
It is used for network trafﬁc measurement, monitoring, planning, and detection of any security violations.
It reports the network’s bandwidth, along with the number of packets and the average packet size.
It Collects IP attributes of each forwarded packet, and detects network anomalies and security vulnerabilities.
It produces a per-protocol trafﬁc breakdown, including network packets and trafﬁc patterns.
It debugs plaintext protocol interactions to analyse and identify any anomalous network communication.
It extracts ﬁles through interception from a network trafﬁc based on their signatures.
It supports an efﬁcient capture, storage and analysis of network data ﬂow, along with supporting network
forensics.
It classiﬁes previously captured trafﬁc, rewrites the layers headers and replays the network trafﬁc.
A Passive OS ﬁngerprinting tool that captures incoming trafﬁc from hosts to networks, and detects the presence
of ﬁrewall.
A tool that is used for OS ﬁngerprinting and port scanning.
A network intrusion detection system that passively monitors network trafﬁc.
A Network intrusion detection/prevention system that performs packet logging, snifﬁng and real-time trafﬁc
analysis.

Table 4: Cloud Forensics Analysis Tools

Cloud Forensics Tools
(ClFTs)

Description

FROST

UFED

It acquires data from API logs, virtual disks & ﬁrewall logs to carry out digital forensics
investigations, along with storing data logs in Hash trees whilst returning it in a
Cryptographic form.
A cloud Analyzer that allows forensics investigators to have a potential evidence for
their investigations from cloud information sources, which speed up investigations,
where cloud data/metadata is collected using UFED PRO to pack and use it for forensics
examinations.

3.5.1 Malware Forensics Approaches

To ensure a better malware analysis, Various approaches were presented as part of solving malware forensics issues
and challenges. In [85], Li et al. identiﬁed the ﬁrst steps of mobile forensics analysis, which is based on identifying
malicious applications. However, there still are many challenges related to the malware detection tools [86]. In [87],
Khurana et al. divided the malware analysis into two main areas including behavioral analysis and code analysis. More
precisely, the behavioral analysis aims to examine how a malware interacts with its environment [88], while the code
analysis examines the malware malicious code [89]. Moreover, several methods and taxonomies were presented in [90].
However, the behavioral analysis still remains as an open issue. In [91], Cook et al. relied on six main individual
metrics to measure the level of the attribution’s effectiveness in the Industrial Control Systems (ICS) context applied
to Critical Infrastructures (CI). In [92], Rathnayaka et al. presented a malware analysis that integrates the malware
static analysis with forensic analysis of memory dumps. Their approach can analyse advanced malware types that hide
their behaviours without showing any possible artefact with an accuracy result of 90%. However, this approach isn’t
compatible with different environments and suffers from memory dump size issues.

13

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

E-mail Forensics Tools
(EFTs)

MailXaminer
email analysis Software
Aid4Mail Fookes software

forensics

MxToolBox Email Software
Paraben Email Examiner
OSForensic Software
Free EDB Viewer

Exchange EDB Viewer

FreeViewer EML Viewer
FreeViewer OST Viewer
FreeViewer PST Viewer
FreeViewer MSG Viewer
SQL MDF Viewer
SQL LDF Viewer
FreeViewer MBOX Viewer
Opera MBS Viewer
DBX Viewer
WAB Viewer

ZDB Viewer

Table 5: E-mail Forensics Investigation Tools

Description

It performs data collaboration & access, and supports multiple mailboxes, equipped with search ﬁlters
for an accurate forensics email search, recovery, along with storing & preserving email evidence.
An email archiving software that is used to search through mail, to produce results based on ﬁlters,
and to convert mail to industry-standard production formats in a highly accurate manner capable of
safely preserving hidden metadata.
It analyses IP addresses & explores cyber-crime.
It allows users to perform email examinations.
It performs email forensics searches.
It is easy to use, with all user related mailbox information will be available here, and allows the
ofﬂine viewing of EDB emails.
It can be associated with server exchange, and it contains crucial information to enable a forensics
investigation.
It uses EML format to store emails locally.
It aids in viewing all email related information of an OST ﬁle attached with Outlook.
It reads the PST ﬁle content such as emails, attachments along with header information.
It reads the content within the Outlook MSG ﬁle along with headers. & attachments information
It views MDF Databases without SQL Server environments.
It helps analysing what happened with SQL Server databases.
It is used by many email clients, and can be easily viewed by the MBOX Viewer.
It is a mail client that stores & sends users emails, also generates MBS ﬁles.
The users can use this tool to view email, header information & attachments.
It stores contact details in WAB format, and allows the retrieval of contact information stored in a
WAB format.
Zimbra can be connected to Outlook to view the email head information.

3.5.2 Malware Forensics Tools

Malware forensics tools are essential for any malware analysis and investigation. For this reason, different malware
forensics tools are summarized in the following table Table 6 and are further explained and discussed in [93, 94, 95, 96].

Table 6: Malware Forensics Analysis Tools

Malware Forensics Tools (MFTs)
FOR610

Cuckoo [97] Sandbox

Yet Another Recursive Acronym
(YARA) Rules
Google Rapid Response (GRR)

Remnux

Description
It explores malware analysis tools & helps forensics investigators, incident responders to acquire the needed practical skills to
examine malicious programs that infect Windows systems.
An open source platform that automates malicious ﬁle analysis with a detailed meaningful feedback, and ensures malware
detection & protection.
An open source malware attribution tool that is used to classify & analyse malware samples based on textual or binary patterns,
malware are described based on their patterns.
An incident response framework that analyses speciﬁc workstations for malware footprints, consists of an agent deployed on
the target system & an interactive server infrastructure to interact with the agent, various forensics tasks can be performed on
the client machine.
It uses the one-stop-shop approach to reverse engineer malware samples, help investigating browser-based malware, ensure
memory forensics, and analyse multiple malware samples.

3.6 Memory Forensics

Memory forensics reveal most of the crime credential information. This forensics type is meant to evaluate the physical
memory including completeness, correctness, speed and amount of interference. As a result, various memory forensics
useful tools and steps were listed for an enhanced memory forensics investigation in [98, 99].

3.6.1 Memory Visualisation

Volatile memories are characterized by their high speed of read/write operations. Thus, the visualisation is crucial in the
volatile memory case, especially with large disk size and full disk encryption. In this context, MAC memory readers
permit the visualization of the physical memory mapping, similarly to the show boot memory map used in the apple
kernel debug kit [100, 98].
After mapping the memory, the investigation process requires a recording of the "correct and complete physical
memory" of a given device or Basic Input/Output System (BIOS) [101, 102]. Hence, its main role is to record the image
memory to avoid memory alteration, especially in the physical RAM [103].

14

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

3.6.2 Memory Forensics Approaches

As for memory forensics, various approaches were presented in [104] to mitigate volatile memory issues (i.e Random
Access Memory (RAM) [105]) to allow law enforcement agencies to take legal actions against cyber-criminals. In [106],
Shosha et al. developed a prototype to detect programs being maliciously used by criminals. This prototype is based
on evidence deduction, which in turn, is based on traces of the program’s suspect. In [104], Olajide et al. used RAM
dumps to extract information about the user input from Windows applications. In [107], Ellick et al. introduced a
RAM forensics tool known as ForenScope [108]. This tool ensures the investigation of a given machine by using
regular bash-shell, which permits to disable the anti-forensics tools whilst searching for any potential evidence. In [109],
Johannes et al. presented a different approach. This approach investigates the ﬁrmware along its components, and
improves forensics imaging based on page table mapping and PCI introspection. In [110], Shashidhar et al. presented
an approach that was aimed to target the potential value of a prefetch folder, along with the prefetch folder itself. This
is used to start-up and speed-up a window machine program. In [111], Latzo et al. surveyed the memory forensics
domain and presented a forensics memory acquisition taxonomy that is independent of the Operating System (OS) and
the Hardware Architecture (HA), and can also be deployed pre/post-incident.

3.6.3 Memory Forensics Tools

This paper summarizes the main different memory forensics tools that are presented and explained in [112, 41]. For
example, PTFinder [113], which is a forensics toolkit, was used to allow the investigation of the main memory content.
For further clariﬁcation, these tools are summarized In the following Table 7.

Table 7: Memory Forensics Investigation Tools

Description

It includes all the needed tools to conduct an in-depth forensics or incident response investigation.

It is used as part of an incident response scenario to gather contextual information, and it can
also scan host for malware detection.
It is a memory forensics framework for incident response and malware analysis that allows the
extracting of digital artefacts from volatile memory (RAM) dumps.
It can be used to perform in-depth analysis of various ﬁle systems.
It allows the examination of ﬁles and folders on local hard drives, network drives, CDs/DVDs,
whilst reviewing the content of forensics images or memory dumps.
It is used for a forensics wiping a drive whilst also creating a raw drive image.
It includes a user-friendly GUI, semi-automated report tools for Mobile & Network forensics,
along data recovery.
Fast & It supports large range of ﬁle format,and it is used to read, write or edit ﬁle metadata
information.
It is designed to handle & load very large ﬁles, along, information gathering, or searching for
hidden data.
It scans a disk image, ﬁle, or directory of ﬁles and extracts information including e-mail addresses,
URLs, and ZIP ﬁles.
It aims at helping with Incident Response, Cyber Intelligence and Computer forensics scenarios.
It allows the view of what actions were taken by a user and what events occurred on the machine,
useful to prove that a given user performed an action they denied.
It ensures a write-block to USB devices to keep data and metadata safe.
It performs host memory & ﬁle analysis, collects memory information & gathers ﬁle systems to
build an overall threat assessment proﬁle.
It allows users to perform digital forensics tasks, along with examining physical memory dumps
& more.
It performs a low-level editing & modiﬁcation of a raw disk or main memory (RAM).
It is built & used in incident response, computer forensics and E-discovery scenarios.
It displays useful information including USB drives & the serial numbers, to understand if data
was stolen, moved or accessed.

Memory Forensics Tools
(MFTs)
SANS Investigative Foren-
sics Toolkit (SIFT)
CrowdStrike
dResponse
Volatility

Crow-

Sleuth Kit
FTK Imager

Linux ‘dd’
Computer Aided INvestiga-
tive Environment (CAINE)
ExifTool

Free Hex Editor Neo

Bulk Extractor

DEFT
LastActivityView

DSi USB Write Blocker
FireEye RedLine

PlainSight

HxD
HELIX3 Free
USB Historian

3.7 Mobile Forensics

Mobile forensics are classiﬁed as a new branch of digital forensics, which is about analyzing mobile devices to
retrieve and recover digital data serving as evidences. This is done by preserving the integrity of the evidence in a

15

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

un-contaminated and un-altered state [114, 115]. Mobile forensics tools and techniques rely on quantitative analysis
approaches [116]. More precisely, this is due to the fact that mobile devices contain large amount of digital data and
information (i.e contacts, call logs, SMSs, Wi-Fi information, IP/MAC address, Global Positioning Systems (GPS)
signals, Bluetooth, etc...) that can serve as evidence.

• Locating Evidences: Locating evidences in mobile forensics is not an easy task, but it can be achieved.
In [117], Chernyshev et al. described the mobile phone evidences sources speciﬁcations. This includes the
uniqueness and persistence of the devices identiﬁers, as well as the network information, and personal local
settings (i.e saved passwords, cookies, electronic documents, web-browsing activities, etc...).

• Digital Artifacts: Before describing and classifying the mobile forensics tools, it is important to know what

digital artifacts can be retrieved ﬁrst, including their types. For this reason, Figure 8 was presented.

Figure 8: Mobile Forensics Digital Artifacts

– Internal Memory: includes the NAND ﬂash memory [118]. In such a memory type, many evidences

can be found, such as digital data, SMS, call logs and browser history.

– External Memory: includes the SIM card, where several evidences can also be found and retrieved,

such as the subscriber’s data, real-time location, and additional internal memory storage.

– Service Provider Logs: includes call logs, duration and usage that can be identiﬁed and retrieved even

after deletion.

• Mobile Forensics Tools In recent years, mobile devices were involved in both crimes and cyber-crimes scenes
alike as vital key digital witnesses to investigate the crimes involving mobile devices. For further technical
explanation, Table 8 summarizes the main mobile forensics tools.

As a result, these forensics tools are summarized in Figure 9.

3.8 IoT Forensics

IoT is a smart network capable of decision-making and self-managing, whilst being linked to various domains including
medical IoT [121]. Unlike traditional forensics that rely on the Triple-A domain (known as Authentication, Authorization
and Accounting) [122], IoT forensics rely on Radio Frequency Identiﬁers (RFID) tags, as well as the network and
sensor nodes. In fact, Table 9 contains a comparison between traditional forensics and IoT forensics.

In the following, the IoT characteristics are detailed based on the comparison elements included in Table 9.

• Evidence Source: Identifying the source of evidence requires having the knowledge of the type of devices
being in use (i.e Software, Hardware and OS). Moreover, it also requires collecting the necessary forensics
evidences from IoT-based and digital cyber-crime scenes.

• Crucial Information: due to the increasing growth of the devices numbers, with more than trillions of
interconnected devices being operational on IoT networks [123], the aim is to locate and identify any available
information that proves to be crucial for a given forensics investigation, despite the explosions in terms of data
size on IoT platforms [124] which may reach up to 40,000 Exabytes by 2020 [125].

16

Table 8: Description of Mobile Forensics Tools

Mobile Forensics
Tools (MFT)

Description

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

forensics

It extracts data from mobile devices and analyses it, and ensures an efﬁcient use and acquire of information

OXYGEN
KIT
Pilot-Link

Encase

PDA Seizure

XRY

PlainSight

Cellebrite UFED

It is an open source software designed for the Linux client, and provides the means to ﬁnd the logical device’s
contents which can be examined manually by palm OS emulators [119]
It allows palm OS device, and stores the physical bit stream image of ﬁle for future use & can be viewed any
time in the future, also it helps snapping physical and logical snapshot of the device’s current state. [120]
It ensures a logical access to information through the use of API protocol to allow desktop applications to
communicate with mobile devices & allows investigating the pocket PC and palm OS, along bookmarking,
graphical libraries.
It is used to analyze and recover crucial information from mobile devices, and it is made up of hardware device
and software & designed to recover data for analysis.
It recovers deleted data (calls, SMS, images etc..) from all kind of smartphones including Android, iPhone and
BlackBerry.
It is a uniﬁed workﬂow that allows investigators along ﬁrst responders to collect, protect and act on mobile data
in a fast yet accurate way without risking data being compromised.

Table 9: Traditional Vs IoT Forensics

Traditional Forensics
Individuals, companies, governments, etc..
Ethernet, Wireless, Bluetooth, IPv4, IPv6
Terabytes

Comparison
Ownership
Protocols
Data Size
Number of Devices Billions
Networks Nature
Evidence Source
Evidence Type

Wired, Wireless, Bluetooth, GSM
AAA, gateways, social networks
Electronic documents, standard ﬁle formats Any available format

IoT Forensics
Individuals, companies, governments
Wireless, Bluetooth, Zigbee, RFIDs
Exabytes
40+ Billions
Wireless, Bluetooth, RFID, WSN, 4G/5G
RFID tag/reader, sensor nodes/networks

3.9

IoT Persistent Issues

One of the main IoT forensics issues is the lack of a reliable IoT forensics application [126]. Moreover, there is
no existing digital forensics guidance that allows retrieving data from an IoT device, in case of an active forensics
investigation, or an occurring cyber-event. More precisely, the embedded technologies are challenging due to their
reliance on traditional computer OS or even magnetic data. Therefore in [126], Watson et al. introduced the need for an
advanced data recovery technique whenever a data acquisition from an embedded remote IoT device is required. In fact,
it seems like the digital forensics complexity is due to three main issues:

• Inaccessible Data Storage: On-board data storage cannot be accessible through the use of traditional digital

forensics methods.

• Dispersed Cumulative Datasets: might exist in various yet different geographical locations.

• Unreadable Data: in case the data was acquired, the issue is that it cannot be readable or accessed with the

available tools.

4 Digital Forensics Challenges

So far, there are plenty of challenges and issues that surround the Forensics domain as whole [42, 127]. As a result,
digital forensics challenges can be divided into technical, operational, legal and investigative challenges. This taxonomy
is slightly similar to the on.e presented by Karie et al. in [128].

4.1 Technical Challenges

During a forensics investigation, different types of technical challenges that require dealing with cryptographic and
non-cryptographic data are encountered. This includes data size, data location, data hiding, data deletion, anti-forensics
tools, and incompatibility, which may result into hindering an investigation, or extreme consumption of resources and
time.

17

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

Figure 9: Classiﬁcation of Forensics Tools

• Cryptographic Challenges: The level of encryption plays a key role in a forensics investigation, since it can
vary between symmetric and asymmetric encryption techniques. In fact, hackers and cyber-criminals use it
to preserve the privacy of their data to avoid its capture. Hence, this explains their reliance on anonymity,
homomorphic encryption, secret sharing and differential privacy, along other encryption mechanisms to make
it almost impossible for digital forensics investigators to decrypt them.

• Data Size: Another technical challenge is related to the size of data (small data, medium data, big data [129,
130]) that requires to be retrieved. This also includes seeking which data can be used as evidence, by identifying
what data is relevant and what data serves no purposes. Hence, cyber-criminals rely on covering their tracks
and leaving data that serves no purpose to waste the investigators time.

• Data Location: Locating where the data is stored is yet another challenge, since, it is not easy to know where
the data is stored and located. It is due to the fact that hackers use VPNs, proxies and TOR to perform their
attacks anonymously without leaving any trail or trace back, which limits the amount of data being recovered
and analysed for any possible trace or evidence.

18

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

• Data Wiping: Wiping or deleting data became also a serious challenge for forensics investigators, since
hackers and cyber-criminals kept on deleting their data beyond recovery. Thus, leaving forensics investigators
with little or no evidences at all to carry out with their digital investigation.

• Data Hiding: Hiding data is a popular technique used by both cyber-criminals and hackers alike. Such a
technique relies on steganography to hide data. In some cases, hackers also rely on hiding their data in volatile
RAMs (Random Access Memory). Therefore, once the power is off, the data is completely erased, and there is
nothing that digital investigators can do to retrieve it.

• Anti-Forensics Tools: Anti-forensics tools are in use due to their popularity and effectiveness to counter
forensics investigations and eliminate any source of evidence that can be retrieved or/and traced back. In fact,
these tools impose a serious risk and threat to any digital investigation, since it is very easy to use them to
erase data beyond recovery.

• Incompatibility: Due to the various techniques and technologies used by IoT devices, forensics tools are
alsmost unreliable when it came to deal with the different types of devices, especially counterfeit devices. This
makes any data’s retrieval process very difﬁcult and almost impossible.

• RAID: The use of Redundant Array of Independent Disks as a technology that combines different physical
drives into a single logical unit resulting into a data storage virtualization [5] is increasing. This technique
mainly relies on arbitrary disk order, stripe order, stripe size and block size, along with the use of uncommon
RAID controllers to eliminate any evidence, which is proving to be very difﬁcult to recover them.

• Cloud Computing Storage: Due to the emergence of cloud computing [131], data is moved and outsourced
to third parties. Hence, a new challenge will be thrown against a forensics investigation process especially
with untrusted and semi-trusted third parties. Once the data is stored or transferred through cloud services, it
can be transferred across different countries that impose different regulations. This would seriously complicate
and affect a given investigation.

4.2 Operational Challenges

Aside technical challenges, operational challenges also present a serious threat to the forensics investigation process.
This is due to the lack of incident management, lack of standardized procedures, and lack of forensics readiness.

• Lack of Incident Management: Lack of incident management, is also known as lack of incident detection,
response and prevention. In other terms, digital forensics investigators are still incapable of detecting any
incident. In fact, even if they managed to detect an incident, they are either unable to respond to it in time, or
they lack the ability to respond at all. Furthermore, there is lack of tools to prevent an incident from occurring,
even with the reliance on IDS/IPS hybrid responses [132, 133, 134].

• Lack Of Standardized Procedures: Due to the lack of standardization of both procedures and policies,
digital forensics investigators are facing real challenges in acting and reacting in the right way when an incident
occurs.

• Lack of Forensics Readiness: Due to the lack of incident management and standardized procedures, forensics
investigators severely lack of any sort of readiness to deal with a cyber-crime scene and retrieve forensics
evidences. This makes it more difﬁcult to detect and trace back any digital evidence.

4.3 Legal Challenges

After encountering technical and operational challenges, another type of challenges requires further attention to deal
with and overcome. This issue is based on legal challenges which includes lack of jurisdiction, lack of legal process,
security issues, insufﬁcient support and privacy concerns [135].

• Lack Of Jurisdiction: Lack of jurisdiction is due to the lack of the ofﬁcial power to make legal decisions and
judgements. This is caused by the tight human right constraints, which presents a serious challenge against
forensics investigators to track down and arrest hackers depending on the type of their committed crimes.
• Lack of Legal Process: Lack of legal process includes the lack of any criminal prosecution by the court to
take the necessary legal decision and judgment over a suspect that was proven to be guilty. Thus, lacking the
knowledge of digital matters, with no ﬁrm laws being applied by courts to prosecute cyber-criminals.

• Security Issues: Security issues are part of the legal challenges, especially with the victims’ concerns towards
trust issues. This also includes the accuracy and timeliness of the forensics investigation . More precisely, it is
based on the level of trust that victims have in the federal services, whilst also providing them with details to
track down and arrest cyber-criminals.

19

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

• Insufﬁcient Support: Insufﬁcient support is another challenge, consisting of the lack of funds, and the lack
of public support. In fact, the lack of trust and support from the public can result into the lack of conﬁdence in
the job performed by the forensics investigators.

• Preserving Users & Victims’ Privacy: the sharp rise of social engineering social-media based attacks is
due to users’ excessive online life sharing aspects on social media. However, due to users’ privacy fears and
concerns from forensics investigators breaching their privacy imposes a challenge, since an event and attack
cannot be easily reconstructed without violating users’ privacy [136].

• Legitimation: still remains a challenge due to the shifting from modern infrastructure to fog computing and
third parties such as platform-as-a-service frameworks. Therefore, this offers a new complex and virtual issues.
As a result, modern digital forensics investigations must be executed legally and without violating laws in the
borderless virtual cyber-world [136].

• Responsibility: due to social media platforms (Twitter, Facebook, etc..) turning a blind eye on fake news,
this ensured their continuous spread which led to various negative effects including violence, hatred, terror
and fear. Moreover, this also led to the rise of phishing and privacy attacks by stealing users’ credentials for
the purpose of blackmailing, forgery, fake identity or privacy breaches. Therefore, social media companies
must allow and help forensics investigators to track down the source of fake news and prevent its spread by
containing it and providing the right helpful information to locate the perpetrators and enhance [136].

4.4

Investigative Challenges

Investigative challenges are usually caused by the lack of qualiﬁed forensics personnel, and the lack of forensics
knowledge when it comes to use forensics tools.

• Interoperability of Forensics Tools: since forensics tools store data in various different format types which
vary between different databases, datasets and data structures types, this still remains a real challenge and
issue [137]. The lack of standardization and uniformity, makes these digital forensics heterogeneous by nature.
Therefore, there’s urgent and persistent need for a uniﬁed data format for the acquired forensics digital data.

• Lack of Qualiﬁed Forensics Personnel: Lack of qualiﬁed digital forensics personnel is a challenge in itself,
especially with the lack of training and experience in the forensics ﬁeld. In fact, this is due to the lack
of education, where many digital forensics investigators operate without obtaining any ofﬁcial forensics
certiﬁcate.

• Lack of Standardized Threshold: The lack of standardized threshold is due to the lack of issued certiﬁcates
for forensics investigators that allows them to be classiﬁed as authorised. Many investigators claim to be
forensics investigators due to the fact that they literally know details, or have an experience in the forensics
domain. Therefore, the lack of a standardized threshold to classify forensics investigators remains a consistent
challenge.

• Lack of Forensics Knowledge: Despite the lack of experience, knowledge and skills, another challenge is
the lack of forensics tools and kits. Moreover, in most cases, forensics investigators are incapable of using
these tools or these forensics kits due to the lack of expertise and skills. This might result into the loss, or
damage of original data beyond recovery.

• Lack of Forensics Investigative Skills: Another challenge is the lack of investigative skills. In fact, these

skills can be classiﬁed into soft investigative and hard investigative skills.

4.5 Mobile & Device Challenges

Smart and mobile devices along with computers, laptops, and tablets are part of the IoT world. Thus, forensics
investigators encounter many challenges when extracting data from these devices [138, 139]. These challenges are
listed in the following:

• Heterogeneous Nature: The heterogeneous nature of mobile, digital and IoT devices, especially with different
hardware and software conﬁgurations and components [140], is challenging for digital forensics investigation.
Therefore, different forensics techniques and tools are needed to investigate and disassemble a given device to
prevent the risk of destroying data.

• Built-in Security Features: Built-in security features are capable of limiting the access to any device. These
features are related to authentication, identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation. Moreover, the use of biometrics imposes
a serious challenge to the forensics investigation process.

20

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

• Lack of Forensics Tools: In fact, there is a lack of forensics tools, kits and equipment that can be used for IoT
devices forensics investigation. Therefore, there is a limited chance of ensuring that data can be retrieved safely
and carefully without risking damage or destruction. In fact, the existing forensics tools are incompatible with
the emerging IoT devices.

• Malicious Applications: Malicious applications are used by cyber-criminals to perform surveillance attacks.
Once these applications are installed, a Trojan or worm will be activated on a given device, capable of ensuring
spyware, ransomware, botnet or even DoS attack. This offers the ability to delete, alter, modify and even
manipulate the device’s data, whilst gaining an unauthorized privileged access.

• CTI Challenges: Due to the existing exploitable vulnerabilities and security gaps in any given system,
cyber-criminals may carry out their cyber-attack through infection and exploitation. In fact, attackers start
using innovative methods to attack and target their victims, by relying on spear-phishing and social/reverse
engineering techniques [141] . Moreover, such attacks can masquerade a given malware into a PDF ﬁle, image
or even a video, that would run on the victim’s machine [142] without his knowledge. Therefore, this would
lead to another form of backdoor [7, 143] to the victim’s system.

• Legal Limitations: Since mobile devices are part of the IoT world, in case of an international crime, different
laws and different security measures can cause conﬂicts among different countries. In fact, it is due to the
absence of a uniform jurisdiction and legal processing systems that can be applied to ensure a better cooperation
and collaboration between different peers.

• Devices Components: Device components can be divided into:

– Software components: are related to the use of different OSs and software (e.g Apple, Android, etc.
on smartphones, Windows, Linux etc. on computers). Each OS operates differently, which presents a
challenge for forensics investigators, since this requires different investigation approaches.

– Hardware components: including the storage of data on volatile memories including RAMs, or on
magnetic storage. Thus, the smaller the physical size of a given storage area, the harder for forensics
investigators to investigate it without risking damaging it.

• Wireless Communications: It is also important to note that wireless communications impose a serious
challenge to the forensics investigators, especially when dealing with well-trained and well-experienced
hackers (cyber-(industrial)-espionage, advanced persistent threats) that cover their tracks aside the use proxies,
VPNs and TOR [144, 145, 146] to hide their committed moves. This eliminates and reduces possible evidences
to avoid being detected and tracked down by forensics investigators.

• Devices Types: Another challenge arose, especially with the huge number of counterfeit devices including
laptops, PCs, smartphones and tablets being spread across the market. This is due to their cheap prices and
their lack of security measures. This made it extremely easier for an attacker to use them to bait his victims to
install fake applications, or use them to hide data and information. In many cases, these fake devices can serve
as bots (zombies) and lead an anonymous attack on the attacker’s behalf. This also includes their usage to
easily logically destroy the data through the use of anti-forensics tools, or through physical destruction. Unlike
original devices, it is harder for forensics investigators to track a genuine device compared to a counterfeit
device.

4.6 Big Data Challenges

Although the big data challenge was brieﬂy mentioned before, it is important to explain it in more details to highlight its
importance (see Figure 10). Dealing with big data issues and challenges [147, 8, 148], requires extra efforts to achieve
the intended results and hunt down cyber-criminals. In [149], Adebayo classiﬁed these challenges depending on the
data’s variability, velocity and volume. In fact, other challenges related to the accuracy and heterogeneity, validity, and
trustworthiness are discussed in the following:

• Lack Of Accuracy: Due to the big data size, an accuracy issue related to the nature, source and value of the
retrieved evidence(s) arose. In most cases, big data offers zero or poor evidence. This is the reason why it
presents a real problem for forensics investigators by wasting their time searching for any useful information.

• Heterogeneous Data: data collected from different sources can either be structured, semi-structured, or
non-structured. This presents a serious problem that can tackle down the forensics investigation. In case the
data was non-structured, there’s no format to support it properly, resulting into a waste of time and resources.

• Data Inconsistency: is related to the volume, velocity and variety of big data [149]. This presents an extra
burden since cyber-criminals rely on a high volume of big data which is in most case irrelevant and inconsistent.

21

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

Figure 10: Forensics Challenges

Moreover, the nature of the retrieved data depends on whether it is structured or not-structured. This requires
an additional time and resources to reconstruct the data and analyse it.

• Data Validation: Another challenge is related to the data validity, especially if dealing with metadata that
serves for a short amount of time. In this case, the challenge is to see how long the data can survive, especially
on volatile memories such as RAM.

• Data Trust: Data hiding, manipulation, and alteration, make it difﬁcult for forensics investigators to prove
that the retrieved evidence is legitimate. This is due to the possibility that the collected data is modiﬁed or
even altered. Therefore, it is challenging to prove the legitimacy of the retrieved evidence to be justiﬁable,
legal and usable in courts.

• Data Speed: Data velocity or data speed is related to the speed of which the data is processed at [149]. In
other terms, it is the speed of generating or moving data around. In fact, big data velocity requires the need for
data acquisition and analysis at a higher scale to maximize the data value.

• Data Volume: can be deﬁned as the amount of data generated, especially when dealing with big data, where a
huge amount of data is generated. Consequently, this requires ensuring the scalability of data storage, along
with the need for a distributed data processing approach. This presents a serious challenge for digital forensics
investigators, especially if the data was hidden in networks, clouds and memories, or even encrypted.

4.7 Educational Challenges:

Education also plays a key-role as the initial source of most of the occurring challenge, due to lack of training,
experience, funding and available personnel. Potential forensics investigators must undergo excessive forensics studies,
courses and training, while also being familiar with various forensics tools and aware of the most frequent anti-forensics
activities. As a result, educational challenges are presented as follows:

• Funding: the lack of or little funding by government, organisations and enterprises renders the forensics
domain very limited in terms of capability-wise and performance-wise. Hence, it still remains as a challenge
[150]. Therefore, more funding is needed towards researching and developing digital forensics ﬁelds to
improve the collaboration among various forensics investigators and colleagues.

22

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

• Mindsets: the mindsets of many individuals including numerous, universities, organisations and governments
still believe that the digital forensics domain is still not effective. It is clear that there’s a huge funding,
knowledge, and experience gaps in this ﬁeld, with many attacks remaining untraceable and anonymous.
Therefore, most military, law enforcement, police and governments mindsets are now shifting towards
enhancing their forensics skills especially in the rise of cyber-terrorism [151], cyber-warfare [152, 153],
cyber-espionage [154] and cyber-politics [155] era.

• Liaison & Communication Support: the lack of support among communities is caused (aside funding) by
the lack of proper discussion, communication and liaison. This results into conﬂict caused by a total lack of
information or misinformation being shared. As a result, more collaboration and encouragement between
communities (mainly universities and institutions) is required to share and enhance their forensics data sets for
a better investigative outcome.

• Institutions Support: the lack of institutions’ support including universities is primary related to the high cost
of available education, tools, license and lack of skills to use them. Therefore, more fund, focus and education
must be invested in this forensics ﬁeld which may include national/international competitions, collaborations,
opportunities and exchange of students [150], such as the "GenCyber" program [156].

• Standards Development: the lack of communication and collaboration between different national and
international forensics universities, facilities and organisations led to the creation of various software and
hardware forensics tools that perform the same task of artifacts collection, categorisation and analysis.
Therefore, proving to be a loss of time and resources alike. Hence, research communities need to work and
agree on a uniﬁed set of standards and formats and abstractions [136] to avoid redundancy and collusion issues,
with a focus on the timeliness of these standards, along their accuracy and effectiveness.

5 Anti-Forensics

Cyber-criminals are now excessively using new sophisticated methods to perform their attacks. These methods are
based on covering their tracks to avoid detection. This is achieved by using anti-forensics techniques and tools to alter
and delete log and audit ﬁles [141]. As a result, Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) [157], along with
Static Malware Trafﬁc Analysis (SMTA) [158] are not enough to mitigate this issue. Thus, anti-forensics presents a
seriously threatening challenge for the IoT domain that heavily relies on cloud computing services to store and process
big-data. Additionally, their use would drastically hinder the progress of forensics investigators by preventing them
from carrying out their investigations. Hence, it is essential to overcome the existing challenges and limitations that
Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) domains suffer from [159]. Anti forensics are also known as counter-forensics [160].
Their task is to disrupt a given forensics investigation. Hence, different anti-forensics techniques, tools and approaches
are being employed to evade detection and avoid being caught. This section presents and discusses them in details to
help identify them and protect digital evidence(s) through mitigation and implementation of the right security measures.

5.1 Anti-Forensics Aspects

Anti-forensics are used to remove, alter, disrupt or illegally interfere with the evidences found on digital devices in a
digital/physical crime scene. Different anti-forensics aspects were discussed in [161]. This included the reliance on the
Metasploit anti-forensics project [162], which is an open source project used to provide pen testing, Intrusion Detection
Systems (IDS), information system exploit, and other services. Moreover, the Metasploit Anti-forensics Investigation
Arsenal (MAFIA) has been used to improve the digital forensics processes, while also validating the forensics tools.
MAFIA included the following components:

• Transmogrify: aims to overcome the EnCase’s ﬁle signature detection. It is done by masquerading a ﬁle into

another ﬁle type.

• Timestamp: as a program, it is capable of altering New Technology File System (NTFS) timestamp values.
This is done through the MAC ﬁle entry modiﬁcation, and entry update. These tools help confuse forensics
investigators and further complicate their forensics investigation [163].

• Sam Juicer: is a program that compromises the hashes of a given security access manager ﬁle. In fact, Sam
Juicer runs over a memory/Image Local Security Authority Subsystem Service (LSASS) channel to store
password hashes on a Windows system without leaving any trace or signature on the disk. Thus, avoiding the
risk of being detected.

23

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

• Slacker: is a program that allows cyber-criminals to hide their data within a slack space found in the memory.
This slack space is created when the ﬁle system (e.g. NTFS) allocates more space for a ﬁle, where the unused
space is called a slack space. Therefore, this space forms a perfect place for data hiding [163].

5.2 Anti-Forensics Techniques

As a result of the constantly increasing use of anti-forensics techniques, different anti-forensics approaches were
presented to show how easy it is to target and tackle down a given investigation. In [164], Peron et al. discussed the
attacker aims when using anti-forensics techniques and focused on how the attacker is capable of hiding, destroying,
manipulating and/or even preventing the creation of any given evidence. In [165, 161] Wundram et al. and Kessler et al.
presented four main categories of anti-forensics approaches to provide artefact wiping, data hiding, trail obfuscation
and other attacks against the computer forensics tools and the forensics investigation process. In [166], Harris et al.
presented a new method of data transformation which either hides, destroys, eliminates or counterfeits the evidence
and its source. In [167], Garﬁnkel combines the attack targets and goals to present the already existing tools. In [165],
Wundram et al. presented the integration and harmonization of existing classiﬁcation schemes into a single taxonomy
with two dimensions respectively. The ﬁrst dimension refers to the goal of the attacker who aims to avoid or delay the
investigation. The second dimension refers to the target of the attacker which can be one of the following: the evidence,
the forensics tool, or the investigator. In [168], Stamm et al. presented a temporal forensics approach for a motion
compensated video known as the "Game Theoretic Framework". The purpose was to identify the optimal set of actions
for forensics investigators and forgers alike. Their simulation results revealed that any false-alarm constraint is less or
equal to 10%. Moreover, forensics investigators have a 50% chance of detecting a video forgery, and in case the false
alarm constraint was higher than 15%, the detection rate of video forgeries was equal to or higher than 85%. In [169],
Baier et al. presented an approach called Anti-Forensics of storage devices by alternative Use of Communication
channels (AFAUC), which relies on reverse engineering of the ﬁrmware commands to access a storage medium through
the communication channel. In fact, the approach can be achieved without expensive toolkits, with a lower risk of
detection. In [168], Stamm et al. presented an approach based on the use of a game theoretic framework to identify the
optimal set of actions for both the forensics investigator and the forger model. This helped them design an anti-forensics
technique with the ability to remove any frame ﬁngerprint by deletion or addition. Moreover, the authors showed that
their presented anti-forensics technique can fool forensics techniques if applied at full strength.
In [170], Shirani et al. aim at hiding the intrusion attempt. In [164], Peron et al. aimed to limit the collection,
identiﬁcation, and validation of electronic data. Garﬁnkel [167] and Rogers [171] aimed to defeat any forensics analysis
by limiting the quantity and quality of forensics evidence. In [172], Foster and Liu managed to evade and avoid detection
by leading anti-forensics attacks. In [173], Dahbur et al. presented the use of scientiﬁc methods to confuse the forensics
investigation in all its stages. In [174], Albano et al. presented different methods to thwart a given digital investigation
process. In [175], Sremack and Antonov presented a taxonomy to thwart a forensics investigation. In [176], Stamm et
al. managed to disguise and manipulate, and falsify the devices speciﬁc ﬁngerprints once a digital ﬁle is formed.

Anti-Digital Forensics (ADF) consists of identifying any activity aiming to hide an attack’s trace(s) [177]. ADF is used
by forensics investigators, forensics researchers, and ﬁrst responders. Their main anti-forensics techniques [161] are
summarized in Figure 11, and are classiﬁed as follows:

• Hiding Data: Encryption and steganography [178, 179] are mainly used to hide any evidence and cover
criminals tracks to extremely complicate a forensics investigation. This includes encrypting data, encrypting
disks, hiding data in the network trafﬁc or even in the memory, etc.

• Encrypting Data: Encrypting data is the straightforward way to hide data from being easily disclosed.
Encryption also prevents any unauthorised access to the stored data. Cyber-criminals use the encryption to
make it harder to investigate and extract data. Therefore, leading to a total waste of time and resources to
decrypt long keys that encrypt false data.

• Secure-Deletion: Secure-Deletion consists of removing the targeted data completely and permanently from
the source system by overwriting it with random data. This ensures that the data will not be recoverable
anymore. However, most commercial secure-deletion tools do not ensure a full deletion of data, as some parts
of it might still be recovered [180].

• Hashing: is used by criminals to evade detection by preventing the validation of data’s integrity. In this regard,
various techniques were used including, fuzzy hashing [181], hash collision, MD5 [182] and SHA-1 [183].The
hash’s generated output is unique and can be used as a biometric print for a given input ﬁle. Therefore, in case
of a minor change in the original ﬁle, the hash value is completely different. Resulting into the recovery of the
original input ﬁle to become almost impossible.

• Encrypting Disks: Different tools were developed to encrypt the full hard-drive’s volume. Thus, cyber-
criminals employ disk encryption to protect any data that may serve as evidence against them. This can be

24

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

Figure 11: Anti-Forensics Techniques

done by converting it into an unreadable non-comprehensive form, or unsupported format. Making it difﬁcult
for digital forensics investigators to decipher it. Moreover, disk encryption relies on encrypting software or/and
hardware to encrypt every bit of data that exists on the hard disk [184].

• Encrypting Databases: Due to the constant increase use of databases [185], database encryption became
another popular form of data hiding. This encryption also targets single users and multi-users’ ﬁles/ folders.
Database encryption [186] is based on the process of converting data into a meaningless cipher text, including
applications, emails, mobile devices, and cloud services.

• Hardware Memory Encryption: the development towards this type of memory encryption helps criminals
avoid access hierarchies of a traditional memory. This will render any known memory acquisition form as
infeasible [111].

• Steganography: Cyber-criminals use steganography to hide data into digital multimedia elements. These
elements include image, video, audio, and text ﬁles [187, 188]. This also includes system ﬁles, as presented
by Peron et al. in [164]. Steganography can be overcome by relying on steganalysis methods and attacks
[189, 190, 191].

• Data Contraception: This method was introduced by Conlan et al. [192], as a new way for hiding data. In
fact, it is classiﬁed as an anti-forensics activity that leaves either little or no traceable digital evidence(s) to
prevent its retrieval. In fact, data contraception can deliberate ﬁle-systems and manipulate hard-disks in use by
hiding any item on a given system or network.

• Zero-Footprinting: or disk cleaner is a new emerging anti-forensics tool [193] which is used to clean disk
areas or completely destroy the disk’s original content(s). Thus, making the attack completely undetectable.
Zero-footprinting shows its usefulness for legitimate or/and illegitimate purposes, due to its ability to un-link
ﬁles and overwrite them with gibberish data.

• Timestamp Modiﬁcation: or timestamp extraction is a critical task that requires an establishment of a
forensics chain-of-events investigation. However, hackers and cyber-criminals managed to modify timestamps
of ﬁles and logs to mislead investigators. For additional details, different timestamp modiﬁcation tools are
already mentioned in [194].

• File Signature Manipulation: A ﬁle signature exists at the beginning of each ﬁle to identify a given ﬁle
type. Hackers usually use anti-forensics tools to purposely change and manipulate a ﬁle signature to mislead
forensics investigators [131].

25

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

• Hiding Network: Networks were also used by the attackers to hide data. The aim of hiding data into networks
is to ensure that no traces are left behind the attackers. Thus, resulting into crippling the forensics investigation,
especially due to the use of VPNs, proxies or TOR.

• Artefact Wiping: Artefact Wiping [195] consists of the destruction of useful data that serves as a possible
evidence [166]. Through the analysis of artefact wiping, many software tools exist and can be used to wipe
different forms of data and metadata. This includes ﬁles, disks, logs, audits and registers. In fact, various types
of tools were built by combining different data wiping forms.

• Trail obfuscation: is a deliberate activity to purposely disorient and divert a forensics investigation. It is
based on the same principles of steganography, or false data injection [196]. Trail obfuscation employs the
Peer-to-Peer (P2P) protocols to perform cyber-criminal activities. This helps cyber-criminals to mitigate their
cyber biometric “ﬁngerprints” to hide the evidences and cover up their tracks.

• Virtual System Execution: The execution of a malicious code or script can be either led from external or
even remote disk storage without leaving any trace(s) on the device. Moreover, in [196], Botas et al. presented
different virtualization mechanisms including USB boot devices and network boot devices.

• Content Compression: Saturation or content compression is aimed at infecting systems with unstable
contents. This leads to added latency and delays, which have a high negative impact on the forensics
investigation process. Content compression can be divided into two types: Compression Bombs or zip
bombs [196], are designed to largely expand once decompressed, and Regular Compression used to exploit
regular compression implementations [197].

• Data Pooling: By data pooling, attackers intend to keep their digital media including USB keys, CDs/DVDs,
smartphones, laptops, PCs and hard drives active. By doing so, investigators are lured to search all the collected
data. As a result, such a search can take from months to years, and may violate the suspect’s or victim’s
privacy, which would result into legal conﬂicts [198]. Therefore, leading to a higher investigative cost, and
longer investigation time.

• Loop References: are identiﬁed as default ﬁle paths lengths, which are restricted to 260 characters due to
the Windows Application Programming Interface (API) on New Technology File System (NTFS). However,
various ways to initiate longer paths exist. The most popular way is based on the use of Long Path Tool
(LPT) [5]. Other ways also exist, including the use of loop references where symbolic links can point to
a parent folder. Thus, creating a recursive path, where malicious users can safely store their data in these
recursive nested ﬁles.

• Dummy Hard Disk: Hackers and cyber-criminals use this method by keeping an unusable PC with a hard
disk. This allows the PC to be booted from a USB where the OS is stored, without using the hard disk itself.
Therefore, data will be stored on cloud services. Hackers might also try and simulate random writes on hard
disks, to trick investigators into thinking that a given hard disk has been recently used [199]. Therefore, this
would result into a waste of time and resources.

• Anti-Forensics Malware: which were also used to perform an anti-forensics activity by wiping out all
relevant data that serve as a vital evidence to track down its source, structure and characteristics. Among
these malware types we name Stuxnet 1-2, Duqu, Duqu 2.0, Flame, Red October, Shamoon, Gauss, and
Mahdi malware types [200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205], used for cyber-warfare [206], cyber-terrorism [207],
cyber-politics (hacktivism) [208, 209] and cyber-(industrial)-espionage [210] purposes.

6 Anti-Anti-Forensics

Categorizing anti-anti-digital forensics includes the classiﬁcation, identiﬁcation, characterization , and the differentiation
between digital forensics and anti-forensics techniques and tools [166]. In [164], the effectiveness level of anti-anti-
forensics tools against the use of the old fashion traditional anti-forensics tools was evaluated. As a result, different
anti-anti-forensics approaches were presented.

6.1 Anti-Forensics Prevention Techniques

Anti-forensics preventing techniques were presented to counter the anti-forensics activities whilst also preserving
the privacy of both individuals and evidences. One key challenge in digital forensics is to protect the privacy of the
digital evidences [211, 212] during a forensics investigation [213, 214]. Thus, several forensics solutions have been
developed to preserve the privacy of the evidences, including digital ﬁles, emails or even documents. In [215], Goh et

26

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

al. presented a secure indexing scheme used to search for encrypted data and support advanced query searches [216].
This also included the Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC) and Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) stream
cipher operations to ensure a high level of accuracy and efﬁciency, while guaranteeing the admissibility of electronic
evidence and the privacy of each individual. In [217], P. Stahlberg et al. investigated the privacy threats that may
possibly surround the database investigation and proposed a system transparency criteria set. This system set is used to
control the results of different queries, except for database searching and retrieval. In [218], S.Bottcher et al. presented
a detective database forensics approach to be capable of detecting any privacy leakage. This was done through the
identiﬁcation of each party accessing the leaked information. In [219], Reddy et al. presented a theoretical forensics
readiness framework, which can be used exclusively for enterprises and organisations. This framework suggested a
speciﬁc organisational structure used to minimize the risk of possibly leaking private information in a given digital
investigation case. In [220], Guo et al. deﬁned general policies and procedures for network forensics investigations.
In [221], Pangalos et al. provide a description of the forensics readiness role when it comes to optimizing the level of
security and privacy of each organisation. In [222], N.J. Croft et al. presented a sequential private data release model
which is based on the prior knowledge and proof of a given hypothesis used for forensics investigations. This resulted
into placing the less important data in less sensitive layers, allowing sensitive and important data to be made available
only in case of the knowledge of lower-level layers. This process was proven and demonstrated by the forensics
investigators. In [214], Law et al. presented several cryptographic models which can be employed into the already
existing digital forensics processes to ensure a higher level of data protection. In [223], S. Pearson developed a privacy
model and language which can be incorporated within a given company. This helps ensuring auditing and assurance of
the employed mechanisms. In [224], Pooe et al. studied a forensics policy speciﬁcation to ensure a higher forensics
readiness. In [225], S.Hou et al. investigated the legal and practical privacy issues in a given forensics investigation and
successfully presented a practical solution based on using homomorphic and communicative encryption techniques to
limit the disclosure of data during a given forensics investigation. However, their solution lacked the ability to identify
malicious data from non-malicious data [226]. In [227], Gupta presented a a framework called “Privacy Preserving
Efﬁcient Digital Forensics” (PPEDF) to ensure an automated investigation through the reduction of the amount of data
being analyzed. In fact, PPEDF is compatible with the Encase Version 7.0, with a 100% accuracy when extracting
evidence ﬁles. In [228], Hou et al. presented another solution based on the use of the (t,n) sharing scheme as a data
encryption method, to ensure the integrity and authenticity through the appliance of homomorphic property of the
(t,n) sharing scheme. In [229], Arrnknecht et al. presented another privacy preserving mechanism for email data. This
method is based on the combination of secret sharing and encryption algorithms. In fact, it is based on two main
schemes including protection and extraction. This ensures that the encrypted data will only be decrypted upon its
need. In [230], Aﬁfah et al. revealed and alternative implementation of data protection presented by Armknecht and
Dewald. It was focused on preserving the privacy of disk image instead of email data. In [231], Nieto et al. presented
a solution named Digital Witness, which is a personal device that identiﬁes, collects, safeguards and communicates
digital evidences [232] as a member of Digital Chains of Custody in Internet of Things (DCoC-IoT) [233]. This
was meant to support eleven privacy principles included in several PRoFIT (Model The Privacy-aware IoT-Forensics)
presented in [234]. Thus, ensuring a better cooperation between citizens and digital forensics investigations.

6.2 Anti-Forensics Detection Techniques

Anti-Anti-Forensics is a newly evolving technology that protects forensics against any anti-forensics attempt(s). Hence,
it is essential to maintain the right anti-forensics countermeasures to ensure a high detection rate of any anti-forensics
activity or attack.

The ﬁle installation for cryptographic software indicated that the data could be possibly encrypted on a system which
could lead to the occurrence of a possible anti-digital forensics activity. Therefore in [192], Conlan et al. compared a
hash data set against NIST hashes, where unmatched hashes were possibly a sign of the existence of anti-forensics
ﬁles or/and tools. This indicated the possibility of the employment of anti-digital forensics tools to erase any evidence
beyond recovery to cover all tracks. Disk-avoiding using anti-forensics tools was addressed by the Garﬁnkel in [167].
The presented solution is built on existing anti-forensics detection methods. In [235], Blunden examined the already
existing approaches that might be used by a forensics investigator against the malicious yet persistent use of rootkits,
whilst identifying the anti-forensics possibilities that a rootkit might use or even employ.
To mitigate the use of anti-forensics activities, an enhanced protected forensics version is needed. Hence, the shifting is
heading towards an enhanced Anti-Anti-Forensics version [199]. In [192], a theoretical approach was presented by
Conlan et al. to detect the use of anti-digital forensics tools, and reporting them to digital investigators. This enhanced
and improved the digital forensics investigation to overcome an anti-forensics attack [236]. In [237, 238], Geiger
presented an approach that consists of the analysis of ﬁve anti-forensics tools including: “Secure-Clean”, “Evidence
Eliminator”, “Window Washer”, “Cyber-Scrub Professional”, and “Acronis Privacy Expert”. This was done by using a
Forensics Tool Kit (FTK). The approach revealed that an incomplete wiping of unallocated space allowed the recovery

27

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

of the right data containing the necessary evidences. In [239], Fairbanks et al. introduced a forensics tool, that can
extract and analyse the forensics data to allow the detection of anti-forensics attempts, whilst also capturing unavailable
forensics information. This facilitated a system’s recovery, and enhanced the digital forensics investigation.
Despite the challenges and limitations that forensics domains suffer from, machine learning came as a new early smart
detection method to sort the limitations of previous forensics and counter anti-forensics methods. As a result, a new
machine-learning counter anti-forensics-based branch was presented in [240, 241, 242, 243] to detect any anti-forensics
activity. In [141] Conti et al. revealed the importance of implementing and applying Artiﬁcial Intelligence-Machine
Learning (AI-ML) techniques in the cyber-security domain. In [59]. Mukammala et al. presented a study based on
the use of artiﬁcial intelligent techniques (Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs) and Support Vector Machines (SVMs))
for ofﬂine intrusion analysis to maintain the integrity and conﬁdentiality of the information infrastructure. Based on
their study, SVM outperformed ANN in terms of scalability and prediction accuracy, while both methods produce
largely consistent results. In [244], Yeow et al. designed and developed an Intelligent Forensic Autopsy (of war victims)
Report System (I-AuReSys) based on the Case-Based Reasoning (CBR) method, which is used to analyse forensic
evidence. I-AuReSys is used to extract features by using an information extraction (IE) technique from the already
existing autopsy reports, before analysing any case similarities by coupling CBR technique with a Naïve Bayes learner
for feature-weights learning. Experimental results class as a practical viable alternative forensics method. In [245],
Weber et al. presented graph convolutional networks for ﬁnancial forensics as prototype and experimented them to
overcome Anti-Money Laundering (AML) in bitcoin cryptocurrency. The authors contributed to the Elliptic Data
Set using series graph of Bitcoin transactions (nodes), directed payment ﬂows (edges), and node features, including
ones based on non-public data. Results revealed the superiority of Random Forest (RF) algorithm. In [246], Wang et
al. presented a novel TKRD method named Trusted Kernel Rootkit Detection for cyber-security of Virtual Machines
(VM). TKRD is based on machine learning and memory forensic analysis and is used to detect kernel rootkits in VMs
from private cloud. Experimental results revealed that the RF classiﬁer has the best unknown kernel rootkits detection
performance. In [247], Axenopoulos et al. presented a new framework which is implemented in the context of the
European Union-funded project LASIE. This framework is applied for large-scale exploitation of forensic data acquired
from different sources and in multiple formats, whilst several video analytics tools that performed automated object
(human, face, vehicle, logo) detection and tracking, video event detection and summarization. Detection and tracking
events are also robust in low-resolution, low color quality, motion blur, and lighting variations. An evidence search
engine was also presented to offer various ways of retrieving relevant evidence. This framework was tested using real
content (CCTV footage) provided by the London Metropolitan Police (MET), and have shown promising results. In
[248], Sun et al. presented a novel Convolutional Neural Network-based (CNN-based) Contrast Enhancement (CE)
forensics method, using the the Gray-Level Co-occurrence Matrix (GLCM) which contains traceable CE forensics
features. Experimental results revealed that this method outperforms conventional forensics methods in terms of
forgery-detection accuracy, robustness and performance, especially when dealing with counter-forensic attacks. In
[249], Yang et al. presented two effectively robust CE forensics algorithms based on deep learning. Their method
achieves a better end-to-end classiﬁcation based on pixel and histogram domain. Experimental results revealed that
this method achieves a better detection performance than the other state-of-the-art algorithms, as well as it being
robust against Pre-JPEG compression and anti-forensics attacks. In [250], Shan et al. presented a JPEG-robust CE
forensic method based on a modiﬁed CNN, adding a GLCM layer and cropping layer ahead of a tailor-made CNN.
Extensive experimental results revealed that this method achieves signiﬁcant improvements in terms of both global and
local CE detection. In [251], Yu et al. presented a multi-purpose CNN-based method to detect various anti-forensics
activities, including the automatic features extraction and identiﬁcation of the forged types. This model can effectively
detect various image anti-forensics in binary and multi-class decision. Experimental results revealed that their methods
achieves a better performance than other counter-anti-forensics methods in anti-forensics detection. In [252], Chen et al.
presented a new CNN approach for multi-purpose image detection and manipulations under anti-forensics activities, and
using a dense connectivity pattern for a better parameter efﬁciency. Experimental results revealed a better performance
in terms of accuracy detection of anti-forensics attacks, as well as enhanced robustness against JPEG compression. In
[253], Li et al. presented a 3D Convolutional Neural Network architecture tailored for the spatial-temporal input to
tackle the face spooﬁng detection problem. Experimental results revealed that this method can learn discriminative and
generalized information compared to with other deep learning based biometric spooﬁng detection methods.

In the next section, the main recommendations will be presented to ensure a much more suitable forensics solution to
adhere and overcome various forensics challenges and issues especially in terms of security and privacy-wise.

7 Suggestions & Recommendations

28

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

Due to the increase number of data volume, size, structure and velocity, this paper suggests and recommends the
following solutions:

• Counter Anti-Forensics: further work needs to be done in terms of ensuring a higher accuracy and detection
rates based on employing further machine-learning-based approaches, whilst also employing different privacy
preserving solutions to prevent any evidence alteration caused by anti-forensics activities.

• Enhancing the investigators skills: investigators must be legally certiﬁed by undergoing further training
to specialise in the cyber-security and digital forensics ﬁelds. As well as be more familiar with how to use
forensics/counter anti-forensics techniques and tools, to enhance their investigation and investigative skills.
This will make it less complex and less time consuming [254].

• Forensics Training/Testing Ground: is required and more funding is needed especially for the newly
emerging forensics tools. This would help ensure their accuracy, advantages, limitations and issues through
forensics testing. Moreover, forensics and digital forensics examination and educational grounds (low
level/high level courses) need to be reconsidered and re-evaluated to adhere to the modern constant growth in
this domain.

• Raising Forensics Awareness: can be enhanced through constant workshops, and forensics-based events, as

well as weekly, monthly or yearly meetings and international conferences.

• Constant Alertness & Awareness: is required in order to monitor and shadow the newly or/and constantly
emerging topics, where forensics can play a key role to locate, identify, retrieve and protect evidences. This
can be done by expanding the range of forensics ﬁelds to cover every digital, real-life and IoT aspects.

8 Conclusion

The integration of forensics into the digital ﬁeld and the IoT world led to its global spread and worldwide use to sort
digital, cyber and IoT-related crimes. However, in recent years, there was a very remarkable rise in the number of
anti-forensics activities to hide evidences and alter/delete them beyond recovery. In this paper, a new modern forensics
analytical view is presented. An initial forensics background was presented to include the forensics investigation
process, chain-of-custody and the structure of cyber crimes, while also classifying digital data and digital investigators
types. Then, digital forensics sub-domains were discussed along their different investigative forensics tools, techniques,
and approaches. Cyber-forensics challenges were also mentioned and detailed. Anti-forensics aspects and techniques
were also highlighted, whilst counter anti-forensics detection and prevention techniques were discussed using machine
learning techniques to enhance the detection rate and accuracy, whilst using privacy preserving techniques to prevent
any evidence alteration, deletion or/and modiﬁcation.
As part of future work, further research will be performed on the newly introduced counter anti-forensics or anti-anti-
forensics topic especially in terms of enhancement in both detection, prevention, and privacy preserving aspects.

Acknowledgement

This paper was partially supported by funds from the Maroun Semaan Faculty of Engineering and Architecture at the
American University of Beirut.

References

[1] Yanping Zhang, Yang Xiao, Kaveh Ghaboosi, Jingyuan Zhang, and Hongmei Deng. A survey of cyber crimes.

Security and Communication Networks, 5(4):422–437, 2012.

[2] Mohammad Wazid, Avita Katal, RH Goudar, and Sreenivas Rao. Hacktivism trends, digital forensic tools and
challenges: A survey. In Information & Communication Technologies (ICT), 2013 IEEE Conference on, pages
138–144. IEEE, 2013.

[3] Emmanuel S Pilli, Ramesh C Joshi, and Rajdeep Niyogi. Network forensic frameworks: Survey and research

challenges. digital investigation, 7(1-2):14–27, 2010.

[4] Marcus K Rogers and Kate Seigfried. The future of computer forensics: a needs analysis survey. Computers &

Security, 23(1):12–16, 2004.

29

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

[5] Murat Gül and Emin Kugu. A survey on anti-forensics techniques. In Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Data Processing

Symposium (IDAP), 2017 International, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2017.

[6] Lei Zhang, Shui Yu, Di Wu, and Paul Watters. A survey on latest botnet attack and defense. In Trust, Security
and Privacy in Computing and Communications (TrustCom), 2011 IEEE 10th International Conference on,
pages 53–60. IEEE, 2011.

[7] Adrienne Porter Felt, Matthew Finifter, Erika Chin, Steve Hanna, and David Wagner. A survey of mobile
malware in the wild. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM workshop on Security and privacy in smartphones and
mobile devices, pages 3–14. ACM, 2011.

[8] Min Chen, Shiwen Mao, and Yunhao Liu. Big data: A survey. Mobile networks and applications, 19(2):171–209,

2014.

[9] Waleed Halboob, Ramlan Mahmod, Nur Izura Udzir, and Mohd Tauﬁk Abdullah. Privacy levels for computer
forensics: Toward a more efﬁcient privacy-preserving investigation. Procedia Computer Science, 56:370–375,
2015.

[10] Shaheen Shariff. Cyber-bullying: Issues and solutions for the school, the classroom and the home. Routledge,

2008.

[11] David Finkelhor and Richard Ormrod. Child pornography: Patterns from nibrs. Juvenile justice bulletin, 2004.

[12] Lakitta D Johnson, Alfonso Haralson, Sierra Batts, Ebonie Brown, Cedric Collins, Adrian Van Buren-Travis, and
Melissa Spencer. Cyberbullying on social media among college students. Vistas Online, pages 1–8, 2016.

[13] Peter K Smith, Jess Mahdavi, Manuel Carvalho, Sonja Fisher, Shanette Russell, and Neil Tippett. Cyberbullying:
Its nature and impact in secondary school pupils. Journal of child psychology and psychiatry, 49(4):376–385,
2008.

[14] Richard Donegan. Bullying and cyberbullying: History, statistics, law, prevention and analysis. The Elon Journal

of Undergraduate Research in Communications, 3(1):33–42, 2012.

[15] Rosemary Stockdale and Craig Standing. Beneﬁts and barriers of electronic marketplace participation: an sme

perspective. Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 17(4):301–311, 2004.

[16] Katharina Krombholz, Heidelinde Hobel, Markus Huber, and Edgar Weippl. Advanced social engineering

attacks. Journal of Information Security and applications, 22:113–122, 2015.

[17] JongHyup Lee, Thanassis Avgerinos, and David Brumley. Tie: Principled reverse engineering of types in binary

programs. In NDSS, 2011.

[18] Mohamad Badra, Samer El-Sawda, and Ibrahim Hajjeh. Phishing attacks and solutions. In Proceedings of the
3rd international conference on Mobile multimedia communications, page 42. ICST (Institute for Computer
Sciences, Social-Informatics and . . . , 2007.

[19] Sergei Shevchenko and Adrian Nish. Cyber heist attribution. BAE SYSTEMS THREAT RESEARCH BLOG, 2016.

[20] Ivica SIMONOVSKI. Financial sector as an open ﬁeld for cyber crime and fundraising of terrorist activities.

Countering Terrorist Activities in Cyberspace, 139:121, 2018.

[21] Australia Attorney General. Commonwealth organised crime strategic framework, 2013.

[22] Mike Perry, Erinn Clark, and Steven Murdoch. The design and implementation of the tor browser. Draft

https://www. torproject. org/projects/torbrowser/design/. The Tor Project, 2013.

[23] Hsinchun Chen, Wingyan Chung, Jialun Qin, Edna Reid, Marc Sageman, and Gabriel Weimann. Uncovering
the dark web: A case study of jihad on the web. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 59(8):1347–1359, 2008.

[24] Andy Greenberg. Hacker lexicon: what is the dark web? Wired.. Accessed on, 12(3):2016, 2014.

[25] Gary Stoneburner, Alice Y Goguen, and Alexis Feringa. Sp 800-30. risk management guide for information

technology systems. 2002.

[26] Christopher Hargreaves and Jonathan Patterson. An automated timeline reconstruction approach for digital

forensic investigations. Digital Investigation, 9:S69–S79, 2012.

[27] Frank J Donner. The age of surveillance: the aims and methods of America’s political intelligence system.

Vintage, 1980.

[28] Mike Maguire. Policing by risks and targets: Some dimensions and implications of intelligence-led crime control.

Policing and Society: An International Journal, 9(4):315–336, 2000.

30

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

[29] Jacqueline E Ross. The place of covert surveillance in democratic societies: a comparative study of the united

states and germany. The American Journal of Comparative Law, 55(3):493–579, 2007.

[30] Carles Fernández, Pau Baiget, F Xavier Roca, and Jordi Gonzàlez. Determining the best suited semantic events

for cognitive surveillance. Expert Systems with Applications, 38(4):4068–4079, 2011.

[31] Paul Bernal. Data gathering, surveillance and human rights: recasting the debate. Journal of Cyber Policy,

1(2):243–264, 2016.

[32] Mathieu Gorge. Lawful interception–key concepts, actors, trends and best practice considerations. Computer

Fraud & Security, 2007(9):10–14, 2007.

[33] Gregory Kipper. Wireless crime and forensic investigation. Auerbach Publications, 2007.

[34] Robin Bryant. Policing digital crime: the international and organisational context. In Policing Digital Crime,

pages 129–140. Routledge, 2016.

[35] Giuliano Giova. Improving chain of custody in forensic investigation of electronic digital systems. International

Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, 11(1):1–9, 2011.

[36] Jason M Daniels. Forensic and anti-forensic techniques for ole2-formatted documents. 2008.

[37] Jorge Benítez Abad et al. Computer forensics: automatización con autopsy. 2018.

[38] Marcus K Rogers, James Goldman, Rick Mislan, Timothy Wedge, and Steve Debrota. Computer forensics ﬁeld

triage process model. Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, 1(2):2, 2006.

[39] Yashwanth Reddy Kambalapalli. Different forensic tools on a single ssd and hdd, their differences and drawbacks.

2018.

[40] Eoghan Casey. Digital evidence and computer crime: Forensic science, computers, and the internet. Academic

press, 2011.

[41] Andrew Zammit Tabona. Top 20 free digital forensic investigation tools for sysadmins. TeckTalk Powered by

GFI Software, 2017, 2002.

[42] David Bennett. The challenges facing computer forensics investigators in obtaining information from mobile
devices for use in criminal investigations. Information Security Journal: A Global Perspective, 21(3):159–168,
2012.

[43] Douglas Schweitzer. Incident response: computer forensics toolkit. Wiley New York, 2003.

[44] Alec Yasinsac, Robert F Erbacher, Donald G Marks, Mark M Pollitt, and Peter M Sommer. Computer forensics

education. IEEE Security & Privacy, 99(4):15–23, 2003.

[45] HA Boyes, P Norris, I Bryant, and T Watson. Trustworthy software: lessons fromgoto fail’& heartbleed bugs.

2014.

[46] Noble Kumari and AK Mohapatra. An insight into digital forensics branches and tools. In Computational
Techniques in Information and Communication Technologies (ICCTICT), 2016 International Conference on,
pages 243–250. IEEE, 2016.

[47] Nicole Lang Beebe and Jan Guynes Clark. A hierarchical, objectives-based framework for the digital investiga-

tions process. Digital Investigation, 2(2):147–167, 2005.

[48] Andrew Marrington, Ibrahim Baggili, George Mohay, and Andrew Clark. Cat detect (computer activity timeline
detection): A tool for detecting inconsistency in computer activity timelines. digital investigation, 8:S52–S61,
2011.

[49] Shadi Al Awawdeh, Ibrahim Baggili, Andrew Marrington, and Farkhund Iqbal. Cat record (computer activity
timeline record): a uniﬁed agent based approach for real time computer forensic evidence collection.
In
Systematic Approaches to Digital Forensic Engineering (SADFE), 2013 Eighth International Workshop on, pages
1–8. IEEE, 2013.

[50] Jens Olsson and Martin Boldt. Computer forensic timeline visualization tool. digital investigation, 6:S78–S87,

2009.

[51] Demo Proposal Wei. Network forensics analysis with evidence graphs. 2005.

[52] Mohammed Alzaabi, Kamal Taha, and Thomas Anthony Martin. Cisri: a crime investigation system using the
relative importance of information spreaders in networks depicting criminals communications. IEEE Transactions
on Information Forensics and Security, 10(10):2196–2211, 2015.

31

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

[53] Kemal Hajdarevic and Vahidin Dzaltur. An approach to digital evidence collection for successful forensic
application: An investigation of blackmail case. In Information and Communication Technology, Electronics and
Microelectronics (MIPRO), 2015 38th International Convention on, pages 1387–1392. IEEE, 2015.

[54] Anchit Bijalwan, Mohammad Wazid, Emmanuel S Pilli, and Ramesh Chandra Joshi. forensics of random-udp

ﬂooding attacks. Journal of Networks, 10(5):287, 2015.

[55] Nickolaos Koroniotis, Nour Moustafa, and Elena Sitnikova. Forensics and deep learning mechanisms for botnets

in internet of things: A survey of challenges and solutions. IEEE Access, 7:61764–61785, 2019.

[56] Ray Hunt and Sherali Zeadally. Network forensics–an analysis of techniques, tools, and trends. Computer, pages

1–1, 2012.

[57] Sherri Davidoff and Jonathan Ham. Network forensics: tracking hackers through cyberspace, volume 2014.

Prentice hall Upper Saddle River, 2012.

[58] William Yurcik, James Barlow, Kiran Lakkaraju, and Mike Haberman. Two visual computer network security
monitoring tools incorporating operator interface requirements. In In ACM CHI Workshop on Human-Computer
Interaction and Security Systems (HCISEC. Citeseer, 2003.

[59] Srinivas Mukkamala and Andrew H Sung. Identifying signiﬁcant features for network forensic analysis using

artiﬁcial intelligent techniques. International Journal of digital evidence, 1(4):1–17, 2003.

[60] Simson Garﬁnkel. Network forensics: Tapping the internet. IEEE Internet Computing, 6:60–66, 2002.
[61] Simson Garﬁnkel and Gene Spafford. Web security, privacy & commerce. " O’Reilly Media, Inc.", 2002.

[62] Vicka Corey, Charles Peterman, Sybil Shearin, Michael S Greenberg, and James Van Bokkelen. Network

forensics analysis. IEEE Internet Computing, 6(6):60–66, 2002.

[63] Gulshan Shrivastava. Network forensics: Methodical literature review. In Computing for Sustainable Global

Development (INDIACom), 2016 3rd International Conference on, pages 2203–2208. IEEE, 2016.

[64] Keyun Ruan, Joe Carthy, Tahar Kechadi, and Mark Crosbie. Cloud forensics. In IFIP International Conference

on Digital Forensics, pages 35–46. Springer, 2011.

[65] Xath Cruz. The basics of cloud forensics. Cloud Times, 2012.

[66] Konstantinos Vlachopoulos, Emmanouil Magkos, and Vassileios Chrissikopoulos. A model for hybrid evidence

investigation. International Journal of Digital Crime and Forensics (IJDCF), 4(4):47–62, 2012.

[67] Monali P Mohite and SB Ardhapurkar. Design and implementation of a cloud based computer forensic tool.
In Communication Systems and Network Technologies (CSNT), 2015 Fifth International Conference on, pages
1005–1009. IEEE, 2015.

[68] Ronald L Krutz and Russell Dean Vines. Cloud security: A comprehensive guide to secure cloud computing.

Wiley Publishing, 2010.

[69] Josiah Dykstra and Alan T Sherman. Design and implementation of frost: Digital forensic tools for the openstack

cloud computing platform. Digital Investigation, 10:S87–S95, 2013.

[70] Sameena Naaz and Faizan Ahmad Siddiqui. Comparative study of cloud forensics tools. Communications on

Applied Electronics (CAE) ISSN, pages 2394–4714.

[71] James B Wendt, Michael Bendersky, Lluis Garcia-Pueyo, Vanja Josifovski, Balint Miklos, Ivo Krka, Amitabh
Saikia, Jie Yang, Marc-Allen Cartright, and Sujith Ravi. Hierarchical label propagation and discovery for
machine generated email. In Proceedings of the Ninth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data
Mining, pages 317–326. ACM, 2016.

[72] Marie-Helen Maras et al. Computer Forensics. Jones and Bartlett Learning, 2015.
[73] Markus Jakobsson. Modeling and preventing phishing attacks. In Financial Cryptography, volume 5, 2005.
[74] Bimal Parmar. Protecting against spear-phishing. Computer Fraud & Security, 2012(1):8–11, 2012.

[75] Justin Paglierani, Mike Mabey, and Gail-Joon Ahn. Towards comprehensive and collaborative forensics on email
evidence. In Collaborative Computing: Networking, Applications and Worksharing (Collaboratecom), 2013 9th
International Conference Conference on, pages 11–20. IEEE, 2013.

[76] Justin W Paglierani. A Framework for Extended Acquisition and Uniform Representation of Forensic Email

Evidence. Arizona State University, 2013.

[77] Muhammad Yasin and Muhammad Abulaish. Digla–a digsby log analysis tool to identify forensic artifacts.

Digital Investigation, 9(3-4):222–234, 2013.

32

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

[78] Brian Carrier. Open source digital forensics tools: The legal argument. Technical report, stake, 2002.
[79] Salvatore J Stolfo, Shlomo Hershkop, Chia-Wei Hu, Wei-Jen Li, Olivier Nimeskern, and Ke Wang. Behavior-
based modeling and its application to email analysis. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT),
6(2):187–221, 2006.

[80] Vamshee Krishna Devendran, Hossain Shahriar, and Victor Clincy. A comparative study of email forensic tools.

Journal of Information Security, 6(2):111, 2015.

[81] Jeff Lessard and Gary Kessler. Android forensics: Simplifying cell phone examinations. 2010.
[82] Andrew Hoog. Android forensics: investigation, analysis and mobile security for Google Android. Elsevier,

2011.

[83] Yajin Zhou, Zhi Wang, Wu Zhou, and Xuxian Jiang. Hey, you, get off of my market: detecting malicious apps in

ofﬁcial and alternative android markets. In NDSS, volume 25, pages 50–52, 2012.

[84] Francesco Di Cerbo, Andrea Girardello, Florian Michahelles, and Svetlana Voronkova. Detection of malicious
applications on android os. In International Workshop on Computational Forensics, pages 138–149. Springer,
2010.

[85] Juanru Li, Dawu Gu, and Yuhao Luo. Android malware forensics: Reconstruction of malicious events. In
Distributed Computing Systems Workshops (ICDCSW), 2012 32nd International Conference on, pages 552–558.
IEEE, 2012.

[86] Aubrey-Derrick Schmidt, Hans-Gunther Schmidt, Jan Clausen, Kamer A Yuksel, Osman Kiraz, Ahmet Camtepe,
and Sahin Albayrak. Enhancing security of linux-based android devices. In in Proceedings of 15th International
Linux Kongress. Lehmann, 2008.

[87] Himanshu Khurana, Mark Hadley, Ning Lu, and Deborah A Frincke. Smart-grid security issues. IEEE Security

& Privacy, 8(1), 2010.

[88] Jayant Shukla. Application sandbox to detect, remove, and prevent malware, January 17 2008. US Patent App.

11/769,297.

[89] Ulrich Bayer, Andreas Moser, Christopher Kruegel, and Engin Kirda. Dynamic analysis of malicious code.

Journal in Computer Virology, 2(1):67–77, 2006.

[90] Andrew Nicholson, Tim Watson, Peter Norris, Alistair Duffy, and Roy Isbell. A taxonomy of technical attribution

techniques for cyber attacks. In European Conference on Information Warfare and Security, page 188, 2012.

[91] Allan Cook, Andrew Nicholson, Helge Janicke, Leandros Maglaras, and Richard Smith. Attribution of cyber

attacks on industrial control systems. 2016.

[92] Chathuranga Rathnayaka and Aruna Jamdagni. An efﬁcient approach for advanced malware analysis using
memory forensic technique. In Trustcom/BigDataSE/ICESS, 2017 IEEE, pages 1145–1150. IEEE, 2017.
[93] Alissa Torres. Building a world-class security operations center: A roadmap. SANS Institute, May, 2015.
[94] Vaibhav Rastogi, Yan Chen, and Xuxian Jiang. Droidchameleon: evaluating android anti-malware against
transformation attacks. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM SIGSAC symposium on Information, computer and
communications security, pages 329–334. ACM, 2013.

[95] Michael I Cohen, Darren Bilby, and Germano Caronni. Distributed forensics and incident response in the

enterprise. digital investigation, 8:S101–S110, 2011.

[96] Michael Ligh, Steven Adair, Blake Hartstein, and Matthew Richard. Malware analyst’s cookbook and DVD:

tools and techniques for ﬁghting malicious code. Wiley Publishing, 2010.

[97] Rayan Mosli, Rui Li, Bo Yuan, and Yin Pan. A behavior-based approach for malware detection. In IFIP

International Conference on Digital Forensics, pages 187–201. Springer, 2017.

[98] Hajime Inoue, Frank Adelstein, and Robert A Joyce. Visualization in testing a volatile memory forensic tool.

Digital Investigation, 8:S42–S51, 2011.

[99] Stefan Vömel and Felix C Freiling. A survey of main memory acquisition and analysis techniques for the

windows operating system. Digital Investigation, 8(1):3–22, 2011.

[100] Bryan Ford, Godmar Back, Greg Benson, Jay Lepreau, Albert Lin, and Olin Shivers. The ﬂux oskit: A substrate
for kernel and language research. In ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review, volume 31, pages 38–51. ACM,
1997.

[101] William A Arbaugh, David J Farber, and Jonathan M Smith. A secure and reliable bootstrap architecture. In

Security and Privacy, 1997. Proceedings., 1997 IEEE Symposium on, pages 65–71. IEEE, 1997.

33

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

[102] James T Mihm and William R Hannon. System and method for automating bios ﬁrmware image recovery using
a non-host processor and platform policy to select a donor system, October 5 2010. US Patent 7,809,836.
[103] Michael Sikorski and Andrew Honig. Practical malware analysis: the hands-on guide to dissecting malicious

software. no starch press, 2012.

[104] Ziad A Al-Sharif, Mohammad I Al-Saleh, Luay M Alawneh, Yaser I Jararweh, and Brij Gupta. Live forensics of

software attacks on cyber physical systems. Future Generation Computer Systems, 2018.

[105] Vikram S Harichandran, Daniel Walnycky, Ibrahim Baggili, and Frank Breitinger. Cufa: A more formal deﬁnition

for digital forensic artifacts. Digital Investigation, 18:S125–S137, 2016.

[106] Ahmed F Shosha, Lee Tobin, and Pavel Gladyshev. Digital forensic reconstruction of a program action. In 2013

IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops, pages 119–122. IEEE, 2013.

[107] Ellick Chan, Winston Wan, Amey Chaugule, and Roy Campbell. A framework for volatile memory forensics. In

Proceedings of the16th ACM conference on computer and communications security, 2009.

[108] Ellick Chan, Shivaram Venkataraman, Francis David, Amey Chaugule, and Roy Campbell. Forenscope: A
framework for live forensics. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference,
pages 307–316. ACM, 2010.

[109] Johannes Stüttgen, Stefan Vömel, and Michael Denzel. Acquisition and analysis of compromised ﬁrmware using

memory forensics. Digital Investigation, 12:S50–S60, 2015.

[110] Narasimha Karpoor Shashidhar and Dylan Novak. Digital forensic analysis on prefetch ﬁles. International

Journal of Information Security Science, 4(2):39–49, 2015.

[111] Tobias Latzo, Ralph Palutke, and Felix Freiling. A universal taxonomy and survey of forensic memory acquisition

techniques. Digital Investigation, 28:56–69, 2019.

[112] Kristine Amari. Techniques and tools for recovering and analyzing data from volatile memory. SANS Institute

InfoSec Reading Room, 2009.

[113] Andreas Schuster. Ptﬁnder version 0.3. 05. 2007.
[114] Eoghan Casey, Michael Bann, and John Doyle. Introduction to windows mobile forensics, 2010.
[115] Iosif I Androulidakis. Mobile phone forensics. In Mobile Phone Security and Forensics, pages 75–99. Springer,

2012.

[116] Fabio Marturana, Gianluigi Me, Rosamaria Berte, and Simone Tacconi. A quantitative approach to triaging in
mobile forensics. In Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications (TrustCom), 2011 IEEE
10th International Conference on, pages 582–588. IEEE, 2011.

[117] Maxim Chernyshev, Sherali Zeadally, Zubair Baig, and Andrew Woodward. Mobile forensics: Advances,

challenges, and research opportunities. IEEE Security & Privacy, 15(6):42–51, 2017.

[118] Jae-Duk Lee, Sung-Hoi Hur, and Jung-Dal Choi. Effects of ﬂoating-gate interference on nand ﬂash memory cell

operation. IEEE Electron Device Letters, 23(5):264–266, 2002.

[119] Wayne Jansen and Rick Ayers. An overview and analysis of pda forensic tools. Digital Investigation, 2(2):120–

132, 2005.

[120] Justin Grover. Android forensics: Automated data collection and reporting from a mobile device. Digital

Investigation, 10:S12–S20, 2013.

[121] Jean-Paul A Yaacoub, Mohamad Noura, Hassan N Noura, Ola Salman, Elias Yaacoub, Raphaël Couturier, and
Ali Chehab. Securing internet of medical things systems: Limitations, issues and recommendations. Future
Generation Computer Systems, 2019.

[122] Steven Glass, Tom Hiller, Stuart Jacobs, and C Perkins. Mobile ip authentication, authorization, and accounting

requirements. Technical report, 2000.

[123] Adam Dunkels. Rime-a lightweight layered communication stack for sensor networks. In Proceedings of the
European Conference on Wireless Sensor Networks (EWSN), Poster/Demo session, Delft, The Netherlands, 2007.
[124] Louis Coetzee and Guillaume Olivrin. Inclusion through the internet of things. In Assistive Technologies. InTech,

2012.

[125] John Gantz and David Reinsel. The digital universe in 2020: Big data, bigger digital shadows, and biggest

growth in the far east. IDC iView: IDC Analyze the future, 2007(2012):1–16, 2012.

[126] Steve Watson and Ali Dehghantanha. Digital forensics: the missing piece of the internet of things promise.

Computer Fraud & Security, 2016(6):5–8, 2016.

34

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

[127] Vicki Miller Luoma. Computer forensics and electronic discovery: The new management challenge. Computers

& Security, 25(2):91–96, 2006.

[128] Nickson M Karie and Hein S Venter. Taxonomy of challenges for digital forensics. Journal of forensic sciences,

60(4):885–893, 2015.

[129] Alvaro A Cardenas, Pratyusa K Manadhata, and Sreeranga P Rajan. Big data analytics for security. IEEE

Security & Privacy, 11(6):74–76, 2013.

[130] Andrii Shalaginov, Jan William Johnsen, and Katrin Franke. Cyber crime investigations in the era of big data. In

Big Data (Big Data), 2017 IEEE International Conference on, pages 3672–3676. IEEE, 2017.

[131] Kamal Dahbur and Bassil Mohammad. The anti-forensics challenge. In Proceedings of the 2011 International

Conference on Intelligent Semantic Web-Services and Applications, page 14. ACM, 2011.

[132] M Ali Aydın, A Halim Zaim, and K Gökhan Ceylan. A hybrid intrusion detection system design for computer

network security. Computers & Electrical Engineering, 35(3):517–526, 2009.

[133] Akash Garg and Prachi Maheshwari. A hybrid intrusion detection system: A review. In Intelligent Systems and

Control (ISCO), 2016 10th International Conference on, pages 1–5. IEEE, 2016.

[134] Megha Gupta. Hybrid intrusion detection system: Technology and development. International Journal of

Computer Applications, 115(9), 2015.

[135] Suleman Khan, Ejaz Ahmad, Muhammad Shiraz, Abdullah Gani, Ainuddin Wahid Abdul Wahab, and
Mustapha Aminu Bagiwa. Forensic challenges in mobile cloud computing. In Computer, Communications, and
Control Technology (I4CT), 2014 International Conference on, pages 343–347. IEEE, 2014.

[136] Luca Caviglione, Steffen Wendzel, and Wojciech Mazurczyk. The future of digital forensics: Challenges and the

road ahead. IEEE Security & Privacy, 15(6):12–17, 2017.

[137] Konstantia Barmpatsalou, Tiago Cruz, Edmundo Monteiro, and Paulo Simoes. Current and future trends in

mobile device forensics: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 51(3):46, 2018.

[138] Dasari Manendra Sai, NRGK Prasad, and Satish Dekka. The forensic process analysis of mobile device.

International Journal of Computer Science and Information Technologies, 6(5):4847–4850, 2015.

[139] Mandar Jadhav and KK Joshi. Forensic investigation procedure for data acquisition and analysis of ﬁrefox os
based mobile devices. In Computing, Analytics and Security Trends (CAST), International Conference on, pages
456–461. IEEE, 2016.

[140] Tor-Morten Gronli, Jarle Hansen, Gheorghita Ghinea, and Muhammad Younas. Mobile application platform
heterogeneity: Android vs windows phone vs ios vs ﬁrefox os. In Advanced Information Networking and
Applications (AINA), 2014 IEEE 28th International Conference on, pages 635–641. IEEE, 2014.

[141] Mauro Conti, Tooska Dargahi, and Ali Dehghantanha. Cyber threat intelligence: Challenges and opportunities.

Cyber Threat Intelligence, pages 1–6, 2018.

[142] Michele Elingiusti, Leonardo Aniello, Leonardo Querzoni, and Roberto Baldoni. Malware detection: A survey

and taxonomy of current techniques. Cyber Threat Intelligence, pages 169–191, 2018.

[143] Adam Young and Moti Yung. Backdoor attacks on black-box ciphers exploiting low-entropy plaintexts. In

Australasian Conference on Information Security and Privacy, pages 297–311. Springer, 2003.

[144] Ting-Fang Yen, Yinglian Xie, Fang Yu, Roger Peng Yu, and Martin Abadi. Host ﬁngerprinting and tracking on

the web: Privacy and security implications. In NDSS, volume 62, page 66. Citeseer, 2012.

[145] Nguyen Phong Hoang and Davar Pishva. Anonymous communication and its importance in social networking.
In Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT), 2014 16th International Conference on, pages 34–39. IEEE,
2014.

[146] E Ramadhani. Anonymity communication vpn and tor: a comparative study. In Journal of Physics: Conference

Series, volume 983, page 012060. IOP Publishing, 2018.

[147] Wo L Chang. Nist big data interoperability framework: Volume 1, deﬁnitions. Technical report, 2015.
[148] Sam Madden. From databases to big data. IEEE Internet Computing, (3):4–6, 2012.
[149] Oluwasola Mary Adedayo. Big data and digital forensics. In Cybercrime and Computer Forensic (ICCCF),

IEEE International Conference on, pages 1–7. IEEE, 2016.

[150] Ge Jin, Manghui Tu, Tae-Hoon Kim, Justin Heffron, and Jonathan White. Game based cybersecurity training for
high school students. In Proceedings of the 49th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education,
pages 68–73. ACM, 2018.

35

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

[151] Mitko Bogdanoski and Drage Petreski. Cyber terrorism–global security threat. Contemporary Macedonian

Defense-International Scientiﬁc Defense, Security and Peace Journal, 13(24):59–73, 2013.

[152] Daniel Hughes and Andrew Colarik. The hierarchy of cyber war deﬁnitions. In Paciﬁc-Asia Workshop on

Intelligence and Security Informatics, pages 15–33. Springer, 2017.

[153] Alexander Kosenkov. Cyber conﬂicts as a new global threat. Future Internet, 8(3):45, 2016.

[154] Ralph Langner. Stuxnet: Dissecting a cyberwarfare weapon. IEEE Security & Privacy, 9(3):49–51, 2011.

[155] Manuel R Torres Soriano. Internet as a driver of political change: cyber-pessimists and cyber-optimists. Journal

of the Spanish Institute of Strategic Studies, 1(1):332–352, 2013.

[156] Laoise Luciano, Ibrahim Baggili, Mateusz Topor, Peter Casey, and Frank Breitinger. Digital forensics in the next
ﬁve years. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security, page 46.
ACM, 2018.

[157] Milda Petraityte, Ali Dehghantanha, and Gregory Epiphaniou. A model for android and ios applications risk
calculation: Cvss analysis and enhancement using case-control studies. Cyber Threat Intelligence, pages
219–237, 2018.

[158] Andrii Shalaginov, Sergii Banin, Ali Dehghantanha, and Katrin Franke. Machine learning aided static malware

analysis: A survey and tutorial. Cyber Threat Intelligence, pages 7–45, 2018.

[159] Mudit Kalpesh Pandya, Sajad Homayoun, and Ali Dehghantanha. Forensics investigation of openﬂow-based sdn

platforms. Cyber Threat Intelligence, pages 281–296, 2018.

[160] Kresimir Hausknecht and S Gruiˇci´c. Anti-computer forensics. In 2017 40th International Convention on
Information and Communication Technology, Electronics and Microelectronics (MIPRO), pages 1233–1240.
IEEE, 2017.

[161] Gary C Kessler. Anti-forensics and the digital investigator. In Australian Digital Forensics Conference, page 1,

2007.

[162] LLC Metasploit. The metasploit framework, 2007.

[163] Sarah Hilley. Anti-forensics with a small army of exploits. digital investigation, 4(1):13–15, 2007.

[164] Christian SJ Peron and Michael Legary. Digital anti-forensics: emerging trends in data transformation techniques.

In Proceedings of, 2005.

[165] Martin Wundram, Felix C Freiling, and Christian Moch. Anti-forensics: the next step in digital forensics tool
testing. In IT Security Incident Management and IT Forensics (IMF), 2013 Seventh International Conference on,
pages 83–97. IEEE, 2013.

[166] Ryan Harris. Arriving at an anti-forensics consensus: Examining how to deﬁne and control the anti-forensics

problem. digital investigation, 3:44–49, 2006.

[167] Simson Garﬁnkel. Anti-forensics: Techniques, detection and countermeasures. In 2nd International Conference

on i-Warfare and Security, volume 20087, pages 77–84, 2007.

[168] Matthew C Stamm, W Sabrina Lin, and KJ Ray Liu. Temporal forensics and anti-forensics for motion compen-

sated video. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 7(4):1315–1329, 2012.

[169] Harald Baier and Julian Knauer. Afauc–anti-forensics of storage devices by alternative use of communication
channels. In IT security incident management & iT forensics (iMF), 2014 eighth international conference on,
pages 14–26. IEEE, 2014.

[170] B Shirani. Anti-forensics. High Technology Crime Investigation Association, http://www. aversion.

net/presentations/HTCIA-02/anti-forensics. ppt, 2002.

[171] M Rogers. Anti-forensics: the coming wave in digital forensics. Retrieved September, 7:2008, 2006.

[172] M Rogers and M Lockheed. Anti-forensics. Lockheed martin. San Diego, California. Retrieved from

http://cyberforensics. purdue. edu/documents/AntiForensics\LockheedMartin09152005. pdf, 2005.

[173] Kamal Dahbur and Bassil Mohammad. Toward understanding the challenges and countermeasures in computer
anti-forensics. In Cloud Computing Advancements in Design, Implementation, and Technologies, pages 176–189.
IGI Global, 2013.

[174] Pietro Albano, Aniello Castiglione, Giuseppe Cattaneo, and Alfredo De Santis. A novel anti-forensics technique
for the android os. In Broadband and wireless computing, communication and applications (bwcca), 2011
international conference on, pages 380–385. IEEE, 2011.

36

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

[175] Joseph C Sremack and Alexandre V Antonov. Taxonomy of anti-computer forensics threats. IMF, 103:e12,

2007.

[176] Matthew C Stamm, W Sabrina Lin, and KJ Ray Liu. Forensics vs. anti-forensics: A decision and game theoretic
framework. In Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2012 IEEE International Conference on,
pages 1749–1752. IEEE, 2012.

[177] Anthony Dekker. A taxonomy of network centric warfare architectures. Technical report, DEFENCE SCIENCE

AND TECHNOLOGY ORGANISATION CANBERRA (AUSTRALIA), 2008.

[178] Shashikala Channalli and Ajay Jadhav. Steganography an art of hiding data. arXiv preprint arXiv:0912.2319,

2009.

[179] Arvind Kumar and Km Pooja. Steganography-a data hiding technique. International Journal of Computer

Applications, 9(7):19–23, 2010.

[180] S Srinivasan. Security and privacy vs. computer forensics capabilities. Information Systems Control Journal,

4:1–3, 2007.

[181] Frank Breitinger and Harald Baier. A fuzzy hashing approach based on random sequences and hamming distance.

2012.

[182] Ronald Rivest. The md5 message-digest algorithm. Technical report, 1992.
[183] D Eastlake 3rd and Paul Jones. Us secure hash algorithm 1 (sha1). Technical report, 2001.
[184] Anthony J Wasilewski. Retrieval and transfer of encrypted hard drive content from dvr set-top boxes, December 8

2009. US Patent 7,630,499.

[185] George I Davida, David L Wells, and John B Kam. A database encryption system with subkeys. ACM

Transactions on Database Systems (TODS), 6(2):312–328, 1981.

[186] Rakesh Agrawal, Jerry Kiernan, Ramakrishnan Srikant, and Yirong Xu. Order preserving encryption for numeric
data. In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data, pages
563–574. ACM, 2004.

[187] Richard Bergmair. Natural language steganography and an “ai-complete” security primitive. In 21st Chaos

Communication Congress, Berlin (December 2004), 2004.

[188] Józef Lubacz, Wojciech Mazurczyk, and Krzysztof Szczypiorski. Vice over ip. IEEE Spectrum, 47(2), 2010.
[189] Natarajan Meghanathan and Lopamudra Nayak. Steganalysis algorithms for detecting the hidden information
in image, audio and video cover media. international journal of Network Security & Its application (IJNSA),
2(1):43–55, 2010.

[190] Manveer Kaur and Gagandeep Kaur. Review of various steganalysis techniques. International Journal of

Computer Science and Information Technologies, 5(2):1744–1747, 2014.

[191] Huayong Ge, Mingsheng Huang, and Qian Wang. Steganography and steganalysis based on digital image. In
2011 4th International Congress on Image and Signal Processing, volume 1, pages 252–255. IEEE, 2011.
[192] Kevin Conlan, Ibrahim Baggili, and Frank Breitinger. Anti-forensics: Furthering digital forensic science through

a new extended, granular taxonomy. Digital investigation, 18:S66–S75, 2016.

[193] Bryan Sartin. Anti-forensics–distorting the evidence. Computer Fraud & Security, 2006(5):4–6, 2006.
[194] Xiaoyun Wang and Hongbo Yu. How to break md5 and other hash functions. In Annual international conference

on the theory and applications of cryptographic techniques, pages 19–35. Springer, 2005.

[195] Anu Jain and Gurpal Singh Chhabra. Anti-forensics techniques: An analytical review.
Computing (IC3), 2014 Seventh International Conference on, pages 412–418. IEEE, 2014.

In Contemporary

[196] Alvaro Botas, Ricardo J Rodríguez, Teemu Väisänen, and Patrycjusz Zdzichowski. Counterfeiting and de-
fending the digital forensic process. In Computer and Information Technology; Ubiquitous Computing and
Communications; Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing; Pervasive Intelligence and Computing
(CIT/IUCC/DASC/PICOM), 2015 IEEE International Conference on, pages 1966–1971. IEEE, 2015.

[197] Ang Chen, Akshay Sriraman, Tavish Vaidya, Yuankai Zhang, Andreas Haeberlen, Boon Thau Loo, Linh Thi Xuan
Phan, Micah Sherr, Clay Shields, and Wenchao Zhou. Dispersing asymmetric ddos attacks with splitstack. In
Proceedings of the 15th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks, pages 197–203. ACM, 2016.

[198] Ahmed Alenezi, Hany F Atlam, Reem Alsagri, Madini O Alassaﬁ, and Gary B Wills. Iot forensics: A state-of-

the-art review, challenges and future directions.

[199] Michael Perklin. Anti-forensics and anti-anti-forensics. Talk at DEF CON, 20, 2012.

37

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

[200] Sean Collins and Stephen McCombie. Stuxnet: the emergence of a new cyber weapon and its implications.

Journal of Policing, Intelligence and Counter Terrorism, 7(1):80–91, 2012.

[201] Boldizsar Bencsath. Duqu, ﬂame, gauss: Followers of stuxnet. In RSA Conference Europe 2012, 2012.

[202] Sami Zhioua. The middle east under malware attack dissecting cyber weapons. In 2013 IEEE 33rd International

Conference on Distributed Computing Systems Workshops, pages 11–16. IEEE, 2013.

[203] Nart Villeneuve, Ned Moran, Thouﬁque Haq, and Mike Scott. Operation saffron rose. FireEye Special Report,

2013.

[204] KL Zao. Red october diplomatic cyber attacks investigation. Retrieved from.

[205] Zakariya Dehlawi and Norah Abokhodair. Saudi arabia’s response to cyber conﬂict: A case study of the shamoon
malware incident. In 2013 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics, pages 73–75.
IEEE, 2013.

[206] Sarah P White. Understanding Cyberwarfare: Lessons from the Russia-Georgia War. Modern War Institute at

West Point, 2018.

[207] James Andrew Lewis. Assessing the risks of cyber terrorism, cyber war and other cyber threats. Center for

Strategic & International Studies Washington, DC, 2002.

[208] Tim Jordan and Paul Taylor. Hacktivism and cyberwars: Rebels with a cause? Routledge, 2004.

[209] Scott D Applegate. Cybermilitias and political hackers: Use of irregular forces in cyberwarfare. IEEE Security

& Privacy, (5):16–22, 2011.

[210] Mark Button. Industrial espionage and information security.

[211] C Benjamin, M Fung, K Wang, R Chen, and S Philip. Yu privacy-preserving data publishing: A survey of recent

developments. ACM Comput. Surv., pages 1–53, 2010.

[212] Ali Dehghantanha and Katrin Franke. Privacy-respecting digital investigation. In Privacy, Security and Trust

(PST), 2014 Twelfth Annual International Conference on, pages 129–138. IEEE, 2014.

[213] Thomas Andl, Kyung Ahn, Alladin Kairo, Emily Y Chu, Lara Wine-Lee, Seshamma T Reddy, Nirvana J Croft,
Judith A Cebra-Thomas, Daniel Metzger, Pierre Chambon, et al. Epithelial bmpr1a regulates differentiation and
proliferation in postnatal hair follicles and is essential for tooth development. Development, 131(10):2257–2268,
2004.

[214] Frank YW Law, Patrick PF Chan, Siu-Ming Yiu, Kam-Pui Chow, Michael YK Kwan, KS Hayson, and Pierre KY
Lai. Protecting digital data privacy in computer forensic examination. In Systematic Approaches to Digital
Forensic Engineering (SADFE), 2011 IEEE Sixth International Workshop on, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2011.

[215] Eu-Jin Goh et al. Secure indexes. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2003:216, 2003.

[216] Dawn Xiaoding Song, David Wagner, and Adrian Perrig. Practical techniques for searches on encrypted data. In

Security and Privacy, 2000. S&P 2000. Proceedings. 2000 IEEE Symposium on, pages 44–55. IEEE, 2000.

[217] Patrick Stahlberg, Gerome Miklau, and Brian Neil Levine. Threats to privacy in the forensic analysis of database
systems. In Proceedings of the 2007 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data, pages
91–102. ACM, 2007.

[218] Stefan Böttcher, Rita Hartel, and Matthias Kirschner. Detecting suspicious relational database queries. In
Availability, Reliability and Security, 2008. ARES 08. Third International Conference on, pages 771–778. IEEE,
2008.

[219] Kamil Reddy and Hein Venter. A forensic framework for handling information privacy incidents. In IFIP

International Conference on Digital Forensics, pages 143–155. Springer, 2009.

[220] Hong Guo, Bo Jin, and Daoli Huang. Research and review on computer forensics. In International Conference

on Forensics in Telecommunications, Information, and Multimedia, pages 224–233. Springer, 2010.

[221] George Pangalos, Christos Ilioudis, and Ioannis Pagkalos. The importance of corporate forensic readiness in
the information security framework. In Enabling Technologies: Infrastructures for Collaborative Enterprises
(WETICE), 2010 19th IEEE International Workshop on, pages 12–16. IEEE, 2010.

[222] Neil J Croft and Martin S Olivier. Sequenced release of privacy-accurate information in a forensic investigation.

Digital Investigation, 7(1-2):95–101, 2010.

[223] Siani Pearson. Privacy models and languages: assurance checking policies. In Digital privacy, pages 363–375.

Springer, 2011.

38

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

[224] Antonio Pooe and Les Labuschagne. A conceptual model for digital forensic readiness. In Information Security

for South Africa (ISSA), 2012, pages 1–8. IEEE, 2012.

[225] Shuhui Hou, Tetsutaro Uehara, SM Yiu, Lucas CK Hui, and KP Chow. Privacy preserving multiple keyword
search for conﬁdential investigation of remote forensics. In Multimedia Information Networking and Security
(MINES), 2011 Third International Conference on, pages 595–599. IEEE, 2011.

[226] Xiaodong Lin, Rongxing Lu, Kevin Foxton, and Xuemin Sherman Shen. An efﬁcient searchable encryption
scheme and its application in network forensics. In International Conference on Forensics in Telecommunications,
Information, and Multimedia, pages 66–78. Springer, 2010.

[227] Anuradha Gupta. Privacy preserving efﬁcient digital forensic investigation framework.

In Contemporary

Computing (IC3), 2013 Sixth International Conference on, pages 387–392. IEEE, 2013.

[228] Shuhui Hou, Siu-Ming Yiuy, Tetsutaro Ueharaz, and Ryoichi Sasakix. A privacy-preserving approach for
collecting evidence in forensic investigation. International Journal of Cyber-Security and Digital Forensics
(IJCSDF), 2(1):70–78, 2013.

[229] Frederik Armknecht and Andreas Dewald. Privacy-preserving email forensics. Digital Investigation, 14:S127–

S136, 2015.

[230] Khoirunnisa Aﬁfah and Riza Satria Perdana. Development of search on encrypted data tools for privacy
preserving in digital forensic. In Data and Software Engineering (ICoDSE), 2016 International Conference on,
pages 1–6. IEEE, 2016.

[231] Ana Nieto, Ruben Rios, and Javier Lopez. Iot-forensics meets privacy: towards cooperative digital investigations.

Sensors, 18(2):492, 2018.

[232] Ana Nieto, Rodrigo Roman, and Javier Lopez. Digital witness: Safeguarding digital evidence by using secure

architectures in personal devices. IEEE Network, 30(6):34–41, 2016.

[233] Yudi Prayudi and Azhari Sn. Digital chain of custody: State of the art. International Journal of Computer

Applications, 114(5), 2015.

[234] Ana Nieto, Ruben Rios, and Javier Lopez. A methodology for privacy-aware iot-forensics. In Proceedings of the

2017 IEEE Conference on Trustcom/BigDataSE/ICESS, Sydney, NSW, Australia, pages 1–4, 2017.

[235] Bill Blunden. Anti-forensics: the rootkit connection. In Black Hat USA 2009 Conference Proceedings, page 10,

2009.

[236] Slim Rekhis and Noureddine Boudriga. A system for formal digital forensic investigation aware of anti-forensic

attacks. IEEE transactions on information forensics and security, 7(2):635–650, 2012.

[237] Matthew Geiger. Evaluating commercial counter-forensic tools. In DFRWS, 2005.
[238] Matthew Geiger, Lorrie Faith Cranor, et al. Counter-forensic privacy tools. Privacy in the Electronic Society,

2005.

[239] Kevin D Fairbanks, Christopher P Lee, Ying H Xia, and Henry L Owen. Timekeeper: a metadata archiving
method for honeypot forensics. In Information Assurance and Security Workshop, 2007. IAW’07. IEEE SMC,
pages 114–118. IEEE, 2007.

[240] Parag H Rughani and Prerak Bhatt. Machine learning forensics: a new branch of digital forensics. International

Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Science, 8(8), 2017.

[241] Bruno WP Hoelz, Célia Ghedini Ralha, and Rajiv Geeverghese. Artiﬁcial intelligence applied to computer

forensics. In Proceedings of the 2009 ACM symposium on Applied Computing, pages 883–888. ACM, 2009.

[242] Faye Mitchell. The use of artiﬁcial intelligence in digital forensics: An introduction. Digital Evidence & Elec.

Signature L. Rev., 7:35, 2010.

[243] Greg Allen and Taniel Chan. Artiﬁcial intelligence and national security. Belfer Center for Science and

International Affairs Cambridge, MA, 2017.

[244] Wei Liang Yeow, Rohana Mahmud, and Ram Gopal Raj. An application of case-based reasoning with machine

learning for forensic autopsy. Expert Systems with Applications, 41(7):3497–3505, 2014.

[245] Mark Weber, Giacomo Domeniconi, Jie Chen, Daniel Karl I Weidele, Claudio Bellei, Tom Robinson, and
Charles E Leiserson. Anti-money laundering in bitcoin: Experimenting with graph convolutional networks for
ﬁnancial forensics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.02591, 2019.

[246] Xiao Wang, Jianbiao Zhang, Ai Zhang, and Jinchang Ren. Tkrd: Trusted kernel rootkit detection for cybersecurity
of vms based on machine learning and memory forensic analysis. Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering,
16(4):2650–2667, 2019.

39

A PREPRINT - APRIL 1, 2021

[247] Apostolos Axenopoulos, Volker Eiselein, Antonio Penta, Eugenia Koblents, Ernesto La Mattina, and Petros
Daras. A framework for large-scale analysis of video in the wild to assist digital forensic examination. IEEE
Security & Privacy, 17(1):23–33, 2019.

[248] Jee-Young Sun, Seung-Wook Kim, Sang-Won Lee, and Sung-Jea Ko. A novel contrast enhancement forensics
based on convolutional neural networks. Signal Processing: Image Communication, 63:149–160, 2018.
[249] Gang Cao, Haorui Wu, and Wei Zhao. Robust contrast enhancement forensics using convolutional neural

networks. 2018.

[250] Wuyang Shan, Yaohua Yi, Ronggang Huang, and Yong Xie. Robust contrast enhancement forensics based on

convolutional neural networks. Signal Processing: Image Communication, 71:138–146, 2019.

[251] Jingjing Yu, Yifeng Zhan, Jianhua Yang, and Xiangui Kang. A multi-purpose image counter-anti-forensic method
using convolutional neural networks. In International Workshop on Digital Watermarking, pages 3–15. Springer,
2016.

[252] Yifang Chen, Xiangui Kang, Z Jane Wang, and Qiong Zhan. Densely connected convolutional neural network
for multi-purpose image forensics under anti-forensic attacks. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM Workshop on
Information Hiding and Multimedia Security, pages 91–96. ACM, 2018.

[253] Haoliang Li, Peisong He, Shiqi Wang, Anderson Rocha, Xinghao Jiang, and Alex C Kot. Learning generalized
deep feature representation for face anti-spooﬁng. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
13(10):2639–2652, 2018.

[254] Erik Laykin. Investigative computer forensics: the practical guide for lawyers, accountants, investigators, and

business executives. John Wiley & Sons, 2013.

40

